HIS TO R Y OFTHE
LIFE AND
ADVENTURES OF
Mr. Duncan A
Gentleman, who tho' Deaf and Dumb,writcs down any Stranger's Name at first Sight : with their future Contingencies of Fortune.
Now Living
In Exeter-Court over-against the Savoy in the Strand.
Gentem quidem nullam video neque tarn bumanam atque doil.m ; neque tarn immanem tamque barbaram-, qua non significari fu- tura oy a quibusdam intelligi frudicique pojse cenfeat.
Cicero de Divinacione, lib. x. €Ue ^ecotTD (EDitton coirecteD.
LONDON:
Printed for E. C u R L l
and T. ] A uN c Y without Temple-Bar , W.
Campbell,
 : And foldby W.M£aRs
Meadows in Cornhill, A. Bettesworth in Pater-Nofler-Roxo , W. Lewis in C,vent-
Garden, and 7 GRAVES in St. MDCCXX.
James's-Strest.
  
  ,'*
3
  
 ^ visv
"J
TO THE
LADIES AND
GENTLEMEN OF
GREAT-B KITJIN.
A M not unacquainted, that, ever since this Book was jirji
promised by Way of Advertise ment to the World , it was gree
 dily coveted by a great many
Persons of airy Tempers, for the fame reason, that it
has been condemned by those of a more
A2
formal
  
 iv
formal Class, who thought it was cal culated partly to introduce a great ma
ny new and diverting Curiosities in the
way of SuperJlition,3 and partly to di vulge the secret Intrigues and Amours of one part of the Sex, to give the other part room to make favourite Scan
dal the SubjeSi of their Discourse j and so to make one half of the fair Species
very merry,
over the Blushes, and the
Epistle Dedicatory.
 "Mortifications of the other half But when they come to read the following
Sheet j,r they will find their Expecta
I hope I may disappointed. 'they will find a much more elegant
tions disappointed, (but
fay too)
very agreeably
"Entertainment than they expected- In stead of making them a Bill of Fare out
of patchwork Romances of polluting Scandal ; the good old Gentleman who wrote the Adventures of my Jjfe} has made it his Business to treat them with
a great variety of entertaining
ges, which always terminate in Morals
that tend' to the Edification of all Rea ders^
Passa
  
 ^Delight,
reading the gay and
Dedicatory.
v
Epistle
ders, of whatsoever Sex, Age, or Pro-*
session. Instead of seducing young, in nocent, unwary Minds into the vicious
which is tod often taken in
Chi
ed Tricks of Superstition, my ancient Friend, the Writer, strikes at the very
Root of these Superstitions, and shews
in
their several Curiosities, by having re~ course to Me, who by the Talent of
the Second-sight {which he so beauti
how 'Nature is so kind
bewitching meras of the Caballifisj and in per using the enticing Fables of new invent
 them, how they may be satisfyrd
fully
represents,
frequently to implant in the Minds
of Men born in the fame Climate with
my self) can tell you those Things turally, which when you try
na to learn either run the Hazard
your selves, you
of being imposed upon in your sockets , by Cheats, Gypsies and common Fortune
tellers, or else of being imposed upon, tit a still iporse way, in your most last
ing Welfare, by having
recourse
to A 3 Conjurers
  
 vj Epistle
Dedicatory.
or Jnchanters that deal in
Conjurers
Black Arts, and involve all their Con-
falters in one general Partner flip of their execrable Guilt j or lastly, of
imposing worst of all on your own selves,
into an Itch
and trying the little Tricks of Female
by getting
of
practising
which are often more handed down, by the Tradi tion of credulous Nurses and old Wo
men, from one Generation to another,
Superstition, officiously
 -than the first.
DoBrine, which 7tis their Duty to
Jinstill early into little Children. But hope when this Book comes to be
pretty generally read among you La-
dies, (as by your generous
and numerous
Principles
of Christian
Subscriptions, 1 have good reason to expeSt) that it will afford a perfed
and a thorough Cure to that
Remedy
Distemper, which frjt took its
Rife from too great a Growth of Curiosity,
and too large a Stock of Credulity, nur
prejudicially up with you in your more tender and infant Tears.
a Whatever
sed
  
 her Points,
Sheets Man that can
those
Epistle Dedicatory*
Whatever young Maid
hereafter
has an innocents but longing Desire to know who jhall be her Husband, and
hope, lowing
"what time jhe Jhall be
marry willy when she hds read in the fol
right in the Knowledge
surely
the Second- fight, sooner
the
have re*
possessing
Gift
 innocently use unlawful
to such Means to
Man, than
acquire
course
as running to Conjurers
his Figure shewn in their
Classes, or using any those traditio
such
to have inchanted
nal Superstitions, which dream their Husbands, or
cause visionary Shapes them to appear on
and such Festival Nights the ordinarily wicked and impious, bus
such
Tear * all which Practices are not
that the next twenty ninth June., which
downright diabolical. hope
St. John BaptistY Vdy, pall not
fee the several Pasture Fields
adjacent U
they may
  of
by of Aofofby a
4 I of Ia
of it
of it,
d, set
vij
of
I

 viij Epistle Dedicatory.'
to this Metropolis, especially that b^
as they were the last Year, with well
drest young Ladies crawling bujily up and down upon their Knees , as if they
were a parcel of Weeders, when all
hind Montague
House, thronged,
the Business is to hunt
after a Coal under the Root of a Plan tain, to put under their Heads that
Night, that they may dream who
supersiitiously
 be their Husbands. In order
should
to shame thIem out of this filly but guilty PraBice, do intend to have some
out on that Day, that shall dis cover who they are , and what they
(if it be aBed at all this Tear)
must begin according to the Rule of
their Superstition, on that Day precisely
at the Hour of Twelve. And so much
the pretty Weeders : But as you,
(Ladies) have had several Magical Traditions delivered to you, which, if
you put in Exercise and PraBice, will be
Spies
have been about j and I
to the Publick, that this ill-aSled Co
medy
for
here
give
notice
  
 ix
be greatly prejudicial to your: Honour and your Virtue, let me interpose my
Counsels, which will conduB- you inno
by
these Impieties. Give me leave frst to tell you, that tho what you aim at
may be arrived to by these Means, yet
these Means make that a miserable . Fortune which would have been a good
one •
Epistle Dedicatory.
to the fame End which some
cuously
Ladies have laboured to arrive at
 in order to know human
because
Things before-hand, you use preterna tural Mediums, which dejlroy the Good
the Courses, which Nature her self was taking for you> and an
ness of
nex to them diabolical
Influence^ which commonly carry along with them
Fatalities in this World as well as the
next. You will therefore give mIe your
Fardon likewise, Ladies, if relate
some other of these Tra&ices, whichI bare relation of it self, after what
have said before, seems to me sufficient to explode them*
Another
  
 x Epistle Dedicatory.
Another of the Nurses
is this. 'Upon a St. Agnes'/ Night,
the i\fl Day of January,
take a Ron? of Pins, and pull out every one, one after another, faying a Pater-noster,
or Our Father, flicking a Tin in your
will dream of her Ben. Johnson in one
of
And on sweet St. Agnes Night Please you with the promised Sight, Some of Husbands, some of Lovers, Which an empty Dream discovers.
Now what can be more infinitely pro-
Sleeve,
and you
yon shall marry.
of his Masks makes some mention
Prescriptions
 this.
*
than to the Prayer our Lord instituted in such Way
phane
which as follows You musk lie in another
and knit the left Garter about
the other Carter
There another
Prescription,
County,
the right-legged Stocking (let
  is
is :
use a
?
of

 Epistle Dedicatory. xj
Carter and Stocking
rehearse these following Verges, ry Comma knit a Knot,
This Knot I knit,
To know the Thing I know not yet, That I may fee,
The Man that malt my Husband be.
How he goes, and what he wears, And what he does all Days and
Years.
Accordingly in your Dream you *wiU fee him : If a Musician , with a Lute
or other Instrument
a Book, Sec. Now
to Ladies, what a ridiculous Prescription
alone)
and as you
* iIf a Scholar^ with
At eve
 appeal
is this ? But yet as flight a Thing as it
wust
construed
preter
be
may be great
brought about, because then it
to be done
natural Means, and then those Words
are nothing less than an Application to the Devil.
Importance
youy
  be
it is, it
by
if
of

 Epistle Dedicatory.
Mr. .Aubrey the Royal
says, Gentlewoman that he knew,
in his hearing
this Method, and dreamt her Hus
band whom she had never seen About two or three Tears after as flje was
one Sunday at Church, up fops young Oxonian in the Pulpit jhe cries out
presently to her Sifter, this the very Face the Man saw in my Dream.
Sir William Somes'j. Lady did the like*
Another way to charm the Moon thus, (as the old Nurses give out At the frft Appearance the Moon after
confessed
that foe used
Society
 other New Moon as good) go out in the
New-years-day, some say any
Evening, and ftdnd over the Sparrs Gate or Stile, looking on the Moon
(here remarks that in Yorkshire they kneel on Ground-faji Stone) and
All
  of a
xij a
a
is
(
of
is
I
of ,
).
of
;
of a
fa
:

 Epistle Dedicatory, xiij
AH hail to the Moon, all hail to thee, I prithee good Moon reveal to me This Night; who my Husband shall
be,
Ton must presently after go to, Bed: The aforesaid Mr. Aubrey knew two Gentlewomen that did thus when they
were
Dreams of those that married
young Maids, and they had them*
 But a
part ofyour Sex laugh at these common
great many of the Superstitions j but then they are apt to
run into worse :
up to the reading of the
frmities and Frailties
No •
peculiar to your
Men,
4
They give themselves Cabalistical
Systems of Sylphs, and Gnomes, and
Mandrakes, which are anddelusive Imaginations,
not I would I
dies) -that impute these Things as In*
have
you imagine, {La*
very
wicked
r
and great Men too, and
wittiest
  
 xiv
Epistle Dedicatory:
and Scholars , and even Statesmen and Princes themselves have been tainted with Superstitions j and where they in
fect the Minds of such great Persona*
ges, they make the deeper
Impression, according to the stronger and more Man
ly Ideas they have of them. Their
greater degree of Strength in the In tellect only subjects them to greater
of Learning in the Age wherein he lived, and such were all his Followers,
Scholars, Statesmen, Divines, and Priti* ees that are Talismanists.
Weaknesses j such Paracelsus,
was even the
the Wonder and Miracle
 Talismans that
Paracelsus
These
pretends to owe to the Excogitation and
Invention of hones Art, seem to me to
very Diabolical Nature, and to owe their Rife to being dedicated the Author to the Heathen Gods.
Thus the Cabalists pretending to Penetration into Arts and Sciences all their Thoughts are Chimeras
Extra
great
vast
(tho> and
  a
by l?e
of a

 xv
"Extravagancies j unless they le helped by preternatural Means) fay they have
Epistle Dedicatory.
out the several Methods
found
the Sunday ^ Silver to the Moon on the
pri at ed to the several Planets :
appro~ They
have appropriated Gold to the Sun on
Iron to Mars on the Tues-
Monday y
day, Quicksilver to Mercury on the
Tin to Jupiter on the
Wednesday,
Thursday, Copper
on the Friday, and Lead to Saturn on the Saturday. The Methods they
or Brass to Venus
 in forming these Talismans are too long to dwell upon here. But *the
take
Properties which they pretend
to them, are, that the first Talisman, or Seal of the Sun, wits, make a Man beloved by all Princes and
Potentates^ and cause him to abound with all the
Riches his Heart can wish. The fe
cond preserves Travellers
and is favourable to
The thirds carries DefiruBion to any Place where
Tt isput'
ger,
Tradesmen, and Workmen.
and 'si/ said that a certain
•
belong
'Dan Merchant s3
from
great
  
 xvj Epistle Dedicatory:
Minister of State ordered one of
great
to be carry* d into
the Times of the Revolution of Govern* ment caused by Oliver Cromwell.
The fourth, they pretend, cures Fevers and other Diseases ; and if it be put under the Bolster , it makes the Pro
prietor have true Dreams, in which he fees all he desires to know. The
fifth, according to them, renders a Man lucky and fortunate in all his Businesses and Undertakings. It disfi'
Melancholy, drives away all
Cares, and banishes pa-
these
England in
 pates
importunate
nick Fears from the Mind. The
sixth, by being put into the 'Liquor which any
one drinks, reconciles mortal Enemies, makes them intimate Friends j it gains the hove of all Women, and renders the Proprietor very dextrous in the Art
The seventh, makes Wo- be easily brought to Bed without Pain j and if a Horstman carries it in his left
Boot, himself and his Horse become in* vulnerable.
This
of Mustek.
  
 -
Epistle Dedicatory.
This Paracelsus and his learned Followers jay is owing to the Influence
vf the Stars ; but I can't
to be Acts
But as these Arts are rarely known a>-
mong the middling fart Mankinds JJjall neither open their Myferies, ncir
inveigh -against them any farthen
The Persons who are most to b~e avoidedj- are your ordinary Fortune- telling Women and Men about this Town.,
these
of
diabolical
Impiety.
xv Lj
help arguing
 whoje Houses ought
to avoided ax.
Plague or Pestilence y either because they are Cheats and Impostors, or because they deal with Black Arts, none them
that know having any Pretensions to the Gift a, Second*fight. Among ma ny, few the most notorious, that can call to mind now,' are as follow.
The jtrst,
vous Fortune-tellers Woman that
and chiefest these mischie
does not live far front the Old Baily.
And truly the Ball in that Place suffice U
  a
U
>
a of
be
a
of
I
of
a
j
I
of
a
I
'of

 xviij Epistle Dedicatory.
Paper
Jhe
which
him, ought
at the
famous Palace of the senseless
for
a
very profound Astrologer.
properejl Place for her to appear
is the
at j where, if she was trfd for pre tending to give Charms written upon
with odd Scrawls, which
calls Figures, foe would be probably conviSied, and very justly condemned, and doomed to have her last
Journey the Old Baily to Newgate, and
from
from Newgate to Tyburn. The other,
is a Fellow that lives in Moorsields^ in
 Place, those who go to consult to live all their Life-times
: He is the Successor of the fa
Men
mous Dr. Trotter, whose Widow he
marrfd j and from being a Taylor and patching Mens Garments, he now cuts
Flourishes with his Sheers upon Parch ment, considers the Heavens as a Gar
ment, and from the Spangles thereupon, he calculates Nativities, and sets up
The third is an ignorant Fellow that kaws
out Jirange Predictions in Crow-Alley,
of whose croaking
Noise I ftall here take
±
  
 xix
take no Notice; he having been suffici
ently mawPd in the most ingenious Spe
ctators. These, and such Counterfeits as these, I would desire all Gentlemen
and Ladies to avoid. The only two really learned Men, that I ever knew
Epistle Dedicatory.
in the Art of AJirology, were my good friends Dr. Williams and Mr. Gad-
and I thought it necessary to
bury '
pay this Esteem to their Manes., let the World of them what it will. I will here judge
 fay no more, nor hinder you any longer, Gentlemen and Ladies,
from the Diversion which my good old friend, who k now departed this Life,
prepared for you in his Book, (which a young Gentleman of my Ac quaintance revised,) than only to sub
scribe my self,
Yours, April jth,
has
Exeter-Court,
J720.
Duncan
a2 THE 4
Sec.
Campbell.
  
 , - .*
• **...
»i, . V. ......•7', '*""
*
,
.'V.
a"* * .• ** .
'
-
* .* .1
.»• . .-•
**• ,1 l*
i c .... . y .,\ T'(i\
• '.
 ^• *.\ *. . * ;
ft €.»IV 1
*"'
,•.-.'.-Vv.-.J
. ..i."
:f h t
-
. +• r
-
f•* * . *.V:\ a v..
. '. V'\\
*
V
. Xt.. ' .
*
  
 THE
CONTENTS- CHAP.I.. v. .
R. Campbell' j- Descent, Fa mily, .'Birth j &c. Page 8. Also an Account ofMr. Ar chibald CampbellV Tra
vels into Lapland, where he married
a rich Lady of that Country y who was Daughter to the Under-Præfect
or Deputy Governor of the DistriSt of UmaLapmjrk ; with some Let- ters from, him to his Father in the
\.
.
piJ
. v,;.
Campbell. *
16.
:
 Isle Schetland in Scotland, 'far*
one, concerning the Birth
t'icular/y
Son our
present
Mr. Duncan
,•
  ,
'
C
HA p..
P.
of
of
.',

 ,
The Method of teaching Deaf and Dumb Tersons to write } ready and
underhand a Language. p. 38. CHAP. IV.
Young Duncan Campbell returns with his Mother to Edinburgh. The Earl of Argyll's Overthrow. The Ruin
.
The Contents.
chap.
n.
After the Death of Mr. Duncan
Campbell's Mother in Lapland, his Father Mr. Archibald Camp bell returned into Scotland with his
. little Son and Family. His "Marriage 5 and how hk Son being born Deaf and Dumby was first learn d to read and write.
p. CHAP. III.
32.
of Mr. Archibald Campbell, and Pra-
,
his Death : Young Duncan's
4
Bice
second
   
 The Contents.'
Bice in PrediStion at Edinburgh, while yet a Boy. p. 55.
have,
by all the Senses, as Seeing, Hearing, Sec. of Dæmons, Genii, or Fami-
miliar Spirits. p. 78. CHAP. VI.
A Narrative of Mr. Campbell'/ com
C H A P. V.
Argument proving the Perception,
An
which Men have had, and
 ing to London, and taking
him the Profession of a TrediSior
with an Account
flrange Things that came to pass juji
as he foretold.
G H A P.
A Philosophical Discourse concerning the 'I Second-sight. p. 175
CHAP.
together
of p.
many
1 24 VII.
upon *
  
 tents,
i&n a
A Dissertation upon Magidk under alt itsJW'anches j with some remarkable
. Particulars y relating to Mr. Camp
bells private Life. p.
the frfl Obje&ion against the Existence . of Spirits } and the Refutations there
The
Co; n
of .1 ' .'. /. ')
p. 160
the Ex~ p. 270
p. 2^7*
The second Objection againjl ,w iflence of Witches.
The Appendix. X.
.;i7
p.
viil
.
.205.
 THE
  
  »
  
    
 , ii I'
.it 'I
i i'.i 1 'J -i f"ssl *->ti r ' ii' V"i
F all the Writings delivered in ad
Historical Manner to the World,
.none certainly were ever held
in greater Esteem, than those,
us the Lives of I give distior
' .•./3'io •{..•. ;.;•!(. *. ;.'!.,.-.' . .!.T •'. -7'
 burpnzing Adv &N tu re s i; I io r:oi£.]! $ jplort'.v £ 'ri-
which
guished private Men at' full length ; and, as
B
ttiif
  
 z The Life and Advent ub.es
may say,to the Life. Such curious Fragments of Biography are the Rarities, which great Men seek after with eager Industry ; and, when found,prize them as theChief Jewels and Orna ments, that enrich their Libraries : And deser vedly ;for they are the Beauties of the greatest Men's Lives handed down by way of Example or Instruction to Posterity, and commonly handed down likewise by the greatest Men. Since therefore,Persons distinguished for Merit in one Kind or other, are the constant Subjects of such Discourses, and the most
Elegant Writers of each Age have been usually the
 only Authors, who chuse upon such Subjects to employ, their Pens ; and since Persons of
the highest Rank, and Dignity, and Genij of the most refined and delicate Relish, are fre
quently curious enough to be the Readers of them, and to esteem them the most valuable Pieces in a whole Collection of Learned Works : It is a wonder to me, that when A Man's Life has something in it peculiarly Great and Remarkable in its Kind, it should not move some more skilful Writer than my self to give the Publick a Taste of because
must be at least vastly Entertaining,
be nor, which next to impossible, im mensely Instructive and Profitable withal.
If ever the Life of any Man under the Sun was Remarkable, this Mr. Duncan Camp bell's, which am going to treat upon, so, to very eminent Degree.
  z
I
is
It
a
is
if it
it
it,

 ef Mr. Duncan Campbell
\ Itaffords such variety of Incidents; and is
accompanied with such diversity of Cir
that it includes within what must yield entire Satisfaction to the most learned, and Admiration to Persons of mo>. derate Understanding. The Prince and the
Peasant will have their several Ends 01
cumstances,
and Mr. Camp? of that Extent, that concerns
thy Delight
bells Life
and collects
every Station of Life
There Demand
that relates any new Act of his, for the finest and closest Disquisitions that Learning can make upon Human Nature, to account how those Acts could be done by him. For he daily practised, and still practises those Things naturally, which puts Art to the rack to find ©ut how Nature can operate him and his fleshly Body, by these Operations, living, practical System or Body of new Phi losophy, which exceeds even all those that have hitherto: been compounded by the La bour and Art of many Ages.
one, that had speculated deep into ab* strufe Matters, and madd his Studv, not only to know how to. assign natural Reasons for some strange new Acts, that looked like Miracles being peculiar to the individual Genius of some particular admired Man, but carrying his Enquiry to much greater Height, had speculated likewise, what might
'possibly
(as
may fay within self the Universe. Besides, almost every Pagej
reading
   \
Bi
so in in
a
it
)
it
it ;
If by :
is
a is :
is a
in
in I
it
a
it,

 TbiLiiE and Adventures
possibly be atchieved by a human Genius in the full Perfection of Nature, and had laid it
4
down as a Thesis by strong Arguments, that such Things might be compasied by a Human Genius (if in its true degree of Perfection) as are the Hourly Operations of the Person's
Life I am writing, he would have been count ed a wild Romantick Enthusiast, instead of a Natural Philosopher. Some of the wisest would be Infidels to so new and so refined a Scheme of Thinking, and demand Experi ment, or cry it was all against Reason, and would not allow the least Tittle to be true
 without it. Yet the Man that had found out
so great a Mystery, as to tell us, what might be done by a Human Genius, as it is here actu ally done, would have been a great Man with in himself ; but wanting farther, Experimen
tal Proof, could lay no claim to the Belief of others, or consequently to their Esteem : But how great then is the Man, who makes it con stantly his Practice, actually to Do, what would not otherwise have been thought to be
of such a Nature, as might ever be acquired by mortal Capacity, tho' in its full Comple ment of all possible Perfection? He is not only
great within himself, he is great to the World ; his Experiments force our Belief, and the
this Propositipn,That rneer Human Art could
amazing Singularity of those Experiments, provokes both our Wonder and Esteem.
~
If any learned Man should have advanced
*..;
i si
give
  
 Of Mr. D U NCA N CAMPS ELI? J
give to the Deaf Man what should be equal to his Hearing, and to the Dumb Man an Equi valent for his want of Speech, so that he
should converse as freely almost, as other
Hearing or Talking Persons ; that he -might, tho' born Deaf, be by Art taught, how to Read, Write, and understand any Language, as well as Students that have their Hearing j would not the World, and many even of the Learned Part of it fay, that nothing could be more extravagantly Wild, more Mad and Frantick? The learned Dr. Wallis, Geome-
try-Profeflbr of Oxford, did first of all lay down this Proposition, and was counted by many to have overshot the Point of Learning, and to have been the Author of a whimsical Thesis. And I should not have wondered,
after Man's having averted This might be done, before was actually done, some blind devout People, those Days, had ac-: cused him of Heresy, and of attributing* to Men Power of working Miracles. The No tion of the Antipodes was by the most learn
ed Men of the Age in which St. Augufiin lived, and the Great St. Austin himself treated no milder manner yet the Abi
lity of teaching the Deaf and the Dumb Lan guage, proved Truth in Experience after wards, ought not those to turn their Con tempt into Admiration, ought not those very
People to Vote him into the Royal Society for* laying down this Proposition, who, before* proved true in Fact, would have been vefy-
forward
   Ba 3
&
by a
it in
if a
in
a
;
if, a

 4> TheLiiE and Adventukss
forward to have sent him to Bedlam ? The first Instance of this Accomplishment in a
Person, was proved before King Charles II. by this fame Dr. Wallis, who was a Fellow of the Royal Society, and one of the most ingenious of that Society. . j
Dumb
But notwithstanding this, should I come afterwards and fay, that there is now living a Deaf and Dumb Man, and born so, who could by dint of his own Genius teach all others Deaf and Dumb to Read, Write, and Converse with the Talking and Hearing Part of ' Mankind ; some would, I warrant, very
religiously conclude, that I was.
about to in-
t
 and Impostor into the World ; with a Design of setting up some new Sect of Antichristia- nism, as formidable as that of the Brachmans. Should I proceed still farther and fay, that this fame Person so Deaf and Dumb, might be able also to shew a presaging Power, or kind of prophetical Genius (if I may be al lowed the Expression) by telling, any strange Persons he never saw before in his Life, their Names at first Sight in Writing, and by tel ling them the past Actions of their Lives, and predicting to them determined Truths of fu ture Contingencies ; notwithstanding what Divines fay, that Infuturis contingentibus ntm datur determinata veritas, wouid (not jtjiey conclude that I was going to usher in a fcew Mahomet >/Sin,ce.rtherefore there' does exist sireh a Man in JU>ndont who actually isDeaf
*
and
  
 predict
of Mr. D U N C A: N C A M P B fi L t.
7 and Dumb, and was born so, who docs Write and Read, and Converse as well as any Body, who teaches others Deaf and Dumb to Write and Read, and Converse with any Body ;
who likewise can, by a presaging Gift, set down in Writing the Name of any Stranger at first Sight, tell him his past Actions, and
his future Occurrences in Fortune ; and since he has practised this Talent as a Profession with great Success, for a long Series of Years, upon innumerable Persons in every State and Vocation of Life, from the Peeress to the Waiting-Woman, and from the Lady
 to the Milliner and Sempstress ; will it not be wonderfully Entertaining to give the World a perfect History of this so
Mayoress
And while we are relating the pleasant Adventures with such
singular a Man's Life ?
prodigious Variety, can any Thing be more
instructive in a New Way, than to the Reasons, and account for the
agreeably
intersperse
manner how Nature, having a mind to be remarkable, performs by him Acts Xo myste
rious.
I have premised this Introduction, com
pounded of the Merry and the Serious, with the Hopes of engaging many curious People of all sorts to be my Readers ; even from the Airy Nice Peruser of Novels and Romances, neatly Bound, and finely Gilt, to the grave: Philosopher, that is daily thumbing over the musty and tatter'd Pieces of more solid Anti-
B 4 quity.
  
 SiT The Life and Adventures
I have all the Wonders to tell, that such a merry kind of a Prophet has told, ter Entertain the Fancies of the first gay Tribe,
quity.
by which means
I
may
entice them into some
solid Knowledge arid- Judgment of Human
>|ature ; and I have several solid Disquisi
tions of Learning to make, accounting for
the manner of these Mysterious Operations,
never touched upon before, in due Form and :
Order, by the Hands of the Antient or Mo
dern Sages, that I may Bribe the Judgment '
of this last Grave Class so far, as to endure
the trit rmixing of Entertainment with their .
severer Studies.' " -
 c: '"• ?y-:"..- "i.
IT :*.. Cl H A P. .
Mir. Campbell's Descent, Family, Birth, &c.
Name and Family of this Gentleman,
nb!Boidy can ever make any Question He is' GUmpbell, Lineally Descended from the House of Argyll, and bears distant Relation to' the present Duk6 of that Name Scot- Iknd, and who now Constituted Duke of England, by the Stile and Title of the Duke of Greenwich
-'It happens frequently, that the Birth of Extraordinary Persons long disputed by diferent People, each claiming him for their owh^Mr :the^eai Place where he first took-
Breath
it •
.
f~Y$ tile Goodness and Antiquity of the
"•'
  I».
I
';. •
'
.
*
*
is '
'
is so
^
J '
J.
a
: *
a
I,
in
:
a:

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 9
at last dubious : And thus it fares with the Person who is the Subject of
the following Sheets ; as therefore it is my
Breath grows
Proposal to have a strict regard to Historical Faith, so am I obliged to tell the Reader, that
I can, with no certainty, give an Account of him, till after he was Three Years Old ; from which Age I knew him even to this Day : I will answer for the Truths which I impart to the Publick during that Time ; and as for his Birth and the Circumstances of and how the first Three Years of his Life pasted,
can only deliver them the same Account have received from others, and leave them to their own Judgments, whether ought to be deemed Real or Fabulous.
The Father of our Mr. Duncan
fas these relate the Story) was from his In
sancy of very curious inquisitive Nature,
and of an Enterprizing Genius and he heard of any Thing surprizing to be seen, the Difficulty in Practice was enough to recom mend to him the attempting to get sight of
at any Rate or any Hazard. It certain, that during some Civil Broils and Troubles Scotland, the Grandfather of our Mr. Camp bell was driven with his Wife and Family by the Fate of War into the Isie of Schetlan'd, where he lived many Years and during his
Residence there, Mr. Archibald Campbell, the Father of our Duncan Campbell, was Born.
Schet-
 Campbell
  ;
it
I a
j is a
it
it,
if
in I

 xp The Life and ApvENtURis
be-,
Schetland lies Nor th-Eaft from Orkney, tween 60 and 61 Degrees of Latitude. The largest Isle of Schetland, by the Natives cal-* led the Main- Land, is sixty Miles in Length, from South-Weft to the NorthÆaJl; and from sixteen, to one Mile in Breadth. T,S ., t
who live in the smaller Ifle6,
The People
have Abundance of Eggs and Fowl ; which contributes to maintain their Families during
theSummer. , r, I ot The ordinary Folks are mostly very nim-.
ble and active, climbing the Rocks in quest
far
of those Eggs and Fowl.
more diverting than Hunting arid Hawking among us and would certainly, for the Plea sure of be followed by People of greater
This Exercise
 Distinction, was not attended
great Dangers, sufficient to turn Sport into Sorrow, and which have often prov fatal to
those,, Who too eagerly pursue
Mr. Archibald Campbell, however,
extreamly in this way of Foiling,
to condescend to mix with the Common Peo ple for Company, because none of the Youths of his Rank and Condition were venturesome;
enough. to go aldng-wich him*) stb. tWAta*i The most remarkable Experiment of thiss
atthe Isle called the Noss of Braffak The Noss standing at sixteea Fathom Distance from the Side" of the opposite Main the higher and lower R<acks have; two. .Stakes,
fasten'd each of them, and to these there are
Sort,
with very
their Game*
delighted: and used
  is in
it, ;
in
.
.
;.
is
.i,
1 it
>
d

 of Mr. D u N c A n C a m p b fe m£ x r
are Ropes tied : Upon the Ropes there is an Engine hung, which they call a Cradle ; and in this a Man makes his way over from the
to the smaller Rocks, where makes a considerable Purchase of Eggs an4i Fowl : But his Return being by an Ascent, makes it the more dangerous ; tho' those ofi thfc great Rock have a Rope tied to the Cra dle, by which . they draw it and the Man safe over for the most part. Over this Rock, Mr« Archibald. Campbells and Five others, were in that manner let down by Cradles and' Ropes ; but before they could!be all drawrt back again, it grew dark ; and their Associ ates not daring to be benighted, Vere*forced to withdraw ; and Mr. Campbell was the un fortunate Person left behind, having wan* dered too far, and not minded how the Day declined, being intent on his Game. He pas sed that Night, you may easily guess, with out much Sleep, and with great Anxiety of Heart. The Night too (as he lay in the open Air) was, to add to his Misfortune, as boi sterous and tempestuous as his own Mind : But in the end the Tempest prov'd very hap py for him. The Reader is to understand, that the Hamburghers, Bremeners and HoL
greater
he;
 Jandehi carry on a great Fish Trade there. Accordingly a Holland Vessel, that ; Was just coming1in the! Sound of Brajsab, was by this "Tempest driven into a Creek of the Rock, whicBc Nature had made into a Harbour ;
oil} " and
  
 iz The LiiE»and Adventures
and they were Providentially laved from the Bottom of the Sea by a Rock, from which,
humanly speaking, they could expect nothing but Destruction, and being sent to the Bot tom of that Sea. As never could a Man be taken hold of with so sudden and surprizing a Disaster, so no body could meet with a more sudden and surprizing Relief than Mr.+ Campbell found, when he saw a Ship Ib' near. He made to the Veslel, and begged the Hollanders to take him in : They asked
Him, what he would give them ? or, said the Barbarous Sailors, we will even leave you where you are. He told them his Disaster ; but they askeel Money, and nothing else would move them. As he knew them a self-inte rested People, he bethought himself, that if he should tell them of the Plenty of Fowls and Eggs they would get there, he might not only be taken in a Paslenger, but made a Partner in the Money arising from the Stock : It succeeded accordingly, when he proposed it ;
the whole Crew were all at work, and in four Hours pretty well stored the Veslel ; and then returning on Board, set Sail for Holland. They offered Mr. Campbell to put. him in at his own Island j but having a mind to see Holland, and, being a Partner, to learn their Way of.! Merchandize ; which.' he- thought he might turn to his Country?) men's Advantage ; he told them he :would'
fee, the
 go the Voyage out with them, and L-3 ,
  
 r(;who
of Mr. DuncanCampbe l *rj
of those who were his De necesiary way of Speech, when _one has Design to sooth Barbarians who, but for Interest, would have left him unre-
- deemed, arid, for ought they knew, perpetu sole Inhabitant of ia dreadful Rock, incoiri-
,pass'd round with Precipices, some Three Hun dred Fathom high.' Not To the Islanders
Country liverers
fthe
are wrongly called Savage Set of Mortals no they Came quest of him after so bitter Night, not doubting to find him, but fearing to find him lamentable Con
dition. They hunted and ransack'd every lit
tle Hole and Corner the Rock, but all •vain. In one Place, they saw great Slaugh
ter of Fowls, enough to serve 'Forty, Families (for; Week and then they guested, tho'
had not the Fortune' to meet the Eagles frequently noted to.v hover about those Isles) that they might have devoured Part of him on some Precipice of the Rock,
 they
and dropt the Remnant into the Sea.
came upon them, and they were afraid of
falling into the fame Disaster they went to relieve Mr. Campbell from. They returned each to their proper Baskets and were drawn up safe their respective Friends who were amazed that one Basket was a'rftwn up
empty, which was. let down for Mx.-Campbellf; and that there was not the least Intelligence to be had concerning! ihijm, but the supposi titious S"tory c£ hjs^vjng been devour by Liit Eagles.
Night
  d
a
; is.
by
a ,
al
a A:
ill ,a
;
..
'
(
;
a ;) .;
a
.
in
in
in
a
in
;

 The Life and
The Story was told at Home j and, with the Lamentation of the whole Family, and all his Friends, he was look'd upon to be murthered, or dead. - J*.r- . -ml
Return we now to Mr. Archibald Camp bell still alive , and on Board the Holland Veslel ; secure, as he thought within himself,
•that from the Delivery he lately had by the Gift of Providence, he was not intended to be liable to any more Misfortunes and Dan
gers of Life, in the Compaft of so small a
Voyage* But his Lot was placed other
wise in. the Book of Fate, than he too
fondly imagined : His Time of Happinefe was dated some Pages lower down ; and more llubs and Difficulties were to be encounter'd witfis before his Stars intended to lead him«6 the Port of Felicity. Just as he arrived with
in sight of Amjlerdamy a terrible Storm arose, fend, in danger of their Lives for many Hours, they weather'd out the Tempest ; and a Calm
promising fair afresh, they made to the
Coast of Zealand ; but a new Hurricane
prevented the Ship from coming there also.:
14
Adventures
fcagles.
 after having lost their Masts and Rig ging, they were driven into Lapland. There they went ashore, in order to careen aild
,And
their Ship, and take in Provisions.
repair
While the Ship was Repairing by the Thach^ our Islander made merry with the Inhabit
tants ; being the most inclined to their Super stitious Customs. He there became acquainted
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell^
with a very beautiful Woman, who fell in Love with him ; and after a Very short Space of Time, he married her. About the Time
hisWife (who#as very rich) :' was big with Child of a Stfn ; namely, -Mr. Duncan Campbell. He wrote ft Letter by the Master of the Vqllej .cp his Pi- rents in Scbetland, concerning the various Adventures hehad met with j which wafccjet- liver'd the Jme following , about the Time
:
when the Ship departed,
of Fishing, to his Parents ; and several Per sons: hod- Copies thereof,; and: for ought I know, some retain them td this very Day. Sure I am, that many remecnbgrrthe Particu lars of this surprizing Affair^ who are now
*iy
 living in that Island.' 'V; .v.J: j •:•»;
.~. hshe Letter -being veny. remarkable, and "singular ist: ail Its Circumstances, I /hall pre sent it the Reader word for word,, as it was
given into my Hands, together with some others which he wrote afterwards ; in all which, I am aslured by vpry credible Per sons, and undoubted Authorities, there are not the least Alterations, but what the Verv sion of it from the then Scots Manner of Ex pression into ra more Modern Engkjb Drels, ¥nade absplutelylnecejUary; v. s .
l», ' *"i-T
rvn?. v ..'-'•! ..'i. , j.') '\Li'\C '.I z.rl "Nos f-" . t.-v[t
  I'
r. I
!
•\
ry.\ i
r "..j

 i6 The Life and Adventures
,!."
H E same odd Variety of Accidents,
which put it out of my Power to be
perlonally present with you for so long a Time, put it likewise out of my Power to
write to you. At last Fortune has so ordered
Letter to you, before can written expresly to tell
have met with which 'have detained me this tedious Space of Time from my Dear Father and because the lame •Captain of Ship, that brings you this, might
as easily have brought your Son to speak for himself shall, the next place, lay before you the Necessity there for my Stay lit tle longer among the strange Natives of the Country where now inhabit, and where am manner become Naturalized. , .;,,
You have, no doubt of been irtform'd by
my Companions, some of whom hope got safe back again, not all) that was lost,
where many brave Man has perisii'd before
that can send come my self and
.you the Adventures
 going over the high Precipices of the Mountain Erajsah in Basket, sliding dowiji by Rope. must suppose have given you the Anguish of Father for Son, who, you
thought, had lost his Life such Fool-har
dy Attempt and implore your Pardon with all the Power of Filial Contrition, Penitence
and Duty. You have always mewed me such singular
me)
  it, aI
by a
I
X
it,
a in
by a ;I
I ;
jIa
I
a
a ;is
a
if(
I
in
I
;
, aI
r
I
I is
it a

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
17 singular Marks of Paternal Affection, that I know your Receipt of this Letter will fill your Heart with Joy, and cause you to sign me an Absolution and free Pardon for all
the Errors I have committed ; and think
the Sufferings I have undergone for my Rashness and Indiscretion, a sufficient Atone
ment for my Crime of making you, by my Undutifulness, a Partner of my Sorrows. To free you the more from thisUneasiness,I know I need only tell you, that every Grief of mine is gone, excepting one, which that must still
lose the Pleasure of seeing you little longer. There was never surely more bitter Night, than that which must by me be for ever
remember when was lost the Moun tain ofBraffah, where must for ought know have liv'd for ever, wild, single Inhabitant, but that the Storm (which made the Night so uneasy to me) render'd the first Approach of Daylight beyond Measure delightful. The first Providential Glimpse of the Morning,
gave me View of Ship driven by the Tem pest into Creek of the Rock, that was by
Nature form'd like Harbour miraculous Security of Deliverance, as thought, both for the Ship's Crew, and my self. made all
the Haste could, you may be sure, to them and found them to be Dutchmen, that were come for Fish But in Lieu of Fish, structed them to load with Eggs and Fowl which we compassed very happily in short
Space
   : ,
C
it
aa
I
is,
I a
I I
I
; in ;
I
a
I
a
'd ;
I
a
;
a in
a
a
I

 18 TkLiFE ot^Adventures
Space of Time ; and I was to be a Sharer
with the Captain in the Lading, and bargain ed to go for Holland, to fee the Sale, and the Nature of Traffick : But when we were at Sea, after much bad Weather, we made to wards Zealand ; but we were driven upon the Coast of Finland by a new Storm, and thence into Lapland, where I now am, and from whence I send you this Letter.
I could not come into a Place so properly named for my Reception. As I had been undutiful to you , and Fortune seemed to make me an Exile, or banished Man, by way of Punishment for the Vices of my Youth ; so Lapland (which is a Word originally de- riv'd from the Finland word Lappi , that Exiles and from the Swedish word Lap, signifying Banished from which Two King doms most of our Inhabitants were banish'd hither, for not embracing the Christian Reli gion was certainly the properest Country
 the World to receive me.
When first enter'd this Country,
thought: was got into quite another World The Men are all of them Pigmies to our tall,
brawny Highlanders They are,
speaking, not above Three Cubits high in somuch that tho' the whole Country of Lap land
immensely large, and have heard reckon'd by the Inhabitants to be above
Hundred German
Fourscore and Ten Breadth Yet was
Leagues Length, and the
generally
  it i
in
I
;
in :
I
a
is
I
in
); ;
I
I
:
;
:
is,

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
the tallest Man there , and look'd upon as a Giant. The District in which I live now,
is called Uma Lapmark. You must under stand, Sir, that when I landed at North Cape^ in Kimi-Lapmark, another District of Lapland ; there was at that Time a most
beautiful Lady come to fee a Sick Relation of her Father's, who was Prefect, or Governor of Uma Lapmark ; which is a Post of great
Distinction.— This Lady, by being frequently
in the Company of French Merchants, Traffick now and then in that Province of
Uma Lapmark ) understood French ; and ha ving heard of a Man Six Foot and a half high,
(who
19
 desired to fee me ; and when I
happen'd mightily to like my Person : And she talk'd French ; which when I anlwer'd, /he
• made great Signs of Joy , that she could communicate her Sentiments to me ; and she told me who she was, how rich, and that
not one in the Company besides could un derstand a Syllable we said, and so I might speak my Mind freely to her. She told me the Customs of the Country ; that it was divided into Cantons, like our Shires, and those Cantons into Rekars, or certain Grounds allotted to Families , that are just like our Clans. As she was beyond measure beautiful,
slie was extreamly good-humour'd, (a Thing rarely to be met with among LaplandWomen) of better Stature than her Country- Women ;
very rich, and of good Birth : Ci
I thought it
came, she
  
 ao The Life and Adventures
it would be a prodigious Turn of Fortune for a Man in my Circumstances, if I could make any Progress in her Heart ; which she seem'd a little to open to me , in such a man ner, for the beginning, as if such a successful Event, if managed with Prudence, might
not be despaired of. Souls that are Gene rous, are apt to Love j and Compassion is the best Introducer of Love into a generous Bo som ; and that was the best Stock I had to go upon in my Courtship. I told her of all my Calamities, my Dangers, and my Escapes ; the Goodness of my Birth ; as being allied to
 one of the greatest Nobles in our Island : And still she would ask me to tell it her over again ; tho' every Time I told it , just at such and such Paslages, me was forced to drop the
Tears from her Eyes. In fine, I grew more in Love with her, out of a Sense of Gratitude now , than by the Power of her Charms be fore. The Matter in a few Days went 'so far, that she owned to me I had her Heart. As to Marriage, I did not then know the
Custom of the Nation :
proved only dangerous to me, I lov'd her so well, that I intended to marry her , tho' theI Law was to pronounce me dead for it ; but
did not know whether it might not be peri lous for her too, to engage in such a State with me ; and I resolved in that Case, rather to be singly unhappy, than to involve her in Distress, and make her the fair Companion
of
I thought that if it
  
 of Mr. Dunca n Campb ellT Zl
of my Woes. I would not tell her so, for fear she mould out of Love hide from me those Dangers ; and therefore using a kind
Sort of Dissimulation, I conjured her to tell me the Laws and Customs of Marriages in that Country to a Tittle ; and that nothing should hinder us from Happiness. She told me exactly, as I find since. Our Marriage, said
she, will be very hard to compals ; provi ded we follow the strict Rule of the Coun
For our Women here are bound not to see the Men who make their Addresses to them, in some Time. His way of Courtship, is to come 'to the Parents ; and his nearest Friends and Relations must make her Father Presents, and supplicate him like a King, to grant him his Daughter. The Courtship
often lasts two or three Years, and sometimes hasnotitsEffectatlast: Butifithas,the Woman is dragged by her Father and Bro
ther to Church, as unwilling to go to be mar
ried ; which is look'd upon as a greater Part
try.
 of Modesty in her, according to the greater Disinclination she shews. My Father and Brother, said Ihe, will both be against it : You have no Relations in this Country to move
your Suit :
I cannot be so hypocritical, as to
be dragged unwillingly to him I own I de sire for my Lawful Husband ; and therefore,
as I have an Inclination to you , and I dare own I have, I will not follow those Methods which I disapprove.C I have talked with sc-
3 veral
  
 The Life and Ad ventures
veral Swedes, and several Polite Frenchmen, about their Manner of Espousals ; and I am told, that when Souls are naturally united by Affection, the Couple so mutually and reciprocally loving, tho' they had rather have their Parents Leave, (if likely to be got) yet unwilling to be disappointed, only go to the next Minister's, and marry for better for worse. This way I approve of ; for where two Persons naturally love each other, the rest is nothing but a, modest Restraint to their Wishes : And since 'tis only Custom, my own Reason teaches me, there is no Error com mitted, nor any Harm done in breaking thro' upon so commendable an Occasion.
'ii
 added she, Thousand Rain-Deer be longing to me, beyond my Father's Power of taking away and Third Share Re- kar, or Clan, that Ten Leagues in Corn-
have,
pals, the mark. This
ar or Canton of Una Lap- at my own Disposal and
you please to accept of
all your own,
with me. Our Women are very coy, when they are courted, tho' they have neve* much an Inclination to their Suitor but good Reason, and the Commerce have had with Persons of Politer Nations than ours teach me, that this proceeds entirely from Va nity and Affectation and the greatest Proof of Woman's
Modesty, Chastity, and Sincerity, certainly consists (contrary to the general corrupted Opinion) yielding up
  in
I
;
a
;
if
is
a a
;
is, so itit
in a
is
I
in isBy ;
it,

 ofMr. Duncan Campbell \$,
her self soon into the Arms of the Man she loves. For she that can dally with a Heart she prizes , can give away her Heart ( when she is once baulked) to any Man, even tho' she dislikes him. You must judge, ( my dear Father) I must be touch'd with a Woman that was exceeding beautiful beyond any of her Nation, and who had Thoughts as beau
I therefore was all in Rapture, and long'd for Matrimony j but
tiful as her Person :
still loved her enough to propose the Questi on I resolved to her ; viz. If it would not be
in her Nation accounted a Clandestine Mar
riage, and prove of great Damage to her ? To this she answer d, with all the Wisdom which could be expected from a Woman,
who had given such Eminent Tokens of her
 on other Points, amidst a Nati on so barbarous in its Manners, and so cor rupt in its Principles as Lapland is. I am, said she, answerable to my Father for no thing, by our Laws ; having no Portion of him, but only what was presented me by my Relations , at my Birth, according to Custom, in Lands and Rain-Deer. My Fa
ther is but Deputy- Governor ; tis a Swede who is the Governor of Uma ; and if I pay to him at every Mart and Fair, the due Tribute, (which must either consist of Fifty Rain-Deer, or One Hundred and Fifty
Judgment
he will have the Priest that mar ries us present at the Court ofJustice, accor- C4 ding
Rixdollars)
  
 The Life and Adventures
24
ding to our Custom, and lieep us in Poslessi-f
on of our Rights, that we may be enabled to pay Tribute to the Crown of Sweden. In deed, before the Abolition of the Bkkarti, which were our Native Judges, we could not have Married thus without Danger to us both ; but now there is none at all.
My dear Father^ You must easily imagine that I could not help embracing with all Tenderness so dear and so lovely a Woman.
In fine, I am Married to her ;
I have lived very happily hitherto, and am now grown more happy, for she is big with Child ; and
 like, before my Letter comes to your Hands, to make you a Grandfather of 'a pretty Boy. You will perhaps wonder, that I name the Sex of the Child before it comes into the World ; but we have a way in Lapland of finding that out ; which tho' some Judicious
People :all superstitious , I am really persua ded of by Experience ; and therefore I in
dulged my signified
dear Wife's Curiosity, when she
to me, Ihe had a Mind to make the
usual Tryal, whether the Child she ;was going
to be deliver'd of, would be a Boy'or a Girl ? You must understand, {,My Dear Fathers the People here judge of the Sex of the Child
by the Moon,' unto which they compare a big-belly'd Woman. If they fee a Star appear
just above the Moon, it Sign will be Boy but the Star be just below the Moon, they conjecture her to 'be big with Girl.
This
  !
if
;
it a
a .
is' a

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell"
This Observation and Remark of Laplan ders has (1 know) been accounted by some, and those wise and judicious Men too, to be ridiculously superstitious ; but I have been led into an easy Belief of this'Mystery, by a Mistress (that is superior to Wisdom it self)
constant, and therefore probably infallible,
Experience. I therefore indulg'd my Wife in this her Request, and went with her to the
Ceremony : The Star appeared above the Moon, which prognosticates a Boy , which I wish may, and I scarce doubt will prove true ; and when she is brought to Bed, I will fend you word of it. It is remarkable likewise, that a Star was seen just before the Moon, which we also count a
z$
 very good Omen. For It is a Custom likewise here in Lapland, to consult the Moon as an Oracle,
about the Health and Vigor of the Child. If a Star be seen just before the' Moon, we
count it a Sign of a lusty and well-grown Child, without Blemish ; if a Star comes just after, we reckon it a Token, that the Child will have some Defect or Deformity, or die soon after it is born.
Having thus told you the Manners of the Country live at present, as much at large
as the Spaceof Letter will permit, and rela ted to you my own happy Circumstances, and the kindly Promises of the Heavens, that are
lishering '•Jin>f'the Birth of my Child would not Mve you think that addict my self
  t. '
I in
I
;I
a
,••

 i6 Thehirn
and Adventures
self to the Superstitions of the Country, which are very many, and groundless ; and arising partly from the Remainder of Pagan Wor-
ship, which is still cultivated among some
of the more obstinate Inhabitants.
on the contrary, (since I married her ) en deavour d to repay my Wife's Temporal Blessings to me, with those that .are endless: instructetf b,er. in all the Points of Religion, and made her perfectly a (Christian : And /he, by her Devotion and Prayers for me, makes me such Amends for that hope in Us Two St. Paul Saying will be verified viz. That the Woman foall be santlified in her Hnjhand,
I have,
 his Wife.
and she Husband shall be sanBified
"1n;;
However, must take notice in this Place,
with all due Deference toChristianity, that dip am obligd to applaud the Prudence and Pi
ety of Charles the Ninth, King of Sweden, who constituting Swedijb Governors over this Country, abrogated their Practice of Superr stitions, and Art Magick, upon Pain of Death Yet that King carried the Point too far, and intermingled with these Art^the Pretensions to the Gift of Second Sight which you know how frequent with us Scotland, and which aslure you, my Wife (tho' she durst
;not publickly own for fear of incurring the Penalty of those Swedifo Laws does as
were inherit for all her Ancestors before her have had from Time immemorial to
great
  ) a
I ;
;)
it
I ;.: in
it( it
s
I
aI is
it,
in j
it,
:

 os Mr. Duncan Campbell^ rj_
a greater Degree , than ever I knew any of
our Countrywomen, or Qountrymen. One>Day this last Week she distracted me, between the Extreams of Joy and Sorrow :
She told me I mould fee you shortly ; and that my coming Son would grow to be one of the most remarkable Men in England and Scot land, for his Power of Foresight : But that I should speedily lose her, and meet with Difficulties in my own Country, in the fame manner as my Father (meaning you,
Sir) had done before me, and on the fame Ac
count ; viz. of Civil Broils , and intestine Wars in Scotland.
 These unfortunate Parts of her Relation, I would not conceal from you ; because the Veracity of her Notions should appear, if they are true ; tho' you may be sure I much wish they all may prove false to the very last, excepting that wherein she tells me, my Son will be gres^y remarkable , and that I shall shortly Ice my dear Father, which I dai ly long for, and will endeavour to do as soon as possible. Pray remember me to all Friends ;
being, '
_
Honour d Sir,
Tom moft Dutiful and Loving Son,
Archibald Campbell. •'.The
  
 28 The Life and Adventures
The Second Letter.
IAm now the happiest Man alive : The prosperous Part of my Wife's Predicti ons, which I mention 'd to you in my last, is come in some measure to pass. The Child she has brought me proves a Boy , and as
fine a one as ever I beheld ; if Fondness for my own makes me not blind. And sure it can't be Fondness, because other plain Cir cumstances join'd at his Birth, to prove it a more than ordinary remarkable one. He was born with a Cawl upon his Head ; which we count one of the luckiest Signs that can be in Nature : He had likewise Three Teeth ready cut thro' the Gums ; and we reckon
 that an undeniable Testimony and Promise, given to the World by Nature, that she in tends such a Person for her extraordinary Fa vourite, and that he is born fer great Things ; which I daily beg of Heaven may come to
pass.
; Since I have known for some Months
what it is to be a Father, it adds a conr. Isiderable Weight to those Affections which
had for Wife. that
my I thought my
Tenderness for her was at the Heighth of Perfection before ; which shews how little we know of those Parts of Nature , that we have yet never tried, and of which we have not yet been allotted our Share to
  
 os Mr. Duncan Campbell.
act upon the Stage of Life. I find that I did love her then, as well as a Husband could love a Wife, that Wife without Child, but the Love to Wife that has Child,
feeling wonderful and inexpressibly different. A Child the Seal and the Pledge of Love Meditating upon this, has likewise doubled my Affection to you loved you before as
Son, and because as such felt your Ten derness but my Love much increased now,
because know the Tenderness which
felt for me as Father With these pleasing
Images of Thought, often keep you nearer Company at this vast distance, than when lived irregularly under your Eye. These Re
flexions render Solitary Life dear to me. And tho have no manner of Acquaintance with her Relations, who hate me as am told, nor indeed with almost any of the In habitants, but my own Domesticks, and those am forcep! to deal with yet have as much methinksj' as wish for, unless could come over to Schetland, and live with which the more ardently desire, because
think and my Wife could be true Com forts to you your advanced Years now
know What living truly is. am daily per suading my Wife to go with me but she denies me with kind Expressions, and fays,
she owes too much to the Place ("however less pleasant in self than other Climates) where she had the Happiness of first joining
Hands
z9
you
 you
  in it
a aa
;
I ;
II
a
I
I
I
I is
I I
is, I: is ;I a
;
I
a
I ;I;
a
I
I;
is a

 3o
The Life and Adventures
Hands with me in Wedlock , ever to part from it. But I must explain how I ask, and
how she refuses. I resolv'd never
and downrightly to ask her, because I know {he can refuse me nothing ; and that would be bearing hard upon the Goodness of her Will : But my way of persuading her, con
sists in endeavouring to make her in Love
with the Place, by agreeable Descriptions of and likewise of the Human Temper of the People that shortly shall induce her to signify to me, that her own Will to come with me and then shall seem rather to consent to her Will, than to have moved
over to my own. These Hopes have of seeing my dear Father very shortly and know such News would make this Letter
which therefore fend) more acceptable to him, to whom will be
mo Dutiful and AffeBionate Son tillDeath,
Archibald Campbell.
P. If cannot bring my Wife to change this Country for another, have brought her to that Pitch of Devotion, that whenever Pro
directly
 vidence (which, notwithstanding
her to change this World for another, will.
her Pre dictions, hope will be long yet) shall call
  I
I
A
; so
I it
I
it is
S.
I
I [I
I
C
it
it,
I ;
I
;

 of Mr. Duncan CampbeliI
be happy with her there. She joins with me,
in begging your Blessing to me, her self, and our little Duncan ; whom we Christen'd so, out of a Respect to the Name you bear.
The Third Letter.
IMy Dear F a th e r,
Am lost in Grief. — I had just brought.a my Wife ( Her that was my Wife, for I have
none now ; I have lost all Joy in the Mind of coming over to be Comfort to you But now Grief will let me say no more, than that am coming to beg Comfort from you and by this prepare you to receive, when he comes,
 Son in Tears and Mourning,
Archibald Campbell.
P. have Babe not much above Two Years old, must bear the Hardships of Tra velling over the Ice, and all thro' Muscovy for no Ships can stir here for many Months, and cannot bear to live this inhospitable Place, (where Ihe died, that only could
make easy to me;) one Moment beyond the first Opportunity have of leaving it. She
Heaven that should make me easy But cannot am not so good Christian as me was am lost and ruin'd.
CHAP.
  I:
;
I a
:
a
is
a
Iin I it
I 5.
;I
I
a
1
in
:;I
;
:
;.)

 After
The Li*e and Adventures
Jx
G H A P. II.
the Death of Mr. Duncan Campbells Mother in Lapland, his Father Archibald returned with his Son to Scotland. His Se cond Marriage, and how his Son was taught to Write and Read.
MR. Archibald Campbell, having bu ried his Lapland Lady, returned to Scotland ; and brought over with him his Son Mr. Duncan Campbell. By that time he had been a Year in his own Country he Married a Second Wife, a Lady whom I had
known very well for some Years, and then I first saw the Boy ; but as they went into the IVeftern Islands, I saw them not again in three Years. She being (quite contrary to the cruel way much in Use among Step-Mothers,)
fond of the Boy, was accustomed to say, she did, and would always think him her own Son. The Child came to be about Four Years of Age (as me has related to me the Story since) and npt able to speak one Word, nor to hear any Noise the Fa ther of him used to be mightily oppressed
with Grief, and complain heavily to his new Wife, who was no left perplexed that a Boy so pretty, the Son of so particular a Woman, which he had made his Wife by strange Ac cidents and Adventures, and a Child coming
 very
  
 of Mr. Duncan Cam pb^lL 33
into the World with' so many amazing Cir cumstances attending his Birth, mould lose those precious Senses, by which alone the So cial Commerce of Mankind is upheld and maintained ; and that he should be deprived of all Advantages of Education,' which could
raise him to the Character of being the great Man, that so many concurring Incidents at his Nativity promised arid betokened he would be.
One Day a Learned Divine , who was of the University of Glascow, but had visited Oxford, and been acquainted with the chief Men of Science there, happening to be in Conversation with the Mother-in-Law of this Child, me related to him her Son's Misfor tunes, with fb many Marks of Sorrow, that she mov'd the good old Gentleman's Compas sion, and excited in him a Desire to give her what Relief and Consolation he could, in this unhappy Case. His particular Inclination to do her good Offices, made him recollect, that at the Time he was at Oxford, he had been in Company with one Dr. Wallis, a Man famous for Learning ; who had told him, that he had taught a born-Deaf and Dumb Man to Write and to Read , and even to litter some Sounds articulately with his Mouth ; and that he told him^ he was then going to commit to Print the Method he made use of, in so Instructing that Person* that others in the like unfortunate Conditions
D might
   
 tages
Hopes,
The Life and An ventures
34
might receive the same Benefits and Advan
from other Masters, which his Deaf
and Dumb Pupil had received from him. A
Dumb Man recovering his Speech , or a
Blind Man gaining his Sight, or a Deaf one getting his Hearing, could not be more over joyed, than Mrs. Campbell was at these un
expected Tidings ; and shc wept for Glad ness, .when he told it. The good Gentle man animated and encouraged her with the kindest Promises ; and, to keep alive her
allured her he would fend to one of the Chief Booksellers in London, to enquire after the Book ; ( who would certainly pro cureithim, ifitwastobegot;)and that afterwards he would peruse it diligently, make himself Master of Dr. WaUiss Method j and tho' he had many great Works upon his Hands at that Time, he would steal from his other Studies Leisure enough to compleat so Charitable an Office, as teaching the Dumb and Deaf to Read and to Write, and give her Son, (who was by Nature deprived of them ) the Advantages of Speech , as far
as Art' would permit that Natural Defect
to be supplied by her powerful Interposi tion. , A'.
When the Mother came Home, the Child
(who could hear no knocking, and therefore
itmustbe a) and In by strange inexplicable
stinct in Nature was the first that ran to the Door 'r and falling in a great Fit of Laugh- :, ter,
   
 of Æsr. Duncan Campbell.
\$ ter, (a Thing it was not much used to before, having ort the contrary rather a melancholy
Cast of Complexion ;j it clung round its Mother's Knees, incessantly embracing and kissing them ; as if just: at that Time it had an Insight into what the Mother had been
doing for arid into its own approaching Relief from its Misery.
When the Mother came with the Child her Hand to the Father to tell him the wel come News the Child burst afresh into great Fit of Laughter, which continued for an unusual Space of Time and the Scerie of
such reciprocal Affection and Joy between Wife and her own Husband on signal an Occasion, Thing easier to be felt by Pa rents of good Disposition,, (imagining them selves under the same Circumstance, with Re gard to Child they loved with Fondness) than to be express'd, or describ'd the Pen of any Writer. But certain whenever they spoke of this Affair, as any body, who knows the Impatience of Parents for the Welfare of an only Child, may guess they must be often discoursing over and wish ing the Time was come the Boy, who used seldom much as to smile at other Times, and who could never hear the greatest f^oise that could be made would constantly look wishfully their Faces, and laugh immode rately which plain indication, that there was then, wonderful Instinct Na-
ture,
i
   a Da
in
;
in
so
a
a
is
,
a ); it ( is
,
it ,;
,
,
by
is a
it, ;
so
a a in

 Tta Life and Adventures
ture, as said before which made him fore taste his good Fortune, and, may be
lowed the Expression, The Dawnings as were of the Second Sight, were then preg nant within him.
To confirm this, the happy Hour of his Deliverance being come, and the Doctor having procur'd Dr. Wallic's Book, came with
great Joy, and defir'd to see his Pupil. Scarce were the Words out of his Mouth, when the. Glild happen'd to come into the Room, and running towards the Doctor, fell on his Knees, kisled his Hand eagerly, and laugh'd as be
fore which to me Demonstration that lie had an Insight into the Good which the Doctor intended him.
It certain, that several Learned Men, who have written concerning the Second Sights have demonstrated by uncontestable Proofs, and undeniable Arguments, That Children,
riay, even Horses and Cows, see the Second
 as well as Men and Women advanced Years But of this shall discourse at large in its proper Place having allotted whole
future Chapter for that fame Subject of Se-
cond-sightedness.
In about Half Year, the Doctor taught
his little Dumb Pupil, First, to know his Letters then to name any Thing whatsoever to leave off some Savage Motions,, which he lrad taken of his own accord before to sig
his Mind and to impart his
Sight,
nify
.
Thoughts
  by ,
a
;
I
is a
,
;
; is
I
;
it al
a
,
in :
3<$
1
if I
;

 cf Mr. Dunca n Campb ell. 37
Thoughts by his Fingers and his Pen, in a Manner as intelligible, and almost as swift thro' the Eyes, as that is of conveying our
Ideas to one another by our Voices, thro' the Conduits and Port-holes of the Ears. But in little more than Two Years, he could write and read as well as any body. Because a great many People cannot conceive this, and others pretend it is not to be done in Nature,
*
I will a little discourse upon Dr. Wall Foun
dation, and shew Manner obvious to the
most ignorant, how this hitherto mysterious Help may be easily administred to the Deaf and yie Dumb which shall be the Subject of
the ensuing Chapter.
But cannot conclude this, without telling
the handsome Saying, with which this Child, (when not quite Six Years old as soon as he thought he could express himself welJ, paid his
first Acknowledgment to his Master and which promised how great his future Genius was to be, when witty Child ripen'd into Man. The Words he wrote to him w ere these only alter'd into English, from the Scots Dialect.
' Sir, is no little Work you have accom plished My Thanks are too poor an Amends
The World, Sir, foall give you Thanks for
as could not have express piy self without your Teaching me those that can talk, tho they have Eyes cannot fee the Things
which
   D, ,
I
;
I
:
It
so
3so a
d
a
)
;
:
;
is' s
»
;
in

 38 The Life and Adventures
which I can see, and (hall tell them ; so that, in doing me this , you have done a General Service to Mankind.
C H A P. III.
The Method of Teaching Deaf and Dumb
Persons to Write, Read , and understand a Language.
... i
is, I must, confess, in some Measure
IT to me, that Men (of amazing any
 mo derate Share of Learning) should not natu
rally conceive of themselves a plain Reason for this Art, and know how to account for the Practibility of it , the Moment they hear the Proposition advanced ; the Reasons for it are so obvious to the very first Con sideration we can make about it. It will be likewise as amazing to me, that the most ignorant should not conceive
Reason given them for going to set down.
.-"
To begin How are Children at first taught Language that can hear Are they
not'taught by Sounds And what are those Sounds, but Tokens and Signs to the Ear, importing and signifying such and such Thing then there can be Signs made
to the Eye, agreed the Party teach.r
after plait; as am now
  by
?
?a
If
is :
a
it, I
I .
a
it ,
so

    
    
 ofMr. Duncan Campbell. 39
ing the Child, that they signify such and such a Thing ; will not the Eye of the Child con vey them to the Mind, as well as the Ear ?
They are indeed different Marks to different Senses 5 but both the one and the other do equally signify the same Things or Notions,
to the Will of the Teacher, and consequently, must have an equal Effect with the Person who is to be instructed : For tho' the Manners signifying are different, the Things signified are the same.
For Example : If, after having invented an
Alphabet upon the Fingers, a Master always
by
\ Eye the same Notions of Things, as Sounds
do to the Ears of Children that hear \ The
Manner of Teaching the Alphabet by Fin
is plainly described in this Plate. When the Deaf Child has learn 'd by these
Motions a good Stock of Words ; as Chil dren that hear, first learn by Sounds ; we may methinks call (not improperly) the Fin gers of such a dumb Insant its Months and the Eye of such a deaf Child its Ear. When he has learn'd thus far, he must be taught to
according
 with a Deaf Child, and
keeps Company
teaches it to call for whatsoever it wants, such Motions of the Fingers, which if put down by Letters, (according to each invented Mo tion of each Finger) would form in Writing a Word of a Thing, which it wanted ; might not he, by these regular Motions, teach its
gers,
'D4 ] write
  
 The Life and Adventures
40
write the Alphabet, according as it was adapt ed to the Motions of his Fingers. As for In stance, the Five Vowels, a, et i, ?, u; by pointing to the Top of the Five Fingers ; and the other Letters, b, c, d, &c. by such other
Place or Posture of a Finger, as in the Plate is represented ; or otherwise, as shall be
agreed upon.
When this is done, the Marks
B, R, E, A, D, (and so of all other Words)
corresponding with such Finger , conveys
thro' his Eyes unto his Head the seme Noti on, viz,, the Thing signified , as the Sound we give to those same Letters, making the Word Bread do Mid our Heads thro' the Ears.
 This once done, he may be easily taught to understand the Parts of Speech ; ss the Verb, the Noun, Pronoun, &c. And so by Rules of Grammar and Syntax, to compound Ideas, and connect his Words into a Lan guage. The Method of which, since it is plainly set forth in Dr. Walliss Letter to
Mr. Beverly, I shall
Extract ; that People in the same Circum stances with the Person we treat of, and of the like Qenius, may not have their Talents Jost for want of the like Assistance.
set it down of by way
When once a Peas Person has learn'd so far, as to understand the common Discourse of others, and to' express his Mind (tolerably'
well) in Writing ;
Ifee no
Room,
to
dqubt, but
that; (provided Nature h,as endow'd him with
k"u '»•• :'
apre^ " ! ' ''
  
 of Mr. Dunc an CampbeliI 41
a proper Strength of Genius, as other Men that hear) he may become capable (upon farther Improvement) of such farther Know ledge as is attainable by Reading. For I must here join with the Learned Doctor Walks, in averting, fas to the present Case before us) that no Reason can be assigned, why such a Deaf Person may not attain the understanding of a Language as perfectly as those that hear,* and with the fame Learned Author, Itake upon me to lay down this Proposition as certain, that allowing the Deaf Person the like Time and Exercise, as to other Men is requisite in order to attain the Perfection of a Language, and the Ele gance of he may understand as well, and Wrife as good Language as other Men and abating only what doth depend upon Sound, as Tones, Cadencies, and (uch Punctilio's, no whit inferior to what he may attain to, lie had his hearing as others have.
An Extras from Dr. Wallis, concerning the
Method Teaching the Deaf and Dumb to Read.
most natural (as Children learn the
 Names of Things) to furnish him Degrees) with Nomenclator, containing
Competent Number of Names of Things common and obvious to the Eye (that you
Thing answering to such '
Name)
may shew
the, •
"
(by
  .'• /
a
IT is
4
a
; if
of a
it,

 42.
The Life and Adventures
and these digested under convenient Titles ; and placed under them, in such con venient order Cin several Columns, or other orderly Situation in the Paper) as (by their
Name)
best to express to the Eye, their Relation or Respect to one another. As Contraries or Correlatives, one against the other ; Subordinates or Appurtenances under their Principle, which may serve as a kind of Local Memory.
In another Paper, under the Title Body^ may be written ("in like convenient Order) Head ("Hair, Skin, Ear) Face, Forehead, Eye (Eyelid, Eyebrow ) Cheek, Nose,
Position)
- Thus (in one Paper ) under the Title Man kind, may be placed snot confusedly, but in decent order) Man, Woman, Child Boy, Girl.
 stril) Mouth (lip, Chin) Neck, J Back, Breast, Side, CRight-Side, Left-Side) Belly, Shoulders, Arm (Elbow, Wrist Hand,
(Back, Palm) Finger (Thumb,Knuckle,Nail) Thigh, Knee, Leg, (Shin, Calf, Ancle) Foot, ("Heel, Sole, Toe.)
And when he hath learned the Import of Words in each Paper, let him write them in like Manner, in distinct Leaves, or Pages of a Book ("prepared for that Purpose) Bq confirm his Memory, and to have Recourse to it upon Occasion.
In a Third Paper, you may give him the Inward Parts j as Skull (Brain) Throat
fWind-
("No Throat,
  
 *
(Windpipe, Gullet) Stomach, Guts, Heart, £ungs. Liver, Spleen, Kidney, Bladder (U~
fine) Vein (Bloods' Bone (Marrow) Flesti, Fat, &c. - •
In another Paper, under the Title Beast,
may be placed Horse (Stone-Horse, Gelding,) Mare (Colt) Bull (Ox) Cow, Calf, Sheep,
Ram (Wether) Ewe (Lamb) Hog, Boar, Sow, Pig, Dog (Masting Hound, Greyhound, Spaniel) Bitch (Whelp, Puppy) Hare, Rab bet, Cat, Mouse, Rat, &c.
Under the Title Bird or Fowl, put Cock, Capon, Hen, Chick, Goose (Gander) Gosling, Puck (Drake) Swan, Crow, Kite, Lark, &c.
Under the Title Fish, put Pike> Eel, Place, Salmon, Lobster, Crab, Oyster, Crawfish, &c.
You may theh put Plants or Vegetables, under several Heads or Subdivisions of the
Head, as Tree (Root, Body, Bark, Bough, Leaf, Fruit, Oak, Ash, Apple-tree, Pear-tree, Vine, &c. Fruit ; Apple, Pear, Plumb, Cherry, Grape, Nut, Orange, Le mon. Flower j Rose, Tulip, Gillyflower. Herb ; (Weed ) Grass, Corn, Wheat, Barley, Rye, Pea, Bean.
And the like of Inanimates ; as Heaven, Sun, Moon, Star, Element, Earth, Waters Air, Fire j and under the Title Earth, Clay? Sand, Gravel, Stone. Metal, Gold, Silver, Bra)ss, Copper, Iron (Steel) Lead, Tin (Pew
ter Glass. Under the Title Water, put Sea,
fame
•'
"
Pond,
of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
4;
   •'.

 The Life and Adventures
44
Pond, River, Stream. Under that of Air,
put Light, Dark, Mist, Fog, Cloud, Wind,
Rain, Hail, Snow, Thunder,
Rainbow. Under that of Fire ; Coal, Flame, Smoak, Soot, Allies.
Under the Title Cloatbs, put Woollen (Cloth, Stuff) Linnen (Holland, Lawn, Lockarum) Silk (Satin, Velvet) Hat, Cap, Band, Doublet, Breeches, Coat, Cloak,
Shoe , Boot, Shirt, Petticoat , Gown, &c.
Under the Title House, put Wall, Roof, Poor, Window, Casement, Room.
Under Room, put Shop, Hall, Parlour, Pining-Room, Chamber, Study, Closet,
Kitchin, Cellar, Stable, &c.
And under each of these, as distinct Heads,
the Furniture or Utensils belonging there unto ; with Divisions and Subdivisions, as there is Occasion ; which I forbear to Men tion, that I be not too Prolix.
And in like manner, from Time to Time, may be added more Collections, or Clauses
Stocking,
Lightning,
 of Names or Words,
under distinct Heads, and suitable Distribu tions ; to be written in distinct Leaves, or Pages of his Book, in such Order, as may seem convenient.
When he is furnished with a
Number of Names, though not so many as
Ihave mentioned :
competent It will be seasonable to
teach him, under the Titles Singular
conveniently digested,
and Plural.
•
.
  
 of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbelL 4j
Pluralj the Formation of Plurals from Sin- gulars , by adding S or Es. As Hand. Hands, Faec Faces, Fish Fifties, &c. with some few Irregulars, as Man Men, Woman Wo men, Foot Feet, Tooth Teeth, Mouse Mice, Lowse Lice, Ox Oxen,. &c.
'. Which, except the Irregulars, will serve for Posiessives, to be after taught him \ which are formed by their Primitives by like Addition of S or Es, except some few Irregulars, as My Mine, Thy Thine, Our Ours, Your Yours, His, Her, Hers, Their Theirs,
&c
And in all those, and other like Cases, it
.
will be proper first to shew him the Parti
\
 culars, and then the General Title.
1,•
. :Then teach him.in another Page, or Paper, the Particulars, a, an, the, this, that, these, those.
And the Pronouns, I, me, my, mine, thou, thee, thy, thine, we, us, our, ours, ye, y ou,your, yours, he, him, his, she, her, hers, it's, they, them, their, theirs, who, whom, who's.
Then under the Titles Substantive Adje- Bive, teach him to Connect these as, My Hand, your Head, his Foot, his Feet, her Arm, her Arms, our Hats, their Shoes, Johns Coat, Williams Band, &c.
And order to furnish him with more Adjectives under the Title Colours you may place, Black, White, Gray, Green, Blue, Yellow, Red, &c. And having shewed the Particulars, let him know that these "are
called
  ,
in
,
it, ;

 The Life and
Adventures
46
called Colours, the like for Taste arid Smefl,.
as Sweet, Bitter, Sour, Stink.
And for Hearing ; Sound, Noise,
Then for Touch or Feeling : Hot, Warm,
Cold, Cool, Wet, Moist, Dry, Bard, Softy Tough, Brittle, Heavy, Light, &c.
From whence you may furnish him with more Examples of Adjectives with Substan tives ; as, White Bread, Brown Bread, greeri Grafs, soft Cheese, hard Cheese, black Hat,
my black Hat, &c.
'.<''.
And then inverting the Order, Substantives. Adjective, with the Verb Copulative between. As, Silver is White, Gold is Yellow, Lead is heavy, Wood is light, Snow is white, Ink is black, Flesh is soft, Bone is hard, I am sick, I am not well, &c. which Will begin to give him some Notion of Syntax.
. In like Manner, when Substantive and Sub stantive are so connected ; as Gold is a Me tal, a Rose isa Flower ; they are Men, they are Women, Horses are Beasts, Geese are Fowls,
may give him some other Words relating to Quantity ; as long, short, broad, narrow, thick, thin ; high, tall, low ; deep, shallow, great, big, small (little) much, little ; many, few, full, empty ; whole, part, piece ; al], some, none, strong, weak, quick, slow, equal,
Word; ! ;
 c2y.
Larks are Birds,
Then as those before relate to Quality, you
unequal, bigger,
less.
z , Then
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell 47
Then Words of Figure ; as Strait, Crook
ed, Plain, Bowed, Concave, Hollow, Con
vex ; Round, Square, Three-Square, Sphere,
Globe, Bowl, Cube, Die, Upright,
Sloping, leaning Forward, leaning Backward, Like,
Unlike. , . •.
Of Gesture ; as Stand, Lie, Sit, Kneel,
Sleep. .' ,/r-.= .-. ..; i . ;
Of Motion ; as Move, Stir, Rest, Walk, Go, Come, Run, Leap, Ride, Fall, Rife, Swim,
Sink, Drawn, Slide, Creep, Crawl, Fly, Pull, Draw, Thrust, Throw, Bring, Fetch, Carry.
. Then Words relating to Time , Place, Number, Weight, Measure, Money, &c. zte in convenient Tiraej to be.stiewed him di stinctly for which the Teacher according to: ruY Discretion, may take a convenient Sea-, son.
:As likewise the Time of the Day ; the Days of the Week, the Days of the Mqnth, the Months of the Year ; and other Things- relating to the Altpanack, which he will quickly be capable to understands if once. Methodically shewn him.
As likewise the Names, and Situation d$:j
Places, and Countries, which are
ent for him to know ; which may be order ly 'Written in his Book, and shewed him in the Map of London, England, Europe, the
World, &c.
But these may be done at leisure, as like
wise the Practice of Arithmetick, and other
like Pieces of Learning.
In
.,.
..
convent*-:
•
   
 The Life And Adventures
48
In the mean time, after the Concord of
Substantive and Adjective, he is to be shew ed by convenient Examples, that of the No- nt'mative and Verb. As for Iristartce : I go, you see, he fits, they stand, the Fire burns,
the Sun shines, the Wind blows, the Rain falls, the Water runs ; arid the like, with the Titles in the top Nominative, Verb.
After this, J the Titles Nominative, (under
Verb, Accusative give him Examples of Verbs Transitive ; as, I fee you, you see me, the Fire burris the Wood, the Boy makes the Fire, the Cook roasts the Meat, the Butler lays the Cloth, we eat our Dinner.
 Or even with a double Accusative ; as you teach me Writing or to Write, John teacheth me to* Dance, Tbomai tells me a Tale, &c.
:- After this, you may teach him the Flexi
on Or Conjugation of the Verb, or what is
thereunto ; for in our English TortgUe, each Verb hath»but two Tenses, the Present and the Preter, two Participles, the
Active and the Passive, all the rest is perform ed by Auxiliaries^ which Auxiliaries have no more Tenses than the other Verbs.
Those Auxiliaries are, Doj did$ will, would, shallj should, may, might, can, could, must, Ought, to, have, had, am, be, was. And if by
Examples you can insinuate the Signification of these few Words, you have taught him the whole Flexion of the Verb.
Equivalent
..
And
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
49 And here it will be convenient,, once for all-, to write him out a full Paradigm ot some one Verb, (suppose to see) through all thole
Auxiliaries. ,.v/i The Verb it self hath but these Four Words*
to be learn d ; fee, saw, seeing, seen ;*.save that after thou, in the Second Person Singu lar, in both Tenses, we add and the Third Person Singular, the Present Tense, etb or es, or instead thereof, tb, and so in all Verbs.
Then to the Auxiliaries, do did, will would, shall mould, may might, can could, must
 to, we join the Indefinite fee. And after have, had, am, be, was, the Passive Par^ tide seen And for all other Verbs.
But the Auxiliary Am or ite, somewhat
ought
Irregular Am art
Plural were. Be beest be
double Form* Plural are
'.0 Was wast was
. Plural be
Plural were.
Be, am was, being, been.
Which, attended with the other Auxilia
ries, make up the whole Passive Voice.
AU Verbs, without Exceptions, in the A-
.jctive Participle are fdrm'd adding hig
as, fee seeing, teach teaching, &c-.
The Preter Tense and the Participle are
formed regularly, by adding ed but are oft subject to Contractions, and other Irregulari
ties sometime, the same both, sometime
'^fi
;'•'.,
Were wert were
.!.
,:
  :
in
;
:
Jf,
1 , ."
. :
,
; •.
so
by
eft ;
;;
,;. j
»
isin :. .;a
:
::
in
is
, .
s ;
in

  ,
ken, forsake forsook forsaken, write wrote written , &c< with many more , fit to be learned.
The Verbs being thus dispatched, he is then to learn the Prepositions ; wherein lies the whole Regimen of the Noun. For Di- versitv of Cases we have none ; the Force of which is to be insinuated by convenient Ex amples, suited to their different Significati
The Life and Adventures
50
different ; and therefore it is convenient here to give a Table of Verbs, especially the most' usual, for those Three Cases , which may at once teach their Signification and Formats on : As, boil boiled, rost rosted rosted, bake baked baked <&c' teach taught taught, bring
&c. fee saw seen, give gave given, take took ta
brought brought, buy bought bought,
ons. As for Instance, Of
; a Piece
a Pint 0/Wine, the Colour ofa Pot, the Colour
fl/'Gold, a Ring f/Gold, a Cup ofSilver ; the
Mayor of London, the longest of all, &c.
And in like manner, for off on upon to
unto, till until, from at in within, out with out, into out of, about over under, above be
low, between among, before behind after,
for, by, with, through, against, concerning : And by this Time, he will be pretty well enabled to understand a single Sentence.
In the last Place ; He is in like manner to be taught Conjunctions, which serve to 'eerinect not Words only, but Sentences : As, .and also, likewise, either or whether, neither
nor,
»
of
Bread,
  
 of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbel i.
51
nor, if then, why, wherefore, because, there- Fore, but, though, yet, &c. and these illu strated by convenient Examples in each Case :
As, Because I am coldj therefore I go to the Fire, that I may be warm, for it is cold Wea ther.
If it were fairy then it would be good Walking ; but however, though it rain, yet I
must go, because I like Instances.
And by this Tirile, his Book, if well fur - nifh'd with Plenty of Words^ and those tyell digested under several Heads, and in good Order, and well recruited from Time to Time as new Words occur, will serve him in the
Nature of a Ditlionary and Grammar.
And in case the Deaf Person be otherwise bf a good Natural Capacity, and the Teach-,
ef of a good Sagacity ; by this Method, pro ceeding gradually Step by Step, you may^ ( with Diligence , and due Application of "readier and Learner,) in a Year's Time, ot thereabouts, perceive a greater Progress than you would expect, and a gdod Foundation laid for further Instruction in Matters of Re
ligion , and other Knowledge which may be
F. %
way
promised
: With other
 taught by Books.
It will be convenient all along to have
Pen, Ink, arid Paper ready at Hand, to write down in a word what you signify to him by Signs, and cause him to write, or shew how
to write, what he signifies by Signs ; : which '
".'.[•
  
 The Lie £ and Adventures
way of signifying their Mind by Signs, Deaf Persons are often very good at. And we must endeavour to learn their Language, if I may so call it, in order to teach them ours ; by (hewing what Words answer to their Signs.
'Twill be neceflary also , as you go
along, after some convenient Progress made,
to express (in as plain Language as may
5i
the Import of some of the Tables : As, for Instance,
The Head is the highest Part of the Body,
the Feet the lowest Part : The Face is the
Forepart of the Head : The Forehead is over
the Eyes ; the Cheeks are under the Eyes :
The Nose is between the Cheeks ; the Mouth
be)
 is under the Nose, and above the Chin,
-
&c. ' . :
And such plain Discourse put into Writing, and particularly explain'd, will teach him by degrees to understand plain Sentences. And like Advantages a Sagacious Teacher may take, as Occasion offers it self from Time to Time.*
This Extract is mostly taken out of the In
Dr. Wallis ; and lying hid in that little Book, which is but rarely enquir'd af
genious
and too scarcely known, died in a man ner with that Great Man. And as he de
ter,
it for the General Use of Mankind, that labour d under the Misfortune of losing those Two valuable Talents of Hearing and
signed
v Speak
  .7-

 cf Mr. Duncan Campbell.
Speaking ; I thought it might not be amiss, (in the Life of so particular a Dumb Person as
I
ticular Fragment of Grammar and Syntax. l ' '
am to writing)
give
them this small but
par
It is exactly adjusted to the Englifi Tongue ; because such are the Persons with whom the Doctor had to deal, and such the Persons whose Benefit alone I consult in this Treatise.
One of the Chief Persons, who was taught by Dr. Wallu, was Mr. Alexander Popbam; Brother-in-Law (if I am not mistaken) to the present Earl of Oxford ; and he was a veryx great Proficient in this way ; and, tho'
he was born deaf and dumb , understood the Language so well, as to give under his Hand many rare Indications of a Masterly
 Genius.
The Uncle of his present Sardinian Ma
jesty, as I have been credibly informed, had" the want of the fame Organs ; and yet was'a perfect Statesman , and wrote in Five or Six different. Languages elegantly well.
Bishop Burnet, in his Book of Travels, tells us a Story almost incredible ; but tells it as *
that deserves our Belief. It is con cerning a young Lady at Genoa, who was
Paslage
not only Deaf and Dumb, but Blind too
(it into the Bargain ; and this Lady, he
seems)
aslures us as a Truth, could, by putting her
Hand on her Sister's Mouth, know every Thing she said.
'. . . '. • .1.- . :,{ ..»- • V E3 But
  
 John Garvdy,
Sir Thomas Knotcliff, Sir , .,
The Life and Adventures
5*4
But to return back to England : We have
many rare Instances of our own Country* men, the Principal of whom I Ihall mention, as their Names occur to my Memory. Sir
• Go ft wick, Sir Henry Lydall, and Mr. Richard Lyns of Oxford, were all of this. Number ;
and yet Men Eminent in their several Capa cities, for understanding many Authors, and
themselves in* writing with won derful Facility.
expressing
In Hatton-Garden, there now lives a Mi
I mean the of Mr. hoggin ; who , tho' bom deaf and dumb, (and she has a Brother who
 racle of Wit and Good Nature ;
Daughter
has the fame Impediments) yet writes her Mind down upon any Subject with such Acuteness , as would amaze Learned Men themselves, and put many Students, that have pass d for Wits, to. a Blush, to fee them selves so far surpassed by a Woman, amidst that Deficiency of. the Common Organs. If any body speaks a word distinctly, this Lady will, by observing narrowly the Motion of the Speaker s Lips , pronounce the Word af
terwards very intelligibly.
As there are a great many Families in Eng
land and Ireland, that have several, and some even have Five or Six Dumb Persons be longing to them and as a great many more believe it impossible for Persons bora Deaf and Dumb to. Write and Read, and
" '•
.1 . if have
-
  
 '
ther ^Edinburgh; The Earl of Argyll's Over- verthrpw. The RuinofMr. Archibald Camp bell, and his Death. Toung Duncan j Pra&he
in Predi&ion at Edinburgh, 'while yet a Boy.
OU R young Boy, now between Six and Seven Years of Age, Half a Highlander
of Mr. Duncan Campbell,
$f have thence taken' Occasion to fay and afifert;
. that Mr. Campbell could certainly speak ; 1 » % could never think it a Digression in the Histo
ry of this Man's Life, to let down the Gram
mar by which he himself was taught, and which he has taught others : (Two of which' Scholars of his, are Boys in this Town ;) part ly to confute the Slander made against him, and partly for the Help of others Dumb and Deaf; whose Parents may, by these Examples, be encouraged to get them taught. w
,-.. ••-.r..' , ,
C h a r. IV.
Toung DuriCani Campbell returns with his Mo
 "V
and Half a Laplander, delighted in wearing a little Bonftet and Plaid, thinking it look'd very Manly in his Countrymen ; and his Father, fo soon as he was out of his Hanging-Sleeves, and
left off his Boy's Vest, indulged him with that Kind of Dress , which is truly Antique and Heroick. In this early Part of his Nonage, he was brought to Edinburgh by his Motlier- in-LaW ; where I my self grew afreft"^
quainted with her, his Fathef heing then but lately dead. Just after the Civil Commo- E 4 tion,
  
 The Lite and Absent ivb.es
and off and on have known him ever since, and conversed with him very frequent ly during that Space of Time, which now is about Three or Four and thirty Years ; so that Whatever I say concerning him in the future
56
tion ,
I shall relate to the Reader from my
Pages,
own certain Knowledge ; which, as
Iresolve to
continue Anonymous, may perhaps not have so much Weight and Authority, as if I had prefix'd my Name to the Account. Be that as it will j there are Hundreds of living Wit- nesses, that will justify each Action I relate ; and his own future Actions while he lives, will procure Belief and Credit to the precedent ones which I am going to record : So t.hat if many do remain Infidels to my Relations, and will not allow them Exact, (the Fate of many as credible, and more important Historians than my self) I can however venture to flatter my self, that greater will be the Number of those Who will have a Faith in my Writings, than of those who wisl reject my Accounts as in credible. • ,, \
.
 st .H Having just spolje the Decease of Mr. Archibald CampkeUy the Father of our young Duncan Campbell rj.it will not be. amiss here
to observe, how /true the Predictions, of his Lapland Mother, were,; which arose from Se
cond Sight, according to the Notices. given by
the Child's Father to, its Grandfather, Letter from Lapland, even before was. bflrn
which shews, that tdie Infant held this Se-
,bn.:* ry'Uvs.yofo
teals 3I.7T
.brjj
v$g«J
his
  it
in ;
of
':!'

 os Mr. Du N G A N C KM P B E L L.
eond Sighted Power, or Occult Faculty of Divination even by Inheritance.
In the Year 1 68 5, the Duke of Monmoutb and the Earl of Argyll sailed out of the Ports of Holland without any Obstruction, , the Earl of Argyll in May with three Ships for Scotland, and Monmoutb in June with the fame Number for England.
The Earl setting out first, was also the first
to in the North of Scotland, and being disappointed by the Vigilance of the Bishop of the Orcades, Landed in the Weft, and
at Landing. Argyll having attempted Land
57
 Incamped at Dimftafne Castle in the Province of Lorn, which had belonged to him. He omitted nothing that might draw over to him all the Malecontents in the Kingdom, whom he thought more Numerous than they after wards appeared to be. He dtspersed about his Declarations, wherein, after protesting, that he had taken up Arms only in Defence of Religion and the Laws, against an unjust
Usurper (To he stiled King James the Second) he invited all good Protestasts, and luch Scots as would allert their Liberty, to join him against a Prince, he said, who was got into the Throne, to ruin the Reformation, and to bring in Popery and Arbitrary Power. Next hfe lent Letters to those he thought his Friends,
among whom was Mr. Archibald Campbell, who according to the vast deference paid
by the Scots to their Chief, joined him, tho'
  
 The Life and Adventures
58
in his Heart of a quite different Principle to call them to his Assistance : He De
two of his Sons to make Inroads in
the Neighbourhood, and compel some by Threats, others by mighty Promises to join him. All his Contrivances could not raise him above three Thousand Men, with whom he Incamped in the Isle of Boot, where he was soon in a manner Besieged by the Earl of Dimbarloft, with the King's Forces, and several other Bodies Commanded by the Duke of Gordon, the Marquis of Athol, the Earl df Artan, and other Great Men, who came from all Parts to quench die Fire before it grew to a Head.
The Earl of Argyll being obliged to quit a Post he could not make good, went ovej? into a Part of the Country of his own Name* where having hastily Fortified a Castle called
tached
 he put into it the Arms and Anv munition taken out of his Ships, which lay nt Anchor under the Cannon of a Fort he Erected near that Place. There his Rout be gan ; for going out from the Castle with his Forces to make an Incursion, one of his Par ties were Defeated by the Marquis of Athol,
.who slew Four Hundred of his Men j and Captain Hamilton who Attacked his Ships with some of the King s, and took theni without any Resistance.
Ellingrey,
ori:
'*.
The
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
59 The Earl of Dunharton advancing towards
him, at the fame time, by long Marches,
gave him not so much time, for they pasted the River in the Night, in such Confusion, that being overcome with Fear they dispersed as soon as over. Argyll could scarce rally so
while he endeavoured to secure himself
by Rivers, surprized him passing the Clyde in the Village of Killern, as he was Marching towards Lenox. Dnnbarto?i coming upon them at Night, would have staid till the next Day to Attack the Rebels, but they
 as would make him a small Guard, which was soon scattered again ; Dunbarton having palled the River, and divided his For
ces to pursue those that fled. . Argyll had ta~
ken Guides to Conduct him to Galloway ; but
they mistaking the Way, and leading him into a Bog, most of those, that still followed
him, quitted their Horses, every Man misting for himself.
Argyll himself was making back alone to wards the Clyde, when two Resolute Servants, belonging to an Officer in the King's Army meeting him, tho' they knew him not, bid him Surrender. He fir d at, and misled them j but they took better Aim, and wounded him with a Pistol Ball. Then the Earl drawing his two Pistols out of the Holsters,
his Horse, that was quite tired, and took the River. A Country Fellow, who came with
those two that had first assaulted him, pur- V,j, " " ;' ' '' sued
many
quitted
  
 60 Ik Life W Adventures
sued him with a Pistol in his Hand ; the Earl would have fired one of his, but the Flint fail ing he was dangerously wounded in the Head, by the Peasant.He discovered himself, as he fell
Sensless, crying out, Unfortunate Argyll. This Nobleman how far soever he may be thought misled in Principle, was certainly in his Person a very Brave and a very Gallant Hero. They made haste to draw him out and bring him to himself ; after which, being delivered up to the Officers, the erring unfortunate Great Man was conducted to Edinburgh and there Beheaded, i
Many Gentlemen that followed the For tunes of this Great Man, tho' not in his Death,
shared in all the other Calamities
his Overthrow. They most of them fled in to the remotest Isles and the obscurest Cor ners of all Scotland ; contented with the sa ving of their Lives ; they grew Exiles and Banished Men of their own making, and Abdicated their Estates before they were known to be Forfeited, because, for fear of being informed against by the Common Fel lows they Commanded, they durst not ap pear to lay their Claims. Of this Number was Mr. Archibald Campbell ; and this new Disaster wounded him deep into the very Heart, after so many late Misadventures, and sent him untimely to the Grave. He
 and wasted ; he was between his Last Breath and his way
perfectly pined away
attending
  
 ofMr. DuncanCamp b'exl. 61
of Breathing during all that time, was only that he expired with a greater Sigh than he ordinarily fetched every time when he drew his Breath.
Every Thing the Lapland Lady had Pre dicted so long before* being thus come to pass, we may the less admire at the Wonders
her Son, when we consider this Faculty of Divination to be so derived to
him from her, and grown as it were Here ditary.
Our Young Prophet, who had taught most of his little Companions to converse with him by Finger, was the Head at every little Pastime and Game they play'd at. Marbles
('whicJh he used to call Children's playing at Bowls yielded him mighty Diversion ; and he was so dextrous an Artist at shooting that little Alabaster Globe from between the end of his Fore-finger and the Knuckle of his Thumb, that he seldom misled hitting Plum ('as the Boys call the Marble he aimed at, tho' at the distance of two or three Yards.
performed by
 The Boys always when they play'd coveted to have him on their Side, and by hearing that he foretold other Things, used to consult him, when they made their little Matches
(which thehj Thoughts who should get the Victory. Hq
were Things of great Importance
used commonly to leave these Trifles undeci ded, but ever he gave his Opinion these trivial Affairs, the Persons fared well by
their
  if )
in
in
it)

 £i The Life and
their Consultation, for his Judgment about? them was like a petty Oracle, and the End always Answered his Prediction. But I would have my Reader imagine (that tho' ouf1 Duncan Campbell was himself but a Boy) He
Nvas not consulted only by Boys ; hi$ Pene tration and Insight into Things of a high Nature, got Air, and being attested by cre dible Witnesses wort him the Esteem of Per sons of Mature Years and Discretion!.
If a Beautiful young Virgin languished fttf a Husband ; or a Widows Mind was in La
bour to have a second Venture of Insants by
If a
any Thing belonging to her Master, still little
another Spouse :
House-keeper
had lost
Adventures
 Duncan Campbell was at Hand ; he was the Oracle to be applied to, and the little Chalk 'd Circle, where he was diverting himself with
'
^
his Play-Fellows near the Cross at Edinburgh j Was frequented with as much Solicitation arid as much Credit, as the Tripos of Apollo was at Delphos in Ancient Times.
It was highly Entertaining to see a Young Blooming Beauty come and stily pick up the Boy from his Company, carry him home with as much eagerness, as (lie would her Gallant, because she knew she should get the Name of her Gallant out of him before he went, and bribe him with a Sugar-Plumb to write down
the Name of a Young Scots Peer in a green
Ribbon that her Mouth watered after. <
\
!.... How
  
 of Mr. D u ncanCampbeil 6j
How often, after he has been wallowing in the Dust, have I my. self seen nice squeamish Widows help him up in their gilded Chariots
and give him a pleasant Ride with them, that he might tell them they should not long lie alone; little - Duncan Campbell had as much Business upon his Hands as the Parsons of all the Parishes in Edinburgh : He com monly was consulted, and named the Couples before the Minister joined them. Thus he grew a rare Customer to the Toyshop, from whence he most an end received Fees and Rewards for his Advices, If Lady
Betty such a one, was foretold that she should
 certainly have Beau such a one in Marriage ; then little Duncan was sure to have a Hobby- Horse from the Toyshop as a Reward for the promised Fop. If such a Widow that was Ugly but very Rich, was to be pushed hard for, as she pretended ftho' in reality easily won) little Duncan upon ensuring her such a Captain, or such a Lieutenant Colonel,
was sure to be presented from the same Child's Warehouse with a very handsome Drum, and a Silver'd Trumpret.
. .If. a Sempstress had an Itching desire for a Parson, she would upon the first Assurance of him, give this little Apollo a Pastboard Temple, or Church finely painted, and a Ring of Bells into the Bargain, from the fame Toy- Office.
z If
  
 64 The Life and Adventures
If a Housekeeper lost any Plate, the Thief was certain to be catch'd ; provided she took little Master into the Store Room, and ask'd him the Question, after she had given him his Belly-full of Sweetmeats.'
•••• Neither were the Women only his Consul- ters : The grave Merchants, who were anxi
ous for many Ventures at Sea, applied ten the Boy, for his Opinion of their Security ; and: they look'd upon his Opinion to be as safe, as the Insurance-Office for Ships. If he but told them , (tho' the Ship was just set Sail, and a Tempest rose just after on the Ocean,) that it would have a successful Voyage , gain the Port designed, and return home safe laden with the Exchange of Traffick and Mer chandize ; they dismiss d all their Fears, ba nish 'd all their Cares, set their Hearts at Ease, and safe in his Opinion , enjoy'd a Calm of
Mind amidst a Storm of Weather.
I my self knew one Count Cog> an Eminent
Gamester ; who was a Person so far from be ing of a credulous Disposition, that he was an Unbeliever in several Points of Religion, and the next Door to an Infidel. Yet as much as he was a Stranger to Faith , he wras master'd and overpower d so far in his Incredulity,
by the strange Events, which he had seen come frequently to pass from the Predictions of this Child , that he had commonly daily Access to this Boy, to learn his more adverse and more prosperous Hours of Gaming. At
.: first
 .
  
 of Mr. DuncaKCampbell.
6$ first indeed he would try, when the Child
foretold him his ill Fortune, whether it would prove true ; and relying upon the mere Hazard and Turn of the Dye, he had always ( as he
a Run of ill Luck on those forbid den Days, as he never fail'd of Good, if he chose the fortunate Hours directed by the1 Boy. One Time above all the rest, just be
fore he was departing from Edinburgh , and when the Season of Gaming was almost over* most Persons of Wealth and Distinction with
observed)
for Pleasure to their Seats in the
drawing
Country, he came to young Duncan Campbells to consult ; and was extremely solicitous to know, how happily or unluckily he Ihould end that Term ("as we may call it) of the Gamesters weighty Buji?iessi viz. Flay ; there
 being a long Vacation likely to ensue, when the Gaming-Table would be empty* and the Box and Dice lie idle, and cease to rattle. The Boy encouraged him so well with his Predictions on this Occasion , that CounE went to the Toy-shop, brought him
Cog
from thence a very sine ivory Totunt,
(as Children call it) a pretty Set of painted and
gilded little Nine-pins and a Bowl, and a large Bag of Marbles : And what do you think she Gamester got by. this little Present, and
i...
the Prediction of the Boy ?
without telling the least Tittle of Falshood, within the Space of the last Weeks Play, the Gains of Count Cog really amounted to no less thart
' F "Twen>
Why*
  
 66 The Life anJAdventures
Twenty Thousand Pounds Sterling , Nett
Money.
Having mention'd these Persons of so many
different Professions, by borrow'd Names, and
bulous :
perhaps in a manner seemingly ludicrous ; would not have my Reader from hence take Occasion of looking upon my Account as fa
If I was not to make use of borrow'd Names, but to tell the Real Characters and Names of the Persons, I should do Injury to those old Friends of his, who first gave Cre dit to our young Seer ; while I am endeavour ing to gain him the Credit and Esteem of new ones , in whose way it has not yet happen 'd to consult him. For many Persons are very
willing to ask such Questions as the foregoing ones ; but few or none willing to have the Publick told they ask'd them ; tho' they suc ceeded in their Wish, and were amply satisfy 'd in their Curiosity. I have represented them perhaps in a ludicrous manner ; because tha they are mysterious Actions, they are still the Actions of a Boy ; and as the Rewards he re- ceiv'd for his Advices did really and truly
I mention'd, so could they not be treated of in a more serious man ner, without the Author's incurring a Magi
consist of such Toys as
sterial Air of Pedantry, and shewing a Mind, as it were, of being mighty grave and senten tious about Trifles. There are however some Things of greater Weight and Importance^ done by him in a more ad vanc'd Stage of Life,
2
which
I
   
 tf Mr. Duncan Campbell.
\vhich will be deliver d to the Publick with
that Exactitude and Gravity which becomes them ; and in some of those Relations* the Names some Persons that are concern'd,
shall be printed because will not at ill be injurious to them, or because have their Leave, and they are still living to testify what
shali relate.
In the mean time, as the greatest Part df his
Non-age was soetit in Predicting almost innu
merable Things, which are all however redu cible to the General Heads above-mention'd •
will not tire, the Reader with any Particu lars but instead of doing that, before come to shew his Power of Divination in the more
active Parts of his Life, and when, after Re moving from Edinburgh to London, he at last made his publick Profession mall ac count how such Divinations may be made
Historians oi Persons who have
doubted
done the like before him, some in one ivay, and some in another tho' this he seems to be peculiar, and to be>(if may be allow'4 the Expression Species himself alone in,
rare Ex
67
 and divert the Reader with many
amples (taken from several faithful and un
the Talent of PrediBhn that he has colleB* ed within his Own individual Capacity, alt
the Methods which others severally us'd, arid with which they were differently and singly^
  ) a
of; ;
) ;
;
by I
,
in
it
j
it
;I
I
I
I
I ;

 '
68 The Life and Adventures
This Art of Prediction is not attainable any otherwise, than by these Three Ways : Fir It done by the Company of Familiar Spirits and Genij which are of Two Sorts, (some good, and some bad) who tell the gift ed Person the Things of which he informs other People, zdly, perform'd by the Second Sight which very various, and dif
fers in most of the Posieslors being but very little in some, very extensive and constant in others beginning with some in their Infancy, and leaving them before they
come to Years Happening to others Middle Age to others again in an old Age, that never had before, and lasting only for
Term of Years, and now and then for very Ihort Period of Time and some
 like Fits as were of Vision, that leave them for Time, and then return to be
as strong in them as ever And being manner Hereditary to some Families whose Children have from their Infancy (with out Intermission) to great old Age, and even to the Time of their Death, which they
often foretel before comes to pals, to Day, bay, even to an Hour. ^dly, attain'd by ,the diligent Study of the lawful Part of the
Artr of Magick.
Before slmrf do
Concerning
Spirits, viz. the good and bad Genij, have had,
and
termitting,
give the Reader an Account, Three distinct Discourses)
(as
xjl, the Intercourse which Familiar
  / •
J[
a
a
in I
.' aitisIt
fly is
-'
it ;
;; ita it:
;
is It ;
is
a
;
it ,
it
:
;
in
in in in aaa

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
and continue to have to a great Degree with some select Parts of Mankind, idly, Concern-,
the wonderful and almost miraculous Power of a Second Sight, with which many (beyond all Controversy) have been extraor
dinarily, but visibly gifted. And ylly, Con cerning the Pitch of Perfection, to which the Magick Science has been carry d and promo ted by some Adepts in that mysterious Art : I will premise a few Particulars about the Ge- nij , which attended our little Duncan Camp bell, and about the Second Sight, which he had when yet a Child , and when we may much more easily believe, that the Wonders he
ing
them, and compass'd such Predi ctions, as. feem'd to want their Assistance, by
concerning
the mere Dint of a Child's Capacity.
One Day, I remember, when he was about Nine Years of Age, going early to the House where he and his Mother liv'd, and ,I
it being before his Mother was stirring * , went into little Duncan Campbell's Room, to
divert my self with him :
up in his Bed, with his Eyes broad open, but as motionless as if he had been asleep, or even (if it had not been for a lively, beautiful Co lour, which the little, pretty, fair, Sil ver-hair d Boy always had in his Cheeks. ;) as if he had
F3 been
I found him sitting
69
 and wrote of, must have been ra ther brought about by the Intervention of fiich Gem], and the Mediation of such a Sight j than that he could have invented such Fables
perform'd
  
 The Life and Ad v e ntur es
7©
been quite dead. He did not seem so much as to breathe : The Eyelids of him were so fix'd
and immovable, that the Eyelashes did not so much as once make, which the least Motion
in (what we commonly call) a brown Study to the highest Degree, and for the largest Space of Time I ever knew. I, who had been fre quently inform'd by People, who have been
present at the Operations of Second-sighted Persons, that, at the Sight of a Vision, the Eyelids of the Person are erected, and the Eyes continue staring till the Object vanishes , I, I fay, fat my self softly down on his Bedside,
and with a quiet Amazement observd him ;
avoiding diligently any Motion, that might give him the least Disturbance, or cause in him any Avocation, or Distraction of Mind, from the Business he was so intent upon. I re marks, that he held his Head sideways, with his Mouth Wide open , and in a liflning Po sture ; and that after so lively a manner, as, at the first general Thought, made me forget his Deafness, and plainly imagine he heard some thing, till the Second Thought of Reflection brought into my Mind the Misfortune that shut up all Pamge for any Sound through his Ears. After a stedfast Gaze, which lasted about Seveil Minutes, he smil'd, and stretch'd Jiis Arms, as one recovering from a Fit of In-
and rubb'd his Eyes ; then turning < tpwards
imaginable must agitate :
was like a Person in an Ecstafy, he was at least
Not to that he soy
 flolence?
  
    
    
 ri
towards me, he made the Sign of a Salute,, and hinted to me upon his Fingers his De- fire for Pen, Ink and Paper ; which I reach d him from a little Desk, that stood at his Bed's
Feet.
Placing the Paper upon his Knees, he wrote
me the following Lines; which, together with my Answers I preserve by me, for their Ra rity, to this very Day ; and which I have transcribed Word for Word, as they form a
little Series of I Dialogue.
ofMr. Duncan Campbell,
Duncan Campbell.
with you ; but 1 Jbali see my
my Lamb by and by, in the Fields near a lictle
flay Coppice, or Grove, where Jgo to play with
am
sorry pretty
I cant Touth and
 I would not
the whole Wirld : For they and I
them ; and
lose
often their
Company for
are
miliar together ; and the Boy tells me every thin*, that gets me nty Reputation attiong the Ladies
and Nobility ; and you mist keep it secret.
My Question. I will be sure to keep it se-,
cret. But how do you know you are to meet them there To-day ? Did the little Boy ap point you ?
Duncan Campbell. Yes, he did j andsigni fied, that he had severalThings to prediH to me, concerning People that, he foreknew would corns
to me the Week following, to ask me Questions. My Question. But what was you ltarlng ar,
?
when I came in
Duncan Campbell. Why, at that little Boy,
F4
that
mighty fa
  
 .
yz The Life and Adventures
that goes along with the Lamb Ispeak of; and 'treat then he made, me the Appointment'
My Question: How docs he do it ? Does he write ?
Duncan Campbell. No, he writes sometimes, but oftner he speaks with his Fingers, and migh ty svift : No Man can do itso quick, or write half
so soon. He hat a little Bell in his Hand, like that which my Mother makes me a Sign to jhake, when jbe wants the Servants ; with that he tic kles my Brain strangely, and gives me an incredi ble Delight of Feeling in the Inside of my Head ; he usually wakes me with it in the Morning,when
he comes to make me an Appointment. 1 fancy,
'tis what you caIll Hearing , which makes me
could hear in way ; Tis mighty desirous your
 sweeter to the Feeling, methinks, thananyThing js to the Tafte : It is just as ifmy Head was tic kled to deaths as my Nurse used to tickle my Sides ; but tit a different Feeling, for it' makes Things like little Strings, tremble in my Temples, and behind my Ears. Now J
you what 'tis like, that makes me believe 'tis
like your Hearing, and that strange Thing,
which you, that Ican speak, call Sound or Noise : Because, when was at Church with my Mo ther, who fold me tIhe Bells could he heard ring
was on
ing a Mile off ; as kneeling the Bench,
and leaning over the Top ofthePew, and gnaw ing the Board ; every time the Man pull'4 the Rope, I thought all' my Head beat, as if it would come to Pieces t. but yet it pleased me,
methoughti
remember,
Iwill tell
  
 of Mr. Dun can Campbell.
73 rather than paind me, and 1 would be~ always gnawing the Board, when the Man
tnethought.,
pulfd the Rope, and I told my Mother the Rea
son : Thefeeling ofthat wassomething like the little Bell, but only that made my Head throb as if it would break, and this tickles me and makes, as it were, little Strings on the back of my Ears dance and tremble like any Thing ; is not that like your way of Hearing ? — Ifit be, it is a sweet Thing to hear. — It is more pleasant than to see the fineft Colours in the World. — It is something like being tickled in
the Nose with a Feather till one Sneezes, or like the feeling, after one strikes the Lea, when it has been numb or asleep ; only with this difI
ference, that those TwoJ Ways give a Fain and
had a feeling something like it, but that was blunt, dull, confused and troublesome. Is nojt
 the other a ; Pleasure
remember too, when had a great Cold for about Two Months,
this like what you call Hearing
?
My Question. It is the finest kind of hear
ing, my DearT it is what we call Mustek. But what fort of a Boy is that, that meets you ? And what fort of a Lamb ?
Duncan Campbell. Oh ! tho they are like other Boys and other Lambs which you fee,
they are a Thousand Times prettier and finer ; you never saw such a Boy nor such a Lamb
'
Boy
in your
My Question. How big is hel As big as
Life-time.
you are ? And what fort i. 1"
of a
is he
? Duncan;
  
 The Life and Adventures
74
Duncan Campbell. He is a little pretty
Boy, about as tall as my Knee, his Face is as white as Snow, and so are his little Hands; his Cheeks are as red as a Cherry, andso are his Lips ; and, when he breathes, it makes the Air snore perfumed than my Mothers sweet Bags that fie puts among the Linnen ; he has got a. Crown of Roses, Cowslips, and other Flowers rtpen his Head, such as the Maids gather in
May ; his Hair is like fine Silver Threads, andshine like the Beams ofthe Sun \ he wears a loose Veil down to his Feet, that is as Blue as the Sky in a clear Day, and embrroiderd with Spangles, that look like the brightest Stars in the Night ; be carries a Silver Bell in one Hand, and a Book and Pencil in the other ; and he and the little Lamb will dance and leap about me in a Ring as high as my Head ; the Lamb has got a little Stiver Collar with Nine little Bells upon it ; and every little
piece of Wooll upon its Back, that is as white . as Milk, is tied up all round it in Puffs like a little Misses Hair, with Ribbands of all Co
lours ; and round its Head too are little Roses
and Violets /luck very thick into the Wool that grows upon its Forehead, and behind and be
tween its Ears in the Shape of a Diadem.
They fir/1 meet me dancing thus ; and after they have dancd some time, the little Boy writesI down wonderful Things in his Book, which write down \n mine ; then they dance again,
till he rings his Bell, and then they are gone
   
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell. I j$
all of a sudden I know not where * but seel
the Tickling in the Inside os my Head, catisd by
and less, till I
it at all ; Lesson
don t
home, read over my in my
the Bell,
and then
Book, and when
written Leavesy according as the little Boy bids Ime, or he would let me have no more.
hear the little Bell ; the little again Boy
I
feel have it by heart, I
less
go
I
But
is angry with me ; he pull'd me Twice by the
Ear, and
IIwould not displease him
for
"Thing ; so must
to the Joy and Delight of my Life.
any up, go immediately^
get and
I told him he might, if he would promise me to tell me more another Time : He said he would , if I would keep it secret. I told
burn the
 liim I would and so we parted : Tho' just before he went, he said he smelt some Venison, and he was sure they would shortly have some for Dinner : And nothing was so fore, as that my Man had my Orders to bring a Side of Venison to me the next Day to Mrs. Camp bell's ; for I had been Hunting, and came thi ther from the Death of a Deer that Morning ;
and intended, as usual, to make a Stay there for Two or Three Days.
There are, I know, many Men of severe
and who are more Strict, Grave and Formal, in their Manner of Thinking,
than they are Wife ; who will be apt to judge
of these Relations^ as Things merely Fabulous and Chimerical, and, not contented with be
ing Disbelievers by themselves , will :
Principles^
la- bour
  ''-

 j6 The Life and Adventures
bour to insinuate into others this pernicious
Notion, that it is a Sign of Infirmity Weakness in the Head, to yield them Credit. But tho'I could easily argue these Sir Gravities down ; tho' a Sentence or. Two would da their Business , put them beyond the Power of replying, and strike them dumb ; yet do
I think it not worth my while : Their greatest and most wonted Objection against these Eu- dæmons and Cacodœmonsibeing, that it arises all from the Work of Fancy, in Persons of a me- lancholick Blood. If we consider the Nature of this Child's Dialogue with me, will it not be more whimsically strange and miraculous, to say, that a Child of Nine Years old had only a Fancy of suchThings as these, of which it had never heard any body give an Account, and that it could by the mere Strength of Ima
and
 gination predict such Things as really after came to pass ; than it is (when it does so
strangely predict Things) to believe the Child does the Manner self owns does which the Intervention of good Dœmony or happy Genius Departing therefore from these singular wise Mens Opinions, who will believe nothing Excellent can happen to o- thers, which has not been their Lot to en
joy Share of shall take my Farewel hasti
of them (without losing my own Time, or theirs) in the Words of the Ingenious and Learned Monsieur Le Clerc Acerbos homings
non motor Indignos quippe, qui h&c Studitz trafienty
  i
is it, by in
:
it a
ly
a
a
;I it
.<?
it
; '

 of Mr. Duncan Gam pb el l.
77 traBent, aut quorum Jadicij ulla ratio habe-
atur.
I shall rather see how far these Things have
lain open to the Eyes of, and been explain'd
by the Ancient Sages :
among them were happy in their Genij> and who among the Moderns ; whose Examples may be Authorities for our Belief. I will set down as clearly as I can, what Perception Men have had of Genij, or Spirits, by the Sense of Seeing ; what by the Sense of Hear ing j what by the Sense of Feeling, Touching or. Tasting ; and, in fine, what Perception o- thers have had of these Genij by all the Senses j what by Dreams, and what by Magickj a Thing rarely to be met with at once in any single Man, and which seems particular to the Child who was the SubjecV'of our last little Historical- Account., When I have
I will relate who
 and the Opinions of wise and the Evidence of undeniable
brought Examples,
Philosophers,
Witnesses ; which one would think sufficient to evince Persons, of the Commerce Men have with Spirits, if they were not past all Sense of
I shall, not so much to
Conviction ;
rate what I say, as to shame some Wiseacres,
•who would by their frail Reason scan all Things, and pretend to solve the Mysteries
ascribed to Spirits, as Facts
merely natural,
and who would
of Men all Belief of Spirits whatsoever ; shall, I say, (in order to put to flume these Wise
acres.9
from the I ..b'aaish Thoughts
corrobo
  
 jS The LiFfi and Adventures
acres, if they have any Shame left)
the Opinions of the Fathers as Divines, shew
the Doctrine of Spirits in general to be con sistent with Christianity ; that they are deli- ver'd in the Scripture, and by Christian Tra dition ; in which if they will not acquiesce, I shall leave them to the Labyrinth of their own wild Opinions, which in the end will so perplex their Judgments of Things, that
they will be never able to extricate themselves. And these different Heads will be the Subject of the Chapter ensuing j and will (or I am greatly mistaken ) form both an instructive, edifying and entertaining Discourse, for a Rea der really and truly intelligent, and that has a good Taste and Relish for sublime Things,
produce
 i•.' ' . .. 7
' «• •.>
•", , ", i""'1'i "1 .r. t
G H A P. V.
An Argument, proving the Perception which Men have had, and have, by alt the Senses,
' as Seeing, Hearing, &c. Dæmons, Ge- nij, or Familiar Spirits.
said the Ninth Book of the Mo rals of Aristotle, better to come at
the probable Knowledge some Things above
us in the Heavens^ than to be capable of
ving many Demonstrations relating to Things here below. This rto doubt, an admira*
ble Proposition, and speaks the lofty Aim*
  is,
of is
gi
IT is
in
It
o/'

 •
Heaven.
fortu Porphyri-
-
os Mr. Duncan Campbell 79
of that sublime Mind from whence it pro ceeded. Among all the Disquisitions in this kind, none seem to me more excellent, than those, which treat concerning the Genii, that attend upon Men, and guide them in th<f Actions of Life. A Genius or Dæmon of the good Kind is a fort of mediate Being, between: Human and Divine, which gives the Mind of Man a pleasant Conjunction with Angelick and Celestial Faculties, and brings down to
Earth a faint Participation of, the Joys of
That there have been such
nate Attendants upon wise Men, we have; many rare Instances. They have been aserir bed to Socrates, Ariflotle, Plotinus,
fiy, Jamblicm, Chicits, Scaliger and Cardan* The most celebrated of all thefc Ancients was Socrates ; and as for his having a Genius or Dæmon, we have the Testimonies of Plfito, Xenophon and Antifihenes, hisQontfcmporarieSfr confirm'd by Laerthis, Plutarch, Maximtg Tyrius, Dion Chrysoflomut, Gicftfo, Apuleius^ Ficinw, and others, many of the Moderns be*. fides Tertullian, Origen,Clemens AUxandrinus^ Aujlin and others ; and Socrates himself
Plato's The age, fays, some Divine Lot
 have a certain Dæmon, wkjftkspas
me from my Childhood a& an,Qr#$U and in th$ same Place intimates, that the Way he gain'd
his Instruction was hearing {he Damons
Voice. Nothing certainly ib eaiy as for Men to be able to contradict Things, tho' ne,>
followed
  is
by
By
i
f iff

 80 The Life and Adventures
ver so well attested with such an Air of Truth, as to make the Truth of the History doubted by others as well as themselves where no demonstrative Proof can be brought to con
vince them. This has been the easy Task of those who object against the Dæmon of So- crates ; but when no demonstrative Proof is to be had on either Side, does not Wisdom incline us to lean to the most Probable ? Let
• us then consider whether the Evidences arc not more credible, and Witnesses of such a Thing are not Persons of more Authority, than these Men are, who vouchsafe to give 7to reason but their own Incredulity for main taining the contrary; and whether those there fore by the right Rule of judging, ought not much sooner than these,. to gain over our Aslent to their. Asseftions ? . ."« % .
 We will however, laying aside the Histo ries of those ancient Times, the Sense where of, by various Readings and Interpretations
being put upon the Words, is render d ob scure and almost unintelligible,, descend to more modern Relations, the Facts whereof mall be placed beyond doubt, by reason of the Evidences we will bring to attest them, and mail consequently prove the Perception Men have of Spirits or Genij by every Sense.
SECTI0N I.
We will first begin as to the Perception of Mr.
-
Spirits by the Sight.
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell^ 8i
Mr. Glanvil, in his Collection of Relations, for proving Apparitions, Spirits, &c. tells us of an Irijbman, that had like to have been carried away by Spirits, and of the Ghost of a Man who had been Seven Years dead, that
brought a Medicine to his Bedside. The Relation is thus :
A Gentleman in Irelandr near to the Earl ofOrrery sending his Butler oneAftemoon to buy Cards ; as he pals'd a Field, to his Won der , he espy'd a Company of People sitting round a Table, with a deal of good Chear before them, in the Midst of the Field : And he going up towards them, they all arofe and
saluted him, and desir'd him to sit down with them ; but one of them whisper'd these Words in his Ear Do nothing this Company invites
you to. Hereupon he refus'd to sit down at the Table ; and immediately Table and all that belong'd to it were gone, and the Com pany are now dancing and playing upon Mu sical Instruments. And the Butler being de sir'd to join himself with them, but he refu sing this also, they all fall to work ; and he
not being to be prevail d with to accompany them in working, any more than in feasting or dancing, they all disappears, and the But ler is now alone : But instead of going for wards, Home he returns, as fast as he could •drive, in a great Consternation j and was no sooner enterd his Master's Door, but he fell down, and lay some Time senseless; but coming
G again
   
 Bt The Life and Advent UA e %
again to himself, he related to his Master what had pasted. .,..-.:.
The Night following, there comes one of his Company to his Bedside , and tells him, That if he offered to fiir out of Doors the next Dajfy. be would, be tarried away. Here upon he kept within ; but towards the Even ing' having need to make Water , he adven- turd to put one Foot over the Threshold, several standing by ; which he had no sooner done , but they espy'd a Rope cast about his Middle ; and the poor Man was hurried away with great Swiftness, they following him as fast as they could, but could not over take him : At length they espy'd an Horse
man coming towards him, and made Signs to him to stop the Man whom he saw co ming near him, and both Ends of the Rope, but no body drawing. When they met, he laid hold of one End of the Rope, and imme diately had a smart Blow given him over his Arm with the other End j but by this means the Man was stopp'd, and the Horseman
brought him back with him.
The Earl of Orrery hearing of these strange
Passages, sent to the Master, to desire him to fend this Man to his House j which he ac cordingly did ; and the Morning following, or quickly after, he told the Earl, that hisSpe&rc had been with him again, and assur'd him, that that Day he should most certainly be
carry 'd away, and that no Endeavours should :. avail
   
 *f Mr. Duncan Campbell.
avail to the saving of him. Upon this, he was kept in a large Room, with a considerabl6 Number of Persons to guard him ; among
whom was the famous Stroaker, Mr. Grea-
trix, who was a Neighbour. There were, beside other Persons of Quality, Two Bishops in the House at the same Time, who were
consulted concerning the making use of a Me
dicine, the Speftre or Ghost prescribed j of which Mention will, be made anon j but they
determine! on the Negative.
- Till Part of, the Afternoon was spent , all
was quiet ; but at length he was perceiv'd to rife from' the Ground ; whereupon Mr. Grea- trix and another lusty Man clapt their Arms over his Shoulders, one of them before him, and the other behind, and weigh'd him down with all their Strength ; but he was forcibly
taken up from them, and they were too weals to keep their Hold ; and for a considerable
Time he was carry 'd into the Air, to and fro
ever their
still running under him, to prevent his recei ving Hurt, if he mould fall : At length he felj? and was caught before he came to the Groundj and had by that means no Hurt.
All being quiet till Bed-time, My LORD order'd Two of his Servants to lie with him ; and the next Morning he told his Lordship, that the SpeSre was again with him, and brought a wooden Dish with grey Liquor in
and bid him drink off At the first Sight a of
Heads ; several of the Company
8j
   G it
itj

 The Life and Adventures
oftheSpeflre,hesaid,heendeavour'd toawake his Bed-fellows ; but it told him, that that Endeavour should be in vain ; and that he had no Cause to fear him, he being his Friend, and he that at first gave him the good Advice in the Field, which had he not followed, he
had been before now perfectly in the Power of the Company he saw there. He added, that he concluded it was impossible, but that he should have been carried away the Day be
fore, there being so strong a Combination against him ; but now he could aslure him, there would be more Attempts of that Na ture ; but he being troubled with Two Sorts of fad Fits, he had brought that Liquor to cure him of them, and bid him drink it : He
peremptorily refusing, the Spe&re was angry, and upbraided him with great Disingenuity ; but told him, however, he had a Kindness for him ; and that if he would take Plantain Juice, he should be well of one Sort of Fits, but he should carry the other to his Grave. The poor Man having by this somewhat re- cover'd himself, ask'd the Spe&re, whether by
the Juice of Plantain, he meant that of the Leaves, or Roots ? It reply the Roots.
84
 Then know him
ask'd him, whether he did not He answer'd, No. reply'd,
one The Man answer he had been
am such
been long dead. have been dead, said the SpeBre or Ghost, Seven Years and you know that liv'd loose Life, and ever since have
  I
a
it
a
? :
I
;
d, It
'd,
I
I

 of Mr. Duncan Campb ell.
been hurried up and down restless Con dition with the Company you saw, and shall be to the Day of Judgment. Then he pro ceeded to tell him, that had he acknowledge God in his Æto, he had not suffer such vere ThingBP their Means. And sarther
said, You never pray'd to God that Day, before you met with this Company the Fields.
This Relation was sent to Dr. Henry More, by Mr. E. Fowler who said, Mr. Greatrix told several Persons. The Lord Orrery
so own'd the Truth of And Mr. Greatrix told to Dr. Henry More himself who par ticularly enquir'd of Mr. Greatrix about the Man's being carried up into the Aii', above Men's Heads the Room and he did expresly affirm, that he was an Eye-Witness thereof.
Vision which happend to the ingenious
and Learned Dr. Donne, may not improperly
be here inserted. Mr. Isaac Walton, writing the Life of the said Doctor, tells us, That the
 Doctor and his Wife living
Drury who gave them free Entertainment at his House Drury-Lane happen tlut the Lord Haye was by King James sent in an Embassy to the French King, HenrylV. whom Sir Robert resolv'd to accompany, and en gage! Dr. Donne to go with them whose Wife was then with Child, at Sir Roberts
Two Days after their Arrival at Paris, Pr. pqnne was left alone in that Room
House.
with Sir Robert
' which
  G 3
;
» in
;
d,
d in
in
a ;
it ;:
it
in a
A ;
it it in
;
al
se
85.

 $6 The Life and Adyentur es
which Sir Robert and he, and some other Friends, had dined together. To this Place Sir Robert return 'd within Half an Hour ; and as he left, so lie found Dr. Donne alone , but in such an Extasy, and so alter'd in his Looks, as amaz'd Sir Robert to behold him ; inso much that he earnestly desir'd Dr. Donne to
declare, what had befallen him in the short Time of his Absence ? To which Dr. Donne was not able to make a present Answer ; but after a long and perplex d Pause , did at last say, I have seen a dreadful Vision, since I saw
I have
by me, through this Room , with her Hair
you :
seen my
dear Twice Wife pass
 about her Shoulders, and a dead Child in her Arms : This I have seen, since I saw you. To which Sir Robert reply Sure, Sir, you have slept since saw you and this
the Result of some melancholy Dream which desire you to forget, for you are now awake. To which Dr. Donne Reply was, cannot be surer that nono live than that have not slept since saw you and am as
sure that at her second Appearing^ she stopp'd, and look'd me the Face, and vanifid. Res}
and Sleep had not alter Dr. Donne's Opini
for he then affirm'd this with more deliberate and con Confidence, that he inclind Sir Ro
faint Belief that the Vision was who immediately sent Servant to
hanging
on the next Day
Vision
firm bert to
true
Drury-House, with Charge to hasten back,
  a
I dI
; da a
,
I
a
;
,
s
a
in
;
I
so
I
;
'd,
I
;
, is

 osMr. Duncan Campbeli^
and bring him word whether Mrs. Bonne were alive ; and if alive, what Condition she was in as to her Health. The Twelfth Day the Meslenger return'd with this Ac
count : That he found and left Mrs. Donne very Sad and Sick in Bed ; and that after a long and dangerous Labour , she had been deliver'd of a dead Child : And upon Exa mination, the Abortion prov'd to be the fame Day, and about the very Hour., that Dr. Bonne affirm'd he saw her pass by in his Chamber. Mr. Walton adds this, as a Relation which will beget some Wonder ; and well it may ; for most of our World are at present pos- sess'd with an Opinion, that Visions and Mi racles are ceas'd : And tho' 'tis most certain, that Two Lutes, being both strung and tuned to an equal Pitch, and then one play'd up
on, the other, th^t is not touch'd, being laid upon the Table, at a fit Distance, will (like an Eccho to a Trumpets warble a faint au dible Harmony, in Answer to the fame Tune 5 yet many will not believe, that there is any such Thing as a Sympathy with Souls, &c.
section n.
I.'i. ,.( »• ...,
shall next relate some little Histories, to Ihew what Perception Men have had of Spirits by the Sense of Hearing : For as
Wierw fays ) Spirits appear sometimes invU
q4
87
 M(
  
 88 ,.The Lite and Adyeutures
sibly, so thajt only a Sound, Voice or Noises is perceived by Men ; viz. a Stroke, Knock ing, Whistling, Sneezing, Groaning, Lament ing, or Clapping of the Hands, to make Men attent to enquire or answer.
In Luther's Colloquia Mensalia, or Table- Talk, set forth in Latin at Frankfort, Anno 1557, (it being a different Collection from that of Aurifaber, which is translated from
High-Dutch into English ; ) we have the fol lowing Relation.
It happen'd in Prujfia, that as a certain Boy was born , there presently came to him
 a Genius, or what you please to call it,
I leave it to Men's Judgments;) who had so faithful a Care of the Infant , that there was no need either of Mother or Servant ; and as he grew up, he had a like Care of him. He went to School with him j but so, that he could never be seen, either \?y himself, or any others, in all his Life. Afterwards he travels d into Italy ; he accompanied him, and whensoever any Evil was like to hap pen to him, either on the Road or in the Inn , he was perceiv'd to foretel it by some Touch or Stroke : He drew off his Boots,
as a Servant. If he turn'd his Journey ano ther way, he continued with him ; having the same Care of him in foretelling Evil. At length he was made a Canon ; and as
on a Time he was sitting and
with his Friends, in much Jollity, a vehe
»
(for
feasting ment
  
 of Mr. Dun can Campbell?
89 mcnt Stroke was struck on a sudden, on the
Table, so that they were all terrify'd : Pre sently the Canon said to his Friends, Be not afraid ; some great Evil hangs over my Head. The next Day he fell into a great Fever, and the Fit continued on him for Three whole Days, till he died miserably.
Captain Henry Bell, in his Narrative pre-
fix'd to Luther s Table-Talk, printed in Eng
lish, Anno 165%, having acquainted us how the German Copy printed of it had been dis covers under Ground, where it had lain hid
Fifty two Years ; that Edition having been
suppress'd by an Edict of the Emperor Rudol- phus II. so that it was Death for any Person to keep a Copy thereof : And having told us that Casparus Van Spar, a German Gentleman,
 with whom he was familiarly
while he negotiated Affairs in Germany for King James I. was the Person that discover'd it, Anno 1626, and transmitted it into Eng land to him , and earnestly desired him to translate the said Book into English, says, he
accordingly set upon the Translation of it many times, but was always hinder d from proceeding in by some intervening Business. About Six Weeks after he had received the Copy, being in Bed with his Wife one Night, between Twelve and One of the Clock,
fshe being asleep, but himself awake there ap
pear to him an ancient Man standing at his
Bedside, array all White, having long ana
acquainted,
  d in
it,
d
); a

 Tb* Lift and Adventures
said thus to him Sirrah Wil! you not take Time to translate that Book, which sent
unto you out of Germany will shortly pro vide for you both Place and Time to do
And then he vanijb'd. Hereupon being much affrighted, he fell into an extream Sweat
and ifow/fctf Beard,
hanging down to his Girdle who taking him his right Ear,,
that his Wife awaking, and
Over wet Ihe ask'd him what he ail'd He told her what he had seen and heard but he never regarded Visions nor Dreams, and the fame fell out of his Mind. But Fort night after, being on Sunday at his Lodging in Kings-streets Westminster, at Dinner with
carry him to the Gatehouse, there to be kept till farther Order from the Lords of the Council upon which Warrant he was kept there Ten whole Years close Prisoner, where he spent Five Tears of Translating the
said Book having good Cause to be mindful of the Old Mans Saying, will shortly pro vide for you both Place and Time to Tran
slate it.
Tho' the Perception of Spirits chiefly af
fects the Hearing and Seeing Faculties, yet are not the other Senses without some Par ticipation of these Genial ObjeUs, whether Good or Evil For, as St. Justin fays, the Evil Work of the Devil creeps through aft
the
his Wife, Two Messengers were sent from the whole Council-Board, with Warrant to
finding him all
   :
'
I
it in
Ii !
j ;
,
a
by
a
;
?
a
;
is
it so so:
:
$>6

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
9t the Paslages of the Senses ; he presents him* self in Figures , applies himself to Colours, adheres to Sounds, introduces Odors, infuses himself in Savours, and fills all the PasiageS
of Intelligence ; sometimes cruelly torment ing with Grief and Fear, sometimes sporting- ly diverting Man, or taunting with Mocks :
And, on the other Hand, as the learned Wal
ter Hinton (a great Master of contemplative Life ) in his Scale of Perfection, sets forth,
that Appearances or Representations to the Corporeal Senses, may be both Good and Evil.
 But before I conclude upon this Head, to give still more Weight and Authority to the Perception Men have had of these Genij,
I will relate Two very remarkable Fragments of History of this kind, told us by Persons
both by the Senses of Hearing arid Seeing,
who demand our Credit, and done within the Memory of our Grandfathers and Fa thers.
The first is concerning the Duke of Buck ingham, who was stabb'd by Felton, August
the 23d,
Mr. Lilly the Astrologer, in his Book enti
tled, Monarchy or no Monarchy in England, printed in Quarto, 165-1, having mention'd
lows: SinJ ce
as fol am the Death Buck
ingham,
Jhall
of
his being admo-
x6xZ.J\
the Duke ofI Buckingham , writes
upon
relate a true Story
:
of
  
 and Adventures
the Duke, or of great Acquaintance with the Duke's Father, and now retired, had a Damon appear'd several Times to him, in the Shape of Sir George ViUars, the Duke's Fa ther. This Damon walk'd many times in. Parkers Bed-Chamber, without any Action of Terror, Noise, Hurt or Speech j but at last, one Night, broke out in these Words : Mr. Parker, I know you lov'd me formerly, Iand my Son George at this Time very well :
$t
TheLui
admonished often of the Death he should die* in this manner.
An aged Gentleman, one Parker, as I now
 would have from me, (you know you go
me very well to be his Father, old Sir George
ViUars, of Leicejierjhire j ) and acquaint him with these and these Particulars , &c. and that he above all refrain the Council and Company of such and such, (whom he then nominated1) or else he will come to Defin
ition, and that suddenly. Parker, tho' a ve
ry discreet Man , partly imagin'd himself in a Dream all this Time ; and being unwil ling to proceed upon no better Grounds, for bore addressing himself to the Duke ; for he conceived, if he should acquaint the Duke With the Words of his Father, and the Man ner of his Appearance to him, (such Appa-r
ritions being not usual) he should be laugh'd ut, and thought to dqat% in regard he was aged. Some few Nights pafc'd without fur
ther
  
 of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbell* 9$
fcher Trouble to the old Man : But not very many Nights after, old Sir George Villars ap peared again, walk'd. quick anafurioufly in the Room, seem 'd angry with Parker, and at
last said, Mr. Parker, I thought you had been my Friend so much, and lov d my Son George so well, that you would have acquainted him with what I desired j but I know you have not done it. By all the Friendship that ever was betwixt you and me , and the great
RespeS you bear my Son, I desire you to de liver, what I formerly commanded you, to my Son. The old Man seeing himself thus solicited, promised the Damon he would ; but
'
 first argued it thus ; That the Duke was not easy to be spoken withal ; and that he would account him a vain Man , to come with fitch a Message from the Dead : Nor did he con ceive the Duke would give any Credit to him. To which the D&mon thus answerd : If
he will not believe you have this Discourse from me, tell him of such a Secret, (and nam'd it) which he knows none in the World ever
Jknew but my self and him. Mr. Parker be
ing now well satisfied that he was not afleep, and that the Apparition was not a vain Delu
sion, took a fit Opportunity, and seriously ac quainted the Duke with his Fathers Words, and the Manner of his Apparition. The Duke laughd heartily at the Relation, which put old Parker to a Stand ; but at last he aslum'd
Courage, and told the Puke, that he acquaint ed
  
 The Leee and ADTiMtxrkfi.
cd his Father's Ghost , with whit he fourid rtow to be true ; iHK Scorn. mi Derision : But, my Lord, fays he, your Father bid me acquaint you by this Token ; and he said, it was such as none ia the World but your Two
P4
sehe* did yet know. Hereat the Duke was amazed, and. much astonished, but took no Warning or Notice thereof ; keeping the same Company still , advising with such Counsel lors, and performing such AUicns, as his Far ther by Parker countermanded. Shortly after, old Sir George VUlars, in a very quiet but sorrowful Posture, appears again to Parker, ana1 said, Mr. Parker, I know you deliver'd
 I thank you for so doing ; but he flighted them : And now I only request this more at your Hands, That
my Words to George my Son ;
once again you repair to my Son, and tell . him, that if he will not amend, and follow the Counsel I have given him, this Knife or
with that he pull'd a Knife or Dagger from under his Gown) shall end him :
And do you, Mr. Parker, set your House in Or der, for you shall die at such a Time. Mr. Parker once more engag'd, tho' very unwil lingly, to acquaint the Duke with the last Menage j and so did ; but the Duke desir'd him to trouble him no further with such Mes sages and Dreams, and told him he perceiv'd he was now an old Man, and doated. And within a Month after, meeting Mr. Parker on
Lambeth-Bridge, said, Now, Mr. Parker, what say
Dagger
(and
  
 ef*M.KDUNCANT CAMPBELXV
say you of your Dream ? Who only return'd, Sir, I wifo it may never have Success, &c. But; within Six Weeks after , he was stabb'd
witha Knifes according
to his Fathers Ad
monition beforehand i and Mr.. Parker died soon after he had seen the Dream or Vision
x\ s,lj , j This Relation is inserted also in the Great Lord Clarendons History, and in Sis, Richard
Bakers Chronicle. The Lord Clarendon, ill
his History, Vol. I. £. i> having given some Relations, fays, that amongst others, there
was one (meaning this of Parker) which was upon a better Foundation ofCredit, than usu ally such Discourses are sounded upon. And he tells us, that Parker was an Officer in the King's Wardrobe in Windsor-Cafilei of a good Reputation for Honesty and Diseretion, and then about the .Age of Fifty Years, or more. This Man had in hi$ Youth been bred in a School in the Parish where Sir George Villars (the Father of the Duke) liv'd ; and had been much cherish'd and oblig'd in that Season of his Age, by the said Sir George, whom after wards he never saw. About Six Months be fore the miserable Ea<i of the Duke of Buck-
the Apparition was seen : After the Third Appearance, he made a Journey to London, where the Court then was : He was very well known to Sir Ralph Freeman, one of the Masters of the Requests, who had marJried a Lady that was near allied to the vl - I Duke,
personnel. .v! - w \
f...
 inghamy
  
 The Life and Adventures
$6
Duke, and was himself well receiv'd by him.' He iriform'd the Duke with the Reputation and Honesty of the Man ; and Sir Ralph Free
man carry 'd the Man the next Morning , Five of the Clock, to Lambeth, according to the Duke's Appointment, and there presented him to the Duke ; who received him courte ously at his Landing, and walk'd in Conference near an Hour with him ; and Sir Ralph's and the Duke's Servants at such a Distance, that they heard not a word : But Sir Ralph always fix a his Eyes on the Duke , who sometimes (poke with great Commotion and Disorder : And that the Man told Sir Ralph, in their Return over the Water, that when he men tion d those Particulars that were to gain him Credit, the Duke's Colour changed, and he swore he could come to that Knowledge only by the Devil ; for that those Particulars were
I will now subjoin an authentick Relation, which Dr. Beaumont tells us at the End of his Book of Genij, or Familiar Spirits, print ed in the Year 1705., he had just before re ceived from the Mouth of Dr. Fowler, then Bishop of Gloucester, himself. It is as fol
Word for Word.
Sir Charles Lee, by his first Lady, had only
one Daughter, of which she died in Child birth ; and when she died, her Sister, the
lows,
v
Lad£ x
by
 Imown only to himself, and to one Person more, who (he was sure ) would never speak of them. So far the Lord Clarendon.
  
 ef Mr. DuncatJ Campbell.
5>7
Lady Everard desir'd to have the Education of the Child ; and she was by her very weil
; and a Match was concluded for her with Sir Wil
educated, till she was Marriageable liam Perkins, but was then prevented
in art a Thursday - Night, me thinking she saw a Light in her
Chamber after me was in Bed, knock'd for her Maid, who presently came to her ; and Ihe ask'd why she left a Candle burning in her Chamber ? The Maid said, she left none ; and there was none, but what she brought with her at that Time. , Then Ihe said it was
extraordinary
manner. Upon
 told her, was quite out ; and said , me believ'd it was only
the Fire : But that, the Maid
it might be so ; and compos d her self again to Sleep : But about Two of the Clock she was awaken'd a-
gain, and saw the Apparition of a little Wo man, between her Curtain and her Pillow Who told her, she was her Mother ; and that she was Happy ; and that by Twelve of the Clock that Day, she should be with her : Whereupon she knock'd again for her Maid,
called for her Cloaths ; and when she was drelsd, went into her Closet, and came not
out
H Mad i
a Dream ; whereupon she said,
out again till Nine ; and then brought with her a Letter seal'd to her Father, brought it to her Aunt, the Lldy Everard, told her what had happen d ; and desir'd, that as soori as she was dead, it might be sent to him i But the Lady thought ihe was suddenly fallen
  
 The Life and Adventures
98
Mad ; and thereupon sent presently away to Chelmssord, for a Physician and Surgeon, who both came immediately ; but the Physician could discern no Indication of what the Lady imagined, or of any Indisposition of her Bo dy ; notwithstanding the Lady would needs have her let Blood, which was done accor dingly : And when the young Woman had patiently let them do what they would with her, she desir'd that the Chaplain might be called to read Prayers ; and when Prayers were ended, she took her Guittar and Psalm- book, and fat down upon a Chair without Arms, and play'd and fung so melodiously and admirably, that her Musick-Master, who was then there, admir'd at it : And near the Stroke of Twelve, Ihe rose and fat her self down in a great Chair with Arms ; and pre sently fetching a strong Breathing or two, immediately expir d ; and was so suddenly cold, as was much wonder'd at by the Physi cian and Surgeon. She died at Wahham, in EJsex, Three Miles from Chelmsford ; and the Letter was sent to Sir Charles, at his House in Warwickshire ; but he was so afflicted with the Death of his Daughter, that he came not till she was buried : But when he came, he caus'd her to be taken up, and to be buried by her Mother at Edmonton, as she desir'd in her Letter. This was about the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Sixty Two, or Sixty Three. And this Relation the Right
a Reve
   
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 99
Reverend the Lord Bishop of Gloucester had from Sir Charles Lee himself ; and Dr. Beau mont printed it in his Book abovementioned,
from the Bishop's own Mouth.
The Relations which I have given above,
are not like the trifling Accounts too often
given of these Things, and therefore causing
ones to be ridicul'd in common with them.T They are of that Nature, that who ever attempts to ridicule them, will, instead of turning them intoJest, become the Object
of Ridicule himself.
The first Story, which has in it such ama
zing Circumstances, and such uncommon and dreadful Incidents concerning the Butler in Ireland, is (as the Reader fees)' attested by no less a Personage than an Earl of Orrery * Two Bishops, and many other Noblemen and Gen tlemen, being present, and Eye- witnesles of
what the Earl said. What greater Testimony
grave
 would the most Incredulous have ?
lay, such Things are told for Interest : What Interest could an Earl, and many Noblemen have, in promoting such an Imposture ? The
Incredulous fay likewise, Great and Learned Men delight sometimes in putting Frauds up on the World, and after laugh at their Creduli- tv. Would a Number of Noble Laymen chuse Two Prelates to carry on such a Fraud > And would Two Pious Bifiops probably combine with several, and some Servants there present,
in spreading such a Deceit ? Tis past belie- H z ving,
They
  
 ioo The Life and Adventures
ving, and it demands the strictest of Moral Faith that can be given, to the most unque- stion'd History that the Pen of Man ever wrote.
The Second Story is founded, first, upon
the Experience of one of the most ingenious Men of that Age, Dr. Donne ; and then upon the Proof made by his Friend, Sir Robert Drury, who could at first scarce believe it : And shall we doubt the Credit of Men, whose Company (for their Credit be it spoken) a
British Ambaslador was proud of gaining
? The Third Story is told by Luther himself,
 who began the great Work of the Reformation. The Fourth is told by one that was a King's
Publick Minister, and told from his own Tri
al of the Matter, where he could have no In
terest in the telling it.
The Fifth is related by those great Histori
ans, the Lord Clarendon, and Sir Richard Ba ker ; as a Truth rely'd upon by themselves, and fit to be credited by their Readers.
The Sixth and last was related to Dr. Beau mont, by the Lord Bishop of Gloucester, who
L,ee himself, to whose Grand-Daughter the Mat
receiv'd the Account from Sir Charles
ter happen'd.
Men, who will not believe luch Things as
these, so well attested to us, and given us by ftch Authorities, because they did not fee them themselves, nor any Thing of the like
Nature, ought not only to deny the Damon of
  
 ofMr. Duncan Campbell, ioi
of Socrates but that there was such a Man as Socrates himself. They mould not dispute the Genij of Cesar, Cicero , Brutus, Marc Anthony ; but avow, that there were never any such Men existing upon Earth, and over throw all credible History whatsoever. Mean while, all Men, but those who run such
in their fantastical Incredulity, will, from the Facts above-mention'd, rest satisfied, that there are such Things as Evil and Good
Genij ; and that Men have sometimes a Com merce with them by all their Senses, particu
larly those of Seeing and Hearing ; and will not therefore be startled at the strange Frag ments of Histories, which I am going to re late of our young Duncan Campbell, and look upon some wonderful Adventures which he perform'd by the Intervention of his Familiar 'Dæmon or Genius, as Falshoods, only because they are uncommon and surprizing ; more especially since they were not done in a Corner, but by an open way of Profession of a Predi ctor of Things, in the Face of the Metropolis of London, where he settled young ; as will
appear in the Progress of his Life. However, some People, notwithstanding all this, may alledge, that tho' a Mart may have a Genius appear to him, so as to convey into his Mind, thro' his Senses, the Knowledge of Things that are to come to pass ; yet this happens but on very eminent and extraordinary Occa sions. The Murder, for Example, of a Prime
H3 Mini
Lengths
   
 ioz The Life and Advintur es
Minister, and the Favourite of a Monarch, in such a manner as it was performed on the Great Buckingham by Felton, was a Thing so uncommon, that it might perhaps deserve, by the Permission of Heaven, an uncommon Prediction. The others likewise are Instances
eminent in their way, particularly that of
the Lady Everards Niece : For that young
Lady being then Marriageable, and a Treaty for that End being on Foot with Sir William Perkins ; the Divine Providence foreseeing that such a State might call away her Thoughts, hitherto bent on him and Spiritual Affairs, and fix them on the Trifles of this World, might perhaps permit her to be cal
led by a Holy Mother to the State of Hap piness she before her enjoy d, lest her Daugh ter s Mind should change, and she go into the Ways of a Sinner. But if these super- eminent, these scarce and rare Examples may be admitted, of Man's holding a Conversati on with the spiritualizd Beings of another World ; it will, however, be far below the Dignity of Hurnan Reason, methinks, to make such large Concessions to People, who pre tend to converse that wonderful way, as to
allow them the Credit of being able, to do
\t upon every slight Occasion, and every in different Occurrence of Human Life.
 I cannot help acknowledging, that a Mart of Wisdom may, at first Thought, make such an Objection ; but Reflection will presently
. .. .
jit.'
retract
  
 gine,
sequence
ofMr. Duncan Campbell.
103 retract it ; and the same good Sense that taught him to make an Objection so well upon the
first Thought, will teach him, upon second
Thoughts, to acquiesce in the Answer. Infants may have, no doubt, the Benefit of
such an attending Genius, as well as People more advanc'd in Years ; as may be seen in one of the Instances, which is a very samous one, relating to the Boy born in Tntffta, who was attended by one constantly from the Time of his Birth to his Death. Besides, it is a Mistake in the Understanding, to ima
that Death, which is the Determinati on and End of Life, is of more Consequence to be known, than the Manner of regulating that Life. For, in Reality, according to the right way of considering, Death, or the De
termination of a Man's Life, derives its Im portance from the Steps which he took in the due Regulation of it ; and therefore e- very the least Step , proper to be taken' for the due Regulation of Life, is of more Con
to be known , than the Death of a Person ; tho' this, at first Sight, carries the Face of Significance, and the other no thing better than the Look of a Trifle. Mar riage, for Example, is a Step in Life of the utmost Importance, whether we consider that Estate with Regard to this, or the next World. Death is but the Finishing of one Person ; but Marriage may be the Introducing of many
 into the World with Happiness :
It is there- H4 fore
  
 first, who
The Life and Adventur es .
104
fore a Thing of more importance to be known beforehand, and consequently more worthy
of the Communication of a Genius to the Man with whom he convers'd. PoJJidonius tells us, that a certain Rhodian dying, nominated Six of his Equals, and said who mould die
next, and so on, and the Event
answer d the Prediction ; why then (tho' some
People are apt to make a Jest of may not
Man by the intervention of his good Ge nius, tell Woman, that to have six Huf. bands, who she shall have first, who next, and on, and the Event answer the Predi ction Men of Learning may acquire such Knowledge, as to attain to extraordinary Things by their ordinary Faculties, why may not ordinary Things be taught others in this extraordinary Way For will any Body lay yhat it easier for Man to accommodate himself to the knowledge of Dæmon or Ge nius, than for Dæmon or Genius to accom modate himself to the knowledge of Man Certain indeed that this good Genius (that endues Man with prophetick kind of Science) be any Thing resembling good
Angel, the primary end of his being permitted to direct Mankind, must consist in Things re lating more to their Welfare hereafter yep
know not why they may not sometimes spire, or openly direct them in human Know ledge, and Things relating to Human Life,
they are of good Tendency more espe- cially
   , <
if
so
Ja ? so
;
it)
in a
a
a
?
a in
a ?
j
it is If is
a
a
a
is
a

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell/
cially since such a good Inspiration may be a Counter-balance to the bad Knowledge which, some have been inspir'd with by evil Spirits. I would not be thought to go too far in a
Point of this Nature, and have
therefore I could fay much more if I
(though perhaps
follow'd entirely my own private Opinion, and would venture to introduce it here, in order to communicate it to others, and make it a publick one) said no more on this Head than what Divines generally teach.
But the most unexceptionable Mistress, that
teaches these Things to be in Nature, is Ex
io?
 perience. If we had very many People gifted
this Way, the extraordinary Thing would have been become ordinary, and therefore I can't
help wondering that it should be so ordinary a Thing for wife Men themselves to wonder too much at Things, because they are extra ordinary, and suspect them as Frauds, because they are uncommon.
There has scarce been any Period of Time, in which some Person of this Prophetick Class, has not existed, and has not been consulted by the greatest of Men, and their Predictions found at the long run to come true ; ignorant Men always rise to their Belief of them by Experience, and the most learned Men sub
mit their great Opinions to Experience, but your Men of middling Talents, who make up their want of Reason with bustling Obstinacy
and n.oify Contradiction, have been anpl still
.
,
con
  
 The Life and Adventures
continue to be their own Opposers, and with out discovering the reason for what they say, they content themselves with having the
Laugh on their Sides, and barely affirming without proving, that it is a kind of ideal
Juggle zndintelle&ual Legerdemain, by which, these Modern Predictors impose Things up on the Eye of Reason, as the corporeal Eye is impos'd upon by sleight of Hand ; but it is a strange Thing that Men of such quick Reason can't give us a Sample of the Frauds. Thus I remember to have read (I can't tell where) a Story of some Courtiers, who when a great Artist of Legerdemain was to act before the King, pretended to be so quick- sighted, that nothing he did should escape their Discovery, were left by his nimble Fingers in the Dark, and fore d at last with Blushes to own they had no better Eyes than other People. In a word, if People will be led by Suspicions and remote Possibilities of Fraud and Contrivance of such Men, all Historical Truth shall be ended, when it consists not with a Man's pri vate Humour or Prejudice to admit it. Now therefore to prove by Experience and undeni able Testimonies, that these kind of Genij will submit to little Offices in order to bring
x66
 I will
Three or Four curious Pallages, that will set
the reasonable Reader at ease,and prepare hirrj
for reading the Passages of Mr. Campbells Life with Pleasure, and as a fine History of won- '
derfui
Men to greater Good ;
give
the Reader
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell^ 107
derful Facts, that though they seem to sur pass Belief, yet ought to have his Credit.
What in Nature can be more trivial than for a Spirit to employ himself in knocking on a Morning at the Wainscot by the Beds-head of a Man who got Drunk over Night, ac cording to the Way that such Things are or dinarily explain'd ? And yet I shall give you such a Relation of this, that not even the most devout and precise Presbyterian will offer to call in Question. For Mr. Baxter in his Histo rical Discourse of Apparitions writes thus.
There is now in London an understanding sober pious Man, oft one of my Hearers, who has an elder Brother, a Gentleman of consi derable Rank, who having formerly seem'd Pious, of late Years does often fall into the Sin of Drunkenness ; he often Lodges long to gether here in his Brother's House ; and when soever he is Drunk and has slept himself So ber, something knocks at his Bed s-head, as if one knock'd on a Wainscot : When remove his Bed it follows him : Besides other
 loud Noises, on other Parts where he that all the House hears they have often watch him, and kept his Hands lest he should do himself His Brother has often told
me, and brought his Wife, discreet Woman, to attest who avers moreover, that as stie watch'd him, she has seen his Shoes under the Bed taken up, and nothing Visible to touch them. They brought the Man himself
they
  ,
it ;
:
; a
it
is, it d,

 lotf TbeLiiE
and Adventures
to me, and when we ask'd him, how he dare Sin again after such a Warning, he had no Excuse : But being Persons of Quality, for some special Reason of Worldly Interest I
must not name him.
Two Things are remarkable in this Instance,
(says Mr. Baxter ; ) ' first, What a powerful Thing Temptation and fleshly Concupiscence
and what an harden'd Heart Sin brings Men to one rose from the Dead to warn such Sinners, would not of self persuade them.
Secondly, (says Mr. Baxter) poses me to think what kind of Spirit this that has
such care of this Man's Soul, which makes me hope he will recover. Do good Spirits dwell so near us, or are they sent on such
 Or his Guardian Angel Or the Soul of some dead Friend that suf
fers and yet retaining Love to him as Hives to his Brethren,wouId have him saved God yet keeps such Things from us the Dark.
So far we have the Authority of the re- nown'd and famous Mr. Baxter, who makes this knocking of the Spirit at the Beds-head (though what we commonly call frivolous) an important Errand.
Another Relation of this Kind was sent to
Dr. Beaumont fwhbm my self personally
and which he has inserted in his Ac count of Genii or familiar Spirits) in Letter by an ingenious and learned Clergyman of
who had given him the Relation likewise
Meslages
knew, Wiltshire
  ;
;
?
; if
a
I
in
?
it is, It
is
is,
it
a
is it
it
?

 of Mr. Duncan Camp bel t. "109
likewise before by Word of Mouth. It is as follows.
Near Eighty Years since, in the Parish of
Wilcot (which is by the Devizes) in the Vi car's House, there was heard for a conside
rable Time the found of a Bell,
tolling every Night ; the Occasion was this,: A debauch'd Person who liv'd in the Parish, came one Night very late and demanded the Keys of the Church, of the Vicar, that he might ring a Peal, which the Vicar refused to let him have, alledging the unseasonable- nefs of the Time, and that he mould by grant ing his Desires give a Disturbance to Sir George
Wroughton and his Family, whose House ad joined to the Church-yard. Upon this Refu- . sal the Fellow went away in a Rage, threat- ning to be reveng'd of the Vicar, and going some time after to the Devizes, met with one Cantle or Cantlow, a Person noted in those Days for a Wizard ; and he tells him how the Vicar had serv'd him, and begs his Help , to be even with him. The Reply Cantel made him was this : Does he not love Ring ing ? He shall have enough of it : And from that Time a Bell began to Toll in his House, and continued so to do till Cantell's Death, who confessed at Fifoerton Goal in Sarum,
ring his Life that he caus'd that Sound, and
where he was confin'd du f J by King James
that it should be heard in that Place
Life. The Thing was so notorious, that
constantly
 during Persons
  
 -
iio The Life and Adventures
Persons came from all Parts to hear it. And King James sent a Gentleman from London, on Purpose to give him Satisfaction concern ing the Truth of the Report. Dr. Beaumont had likewise this Story as he tells, from the
Mouth of Sir George Wroughten's own Son j with this remarkable Circumstance, That if any in the House put their Heads out of the Window, they could not hear the Sound ; but heard it immediately again, as soon as they stood in the Room.
The Reader here fees, that good and bad Gem] exercise themselves upon very little Functions Knocking at Bed's-Heads, and Ringing of Bells. For Proof of this, we have the Testimonies of Two Divines, of Man of Quality and Probity, and the fame Satis faction that Learned King had, who sent to enquire into the Matter And after this, there can be, think, no room for DoubV.
But to carry the Point still nearer Home Inasmuch as know some will leave no Stone unturn'd, to make the Extraordinary Actions, which the Person whose Life write, has
performed, appear Impostures and inasmuch as for this End they may fay, that tho' many People may have been gifted this extraordi nary manner, yet not as to make Pro fession of and therefore from thence they take their Suspicions shall, in this Place, to remove every nicest Scruple they can have
touching this Affair, give the Reader one
 x
. Instance
  it,
I
I
a
;
;I
so
:
in
;
I
aa :
"."

 os Mr. Duncan CampbeIl tw
Instance of this kind likewise, before I pro ceed with my History.
There liv'd, not many Years since, a very.
aged Getlewoman in London, in Water-Lam
gives the World this Account of her. She was very well known, says he, to many Persons of my Acquaintance, now living in London : Among others, a Gentleman, whose Candour I can no way suspect, has told me, that he often resorted to her, as to an Oracle; and that as soon as he came into her presence, me would usually .tell him, that she knew what he was coming for, for that she had seen his
for some Time before : And without his saying any Thing to her, Ihe would com monly tell him what the Business was, which he came to consult her about, and what the Event of it would be ; which he always found to fall out as she laid ; and many other Per
by Fleetjireet, whose Name was Pight, who was endow'd With a Prophetick Spirit : And
the ingenious Dr. Beaumont (whom I perso nally knew, and who had a Familiar Genius
himself)
 Spirit
sons now living, can testify the like Experi ence of her as to themselves. ' !
Before I conclude this Chapter, I am wil ling to give the Publick one farther little Hi- :ltory of the like kind with the foregoing ones ; with this only Difference, That if it be values!
according to the Worth the World has al
ways attributed to the very ingenious Person
.whom it concerns,, it will be far the most fa mous
  
 Hi The Life and Adventures
mous of them all, and therefore fittest to fi nish this Chapter, and to crown this part of the Work, in which we are mowing that Per sons have had a Perception of Genii or Spirits, not visible at the same time to others.
The famous Torquatus Tajso Prince of the Italian Poets, and scarce inferior to the im mortal Virgil himself, and who seems to en
joy the intermingled Gifts of the most ac curate Judgment of this Latin Poet, and the more fertile and copious Invention and Fancy of the Greek one, Homer, strongly asserted his own Experience in this kind. . His Life was written and published in French, Anno 1692, by D. C. D. D. V. who, in his Preface tells us, that, in what he writ, he has followed
 the History given us in Italian by
chiefly
John Baptifla Manso, a Neapolitan Gentle man, who had been a very intimate Friend to
Tasso. In his Life, among other Things, he ac quaints us, that Tajso was naturally of that me- lancholick Temperament, which has always
made the greatest Men, and that this Tem
perament being aggravated by many Hard ships he had undergone, it made him some times beside himself, and that those melan- cholick Vapours being dispatched, he came again to himself, like those, that return from Fits of the falling Sickness, his Spirit being as free as before. That, near his latter End, he retired from the City of Naples, to his
Friend Manso, at Eisaccia, a small Town in
.
the
  
 of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbel t. zif
the Kingdom of Naples, where Manfo had a considerable Estate, and pass 'd an Autumn there
in the Diversions of the Season.
And here the French Author gives us an
Account of TdJso\s sensible Perception of a Genius, as follows. As, after these Amuse ments, he usually retir'd to his Chamber, to entertain himself there with his Friend Manfo, the latter had the Opportunity to enquire into
one of the most singular
of Tajfos
Effects MIelancholy, (of this Heroick Melancholy as
call which rais'd and brighten'd may his
Spirit so far was from depressing, or ren- dring obscure and which, among the An
cients, would have reasonably caus'd them to have aserib Familiar Damon to him, as
 to Socrates. They were often
warm De
bate, concerning this Spirit, with which Taf- fo pretended to have free Communicati
on. I'm too much your Friend, said Manfo to him one Day, not to let you know what the World thinks of you concerning this Thing, and what think of my self. Is
will you give your Enemies that Advantage, to be able to prove by your own Acknowledg
ment,' what they have already published to the World You know, they say you did not
that being enlighten'd
you should be fallen into so great Weakness, as to think you have Familiar Spirit And
possible,
publish your Dialogue
the Messenger,
as
xitfion but you would have Men believe, that
as you are,
  I'
of
I a
so
;
?
it ;
a
it
?
it aa
a
in
'd a
it
it) ;;

 The Life Adventures
that the Spirit, which you make to speak there, was a real and fn/<? Spirit : Hence Men
have drawn this injurious Consequence, That your Studies have embroil d your Imaginati on ; so that there is made in it a confused Mixture of the Fictions of the Poets, the In ventions of the Philosophers, and the Doctrine
n4
of Religion.
,
I am not ignorant, answer'd Taffb, of all
that is spread abroad in the World, on the Account of my Dialogue : I have taken care divers Times to disabuse my Friends, both by Letter and Word of Mouth :
I prevented ev'n the Malignity of my Enemies, as you
 '
Idea of it ; and I committed it to Paper a lit tle after my unfortunate Return. I address'd it to this Prince ; and all Men might have read in the Epifile Dedicatory, the Protestation I there make, that this Dialogue being writ
know, at the Time I publish'd my Dialogue. Men could not be ignorant, that I compos'd it for the young Prince of Mattua ; to whom I would explain, after an agreeable manner, the principal Mysteries of the Platonick Phi- Ibsophy. It was at Mantua it self, after my Second Flight from ¥errara, that Iform'd the
to the Doctrine of the Platonicks, which is not always conformable to reveald Truths ; Men must not confound what I ex
pose there as a Philosopher, with what
lieve as a Christian. This Distinction is by so much the more reasonable, that at that Time
A nothing
according
be
  
 '
and I spake iiot; of any Apparition. pe attested/Dy those with whom
This can
lodg'd, or and there
of Mr. Duncan Camp tiitl slothing extraordinary had happen'd .to me ;
whom frequentedinthisVoyage
fore there no Reason for confounding the ction of my Dialogue^ with what has happen'd to me since. am persuaded of all you say to me, reply Manso but truly cannot be, of what you believe, at present, concerning your self. Will you imagine, that you are Com merce with Spirit And ask you, of what Order that Spirit Shall we place him in the Number of the Rebels, whom their Pride
its
 precipitated into the Abyss Or of the Intel
who continued firm Faith, and Submission to their Creator For there no Mean to take the true Religion and we' must not foil into the Extravagances of the Gnomes and Sylphs of the Cabalijis.
Now the Spirit Question cannot be Dæmon. You own, that instead of inspiring you with any Thing contrary to Piety and Religion, he often fortifies you the Maxims of Chri stianity he strengthens your Faith by pro found Reasonings, and has the fame Respect
.with you for sacred Names and Things. Nei ther can you fay that it's an Angel for. tho' you have always led regular Life, and far from all Disloluteness tho', for some Years past, you have apply'd your self after par ticular manner to the Duties of true Chri
stian you will agree with me, that these Sorts of
ligences,
  ;
I
a
a
I Fi
;
a
in
in
J
is
a
in ;;
?
I
is a
in
??
I ;
all
I ?
in
'd
is
;

 116 The Life and Adventures
of Favours are not common ; that a Man must have attained to a high Degree of Sanctity, and not be far from the Pureness of Cœlestial Spirits, to merit a familiar Converse, and bear a Harmony with them. Believe me, there is nothing in all these Discourses, which you
imagine you have with this Spirit. You know, better than any Man, those Symptoms, which the black Humours, wherewith you are tor mented, causes in you. Your Vapours are the Source of your Visions ; and yourself would not judge otherwise of another Person , to whom a like Thing mould happen : And you will come to this in your own Respect also, if you will make a mature Reflection, and apply your self to blot out, by an Effort of Reason, these Imaginations, which the "Vio lence of your evil Effects causes in you. You may have Reason, reply 'd Tajso, to think so of the Things that pass in me 5 but as to my self, who have a sensible Perception of them, I am forced to reason after another manner. If it were true, that the Spirit did not shew
himself to me, but in the violent Affault of my Vapours ; if he offer'd to my Imagina tion, but wandring and confus'd Species, without Connection or due Sequel ; if he us'd to me frivolous Reasonings, which ended in nothing ; or having begun some solid Rea soning, he broke off" on sudden, and left me »Darknefs should believe with
 you^_ that all Tilings that pass, are but mere Dreams
  in
if, ;I it
a

 esMr. Duncan Campbell^ 117,
and Phantoms. But it's quite otherwise : This Spirit is a Spirit of Truth and Reason y and of a Truth so distinct, of a Reason so
sublime, that he raises me often to Know ledges that are above all my Reasonings, tho' they appear to me no less clear ; That he teaches me Things, which, in my most pro found Meditations, never came into my Spi rit, and which I never heard of any Man, nor read in any Book. This Spirit therefore
its being impossible for me to comprehend and define him. Manso did not yield to these Facts, which To/so would have palsd for Proofs : He press'd him with new Questions, which were not without Answers. Since you will not believe me on my Word, laid Tajfso to him,Ianother Day, after having well dis
is somewhat of real ; of whatsoever Order he
be, I hear him and fee him, nevertheless for
 must convince own puted, you by your
Eyes, that these Things are not pure Imagi nations. And the next Day conversing toge
ther in the fame Chamber,
that on a sudden he fix'd his Eyes towards the Window, and that he stood , as it were, immovable ; he call'd to him, and jogg'd him many times : But instead of answering him ;
See there the Spirit, says Tajso at last, that has been pleased to come and visit me, and to entertain himself with me : Look on him, and
you will acknowledge Ith
what /say. Manso
' ,* !
Ie Truth
(
os
Manso
perceiv'd,
  
 The Life and Adventures
Manso, somewhat surprized, cast his Eyes towards the Place he shew'd him, and per- ceiv'd nothing but the Rays of the Sun pas sing through the Glass ; nor did he fee any
1*6
in all the Chamber, tho' he cast his Eyes round it with Curiosity : And he desir'd him to shew him the Spirit, which he look'd
for in vain, while he heard Tajso speak with much Vehemency. He declares in a Letter, which he writ concerning this to the Admi ral of Naples, that he really heard no other Voice but Tajso s own : But there were some times Questions made by him to the pretended Spirit, sometimes Answers, that he made to the pretended Questions of the Spitit ; and
which were couch'd in such admirable Terms,
so efficacious, concerning Subjects so ele vated and so extraordinary, that he was ra- visiYd with Admiration , and dared not to interrupt him. He hearkend therefore .at tentively ; and being quite beside himself at C this mysterious Conversation, which ended
Thing
 at last by a Recess of the Spirit, as he found by the last Words of Tafso. After which, Tajso turning himself to him, Well, said he, are your Doubts at last dissipated i On the contrary, ansvver'd Manso ;
I am more embroil'd than
Ihave heard wonderful truly
ever :
but you have not shewed me what you pro- mis'd me. You have seen and heard, resum d Taj/h, perhaps more than . .., .. He stopp'd here ; and Manso, who could not recover
him-
Things ;
  
 of Mr. Dunca n Campb ei t.
liimself of his Surprize, and had his Head
led with the Ideas of this extraordinary En tertainment, found himself not Condition to press him farther. Mean while he engag'd himself not to speak Word to any Man of
these Things he had heard, with Design to
make them Publick, tho' he should have Li
berty granted him. They had many other Conversations concerning this Matter after which, Manso own'd, he was brought to that Pass, that he knew not what to think or say only, that were Weakness his Friend to believe these Visions, he much fear'd
would prove contagious to him and that he should become at last as credulous as him self.
Dr. Beaumont, who still living, and with whom have had formerly some Acquaint ance my self, has set down, among others, this Relation at large concerning Tajso and gives this Reason for Because, says tlje Doctor, think contains a sufficient Answer to what many Learned Friends have said to
my self on the like Occasion.
Perhaps may not be ungrateful to the
Reader, subjoin here the short Elogium writ on Tajst^by the famous Thuanin which
as follows.
Torquatus Taslb died about the Forty fifth Tear his Age a Man a wonderful and prodigious Wit, who was seized with an incu*
fable Fury in his Touth, when he lived at the Court
1x9
   '
fil
I ^
;
it
of
I I
of
;
in ;in aa
is
if
I it
if it
it :
a
is a
;
; it j

 izo The Life and Adventur es
Court of Ferrara , and nevertheless, in lucid
Intervals, he writ many Things, both in Verse
and Prose, with so much Judgment, Elegancy, and extreme Correctness ofStile, that he turn d at length that Pity, which many Men had con ceiv'd for him, into an Amazement ; while by that Fury, -which, in others, makes their Minds- outrageous, or dulls them, after it was over, his
Understanding became as it were more purified,, more ready in inventing Things, more acute in aptlydisposing themaftertheywereinv€nted,and more copious in adorning them with choiceWords
flndWeight of Sentences ; and that whicbaMan
the soundest Sense would scarce excogitate at his Leisure, with thegreatest Labour andCare imaginable, he, after a violent Agitation
the Mind set beside self naturally perform with a wonderful Facility that he did not
seem struck with an Alienation of Mind, but with a divine Fury. He that knows not these
Things, which all. Men know that have-been in July, and concerning which himself sometimes
complains, tho' modestly, in hie Writings let him read his Divine Works, and he must necejsa-
rify conclude, either that speak ofanother Man tbanTaflb, or that these Things were written
 another Mai\ than Taslb.
*
After having given my Readers many memorable Accounts, concerning the Percep tion Men have had all Ages, and still conti nue to have, of Genij, or Familiar Spirits, by
all the Senses, as, S&eing, Hearing, &c. whicl}
.
k Accounts
  \ ,
by
•of
;
/ <
, so
in
it
so ,T r-
>• ' *
;
.
dof

 tf Mr. D u N ci N G AtM p b e i l
Accounts have been attested by Men of the greatest Learning and Quality ; if any of them stili remain dislatisfied, I am contented, and desire them, for their Punishment, to lay down the Book, before they arrive at the •more pleasant Parts of which are yet to
and not to read one Tittle further. These unbelieving Gentlemen shall then be at Liberty, according as their different Spi rits dictate, to ridicule me in the lame man ner; as many more learned and greater Men than have b?en satyriz'd, before my Time, by Persons of like infidel Temper, who would fain pasit Incredulity upon the World, as Wisdom and they may, with all the Free dom Nature, bestow upon me those merry
.Appellations, which very well know, such
'•'come,
to be long of Right to any Author, that either be
extraordinary Free-thinkers imagine
lieves himself, or would possess the World with an Opinion and Belief, that there such a Thing, as the holding Commerce and Con versation, in this habitable World, with Ge nii and familiar Spirits, shall only first tell them all have to fay to terminate the Di spute between them and me.
Those, who, to give themselves the Air and Appearance of Men of solid Whclom and Gravity, load other Men, who believe in Spi rits, with the Titles of being Men of Folly, Levity, or Melancholy, are desired to learn, that the fame Folly they are pleas'd to
' term
„
i
   (as
a I
I
I
is
:
it,
in
;
I

 i'.i* The Life and Adventures
termit) ofOpinion is to be found in the great est Men of Learning that ever existed in the Universe. Let them, in order to be convin ced of this read, Apuleius's Book de deo So- traU Censorinus's Book de die Nat. c. 3. Por-
phyrius in his Book de Abflinentia, Agrippa in his Treatise de Occult. Phil. I. 3. c. 1.%. and also c. Natalts Comes in his Myth. I. 4.
c. 3. Maraviglia in his Pseudomantia. Disser tation. 9. and 1 1 .and Animadversion. 10. Pla
to in his Timœus & Cratylus, Ammianus Mar- tellinuss History, Book %t. Hieronimus Car- danus in his Book de vitd pioprid. c. 47. The great Kircher in hlsOedipus Oegyptiacus.Vol
 3. p. 474. Pausanius in Cliac. Pqfter. That im mortal Orator Cicero Lib. 1. de divinatione.
Lib. i. de Naturd Deorum 5 the Hifloire digieuse, written by Pere Arnault. Ana a Book intituled Lux e Tenebris, which is a Col lection of modern Visions and Prophecies in Germany, by several Persons ; translated into Latin by Jo. Amos. Comenius, Printed at Am
sterdam, 1655'. And if they will be at the pajns of having due recourse to these Quota tions, they will find, that all these Men, whose Learning is unquestionable, and most of whom have been in a firm and undisputed Possession of Fame for many Centuries, have all una nimously agreed in this Opinion,Chow foolish soever they may think that there ever was and ever would be Communication held be
tween some select Men and Genii or familiar Spirits.
pro-
  *' '. .'
a
it)

 f *
then Christians.
The Third Sort, out of a pretended Vene
of Mr. Dun cjLn Campbell jij
Spirits. I must therefore desire their Pardons if I rejoice to see them remain Wise by them
selves, and that I continue to be esteemed by
them a Fool among so much good Company. Others, out of a meer contempt of Reli-
gioripor cowardly, for fear of being thought
Pusillanimous by Men, turn Bravo's to Hea
ven, and laugh at every Notion of Spirits, as
imbibed from the Nurse, or imposed upon us
by Priests, and may top these Lines upon us
with an elegant and a convincing magisterial Sneer, though the divine Socrates was ofour
Opinion, and even gxperienc'd it to be true, having a Genius himself.. V '
The Priests hit finish, what the Nurse began^ And thus the Child imposes on the Man. \£
 ffhese bring into my Mind, a Saying of Sir Roger L' Estrange on Seneca, which I must
I join in Opinion with a Christian Heathen, while they remain Hea-
apply to Socrates : '
ration to Religion and Divinity, may call mIeSuperstitiousandChimerical. Tothem
answer, I will continue Chimerical and Su perstitious with St. Justin ; who gives the fame Opinion in his Civitate Dei with Ludo- vicns Vives ; let them be solider and more religious Divines than St. Justin in disown
ing it. Thus I bid these austere Criticks hear
  
 » The Lit* and Adventure's
sarewel ; but let my better natured
Readers go on and find a new Example of this Conversation, being held with the Ge nii by our Duncan Campbell.
H A P. VI.
ii4 heartily
.
\.
G
A Narrative of Mr. Campbells coming to London, and taking upon him the Profession of a PrediBor ; together with an Account of many strange Things that came to pass
 just as he foretold.
,
of young Duncan Campbell, I must let TO
proceed on regularly with the Life
the Reader know that he continued thus con versing with his little Genius, as is set forth above in the Dialogue he had with me, and predicting many Things of the like Nature, as I have described, till the Year 1694, when he was just Fourteen Years of Age, and then he left Scotland.
But before I come to speak of the manner of his departure from thence, his half native Country, inasmuch as his Father was of that Country, and he had his Education there, (what Education he could have, being Deaf and Dumb) I must let the Reader know that
in the Year 1691, my very good Friend Mrs.
Campbell, ... . .
his Mother-in-La\v, died, and left him
  
 ifMr. Duncan Campbell
tif him there at Edinburgh, an Orphan of
Twelve Years of Age.
He was, I may venture to fay, the most
beautiful Boy of his Age I
ever knew ; and the sensible Reader, who considers a Child of good Birth, with the Misfortunes of being
Deaf and Dumb, left Fatherless and Mother less in the wide World, at Twelve Years Old,
for his Mainte nance and Support, without any Relations, in a manner that knew him or assisted him, all the little Fortune his Father had, having
as
without any Competency
been lost in the civil Commotions in Scotland,
I have related above, need not hear me describe the Compassion, I and many more, had for him ; because such a Reader must
 feel in his own Bosom the fame Acts of Pity and Commiseration, aft the hearing of such a Mishap, as I had at the
certainly lively
or at least as have now revives afresh within me at the relating it.
However, came to pass, that
of the Name of Campbell, and who was
stant Relation of the Boy, though he himself was but in indifferent Circumstances, was re- solv'd to fee him provided for one way or ano ther, In manner somewhat suitable to his Condition, and till that Time to take the best care of him himself, that he was able. '' .
Several Ladies of Quality, who had known. his Perfections, coveted to make the Boy one of their Domesticks, as Page, or Play-
, . fellow
seeing
Person,
  -. .
a
'
'
a
a
it, it
a di
so I

 ji6
fellow to their Children ; for though he could not speak, he had such a Vivacity in all his Actions, such a Sprightlinefs of Behaviour, and such a Merriment accompanying all his
Gestures, that he afforded more Entertain ment, than the prettiest and wittiest little- Prattlers at those Years are wont to do. Mr.
The Life and ADVENtURE*
had certainly accepted of some of these fortunate Offers for his little Cousin, which were many of them likely to prove
Very Advantageous, if it had not been put
in his Head by some Friends,
my self, that if he had a: mind to dispose of the Boy in that manner, the best way he could take, would be, to present him to the late Earl of Argyll, who for his Name s Sake, and for his Father's Sake, as well as the Qua lifications and' Endowments' of the
would more naturally (according to all Pro* bability) take a greater Pleasure and Delight in him, and consequently provide better for him, and with a more lasting Care, than
Campbell
other Person of Quality, that had a
any
sodden liking to him , which might change, and took him as a Stranger out of a bare Cu
riosity. Mr. Campbell was by these Reasons over-rufd in the disposal of his little Dumb Prophetical Cousin, as he call'd him, and re- solv'd that an Offer should be made of him
to the present illustrious Duke of Argyll's most
noble Father. But it so
unfortunately hap pened, that the Earl making very much a v : 'longer
particularly
 Boy,
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell! %zj
longer stay at London than was expected, Mr. Campbell, the Uncle, sent our young Bun-
can Campbell, his Nephew, handsomely ac- couter'd, and with a handsome Sum of Mo
in his Pocket, by Sea, With Captain Meek of Kircaldie to London, with Letters of Recommendation to the Earl's Favour ; and just a few Days before young Duncan arrived in London, the Earl was set out on hit Journey to his Seat in Scotland.
had now left him for near Three Years, not having seen him since about a Year after his Mother's Death ; and then coming to Lon don, I had by mere Accident an Appointment to meet some Scots Gentlemen at the Buffalo's Head TavematCharing-crofs. There happen'c} at that Time to be a great Concourse of Scots Mobility there at an Entertainment, and on? of the Ladies and Gentlemen pasting by and seeing one of my Friends, desir'd him to come in, and told him both he and his Compani ons should be very welcome to partake of the Diversion. The Lady told him they had got a lovely Youth, a Scots Miracle among them, that would give us exquisite Delight, and write down to us all the Occurrences of our future Lives, and tell us our Names upon our first Appearance. The Moment I heard of
Duncan Campbell came into my Head but as Thing not rare to be met with in Scotland, for second-sighted Persons to tell such Things, and as the Earl of Argyll was
ney
I
   it, it
is a
j

 ii8 The Life and Adventures^
•
in the North, I thought little Duncan had been under his Protection, and with him, and did not dream of meeting with him there,' and accordingly told my Friend, before It went in, that I believed I knew a Lad in Scotland would exceed this in Foresight, let
him be as dextrous in his Art as he would.
I enter'd the Room, I was sor- priz'd to find my self encompass'd and fur-
As soon as
rounded by a Circle of the most beautiful Fe males that ever my Eyes beheld. In the Centre of this Angelick Tribe was seated a heavenly, Youth, with the most winning comeliness of Aspect, that ever pleased the Sight of any Be holder of either Sex ; his Face was
 divinely Fair, and ting'd only with such a sprightly
as a Painter would use to Colour the
Picture of Health with, and the Complexion
was varnifh'd over by a Blooming, like that
of flourishing Fruit, which had not yet felt the first Nippings of an unkind and an uncivil Air ; with this Beauty was join'd such a smiling
Blush,
of all the Features, as is the result
Draught
of Pleasantry and good Humour. His Eyes were large, full of Lustre, Majestick, well set, and the Soul shone so in them, as told the Spectators plainly, how great was the in ward Vivacity of his Genius : The Hair of his Head was thick and reclin'd far below his Shoulders ; it was of a fine Silver Colour,
and hung down in Ringlets like the curling Tendrils of a copious Vine. He was by the
Women
i
  
    
    
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell. izp
Women entertain d, according to the Claim,
which so many Perfections joining in a Youth just ripening intaManhood, might lay to the benevolent Dispositions of the tender Sex.
One was holding the Bason of Water, ano ther washing a Hand, a Third with a Towel drying his Face, which another Fair had gree
dily snatch'd the Pleasure of washing before, while a Fourth was disposing into order his Silver Hairs with an Ivory Comb, in an Hand as White, and which a Monarch might have
been proud to have had so employ 'd in adjust ing the Crown upon his Head j a Fifth was setting into Order his Cravat ; a Sixth stole a
Kiss, and blush'd at the innocent Pleasure, and mistook her own Thoughts as if she kiss'd the Angel and not the Man ; and they all ra ther seem 'd td adore than to love him, as if they had taken him not fdr a Person that en
joy'd the frequent Gift of the second Sight, but as if he had been some little Prophet pe
culiarly inspired ; and while they all thus ad- mir'd and wonder'd,they all consulted him as an Oracle. The Surprize of seeing a young
Man so happy amidst the general concurring Favours of the Fair, made me be for a while lost in a kind of delightful Amazement, and the Consideration of what Blifi he was pos
sessed, made me scarce believe my own Eyes, when they told me it was Duncan Campbell, who I had left an unhappy Orphan at Edin
burgh. But fa it was* though he was much
 .
K altered
  
 The Life and AdventhM^
130
altered in Stature, being now shot up pretty fast in his Growth since I had seen him, and having gain'd a kind of a fix.'d Comportment, sueh as we may daily observe in those, who are' taking leave of their Minority, and step ping into a Stage of matureflLife.
The first remarkable Thing I knew him do
in London, being in this splendid Company,
where there were so many undoubted Wit-
nesles of Quality too, that had Ocular Proof
of his Predictions, was at that Tavern : ,I
chuse to Record it here, according to its due
Order. It was in the* Year 1 698.
Among this Angelical Class of Beauties, were' Dr. W-bv-as Lady and : Daughter, tipoh Earth there was not sure a moire beau tiful Creature than ' the Daughter j me was the 'leading Light of all the sparkling Tribe ; and Otmnys Character suits her exactly j for
One would imagine prosperous and lucky Fortune was written upon her Face,and thatnc- thing unhappy could be read in so fair a Book ; and it was therefore the unanimous Consent 6f all, that, by way of good Omen to the rest; his Predictions; mould begin to be open'd luckily that Day, and jhat therefore he should first* of all be consulted about her.
Accordingly the Mother to be satisfied of his Talent, before, me proceeded to any o- &et Questions, ask d. him in Writing, if he
knew
 •
Ate' was,"
'..''..'. ;,: ./^iong Ten Thousand, eminently Fair.
  
 of Mr. Duncan Cam pbeliT iji
knew the young Lady, her Name, and who Ihe was. After a little; ruminating and pon dering upon the Matter,^ afad taking an exact View of: the Beauty, he wrote down -her
Name, told Mrs. W-lvo-d slie was her Daugh* ter, . and that her Father was a Physician;, Convinced by his so readily telling the Name and Quality of Persons he had never seen'in his Life-time, that Fame had\ not given a; false Character of' his Capacity, she proceeded. in
. her Questions as to her future Fortune. ! He gaz'd afresh at her very eagerly for some time, and his Countenance' during that time of viewing her seem'd to be ruffled with abun- dance pf Disturbance and Perplexity.5 -We
all imagin'd that the Youth was' a' little touch'd at the Heart himself with what he saw, andithat instead of telling hers, he had
met in her bright Eyes with his own Destiny^ the Destiny of being for ever made a Slave and a Captive, to so many powerful arid al* most irresistible Charms. • -ninv
At length, after having long Debate within himself, which we thought proceed
ed from the Stragglings of Love and Passions he fetching great Sigh, which still don* vinced us more, took the Pen and wrote to
Mrs. W-lw-d, that he begg'd to be exdus'd^ and that his Pen might remain as Dumb and Silent as his Tongue, . on that Affaist By this Answer we concluded one and all*
   a
a
rii

 The Life and Adventures
that our former Conjectures were true, and
we join'd in pressing him the more earnestly to deliver his real and sincere Opinion con cerning the Accidents upon which the future
i^i
of her Life were to turn and de pend. He shew'd many mighty Reluctances in the doing it ; and I have often since con sidered him in the fame Anguish as the late great Dr. Radcliffe, who was endeavouring by
Study to save a certain Fair One, whom he lov'd with a vehemence of Temper, and who was (as his Reason told him) got far away beyond the reach of the Art of Physick to recover. At last he wrote in plain Terms,
that his Backwardness and Unwillingness to tell arose from his Wishes that her For tune would be better than his certain Fore knowledge of told him would be, and
Fortunes
 that we would rest satisfied with that
begg'd
general Answer, since was in particular
Case, where he himself was Well-wisher in vain, to the Lady about whom he was consulted. The young Lady herself thinking,
she knew any Disasters, that were to befall her, she might by knowing the nature of them beforehand, and the time when they were likely to happen, be able by timely
Prudence and Forecast to avert those Evils
with many Beseechings, urg'd him to reveal the fatal Secret. After many Struggles to avoid and as many Instances made to him, both by Mother and Daughter, for the Dis
covery
that,
  it,
a if
it,
;
a
so
it
it
it

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell? ijj
oovery of his Prescience in that Point, he
complied with very great Difficulty, and blot ting the Paper with Tears that trickled fast from his Eyes, he gave her the lamentable Scroll, containing the Words that follow, via. I wish it had not fallen to my Lot to tell this Lady, whom every Body, that but once looks at her, must admire, though they must not have leave to love, that she is not much longer to be Posleslbr of that lovely Face, which gains her such a number of Adorers. The Small Pox will too soon turn a Ravisher, and rifle all those Sweets and Charms that might be able to vanquish a King, and to subdue a Conqueror of might/ Battels. Her Reign is doom d alas to be as short as
 it is now Great and Universal
I believe /he
!
has internal Beauties of the Mind, not the
least inferior to those external Excellencies of the Body, and she might perhaps by the
Power of her Mind alone, be absolute Queen of the Affections of Men, if the Small Pox threaten cl not too surely to be her farther Enemy ; and, not contented to destroy the Face, was not perverfly bent to destroy the whole Woman. But I want Words to ex
press my Sorrow. —I would not tell
you did not extort the baneful Secret from my Bosom. — This fair Creature, whose Beauty would make one wish her Immortal, will by the cruel means of the Small Pox, give us too sudden Proof of her Mortality. —-But nei-
' rjr
ther
  K 3
a
it, if

 compel me to
an Answer, to
only give you because you ,so particular and so exact
Life and Adv enturis.
IJ4
ther the Mother nor herself ought too much to repine at this, seeing it appears to be the
Decree of Providence, which is always to be interpreted as meant for our, Good, and fee
ing may be the means of translating her the sooner only: to hejr kindred Angels, whose Beauty she much resembles here on Earth, and to be among the lowest Class of whom,
better than being the: greatest Beauty of the World here below,, and wearing an Imperial Crowni —While comfort you, can't help the force of NftSure, .which makes me grieve my self, and
.
 particular and exacting
Question.:
The Mother, who took the Paper, was
prudent enough to conceal from the Daugh ter what he laidj but Nature would force its Way, and bubbled from her Eyes ,and the Daughter perceiving that, prested hard to fee
and wept at the Consideration of that hard
Fate ("though she knew not particularly what Way) was to befall her. Never surely was any Thing beautiful Tears* and obtain'd of the Mother to fee the Writing, —r: At last,
general Terms, to free her from suspense of Mind, was told her that some Trouble should happen to her that would^diminish her Beauty. She had Courage enough to hear that Misfortune ityjth Disdain, aadnctying, If that be all, I,am, 4*W J.don't place much
Pride
  F/ dj '
in
it
so
.. I so
in
it,
is
it,
aI
;
(
' so i,
so it,
I
I a
*.

 os Mr. Dunca n Campb ell/ v\.$
Pride in that, which I know Age must shortly after destroy, if Trouble did not do* it be
of when fie ' dies, is the loss of her Beauty) me shew'd an admirable Pattern of Female
Philosophy, in bearing fiich a cruel Predicti
on with such unspeakable Magnanimity, ass exceeded even the Patience of stern Stoifm,
fore ; arid she dry'd up her Tears, and what Monsieur de la Bruyere fays be true/ That the loft Thing a celebrated Woman thinks
she was a Woman, to whom Beauty is more dear than Life.
considering
If any Evil that is impending over Peo ples Heads could be evaded by Foreknow ledge, or eluded by Art, she had the fairest Opportunity of having this Prediction annul led ("which would have been more to the sa
(If
 tisfaction of the Predictor than knowing it
than ever any Woman had. Her Mother was specifically told, that the fatal Di stemper should be the Small Pox ; her Father was, and is still a very eminent Physician; and Distempers of that Kind, especially, are much rhore easily prevented by Care, than curd by Art, and by Art more easily set aside, when: there is a timely warning given to a Physician to prepare the Body against the Danger of the Poison, than wh^^he Di stemper has once catch'd hold of a Body at unawares,- when it is unpurg'd of any gross Humours that may accompany it. But nei
verified)
ther thef! '
K and Caution of the Foreknowledge
i
4
Mother
  
 great
Physician
The Life and Adventur es
2^6
Mother, nor the Skill and Wisdom of the
her Father, were sufficient to ward off the approaching Harm, that was written in the Books of Fate. Not many
Suns had finished their yearly Courses before slie was forc'd to submit to. the inevitable Stroke of Death, after the infectious and ma licious Malady had first ravag'd her Beauty, rioted in all her Sweets, and made an odious
deform d Spectacle of the Charmer of Man^ kind. The predicted Fate of the Daughter workd Ib hard upon the Mothers Bowels, that it dragged her first, with a broken Heart to the Grave.
This Lady, whose Fortune so great and so
distinguifli'd an Asiembly had chosen to hear as a happy Forerunner and lucky Omen of all their own, which were to be ask'd after wards in their Turns, proving so contrary to
their Expectations already unfortunate in the Prediction, and having been in Tears about the Matter, dishearten'd all the rest of the Beauties from consulting him farther that Day. The Person, who kept the Tavern,
by Name Mrs. Irwin, alledg'd that as some People were very fortunate, and others un fortunate upon the same Day ; so one Lady might be before told a Mishap one. Mi nute, and another Lady all the Prosperity in Nature the very next Minute following ; and therefore that what the unfortunate Lady had
heard was not to be taken as Ominous^ or r, .. as
   :..
.
. t

 of Mr, Duncan Campbell'
as what could malignantly influence the Day, neither ought it to be the least hindrance to 1 any who had the curiosity of being let into the Secrets of Time before-hand. However,
were convince! or noj if she prevail'd over their Belief in that Point, she could not prevail over their Humour,
which Cthough they might not believe the
whether the Ladies
Prediction ominous to themselves) was naturally aw'd for fear of the like, per- adventure, for a Time \ and so it was agreed,
nemine Contradkente, as a witty Lady wrote
it down, that no more Petitions should for
that Day be presented by any of that Com
pany to his Dumb, yet oracular. Majesty. Mrs. Irwin, however, would have her way ;
said, she did not presume to such Honour as to call her self of that Company, and that: therefore she might consult him without breaking through the Votes of the Assembly. Many endeavour d to diflwade her, but as she was passionately fond of knowing future E- vents ; and had a mighty Itch to be very in quisitive with the Oracle, about what might happen, not only to herself, but her Posterity ; it was agreed that he should have the liberty of satisfying her Curiosity, since she presum'd her Fortune was sure to be so Good, and was so forward and eager for the knowledge ofrit. But(alasi)suchistoooftenthe fantastical Impulse of Nature unluckily de
praved, djat it carries us often into Wishes of . L'... .* know-
f
former
137
   
 i$8
The Life and Ad ventures
that when known we would be- glad to unkriow again, and then our Memo-
rywill not let us be untaught.
0 'Mrs.- Ifarirt was -at that time in a pretty
commodious way of Business, every Thing in Plenty fourid about her, and liv'd more like a" Person of Distinction, that kept such a-Cel-i ter1 of 'Wme, tfperi House, and a free Table, tfoan' like one who kept a Tavern. She brought irt^her three pretty Children, that ^ere1 then almost Babies, the youngest having fl^c i long been put of the Nurse's Arms, or
tttfsted to the Use of its own Legs* These Children sh6 lovd as a Mother should loW Children $ they1 were the Delight of her Eyes all. Day, and ttie Dream of her Imagination «fl Night. ! All the Passions of her Soul were dorifiri'd to them j she was never pleas'd but'
wlien they were so, and always angry if they w^re crois'd ; her whole Pride was eenter'd hf them,' and they were cToath'd and went attended naofe like the Infants of a Princess, than of a -Vintner s ReUct. The Fortune of these was what -me had near at Heart, and of which she *#as' ib eager of being immediately apprized \ Herlmpatienbe wirfs proportiona- Bl^to *ferLoVe (he had for them, and wmch made her wist* to foreknow all the Happineft th&fc was H&e to attend them. She fate chear- fully down,- presented one - to him, and smi^ ling, Wrote the Question in general Terms,
Is this Boy to be Happy or Unhappy?
knowing,
   
 of Mr. Dunc an Campbell.
159. A- melancholy Look once more' spread it self ail over the Fatie of the Predictor, when he'
read the too inquisitive Words ; and he seem'd mightily to regret being asfc'd a Question, ito- which he was, by his Talent of Foreseeing* compell'd to give so unwelcome an Answer.. The Colour of the poor Woman flush'd and vanish'd alternately, and very quick and Ihe look'd not quite like the Picture of Despair,' but a disconsolate Woman, with little Hopes on one Hand, and great Doubts* and dismal Fears on the other. She profefe'd, she read great Evil in the Troubles of hisFace ; thanks him for his good Nature ; tord .him, that they all knew, that tho' he could? foretel, he could not alter the Acts and Decretals of Fate ; and therefore desir'd him to tell her the worst ; for that the Misfortunes, were they never so
great, would be less dreadful to .her, than re maining in the State of Fear and Suspension. He at last wrote down to her, that great and unexpected, and even unavoidable Accidents, would involve the whole Family in new Ca lamities ; that the Son me ask'd him about, would have the bitterest Task of Hardship
to go thro' withal, while he lived ; and that
to finish all' more unhappily, he would be
basely and maliciously brought to an untimely End , by some mortal Enemy or other ; but that she should not trouble her self so much on that Head, she would never see for would happen some Years after she was de-
parted
   ,
it,
it

 The Life and Adventures
parted from the World. This melancholy Ac
140
count clos'd up the Book of Predictions
for that Day, and put a sad Stop to all the pro
jected Mirth and Curiosity. Now I must tell
the Reader, how and when the Event swer'd the Prediction : And in a few Words, it was thus : Poor Mrs. Irwin, by strange Ac cidents decay'd in the World, and dying Poor, rjer Sons were fore'd to be put out Apprenti ces to small Trades ; and the Son, whom the abovemention'd Prediction
for stealing one Cheese from a Man' in the Hay-Market> severely prosecuted at the Old- Baily ; and on Wednesday, the Twenty-third of December 1713, hang'd at Tyburn with se veral other Criminals.
The Two foregoing Pasiages are of so Tra gical a Nature, that it is Time I should re
lieve the Minds of my Readers, with some Histories of Ladies, who consulted him with more Success and Advantage ; to whom his Predictions were very entertaining, When they so came to pals in their Favour ; the Relation whereof will consequently be agreeable to all
Readers, who have within them a Mixture of happy Curiosity, and good Nature.
Two Ladies, who were the most remark able Beauties in London, and the most courted, turn'd at the fame Time their Thoughts to Matrimony ; and being satiated, I may say wearied, with the Pleasure of having conti
nually after them a great Number and Variety
concern'd, was,
an-
   .

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell! 141
of Adorers, relblv'd each, about the fame Time, to make Choice of their several Men, to whom they thought they could give most Happiness, and from whom they might re
ceive most. Their Names (for they are both Persons of Distinction) shall be Chriftailina,
and Urbana. Chrifiallina was a Virgin, and Urbana a young Widow. Chrijiallina engrofs'd the Eyes, the Hearts, and the Sighs of the whole Court, and whereever she appear put
out of her Place, that had one before in the Heart of any Youth and was the celebrated Toast among the Beau
Monde. Urbana Beauty made as terrible Ha- vock in the City All the Citizens Daugh ters, that had many Admirers, and were in
any Court-Lady
 fair Hopes of having Husbands, when they pleas'd themselves as soon as Urbana had lost her old Husband, found that they every Day lost their Lovers and 'twas
general Fea* among the prettiest Maids, that they should
remain Maids still, as long as Urbana remain'd Widow. She was the Monopolizer of City Affection and made many Girls, that had
large Stocks of Suiters, Bankrupts in the Trade of Courtship, and broke some of their Hearts, when her Charms broke offtheir Amours. — Well but the Day was near at Hand, when both the Belles of the Court, and the City Damsels, were to be freed from the Ravages, which these Two Tyrants, triumphant in
Beauty, and insolent Charms, made among ..: the
  in
j
;
a
;
s ;:
a
;
'd,

 TheLivE and Adventures
i4x
the Harvest of Love. Each had seen her proper Man, to whom the Enjoyment of her
Person was to be dedicated for. Life : But it being an Affair of so lasting Importance, each had a Mind to be let into the Knowledge of the Consequences of such a Choice, as far
as possible, before they stepp'd into the irre vocable State of Matrimony. Both of them happen'd to take it into their Heads, that the best way to be entirely satisfied in their Curi osity, was to have Recourse to the great Pre dictor of future Occurrences, Mr. Duncan Campbell, whose Fame was at that Time spread pretty largely about the Town.
 Chriftallina and Urbana were not acquainted with each
other, only by the Report which Fame had made of Beauty. They came to Mr. Camp bell's on the same Day , and both with the fame Resolution of keeping themselves con- ceal'd, and under Masks, that none of the Company of Consulters, who happen'd to be there, might know who they were.' It hap
pen'd that on that very Day, just when they came, Mr. CampbeWs Rooms were more than ordinarily crowded with Curious Clients of the Fair Sex ; so that he was oblig'd to desire these Two Ladies, who express'd' so much Precaution against, and Fear of having their Persons discover d, to be contented with only one Room between them ; and with much ado, they comply'd with the Request, and condescended to . sit together Incog. Distant
Com
  
 os Mr. DuncanCampbell.
Compliments of Gesture passd between them, (the Dress and Comportment of each making them appear to be Persons of Figure and Breect-
Ing ; .) and after three or fourMpdim Courte sies, down they sat^ without so rmieh as pnc£ opening their Lips, or intending so to do. .Tfye Silence between them was very formal and profound, for near Half anHour:; and nothing
Was .
to be . heard ;
but
the; Snapping
of
Fans,
. which they both did very tuneably, and wit£ great Harmony, and play'd (as, it were ). in
..., . r,r
At last one of the Civil, well-bred
Consort.
. ,(
Mutjes happening tosneeze, the other very gracefully
bow'd ; and, before she was.wejl aware, out popp'd the Words—^-Bless you, Madam ; The fair Sneezer return'd the Bow,. , with an thank you, Madam. They, founja, they did hot know one another's Voices"4 and they
began to talk very merrily together, with pretty great Confidence ; and they taking a mutual Liking from Conversation , so much Familiarity grew thereupon instantly between them, that they began not only to unmaskj but to unbosom themselves to one another, and confess alternately all their Secrets. Chrh>
Jlallina own'd who stie was ; and told Urbana
the Beau and Courtier, that had her Heart,.
Urbana as frankly declar'd, that Vshe was a Widow ; that she would not become the La dy's Rival ; that she had pitch'd upon a Se cond Husband, an Alderman of the City.
   
 The Life and Adventures
144
just by that Time they had had their Chat
out, and wish'd one another the Pleasure of a successful Prediction, it came to Christ allina' s Turn to visit the Dumb Gentleman, and re ceive from his Pen Oracular Answers, to all the Questions Ihe had to propose. Well ; he
accordingly satisfy 'd her in every Point she ask'd him : But while she was about this,
one of Mr. Campbell's Family going with Ur bana, to divert her a little ; the Widow rail'd at the Virgin as a Fool, to imagine that she should ever make a Conquest of the bright est Spark about the Court ; and then let fly some random Bolts of Malice, to wound her Reputation for Chastity. Now it became the Widow's Turn, to go and consult : And the lame Person of Mr. Campbell s Family, in the mean Time entertain'd Christallina. The Maid was not behind-hand with the Widow i She rail'd against the Widow j represented her as sometimes a Coquet, sometimes a Lady of Pleasure, sometimes a Jilt ; and lifted up her Hands in Wonder and Amazement, that Urbana should imagine so Rich a Man, as Alderman such a one should fall to her Lot. Thus Urbana swore and protested, that Chri stallina could never arrive -at the Honour of being the Wife to the Courtly Secretaries, let Mr. Campbell flatter her as he would : And
 vow'd, that Campbell must be a downright Wizard, if he foretqld, that such a one as Urbana would get Alderman Stiff- rump
Christallina
  
 .
of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
•ftimp for a Husband, provided a Thing so im-^ probable should come to pass.
However, it seems, Duncan had told thetri
and the Names of their them farther, how soon they were both to be married, and that too, directly to their Hearts Content ; as they said
They went away, each satisfied that she should have her own Lover ; but Chriftallina
Jaugh'd at Mr. Campbell, for assigning the Al derman to Urbana ; and Urbana laugh'd at him, for promising the Courtier to the Arms
of Chriftallina. of the Tem This is a pretty good Figure
pers of Two reigning Toasts, with regard to one another.
their own Names, Suiters ; and told
rejoicingly to mutual Gratulations.
themselves,, and made their
14^
 Their Curiosity made them, from
First,
resolving to be concealed,
ther wilfully ; from utter Strangers, grow as familiar as ol4 Friends in a Moment ; swear
one another to Secrecy, and exchange the Sentiments of their Hearts together, and from being Friends, become envious of each other's
enjoying a Similitude of Happiness. The Compliments made on either Side, Face to
Face, werei,- upon the turning of the Back, turn'd into Reflections, Detraction and Ridi cule : Each was a Self-Lover, and Admirer of her own Beauty and Merit , and a Despi- ser of the other's. L
/
discover one ano
How-
  
 The Lite /W Adventures
146
However , Duncan Campbell prov'd at last
to be in the right : Urbana was wrong in her
Opinion of Christallina s want of Power over Secretarw ; and Chrijlallina was as much out in her Opinion, that Urbana would miss in her Aim of obtaining Stifrump : For they both prov'd in the right of what they thought, with regard to their own dear single Persons, and were made happy according to their Ex
pectations, just at the Time foretold by Mt.
Campbell.
Chrijlallina s Wishes did not hinder £7r-
hana from being Mistress of Alderman rump's Person and Stock nor did Urbana
hinder Chrijlallina
Stiff-
 from mewing her self shining Bride at the Ringy in Secretarhtss gild
ed Chariot, drawn by Six Prancers of the proud Belgian Kind, witn her Half Dozen of Liveries, with Favours their Flats, waiting
lier Return at the Gate of Hide-Park: Both lov'd, and both envy'd tut both
low of Mr. Campbell's Foreknowledge. Having told you Two very sorrowful Pas
sages, and one tolerably successful and enter taining shall now relate to you another of rny own Knowledge, that mix'd up with the Grievous and the Pleasant, and chequer
as were, with the Shade and the Sunshine of Fortune.
Though there are Vicissitudes every Stage of Life under the Sun and not one ever ran continually on with the fame Series
of
  ;
in
d,
al
as
it
;I
a
is
in ;
ill ;

 of Mr. Duncan Cam pbJl& 1.4?
Of Prosperity ; yet thdfe Conditions, which are the most liable to the fignalrAlturations of Fortune, are the Conditions of Merchants : For profess d Gamesters I reckon, in a man ner, as Men of rto Condition of Lift; at all, but What comes under the Statute ofVagabonds.
It was indeed, as the Reader would guess j a worthy and a wealthy Merchant, who was to run thro' these different Circumstances of Being : He. came and visited our Mr, Camp bell, irt the Year 1707 : He found him amidst a Crowd of Consulters f and being very cad
and solicitous td know his own Fortunes just at thatCritical Juncture of Time, hebegg d of himj, if possible, to adjourn his other Clients to the Day following, and sacrifice that' one
wholly to his Use ; which, aS it was probably more important than all the others together, (q He wrote down, that he would render the Time spent .about it more advantageous to
Mr. Campbell ; and, by way of previous En couragements threw him down Ten Guineas, as a retaining Fee. ,
Mr. Campbell, who held Money in veryioV tie Esteem, and valued it so much too littles that he' has often had my Reprehensions ion' that Head, paused a little ,• and after looking earnestly in the Gentleman's Face, and read ing there. as i suppose, in that little Space of Time in general, (according to the Power of the Second Sight) that what concern d hint •was highly momentous ; wrote him this An-
L z swet 1
ger
   
 148 The Life and Adventures
swer ; " That he would comply~-witkJiis " Requests, adjourn his other Clients to the " Day following, and set. apart all the Rem- " nant of that, till Night, for inspecting the " future Occurrences, of which he had a ,rt Mind to be made a Master.
There is certainly a very keen Appetite in
Curiosity ; it cannot stay for Satisfaction ; it
is pressing for its neceslary Repast, and is with out all Patience. Hunger and Thirst are not Appetites more vehement, and more hard and difficult to be repress'd, than that of Curiosi ty : Nothing but the present NOW is able to allay it. A more expressive Picture of this I never beheld, than in the Faces of some, and the Murmurs and Complaints of others, in that little inquisitive Company, when the unwelcome Note was given about, signifying an Adjournment for only Twenty four Hours,,
The Colour of a young Woman there came and went a Hundred times (if possibles in the
of two Minutes : She blusiYd like a red Rose this Moment ; and in the Switch of an Eyelash, she was all over as pale as a white one. The Suiter, whose Name her Heart had gone pit-a-pat for the Space of an Hour, to bt inform'd of from the Pen of a Seer, was now deferr'd a whole Day longer ; she was once or twice within an , Ace of swooning away ; but he comforted her in particular, by telling her j (tho' he said it only by way of
 Space
  
 ofMr. Duncan Campbell? 149
Jest) that the Day following would be a more lucky Day to consult about Husbands , than the present that she came on. The Answer was a kind of Cordial to her Hopes, and
brought her a little better to her self.
Two others, I remember, Sisters and old Maids, that it seems were Misers, Women ordinarily dress'd, and in blue Aprons, and yet
fby Relation) worth no less than Two Thou sand Pounds each, were in a Peck of Troubles about his going and leaving them unsatisfied. They came upon an Enquiry after Goods that were stolen ; and they complained, that by next Morning, at that Time, the Thief might be got far enough of£ and creep into so re mote a Corner, that he would pu'tlt feeyond the Power of the Devil; jand'the Art of Con
 juration to find him out, and bring him back
The Disturbance and Anxiety that was to be seen in their Countenances, was just like that which is to be beheld in the Face of a losing Gamester, when his All, his last great Stake lies upon the Table, and is just sweeping off by another winning Hand,
into his own Hat.
The next was a Widow j who bounc'd, be
cause, as she pretended, he would not tell Jier what was best to do with her Sons ; and what Profession it would be most happy for them to be put to : But in Reality, all the Cause of the Widow's fuming and fretting,
was, not that she wLanted to provide for her
again.
3
Sonj
  
 .
Sons, but for her self : She wanted a Second Husband ; and was not half so solicitous about being put in a way of Educating those Chil dren she had already, as of knowing when slie should be in a Likelihood of getting more.
This was certainly in her Thoughts ; or else she would never have flounc'd about in her Weed from one End of the Room to "the
other, and all the while of her Passion, smile by Fits upon the Merchant, and leer upon a
Fellow that was there. The young Irishman made use . of a little Eye-
Language : She grew appeas'd ; went away in quite a good Humour ; skuttled too airily down ' Stairs, for a Woman, in her Cloaths j and the Reason was certainly, that she knew the Mat ter before, which we t;ook noticp of presently after.. The Irijlnmn went precipitately after her down Stairs, without taking his Leave.
~ .But neither- were the Two Misers ; fpr their Gold, the Virgin for a first; Husband, nor the Widow for a Second, half so eager, as ano ther married Woman there was for the Death of her Spouse. She had put the Queslipn
young pretty Irijb
 expecting
manner for lucky Answer,
and with
her Looks that no big-belly Woman
was ever more .eager for devouring Fruit
no young hasty Bridegroom, just married to .a Beauty, more impatient for Night and En-i
thought more happy Moment, the Moment
much keen Desire appearing plain
  f j.
a
so
;
in.
so in
ly"
a ,
a 'd

 Of Mr. DUNCA N CAMPB EI.L.
I51 of her Husband's last agonizing Gasp. As her
Expectation was the greatest, so was her Dis appointment too, and consequently Jier, Dis order upon his going and leaving h^r unre- solv'd. She was frantick, raging and impla
cable : Sjhe.was in such aTury at the Delay of putting offher Answer to the Day following, that in her Fury she acted as if she would have given her self an Answer, which of the Two should die first, by choaking her self upon the Spot, with the Indignation that swell'd in her Stomach, and rose into her Throat on that Oc casion. It may look like a Romance to say it ;
but indeed they were forc'd to cut her Lace ; and then she threw out of the Room with great Passion —But yet had so much of the enragJed .Wife left, (Jbeyond the enrag'd Wo man as to return instantly up Stairs, and
 she would be certain to be there next Day ; and beseech'd earnestly,
that she *might not meet with a Second Dit-
appointment.
All this Hurry and Bustle created a Stay, a
little too tedious fpr the Merchant ; who be gan so be impatient himself, especially when. Word was brought up, that a fresh Company y/as corrie in :' But Mr. Campbell was deny'd to thetjjj; and to put a Stop to any more In- terruMionsy the Merchant and the Dumb Gentleman pgreed to slip into a Coach, drive, to a Tavern in the City, and settle Matters o\ futurity
signify very calmly,
'AVer of œw^jHtif
,
r[x6
.
a Bottle French Claret,. r ,M.
  
 The Life and Adybntur es
xsz
The first Thing done at the Tavern,
was£ Mr. Campbell's saluting him upon a Piece of Paper by his Name, and drinking his Health.
The next Paper held a Discourse of Condo- lance, for a Disaster that was past long since ; namely, a great and considerable Loss that hap-
to his Family, in the dreadful Confla gration of the City of London. In the Third little Dialogue which they had together, he
told the Merchant, that Losses and Advan tages were general Topicks, which a Person unskill'd in that Art might venture to assign to any Man of his Profession ; it being next to impossible, that Persons who traffick, should not sometimes gain , and sometimes lose.—-- But, said Mr. Duncan Campbell, I will sketch out particularly, and specify to you some fu ture Misfortunes, with which you will una
voidably meet : 'Tis in your Stars ; it is in Destiny, that you should have some Trials ; and therefore when you are forewarn'd, take a prudent Care to be forearm'd with Patience j and by Longanimity, and meekly and resign edly enduring your Lot, render it more easy, since Impatience can't avert and will only render more burthensome arid heavy. He gave these Words to the Merchant who press'd for his: Opinion that .Moment. By your Leave, reluming the Pen, said the Dumb Gentleman in writings we will have this Bottle out firs):, and tap fresh brie, this you
may be warm'd with Courage enough- 'to- *e-
pen'd
 Gi
*
ceive
  r
:
it, j
a
it f

 of Mr. Duncan Campbeli? i^j
ceive the first speculative Onset of ill Fortune, that I shall predict to you, with a good Grace ; and that may perhaps enable you to meet when comes to reduce self into Action^ with manful Purpose, and all-becoming Re solution. The Merchant agreed to the Pro-
osal, and put on an Air of the careless and in-
ifferent as well as he could ,,to signify, that he
had no need to raise up an artificial Courage
from the auxiliary Forces of the Grape. But
Nature, when hard press'd, will break thro' all
Disguises and not only, notwithstanding the
Air of Pleasantry he gave himself, which ap
 forc'd and constraint, but Spite of two or three sparkling and enlivening Bum
Cloud of Care would ever and anon gather and shoot heavily cross his Brow, tho' he labour'd all he could to dispel as quick ly, and to keep fair Weather his Counte nance. Well they had crack'd the first Bot tle, and the Second succeeded upon the Table, and they call'd to blow Pipe together. This Pipe Mr. Campbell found had very Effect It certainly pensive kind oflnstrument, and fills Mind any thing so disposed, with disturb ing Thoughts, black Fumes, and melancholy Vapours, as certainly as doth the Mouth
with Smoke. plainly took away even the lit tle Sparks of Vivacity, which the Wine hact given before he wrote for Truce of Fi ring those Sort of noxious Guns any longer and they laid down their Arms by Consent, and
drank
pear
pers,
  *a
is
; so
It
a
a
in
it
it
a
it
a
a ;
'd
;
a
it
ill
;: it,
in

 7^!LlFE **d Adventures'
Y$4
drank off the Second Bottle. A Third jro>
VnediateLy supply'd its Place ; and at the firt^ 'Glass of the opening of the Bottle,, Mr. Camp* bell began to open to him his future Cafe, in the
sowing Words : e Sir, You have now some t, Ventures at Sea, from such and such a Place,
£j to such aValue: Don tl^ediscomforted at the 'i.jNc.ws which you certainly will have within,
' thjree Months, t(but 'twill be false at last) that
' they are,by thicee diffe^entTempests ma^ethe ' Prey ofit^great Ocean, and enrich the Bot>
,o: torn oftti&Sea^the Palace ofNeptune. A worse
* -.Storm than, all these attends you at homej a
f, 'Wife who is,and will be more the Tempest of
c the House, wherein me lives, fine high an/i ,
.
 Ireyeriiypur,p9iwerfuiy
her will blow Vanity,
\ . .lofty Winds of
'^e Pillars, of your House acid Family ; t;he
' High-tide 9s her Extravagance, will roll on ' , like a resistless Torrent, and leave you at low f -Water,. a^i; the. Ebb of,.a$ your Fortunes. rjPk? the highest,and the most cutting Di*
faster (hat to befal you. real Ship- fi%d^ f\qt foreign, but cfomestick your ',£osom-Friend to be your greatest Foe,!^!
ndoer for aTime. Marfe 'ywljat say, and take Courage shall be but
ji.for Visile, provided you take Courage. It will* vp,Qg tfat. £ondition,be only short and .V^holsome, |Ta^e of Adversity given to you, f^hat yourqay relisli returningProsperity with
greater Return ofThanks %t$r him .,',tnat' senses at Pleasure to Man-
.yirtue^nd.WAtih inzih
kind.
dow^
  *
j
d
a
is i$
it
i
t; \
a
aI
is;
; it

 of Mr. Du n.c a n Ca m % b p l %j $ 5 j t kind. Remember, :Courage and Resignation
* iswhatI to ; use it advise you £as
becomes
* (those Virtues ; and the more you feel the one, 1 ought not to cast you dawn, but raise your
i. Hopes the more, that he who (foretold you ' .that so exactly, could likewise forptel you the
K other.' TheMerchant was by .this put iqta ja great Suspense of Mind ; but sqmpwhat, ^ sier,' by the second Prediction; )^>eing annex 'd fo kiadly to the first fatal one. They crown d the Night with a Flask of Burgundy ; and t&en
parting, each wpnt to their; respective Homes. <
* J in your Adversity ; and believe, that as ' you) that Adversity, -sol can foretel, a
1 Prosperity .Consequence foretold will again be the of
 how I> who make no mention of my being, there,, (as
Thejleader may perchance^Qncjler,
;
in Truth I was not at theTavefnJ mould able to relate this as of my o.\yn Knowledge but he pleases to have Patience to the End of the Story, he will hajve entire Satisfaction
in that Point. came About Half Year after, theMerchant
again told hjm that his Prediction was too
,far verify . to very dear Cost and that he was now utterly undone, and beyond any
visible Means of future Recovery and doubt ing Jest the other fortunate Part of the Pre diction was only told him by ,way of Encou
ragement, (for groundless Doubts and Fears ja^ways attend a Mind implung'd Melan
choly -besought him very earnestly to tell him
  ;)
a
'd,
j in
\
. ,
if
,h is
,
a
; jbe

 The Life and Adventures
^$6
him candidly and sincerely , if there was no real Prospect of Good, and rid him at once of the Uneasiness of such a Suspension of Thought : But pray, too, said he, with all the Vehemence of repeated Expostulation, sa
tisfy me, if there are any farther Hopes on this side the Grave ?
To this, Duncan Campbell made a short, but a very significant Reply in Writing. ' May the ' Heavens preserve you from athreatningDan-
* ger of Ltfe. Take care only of your self ; * great and mighty Care ; and if you outlive ' Friday next, you will yet be great, and more ' fortunate tfyan ever you was, in all the ' Height ofyour former most flourishing Space c of Life.' He colour'd inordinately, when Dun can Campbell said Friday ; and conjur d him to tell him as particularly as he could, what he meant by Friday ? He told him, he could not particularize any farther ; but that great Dan ger threaten'd him that Day ; and that with out extraordinary Precaution, it would prove fatal to him, even to Death. He shook his Head, and went away in a very sorrowful Plight. Friday past, Saturday came ; and on that very Saturday Morning came likewise the joyful Tidings, that what Ventures of his were given over for lost at Sea, were all come safe into the Harbour. He came the Moment he receivd those Dispatches from his $gent, to Mr. Duncan Campbells Apartment,
'embrac'd him tenderly, and saluted him with much
   
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell! 157
much Gladness of Heart, before a great Room full of Ladies , where I happen'd to be pre
sent at that Time ; crying out in a
loud said, that Mr. Campbells had sav'd his Life ; that Friday was his Birth-day, and he had intended (with
a Pistol) to moot himself that very Day. The Ladies thought him mad j and he, recover'd from his Extacy, said no more, but sat down, till Mr. Campbell 'dismiss 'd all his Clients and then we Three went to the Tavern together, where he told me the whole little History, or
Narrative, just as is above related.
! The Fame which Mr. Duncan Campbell got
by the foregoing, and several other Predicti ons of the like kind, was become very large and extensive, and had spread it self into the remotest Corners of this Metropolis. The Squares rung with it ; it was whifper'd from one House to another, thro' the more magni ficent Streets, where Persons of Quality and Distinction reside ; it catch'd every House in the City ; like the News of Stock from Ex change-Alley, it run noisily thro' the Lanes and little Thoroughfares where the Poor in
Voice, before he knew what he
 It was the Chat of the Tea-Table, and
habit :
the Babble of the Streets ; and the whole Town, from the Top to the Bottom, was full of it. Whenever any Reputation rises to a Degree like this, let it be for what Art or Ac complishment, or on what Account soever it will ; Malice, Envy and Detraction, are sure
to'
  
 i58 The Life and Adventures
to be the immediate Pursuers of it with full Molith, and to hunt it down, if possible,' with
full Cry. Evert the great Nostradamus, tho* favourd by Kings and Queens, (which alwaysf
out France , than our Duncan Campbell wa$ London, and even throughout England.
Various, different,' dnd many were the Ob jections tzisd, to blot his Character, arid ex tenuate his fame ; that, when one was con futed, another might not be wanting to sup
ply its Place ; arid so maintain a Course and
Series of back-biting, according to the knowri Maxirri,—'throw Dirt, and ifit does notsticky
without any
Other Reason. creates Enemies)' Was not more pursued by .Envy and Detra ction, for tiis Predictions in Paris, and through
 throw Dirt continually, dndsome willstick.
, Neither is there any wonder ; for a Man
tfh'at has got Applauders of all Sorts and Con* ditions, must expect Condemners and Detra ctors Of all. Sorts and Conditions likewise. If a Lady of high Degree, for Example, should. fay, smiling, (tho' really thinking absolute ly what she layji ) for fear of being tb.dught over-credulous :~ Well, I vow^ some Things * Mr. Campbell does, are surprizing, after all ; c they would be apt to incline one to a Beliefs ' that he is a Wonder of a Man, for one would
* imagine the Things he does impossible —Why
then a Prude, with art aiTumed,
Air, and a scornful Tehee, would, in order to leem more wise than (he wats, reply, c La*d,^
supercilious t Madams
  
 .
* and therefore believe me. —He has it all by ' Hearsay .'—If the Lady that belie v'd should
reply, That he had notice of every Stranger by Hearsay, he must be greater Man tharl she suspected, and must keep more Spies iri
Pay than Prime Minister The Prude Answer would be with loud Laugh, and gig gling out these Words — Lard, Madam,
aslure you, nothing can be more easy and so
take for granted/ Because she was inclin'd to fay so, and had the Art of Wisdom on her fide, forsooth, that she appear'd hard of Be lief, which some call hard to be put upon and the other Lady credulous, which some, tho' believing upon good Grounds, are call'd and thought foolish the Prude's Answer would be thought sufficient artd con
vincing.
Thus Malice and Folly, Dint of Noise
and Impudence, and strong tho' empty As sertions, often run down Modesty and good Sense. Among the common People the" fame, but only done different manner.' For Example An ordinary Person, that had
eoni
' of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbexlI 15-9
* Madam, 'tis more a Wonder to me, that you can be imposed upon so.^-I vow to Gad,
4 Madam, I would as soon consult an Almanack*
' Maker, and pin my Faith upon what he pricks
' down ; or believe like my Creed, in the Croft
' which I make upon the Hand of a Gypsies*
* Lard, Madam, I assure your La ship he knbws
* no more than I do of you.— I aslure you fbs
   : a
if
( so
)
it
a
4
: a4a
in
a
by
;
(
:'
it ; it, is
*'f'*
)Is

 1 66 The Life and Adventures J
consulted, might say, ( as he walk'd along There goes the Dumb Gentleman, who writes down any Name of a Stranger at first Sight.
Steps up a blunt Stranger , that takes Stub bornness for Sense, and says, —That is a con founded Lye ; he is a Cheat and an Impostor, and you are one of his Accomplices. He'll tell me my Name, I suppose, if you tell it him first. He is no more dumb than I am j
he can (peak and hear as well as us :
been with those, that fay they have heard him. I wish I and Two or Three more had him in our Stable ; and I warrant you, with our Cartwhips, we would lick some Words Iout of his Chops, as dumb as you call him.—
tell you, 'tis all a Lye, and all a Bite.— -If the other desires to be convinc'd for himself by his own Experience —the rougher Rogue,
who perhaps has stronger Sinews than t'other^ answers, If you lye any farther, I will knock you down : And so he is the vulgar Wit, and the Mouth of the Rabble-Rout. And thus the Detraction spreads below with very good Success, as it does above in another kind. .
As there are Two Comical Adventures in his Life, which directly suit and correspond with the foregoing Reflections, this seems the most proper Place to insert them in. The first consists of a kind of Mob Way of Usage he met with from a Fellow, who got to be an Officer in the Army, but by she following Behaviour, will be found unworthy of the
.Name, and the Commission, In
I have
 •
  
 es Mr. Duncan Campbell.
In the Year 1701 , a Lady of good Quality came and address'd her self to him much after the following manner. She told him she had
Choice of Lovers, but preferr'd one above
the rest ; but desired to know his Name, and if she made faim her Choice, what would be the subsequent Fate of such a Matrimony. Mr. Duncan Campbell very readily gave her
down in Writing this plain and honest Re ply ; that of all her Suiters she was most in- clin'd to a Captain, a distinguish'd Officer,
and a great Beau, fnaming his Name) and one that had a great many outward engaging Charms, sufficient to blind the Eyes of any
 Lady that was not thoroughly acquainted with his Manner of living. He therefore as sured her, (and thought himself bound, be ing conjured so to do, having received his Fee, though there was Danger in such plain and open Predictions,) that he was a Villain and a Rogue in his Heart, a profligate Game ster, and that if she took him to her Bed, she would only embrace her own Ruin. The Lady's Woman, who was present, being in Fee with the Captain, resolving to give Intelli
gence, for fear the Officer her so good Friend
should be disappointed in the Siege ; slily shuf fled the Papers into her Pocket, and made a Present of them to the military Spark. Fir'd with Indignation at the Contents, he vow'd Revenge ; and in order to compass con spires with his Female Spy about t,b,e Means.
M In
  it,

 \6i The Life and Adventurer
In fine, for fear of losing the Lady though he quarrel d with Duncan Campbell, a Method was to be found out how to secure her by the
very Act of Revenge. At last it was re- solv'd to discover to her, that he had found out what she had been told by Mr. Campbell, but the Way how he had been inform'd was to remain a Secret. He did do so, and ended his Discovery with these Words :
I desire, Madam, that if I prove him an Im
postor, you would not believe a Word he
says. —The Lady agreed to so fair a Propo sal. -——Then the Captain swore that he him self would never eat a Piece of Bread more till he had made Mr. Campbell eat his Words ; nay he insisted upon that he would bring him to his Tongue, and make him own Word of Mouth, that what he had written
before was false and calumnious. To which the Lady answer'd again, that, he perform
 what he said me would be convinced.
brave Military Man, however, not relying
upon his own single Valour and Prowels, to bring about miraculous Thing as the ma king Person that was dumb to speak he took with him for this End three lusty Assistants to
combine with him
Ambuscade was settled to be at the Five Bells
the Aslassination. Tavern Wkh-Jlreet in the Strand. After
the Ambush was settled with
Courage, the Business of decoying Mr. Campbell into was not practicable any other way,.
much false
This
The
  it,
a in
,
so
a
if
so in
;
d J
by
it,

 os Mr. Duncan Campbell. 165
than by sending out false Colours. The La dy's Woman, who was by her own Interest tied fast to the Interest of the Beau, was to play the Trick ofDalilah, and betray this deaf and dumb Sampson (as he will appear to be a kind of one in the Sequel of the Story) into the Hands of these Philistines. She smooths her Face over with a complimenting Lye from her Mistress to Mr. Campbell ; and acted her Part of Deceit so well that he promis'd to follow her to the Five Bells with all haste ; and so she skuttled back to prepare the Cap tain, and to tell him how lucky (he was in Mischief ; and how she drew him out by Smiles into Perdition. The short of the Story
when they got him among them, they endeavour'd to assassinate him but they mifs'd of their Aim yet 'tis certain they left him in very terrible and bloody Condition and
the Captain went away as bad Plight as the Person was left in, whom he assaulted so cowardly with Numbers, and to such Disad
 was sent for to him upon this Disaster, and the Story was deliver'd to me thus, one of the Drawers of the Tavern,
when enquir'd into it. They began to ban ker him, and speaking to him as he heard,
ask him he knew his own Fortune
told him was to be beaten to Death. This was an odd way of addressing deaf and dumb Man. They added they would make him speak before they had done. The Boy
M 2. seeing
vantage.
they
  a '
if ;
a
;
'd
is, a
I it if
by
I
;
in
in ;

 1 64 The Life and Adventures
seeing he made no Reply, but only smiled j thought what pass'd between them was a Jest with an old Acquaintance, and withdrew about his Business. The Door being sasten'd, however, before they began the honourable Attack, they vouchsafed to write down their Intent in the Words above-mentioned which they had uttered before, to make sure that he should understand their Meaning, and what this odd way of Correction was for. All the while the Maid, 'who had brought him into
was peeping through Hole, and watch ing the Event,' as appears afterwards/ Mr. Campbell wrote them the following Answer, viz. that he hop'd for fair Play that he un derstood Beargarden as well as they but
Gentleman was amongst them, he would
expect Gentlemanly Usage. The Rejoinder they made to this consisted, seems, not of Words but of Action. The Officer, in Con
junction with another Ruffian, one of the strongest of the Three he had brought, com menced the Assault. As good Luck would have he warded off their first Blows
seems} with tolerable Success and Wine-
Quart- Pot standing upon the Table, Duncan took to his Arms, and at Two or Three quick Blows, well manag'd, and close laid in upon
the AslailantSjfell'd them both to the Ground: Here was that the Maid discover'd her Knowledge of and Privity to the Plot, to the whole House for stie no sooner sees the'
famous
   : it,
it
it,
;
it
;
a
(it
; if
a
it,
a

 ,
tendants of ithe' Tavern scamper'd up Stairs burst into the Room, and found Duncan Camp bell struggling with the other Two, and the Quart-Pot : still fast clenchM in. his Hand,
.which they. were .endeavouring to wrench from hiiriv. The Drawers rescu'd him, out of
their Hands* and enquir'd into the Mattes. The Maid in a Fright confess d the whole Thing. The Officer and his Aslbciate rubb'd their Eyes, as recovering from a stunning Sleep, reefd as they went to rife, paid the Reckoning, and slunk pitifully away, (or a# the Rakes Term for it is*) they brush'd of£ and for all their odds had the worst of the Lay. I who had some Authority with Mr. Campbell, by.reaIfoh of my Years, and the strict
.os Mr. DuncxnCampb.e i£. 1 6$
fatuous Leader, the valiant Captain, lie sorau* ling on the Floor with bleeding Temples, but she shriek'd out, with ,all' tho Voice she eoul4
Alarmd at this Out-cry, the Master and all the At
exert, Murder, Murder* Murder !
 IAcquaintance
came and found hirri.in that
had with; his Mother,, when
and had the whole Relation told me by the People of
the House* though I could not forbear pitying
him within my own Mind, took upon trie to • reprehend him, and told him that these Hard
ships would by Providence be daily permitted! to fell upon him (for he met with them Twenty Times) while he continued in that irregular way of Living arid spending his Tirnej that might be so precious to himself
M 3 arief
Pickle*
  
 r
Affront
The Lite and Adventures
i66
and many others, in Drunkenness and De bauchery ; and I think the Lesions I wrote down to hinrupon that Head, though a lit tle severe just at that Juncture, were notwith
standing well-tim'd, and did, as
guess'd they would, make a more solid Impression in him than at any other. In all these Scuffles
("whether it is that being deaf and dumb an
works deeper upon a Man, and so renders him far more fierce or resolute) it must be said, that though Nature has been kind in making him very Strong, Robust, and Active withal, yet he has bore some Shocks, one would imagine beyond the Strength of a Man, having sometimes got
the better of Five or Six Ruffians in Rencoun ters of the like kind. 'I
The next Banter he met with was in a
genteeler Way, from an unbelieving Lady, and yet she came off with very ill Success, and
-the Banter turn'd all upon herself in the End.
A Lady of Distinction (whose Name shall therefore be conceal d in this Place,) came "with Two or Three of her special Friends
"who took her for the most merry innocent spotless Virgin upon Earth, and whose Mo desty was never suspected in the least by her Relation's or Servants that were nearest a-
- bout her ; after having rally'd Mr. Caifipbell with several frivolous Questions, doubting his
-iSapacity, and vexing and teazing him with
, gay Impertinencies beyond all Patience, was '
C by
I
 *
  
 os Mr. Dunca n Campb ell.' Ix6j
"By him told, that he did not take Fees in his Profession to be made a Jest of like a comm<3ti Fortune-teller, but to do real Good to those who consulted him, as far as he was able By his Predictions ; that he was treated with more
Persons of a higher Condition, though .her own was very good, and so of- fer'd her Guinea back again with a Bow and
2. Smile. She had a little more Generosity of Spirit than not to be a little nettled at the Proffer me had caus'd by so course an Usage. She affected appearing grave a little, and told him she would be serious for the future, and ask d him to set down her Name, which Jhe had neglected before, to ask other Questions that were nothing to the Purpose. He pro- mis'd to write it down, but pausing a little longer than ordinary about me returned to her former way of uncivil Merriment and
ungallant Raillery. She repeated to him in • Three or Four little Scraps of Paper one after another as fast as shc could write them, the fame Words, viz. -—^Fhat tie could not tall
her Name, nor whether she was Maid, Wife, or Widow and laugh'd as she would split
~her Sides, triumphing to the rest of her Com panions, over his Ignorance and her own Wit, ' as fte had pos'd him and put him to an
.entire Stand. But see what this over-ween
ing Opinion of Security ended The Man of the Second-Sight was not to be easily baffled. Vex'd at being so disturb'd, and cO-
M mmg
Respect by
 ,
  4
if
so
in :
it,
if
;

 The Life: and Adventur
ming out of his brown Study, he reaches tke Paper, and begins to write. —Now it was the Lady 's Turn to suffer ; she had deserv'd hearty Punishment, and it came into her Hands with the Note, to a Degree of Severity ; as you will perceive by the Contents of it just now. — She read and swooning away, dropp'd from her Chair. The whole Room being in
Bustle, that'waa the outward Chamber,
ran in. While Mr. Campbell was sprinkling Water her Face, Lady snatch'd up the Note to read at which he seem'd mighti
i6$
therefore, who understood his Signs, recover'd out of her Hands by Stra
tagem, and ran to burn which did so quick, that was not difcover'd in the Curi osity, which must own satisfied my self in, by reading first Curiosity raisd too high, particular an Adventure, to be overcome little Time Of Thought, as
was' to keep my Hands and came by the Knowledge of my self, without being inform'd by Mr. CampbelL This shews, how
sudden Curiosity when there not Time given to think and correct' it,' may overcome Man as well as Woman For was never over-curious in my Life and tho' was
pleas'd with the Oddness of the Adventure, often blush'd to my self since^ for the unmanly Weakness of not being able to step with Note, from one Room to another, to the Fire- fide, without peeping into the Contents of if.
The
displeas'd
   I aI
is
so I
;
:
I ;
aa
I
ly
a
I
I
by in so
in I:
b I a,in it
I it,
L a in
it,
it so
it a : A
it ;

 os Mr. Duncan Camp^eii^ 169
The Contents of it were these : " Madam,finceK
** you provoke me, your Name is ——— " You are no Widow, you are no Wife, an<L **yetyouarenoMaid: YouhaveaChildat
. *' Nurse at such a Place, by such a Gentleman ;
€t and you were brought to Bed in Leicestershire. The Lady* convinc'd by this Answer, of his
strange and mystical Power, and pseasd with his Civility in endeavouring to conceal from others the Secret, after so many repeated Pro vocations, tho' she fliew'd great Disorder for
that Day, became one ot his constant At tendee some Time after, and would not take any Step in her Affairs without his Advice ; which, she often has said since, she found very much to her Advantage. She was as serious in
- her Dealings with him afterwards, and im-
prov'd by being as she was gay and turbu lent with him before, and smarted for it. In fine, she was thorough Convert, and Vo tary of his and the only Jest she us'd after- Wards to make concerning him was Civil Witticism to his Wife to whom she was wont, every now and then, smiling, to address her
.self after this manner Your Husband, Ma- dam, Devil but he very hmd- some, and very civil one.
Not long aft^r this came another Lady, with like Intent to impose upon him and was resoiv'd (as she own'd to have laugh'd him to scorn, she had succeeded in her At-
tempt. She had very dextrously dress her
self
 '
  :
:
:
'
d
a. ;aa
if
a a
;
a
a
)
is
,
is
;
;
so,
:
'

 r jo The Life and Ad ye ntures
self in her Woman's Habit, and her Woman in her own ; 'her Fbotman squired the new- made Lady in a very, gentlemanly Dress, hir'd for that Purpose of a Disguise from MonmoUth-
The strange and unknown Masquera- ders enter'd Mr. Campbell's Room with much Art. The Fellow was by Nature of a clean Make, and had a good Look, and from fol lowing a genteel Master, when he was young, copyd his Gait a. little, and had some Appear
street.
ance of a Mien, and a tolerable good Air about him. But this being the first time of his tyeing so fine, and he a little vain in his Temper ; he over-acted his Part ; he strutted too much ; he was as fond of his Rufflesj xhis Watch, his Sword, his Cane, arid his Snuff Box, as a Boy of being newly put into Breech es j and view'd them all too often to be thought
.the Posleslbr ofany such Things long.The Affe ctation of the Chambermaid was insufferable j She had the Toss of the Head, the Jut of the
.Bum, the side-long Leer of the Eye, the impe rious Look upon her Lady, now degraded in to her Woman, that me was intolerable, and a Person without the Gift of the Second-Sights would have guess 'd her to have been a prag
matical Upstart, tho' 'tis very probable, that •Huring that time, flhe fancy'd herself real
ly better than her Mistress : The Mistress 'acted her Part of Maid the best, for it is. ea
sier for genteel Modesty to act a low Part,thast *for affected Vanity to act a high one. She kepfi
'
   
 of Mr. Duncan GamMe it" 171
jcept her Distance like a Servant ;• but would j to disguize Things the better, be every now and then pert , according to their way, and
Occasion to be chid. But there is an Air of Gentility , in-born and in-bred to some People ; and even when they aim to be awkward, a certain Grace will attend all their minutest: Actions and Gestures, and command
give
v
after
Love, Respect and Veneration. I must there
fore own, that there was not need of a Man s
being a Conjurer , to guese who ought to be the Lady, and who the Maid ; but to know -who absolutely was the Lady, and who was the Maid, did require that Skill. For how many such real Ladies have we, that are made
 so from such Upstarts i And how many gen teel Waiting-Women of great Descent, that are born with a Grace about them , and are bred to good Manners ?
Mr.
made him positive in the Case : He took the
Patches from the Face of the Maid, and plac'd them on the Mistress's : He pull'd off her Hood and Scarf, and gave it the Lady ; and taking from the Lady her Ridinghood, gave it the
Maid in Exchange j for Ladies at that Time of Day, were not enter'd into that Fa/hion ©f Cloaking themselves. Then he wrote down, that he should go out, and ought to fend his Maid in, to undress them quite, and give the
Mistress her own Cloaths, and the Maid her's ; and, with a Smile, wrote down both their Barnes, and commended her Contrivance. But
Campbell's'
An
  
 The Life and Adventur.e8
after that, it was remark'd by the Lady, that
i?t
her left Respect than she expected* and more to her Footnian, who was in a Gen tleman's Habit ; whom he took aside, and
told a great many fine Things ; whereas he would tell the Lady nothing farther. The Ladyj nettled at this, wrote to him, that she had Vanity enough to believe, that she might
. be distinguish'd from her Maid in any Dress ; but that he had shown his want ofSkill, in not knowing who that Gentleman was. Mr. Camp- tell told her her Mistake in sharp Terms ; and begging her Pardon, aflur'd her he knew se veral Chambermaids as genteel and as well born as her, and many Mistresses more auk- ward and worse-born than her Maid : That he did not go therefore by the Rule of Guess
and Judging what ought to be, but by the Rule of Certainty . and the Knowledge of what actually was. She; however, unfetisfy'd with that Answer, perplex d him mightily to know, who the Man was. He anfwer'd, he would be a Great Man.—.The Lady laugh'd scornfully, and said, she wanted to know who he was, not what he would be. — He an fwer'd again He was her Footman ; but
he paid
 —— that she would have a worse. She
grew warm, and desir'd to be inform'd, Why, since he knew the Fellow's Condition, he rejected
her so little, and him so much i And accus'd him of want of practising Manners, if he had not want of Knowledges He anfwer'd,.it"Ma-
*• aams
  
 ofMr. Duncan Campbel^. 173
f* dam, since you will be asking Questions too
fc far— This Footman will advance himself to
fc she Degree of a Gentleman, and have a Wq-
f* man of Distinction to his Wife j while you
*c will degrade your self by a Marriage, to be " the Wife Footman. His Ambition
" laudable, your Condescension mean' there- <c fore give him the Preference. have givejrf " you fair Warning, and wholsome Advice
** You may avoid your Lot Prudence
his will certainly be what tell you.
This coming afterwards to pals exactly as
was predicted, and his disappointing many that had Mind to impose upon him, has render him pretty free from such wily Con
trivances since tho' now and then they have
"
bu£
 doubr?
but still to the Mortification and
happen'd,
Disappointment
we have not pretended to fay, with regard to these Things, that he has his Genius always at his Elbow, or his Beck, to whisper his Ear the Names of Persons, and luch little
constant Events as these so, that we may not be deem to give fabulous Account of his Life and Adventures,, we think our selves bound to give the Reader an Insight into the particular Power and Capacity which he has, for bringing about these particular Perform ances, especially that of writing down Names
.Of- Strangers at first Sight which, don't
will be done to the Satisfaction of all . Per
of the Contrivers. But as
  ;
I
by
I
I
so ; ;
'd
a
j
in
'-i
os' a
d
I a
: is

 Tke%tvB
and Adventures
174
Persons, who shall read the succeeding Chap
ter, concerning the Gift of the Second-Sight.
Chap.
A Philosophical Discourse concerning the ;" SECOND -SIGHT.'
MR. Marten has publish'd a Book, en
titled, A Description the Western of
ljles of Scotland, called by the Ancient Geo
It contains many Curious graphers, Hebrides : Civil,
Particulars, relating to the Natural and History of those Islands, with a Map of them. And in his Preface he tells us, ' That perhaps * it is peculiar to those Isles, that they have ne- ' ver been describ'd till now, by any Man that ' was a Native of the Country, or had travell'd * them, as himself has done :' And in the Con clusion of the said Preface he tells us, * He has * given here such an Account of the Second- ' Sight, as the Nature of the Thing will bear, * which has always been reckon' d sufficient a- ? mong the unbiass d Part of Mankind : But for
* those that will not be satisfy d, they ought to * oblige us with a new Scheme, by which we
£ may judge of Matters of Fag.' The chief Par ticulars he has given us concerning the Second Sight, are here set down, by way of Abstract, orEpitome, that they may not be too tedious to the Reader.
VII.
   
 of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbell 175
.1. In the Second-Sight,, the
lucri a lively Impression on the Seers, that they neither fee nor think of any Thing else but the Vision, as long as it cqntinues : And then they appear Tensive or Jovial, according to the ObjeB which was presented to them.. ,. ,
, z. At the Sight of a Vision, the Eyelids of the Person are erected, and the Eyes continue staring till the Objects vanish ; as has often been observ'd by the Author, and others pre sent.
. 3. There is one in Skye, an Acquaintance
of whom observ'd, that when he sees a Vision, the inner Part of his Eyelids turns so far up wards, that, after the Object disappears, he, must draw them down with his Fingers j and sometimes employs others to draw them down , which he finds to be much the easier
,way.
4. The Faculty of the Second-Sight does not
lineally descend in a Family, as some ima gine j for he knows several Parents that are endow'd with but not their Children and
on the contrary Neither acquir'd by aay previous Compact. And after strict En quiry, he could never learn from any among them, that this Faculty was communicable any way whatsoever.
Tsote, That this Account differing from the Account that given by Mr. Aubrey, Fellow of the Royal Society And think Mr. Martens Reason here, against the Descent
of
Vision makes
   it, is :
: is
is
I
a
it a
so
;

 The Lite and Adventures
176
of this Faculty from Parents to Children, is
not generally conclusive. For tho' he may. know Parents endow 'd with and not Chil dren and vice versa yet there may b© Parents who are endow'd with
being qua lify as Mr. Aubrey has said, (via. both be ing Second sighted, or even one to an extra
ordinary Degree) whose Children may have Descent. And as to this Faculty's being
any otherways communicable, since the Ac counts differ) must leave to farther Exa mination.
Seer knows neither the Time nor Place of Vision^ before
and the fame Object often seen different PersonSj'living at considerable Distance from one another. The true Way ofJudging, as'to the Time and Circumstance of an Object,
by Observation For several Persons ofJudg ment, without this Faculty, are more capable to judge of the Design of Vision, than No vice that Seer. As an Object appears in the Day or Night, will come to pass sooner or later accordingly.
an Object be seen early the Morn
ing,' (which not frequent) will be accom- plisiVd in few Hours afterwards If at Noon,
will commonly be accomplish'd that very Day If the Evening, perhaps that Night
after Candles be lighted, will be accom^
Ttye
Object, appears
 plish'd that Night. complishment,1
later always in Ac Weeks, Months, and some
times
  in by
a
is
is a
I
so
It is
it a is
it it :6. $.byd;
if
If
it
:
it
: it
a
;
in
a( by it
it, it,
a
; is;
:
a

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
times Years, according to the Time of the freight the Vision is seen.
7. When a Shroud is perceiv'd about one, it is a sure Prognostics of Death. The Time is
judg'd according to the Height of it about the Person ; for if it be not seen above the Middle, Death is not to be expected for the
£pace of a Year , and perhaps some Months Jonger : And as it is frequently seen to ascend higher towards the Head, Death is concluded to be at hand iri a few Days, if not Hours*
as daily Experience confirms. Examples of this kind were shown the Author, when the Persons (of whom the Observations -were made) enjoy 'd perfect Health;
"There was one Instance lately of a Pre diction of this kind, by a Seer that was a Novice, concerning the Death of one of the Author's Acquaintance : This was cohirriuni- cated to a few only, and with great Confi dence : The Author being one of theNsumber, did not in the least regard it, till the Death
appears from many late Instances : He lives in St. Mary s Parish, the most Northern in Skye.
8. If
Woman
at a Man's
a
left Hand, it is a Presage that Ihe will be his Wife j whether they are married to others, or unmarriedj at the Time of the Apparition.
be seen
standing
N If
177
 of the Person!, about the Tirhe foretold, cort-
1 firm'd to him the Certainty of the Prediction. The fdrefeid Novice is now a skilful Seer ? as
  
 The Life and Adventures
if Two or Three Women are seen at once,, /landing near a Man's Left Hand ; she that is jlext him will undoubtedly be his Wife first, and so on, whether all Three, or the Man, be single or married, at the Time of the Vi
sion ; of which there are several late Instances of the Author's Acquaintance. It an ordi nary Thing for them to fee Man, that to
.come to the House shortly after and tho' he ,be not of the Seers. Acquaintance, yet fre not only tells his Name, but givet such lively
Description of hi* Stature, Complexion, Ha bit, &c. that upon his Arrival, he answers the Character given of him in all Respects..
the Person appearing be one of die Seers
Acquaintance, he can tell his Countenance whether he conses in good or bad Humour,' The Author has been seen thus by Seers of both Sexes, at some Hundreds of Miles Di stance. Some that saw him this manner^
had never seen him personally, and
pen'd according to their Visions, without any previous Design of his to go to those Places his coming there being purely accidental. And
in the Nineteenth Page of his Book, he tells .us, that Mr. Daniel Morrison Minister) told him, that upon his Landing in the Island Re*- ma, the Natives receiv'd him very affectio1.
nately, and address themselves to him with: this Salutation God save you, Pilgrim Yoit '* are heartily welcome here for we have had repeated Apparitions of your Person amongst
 hap-
  ;
by in
a
*
:'
'd
so
!
a
(a
it ;
;
is.
is If

 of Mr. DuncanCampbell. 179 *. us ; viza after the manner of the Second-
Gardens and Trees , in Places void of all Three ; aud this, in Process of Time, uses to be accompiish'd : Of which he gives an In
stance in the Island of Stye.'
10. To-seba Spark of Fire fall upon one's
Arm, or Breast, is a Forerunner of a dead
Child, tp be seen in the Arms of those Per
r ...
* Sight.
9. It is ordinary wish them to see Houses,
sons of which there are several fresh In
stances; 1 ! •.•,' t
'.
To see a. Seat empty at thb Time of one's
 fitting iri Presage of that Person's Death
-quickly aftef*
Whert 'Novice, or one that has lately
obtain the Second-Sight, sees Vision in the Night-time without Doors, and comes near
fire, he presently falls into Swoon.
Some find themselves as were Croud
of People, having Corpse which they carry along with them and after such Visions, the Seers come irt sweating, and describe the Peo ple that appear'd. there are any of their Acquaintance among them, they give an Ac count of their Names, and also of the Bear
ers- But they know nothing concerning the Corpse.
All those that have the Second Sight, dd hot always fee these Visions at once, tho" they are together at the Time But one1 who has this Faculty, designedly touch his
N Vellor-v~
  2
:
if
'
in a
:
if
;
a
:
it a
a
a
'd
a
it,
is *a

 180 The Lit*, and Adventures
Fellow-Seer, at the Instant of a Vision's ap*- pearing, then the Second fees it as well as the
First.
11. There is the way of foretelling Death
by a Cry, that they call Taijk, which some call a Wrath in the Low-land. They hear a loud Cry without Doors, exactly resembling the Voice of some particular Person1, whose Death is foretold by it ; of which he gives a late Instance, which happen d in the Village
Rigg, in Skye-Ifte.
12. Things are also foretold by Smelling
sometimes, as follows : Fish of Flesh is fre quently smelt in the Fire r- when at the fame Time neither of the two are in the House, or, in any Probability, like to be had in it for some Weeks or Months. This Smell se veral Persons have, who are endued with the Second-Sight ; and it is always accodiplifh'd soon after.
13. Children, Horses and CoftSf haVe the Second Sight, as well as Men and Women ad vanced in Years.
That Children fee plain, from their crying aloud at the very Instant that Corpse, or any other Vision appears to an ordinary Seer Of which he gives an Instance in Child, when himself was present.
That Horses likewise see very plain,., from their violent and sudden Starting, when the Rider, or Seer Company with them, sees Vision of any kind Night or Day. IlLs
obfer
   a
:
by
in
it, is
f '•
it, is
a
a

 6fMr. Duncan Campbell. i8r
observable of a Horse, that he will not go forward that way, till he be led about at some Distance from the common Road, and then he is in a Sweat. He gives an Instance of
this in a Horse, in the Isle of Skye .
That Cows have the Second-Sight, appears from this ; That if a Woman milking a Cow,
happens to see a Vision by the Second-Sight,
the Cow runs away in a great Fright at the fame Time, and will not be pacify d tor some ; • Time after.
In Reference to this, Paracelsus, Tom. 9. , L. de Arte pr&sagd, writes thus : * Horses a 1(6
' have their Auguries ; who perceive, bv their;- * Sight and Smell, wandring Spirits, Witches * * and SpeUres, and the like Things ; and Dogs . * both see and hear the (ame. *
Here, in the next place, the Author an
swers Objections, that have lately been made
against the Reality of the Second-Sight.
Fit It objected, that these Seers are
Visionary and Melancholy People, who fancy they fee Things, that do not appear to them
or any body else.
He answers The People of these I/les, and
particularly the Seers, are very temperate, and their Diet simple and moderate, Quantity and Quality that their Brains are not, all Probability, disorder by un
,
 Fumes of Meat or Drink. Both Sexes are free from Hyjlerick Fits, Convul sions, and several othci? Distempers ©4 that
N Sort
digested
%
.'
  ^
; so
'
in
d
in
is
is ;
, 5
ft,

 -
Secondly, It objected, that there are none -among the Learned, able to oblige the World
;8x The Lite find Adventures,
Sort. There are no Madmen
nor any Instance of Self-Murther.
serv'd among them, that a Man drunk, never'
has a Vision of the Second-Sight ,v ar>d -he that is a Visionary, would discover himself in other Things as well as in that. Nor are such as have
the Second Sight, judgd to be Yijfana?)$f, by any of their Friends or Acquaintance,.:
with satisfactory Account of these Visions therefore they are not to be believed.
He answers every Thing, of which the Learned are not able to give satisfactory Ac count, shall be condemn as False and Impos
among them,, It is ob-
 sible, we shall find many other Things, gene rally believ'd, which must be rejected assuch.
Thirdly, It objected, that ike Seer are Im postors and the People who believe them, are credulous, and easy to be impps'd upon.
He answers The Seers are generally illi terate and well-meaning People, and altoge
ther void of Design Nor could faeever learn that any of them made the least Gain of neither reputable among them, to have that Faculty. Jieside, the People of tjie Isles are not so credulous as to believe, an Impos
sibility, before the Thing foretoW he accom?
plish'd but when actually conies to pass, afterwards not their Power so deny without offering Violence to their Senses and
Hea^ori. Beside, the Sters were f)efeivers^
  if
in it
:
,
;
is
;
a
it it is
; is ; If
is
it,it j ;•
s
d
a
c.. ,

 cf Mr. DuncaW Campb ell.'-
can it be reasonable to imagine, that all the .
who b,ave n°t tne Second Sights ihould combine together, and offer Violence to their Understandings and Senses, to force themselves to Relieve a Lye from Age to Age J
There are several Persons among them, whose Birth and Education raise them above the
Suspicion of concurring with an Imposture, merely to gratify an illiterate and contempti- ible Sort of Persons* Nor can a reasonable Man believe, that Children, Horses and Cbn.y,
could be engaged in a Combination, to per suade the World of the Reality of a Second-
Sight.
Every Vision that is seen, comes exactly
to pass according to the Rules of Observati on ; tho' Novices, and heedless Persons, do
.not always judge by those Rules : Concern
ing which he gives.Inflance>\
There are Visions seen by several Persons*
in whoise Days they are not accomplish d $ and this is one of the Reasons, Why soixe Things have been seen, that are said never to have come to pass ; and there are also several Visions seen, which are not understood till
they are accomplish'd.
. The Second-Sight is not a late Discovery, seen by qae pr two in a Corner, "or a remai^ a IJle ; but it is seen by many Persons' of both Sexes,. in several Isles, separated about Forty pr,Firty Leagues from one another. The In
habitants' p£ many of these Isles never had
islanders,
 ,,'..!.
. t:
.
'tfiC
  
 The Life and Advintur es
184
the least Converse by Word or Writing. And
this Faculty of seeing Visions having conti nued, as we are insorm'd by Tradition, ever since the Plantation of these Isles, without being disproved by the nicest Sceptick, after the strictest Enquiry, seems to be a clear Proof of its Reality.
It is observable, that it was much more common Twenty or Thirty Years ago, than at present ; for One in Ten does not fee it now, that saw it then.
The Second-Sight is not confin'd to she We stern Isles alone ; the Author having an Ac
count that it is in several Parts of Holland, but
 particularly
for which she
in Eommel, where a Woman has
courted some, and She fees Smoak about the Fore-runner of the seen and she actually foretold the Deaths of several that lived there.
She was living that Town few Winters
ago.
The Second-Sight likewise in the IJle
Man, as appears by this Instance Captairj. Leathes, the Chief Commander of Belfast,
his Voyage i6po? lost Thirteen Men vio1 lent Storm and upon his Landing the Iste Man, an ancient Man, Clerk to Parish
there, told him immediately that he had lost Thirteen Men there. The Captain enquir'd, how he came to the Knowledge of that He answerd,that was Thirteen Lights,which
dreaded others. one's Face, w hich Death of Person
  ; it
a in
by
by
is
so is
of
it,
in by ?
a :
a
a
in
a by of
is ;

 of Mr. Duncan Gampbelj.^
he had seen come into the Churchyard ; Mr. Sacheverell tells us, in his late Descripti on of the Isle of Man. Note , That this is like the Sight ot the Corpse-Candles in Wales, which is also well attested.
Here the Author adds many other Instances; concerning the Second.Sight, of which I mall set down only a few.
A Man in Anockoxv, in St. Marys Parish,
(the Northernmost Part of Skye') being in perfect Health, and sitting with his Fellow-
Servants at Night, was on a sodden
ill, dropp'd from his Seat backward, and then
fell a vomiting j at which the Family was
much concern'd, he having never been subject to the like before : But he came to himself soon aftery arks had no Sort of Pain about him. One of the Family, who was accustom'd to see the Second-Sight, told them, that the Man s Illneis proceeded from a very strange Cause, which was thus : An
ill-naturd Woman (whom he nam'd) who lives in the next adja
cent Village of Bornjkittag, came before him; in a very angry and furious Manner ; her Countenance full of Passion, and her Mouth full of Reproaches ; and threaten'd him with her Head and Hands, till he fell over, as you have seen him. This Woman had a Fancy for the Man, but was like to be disappointed as to her marrying of him. This Instance was told the Author, by the Master of the
- '. • Fami
185:
taken
   
 iS6 The Life and Adventurer
Family, and others, who were present wfiea it happen'd.
Sir Norman MacVlead, and some others, playing at Tables,' at a Game called in Irish talmermore ; wherein there are Three of a
Side, and each of them throw the Dice by Turns ; there happen cl to be one difficult Point in the disposing or one of the Table-men. This oblig'd the Gamester to deliberate, before he was to change, his Man ; fuice, upon the dis posing of rfye winning or losing of the Game depended, length the Butler, wno stood behind advised the Player where to place the Man, with which he comply and won the Game. This
;
 being though):
nary, and Sir Herman hearing one whisper
him the Ear, ask'd who advis'd him
skilfully He answer'd, was the Butler but
|his seem'd more strange, for was generally thought he could not play at Tables. Upon this, Sir Norman ask'd him, how long was fince he had learn'd to play And the Fellow own'd, that he had never pl^y'd in his Life but that he law the Spirit Browne Spirit usually seen that Country) reaching his Arm over the Player's Head, and touching the Part with his Finger, where the Table-man was
to he placed. This was told the Author by Sir Norman, and others, who happen'd to be
present at the Time.
Daniel Bow, alias an Black,
01 ?r Inhabitant of
.,
Bomfkhtag, who one of the precisest Beers
extraordi
  is
in
(a
if? , so
,
?
it it
it
;
in • >
,
it,
.
'd,
'

 of Mr. Dun ca.n Camp b&ll^
187. in the Isles, foretold the Death of a young
Woman in Minginis, within less than Twenty four Hours before the Time ; and accordingly she died suddenly in the Fields ; tho' at the Time of the Prediction, she was in perfect Health : But the Shroud appearing close about
her Head, was the Ground of his Confidence that her Death was at Hand.
The same Person foretold the Death of a Child in his Master's Arms, by seeing a Spark of Fire fall on his Left Arm ; and this was like wise accomplished soon after the Prediction.
Some of the Inhabitants of Harries sailing round the Isle of Sfye, with a Design to go to the opposite Main-Land, were strangely sur prized with an Apparition of Two Men,
hanging down by the Ropes that secur'd the
Mast, but could not conjecture what it meant,
, They pursued their Voyage ; but the Wind turning contrary, they v\ ere fore d into Broad-
 in the JJle of Skye, where they found Sir Donald Mackdonald keeping a Sheriff s Court, and two Criminals receiving Senrence
of Death there, The Ropes and Mast of that very Boat, were made use of to hang those Criminals, This was told the Author by several, who had this Instance related to
them by the Boat's- Crew.
Several Persons, living in a certain Fami
ly, told the Author, that they had frequently seen Two Men standing at a Gentlewoman's Left Hand, who was their Masters Daughter :
They
ford,
  
 TbeLiTE and Adventures
they told the Men's Names, and being her .
>38
it was not doubted but she would be marry d to one of them j and perhaps to the other after the Death of the first. Some time after a Third Man appeared who seemed always to stand nearest to her of the Three, but the Seers did not know him, though they
could describe him exactly ; and within some Months after, this Man, who was seen last, actually came to the jHouse, and fully an- swerd the Description given pf him, by those, who never saw him but in a Vision ,• and he marry'd the Woman shortly after; They live in the IJle of Skye, and both themselves and others confirm 'd the Truth of this Instance, when the Author saw them.
Archibald Mac Donald, of the Parift of St.
Marys in the Isle of Skye, being reputed fa mous in his Skill of foretelling Things to come
by the Second-Sight, happening to be in the Village Knockow one Night, aind before Sup- .
per, told the Family, that he had just then seen the strangest Thing he ever saw in his Life : viz. A Man with an ugly long Cap, always making his Head ; but that the strangest of all was a little kind of an Harp, which he Had with Four Strings only, and that it had Two Harts-horns fix d in the Front of it : All that heard this odd Vision fell a Laughing at Archibald, telling him, that he was dreaming, or had not his Wits about him., since he pre~ tended to see a Thing which. had no Being*
and
Equals,
   
 esMr. Duncan CampbeIi?
^nd was not so much as heard of in any Part of the World. All this could not alter Archi bald's Opinion, who told them, that they must excuse him if he laugh'd at them, after the
of the Vision. Archibald re turned to his own House, and within Three or Four Days after, a Man with a Cap, Harp,
&c. came to the House, and the Harp, Strings, Horns, and Cap, anfwer'd the Description of them at first View, and he shook his Head •when he play'd ; for he had two Bells fix'd to his Cap. This Harper was a poor Man, who made himself a Buffoon for his Bread, and was never seen before in those Parts, and at the Time of the Prediction he was in the
Isle of Banay, which is about Twenty Leagues distant from that Part of Skye. This Rela
tion is vouch'd by Mr. Daniel Marten and all his Family, and such as were then present, and they live in the Village where this hap pened.
One Daniel Nicholson, Minister of St. Ma rys in Skye., the Parish in which Mr. Archi
bald Mac Donald lived, told the Author ; that, one Sunday, after Sermon, at the Chapel Uge, he took an Occasion to enquire of Archi bald, if he still retain d that unhappy Faculty of seeing the Second-Sight, and wish'd him to get rid of possible for, said he, no true Character of good Man. Archibald was highly displeas'd, and anfwer'd that he hoped
he was no more unhappy than his Neighbours,
Accomplishment
   a
;
it, if
it is

 Stoo The LiFt and AdvEntuileS
tor seeing what they could not perceive, t had , said he, as serious Thoughts as my
Neighbours, Time of hearing Sermon to day and even then saw Corpse laid on the Ground, close .fo the Pulpit arid asliire you*
will be acconiplish'd shortly for the Day-time* There were rione rish then sick, and few are buried
was ut the Pa that lit
tle Chapel nay, sometimes rtbt fcrie iri Year. Vet when Mr. Nicholson return'd.to preach iri the Iaid Chapel: Foftriight of. Three Weeks after he founa one buried iri the very Spotj named bV Archibald. This Story vouch'd by Mr. Nicholson, the Minister, and several of the Parishioners still living.
Note) That counted many ah Argu ment of somewhat Evil attending this Facul
of the Second-Sights because there are Iii- •stances given of some Persons who have been
freed of upOrt using some Christian Pra ctices. But slmll hereafter mow^ that this Opinion cannot be entirely true. Reft,
Sir Norman Mac-Lead, who has his science the Isle of Bernera, which lies be
tween the Jjles of N. Vijl and Harries, went to the Isle of She about Business, without ap pointing any Time for his Return His Ser vants, in his Absence, being all together
the large Hall at Night one Of them, who had the Second-Sight, told the rest they must remove, for there would be Abundance of o-
ther Company iri the Hall that Night. One of his
   2
I
it
is a
1st
;
id
:
is
a
in in it
»
in
it,
;
ty
it
;
by
;
y
a ,
I
a
I

 os Mr. D u nganCampb6ll. i$i
his Fellow-Servants answer'd, that there was very little Likelihood of that, because of the Darkness of the Night, and the Banger of coming thro' the Rocks, that lie round the IJle : But within art Hour after, one of Sir
Wormaris Men came to the House, bidding them provide Lights, &c. for his Master had
«ewly landed.
Sir Norman being told of this, called for
the Seer, and examin'd him about it. He an swer d, that he had seen the Spirit Browne , in human Shape, come several Times, and make a Show of carrying an old Woman (that fkt by the Fire) to the Door ; and at last feem'd to carry her out by Neck and Heete; which made him laugh heartily, and gave Oc casion to the rest to conclude him Mad, to laugh so much without any Reason. This Instance was told the Author^by Sir Norman
w^nt toBarbadoes, and itay'd there some Year*; •who, tho' they had wont to see the Second- Sight in their native : Country, never saw it m
BarbaJoes ; but upon their Return to England? the first Night after their Landing, they saw the Second-Sight ; as the Author was told by several of their Acquaintance.
John Morrison, who lives in Bernera of Has- tiesi wears the Plant called Fuga Damonum, sewed in the Neck of his Coat, to prevent his seeing of Visions ; and fays, he never (aw
himself.
.'
any
•
 .
Four Men from the Isle of Skye and Harries
  
 .The Life and AdventUS.es
i$i
any since he first carried that Plant about him.
A Spirit, by the Country People called 'Brownie, was frequently seen in all the most considerable Families in the Isles; and North of ScotIanJ,'mtheShi.pe of atallMan, having very long brown Hair: But within these Twenty Years past he has been seen but rarely.
Tfaere were Spirits also that appeared in the shape of Women, Horses, Swines, Cats,; and some like fiery Balls, which would fol low Men the Fields, but there have been but few Instances of these for upwards of Forty Years past;
These Spirits us'd also to form Sounds
the Air, resembling those of art Harp, Pipes, crowing of Cock, and of the grinding of Hand-mills: And sorrietisties Voices have been heard the Air at Night, singing Irish Songs; the Words of which Songs some of the Au thor's Acquaintances still retain One Of them resembled the Voice of Woman, who died lbme time before, and the Song related to her
State the other World* AU these Accounts, the Author fays, he had from Persons of as great Integrity as any are in the World. So sar Mr. Marten, whose Account so long,that
have given the Reader only short Abridg ment thereof and shall therefore satisfy my self, without relating any further Pasiages, by directing the Reader to others also, learned
   j
jin
I
in
in
a
a
is
a
j
in

 of Mr. Dunc An Campbell.
Men, who have written on the same Subject, Laurentius Ananias printed a Volume in Latin at Venice, Anno 1 581, about the Nature of Dæmons, where, in the Third Book, he writes concerning the Second-Sights—The Learned
Camerarius does the like ; and names a Per
son of his bwn Acquaintance, whom he te> .ctifies to have had that Gift. St. Austin him
self testifies something (not very different from what we now call theGift of the Second-Sight) of one Curina, who lived in the Country of
in Africa. --^Bonaysteau tells us some
Hippo,
thing like in his Disc. de Excell. & Dig. Hominis, concerning the Spirit of Hermoti- ntus. —So do likewise Herodotus and Maximus Tyrius, about the Spirit of Aristœus. —Cardan does the lame, his De Rerum variet. c. 84. of his Kinftnan Baptista Cardan, Student at avia.——Baptifia Eulgofm tells us of -what we call the Second-Sight, in other Words, iti his L. 1. Faff. & DitJ. memorab. c. Among
195
 our own Countrymen, the Lord Henry How
ard, the: Book he writ against supposed Pro* phecies, his Seventeenth Chapter, tells us wonderful Story of this Kind of Sight and sure that Noble Lord may be lodk'd upon as an unexceptionable Testimony, in Story he relates of his own Knowledge, he having o-
therwise little Faith in Things of this Kind.
Mr. Cotton Mather,
his Relation of the Wonders the Invisible
Wirld, inserted in his Ecclesiastical History of O that
Minister oŒew-England,
  in
a
a
of
a
6.
a
in
P in
; 1. 8.
it, in

 and Adventures
that Country, printed in London, Anno ijotj in Folio, has given us several Instances of this kind, as also of many other Diabolical Opera tions. Mr. Baxters Book concerning the Cer tainty of the World of Spirits, has the like Proofs in it. Mr. Aubrey, Fellow of the Roy al Society, has written largely concerning Se cond-sighted Persons ; so has Dr. Beaumont, in his Book of Genij and Familiar Spirits , who has collected almost all the other Accounts
194
TbeLtti
and many others , whole very Names it would be tedious to recite. How
ever, as there are a few more Paflages very curious in themselves, I will venture so fas upon the Reader's Patience, as not only to recite the Names of the Authors, but the Ac counts themselves, in as succinct and brief a manner as it is possible for any one to do.
Mr. Th. May, in his History, Lib. 8. writes,' That an old Man ( like an Hermit ) Second-
sighted, took his Leave of K. James I. when he came into England : He took little Notice of Prince Henry j but addressing himself to the Duke of Tork, [since K. Charles fell
weeping, to think what Misfortunes he should
together
 undergo
most Miserable that ever was.
and most Unhappy Princes
and that He should be one of the
Scots Nobleman sent for one of these Second-sighted Men out of the Highlands, to give his Judgment of the then Great George
Villars, Duke of Buckingham. As soon as ever
he
"
  a
A
;
I.] a

 of Mr. Duke an Campbell, i^j
Sir James Melvil hath several the like Pas
sages in his History.
A certain old Man in South-Wales i told a
great Man there of the Fortune of his Family ; and that there should not be a Third Male
he saw him ; Pish, said he, He will come to
Nothing : /see a Dagger in bis Breast. And he was stabb'd in the Breast by Captain Tel- ton, zs, has been at large recounted in some of the foregoing Pages.
Generation;
It has fallen out accordingly.
1
Sir William Dugdale, with his own Mouths ihform'd several Gentlemen, that Major-Ge neral Middleton (since Lord) went into the highlands of Scotland, to endeavour to make a Party for King Charles I. An old Gentle-
man (sthat was Second-sighted) came and told him, that his Endeavour was good, but he
would be unsuccessful : And moreover, That
they would put the King to Death ; and that several other Attempts would be made, but all in vain. But that his Son would come in, but not reign in a long 'Time ; but would at lafl be restored. This Lord Middleton had a great Friendship with the Laird Bocconi ; and they made an Agreement, that the first of them
that died, should appear to the other in Ex tremity. The Lord Middleton was taken Prisoner at Worcefler Fight, and was Prisoner in the Tower of London, under Three Locks. Lying in his Bed, pensive, Bocconi appear d to him : My Lord Middleton ask'd him, if he % were
•
 O
  
 The Life and Adventures
it>6
were dead or alive ? He said, dead ; and that he was a Ghost : And told him , that within Three Days he should escape ; and he did so, in his Wife's Cloaths. When he had done his Meslage, he gave a Frisk, and said,
Givanni, Givanni, 'tis very strange,
. In the World to fee so sudden a Change : And then gather'd up, and vanish 'd. This Ac count Sir William Dugdale had from the Bi shop of Edinburgh ; and this Account he hath writ in a Book of Miscellanies, which is now
(with other Books of his) in the
'Museum at Oxford.
Thus the Reader fees, what great Autho
rities may be produc'd to prove, that wonder ful and true Predictions have been deliver'd
by many Persons gifted with the Second-Sight : The most learned Men in almost ill Nations, who are not in all Likelihood deceiv'd them selves ; the most celebrated and authentick Historians , and some Divines , in England, who, 'tis not to be thought, have combined together, and made it their Business to obtrude upon us Falshoods ; Persons of all Ranks, from the highest to the lowest, in Scotland, who (it would be even Madness to think)
would join in a Confederacy to impose Tricks
reposited
 upon us, and to persuade us to the
of Impostures , "as solemn
from their own Mouths :
have unanimously, and (as it were) with one
Voice aslerted, repeated, and confirm'd to us, . that
greatest Truths delivered
All
these, I say,
  
 nif
of Mr. Dunc an Ca m p b el l.
197 that there have been at all Times, and in many different Nations, and that still there are Persons, who, posless'd with the Gift of a
Second-Sight, predict Things that wonderfully come to pals, and seem to merit very little less than the Name of Prophets, for their mi raculous Discoveries. Now if any Man should ; come, and without giving the least manner of Reason for for there no Reason to be
given against such Assertions
Disbelief of all these authentick, tho' Accounts can he with Reason imagine, that
his Incredulity shall pals for Token of Wf- dom Shall his Obstinacy confute the Learned? Shall his Want Faith be thought justly to give the Lye to so many Persons of the highest Honour and Quality, and of the most undoubted Integrity In fine, shall his Infidelity, by re* verse kind of Power to that which attribu- . ted to the Philosopher Stone, be able to change the Nature of Things, turn and transmute Truth into Faljhood, and make downright
plain Matter, FaB, to be no more than Chimœra, or an Ens Rationis And (hall wiif
declare his
ange,
 Experience be easily exploded? Taking therefore for granted, that no modest Man whatsoever, tfe>' never hard
of Belief, which certainly as great Weak ness as that of too much Credulity will make bold openly to declare his Disbelief -of Things well attested and taking much more for granted still, that impossible for
O any
  3;
so
.*?
( it
j?
a
a
)j
is
is
it
;a is ) so \ a
fir
it
eft
?
,,
of is
of s
it, (
so
a
a

 The Lite and Adventures
198
any Man of common Sense to have the Front of declaring his Disbelief of them in such a manner, as to urge it for an Argument, and a Reason, why others should disbelieve them
too : Taking this, I lay, as
well may, for granted ;
fiothing farther for me to offer, before I con
clude this Chapter, except a few Remarks, as to the Similitude there is between those Acti ons, which I have related above to have been perform'd by Mr. Campbell, and these Acti ons which Ib many Learned, Ingenious, and
I think I very I think there remains
I have now have just quoted,
 Noble Authors as
asserted to have been perform'd by Persons, whom they knew to be gifted with the Se
cond-Sight. (
As to what is said, several
above concerning Duncan Campbell, when a Boy at
that he even told his little Com panions, who would have Success at their
little Matches, when they play'd at Marbles ; and that he inforrn'd a great Gamester there, ( whose Name I have dvsguizcd under that of Count Cog') what Times he should chuse to play, if he would win ; as ludicrous as it may
have appear cl to„be , and as much as it may have secmd to my Readers to carry with it
Edinburgh,
better than the Face of Invention, and the Air of Fiction : Yet if they will be at the Pains of comparing that Paslage of Dun can Campbell's , with the Account given in this Chapter from the Mouth of Sir Norman
Mac
nothing
Pages
J)
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campb eil. 199
Maclead, concerning a Man who (tho' he never play'd at Tables in his Life) instructed a skilful Gamester, when he was at a Standy to place one of his Men right , upon which the whole Game depended ; which the igno
rant Fellow, when ask'd how he came to do it, said, he was directed to it by the Spirit Browne : Whoever, I say, will be at the Pains of comparing these Passages together, will find
they bear a very near Resemblance and that the way we may most reasonably account for Duncan Campbells Prediction, when he was a Boy, must be , that he was at that Time di rected by his little Genius, or Familiar Spirit, C which I defcrib'd in the precedent Pages ) as this Fellow was by the Spirit Brorcne, accor ding to Sir Norman Maclead's Aslertion. Which Spirit Browne, as Mr. Mart en (a very good and credited Writer) asiures us, in his History of the Western Islands, dedicated to the late Prince George of Denmark, is a Spirit usually
seen all over that Country.
Ifthe Reader recollects, he will remember
lIikewise, that in the little Discourse which
mention'd to have been held betweeJn me
 and this Duncan Campbell ('when a Boy con cerning his little Genius, I there say, the Boy signified to me that he smelt Venison, and was sure that some would come to his Mo
I came thither that Morning from the Death of a
ther's House shortly after : Accordingly
Deer, and order d a Part of it to be brought O 4 after
  
 4,oo The Lite and Adventures
after me to her House. Now Mr. MaHeris Twelfth Observation about the Second- Sight, in this Chapter, clears it plainly up, that this Knowledge in the Boy proceeded from the Gift of Second- Sight. Not to give the Rea der too often the Trouble of looking back, in
order to judge of the Truth of what I fay, I will here repeat that Observation ; which is as follows. ' Things are also foretold by
c
Smelling sometimes : For Example ; Fijh or
Flejb is frequently smelt in the Fire, when J at the same time neither of the two are in
4 -the House, or, in any Probability , like to be ' had in it for some Weeks or Months. This * Smell several Persons have, who are endued * with the Second-Sight ; and it's always ac- ' compUsh'd soon after. - - .• . . .
 But I will here omit any farther Remarks, by way of accounting how he compass d his Predictions when a Boy, either by the In tervention of his Genim, or the .Gift of & Se cond-Sight ; and examine how nearly those Things, which I have related to have been done by him in his more advanc'd Years, when he took up the Profession of a Prediftot in London, correspond with the Accounts gi ven us in this Chapter about a Second Sight ;
and how near a Resemblance the
done by him, bear to those Things that are so well attested to have been perform'd by Others , thro' the efficacious Power of this
.wonderful Faculty.
, y.
", . , .
Things
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell. zoi
First then, if we have a mind to make a tolerable guess, which way *Mx. Campbell came acquainted that the Death of the beautiful young Lady, Mrs. W-lxa-d was so near at Hand, and that, tho' (he was so
universally admired, she would Die unmarried ; the Ac
counts given of other Second-sighted Persons
in the like Cases, will put us in the most pro
bable way of guessing right. This is ex plains by the Seventh Observation in this Chapter, where it is said from Mr. Marten, that when a Shroud is perceiv'd about one, it's a sure Prognostick of Death ; the Time is
judg'd according to the Height of about the Person for be not seen above the Middle, Death not to be expected for the space of Year or longer, but as comes nearer to the Head
to the very Head,
ten was an Eye-witnels, concerning the Death of his own Acquaintance but he did not in the least regard till the Death of the Per son, about the Time foretold, confirm'd to him the Certainty of the Prediction.
Secondly, As to the ignominious Death that Irzvin came to, and which He predicted to his
 not Hours. Of this we have an Example of which Mr. Mar
Hand within few Days,
Mother,
flourishing Circumstances, and when there Was no Appearance, that any of her Children should be brought to beggarly Condition,
*.
and
expected sooner concluded to be at
long before, when stie was in
  \ -
a
;
a
it it is is
so
a it,
is if it
;
if
; if
it
it,

 toz The Life and Adventures
arid learn among base (jangs of Companyjaa thieve, and be earned to the Gallows : The Story told in this Chapter of some of the In habitants of Harries, sailing round the Isle of Skje, and seeing the Apparition of two Men hanging by the Ropes on the Mast of theit*
Veslel, and when they came to the opposite Main.Land, finding two Criminals just sen tenced to Death, by Sir Donald Mac Donald, and seeing their own very Mast and Ropes made choice of for their Execution, clears up the manner how Mr. Campbell might predict
this of Jrw'm likewise by the force' of the
Second-Sight.
Thirdly, As to Mr. Campbell's telling Chri*
flaifina the Belle, and chief Toast of the Court, aad Vrbana the reigning Beauty of the City,
that they mould shortly be married, and who were to be their Husbands ; it is a Thing he has done almost every Day in his Life to one Woman or other, that comes to consult him about the Man she is to be married to ; the manner, he probably takes in doing this, may be likewise explain'd by the foregoing Story in this Chapter, about the Servants, who said
they saw three Men standing by the left
Hand of their Master's Daughter ; and that
he that was nearest would marry her firsts whom they plainly and exactly described, tho jthey had never seen him but in their Vision, as appeared afterwards. For within some
Months after, [the very Man described, did come
   
 of Mr. Duncan CAMPBitiT
pome to the House, and did marry her. Vidp
the Eighth Observation of the Second-Sight. Fourthly, As to the predictions deliver'd
by Mr* Campbell to the Merchant, which are set down at length in the foregoing Chapter, I know no better way at guessing the manner
in him at that Time, than by comparing them to these Two Instances, which I briefly repeats because they are set down at length before in this Chapter. And first it may be ask & how did
the Second- Sight operate in Mr. Campbell, when it gave him to know, that the Merchant's
Ships, which repeated Intelligences had \A appearance confirm'd to be lost, were at that time safe, and would return securely home
into the Harbour designed ? The best way of accounting for that know, the Story that Sir Norman Maclead above affirm'di to have told with his own Mouth concerning
Servant of his, who rightly foretold his re
turning Home, and landing on the Isle of Bernera one Night, where his Residence is* When there was very little or no likeiihood of
because of the Darkness of the Night, and
the Danger of coming through the Rocks that lie round the Ifle. When Sir Norman exa- min'd him about he answer that he knew
by Vision of the Spirit Browne and hence may be the most probably conjectured, that
Mr. Campbell's Knowledge of the Merchant's Ships being safe, came irom Vision of his
particular
horn the Second-Sight operated
   a
;
'd
is
by
it it a
it,
a
it ;
it, I
is

 The Life and Adventures
particular Genius or familiar Spirit ', which we spoke of before. What I have already in
stanced in, is (1 think) sufficient with regard to the wonderful Things which Mr. Camp-' bell has perform'd, either by the Intervention of a Genius, or the Power of a Second-Sights But as he has frequently done a great many amazing Performances, which seem to be of such a Nature, that they can't be well and clearly explain'd to have been done either by the Intervention of his familiar Spirit and Genius, or by the Power of thtSecond-Jighted
ao4
we must have recourse to the Third Means, by which only such Predictions and Practices can be compass'd, before we expound these new Mysteries, which appear like incre
dible Riddles, and Ænigma's at, the first ; and
this Third Means which we must have re
course to for expounding these strange Acts of his, is a due Consideration of the Force and Power of Natural Magick, which toge ther with a Narrative of the Acts, which he seems magically to bring about, will be the Subject of the following Chapter.
Faculty,
 ,
,. .->.
CHAP. . . ... .J
  f
.
.
.', :
, :

 bf Mr. Duncan Campbell"
:
c ii a p. VIII.
A Dissert atkm upon Magick. under all its ' 'Branches, with fame remarkable Particu-
•' lars, relating to Mr. Campbells private Life.
BUT before we proceed to our Disqui sitions concerning the Power and Effi cacy of natural Magick,and examine what my
sterious Operations may be brought atout and eompafs'd by magical Practices. And before we take a farther Survey of what Mt. Camp bell has personnel in this Kind, that relates to his Profession and the publick Part of his Life, Which concerns other People as well as
;
•
I shall here relate some
ventures that he passd thorough ira'his private Life, and which I his own Person.
himself ;
singular
Ad
regard only
must return back to thd
In order to this
Year 1702, about which time some unac countable Turns of Fortune attended him in
his own private . Capacity,
very surprizing and entertaining to my Rea ders, when they find a Man whose Foresight was always so great a Help and Assistance to others, who consulted him in their own fu ture Affairs, helpless (as it has been an Ob servation concerning all such Men in the Ac count of the Second-Sight) and blind in his own future Affairs, tois'd up and down by inevitable and spightful Accidents of Fortune, and made the May-game of Chance and Ha
zard,
which must be
.
. Voj
   
 io6 the tun and Adventures!
2ard, as if that way-ward arid inconstant
Goddess was resolv'd to punish htm,'
she catch'd him on the blind Side, for having
such a quick Insight and penetrating Faculty in other Peoples Matters, arid scrutinizing too narrowly into her Mysteries, and so some
times preventing those fatal Intentions of Jiers, into which she would fain lead many Mor tals hood-wink'dj and before they knew where they were. In this Light, these mighty and famous Seers seem to be born for the Benefit and Felicity of others, but at the lame time to be born to Unhappiness themselves. And cer tainly, in as much as we consider them as useful and beneficial often, but always satisfactory to Persons who are curious in their Enquiries about their Fortunes ; it will be natural to
those of us, who have the least Share of Ge nerosity in our Minds, to yield Our Pity and Qonvpassion to them* wh.ert they are remar kably unfortunate themselves ; especially when that Calamity seems more particularly to light upon them for their Ability, and endeavour to Consult the good Fortune of other Folks.
Aboutthe above-mentioned Year ijox,Dun- fOinCampbel- grew a little tired of his Profession. Such a multitude of Followers troubled him^ several of whom were wild Youths and came to banter him, and many more too inquisitive Females, to teaze him with endless Imper
tinences, and wrjo, the more he told them^ bad still the more to ask , and whose Curio* sky was never to be satisfied : And besides this*
he
wheri
   
 of Mr. Duncan Cam pbelv
2.07 he was so. much eavy'd, and had so many malicious Artifices daily practised against him,
that he resolv'd to leave off his Profession.
He had (I know) follow'd it
from the time I first saw him in London^which was I think in the beginning of the Year 1 698, till the Year 1702, with very good Success ;
and in those few Years he had got together a pretty round Sum of Money. Our young Seer was now at Man's Estate,and had learn d the Notion that he was to be fyis own Gover nor, so far as to be his own Counsellor too in what Road of Life he was to take ; and.
ttns Consideration (no doubt) work'd with a
deeper Impression
pretty closely
 on his Mind, than it usu-. ally does on others that are in the same blos soming Pride of Manhood, because if might;
appear more natural for him to believe, that he had a sufficient Ability to be his own pro per Adviser, who had given so many others, and some more aged than himfelf, Counsel, with very good Success. Now every expe-
rienc'd Person knows, that when Manhood is
yet green,itis still in the fame dangerousCon- dition as a young Plant, which is liable to be warp'd by a Thousand cross fortuitous Acci dents, if good Measures be not taken to sup port it against all the contingent Shocks it may meet with from the Weather or other wise. 'Now it was his Misfortune to be made averse to Business, which he iov'd before, by having too much of and to be sowred;
meeting with numerous Perplexities and mali
  by
it,
so

 io8 The Life and Adventures
malicious Rubs laid in his way by invidious* Pecple,f who are the useless and injurious Busy-
bodies, that always repine at the
others, and rejoice to do harm to the Diligent and Assiduous, though they reap no Profit by
themselves; that he was disgusted and de- terr'd entirely from the Prosecution of Pro
fession, by which he got not only
tent but copious and plentiful Subsistence. Nay, indeed this was another Mischief arising to him from his having much Business,
that he had got Money enough to leave ofTJ when the Perplexities of had made him willing to do so, and to live very comfortably and handsomely, like Gentleman without
for time and we know the youngest Men are not wont to. look the sarthest before them in Matters that concern their own Wel sare. Now inasmuch as he had thus taken
Disgust to Business and Application, and was
surfeited (as may say with the Perplexities of must be as natural for him, we know,
to search for Repose the contrary Extream vi&. Recreation and Idleness, as for Man to seek Rest after Toil, to sleep after Day's Labour, or to sit down after long and tiresome Walk. But there are two very stinct Sorts of Idleness, and two very different Kinds of Recreation there shameful Idle ness which no better than
lence, where Man having taken an Aversion
good
compe
 downright Sloth and there splendid kind of Indo
  4a it,
it a
it
a
is I; .is
a
)
;
it
a
; inJ
is a
it
so
di
of*
it aaj
a
is
a
a
a
it

 of Mr. Dunc an Campbell.
to the Wearisomeness of a Business which pro perly belongs to him, neglects not however
to employ his Thoughts, when they are va cant from what they ought more chiefly to be about, in other Matters not entirely un
profitable in Life, the Exercise of which he finds he can follow with more abundant Ease and Satissaction. There are some Sorts of Recreations too, that are mean, sordid, and base ; others, that are very innocent, tho'
very diverting, and that will give one the very next most valuable Qualifications of a
after those which are obtained by a more serious Application of the Mind.
Gentleman,
The Idea which I have
Readers of our Duncan Campbell, will easily make them judge, before I tell them, which way (in these two ways) his Genius would ilaturally lead him ; and that, when he grew an idle Man, he would rather indulge him
self with applying his Mind to the shining Trifles of Life, than be wholly slothful and unactive ; and that when he diverted him self, he would not do it after a sordid, base manner, as having a better Taste, and a Relish for good Company ; but that his Recreations would still be the Recreations of a Gentle man. And just) accordingly, as my Readers would naturally judge beforehand in his Case^ so it really happen 'd : The Moment he shook off Business, and dismiss d the Thoughts of
k}
his Genius led him to a P
very gallant Way
already given my
2Ck)
   
 aio The Life and Adventures
Way of Life ; in his Lodgings, in his Enter tainments, in paying and receiving Visits, in Cofiee-Houfes, in Taverns, in Fencing-Schools, in Balls and other Publick Aslemblies ; in all ways, in fine, both at home and abroad, Dun
can Campbell was a Well-comported and Civil Fine Gentleman : He was a Man of Pleasure ; and nothing of the Man of Business appear'd about him. But a Gentleman's Life, without a Gentleman's Estate, (however mining and
pleasant it may be for a Time) will certainly end in Sorrow, if not in Infamy. And com
paring Life (as Moralists do) to a Day, one may safely pronounce this Truth to all the splendid Idlers I have mention'd ; That if they have sunshiny Weather till Noon, yet the Afternoon of their Life will be very stormy, rainy and uncomfortable, and per haps just at the End of theirjourney, (to carry
 on the Metaphor throughout) close in the dark est kind of Night. Of this, as I was a Man of Years, and more experience! in the World than he, I took upon me to forewarn Mr. Campbell, as soon as
I perceiv'd the first
rous Fit of this elegant Idleness had seiz'd him. But when will young Men, by so much
the more headstrong, as they have less of the Beard, be guided, and brought to learn ? And when ihall we fee that happy Age, in which, the grey Heads of old Men shall be clapp'd
upon the Shoulders of Youth
Itold him,
?
that in this one Thing he ought to consult me,
dange
  
 of Mr. DuncanCampbell. zii
and acknowledge me to be a true Prophet, if I told him the End of the seeming merry Steps in Life he was now taking, would in fallibly bring him to a. Labyrinth of Difficul ties ; out of which if he extricated himself at all, he would at least find it a laborious Piece of Work. His Taste had lieen already vitia ted, with the Sweets which lay at the Top of the bitter Draught of Fortune ; and my honest rugged Counsel came too late to prevail, when his Fancy jhad decoy'd and debauch'd his
Judgment, and carry d it over into another Interest. I remember I writ down to him the Moral Story, where vicious Pleasure and Virtue are pictur'd by the Philosopher to ap* pear before. Her cities. to court him into two several Paths. I told him more particularly, since he had not an Estate to go thro' with the Gentlemanly Life, ("as he calfd it ) that if he fbllow'd the alluring Pleasures, which endeavour d to tempt Hercules, he would in volve himself at last in a whole Heap of Mise ries, out of which it would be more than an Herculean Labour for him to
 disentangle .himself again. If he had been a Man that
could have ever heard with either, I would have told the Reader in a very familiar Idi om, that he turn'd the deaf Ear to me ; for he did not mind one Syllable nor Tittle of the Prescriptions I set down for him, no more than if he had never read them ; but, varying the Phrase a little, I may say at least, when
  
 iii
he should have look'd upon my Counsel with all the Eyes he had, he turn'd the blind Side; upori it. I was resolv'd to make use of the Re venge natural to a Man of Years, arid there fore apply 'd that reproachful Proverb to him, which we Ancients delight much in making
use of to Youths, that follow their own false and hot Imaginations, and will not heed
the cooler Dictates of Age, Experience, and Wisdom. Accordingly I wrote down to him these Words, arid left him in a seeming Pas sion. * I am very well assitr'd, young Man,
* sad and woful Experience teaches you to ' know it your own self, and makes you come 4 to me, to own. it of your own accords As I was going away, after this tart Admonition and severe Reprimand, I had a Mind to observe hIis Countenance, and I saw him smile.; which
construed to be done in Contempt of the Advice of Age, and in the Gaiety and Ful ness of Conceit , which Youth' entertains of its own fond Opinions, and hair-brain'd rash Resolves. He was got into the Company of a very prdtty Set of Gentlemen, whose For tunes were sar superior to his ; but he follow'd the same genteel Exercises, as fencing, &c. and made one at all their Publick Entertain
ments : AndJ so. being: at an equal Expence
with
The Life and ADVENfUREs^
* you think me, thatam old, tobe a Fdol ; but i 1, that am old, absolutely know you (who are
 ' ayoung Fellow) to be a downright Fopl ; and * so I leave you to follow your own Nftays, till
rightly
'*
  
 .osMr.DUNCAN CAMPB£ll; zi3
those who could well afford to spend
what. they did out of their Estates, he went
on very pleasantly for a Time ; still spending,
and never getting ; without ever considering, that it must, by inevitable Consequence, fall to his Lot as last, to be entirely reduc'd to a
^tate ,of Indigence and Want. And what com monly heightens the Misfortunes of such Men, (and so of all Gentlemen's younger Brothers, who live yppn the ready Money that is given them for their Portions j) that the Prospe rity they live in for Time, gains them Credit enough just to bring them in Debt, and ren
der them more miserable than those Wretches, who never had either any Money or Credit at all. They run themselves into Debt out of Shame and to put off the evil
Day of appearing ruin'd Men as long as they can and then when their Tempers are sour'd Adversity, they grow tir'd of their own
Lives and then in Quarrel, they, or some other Gentleman, may be, run through or else "being hunted by Bailiffs, they exer cise thejr Swords upon those Pursuers. Thus, where Gentlemen will not consider their Cir cumstances, their very Prosperity Cause of, and aggravates their Misery their very
Pride (which was a, decent Pride at first) in keeping up and maintaining their Credit, sub
,with
 them too often to the lowest and the meanest Acts and their Courage, which was qf laudable Kind, turns into brutish and
fa
jects
very
  P 3
a
,
a
a
by ;
a
;
;
is a
is
is,
;
;

 The Life and Acv e nturis
2r4
iavage Rage ; and all the fine, esteem'd-flou- rishing and happy Gentleman, ends, and is
lost, in the contemn'd, poor and miserable Desperado ; whose Portion at last is Confine ment and a Gaol, and sometimes even worse, and what I shall not so much as name here. Into many of these Calamities Mr. Campbell had brought himself before it was lon^, by his Heedlelhess, and running (according to the wild Dictates of Youth) counter to all found and wholsome Advice. He had:, it seems, run himself into Debt ; and one Day, as he was at a Goffee-House, the Sign of the Three Croxvns in Great Qiteenfireet , in rush'd Four Bailiffs upon him, who being directed by the Creditors Wife, had watch cl him into that House, and told him they had a Warrant a- gainst him ; and upon his not answering; they
being unacquainted with his being deaf and dumb, ofler'd: to seize his Sword. He start led at their offering of Violence ; and taking
them for Ruffians, (which he had often met with) repcll d the Asiaufeers ; and' drawing his Sword, as one Man ('more bold than' the rest) closed in with him, he shorten'd his Blade, and, in the Fall, pinn'd the Fellow thro' the Shoulder, and himself thro' the Leg, to the Floor. After that he stood at Bay with all the Four Officers, when the most mischievous Asiailant of them all (the Creditors Wife) venturd to step into the Fray, and' very bar
barously took hold of that nameless Part of
C^ the
 .
  
 of Mr. Dunca n Campb ell.
115. the Man, f for which, as she was a married Woman, Nature, methinks, should have taught
her to have a greater Tenderness ;) and almost fqueez'd and crusiYd those Vitals to Death. But at last he got free from them all, and was
going away as fast as he could, not knowing
what Consequences might ensue : But the Woman, who aim'd her self at committing Murder, in the most savage and inhuman
manner, ran out after him, crying out Mur der, Murder, as loud as she could, and alarm ed the whole Street. The Bailiff following the Woman, and being bloody from Head to Foot, by means of the Wound he receiv'd, gave Credit to the Outcry. The late Earl Ri- vers's Footmen happening to be at the Door, ran immediately to stop the suppos'd Mur derer j and they indeed did take him at last, but perceiv'd their Mistake, and discovers,
that instead of being Assistants in taking a
Man, whom they thought to be a Murderer,
endeavouring to make his Escape from the Hands of Justice, they had only been trick'd in by that false Cry, to be Adjutants to a Bai- lifFin retaking a Gentleman, w ho by so gallant
' ^ a Defence, had rescu'd himself from the Dan gers of a Prison ; and when they had disco ver'd this their Mistake, they were mighty sorry for what they had done. The most active and busy among the Earl s Footmen, was a
Dutchman ; and the Earl happening to be in a Room next the Street, and hearing the P4 Out-
   
 ri6 The Life arid Apventub.es
Outcry of Murder, steppdtothe Winddw.; and seeing his own Servants in the Midst of the Bustle , examin d the Dutchman how the Matter was : And being told it ; he1 chid the
Man, for being concern 'd in stopping a Gen tleman, that was getting free from such trou blesome Companions. But the Dutchman ex cused himself like a Dutchman, by making a
Blunder for a Reply. 4 Sacramente, • said he to his Lord ; if I had thought they ' were Bailiffs , I would have fought for the
f poor dumb Gentleman ; but then why had • not he told me they were Bailiffs,, my Lord ?
In short, Duncan Campbell was carry d ofF
as their Prisoner ; but the Bailiff that was wounded, was. led back to the Coffee-House, where he pretended the Wound was mortal ; and that he despair'd of living an Hour. The Proverb, however, was on the Fellow's Side ;
and he recover d sooner than other People ex pected he could. As. soon as all Danger was over, an Action for Damages and Smart-Mo-
ney ("as their Term is) was brought against Mr. Campbell ; the Damages were exaggera ted, and the Demand was so extravagant,that Duncan Campbel was neither able, just at that Time, nor willing, had he been able, to pay so much, as he thought, in his own Wrong, and having no Bail, and being asham'd to make his cafe known to his better sort of Friends, who were both able and willing to
hejp hiiU & £.4ead Lift, hq was hurry 'd away •..>.! , .: to
merry
   
 i
of Mr. Duncan Campbell
to Gaol by the Bayliffs, who shew'd such a malignant and insolent Pleasure, as commonly attends powerful Revenge, when they put him into the Marshalfea. There he lay in Confinement six Weeks, till at last Four, or
Fiye of his chief Friends came by mere Chance to hearof .it ; immediately they con sulted about his Deliverance,and unanimously resolved to contribute for his Enlargement, and they accordingly went cross the Water together, and procured it out of Hand.
Two of his Benefactors were 'Officers, and were just then going over to Flanders. Dun can Campbell, to whom they communicated their Design, was resolved to try his Fortune
in a Military Way, out of a roving kind 0/ Humour raised in him, partly by his having taken a fort of Aversion to his own Profession in Town, and partly, by his finding that he
3.17
 •could not live, without following a Profession as he had done, any longer. He over a Bot tle frankly imparted his Mind to them at large ; he signify'd to them that he hoped, since they had lately done him so great a Fa vour, in freeing him from one Captivity, they woujd not think him too urgent, if he press'd for one Favour farther, upon Natures so ge^ nerous as theirs, by whom he took as great a Pleasure in being obliged, as he could rer ceive in being capable of obliging others. He
wrote to them that the Favour he meant was
al- most
*o redeem him from another Captivity,
  
 218 The Life and Adventures
most as irksome to him, as that, out of which
they had lately ransom 'd him. This Captivity, continued he, being either sore to follow my old Profession, which have taken an en tire Disgust to, for Maintenance, or being sore to live narrower Way than suits with my Genius and the better Taste have of higher Life. Such State, Gentlemen, you know more unpalatable than Half-Pay
like either being sore to go upon the for lorn Hope, or else like Man's being an entire
cashier'd and broken Officer, that had no younger Brother's Fortune, and no other Sup port but his Commission. Thus though yon have set my Body at Liberty, my Soul still under an Imprisonment, and will be till leave England, and can find means of visiting Flanders, which can do no otherwise than by the Advantage of having you for my Con voy. have mighty longing to Experience some part of Military Life, and sancy, you will grant me your Interest, and intro duce me to the vaJiant young Lord Lome, and be Spokes-men for dumb Man, shall meet with favourable Reception and as for you (Gentlemen) after having named that great Patron and Pattern of Courage and Conduct in the Field, can doubt but the very Name bear, you had not known me, would have made you taken me for Person of Military Genius, and that mould do
 nothing
but what would become
British Sol
  a
I
ly
is
d
t I
Id
I
a
a
a
I ,in
is, if aa
aa;
I
if I ;it
Iaa ad
I
is I
is

 of Mr. Du ncanCam t» b e l'iii 2x9
Soldier and a Gentleman ; nothing in fine that should make you repent the Recom
mendation.
" Y-j' ,' V. ",'
;
a.
These generous and gallant Friends of his, it seems, comply'd With his Request, and pro mised '^hey WOufcl make Application for him to the Lord IJdrne ; and Duncan Campbell had nothing to do' but to get his Bag and Baggage ready and provide himself witfrasE&fS. His
Baggage was ndt very' long getting together,
and he had Xt m tolerable good Order -and
as for his Pa&, , a: Brother of the Lord
Forbes was so kind, as* to prOettre ,htm one
upon the first Application Duncan made to
him.
>rr Accordingly in a few Days afterwards they
went on Board, and having a speedy and an easy Paslage, arrived soon at Rotterdam. Dun
•
 '
can met with some of his 'English
tance in that Town, and hisMdd being pret
ty much bent upon rambling^ and seeing all the Curiosities, Customs, and Humours, he could, in all the Foreign Placed he was* to pass thorough ; lie went out of ; a'Frolick with some Gentlemen, next Day, in a Boat to an adjacent Village, to make merry over a home ly Dutch Entertainment, the intended Repast being to consist of what the Boors there count a great Delicacy, brown Bread and white
Beer. He walk"d out of sight from his Com pany, and they lost one another ;and strolling about by himself at an unseasonable Hour, as
Acquain
  
 The Life and Adventures
they call it there aster the; Bell has toll'd,
zzo
who neither knew their Laws, nor if he had, was capable of being guided by the notice which their Laws ordain,
Duncan Campbells
was taken into Custody in the Village for that Night, and carry'd away the next Day to Williamftadt, - where he was taken for a Spy, and put into a close Imprisonment for Three or Four Dayi
...i .:
But some Scots Gentlemen, who had been
in Company ;'with Mr. Campbell at Mr. Cloy- Jlermaris a Painter in Covent-Garden, made their Application to the Magistrate, and got
him released : He knew his Friends the Of ficers that carried him over were gone for ward to the Camp, and that there was no Hope of finding them at Rotterdam, if he should go thither, and so he resolv'd since he had had so many Days Punishment in Wil liam(Iadt, to have Three or Four Days Plea
sure there too by way of Amends, before he would set ouf on his Journey after his Friends. But on the Third Night he got very much in Drink ; and as he went very boisterously and
disorderly along, a Centinel challengd him ; and the want of the Sense of Hearing had like to have occasion'd the Loss of his Life. The Centinel fir'd at him and narrowly miss d him ; He was taken Prisoner, not without some Re sistance, which was so far Innocent, as that he knew not any Reason why he should be
. seized ; but yery troublesomeand unwarrantar
   
 of Mt. Duncan Camp bel jT iii
fcle in so orderly a Town ; so the Gbvern6rV Secretary, after the Matter was examined ' in to,' judging it better for the unhappy Gentle
man's future Safety, advis'd him to return'
home to his own Country, and accordingly bespoke him a Place in a Dutch Ship called Tonsrow Catherine, for his Pasiage to England'. " Duncan Campbell] had taken up his Hu mour of rambKng first, of his own accord* dtid the Troubles which he had run himself into by we may reasonably suppose, had pretty' well curd him of that extravagant Itch and there little doubt to be made, but that he rejbyc very heartily, when he was got on Board the Ship to return to Eng land and that, in his new Resolutions, he
had reconciled himself to the Prosecution of his former Profession, and intended to set up for Predi&or again as soon as he could arrive at London. But now Fortune had not Mind to let him go off' he had had his own Fancy for rambling, and now she was resolv'd to have hers, and to give him his Bellyful of Caprice. Accordingly when the Dutch Ship called Towsrow Catherine, was making the best
of her Road for London,, and each Person in the Vessel was making merry, fill'd with the Hopes of quick and prosperous Pasiage
French Privateer appeared sight, crouding affi she Sails she could, and bearing' towards them with all Haste and Diligence. The Pri
vateer was double.mann'd, and carry Thif.r1
 .am
ty
  in
a
da
; a
so ;
d is
a
;
;
it,

 %a>
and Adventures
TbetiTE
ty Guns : The Dutch Veslel was defenslese in comparison ; and the People on Board had scarce time to think, and to deplore that they should be made a Prey of before they actu
ally were so, and had Reason enough given them for their Sorrow. All the Paslengers, to a single Man, were stripp'd, and had French Seamens Jackets in exchange for their Cloaths. Duncan Campbell had now a Taste given him of the Fate of War, as well as of. the Humour of travelling, and wislfd himself again, I warrant him, among his greatest: Croud of Consulters, as tiresome as he thought
Business to be, instead of being in the Middle of a Crew of Sea-Savage s. The Town, where the Dumb Prisoner was at last confin'd, was Denain. There happened to be some English Fryars there, who were told by the others who he was, and to them he apply 'd himself in Writing, and receiv'd from them a great a*eal of civil Treatment. But a certain Man of the Order of Recolletfs, happening to sec him there who had known him in England, and what Profession he followed, caused him,
to be called in Question as a Man that made use of ill means to tell Fortunes. When he was questions by a whole Society of these
religious Men, he made them such pertinent and satisfactory Answers in Writing, that he convinced them he had done nothing for which he deserv'd their Reprimand ; and they unanimously acquitted him. The Heads of
   
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell."
215 I have been informed, were
his Defence, as these.
Fief, He alledg'd that the Second-Sight was in-bom and in-bred in some Men ; and that
had had Examples of it more or less ; but that the Country of Scotland, in which he was educated from an Infants a-
bounded the most of any with those fort of People : And from thence he said he thought he might very naturally draw this Conclu sion, that a Faculty that was in-born and in bred to Men, and grown almost a National
Faculty among a People who were remark ably Honest, Upright, and well-meaning Peo ple, could not, without some Impiety, be im puted to the Possessors of it as a Sin. And when one of the Fathers rejoin'd, that it was remark'd by several Writers of the Second Sight, that it must be therefore Sinful, be cause it remain'd no longer among the People when the Doctrines of Christianity were ful ly propagated, and the Light of the Gospel increased among them ; and that afterwards
it affected none but Persons of vicious Lives and an Character To this Objection Mr.
every Country
 Campbell reply
that he knew most
(even
ingenious) Writers had made that Remark
concerning the Second-Sight, but begg'd leave
to be excused, he ventured to declare, that was no better than vulgar and common
Error and the Reasons were these which he
alledg'd
his own Behalf, and to confirm his Assertion.
  ; in
ill
it
if
:
'd, a

 The Life and Adventures
Assertion, he told them Men of undoubted Probity, Virtue and Learning, both of their
Vt4
Own Religion, (viz. the Roman
and also of the Reformed Religion, and in seve ral Nations had been affected, and continued all their Lives to be affected, with this Second-
sighting Power, and that there could be there fore no room to fix upon it the odious Cha racter of being a sinful and vicious (not to say that some call'd it still worse, a diabolical)
He said he would content himself with making but two Instances, because he believ'd those Two would be enough to give Content to them, his Judges too, in that Case. In his first Instance he told them that they might find somewhat relating to this in Jtficolaus Hemingius, who in his Tract dt Su-
perjlitionibus Magicis, printed at Copenhagen, Anno 1 575, informs the World ; " That Petrus
Talent.
Catholick)
 *' Paladins, Bishop of Seelandt, and Professor' " of Divinity at Copenhagen, could, from a " part of his Body affected, foretel from what " part of the Heavens Tempests would come, " and was seldom deceivd". One of the Fathers immediately ask'd him , if he un derstood Latin ?—To this Duncan Campbell re ply 'd no. Oh! Said the Fryar then, I don't re member that Book Was ever translated into English that you mention: — But rejoind Dun
can Campbell, The Pasiage I mention 'd to you, I have read in an English Book, and Word for
Word, according to the best of my Memory
r
-
4
$ as
  
 as
—
I don't re
of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
I have written it down to -In what you. —
Englifi Book, said the Fryar
?
member the Name of the Book, Duncan Camp-
- bell answer'd, but very well remember the Paslages ; and that it Was in a Book of Au thority, and which bore a Credit and good Re pute in the World ; arid you being Scholars^ may, if you please, have recourse to the learn ed Original ; and I doubt not, but you'll find what I fay to be a Truth.-— For the Second Instance, he told them. That in Spain, there are those, they call Saludadores, that have this' kind of Gift. There was (continued he in writing) one of your own Religion, Vene rable Fathers, and of a Religious Order, nay,
225
 a Fryar too, that had this Gift : He was a
noted Dominican, said he ; and tho' I forget
his Name, you may, by writing a Letter to
s. - ' )
Q.
Com-
learn his Name. He was a devout
England,
Portuguese, belonging to Queen Catharine
Dowagers Chapel ; and had the Second -Sight to a great degree, and was famous and eminent for it. They then ask'd him, what was the full Power he had to do by the Second-Sight X He anfwerd, that as they had intimated that-'
present, past, and future Events. They fore
see Murders, Drownings, Weddings,- Burials,'
had perused some of the skilful Wri
they
ters concerning the Second-Sight, he did not doubt but they had found (as well as he could' tell them ) that as to the Extent of People's Knowledge in that secret way, it reach'd both
  
 zz6 The Lhe and Adventuj.es
Combats, Manslaughters, &c. of all which, there are many Instances to be given. They commonly foresee sao* Events, a little while
before they happen. For Instance ;
fatal End be Hanging* they'll fee a Gibbet, or Rope about his Neck ; if Beheading, they'll fee a Man without a Head j if Drowning,
fee Water up to his Throat ; if Stab bing, they'll fee a Dagger in his Breast ; if un expected Death in his* Bed, they'll see a Wind
ing-Sheet about his Head. They foretel not
Only Marriages, but of good Children ; what kind of Life Men (hall lead, and in what Con
dition they shall die ; also Riches, Honours, Preferments, Peace, Plenty, and good Wea.* ther.lt is likewise usual with Persons that have lost any Thing, to go to some of these Men,
l?y whom they are directed how, with what Persons, and in what Place they mall find their Goods. It is also to be noted, that these Gifts bear a Latitude, so that some have it in a sar more eminent Degree than others. And what I have here written down to you, neednottakeasaTruthfromme, butasit
they'll
If a Man's
 concern d me so nearly :
sage by heart, and you will find it very near Word for Word, in Dr. Beaumont's. Book of Familiar Spirits. Aye, said the Fryars ; but you have a Genius too, that attends you, as we are ifiform'd. So (reply 'd Duncan Campbell) have all Persons, that have the Second-Sight in any eminent Degree : And to prove this, I will
,i..
J ' bring
I remember the Pas
you
  
 of Mr. Duncan Cam pbe-il.
faring no lesii a Witness than K. James 1. who,
in his T>&m6mlogy, (Book III. and Chap. x.) mentions also a Spirit caH'd Browne , that was wont formerly to haunt divers Houses, without doing any Evil , but doing (as it
Turns up and down the
were) House. .
neceflary
like a
some believ'd, that their House was all the
Sonfier, as chey called it ; that is, the more lucky or fortunate, that such Spirits resorted
He
appear'd
rough
Man :
Nay,
there. With these
to own they were very well satisfy and ao quiesc'd the Account he had given of him self, as very good, true, and honest Account. But they told him, they had still further Ac cusation against him and that was, that he practis'd Magick Arts and that he us'd, as
Replies the Fryars began
117
 had been inform'd, unlawful Incanta To this he made Answer, That these were two Kinds of Magick of which, he knew, they that were Men of Learning could
not be ignorant. The Art Magick, which wicked and impious, continued he, that which profess and has been profess'd at all Times the World, by Witches, Magii cians, Diviners, Inchanters, and such like no torious Profligates who, by having an unna tural Commerce with the Devil, do many strange, prodigious, and præternatural Acts, above and beyond all human Wisdom And
all the Arguments ever did, or ever will de duce (continued he) from that black Art,
good
r
they tions.
  I 2.
;
1 d,
: is
is
a is
is in
a
in
;
j ;
;
a
'd,

 az8 , The Life and Adventures
good and a shining Argument. It is this, O Fathers : I draw a Reason from these prodi gious Practices of Wizards, Magicians, In-
such as Dæmons are. And this is all the Know ledge I ever did, or ever will draw from that black, hellish Art. But (Fathers,) there is another Kind of Art Magick, calfd Natural
Magick,
and from all the Heathen Ido
chanters, &c.
latry and Superstition,, to prove, that there is a Deity : For, from these Acts of theirs, be ing preternatural and above human Wisdom, we may consequently infer, that they proceed from a supernatural and immaterial Cause,
 which is directly opposite to theirs ; and the Object of which Art is to do spiritual Good to Mankind, as the Object of theirs is to torment them, and induce them to Evil. They afflict People with Torments • and my Art. relieves them from the Torments they cause. The publick Profession of these Ma
gical Arts has (as you know, Fathers, 'tis a common Distinction between Black and White
been tolerated in some of the most famous Universities of Christendom ; tho' af terwards, for a very good Reason in Poli ticks, making it a publick Study to such a
degree, was very wisely retrench d by a Pro hibition. If this therefore be a Fault in your own Opinions, hear my Accusers ; but if not, you will not only excuse, but commend me.
The Fry ar s were extreamly well pleased
with his Defence : But one of them had a
.jI. -„> Mind
Magick,')
•
,.
  
 cf Mr. Dunca"n Campb Etis
Mind to frighten him a little ifhe could, and ask'd him, what he would say, if he could pro duce some Witches lately feizd, that would Iwear he had been frequently at their unlaw
ful Aslemblies, where they were making their waxen Images, and other odd mischievous
Inventions in Black Magick, to torment Folks ? What if I can produce such Evidence against you, wrote the Father to him by way of strengthning the Question ; will you not own
that we have convicted you then ? And when he had wrote the Note , he gave it Duncan
with a Look that seem'd to express his Warmth and Earnestness in the Expostula tion. Duncan Campbell took the Paper, and read it ; and far from being startled, return'd this Answer, with a Smile continuing in his Face while he wrote it. " No, said he, Fathers,'
Campbell,
1x9
 " by your Leave, they will only prove me a £C good Magician by that Oath, and themselves' cc more plainly Witches. They will prove their t£ Love to torment good Folks, and only shew
" their Hatred to me an innocent Man ; but w wise enough to torment 'em, by hindring'em " from tormenting others." The Fathers were well pleas'd with the Shrewdness of the An swer : But Duncan Campbell had a Mind,to, exert his Genius a little farther with the good Fryar, who thought likewise he had put him a very shrewd Question : So taking up ano ther Sheet of Paper ; Fathers, said he, fliall *f I entertain you with a Story of what pals'd,
Q. 3 _ uPost
  
 The Life *nJ Adv e n tukES
'13a
" upon this Head, between two religious Fa-
" thers fas you all of you are) and a. Prince of " Germany ; iri which you will find, that mine " ought to be reputed a full Answer to the " Question the last learned Father Was pleased "to propose tbmt ! The Story is somewhat ? long, but very much t6 the Purpose, and en.1
"; tertaining. I rdmember it perfectly by hearts l'^and if you will have Patience while I am
f writing don't doubt but that fliall not
" only' satisfy you* but please you, and oblige " yoou with the Relation. The Author
" found in, quotes from Fromariniis,
 think the Man's Name was and am sure my Author calls him very learned Man in his Third Book of Magical In*
imitation and tho' don't understand the
'* Language the Original writ in, yet dare venture to fay, upon the Credit of my Eng-
^...lijh Author, ('from whom got the Story by c' heart) that you will find me right, whenever
you shall be pleased to search. . .
The Fryar were earnest for the Story, and expreis'd Desire that he would write
it:down for them to read which he did in
the following Words. Note, That have
fence icumpard Mr. Duncan Campbell Mamt- Jmipt with the Authors Page out. which be
took andfind Wordfor Word' the fame Which jhews how incomparable a. Memory this 3eaf and dumb Gentleman hasgot befides his
,L.. ;' .. .., .j vr..'. ,..'•'„ other n<
  \
it,
.
ri ^
a so ,
a it
s
'
¥
);
*:*
I ; Iis
it
of I
YI :
I I(II
ff
it ;
it, I

 of Mr. Duncan Gamp b e 1,1.' Z31
other extraordinary Qualifications. The Sto ry is this.
" A Prince of Germany faulted two Religi- u ous Fathers, of ennnent Virtue and Learn- " ing, to Dinner. The Prince, at Table,
** said to one of them ; Father
Think
*you
!
" we do right in hanging Persons, who are
" accused by Ten or Twelve Witches, to " have appear d at their Meetings or Sab- " baths /somewhat/tfdT we are imposed on
" by the Devil, and that
tc and Learned Men every where begin to cry " out againf and to charge our Consci- " ences with Tell me thereforeyour Opini-
" Way to Truth, that we walk
not
by safe
these tc Accusations especially, since many Great
tc
 " on. To whom the Father
being somewhat What should make Or what mould touch our Consciences, being convicted by
" of an eager Spirit, laid " us doubtful this Cafe
<c many Testimonies Can we make
" Scruple, whether God will permit inno- " cent Persons mould be traduc'd There
" no Cause for Judge to stick at such
" Number of Accusations, but he may pro- " ceed with Safety. To which when the " Prince had reply 'd, and much had been
" said Pro and Con on both Sides about
" and the Father seem wholly to carry the *" Point the Prince at length concluded the Dispute, saying, am sorry for you, Fa-
ther, that in Capital Cause you h"ave con- demnd
  a
it
in : it,
;
4I
'd
a
1
; ?
;
.<?
it it, a a
is
so
so
s,
?
in
a
it is

 •asp. TJ?e Life and Adventures if
". demnd your self, 'a.ndyou cannot complain
" Icommit you to Custody : For no less than " Fifteen Witches have deposed, that they
" have seen you j ay, start not ! you your own " jse/f, at their Meetings. And to fiowyou that j" Jam w£ injeft, I will presently cause the
" Publick ABs to be brought, sorrow to
, " them. Xhe;jFV*r /;><?>•stood
" with 4*je&td Countenance, had nothing " here to oppose bxxt Consufton and Silence, for
'auT:bis Learned Eloquence.
As soon as Mr. Campbell had wrote down
the .Story, the Fathers perused
mightily entertain'd with
and seem'd
in amaze
j and,
 ,
. to all jurther Qustions and the Man, whom
had been trying for Conjurer, they join'd in desiring upon distinct Pieces of
iey
under their several Hands, to come
Paper,
frequently and visit them as being not only
harmless and innocent, but an extraordina
ry well-meaning, good and diverting Com panion. They treated him for some Time terwards, during his Stay, with the Friend
due to Countryman, with the Civi lity that owing to Gentleman and with .the Assistance and Support which belong'd to Person of Merit in Distress. Money they had none themselves, seems, to give him,
being Mendicants by their own Profession but they had Interest enough to get him quite free from being Prisoner. He participated of thdvElemofinary Table had Cell allow'd him
\,\.wA among '.V
ship
put
an End
  ,
.
•
a a•tQ•-ft .
is
a
a
ja; it
a
.
;
a
it.
It it,
;
af
,
,

 of Mr. Dunc an Campbell. 23.5
among them in what they call their Dormi tory ; he had an odd Coat and a pair of Trow- zers made out of some of their brown coarse Habits, by the poor unfashionable Taylor or
Botcher belonging to the Convent, and at last' they found means of recommending him to a Master of a French Veslel, that was ready to set Sail, to give him a cast over the Channel
to England ; and to provide him with the Ne cessities of Life till he got to the Port. This French Veslel was luckier than the Dutch one
had been before to our dumb Gentleman, it had a quick and prosperous Paslage, and ar-
riv'd at Portsmouth ; and.as soon as he landed there, he having experienc'd the Misfortunes and Casualties, that a Man in his Condition
wanting both Speech and Hearing was liable to, in Places where he was an utter Stranger to every Body, resolv'd to make no Stay, but move on as fast as he could towards London* When he came to Hampton-Town, considering the indifferent Figure he made in those odd kind of Cloaths which the poor Fryars had equipp'd him with, and that his long Beard and an uncomb'd Wigg added much to the
Disguise ,• he was resolv'd to put on the best
 Face he could, in those aukward
stances, and stepp d into the first Barber s Shop he came at, to be trimm'd, and get his Wigg comb'd and powder d. This proved a very lucky Thought to him ; for as soon as he stepp'd into the Barber's Shop, who
should
Circum
  
 "ft* LitE and Adventures
3.}4
mould prove to be the Master of but one Tobit Yeates, who had served him in the lame
Capacity at London, and was but newly set
up in the Trade of Barber-Surgeon at Hamp- ton-Tdtvn, and followed likewise the Profes sion of School-master. This 'Tobit Yeates had shaved him quite, before he kfiew him in that Disguise and Mr. Campbell, though he knew him presently, had mind to try he Ihould be known himself first At length the Barber finding him to be dumb Man by his ordering every Thing with Motions of the Hand, and Gestures of the Body, look'd at him very earnestly, remember'd him, and in
great Surprize, called for Pen, Ink and Pa per, and begg to know how he came to be in that Disguise whether he was under any
Misfortune, and Apprehension of being dis covers, that made him go in poor and clownish Habit, and tender'd him any Ser vices, as far as his little Capacity would reach, and desir him to be free, and command him,
he was able to assist him in any Thing. These were the most comfortable Words, that Duncan Campbell had read great while. He took the Pen and Paper his Turn re lated to him his whole Story, gave the poor Barber thanks for his good natur'd Offer, and said he would make so much use of as to be indebted to him for much Money as would pay the Stage-Coach, and bear him
his travelling Expences up to London, from whence
   in
if
a
so
in
a
a :
it,
;
it,
a
so
d
a
d
so
;
if
;
a

 es Mr. DuncanCamp beiil 43j
whence he would rpeedily return the Favour with Interest. The poor honest Fellow, out of Gratitude to a Master, whose Liberality he had formerly experience ; immediately furnish'd Mr. Duncan Campbell with that little Supply, expressing the Gladness of his Heart that it lay in his Power ; and the Stage Coach being to set out within but a few Hours, he ran instantly to the Inn to fee if he could get him a Place. By good luck there was Room, and but just Room for one more, which pleas'd Duncan Campbell mightily when he Was ac quainted with it by his true and trusty Ser
vant the Barber ; for he was as impatient to fee London again, it seems, as he had been
before to quit it. Well, he had his Wish ; and when he came to London, he had one Wish more for Fortune to bestow upon him, which appear d to begin to grow kind again, after her fickle Fit of Cruelty was over ; and this Wish was that he might find his former Lodgings empty, and live in the fame House,
as he did, when he follow d his Professions T/his too succeeded according to his Desire, dnd he was happily fix'd once more to his Heart's Content in his old Residence, with the same People of the House round about
him, who bore him all that Respect and Af fection sand Ihew'd all that Readiness and Willingness to serve him on every Occasion and at every Turn) which could be expected from Persons, that let Lodgings in Town to
a Gen
   
 through
The Life <jW Adventures
*3<S
a Gentleman, whom they esteem'd the best:
Tenant they, .ever had in their Lives or ever could have.
Immediately the Tidings of the dumb Gen tleman's being return'd home from beyond Sea, spread throughout all the Neighbour hood, and it was nois'd about from one
Neighbourhood to another, till it went
all ; Ranks and Conditions, and was known as well in a Day or Two's Time all the Town over, as if he had been some great Man belonging to the State, and his Arrival had been notified to the Publick in the Ga zette, as a Person of the last Importance. And such a Person he appear'd indeed to be
taken for, especially among the fair Sex, who throng'd to his Doors, Crowd after Crowd,to consult with him about their future Occur rences in Life. These curious Tribes of Peo ple, were as various in their Persons, Sex, •Age, Quality, Profession, Art, Trade, as they
were in the Curiosity of their Minds, and the
Questions they had intended to propound to this dumb Predi&or of strange Events, that lay yet as Embrios in the Womb of Time, and were not to come, some of them, to a Matu rity for Birth, for very many Years after, just as porcelain Clay is stored up in the Earth by good Artificers, , which their Heirs make Chi na of half a Century, and sometimes more than an Age afterwards.
These
   
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell 237
These Shoals of Customers, who were to fee him well for his Advice as we may sup pose, now he stood in need of raising a fresh
Stock, were unquestionably as welcome and
acceptable to him as they appeared too trou blesome to him before, when he was in a State of more Wealth and Plenty; . :
Fortune, that does nothing moderately, seem'd now resolv'd, as she had: been ex- treamly cruel before, to be extreamly kind to him. He had nothing to do from early in. the Morning till late at Night, but to read Questions, and resolve them as sast, as
much frequented Doctors write their Pre
scriptions and Recipes, and like them al so to receive , Fees as fast. Fortune was deed mightily indulgent to the Wants Ihe had
fe suddenly reduced him to, and relieved him as suddenly by these Crowds ofCursvsos, who. brought him a Glut: of Money.i'j But one' single fair Lady, that was one of his very first ,
had;
represented them.
This Lady was the Relict or Widow of a.
Gentleman of a good Estate, and of a very' good Family, whose Name was Digby, and a handsome Jointure, she had Out of the E- state. This Lady, it seems, having been with
: him
 Consulters after his Return, and 'who receive! satisfactory Answers from him m\ other Points, before he went abroad ; prov'd. (so good Fortune would have it) worth alii the rest of his Customers together, as nume rous as they were, and as I have accordingly
,
  
 slovenly
bells
TheLiTE and Adventures
2.38
him in former Days, and Teen him in a more shining Way of Life, (Tor he had taken a Humour to appear before all his Company in that coarse odd Dress made out of the Fryar's Habit, and would not be persuaded by the People of the House to put on a Nightgown, till he could provide himself with a new
SuitJ was so curious, among other Questions, as to ask him, whether he had met with any Misfortunes, and how he came to be in so
and wretched a Habit i Here Mr. Campbell related the whole Story of his Tra vels to her, and the Crosses and Disappoint ments he had met with abroad. The Tears,, he observ'd, would start every now and th.en into her Eyes when (he came to any doleful Paslage, and me appear d to have a mighty compassionate kind of feeling, when she read of any Hardship more than ordinarily me lancholy that had befallen .him. Mr. Camp
 it is certain, had then a very good Pre* fence, and was a handsome and portly young Man ; and, as a great many young Gentle men derive the seeming Agreeableness of their Persons from the Taylor and the Barber, the Shoemaker and Hosier, so Mr.
Mi's Person on the other Hand gave a good Air and a good Look to the aukward Garb
he had on ; and, I believe, it was from feeing him, in this odd Trim (as they call it,) the Ladies first took up the Humour of calling him the handsome Sloven : Add to this, that
. he
::,•. .'.
Camp-
  
 os Mr. Duncan Ca mpbeiiI a,;gi
lie look'd his Misfortune in the Face with a; ' jolly Countenance, and smil'd even while he was penning the Relation of his Calamities : All which are certainly Circumstances, that
first sooth a generous Mind into a State of Compassion, and afterwards heighten it in the Breast wherein it is conceiv'd. Hence it came,
that this pretty and good-natur'd Widow, Mrs. Ttigby, when she had exprelsd her Com miseration of him by her Looks, began to take the Pen, and express it in very, tender Terms. Neither did she think that
Words sufficient Testimony of the
Com passion (he bore to him the Generosity of her Mind led her to express more sijb-n
Expression
 stantial Manner still, and that was to shew; plainly very generous Action. She laid Purse of Twenty Guineas upon the
Table, and at the fame Time failing, point ed to the Gokl, as signifying her Desire that he would accept and running to the Door,* droppd Curtsy, and skuttled away And by
the fame Civil Act as she oblig'd him, she put out of his Povyex to refuse being ob lig'd that tha the Present was very handsome, the Manner of giving was still handsomer. being handsome young Man of Merit in Distress, and bearing his Misfor tunes with an equal Mind, are powerful Mo- tives to excite Compassion the Mind of generous Lady the Generosity of young agreeable Widow, express in kind and fo,
bene-
  d Ib
;
so
a
it ;
in
it
it a
in a
a ..1
it*
it
so a
it a
;
by ;a
If
: so
a

 The Lite and Adventures
benevolous a way to ayoungGentleman,when he had been tasting nothing but the bitter Draughts of Fortune before, must stir up an Af fection, in a Mind that had any Sense of Grati tude. And truly just such was the Effect that
thisLady 's Civility had upon Mr. Duncan Camp bell : He conceiv'd from that Moment a very great Affection for her, and resolv'd to try whether he could gain her j which he had no small Grounds to hope, from the Esteem which ihe appear'd to bear towards him already. I remember, Mr. Dryden makes a very beauti ful Observation, of the near Alliance there is between the Two Passions of Pity and Love in a Woman's Breast, in one of his Plays. His Wordsarethese : • ,! * '
For - Love, Pity (tillforeruns approaching
As Lightning does the Thunder
Mr. Bruyere, a most ingenious Member of the
French Academy, has made another Remark, which comes home to our present purpose. He says, That many Women love their Money bet
ter than their triends^buty et value their Lovers more than their Money. According to the Two Reflections of these fine Writers upon the Tem pers of the Fair, Mr. Campbell had hopes -e- nough to ground his Courtship upon ; and it appeared so in the End by his proving Suc cessful : She from being a very liberal and friendly Client, became at last a most Affe ctionate Wife. He then began to be a House keeper, and accordingly took a little neat one, .
 ,,■
  
 os Mr. Duncan Ca m p b ell.
fetid very commodious for his Profession, in Monmduth-Court. Here I must take Leave to make this Observations ; That if Mr. Camp- hell inherited the Talents of his Second .sight- id Mother, he seem'd likewise to be an Heir
to his Father, Mr. Archibald Campbell, both
in his strange and accidental Sufferings by Sea, arid likewise in his being reliev'd from them, after as accidental and strange a man
ner, by an unexpected Marriage, just like his Father's. And here we return again, to take a new Survey of him, in the Course of his publick Practice, as a ?rediBor. The Ac counts I shall give of his Actions here^ will be Very various in their Nature from any I have yet presented to the Reader : They are more mysterious in themselves ; and yet I shall en deavour to make the Manner of his operating in this kind, as plain, as I think I have the
foregoing
they must afford a fresh Entertainment for
every Reader, that has any Curiosity, and
a good Taste for Things of so extraordinary
a Kind. For what I have all along pro
pounded to my self from the Beginning, and in the Progress to the End of this History,
is, to interweave entertaining and surprizing Narratives of what Mr. Campbell' has done, with curious and instructive Enquiries into the Nature of those Actions, for which he has render'd himself so singularly famous. It was hot therefore suitable to my Purpose, to clog
R the
±4i
 ones ; and then I flatter my self,
  
 242.
The Life Adventures
the Reader with numerous Adventures* al most all of the fame Kind ; but out of a vast Number of them, to single feme few of those that were most remarkable, and that were Mysteries, but Mysteries of very different forts.
I leave that Method of swelling distorted and commented Trifles into Volumes, to the
Writers of Fable and Romance :
If I was to
tell his Adventures with Regard , for Exam
ple, to Women that came to consult him
I have not written the.t
might, perhaps, only
Stories of Eleven Thousand Virgins that died Maids, but have had Relations to give of as many marry'd Women and Widows ; and the
 Work would have been endless. Ail that I mall do therefore, is to pick out one Particu lar, each of a different Kind$ that there may be Variety in the Entertainment. Upon Ap
plication to this Dumb Man, one is told in the Middle of her Health , that she (hall die at such a Time ; another, that she shall sicken, and upon the Moment of her Recovery, have
a Suiter, and a Husband : A Third, who is a celebrated Beauty, with a Multitude of Ad mirers round about her ; that she shall never become a Wife : A Fourth, (hat is marry'd ; when she shall get rid of an uneasy Husband :
A Fifth, that hath lost her Goods ; who stole them ; where and when they shall be resto red ; A Sixth, that is a Merchant ; when he
stiall be undone ; and how . and 'When he fliall recover his Losses, and bq^as great on
  
 happy
of Mr. Duncan Cam pbell.
243 the Exchange as ever : A Seventh, that is a Gamester ; which will be. his winning, and which his losing Hour : An Eighth,, how he
shall be involves in a Law-Suit ; and whether the Suit will have an adverse or a prosperous Issue : A Ninth , that is a Woman , with Choice of Lovers ; and who she shall be most
with for Life : And so on to many others ; where every Predictiort is perfectly new and surprizing, arid differs from the o- ther in almost every Circumstance. When a Man has so extensive a Genius as this at
the future Occurrences of Life^ one Narrative of a Sort is enough in Con science to present the Reader with ; and se
veral of each kind would not fmethinks) be entertaining, but tiresome : For he that can do one Thing in these Kinds by the Power of Predictiort , can do Ten Thousand : And those who are obstinate in extenuating his Talents, and calling his Capacity in Question, and that will not be cohvirtc'd by one In stance of his Judgment, would not own the Conviction, if Ten Thousand Instance's were given them. The best Passage's I can recom mend to their Perusal, are those, Where Per
sons, who came purposely to banter him, under the Colour of Consulting him, and cover'd over their sly Intentions with bor'- row'd Disguizes, and came in Masquerades found all the Jest turn'd upon themselves iri the End, which they meant to our famous
R* Pre<
foretelling
   
 Tb* Liie imJ AvityfixxtLtS
144
Bredi&or ; and had the Discouragement of seeing their most conceal'd and deepest, laid Plots discover'd , and all their most witty Fetches and wily Contrivances defeated ,• tils they were compell'd universally to acknow ledge, that endeavouring to impose upon the Judgment of our Seer T by any hidden Artifice and Cunning whatsoever, was effe ctually imposing upon their own. His unu sual Talent in this kind was so openly known,, and so generally confessed, that his Know
his Papers, to applaud the Speczdations of this Dumb Gentleman, in an admirable Vein
of Pleasantry and- Humour, peculiar to the
was celebrated in some of the most
ledge
witty Weekly Papers that ever appear'd in Publick. Isaac Bickerfiaff, who diverted alf the Beau Monde for a long Space of Time with. his Lucubrations, takes Occasion in several of
 Writer, and to the Subject he writ
And when that bright Author, who join'd the uttermost Facetiousnefc with the most
solid Improvements of Morality and Learn ing in his Works, laid aside the Title of a
and asiumed the Name of a Spe3a- tor, iatid 'Censor of Men's Actions, he still C every now' and then) thought our Dtmcart Campbell a Subject worthy enough to em ploy his farsher Considerations upon, I must
take notice of one Letter sent concerning him to the SpeUaior? in the Year 1 71 z.' (N \ 474.) Which was at a Time when a Lady wanted
Tattler^
,
him,.
upon.
  
 .of Mr. Dunc an Campbell^ 145 Slid, after he had remov'd from Monmoutb-
Street to Dntry-Lane.
:
Mr. SP E"C tA tOR,
u by the younger Part of a Country Family, by my Mother's Side related to me, to visit Mr. Campbell, the dumb Man ; for they told me, that was chiefly what brought them to Town, having heard Wonders of him in Essex. 1, who always wanted Faith in such Matters^ was not easily prevailed on to go ; but lest they should take it ill, I went with them ; when9 to my own Surprize, Mr. Campbell related all their- past Life : (In short, had he not been prevented , such a Discovery would have come out, as would have ruin'd their
buying Wedding-Cloaths.} Our Names- — " tho' he never heard of us before , and we " endeavour d to conceal, were as familiar " to him as to our selves. To be sure, Mr.
Spectator, he is a very learned and wise ** Man. Being impatient to know my For- " tune, having paid my Respects in a Family
** Jacobus, he told me (after his manner) among several other Things, that in a Year t"c and Nine Montiis I should fall ill of a
new Fever, be given over by my Physici-
but should with much Diffic"ulty re- R 3 cover :
<c *' *c
** "
** " <c *c
A Bout two Years ago I was call'd upon
 <c
**
next Design of coming to Town, vitz.
{( ans,
  
 The Life and Adventures
t
5
'? have been in Quest of Mr. Campbell these
'c I Three Months, and cannot find him out :
Now hearing you are a dumb Man too,
4' thought you might correspond, and be a- " ble to tell me something ; for I think my " self highly obliged to make his Fortune,
" as he has mine. 'Tis very possible your " Worship, who has Spies all over this Town, " can inform me how to fend to him : Ifyou " can, I beseech you be as speedy as possible,
and you will highly oblige your constant *' Reader and Admirer,
Dulcibella
The SpeUators Answer.
Ordered, 5 That the InfpeEior I employ about ' Wonders, enquire at the Golden- Lyon, op- * posite to the Half-Moon Tavern in Drury-
That the first Time I took the Air " afterwards, I should be address'd to by a *' young Gentleman of a plentiful Fortune, f good Sense, and a generous Spirit. Mr. " Speffator , he is the purest Man in the 'I World, for all he said is come to pass I
fi cover :
" and I am the Happiest She in Kent.
 ' Lane, into the Merit of this Silent Sage,
• and report accordingly. : '.
-
But;
lhankley\
  
 os Mr. Dunca n Campb ell."
But now let us come to those Paslages of
his Life the most surprizing of all,
the time that he enjoy'd this Reputation, and when he prov'd that he deserved the Fame
he enjoy'd. Let us take a Survey of him while he is wonderfully curing Person's la
under the Misfortune of Witchcraft; of which the following Story: will be an eminent Instance, and likewise clear up how he came by his Reputation in Essex,, as; men tioned in the above-mentioned Letter to tne;
bouring
Spectator.
In the Year
JUU'J ' •
'
~1
1709, Susanna
Johnson, Daughter to one Captain Johnson, who liv'd,
during
 at a Place adjacent to
going one Morning to that Town to* btiy^ Butter at the Market, was met there by an
old miserable looking Woman, just as she. had taken some of her Change of the M^Lr-"' ket-woman in Copper, and this old Woman, ; rather demanded than begg'd the Gentle woman to give her a Penny. Mrs. Johnson reputing her to be one of those, hateful People that are call'd sturdy Beggars, refused it her, as thinking it to be no Act of Charity, and
that it would be rather gratifying and indulg ing her Impudence, tharf supplying or sa
tisfying her Indigence. " Upon the Refusal,
the old Hag with a Face more wrinkled
if possible, by Anger than it was by Age,' took upon her to storm at young Mrs. John-
Rumsord m~EJJ$xil
stills, R4 son
  
 The Life and Adventures
and to threaten and me nace her : But when she found her common Threats and .Menaces were of no avail, she
swore she would be revengd of the young; Creature in so signal a manner, that she should repent the Denial of that Penny from her Heart before she got home, and that it should cost her many Pounds to get rid of
the Consequences of that Denial and her Anger. The poor innocent Girl despised these last Worcls likewise, and getting up on Horseback return'd Homewards ; but just as she got about half way her Horse stopp'd, and pos means that she could use would make him advance one single Step ; but she staid
V48
son
very loudly,
 to see if that would humour him -go on. At last the Beast began to grow
unruly, and shorted and trembled as he had seen or smelt something that frighted him,
ana" fell kicking desperately till he threw the Girl from the Saddle, not being able to
cling tp any longer, tho' pretty good Horsewoman of her Years much were
the Horses Motions and Plungings more than ordinarily violent;. '
. As Providence would have she got not
much harm the Fall, receiving only little Bruise in the right Shoulder but she
aLwJiile
dreadfully frighted. This Fear added
was
Wings to her Feet,, and brought her home
  ,
by
;
if
it
;
so a
• a
j ./
;
it
a
tp' so

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell. %4§
as speedily of her self as Ihe usually came on
Horseback. She immediately, without any
other Sign of Illness than the pallid Colour
with which Fear had disorder'd the Com plexion of her Face, alarm'd all the Family
at home with the Story, took, her Bed ^up on complain'd of inward packings of the Belly, and was never at ease unless she lay doubled up together her Head to her Knees, and her Heels to her Rump, just like Fi
gure of She could not be single Mo ment out of that Posture without shrieking out with the violence of anxious Torments and racking Pains.
In this Condition of Misery, amidst this Agony of Suffering, and in this double Po sture was the poor wretched young Gentle woman brought to Town Physicians were
consulted about her but in vain she was
 carry to different Hospitals
but their Endeavours likewise prov'd
ctual. At last me was conducted to the Col lege of Physicians and even the collective
Wisdom of the greatest Sages and Adepts in the Science of Physick was posd to give her. any Prescription that would do her Service, and relieve her from the inexplicable Ma lady she labour'd under. The poor incurable Creature was one constant Subject of her complaining Mother's Discourse every Com
pany she came into. happen'd at last, and ve
for Assistance,,
ineffe
  It
;
in
a
a
d
it, 8.
;
:

 The Lipe and Adventures
ry providentially truly, that the Mother was thus condoling the Misfortune of her Child among five or six Ladies, and telling them among other Things, that by the most skil
ful Persons she was looked upon to be be- witch'd, and that 'twas not within the power of Physick to compass her Recovery : They all having been acquainted with our Mr. Duncan Campbell, unanimously advised her to
carry her Daughter to his House, and consult with him about her. The Mother was over joy'd at these Tidings, and purposed to let no Time slip where her Child's Health was so deeply concerned. She got the Ladies to go
with her and her Child, to be Eye-witnesles of so extraordinary a Piece of Practice, and so eminent a Tryal of Skill.
As soon as this dismal Object was brought into his Room, Mr. Duncan Campbell lifted up her Head and look'd earnestly in her Face, and in less than a Minute s time signify 'd to the Company, that she was not only be- witch'd, but in as dreadful a Condition al most as the Man that had a Legion of Fiends
within him.
At the reading of these Words the unhap
py Creature rais'd up her Head, turnd her Eyes upwards, and a Smile (a Thing she b.ad been a Stranger to for many Months) overspread her whole Face, and such a kind
a^o
 .
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell." 23?!
©f Colour as is the flushing of Joy and Gladnese, and with an innocent Tone of Voice Ihe laid, (he now had a firm belief fie
Jhould fiortly he deliver d. The Mother and the rest .of the Company were all in Tears, but Mr. Campbell wrote to them that they should be of good Heart, be easy and quiet for a few Moments, and they mould be corn vinced that it was Witchcraft, but happily convinced by seeing her so suddenly well
This brought the Company into pretty good Temper ; and a little after Mr. Campbell desired she might be led up Stairs into his Chamber and left there alone with him for a little while ; this occasioned some small Female Speculation, and as much Mirth as their late Sorrow, alleviated with the hopes of her Cure, would permit.
This you may be sure was but a snatch of Mirth, just as the nature of the Thing would allow of ; and all forts of Waggery being laid instantly aside, and remov d almost as
soon as conceived, the poor young Thing was
carryed in that double Posture up Stairs. She had not been much above half an Hour thare, when by the help only of Mr. Campbells
Arm she was led down Stairs, and descended
into that Room full of Company as a, Miracle
appearing in a Machine from 'above - Qie was led backward and forward in the Room,
wfule all ga?'d at her for a while with joy
again.
   
 iji T^Life tf^ Adventures
ful Astonilhment, for no Arrow was ever more strait than she. Mr. Campbell then pre vailed with her to drink a Glass of Wine, and immediately after Ihe evacuated Wind, which she had not done for some Months before, and
found her self still more amended and easy ;
And then the Mother making Mr. Campbell some small Acknowledgment at that time, with the Promise of more, and her Daugh ter giving Thanks, and all the Company com
his Skill, took their Leave and deI parted with great Demonstrations ofJoy. shall here, to cut the Story, short signify, that she came frequently afterwards to make her Testimonials of Gratitude to him, and con tinues to enjoy her Health to this very Day at Greenwich, where she now lives, and will at any time, if call'd upon, make Oath of the Truth of this little History, as she told me her self with her own Mouth.
The next Thing therefore it behoves 'me to do in this Chapter, to give some satis factory Account of Magick, by which such seeming mysterious Cures and Operations are brought about.
This Task would perform the most perspicuous and most convincing manner
can for Magick know held to be
hard and difficult Study by those Learned, and universally unlawful and diabolical ttyose Unlearned, who believe there such
Science
mending
 very
  in is a
a
by I
;
I I
is
is,

 cfMr.DUNCANCAMPBEX£ 255
a Science attainable by Human Genius. On the other Hand, by some Learned Men, who believe there is no such Science, it is repre sented as an inconsistent System of Supersti tions and Chimeras ; and again laugh'd at as such by the Unlearned, who are of an incre dulous Temper : What I would therefore undertake to do in this Place, is to (hew the Learned Men, who believe there i&iuch an Art, that the Attainment to a tolerable Know ledge of the manner how magicas Practices may be brought about, is no such difficult Matter as they have represented it.'to. them* selves ; and by doing this, I shall make the System of it so plain, that while the Learn ed approve of the Unlearned too, who are not of an unbelieving Kind, may under stand clearly what lay and the Learned Men who have rejected this Science as Chi' irierical, may be clearly convinced real and then there nothing left but obstinate unbelieving Ignorance, which shall not here
 to lead into Sense, but leave to the work of Time. In fine, will endeavour to induce Men of Sense to
. say, that, what has been accounted mysteri ous, delivered in plain, easy, and con vincing manner, and to own that they ap
prove while Men of the lower Class of Un* derstanding, shall confess and acknowledge that they themselves understand and that
pretend by Arguments
•
.
what
  '
it,
it is
; is
it
a
I
.''
is
I
it,
; I
;

 ^2 Life and Adventures
£5.4
what has hitherto been represented as ar» duous and difficult to a great Genius; is adap.» ted and render'd not only clear, . but familiar to Persons of middling Talents. In this Work therefore I shall follow the strictest Order I can (which of all Things render a Discourse
upon any Subject the most clear ; ) and that
it may be plain to the commonest Capacity I will first set down what Order I intend td follow.
Firs}, I will speak of Magick in general. Secondly, Of Magick under its several Di-
visions and Subdivisions.
Thirdly, Concerning the Object of the Artj as it is Good or Bad.
Fourthly, Of the Persons exercising that
Art in either Capacity of Good or Bad, and
by what means they become capacitated to
exercise it.
In the Fifth Place I shall come to the se
veral Objections against the Art of Magick, and the Refutation of those Objections.
The first Objection shall be against the Ex istence of good and bad Spirits. The Refu
y
 r.
tation of which will consist in
my proving
the Existences of Spirits both Good and Bad,
by Reason, and by Experience. ,
The second Objection that will be brought, is to contain an Allegation that there are no
such Persons as Witches
gument to support that Allegation, drawn Irom the Incapacity, and Impossibility of any
now*
and an Ar Things
  
 of Mr. Duncan CampbeIi" zfj
self incarnate Contract with Spirit. This Objection will be answered by proving the Reality of Witches
from almost/Universal Experience; and explaining rationally the Manner how the
Thing's making
(while
Devils hold Commerce with Witches Explication back'd, and authorizd, the
of the most Eminent Divines, and
Opinion
the most Learned Physicians.,
.-/*
From hence Sixthly and Lastly We
.shall conclude on the Side of the good Ma gick, that as there are Witches; on the one hand, that may afflict and torment Persons with Damons so, on the other hand, there
are lawful and good Magicians, that*may cast out Damons from People that, are posleftcl with therri..
Which
 And, Fir/i, As to Magick general Ma gick consists in the Spirit by Faith for Faith
that Magnet of the
which they draw Spirits to them* and bywhjch Spirits they do great Things, that appear like
Miracles.
Secondly, Magick divided into Three
Sorts viz. Divine, Natural, and Diabolical. And Natural Magick again subdivided
to Two Kinds, Simple and Compound And Natural Compound Magick again likewise divided into Two Kinds viz. Natural Di vine Magick, and Natural Diabolical Ma
gick.
Magicians by
Now
•*'
  is is
is ;
it. is
:
in
,
;
:
: ^
;
is
in
.;
is ,
a
by
)a
by

 The Liri and Adventures
2.56
Now to give the Reader a clear, and a Di
stinct Notion of each several Species of Ma gick here mention'd, I set down the following
Desinitions.-~Divine Maghk is a Celestial Sci
ence, in which all Operation? that are won derfully brought about, are performed by the Spirit of God.— Natural Magick is a Science, in which all the mysterious Acts
that are wrought, are compass 'd by Natural
Spirits.- But as this Natural Maghk may be exercised about Things, either in a manner
indifferent in themselves, or mere
morally and then it is mere Natural Magick ;
good,
or else about Things Theologically good, and transcendently bad ; and then it is not mere ly Natural Magick, but Mix'd and Com
 pound. If Natural Magick
. be exercised a- bout the most Holy Operations , it is thert
mix'd with the Divine, and may then be cal
led Cnot improperly^ Natural Divine Magick. But if'Natural Magick troubles it self about
the wickedest Practices, then is it promiscuous with the Dxmoniacaly and may not improperly be called Natural Diabolical
Magick.
Thirdly , The Object of this Art is doing;
Wonders out of the ordinary appearing Courie of Nature, which tend either to great Good or Bad, by the Help' and Mediation of Spirits
.;'-'.' good and bad. • :
Fourthly,
compassing
  
 6s Mr. Duncan Cam pb£li.'
. Fourthly, As to the Persons exercising that Art in either way, whether good or bad, and by what Means they become capacitated to act it ; the Notion of this may be easily de*
duced from the Notions of the Art it self, as consider'd above in its each different Spe cies : For as all Magick consists in a Spirit, every Magician acts by a Spirit.
Divine Magicians, that are of God, are spo ken of in Holy Writ ; and therefore I shall not mention the Paslages here, but pals them over (as I ought in a Book like this) with a profound and reverential Silence , as well as the other PafTages, which speak of Natural and Demoniacal Magicians ; and in all I mall speak of them in this Place, I shall only speak of them with Regard to Human Rea son and Experience, and conclude this Head
with saying, That Natural Magicians work all Things by the Natural Spirits of the Ele ments ; but that Witches and Demoniacal Ma
that these diffe rent Magicians perform their different Ope
rations.
These Things thus distinctly settled and ex
'tis now we must come and ground the Dispute, between those who believe there are no such Things as Magicians of any Kind,
and
plains,
* S
157
 as "James and Jambres in Ægypt the Spirit of Demons : And 'tis by the Means
gicians,
were, work their Magical Performance's by
of these different Spirits,
  
 ij8 The Life /^Adventure!
and those who assert there are of all the Kinds
above specify 'd.
Those who contend there are, have Re
course to Experience, and relate many welf- witness'd Narratives, to prove, that there have been in all Times, and that there are still Magicians of all these Kinds i But those, who contend that there are no. such Persons, wilt give no Ear to what the others call plain Expe rience : They call the Stories (let whatever Witnesses appear to justify them) either fabu lous Legends, invented' by the Authors, or else Tricks of intellectual Legerdemainr im
posed by the Actors, upon the Relators of
those Actions. Since therefore ,
tlio' the Believers in Magick brag of Expe rience never so much, it may be but a fal lible Experience ; they reasonably desire tcy know, whether these Gentlemen' that stand for Magick, can answer the Objections which. they propose, to prove, that the Practice of Magick, according to the System taid down,, is inconsistent with Reason, before they will yield their Assent i Let the Stories be never fo numerous, appear never so credible, these un believing Gentlemen desire to be try'd by Rea son, and aver till that Reason is given,
will not be convinc'd by the Number of Sto ries, because, tho' numerous, they are Stories still ; neither will they believe them, because they appear credible : Because seeming so, i»
not
 they sayr
they
  
 os Mr. DuNd an Campbell. a??
mot being so ; and Appearances, tho' neves so fair, when they contradict Reason, are not to be swallow'd down with an implicit Faith as so many Realities. And thus far, no doubt,
the Gentlemen, who are on the unbelieving Side, are very much in the right on't. The learned Gentlemen, on the other hand, who are persuaded of this mighty mysterious Pow er being lodg'd in the Hands of Magicians, answer, That they will take upon them to re fute the most subtle Objections, brought by
the learned Unbelievers, and to reconcile the Practicability of Magical Mysteries by the Ca pacity of Men, who study that Art, to right Rules and Laws of Reasoning ; and to shew,
that some Stories (tho' never so prodigi ous ) which are told of Magicians, demand the Belief of wise Men on Two Accounts :
Because, as' Experience backs Reason on fne one handy Reason backs Experience on the
other ; and so the Issue of the whole Argu
 ("whether there are .Magicians or not)
ment
is thrown upon both Experience
These Arguments on each Side, I shall draw up fairly Pro and Con ; for I don't pretend to be the Inventor of them my self ; they belong
to other Authors many Years ago : Be it enough for me to boast can draw them up
better and closer Form together, than they have yet appears! In that take upon my
.-Sa;, self were self very great Task erect my as -into
:.l
and Reason.
  t
v
a
;I
I
if I
it
in :
of,
in a

 z6o TheLm and Adventub.es
into a kind of a Judge : Iwill sum up the Evidences on both sides ; and I shall, where-
ever I
see Occasion, intimate which Side of the Argument bears the most Weight with me. But when I have enforc a my Opinion as far as I think needful, my Readers (like a
Jury) are still at Liberty to bring in their Ver dict, just as they themselves shall fee fit. And this naturally leads me, where I promised to come to in the Fifth Part of this Discourse, to the several Objections against the Power of Art Magick, and the Refutation of those Ob
•
jections.
The First ObjeBion being againjl the Exi
 of Spirits, and the Refutations thereof.
'H E First Objection, which they who j| reject Magick make use of, deny
ing that there are any such Things as Spirits about which, since those who defend the Art, say entirely exerciseth self, the Ob
jectors contend That they can make out that there are no such Beings as Spirits, all Pretensions to the Art must be entirely ground- left, and for the suture exploded.
To make this Part out, that there are no Spirits the first Man they produce on their '.'Side, undoubtedly one of very great Cre-
*dit and Authority, inasmuch as he has justly. born for many Centuries the Title of the Prince
stence
  is ;
it ,
if
it
is, ;

 os Mr. Duncan Campbeil z6x
Prince of Philosophers. They say, that Aristo tle, in his Book deMundo, reasons thus against the Existence of Spirits ; viz. ' That since God * can do all Things of himself, he doth not ' stand in need of Ministring Angels and Dæ-
' mons : A Multitude of Servants shewing * the Weakness of a Prince.
The Gentlemen who defend the Science,
make this Reply : They allow the Credit and
Authority of Aristotle, as much as the Ob jectors ; but as the Objectors themselves de
ny all the Authorities for the Spirits, and de- fire that Reason may be the only Ground they go upon, so the Refuters, on their Parts, desire, that Ariftotk's — ipse dixit may not be absolutely pass'd upon them for Argument j
but that his Words may be brought to the seme Touchstone of Reason , and prov'd if they are Standard. If this Argument, say
they, will hold good, Aristotle should not
suppose Intelligences moving the Celestial Spheres ; for God fufficeth to move all with
out Ministring Spirits ; nor would there be need of a Sun in the World, for God can enlighten all Things by himself ; and so all Second Causes were to be taken away : There
fore there are Angels and Ministring Spirits in the World, for the Majesty of God, not for his Want of them ; and for Order, not for his Omnipotency. And here, if the Ob jectors return, and fay, Who told you tha t there are Spirits ? Is not yours a precariou s
S 3 typo.
   
 i6z
The Life and Adventures
Mayn't we have Leave to recri minate in this Place ? Pray, who told Aristo
tle, that there were Intelligences that mov'd the Celestial Spheres ? Is not this Hypothesis
as precarious , as any Man may pretend that of Spirits to be ? And we believe there are few Philosophers at present, who agree with Ariflotle in that Opinion : And we dare pro
nounce this to be ours, that Aristotle took his
ther this Book, De Mundo, be Aristotle s or no.
an Idea of Spiritual Substance. As to this Part, the Defendants rejoin, That they think our late most judicious Mr. Locke, in his ela borate and finish'd EJsay on Human Under
standing, has fairly made out, that Men have as
clear Notion of a Spiritual Substance, as they
have of any Corporeal Subflance, Matter, or Body and that there as much Reason for
Hypothesis ?
from the Hebrews, who went
Intelligences
according to the same whimsical (tho' pretty} Notion , which first gave Rise to the Fiction of the Nine Muses. But more than all this, it is a very great Doubt among learned Men, whe
 The next Thing the Objectors bring a-
,
gainst the Existence of Spirits, That Nonsense for Men to say that there are such Beings, of which impossible for Man to have any Notion and they insist up on that impossible for any Man to form
the Existence of the one, as of the other for that they admit the latter,
admitting
but Humour them to deny theformer.
  ■
it It is
it a is
; ;, a
ir,
in if
is
a it is
;
it is
is,

 tfMr. Duncan Campbell?
, if%
is in his Second Book, Chap.xy. where he rea
sonsthus: " '
If a Man will examine himself, concerning his Notion of pure Substance in general, he will find he has no other Idea of
it, but only a Supposition of he knows not what Support, of such Qualities which are ca pable of producing simple Ideas in us j which
are commonly called Accidents. Thus if we talk or think of any particular Sort of Corporeal Substance, as Horse, Stone, i&c. tho the Idea we have of cither of them be but the Complication or Collection of those several simple Ideas, or sensible Quali ties, which we use to find united in the Thing call'd Horse or Stone ; yet because we can
not conceive how they should subsist alone not in one another, we suppose them to ex ist in, and be supported by some common Sub
ject ; which Support we denote by the Name of Substance ; tho* it be certain, we have no clear or distinct Idea of that Thing we sup pose a Support. The same happens concern ing the Operations of our Mind, viz,. Think ing, Reasoning, and Fearing, &c. which we concluding not to subsist of themselves, and
not apprehending how they can belong to Body ; we are apt to think these the Acti
ons of some Substance, which we call Spirit. : Whereby it's evident, that haying no other Notionr of• Matter , but something, wherein those many sensible Qualities, which affect our Senses, do subsist, by supposing a Substance',
S 4 where
.•Qualities
   
 The Life and Adv e ntur.es
wherein Thinking, Know ing, Doubting, and a Power of Moving, &c. do subsist ; we have as clear a Notion of the Nature or Substance of Spirit, as we have of Body ; the one being
supposed to be, without knowing what is the Substratum to those simple Ideas which we have from without, and the other supposed
(with a like Ignorance of what it is) to be the Substratum of these Operations which we experiment in our selves within. "Tis plain, then , that the Idea of Corporeal Substance in Matter, is as remote from our Concepti
ons and Apprehensions, as that of Spiritual Substance ; and therefore, from our not having any Notion of the Substance of Spirit, we can no more conclude its Non-Existence, than we can for the same Reason deny the Existence of Body ; it being as rational to affirm there is no Body, because we cannot know its Es sence, as jx is called, or have the Idea of the Substance of Matter, as to say, there is no Spirit, because we know not its Eslence, or have no Idea of a Spiritual Substance." Mr. Locke also, comparing our Idea of Spirit with our Idea of Body, thinks there may seem ra ther less
z6q
 Obscurity in the former than the
latter. Our Idea
an extended solid Substance, capable of com municating Motion by Impulse ; and our Idea of Soul is a Substance that thinks, and has a Power of exciting Motion in Body, by Will dr Thought. Now, some perhaps will say,
they
of Body, he takes to be
  
 of Mr. Dunc an Campbell
they comprehend a thinking Thing which perhaps is true ; but, he fays, if they con sider it well, they can no more comprehend an extended Thing ; and if they fay, they know not what it is thinks in them, they mean they know not what the Substance is of that thinking Thing ; no more, says he, do they know what the Substance is of that solid Thing ; and if they sayj they know
not how they think, he says, neither do they know how they are extended, how the solid Parts are united, or where to make Ex
tension, &c. ''. The learned Monsieur le Clerc, who gene
rally knows how far human Reason can bear, argues consonantly to what is before deliver d by Mr. Locke in his Coronis, added to the Fourth Volume of his Philosophical Works,' in the third Edition ofthem, where he writes as followeth.
When we contemplate the corporeal Na ture, we can fee nothing in it but Exten
sion, Divisibility, Solidity, Mobility, and va rious Determinations of Quantity or Figures ; which being so, it were a rash Thing, and contrary to the Laws of right Reasoning, to affirm other Things of Bodies ; and confe- quently from mere Body, nothing can be deduced by us, which is not joined in a ne- ceslary Connexion with the said Properties : Therefore those, who have thought the Pro
perties
265
 \
  
 TheLiiE and Adventures
perties of perceiving by Sense, of Under
standing, Willing^ Imagining, Remembring, and others the like, which have no Affinity
with corporeal Things,to have risen, from the Body, have greatly transgressed in the Me thod of right Reasoning and Philosophising, which hath been done by Epicurus, and those, who have thought as he did, affirmed our Minds to be composed of cor poreal Atoms : But whence shall we say they have had their Rife ? Truly, they do not owe their Rise to Matter which is wholly destitute of Sense and Thought, nor are they spontaneously sprung up from nothing, it being an ontological Maxim of most evident Truth, that nothing springs from nothing.
Having thus given the Reader the primary Objections made against the Existence of Spirits, and the Refutations thereof, I must now frankly own on which side my Opinion. Jeans, and for my Part, it seems manifest to , me that there are two Beings, we conceive very plainly and distinctly, vii%. Body and Spirit ; and that it would be as absurd and ridiculous to deny the Existence of the one, as of the other : And really, if the Refusers have got the better in their Way of Rea soning, they have still a much greater Ad vantage over the Objectors, when they come'
to back these Reasons with fresh Arguments drawn from Experience. Of this, there ha-
4&£
having"
   
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell 167 ving been many undoubted Narratives given
in the foregoing Pages, concerning the Ap paritions of Spirits, I shall refer the Reader
back again to them, and only subjoin here one or two Instances, which, may, if re
be proved upon Oath, of Spirits seen by two Persons of our Duncan Campbell s own Acquaintance. In the Year 171 1, one
quired,
Mrs. Stephens, gether
were to at the House of
and her Daughter, with Mr. Campbell,
Mr. Ramell's, a very great and noted Weaver
where the rainy Weather de tained" them till late at Night, Just after the Clock struck Twelve, they all of them went to the Door to see if the Rain had ceased,
, being extreamly desirous to get home. As soon as ever they had opened the Door and were all got together, there appeared before them a Thing all in White, the Face seemed of a dismal pallid Hue, but the Eyes thereof fiery and flaming like Beacons, and of a fewcer Size. It made its Approaches to
them, till it came up within the Space of about three Yards of them, there it fixt and stood like a Figure agaze for some Mi nutes ; and they all stood likewise stiff like the Figure, frozen with Fear, Motionless, and Speechless : When all of a sudden it vanish'd from their Eyes ; and that Apparition to the Sight was succeeded by a Noise, or the Ap pearance of a Noise like that which is occa
sioned
at Haggerjlone,
   
 2.68 The Life and Adventures
sioned by she Fighting of twenty MastirTDogs.
•Not long after, Mrs. Anne Stephens, who
lived in Spittlejtelds, a Woman well known
by her great Dealings with Mercers upon
Ludgate-Hill, sitting in her House alone, and
musing upon Business, happened by Accident to look behind her, and saw a dead Corps, to
her thinking, lie extended upon the Floor, just as a dead Corps should be, excepting that the Foot of one Leg was fixd on the
Ground as it is in a Bed, when one lies with one Knee up ; Ihe look'd at it a long while, and by degrees at last stole her Eyes from so
unpleasing and unexpected an Object. How ever, a strange kind of a Curiosity overcome her Fears, and she ventured a second Time to turn her Head that Way, and saw it as before, fix'd for a considerable time longer, but durst not stir from her Seat ; she again with drew her Eyes from the horrible and melan choly Spectacle, and resum'd the Courage,
after a little Reflection, of viewing it again, and resolving to ascertain her self if the Vi sion was real, by getting up from her Seat and going to but upon this third Retro spection she found vanisli'd. This Relation she writ down to Mr. Duncan Campbell, and has told before Mrs. Ramell, her own Sister, and many other very creditable Persons. Now as to these Arguments from Experience, shall also deliver my Opinion. dispute not but that Learned Men, who have obstinate
Prepos-
   I
I
it, it

 of Mr. DuNCAtf CampbeiiI
may produce plausible Argu ments, why all Things should be thought to be done by Imposture which seem strange to
them, and interfere with their Belief ; and truly thus far their Humour may be indulged, that if only one Person relates a very strange and surprizing Story, a Man may be more apt to think it is pojjible for that Person to lie, than that so strange a Relation should be true ; but if a considerable Number of Per sons of several Countries, several Religions, several Professions, several Ages, and those Persons look'd upon to be of as great Saga
city as any the Country afford, agree in Re
Prepossessions,
I think it a Vio lation of the Law of Nature to reject all these Relations as fabulous, merely upon a
sider d Circumstances ;
self-presuming Conceit; unless a Man can sair ly shew the Things to be impossible, or can demonstrate wherein those Persons were im
posed on ; for, from hence I form the fol lowing conclusive Argument. What is pos sible according to Reason grows probable ac cording to Belief, where the Possibility attested to have reduced self into Action by Persons of known Credit and Integrity. Now, not only the Possibility of the Ex istence of Spirits, but the actual Existence thereof proved above Logical Demon-
strange,
x6<)
 lations of the same Kind, tho' very
and are ready to vouch the Truth of them upon Oath after having well con
  is
by
it
is.

 ijo The Life and Adventures
stration ; therefore are we to believe both by
the Course • of Logical Reason, and
Faith, that those Existences have appeared to Men of Credit, who have attested the Re
Moral ality thereof upon Oath. -r :
Offenders. 4
1
HES E Objectors go on to sayj that
should allow there is an Existence of Spirits, yet that would be still no Argument how Magick should subsist,
because they deny that it is possible for a Man in his Body to have a Commerce, much less make a Contract with Spirits. But here again the Refuters alledge they have both
provided they
 and Reason on their Sides. As
Experience
a joint Argument of Reason and Experience, they tell you, that the numerous Witches
which have in all Countries been
and condemned upon this Occasion, are evi dent Testimonies of this Gofrimerce and Contract being held and made with Spirits.
They pretend to fay, that thefe Objectors call not (theirJ the Refuters Judgment1 so much in Question, who contend that there is a Magick Art, as they call in Question the Judgment of all the wisest Legislative Power* in Christendom, who have universally agreed
in enacting penal Laws against such capital
arraigned
But
  
 .
of Mr. Du n cAn'Camp be n!
£71 But here the Objectors return and say, that it being impossible for us to shew the manner how such a Contract should be made, we can never, but without Reason, believe, a Thing to be, of which we can- form no perfect:
Idea. The Refuters, on the other Hand, re ply with the learned Father le Brune ; it is manifest, that we can seeibut two Sorts of Beings, Spirits and Bodies, and that sirtce We can reason but according to our own Ideas, we ought to ascribe 'to Spirits what cannot be produced by Bodies. Indeed, the Author of the Nouvel/es ae la Republique des Lettres, for the Month of August, Anno 1686, has given us a rough' Draught for writing a good Tract of Witchcraft, which he looks
as a Desideratum. Where among other Things he writes thus 4 Since this Age is the true
time of Systems, one should be contriv'd concerning the Commerce that may be be
 twixt Dæmons and Men.
On this Passage, Father Brune writes
thus. " Doubtless here the Author complies
with the Language of great marty Persons;, who, for want of Attention and Light, would
have us put all Religion into Systems. What
ought to have for many of must not be afraid to fay* no System to bejmade of those Truths, which we ought to learn distinctly Faith, because we must advance nothing :. • here,
ever Regard those Persons, that there
upon
oil
  .\
by
is '}
I \.i
I
a
le
,:;
,'< j

 T<&<?Life and Adventures
here, but what we receive from the Oracle,
We must make a System to explain the Ef
fects of the Loadstone, the Ebbing and Flow ing of the Sea, the Motion of the Planets j for that the Cause of these Effects is not evi
dently signified to us, and many may be con ceived by us ; and to determine us, we have
need of a great Number of Observations, which, by an exact Induction, may lead us to
a Cause that may satisfy all the Fhænomena. 1 It is not the fame in the Truths of Religion, we come not at them by groping, it were .to be wish'd Men spoke not of them, but
after a decisive and infallible Authority. It is thus we should speak of the Power of Dæ- mons, and of the Commerce they have with Men ; it is of Faith that they have Power, and that they attack Men, and try to seduce them divers Ways. It is true indeed, they are sometimes permitted to have it over theJust,
tho' they have it not ordinarily, but over those, that want Faith, or Fear, not to partake of their Works ; and that to the last particular ly, the disordered Intelligences try to make exactly succeed what they wish ; inspiring them to have Recourse to certain Practices by which those seducing Spirits enter into Com
merce with Men. Thus far Father le Brune. But still these Objectors demand to know, by
172
 what Means this Commerce
tween Dæmons and Men, and urge us to de scribe the Manner ; or pretend that they have
maybe held be still
  
 of Mr. DuncAn Campbeli. ijl
still Reason to refuse cdming into the Belief of a Things which we would impose upon them, tho wholly ignorant of it our selves; To that, the Refuters answer thus :
That both Christian pivlties and Physicians agree,- (as
to the Manner how, wJ hich
curi
rally Sleeps) Or recalling the sensitive Spirits, from the outward Senses to tsie5iH- ward Organs, which he there retains So tne Devil renders WOmeri-Witches extatical and Magicians, who, while they lie fast asleep in one Place, think they have been divers Pla ces, and dorte many ThingSi This, the learned Objectors fay, proceeds trom rto Dæmon, but from the Disease calf an epilepsy. Bus ori the other hand, the more learned Refuters
insist upon that these Extasies are noiEpi- teptick Seizures This, fay they, appears from Bodin, in 'his Theatre' Universal Nature where he fays, " That those that are wrapt " the devil, feel neither Stripes nor Cut-
per- .
are so
ous in enquiring after- that Dæmons ftir up Raptures and Extasies Men, binding or loosing the exterior Senses^ and that either by- stopping the Pores of the Brain^ that the Spirits cannot pals forth, ("as dOrie riatti-
" ceived, them
but afterwards, returning
they feel most bitter Pains t£r s/r]', hjiimi "0f
tf to themselves .'*jrj;:t\
they
 " tings, rtor no Wtesting of their Limb^ lhqr " burrting .Tortures, 'not the Application
<r red-hot' Irbrt nay, not the Beat of " the Pulse, nor the Motion of the Heart
  "i jj
is .
in
it
is so
a
by in
by
J,
of
;
;
qf j
it,
d
by
itf
V
i

 Tfo Life and Advent tlft.ES
174
" of the Wounds receiv'd, and tell of Things " done at Six Hundred Miles distance, and af-
firm themselves to have seen them done." The ingenious Dr. Ader makes an admirable Physical Distinction between this Kind of Ex- tasy , and a Syncope, or Stupor, caused by Narcotick Medicines. Sennertus, in his In-
Jlitutio Medica, writes of the Dæmoniacal So por of Witches, who think they are carry'd
thro' the Air, dance, feast, and have Copula tion with the Devil, and do other Things in their Sleep ; and afterwards believe the fame Things waking. Now, he fays, " Whether
 " they are really so carry'd in the Air, &c. or " being in a profound Sleep, or only dream
" they are so carry'd, and persist in that Opi- " nion after they are awake ; these Facts or " Dreams cannot be natural : For it cannot
," be, that there should be so great an Agree- " ment in Dreams , of Persons differing in ."Place, Temperament, Age, Sex, and Stu-
" dies, that in one Night, and at the fame "Hour, they should, in Concert, dream of " one and the fame such Meeting ; and should " agree as to the Place, Number, and Qua- " lity of the Persons, and the like Circum- "stances : But such Dreams are suggested " from a preternatural Cause, viz. from the " Devil to his Confederate, by the Divine
." Permission of an Almighty Power , where " Punishments are to be permitted to be in- " flicted upon reprobate Sinners.
Whence
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
Whence also, to those Witches sincerely converted , and refusing to be any more pre sent at those Diabolical Meetings, those Dreams
no longer happen j which is a Proof that they proceeded, not before, from a natural Cause.
Here begins the great Point of the Dispute, as to that Branch of Magick , which we call Natural Magick The Objectors may tell us,
that they will freely own, that there may be an Existence of Spirits ; that there may be an Existence of Witches ; that by a divine Power, Men may be influence! so far, as to
have a Communication with good Spirits, and that from thence they may become spriritual, divine Magicians. They will likewise, perhaps, as freely grant, that by the Intervention of a Dæmon, Things preternatural may be brought about by Persons who have studied the De moniacal Magick ; but then, what they prin
cipally insist upon, that must be con tradictory to all Human Reason to imagine, that there can be such Thing as Natural Magicians And thus far they may form their Argument. They fay, that the Persons who
contend for the Magick Art, own, that all that brought about Magick, the Assistance and Help of Spirit and that consequently, what effected by must be preternatural. Now, fay they, Thing
inconsistent by Natural Power, to bring about preternatural Effect therefore, there can
'V
zys
 •• :*.
  T.
is
a
is
:
a
») aby a
is, it
-j .
;
it j
is it, a
is by

 7.y6 Tfoetxti and Adventures
'can be no such Thing as Natural Magics which his within it self the Efficacy of de- stroyirlg those Acts done by Magicians, in the
Diabolical.
..
To this, the Refusers take Leave to reply, That the Foundation upon which the Argu ment is built, is wrong grounded : They have admitted, if hat in Diabolical Art Magkk, these
may be a Commerce held between Men and Spirits, bj which several preternatural Effects may be brought about : And the Reason they assign1 for it there, Because there pre ternatural Agent concern'd therein, the Devil Burthen, fay stockist Natural Magick, you Can pretend to no such Agent, arrd there fore' rio such preternatural Effect. This Argutrient contains within Two Fallacies First,; As to the Commerce held between Man and Dœttion, there nothing pre
ternatural in getting the Acquaintance The Will of the Mars *i# entirely natural either
naturally good, or; naturally corrupted. The black Spirit that cbnverseth with him,
.
 not so; but from the \yfllsdf ,tire Mar^ not from the Power vested
^rhfteDevii; that the Acquaintance first grows, ' thereWe the Acquaintance self natural, tho' arises from the last' Corruption and De
pravations of 'Nature but being made with preternatural'' Existence, tho' the Cause of
the Acquaintance be corroptedly natural, yet the intermediate Cause or Means after that
Acquain
acfcrt$vsed*;'d
  a
it
:
is j
is,
it
is it
is
it is
;
:
is a
it
is a
:
r
to; a

 tf Mr. DuncanCampbei^ zy'f
Acquaintance is not so, and therefore the Ef fect of that intermediate Cause may be won
derful, and seem to be out of die ordinary Course of Nature. Now, since it is gene
rally' aHow'd, that there are Natural Spirits of the Elements, as well as Divine and In
fernal j what we have to prove , is
this ; That Man, by Natural Magick,
have a Commerce with Natural Spirits of their Elements', as Witches may have with tire Spirits, or Dfmon s. Now, as we said before,
the Commerce k self depends upon the Will of the Person, and is 'therefore natural, and consequently may as well subsist between the one as the other ,' for the Devil cannot force a Mart to' hold a Commerce with him wile1 ther;he;will or no. The Second Fallacy calling the Effect preternatural no other wise; than as 'connotates the Agent that brought about, which spiritual Agent For the Effect (in self considers) natural, and brought about by Second Causes that are natural the Devil's Penetration who
subtle enough to make use of them for such and such Ends. Now Men, by Natural Spi rits, which are of Faculty thoroughly sub tle, may as well With Natural Second Causes
compass the Remedy of an Evil Spirit, as the Devil able to infect Men with it. From
these Speculations, sarther plain Consequence maybe dedue'd, How aMan may, by tsle pure Force of Natural Magickj cure Person that
only may
   a
,
a
a
is
;
it by
;
,
is
it
it
is a
is : is,

 rj% TheLiiz and Adventures
is infested with Evils by a Dæmon : for how is that Dœmo?i infests any body with his evil Motions true, he preternatural A-
but the evil Effect he does,
about Natural Causes. For how does Dæ- mon stir up Raptures orExtasies in Men Why, he does (as we are told above bind
ing or loosing the Exterior Senses,, stop ping the Pores' of the Brain, that the Spi rits cannot pass forth And this the Art of Physick can compass its Drugs and Sleep causes the same Thing very naturally of self: Therefore as the Evil self natural, the Re
medy, that natural, will certainly overr come it. But then, say you, why can't those Persons be cur by Physicians answer
Not because their Remedies are not in them
selves sufficient to cure the Evils themselves
but because, generally, Physicians don't ad minister their Drugs as Christians, but as Phy sicians and when they prescribe them to the Sick, they generally prescribe to them only, purely consider'd as Patients, not as Christians and therein they come to fail Because the
Agent, the Devil, subtle Spirit, that brings the Evil, and alters its Situation before the Remedy (which would master otherwise can take any Effect Which Agent, the Devil,
employ the horrible and impious Faith of the Anti-Physician, viz. the black Magi cian. But the Physiciarj would act the Chri stian, at the fame Time, far as. to have
Faith
gent
brought
   se
is
so J
is a
if
d
; ; it by
a ?
is
it,
by is It d is
:
is a
it
:
a);;;
it
by :
?
I; is
byby ?
it a

 ofMr. Duncan Campbell^ 279
Faith that Things ordain'o* in the Course of Nature, for the Good of Man, would have
its Effects in Spite of a Devil, if taken with , a good Faith by the Patient : That all good Things, ordain'd to be for the natural Re covery of Men, if they took it with Thank fulness to the Sender, would have due Effect : Why then the Natural Spirits of the Elements would resist the farther Agency of the Dæ moniacal Spirit j and then nothing but the Natural Evil (caused at first by the Dæmons remaining in the Person, without the sarther Superintendency of the Dæmon, might de monstratively be taken away by the mere na tural Remedy or Medicine. And thus good and pious Physicians, making use of such pro
per Remedies as their Skill teaches them, and having an honest Faith, that the Goods of Nature, (intended for the Use and Benefit of Man) if receiv'd by the Patient with the same good Faith, above the Power of the Devil so frustrate, may not improperly be call'd Natu
ral Magicians. These Arguments of mine,
shall now take Leave to back Experience.
Besides what we have urged from Rea son, concerning the Power of Natural Ma- gick we lhall only subjoin that Divines themselves hold that Natural-Magick and also Natural-Divinations and Prophecies are
 from that Venerable Writ which- their Guide and bring Proofs
from the fame also, that Natural Magick Dæmon
proved Quotations
  T 4
by is
is'
by;
,
by
, t
,
I
,
,

 2,8o The Life and Ad? e ntuf.es
Dæmons are also cast forth, but not all Kinds
and so many Works of Effica cy arc wrought by Natural Magick : They
tell you, such was the Pythonijsa, that raised the Apparition to SauU which appear'd in a Body of Wind ;and Air. "thus, if a Per son, by Natural Magick, should cast out
mons ; it does not follow, that this was also from Divine Magick : And. if Dæmons are cast out by Natural Magick, by one that is
in the Fear of God, it does not follow, that he is a true Magician of God ; but if it exor- bitates to D&ntoniacaly then it is condemn 'd. And when Natural Magick keeps within its
Bounds, the Divines tell us, it is not con demn'd in the Venerable Book which is the Christian's sure Guide. But in^asmuch as the Lawfulness even of Natural Magick has been call d in Question by others, I shall, in an Ap pendix join'd to this .Treatise * examine that Matter, both according to the. Reasons of our
of Dfiwcns,
 English Laws, and according to the best stated
Rules of Casuistry that I am Master of ;
still submitting my Judgment to the superior Judgment of those who are profefs'd Divines
if
and Lawyers : And my Opinions prove
erroneous, I am willing to retract them. And therefore, in this; Place, there remains nothing farther for me ,tp do, but only, as 1 have ihewn, on the one hand,
how Natural Ma gick, and its powerful Operations, are prov'd by Reason ; to shew, on the other hand, how far
  
 of Mr. DtiN c an Campbell^
2.81
in these Cases, is likewise back'd and supported by well-evidenc'd Practice,and
far Reason
notorious Experience.
And to do this, after mentioned one memorable Instance,
having
which I refer the Reader to in the Body of
the Performances of Mr. Greatrix, to which the Lord Orrery was
the Book, concerning
a Witness in Ireland ; I shall, to avoid Pro lixity, bring the other Testimonials of Pra ctice, from the Success which our Duncan
himself has had in this Way on other Occasions.
In the Year 1713, lived in Fenckurch-Jlreet^ one Mr. Coate s, a Tobacco Merchant,whohad been for many Years sorely tormented in his Body, and had had Recourse for a Cure to all the most eminent Physicians of the Age, even
up to the great Dr. Ratcliff himself ; but all this mighty Application for Relief was still in vain : Each Doctor own'd him a Wonder and a Mystery to Physick, and left him as
much a Wonder as they found him. Nei ther could the Professors of Surgery guess ac his Ailment, or resolve the Riddle of his Di
Campbell
 from first to last, above a Thousand Pounds in search of proper Remedies, they found the
stemper
; and after having spent,
Search ineffectual : The Learned all agreed, 1 that it could proceed from nothing else but Witchcraft ; they had now indeed guess'd
the Source of his Illness, but it was an Ill
ness of such a Kind, that, when they
had found
  
 z8* The Lite and Adventures
found it out, they thought themselves not the proper Persons to prescribe to him any Remedies. That Task was rescrv'd, it seems, for our Duncan Campbell, who, upon some
or other, was sent to the bewitched Patient Mr. Coates,
Body's Information
for
who found him the Wonder that the others had left him, but did Wonders in undertaking and compacting; his Cure. I remember, one of the Jngjredients made use of, was boiling
I
used ,* and, upon turning over the Books of
bis own.Water,. !but
can't tell how 'twas
some great Physicians since, I have found, that they themselves have formerly delivered that, as one part of the Prescriptions for the Cure of Patients in like Cases. But as there
are other Tilings, which Mr. Campbell per forms, that seem to require a Mixture of the
Second-sight, and of this Natural Magick be fore they can be brought about, I will enter tain the Reader with one or two Pasiages of that fort likewise, and so conclude the Histo ry of this so singular a Man's Life and Ad
ventures. ,
In the Year 1710, a Geritlewoman lost
about Six Pounds Worth" of Flanders-Lace^ and inasmuch as it was a Present made to her Husband, she was concerned as much as if it had been of twenty Times the Va lue ; and a Lady of her Acquaintance com ing to visit her, to whom me unfolded a- mong other Things in Discourse this little
Disaster : The Lady siniling, reply'd, with this
 1
Question,
  
 of Mr. Duncax Camps 1,1.1. z8$
Question, Did you never hear, Madam, of Mr.
Duncan Campbell ? It is but making your Ap
plication to him, Things that are lost are im
found ; the Power of his Know ledge exceeds even the Power of Laws ; they but restrain, and frighten, and punish Robbers, but he makes Thieves expiate their Guilt, by the more virtuous Way of turning Restorers
mediately
Madam, re joined the losing Gentlewoman, you smile
of the Goods they have stoln.
when you tell me this ; but really a,s much a Trifle as it since 'twas Present to my Husband, can't help being sensibly concern ed at Moment's Disappointment to him
the least Thing in Nature, creates me
Uneasiness, than the greatest Dis appointment to my single self could do, in Things of Moment and Importance. What makes me smile, laid the Lady when speak of or think of the Oddness and Pe culiarity of this Mans Talent helping one to such Things but, without the least Jest,
 greater
know, Experience, these Things come within the Compase of his Know
assiire you, that
and must seriously tell you, for your farther Satisfaction, that he has help'd me, and several of my Friends, to the finding a-
ledge
which were of great Value. And this, without laughing, true, said the
losing Fair, very gravely and demurely, like Person half believing, and desirous to be fully confirmed such Belief The. Lady she
aavisQ
gain Things lost,
  in a ?
I
;
a
is,
is ;
it ;
aI
I
by
in
a
a it,
in
it, is
I
in
I

 The Life and Adve ntures
x84
advis'd with, did then ascertain her of the Truth of the Matter, alledging that, for a
half Guinea, he would inform her of her Things, and describe the Person that con- vey'd t^iem away. No sooner was this Gentle woman convinced, but she was eager for the
Tryal, solicited her Friend to conduct her to Mr. Campbell ; and upon the first Word of Consent, she was hooded and scarfed imme diately, and they coached it away in a Trice to Mr. Campbell's House, whom they luckily found within.
fore he wrote down the Name ofthis new Cli ent of his, exactly as it was, via. Mrs. Saxon. Then she was in good Hopes, and with much Confidence propounded to him the Question about the Lace. He paused but a very little while upon the Matter before he describ'd
the Person that took and satisfy her, that two or three Days she would be Mistress of her Lace again, and find in some Book,
or Corner of her Room. She presented him Half-Guinea, and was very contentedly go
ing away but Mr. Campbell very kindly stopp'd her, aind signify to her,that she had
single
 no more to offer to him, he had
of more Importance to reveal to her She sate full of Expectation while he wrote this new Matter and the Paper he deliver to her contain'd the following Account. As
the Loss of little Bit of Lace,
mere
something
  ; a
if it
d
: is
d a
;
a
in
'd
it
it,

 *n
Hand
of Mr. Du NCAN Ca Ms f K,hp
28$"
mere Trifle ; you have lost a great many Hundreds of Pounds, which your Aunt (nam ing her Name) left you, but you are bub bled out of that large Sum. For while you was artfully required down Stairs about some
pretended Business or other, one Mr. H -tt-n, convey d your Aunt's Will out of the Desk,
and several other Things of Value. And wri ting down the Names of all the Persons con- cern'd, which put Mrs. Saxon in a great Consternation
,, he concluded this Paper, with bidding her go home with a contented Mind, she should find her Lace in a few Days, and as she found that Prediction prove true,
 -
she should afterwards come and consult about the rest.
When she came home Qt, seems) big at first wish the Thoughts of what me had been told, she rifled and mmack'd every Corner, but no Lace was to be met with ; all the next Day me hunted in the like manner, but frighten'd the whole Time, as if slie thought the Devil was the only Person could bring but all to no Purpose the third Day foer Curiosity abated, she gave over the
Hopes of and took the Prediction as vain Delusion, and that, what Ihe gave for was only more Money thrown away after what had been lost before. That very Day, as commonly happens in such Caiesy when she least dream'd of she lighted on Acci dent and Surprize. She ran with her
  it it' in by
;
it,
it, a it
it, it,

 \26. The Life and Adventures
Hand immediately to her Husband, and now she had recovered it again, told him of the Loss of and the whole Story of her ha ving been at Mr. Campbell's about and then amplifying the Discourse about what lie had told her besides, as to more considera ble Affairs, she said, she resolved to go and consult him little farther about them, and begg'd her Husband to accompany her. He
would fain have laugh'd her out of that Opi nion and Intent but the End was she per suaded him into and prevailed upon him
'to seem at least very serious about the Matter, and go with her to the Oracle, assuring him there was no room for doubting the fame Success.
Well to Mr. Campbell's they accordingly came, and after Mr. Saxon, Deference to his Wife's Desire, had paid our Predictor handsome Compliment of Gold Mr. Dun can Campbell saluted him as grateful
manner, with the Assurance, that there was in Kent little Country-House with some Lands appertaining to that was his, right of his Wife That he had the House, as
were, before his Eyes, that tho' he had ne ver actually seen nor been near the
 Place where tively as
that particularly fore the Door
stood, he had seen figura
exact Painting and Sculpture, had four green Trees be
from whence he was positive, that Mr. Saxon went with him in quest
of
  if
;
a
if
in it
a :
it,
it
it,
; it,
it
in
it ;
it,
it a a
in
;
in
!

 of Mr. Duncan CaSipbeix^
187 of he should find out, and know as well the Moment he came near as he
•had been an Inhabitant in all his Life.
Mr. Saxon, tho' somewhat of an Unbe
liever, yet must naturally wish to find true, you may be sore and yet partly doubting the Event, and partly pleased with the visionary
Promise of fortune he neves
laugh'd very heartily
Adventure, and said, he would consider, whe ther would not savour too much of Quix
otism, to be at the Expence of Journey on . such Frolicks, and on such chimerical Foun-
dation of airy Hopes, and that then he would call again and let Mr. Campbell know his Mind upon that Point.
In every Company he came into, ferv'd for Laughter and Diversion they alj, how- ever, agreed twas worth his while, since the
Journey would not be very expensive, to go
. by way of Frolick. His Wife one Morning
saying, that (he did remember some Talk of House, and such Things as Mr. Campbell had describ'd, put him forward upon the Adven ture and upon Mr. Saxons proposing to his Brother Barnard, Mr. Barnard lavour'd the Proposal as Joke, and agreed upon the Country Ramble. They came on Horseback toMr.Campbell's, with third Horse,on which the Dumb Predictor was mounted, and on they jogg'd into Kent towards Sevenoak, be ing the Place which he describ'd. The first Day they set out was on Saturday Morning \njune,
expected, at the Oddness of the
   a
a a
a
;
.
'
I
so
it
;
it
ir,
a' it
;
a
a
it it
it
it
it, if it

 a88 T^LiFfe and Adventures
and about Five that Afternoon they arrived dt the Black-Bull at Sevenoak in Kent. It being a delicate Evening, they took an agree able Walk up a fine Hill gracefully adorn'd
with Woods, to Knollei an ancient Seat of
the Earl of Dorset meeting, by the way, with an old Servant of the Earl's, one PerkinS
he offered Mr. Barnard> who
seems) was his old Acquaintance, to give them all Sight
of that fine ancient Seat.
After they had pleased themselves with
viewing the antique Nobility of that stately Structure, this Perkin went back with them
to their Inn, the Bull at Sevenoak.
that could talk were very merry Chat and the Dumb Gentleman', who saw them laugh* and wear all the Signs of Alacrity their Countenances, was resolv'd not to be behind with their Tongues, and Dint of Pen, Ink, and Paper, that he made Signs should be
brought in, was resolv'd orte might be said to crack without Noise') to crack his jest as well as the best of them for may be tru
said of him, that he seldom comes into
any even diverting Company, where he not the most diverting Man there,and the Head (tho' we can't call him the Mouth) of the chearful Society. After having eyd this Per kins little, and being grown by his Art,
as we may suppose, as tamiliar with the Man's Humour, as he had knbwrt him as many
 Years as Mr. Barnard
Pray, Mr. Betrndra^
They
  if :
's,
a
is
ly
;
(if by it
(it a
in
j
in

 os Mr. Duncan Campbell? 289
quoth he, in writing) how comes you,
that are stanch and rigid Whig, should
be acquainted and particularly familiar
Life) to be And pray, reply Mr. Bar- nard, what Reason have you, beyond Pun, to take him for Jacobite Must he be so, because his Name W' Perkin do asiure you, in: this you shew your self but little of Conjurer you can tell no more of Houses than you do of Men,- we may give over our Search after the House you spoke of (Here the Reader must understand, they discoursed on their Fingers, and wrote Turns.) Mr. Campbell reply seriously, Lay ing Wager no Argument in other Things,
own but this know because am sure, after we have laid the Wager, he will fairly confess among Friends, since will go no farther And said Mr. Campbell, will lay what Wager you will apiece with you all round. Hereupon, Mr. Barnard, who had known him great many Years, was the first that laid and many more, to the Number of Five or Six", follow his Example. The Decision of the Matter was deferr till next Day, at the Return of the old Man to the Inn they being about to break up that Night, and go to Bed.
U The
with such an old Papiji, and violent
cobite, as Enow that Mr. Per kin whom never saw, nor had any Notice of in my
Ja
 by
  ':
so
so
-
;a ;
:
a
d
is ;
so 'd
;
a
in is
I ?
'd
I,
so so a
:
it
it I
II
If I
a
it
I?
a fa it,
'd
.*?
:

 ,
.
The Lit* and Adventures
The next Day, being Sunday, the Land lord carry'd his Guests to fee the Country ; and after a handsome Walk, they came thro' the Churchyard. They were poring upon the Tombs ; no Delight can be greater to Mr. Campbell than that : And really, by the fre quent Walks he usually takes in Wejlminjler-
Abbtys ,and the . Churchyards adjacent to this Metropolis , one would imagine he takes De light to stalk along by himself on that dumb silent Ground, where the Characters of the Persons are only to be known, as his own Meaning is,, by Writings and Inscriptions on the Marble. (When: they had sufficiently iurvey'd the Churchyard, it grew near Din ner-time, and they went homewards ; buc before they had got many Yards dut .of the Churchyard, Mr. Campbell makes. a full Stop,
190
 to a House ; and stopping his Friends a little, he pulls out of. his Pocket a
Pencil and Paper, and. writes down the fol lowing Words : That., TIhat is the House my
pointing up
Vision presen
to me y
Ited swear
know it To be the
the same same :,
am certain os it. The Gentlemen with him re-
mark'd It ; would not take any farther No tice at that Timey intending to. enquire into it with Secrecy j and rfo went ion to the Inn
to Dinner. • .
As merry as they had been the' Night be
fore after Supper, they were stilktngre inno cently chearful this Day after Dinner, till the Time
';o
could it tIo be
  ,::
• ;
.'' •
\ .
•

 of Mr. DuNq an Camp be l£. 29*
Time of; Service began. When the Duty of the. Day, was. perform d and over, they- re turn cj.: to vert and unbend their Minds,
goodiDay^ and decided the Wagers, by ovvn- ing to aJl the Company (Secrecy being first enjoined) that he wajs Roman Catholick
tho' no body of the- Family knew so many Years as he ha4 fev'd there, which was before Mr. Campbell was born. This, and other innocent Speeches, afforded as much Chearfulness as the Lords-Day would
*
.with; pleasant' but harmless
suppose no body, but Set of very great Formalijis, will be offended with Scandal or Scruples, that, to Travellers just ready to de part the Town Mr. Perkin came on that
low Of.
. .,
0.
On the. next Day,'being Monday, they sent
for one Mr. Toland Tokr, an Attorney of the Place, to find out to whom that House be- long'd but by all the Enquiry that could pos sibly he made, ('with convenient SecrecyJ no body coujd; find out for long Time but a): last camfe to tight, and appear'd to be just to Tittle as Mr. Campbell had predicted.
Being now; satisfy 'd,. the next Day our three Travellers fetura'd for London and the two Vocal Men were very jocular upon their Ad venture, and by their outward Gesticulations, gave the pirophetical Mute his Share of Di version* Mr. Barnard as: they pafs-'d into Farm-Houfe Yard, remark'd, that all the Hogs
U fell
{v
Conversation;
   i
z
, f
] ;. {
a
al
;
;
ly a
it ;
it
,
a
a; a
;
•;
i
:
.dij
r i.
i-t
in J
•

 TheLirt and Adventure^
291
fell a^grunting and squeaking more ancl more, as Mr. Campbell came nearer ; ( who, poor
Man! could know nothing of the Jest, nor the Cause of till they aliglited, and told him by Signs and Writing and said to Mr.
Saxon, laughing, Now we have found out our House, we shall have only Mr. Campbell home again by himself we have no sarther need of the Devil, that accompany'd him to the Country, up to Town with us there are o- ther Devils enow to be met with there, he knows and this, according to the Fashi on of his Predecessor Devils, enter'd into the
 Herd of Swine.
However, the Event of this Journey
("to cut the Story short procur'd Mr. Saxon
great Insight (upon Enquiry) into several Af fairs belonging to him, of which he would otherwise have had no Knowledge and he
now engag'd Chancery-Suit to do him self Justice, and fair way of Recovering great Sums of Money which, without the
Consultation he had with this Dumb Gen tleman he had all Likelihood never
dreamt of.
In the Year 171 1, Gentleman, whose
Name shall be, in this Place, Amandiis fam'd for hisexquisiteTalents all Arts and Sciences, but particularly for his Gentleman-like and entertaining Manner of Conversation whose Company was affected all Men of Wit, who grew his Friends, and courted by all
Ladies
  in by
a
in
;
;
;
;
is ,;
it
in in aa)
;
a
so
it,
is
;
;)

 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
Ladies of an elegant Taste , who grew his Admirers : This accomplished Gentleman, I sey, came to Mr. Campbell, in order to pro pound a Question to him j which was so ve
ry intricate, and so difficult to answer, that if he did answer might administer to himself, and the Ladies he brought with him, the Pleasure Admiration, of seeing
Thing wonderful in Or, on the other hand,
satisfactory Reply to ford him and the Ladies
self perform
he did not make
then might af very great De
light, being the first that puzzled Man, who had had the Reputation for many
Years, of being capable of baffling all the wittiest Devices and shrewd Stratagems that had been, from Time to Time, invented to baffle his Skill, and explode his Penetration
the Second-Sight, and the Arts which he pretended to. The Persons, whom Amandus
195
 with him, were the illustrious La-
brought
dy Delphina, distinguished for her great Qua
lity, but still more celebrated for her Beauty his own Lady, the admif'd Amabella, and
young, blooming, pretty Virgin, whom we will call by the Name of Adeodata about
which last Lady, the Question was t,o be put to Mr. Campbell. Adeodata, seems, was the natural Daughter of this very fine Gentleman, who had never let her into the Knowledge
of her own Birth, but had bred her up from her Infancy under borrowed Name, the U Notion
  a 3
of it, if it
it, it
'*
in
it so a
it
a
aj
d :
in
aa
in
so

 cy. Now
the Man that had the Second*
Sight
was to be.
The Life and Adventures
294
Notion
and recommended to His Care in her Infan
that she was<. a TLelatio n s Daughter,
try'd :' It was now to' be put to the Proof, if he could tell Names, or
no. Amandiis was so much an .Unbeliever, as to be willing: to hazard the Discovery.
Amabella and Delphina were Strangers, to her real Name ; and ask'd Duncan Camp bell ; not doubting, but he would set down that which she ordinarily went by. Ama- bella had indeed been told by Amaridiis, that Adeodata was the natural Daughter of a near
Friend of his ; but who this near Friend was, remain'd a Secret : That was the Point which lay upon our'Duncan Campbell to disco
ver. When the Question was proposed to him, what her Name was ; he .look'd at her very stedfastly, and shook his Head ; and after some Time, he wrote down, that it Would be a very difficult Name for him to fix up on. And truly so prov'd He toil'd for
- could not well take full and proper Sur vey of Ladies Faces,' when Gentleman was
by. This Disturbance and Perplexity of his, afforded them'"' still more Subject of Mirth and that Excuse was taken as Pretence, and
 Letter till he sweated and the La
every
dies laugh' incontinently, imagining that he was in an Agony of Shame and Confu sion, at finding himself pos'd. He desired Amandus to withdraw a' little, for that he
-
•
Put
  '
a
it. '
:
a a
;
:
a
;
so
d

 Of Mr. DUNCA&GAMPBELit
a Put-riff^ ' to cover his Shame the better, and hide from one at least, ' that he was but a
the Face in different Shades and Lights, (for I must observe to the Reader, that there is a vast deal of Difference some
lie can tell in a Minute or two, with Ease ; some not in less than four or five Hours, and that with great Trouble ;) he undeceived them with Regard to his Capacity. He wrote down, that Adeodata's real Name was Aman
da, as being the natural Daughter of Aman- dus. Delpbina and Amabella were surpriz'd at the Discovery j and Amandus , when he was call'd in, owning it a Truth, his Wife AmabeUa applauded the curious Way of her coming by such a Discovery, when Adeodata was just marriageable ; took a Liking to her, as if her own Daughter ; and every Thing ended with Profit, Mirth and Chearfulness. I could add a Thousand more Adventures of Mr. Campbells Life, but that would prove te dious ; and as the Town has made a great De
mand for the Book, it was thought more pro per to conclude it here. The most diverting of all are to be found, best to the Life, in Original Letters that pass'd between Mr. Camp bell and his Correspondents ; some select ones
of which will be shortly publiffi'd, with a Continuation of his Life to the present Tim e* U4 v for
viewing
in what he pretended
downright Bungler,
to be so wonderful an . Artist.
after two Hours hard Sweat and Labour, and
However,
zp$
   
 The Life and Adventures, &c.!
%$6
for the farther Entertainment of such Read ers as shall relish this Treatise : In which, the Author hopes, he shall be esteem'd to have endeavour'd at the Intermingling of some curious Disquisitions of Learning, with enter taining Paslages ; and to have ended all the merriest Adventures with a sober, instructive, and edifying Moral ; which, to those who are not willing to believe the Stories, is reckon'd
sufficient selves.
to recommend even Fables them
 THE
  
 THE
A P PEN D I X.
T is not that Mr. Duncan Camp bell stands in need of my Argu ments, to prove that he is in no respect liable to the Acts of Par liament made against Fortune-
tellers, &c. that I undertake the writing of
this Appendix, the true Reason thereof, be ing the more completely to finish this Un dertaking : For having, in the Body of the Book it self fully proved a Second-Sight, and that the same frequently happens to Persons, some of them eminently remark able for Piety and Learning, and have from thence accounted for the Manner of Mr. Campbell's performing those Things he pro fesies, to the great Surprize, and no less Sa tisfaction of all the Curious who are
the Lawfulness of such his Perfor mances
plea sed to consult him ; and at the same time
proved
*9 7
   
 The Life and Adventures
mances from the Opinions of some of the most. Lea rned in holy Science ; I thought it not improper to add the following shor't
. Appendix, (being a Summary of several Actsof Parliament made againfaFortune-tellers,
^~^Twjurfrty Gipsies e. Eg-yptiani) Sorcerers, Pretenders to Prophesy, &c. with some proper Remarks, suited to our present Pur pose) as well to satisfy them who are fan
tastically Wife, and obstinately shut their Eyes against the most refulgent Reason,, and
29§
are wilfully deaf to the most
convincing and persuasive 'Arguments, and thereupon
 cry out, that Mr. Campbell either an Im,-
and Cheat, or at least Person who acts . by the Assistance of unlawful Powers as also to put to silence the no less waspish Curs, who are
at such, whom Providence has distinguish a
more excellent Talents than their Neigh bours. True Merit always the Mark,
postor
which Traducers level their keenest Darts and Wit and Invention oftentimes join Hands with Ignorance and Malice to
against
foil those who excel. Art 'has no
Enemy than Ignorance and were there no such Thing a!s Vice, Virtue would not shine with half its Lustre. Did Mr. Campbell
perform those wonderful Things' he so
am
famous for, as these Cavillers by holding Intelligence with Infernal'
deservedly
fay,
Powers, or by any unjustifiable Means,
always snarling
greater
  is f'
by ;
; is
' is
.
;
a
a
,
(i.

 of Mr. Dun canCampbell. a^9
am- of Opinion, he would find very few, in this Atheistical Age, who would open then- Mouths against him, since none love to act
•Counter to the Interest of that Master they
serve. And did he, on the other Hand, put the Cheat upon the World-, as they ,
industriously
I fancy he would then be more generally admired, especially, in a Coun try Where the Game is so universally, art
maliciously assert,
fully, and no less profitably play'd, and that with Applause, since those Pretenders to Wisdom merrily divide the whole Species of Mankind into the two Classes of Knaves and
 fixing the Appellation of Folly only upon those whom they think not Wise, that wicked enough to have Share with
them in the profitable Guilt.;
Our Laws are as well intended -by their
wife Makers to skreen the Innocent, as to punish the Guilty and where their Penal ties are remarkably severe, the Guilt they punish of proportionable Size Art,
which Man's Property when acquires claims Protection from those very Laws which false Pretenders thereto are to be try'd and punished by, or else all Science would soon have an end for no Man would dare make use of any Talent Providence had lent him, and his own industrious Applica tion had improved, should he be immedi ately try'd and condemn'd (by those Statues,
which
Fools^
  ;
a
;
a is is a
is,
a

 The Life and Adventures
which are made to suppress Villains,) by eve ry conceited and half learned Pedant.
}oo
'Tis true indeed, those excellent Statutes, which are made against a sort of People, who pretend to Fortune-telling, and the like, are such as are well warranted, as
being built upon the best Foundation, viz. Reli
gion and Policy ; and were Mr. Campbell guilty of any such Practice, as those are made to punish, I openly declare, that I mould be so far from endeavouring to de fend his Cause, that I would be one of the first that should aggravate his Crime, there
to enforce the speedier Execution of those Laws upon him which are made against such Offenders. But when he is so far from acting, that he doth not even pretend to any such Practice, or for countenancing the same in others, as is manifest from the many De tections he has made of that sort of Villany, which the Book furnishes us with, I think my self sufficiently justified for thus pleading in his Defence.
 by
I cannot but take Notice, in Reading the Statutes made against such Offenders, our wife Legislature hath not in any part of them seem'd so much as to imply, that there are in reality any such wicked Persons as they are made against, to wit, Conjurers, &c. but that they are only Pretenders to those infernal Arts, as may reasonably be
,
- inferr'd
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell^
301 inferr'd from the Nature of the Penalties they inflict ; for bur first Laws of that Ibit only inflicted a Penalty, which asfected the Goods and Liberty of the Guilty, and not
their Lives, tho' indeed they were afterwards forced to heighten the Punishment with a Halter ; not that they were better convinc'd, as I humbly conceive, but because the Crimi nals were most commonly Persons who had no Goods to forfeit, and to whom their Li berty was no otherwise valuable, but as it gave them the opportunity of doing Mischief. In deed our Law-Books do furnish us with ma ny Instances of Persons, who have been try'd and executed for Witchcraft and Sorcery, but then the wiser part of Mankind have taken the
Liberty to condemn the Magistrate, at that time of Day, of too much Inconsideration,
and the Juries of an equal share of Credulity : And those who have suffer'd for such Crimes have been commonly Persons of the lowest Rank, whose Poverty might occasion a Dis like of them in their Fellow-Creatures, and their too artless Defence, subject them to
their mistaken Justice ; so that upon the whole, I take the Liberty to conclude, and, I hope, not without good Grounds, that those Laws were made to deter Men from an idle Pretence to mysterious and unjusti fiable Arts, which, if too
 closely pursued, lead them into the darkest Villa-
commonly
ny, not only that of deceiving others, bu^
as
  
 jo* The Life and Advent.ures
as far as in them lye, making themselves Slaves to the Devil ? And not to prevent and hinder Men from useful Enquiries, and from the Practice of sueh Arts, which tho* they are. in themselves :mysterious, yet are, and maybelawful. . : n .
I would not however be thought, in con tradiction to my former Arguments, to as sert, that there. .never were, or that there now are; no Persons, such as Wizards, Sor cerers, &c. for by so doing, I should be as liable to be censored for my Incredulity, as those who defame Mr. Campbell on that Ac count, are for their want of Reason and comI mon Honesty. Holy and Prophane Writ,: confess, furnishes us with many Instances of
 such Persons ; .but we must not from thence hastily infer, that all those Men are such who are spightfully branded with theodious Guilt ; for were it in the Devil's Power to ,:make every wicked Man a Wizard ,- and Woman a Witch, he soon would have Agents enough to shake this lower World • to Atoms ; but the Almighty, ) who restrains.' him, likewise restrains those,. :: • : .,• .r
Having premised thus much, I shall 'now proceed to consider some of the Acts of Part liament themselves ; the Persons against whom they weUe made, and the Necessity of making the fame. And some of the first Acts we
meet with, were those which were made against a sort of People . called Gfpsw%
4,,v
Persons,
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell
Persons, who, if in reality such, might, if any, be suspected of practising what we call the Black An, the same having been for
in their Country ; nay, so much has it been by them favour'd,
many Ages encouraged
that it was introduced into their superstiti ous Religion (if J may without an Absur dity call it so} and made an essential Part
thereof : And, I believe, Mahometanism has not much mended the Matter, -since it has
imperiously reigned there, or in any respect reform'd that Idolatrous Nation. Now the Mischief these Persons might do (being so
much in the Devil's Power) among the un« wary, was thought too considerable not to be provided against ,• and therefore our wise
 the more effectually to prevent the same, by striking at the very Founda
Legislature,
tion, made an Act in the iz H. VIII. That if any, calling themselves Gypsies, do come into this Realm, they shall forfeit all their Goods ; and being demanded, shall depart the Realm within fifteen . Days, upon pain of Imprisonment ; and the Importers of them by another Act, were made liable to a. heavy Penalty. This Act was continu'd by the i LPh. and Ma. Conjuration, Witchcraft, Inchantmenty and .'So rcery, to get Money, or
consume any Person in his Body, Members, or Goods, or to provoke any Person to un lawful Love, was by the 33 if. VIII. 14. and the' 5 Eliz, 16. and the 1 Jac. I. iz. made
(.yfjjj.tr
Felony
  
 The Lin and Adventures
304
Felony ; and by the same 33 H. VIII. 14. it was made Felony to declare to another any
upon Arms, &c. but this Act was repealed by the 1 Ed. VI. 12. but by another Act of the 3 and 4 of Ed. VI.
15.. it was again enacted, that all such Per sons who should pretend to Prophecies, &c. mould, upon Conviction for the first Offence forfeit Ten Pounds, and one Year s Impri sonment ; and for the second Offence, all his Goods and Imprisonment for Life. And by the 7. Ed. VI. 11. the same was made to continue but till the then next Sessions of Parliament. And by the 5. Eliz. i?. the
fame Act was again renewed against fanta stical Prophesiers, &c. but both those Acts
were repealed by the 1 Jac. I. 12.
Thus sar we find, that for Reasons ofState, and for the Punishment of particular Persons,
those Acts were made and repealed, as oc casion required, and not kept on foot, or in deed were they ever made use of, as I can remember in my reading, against any Per sons whose Studies led them into a useful
into the Nature of Things, or a lawful Search into the Workings of Na ture it self, by which means many Things are foretold long before they come to pals, as Eclypses, and the like, which Astrologers successfully do, whose Art has been in all A- gcs held in so great Esteem, that the first Mo narches of the Eajl made it their
false Prophecies
 Enquiry
peculiar Study,
  
 os Mr. Duncan Camfbjeli."
Study, by which means they deservedly ac quired to themselves the Name of Magi or Wife Men ; but, on the contrary, were pro vided against Persons profligate and loose,
who, under a Pretence and Mask of Science, commit vile and roguish Cheats ; and this will the more plainly appear, if we consider the Letter and express Meaning of the follow ing Acts, wherein the Perfonslam speaking of are described by such Characters which suf ficiently prove the Aslertion : For in the 39
of Eli&. 4. it was Enacted, That all Persons' calling themselves Scholars going about beg- ging,Sea-faring Men pretending Losses of their Ships and Goods at Sea, and going about the Country begging, 01 using any subtile Craft, feigning themselves to have Knowledge in Phi-
sicgnomy, Palmistry, or any other the like crafty Science, or pretending that they can tell Destinies, Fortunes, or such like fantastical Imaginations, shall be taken and deem'd Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and shall be stripp'd naked from the Middle upwards, and whipp'd till his,or herBody be bloody .And
by the 1 Jam. 1. iz. for the better restraining of the said Offences, and for the farther pu nishing the fame, it was farther enacted, That any Person or Persons using Witchcraft Sor cery, &c. and all their Aiders, Abettors, and Counsellors, being convicted, and attainted
of the fame Offences, shall suffer Pain of Death as Felons, without the Benefit of Cler- X gy ;
305-
   
 Or
The Life and Adv^ntur es
306
gy : Or to tell and declare in what Place any Treasure of Gold and Silver should or might be found in the Earth, or other secret Places :
where Goods or Things lost or stol'n should be found : Or to provoke any Person to unlawful Love, such Offender to suffer
for one whole Year without Bail or Mainprize, and once in every Quarter of the said Year mail in some Market-Town,
or upon the Market-Day, or at any such Time as any Fair shall be kept there, stand openly in the Pillory for the Space of six Hours, and there shall openly confess his or their Offence ; and for the second Offence shall suffer Death
as Felons without the Benefit of Clergy. That these Laws were made against a Set
of Villains, whose natural Antipathy to Ho nesty and Labour, fumish'd them with Pre tensions to an uncommon Skill, thereby the more easily to gull and cheat the superstiti- oufly credulous, and by that means discover
from them some such Secrets that might far ther them in perpetrating the more consum mate Villany, is plain from the very Words and Expressions of the very Acts themselves, and the Description of the Persons they are
.Knowledge.
Mr. Campbelly who has been long a settled
and reputable Inhabitant ' in many eminent y Parts
Imprisonment
 made against ; and not, as
to prevent and hinder Men from the lawful Enquiry after useful, delightful, a,nd profitable
I before observed,
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campb el il
307 Parts of the City of London, cannot., I am
lure, be look'd upon as one of those these Acts of Parliament were made against, un less we first strip the Acts themselves of their
own natural, express and plain Meaning, and cloath them with that which is more obscure, unnatural, forced, and constraint ; a Practice, which, if allowed, would make them wound the Innocent and clear the Guilty, and ren der them, not our Defence but our greatest Evil ; they would, by that means, become
a perfect Æriigma, (or Riddle) and be so far from being admired for their Plainness, that
 they would be even exploded like the Oracles of the Heathens for their double Meaning.
If Mr* Campbell has the Second-Sight, as is
from the allowed Maxim, that what has been may be again, and by that means can take a View of Contingencies, and future Events ; so long as he confines these Notices of approaching Occurrences to a good
Purpose, and makes use of them only inno cently and charitably to warn Persons from do
ing such Things, that according to his Con ceptions would lead them into Misfortune, or else in putting them upon such Arts that maybe of Use and Benefit to themselves and Posterity, always having a strict Regard to
Morality and Religion to which he truly ad.v heres : Certainly, I think, he ought so much the more to be admired for the fame, by how much the more this his excellent Knowledge
X1 is
unquestionable
  
 ^o8 The Life and Adventures
is surpassing that of other Men, and not be therefore unjustly upbraided with the injuri
of a Cheat, or an ill Man I
ous Character
However, this Iwill presume to affirm, and doubt not but to have my Opinion confirm 'd by the Learned Sages of the Law, that this
innocent Practice, and I venture to add, ho nest one too, doth by no means entitle him
of the before-mentioned Laws made against Fortune-tellers, and such
to the Penalties
sort of profligate Wretches ; which it as great
to decry, as it would be to call him, who is a settled and reputable Inhabi
tant, a Stroler or wandring Beggar.
an Absurdity
:
 It is true that Mr. Campbell has re lieved many that have been supposed to have been bewitched, as is related and well attested in this Account of his Life j but will any one from thence argue that he himself is a real Conjurer or Wizard, because he breaks the
Chains by which those unhappy Wretches were
Again,
No surely, for if that were the Case, we might then as well indict the Physician who drives away a malignant Distemper, and
roots out its latentCause by his mysterious Skill in Plants and Drugs ; or conclude, that the
bound ?
who condemns a Criminal is for the fame Reason guilty of the self-same Crime for which the Offender is so by him condemned.
be in love with the
greatest Absurdities, and must entirely aban don
Judge
Persons who delight clusions, must certainly
in such unnatural Con
  
 of Mr. Duncan Campbell.
309 don their natural Reason, before they can be
brought to conclude, that the Prince of Dark ness would assist Men in destroying his own power.
The best Answer I
can afford these Men is Silence for if they will not argue upon the Principles of Reason, or be guided by her
dictates, I think them no more fit to be con tended with, in a rational and decent man
ner, than Bedlamites, and such who are bereft of all Understanding. A Rod is the best Ar gument for the Back of a Fool, and Contempt the be# Usage that ought to be shewn to every head-strong and ignorant Opponent. ;
 In a Word, I know of no Branch of Mr. Campbell's Practice that bears the least Resem blance to those Crimes mentioned in the fore going Acts. That he can and doth tell Peoples Names at first Sight, tho' perfect Strangers to him, is confessed by all who have made the curious Enquiry at his Hands ; but what part of the Law, I would fain knaw,is that against i Knowledge, and a clear Sight into Things not
common, is not only an allowable, but a com mendable (Qualification j and whether this Knowledge in him be inherent, accidental, or the result of a long Study, the Case is still the fame ; since we are aslured he doth it by no unlawful Intelligence,or makes use of the same to any ill Purpose, and therefore is undoubted ly as lawful as to draw natural Conclusions,
from right Premises. Hard is the Fate of any X3 Man
  
 The Life and Adven ture s,
^io
Man to be ignorant, but much harder would his Lot be, if he were to be punished for being
Wife, and, like Mr. Campbell, excelling others in this kind of Knowledge.
Much more might be said in Defence of Mr. Campbell and the Art he profesferh, but as the Arguments which are brought against him by his Enemies on the one Hand,, are trivial and ill-grounded ; I therefore think they deserve no farther Refutation ,. so on the other, his Innocency is too clear' to require it.
After having thus taken a Survey of Mr. Campbell's Practices, with regard to their Le
gality according to the Statutes and the Laws of the Nation wherein he lives, we will con sider next, whether according to the stated
Rules of Casuistry, among the great Divines
eminent for their Authority, it may be lawful
for Mr. Campbell to predict, or for good
 Christian. Persons to visit his House, and con
sult him about his Predictions. I have upon
this Head examined all the learnedest Casuists
I could. meet with In ancient Times, for I
cannot meet (in my readings with any Mo
derns that treat
or I should rather have chosen them, because perhaps the Second.Sight was less known in those aritient Days than it has been since, and ib might escape their Notice.
My Design is first to give the Reader a distinct Summary of all that has been said of 'this Matter, and to do it as succinctly and
briefly
thoroughly upon this Case,
  
 es Mt". DuNCANCARsPBELf.
^hSr briefly as possible, and then to argue my self from what they agree upon as to this
Man's particular Case.
That every one may have recourse to the
Authors themselves, ifthey have a Curiosity* and find that I don't go about to impose up on their Judgments, I will here tell the Rea der where he may find the whole Content*
of the following little Abstract of Divinity
and Casuistry ; because it would be a tedious
piece of Work to set down the Words of each
of them distinctly, and quote them every
 one round at the end of their
ferent Sentences, which tend to the fame Meaning; but I will strictly keep to the Sense*
of them all -y and I here
Names, and the Places, 'that he may consult
the Reader tljeirj them himself, if his Inclination leads him to
be so
34. quœjlto. 1. Art. 3. Bona 2. Dist.-y. Art.
curious ; Thomas Aquinas
4. Distin.
2. Quest. 1. Johannes Major, 4. Dift. 34. quœft. 2. Sylvester Verbo Malefico-, qwst. 8. Rosella, Verb. Impedimentum if. cap. 18, Tabiena, Verb.Jmped. 11 Vers. Cajetan, Tom. r. Opusc. ri. de Malefic. Alphonfus a Cast. Lib. id. de Juftd Hxreticomm pitnitione, cap*
Stnzjfrus. Co)ife£wnibus
These
Cofmus Philiarchus, de Offic. Sacerdot. p. %. 1. }. cap. 11. Toletus in Summa, lib. 4^
IS-
cap. 16. Spineus, im TraB. de
Petrus MalesicoYUm.
Binsfield, in TraB. de X4
give
several dif
  
 prejly
The Lit* And Adventures
}t2.
These Divines have generally written up^
on the impious Arts of Magick, which they call by the Name of Divination ; and this Di
vination ('as they term they divide into Kinds, the One, which the Devil ex~
invoked to teach hidden and occult Things the Other, in which he tacitly called upon to do the same. An express In vocation Word or Deed, by which real Compact actually made with the Devil, and that Sin that asfects the Death of the Soul, according to the Laws of Theology, and ought
to effect the Death of the Body, according to Civil and Political Laws. The tacit Invoca tion of Dæmons then only, when Man busies himself far with such Persons, that
meet, and just, that the Devil Ihould be per mitted to have to do with him, though was opposite to the Intention of the Man.
But then this express Invocation again subdivided into several Species, according to the divers Manners which the Devil in structs these Men.
The first Enchantment, which need not describe, and of which will speak ho more, because what every Body knows to be de- testable,and no Body ought to know the Art
thereof.
The second Divination by Dreams, when
any Instructions are expected from the Devit way of Dream, which capital Crime.
The
   by
is
is a
is
so
is
it is
is a
; by
I
by
in it)
is
is is
I
is ita ais
is
it

 os Mr. Duncan Campbell^
The third is called Necromancy which when by the use of Blood and Writing, or speaking certain Verses, the Dead seem to rise
again, and speak and teach future Things. For tho the Devil can't recal Soul departed, yet he can (as some have thought) take the Shape
of Samuel and Saul. But Divines of more solid Genius attribute that Power only to the Deity, and fay, with Reason, that beyond
ofthe dead Corpse,
himself actuate by his Subtilty, as was inform'd with Soul. And some affirm, that by the Divine Permission, the Devil can do this, and spake the Case
called Divination by the Pytbians, which was taken from Apollo, the first Diviner, as Thomas Aquinas says in
his Secundd secundæ qu. 95. Artie.
The fifth called Geomancy, which when
the Devil teaches any Thing certain Signs appearing in the Earthly Bodies, as in Wood, Iron, or polished Stones, Beryls, or Glass.
the Water.
The seventh stiled Æromancy
when he informs People of such Things by
the Air.
The fourth Species
The sixth named Hydromancy,
as when Dæmon teaches any Thing Appearances
Figures
which
%i%
 But certain this was Divination done in dead Animals the Use
of their Blood, and therefore the Word de rived from the Greek vtxepv, which signifies Dead, and Mclvthcc, which signifies Divination.
she Devil'sCapacity.
  in
is
is
is
if it
if
is,
in a
f a
by
by
; 3. it by is
so
a
it
is
is a is
it is
a
in

 ^14
*
ing
The Lite and Adventures
The Eighth B cntituled Pyromancy ; that when instructs People by Forms appear
the Fire.
The Ninth termed Antspicy which is,
when Signs appearing the Bowels of crificed Animals the Dæmon predicts at Altars. Thus tar, as to express Divination, or Invo
cation ofthe Devil, which detestable, and the very consulting of Persons, that use such
J: - Means,
-
.... a. according to the
ment of all Casuists, the high Road to nal Damnation.
Now as to tacit Divination or Invocation the Devil, that divided into two subal-
Kinds. The first Kind when for the of knowing hidden Things, they make
 use of vain .and
superstitious Disposition existing in Things to judge from which
not of sufficient Virtue to lead them to any real Judgment. The second
Kind of tacit. Divination when tha
Knowledge .is sought by the Disposition
those Things, which Men effect on purpose
and of their own accord, order to come
by and acquire that Knowledge.
"oth these Kinds of f^r;'rDivination are
subdivided into several Species, as are rticularly mentioned by St. Tho. Aquin. Se-
Disposition
.(-. Se, nn u\ Quæst. Artie. SeValeht'w, Tomo Disput. quæst. n. p\lhct#:2: YoHeWs Sumrrsa. Lib. 4. cap. if.
And Michael Medina Lib. "V. de refta in Dewn
Gregory
  in 3.
a
is is
6.
3.
is, ;
*
,
>i
in
in
is,
is
in
;
<
< Jt
sa
is '
i
a
by
it
is
is,

 os Mr. Duncan Ca m fee i t.
Deum fide : pqfi sanBum Auguftinum. Lib. z' de DoB. Christ. cap. 19. & sequem.
The first of these Kinds of tacit Divination, contains under it the following several Species.
The first Species is called Genethliacal, which when from the Movement or Situa^- tion of the Stars, Men's Nativities are calcula
ted and enquired into so far, as that from such Search they pretend to deduce the Know-
Events that are to attend them. This Thomas
and Sixtm Quintus condemns but mall with Humility and Submission to great er Judgments enquire hereafter into their Rea
Aquinas
sons, and give my Opinion why think this
Augury, when any Thing predicted from the chattering of Birds, or the
voice of Animals, and this may be either law ful, or unlawful. If comes from natura Hn- stinct (for Brutes having only sensitive Soul^ have their Organs subject to the Disposition of the greater Bodies in which they are contain ed, and principally of all to the Celestial Bo
dies) his Augury not amiss. For when Crows are remark'd to Kaw fas the Vulgar
Phrase
more than ordinary, judging
according to the Instinct of their Nature,if we
expect Rain, and we may reasonably depend
upon' we shall be right we foretel Rain to be at Hand But sometimes the Devils actuate those
Y*5
 no evil Art but
after given, The second
submit my Opinion, thought erroneous.
  .
; is
Ia it, it;
is,
if
is)
is
it is
I
is
it
it I is
if
; if,
a
is

 TVLife and Adventures
those Brute Animals to excite vain Ideas in Men, contrary to what the Instinct of their
Nature compels them to. This is superstiti ous and unlawful, and forbid in holy Writ.
The Third is Aruspicy, when from the Flight of Birds, or any other Motion of any Animals whatsoever, Persons pretend to have an In
sight and a penetrative Knowledge into oc cult and hidden Matters. >
The fourth consists in Omensy when for Example a Man from any Words which others may have spoken on Purpose or by Accident, pretends to gather a way of looking into and
knowing any Thing of Futurity.
The fifth is Chiromancy, which consists in
making a pretence to the Knowledge of fu ture Things by the Figures and the Lines of the Hands : And if it be by consulting the
Shoulder-bones of any Beast, it goes by the
Name of Spatulamancy.
As the first Kind of Divination, by a tacit
Invocation of the Devil, is divided into the five Species above-mentioned ; so also is the second kind of tacit Divination or Invocation
of the Devil, divided into two Species by
St. Thomas Aquin. Secunda secund&, qua-
fi'wne nonagefimd quint a articulo tertio, and too tedious to insert here.
Now all these Ways are by these Divines accounted wicked, and I set them down that People may avoid them. For hqw many Gyp
sies and Pretenders to Cbyromattcy have we London
   in.

 0/ jiff. Dun can Campbell! 817 London and in the Country ? How many that
their Glasles, that, if they are not under the Instigation of the Devil, propogate the Scan
dal at least by being Cheats, and who ought to be punished to the utmost Severity, as
methinks, to be encouraged by their being
restrain'd ; and People of curious Tempers, who always receive from him moral and good
Instructions, which make them happy in the Conduct of Life, mould be animated in a publick Manner to consult him, in order to divert the curious Itch of their Humours from consulting such wicked Impostors, or Diar bolical Practicers, as too frequently abound in this Nation, by reason of the inquisitive
that pretend
to shew Men mighty Mysteries ? And how many in Geomancy, with their Beryls and
are for Hydromancy,
who hates, contemns, and abhors these ways, ought,
our English Laws enact ?
Mr. Campbells
Vulgar, who are more numerous in our Cli
mate, than any I ever read of.
But now to argue the Cafe of Conscience
with regard to his particular Practice by way of the Second-Sight, whether, in soro Con- scientia, it is lawful for him to follow or others to consult him The Divines above-
mentioned having never had any notice of that Faculty in all Likelihood, or they had,
Point more difficult for me to discuss but think they
have stated some Cafes, by the making of which
never mentioning
makes
in Water
   ; I
it
a if
it,
?
it,

 The hut. and Adyentures
318
which my Premises, I can deduce
from all
the learned Men I have above
Conclusion in favour of our Mr. Duncan Campbell, and of those who consult him ; but
my Opinion mall be always corrected by those who are wiser than my self, and to whom I owe entire Submission. I take leave to fix these Premises from them first, and to form my Argument from them afterwards, in the following manner. i.
Fir/?, It is allowed by all these Divines, that a Knowledge which one may have of
suture Things within the order of Nature, and may be lawful. w
Secondly, They imply, that where Justice not violated, lawful both to predict,
and to consult.
Thirdly, Many
Aureolus puts this Question Is lawful to go to one that deals the Black Art, to per- soade them to cure any innocent Body, that another Necromancer or Dealer in the Black Art may have maliciously afflicted, and tor mented with Pains And some of these Ca suists, particularly Aureolus, say, lawful on foch an Occasion to go to such Con
jurer, because the End not Conjuration, but
Person from it.
But take leave to distent from these great Men, and think they are double Mistake
first
quoted, a
 freeing
.
of them, but particularly
  in a
:
;
is,
I
a
is
a
it is
it
?
in
is
,
is ' .
it

 ofMr.DuncanCampbeii. 319
•first in stating the, Question,, , and then in mas
king such an Answer, provided the Question
liad been stated right. „0; .t 3 vjr0 t ,\2 The Question is founded, upon this Suppo
sition (which is past by as .granted) viz. that one Necromancer could release a Person bewitched by, another, which isr absolutely
false ; for it is against the Nature of the De vil to be made an Instrument to undo his own
: But admitting*; and nor. granting this to be possible,, and the Question to be rightly stated, why still, these Casuists
are out in their Answer ?' It is lawful, reply
Works of Impiety
 because the End of going to the Con jurers is not Conjuration, but freeing a good Person from it : But the End is not the Poinj; here to be consider' d, it is the Medium which
they,
is bad that is to be constder'd. It is by Con juration, (according to their Hypothesis) the
is to be dissolved ; and does not the common Rule, that a Man must
not do Evil that Good may come of for bid this Practice And to speak my Opinion plainly in that Case, the Friend that mould consult Conjurer for that End, would be
to relieve
his afflicted Friend from some bodily Pains, which would be Virtue him to suffer with Patience and Resignation.
Others, almost all Divines,indeed agree, that
it and may be lawful to go to Conjurer that
other Conjuration
kind to put his own Soul danger
only
of being guilty of Hell-torments,
  is
it
so
a
in a
a
in
it,
?

 3i'o The Life and Adventures
that torments another, and give him Money
not to afflict the Patient any longer ; because
that is only seeing him to desist from actings after his conjuring manner.
and natural and common to some Families, which is proved in the Book ; and if all that Mr. Campbell has predicted in that Second- sighted Way terminates with moral Advice, and the Prosit of the Consulter, and without
the Violation of Justice to others, as the Book mews all throughout ; if he can relieve from Witchcraft, as it seems Oath is to be had he
These Premises thus settled,
the Second- Sight to be in-born and in-bred,
Black Art can do,
need not draw
why then I
every Reader will do it na
the Conclusion,
turally ; they will avow all the strictest Laws
of Casuistry and Morality to be in favour of Mr. Campbell and his Consulters.
FINI
S.
if we allow
 can, which no one that deals in the
  
  s
  
  J
  
    
 i
   
 3 9015
01374
7905
UNIVERSIrYOF MICHIGAN
 A 512488
  
    