A memorial of Mrs.
Margaret Breckinridge.
John Breckinridge, Archibald Alexander, Samuel Miller
º ºy ſº


<page 1>
The Arthur and Elizabeth
SCHLESINGER LIBRARY
on the History of Women
in America
RADCLIFFE INSTITUTE
John R. and Sarah C. Briggs
Book Fund



<page 2>


<page 3>

<page 4>

<page 5>

<page 6>

<page 7>

<page 8>

<page 9>
º -
º º


<page 10>
----

<page 11>
----- - - -
_ _ _


<page 12>
M E M O R I A L
of
MRS. MARGARET BRECKINRIDGE.
“Jesus wept.”

<page 13>

<page 14>
M E M O I R.
OF
MRS. MARGARET BRECKINRIDGE.
IN TWO PARTS.
PART I. MEMOIR, AND FUNERAL SERMON.
PART II. LETTERs To HER surviving CHILDREN.
PHILADELPHIA:
W I L L I A M S. M A R T I E N .
1839.

<page 15>
429.7
227Ac
Entered, according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1839, by
WILLIAM S. MARTIEN,
in the office of the Clerk of the District Court, for the Eastern
District of Pennsylvania.

<page 16>
C O N T E N T S.
PART I.
INTRoDUCTION,
CHAPTER I.
Life of Mrs. Breckinridge,
ChapTER II.
Additional Illustrations of the Life and Charac-
ter of Mrs. Breckinridge,
Her Religious Character, .
Her dedication to the work of Foreign Missions,
Her Sacrifices for the Church of God,
Her Last Sickness and Death,
CHAPTER III.
Closing Reflections,
SUBMISSION:
A SERMoN—by the Rev. A. Alexander, D. D.
Page.
13
17
42
46
47
61
69

<page 17>
12 C O N T E N T S.
PART II.
LETTERS OF A GRAND FATHER.
LETTER I.
Page.
Introductory, - - - - 5
LETTER II.
Human Nature, - - - - 10
LETTER III.
The Way of Salvation, - - - 17
LETTER IV.
The Bible, - - - - 29
LETTER V.
Prayer, - - - - - 37
LETTER VI.
Cultivation of the Mind, - - - 45
LETTER VII.
Cultivation of the Heart and the Moral Habits, 67
LETTER VIII.
Manners, - - - - - 87

<page 18>
I N T R O DU C T I O N.
MoRE than a year has now passed since
Mrs. MARGARET BRECKINRIDGE, the belov-
ed subject of the following brief notices,
was taken from us into the saints' everlast-
ing rest. By that event, the little family of
which she was the joy and crown, was dis-
solved. The surviving parent felt that God
had committed to him the interesting but
mournful duty of preserving the memory of
so inestimable a friend. But it is long after
such an event, before the mind is sufficiently
tranquil to utter our thoughts and feelings
without excess. The peaceable fruits of so
dreadful a chastisement succeed, alas! but
slowly in our intractable hearts, to the dis-
traction of grief, and the desolation of the
grave.

<page 19>
14 I N T R O D U C T I O N.
It was in the midst of the deepest of his
sorrow, also, that the writer was hastened
(by a yery kind Providence, as he now sees
it to have been) into the active duties of an
office which left no rest for body or mind
during almost an entire year. So that if
his feelings had allowed the attempt at pre-
paring a Memoir, his duty to the Church of
God forbade it.
In these trying and peculiar circumstan-
ces, he was permitted to call in the aid of
those honoured and venerable Friends, from
whose hands, in a happier day, he had re-
ceived the lovely wife of his youth. They
of all others knew her best, especially from
her birth to her marriage. They had done
most, under God, to fit her for life’s duties,
and its close; and to make her “worthy to
be had in everlasting remembrance.” And
none were judged to be so well qualified to
do justice to her memory. To the one we
are indebted for the following interesting
Sketch, making the first chapter. To the

<page 20>
INT R O DUCTION. 15
other for the valuable Letters to her surviv-
ing children, forming the second part of this
memorial.
While all must admire the delicacy and
candour with which this sketch is drawn, it
is evident to those who knew the deceased,
that much remains to be said which ought
not to be omitted—especially in regard to
that portion of her life, embracing more
than fifteen years, which passed between
the time of leaving the parental roof, and
her lamented death. In attempting to sup-
ply this omission, the writer felt the incon-
venience—even awkwardness of returning
upon a narrative which seemed to have
been brought to an appropriate close. But
this was thought preferable to leaving the
memoir incomplete; or to breaking the
thread of the narrative given in the first
chapter.
And moreover it was felt that the design
of the work which called for the additional
chapters, dispensed with form in the man-

<page 21>
16 INTRODUCT I o N.
ner of furnishing them. It is intended to
preserve the memory of the beloved dead
for her bereaved children, and her nume-
rous kindred and friends, rather than to
unveil her retiring character to the public
eye. The work being designed, not so
much for general circulation as for family
use, is rather printed, than published; and
all its imperfections will readily be over-
looked by those who will come to these
pages, as Mary went to the tomb of Laza-
rus—“to weep there.”

<page 22>
M E M O I R.
C H A PTER I.
A NARRATIVE of the life of our departed friends,
bears some resemblance to the representation, on
canvass, of their persons and features; it serves
to restore and collect our scattered thoughts, and
revive our affections; and prevents the hand of
time from obliterating entirely, their peculiar men-
tal and moral lineaments.
It was in consequence of the necessity of this
help to our natural infirmities, that our Lord gave
to his people the bread and wine, as a symbol of
his body and blood, and said, “Do this in remem-
brance of me.” He knew too well our careless,
wandering hearts, to trust the recollections, even of
his great and lovely character, to our unfaithful
keeping, and established, as a help to his word,
the ordinance which was to continue unto the end
of the world, “as a memorial of him.” And we
trust that his people are permitted to endeavour to
perpetuate the remembrance of each other by
means, which, however they may come greatly
2*

<page 23>
18 M. E. M. O I R O F
short of the significant emblem ordained by him-
self, will assist in enabling them “to love one
another as he also loved them.”
In view of this encouragement, given us in the
Scriptures of inspiration, we would endeavour to
bring together, and exhibit, in the history of the
short life of Mrs. Margaret Breckinridge, some of
those graces of a Christian character, which lead
us to hope that the finger of the Lord had engraven
his name on her heart, and that his grace was car-
rying on the work, notwithstanding much infirmity
of flesh and spirit, until the body of sin and death
within her was rolled away, and a simple, undivi-
ded hold taken on the Rock of ages.
She was born September 29th, 1802, in New
York, and educated for several years under the
immediate instruction of the sanctuary, in a com-
paratively pure state of the Church, when the
name and influence of a few such venerable and
holy men as the Rev. Dr. John Rodgers, had
thrown a restraint on the vices of the world around
them, as well as on the constantly recurring dis-
orders of the Church, so that the very vagrants of
the street felt their presence.” Every pastor of a
* The appearance of these servants of God, in any
part of the city, seemed to make “iniquity hide its
head,” and was often the means of dispersing an idlc,
youthful group, in which profanity and disorder were
beginning their destructive career. Through their influ-
ence, in a great measure, the Sabbath was, at least

<page 24>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I D G E. 19
flock of Jesus Christ seemed to feel it his privi-
lege, as well as his duty, to feed the lambs of his
flock himself, and did not commit them to the
ever-varying, heterogeneous instruction of others.
The Scriptures, and the Catechism, it was his own
business to inculcate; and the same afternoon in
each week, had been for many years, in several of
the churches of the city, of various denominations,
the season for this instruction.
By these and other means, the Bible had taken
a systematic form in Margaret's mind, very early;
and whenever she met, even in childhood, with a
scriptural scene or subject, she generally knew
where to place it, and was particularly animated
by it. And this peculiar skill, and taste, continued
and increased until childhood passed away, and
the pride and enjoyment of life opened a new
scene before her.
For a time it seemed as if every vestige of the
sensibility arising from religious instruction would
be swept away. She had friends who wished to
see her enjoying the innocent pleasures of youth;
especially as in person and mind there was a pro-
mise of peculiar adaptation to them. And there
was a will of her own very clearly developing,
which wanted more restraint than parents are
externally, a holy day, on which the public ways exhibit-
ed no crowd or bustle, but what was of necessity occa-
sioned by a church-going people.

<page 25>
20 M. E. M. o. I r or
generally willing to exercise. Many interpositions,
however, in providence occurred, which, though
sad in the view of her family, proved a real deliv-
erance to her—frequently arresting her first deci-
sive step in folly.
At the age of eleven she was removed with her
family to Princeton, in consequence of a call
which her father received, to a Professorship in
the Theological Seminary in that place. Being
thus separated from many snares incident to a city
life, she began anew, as it were, to form habits
and connexions, which, although in some res-
pects, more dangerous and ensnaring than those
which she had left, had not “grown with her
growth, and strengthened with her strength;” and
were, on that account, more ready to yield, when
the follies of youth passed away, and the solem-
nities of this world, in view of another, opened
before her.
The want of a good school in Princeton, indu-
ced her parents to send her, at the age of about
fourteen years, to Philadelphia, for the purpose of
obtaining for her some finish to the education
which she had received at home. She remained
there nearly a year, residing with an aunt, and
attending a daily and well conducted school. In-
deed it was her privilege, as well as the privilege of
many others, to receive instruction from a teacher,
who not only was competent to every branch of
polite learning which adorns the mind of a female,

<page 26>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I. D. G. E. 21
but desirous of having all which he taught so sanc-
tified as to reach the heart, and be made the means
of communicating spiritual and saving, as well as
intellectual instruction.*
The immediate effect of this experiment was
injurious to Margaret's disposition and deport-
ment. She returned to her parents with more
love for the world, and a better opinion of herself;
and of consequence was less docile. It was evi-
dent that the atmosphere of a city was not the
element in which her heart would receive the best
influence.
In a revival which took place in Princeton,
when she was about eighteen years of age, an
interest was excited in some of her pious fe-
male friends for her conversion. They concluded
to make her the subject of special prayer. Of
this she was entirely ignorant, until the evidence
appeared in herself of the verity of the promise, as
to the result of “fervent, effectual prayer.” A
sermon of the celebrated President Edwards, read
* Many will probably have reason for everlasting re-
joicing in the kind arrangement which placed them under
Mr. Jaudon's instruction. He was truly “a man of God,”
and the effects of his wise and holy instruction and discip-
line, we have no doubt are felt in the bosom of many fami-
lies, and in the hearts of many individuals in Philadel-
phia, to this day, who will, we trust, be prepared to meet
him, where, having turned many to righteousness, “he
shall shine as a star for ever and ever.”

<page 27>
22 M. E. Mo i r O F
in a small, social meeting, arrested her attention,
and brought her to continued, deep, serious think-
ing, which ended, as she thought, in a new view
of everlasting things. With all the sanguine feel-
ings of youth, she judged herself prepared to be
united with the Church; but owing to the unwil-
lingness of her parents to risk the possibility of a
premature profession of religion, this step was
delayed.
In connexion with this period of her life, it
seems necessary to relate some circumstances
which took place with regard to a much loved sis-
ter of hers; not many years younger than herself.
They had been so closely educated together, as to
make them one in many of their views and feel-
ings.
Elizabeth, in giving an account of the exercises
of her own mind on the subject of religion, some
time after they took place, said, that she experi-
enced an irresistible feeling of contempt for the
concern which Margaret manifested, and concluded
that she was indulging a mere hypocritical affecta-
tion; in consequence of which she was beginning
to make some observations to this effect, when, in
a moment, a deep conviction fastened on her con-
science, of the danger of resisting what might
prove to be the influence of the Holy Spirit.
This impression resulted in a real concern for
herself, and in views equally solemn with those
expressed by Margaret.

<page 28>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I D G E. 23
They both now made progress together in their
inquiries and experience, and were a mutual help,
rather than a hinderance to each other. Both soon
thought that they had obtained an interest in
“Him, whose blood cleanseth from all sin.”
It appeared, however, soon after this, as if our
fears with regard to Margaret were but too well
founded. “Because of manifold temptations,” she
seemed to be taking a new hold on the world; but
a state of things about the same time, began with
Elizabeth, which disciplined and humbled her
spirit; and she was soon enabled to realize all the
insufficiency and uncertainty of this world, as a
portion.
Many doubts with regard to the genuineness of
the change which Elizabeth trusted had taken
place in her heart, increased by the weakness
which rapidly declining health had induced, per-
plexed and troubled her, and made her more and
more unwilling to make a profession of religion.
She had witnessed some of the extravagances of
revivals, and felt the danger of being deceived, and
of “having a name to live whilst she was dead.”
In January, 1823, Margaret was married to the
Rev. John Breckinridge, and returned with him to
Kentucky, his native State, in the spring of the
same year. In consequence of a call which her
husband received, to a church in Kentucky, (which
he accepted,) they were soon after this settled in
Lexington. Her departure from her early home

<page 29>
24 M. E. M. o. I R O F
was her first real trial. For although, through the
course of several months, she had taken a prospec-
tive view of this arrangement, with much buoyancy
of spirits, as the time approached, every circum-
stance connected with a separation from all the
associations of her childhood and youth, seemed
to produce a new and deeper impression, and
seven or eight hundred miles appeared at length,
as almost an interminable space. The sadness
which irresistibly overspread her countenance,
convinced her friends that when, in view of Mr.
Breckinridge's first destination, she had given her-
self unreservedly to a foreign mission, she, like
many others, little knew her own heart, and all
the sacrifices which such a destination involved.
And when it was seen expedient that this intention
should be relinquished by him, for a plan more
eligible in the view of his fathers in the ministry,
a release from this more enduring trial, formed no
small part of the considerations which assisted in
making her submissively bow to one so much
more lenient. And indeed, she had reason to say,
that goodness and mercy had followed her at eve-
ry step. For this very trial which sobered her
countenance, made her heart better, and prepared
the way for deeper self-examination, and probably
more ſervent prayer; and the result was, that with
a trembling confidence she united herself with her
husband's church in Lexington, a few months after
he took charge of it. From her letters, after this
-

<page 30>
M. R. S. B.R. E. C K I NR ID G. E. 25
event, we learned that her connexion with the
church took place at the same time—it is thought
on the same day—in which her sister Elizabeth,
having been delivered from the many doubts which
had clouded her mind, made a profession of religion
in the church in Princeton. This co-incidence in
providence, having occurred without any mutual
intercourse or understanding on the subject, seemed
so consistent with the plans of Him who “sees the
end from the beginning,” and who, from their first
serious impressions, appeared to have united the
lines of their experience until they ended in one
gracious result, that it did much to confirm their
friends in the hope, that a good “work was begun
in them which should be carried on.” They felt
constrained to say, “It is the Lord's doings and
wonderful in our eyes.”
The kind and affectionate family in Kentucky,
of which she now made one, assisted much in alle-
viating the pressure of sorrowful recollections, and
in making the resolution which she had formed of
“learning in whatsoever state she was, therewith
to be content,” more practical, and more enduring;
and when Mr. Breckinridge was called to Balti-
more in 1826, although she was pleased with the
prospect of getting nearer to her early home, she
felt that a new tie had been formed which could
not be broken, even partially, without much pain.
It was a source of much grateful recollection to her,
that she was not permitted to use any undue influ-
3

<page 31>
26 M. E. M. o. I R O F
ence to lead her husband away from his congre-
gation in Lexington, to which she was indebted in
so considerable a degree, for the pleasant circum-
stances which surrounded her.
Her health was remarkably firm, especially for
one of her delicate appearance, for several years
after her marriage, and during all the time that her
husband had a settled charge. In Baltimore, to
which he removed from Lexington, she seemed to
realize with much gratitude, the particularly plea-
sant circumstances in which her family was placed.
Situated on the direct way between her husband's
relatives, endeared to her by so many pleasant
recollections, and the family of her youth, with
both of which she could have frequent intercourse,
and in the midst of a kind circle of friends, not
limited by the bounds of Mr. Breckinridge's con-
gregation, she was literally at home; and when
the summons came to call him to another sphere
of labour in the Church, she was the last to be
persuaded that it was his duty to obey it, and
reluctantly yielded to the opinion of those whose
judgment she honoured. -
From this time she may truly be said to have
been a sacrifice to the interests of the Church.
The unsettling of her domestic duties and habits, to
which her temperament was particularly adapted,
was, probably, directly and indirectly at the foun-
dation of those causes, which gradually but too
surely undermined her health, and prepared her

<page 32>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K. I N R. I D G E. 27
for a premature grave. Her last change of resi-
dence, which placed her in Princeton by the side
of her paternal family, and amongst many of her
youthful associates, seemed to her to fill up the
measure, as it regarded this world, of that provi--
dential goodness “which had followed her all the
days of her life;” and she said, not long after it
took place, with a humility which was in itself an
evidence of her gracious state, “I think, in view
of all my mercies, there is a thankfulness experi-
enced which is not the natural growth of my own
heart.” To us who remain it is given to see, that
these unusual comforts were mercifully intended to
soothe the infirmities of a rapidly dissolving body,
and soften the approach of the last and most for-
midable enemy.
Several attacks of disease in the course of two
years, which threatened to be immediately fatal,
were, by the aid of skilful medical treatment, hap-
pily arrested, but not until their baleful effect had
fastened on her feeble body, and each had left her
“more a prey for death.” And it was a cause of
much thankfulness to her friends, that instead of
one of those unexpected instant departures, which
so frequently occur, and which in her case it was
often feared would take place, the approach of
death was gradual and mild, so as to involve no
pain, and but little surprise.
The simplicity of her character appeared through
all her last days, especially after she ascertained

<page 33>
28 M. E. M. O I R O F
that her end was not far off. Her words were
few, because she studied to utter none but “the
words of truth and soberness;” she seemed to feel
that there might be a parade even in dying.
After a short conversation in her room a day
or two before she departed, on the subject of the
unprofitableness of our best works, which we found
had deeply exercised her mind, she remarked with
much emotion, a tear starting to her eye, “I feel
the truth of these remarks;” but, after a pause, she
said, “I have tried to do my duty as a wife and
as a mother; I have endeavoured to conduct the
affairs of my family with discretion, and to instruct
my children in the best things.” She evidently
clung to this as an evidence of grace, (and not at
all as a cause of acceptance with God,) and as
affording some hope for her children, when relied
on in view of the promises of Him who says, that
if this precious seed is sowed, grace shall insure
the crop.
Her Sabbath evenings, after the good old way of
our puritan fathers, saw her with all her household,
over whom she had any authority, gathered around
her for the purpose of giving them that instruction
which, with the promised blessing, would save
them from the paths of sin and folly in this world,
and prepare them for enjoying the blessedness of
another. And through the distractions of an unset-
tled life, and the hinderances experienced in a large
boarding house, in which several winters were

<page 34>
M. R. S. B R E C K INR ID G. E. 29
spent with her family, she persevered as far as
possible, in the instruction of both children and
servants in the week and on the Sabbath, with a
determination which both she and her friends
thought had shortened her life.
In view of this peculiar faithfulness to her
domestic duties, we are the more willing to offer
an apology for what appeared to some of her
friends, an indifference to various extra means;
which in these last times have been esteemed
needful for the awakening of a slumbering church.
When her mind began to open to this subject,
the glory of our revivals was beginning to be tar-
nished. “The enemy had begun to sow his tares.”
The extravagance which so frequently attended
them, had produced in her no little disgust for
what she thought the mere machinery of religion.
In such circumstances, it is difficult to “choose the
good, and refuse the evil.” The cast of her mind
was such, that parade in any thing, and especially
in the vital concerns, in which is involved our ever-
lasting destiny, irresistibly revolted her mind. And
the errors in principle and in practice, which had
been by these means insinuated into, and corrupted .
the legitimate and professed doctrines and ordi-
nances of the Presbyterian Church, greatly im-
paired her confidence in what many good people
esteemed genuine revivals of religion. Subsequent
events have abundantly confirmed the wisdom of
her early and deep distrust.
3#

<page 35>
30 M. E. M. O I R O F
After her constitution had been tried with another
violent and unusual attack, in March, 1838, which
prostrated nearly all her remaining strength in a
few hours, it was evident to many of her friends,
that recovery was no longer to be expected. Every
means, however, were made use of, that might in
any way prove salutary; many of which, as has
often occurred, were rather injurious than bene-
ficial. As a last resource, a journey was com-
menced, for the purpose of trying the Springs of
Virginia, so highly recommended to invalids. She
was not permitted, however, to go beyond Phila-
delphia. Her physicians there, judging so long a
journey very hazardous, gently arrested it, by pro-
posing a delay of a few days; thus endeavouring
to obviate the effects of any disappointment which
she might experience. Her own views seemed,
spontaneously, to meet theirs, and a quiet acqui-
escence was every day more manifest. After a
consultation of physicians, in which they agreed
that an effort might be safely made for her return
to Princeton, the sweet complacency with which
she said to a very kind friend, who was visiting
her, “I am going home to-morrow,” encouraged
a hope that she had realized her danger; and that
her will was gradually moulding to the Divine will,
and she preparing for a far better home.
It appeared as if she was permitted to get thus
far on her journey, in order to gratify the feelings,
and experience the renewed kindness of friends,

<page 36>
M. R. S. b. R. E. C. K. I N R. I. D. G. E. 31
whom her husband had attached to his family,
from his temporary labours amongst them. The
attention of these, and indeed many others, whom
their interesting circumstances were a means of
winning to them, is deeply felt in the family circle,
of which she was a beloved member; and which
will continue to be felt, as long as her memory
shall be cherished amongst them.
It was with difficulty that she was removed to
her own residence at Princeton, a few days before
she died, fully sensible that her departure was not
far off. One of her anxious friends, wishing to
be more satisfied of this, said: “You know, my
dear Margaret, how ill you are?” A most emphatic
“O yes,” silenced every remaining doubt.
The day before she died, the conversation lead-
ing to the subject of death, she said, “I am only
afraid of the article of death: I know that when
this is over, I shall be in Jesus’ arms.” From one,
so slow to speak, these were encouraging words.
A few hours after this, she awoke from a light
sleep, with that sort of bewildered spirit, which is
frequently experienced under circumstances of so
much weakness, especially when accompanied
with, perhaps, the effects of an opiate, and repeated
the name of a person, with which she had been
familiar in her childhood. She observed, “what
easy words!” Some one present remarked—there
are words equally easy. She said, “tell me some.”

<page 37>
32 M. E. M. o. I R O F
Upon being referred to a Psalm which had been
spoken of the day before, she commenced, as
having found something exceedingly pleasant—
“The Lord is my shepherd”—and continued to
the end of this short and interesting portion of the
Word of God, in a tone of sweetness and solem-
nity, which impressed every one present, adding
her testimony to the sweetness of the words. It
appeared as if, while the world was fast receding,
her character was rapidly finishing in the mould
of this precious Word.
Reason was continued to her until the last de-
parting moment, when, after a violent but short
struggle, which seemed to arrest every mental
exercise, except that which led her spirit imme-
diately to “Him who takes away the sting of
death,” the freshness of former years was restored
to her complexion, which had been, for some
months, suffused with feverishness, and marked
with suffering, and a calm and solemn composure
settled on her countenance, appearing full of mean-
ing, which persuaded those who were around her,
that she had some communication to make. But
her mouth was sealed, and her hand could no
longer effect the gentlest pressure. We were left to
conclude, that when in her agony she had cried—
“Come, Lord Jesus—come quickly;”—“Lord
Jesus receive my spirit,” “she was heard, in that
she asked;” and the freshness of everlasting youth,
-

<page 38>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C K I N R. I. D. G. E. 33
casting one parting ray upon her mortal counte-
nance, had passed upon her, and “she had gone
to be forever with the Lord.”
“She being dead yet speaketh,” and speaks,
especially, to all who yet live of her youthful asso-
ciates. Many of them are, as she was, called to
sustain the character of wife and mother, and their
history in its prominent features, most probably
resembles hers. Her course was marked with
much failure in duty, over which she mourned,
and, in view of which she seemed deeply humbled.
She once said—many months before she died—
“O ! if the Lord were to send his bereaving com-
mission into my family, I could never forgive
myself for the manner in which I have failed to
improve the trust committed to me, and fulfilled
the duties to which I have been called.” Hear the
voice which speaking, says, “My dear compa-
nions in sin and infirmity, I leave you a poor
example. But I exhort you to to become believ-
ingly and affectionately acquainted with Him, who
has borne me through the dark valley and shadow
of death, and ‘presented me faultless before his
Father, clothed in his righteousness, and washed
in his blood.’”
“Ye cannot, though Christian wives and mo-
thers, do the things ye would;” but there is a
fountain opened, in which your poorest desires and
efforts, though like filthy rags, “may be washed
and made white, and made instrumental for much

<page 39>
34 M E M o I R O F
good. Point this out to your children, “talk to
them in the house and by the way, in sitting down
and rising up,” of this only hope of perishing sin-
ners. And lest, after all, they should come short,
plead, unceasingly, the promises for them, and
take hold by faith of the blessing, O! how will
you rejoice if you can say, “Here am I Lord, and
the children thou hast given me.” In order to sus-
tain your character as wives, aim continually, by
prayer, to obtain the gift of a meek and quiet
spirit, “which in the sight of God is of great
price, that even the unbelieving husband may be
won to the knowledge of the truth.”
May such exhortations from our departed
friends, reach us all, and be sanctified to us—and
may we “exhort one another, daily,” so that our
social intercourse may be made the means of
grace, and assist in preparing us for our last great
change |

<page 40>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K. I. N. R. I. D. G. E. 35
C H A P T E R II.
ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE LIFE AND CHARACTER
OF MRS. MARGARET BRECKINRIDGE,
WHoEveR has been called, in the midst of life,
to part with the wife of his youth'—if these
pages should chance to meet his eye—will know
what the writer has felt. Such a bereavement
must be felt, in order to be understood. There is
a shock in its coming for which no foresight or
submission can fully prepare us. There is a
chasm created by it which nothing can fill. It is
a new experience, replete with dreadful desolation.
It is a wonderful attribute of grace that can make
these great afflictions so “work for us an exceed-
ing and eternal weight of glory,” that the most
weighty and enduring of them all, shall seem, in
comparison, to be “light, and but for a moment.”
Yet “no chastisement,” (especially such as this)
“for the present seemeth to be joyous, but rather
grievous.” God intends that we shall be moved
by such visitations. The call which they utter is
too costly to be lightly felt. The stroke is too
deep to be hastily healed. “To faint when we
are rebuked of Him,” is to reproach the goodness
of God, when we ought to “lay hold on his

<page 41>
36 M. E. M. o. I r o F
strength.” But insensibility to his afflictive dis-
pensations is to “despise” the methods of his
grace. And who can fail to feel at such a moment!
To find one's self strangely, and after all the
warnings mercifully given, suddenly left alone; in
the midst of life to be broken in twain; to come
to a time when you may no longer pray with
her whose presence sweetened devotion itself; no
more pray for her who many a year has been the
lear burden of all your intercessions; to see your
orphan babes left desolate, and enhancing your
woe, by being unconscious of their own; yea,
“to sorrow most of all” for those dread words,
“that you shall see her face no more ” This is
sorrow ! If it were possible, and being so, were
right to ask it for others, we might pray for our
readers, that they may be forever ignorant of our
experience. But we know that every house is
appointed to such a sorrow, sooner or later.
They who are yet to pass through these deep
waters, if they cannot now fully enter into our
trials, may at least be expected to excuse this
humble tribute to the dead, as an amiable weak-
neSS.
But it is not bleeding affection, merely, which
has prompted us to add to the foregoing brief nar-
rative, these imperfect illustrations of the life and
character of Mrs. Margaret Breckinridge. The
bereaved children having been early called to lose
a mother's care, justly claim of surviving friends

<page 42>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I D G E. 37
to preserve her image that they may gaze on it,
and her example that they may imitate it, in after
life. It is a cruel addition to an orphan's lot, to
consign to the tomb even the memory of the dead.
We refer not to the indecent and revolting haste
with which every memorial of the deceased is
swept into oblivion by those who, studious of new
relations, are faithful only to forget. Such a spirit
is abhorrent to every sentiment of humanity and
religion. But it often happens that the disconso-
late survivor, for a season careless of all things but
of grief, neglects to treasure and record what God
gave in peculiar trust to him—for the good of
others. That godly example, which it cost the
toils and the trials of a life to exhibit, ought not
to be permitted to perish from the world. That
“death of the saints,” which “is precious in the
sight of the Lord,” and which so gloriously shows
forth his praise, is worthy of a monument that
time cannot consume. These should live! We
should embalm them in the memory of the heart.
We should hand them down in the tradition of
faithful love. We should record them in a house-
hold book, if not publish them to the world—in
honour of Jehovah; in memory of the beloved
dead; and for the good of those who, even while
they were spared to them, were too young to
know their value. It is the memory of the wicked
alone which God has doomed to rot; or if it live,
to stand as a beacon on the brow of death.
4

<page 43>
38 M. E. M. o. 1 R O F
There is another consideration of great tender-
ness and force by which we have been influenced
in making these sketches. Woman dwells, to
speak so, in the shade of retirement; and not like
man, in the blaze of public life. In the household
she sits enthroned, the weaker vessel, but the
stronger power. Yet the domestic circle, in a great
degree, circumscribes her influence; shuts in her
character. Her refinement—her patience—her hu-
mility—her cheerfulness in trial—her fortitude—
her readiness to forgive—her faithful, constant
love—her self-devotion to her children—her per-
sonal charms—her domestic virtues—her Chris-
tian graces—which make her
“The light and music of our happy homes,”
are little known beyond the narrow boundary of
her own family, on which they continually rest,
“like the dew of Hermon that descended upon the
mountains of Zion.” It is not less so with her do-
mestic trials—with her perplexing domestic duties,
as she meekly toils in “patient continuance” amidst
their innumerable detail, and ever returning round.
Now while the full disclosure and rewards must
be reserved to the great day of final account, it is a
special duty, on proper occasions, to bring such
excellence to view. Without our care, this never
will be done, since the graces that most adorn, are
the most retiring. By an affectionate diligence in

<page 44>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I D G E. 39
this service, a thousand pearls might be brought
from the recesses of domestic life, and added to the
too scanty stock of memorable worthies. At least,
we ought not to make oblivion the penalty of
domestic virtue. On the other hand, the doing of
proper justice to real female merit, would most
effectually rebuke that assurance of coarse and
fanatic women, who, in the insulted name of God,
assume the prerogative, and attempt the offices of
the stronger sex—forgetting that the immodesty
which is offensive” to all men, can never be an
offering pleasing to a God of purity and order.
By presenting to mankind examples of Christian
women revolving in orderly beauty, and shining
with mild lustre in their appointed course, we not
only preserve the memory of those who rest from
their labours, but we diffuse their influence abroad.
If we may but do justice to the subject of these
notices, she would be herself the only being likely
to complain, for she shrunk with instinctive sensi-
bility from every such disclosure of her retiring
character.
Without repeating what has been said in the
first chapter, we proceed to fill up the narrative
given therein, by additional notices, which some
one ought to furnish, and which a parent could
In Ot.
It was God's peculiar mercy to Margaret (Mil-
ler) Breckinridge, that she came into life under
parental influence so admirable in all respects, that

<page 45>
40 M. E. Mo i R O F
she may be said to have been born and reared in a
family, which, like that of Aquilla and Priscilla,
“ had a church in the house.” She enjoyed, in
its happiest form, a domestic Christian education,
having the BIBLE for the basis of knowledge; the
Parents for instructors; the family fire-side for the
school of manners; and the royal law of love and
truth, as the standard and source of all true polite-
ness. Truly it is a goodly spectacle in these days
of pretension, and vulgar parade; of shallow learn-
ing, and degenerate manners, to behold here and
there a mother in Israel, after “the manner of the
olden time,” training her little flock without the
aids of modern parties, fashions, vain accomplish-
ments, and earthly tinsel; waiting with them day
by day at the door-posts of that wisdom by which
grace is poured into the lips, and mien, as well as
heart—where “woman indeed becomes the glory
of man;” (1 Cor. xi. 7,) and then to see her lead
them forth into life, from these sacred shades,
polished after the similitude of a palace.” Such a
* The following passages are so graphic, that it would
seem as if our day had set for the likeness, though they
were written two thousand six hundred years ago:-
“Moreover the Lord saith, because the daughters of Zion
are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks, win-
cing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:
Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of
the head of the daughters of Zion: The Lord will take
away in that day the bravery of their tinkling ornaments

<page 46>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. KIN R ID G. E. 41
school was well fitted to form the mind, refine the
manners, and under God to save the soul of our
lamented friend. God had been pleased to endow
her with an unusual measure of personal beauty,
and great charm of character and mind. So that
as soon as she entered into society, which she did
with great reserve, she attracted much attention,
and was universally admired. These things com-
bined, might have been expected, especially in
early life, to draw her into the world; and lead
her away from the humbling and self-denying reli-
gion of her father's house. But even before she
gave her heart to God, there was an inimitable
simplicity in her character, manner, and dress,
which evinced either a total unconsciousness of her
attractions, or a noble superiority to human praise.
Her good taste, and the better principles of the
Gospel, enabled her in all her after life, notwith-
standing the many temptations to which she was
exposed, to exhibit the same transparent and
lovely example. -
about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires
like the moon, the chains, and the bracelets, and the
mufflers, the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and
the head-bands, and the ear-rings, the rings, the change-
able suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the whimples,
and the crisping pins, and the glasses, and the fine linen,
and the hoods, and the veils.”—Isaiah iii, chap. Behold
the contrast! 1 Peter iii. 1–6. 1 Timothy ii. chap. 9–10.
4*

<page 47>
42 M. E. Mo i r of
r
HER RELIGIOUS CHARACTER.
The work of the Spirit was early begun in her
heart; but it was for some time resisted. Our
acquaintance with her began just as she was
closing her domestic education, (in her sixteenth
year,) and almost before she had looked this evil
world in the face. In 1820 she became decidedly
serious; and after several months of deep religious
impression, expressed a trembling hope of an inte-
rest in the Divine Redeemer. At this time she was
strongly disposed to make a public profession of
religion; but the salutary caution of her parents
induced her to postpone it to a future occasion.
Subsequently to this, the extreme fear which she
ever after cherished, of self-delusion in religious
exercises; the high standard of Christian character
which she had proposed to herself; and her strong
conviction of the frequent and very hurtful incon-
sistencies of many professors of religion; influ-
enced her, in the end to defer that solemn step to
a distant day. That day, as stated in the narra-
tive, did not arrive until after her marriage, her
removal to Kentucky, and her settlement as the
wife of a pastor. In the mean time, however, it
cannot be doubted, that the grace of God had taken
possession of her heart. And when finally she did
publicly connect herself with the people of God,
her tenderness of heart, her self-distrust, her deep

<page 48>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I. D. G. E. 43
humility, her child-like simplicity, and transpa-
rency of Christian character, condemned her only
for a delayed profession, and left few fears for her
sake in any bosom but her own.
She was in a remarkable measure devoted to the
Word of God. Her extraordinary memory faith-
fully stored with its rich treasure in early youth,
vividly retained the chief part of it through life.
The Psalmody of Dr. Watts, her favourite author
in that department, she had almost wholly at her
command. And with the Commentary of the
inimitable Matthew Henry, a Latin and a French
Bible, and a Harmony of the Gospels at her
side, she daily and most devoutly searched the
Scriptures. Clarke on the Promises, was also a
favourite book, especially in her last days; and the
Pilgrim's Progress was her companion to the
“water's edge,” where her real visions of the ce-
lestial city enabled her to lay the sweet Dreamer by,
as the Parting Pilgrim did his crutches, when on
the bank of the river he saw “chariots of fire” to
bear him to the Pearly Gates. Her diligence in
studying the Bible, without in the least degree
neglecting her dámestic duties, (and even in the
days of her feeblest health,) was truly wonderful,
When a subject specially interested her, she com-
piled and collated all the leading passages of the
Bible upon it; often writing them out at great
length, and preserving them for reference on future
occasions. Indeed, so far did she carry her inte-

<page 49>
44 M. E. M. o. I R OF
rested inquiries into the various parts of the Old
and New Testament, and especially into the life of
Christ, that she drew out a harmony of the Gos-
pels with her own hand; the better to confirm her
knowledge of the true order and relation of the
events of his history.
She was a most faithful hearer of the preaching
of the Gospel. Her luminous face cheered the
progress of the herald of the Lord, and marked the
deep measure of her personal interest in the mes.
sage from the skies. Since her decease, we have
found numerous briefs of sermons which she had
heard at different periods of her life, from those
whom she most admired. Some of these were
delivered by Dr. James P. Wilson, and some by
her father, others by Dr. Green, but chiefly by the
venerable and honoured friend whose tribute to her
memory is affixed to this Memoir. He was un-
doubtedly her most esteemed instructor from the
sacred desk. His inimitable simplicity, vivacity,
richness, and force of truth, always carried her un-
derstanding and her affections along with him; and
those appeals which were most searching and sim-
ple, were most treasured and admired.
To her refined and candid spirit, nothing was
more detestable than religious parade. As it is in-
timated in the former chapter, it sometimes served
to repel her from things and people that were good,
but savoured of religious cant. She was especially
shocked with the numberless and painful examples

<page 50>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I. D. G. E. 45
of female impropriety in this way, which our age
has disclosed. But in all the appropriate walks of
Christian females, and in every becoming expres-
sion of their feelings and influence, though diffi-
dent of herself, she promptly took her part. Per-
haps her most cherished occupation in the service
of others, was that of a Sunday-school teacher.
Here she rejoiced in the work of her hands. Here,
without indelicacy or pretension, she could use the
word of God, in his house, and on his day, to teach
the little children, whom like her Lord, she so much
loved to take in her arms and bless. She had for
this service uncommon adaptation in the vivacity
of her mind, in the charm of her manner, and
especially in the rich store of her Biblical know-
ledge. She continued this relation after she be-
came a wife, and a mother; and the tenderness of
a Christian mother's love seemed to be transferred
to the little commonwealth of the Sabbath-school.
We shall never forget the animation and delight
with which she communicated to us, two years
before her decease, the account of a visit which had
been paid her very recently, by a highly respecta-
ble young gentleman, then attached to a learned
profession, the son of a distinguished public man,
who had been a member of her Sunday-school
class in Princeton, fifteen years before

<page 51>
46 M. E. M. o. IR OF
her DEDICATION TO THE WORK OF FOREIGN MISSIONS.
It was not long after the first experience (as
was hoped) of the grace of God in her heart, that
the relation was formed between herself and the
writer of these pages, which, by its consummation
and close, became in succession the crowning joy
and the absorbing sorrow of his life.
While this interesting event, combined with
other causes, was made the occasion (from an ex-
cess perhaps of delicacy on her part) of retarding
her public profession of religion, it led to an early
and very decisive trial of her Christian principles
in another form. At this time the friend whom
she so much honoured by her affection, was devo-
ted to the work of Foreign Missions; and he had
solicited her hand with the distinct expression,
both to herself and her venerable parents, of such
a purpose. This necessarily called her to con-
sider the question of a personal engagement in
this work. She met and decided this question
with a promptitude and nobleness of Christian re-
solution which surprised even those who knew her
best; and though in the providence of God she
was spared the expected trial of separation for life
from her family and country, yet the unreserved
dedication of herself to the Missionary cause which
her Redeemer enabled her to make, gave elevation
to her Christian character, and prepared her for

<page 52>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I D G E. 47
the trials scarcely less severe to which she was
called in the domestic field. It was on the ground
of her having thus dedicated herself, that with
so much self-oblivion, and even cheerfulness, she
encountered the many difficulties of which we are
now to speak.
HER SACRIFICES FOR THE CHURCH OF GOD,
By a train of events over which we had no con-
trol, and in the interpretation of which we were
permitted to enjoy the direction of the Church, (it
would be needless to recite them here,) we were
hindered from indulging the desire to “go far hence
to the Gentiles.” But the principle of dedication
for life was settled; and hence it was from the first,
understood and acted on at all times, that other
things being equal, the field at home in which there
was opportunity to do most for the conversion of the
heathen, was always to be preferred, if offered by
the Lord of the harvest. Her first and second set-
tlements could scarcely be considered as giving oc-
casion to many sacrifices. Lexington, Kentucky,
was in the bosom of her husband’s native state.
There, in the garden of America, surrounded by a
great circle of the most affectionate kindred and
friends, and in a city remarkable as the Athens of
the west for its refinement and general intelligence,
and connected with a most kind and worthy con-
gregation, Mrs. B. felt, that even separation from

<page 53>
48 M. E. M. o. I R OF
the home of her youth, was a form of trial so soft-
ened by her circumstances, that it was converted
into a mercy.
In our removal to the interesting and impor-
tant city of Baltimore, we felt that goodness and
mercy followed us, changing our abode, but aug-
menting the number of our friends, and opening to
us new and effectual doors of usefulness. Her
attachment was very strong to both cities; she left
each with regret; but still referring the decision to
others in whose wisdom and affection she confi-
ded, she cheerfully obeyed their successive sum-
mons to depart. It was in leaving the latter city
that her sacrifices for the Church more especially
commenced. At this eventful period, (the sum-
mer of 1831,) it was found that there were more
than one thousand congregations in the Presbyte-
rian Church without a pastor, not to mention the
immeasurable destitution of the heathen world. To
supply this immense demand required, in addition
to the very inadequate means already in use, a
greatly enlarged and quickened effort of the entire
Church. This necessity was deeply felt by the
General Assembly of 1831, and led to the re-or-
ganization by that body of its Board of Education.
In the solemn providence of God, the writer of
these sketches was called to fill the office of Cor-
responding Secretary and General Agent for that
Institution. He found it impossible to resist what
appeared to be the voice of God speaking through

<page 54>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C K I N R. I D G E . 49
his Church; though in yielding to it he was con-
strained to dissolve forever the sacred tie which
bound him to a beloved people, and to pass from
the endearments of domestic and Pastoral life, to
incessant toil and travel in the wide and homeless
world. She foresaw, and with keen anticipation
felt, all the trouble which such a step must bring
upon herself and her little household. But the
decision of all her friends, excepting the kind
people we were about to leave, was in favour of
removal. She remembered her Missionary vows.
She saw in it the sweetness as well as the severity
of the cross, and without a murmur meekly bowed
to the burden of the Lord. In this service, which
continued for nearly five years, she shared; and
like an angel, soothed the trials of the work. The
comforts of domestic life were almost annihilated,
either by incessant separations, or the nameless
discomforts of a constant absence from home.
During one entire year her house was occupied by
her but sia weeks, the rest being spent in hotels,
and boarding houses, and steamboats, and stages,
with occasional intervals of repose in the bosom of
related or attached families scattered through the
wide field of her visits from the Mississippi to the
Hudson. Yet never did woman shine with more
lovely lustre at home; never was woman more
indisposed to step from this, her undisputed and
delightful empire, into the confusion and folly of
this selfish and evil world. Yet did she give up
9

<page 55>
50 M. E. M. o. I R O F
all, and consent to erect her domestic altar in the
wilderness, and gather her little fold on the high-
way, for Jesus' sake. When weary of a year of
travel, undertaken to shun a year of separation, she
returned to occupy and order her solitary home.
There she was constrained, though both tender and
inexperienced, “to guide her house” alone; and to
receive her husband only as an occasional visitant.
Still, she never murmured; nor would we com-
plain. But faithful history—now that she rests
from her labours, requires this narrative; and God
permits the record of “those works which follow”
such “as die in the Lord.” Thus, for five years,
were kept up the alternations of these affecting
trials. They were relieved, it must devoutly be ac-
knowledged, by the unremitting attentions of those
kind and lovely families in Philadelphia, whose
virtues bound them to us by better ties than those
of earthly kindred—as “Zion's friends, and ours;”
whose reward we will not attempt to take out of a
Saviour's hands by our poor praises; and whose
displeasure we shall only then be sure of incur-
ring, when we attempt to unveil to the public eye,
the authors of so much disinterested and untiring
goodness. The same reference is due to very
many families in the city of New York, in which,
for several successive years, she passed the win-
ters with her husband. He who thus imperfectly
attempts to record his gratitude, knew her worth
so well, that he cannot wonder that such friends

<page 56>
MR s. B R E c KINR ID G. E. 51
should love her; and he feels it his duty here to
say, that any portion of success in the work herein
referred to, is under God, largely owing, not only
to her influence on his labours, but to the charm
which she threw upon every circle with which she
mingled, and the interest she kindled in all the
persons and objects which interested her. When,
at the end of two years, he felt overwhelmed with
the review of her domestic trials, and was strongly
moved to abandon a work which made them inevi-
table, she earnestly resisted the thought of change;
and with generous self-devotion urged her husband
forward in a work which, though painful to her
feelings, was in her view useful to the Church,
and pleasing to its glorious Head. As her impres-
sions were those of all her friends, and apparently
of the Church at large, and as the Board itself
kindly relaxed some of the severer features of our
trials, we were confirmed in the conviction that it
was our duty to persevere, lest we should incur
the divine displeasure, “by being weary in well-
doing.”
When, however, the indications of divine Provi-
dence in the spring of 1835 seemed plainly to say,
that our work for the Board of Education was
done, and that we ought to enter the door opened
for us at Princeton, she was the last to see the
duty of a removal; and though her parental home
was there, and though her heart and her wearied
nature cried aloud for rest, she would not allow
any reasons for the change, to be drawn from her

<page 57>
52 M. E. M. o. I r O F
wishes or her sacrifices, and to the last, rather
submitted to, than heartily approved of, the new
relation.
But how deep are the ways of God! Scarcely
had she time to establish herself in her new home
at Princeton,” when another and loud call to an
agency, directly in behalf of Foreign Missions,
was pressed upon us. Though at this period her
health had become evidently far more delicate, she
heard and heeded again the voice of her Saviour;
and still recalling the Missionary vow, offered her-
self again a willing sacrifice on the altar of God.
In deciding this momentous question (in the winter
of 1838, after having spent but eighteen months
in Princeton, nearly half of which was occupied
by her husband in active agency in behalf of the
funds, library, &c. of the Theological Seminary,)
* It is at once a remarkable indication of the noble-
ness of those Philadelphia friends already named, and of
the extent to which her worth and her sacrifices were
appreciated, that on being informed of our final purpose to
remove to Princeton, they united in the purchase of
a commodious dwelling, which was presented to Mrs.
Breckinridge and her children. It is true, one object in
view was, the accommodation of the Professor (for the
time) of Pastoral Theology and Missionary instruction in
the Seminary. But the terms of the gift are specific;
and when we attempted to alter the direction of this mu-
nificent testimonial, so as to make it the property of the
Institution, it was peremptorily declined; and the deed was
drawn in the name of Margaret Breckinridge and her
children.

<page 58>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K. I. N. R. I. D. G. E. 53
we found ourselves incapable of being instrumental
in recalling her still again to the commotion, deser-
tion at home, and incessant cares, of another
agency. Three months therefore were given to
the important work, and the offer of the office
finally declined. Even here however, she persist-
ed in referring the decision to public relations
alone, leaving all personal considerations out of
view. And though fast approaching her end (what
at that time none of us knew) she spontaneously
put herself at the disposal of the friends of the
Board of Foreign Missions, for her part of any ser-
vice which might be required of her husband,
whether it was in extensive journeys with him, or
separation from him, or a winter's sojourn with
him and her children in the city of New York.
For the first, hoping it might invigorate her health,
she was actually furnished; and when that was
abandoned for the last, she repaired, with the spi-
rit of her Master in her heart, to meet the trials it
induced. It was in the fresh recollection of the
parting scene, on her way thither, that the follow-
ing sentences were addressed to the writer by the
Rev. Dr. Alexander.
“I cannot conclude, without a word to dear
Mrs. Breckinridge. I admire her ready submis-
sion to the calls of Providence. For although she
cannot help dropping the silent tear, she makes
no complaint, but shuts up her comfortable house,
leaves her home and her friends, and as cheerfully
as she can, goes to live in a hotel, and among
5*

<page 59>
54 M E M O I R O F
strangers. Well, she shall not lose her reward.
For these sacrifices she shall have rich compensa-
tion: and our sweetest earthly pleasure is in doing
the will of our Heavenly Father.” (Dated Prince-
ton, December 17th, 1837.)
At the close of the winter we returned to Prince-
ton, hoping that now God would grant us a little
rest in that quiet village and that delightful home,
where not “unaware we entertained an angel.”
But ah! this blessedness was not long intended
for us. Having done her work, (though still we
did not fear it,) she was soon to be taken to her
rest and her reward on high.
HER LAST SICKNESS AND DEATii.
Her last sickness was of a protracted and very
interesting character. When she returned from
New York, she was delicate and her state of health
was mysterious, but not yet alarming even to her
physicians. Very soon after this, she had a vio-
lent attack, which in a short season prostrated her
frame, and, disclosing a peculiar complication of
diseases, overwhelmed every mind in the family,
but her own, (she was calm,) with the most gloomy
apprehensions of her danger.
At the close of the winter term of the Theolo-
gical Seminary, (May first,) it was our anxious
desire to take her to the Red Sulphur Springs
in Virginia. But it was too early in the season;
and being yet doubtful, whether this or that place
would be useful or hurtful, it was agreed by her

<page 60>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K. I N R. I. D. G. E. 55
physicians to indulge her strongly expressed wish
to try the waters of Saratoga. Thither there-
fore we went, pausing only a short time in the
city of New York for medical consultation.
At this time, she was a most interesting object
to all who saw her. Her debility was so extreme
that she was borne from place to place in the arms
of her husband, which, from her delicate frame,
it was easy to do. The gentleness and patience
with which she endured her sickness, the inimi-
table moral beauty of her countenance, and the
general expression of frailty mingled with grace,
excited the deepest interest wherever she passed.*
At Saratoga we spent a very quiet season of
three weeks, (before the great hotels were opened,
or the crowds had arrived) at the house of a most
kind and deserving Christian woman, Mrs. Tay-
lor, whose unceasing attentions greatly conduced
to soothe sufferings which God had pleased should
not be arrested. During this visit she used the
waters freely, as a beverage, and in the bath, with
no apparent injury, except that it evidently dis-
* There is poetic beauty in the Stanza of Southey's on
the portrait of Bishop Heber, written after his decease;
and though fanciful it is striking. Blessed be God our
Redeemer, we have surer marks of recognition in the
heavenly world.
“They too, will gaze
Upon his effigy
With reverential love,
Till they shall grow familiar with its lines
And know him when they see his face in heaven.”

<page 61>
56 M. E. M. o. i r of
closed the fatal symptoms of her malady. She was
able almost every day, to take gentle rides in the
open air, and frequently to mingle with the family.
But her chamber was her sanctuary. There she
reclined, feeding on the Word of God. She was
especially delighted with Clarke on the Promises.
During that season of seclusion, she seemed to
grow in grace with a progress which surprised
(while it delighted) us; for we knew not then
how near she was to the perfection of the heavenly
rest. But it has since been interpreted to us,
by the event, as one of God's peculiar mercies.
What made this the more pleasing evidence of
grace was, that she did not know her own danger.
It was the power of religion poured upon her
spirit by Him who was “hastening to make her
up among his jewels.” At one time, she said—
“Oh, yes, pray that the distance between God
and me may be taken away.” And after uniting,
with the most affecting solemnity and tenderness
in the prayer which was offered, she at its close
expressed aloud her joy in the exercise, (a thing
most unusual with her) and her delight in God her
Saviour, who draweth nigh. On another occa-
sion, after hearing some of the promises of healing
to the body, as collected by Clarke, she seemed for
a moment to be musing, she then gently said:
“My dear I am like the poor woman who
had spent all her living upon physicians, neither
could be healed of any; but rather grew worse.
My hope is in the Great Physician!”

<page 62>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K. I. N. R. I D G E . 57
Since we have been calm enough to review the
various stages of her last sickness in relation to
her religious exercises, it has been a subject of
deep regret, and of no little self-reproach, that we
had not made the attempt at recording, as they
were uttered, some of the deeply affecting ex-
pressions of her Christian principles and feelings.
But the tumultuous hour of hope and fear, and
hurried, anxious watching at the bed of death, is
not the time for cool calculation. Some of the
most affecting parts of such scenes are incapable of
being written down, even by one not interested in
the sufferer. Nay, more—like the voices which
John heard from heaven in Patmos, the Spirit
seems to say of them, “write them not.” These
are “joys with which the stranger intermeddleth
not.” (Prov. xiv. 10.) It is a sanctuary which no
creature can enter. And then our beloved Friend,
who was often afraid to whisper her religious joys
to her Saviour, lest she should be found offering
“strange fire” on his altar, seldom talked of her
hopes, (though often of her sins,) to her nearest
friends; and never, by writing them down, put it
in the power of posthumous publications to expose
them to the view of others. We can only, there-
fore, illustrate her religious character, at the stage
which we now approach, by broken fragments of
thoughts and feelings, caught from her lips amidst
the awful mercies of a dying hour.
She began at length, visibly to sink, when Dr.

<page 63>
58 M. E. M. O I R O F
Freeman, of Balston, whose skilful and kind atten-
tions she enjoyed, (Dr. Steel, of Saratoga, having
himself been recently removed by death,) strongly
advised a discontinuance of the use of the waters,
and an attempt to reach the Red Sulphur Springs.
For now the prevailing type of the disease had
become distinctly pulmonary; and the skill of phy-
sicians, and the healing waters, and all the help
of man were vain. Now, for the first time, we
began to discern the dread reality of her approach-
ing dissolution; and had some foretaste of the first
anguish of such a loss.”
With heavy hearts, but hastened steps, we re-
* The following touching stanzas do more real honour
to their illustrious author, (Lord Palmerston) than all the
distinctions of his high rank and public life.
Whoe'er, like me, with trembling anguish brings
His dearest earthly treasure to these springs;
Whoe'er, like me, to soothe distress and pain,
Shall court these salutary springs in vain:
Condemn'd, like me, to hear the faint reply,
To mark the fading cheek, the sinking eye-
From the chill brow to wipe the damps of death,
And watch in dumb despair the short'ning breath:—
If chance should bring him to this humble line,
Let the sad mourner know his pangs were mine.
Ordain'd to lose the partner of my breast,
Whose virtues warm'd me, and whose beauty bless'd;
Fram'd ev'ry tie that binds the heart to prove,
Her duty friendship, and her friendship love.
But yet, remembering that the parting sigh
Appoints the just to slumber, not to die,
The starting tear I check’d—I kissed the rod,
And not to earth resigned her, but to God!

<page 64>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K.I.N. R. I. D. G. E. 59
turned to Princeton; whence almost in despair, yet
anxious to try any and all means for so great an
end, we hastily set out with our meek sufferer for
the Virginia Springs: but as the previous narra-
tive has recited, we were arrested at Philadelphia.
Here all was done by the assiduity and skill of her
physicians,” and the most tender and constant
attentions of a great number of friends. But her
divine Redeemer claimed her for himself. She
returned to Princeton, to bless her household, and
to die. On the evening of June the 13th, she
reached her children, and her earthly home. On
the morning of the 16th, a quarter before ten
o'clock, with her reason unclouded, in a frame of
calm and holy triumph which marked the dawn-
ing of heaven on her soul; with a meek prayer
for permission to die, and with but a single pang,
she bade the world farewell, and ascended to God!
Her remains were attended to the grave by a
very large and deeply affected assembly, after the
delivery of the impressive funeral discourse affix-
ed to this Memoir; where they rest by the side of
her three little children, two daughters and a son,
removed by death before. The like number and
of the same sex, two daughters and a son, are left
to the surviving parent, to mourn her loss, to trea-
* Drs. Chapman and Meigs, to whom with Dr. Nelson
of New York, we all owe more for their unwearied and
sympathizing care than we have words to express.

<page 65>
60 ME Mo 1 R of
sure and imitate her example, and, by the grace of
the Saviour, to follow them to the skies, where
the “house now left desolate unto them” shall be
restored with added bliss; and the little family
thus divided in the midst of life, being reunited in
pure and perfect love, be received into everlasting
habitations.
A neat marble monument points to the spot
where her dust reposes.

<page 66>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C K I NR ID G E . 61
C H A P T E R III.
CLOSING REFLECTIONS.
THUs it has pleased our Heavenly Father to “take
away from us the desire of our eyes, with a
stroke.” The first impression of such a loss is
that of amazement—overwhelming and bewilder-
ing the soul, and with strange horror, destroying
for a time, the power to feel. “Deep calleth unto
deep—all thy waves, and billows have gone over
me.” Such is the abyss of grief! At such a time,
our part is “to be still”—sitting, like the Marys,
“over against the sepulchre.”
When the disciples of John lost their earthly
Master, “they came and took the body, and buried
it, and went and told Jesus.” This ought to be
the first act of every mourner, to tell it unto Jesus.
With him we shall find both sympathy and sup-
port. And more than this: He resolves the
death of our friends into his own gracious sove-
reignty, when he calls it, “the coming of the Son
of Man.” Death loses its terror when it becomes
his act of grace. “The death of his saints is pre-
cious in his sight,” and is always ordered with a
supreme regard to their blessedness, and his glory.
So that the feeblest of his dying children may con-
6

<page 67>
62 M. E. M. o. I R O F
fidently say, “Though He slay me, yet will I trust
in Him.” “Though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for Thou
art with me.”
There is a feeling about the death of our friends,
which is made up in part of unbelief, and in part
of that tender regard which is produced by their
dependence on us through life. Those endearing
relations which make us their protectors, and sup-
ports, send their deep sympathies even into the
grave. Who of us that is a husband, or a parent,
that does not feel the horror of the separation
aggravated by the spectacle of our helpless kindred
struggling alone in mortal strife with “the king of
terrors”? We, to whom they have always looked
for succour, are then as helpless as they, in their
extremest need. We cannot even share their ago-
my. It is this which gives a nameless anguish to
such a moment.”
But it is because we forget that “when father
and mother,” and all they most depended on in
life, “forsake them, then the Lord doth take them
up.” The Christian is never so little alone as on
the verge of heaven. The Lord of life is there.
Underneath are the everlasting arms; and through
* One of the most affecting scenes ever witnessed, was
the death of a little child, who, in the last moments, called
on her mother to die with her. This was the voice of
nature. To this call the heart would, but cannot respond.
“Here our father and mother must forsake us.”

<page 68>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. K. I. N. R. I. D. G. E. 63
all the terrors of the grave; and above all the
tumult of that last hour, the Shepherd's voice is
heard, saying—“IT Is I–BE NOT AFRAID.” While
some pass over Jordan on the wing, and some
struggle through the waves, yet all safely pass.
Not one of them shall perish, but each appear in
Zion before God.
It adds tenderness and force to these consoling
hopes, that Jesus once “tasted death himself.” It
moves us, that “Jesus wept.” But it gives a new
nature to death, that Jesus died For while the
merit of his death takes the sting from ours, his
presence in the tomb dispels all its terrors.
Therefore, since Jesus died, let us consent to
death; and surrender at his call those most dear
to us.
The graves of all his saints he blest,
And softened every bed—
Where should the dying members rest,
But with their dying head Î
It must be sweet to lie in that grave which he has
hallowed by his presence among the dead.
One of the considerations which should make us
acquiesce in the removal of our beloved friends
who die in the Lord, is this—that we are suffering
for their sakes; and that they could not be bless-
ed without our sufferings. For their death, (the
dread cause of all our grief) was necessary to
their perfect and eternal blessedness. This thought

<page 69>
64 M. E. M. O I R O F
ought to soften every pang. If we really love
them, and if our sacrifices for them while they
were here below, were the fruit of our love,
then we have only to remember that this is one
prolonged, supreme sacrifice for their sakes.—This
reflection if properly pursued, would often turn our
mourning into gladness.” And then, if this weight
of sorrow that is laid on us may but be duly im-
proved and meekly borne; if it may not only mark
the bliss of our friends begun on high, but be made
by a wise and good God conducive to our growth
in grace—it will have in it the pledge of our ever-
lasting re-union in heaven; and thus be an afflic-
tion doubly blessed.
But the silencing, yea, elevating thought of all
is, that it is for Jesus' sake, we are called to suffer.
“The Master is come and called for her.” It is
indeed the richest of our earthly treasures. Our
own life were a far lighter offering. But for that
reason we honour him the more. It is our Isaac
* A lovely example of the power of this sentiment in
subduing grief, is given in the narrative of one of our
American missionaries. He and his fellow-labourer were
alone in a barbarous land, far away from any creature
who cared for their Lord or for them. Suddenly his
friend was taken from him. In that awful moment of
desertion and anguish, after commending the parting
soul to God, and closing the eyes of the dead, he kissed
his cold lips, and thought, “What glory has already burst
upon his view ſ” In this thought his sorrow was lost.

<page 70>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C K I N R I D G E . . 65
that God calls for; and it is then indeed we
honour God when we can offer like Abraham.
We shall receive the offering back, if not as soon,
as certainly—and at no distant day ! When,
therefore, He who laid down his life for us, asks
for our richest gift, let us not call him a hard
master, but give without a murmur.
The death of our friends should have the effect
of bringing Heaven nearer to us. We ought to
cultivate, if we may so speak, domestic views
of that blessed world to which we are so much
honoured as to have sent up angels from our
households. While all superstitious emotions are
carefully to be quelled, we are permitted to draw
very nigh to them. We may cherish their image
in our memories and hearts; we still belong to the
same great communion—and all are members of
that body of which Jesus is the head. “As death
does not separate from the Lord, neither does it
divide the saints from one another. Our spirit
and theirs daily meet at the one throne—they to
praise, we to pray; therefore, in that sense, though
we are absent in body, we are present in spirit.”
And the distance which lies between them and
us is daily growing less. How swiftly we travel,
yea, fly, in all the speed of time! It may not be
an inappropriate close to these meditations, to insert
the family hymn, with which the remnant of a
bereaved household often close the day, and com-
6*

<page 71>
66 M. E. M. o. I R OF
fort each others' hearts, at the hour when we feel
most desolate.
Come let us join our friends above,
That have obtained the prize;
And on the eagle wings of love,
To joy celestial rise.
Let saints below his praises sing,
With those to glory gone;
For all the servants of our King,
In heaven and earth are one.
One family, we dwell in him,
One church above, beneath:
Though now divided by the stream,
The narrow stream of death.
One army of the living God,
To his commands we bow;
Part of the host have crossed the flood,
And part are crossing now.
Ten thousand to their endless home,
This solemn moment fly;
And we are to the margin come,
And soon expect to die.
Dear Saviour, be our constant guide,
Then when the word is given,
Bid the cold waves of death divide,
And land us safe in heaven.
And now, in bringing to a close these very
imperfect notices of a beloved saint of God, it is
proper to say, that much more might truly have
been added in reference to many points of her
character, that would have been proper, and inter-
esting: as for example, her intellectual endow-
ments; her extensive acquirements; her domestic

<page 72>
M. R. S. B. R. E. C. KINR ID G. E. 67
life; her personal accomplishments. But we fear
to indulge our feelings. Nor is it needful. For
it was her Christian character mainly which we
designed to illustrate. Her love for the Redeemer,
and her sacrifices for his sake, were the jewels
which adorned her on earth, and which lose not
their lustre in death. It was the glory of all those
qualities which so eminently fitted her to attract
the admiration of this world, that she meekly laid
them at the Saviour's feet. There also, we desire
to leave this humble tribute to one whose “sun
went down while it was yet day,” praying that he
who thus early fitted her for heaven, may by these
poor means prolong her usefulness, and bless her
memory on earth.

<page 73>

<page 74>
SU B MISSION:
A S E R M O N
O C C A S I O N E D B Y T H E D E A T H U F
MR. S. M ARG ARET BREC KINR ID GE.
BY THE
R E.W. A. AL EXAN DER, D. D.

<page 75>

<page 76>
S E R M O N .
PsALM xlvi. 10.
“Be still, and know that I am God.”
OMITTING all critical discussion of the true im-
port of the text, I will consider the words as
addressed by Jehovah to his own people, when
suffering affliction under the strokes of his mighty
hand. It may be considered as the language of
authority; or of consolation. According to the
first view, it is as if the Almighty had said, “Be
still, and neither repine, nor rebel, for your afflic-
tion comes not from the dust, but from me, your
rightful Sovereign; to whom you owe absolute
subjection.” If viewed in the sense last mentioned,
then it will be as though God, feeling compassion
towards his afflicted saints, puts them in mind of
the sure refuge which they had in him; as if he
had said, “Be calm and unruffled, in the midst of
all your overwhelming calamities, for I am able to
sustain you, and to deliver you by my Almighty
arm.” “Be still, and know that I am God.” In
either case, the result, as to our duty, is the same.
Unreserved submission is the thing enjoined, and
the reason to enforce the injunction is, “I am
God.”

<page 77>
72 S U B M I S S I O N ,
“Man that is born of a woman is of few days,
and full of trouble. He cometh forth as a flower,
and is cut down: he fleeth also as a shadow, and
continueth not. His days are determined: the
number of his years are with thee; thou hast
appointed his bounds, that he cannot pass.” No
condition in this life is exempt from trouble. No
bulwarks can be erected by kings and princes,
strong enough, and high enough, to be a safe-
guard against the shafts of adversity. In regard
to this matter, the rich and the poor stand very
much upon a level. “Man is born unto trouble
as the sparks fly upward.” Hence, this life has
justly been denominated, “the vale of tears.”
Uninterrupted bliss cannot be found beneath the
skies. The righteous are not exempt, but many
are their afflictions. Besides a participation in the
common lot of humanity, they have troubles pe-
culiar to themselves. The dispensations of God
towards his own people, are, indeed, in covenant
love and faithfulness, but they are not calculated to
encourage them to take up their rest in this world,
but to render their path so thorny, and their bed so
uneasy, that they are continually admonished of
their duty to set their affections on things above,
and to press forward as pilgrims to the possession
of their heavenly inheritance.
The reasons which should persuade us to exer-
cise unreserved and uncomplaining submission to
the will of God, as manifested in the dispensations

<page 78>
A S E R M. O. N. 73
of his wise and righteous Providence, are at the
same time obvious and weighty. But, here, as in
other cases, theory and practice are very different
things. On this subject, we all can teach and
inculcate what is right; but when it becomes ne-
cessary to practise our own lessons, we experience
a sad deficiency. This is a school in which,
sooner or later, we must all be learners; and it
behoves us to use diligence in preparing ourselves
to endure trials with fortitude, and cheerfully to
acquiesce in those painful events, which we cannot
avoid. Some persons, when overtaken by severe
strokes of adversity, are, like the bullock unaccus-
tomed to the yoke, restive and rebellious; they
resist the hand which presses them, and struggle
to throw off the yoke. Such a course is altogether
unwise, and must be unsuccessful. “Wo to him
that striveth with his Maker. Let the potsherds
strive with the potsherds of the earth,” but let not
a feeble, sinful worm rise up in rebellion against
the Almighty; for who hath hardened himself
against him and hath prospered? And when there
is no open rebellion, there is often a spirit of
discontent and murmuring, which, though smother-
ed in the breast, partakes of the nature of rebellion,
and is the very opposite of cordial, filial submis-
sion. Every degree of this temper, whether con-
cealed or expressed, is exceedingly offensive to
God, as we learn from his word, and is so far
from mitigating the evils which we suffer, that it
7

<page 79>
74 s U B M I s s I O N,
doubles their pressure; it makes even a light bur-
then intolerable.
Others again, endeavour to form habits of hardy
insensibility; they seek refuge from the keen
arrows of affliction, in a stoical indifference. They
affect to contemn, as weak, and wanting in forti-
tude, all those who seem to suffer exquisitely
under the strokes of adversity. Much practical
progress never can be made in this unnatural sys-
tem. Whatever men may profess or pretend, na-
ture will assert her claims, and if her feelings may
be for a season suspended, she will again resume
her sway; and indeed the equanimity acquired by
these principles, has been more in appearance than
reality; and the greatest adepts in eradicating the
susceptibilities of our nature, have only learned
the art of successfully concealing the emotions of
their bosoms from the observation of others.
But while some endeavour to obtain relief by
rendering themselves insensible to the calamities of
life, and aim at braving the storms of adversity,
there are others, who err on the opposite extreme.
Under the chastising hand of God, they are pros-
trated in the dust; not in humility, but in des-
pondency; their sorrow not only casts them down,
but overwhelms them. They find themselves sink-
ing in deep waters, where there is no standing.
Such persons not only put away all hope, but
cease from all exertion, and abandon themselves
to grief; forgetting the exhortation which speaketh

<page 80>
A S E R Mi o N. 75
unto them as to children, “My son, despise not
thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him.”
There is but one effectual remedy for the evils
to which man is heir, while on his earthly pil-
grimage; and that is RELIGION.—true religion, not
merely apprehended and approved in its theory,
but deeply felt, and cordially embraced in the
inmost soul. This is the only principle of suffi-
cient potency to tranquillize the perturbations of
the soul when deeply afflicted. This only can
sustain the mind, ready to sink into despair.
This furnishes the only medicine which heals the
anguish of the broken heart; the only balm which
relieves the wounds made in the spirit by painful
bereavements. Here the superlative value of true .
religion is realized; and this principle of heavenly
origin is found to possess a power, not only to
sustain the soul under the heaviest pressure of
affliction, but to pour sweet consolations into the .
desolate and troubled heart. Here, indeed, is
opened a fountain of refreshing streams, in the
midst of this dreary wilderness, of which the poor
heathen had no knowledge, and of which the men
of the world are still ignorant.
These blessed effects of genuine piety are not
produced by any irrational process, or blind im-
pulse; but by the contemplation of truths adapted
to the end. Consolations which do not rest on
this firm foundation, will ever be found precarious,

<page 81>
76 s U B M I s s I o N,
and commonly evanescent. Buoyant hope and
cheerful resignation must have the solid pillar of
truth on which to repose. It will therefore be
consonant to our present purpose, to bring more
distinctly into view, some of those important doc-
trines, the practical belief of which leads to the
exercise of Christian submission.
That which lies at the foundation of the whole,
is, that God exists, and governs all events by his
providence. Whatever men profess, or specula-
tively believe, as it relates to the actual presence
and operative providence of God, there is un-
doubtedly much practical atheism in the hearts of
men. Most feel and act as if there was no God,
and as if all things happened by chance. This is
remarkably manifest when they are suddenly cast
down into deep affliction. They recognise not the
hand that smites them. They seem to think, that
affliction cometh from the dust, and that trouble
springeth out of the ground. In all their bitter
lamentations, their views extend no farther than to
the proximate causes of their distress; and they
often experience the bitterest regret, because they
did not pursue a different course, or make use of
different means from what they did; although
with the knowledge possessed, they could not have
done better. Under the same short-sighted views,
they are prone to censure others who have had
an innocent instrumentality in bringing about the
events by which they are distressed. All this

<page 82>
A S E R M O N. 77
arises from the want of faith in Divine Providence;
and too much of this unbelief cleaves to the pious
themselves, and greatly aggravates their calamities.
But when their faith in the being and providence
of God is strong, they see his hand in every thing
good and evil, which occurs; they behold him
operating through all nature, and giving efficacy to
all second causes; and are as fully persuaded that
he directs the fall of a sparrow, as the overthrow
of a kingdom. This doctrine of an universal and
particular Providence, is the foundation of our trust
in God, for security and sustenance. How beau-
tifully did Christ teach this lesson to his disciples,
when he said, “Behold the fowls of the air, for
they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them.
Are ye not much better than they? And why take
ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the
field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do
they spin; and yet I say unto you, that even Solo-
mon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these. Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of
the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast
into the oven, shall He not much more clothe you,
O ye of little faith?’”
When the dark and cloudy day of adversity, or
the long and tempéstuous night comes upon us—
when our comforts are suddenly blasted, and our
brightest earthly prospects are obscured, then, in-
stead of repining or desponding, we should be-
7+

<page 83>
7S s U B M I s s I o N,
take ourselves to the doctrine of an overruling
Providence. The dispensation may be dark, and
afflictive, and even profoundly mysterious; yet
we should think, it is God that hath done it. These
are his footsteps. This is the operation of his hand.
He it is, “who formeth the light and createth the
darkness; that maketh peace, and createth evil.”
The more, in such circumstances, we look beyond
all creatures, and second causes, and fix our thoughts
and our faith, on God alone, the sooner shall we
find composure of mind. If we fully believe that
God is in the storm, and that it is his voice which
is heard in the thunder, and his face which is seen
in the flashing of the lightning, the less shall we
be terrified with the apprehension of unknown
dangers.
But we are permitted to know not only that
God governs all human affairs by his Providence,
but also that his dispensations, as it relates to his
own people, are all ordered in wisdom, in faithful-
ness, and in love. The doctrine of Providence
can bring no true consolation to any who are
unreconciled to God. They may know that it is
his rod by which they are smitten, but they
cannot tell but his strokes are those of vindicatory
justice, and only a prelude to more intolerable
pains. Before we can repose with confidence and
comfort on the faithfulness, wisdom, and goodness
of the Divine dispensations, we must possess some
evidence that our sins are pardoned and our per-

<page 84>
A S E R M O N . 79
sons accepted; for the more perfect the Divine
government, the more certainly will punishment
pursue the guilty. Our cheerful resignation to the
afflictions of life, is therefore, closely connected
with our justification through the merits of the
Lord Jesus Christ. While we contemplate our
own sins and imperfections only, we can entertain
no other feeling, than a fearful looking for of
wrath; but when with the spirit of adoption we
can look up to our heavenly Father's reconciled
face, we need not be alarmed nor cast down,
under the heaviest afflictions which befall us. We
know that he doth not willingly afflict his beloved
children, but out of love chastises them for their
greater good, that they may become in a higher
degree, partakers of his holiness. They are
assured, therefore, that all these painful events
shall be so overruled, as to work for their good.
And the Holy Scriptures clearly teach, that al-
though these chastisements are, for the present,
not joyous, but grievous, yet, hereafter, they will
produce in them who are exercised thereby, the
peaceable fruits of righteousness. They eminently
conduce to wean the affections from this vain
world, to humble the spirit in the dust under a
sense of unworthiness, and to excite an ardent
spirit of prayer. It is, moreover, by a severe but
salutary discipline of this kind, that saints are
made meet for the heavenly inheritance. And not
only so, but these temporary afflictions, somehow

<page 85>
80 s U B M I S S I O N,
or other, will have a direct efficiency in increasing
their future felicity and glory, according to that
remarkable declaration of Paul, “These light
afflictions which are but for a moment, work out
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.” It is not surprising, therefore, that God
who loves his people with an unchangeable love,
should visit them with the rod. It is the method
which he takes to purge out their dross and their
tin. Affliction is therefore compared to a furnace,
in which the precious metals are assayed and
purified. Thus Peter comforts suffering Chris-
tians in his time:
“Beloved, think it not strange concerning the
fiery trial which is to try you, as though some
strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice,
inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings,
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be
glad also with exceeding joy.” Again: “That
the trial of your faith being much more precious
than gold that purifieth though it be tried with fire,
might be found unto peace, and honour, and glory,
at the appearing of Jesus Christ.”
In the testimony just cited, there is another
interesting reason suggested for the affliction of
Christ's disciples. And it is one which must be
touching to the hearts of all who truly love their
Lord. It is, that as he was pre-eminently “the
man of sorrows,” there is a congruity in their
participating in suffering, that in this respect, as in

<page 86>
A. S. E. R. M. O. N. 81
others, they may be conformed to his example.
Paul also makes express and repeated mention of
the same thing. “If children, then heirs of God,
and joint heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer
with him, that we may also be glorified together.”
He speaks of this communion with Christ in suf-
fering, as a characteristic of discipleship, and as
a high privilege, “Always bearing about in the
body the dying of the Lord Jesus.”—“For unto
you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.”
Christians, therefore, in primitive times, gloried
in their severest sufferings. And now, no con-
sideration is more efficacious in fortifying the
believer against fainting than the idea of the
sufferings of Christ for us. It would seem that
they who have been privileged to endure nothing
for Christ's sake, would scarcely be admitted to
reign with him in glory.
And as we should endeavour, while in the
world, to glorify God to the utmost of our power,
by letting the light of a holy example shine forth,
so there is no situation in which piety appears to
greater advantage, than when exercised in deep
affliction. What disposition can be conceived as
possessing more moral beauty, than the grace
enjoined in our text; cheerful, quiet submission to
the will of our heavenly Father, under the
heaviest pressure of his hand. And as we all are
conscious that there is yet much impurity and

<page 87>
82 s U B M is s I o N,
dross cleaving to our nature, we should rejoice in
being subjected to a process, though it be a fiery
one, by which we might be more and more
purified from sin. Indeed, we cannot do without
this salutary discipline: our salvation, probably,
depends upon our sufferings as a means of conser-
vation in a state of grace. We ought not, there-
fore, “to think it strange concerning the fiery
trial, which is to try us, as though some strange
thing happened to us; but should rather rejoice,
inasmuch as we are partakers of Christ's suffer-
ings, that when his glory shall be revealed, we
may be glad with exceeding joy.”
“Be still, and know that I am God.” Be calm
and submissive; be not alarmed nor perturbed;
let your resignation to the Divine will be unre-
served and cheerful. Seize the occasion, which
severe afflictions offer, to show your entire wil-
lingness that God should govern and dispose of
you and yours according to his own sovereign
will. He is wise, and knows how to order every
thing for the best. He is powerful, and can bring
light out of darkness, and good out of evil. He is
faithful, and will certainly fulfil all his gracious
promises. , He is good and merciful, and will con-
sult the best interests of his children in all his
dealings towards them; and even those events
which seem to be most adverse, he will so temper
and overrule, that ultimately, and relatively, they
will be made to work for their good.

<page 88>
A S E R Mo N. 83
Under sore and unexpected bereavements, the
human heart will bleed; and the susceptible feel-
ings will be lacerated, and the gush of sorrow will
have its course; but grace comes in and suggests
considerations which ought to moderate our grief;
and to teach us to be quietly submissive to the
hand of the Almighty. It is a blessed state, when
the feelings of the man are absorbed in the nobler
feelings of the Christian; when our will is swal-
lowed up in the will of God. What He doeth we
know not now, but we shall know hereafter. It
will not be long until we shall be able to see,
“ that he hath done all things well.”
In the recent mournful dispensation of Divine
Providence, we see how many hearts may be
wounded, and how many joys withered, by a sin-
gle stroke. In this interesting group of mourners,
we behold the aged parents weeping over the life-
less body of a much loved, and very lovely daugh-
ter. They have lived to witness the premature
departure of one, whom they might naturally have
expected to be a comfort to them in their declining
years, and to wipe from their foreheads the cold
drops, in a dying hour. Parental bereavements
admit of less alleviation, than others, from earthly
considerations. The friends and comforts which,
late in life, we lose, we cannot hope to have made
up to us. And, sometimes, the parents of a nu-
merous offspring are preserved so long, that they
survive all, or most of their children; and they

<page 89>
84 s U B M I S S I O N,
stand, like aged trees, which, by successive storms,
have been stripped of their foliage and branches.
But, although bereaved parents cannot draw much
consolation, under their afflictions, from this world;
yet the rich consolations of the Gospel are acces-
sible to them, and peculiarly appropriate to their
condition. The pious do not know how to appre-
ciate the promises of God rightly, until, in the hour
of affliction, they are made to experience their
power and sweetness. We cannot blame these
parents for mourning the loss of a first born and
very amiable daughter; but we trust that they now
find support and comfort in that God on whose
Almighty arm they have long trusted. They have
not now for the first time, to learn the riches of
that grace which is treasured up in Christ Jesus;
and may they be enabled to come now to that
fountain of mercy, by the streams of which they
have been so often refreshed and comforted, under
former trials'
The grief of affectionate brothers and sisters
also, flows this day, in a strong current. They
feel as if a part of themselves had been taken
away; and yet they can scarcely realize the ex-
tent of their calamity. It often requires time for
grief to become rooted in the soul. The first gush
of sorrow from the bleeding heart, is indeed a
more sensible emotion, but the full value of our
loss is not felt, until after serious reflection. It is a
painful thing to be separated from those around

<page 90>
A S E R M. O. N. 85
whom our earliest and tenderest affections were
entwined. The thought of never again, in this
world, seeing a face, from which always the most
benignant affections beamed upon us, cannot but
leave a melancholy and heart-sinking impression.
Who can adequately describe the anguish pro-
duced by the sudden severance of hearts, long
cemented in the bands of the tenderest affection 1
But, though nature will be obeyed, and the floods
of sorrow cannot be altogether restrained, yet
there is a Christian duty incumbent on those
placed in these circumstances. The command
does not say, that we should not weep, but that
we should not sorrow as those that have no hope.
Christians are not divested of the common sensi-
bilities of humanity; but they possess principles
much higher than mere humanity, by which they
moderate their passions, and by which the stream
of natural sorrow may be sanctified, and turned
into that of “godly sorrow, which worketh a
repentance not to be repented of.”
But among the weeping mourners, on this sad
occasion, I see some, who though deeply affected,
can scarcely be supposed capable, on account of
their tender age, of estimating the irreparable loss
which they have sustained. I call the loss of
a mother irreparable; because, however many
affectionate friends may stand ready to do all in their
power to supply a mother's place; yet, the assi-
duity, forbearance, and tenderness, so requisite in
8

<page 91>
86 s U B M I s s I O N,
the treatment of young children, can be expected
in perfection from nothing but that affection,
which the Creator has deeply implanted in the
hearts of mothers. To those who have had
long experience in the world, there are few ideas
more affecting than that of a motherless child.
But orphaned, as these dear little ones are, by the
loss of one parent, they are, I may say, on this
account, more peculiarly the care of a covenant
God, whose promise extends not only to believers,
but to their seed, and whose kind care extends
especially to such children of the faithful, as have
been bereaved of one or both parents. These dear
children, we confidently trust will be the objects
not merely of God’s common goodness, but of his
special grace; and after spending a life of useful-
ness in acts of piety and beneficence, will enjoy
the blessed privilege of regaining their beloved
mother, in the mansions of glory, where sickness,
death, and tears, will be known no more.
In addressing the interesting group of mourners
now before me, I perceive one, whose griefs are
too big for utterance, and whose swelling bosom
cannot be soothed, at this time, by any of the com-
mon topics of consolation. An officious intrusion
into the sacred recess of such indescribable sorrows,
only serves to exacerbate, rather than mitigate the
wounded spirit. All that the kindest friends can
do, in such a case, is to let their warmest, tenderest
sympathies fall in with the tide of overwhelming

<page 92>
A. S. E. R. M. o N. 87
grief, which rejects all consolation. “Weep with
them that weep.” There is another thing which
we can do, and that far more important, we can
pray for our afflicted and bereaved brother. In
such circumstances, prayer is almost our only
refuge; for all our help must come from God.
While the voice of man is powerless to afford
relief, there is one who causes his voice to be
heard even in the midst of the tempest. And his
authoritative, his affectionate language to our be-
loved brother is, “Be still, and know that I am
God.” “God is our refuge and strength, a very
present help in trouble.” It is somewhere related
of that eminently pious reformer, Luther, that when
he fell into any great trouble, he was wont to say
to his friends, “Come, let us sing the forty-sixth
psalm.”
A striking example of uncomplaining submis-
sion we have in the good old priest Eli, who,
when informed that God was about to bring such
judgments on his house, as would cause the ears of
every one that heard them to tingle; meekly
replied, “It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth
him good.”
And the patriarch Job, when deprived of all
his property, and of all his children, humbled
himself and worshipped God, saying—“The Lord
gave, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be
the name of the Lord.” “What, shall we receive

<page 93>
88 S U B M I S S I o N,
good from the hand of the Lord, and shall we not
receive evil?”
When Jesus visited the mourning family of
Bethany, who were among his dearest friends, he
did not say to the afflicted sisters, weep not—but
the compassionate Redeemer united his tears with
theirs; for it is written, “Jesus wept.” These
were indeed only the tears of sympathy, for it was
in his benevolent purpose to restore the deceased
brother to his disconsolate sisters. Here also, we
have a striking illustration of the truth, that God's
children are ignorant often of his kind designs,
when he permits sore afflictions to come upon
them; “If thou hadst been here,” said both the
weeping sisters, “my brother had not died.” Their
regret was keen, and unmitigated by any known
circumstance; but in one short hour, they were,
no doubt, glad that their Lord was not there—they
rejoiced that their beloved brother had died; be-
cause the glory of God and the power of the
Redeemer had now been manifested. Indeed, a
gracious visit from Jesus will turn our bitterest
sorrows into joy. His name—his word—his
grace—has a mighty power to calm the swelling
surges of overwhelming sorrow. He can say, as
he did to the raging storm, “Peace, be still,” and
there will be a great calm. Were it not for
thoughts of God—of his providence, and promises,
and of the seasonable and effectual aid of his

<page 94>
A S E R M ON . 89
grace, grief would often drown the soul in perdi-
tion; as it often does work death in the heathen,
and in the men of the world, who are without God,
and without hope. .
It would be in place here to speak of our dear
departed sister, whose loss we now mourn; but
this task will hereafter be better performed by
another hand. And to this audience little need be
said; for she was brought up among you from her
childhood, and enjoyed the affectionate regards of
this community in no common degree, as is mani-
fest by the general and tender sympathy felt on
this occasion. By her sweet simplicity, engaging
vivacity, affectionate temper, and affable manners,
our beloved friend endeared herself to her acquaint-
ances and neighbours, wherever she resided. And
in regard to her Christian character, she adorned
her profession by a consistent life and conversation,
in all the relations which she sustained.
Her latter end was calm and peaceful. She felt
some dread of the pangs of dissolution; but in
regard to what comes after death, she had no
fear—her hope continued firm and her prospects
bright to the last moment.
It is always a cause of lively gratitude, when
God is pleased to sustain his dear children in
passing through “the valley of the shadow of
death.” It affords to mourning friends the sweet-
est consolation which could be received under
such sore bereavements. This consolation of our

<page 95>
90 S U B M I S S I O N , A S E R M ON .
benignant Father has not been withheld in the
present instance. Mourning friends are permitted
to rejoice in the midst of their overflowing sorrow,
in the confident hope, that the departed spirit of
our dear sister, free from all sin and pain, rests
sweetly in the love and beatified vision of her
divine Redeemer. -
“BLESSED ARE THE DEAD THAT DIE IN THE
LoRD, FROM HENCEForTH; YEA, SAITH THE SPIRIT,
THAT THEY MAY REST FROM THEIR LABours; AND
THEIR works Do Follow THEM.”

<page 96>
M. R. S.
L E T T E R S
of
A G R A N D F A T H E R, ,
TO THE SURVIVING CHILDREN OF
M A R G A R E T B R E C K I N R I D G E .
BY THE
REV. SAMUEL MILLER, D. D.
PART II.

<page 97>

<page 98>
L E T T E R S
of
A G R A N D F A T H E R .
LETTER I.
I N T R O D U C T O R Y .
My DEAR GRANDCHILDREN : — The decease of
your beloved and lamented Mother, has placed
both you and me in circumstances of great solem-
nity and responsibility. To be deprived of a
mother's care and counsel at the tender age at
which she left you, is indeed a loss which no
human arithmetic can estimate; especially to be
deprived of such a mother, one so well qualified
by strength of intellect, by sincere piety, and by
peculiar loveliness of character, to be a blessing to
you, for time and eternity, is a bereavement of
which, even now, I know not how to speak with-
out emotions too strong for utterance. While this
precious Parent lived, she seemed to interpose
between your beloved grandmother and myself,
2

<page 99>
6 L e T T E R S o F
and any immediate responsibility in regard to your
education; but now that she is removed, we seem
to be brought, in the mysterious and mournful
Providence of God, to stand in some measure in
her place, and to perform some of the most impor-
tant duties which she owed to her children. And,
although your surviving Parent is eminently fitted,
both by nature and grace, to be a guide to your
youth; yet, as he is engaged, and is likely for
some time to be engaged, in active, arduous, and
extended labours for the Church of God, which
will probably separate him from you often and
much for a considerable time;—an additional re-
sponsibility on our part seems to grow out of
every circumstance.
It is under these impressions that I now address
you. Your grandparents are drawing near to the
end of their course. They must soon leave you
in a depraved and ensnaring world. What they
do for your benefit, they must do quickly. As
one placed in these tender and endearing relations
to you, and in these solemn circumstances, allow
me to pour out the fulness of a heart most earnest-
ly engaged for your welfare, and desiring more
ardently than I am able to express, to see you
walking in truth and happiness, and embalming
by your conduct, as well as by your affection, the
memory of that blessed Parent, who, if she is ever
permitted from her high and holy abode, to look
down on those whom she has left behind, will

<page 100>
A G. R. A. N. D F A T H E R . 7
rejoice to see you making choice of that path
which leads to the same blessedness. º
There are two considerations, beloved grand-
children, which, I think, you will all agree, entitle
me to expect from you a respectful and affectionate
attention to what I have to offer in these letters.
The first is, that I have lived a long and some-
what eventful life; and, of course, my range of
experience has not been small. In my three-score
and tenth year, I have had an opportunity of fol-
lowing many young people from the cradle to the
grave. I have seen the training, the subsequent
course, and the end of thousands. Need I say,
that the lessons derived from such experience are
not unworthy of your regard? O, if you could
start in your career with that practical knowledge
of the vanity, the snares, and the sufferings of the
world, which has come to me through the medium
of many a melancholy sight, and many a painful
conflict, how great would be the advantage! But
this cannot be. Happy were it for you, if you
were willing to profit as you might from the
experience of others. But neither can this be
expected, in ordinary cases, to be realized. I
cannot, however, admit the thought, that you will
be willing to reject this teaching altogether.
The second claim which I have on your atten-
tion is, my ardent and affectionate desire to pro-
mote your happiness. You cannot suspect me of
any sinister design in what I have to say. This

<page 101>
8 L. E t t E r S o F
would be to suppose me capable of “hating my
own flesh.” No, dear children, I have no desire
to damp the sanguine joy, or cloud the smiling sun
of your youth. I would not take from you a
single rational pleasure. On the contrary, I delight
to see you happy; and desire, by all the means in
my power to promote your true enjoyment and
honour. But you must allow me now, in my old
age, when I have seen so much of the illusions of
the world, and so many examples of the destruc-
tion of those who yielded to them, to counsel you,
not in the style of youthful flattery, but in the
language of “truth and soberness.” You will
find nothing in these letters intended to carry a
point by overpainting, or by any other artifice.
If you have a real disinterested friend on earth,
who unfeignedly wishes to promote your best inte-
rest in both worlds, it is he who now addresses
you. I shall not give a counsel or an injunction,
but what I verily believe your precious Mother, if
she were permitted to speak from the bosom of
her Saviour, would ratify with all her heart.
You will observe that some of my counsels
have a respect to objects beyond the period of
childhood, which you now occupy. The truth is,
I expect soon to leave you. Probably long before
any of you shall reach adult age. Of course, I
feel that what I have to say at all, had better be
said now. I may have no other opportunity.
Besides, one of the great truths which I wish to

<page 102>
A G R A N ID F A T H E R . 9
impress upon your minds is, that you are, even at
your present age, sowing the all important seeds of
a future harvest of good or evil. You will not
find a single habit or attainment recommended in
the following pages, which, if you are ever to gain
it, you will not find an advantage in having calcu-
lated and prepared for, as far as possible, at the
earliest age. The earlier you begin to imbibe
good principles, and lay good plans, the better will
it be for all the future.
Let me entreat you, then, to receive with all the
affection and docility of dutiful children, the coun-
sels of one who, while he writes, looks up to
“Him who has the residue of the Spirit,” that
what is rightly said, may be impressed upon your
hearts, and made to bring forth precious fruit, to
your happiness, and to the glory of his holy
name!
2*

<page 103>
10 L E t t e R s or
L ETT E R II.
H U M A N N A T U R E.
DEAR CHILDREN:—On all important subjects there
are certain great facts which must be regarded
as fundamental; as lying at the foundation of all
truth, and all duty. I feel that this is peculiarly
the case in regard to the counsels which I am about
to give you concerning your course in life. Among
these fundamental facts are the depravity, the
misery, and the numberless temptations of the
world in which you live; the depravity of your
own nature, ever ready to be attracted by the
allurements and corruptions of the world; and
your consequent need of the grace of God, at
every step, for your guidance, protection, and de-
liverance. And until you know and feel, and in
some degree lay to heart, that the world in which
you live is a fallen, depraved world; that its
habitual maxims and ways are hostile to your best
interests; that you are yourselves, by nature,
miserable sinners, standing in need of pardoning
mercy, and sanctifying grace; and that you are
every day exposed to snares and perils, from the
joint influence of a depraved nature and a corrupt
world;—until you have learned, in some good mea-
sure, to recognise these facts; to dwell upon them

<page 104>
A G R A N D F A T H E R. 11
daily and hourly; and to receive the lessons which
they are adapted to teach; you are not prepared
even to begin life. You are not prepared to meet
or encounter the most common scenes, much less
the more formidable dangers which are likely to
beset your path every day that you live. But the
moment you are brought to admit these humbling,
momentous truths; to feel their reality; and to
consider and treat them in some degree according
to their practical importance; then, and not till
then, may we hope you will be ready to make a
proper estimate of the world; to guard against its
allurements; to ponder well what you need for
securing your true happiness; and to implore that
divine aid which is necessary if you desire, in such
circumstances, to perform any duty aright. And,
therefore, when I see young people apparently
forgetful of the character of their own hearts, and
of the world in which they live; thinking that all is
gold that glitters; and imagining that they can safely
trust to their own wisdom and strength in every
situation, I regard them as objects of the deepest
commiseration, and as wholly unqualified for either
the duties or the best enjoyments of life.
Know, then, dear children, and remember, that
you belong to an apostate race; that we are all,
according to the declaration of God's own word,
“born in sin,” and “shapen in iniquity;” that we
are “by nature the children of wrath;” that our
native propensities are all of them corrupt; opposed

<page 105>
12 L E TT E r S OF
to God; impelling us to habits and practices
forbidden by his law, and unfriendly to our best
interest. Remember, too, that, so far from being
able to trust your own hearts to resist the tempta-
tions around you, and to guide you aright, they are
all naturally inclined to that which is evil, and dis-
posed to take side with the vanities and corruptions
of the world. So that there is constant need of
self-denial; of imposing restraints upon all our
appetites and passions; and of submitting, espe-
cially in early life, to the counsels of the wise and
the good, who have gone before us in the journey
of life, and have had more experience than our-
selves of its temptations and dangers.
Hence it is, that so large a part of religion is
represented in Scripture as consisting in opposing
our own corrupt inclinations; in “crucifying the
flesh with the affections and lusts;” in constant
efforts to bring down pride and vanity; to mortify
our evil propensities; “to keep under the body;”
to “rule our own spirits;” and, in general, to gain
the victory over ourselves. All these expressions
imply that the course of true wisdom is a warfare
with evil; that our most formidable enemies are
within; and that resisting our own corrupt nature
is at once the most constant, and the most serious
part of our duty as accountable creatures.
Nor is this all. Not only is our nature corrupt;
not only are we from our very birth, prone to evil
“as the sparks fly upward;” but we are also by

<page 106>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 13
nature under condemnation. In the language of
that incomparable Catechism, with which you have
been familiar from lisping infancy—and every doc-
trine of which, as I believe, is drawn from the
Bible—“All mankind by their fall lost communion
with God, are under his wrath and curse, and so
made liable to all the miseries of this life, to death
itself, and to the pains of hell forever.”
Such is the condition of our race by nature.
Not only depraved and unworthy, but guilty, con-
demned, and perishing; not only in danger of be-
ing forever lost; but already under a sentence of
death, unless rescued from it by the power and
grace of the Saviour. All the posterity of Adam
are by nature, “dead in trespasses and sins,”
having no resources within themselves for regaining
the favour and image of God. “The carnal mind
is enmity against God; it is not in subjection to
the law of God, neither indeed can be.” So that,
left to ourselves, we should infallibly go on in sin
to eternal, merited, and hopeless destruction.
Here you are, then, dear children, in a revolted,
polluted, lost world, where the vast majority of the
population is in open rebellion against God; where
the prevailing habits and maxims are selfish, car-
nal, and opposed to all that is truly and spiritually
good; where, if you fall in, and continue to go
with the prevailing current, you are inevitably and
eternally lost; where your only safety consists in
renouncing the world, its idols, its master, and its

<page 107>
14 LETTE R S o F
hopes; in “crucifying the flesh with its affections
and lusts; in resisting the fashions and allurements
which reign around you; and taking refuge in that
Saviour, who came to seek and to save that which
was lost. Such are the temptations and perils
with which you are constantly and every where
surrounded; and such your only refuge. And,
what greatly adds to your danger is, that if the
representation which I have given be correct, your
own hearts are naturally disposed to take the side
of the enemy, and to betray you into his toils and
his power. So that you are like persons travel-
ling in an enemies' country, and liable every mo-
ment to be taken in some insidious and fatal snare,
and whose own inclinations to yield to the enemy
are among their greatest dangers. These are the
humbling facts which it behoves you constantly to
keep in view, and to regard as the great practical
index of all your plans, resolutions, and efforts, as
long as you live.
And as you can never be truly wise until you
learn the corruption of your own nature, and
how indispensably you need pardoning mercy,
sanctifying grace, and unceasing guidance and help
from on high; so you are not prepared to begin
your intercourse with a corrupt world, until you
have learned to appreciate the real character of
human nature as it appears in all the walks of
social life. The young, anterior to experience—and
indeed many, long after experience ought to have

<page 108>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 15
taught them otherwise—are too ready to put confi-
dence in the professions and arts of men. They
are apt to believe the flattering tongue; to rely on
plausible promises; to trust heartless professions
of attachment; to repose confidence in civilities
never meant to be accepted; and to expect much
from protestations of kindness, and assurances of
friendship—all dictated by the merest selfishness,
and never intended to be fulfilled. Rely on it,
dear children, you live in a cold, selfish, heartless
world. Its civilities are hollow; its promises are
deceitful; its flatteries are insidious; its most
splendid attractions are delusive. Expect little from
the warmest professions, and be very backward
to avail yourselves of the most fervent proffers
of friendship. I am far, indead, from recommend-
ing a misanthropic suspicion of every body. Your
parents and grandparents ought to be the last per-
sons in the world to indulge or recommend such a
spirit. They have been so happy as to enjoy
friendships sincere, disinterested, active, and un-
wearied, never to be forgotten. For these they
would be thankful, and enjoin it upon you never to
forget such precious friends. But remember, that
social confidence is a plant of slow growth; that
there are few cases in which it can be safely indul-
ged; that where it exists, great care ought to be
taken not to abuse it by laying too much upon it;
and that, while you ought to receive all expressions
of civility and respect with a suitable acknowledg-

<page 109>
16 L. ET "t E R S o F
ment, nothing can be more unwise and unsafe in
such a world as this, than to trust indiscriminately
to the professions and promises of men.
If such be our deplorable circumstances, as a
race, and as individuals, then we need deliverance.
We need salvation. To this great subject I would
next entreat your attention.

<page 110>
A G. R. A. N. D F A T H E R . 17
L ETTER III.
T H E W A Y O F S A. L. W. A TI O N .
DEAR CHILDREN:—Salvation is a word often on
your lips, and on the lips of many around you.
The truly pious look forward to it with humble,
joyful hope. And those who have no piety, and
even the profane and profligate often speak of it as
something which they desire and anticipate. But
what is salyATION? The very expression presup-
poses that we are all by nature in a state from
which we need to be delivered or saved. We
never apply this term to any but those who are in
danger of being lost. When a man is drowning,
or in the utmost peril of death in any form, and by
the interposition of some benevolent and active
friend, is rescued, we say he is saved. Now in a
similar sense is the term used in the case before
us. The salvation of man implies that he is, by
nature not only in danger, but in a lost and
perishing condition. Accordingly I told you, my
dear children, in the preceding letter, that our
whole race, and you among the rest, are, by
nature in a state of guilt, depravity, and misery;
that we are fallen creatures; under condemnation;
exposed to the wrath and curse of God; liable not
only to natural death, but also exposed to all the
3

<page 111>
18 L. E. T. T E R S o F
terrors of eternal death, that is, of eternal separa-
tion from the presence of the Lord, and the glory
of his power, unless delivered, or, in other words,
saved by the interposition of some mighty and
merciful deliverer. Such a great Deliverer has
appeared to save sinners of our race;—to “put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself.” And now,
the word of God assures us, that there is “no
other name given under heaven among men
whereby we can be saved, but the name of Jesus
Christ.”
It is my earnest desire, dear children, to open
this way of salvation to your minds, and to recom-
mend it to your serious and solemn attention.
Believe me, “it is not a vain thing for you, it is
even your life.” Unless you are, by the grace of
God made partakers of this great salvation, it “had
been better for you that you had not been born.”
By the salvation revealed in the Gospel is meant,
delivering us from all the ruins of the fall—from
the condemnation of sin and the power of sin–
restoring us to the favour and image of God—and
bringing us to the everlasting enjoyment of his
presence in heaven. This is salvation. Now I
wish to show you how this great and blessed
result is accomplished by the undertaking and
work of Jesus Christ, whom we are accustomed,
on that account, to denominate, with emphasis,
our SAviour.
Man was made upright; in full possession of all

<page 112>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 19
the powers necessary to perfect moral agency, and
with all the dispositions which prompted to a
perfectly correct use of those powers. But “man
being in honour abode not.” He rebelled against
God. He violated the covenant under which he
was placed, and became liable to the dreadful
penalty which it denounced against transgression.
In this fall of our first parents we are all sharers.
“In Adam,” says the apostle, “all die.” “By one
man's disobedience,” he again declares, “many
were made sinners.” We have all totally lost our
original righteousness; so that there is now, by
nature, “none righteous, no not one.” In short,
we have all become guilty and polluted before
God, and incapable of regaining his image or his
favour by any merit or doings of our own. How,
then are we to be delivered from these deplorable
circumstances? How shall we escape that perdi-
tion which is the just reward of sin: “How can
we escape the damnation of hell?” How can any
be saved? God cannot set aside his own law, or
permit his authority and majesty, as a righteous
Governor, to be trampled under foot. To “clear
the guilty;” to take impenitent rebels into the
arms of his love, would be to “deny himself.”
Where, then, is our refuge? Must we sit down
in despair, and say, “There is no hope? No, by
no means. A God of infinite wisdom, power, and
love, has devised and proclaimed a wonderful plan
by which sin was punished while the sinner is

<page 113>
20 L ET T E R S o F
pardoned; by which justice is completely satisfied,
while mercy is extended to the guilty and vile; by
which “grace reigns through righteousness, unto
eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.”
This wonderful and glorious plan of mercy
consisted in the Father giving his own Son to
obey, suffer, and die in our stead, as our substi-
tute; and in the Son consenting to bear the penalty
of the law for us; to put away our sin by the
sacrifice of himself; and to bring in an everlast-
ing righteousness for our justification. Yes, dear
children, however coldly an unbelieving world
may receive the amazing annunciation, the Lord
Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, conde-
scended, in his wonderful love, to assume our
nature; to take the place of the guilty and the
perishing; and to become the victim of Divine
justice in their stead. His language, in the eternal
counsel of peace, was, “Let me suffer instead of
the guilty. Let me die to save them. Deliver
them from going down to the pit; I will be their
ransom.” This wonderful, this unparalleled offer
was accepted. The Father was well pleased for
the righteousness sake of his Son. He accepted
it as the price of our pardon; as that on account
of which all who repent and believe should be
justified. So that the Scriptures may well say
concerning the Saviour—He is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believeth.
He is the Lord our righteousness. He was

<page 114>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 21
*-
wounded for our transgressions; he was bruised
for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace
was upon him; and by his stripes we are healed.
He bare our sins in his own body on the tree.
He died the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God. He delivered us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us.
Here then, dear children, is the way, and the
only way of a sinner's acceptance with God. In
virtue of the covenant of redemption, the righteous-
ness of Christ, or what he did and suffered on our
behalf, is placed to the account of his people, as
if they had performed it in their own persons.
Though sinful and unworthy in themselves, God
is pleased to pardon and accept them as righteous
in his sight, only for the righteousness sake of his
beloved Son. I am aware, indeed, that some who
speak much of “the merits of Christ,” and profess
to rely entirely on those merits, represent the
whole subject in a very different light. They
suppose that in consideration of the sufferings and
death of our blessed Saviour, the old, original law
of God, requiring perfect obedience, is repealed,
and a mitigated law now prescribed as the rule of
our obedience. So that now, under the Christian.
dispensation, a perfect obedience is not even re-
quired, but only an imperfect one, accommodated
to our fallen condition and our many infirmities.
But still, they insist, that this imperfect obedience
is the meritorious ground of our acceptance with
3+

<page 115>
22 LE t T E R S or
God; and, of course, that eternal life is the pur-
chase of our own obedience. In short, the doc-
trine of these errorists is, that the benefit conferred
by the sufferings and death of Christ, consists, not
in providing an entire righteousness for us, but
only in abating the demands of the law; in bring-
ing down the divine requisitions more to a level
with our ability; and still enabling us, low as we
have fallen, to be the purchasers of salvation by our
own works.
Be assured, dear children, this view of the sub-
ject is a grievous departure from the Scriptural
doctrine concerning the way of salvation. The
Bible represents our pardon and acceptance with
God as not founded, in any respect, or in any
degree, on our own obedience; but as wholly of
grace—as a mere unmerited gift, bestowed solely
on account of what the Redeemer has done as our
substitute and surety. It represents the holy law
of God as remaining in all its original strictness
without repeal or mitigation; and as falling with
the whole weight of its penalty on all the impeni-
tently guilty. But it declares that penalty to be
removed from those who repent and believe the
Gospel, not on account of any worthiness in them-
selves, as the meritorious ground of the benefit;
but only on account of the perfect righteousness of
Him who came to seek and save those who were
lost. In short, a gracious God saves his people
not by overlooking their sins; but by lifting the

<page 116>
A G R A N D F.A. T H E R . 23
penalty from them, and laying it upon the divine
Redeemer, and for his sake letting them go free,
and accepting them solely on account of his merit.
This righteousness of Jehovah the Saviour is
said to be “to all, and upon all them that be-
lieve;”—that is, it is imputed to none—set to the
account of none but those who receive Christ by
faith. Faith is that great master grace by which
we become united to the Saviour, and interested in
his atonement. This righteousness, therefore, is
called the righteousness of faith, and the right-
eousness of God by faith. Hence we are said to
be justified by faith, and to be saved by faith.
Not that faith, as an act of ours, is, in any
measure, the ground of our justification; but all
these expressions imply, that there is an insepara-
ble connexion, in the economy of grace, between
believing in Christ, and being justified by him, or
having his righteousness imputed to us. Happy,
thrice happy they, who can thus call the Saviour
theirs, and who have thus “received the atone-
ment ſ” Though unworthy in themselves, they
are graciously pronounced righteous by their
heavenly Judge, on account of what the Mediator
has done. Their sins, though many, are, for his
sake, forgiven them. They are freely justified
from all things from which they could not be jus-
tified by the law of Moses. They are “accepted in
the Beloved.” Though polluted and undeserving in
their own character, they are “complete in Him.”

<page 117>
24 L. E t t e R s O F
There is no condemnation to them now; and in
the day of judgment they shall find, to their eternal
joy, that there is both safety and happiness in
appearing in the righteousness of Him who loved
sinners, and gave himself for them, clothed in
“robes which have been washed and made white
in the blood of the Lamb.”
But we not only need to be justified by the
righteousness of Christ; we also indispensably
need to be sanctified by the Spirit of Christ.
Accordingly, the purification of our nature, as well
as the pardon of our sins, is one of the benefits
purchased by Him, and secured by covenant to all
believers. Hence the teaching and the sanctifying
power of the Holy Spirit must be regarded as an
essential part of the great salvation of which I am
speaking. We need as much to be delivered from
the love of sin as from its condemnation. And for
both, the plan of mercy held forth in the Gospel
of Christ, makes equal and effectual provision.
“Whom he justifies, them he also sanctifies; and
whom he sanctifies, them he also glorifies.” By
the power of the Holy Spirit, the dominion of sin
is broken in the hearts of all who are brought
under the power of the Gospel. The reign of
corruption in the soul is destroyed; the love of it
is taken away; and though not perfectly sanctified
in the present life, yet every believer has his sanc-
tification begun. It is carried on, not by his own
wisdom or strength, but by the same divine power

<page 118>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 25
by which it was commenced; until he is, at last,
made perfectly holy, as well as perfectly happy in
the presence of his God and Saviour.
Thus does it appear that salvation is all of grace,
sovereign, unmerited grace. The original devising
of the plan, in the eternal counsels of peace, was
prompted, not by any foresight of faith and holi-
ness in the fallen creature; but in mere grace.
The plan itself, in all its principles and provis-
ions makes our salvation perfectly gratuitous, and
wholly excludes all human merit. After the plan
was formed and executed, and the knowledge of it
imparted to us, no one would ever accept of it, did
not the same grace which formed it, incline the
sinner to lay aside his native opposition, and accept
of the offered mercy. And even after cordially
accepting it, no individual would ever cleave to his
hope, and continue to embrace it, and live under its
power, were he not “kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation.”
After the foregoing statement, the great question
is, what message does this plan of salvation bring
to you? The message which it brings, dear chil-
dren, is an unspeakably solemn one. It charges
you with being sinners—miserable sinners in the
sight of God—without merit—without help, and
without hope in yourselves. It offers you peace,
and pardon, and sanctification, and eternal life,
through the atoning sacrifice of the blessed Re-
deemer. It entreats you to lay aside your en-

<page 119>
26 L. E. T. T E R S or
mity, and to receive these benefits with humble
and adoring gratitude, as a free, unmerited gift,
“through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.”
Its language is, “Whosoever will, let him come,
and take of the water of life freely.” And again,
“Whosoever cometh to me, I will in no wise cast
out.” It calls upon you to renounce all confidence
in yourselves, and to receive and rest on Christ
alone for salvation as he is freely offered in the
Gospel; to receive him as the Lord your righteous-
ness, and the Lord your strength, and rejoice in
him as your only hope. To this end, it is indis-
pensable that you be convinced of sin; that you
experience a deep and cordial sense of your own
sinfulness and unworthiness; that you despair of
saving yourselves; that you fall at the footstool of
sovereign grace, feeling that you deserve to die,
and that you can have no hope but in the atoning
blood, and sanctifying Spirit of the Redeemer. It
is your duty and your privilege to go to the Saviour
at once, and cast yourselves on his mercy, without
waiting for any qualifications to render you worthy
of his favour. You are commanded to go to him
as miserable, helpless sinners, not with a price in
your hands; but to receive from him all that you
need to make you holy and happy here and here-
after. And until you are prepared thus to go to
him, as miserable, unworthy sinners, who deserve
God's wrath and curse forever; until you sincerely
feel that you have nothing to plead but the merit

<page 120>
A G. R. A. N. D F A T H E R . 27
of another; until you are ready to cast yourselves
at the feet of the Saviour, and to be indebted for
pardon and eternal life as a mere gift of grace, you
have yet to learn the vital element of practical reli-
gion.
Dear children! will you hesitate a moment—
will you wait for a second invitation to accept of
such a Saviour? Will you turn away with ingrati-
tude from such a salvation? Listen to the entreaty
of one who loves you, and who has no stronger
desire concerning you than to see you walking in
the Spirit, and enjoying the consolation of the
Gospel: or rather listen to the voice of that blessed
Saviour himself who died for sinners; and who
says to you, and to all who hear the Gospel—
“Come unto me all ye who labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. Him that cometh
unto me I will in no wise cast out.”
Think not, I beseech you, of putting off this
acceptance of the Saviour's love until you are far-
ther advanced in life. Do you forget that “the
ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all
her paths peace,” and that you cannot too soon
begin to be happy? Besides, have you any assu-
rance that you will live to be much more advanced
in age than you now are? Not long since, a
graduate of one of our colleges was heard to say,
“I have finished my college education. I will
now devote two years to the study of a profession;
and then I will take one year to see what there is

<page 121>
28 L. E. T. T. E. R. S. o F
in that mighty thing they call RELIGION.” So
calculated this careless, blooming youth. But be-
fore his plan was half accomplished, he suddenly
fell sick; was seized with delirium; and died
without hope. But there are facts, dear children,
which ought to come nearer home. Can you for-
get your beloved brother and sisters, who, in the
very threshold of their existence, were cut down,
and laid in the grave? And what security have
syou that you will live to see another year? But
even if you are permitted to live until you reach
adult age, or until you are old and grey-headed,
what reason have you to hope, if you go on hard-
ening yourselves against the Gospel until that time,
that you will then have grace given you to “con-
sider your ways?” O, how many who were in
youth thoughtful and tender, have become more
and more callous to every serious impression, as
they advanced in life, and have, at length, sunk
into the grave without hopel Be entreated, then,
dear children, now, while your hearts are tender;
before the world has twined around them a thou-
sand entanglements; before you become hardened
by inveterate habits of sin; be entreated to make
choice of that “good hope through grace,” which
will form the best treasure, and the only effectual
pledge of safety and happiness in the voyage of
life: the treasure which is emphatically “that
good part which can never be taken away from
you.”

<page 122>
A G R A N D F A T H E R. 29
L E T T E R IV.
T H E B I B L E .
DEAR CHILDREN:—If you were walking, in a
dark night, along a road full of sloughs, and pits,
and snares, and dangers of every kind, what would
you do for safety? You would naturally, if you
could obtain it, take a light in your hands. You
would also, if possible, engage a guide, strong and
faithful, well acquainted with the road, and quali-
fied to conduct and defend you. And, besides all
this, you would vigilantly look around you at
every step, and eagerly mark and avoid every spot
that had a suspicious or doubtful appearance.
Your situation, dear children, in the journey of
life, is precisely such as I have described; or
rather, I ought to say, “the half has not been told
you.” You are just entering on a world, dark,
corrupt, and full of allurement and danger. On
every side enemies lie in wait to deceive and be-
tray. You are and will be exposed to a thousand
temptations and perils from which you have no
wisdom or strength to deliver yourselves. You
need direction and guidance at every step. Now
the BIBLE presents the only complete and perfect
map of the road which you are travelling. It was
4

<page 123>
30 L. E. T. T. E. R. S. o F
given us to be “a light to our feet, and a lamp to
our path.” It exhibits, with unerring fidelity,
every enemy, every snare, every danger which
beset your path. It gives all the information, all
the warning, all the caution, and all the encourage-
ment which you need. It tells you, more perfectly
than any other book, all that you have to fear, and
all that you have to hope for. There is not a form
of error, or of corruption, against which it does not
put you on your guard; nor an excellence or a
duty which it does not direct you how to cultivate
and attain. “Wherewith,” asks the Psalmist,
“shall the young cleanse their way?”—“By
taking heed thereto,” he replies, “according to
thy word.”. No one ever made this holy Book
the guide of his life, without walking wisely,
safely, and happily; without finding the truest
enjoyment in this world, and eternal blessedness
in the world to come.
Can you wonder, then, beloved children, that I
place a high value on this blessed Book; that I
earnestly recommend it to your serious attention,
to your constant study, and to your devout and
affectionate application and confidence? Can you
wonder that I should delight to see it daily in your
hands; much of its sacred contents committed to
your memory; and your hearts deeply imbued
with its spirit and its power? You, no doubt,
remember how earnestly your precious Mother,
now gone to the God who gave this Book, recom-

<page 124>
A G R A N D F A T H E re. 31
mended it to your attention; how assiduously she
put it into your hands; how often she constrained
you to commit portions of it to memory; and how
frequently, on Sabbath evenings, she gathered you
round her to recite those portions in her hearing,
and to receive her instructions and counsels in
regard to them. Can you ever forget these scenes,
and the solemn, tender lessons which you then
received 7 Call to mind her earnest looks, her
affectionate tones, her unceasing labour to impress
the contents of this sacred Book on your minds
and hearts. Think of these things; and if you
can recollect them without gratitude to God for
such a mother, and without tears of regret that you
have not profited more by her faithful counsels,
you have less moral feeling, and less filial sensi-
bility than I have been accustomed to give you
credit for.
Why is it, my dear children, that so many
young people regard the Bible with aversion, and
consider the study of its pages, and especially com-
mitting them to memory, as a task and a burden?
When we reflect that it is sent to us from heaven;
that it contains the glad tidings of peace, and love,
and salvation to a lost world; that it is besides full
of the noblest specimens of literary beauty, and of
tender pathetic eloquence that the world ever saw;
that there is something in it adapted to touch the
finest and best cords of human sensibility—why is
it that you so often feel aversion to the study of

<page 125>
32 L. ET t E R s of
this volume, and would gladly be excused from
the task of perusing its chapters? Alas! dear
children, this is one of the many proofs that your
nature, as I before stated, is depraved; and that
you need the renewing and sanctifying power of
the Holy Spirit, before you can understand and
relish a book given by his inspiration. Every
feeling of reluctance to the study of this Book
which you experience, ought to fill you with
alarm, and to constrain you to cry mightily to God
that he would open your eyes and your hearts, and
give you that taste for the best of all books, without
which you cannot be prepared for the joys of his
presence. Consider, I beseech you, that, as you
have been made acquainted with this Book from
your earliest childhood, so you will have to give
an account for this knowledge. Many children
around you have never had the Bible put into their
hands; have never been taught to venerate and love
its sacred pages; but You have been informed of
its origin and value. You have enjoyed a privi-
lege denied to thousands. Will you not be grate-
ful for this privilege? Will you not manifest that
you know how to prize a gift of more value than
all the world beside? Can you deliberately con-
sent to meet the dreadful condemnation of those
who, from childhood, “knew the Master's will,
and did it not.”
I hope I need not remind you that the Book of
God is to be read with feelings and in a manner

<page 126>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 33
very different from those with which you read all
other books. When you have read books of
human composition once or twice, you have gotten
from them all they contain—you have done with
them. But with the perusal of the Bible you can
never have done. The oftener you go over it, if
you feel as you ought, the richer and more delight-
ful will it appear. You can never exhaust its
meaning or its interest. Like its divine Author, it
has a length and breadth and depth and height,
concerning which no human reader can ever say
that he has completely fathomed its meaning, or
measured its riches.
Other books are to be read with attention, and,
if they abound with truth and wisdom, with res-
pect; but the Book of God is to be read with the
deepest veneration, as containing the mind and
will of our heavenly Sovereign. In fact, every line
of it is to be considered as the voice of God speak-
ing to us. Woe to those, whether young or aged,
who can handle the Bible with levity, make sport
of its contents, or recite its solemn language as
matter of jest! The Lord will not hold them
guiltless who thus, practically, “take his name in
vain.” The Mohammedans manifest much more
reverence for their Koran, than many Christians
for the Bible. They never allow themselves to
touch it without washing their hands. They han-
dle it with the most pointed respect, never holding
it lower than their girdles. Every copy of it com
4* -

<page 127>
34 L ET. T E R S of
monly contains an inscription or label on the cover,
in these words—“Let none touch but those who
are clean.” How very differently do many, young
and old, among us, treat the Holy Scriptures!
I have often been distressed when I have seen
children toss about their Bibles, and even throw
them in the dirt, as they would the least valued of
their play-things, or rattle over some of the most
solemn language of the Bible with as little appa-
rent thought or respect as they would repeat the
veriest effusions of nonsense.
The Bible, farther, is to be read daily, and with
diligence, as containing that daily food from which
you are to derive spiritual aliment, and strength
continually. It is to be read with fixed attention,
seriously directing your mind to its rich and impor-
tant meaning; with humility, feeling your need of
the instruction and grace which it contains; with
prayer, imploring the guidance of the Holy Spirit,
that he may open your hearts to receive the en-
grafted word which is able to save your souls;
with application—asking continually—“How does
this concern me? Does it describe my case?
Does it not contain a lesson which demands my
special regard? Do I know any thing in my own
experience of what is here taught?”
In this precious Book you will find every thing
adapted to enlarge the mind, to gratify the taste, to
elevate the affections, and to purify the heart. If
you only sought the richest entertainment, you

<page 128>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 35
could not open a book more fitted to gratify you.
It is an inexhaustible mine of instruction as well as
of beauty—the deeper you dig, the richer will you
find its treasures. Its exquisite simplicity, its
pathos, its sublimity, its heavenly wisdom, its
purity, are all adapted to turn us away from the
vanities of the world; to enlarge our views be-
yond these regions of disorder and darkness; to
strengthen every high and holy motive; and to
lead us upward to Him who is the source and the
sum of all good. Happy, thrice happy will those
children and young people be, who early learn to
go to the BIBLE for all their sentiments, principles,
and rules of action; who learn daily to go to that
precious Book to direct them in their pursuits, to
comfort them in their sorrows, to guide them in
their perplexities, and to animate them in their
labours whatever they may bel Such have the
best pledge of temporal enjoyment, and of eternal
blessedness. When, therefore, those who love
you, and would in some measure take the place of
your dear departed Mother, daily put this precious
Book of God into your hands, and urge you to
read and commit to memory a portion of its con-
tents, do not allow yourselves to regard it as a
task or a burden. Think from whom it comes—
from the God who made you. Think of the great
purpose for which it was given—to make you
wise and eternally happy. Think of the only
means of making it truly profitable to you—study-

<page 129>
36 L E t t e it s of
ing it with devout attention, laying it up in your
hearts, and practising it in your lives. Think of
the solemn responsibility which the possession of
this Book lays upon you—for to whomsoever
much is given, of them shall much be required.
And may the great Author of this Book give you
grace to “seek for the heavenly wisdom which it
contains as silver, and search for it as for hid
treasures'.”

<page 130>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 37
L ET T E R V.
P. R. A. Y. E. R.
DEAR CHILDREN:—“Prayer is the offering up of
our desires to God, for things agreeable to his will,
in the name of Christ, with confession of our sins,
and thankful acknowledgment of his mercies.”
This is the definition given in a Catechism with
which you are familiar, and a more complete and
perfect one could scarcely be conceived. It is the
offering up of our sincere desires; for unless it be
sincere, it is but solemn mockery. It is to be
addressed to God alone; for prayer addressed to
any created being, is an act of treason to our right-
ful Sovereign. It is to be “for things agreeable to
the divine will;” or else it is unauthorized and
presumptuous. It is always to be presented in the
name of Christ; for there is no other name under
heaven given among men whereby we can draw
near to a holy God with acceptance, but the name
of Jesus Christ. It must be accompanied with
confession of sin; because the approach of a sin-
ner to God, without an humble sense and acknow-
ledgment of unworthiness, would be contrary to
every principle of reason, as well as to the Christian
plan of salvation. And, finally, it ought to include

<page 131>
38 L E t t e r s of
a thankful acknowledgment of divine mercies; for
without a grateful sense of God's goodness, we
cannot be in a frame of mind fitted to receive far-
ther favours.
I trust, dear children, I need not dwell long on
either the reasonableness or the duty of prayer.
If we are entirely dependent on God for every
temporal and spiritual blessing, then it is surely
reasonable that we acknowledge our dependence,
and apply to him with humility and earnestness
for his aid. If his favour is life, and his blessing
the best riches, it is evident that we ought to
supplicate them with importunity and perseverance.
If we are sinners, unworthy of the divine favour,
we ought to humble ourselves at his footstool, and
make confession of our sins with penitence and
obedience. If he has revealed a plan of mercy
and grace to us, of which he invites and commands
us to avail ourselves, then every principle of self
interest concurs with reason, in urging us to seek
with earnestness a participation in that mercy.
And if our Maker and Redeemer has, in so many
words, commanded us “by prayer and supplica-
tion with thanksgiving to make known our re-
quests to God,” who can question, for a moment,
the reasonableness of a compliance with that com-
mand?
Nor is the duty of prayer less apparent than its
reasonableness. The command of our Father in
heaven is—“Pray without ceasing—pray always

<page 132>
A G R A N D F A T H E R , 39
with all prayer and supplication, and abound there-
in with thanksgiving. I will be inquired of by my
people to do that for them which they need. Ask
and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For if
ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto
your children, how much more shall your Father
in heaven give his Holy Spirit to them that ask
him? All things whatsoever ye shall ask in
prayer, believing, ye shall receive. The effectual,
fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.
When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and
when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret, and thy Father which seeth in
secret, shall reward thee openly. If any one lack
wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth liberally,
and it shall be given him. Is any afflicted? let
him pray. Be careful for nothing; but in every
thing by prayer and supplication with thanks-
giving, let your requests be made known to God.
The Lord is rich in mercy to all that call upon
him. In the day of my trouble I called upon the
Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me out of all
my distresses.”
Such are some of the numerous passages of
Scripture which plainly require and encourage
prayer. Can any one who reads and believes the
Bible, doubt for a moment, that it is equally his
duty and his privilege to go daily to the throne of
grace to supplicate for all the temporal or spiritual

<page 133>
40 L E t t e r s or
good which he needs? I hope, my dear children,
you will not be disposed to say, notwithstanding
such express and positive declarations of God's
word, in the language of profane objectors of old—
“Wherefore should we seek after God? Does he
need to be informed of our wants? Can we, by
importunity, alter his purposes? Where is, then,
the advantage of asking for what we need? What
profit shall we have if we pray unto him?” If you
should ever be tempted to ask such a question, I
would answer—“Much every way.” God has
connected our asking for blessings with receiving
them. He has promised to hear and answer
prayer. He has condescended to say, that he will
regard with all the tenderness of a parent's heart,
the cries of his children. He has said in his word,
“Ye have not, because ye ask not.” This is
enough. But it is not all that is worthy of our
attention. Prayer is not intended to inform God,
but to benefit ourselves. It tends to remind us of
our dependence and unworthiness; to impress our
hearts with a deeper sense of the divine goodness
and mercy; and to beget in our minds that humble,
grateful, tender sense of our own weakness, and of
our obligation to the Author of all good, which
constitute the best preparation for receiving the
gracious gifts of our heavenly Parent.
While your precious, lamented Mother was
alive, what a privilege did you consider it to be
allowed to go to her in all your troubles, and to

<page 134>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 41
make known to her all your desires! How much
greater the privilege to be allowed every hour free
access to your Father in heaven, with all your
anxieties and distresses, to pour out all your wants
and wishes, your hopes and fears into the bosom
of an Almighty Friend, who is ever able and ready
to help!
Since, then, dear children, there are so many
reasons prompting you to prayer; since you are
always weak, always dependant, always unworthy,
and always in need, can you doubt that it is your
duty and your interest to abound in prayer? Let
me entreat you, therefore, never to suffer a day to
pass without engaging in this delightful and most
reasonable exercise. Set apart fixed times for the
purpose, that you may form such habits as will
aid your memory, and prevent your neglecting it.
Retire as soon as you can, after rising in the morn-
ing, to return thanks for the mercies of the night,
and to implore the protection, the guidance, and
the blessing of your heavenly Father, through the
day. And in the evening, before drowsiness over-
takes you, retire again, to praise him for the mer-
cies of the day, and to ask for his guardianship
during the night watches. But are these the only
subjects of prayer? Far from it. They are
numerous as the moments you live, and various
as the objects which you are called to contemplate.
Pray in the morning, that God would keep you
from all evil in body or soul, through the day; that
5 -

<page 135>
42 L ET. T. E. R. S. of
he would create in you a clean heart, and renew
within you a right spirit; that he would guard
your speech and behaviour at all times, and in
every situation; that he would enable you to mor-
tify and subdue every sinful affection, and to over-
come every improper habit; that he would deliver
you from sloth, and pride, and vanity, and malice,
and envy, and every evil temper; that he would
enable you to treat all around you in a dutiful and
becoming manner; in a word, that he would enable
you to spend the day in a manner profitable to
yourselves, and to the benefit of all around you.
And in the evening pray, that he would pardon all
the deficiencies and infirmities of the preceding
day; that he would make you grateful for all the
favours of his merciful Providence; that he would
watch over you during the hours of darkness and
repose; and bring you to the light of another day
in health, in the exercise of your reason, and in
the enjoyment of his favour and love.
And while you thus pray daily for yourselves,
it is your privilege and duty to include in your
petitions all with whom you are connected in the
various relations of life. You ought to pray con-
tinually for your beloved father, who is engaged
in such important labour for the Church, and who
loves you with an affection and solicitude which
you can never repay; for your grandparents, who
are daily praying for you, and who are falling
more and more under the infirmities of age; for

<page 136>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 43
one another, that you may be guided and blessed
amidst all the temptations and dangers of youth;
for your teachers; for your school-mates; for the
poor children around you, who have none of the
advantages of instruction and restraint which you
enjoy; for your friends, and neighbours, and all
with whom you are acquainted. O, my dear
children, if you prayed as you ought every day for
all these, how much happier would you be! What
a benign influence it would have on your whole
temper and conduct! It would make you kind,
tender hearted, and forgiving toward all with whom
you conversed; and make all of them, in their
turn, love you as a friend and benefactor.
Let me make, on this subject, one more sugges-
tion. Most people, especially most young people,
have no idea of engaging in prayer unless at par-
ticular times when they retire for the purpose. I
wish you all, dear children, besides your stated
seasons of prayer, morning and evening, to form
the habit of lifting up your thoughts and your
desires to God in any and every situation; when
walking by the way; when surrounded with com-
pany; when met by any call of duty, or by any
circumstance of a doubtful aspect, or perplexing
character—be in the habit of silently but devoutly
looking up to God for wisdom and strength to per-
form every duty. This kind of intercourse with
God may be carried on at all times, and in all
situations; and, I will add, was never sincerely

<page 137>
44 L ET T E R S o F
adopted by any one without being connected with
guidance and consolations of unspeakable value.
In this way the suggestion of the apostle in
writing to Timothy will be realized, that “every
thing be sanctified by the word of God, and
prayer.”

<page 138>
A G R A N D F A T H E R. 45
L E T T E R V I.
c U L T 1 v AT I o N of T H E M I N D.
DEAR CHILDREN:—That every human being is
bound to cultivate, in the best manner, the intel-
lectual powers which God has given him, I hope
you will take for granted, anterior to all argument;
and, although the moral aspects of education are
the most vitally important, yet as no one can be a
moral agent without some degree of intellect; so
it may be said, that the wisest and best culture
even of our moral powers, depends more on the
discipline, the enlargement, and the furniture of the
intellect, than is commonly supposed.
The cultivation of the mind comprises two
things, and two only, viz: giving it proper habits
of exercise, and filling it with useful knowledge.
The case is precisely similar with regard to the
body. The sum total of all that we are called to
do for the benefit of the body, is to secure its
strength by constant and wholesome action or
exercise, and to furnish it with appropriate nourish-
ment. On the one hand, were its eacercise ever so
abundant, if left without aliment, it would speedily
sink into weakness and death; and, on the other,
if its aliment be ever so plentiful and rich, yet if it
5*

<page 139>
46 L E. T. T E R S o F
be left wholly without exercise, it will soon become
a mass of disease and corruption. Precisely so is
it in the cultivation of the mind. Exercise and
aliment are equally indispensable, and must go
together. If the mind be not taught to think, and
to feel an appetite for intellectual provision, all the
knowledge in the world, if introduced into it,
would be of little use. But, if it be taught only to
think and feel, and be furnished with none of the
appropriate aliment of knowledge, it cannot grow
either in strength, or in a capacity to act its part in
the world with dignity or usefulness.
As these principles lie at the foundation of all
intellectual culture, so they are also adapted to
instruct us with regard to the wisest and best means
of conducting that culture, with regard to the de-
partments of knowledge most worthy of being
studied, and the relative stress which ought to be
laid on different pursuits. If you would be trained
up merely to be splendid butterflies, to shine and
to please the superficial and the empty, for a day,
and, having done this, to die like senseless insects;
why, then, a corresponding plan of culture must
be adopted. But, if you wish to be regarded as
rational creatures; to be prepared for sober thought
and action; to “serve your generation by the will
of God;” to die in peace, and to be remembered
with love and veneration when you are gone, then
it is perfectly manifest a very different method of
training is indispensable.

<page 140>
A G. r. A N D F A T H E R . 47
I trust you will not hesitate a moment in
deciding which of these courses you ought to
choose. I trust the way of practical wisdom, of
piety, and of usefulness, will be the object of your
prompt and decisive choice. If so, the course of
mental culture which you ought to adopt, cannot
possibly be mistaken by a mind of the least reflec-
tion. If you are to feel and act as moral account-
able agents, and to consider human life as a serious,
momentous thing; then, doubtless, you will feel
that you are bound, first of all, and above all, to
exercise your minds in such a manner, and to store
them with such branches of knowledge, as will
tend most effectually to enlarge them, to strengthen
them, to inspire them with practical wisdom, and
to furnish them with the means of the most solid
and extensive usefulness.
Upon this principle, I would say, let your first
and chief attention be directed to those branches of
knowledge which lie at the foundation of all that is
enlarged, liberal, and elevated in human pursuits;
such as Grammar, Rhetoric, Geography, the Latin,
Greek, and French languages, Natural and Moral
Philosophy, the elements of Mathematical science,
Chemistry, and as many of the branches of Natural
History as may be within your reach, especially
Botany and Mineralogy. These are all proper for
both sexes; and the more you gain of all of them,
the better fitted will you be both for enjoying life,
and for fulfilling its various and momentous duties.

<page 141>
48 L E T T E R S OF
I grant, indeed, my dear grandson, that with regard
to what is denominated Classic literature, and
Mathematics, I wish you to go more thoroughly to
work, than would be desirable, or perhaps proper,
for your sisters. But I hope that neither of these
will be entirely neglected by them. For I have an
impression, that the careful study, to a certain
extent, of the best of the dead languages, and an
intelligent acquaintance with the elementary prin-
ciples of Mathematics, ought to be omitted by none
who can possibly attain them. In my opinion,
they are adapted to produce an effect on the mind,
and to diffuse an influence over all its other acqui-
sitions, more happy and more important than is
commonly recognised, even by many of the edu-
cated themselves.
Besides the popular sciences just mentioned,
with which every human being who can afford it,
ought to seek some good acquaintance, there is an
extensive and important field of knowlege, which
is defined by the general term of literature, and,
in our case, of English Literature. There is a
large class of writers, with whose works every one
who claims to be intelligent and well informed,
must be familiar. To this department belongs the
whole subject of History, which, I trust, will
receive the serious attention of all of you; and
about which I hope you will take enlightened
advice, as a number of the most attractive and
popular writers in this department, are unfit to be

<page 142>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 49
perused without much reserve and caution. To
these, of course, ought to be added, those great
writers, both in prose and poetry, which deserve
to be ranked as English Classics; and, with
which, I feel confident, you will seize the earliest
opportunity of becoming acquainted. I refer to
such writers as Milton, Shakspeare, Dryden, Ad-
dison, Steele, Pope, Thompson, Gray, Young,
Goldsmith, Johnson, Cowper, Beattie, and a num-
ber of others, whom I cannot pause to specify, but
with whom it would be highly discreditable not
to have some intimate knowledge. Without an
acquaintance with these writers, you cannot appre-
ciate the riches, the beauties, or the purity of your
vernacular tongue, or form for yourselves a good
style of writing. In these writers, too, you will
find a great store-house of fine sentiment, as well
as diction, adapted greatly to enlarge and elevate
the mind, to impart to it its highest polish, and to
prepare it for its best efforts.
There are certain accomplishments commonly
called ornamental, deemed by many desirable for
females, and by some considered as of much con-
sequence. Among these are dancing, music, paint-
ing, drawing, embroidery, &c. With regard to
dancing, your beloved grandmother and myself
never thought proper to permit any of our own
children to be instructed in this art; not because
we thought the act of dancing itself criminal, but
because we considered it as inseparably and almost

<page 143>
50 L ET. T E R S OF
necessarily connected with the whole system of
balls, dancing assemblies, midnight parties, &c.,
all of which we deemed criminal, and in a great
variety of ways, hostile to the principles and
the claims of true religion. We do, indeed, find
dancing spoken of in the Old Testament Scriptures,
as having been employed, even on occasions of reli-
gious joy; but never on such occasions do we read
of the midnight dance, nor of promiscuous dancing,
that is, of the sexes together. And with respect to
the New Testament, we read there of only one
actual dance, and that was performed by a profli-
gate woman, and connected with crime of the most
attrocious and revolting character.
As to music, I am persuaded it is the duty of
every one who is able to do it, to acquire the
power of uniting in the social praise of God with
excellence and efficiency. The cultivation of
vocal music, and the attainment of such a degree
of skill in it as is essential to imparting an interest
in the exercise, are conducive to health and favour-
able to moral and spiritual improvement. So far, I
am confident you ought all to go. And if my
granddaughters should have a special taste and
love for instrumental music, I am by no means
prepared to advise that they deny themselves the
pleasure. It is an elegant accomplishment, and
when wisely employed, may be connected with
innocent pleasure, and sometimes with benefit.
But I should deeply regret to find them aiming at

<page 144>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 51
that eacquisite skill in instrumental music, which
cannot be attained without great expense, much
loss of time, and that intense and long continued
attention which cannot fail to engross the mind and
stand in the way of more worthy objects of pursuit,
if it do not wholly exclude them. This is so
unworthy of a rational accountable creature, that
I would infinitely rather my dear grandchildren
should know nothing of music, than that they
should carry their zeal for it, and their devotion to
it, to such an injurious length. And as to my
dear grandson, while I hope always to hear him
unite in singing the praises of God in the sanctu-
ary with taste and skill, it would give me unspeak-
able pain to hear that he was regarded as a highly
acceptable and admired singer at convivial meetings,
and that his company was courted on that account.
I concur in opinion with the old Grecian sage, who,
when a young gentleman of his acquaintance, of
respectable station and employment in society, had
performed on an instrument of music with consum-
mate skill and effect, said to him, “Are you not
ashamed, my young friend, to play so well ?”
In conducting the intellectual culture of the
young, there is one question which I presume you
will not fail to ask, and which I wish to anticipate
and answer in this little system of affectionate
advices. The question is, whether Novels ought
to have any place in the course of reading pre-
scribed for young people? This is a question of

<page 145>
52 L ET. T E R S OF
exceeding great importance. When I was a youth
it was far less interesting and momentous, as a
practical matter, than it has now become. Three
quarters of a century, and more especially a cen-
tury ago, the number of this class of writings was
so small, and their popular circulation so inconsi-
derable, that their influence was scarcely worthy of
notice, compared with that which they have more
recently exerted, and which they are daily going
on to extend. Bear with me then, dear children,
while I dwell a little on this subject, and call your
attention to some thoughts which I pray God may
be deeply impressed upon your minds.
That fictitious history is not in its own nature
and necessarily criminal, will probably be acknow-
ledged by all. It may be so construed as to awaken
curiosity, to excite sympathy, and to impress the
understanding and the heart in a salutary manner.
Of course, to condemn every thing of the kind as
such, and however constructed or employed, would
be to pronounce an unjust judgment. Hence we
find examples of this mode of instruction in the
holy Scriptures; and on the same principle, some
of the wisest and best human teachers in all ages,
have used the vehicle of lively and interesting
fiction, known to be such at the time, for insinua-
ting into the mind moral and religious lessons,
which in a different form, might not so readily
have gained admittance.
But the great error of modern times is two-fold;

<page 146>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 53
First, in multiplying publications of this kind,
until they bear an inordinate and injurious propor-
tion in the current literature of the day; and,
Secondly, in constructing them upon a plan adapted
to degrade virtue and piety, to recommend vice,
and of course to prove seductive and immoral in
their whole influence.
Even when such works are perfectly unexcep-
tionable in their character; when they are wholly
free from any thing improper, either in language or
sentiment, they may be productive of incalculable
mischief, if, as now, they are issued in excessive
numbers and quantity. Leaving the character of
modern novels entirely out of the question, the
enormous number which for the last half century
has been every day increasing, has become a
grievous intellectual and moral nuisance. As
long as they were few in number, and were
regarded not as the substance, but only as the
seasoning of the literary feast, they occupied but a
small share of public attention. The chief time
and attention of the reading portion of the commu-
nity were mainly devoted to works of substantial
value, fitted to strengthen, enlarge, and enrich the
mind. But, within the last twenty or thirty years,
the number of novels has increased so rapidly;
they have become so prominent and alluring a
part of the current literature of the day; and by
their stimulating and inexhaustible variety, have so
drawn away the minds of the aged as well as the
6

<page 147>
54 L ET. T E R S o F
young from solid reading, that they have formed
the principal reading of a large portion of the com-
munity, and, of course, have become a snare and
an injury to an extent not easily calculated. As
long as exhilarating gases, or other stimulating sub-
stances, are administered sparingly, and as medi-
cines, they may be altogether harmless, and even
essentially useful. But, when those who have
taken them for some time in this manner, become
so enamoured with them as to be no longer satis-
fied with their moderate and salutary use, but
make them their daily and principal aliment, they
become inevitably mischievous. They destroy the
tone of the stomach, and, in the end, radically
undermine the health.
So it is with the insidious excitement of novels.
Were the reader of them to take none into his
hands but those which might be safely pronounced
perfectly pure and innocent; and were he certain
that he would never be tempted to go beyond the
most moderate bounds in seeking and perusing
even such, there would, perhaps, be little danger
to be apprehended. But no one can be thus cer-
tain of either. The general stimulus of fictitious
narrative is morbid and disorderly. It excites the
mind, but cannot fill or enrich it. The probability
is, that he who allows himself to enter on this
course, will be led on, like the miserable tippler,
from one stage of indulgence to another, until his
appetite is perverted; his power of self-denial and

<page 148>
A G. R.A. N. D F A T H E R . 55
restraint lost; and his ruin finally sealed; or, at
least, his mind so completely indisposed and unfit-
ted for the sober realities of practical wisdom, for
the pursuits of solid science and literature, as to be
consigned to the class of superficial drivellers as
long as he lives.
The truth is, novels—even the purest and best
of them—are adapted, not to instruct, but only to
amuse; not to nourish and strengthen, but only to
eachilarate. They even enervate the mind; they
generate a sickliness of fancy; and they render the
ordinary affairs and duties of life altogether unin-
teresting and insipid. After wading through hun-
dreds of the most unexceptionable volumes belong-
ing to this class—what has been gained? What
has been laid up for future use? Nothing. Not a
trace of any thing useful has been left behind. The
days and nights devoted to their perusal have been
absolutely lost. What infatuation is it for a rational
creature who is sent into the world for serious and
important purposes, and who is hastening to the
judgment seat, thus to waste precious time; and,
what is worse, thus to pervert his mind, and dis-
qualify himself for sober employments! The cele-
brated Dr. Goldsmith, in writing to his brother,
respecting the education of his son, expresses him-
self in the following strong terms, which are the
more remarkable, as he himself had written a
novel:—“Above all things, never let your son
touch a romance or novel. These paint beauty in

<page 149>
56 L ET. T E R S OF
colours more charming than nature, and describe
happiness that man never tastes. How delusive,
how destructive are those pictures of consummate
bliss' They teach the youthful mind to sigh
after beauty and happiness which never existed;
to despise the little good which fortune has mixed
in our cup, by expecting more than she ever gave;
and, in general, take the word of a man who has
seen the world, and has studied human nature
more by experience than precepts—take my word
for it, I say, that such books teach us very little of
the world.” He might have gone farther, and
said—They teach us little of any thing; and so
pervert the taste, as to take away all relish for
applying the mind to any thing sober or useful.
Often have I known young men and women so
bewitched by novels, that they could read nothing
else. They sought for new works of this class in
every direction; devoured them with insatiable
avidity; and became less and less disposed for
pursuing any study either prescribed by their pre-
ceptors, or adapted to promote their ultimate enjoy-
ment; until their prospects for both worlds were
irrecoverably overcast with clouds and darkness.
Imagine not, dear children, that you will exer-
cise more resolution than others, and thus avoid
the snare of which I have spoken. You cannot
* Life of Goldsmith, prefixed to his Miscellaneous
Works.

<page 150>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 57
answer for yourselves in this matter, any more
than the man who is constantly exposed to the
temptation of stimulating drinks can be sure of
escaping the danger. Rely upon it, the more con-
fident you are of your own wisdom and firmness
in avoiding the evil in question, the greater your
peril. In this, as in many other things, the only
complete safety is to be found in wholly avoiding
the dangerous territory.
But there is another source of evil in this depart-
ment of literature, still more serious and formi-
dable. A very large proportion of modern novels,
are far from being innocent. They are positively
seductive and corrupting in their tendency. They
make virtue to appear contemptible, and vice
attractive, honourable, and triumphant. Folly and
crime have palliative and even commendatory names
bestowed upon them. The omnipotence of love
over all obligations and all duties, is continually
maintained; and the extravagance of sinful passion
represented as the effect of amiable sensibility.
Surely these representations can have no other
tendency than to pervert the moral sentiments, and
to corrupt the hearts of those who habitually dwell
upon them. And even though they be, at first,
contemplated with abhorrence, no one can tell how
soon the mind may be gradually and insidiously
reconciled to them, by familiarity with the infec-
tious influence.
For example; the novels of Sir Walter Scott
6*

<page 151>
58 L ET. T E R S o F
have been read with eager delight by millions of
the young and the old; and many pronounce them
at least innocent. But those who read them with
intelligence, and with a proper estimate of the
times and the characters which he undertakes to
portray, will perceive that the writer arrays him-
self against the patriotism and the piety of some
of the best men that ever adorned the history of
his country; that he exhibits orthodoxy and zeal
under the guise of enthusiasm and fanaticism; that
he strives to cover with dishonour, men “of whom
the world was not worthy;” and to elevate and
canonize their persecutors. In short, that his
general influence is wholly unfriendly to religion.
These characteristics pervade the most popular
of his novels. Of course few of his readers,
especially of his youthful readers, are aware of his
misrepresentation, and, therefore, are not armed
against the mischievous influence.
But there is a poison lurking in this field, still
more virulent and fatal. A large portion of novels
may be charged with being seductive and immoral,
upon a more refined and deep laid plan. They
are systematic, and, in some instances, ingenious
and plausible apologies for the most atrocious
crimes. In many modern productions of this kind,
the intelligent reader will recognise the following
process of representation: Corrupt opinions are
put into the mouth of some favourite hero, the
splendour of whose character, in other respects, is

<page 152>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 59
made to embellish the principles which he holds,
and the force of whose eloquence is employed to
recommend the most unreasonable and mischievous
dogmas. When this hero commits a crime, and
when, by this crime, according to the fixed laws
of the divine government, he is involved in serious
difficulty, if not lasting and fatal misery, the
fashionable novelist endeavours to throw the blame
on the religious and moral institutions of society,
as narrow, illiberal, and unjust. When a splendid
but corrupt woman, has forsaken the paths of
virtue, and when she suffers in her reputation and
her comfort, by such conduct, all this is ascribed
to “the wretched state of civilization”—to “the
deplorable condition of society.” Every oppor-
tunity is taken to attack some essential principle of
morality, under the title of a “prejudice;” to
ridicule the duties of conjugal and domestic life, as
flowing from “contracted” and “slavish” views;
to stigmatize the sober pursuits of honest industry,
as “dull” and “spiritless;” and, in a word, to
frame an apology for robbery, murder, suicide, and
the indulgence of every propensity, for which a
corrupt heart can plead an inclination.
Now, my dear children, when novels of this
kind are placed on the shelves of every circulating
library, and strewed over every part of our land,
what security have youthful novel-readers that
many of this class will not fall into their hands,
and that they may not imbibe the fatal poison

<page 153>
60 L ET T E R S o F
before they are aware? Is it any wonder that
wise parents and guardians are painfully appre-
hensive of such danger? Many amiable and well-
intentioned young people, who fancied they were
gaining amusement only, have been unwarily be-
trayed into opinions, and prepared for practices
which they would once have regarded with abhor-
rence, and which ultimately led them into error,
crime, and ruin. Since, then, there are so many
novels of this insidious and baneful character; and
since it is by no means easy for the young and
inexperienced to distinguish between the innocent
and the vile, you will not wonder that I advise,
nay, entreat you to avoid the reading of novels
altogether; never to allow yourselves to take a
volume of this kind into your hands at all. The
most innocent of them, as you have seen, are
worthless, and the perusal even of them, a waste
of time; and if you allow yourselves to touch any
of them, you will be in danger of being led astray
to an extent which you can hardly be made to
anticipate. I beseech you, dear children, trust
one who sincerely loves you; who understands
the subject of which he is speaking; and who
would not deprive you of a single safe or solid
pleasure—trust him when he earnestly exhorts
you, NEVER TO READ A Novel.
You will, perhaps, ask, what is my opinion of
what are called “religious novels,” that is, of fic-
titious narrative, designed to illustrate and recom-

<page 154>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 61
mend religion? I am compelled to say, that my
deliberate judgment is unfavourable to these also.
They are neither edifying nor safe as instructors in
the great department of religion. I do not deny
that some of this class may be adapted to do good,
and may have been actually useful. But this is
not the question. The question is, whether, as a
system, it is better to instruct in religion through
the medium of fictitious narrative, and by means of
thrilling incidents, or by plain, sober, didactic, and
exhortatory address. In general, I cannot help
deciding in favour of the latter. The reason why
the large majority of mankind prefer fictitious nar-
rative is, that they love eaccitement; and most
youthful readers will be more likely to take inte-
rest in the “story,” than in the moral lessons
which it conveys. Condiments and stimulants are
useful in our food; but to make our daily food
consist wholly or mainly of condiments and stimu-
lants, would not, surely, be wise or salutary.
But this is not the worst. Among the novels
called religious, there are various classes. Almost
all the different religious denominations have issued
novels appropriate to their respective sectarian cha-
racters. We not only have those which have been
put forth by the friends of truth and piety; but,
also, many by the advocates of error. Socinianism
is now strenuously inculcated through the medium
of fictitious narrative. Cold Pelagianism on the one
hand, and Antinomianism on the other, have been

<page 155>
62 L c t T E R S OF
presented in the same manner. Amidst these alter-
nate pleadings of orthodoxy and heresy, how shall
the youthful learner discriminate? Were he to
take up a didactic treatise in favour of Socinian or
Pelagian opinions, he would see the error in a
moment, and be on his guard against it. But
when he is borne away by the excitement of a
stirring narrative, and a spirited, eloquent dialogue,
he may imbibe the poison of error, before he is
aware.
You must not, dear children, consider me as
fanciful, if I express an opinion, that the present
prevailing state of mind of the religious public has
some connexion with that class of novels of which
I am now speaking. The most striking character-
istic of the present time is a love of excitement.
The old and sober mode of proceeding in any
thing has become unpopular and intolerable. Our
children can scarcely be prevailed upon to read
any thing unless it comes in the shape of a striking
story. If any one wishes a pious tract to be read,
he must construct it in the form of a thrilling ficti-
tious narrative. Every dish must be highly season-
ed; every draught must be a dram. Is it any
wonder that, in such a condition of the public
taste, all old methods of doing good should be des-
pised, and the Church as well as the world filled
with new opinions, new estimates of things, and
“new measures?”
Be assured, when your mind is brought, by any

<page 156>
A a RAND F At H E R. 63
means, whether by an insatiable love of fictitious
narrative, or by any other form of exciting compo-
sition, to relish nothing conveyed in the old form of
solid, didactic, direct instruction, it is high time
to examine whether you are not acquiring habits
unfriendly to sober thought, to the best mental
culture, and to the acquirement of the most va.
luable knowledge. How often have I met with
young people, of both sexes, who could talk flu-
ently, and with apparent intelligence, of the vol-
umes of Miss Burney, Mrs. Radcliffe, Madame
De Stael, Miss Edgeworth, and Scott, and Cooper,
and Bulwer, and even of the depraved and infa-
mous Byron;–but, who were struck dumb if you
spoke to them of Shakspeare; of Bacon; of Mil-
ton; of Addison; of Thompson; of Young; of
Dryden; of Pope, and Johnson, and Robertson,
and Junius, and Cowper, and other English clas-
sics, of whom, if they had ever heard, they seemed
to know nothing! Is this the way to cultivate the
mind? Does this speak for or against the devourer
of novels?
The sum of my counsel, then, under this head,
is, that if you wish really to cultivate your minds,
and to prepare them for healthful and useful ac-
tion, let your studies be solid, diligent, and perse-
vering. Let your reading be such as will fill your
minds with the knowledge of facts, principles, and
sentiments of the enriching and elevating kind.
Let your first and most intimate acquaintance be

<page 157>
64 L E. T. T E R S OF
with those authors whose works will tend to fit
you for answering the great purpose for which you
were sent into the world. Carefully avoid every
species of reading which tends to turn away your
minds from sober, practical views of life and duty.
And remember that, for every book you read, and
for every mental influence which you invite, you
have to render a solemn account.
There is one more counsel, dear children, with
which I will close this letter. It is, that whatever
subject you study—whatever book you read, you
do it faithfully and thoroughly. Leave nothing
until you understand it well;—until you have, as
far as possible, gone to the bottom of it. You
may rely upon it that no solid knowledge is to be
gained without patient, unwearied labour. Be not
in haste, then, to pass on to another subject or
lesson, until you have completely mastered that in
which you may be engaged. Be not contented
with merely enabling yourselves to recite a lesson
with plausible fluency. Be sure that you tho-
roughly comprehend, not only its obvious mean-
ing, but also its elementary principles. Despise
the indolence of those, who, in learning languages,
are constantly using the miserable crutches of
translations, instead of walking with the use of
their own limbs; and who, whenever a difficulty
occurs in mathematics, or any other subject, in-
stead of delving it out themselves, ignobly ask help
from some wiser and better scholar. This is

<page 158>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 65
cheating yourselves. That which is gained by
your own efforts, and with considerable labour,
will be better understood, and more firmly lodged
in the mind, than that which is imparted gratui-
tously by others, without any vigorous mental
exercise on your part.
The fact is, the pursuit of knowledge may be
compared to the task of one who is called to cross
a high and craggy mountain. If he is willing to
forego his own best interests, both as to bodily
and mental health, he may employ some sturdy,
athletic assistant to take him up in his arms, and
bear him over the steep ascent, and deposit him in
safety on the other side, without the use of a mus-
cle of his own. But what would he be the better
for it, at the end of his journey ! His limbs would
not be braced. His chest would not be expanded.
He would miss, a thousand interesting objects of
attention which the use of his own feet would have
brought to his view. After a thousand such boast-
ed expeditions, he might live and die the same
feeble, nervous dyspeptic, that he was when he set
out. Whereas, he who resolves to climb the same
mountain by his own efforts; who addresses him.
self to the task with patient persevering labour;
who takes step after step, slowly, but wisely and
firmly; may not gain the ascent quite as speedily
as his weaker contemporary; but he will gain it
much more to his own profit and comfort, and, in
the end, find every power invigorated by the
7

<page 159>
66 L ET. T E R S OF
enterprise. O, if children and young people could
feel how foolish it is to procure themselves to be
borne up the mountain of knowledge by others,
instead of climbing it themselves, they would des-
pise all the “labour-saving machinery” to which
many of them are so fond of resorting; and would
remember that what is gained by their own intel-
lectual efforts, is more solid, wears better, digests
better, and is productive of richer fruit, both to
themselves and others. t
It is a law impressed by our Maker on the intel-
lectual, as well as the physical man, that “if any
will not work, neither shall he eat.” It is a real
blessing, if we did but know it, to have labour con-
nected with all our attainments. Thus do we best
answer the great end of our being; thus do we
invigorate every power, and become prepared most
effectually to “serve our generation by the will of
God.

<page 160>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 67
L E T T E R V II.
CULTIVATION OF THE HEART, AND THE
MORAL HABITS,
DEAR CHILDREN:—By the heart, I mean the mo-
ral feelings, dispositions, and affections. And by
cultivating the heart, I mean directing much atten-
tion to restraining, regulating, and purifying all its
exercises. This may be said to lie at the founda-
tion of all duty and all happiness. Were your
intellectual powers cultivated with all possible care
and success, and your moral faculties neglected,
you might be polished and elegant demons; but
would be miserable yourselves, and a curse to
society. Whether, therefore, you regard your own
present enjoyment, and everlasting welfare, or the
happiness of those around you, you cannot too
early remember the great purpose for which you
were sent into the world, and the relations which
you sustain as rational, social, and immortal crea-
tures. You cannot too early or too diligently learn
to restrain your passions; to deny yourselves; and
to cultivate those benevolent, meek, humble, and
amiable habits, which are indispensable to tran-
quillity and peace of mind, and which alone can
prepare you to adorn and bless the social circles

<page 161>
68 L. E. T. T E R S o F
with which you may be connected. I draw your
attention the more earnestly to this great subject
because I see so many young people who appear
never to think of the importance, or even utility of
this part of their education.
If you have not learned, dear children, that you
are by nature prone to be proud, vain, selfish,
envious, irascible, sensual, malignant, and, in a
word, to indulge the various appetites and passions
which tend to destroy your own peace, and to
invade the comfort of those around you; if you
have not discovered that this is the tendency of
your nature, and that resisting it will call for much
self-denial, and continual, and sometimes for agon-
izing effort, you have attended less to your own
feelings, and habits, and less to the character of
your friends and associates than I am willing to
suppose.
Perhaps you will ask—Does not religion cover
all this ground? Where the power of Christian
principle reigns in the heart, will not every thing
intended to be included in this letter follow as a
matter of course? If the plan of salvation, treated
in a former letter, be received and obeyed, will not
all the objects contemplated in the present letter,
be included and secured? Whence, then, the
necessity, or even the propriety, of making it mat-
ter of separate consideration? I answer, the reli-
gion of Christ, in its spirit and power, does indeed
embrace all moral excellence. It does, in fact,

<page 162>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 69
where it bears appropriate and entire sway, include
every moral feeling, affection, and habit, which
can adorn and elevate human nature. And yet it
is to be lamented that many who cherish the
Christian hope, are not as much aware of this fact
as they ought to be; and are not so careful to
exhibit all the loveliness, as well as the purity
of example which become them, as is desirable.
And, besides, I have always found that there is a
great advantage in pursuing rather more into detail
the various branches of the Christian temper, than
is commonly done even in the best treatises on
religious character and duty. The French have a
phrase which expresses more exactly than any
English one which I can recollect, my meaning in
the title of this letter. The phrase I refer to, is
Les petites morales; by which they appear to
understand those moral delicacies of feeling, tem-
per, and intercourse, which, though not always
found actually shining in every professing, or even
every real Christian, do really belong to the Chris-
tian code of ethics, and are indispensable to a com-
plete and exemplary character.
The duties which grow out of our relations to
God, are generally acknowledged by all professors
of religion. However defective their obedience,
their obligations are seldom disputed. But if it be
the law of God, not only that we should “love
Him with all our heart and soul and strength and
mind,” but also that we should “love our neigh-
7+

<page 163>
70 L. E. T. T E R S OF
bours as ourselves,” then the duties growing out of
this great law are more multiplied, tender, delicate
and important than most of those who are called
religious people recognise in practice, or even in
theory. '
It is true, the root of all sound morality is reli-
gion. And it is equally true, that the deeper sense
any one has of the constraining love of Christ, and
of the holiness, majesty, omniscience, and omni-
presence of God, the more faithful he will be in
the discharge of all moral duties, both in private
and in public. Labour then, day by day, to gain
a deeper impression of the claims of your Creator
and Redeemer upon you. Meditate much on the
Divine glory. Cultivate a devout spirit. Study
to walk with God in the exercise of faith, and
love, and prayer. And endeavour to keep con-
stantly before your minds his all seeing eye, his
infinite holiness, his judgment seat, and those
righteous retributions which he has in store for all
his creatures, whether they be good, or whether
they be evil? This is cultivating the heart in the
most essential and radical sense. This is going to
“the root of the matter.” That morality, and
that alone, which is grafted upon this sanctified
stock, will be regarded with approbation by the
. Searcher of hearts, and stand the test of the great
day.
But while you labour with your hearts, that
they may be habitually laid open, with all the soft-

<page 164>
A G. r. A N D F A T H E R . - 71
ness and tenderness of spiritual sensibility, to the
claims of your Creator and Redeemer; study with
no less diligence to cherish a deep sense of all the
duties which you owe to your beloved relatives, to
your friends, to your neighbours, and to all with
whom you have intercourse. To perceive the
theory of these duties, is the province of the under-
standing; to enter into them, as a practical matter,
and under a solemn sense of obligation, is an affair
of the heart; and the more deeply your hearts are
schooled both in the principles and practice of
these duties, the more they may be said to partake
of that culture which I am now recommending.
When I imagine to myself what an influence
your precious Mother might have had in culti-
vating your moral feelings and habits, if it had
pleased God to spare her to you; when I think of
the happy power which her delicate, forming
hand, might, by the divine blessing, have exerted
over the heart of each of you;-the heart—as Mrs.
Hannah More expresses it—that “seat of evil
propensities—that little troublesome empire of the
passions;”—I could sit down and weep afresh
that you are never to enjoy that culture. But,
happily, there is a source of infinitely better cul-
ture. Try to lay to heart your weakness and your
wants, and implore without ceasing the enlighten-
ing, subduing, and sanctifying power of the Holy
Spirit, and you will find “his grace sufficient for
you.”

<page 165>
72 L. E t t e r s o F
There are special duties which you owe to your
beloved surviving Parent, and to all your domestic
relatives, of the most peculiar and tender kind;
duties which it is equally your privilege and your
honour to discharge. These are veneration, love,
gratitude, and a dutiful respect to all their feelings,
as well as their interests. Here children are ex-
tremely apt to fail. Affection is generally found
to descend from parents to their offspring, and in
general from elder to younger relatives, in great
strength; but from children to parents, or from the
young to the old, it seldom rises with equal vigour.
Let not this be said of you. Constantly cherish
toward your beloved Father, and all your elder
relatives, not merely an outward respect, and duti-
fulness of deportment, but a cordial and ardent
affection; a sincere and lively gratitude for all
those anxious cares and labours on their part for
your benefit, for which you have been indebted
ever since you were born, and for which you can
never make an adequate return. Try to please
them by the constant manifestation of love, confi-
dence, and grateful veneration; and let them see
that you treasure up, to your profit, all their
instruction, reproofs, and warnings. When the
heart, as well as the outward conduct, is con-
formed to these sentiments, O, how endearing and
happy is the intercourse between parents and chil-
dren' What a charm is diffused over the whole
aspect of domestic society

<page 166>
A. G. R. A. N. D F A T H E R . 73
Let me entreat you, also, early to learn the duty
and the pleasure of living in affectionate harmony
among yourselves. I can scarcely express to you
the pain which I have sometimes felt when I
have perceived any thing like a spirit of strife and
acrimony rising between you, and leading to the
exchange of angry looks and passionate language.
Surely three motherless children ought to feel
more closely bound together than to indulge in
such a temper and conduct. If you do not love
one another, who can you expect will love you?
Be careful, then, continually to cultivate a spirit of
brotherly and sisterly affection toward each other.
Let nothing interrupt this. When any contest
arises, let the only strife be, which shall be the
first to yield, rather than contend. On no account
allow yourselves to employ harsh, much less vio-
lent language toward each other. And if any con-
test arises which you cannot settle between your-
selves without violence, let a united appeal to your
Father, if he be present, or in his absence, to your
grandparents, terminate the controversy. Seldom
does a conflict of this kind arise without there
being blame on both sides. And who so proper to
make the proper award, and to adjust every diffi-
culty, as those who love you all equally and
dearly, and have age and experience on their side?
Let me enjoin on you to begin, as early as pos-
sible, to cherish a spirit of habitual benevolence—
a desire, wherever you go, to promote the happi-

<page 167>
74 L ET T E R S o F
ness of all around you. Selfishness is the great
master-sin of human nature. “All seek their
own.” The young, especially, are apt to be
swallowed up in the excessive pursuit of their own
enjoyment, and that enjoyment is rarely sought or
found in ministering to the wants, and promoting
the comfort of others. But rely upon it, dear
children, this is a narrow and altogether deceptive
view of the best means of happiness. Not only is
it the divine command that we “love our neigh-
bour as ourselves,” but it is equally certain that
obedience to this great law tends as directly to
make ourselves happy, as it does to promote the
comfort of the objects of our benevolent attention.
If you wish to be happy yourselves, study continu-
ally to make all around you so too. The luxury
of doing good is the richest luxury of which we
are capable. It is the very spirit of Christ, who
“went about doing good;” and the more closely
we commune with him in the exercise of the same
spirit, the more we secure true and rational enjoy-
ment. Wherever you are, then, cultivate a spirit
of sympathy with the afflicted, and the habit of
flying spontaneously to the relief of suffering.
You cannot begin too early to feed the hungry, to
clothe the naked, to minister to the wants of the
sick and dying, to relieve distress of every kind,
and to “please every one for his good to edifica-
tion:”—not by flattery, which is too commonly
the method of pleasing adopted; but by letting

<page 168>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 75
it be seen that you seek, as much as in you
lies, to make all around you truly happy. Never
promote mirth at the expense of others. Never
allow yourselves to “set others by the ears” as it
is sometimes expressed, for the sake of derision.
Carefully avoid all those “tricks,” which so many
of the young delight in, and by which so much
suffering, and sometimes even ultimately the loss
of life, have been incurred. In a word, conscien-
tiously cherish the principle and the habit of never
giving a moment's pain to a human being, or even
to a brute beast, unless it be necessary for their
real good; and wherever you see pain, by whom-
soever inflicted, do all in your power, consistent
with other obligations, to relieve it, and to give
rational pleasure. There is nothing, be assured,
dear children, in all the splendour of fashionable
display, in all the gratifications of sense, in all the
delirious joys of giddy dissipation, once to be com-
pared with the hallowed pleasure of habitually
doing good to all within your reach. Yes, make
doing good your “ruling passion,” and you will
be among the happiest of mortals.
Let me beseech you to watch over your temper
with studious care. Few things are more unhappy
in a young person of either sex, than an irritable,
irascible temper. It betrays into a thousand indis-
cretions. It poisons social intercourse. It alien-
ates friends. It destroys the comfort of the indi-
vidual who indulges it; and it interferes with the

<page 169>
76 L E. T. T E R S OF
comfort of all with whom he converses. I have
known this infirmity to cast a cloud over the
whole course of many persons who were other-
wise fitted to adorn and bless society. Watch and
pray against it with the utmost diligence. “He
that ruleth his own spirit is greater than he that
taketh a city.” “Be swift to hear, slow to speak,
slow to wrath.” Learn “by soft answers to turn
away wrath,” both in yourselves and others. Be
not ready to take offence, or to consider any one
as “an offender for a word.” Never regard an
honest difference of opinion from yourself as a per-
sonal affront. Surely the indulgence of such a
spirit is as unreasonable as it is unhappy. Guard
with the utmost vigilance against a jealous, suspi-
cious temper. Ill nature, peevishness, and a dis-
position to take every thing by an unfavourable
handle, and to indulge in satire and sarcasm, are
revolting in every human being, but especially in
the female sex. I have never known such a tem-
per to be indulged without diminishing both the
respectability and happiness of its possessor. Let
a mild, amiable, conciliatory spirit reign in all your
intercourse. Be ever kind, tender hearted, and
forgiving, even as you hope to obtain forgiveness
from the God of all grace. Let the spirit of
benevolence, and a desire to please, shine in your
countenances, and be manifest in your deportment
in all companies; at home and on journies; in the
public hotel, and in the parlour of a friend;

<page 170>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 77
towards servants, as well as towards your equals
or superiors. In a word, in temper as well as in
conduct, “Whatsoever ye would that others should
do unto you, do ye even so to them, for this is the
law and the prophets.”
In forming your moral character and habits, I
entreat you to lay great stress upon cultivating a
sacred and delicate regard to truth, in all your
social intercourse. Rely upon it, you cannot pay
too conscientious a regard to this point. A fault
here is as dishonourable as it is criminal. I do
not allow myself to fear that my beloved grand-
children, after the training they have received, will
ever indulge in deliberate falsehood. In this there
is a meanness as well as a sin, which I hope they
will equally despise and abhor. But it is to be
lamented that there is much in social conversation,
in which many people deemed respectable are apt
to indulge themselves, and which I hope you will
make conscience of sacredly avoiding. I mean all
exaggeration in your descriptions; all high-colour-
ing in your statements; all indulgence in fabulous
narratives, even in jest, for the amusement of com-
pany. Aside from the dictates of religion in this
matter, which are sacred and conclusive, there is
something in these habits adapted to lower the
character, and to diminish the influence of those
who indulge them, with all sober-minded people.
Whatever may be the consequence, let a regard to
the strictest verity, as if you were on oath, reign
8

<page 171>
78 L E T T E R S OF
in all you say and do. Avoid the meanness, as
well as the sin of the slightest departure from abso-
lute truth. Let all underhand deceptive contri-
vances, all low cunning, all habits of carrying
your plans by disingenuous arts, be abhorred and
avoided. How gratifying would it be to those
who love you, to know that it had passed into
something like a proverb among your acquaint-
ance—“The statement is from a Breckinridge—
and therefore may be depended on 1’’
Let me farther entreat you to guard against all
indulgence of the spirit of pride, or vanity. By
pride, I mean such an inordinate and unreasonable
conceit of our own superiority in any respect, as
leads us to look down on others as beneath us, and
to treat them with haughtiness, or contempt. And
by vanity, I understand that excessive desire for
the applause of others which leads to egotism, and
such a weak anxiety to attract the notice, and gain
the approbation of those around us, as are apt to
betray into little and unworthy arts for gaining the
object. That both ought to be repudiated, as at
once folly and sin, I hope no formal argument will
be necessary to convince you. But still, they are
both besetting sins, which cleave with deplorable
obstinacy to multitudes whose judgment is against
them. Be assured, dear children, pride is as fool-
ish as it is criminal. Who made you to differ
from others? And what have you that you have
not received? If you have minds, or an education,

<page 172>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 79
or outward circumstances more favourable than
those of many others, who conferred them upon
you? If, therefore, you have received all, why
should you glory as if you had not received them?
I know that we sometimes hear people talk of a
“laudable pride,” an “honest pride,” “a noble
pride,” &c. But such language is a grievous
abuse of terms, and ought to be forever banished
from the vocabulary of Christians. Pride was
“the condemnation and snare of the devil,” and is
in all cases a weakness and a sin. To call a pro-
per personal dignity and self-respect by this odious
name, is altogether incorrect and deceptive. To
speak of a disposition to avoid a mean action as
“a noble pride,” is a perversion of language, as
well as of moral principle. “Be clothed with
humility;” for God resisteth the proud, but giveth
grace to the humble.” “Pride goeth before de-
struction, and an haughty spirit before a fall; for
when pride cometh, then cometh shame, but with
the lowly is wisdom.” Vanity is a passion still
more childish and degrading. It exhibits a rational
creature hanging on the smiles and the praise of
his fellow worms for his importance and happi-
ness. O, what infatuation for miserable sinners,
who deserve nothing at the hand of God but wrath,
and the overflowing of wrath, and who are depend-
ant on his bounty for every breath, to be puffed up
with high thoughts of themselves, and arrogantly
to claim the incense of praise! Fly, then, from

<page 173>
80 L ETTE r S OF
pride and vanity with the utmost vigilance. Study
to be “meek and lowly in heart.” “Mind not
high things, but condescend to men of low estate.”
“In lowliness of mind esteem others better than
yourselves.” “Be not wise or great in your own
conceits.” Be not greedy of praise. Despise all
the unworthy arts of seeking and fishing for it.
Rely upon it, the lower you lie in the dust of
abasement, the happier you will be. The more
you are disposed to love and honour all around
you according to their real character, the more
infallibly you will secure their love and confidence
in return. And the less anxious you are to gain
the applause of men, the more likely you will be
to attain it, if you are found humbly and diligently
performing your duty. In short, if I wished you
to gain the highest degree of esteem and honour
among men, I would say—Do not seek this object
anxiously, or even directly at all. Never inquire
what others say or think of you. Speak of your-
selves, in conversation, as little as possible. Treat
your superiors with uniform respect, but not with
fawning or flattery; and your inferiors, down to
the lowest servant or beggar, with undeviating
condescension and kindness; trying to benefit
every one, and promote the happiness of every
one; and you will have as much of the love and
respect of all as you really deserve, and probably
more. If you sincerely try to promote the happi-
ness of all around you, and do it with a kind and

<page 174>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 81
amiable manner, I believe it is one of the cases in
which our Lord's declaration never fails to be ful-
filled—“Give, and it shall be given unto you,
good measure pressed down and running over
shall men give into your bosom.” -
Strive with sacréd care against every feeling
approaching to the passion of envy. As you are
now at an age when you are called daily to com-
pete with school and play-mates, you may be
sometimes strongly tempted to indulge in this pas-
sion. But it is a base passion. Beware of it.
How fiend-like, to sicken and repine at excellence!
How base, to be displeased and mortified when we
contemplate the superior prosperity, happiness, or
accomplishments of others! When you witness
such superior attainments or excellence, let the
only effort be to excite gratitude to God for its
existence, and a generous emulation of it in your-
selves.
Guard with vigilance against a talebearing and
tattling spirit. I will not suppose you capable of
deliberate slander, or cruelly circulating reports to
the injury of others without just evidence. This
is so base and mean, that I trust you will ever
abhor and despise it. But it is the infirmity of
many, who intend thereby no injury, that they
delight in circulating news concerning their neigh-
bours, and have not a little of the true gossipping
spirit. This is a bad habit. It degrades the indi-
vidual who indulges it, in the view of all wise,
8%

<page 175>
82 L E t T. E. R. S. of
reflecting people; often involves in painful expla-
nations and difficulties; and is frequently followed
by consequences of the most perplexing and disre-
putable kind. Never indulge the disposition to
repeat idle stories about neighbours. If they are
repeated in your presence, listen to them either in
silence, or with a civil remark, which cannot pos-
sibly implicate you, or be construed into an appro-
val of the scandal. It was an excellent appeal
which was once made by a wise and benevolent
man whom I knew in early life—“Why can you
not talk more about things, than about persons?”
Let me farther exhort you, as a point of duty,
to cultivate habitual cheerfulness. When I say
this, you will not understand me as recommending
a spirit of levity and frivolity. This is unworthy
of rational, accountable creatures, and indicates as
much of weakness as of sin. Those who spend
their lives in gaiety and mirth, are “dead while
they live.” But by cultivating habitual cheerful-
ness, I mean cherishing a pleasant state of the ani-
mal spirits; as opposed to constitutional gloom,
mental depression, and settled, clouded taciturnity,
I mean habits, not of light, but of lively and affable
conversation. Such a state of mind does good
like a medicine. It contributes to our own enjoy-
ment. It makes us more pleasant and useful to
those with whom we converse. It may even ope-
rate to promote health and prolong life; and in
various ways extend our power of doing good.

<page 176>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 83
Guard with conscientious care against habits of
indolence. A tendency to this sin is one of the
radical symptoms of the great moral disease of our
nature; and you cannot begin too early to labour
and pray for effecting a cure. Fly from idle-
ness as a habit connected with a legion of evils.
Make a point of always having something useful
to do—something to fill up every moment left
vacant between the larger and more important
tasks of life. I am aware that we all stand in need
of recreation; but this is often best attained by
a change of employment. When you have finish-
ed a sedentary task, which required intense appli-
cation of mind, think, for a moment, whether there
be not some other object to which you may attend
for a short time, which will require no mental
effort, but by attention to which, you may promote
either your own health or comfort, or the advan-
tage of others. Make it your daily study to
“redeem the time.” Try to turn, every moment
to some valuable account. For this purpose, form,
as early as possible, a plan, a systematic order in
your daily tasks. Without such a plan, more or
less formally adopted, you will inevitably lose
much time in passing from one engagement to
another. But if you manage always to have some-
thing useful with which to fill up every little inter-
val; so as never to be idle, and never to waste
time with frivolous, or worse than frivolous em-
ployments, you will be more happy, and live more

<page 177>
84 L E TT E R S OF
to your own true honour, and the benefit of your
generation.
I have only to add on the subject of this letter,
a single word on the great importance of maintain-
ing strict and habitual temperance in all your en-
joyments. If you wish really to enjoy life, and to
“live out all your days,” you must exercise mode-
ration and self-denial in eating and drinking, and in
every department of indulgence. Temperance has
been defined—the moderate use of things useful, and
total abstinence from those which are pernicious.
This is an excellent definition, which I trust you
will ever keep in mind, and make your daily and
hourly rule. To be thus temperate, is a divine
command. It is eminently conducive to health.
It is highly advantageous to the activity and
strength of the powers of the mind. And it is an
admirable defence against a thousand irregularities
and mischiefs which cloud the faculties, destroy
comfort, and lead to multiplied forms of disease,
and to premature graves. If you habitually restrain
appetite, deny yourselves, and “let your modera-
tion be known” in all things, and to all men, you
will avoid many evils which continually beset
those who act on the system of self-indulgence.
Never drink, any thing but pure water, when in
health; indulge in animal food but once in each
day, and that in smaller quantities than most people
consider as temperate. Labourers in the open air
may, not only with impunity, but perhaps with

<page 178>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 85
profit, eat animal food more than once every day;
but I am persuaded few other persons can do it
without disadvantage to their health. My per-
sonal experience and observation in regard to this
point are very decisive. Nay, I would advise you
to go one step farther. Make the experiment of
wholly abstaining from animal food at least one
day in each week, for the purpose of “giving
nature a holyday;” of clearing the body and the
mind from crudities; and taking a new start in
refined feeling and unclogged activity.
In fine, let it be the object of your unceasing
study and prayer, to “keep under the body;” to
“ crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts;”
to subdue and restrain all irregular tempers; “if it
be possible, as much as lieth in you, to live peace-
ably with all men;” to avoid wounding the feelings
of any one with whom you converse, unless re-
quired to do it by a pure sense of duty; to promote
the happiness of all around you; and to be con-
tinually seeking and improving opportunities of
doing good.

<page 179>
S6 L E T T E R S OF
L ETT E R V III.
M A N N E R S.
DEAR CHILDREN:—I wish it were in my power
to give you a perfect and vivid representation of
the manners of your lamented Mother. There
was in them a sweetness, a gracefulness, and an
attraction truly rare. Wherever she went, they at
once gained her friends. I am sure if you had
been old enough at her decease to appreciate them;
or, if I could now depict them to the life, you
would have a deeper impression of the importance
of happy manners; of their value to their posses-
sor; of their benign influence on social intercourse,
than I can now hope to impart. As it is, I hope
you will be willing to take on trust my statement
of the fact concerning her, and that you will be
stimulated to seek a similar accomplishment.
If it be true, as has been often said, that a
good face is an “open letter of recommendation,”
wherever its possessor appears; we may, with
quite as much emphasis, say the same of pleasant
engaging manners. Nay, we may go farther.
The most beautiful face and form that ever existed,
if unaccompanied by agreeable manners, will soon
be contemplated with indifference, if not with dis-

<page 180>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . S7
gust. While, on the contrary, where there is an
entire absence of personal beauty, there may be,
and often are found, such manners as captivate and
win wherever they are seen, and with a power felt
by all, however remote they may be from the pos-
session of such manners themselves.
I shall not tax either your patience or my own,
by entering largely into the subject of manners.
On this extensive subject I refer you to a volume
on “Clerical Manners and Habits” which I pub-
lished a few years ago, and in which considerable
minuteness of detail is indulged. For although
that work was intended more particularly for the
benefit of clergymen, and especially of candidates
for the sacred office; yet a large portion of it is
equally applicable to all classes and professions,
and to both sexes. I recommend the volume
referred to, to your serious attention, and to your
careful study. And whatever may be your situa-
tion in life, I think you will find much in it worthy
of your regard. At any rate, if it be not so, I have
failed of gaining my main object in its publication.
I will not, however, content myself with merely
referring you to the volume in question. It is my
wish, in this little system of affectionate advices,
to call your attention to a few particulars on this
subject which may be considered as more imme-
diately appropriate at your present tender age, and,
perhaps, on that account, more likely to dwell
upon your memory than the contents of a volume.

<page 181>
88 L ET. T. E. R. S. O. F.
You will, perhaps, ask me, what I mean by
those “good manners” which I would recom-
mend? I answer, by such manners I mean that
mode of personal address and deportment toward
all with whom we converse which is dictated by
the meekness, benevolence, and purity of the Gos-
pel. In a word, “true politeness”—the most
genuine politeness—that which I would earnestly
desire those whom I love to cherish and culti-
vate—is the religion of Christ acted out in the
whole temper, conversation, and deportment. The
simple, unembarrassed, gentle expression of min-
gled respect and kindness toward all with whom
we converse, from the hovel to the palace, is the
perfection of manners. These are manners which
become all times, places, companies, and circum-
stances, and which will carry their possessor
through the world with acceptance and comfort.
Perhaps, in your inexperience, you may be
disposed to ask, what is the great value of such
manners as are here recommended? If you have
any doubt on this subject now, I am persuaded a
little more knowledge of the world will satisfy you
that their value is unspeakably great. Few people
are adequate judges of those solid intellectual and
moral qualities which form a character of high
excellence. But of personal manners, all are
judges; at any rate, all are capable of perceiving,
and in some degree estimating, their value. Only
a small portion of those with whom you converse

<page 182>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 89
are able to discern whether you are wise and well
informed; but every child can see whether you
have a sweet voice, a pleasant countenance, an
amiable, kind and respectful mode of address, or
the contrary. Can there be, then, a more obvious
dictate, both of policy and duty, than to cultivate
that which, to multitudes, is more attractive than
real merit; which secures to merit a hearing, and
an influence which it would not otherwise obtain :
and which will be likely, in many cases, to open a
door to usefulness which, without it, would, in all
probability, have continued impenetrably closed ?
In repeated instances have I known persons of
weak minds, and of small information, but of
remarkably fascinating manners, carry all before
them in circles of society into which persons of far
higher qualifications, both intellectual and moral,
but defective in the attractions of manner, were
scarcely able to obtain admittance, and very inade-
quately esteemed when admitted. A soft, insinua-
ting address has, a thousand times, rendered its
possessor every where acceptable and popular,
when, on the score of real merit, he ought by no
means to have enjoyed so much public favour.
But this is not all. Pleasant attractive manners
not only have a paramount influence with the
superficial and unthinking; but they have more
power even on the minds of the wise and the good
than is commonly imagined. To every human
being, that which is intrinsically excellent, appears
9

<page 183>
90 L ET. T E R S OF
doubly attractive when presented in a pleasing
manner. Truth, even to those who know it to be
truth, finds a more cordial welcome; and duty,
even among its most sincere and enlightened
friends, commands a more ready obedience, when
they are clothed in an attractive garb, and speak in
alluring accents. That the very same words,
which, when uttered by some, are intolerably
offensive; when spoken in the mild, respectful
manner of others, are welcome, and even delight-
ful—that the very same action, which, performed
by some, is censured; when performed by others,
of perhaps less talent or virtue, is lauded to ex-
cess; are among the most notorious facts in human
life; and that not in the circles of ignorance and
dissipation only, but also in those of the most esti-
mable portions of mankind.
To despise or undervalue the cultivation of
manners, then, argues a great want of pºactical
wisdom. It is a subject worthy of your constant
regard. To neglect it, is equally to oppose reason
and experience, and to set at naught some of the
most precious means of gaining access to the hu-
man heart. And when I speak of cultivating good
manners, do not imagine that I mean the formal,
showy, pompous manners which some commend,
and seem to aim at. The truth is, the perfection
of manners—the ultimate point which is the result
of the very best culture, is to attain that ease, sim-
plicity, modesty, and gentleness of deportment in

<page 184>
A. G. R. A. N. D F A T H E R . 91
every thing, which has nothing of the artificial,
nothing of display about it. But to be more par-
ticular.
The first characteristic of manners to which
I would direct your attention, as lying at the
foundation of all excellence, is benignity. With-
out the law of benevolence, reigning in the heart,
and governing the temper and the life, there may
be much pomp and courtliness of manner; many
a heartless smile, and many a flattering form
of address; but there can be no genuine polite-
ness. The essence of this consists in the spirit
of cordial good will and kindness shining in the
countenance; expressing itself in the language and
tones of respect and benevolent regard; and flowing
through all the channels of human intercourse, and
all the minutiae of human life. This is the vital
principle of good manners. Just in proportion as
you really desire to increase the happiness of all
around you; to consult their ease; to anticipate
their wants; and to promote their welfare—you
will spontaneously manifest these feelings in all
situations and companies. Your whole deport-
ment will be pleasing, attractive, and graceful,
without your having studied artificial rules. This
is the foundation and the sum of all; but it may
not be improper to trace the radical principle into
some of its minute details.
In all social intercourse, let respectful attention
mark your whole manner. To turn away your

<page 185>
92 L ET. T E R S o F
eyes from the person who is addressing you; or
to manifest in any way that you are thinking, or
wish to be thinking, of something else, is a great
breach of good manners; cannot fail of giving pain
to those with whom you converse; and must de-
prive you of a large part of the benefit of conversa-
tion. When you look your companion gently and
respectfully, but firmly in the face, you manifest
attention; you enable yourselves to watch his
countenance, and mark the impression which you
make on his mind; to say nothing of the power
of the eye in seconding and enforcing all that is
said.
Cultivate affability of manner. By this I mean
that style of manners which is distinguished by
ease, simplicity, and courteousness; a deportment
opposed to haughtiness, reserve, coldness, or taci-
turnity; in short, to every thing that is adapted
to repel, or to prevent freedom and comfort of
approach. I am aware that constitutional tempera-
ment has much to do with this. But still, it is
equally true that affability may and ought to be
carefully cultivated; and that there are few things
better adapted to conciliate good will, to inspire
confidence, to invite freedom of communication,
and to place at ease all with whom we converse.
Study to exercise gentleness and mildness in all
your deportment and conversation. Guard against
every thing harsh, severe, rough, abrupt, or in any
way repulsive in your language, voice, or manner.

<page 186>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 93
Let the meekness and gentleness of wisdom appear
in every look, tone, and expression. By a mild,
respectful address, you may at once reprove im-
pertinence, disarm violence, and put even brutality
to shame. Give all diligence, then, to be “gentle
toward all men.” Learn the happy art of convers-
ing with gentleness, of giving your commands
with gentleness, of arguing with gentleness, of
contending with gentleness, and of even reproving
with gentleness. Both commands and reproofs,
as well as arguments, when dispensed in this
manner, have not only more dignity, but also more
weight than when invested with an opposite cha-
racter.
Few things are more opposed to good breeding
than a loud, boisterous manner in social inter-
course. Whether this be indulged in laughter, or
in conversation, it is equally exceptionable as an
offence against both delicacy and dignity. With
regard to females, an offence against this rule, is
peculiarly revolting. It is a sure sign of vulgarity,
and ought to be carefully avoided. But, in either
sex, it is a blemish which well bred people never
fail to notice.
Closely allied to this is the habit of rude fami-
liarity which some affect, and to which they give
the name of social pleasantry. This is undignified,
and, to all delicate people, offensive. Mutual dig-
nity and respect are indispensable to the continued
existence of Christian intercourse, in its most pure,
9*

<page 187>
94 L ETT E R S OF
delicate, and profitable form. If you wish to
maintain such intercourse, be free and unconstrain-
ed; but never indulge in coarse familiarity. Those
who are worthy of your love will certainly be
repelled rather than attracted by it.
Remember, too, that all interruption of any one
with whom you are conversing, or blunt contra-
diction of his statements, is an offence against
delicate manners. However erroneous he may
be, hear him out; and however certain you may
be that his representations are false, rectify his
mistake, not bluntly, but with kindness and res-
pect.
Guard against talking too much in company.
He who is very talkative incurs disadvantages of a
very serious kind. He cheapens himself; tires his
hearers; and must, of course, diminish his useful-
ness. However rich and instructive any one's
talk may be, yet, if there be too much of it, both
his dignity and his influence cannot fail of being
impaired. “A fool's voice,” says Solomon, “is
known by the multitude of his words.” “In the
multitude of words,” says the same inspired teach-
er, “there wanteth not sin; but he that refraineth
his lips is wise.” And again, “He that hath
knowledge, spareth his words.”
But another extreme in social intercourse, is
that of excessive reserve and taciturnity. Some
from physical temperament; others from abstrac-
tion or absence of mind; and a third class, per-

<page 188>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 95
haps, from still more exceptionable causes, wrap
themselves up in a chilling reserve in company—
never speaking but when addressed; and then
answering as briefly as possible, and relapsing into
silence again. This is surely unhappy in a social
being, and ought to be carefully avoided. While
you avoid garrulity, then, sink not down into obsti-
nate silence. If you find yourselves, from any
cause, prone to this, it is abundantly worth while
to take pains to counteract it, and to labour to have
something ready to say that shall be at once
acceptable and instructive.
In regard to uncleanly and vulgar personal
habits, I will not suppose you capable of them;
and, therefore, shall not dwell upon them. All
spitting on floors, lounging in your seats, putting
up your feet on chairs or stools, leaning with your
elbows on tables—these, and all similar habits, I
hope, after the training you have had, you will
avoid with instinctive repugnance. But there is
one habit which I would earnestly recommend, as
favourable not merely to good manners, but also to
health. Learn to sit erect, not only in company,
but even in your most private apartment. Reading
or writing in a half-sunken or reclining posture is
unfriendly to a graceful carriage; is apt to betray
unwarily into similar postures in company; pre-
pares the way for the sinking, half-bent postures
which disfigure so many of the feeble and aged;

<page 189>
96 L ETT E R S OF
and really tends to bring on premature decrepi-
tude.
Do not affect wit or punning in conversation.
So many of those who try to make themselves
acceptable by such attempts, not only fail, but often
render themselves a laughing stock by it, that there
is little probability of your succeeding as wits or
punsters. But even with respect to those whose
talents in this way are ever so great, there is so
much danger of their indulging those talents unsea-
sonably and imprudently, so as to offend and alien-
ate friends, that such powers ought to be depreca-
ted rather than desired, and their exercise, if pos-
sessed, subjected to the severest restriction. Inever
knew more than one person of wit who was strict-
ly discreet and delicate in its use. But I have
known thousands who, by their miserable attempts
to display what they possessed either not at all, or
in a very small degree, succeeded only in exposing
themselves to ridicule. And I have known many
real wits, who almost every day wounded feelings.
and alienated friends by their reckless effusions.
Do not indulge the habit in conversation of talk-
ing of yourselves. Hardly any quality is more
apt to appear in social intercourse than personal
vanity. This leads to egotism, so that the idea of
self appears to be ever present to the imagination.
Hence we perpetually find people talking of them-
selves; what they have done; what they have

<page 190>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 97
said; what others have said and done to their
honour; in short, bringing into view something to
their own advantage, or that of their family or
relatives. Rely upon it, if you have real worth, the
less you say about it the better; and if you have it
not, every claim of it, direct or indirect, can only
sink you lower in the estimation of those with
whom you converse.
Carefully form the habit of adverting to all the
properties of time, place and circumstances in con-
versation. When you are about, in company, to
make a remark, or to introduce a new topic of
conversation, look round on the circle, and ask
yourself, whether there is any one present whose
feelings would be likely to be hurt by what you
are about to say, or who would be placed by it in
embarrassing circumstances. Be very sure for
example, when about to make, in company, an
unfavourable remark on an absent person, that no
relative or special friend of that person is among
your hearers. For, although you ought never to
make a remark on any one which the Christian
spirit cannot justify; yet in certain circumstances,
a remark perfectly proper in itself, may be unsea-
sonable, and peculiarly painful to some who hear it.
Guard against the possibility of such an occurrence.
This is a dictate of sound worldly policy. A de-
parture from it is a gross violation of true polite-
ness. But it may be said, still more emphatically,

<page 191>
9S L ET. T E R S o F
to be a departure from the principles of Christian
benevolence.
Avoid the too frequent use of superlatives in con- ; ,
versation. The habit of many, when they wish toº
express either approbation or censure, is to employ
the very strongest terms which the English language
affords. If they think favourably of the talents or
the performance of any one, they are apt to speak
of them as “noble, admirable,” as of “the first
order;” or in some terms expressive of the very
highest excellence. And, on the other hand, if
they undertake to express disapprobation, the
terms “mean,” “execrable,” “detestable,” are
the softest that they think of employing. This is
a bad habit. It renders both the praise and cen-
sure of those who indulge it of less value in the
estimation of all sober-minded and discriminating
judges. If you wish your judgment to pass for
any thing in the view of the wise and reflecting,
you must learn to express opinions in that guarded
and moderate manner which indicates intellectual
discrimination rather than undistinguishing emo-
tion. You know where it is said “Fools admire,
where men of sense approve.”
Carefully avoid giving unnecessary trouble wher-
ever you are. The difference between different
persons in this respect is very conspicuous. Some,
when in the houses of their friends, have so many
little wants, so many errands to perform, and are

<page 192>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 99
so absorbed in their own affairs, that, if permit-
ted, they would keep several servants and others
... constantly employed in waiting upon them. You
"may rely upon it you can never be, long together,
welcome visitants in families which you subject to
so much trouble. Make as few demands as possi-
ble on the time and attention of those whose hospi-
tality you are enjoying. Never call upon their
servants to wait upon you when it is practicable to
avoid it. Never allow the occupations or order of
any family to be set aside or disarranged on your
account, where it is possible to prevent it. In
short, act universally on the principle of doing
every thing that you can for yourselves, and mak-
ing as few demands as possible on the time and
labour of those around you. -
In calling on friends consult their convenience,
as well as your own; and in some cases in prefer-
ence to your own. Many make their calls at such
hours, and sit so inordinately long, as to throw a
whole family into disorder, and inflict very serious
pain. Never sit long in your social calls at any
time; but when you make them at times which
may, by possibility interfere with domestic meals,
let them be very short; be on the watch for every
symptom of engagement or uneasiness on the part
of those whom you visit, and on the appearance of
any thing of the kind, instantly take your leave.
Constantly maintain the habit of early rising.
Few things are more conducive to health and ac-
4.

<page 193>
100 L ET T E R S OF
tivity both of body and mind. A disposition to lie
long in bed in the morning, is, at once, a symptom
and a cause of feeble digestion, of nervous debility,
and of general languor. Go early to bed. Avoid
much night study. Quit your beds by dawn of
day, and, in winter, before the dawn, and thus se-
cure several hours of unbroken time, for devotion,
for study, and for gentle exercise in the open air,
before breakfast, and before the interruptions of
the earliest visiters commence.
Cultivate habits of moderation in dress. You
are never likely to be able to indulge in very
inordinate expense in bodily adorning; and I will
venture to say, this inability, wherever it exists, is
a great blessing. Few things evince more weak-
ness of mind, and absence of Christian principle,
than extravagance and splendor in dress. In
young men it is a sad evidence of “dandyism”
and folly; and even in young females, an exces-
sive indulgence in fashion, in finery, and the
extreme of devotion to bodily adorning, never
fails to depress their character in the estimation of
the wise and good. Try to set an example of
sober, dignified moderation in regard to this whole
subject. Always guard against negligence of dress.
Conscientiously avoid exposing yourselves to the
charge of careless, slatternly habits. But never
make dress an idol. Reject every thing dazzling,
or what is commonly called “dashing,” in out-
ward ornament. Be not seen aping the extreme

<page 194>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 101
of fashion; and ever remember how unworthy it
is of Christians to be worshippers of external
adorning; and how peculiarly disreputable for the
children of clergymen to bear such a character.
Thus, dear children, I have endeavoured, with
brevity, to give you a few paternal counsels,
which, I would fondly hope, may, by the grace
of God, be made to promote your benefit, when
the hand which penned them shall be sleeping
in the dust. You will perceive from the order
in which I have placed my counsels, that I con-
sider real heart religion as the most indispensable
and precious of all attainments; that my first and
highest wish concerning you is, that you may love
your Father's and Mother's God, and make it
your daily aim to follow her to that world of bliss
and glory to which, as we trust, she has gone
before us. Next to seeing you real Christians,
my desire is to see you enlightened, polished,
benevolent, amiable, attractive members of society,
respected and beloved by all who know you.
Remember, I beseech you, that the friends of
your Parents will expect much from you. The
advantages which you have enjoyed, and are daily
enjoying, impose upon you a solemn responsibility
in the sight both of God and man. Many prayers
have ascended to heaven on your behalf. Pray
without ceasing for yourselves, that you may be
10

<page 195>
102 L E. T. T E R S OF
preserved from the paths of sin and folly, and led
in the ways of heavenly wisdom.
I have no doubt that the counsels I have given
you will commend themselves to your judgment,
and that you will promptly form the resolution to
make them your constant guide. But you cannot
rely upon your own wisdom or strength to do this.
Such are your own infirmities, and so multiplied
the temptations and allurements which surround
you, that you will need at every step, guidance and
help from above. Happy will it be for you if you
habitually bear this in mind, and acknowledge
God in all your ways, that he may direct your
steps.
And now, dear children, I bid you farewell.
When I look forward, and imagine to myself what
may be your course in life—when I think of the
corruptions and perils with which you are sur-
rounded, and what may be the result of them, I
hardly know how to express my anxieties and
fears: but when I recollect the love and faithful-
ness of that God who blessed your Parents, I feel
willing to commit you into his hands, and to trust
his grace for your temporal and eternal welfare.
May he guide you by his counsel! May he
guard you amidst all the dangers of youth and of
riper years; and finally, “present you faultless be-
fore the presence of his glory with exceeding great
joy!” O how unutterably precious the thought

<page 196>
A G R A N D F A T H E R . 103
of meeting you all at last—with those of our
beloved family who have already gone before us,
and those who are yet to follow—around the
throne of our covenant God, and rejoicing forever
in his presence and glory ! Such will be the
prayer until his last breath, of your
Affectionate Grandfather,
SAMUEL MILLER.
PRINCETON, July 10, 1839.
THE END.

<page 197>

<page 198>

<page 199>

<page 200>

<page 201>
-----------，_， ！
----




<page 202>


<page 203>


<page 204>
