
<page 1>

<page 2>

<page 3>
i:

<page 4>
–- - - - -
* 2, waves. \\ºw, weg) A. º A
C E C I L I A,
M E M O I R S
H E I R E S S.
THE AUTHOR OF EVE LINA,
I N F I V E v. o L U M E s.
V O L. I.
Cº. a
L O N D O N :
Printed for T. PAY N E and So N at the Mews-
Gate, and T. CADell in the Strand.
MDCCLXXXII.

<page 5>
41 CC
º
º
A.
*::::
---,
- - - -
--
------
… ）
… » »
|-→…»
W , ' ） »
… » » » »
→...»
→ → '' »
, ！ '
·
→→
• •
•
·
→ • • • •
→* ,
• • • •
• •
: • •
• •


<page 6>
------—---— – : - - -
A D V E R T I S E M E N T.
THE indulgence ſhewn by the
Public to Eve LINA, which, un-
patronized, unaided, and unowned,
paſt through Four Editions in one Year,
has encouraged its Author to riſk this
secon D attempt. The animation of
ſucceſs is too univerſally acknowledg-
ed, to make the writer of the follow-
ing ſheets dread much cenſure of te- -
merity ; though the precariouſneſs of
any power to give pleaſure, ſuppreſſes
all vanity of confidence, and ſends
CECILIA into the world with ſcarce
more hope, though far more encou-
ragement, than attended her highly-
honoured predeceſſor, Eve LINA.
July, 1782.
Vol. I, A. C E CI.

<page 7>
----
« ----


<page 8>
C E C I L I A.
B o O K I.
C H A P T E R I.
A J O U R N E Y.
&c. EA C E to the ſpirits of my ho-
noured parents, reſpected be their
remains, and immortalized their virtues'
may time, while it moulders their frail
relicks to duſt, commit to tradition the re-
cord of their goodneſs; and Oh may their
orphan-deſcendant be influenced through
life by the remembrance of their purity,
and be ſolaced in death, that by her it was
unſullied l’” -
Such was the ſecret prayer with which
the only ſurvivor of the Beverley family
quitted the abode of her youth, and refi-
dence of her forefathers; while tears of re-
colle&ting ſorrow filled her eyes, and ob-
- A 2 ſtrućted

<page 9>
4. C E C I L I. A.
ftrućted the laſt view of her native town
which had excited them.
Cecilia, this fair traveller, had lately en-
tered into the one-and-twentieth year of her
age. Her anceſtors had been rich farmers
in the county of Suffolk, though her father,
in whom a ſpirit of elegance had ſup-
planted the rapacity of wealth, had ſpent
his time as a private country gentleman,
ſatisfied, without increaſing his ſtore, to
live upon what he inherited from the la-
bours of his predeceſſors. She had loſt
him in her early youth, and her mother had
not long ſurvived him. They had be—
queathed to her Io,000 l. and conſigned
her to the care of the Dean of — >
her uncle. With this gentleman, in whom,
by various contingencies, the accumulated
poſſeſſions of a riſing and proſperous fa-
mily were centred, ſhe had paſſed the laſt
four years of her life; and a few weeks
only had yet elapſed ſince his death, which,
by depriving her of her laſt relation, made
her heireſs to an eſtate of 3ooo 1. per
annum; with no other reſtrićtion than that
of annexing her name, if ſhe married, to
the diſpoſal of her hand and her riches.
But though thus largely indebted to for-
tune, to nature ſhe had yet greater obliga-
tions: her form was elegant, her heart was
liberal; her countenance announced the in-
- telligence

<page 10>
C E C I L I. A. 5
telligence of her mind, her complexion
varied with every emotion of her ſoul, and
her eyes, the heralds of her ſpeech, now
beamed with underſtanding and now gliſ-
tened with ſenſibility.
For the ſhort period of her minority, the
management of her fortune and the care of
her perſon, had by the Dean been entruſted
to three guardians, among whom her own
choice was to ſettle her reſidence: but her
mind, ſaddened by the loſs of all her na-
tural friends, coveted to regain its ſerenity
in the quietneſs of the country, and in the
boſom of an aged and maternal counſellor,
whom ſhe loved as her mother, and to
whom ſhe had been known from her child-
hood. - -
The Deanery, indeed, ſhe was obliged to
relinquiſh, a long repining expe&tant being
eager, by entering it, to bequeath to ano-
ther the anxiety and ſuſpence he had ſuffered
himſelf; though probably without much
impatience to ſhorten their duration in fa-
vour of the next ſucceſſor; but the houſe of
Mrs. Charlton, her benevolent friend, was
open for her reception, and the alleviating
tenderneſs of her converſation took from
her all wiſh of changing it. -
Here ſhe had dwelt fince the interment of
her uncle ; and here, from the affectionate
gratitude of her diſpoſition, ſhe had per-
A 3 haps
-

<page 11>
6 C E C I L I A.
haps been content to dwell till her own,
had not her guardians interfered to remove
her. -
... Reluétantly ſhe complied; ſhe quitted
her early companions, the friend ſhe moſt
revered, and the ſpot which contained the
relicks of all ſhe had yet lived to lament;
and, accompanied by one of her guardians,
and attended by two ſervants, ſhe began
her journey from Bury to London.
Mr. Harrel, this gentleman, though in
the prime of his life, though gay, faſhion-
able and ſplendid, had been appointed by
her uncle to be one of her truſtees; a
choice which had for objećt the peculiar
gratification of his niece, whoſe moſt fa-
vourite young friend Mr. Harrel had mar-
ried, and in whoſe houſe he therefore knew
ſhe would moſt wiſh to live.
Whatever good-nature could dićtate or
politeneſs ſuggeſt to diſpel her melancholy,
Mr. Harrel failed not to urge; and Cecilia,
in whoſe diſpoſition ſweetneſs was tempered
with dignity, and gentleneſs with fortitude,
ſuffered not his kind offices to ſeem ineffec-
tual; ſhe kiſſed her hand at the laſt glimpſe
a friendly hill afforded of her native town,
and made an effort to forget the regret with
which ſhe loſt fight of it. She revived her
ſpirits by plans of future happineſs, dwelt
upon the delight with which ſhe ſhould
meet

<page 12>
C E C I L I A. 7
meet her young friend, and, by accepting
his conſolation, amply rewarded his
trouble. • .
Her ſerenity, however, had yet another,
though milder trial to undergo, ſince ano-
ther friend was yet to be met, and another
farewel was yet to be taken. -
At the diſtance of ſeven miles from Bury
reſided Mr. Monckton, the richeſt and moſt
powerful man in that neighbourhood, at
whoſe houſe Cecilia and her guardian were
invited to breakfaſt in their journey.
Mr. Monckton, who was the younger
ſon of a noble family, was a man of parts,
information and ſagacity; to great native
ſtrength of mind he added a penetrating
knowledge of the world, and to faculties
the moſt ſkilful of inveſtigating the cha-
raćter of every other, a diſſimulation the
moſt profound in concealing his own. In
the bloom of his youth, impatient for wealth
and ambitious of power, he had tied him-
ſelf to a rich dowager of quality, whoſe
age, though ſixty-ſeven, was but among
the ſmaller ſpecies of her evil properties,
her diſpoſition being far more repulſive
than her wrinkles. An inequality of years'
ſo confiderable, had led him to expečt that
the fortune he had thus acquired, would
ſpeedily be releaſed from the burthen with
which it was at preſent incumbered; but
- A 4 his

<page 13>
8 C E C I L I A.
his expečtations proved as vain as they were
mercenary, and his lady was not more the
dupe of his proteſtations than he was him-
ſelf of his own purpoſes. Ten years he had
been married to her, yet her health was
good, and her faculties were unimpaired;
eagerly he had watched for her diſſolution,
yet his eagerneſs had injured no health but
his own | So ſhort-ſighted is ſelfiſh cunning,
that in aiming no further than at the
gratification of the preſent moment, it ob-
ſcures the evils of the future, while it im-
pedes the perception of integrity and
honour. - -
His ardour, however, to attain the bleſt
period of returning liberty, deprived him
neither of ſpirit nor inclination for interme-
diate enjoyment; he knew the world too
well to incur it's cenſure by ill-treating the
woman to whom he was indebted for the
rank he held in it; he ſaw her, indeed, but
ſeldom, yet he had the decency, alike in
avoiding as in meeting her, to ſhew no
abatement of civility and good breeding:
but, having thus ſacrificed to ambition all
poſſibility of happineſs in domeſtic life, he
turned his thoughts to thoſe other methods
of procuring it, which he had ſo dearly
purchaſed the power of eſſaying.
The reſources of pleaſure to the poſſeſſors
of wealth are only to be cut off by the ſa-
- tiety

<page 14>
C E C I L I A, 9
tiety of which they are produćtive: a ſa-
tiety which the vigorous mind of Mr.
Monckton had not yet ſuffered him to ex-
perience; his time, therefore, was either
devoted to the expenſive amuſements of the
metropolis, or ſpent in the country among
the gayeſt of its diverſions.
The little knowledge of faſhionable man-
ners and of the charaćters of the times of
which Cecilia was yet miſtreſs, ſhe had
gathered at the houſe of this gentleman,
with whom the Dean her Uncle had been
intimately connected: for as he preſerved to
the world the ſame appearance of decency
he ſupported to his wife, he was every
where well received, and being but parti-
ally known, was extremely reſpected: the
world, with its wonted facility, repaying
his circumſpect attention to its laws, by ſi-
lencing the voice of cenſure, guarding his
charaćter from impeachment, and his name
from reproach. -
Cecilia had been known to him half
her life; ſhe had been careſſed in his houſe
as a beautiful child, and her preſence was
now ſolicited there as an amiable acquain-
tance. Her viſits, indeed, had by no
means been frequent, as the ill-humour of .
Lady Margaret Monckton had rendered
them painful to her; yet the opportunities
they had afforded her of mixing with peo-
A 5 Ple

<page 15>
{O C E C F L I A.
ple of faſhion, had ſerved to prepare her
for the new ſcenes in which ſhe was ſoon to
be a performer.
... Mr. Monckton, in return, had always
been a welcome gueſt at the Deanery; his
converſation was to Cecilia a never-failing
ſource of information, as his knowledge of
life and manners enabled him to ſtart thoſe
ſubječts of which ſhe was moſt ignorant;
and her mind, copious for the admiſſion
and intelligent #. the arrangement of
knowledge, received all new ideas with
savidity.
Pleaſure given in ſociety, like money
lent in uſury, returns with intereſt to thoſe
who diſpenſe it: and the diſcourſe of Mr.
Monckton conferred not a greater favour
upon Cecilia than her attention to it repaid.
And thus, the ſpeaker and the hearer being
mutually gratified, they had always met
with complacency, and commonly parted
with regret. ‘.
This reciprocation of pleaſure had, how-
ever, produced different effects upon their
minds; the ideas of Cecilia were enlarged,
while the refle&tions of Mr. Monckton were
embittered. He here ſaw an objećt who to
all the advantages of that wealth he had ſo
highly prized, added youth, beauty, and
intelligence; though much her ſenior, he
was by no means of an age to render his
- addreſ-

<page 16>
C E C I L I A. I I
addreſſing her an impropriety, and the en-
tertainment ſhe received from his converſa-
tion, perſuaded him that her good opinion
might with eaſe be improved into a regard
the moſt partial. He regretted the venal
rapacity with which he had ſacrificed him-
ſelf to a woman he abhorred, and his wiſhes
for her final decay became daily more fer-
vent. He knew that the acquaintance of
Cecilia was confined to a circle of which he
was himſelf the principal ornament, that
ſhe had rejećted all the propoſals of mar-
riage which had hitherto been made to her,
and, as he had ſedulouſly watched her
from her earlieſt years, he had reaſon to be-
lieve that her heart had eſcaped any danger-
ous impreſſion. This being her ſituation,
he had long looked upon her as his future
property; as ſuch he had indulged his
admiration, and as ſuch he had already
appropriated her eſtate, though he had
not more vigilantly inſpected into her
ſentiments, than he had guarded his own
from a ſimilar ſcrutiny. -
The death of the Dean her Uncle had,
indeed, much alarmed him; he grieved at
her leaving Suffolk, where he conſidered
himſelf the firſt man, alike in parts and in
conſequence, and he dreaded her reſiding
in London, where he foreſaw that numer-
ous rivals, equal to himſelf in talents and
A 6 in
41CCC.

<page 17>
I 2 C E C I L I A.
in riches, would ſpeedily ſurround her; ri-
vals, too, youthful and ſanguine, not
ſhackled by preſent ties, but at liberty to
ſolicit her immediate acceptance. Beauty
and independence, rarely found together,
would attract a crowd of fuitors at once
brilliant and aſſiduous; and the houſe of
Mr. Harrel was eminent for it's elegance
and gaiety; but yet, undaunted by danger,
and confiding in his own powers, he deter-
mined to purſue the projećt he had formed,
not fearing by addreſs and perſeverance to
enſure its ſucceſs. .
!--
C H A P.

<page 18>
C E C I L I A. 13
C , H A. P. II.
A N A R G U M E N T.
R. Monckton had, at this time, a
party of company aſſembled at his
houſe for the purpoſe of ſpending the Chriſt-
mas holidays. He waited with anxiety the
arrival of Cecilia, and flew to hand her
from the chaiſe before Mr. Harrel could
alight. He obſerved the melancholy of her
countenance, and was much pleaſed to
find that her London journey had ſo little
power to charm her. He condućted her to
the breakfaſt parlour, where Lady Margaret
and his friends expected her.
Lady Margaret received her with a cold-
neſs that bordered upon incivility; iraſcible
by nature and jealous by ſituation, the ap-
pearance of beauty alarmed, and of chear-
fulneſs diſguſted her. She regarded with
watchful ſuſpicion whoever was addreſſed by
her huſband, and having marked his fre-
quent attendance at the Deanery, ſhe had
ſingled out Cecilia for the object of her pe—
culiar antipathy; while Cecilia, perceiving
her averſion though ignorant of its cauſe,
took care to avoid all intercourſe with her
- but
.*

<page 19>
14 C E C I L I. A.
but what ceremony exačted, and pitied in
ſecret the unfortunate lot of her friend.
The company now preſent conſiſted of
one lady and ſeveral gentlemen.
Miſs Bennet, the lady, was in every ſenſe -
of the phraſe, the humble companion of
Lady Margaret; ſhe was low-born, meanly
educated, and narrow-minded; a ſtranger
alike to inmate merit or acquired accomp-
liſhments, yet ſkilful in the art of flattery,
and an adept in every ſpecies of low cun-
ning. With no other view in life than the
attainment of affluence without labour, ſhe
was not more the ſlave of the miſtreſs of the
houſe, than the tool of it's maſter; receiv-
ing indignity without murmur, and ſubmit-
ting to contempt as a thing of courſe. .
Among the gentlemen, the moſt conſpi-
cuous, by means of his dreſs, was Mr.
Areſby, a captain in the militia; a young
man who having frequently heard the words
red-coat and gallantry put together, ima-
gined the conjunétion not merely cuſto-
mary, but honourable, and therefore, with-
out even pretending to think of the ſervice
of his country, he conſidered a cockade as
a badge of politeneſs, and wore it but to
mark his devotion to the ladies, whom he
held himſelf equipped to conquer, and
bound to adore,
The next who by forwardneſs the moſt offi-
- CIOUS

<page 20>
C E C I L I A. 15
cious took care to be noticed, was Mr. Mor-
rice, a young lawyer, who, though riſing in
his profeſſion, owed his ſucceſs neither to diſ-
tinguiſhed abilities, nor to ſkill-ſupplying
induſtry, but to the art of uniting fupple-
heſs to others with confidence in himſelf.
To a reverence of rank, talents, and fortune
the moſt profound, he joined an aſſurance
in his own merit, which no ſuperiority could
depreſs; and with a preſumption which en-
couraged him to aim at all things, he blen-
ded a good-humour that no mortification
could leſſen. And while by the phability
of his diſpoſition he avoided making ene-
mies, by his readineſs to oblige, he learned
the fureſt way of making friends by becom-
ing uſeful to them.
There were alſo ſome neighbouring
ſquires; and there was one old gentleman,
who, without ſeeming to notice any of the
company, ſat frowning in a corner. -
But the principal figure in the circle was
Mr. Belfield, a tall, thin young man, whoſe
face was all animation, and whoſe eyes
ſparkled with intelligence. He had been
intended by his father for trade, but his
ſpirit, ſoaring above the occupation for
which he was deſigned, from repining led
him to refift, and from reſiſting, to rebel.
He eloped from his friends, and contrived
to enter the army. But, fond of the po-
- lite

<page 21>
16 C E C I L I A.
lite arts, and eager for the acquirement of
knowledge, he found not this way of life
much better adapted to his inclination than
that from which he had eſcaped; he ſoon
grew weary of it, was reconciled to his
father, and entered at the Temple. But
here, too volatile for ſerious ſtudy, and too
gay for laborious application, he made little
progreſs: and the ſame quickneſs of parts
and vigour of imagination which united
with prudence, or accompanied by judg-
ment, might have raiſed him to the
head of his profeſſion, being unhappily aſ-
ſociated with fickleneſs and caprice, ſerved
only to impede his improvement, and ob-
ſtrućthis preferment. And now, with little
buſineſs, and that little negle&ted, a ſmall
fortune, and that fortune daily becoming
leſs, the admiration of the world, but that
admiration ending ſimply in civility, he
lived an unſettled and unprofitable life, ge-
nerally careſſed, and univerſally ſought, yet
careleſs of his intereſt and thoughtleſs of the
future; devoting his time to company, his
income to diſſipation, and his heart to the
Muſes.
“I bring you,” ſaid Mr. Monckton, as
he attended Cecilia into the room, “ a
ſubjećt of ſorrow in a young lady who
never gave diſturbance to her friends but
in quitting them.”
st If

<page 22>
C E C I L I A. 17
“ If ſorrow,” cried Mr. Belfield, dart-
ing upon her his piercing eyes, “ wears in
your part of the world a form ſuch as this,
who would wiſh to change it for a view of
ioy P” . -
“She's divinely handſome, indeed
cried the captain, affecting an involuntary
exclamation. -
Mean time, Cecilia, who was placed next
to the lady of the houſe, quietly began her
breakfaſt; Mr. Morrice, the young lawyer,
with the moſt eaſy freedom, ſeating him-
ſelf at her ſide, while Mr. Monckton was
elſewhere arranging the reſt of his gueſts,
in order to ſecure that place for himſelf.
Mr. Morrice, without ceremony, at-
tacked his fair neighbour; he talked of her
journey, and the proſpects of gaiety which
it opened to her view ; but by theſe find-
ing her unmoved, he changed his theme,
and expatiated upon the delights of the
fpot ſhe was quitting. Studious to recom-
mend himſelf to her notice, and indifferent
by what means, one moment he flippantly
extolled the entertainments of the town ;
and the next, rapturouſly deſcribed the
charms of the country. A word, a look
ſufficed to mark her approbation or diſſent,
which he no ſooner diſcovered, than he
ſlided into her opinion, with as much fa-
- - cility

<page 23>
18 C E C I L I A.
cility and ſatisfaction as if it had originally
been his own.
Mr. Monckton, ſuppreſſing his chagrin,
waited ſome time in expectation that when
this young man ſaw he was ſtanding, he
would yield to him his chair: but the re-
mark was not made, and the reſignation
was not thought of. The captain, too, re-
garding the lady as his natural property for
the morning, perceived with indignation
by whom he was ſupplanted; while the
company in general, ſaw with much ſur-
prize, the place they had ſeverally forborne
to occupy from reſpect to their hoſt, thus
familiarly ſeized upon by the man who, in
the whole room, had the leaſt claim, either
from age or rank, to conſult nothing but
his own inclination.
Mr. Monckton, however, when he found
that delicacy and good manners had no
weight with his gueſt, thought it moſt ex-
pedient to allow them none with himſelf;
and therefore, diſguiſing his diſpleaſure un-
der an appearance of facetiouſneſs, he called
out, “ Come, Morrice, you that love
Chriſtmas ſports, what ſay you to the game
of move-all P”
“I like it of all things 1” anſwered
Morrice, and ſtarting from his chair, he
ſkipped to another. -
“So ſhould I too,” cried Mr. Monck-
toll,

<page 24>
C E C I L I A. 19
ton, inſtantly taking his place, “were I
to remove from any ſeat but this.”
Morrice, though he felt himſelf out-
witted, was the firſt to laugh, and ſeemed
as happy in the change as Mr. Monckton
himſelf.
Mr. Monckton now, addreſſing himſelf
to Cecilia, ſaid, “We are going to loſe
you, and you ſeem concerned at leaving
us; yet, in a very few months you will
forget Bury, forget its inhabitants, and for-
get its environs.”
“If you think ſo,” anſwered Cecilia,
“’ muſt i not thence infer that Bury, its in-
habitants, and its environs, will in a very
few months forget me?”
“Ay, ay, and ſo much the better!”
ſaid Lady Margaret, muttering between
her teeth, “ ſo much the better l’”
“I am ſorry you think ſo, madam,”
cried Cecilia, colouring at her ill-breeding.
“ You will find,” ſaid Mr. Monckton,
affecting the ſame ignorance of her mean-
ing that Cecilia really felt, “ as you mix
with the world, you will find that Lady
Margaret has but expreſſed what by almoſt
every body is thought : to negle&t old
friends, and to court new acquaintance,
though perhaps not yet avowedly deli-
vered as a precept from parents to children,
is nevertheleſs ſo univerſally recommended
by

<page 25>
2O C E C I L I A.
by example, that thoſe who ačt differently,
incur general cenſure for afieóting ſingu-
larity.” -
“. It is happy then, for me,” anſwered
Cecilia, “ that neither my ačtions nor my-
ſelf will be ſufficiently known to attract
public obſervation.”
“ You intend, then, madam,” ſaid Mr.
Belfield, “ in defiance of theſe maxims of
the world, to be puided by the light of
your own underſtanding.” º
“ And ſuch,” returned Mr. Monckton,
“ at firſt ſetting out in life, is the inten-
tion of every one. The cloſet reaſoner is
always refined in his ſentiments, and always
confident in his virtue ; but when he mixes
with the world, when he thinks leſs and ačts
more, he ſoon finds the neceſſity of acco-
modating himſelf to ſuch cuſtoms as are al-
ready received, and of purſuing quietly the
track that is already marked out.”
“ But not,” exclaimed Mr. Belfield, “if
he has the leaſt grain of ſpirit ! the beaten
track will be the laſt that a man of parts
will deign to tread,
For common rules were ne'er deſign'd
Direétors of a noble mind.”
“A pernicious maxim a moſt perni-
cious maxim!” cried the old gentleman,
who ſat frowning in a corner of the room.
&g De-

<page 26>
C E C I L I A. 21
“ Deviations from common rules,” ſaid
Mr. Monckton, without taking any notice
of this interruption, “ when they proceed
from genius, are not merely pardonable,
but admirable; and you, Belfield, have a
peculiar right to plead their merits; but ſo
little genius as there is in the world, you
muſt ſurely grant that pleas of this ſort are
very rarely to be urged.” -
“And why rarely,” cried Belfield, “but
becauſe your general rules, your appropri-
ated cuſtoms, your ſettled forms, are but
ſo many abſurd arrangements to impede
not merely the progreſs of genius, but the
uſe of underſtanding 2 If man dared ačt
for himſelf, if neither worldly views, con-
tračted prejudices, eternal precepts, nor
compulſive examples, ſwayed his better
reaſon and impelled his condućt, how noble
indeed would he be how infinite in facul-
ties 1 in apprehenſion how like a God!” (a)
“ All this,” anſwered Mr. Monckton,
“ is but the doćtrine of a lively imagin-
ation, that looks upon impoſſibilities ſim-
ply as difficulties, and upon difficulties as
mere invitations to vićtory. But expe-
rience teaches another leſſon; experience
ſhews that the oppoſition of an individual
to a community is always dangerous in the
operation, and ſeldom ſucceſsful in the
(a) Hamlet. -
- event ;

<page 27>
22 C E C I L I A.
event;-never, indeed, without a concur-
rence ſtrange as deſirable, of fortunate cir-
cumſtances with great abilities.”
“And why is this,” returned Belfield,
“ but becauſe the attempt is ſo ſeldom
made 2 The pitiful prevalence of general
conformity extirpates genius, and murders
originality; man is brought up, not as if
he were “ the nobleſt work of God,” but
as a mere dućtile machine of human form-
ation: he is early taught that he muſt nei-
ther conſult his underſtanding, nor purſue
his inclinations, left, unhappily for his com-
merce with the world, his underſtanding
ſhould be averſe to fools, and provoke him
to deſpiſe them; and his inclinations to the
tyranny of perpetual reſtraint, and give him
courage to abjure it.”
“I am ready enough to allow,” an-
ſwered Mr. Monckton, “ that an excentric
genius, ſuch, for example, as yours, may
murmur at the tediouſneſs of complying with
the cuſtoms of the world, and wiſh, un-
confined, and at large, to range through
life without any ſettled plan or prudential
reſtrićtion; but would you, therefore, grant
the ſame licence to every one? would you
wiſh to ſee the world peopled with defiers of
order, and contemners of eſtabliſhed forms ?
and not merely excuſe the irregularities re-
ſulting from uncommon parts, but encourage
5 thoſe,
h
:
º

<page 28>
C E C I L I A. 23
thoſe, alſo, to lead, who without blunder-
ing cannot even follow **
“ I would have all men,” replied Bel-
field, “whether philoſophers or ideots, ačt
for themſelves. Every one would then ap-
pear what he is; enterprize would be en-
couraged, and imitation aboliſhed ; genius
would feel its ſuperiority, and folly its in-
ſignificance; and then, and then only,
ſhould we ceaſe to be ſurfeited with that
eternal ſameneſs of manner and appearance
which at preſent runs through all ranks of
men.”
“ Petrifying dull work this, mom ami 1"
ſaid the captain, in a whiſper to Morrice,
“ de grace, ſtart ſome new game.”
“With all my heart,” anſwered he ,
and then, ſuddenly jumping up, exclaimed,
“ A hare a hare l’’
“Where?—where 2–which way ?” and
all the gentlemen aroſe, and ran to different
windows, except the maſter of the houſe,
the objećt of whoſe purſuit was already near
him.
Morrice, with much pretended earneſt-
neſs, flew from window to window, to trace
footſteps upon the turf which he knew had
not printed it: yet, never inattentive to
his own intereſt, when he perceived in the
midſt of the combuſtion he had raiſed, that
Lady Margaret was incenſed at the noiſe it
- pro-

<page 29>
24 C E C I L I A.
duced, he artfully gave over his ſearch,
and ſeating himſelf in a chair next to her,
eagerly offered to aſſiſt her with cakes, cho-
colate, or whatever the table afforded.
He had, however, effeótually broken up
the converſation; and breakfaſt being over,
Mr. Harrel ordered his chaiſe, and Cecilia
aroſe to take leave. -
And now not without ſome difficulty
could Mr. Monckton diſguiſe the uneaſy
fears which her departure occaſioned him.
Taking her hand, “I ſuppoſe,” he ſaid,
“ you will not permit an old friend to viſit
you in town, leſt the fight of him ſhould
prove a diſagreeable memorial of the time.
you will ſoon regret having waſted in the
country?” -
“Why will you ſay this, Mr. Monck-
ton?” cried Cecilia; “I am ſure you can-
not think it.” - - -
“ Theſe profound ſtudiers of mankind,
madam,” ſaid Belfield, “are mighty ſorry.
champions for conſtancy or friendſhip.
They wage war with all expećtations but of
depravity, and grant no quarter even to the
pureſt deſigns, where they think there will
be any temptation to deviate from them.”
... “Temptation,” ſaid, Mr. Monckton, .
“ is very eaſy of reſiſtance in theory ; but
if you reflect upon the great change of
ſituation Miſs Beverley will experience,
5 - upon

<page 30>
C E C I L I A. 25
ſº
upon the new ſcenes ſhe will ſee, the new
acquaintance ſhe muſt make, and the new
conneétions ſhe may form, you will not
wonder at the anxiety of a friend for her
welfare.”
“But I preſume,” cried Belfield, with a
laugh, “ Miſs Beverly does not mean to
convey her perſon to town, and leave her
underſtanding locked up, with other na-.
tural curioſities, in the country : Why,
therefore, may not the ſame diſcernment
regulate her adoption of new acquaintance,
p q
and choice of new connections, that guided
her ſelection of old ones? Do you ſuppoſe
that becauſe ſhe is to take leave of you, ſhe
is to take leave of herſelf?” - -
“Where fortune ſmiles upon youth and
beauty,” anſwered Mr. Monckton, “do-
you think it nothing that their fair poſſeſſor
ſhould make a ſudden tranſition of ſituation
from the quietneſs of a retired life in the
country, to the gaiety of a ſplendid town
reſidence P’’ -
“Where fortune frowns upon youth and
beauty,” returned Belfield, “ they may not
irrationally excite commiſeration; but
where nature and chance unite their forces
º
to bleſs the ſame objećt, what room there,
may be for alarm or iamentation I confeſs I
cannot divine.”
- -> - -
“What l” cried Mr. Monckton, with .
Vol. I. B ſome

<page 31>
26 C. E. C. I L I A.
ſome emotion, “ are there not ſharpers,
fortune-hunters, ſycophants, wretches of all
forts and denominations, who watch the ap-
proach of the rich and unwary, feed upon
their inexperience, and prey upon their pro-
perty f" - * ,
“ Come, come,” cried Mr. Harrel, “ it.
is time I ſhould haſten my fair ward away, if
this is your method of deſcribing the place
ſhe is going to live in.” * *
“Is it poſſible,” cried the Captain, ad-
vancing to Cecilia, “ that this lady has ne-
ver yet tried the town : " and then, lowering
his voice, and ſmiling languiſhingly in her.
face, he added “Can any thing ſo divinely
handſome have been immured in the coun-
try : Ah! quelle homte 1 do you make it a
principle to be ſo cruel: ” - - -
Cecilia, thinking ſuch a compliment
njerited not any other notice than a ſlight
bow, turned to Lady Margaret, and ſaid
“Should your ladyſhip, be in town this
winter, may I expe&t the honour of hearing
where I may wait upon you ?” . . . . -
“I don't know whether I ſhall go or
not;" anſwered the old lady, with her uſual
ungraciouſneſs.
Cecilia would now have haſtened away,
but Mr. Monckton, ſtopping her, again ex-
preſſed his fears of the conſequences of her
journey; “Be upon your guard,” hº
º * - - * Wit

<page 32>
C E C I L I A.’ 2?
“with all new acquaintance; judge nobody
from appearances; form no friendſhip raſh-
ly; take time to look about you, and re-
member you can make no alteration in your
- - - - - - *
way of life, without greater probability of
faring worſe, than chance of faring better.”
Keep therefore as you are, and the more
you ſee of others, the more you will rejoice
that you neither reſemble nor are conneéted
with them.” - - - *
“ This from you, Mr. Monckton 1":
cried Belfield, “what is become of your
conformity ſyſtem? I thought all the world-
was to be alike, or only ſo much the worſe
for any variation?” . - -
“I ſpoke,” ſaid Mr. Monckton, “ of
the world in general, not of this lady in-
particular; and who that knows, who that:
ſees her, would not wiſh it were poſſible ſhe
might continue in every reſpect exačtly and
unalterably what ſhe is at preſent ” -
“ I find,” ſaid Cecilia, “ you are deter-
mined that flattery at leaſt, ſhould I meet
with it, ſhall owe no pernicious effects to
its novelty.” *. -
“ Well, Miſs Beverley,” cried Mr. Har-
rel, “will you now venture to accompany
me to town 2 Orº has Mr. Monckton
frightened you from proceeding any far-
ther P’’ : * . .3 ---
“If,” replied Cecilia, “I felt no more .
. . . . . . .” B 2 ſorrow

<page 33>
28 c E c 1 L I A.
ſorrow in quitting my friends, than I feel
terror in venturing to London, with how
light a heart .# I make the journey !”.
“ Brava / " cried Belfield, “I am happy
to find the diſcourſe of Mr. Monckton has
not intimidated, you, nor prevailed upon
you to deplore your condition in having the
accumulated miſery of being young, fair.
and affluent.”
“Alas! poor thing!” exclaimed the old
gentleman who ſat in the corner, fixing his
eyes upon Cecilia with an expreſſion of
mingled grief and pity.
Cecilia ſtarted, but no one elſe paid him
any attention. es
The uſual ceremonies of leave - taking
now followed, and the Captain, with moſt
obſequious reverence, advanced to condućt
Cecilia to the carriage; but in the midſt of
the dumb eloquence of his bows and ſmiles,
Mr. Morrice, affecting not to perceive his
deſign, ſkipped gaily between them, and,
without any previous formality, ſeized, the
hand of Cecilia himſelf; failing not, how-
ever, to temper the freedom of his ačtion:
by a look of reſpect the moſt profound.
The Captain ſhrugged and retired. But
Mr. Monckton, enraged at his aſſurance,
and determined it ſhould nothing avail him,
exclaimed “Why how now, Morrice, do
you take away the privilege of my houſe?”
• True,
-

<page 34>
C E C I L I A. 29
- º
“ True, true;” anſwered Morrice, “ you
members of parliament have an undoubted
right to be tenacious of your privileges.”
Then, bowing with a look of veneration to
Cecilia, he reſigned her hand with an air of
as much happineſs as he had taken it. :
Mr. Monckton, in leading her to the
chaiſe, again begged permiſſion to wait up-
on her in town: Mr. Harrel took the hint,
and entreated him to conſider his houſe as
his own; and Cecilia, gratefully thanking
him for his ſolicitude in her welfare, added
“And I hope, fir, you will honour me
with your counſel and admonitions with re-
ſpect to my future condućt, whenever you
have the goodneſs to let me ſee you.”
This was preciſely his wiſh. He begged,
in return, that ſhe would treat him with
confidence, and then ſuffered the chaiſe to
drive off. * - -
* B 3 C H A P.

<page 35>
3o C E C I L I A.
C H A P. III. º e
- . . . . " ,
A N A R R 1 v AL. . . .
AS ſoon as they loſt fight of the houſe,
* Cecilia expreſſed her ſurpriſe at the
behaviour of the old gentleman who ſat in
the corner, whoſe general ſilence, ſecluſion
from the company, and abſence of mind,
had ſtrongly excited her curioſity. . . . .
Mr. Harrel could give her very little ſa-
tisfaction: he told her that he had twice or
thrice met him in public places, where
every body remarked the ſingularity of his
manners and appearance, but that he had
never diſcourſed with any one to whom he
ſeemed known; and that he was as much
ſurpriſed as herſelf in ſeeing ſo ſtrange a
charaćter at the houſe of Mr. Monckton.
The converſation then turned upon the
family they had juſt quitted, and Cecilia
warmly declared the good opinion ſhe had
of Mr. Monckton, the obligations ſhe owed
to him for the intereſt which, from her
childhood, he had always taken in her aſ-
fairs; and her hopes of reaping much inſtruc-
tion from the friendſhip of a man who had
ſo extenſive a knowledge of the world.
- Mr.

<page 36>
C E C I L I A. 3 I
Mr. Harrel profeſſed himſelf well ſatiſ.
fied that ſhe ſhould have ſuch a counſellor;
for though but little acquainted with him,
he knew he was a man of fortune and fa-
ſhion, and well eſteemed in the world. They
mutually compaſſionated his unhappy ſitu-
ation in domeſtic life, and Cecilia inno-
cently expreſſed her concern at the diſlike
Lady Margaret ſeemed to have taken to
her; a diſlike which Mr. Harrel naturally
enough imputed to her youth and beauty,
yet without ſuſpe&ting any cauſe more co-
gent than a general jealouſy of attractions
of which ſhe had herſelf ſo long outlived
the poſſeſſion.
As their journey drew near to its conclu-
ſion, all the uneaſy and diſagreeable ſenſa-
tions which in the boſom of Cecilia had ac-
companied its commencement, gave way
to the expectation of quick approaching
happineſs in again meeting her favourite
young friend. -
Mrs. Harrel had in childhood been her
playmate, and in youth her ſchool-fel-
low; a ſimilarity of diſpoſition with reſpect
to ſweetneſs of temper, had early rendered
them dear to each other, though the reſem;
blance extended no farther, Mrs. Harrel
having no pretenſions to the wit or under-
ſtanding of her friend; but ſhe was amiable
and obliging, and therefore ſufficiently de-
B 4. ſerving

<page 37>
32 C E C I L I A.
ſerving aſſeåtion, though neither, blazing
with attractions which laid claim to admira-
tion, nor endowed with thoſe ſuperior qua-
lities which mingle reſpect in the love they
inſpire, - -
From the time of her marriage, which
was near three years, ſhe had entirely quit-
ted Suffolk, and had had no intercourſe with
Cecilia but by letter. She was now juſt re-
turned from Violet Bank, the name given
by Mr. Harrel to a villa about twelve miles
from London, where with a large party of
company ſhe had ſpent the Chriſtmas holi-
days.
Hiei, meeting was tender and affeótion-
ate; the ſenſibility of Cecilia's heart flowed
from her eyes, and the gladneſs of Mrs.
Harrel's dimpled her cheeks.
As ſoon as their mutual ſalutations, ex-
preſſions of kindneſs, and general enquiries
had been made, Mrs. Harrel begged to lead
her to the drawing-room, “ where,” ſhe
added, “ you will ſee ſome of my friends,
who are impatient to be preſented to you.”
* I could have wiſhed,” ſaid Cecilia,
“ after ſo long an abſence, to have paſſed
this firſt evening alone with you.”
“ They are all people who particularly
deſired to ſee you,” ſhe anſwered, “ and I
had them by way of entertaining you, as I
W3S

<page 38>
C E C I L I A. 33
was afraid you would be out of ſpirits at
leaving Bury.” -
Cecilia, finding the kindneſs of her in-
tentions, forbore any further expoſtulation,
and quietly followed her to the drawing-
room. But as the door was opened, ſhe
was ſtruck with amazement upon finding
that the apartment, which was ſpacious,
lighted with brilliancy, and decorated with
magnificence, was more than half filled
with company, every one of which was
dreſſed with gaiety and profuſion.
- Cecilia, who from the word friends, ex-
pećted to have ſeen a ſmall and private º:
ſelected for the purpoſe of ſocial converſe,
ſtarted involuntarily at the fight before her,
and had hardly courage to proceed.
Mrs. Harrel, however, took her hand
and introduced her to the whole company,
who were all ſeverally named to her; a ce-
remonial which though not merely agree-
able but even neceſſary to thoſe who live in
the gay world, in order to obviate diſtreſ-
fing miſtakes, or unfortunate implications
in diſcourſe, would by Cecilia, have been
willingly diſpenſed with, ſince to her their
names were as new as their perſons, and
ſince, knowing nothing of their hiſtories,
parties or conneétions, ſhe could to nothing
allude: it therefore ſerved, but to heighten
her colour and increaſe her embarraſsment.
. 2 B 5 A.

<page 39>
, 34 C E C I L II A.
. A native dignity of mind, however, which
had early taught her to diſtinguiſh modeſty
from baſhfulneſs, enabled her in a ſhort
time to conquer her ſurpriſe, and recover
her compoſure. She entreated Mrs. Har-
rel to apologize for her appearance, and be-
ing ſeated between two young ladies, endea-
voured to ſeem reconciled to it herſelf.
Nor was this very difficult; for while her
dreſs, which ſhe had not changed ſince her
journey, joined to the novelty of her face,
attracted general obſervation, the report of
her fortune, which had preceded her en-
trance, ſecured to her general reſpect. She
ſoon found, too, that a company was not
neceſſarily formidable becauſe full dreſſed,
that familiarity could be united with mag-
nificence, and that though to her, every one
ſeemed attired to walk in a proceſſion, or to
grace a drawing-room, no formality was aſ-
fumed, and no ſolemnity was affected:
every one was without reſtraint, even rank
obtained but little diſtinétion; eaſe was the
general plan, and entertainment the ge-
neral purſuit. . . . . . . .
Cecilia, though new to London, which
city the ill health of her uncle had hitherto
prevented her ſeeing, was yet no ſtranger
to company; ſhe had paſſed her time in re-
tirement, but not in obſcurity, ſince for
ſome years paſt ſhe had preſided at the table
* & bi of

<page 40>
º * * *
C E C I L I A. 35
of the Dean, who was viſited by the firſt
people of the county in which he lived :
and notwithſtanding his parties, which were
frequent, though ſmall, and elegant,
though private, had not prepared her for
the ſplendour or the diverſity of a London
aſſembly, they yet, by initiating her in the
pračtical rules of good breeding, had
taught her to ſubdue the timid fears of total
inexperience, and to repreſs the baſhful
feelings of ſhame-faced awkwardneſs; fears
and feelings which rather call for compaſ-
ſion than admiration, and which, except in
extreme youth, ſerve but to degrade the
modeſty they indicate. *
... She regarded, therefore, the two young la-
dies between whom ſhe was ſeated, rather.
with a wiſh of addreſſing, than a ſhyneſs of
being attacked by them; but the elder,
Miſs Larolles, was earneſtly engaged in
diſcourſe with a gentleman, and the younger, ,
Miſs Leeſon, totally diſcouraged her, by .
the invariable filence and gravity with
which from time to timé ſhe met her eyes. .
Uninterrupted, therefore, except by oc-
caſional ſpeeches from Mr. and Mrs. Har-
rel, ſhe ſpent the firſt part of the evening
merely in ſurveying the company.
Nor was the company dilatory in return-
ing her notice, ſince from the time of her ,
- B 6 entrance

<page 41>
36 C E C I L I. A.
entrance into the room, ſhe had been the ob-
jećt of general regard.
`" The ladies took an exačt inventory of
her dreſs, and internally ſettled how differ-
ently they would have been attired if bleſt
with equal affluence. -
The men diſputed among themſelves
whether or not ſhe was painted; and one of ,
them afferting boldly that ſhe rouged well, a
debate enſued, which ended in a bet, and
the decificn was mutually agreed to depend
upon the colour of her cheeks by the be-
inning of April, when, if unfaded by bad
É. and continual diſfipation, they wore
the ſame bright bloom with which they
were now glowing, her champion acknow-
ledged that his wager would be loſt.
In about half an hour the gentleman
with whom Miſs Larolles had been talking,
left the room, and then that young lady,
turning ſuddenly to Cecilia, exclaimed
“How odd Mr. Meadows is Do you
know he ſays he ſhan’t be well enough to
go to Lady Nyland's aſſembly 1 How ridi-
culous! as if that could hurt him.” . .
Cecilia, ſurpriſed at an attack ſo little ce-
remonious, lent her a civil, but filent atten-
tion.
“You ſhall be there, ſha'n't you?” She
added. -
gº No,

<page 42>
C E C I L I A. 37
“No, ma'am, I have not the honour of
being at all known to her ladyſhip.” -
“O there's nothing in that,” returned
ſhe, “for Mrs. Harrel can acquaint her you
are here, and then, you know, ſhe'll ſend
you a ticket, and then you can go.”
“A ticket 2" repeated Cecilia, “ does
Lady Nyland only admit her company with
tickets?” - - -
“O lord,” cried Miſs Larolles, laugh-
ing immoderately, “ don't you know what
I mean? Why a ticket is only a viſitin
card, with a name upon it; but we all cº
them tickets now.” t
Cecilia thanked her for the information,
and then Miſs Larolles enquired how many
miles ſhe had travelled ſince morning * :
“Seventy-three,” anſwered Cecilia,
“ which I hope will plead my apology for
being ſo little dreſſed.” -
“O, you're vaſtly well,” returned the
other, “ and for my part, I never think
about dreſs. But only conceive what hap-
pened to me laſt year! Do you know I
came to town the twentieth of March! was
not that horrid provoking?”
- “ Perhaps ſo,” ſaid Cecilia, “ but I am
ſure I cannot tell why.” 3.
“Not tell why?” repeated Miſs La-
rolles, “why don't you know it was the
very night of the grand private maſquerade
- at

<page 43>
38 C E C I L I. A.
-
at Lord Dariens? I would not have miſſed
it for the whole univerſe. I never travelled
in ſuch an agony in my life: we did not get
to town till monſtrous late, and then do
you know I had neither a ticket nor a habit!
Only conceive what a diſtreſs! well, I ſent
to every creature I knew for a ticket, but
they all ſaid ºthere was not one to be had;
ſo I was juſt like a mad creature—but
about ten or eleven o'clock, a young lady
of my particular acquaintance, by the
greateſt good luck in the world happened to
be taken ſuddenly ill; ſo ſhe ſent me her
ticket, was not that delightful ?”
ºr “ For her, extremely 1" ſaid Cecilia,
laughing. . .
“ Well,” ſhe continued, “ then I was
almoſt out of my wits with joy; and I went
about, and got one of the ſweeteſt dreſſes
you ever ſaw. If you'll call upon me
ſome morning, I’ll ſhew it you.” -
Cecilia, not prepared for an invitation ſo
abrupt, bowed without ſpeaking, and Miſs
Larolles, too happy in talking herſelf to be
offended at the ſilence of another, conti-
nued her narration. --
“Well, but now comes the vileſt part
of the buſineſs; do you know, when every
thing elſe was ready, I could not get my
hair-dreſſer . I ſent all over the town,-he
was no where to be found; I thought I
ſhould

<page 44>
.C. E. C I L I A. 39
Thould, have died with vexation; I aſſure
you I cried ſo that if I had not gone in a
maſk, I ſhould have been aſhamed to be
ſeen. And ſo, after all this monſtrous fa-
tigue, I was forced to have my hair dreſſed
by my own maid, quite in a common way;
was not it cruelly mortifying R* . . . . .
Why yes,” anſwered Cecilia, “I ſhou
...think it was almoſt ſufficient to make you
regret the illneſs of the young lady who
ſent you her ticket.” & ºf
: They were now interrupted by Mrs. Har-
rel, who advanced to them followed by a
joung man of a ſerious aſpect and modeſt
.demeanour, and ſaid, “I am happy to ſee
you both ſo well engaged ; but my brother
has been reproaching me with preſenting.
severy body to Miſs Beverley but himſelf.”
“I cannot, hope,” ſaid Mr. Arnott,
that I have any place in the recolle&tion
of Miſs Beverley, but long as I have been
abſent from Suffolk, and unfortunate as I
was in not ſeeing her during my laſt viſit
there, I am yet ſure, even at this diſtance
of time, grown and formed as ſhe is, Iſhould
inſtantly have known her.” . . . . .º.º. 1
: “, Amazing!” cried, an elderly gentle-
man, in a tone of irony, who was ſtanding
near them, “ for the face is a very com:
mon one!”.'s e. , , . . . . . . . . -
, “I remember well,” ſaid Cecilia, “ that
- - , s when

<page 45>
4:O C E C I L I. A.
when you left Suffolk I thought I had loſt
my beſt friend.” - - - -
“Is that poſſible 7" cried Mr. Arn
with a look of much delight.
º “ Yes, indeed, and not without reaſon,
for in all diſputes you were my advocate;
in all plays, my companion; and in all
difficulties, my aſſiſtant.”
“Madam,” cried the ſame gentleman,
“if you liked him becauſe he was your ad-
vocate, companion, and aſſiſtant, pray like
me too, for I am ready to become all three
at once.” - -
“You are very good,” ſaid Cecilia,
laughing, “but at preſent 1 find no want
of any defender.”
“That's pity,” he returned, “ for Mr.
Arnott ſeems to me very willing to act the
ſame parts over again with you.”
“But for that purpoſe he muſt return to
the Days of his childhood.”
“Ah, would to heaven it were poſſible!”
cried Mr. Arnott, “for they were the hap-
pieſt of my life.”
“ After ſuch a confeſſion,” ſaid his com-
panion, “ ſurely you will let him attempt
to renew them 2 'tis but taking a walk
backwards; and though it is very early in
life for Mr. Arnott to figh for that retro-
gade motion, which, in the regular courſe
of things, we ſhall all in our turns defire,
* - yet

<page 46>
C E C I L I A. 41
yet with ſuch a motive as recovering Miſs
Beverley for a playfellow, who can wonder
that he anticipates in youth the hopeleſs
wiſhes of age 2" . . .
"Here Miſs Larolles, who was one of
that numerous tribe of young ladies to
whom all converſation is irkſome in which
they are not themſelves engaged, quitted-
her place, of which Mr. Goſport, Cecilia's
new acquaintance, immediately took poſ-
ſeſſion.
“Is it utterly impoſſible,” continued
this gentleman, “that I ſhould aſſiſt in
procuring Mr. Arnott ſuch a renovation ?
Is there no ſubaltern part I can perform to
facilitate the projećt? for I will either bide
or ſeek with any boy in the Pariſh ; and for
a Q. in the corner, there is none more ce-
lebrated.” - . . * . .
“ I have no doubt, Sir,” anſwered Ceci-
lia, “ of your accompliſhments ; and I
..ſhould be not a little entertained with the
ſurprize of the company if you could per-
ſuade yourſelf to diſplay them.”
“And what,” cried he, “ could the
company do half ſo well as to ariſe alſo,
and join in the ſport 2 it would but inter-
rupt ſome tale of ſcandal, or ſome deſcrip-
tion of a toûpée, Aétive wit, however de-
ſpicable when compared with intellec-
tual, is yet ſurely better than the iº.
Cant

<page 47>
42 C E C I L I A.
ficant click-clack of modiſh converſation,”
caſting his eyes towards Miſs Larolles, “ or
even the penſive dullneſs of affected filence,”
changing their direction towards Miſs
Leeſon. - -
Cecilia, though ſurprized at an attack
upon the ſociety her friend had ſelected, by
one who was admitted to make a part of
it, felt its juſtice too ſtrongly to be of.
fended at its ſeverity. -
“ I have often wiſhed,” he continued,
“ that when large parties are collected, as
here, without any poſſible reaſon why they
might not as well be ſeparated, ſomething
could be propoſed in which each perſon
might innocently take a ſhare : for ſurely
after the firſt half hour, they can find little
new to obſerve in the dreſs of their neigh-
bours, or to diſplay in their own ; and
with whatever ſeeming gaiety they may
contrive to fill up the middle and end of
the evening, by wire-drawing the com-
ments afforded by the beginning, they are
yet ſo miſerably fatigued, that if they have
not four or five places to run to every
night, they ſuffer nearly as much from
wearineſs of their friends in company, as
they would do from wearineſs of them-
ſelves in ſolitude.”
Here, by the general breaking up of
- the party, the converſation was interrupted,
and

<page 48>
C E C I L I A. 43
and Mr. Goſport was obliged to make his
exit; not much to the regret of Cecilia,
who was impatient to be alone with Mrs.
Harrel.
The reſt of the evening, therefore, was
ſpent much more to, her ſatisfaction ; it
was devoted to friendſhip, to mutual en-
quiries, to kind congratulations, and en-
dearing recollečtions; and though it was
late when ſhe retired, ſhe retired with re-
iuétance.
*

<page 49>
* c E c 1 L I A.
C H A P. IV.
: A Sketch of H 1 G H LIFE.
EAGER to renew a converſation which
had afforded her ſo much pleaſure,
Cecilia, neither ſenſible of fatigue from
her change of hours nor her journey, aroſe
with the light, and as ſoon as ſhe was
dreſſed, haſtened to the breakfaſt apart-
Inênt,
She had not, however, been more impa-
tient to enter than ſhe ſoon became to quit
it ; for though not much ſurprized to find
herſelf there before her friend, her ardour
for waiting her arrival was ſomewhat chil-
led, upon finding the fire but juſt lighted,
the room cold, and the ſervants ſtill em-
ployed in putting it in order. -
At 1o o'clock ſhe made another attempt:
the room was then better prepared for her
reception, but ſtill it was empty. Again
ſhe was retiring, when the appearance of
Mr. Arnott ſtopt her.
He expreſſed his ſurprize at her early
rifing, in a manner that marked the plea-
fure it gave to him; and then, returning
to the converſation of the preceding even-
1ng,

<page 50>
C E C I L I. A. 45
ing, he expatiated with warmth and feel-
ing upon the happineſs of his boyiſh days,
remembered every circumſtance belonging
to the plays in which they had formerly-
been companions, and dwelt upon eve
incident with a minuteneſs of delight that
ſhewed his unwillingneſs ever to have done
with the ſubjećt.
This diſcourſe detained her till they were
joined by Mrs. Harrel, and then another,
more gay and more general ſucceeded to it.
During their breakfaſt, Miſs Larolles
was announced as a viſitor to Cecilia, to
whom ſhe immediately advanced with the
intimacy of an old acquaintance, taking:
her hand, and aſſuring her ſhe could no
longer defer the honour of waiting upon
her.
Cecilia, much amazed at this warmth of
civility from one to whom ſhe was almoſt
a ſtranger, received her compliment rather
coldly; but Miſs Larolles, without con-
ſulting her looks, or attending to her man-
ner, proceeded to expreſs the earneſt defire
ſhe had long had to be known to her; to
hope they ſhould meet very often; to de-
clare nothing could make her ſo happy;
and to beg leave to recommend to her no-
tice her own milliner.
“I aſſure you,” ſhe continued, “ ſhe
has all Paris in her diſpoſal; the ſweeteſt
caps
~

<page 51>
46. C E C I L I A.
z
caps the moſt beautiful trimmings and
her ribbons are quite divine ! It is the moſt
dangerous thing you can conceive to go'
near her ; I never truſt myſelf in her room'
but I am ſure to be ruined. If you pleaſe,
I'll take you to her this morning.”
“If her acquaintance is ſo ruinous,”
ſaid Cecilia, “ I think I had better avoid
it.” - - - - - - - * * * . . . . .
“O impoſſible! there's no ſuch thing as .
living without her. To be ſure ſhe's
ſhockingly dear, that I muſt own; but
then who can wonder? She makes ſuch
ſweet things, 'tis impoſſible to pay her too.”
much for them.” *
Mrs. Harrel now joining in the recom-
mendation, the party was agreed upon, and
accompanied by Mr. Arnott, the ladies pro-
ceeded to the houſe of the milliner.
Here the raptures of Miſs Larolles were
again excited : ſhe viewed the finery diſ-
played with delight inexpreſfible, enquired
who were the intended poſſeſſors, heard .
their names with envy, and fighed with all
the bitterneſs of mortification that ſhe was
unable to order home almoſt every thing
ſhe looked at.
Having finiſhed their buſineſs here, they
proceeded to various other dreſs manufac-
turers, in whoſe praiſes Miſs Larolles was
almoſt equally eloquent, and to appropriate
. . . . whoſe
5

<page 52>
t C E. C. I. L. I A. - 47.
whoſe goods ſhe was almoſt equally earneſt: .
and then, after attending this loquacious,
young lady to her father's houſe, Mrs. Har-
rel and Cecilia returned to their own.
Cecilia rejoiced at the ſeparation, and
congratulated herſelf that the reſt of the
day might be ſpent alone with her friend.
“Why no,” ſaid Mrs. Harrel, “... not
abſolutely alone, for I expečt ſome company.
at night.” .
“Company again to-night 2"
“ Nay, don't be frightened, for it will
be a very ſmall party; not more than fifteen
or twenty in all.”
“Is that ſo ſmall a party " ſaid Ce-
cilia, ſmiling; “ and how ſhort a time
ſince would you, as well as I, have rec-
koned it a large one !”
“O, you mean when I lived in the
country,” returned Mrs. Harrel; “ but
what in the world could I know of parties,
or company then * * - -
“ Not much, indeed,” ſaid Cecilia, “ as
my preſent ignorance ſhews.” - -
They then parted to dreſs for dinner.
The company of this evening were again
all ſtrangers to Cecilia, except Miſs Lee-
ſon, who was ſeated next to her, and whoſe
frigid looks again compelled her to obſerve .
the ſame ſilence ſhe ſo reſolutely pračtiſed.
herſelf. Yet not the leſs was her internal,
- * ſurpriſe

<page 53>
48 C. E. C I L I A.
ſurpriſe that a lady who ſeemed deter-
mined neither to give nor receive any en-
tertainment, ſhould repeatedly chuſe to
ſhew herſelf in a company with no part of
which ſhe aſſociated.
Mr. Arnott, who contrived to occupy
the ſeat on her other ſide, ſuffered not the
filence with which her fair neighbour had
infected her to ſpread any further : he
talked, indeed, upon no new ſubjećt; and
upon the old one, of their former ſports
and amuſements, he had already exhauſted
all that was worth being mentioned; but
not yet had he exhauſted the pleaſure he
received from the theme; it ſeemed always
freſh and always enchanting to him; it em-
ployed his thoughts, regaled his imagin-
ation, and enlivened his diſcourſe. Cecilia
in vain tried to change it for another; he
quitted it only, by compulſion, and returned
to it with redoubled eagerneſs.
When the company was retired, and Mr.
Arnott only remained with the ladies, Ce-
cilia, with no little ſurpriſe, enquired for
Mr. Harrel, obſerving that ſhe had not
ſeen him the whole day.
“O,” cried his lady, “ don't think of
wondering at that, for it happens conti-
nually. He dines at home, indeed, in ge-
neral, but otherwiſe I ſhould ſee nothing of
him at all.”
* 5 - & & In-

<page 54>
C - E C I L I A. 49
-
“. Indeed? why how does he fill up his
time * *
“ That I am ſure I cannot tell, for he
never conſults me about it ; but I ſuppoſe
much in the ſame way that other people
do.” v.
“Ah Priſcilla!” cried Cecilia, with ſome
earneſtneſs,” how little did I ever expe&t to
ſee you ſo much a fine lady 1" -
“A fine lady ?” repeated Mrs. Harrel,
“ why what is it I do? don't I live exactly
like every body elſe that mixes at all with
the world P’’ .
“ You, Miſs Beverley,” ſaid Mr. Ar-
nott in a low voice,” will I hope give to
the world an example, not take one from
it,”
Soon after, they ſeparated for the night.
The next morning, Cecilia took care to
fill up her time more advantageouſly, than
in wandering about the houſe in ſearch of
a companion ſhe now expected not to find:
ſhe got together her books, arranged them
to her fancy, and ſecured to herſelf for the
future occupation of her leiſure hours, the
exhauſtleſs fund of entertainment which
reading, that richeſt, higheſt, and nobleſt
ſource of intelle&tual enjoyment, perpetu-
ally affords.
While they were yet at breakfaſt, they .
were again viſited by Miſs Larolles, “I
Vol. I. C am

<page 55>
5o C E C I L I A.
am come,” cried ſhe, eagerly, “ to run
away with you both to my Lord Belgrade's
, ſale. All the world will be there; and we
ſhall go in with tickets, and you have no
notion how it will be crowded.”
“ What is to be ſold there 2" ſaid Ce-
cilia.
“O every thing you can conceive; houſe,
ſtables, china, laces, horſes, caps, every
thing in the world.”
“And do you intend to buy anything?”
“Lord, no; but one likes to ſee the peo-
ple's things.”
Cecilia then begged they would excuſe
her attendance,
“O by no means, cried Miſs Larolles,
you muſt go, I aſſure you; there'll be ſuch
a monſtrous crowd as you never ſaw in your
life. I dare ſay we ſhall be half ſqueezed
to death.”
“ That,” ſaid Cecília, “ is an induce-
ment which you muſt not expect will have
much weight with a poor ruſtic juſt out of
the country: it muſt require all the poliſh
of a long reſidence in the metropolis to
make it attractive.”
“O but do go, for I aſſure you it will
be the beſt ſale we ſhall have this ſeaſon.
I can't imagine, Mrs. Harrel, what poor
Lady Belgrade will do with herſelf; I hear
the creditors have ſeized every thing; I
really

<page 56>
C E C I L I A. , 51
really believe creditors are the crueleſt, ſet
of people in the world ! they have taken
thoſe beautiful buckles out of her ſhoes |
Poor ſoul! I declare it will make my heart
ache to ſee them put up. Its quite ſhock-
ing, upon my word. I wonder who'll buy
them. I aſſure you they were the prettieſt
fancied I ever ſaw. But come, if we don't
go direétly, there will be no getting in.”
Cecilia again deſired to be excuſed ac-
companying them, adding that ſhe wiſhed
to ſpend the day at home.
“At home, my dear 2" cried Mrs. Har-
rel;” why we have been engaged to Mrs.
Mears this month, and ſhe begged me to
prevail with you to be of the party. I
expect ſhe'll call, or ſend you a ticket,
every moment.”
“How unlucky for me,” ſaid Cecilia,
“ that you ſhould happen to have ſo many
engagements juſt at this time ! I hope,
at leaſt, there will not be any for to-mor-
row.” -
“O yes; to-morrow we go to Mrs. El-
-ton’s.”
“Again to-morrow ; and how long is
this to laſt P’’ - -
“O heaven knows ; I'll ſhew you my
catalogue.” -
She then produced a book which con-
tained a liſt of engagements for more than
- C 2 three

<page 57>
52 C E C I L I A.
three weeks. “And as theſe,” ſhe ſaid,
are ſtruck off, new ones are made; and
ſo it is we go on till after the birth-day.”
When this liſt had been examined and
commented upon by Miſs Larolles, and
viewed and wondered at by Cecilia, it was
reſtored to its place, and the two ladies
went together to the auðtion, permiting
Cecilia, at her repeated requeſt, to return
to her own apartment.
She returned, however, neither ſatisfied
with the behaviour of her friend, nor pleaſed
With her own ſituation: the ſobriety of her
education, as it had early inſtilled into her
º the pure dićtates of religion, and
rićt principles of honour, had alſo taught
er to regard continual diſſipation as an
introdućtion to vice, and unbounded extra-
| vagance as the harbinger of injuſtice. Long
accuſtomed to ſee Mrs. Harrel in the ſame
retirement in which ſhe had hitherto lived
herſelf, when books were their firſt amuſe-
ment, and the ſociety of each other was
their chief happineſs, the change ſhe now
perceived in her mind and manners equally
concerned and ſurpriſed her. She found
her inſenſible to friendſhip, indifferent to
her huſband, and negligent of all ſocial fe-
licity. Dreſs, company, parties of pleaſure,
and public places, ſeemed not merely, to
occupy all her time; but to gratify all her
wiſhes.

<page 58>
C E C I L I A. 53
wiſhes. Cécilia, in whoſe heart glowed
- - *
the warmeſt affections and moſt generous
virtue, was cruelly depreſſed and morti-
fied by this diſappointment; yet ſhe had
the good ſenſe to determine againſt up-
braiding her, well aware that if reproach
has any power over indifference, it is only
that of changing it into averſion.
Mrs. Harrel, in truth, was innocent of
heart, though diffipated in life; married
very young, ſhe had made an immediate
tranſition from living in a private family
and a country town, to becoming miſtreſs
of one of the moſt elegant houſes in Port-
man-ſquare, at the head of a ſplendid for-
tune, and wife to a man whoſe own pur-
ſuits ſoon ſhewed her the little value he
himſelf ſet upon domeſtic happineſs. Im-
merſed in the faſhionable round of com-
pany, and diverſions, ther underſtanding na-
turally weak, was eaſily dazzled by the bril-
liancy of her ſituation; greedily, therefore,
fucking in air impregnated with luxury and
extravagance, ſhe had ſoon no pleaſure but
to vie with ſome rival in elegance, and no
ambition but to exceed ſome ſuperior in
expence. - -
The Dean of — in naming Mr. Har-
rel for one of the guardians of his neice,
had no other view than that of indulging
her wiſhes by allowing her to reſide in the
C 3 houſe

<page 59>
54 C E C - I L I A.
f
houſe of her friend : he had little perſonal
knowledge of him, but was ſatisfied with
the nomination, becauſe acquainted with
his family, fortune, and connections, all
which perſuaded him to believe without
further enquiry, that it was more peculiarly
proper for his neice than any other he could
make.
In his choice of the other two truſtees
he had been more prudent ; the firſt of
theſe, the honourable Mr. Delvile, was a
mán of high birth and charaćter ; the ſe-
cond, Mr. Briggs, had ſpent his whole life
in buſineſs, in which he had already amaſ-
ſed an immenſe fortune, and had ſtill no
greater pleaſure than that of encreaſing it.
From the high honour, therefore, of Mr.
Delvile, he expečted the moſt ſcrupulous
watchfulneſs that his neice ſhould in no-
thing be injured, and from the experience
of Mr. Briggs in money matters, and his
diligence in tranſačting buſineſs, he hoped
for the moſt vigilant obſervance that her
fortune, while under his care, ſhould be
turned to the beſt account. And thus, as
far as he was able, he had equally con-
ſulted her pleaſure, her ſecurity, and her
Pecuniary advantage. -
Mrs. Harrel returned home only in time
to dreſs for the reſt of the day.
- - when Cecilia was fummoned to dinner,
ſhe

<page 60>
C E C I L I A. 55
ſhe found, beſides her hoſt and hoſteſs and
Mr. Arnott, a gentleman ſhe had not be-
fore ſeen, but who as ſoon as ſhe entered
the parlour, Mr. Harrel preſented to her,
ſaying at the ſame time he was one of the
moſt intimate of his friends.
This gentleman, Sir Robert Floyer, was
about thirty years of age; his face was nei-
ther remarkable for its beauty nor its ugli-
neſs, but ſufficiently diſtinguiſhed by its
expreſſion of invincible aſſurance; his per-
ſon, too, though neither ſtriking for its
grace nor its deformity, attracted notice
from the inſolence of his deportment. His
manners, haughty and ſupercilious, marked.
the high opinion he cheriſhed of his own
importance ; and his air and addreſs, at
once bold and negligent, announced his
happy perfection in the charaćter at which
he aimed, that of an accompliſhed man of
the town.
The moment Cecilia appeared, ſhe be-
came the objećt of his attention, though
neither with the look of admiration due to
her beauty, nor yet with that of curioſity
excited by her novelty, but with the ſcru-
tinizing obſervation of a man on the point
of making a bargain, who views with
fault-ſeeking eyes the property he means to
cheapen. -
Cecilia, wholly unuſed to an exa-
C 4 mination

<page 61>
56 C E C I L I A.
inination ſo little ceremonious, ſhrunk
abaſhed from his regards: but his conver-
ſation was not leſs diſpleaſing to her than
his looks; his principal ſubjećts, which
were horſe-racing, loſſes at play, and diſ-
putes at gaming-tables, could afford her
but little amuſement, becauſe ſhe could not
underſtand them; and the epiſodes with
which they were occaſionally interſperſed,
conſiſting chiefly of comparative ſtrićtures
upon celebrated beauties, hints of impend-
ing bankruptcies, and witticiſms upon re-
cent divorces, were yet more diſagreeable
to her, becauſe more intelligible. Wearied
therefore, with unintereſting anecdotes, and
offended with injudicious ſubjećts of plea-
fantry, ſhe waited with impatience for the
moment of retiring; but Mrs. Harrel, leſs
eager, becauſe better entertained, was in
no haſte to remove, and therefore ſhe was
compelled to remain quiet, till they were
both obliged to ariſe, in order to fulfil their
engagement with Mrs. Mears.
As they went together to the houſe of
that lady, in Mrs. Harrel's vis-à-vis, Ce—
cilia, not doubting but their opinions con-
cerning the Baronet would accord, inſtantly
and openly declared her diſapprobation of
every thing he had uttered; but Mrs. Har-
rel, far from confirming her expe&tations,
only

<page 62>
C E C I L I. A. 57
I
only ſaid, “I am ſorry you don't like him,
for he is almoſt always with us?”
“Do you like him, then, yourſelf?”
“Extremely; he is very entertaining and
clever, and knows the world.”
“How judiciouſly do you praiſe him l’’
cried Cecilia; “ and how long might you
deliberate before you could add another word.
to his panegyric l’ -
Mrs. Harrel, ſatisfied to commend, with-
out even attempting to vindicate him, was
ſoon content to change the ſubjećt; and
Cecilia, though much concerned that the:
huſband of her friend had made ſo diſ--
graceful an eleētion of a favourite, yet.
hoped that the lenity of Mrs. Harrel re-
ſulted from her deſire to excuſe his choices,
not from her own approbation.
c s c H A P.

<page 63>
58 C E C I L I A.
C H A P. V.
A N Assembly.
M R.S. Mears, whoſe charaćter was of
that common ſort which renders de-
lineation ſuperfluous, received them with
the cuſtomary forms of good breeding.
Mrs. Harrel ſoon engaged herſelf at a
card-table: and Cecilia, who declined play-
ing, was ſeated next to Miſs Leeſon, who
aroſe to return the courteſy ſhe made in ad-
vancing to her, but that paſt, did not again
even look at her.
Cecilia, though fond of converſation and
formed for ſociety, was too diffident to at-
tempt ſpeaking where ſo little encouraged ;
they both, therefore, continued filent, till
Sir Robert Floyer, Mr. Harrel, and Mr.
Arnott entered the room together, and all
at the ſame time advanced to Cecilia.
“What,” cried Mr. Harrel, “ don’t
you chuſe to play, Miſs Beverley P" -
“ I flatter myſelf,” cried Mr. Arnott,
“ that Miſs Beverley never plays at all, for
then, in one thing, I ſhall have the honour
to reſemble her.”
• - - gº Very

<page 64>
-C E C I L I A. 59,
“Very ſeldom, indeed,” anſwered Ce-
cilia, “ and conſequently very ill.”
“O, you muſt take a few leſſons,” ſaid
Mr. Harrel, “ Sir Robert Floyer, I am
ſure, will be proud to inſtrućt you.”
Sir Robert who had placed himſelf oppo-
ſite to her, and was ſtaring full in her face,
made a ſlight inclination of his head, and
faid “ certainly.” -
“I ſhould be a very unpromiſing pupil,”
returned Cecilia, “ for I fear I ſhould not
º want diligence to improve, but de-
re.”
“O, you will learn better things,” ſaid
Mr. Harrel; “we have had you yet but three
days amongſt us, -in three months we
fhall ſee the difference.”
“I hope not,” cried Mr. Arnott, “I
earneſtly hope there will be none !”
Mr. Harrel now joined another party;
and Mr. Arnott ſeeing no ſeat vacant near
that of Cecilia, moved round to the back
of her chair, where he patiently ſtood for
the reſt of the evening. But Sir Ro-
bert ſtill kept his poſt, and ſtill, without
troubling himſelf to ſpeak, kept his eyes
fixed upon the ſame objećt. -
Cecilia, offended by his boldneſs, looked
a thouſand ways to avoid him; but her em-
barraſſment, by giving greater play to her
features, ſerved only to keep awake an at-
- tº ſitſ On,

<page 65>
6c C F C I L I A.
tention which might otherwiſe have wearied.
She was almoſt tempted to move her chair
round and face Mr. Arnott, but though ſhe
wiſhed to ſhew her diſapprobation of the
Baronet, ſhe had not yet been reconciled
by faſhion to turning her back upon the
company at large, for the indulgence of
converſing with ſome particular perſon: a
faſhion which to unaccuſtomed obſervers
ſeems rude and repulſive, but which, when
once adopted, carries with it imperceptibly
its own recommendation, in the eaſe, con-
venience and freedom it promotes.
Thus diſagreeably ſtationed, ſhe found
but little aſſiſtance from the neighbourhood
of Mr. Arnott, ſince even his own deſire of
converſing with her, was ſwallowed up by
an anxious and involuntary impulſe to
watch the looks and motions of Sir Robert.
At length quite tired of fitting as if
merely an object to be gazed at, ſhe deter-
mined to attempt entering into converſation
with Miſs Leeſon. -
The difficulty, however, was not incon-
ſiderable how to make the attack; ſhe was
unacquainted with her friends and connec-
tions, uninformed of her way of think-
ing, or her way of life, ignorant even of
the ſound of her voice, and chilled by the
coldneſs of her aſpect: yet, having no other
alternative, ſhe was more willing to en-
- 2. COunter

<page 66>
C E C I L I. A. 61
counter the forbidding looks of this lady,
than to continue ſilently abaſhed under the
ferutinizing eyes of Sir Robert. . . . . .
... After much deliberation with what ſub-
jećt to begin, ſhe remembered that Miſs
Larolles had been preſent the firſt time they
had met, and thought it probable they
might be acquainted with each other; and
therefore, bending forward, ſhe ventured to
enquire if ſhe had lately ſeen that young
łady? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
; : Miſs Leeſon in a voice alike inexpreſſive
of ſatisfaction or diſpleaſure, quietly an-
ſwered “ No, ma'am.” . . . . . . .
º Cecilia, diſcouraged by this conciſeneſs,
was a few minutes ſilent; but the perſeve-
rance of Sir Robert in ſtaring at her, ex-
citing her own in trying to avoid his eyes,
ſhe exerted herſelf ſo far as to add “ Does
Mrs. Mears expe&t Miſs Larolles here this.
evening?” - : ' ' , *.
Miſs Leeſon, without raiſing her head,
gravely replied “I don't know, ma'am.”
All was now to be done over again, and a
new ſubjećt to be ſtarted, for ſhe could ſug-
geſt nothing further to aſk concerning Miſs,
Larolles. -
Cecilia had ſeen little of life, but that
little ſhe had well marked, and her obſer-
vation had taught her, that among faſhion-
able people, public places ſeemed a never-
failing


<page 67>
62 C E C I L I. A.
failing ſource of converſation and entertain-
ment: upon this topic, therefore, ſhe hoped
for better ſucceſs; and as to thoſe who
have ſpent more time in the country than in
London, no place of amuſement is ſo inter-
eſting as a theatre, ſhe opened the ſubjećt
ſhe had ſo happily ſuggeſted, by an enquiry
whether any new play had lately come out?
Miſs Leeſon, with the ſame dryneſs, only
anſwered “ Indeed I can't tell.” **
Another pauſe now followed, and the
ſpirits of Cecilia were confiderably dampt;
but happening accidentally to recollečt the
name of Almack, ſhe preſently revived,
and, congratulating herſelf that ſhe ſhould
now be able to ſpeak of a place too faſhion-
able for diſdain, ſhe aſked her, in a manner
ſomewhat more aſſured, if ſhe was a ſub-
ſcriber to his aſſemblies? --
“ Yes, ma'am.” . . . ". -
“Do you go to them conſtantly P"
“ No, ma'am.”
Again they were both ſilent. And now,
tired of finding the ill ſucceſs of each parti-
cular enquiry, ſhe thought a more general
one might obtain an anſwer leſs laconic, and
there'ore begged ſhe would inform her what
was the moſt faſhionable place of diverſion
for the preſent ſeaſon?
This queſtion, however, coſt Miſs Lee-
fon no more trouble than any which had
- 3 : preceded

<page 68>
c E c 1 L I A, 63
preceded it, for ſhe only replied “ Indeed
I don’t know.”
Cecilia now began to ficken of her at-
tempt, and for ſome minutes to give it up
as hopeleſs; but afterwards when ſhe re-
fle&ted how frivolous were the queſtions ſhe
had aſked, ſhe felt more inclined to pardon
the anſwers ſhe had received, and in a ſhort
time to fancy ſhe had miſtaken contempt for
ſtupidity, and to grow leſs angry with Miſs.
Leeſon than aſhamed of herſelf.
This ſuppoſition excited her to make yet
another trial of her talents for converſation,
and therefore, ſummoning all the courage in
her power, ſhe modeftly apologiſed for the
liberty ſhe was taking, and then begged her
permiſſion to enquire whether there was
any thing new in the literary way that ſhe
thought worth recommending 2
Miſs Leeſon now turned her eyes towards
her, with a look that implied a doubt
whether ſhe had heard right; and when the
attentive attitude of Cecilia confirmed her
queſtion, ſurpriſe for a few inſtants took
place of inſenſibility, and with rather more
ſpirit than ſhe had yet ſhewn, ſhe anſwered
“ Indeed I know nothing of the matter.”
Cecilia was now utterly diſconcerted; and
half angry with herſelf, and wholly pro-
voked with her ſullen neighbour, ſhe re-
ſolved to let nothing in future provoke her
tC)

<page 69>
64. C. E. C I L I. A.
to a ſimilar trial with ſo unpromiſing a ſub-
iect. - - -
J She had not, however, much longer to
endure the examination of Sir Robert, who
being pretty well ſatisfied with ſtaring,
turned upon his heel, and was ſtriding out
of the room, when he was ſtopt by Mr. Goſ-
port, who for ſome time had been watching.
him. . .
Mr. Goſport was a man of good parts,
and keen ſatire: minute in his obſervations,
and ironical in his expreſſions.
“So you don't play, Sir Robert?” he
cried. -
“What here 2 No, I am going to
Brookes’s.”
“But how do you like Harrel's Ward 2.
. have taken a pretty good ſurvey of
er.” -
“Why faith I don't know; but not
much, I think; ſhe's a deviliſh fine woman.
too; but ſhe has no ſpirit, no life.”
“Did you try her? Have you talked to."
her P” -
“ Not I, truly 1”
“ Nay, then how do you mean to judge:
of her º’’
“O, faith, that's all over, now; one.
never thinks of talking to the women by
way of trying them.”
* What,

<page 70>
C E C I L I A. 65
“What other method, then, have you
adopted?” º, . . . ... "
“. None.” . . . . . . . . . . . . .
a “None : Why then how do you go
on P’’: '. ‘. . . . . . . . - . . . . l
• *.* Why they talk to us.” The women
take all that trouble upon themſelves now.”
-: “And pray how long may you have com:
menced fade macaroni P. For this is a part of
your charaćter with which I was not ac-
quainted.” ". . - - -
“O, hang it, 'tis not fromiton; no, it’s
merely from lazineſs. Who the d–d
will fatigue himſelf with dancing attendance
upon the women, when keeping them at a
diſtance makes them dance attendance up-
on us * > . . . . . . : ; :
Then ſtalking from him to Mr. Harrel,
he took him by the arm, and they left the
room together. . . . . . . . . º. ºf
: Mr. Goſport now advanced to Cecilia,
and addreſſing her ſo as not to be heard by
Miſs Leeſon, ſaid: “... I have been wiſhing
to approach you, ſome time, but the fear
that you are already overpowered by the lo-
quacity of your fair neighbour makes me
cautious of attempting to engage you.”.
“You mean,” ſaid Cecília, “, to laugh
at my loguacity, and indeed its ill ſucceſs
has rendered it ſufficiently ridiculous.” .
“Are you, then, yet to learn,” cried he,
~ *. - “ that

<page 71>
66 C E C I L I A.
“ that there are certain young ladies who
make it a rule never to ſpeak but to their own
cronies? Of this claſs is Miſs Leeſon, and
till you get into her particular Coterie, you
muſt never expect to hear from her a word
of two ſyllables. The Ton miſſes, as they
are called, who now infeſt the town, are in
two diviſions, the superculious, and the vo-
LUBle. The super cilious, like Miſs Lee-
ſon, are ſilent, ſcornful, languid, and affected,
and diſdain all converſe but with thoſe of
their own ſet: the voluble, like Miſs La-
rolles, are flirting, communicative, reſtleſs,
and familiar, and attack without the ſmall-
eſt, ceremony, every one they think worthy
their notice. But this they have in com-
mon, that at home they think of nothing
but dreſs, abroad, of nothing but admira-
tion, and that every where they hold in ſu-
preme contempt all but themſelves.” -
“Probably, then,” ſaid Cecilia, “I have
aſſed to night, for one of the volubles;
#: all the advantage has been with
the supercilious, for I have ſuffered a total
repulſe.”
“Are you ſure, however, you have not
talked too well for her?” -- . . . . .
“O, a child of five years old ought to
have been whipt for not talking better!”
“But it is not capacity alone you are to con-
fult when you talk with miſſes of the Ton ;
º - Were

<page 72>
C. E. C. I L I A. 67
were their, underſtandings only to be con-
ſidered, they would indeed be wonderfully
eaſy of acceſs! in order therefore, to ren-
der: their commerce ſomewhat difficult,
they will only be pleaſed by an obſervance
of their humours: which are ever moſtva-
rious and moſt exuberant where the intel-
le&ts are weakeft and leaſt cultivated.” I
have, however, a receipt which I have
found infallible for engaging the attention
of young ladies of whatſoever charaćter or
denomination.” - . . . .
“O, then,” cried Cecilia, “pray fa-
vour me with it, for I have here an admi-
rable opportunity to try its efficacy.” . .
“I will give it you,” he anſwered “with
full direétions. When you meet with a
young lady who ſeems reſolutely determined
not to ſpeak, or who, if compelled by a di-
rećt queſtion to make ſome anſwer, drily
gives a brief affirmative, or coldly a laco-
nic negative 22
“A caſe in point!” interrupted Cecilia.
** Well, thus circumſtanced,” he con-
tinued, “ the remedy I have to propoſe
conſiſts of three topics of diſcourſe.
“Pray what are they ”
“Dreſs, public places, and love.”
Cecilia, half ſurpriſed and half diverted,
waited a fuller explanation without giving
any interruption, Theſ:
- cº T ele

<page 73>
68 C. E. C. I : L I A...".
“ Theſe three topics,” he continued,
“ are to anſwer three purpoſes, ſince there
are no leſs than three cauſes from which the
filence of young ladies may proceed: for-
row, affectation, and ſtupidity.” -
- “Do you, then,” cried Cecilia, “ give
nothing at all to modeſty : * -
! “... I give much to it,” he anſwered, “as
an excuſe, nay almoſt as an equivalent for
wit; but for that ſullen ſilence which re-
ſiſts all encouragement, modeſty is a mere
pretence, nota cauſe.” - …
- “You muſt, however, be ſomewhat more
explicit, if you mean that I ſhould benefit
from your inſtrućtions.” -
“ Well then,” he anſwered, “ I will
briefly enumerate the three cauſes, with di-
rećtions for the three methods of cure. To
begin with ſorrow. The taciturnity which
really reſults from that is attended with an
incurable abſence of mind, and a total un-
conſciouſneſs of the obſervation which it
excites; upon this occaſion, public places
may ſometimes be tried in vain, and even
dreſs may fail; but love——”
“Are you ſure, then,” ſaid Cecilia,
with a laugh, “ that ſorrow has but that
one ſource?”
“By no means,” anſwered he, “for per-
haps papa may have been angry, or mama
may have been croſs; a milliner may º:
- ent

<page 74>
c E c 1 L I A. 69
ſent a wrong pompoon, or a chaperon to an
aſſembly may have been taken ill;——”
“ Bitter ſubjećts of afflićtion, indeed!
And are theſe all you allow us?” º
“ Nay, I ſpeak but of young ladies of
faſhion, and what of greater importance
can befall them? If, therefore, the grief of
the fair patient proceeds from papa, mama,
or the chaperon, then the mention of pub-
lic places, thoſe endleſs incentives of diſ-
pleaſure between the old and the young,
will draw forth her complaints, and her
complaints will bring their own cure, for
thoſe who lament find ſpeedy conſolation:
if the milliner has occaſioned the calamity,
the diſcuſſion of dreſs will have the ſame
effect; ſhould both theſe medicines fail,
love, as I ſaid before, will be found infal-
lible, for you will then have inveſtigated
every ſubject of uneaſineſs which a youthful
female in high life can experience.”
“ They are greatly obliged to you,”
cried Cecilia, bowing, “ for granting them
motives of ſorrow ſo honourable, and I
thank you in the name of the whole ſex.”
“You, madam,” ſaid he, returning her
bow, “ are I hope an exception in the hap-
pieſt way, that of having no ſorrow at all.
I come, now, to the ſilence of affe&tation,
which is preſently diſcernable by the rov-
ing of the eye round the room to ſee if it
1S

<page 75>
7o C F C I L I A.
is heeded, by the ſedulous care to avoid an
accidental ſmile, and by the variety of diſ-
conſolate, attitudes exhibited to the be-
holders. This ſpecies of filence has almoſt .
without exception its origin in that babyiſh
vanity which is always gratified by exciting
attention, without ever perceiving that it
provokes contempt. . In theſe caſes, as na-
ture is wholly out of the queſtion, and the
mind is guarded againſt its own feelings,
dreſs and public places are almoſt certain of
failing, but here again love is ſure to van-
quiſh; as ſoon as it is named, attention be-
comes involuntary, and in a ſhort time a
ſtruggling ſimper diſcompoſes the arrange-
ment of the features, and then the buſineſs
is preſently over, for the young lady is
either ſupporting ſome ſyſtem, or oppoſing
ſome propoſition, before ſhe is well aware
that ſhe has been cheated out of her ſad ſi-
lence at all.”
“ So much,” ſaid Cecilia, “ for ſorrow
and for affectation. Proceed next to ſtu-
pidity; for that, in all probability, I ſhall
moſt frequently encounter.” ! ---
“That always muſt be heavy work,” re-
turned he, “yet the road is plain, though
it is all up hill. Love, here, may be talked
of without exciting any emotion, or pro-
voking any reply, and dreſs may be dilated
upon without producing any other effect
than

<page 76>
C E C . I L I A. " 71
than that of attraćting a vacant ſtare; but
public places are indubitably certain of
ſucceſs. Dull and heavy charaćters, inca–
pable of animating from wit or from rea-
ſon, becauſe unable to keep pace with
them, and void of all internal ſources of
entertainment, require the ſtimulation of
ſhew, glare, noiſe and buſtle to intereſt or
awaken them. Talk to them of ſuch ſub-
jećts and they adore you; no matter whether
you paint to them joy or horror, let there but
be action, and they are content; a battle
has charms for them equal to a coronation,
and a funeral amuſes them as much as a
wedding.” * .
“I am much obliged to you,” ſaid Ce-
cilia, ſmiling, “ for theſe inſtrućtions; yet I
inuſt confeſs I know not how upon the pre-
ſent occaſion to make uſe of them: public
places I have already tried, but tried in
vain; dreſs I dare not mention, as I have not
yet learned its technical terms,——”
“ Well but,” interrupted he, “ be not
deſperate; you have yet the third topic
uneſſayed.” - --
“O that,” returned ſhe laughing, “I
leave to you !”
“ Pardon me,” cried he, “ love is a
ſource of loquacity only with yourſelves:
when it is ſtarted by men, young ladies
dwindle into mere liſteners. Simpering
- liſteners,

<page 77>
72 C. E. C I L I A. " +
liſteners, I confeſs; but it is only with one
another that you will diſcuſs its merits.”
At this time they were interrupted by the
approach of Miſs. Larolles, who tripping
towards Cecilia, exclaimed “ Lord how
glad I am to ſee you! So you would not go
to the auðtion ? Well, you had a prodigious,
loſs, I aſſure: you. All the wardrobe, was.
ſold, and all Lady Belgrade's trinkets. I.
never ſaw ſuch a colle&tion of ſweet things
in my life. I was ready to cry that I could
not bid for half an hundred of them. I de-
clare I was kept in an agony the whole
morning. I would not but have been there
for the world. Poor Lady Belgradel you
really can't conceive how I was ſhocked for
her. All her beautiful things ſold for al-
moſt nothing. I aſſure you if you had,
ſeen how they went you would have loſt all
patience. It’s a thouſand pities you were
not there.” - -
“On the contrary,” ſaid Cecilia, “I
think I had a very fortunate eſcape, for the
loſs of patience without the acquiſition of
the trinkets, would have been rather mor-
tifying.” -
“Yes,” ſaid Mr. Goſport; “ but when
you have lived ſome time longer in this
commercial city, you will find the ex-
change of patience for mortification the
- moſt
º
y
º

<page 78>
. c. E. c I L I A. 73°
moſt common and conſtant traffic among
it's inhabitants.”
“ Pray have you been here long?” cried
Miſs Larolles, “ for I have been to twenty
places, wondering I did not meet with you
before. But whereabouts is Mrs. Mears 2
O, I ſee her now; I'm ſure there's no miſ-
taking her; I could know her by that old
red gown half a mile off. Did you ever
ſee ſuch a frightful thing in your life? And
it's never off her back. I believe ſhe ſleeps
in it. I am ſure I have ſeen her in nothing
elſe all winter. It quite tires one's eye.
She's a monſtrous ſhocking dreſſer. But do
you know, I have met with the moſt pro-
voking thing in the world this evening? I
declare it has made me quite ſick. I was .
never in ſuch a paſſion in my life. You can
conceive nothing like it.”
“Like what?” cried Cecilia, laughing,
“ your paſſion, or your provocation **
“Why I'll tell you what it was, and then
you ſhall judge if it was not quite paſt en-
durance. You muſt know I commiſſioned
a particular friend of mine, Miſs Moffat,
to buy me a trimming when ſhe went to
Paris; well, ſhe ſent it me over about a
month ago by Mr. Meadows, and it's the
ſweeteſt thing you ever ſaw in your life; but
I would not make it up, becauſe there was
not a creature in town, ſo I thought to
Wo L. I. D bring

<page 79>
74. C E C I L I A.
bring it out quite new in about a week's
time, for you know any thing does till af-
ter Chriſtmas. Well, to night at Lady
Jane Dranet's, who ſhould I meet but Miſs
Moffat! She had been in town ſome days,
but ſo monſtrouſly engaged I could never
find her at home. Well, I was quite de-
lighted to ſee her, for you muſt know ſhe's
a prodigious favourite with me, ſo I ran up
to her in a great hurry to ſhake hands, and
what do you think was the firſt thing that
ſtruck my eyes? Why juſt ſuch a trimming
as my own, upon a naſty odious gown, and
half dirty Can you conceive any thing ſo
diſtreſſing: I could have cried with plea-
ſure.”
“Why ſo?” ſaid Cecilia; “ If her
trimming is dirty, yours will look the more
delicate.”
“O lord, but it's making it ſeem quite
an old thing! half the town will get ſome-
thing like it. And I quite ruined myſelf to
buy it. I declare I don't think any thing
was ever half ſo mortifying. It diſtreſſed
me ſo I could hardly ſpeak to her. If ſhe
had ſtayed a month or two longer I ſhould
not have minded it, but it was the cruelleſt
thing in the world to come over juſt now.
I wiſh the Cuſtom-houſe-officers had kept
all her cloaths till ſummer.”
“ The wiſh is tender, indeed,” ſaid Ce-
cilia, “ for a particular friend.”
Mrs.

<page 80>
-C E C I L I A. 75
Mrs. Mears now riſing from the card-
table, Miſs Larolles tript away to pay her
compliments to her.
“ Here, at leaſt,” cried Cecilia, “ no
receipt ſeems requiſite for the cure of ſi-
lence 1 I would have Miſs Larolles be the
conſtant companion of Miſs Leeſon: they
could not but agree admirably, ſince that su-
PERcIlious young lady ſeems determined
never to ſpeak, and the voluble Miſs La-
rolles never to be ſilent. Were each to
borrow ſomething of the other, how greatly
would both be the better!”
“ The compoſition would ſtill be a ſorry
one, " anſwered Mr. Goſport, “ for I be-
lieve they are equally weak, and equally
ignorant; the only difference is, that one,
though ſilly, is quick, the other, though
deliberate is ſtupid. Upon a ſhort acquain-
tance, that heavineſs which leaves to others
the whole weight of diſcourſe, and whole
ſearch of entertainment, is the moſt fa-
tiguing, but, upon a longer intimacy, even
that is leſs irkſome and leſs offenſive, than
; flippancy which hears nothing but it-
ſelf.”
Mrs. Harrel aroſe now to depart, and
Cecilia, not more tired of the beginning of
the evening than entertained with its con-
cluſion, was handed to the carriage by Mr.
Arnott, -
D 2 C H A P.

<page 81>
76 C E C I L I A.
C H A P. VI.
A B R E A K F A S T.
THE next morning, during breakfaſt, a
ſervant acquainted Cecilia that a young
gentleman was in the hall, who begged to
ſpeak with her. She deſired he might be
admitted ; and Mrs. Harrel, laughing,
aſked if ſhe ought not to quit the room;
while Mr. Arnott, with even more than his
uſual gravity, direéted his eye towards the
door to watch who ſhould enter.
Neither of them, however, received any
ſatisfaction when it was opened, for the
gentleman who made his appearance was
unknown to both : but great was the amaze-
ment of Cecilia, though little her emotion,
when ſhe ſaw Mr. Morrice
He came forward with an air of the
moſt profound reſpect for the company in
general, and obſequiouſly advancing to
Cecilia, made an earneſt enquiry into her
health after her journey, and hoped ſhe
had heard good news from her friends in
the country. **
Mrs. Harrel, naturally concluding both
from

<page 82>
C E C I L I A. 77
from his viſit and behaviour, that he was an
acquaintance of ſome intimacy, very ci-
villy offered him a ſeat and ſome breakfaſt,
which, very frankly, he accepted. But
Mr. Arnott, who already felt the anxiety
of a riſing paſſion, which was too full of
veneration to be ſanguine, looked at him
with uneaſineſs, and waited his departure
with impatience. -
Cecilia began to imagine he had been
commiſſioned to call upon her with ſome
meſſage from Mr. Monckton: for ſhe knew
not how to ſuppoſe that merely and acci-
dentally having ſpent an hour or two in the
ſame room with her, would authorize a vi.
ſiting acquaintance. Mr. Morrice, how-
ever, had a facility the moſt happy of re-
conciling his pretenſions to his inclina-
tion; and therefore ſhe ſoon found that the
pretence ſhe had ſuggeſted appeared to him
unneceſſary. To lead, however, to the
ſubjećt from which ſhe expected his excuſe,
ſhe enquired how long he had left Suffolk?
“.. But yeſterday noon, ma'am,” he an-
ſwered, “ or I ſhould certainly have taken
the liberty to wait upon you before.”
Cecilia, who had only been perplexing
herſelf to deviſe ſome reaſon why he came
at all, now looked at him with a grave
ſurprize, which would totally have abaſhed
a man whoſe courage had been leſs, or .
D 3 whoſ:
**

<page 83>
78 C E C I L I A.
whoſe expectations had been greater; but
Mr. Morrice, though he hazarded every
danger upon the ſlighteſt chance of hope,
knew too well the weakneſs of his claims
to be confident of ſucceſs, and had been
too familiar with rebuffs to be much hurt
by receiving them. He might poſſibly
have ſomething to gain, but he knew he
had nothing to loſe.
“I had the pleaſure,” he continued, “to
leave all our friends well, except poor
lady Margaret, and ſhe has had an attack
of the aſthma ; yet ſhe would not have a
phyſician, though Mr. Monckton would
fain have perſuaded her: however, I be-
lieve the old lady knows better things.”
And he looked archly at Cecilia: but
perceiving that the inſinuation gave her
nothing but diſguſt, he changed his tone,
and added, “ It is amazing how well they
live together ; nobody would imagine the
diſparity in their years. Poor old lady!
Mr. Monckton will really have a great loſs
of her when ſhe dies.”
“A loſs of her l’’ repeated Mrs. Har-
rel, “I am ſure ſhe is an exceeding ill-
natured old woman. When I lived at Bury,
I was always frightened out of my wits
at the fight of her.”
“Why indeed, ma'am,” ſaid Morrice,
“I muſt own her appearance is rather
- againſt

<page 84>
C E C I L I A. *79
againſt her : I had myſelf a great averſion
to her at firſt ſight. But the houſe is chear-
ful,—very chearful ; I like to ſpend a few
days there now and then of all things.
Miſs Bennet, too, is agreeable enough,
and —.” -
“ Miſs Bennet agreeable !” cried Mrs.
Harrel, “ I think ſhe's the moſt odious
creature I ever knew in my life; a naſty,
fpiteful old maid!”
“Why indeed, ma'am, as you ſay,” an-
ſwered Morrice, “ ſhe is not very young;
and as to her temper, I confeſs I know very
little about it ; and Mr. Monckton is likely
enough to try it, for he is pretty ſevere.”
“ Mr. Monckton,” cried Cecilia, ex-
tremely provoked at hearing him cenſured
by a man ſhe thought highly honoured in
being permitted to approach him, “when-
-ever I have been his gueſt, has merited
from me nothing but praiſe and gratitude.”
“O,” cried Morrice eagerly, “there is
not a more worthy man in the world ! he
has ſo much wit, ſo much politeneſs I
don't know a more charming man any
where than my friend Mr. Monckton.”
Cecilia now perceiving that the opinions
of her new acquaintance were as pliant as
his bows, determined to pay him no fur-
ther attention, and hoped by ſitting filent
£o force from him the buſineſs of his viſit,
D 4 if

<page 85>
8o C E C I L I A.
if any he had, or if, as ſhe now ſuſpected,
he had none, to weary him into a retreat.
But this plan, though it would have ſuc-
ceeded with herſelf, failed with Mr. Mor-
rice, who to a ſtock of good-humour that
made him always ready to oblige others,
added an equal portion of inſenſibility that
hardened him againſt all indignity. Find-
ing, therefore, that Cecilia, to whom his
viſit was intended, ſeemed already ſatisfied
with its length, he prudently forbore to
torment her; but perceiving that the lady
of the houſe was more acceſſible, he quickly
made a transfer of his attention, and ad-
dreſſed his diſcourſe to her with as much
pleaſure as if his only view had been to ſee
her, and as much eaſe as if he had known
her all his life.
With Mrs. Harrel this condućt was not
injudicious; ſhe was pleaſed with his affi-
duity, amuſed with his vivacity, and ſuffi-
ciently ſatisfied with his underſtanding.
They converſed, therefore, upon pretty
equal terms, and neither of them were yet
tired, when they were interrupted by Mr.
Harrel, who came into the room to aſk if
they had ſeen or heard any thing of Sir
Robert Floyer
“No,” anſwered Mrs. Harrel, “nothing
at all.” *- -
“I wiſh he was hanged,” returned he,
“ for

<page 86>
C E C I L I A. 8 I
t
“ for he has kept me waiting this hour.
He made me promiſe not to ride out till he
called, and now he'll ſtay till the morning
is over.”
“Pray where does he live, Sir 2" cried
Morrice, ſtarting from his ſeat.
“In Cavendiſh-ſquare, Sir,” anſwered
Mr. Harrel, looking at him with much
ſurpriſe.
Not a word more ſaid Morrice, but
ſcampered out of the room.
“Pray who is this Genius * cried Mr.
Harrel, “ and what has he run away for "
“ Upon my word I know nothing at all
of him,” ſaid Mrs. Harrel; “ he is a vi-
firor of Miſs Beverley's.” -
“And I, too,” ſaid Cecilia, “ might
almoſt equally diſclaim all knowledge of
him ; for though I once ſaw, I never was
introduced to him.” - -
She then began a relation of her meeting
him at Mr. Monckton's houſe, and had
hardly concluded it, before again, and quite
out of breath, he made his appearance.
“Sir Robert Floyer, Sir,” ſaid he to
Mr. Harrel, “ will be here in two mi-
nutes.” .
“I hope, Sir,” ſaid Mr. Harrel, “ you
have not given yourſelf the trouble of go-
ing to him **
“No, Sir, it has given me nothing but
D 5 plea-

<page 87>
82 C E C I L I A.
pleaſure; a run theſe cold mornings is the
thing I like beſt.” -
“ Sir, you are extremely good,” ſaid Mr.
Harrel, “but I had not the leaſt intention
of your taking ſuch a walk upon my ac-
count.”
He then begged him to be ſeated, to reſt -
himſelf, and to take ſome refreſhment;
which civilities he received without ſcruple.
“But, Miſs Beverley,” ſaid Mr. Harrel,
turning ſuddenly to Cecilia, “ you don't
tell me what you think of my friend?”
“What friend, Sir?”
“Why, Sir Robert Floyer; I obſerved
he never quitted you a moment while he
ſtayed at Mrs. Mears.” - -
“His ſtay, however, was too ſhort,”
faid Cecilia, “ to allow me to form a fair
opinion of him.”
“But perhaps,” cried Morrice, “it was
long enough to allow you to form a foul
one.”
Cecilia could not forbear laughing to
hear the truth thus accidentally blundered
out; but Mr. Harrel, looking very little
pleaſed, ſaid, “Surely you can find no
fault with him he is one of the moſt fa– -
ſhionable men I know.”
“My finding fault with him then,” ſaid
Cecilia, “ will only farther prove what I
believe

<page 88>
C E C I L I A. , 83
|
h
believe is already pretty evident, that I am
yet a novice in the art of admiration.”
Mr. Arnott, animating at this ſpeech,
glided behind her chair, and ſaid, “I knew
you could not like him " I knew it from
the turn of your mind; — I knew it even
from your countenance l’’ -
Soon after, Sir Robert Floyer arrived.
“You are a pretty fellow, a'n't you,”
cried Mr. Harrel, “to keep me waiting ſo
long **
“I could not come a moment ſooner;
I hardly expected to get here at all, for my
horſe has been ſo confounded reſty I could
not tell how to get him along.”
“Do you come on horſeback through
the ſtreets, Sir Robert 2" aſked Mrs. Har-
rel.
“Sometimes; when I am lazy. But
what the d–l is the matter with him I
don't know ; he has ſtarted at every thing.
I ſuſpect there has been ſome foul play with
him.”
º “ Is he at the door, Sir 2" cried Mor-
rice. - -
2 : “Yes,” anſwered Sir Robert.
“ Then I'll tell you what's the matter
with him in a minute 5’ and away again
ran Morrice. - * -
“What time did you get off laſt night
Harrel ?” ſaid Sir Robert. -
D 6 * Not

<page 89>
84 C E C I L I A. .
“ Not very early ; but you were too
much engaged to miſs me. By the way,”
lowering his voice, “what do you think
I loſt f° -
: “ I can’t tell indeed, but I know what
-I gained : I have not had ſuch a run of
luck this winter.” -
They then went up to a window to carry
on their enquiries more privately.
. . At the words what do you think I loft,
Cecilia, half ſtarting, caſt her eyes uneaſily
upon Mrs. Harrel, but perceived not the
leaſt change in her countenance. Mr. Ar-
nott, however, ſeemed as little pleaſed as
herſelf, and from a ſimilar ſenſation looked
anxiouſly at his ſiſter. -
... Morrice now returning, called out,
* He's had a fall, I aſſure you !” .
“Curſe him 1" cried Sir Robert, “wha
fhall I do now 2 he coſt me the d 1 and
all of money, and I have not had him a
twelvemonth. Can you lend me a horſe
for this morning, Harrel ?” -
“ No, I have not one that will do for
you. You muſt ſend to Aſtley.” :
“Who can I ſend ? John muſt take care
of this.” . - º
“I’ll go, Sir,” cried Morrice, “if you'll
give me the commiſſion.” -
“By no means, Sir,” ſaid Sir Robert,
- - - &C. I
.3
-

<page 90>
C E C I L I A. 8;
“I can't think of giving you ſuch an
office.”
“It is the thing in the world I like
beſt,” anſwered he ; “ I underſtand horſes,
and had rather go to Aſtley's than any
where.”
The matter was now ſettled in a few
minutes, and having received his direétions,
and an invitation to dinner, Morrice danced
off, with an heart yet lighter than his
heels.
“Why, Miſs Beverley,” ſaid Mr. Har-
rel, “ this friend of yours is the moſt
obliging gentleman I ever met with ; there
was no avoiding aſking him to dinner.”
“ Remember, however,” ſaid Cecilia,
who was involuntarily diverted at the ſuc-
ceſsful officiouſneſs of her new acquaint-
ance, “ that if you receive him henceforth
as your gueſt, he obtains admiſſion through
his own merits, and not through my in-
tereſt.” -
At dinner, Morrice, who failed not to ac-
cept the invitation of Mr. Harrel, was the
gayeſt, and indeed the happieſt man in the
company: the effort he had made to faſten
himſelf upon Cecilia, as an acquaintance,
had not, it is true, from herſelf met with
much encouragement; but he knew the
chances were againſt him when he made
the trial, and therefore the proſpect of
gaining

<page 91>
86 C E C I L I A.
gaining admiſſion into ſuch a houſe as Mr.
Harrel’s, was not only ſufficient to make
amends for what ſcarcely amounted to a
diſappointment, but a ſubjećt of ſerious
comfort from the credit of the connection,
and of internal exultation at his own ma-
nagement and addreſs.
In the evening, the ladies, as uſual, went
to a private aſſembly, and, as uſual, were
attended to it by Mr. Arnott. The other
gentlemen had engagements elſewhere.
C H A P.

<page 92>
C E C I L I A. 87
C H A P. VII.
A PR o j E c T.
SEVERAL days paſſed on nearly in the
ſame manner; the mornings were all
ſpent in goſſipping, ſhopping and dreſfing,
and the evenings were regularly appropri-
ated to public places, or large parties of
company.
Meanwhile Mr. Arnott lived almoſt en-
tirely in Portman-ſquare; he ſlept, indeed,
at his own lodgings, but he boarded wholly
with Mr. Harrel, whoſe houſe he never
for a moment quitted till night, except to
attend Cecilia and his ſiſter in their viſit-
lings and rambles.
Mr. Arnott was a young man of unex-
ceptionable charaćter, and of a diſpoſition
mild, ſerious and benignant: his principles
and blameleſs condućt obtained the univer-
ſal eſteem of the world, but his manners,
which were rather too preciſe, joined to an
uncommon gravity of countenance and de-
meanour, made his ſociety rather permitted
as a duty, than ſought as a pleaſure.
The charms of Cecilia had forcibly, ſud-
denly

<page 93>
88, C E C I L I A.
denly and deeply penetrated his heart; he
only lived in her preſence, away from her
he hardly exiſted: the emotions ſhe excited,
were rather thoſe of adoration than of love,
for he gazed upon her beauty till he thought
her more than human, and hung upon her
accents till all ſpeech ſeemed impertinent
to him but her own. Yet ſo ſmall were his
expectations of ſucceſs, that not even to
his ſiſter did he hint at the ſituation of his
heart: happy in an eaſy acceſs to her, he
contented himſelf with ſeeing, hearing and
watching her, beyond which bounds he
formed not any plan, and ſcarce indulged
any hope.
Sir Robert Floyer, too, was a frequent
viſitor in Portman-ſquare, where he dined
almoſt daily. Cecilia was chagrined at .
ſeeing ſo much of him, and provoked to
find herſelf almoſt conſtantly the objećt of
his unreſtrained examination; ſhe was, how-
ever, far more ſeriouſly concerned for Mrs.
Harrel, when ſhe diſcovered that this fa-
vourite friend of her huſband was an un-
principled ſpendthrift, and an extravagant
gameſter, for as he was the inſeparable com-
panion of Mr. Harrel, ſhe dreaded the
conſequence both of his influence and his
example. -
She ſaw, too, with an amazement that
daily increaſed, the fatigue, yet asinº
- O
*

<page 94>
C E C I L I A. 89
of a life of pleaſure: Mr. Harrel ſeemed
to conſider his own houſe merely as an
Hôtel, where at any hour of the night he
might diſturb the family to claim admit-
tance, where letters and meſſages might be
left for him, where he dined when no other
dinner was offered him, and where, when
he made an appointment, he was to be met
with. His lady, too, though more at
home, was not therefore more ſolitary; her
acquaintance were numerous, expenſive and
idle, and every moment not actually ſpent
in company, was ſcrupulouſly devoted to
making arrangements for that purpoſe.
In a ſhort time Cecilia, who every day
had hoped that the next would afford her
greater ſatisfaction, but who every day
found the preſent no better than the former,
began to grow weary of eternally running
the ſame round, and to ſicken at the irk-
ſome repetition of unremitting yet unin-
- tereſting diſſipation. She ſaw nobody ſhe
wiſhed to ſee, as ſhe had met with nobody
for whom ſhe could care; for though ſome-
times thoſe with whom ſhe mixed appeared
to be amiable, ſhe knew that their manners,
like their perſons, were in their beſt array,
and therefore ſhe had too much underſtand-
ing to judge deciſively of their characters.
But what chiefly damped her hopes of
forming a friendſhip with any of the new
acquain-

<page 95>
90 C E C I L I A.
acquaintance to whom ſhe was introduced,
was the obſervation ſhe herſelf made how ill
the coldneſs of their hearts accorded with
the warmth of their profeſſions: upon every
firſt meeting, the civilities which were
ſhewn her, flattered her into believing ſhe
had excited a partiality that a very little
time would ripen into affeótion; the next
meeting commonly confirmed the expecta-
tion; but the third, and every future one,
regularly deſtroyed it. She found that time
added nothing to their fondneſs, nor inti-
macy to their fincerity; that the intereſt in
her welfare which appeared to be taken at
firſt fight, ſeldom, with whatever reaſon,
encreaſed, and often without any abated;
that the diſtinction ſhe at firſt met with,
was no effuſion of kindneſs, but of curio-
fity, which is ſcarcely ſooner gratified than
ſatiated; and that thoſe who lived always
the life into which ſhe had only lately been
initiated, were as much harraſſed with it as
herſelf, though leſs ſpirited to relinquiſh,
and more helpleſs to better it, and that they
coveted nothing but what was new, becauſe
they had experienced the inſufficiency of
whatever was familiar.
She began now to regret the loſs ſhe ſuſ-
tained in quitting the neighbourhood, and
being deprived of the converſation of Mr.
Monckton, and yet more earneſtly to miſs
- the

<page 96>
C E C I L I A. 91
the affection and figh for the ſociety of Mrs.
Charlton, the lady with whom ſhe had long
and happily reſided at Bury; for ſhe was
very ſoon compelled to give up all expecta-
tion of renewing the felicity of her earlier
years, by being reſtored to the friendſhip of
Mrs. Harrel, in whom ſhe had miſtaken
the kindneſs of childiſh intimacy for the
ſincerity of choſen affection; and though
fhe ſaw her credulous error with mortifica-
tion and diſpleaſure, ſhe regretted it with
tenderneſs and ſorrow. “What, at laſt,” cried
ſhe, “is human felicity, who has taſted, and
where is it to be found 2 If I, who, to
others, ſeem marked out for even a partial
poſſeſſion of it,-diſtinguiſhed by fortune,
careffed by the world, brought into the
circle of high life, and ſurrounded with
ſplendour, ſeek without finding it, yet loſ-
ing, ſcarce know how I miſs it!”
Aſhamed upon refle&tion to believe ſhe
was confidered as an objećt of envy by
others, while repining and diſcontentd her-
ſelf, ſhe determined no longer to be the
only one inſenſible to the bleſlings within
her reach, but by projećting and adopting
ſome plan of condućt, better ſuited to her
taſte and feelings than the frivolous inſipi-
dity of her preſent life, to make at once a
more ſpirited and more worthy uſe of the
affluence

<page 97>
92 C E C I L I A.
affluence, freedom and power which ſhe
poſſeſſed. -
A ſcheme of happineſs at once rational
and refined ſoon preſented itſelf to her ima-
gination. She purpoſed, for the baſis of
her plan, to become miſtreſs of her own
time, and with this view, to drop all idle
and unintereſting acquaintance, who while
they contribute neither to uſe nor pleaſure,
make ſo large a part of the community,
that they may properly be called the under-
miners of exiſtence: ſhe could then ſhew
ſome taſte and diſcernment in her choice of
friends, and ſhe reſolved to ſelečt ſuch only
as by their piety could elevate her mind, by
their knowledge improve her underſtand-
ing, or by their accompliſhments and man-
ners delight her affections. This regula-
tion, if ſtrićtly adhered to, would ſoon re-
lieve her from the fatigue of receiving
many viſitors, and therefore ſhe might-have
all the leiſure ſhe could deſire for the pur-
ſuit of her favourite ſtudies, muſic and
reading. -
Having thus, from her own eſtimation of
human perfeótion, culled whatever was
nobleſt for her ſociety, and from her own
ideas of ſedentary enjoyments, arranged the
occupations of her hours of ſolitude, ſhe
felt fully ſatisfied with the portion of happi-
neſs which her ſcheme promiſed to herſelf, .
- and-

<page 98>
C E C I L I. A. 93
and began next to conſider what was due
from her to the world. ~
And not without trembling did ſhe then
look forward to the claims which the ſplen-
did income ſhe was ſoon to poſſeſs would
call upon her to diſcharge. A ſtrong ſenſe
of DUTY, a fervent deſire to Act RIGHT,
were the ruling charaćteriſtics of her mind:
her affluence ſhe therefore conſidered as a
debt contraćted with the poor, and her in-
dependence, as a tie upon her liberality to
pay it with intereſt.
Many and various, then, ſoothing to her
ſpirit and grateful to her ſenſibility, were
the ſcenes which her fancy delineated; now
ſhe ſupported an orphan, now ſoftened the
ſorrows of a widow, now ſnatched from
iniquity the feeble trembler at poverty, and
now reſcued from ſhame the proud ſtruggler
with diſgrace. The proſpect at once ex-
alted her hopes, and enraptured her ima-
gination; ſhe regarded herſelf as an agent
of Charity, and already in idea anticipated the
rewards of a good and faithful delegate: ſo
animating are the deſigns of diſintereſted
benevolence ſo pure is the bliſs of intel-
lećtual philanthropy
Not immediately, however, could this
plan be put in execution; the ſociety ſhe
meant to form could not be ſelečted in the
houſe of another, where, though to ſome
- - ſhe

<page 99>
94. C E C I L I sa.
ſhe might ſhew a preference, there were none
ſhe could rejećt: nor had ſhe yet the power
to indulge, according to the munificence of
her wiſhes, the extenſive generoſity ſhe pro-
jećted: theſe purpoſes demanded an houſe
of her own, and the unlimited diſpoſal of
her fortune, neither of which ſhe could
claim till ſhe became of age. That period,
however, was only eight months diſtant,
and ſhe pleaſed herſelf with the intention
of meliorating her plan in the mean time,
and preparing to put it in praśtice.
But though, in common with all the race
of ſtill-expecting man, ſhe looked for that
happineſs in the time to come which the
preſent failed to afford, ſhe had yet the
ſpirit and good ſenſe to determine upon
making every effort in her power, to render
her immediate way of life more uſeful and
contented. -
Her firſt wiſh therefore, now, was to
quit the houſe of Mr. Harrel, where ſhe
neither met with entertainment nor inſtruc-
tion, but was perpetually mortified by ſee-
ing the total indifference of the friend in
whoſe ſociety ſhe had hoped for nothing but
affection. -
The will of her uncle, though it obliged
her while under-age to live with one of her
guardians, left her at liberty to chuſe and
to change amongſt them according to her
5 wiſhes

<page 100>
C E C I L I. A. 95
wiſhes or convenience: ſhe determined,
therefore, to make a viſit herſelf to each of
them, to obſerve their manners and way of
life, and then, to the beſt of her judgment,
decide with which ſhe could be moſt con-
tented: reſolving, however, not to hint at
her intention till it was ripe for execution,
and then honeſtly to confeſs the reaſons of
her retreat.
She had acquainted them both of her
journey to town the morning after her ar-
rival. She was almoſt an entire ſtranger.
to each of them, as ſhe had not ſeen Mr.
Briggs ſince ſhe was nine years old, nor
Mr. Delvile within the time ſhe could re-
member. -
The very morning that ſhe had ſettled
ſher proceedings for the arrangement of this
new plan, ſhe intended to requeſt the uſe of
Mrs. Harrel's carriage, and to make, with-
out delay, the viſits preparatory to her re-
moval: but when ſhe entered the parlour
upon a ſummons to breakfaſt, her eager-
neſs to quit the houſe gave way, for the
preſent, to the pleaſure ſhe felt at the fight
of Mr. Monckton, who was juſt arrived
from Suffolk.
She expreſſed her ſatisfačtion in the moſt
lively terms, and ſcrupled not to tell him
ſhe had not once been ſo much pleaſed ſince
her

<page 101>
96 C E C I L I A.
her journey to town, except at her firſt meet-
ing with Mrs. Harrel.
Mr. Monckton, whoſe delight was infi-
nitely ſuperior to her own, and whoſe joy
in ſeeing her was redoubled by the affec-
tionate frankneſs of her reception, ſtifled
the emotions to which her fight gave riſe,
and denying himſelf the ſolace of expreſ-
ſing his feelings, ſeemed much leſs charmed
than herſelf at the meeting, and ſuffered no
word nor look to eſcape him beyond what
could be authoriſed by friendly civility.
He then renewed with Mrs. Harrel an
acquaintance which had been formed be-
fore her marriage, but which ſhe had dropt
when her diſtance from Cecilia, upon whoſe
account alone he had thought it worth cul-
tivation, made it no longer of uſe to him.
She afterwards introduced her brother to
him; and a converſation very intereſting to
both the ladies took place, concerning ſe-
veral families with which they had been
formerly conneéted, as well as the neigh-
bourhood at large in which they had lately
dwelt.
Very little, was the ſhare taken by Mr.
Arnott in theſe accounts and enquiries; the
unaffected joy with which Cecilia had re-
ceived Mr. Monckton, had ſtruck him
with a ſenſation of envy as involuntary as
it was painful: he did not, indeed, ſuſpect
5 - that

<page 102>
C E C I L I A. 97
that gentleman's ſecret views; no reaſon
for ſuſpicion was obvious, and his penetra-
tion ſunk not deeper than appearances; he
knew, too, that he was married, and there-
fore no jealouſy occurred to him; but ſtill
ſhe had ſmiled upon him —— and he felt
that to purchaſe for himſelf a ſmile of ſo
much ſweetneſs, he would have ſacrificed
almoſt all elſe that was valuable to him up-
on earth.
With an attention infinitely more accu-
rate, Mr. Monckton had returned his ob-
ſervations. The uneaſineſs of his mind
was apparent, and the anxious watchfulneſs
of his eyes plainly manifeſted whence it
aroſe. From a ſituation, indeed, which
permitted an intercourſe the moſt conſtant
and unreſtrained with ſuch an objećt as Ce—
cilia, nothing leſs could be expe&ted, and
therefore he conſidered his admiration as
inevitable; all that remained to be diſ-
covered, was the reception it had met
from his fair enſlaver. Nor was he here
long in doubt; he ſoon ſaw that ſhe was
not merely free from all paſſion herſelf, but
had ſo little watched Mr. Arnott as to be
unconſcious ſhe had inſpired any.
Yet was his own ſerenity, though appa-
rently unmoved, little leſs diſturbed in ſe-
cret than that of his rival; he did not think
him a formidable candidate, but he dreaded
Vo L. I. E. - the
º

<page 103>
98 C E C I L I A.
the effects of intimacy, fearing ſhe might
firſt grow accuſtomed to his attentions, and
then become pleaſed with them: he appre-
hended, alſo, the influence of his ſiſter,
and of Mr. Harrel in his favour; and
though he had no difficulty to perſuade
himſelf that any offer he might now make
would be rejećted without heſitation, he
knew too well the infidious properties of
perſeverance, to ſee him, without inquie-
tude, ſituated ſo advantageouſly.
The morning was far advanced be-
fore he took leave, yet he found no oppor-
tunity of diſcourſing with Cecilia, though
he impatiently deſired to examine into the
ftate of her mind, and to diſcover whether
her London journey had added any freſh
difficulties to the ſucceſs of his long con-
certed ſcheme. But as Mrs. Harrel in-
vited him to dinner, he hoped the after-
noon would be more propitious to his
wiſhes.
Cecilia, too, was eager to communicate
to him her favourite projećt, and to receive
his advice with reſpect to it's execution.
She had long been uſed to his counſel, and
ſhe was now more than ever ſolicitous to ob-
tain it, becauſe ſhe conſidered him as the
only perſon in London who was intereſted
in her welfare.
He ſaw, however, no promiſe of better
- ſucceſs
|

<page 104>
C E C I L I A. 99
ſucceſs when he made his appearance at
dinner time, for not only Mr. Arnott was
already arrived, but Sir Robert Floyer, and
he found Cecilia ſo much the obječt of their
mutual attention, that he had ſtill leſs
chance than in the morning of ſpeaking to
her unheard.
Yet was he not idle; the ſight of Sir Ro-
bert gave abundant employment to his pe-
netration, which was immediately at work,
to diſcover the motive of his viſit: but
this, with all his ſagacity, was not eaſily
decided; for though the conſtant direétion
of his eyes towards Cecilia, proved, at
leaſt, that he was not inſenſible of her
beauty, his careleſſneſs whether or not ſhe
was hurt by his examination, the little
pains he took to converſe with her, and the
invariable aſſurance and negligence of his
manners, ſeemed ſtrongly to demonſtrate
an indifference to the ſentiments he in-
ſpired, totally incompatible with the ſoli-
citude of affection.
In Cecilia he had nothing to obſerve but
what his knowledge of her charaćter pre-
pared him to expect, a ſhame no leſs indig-
nant than modeſt at the freedom with which
ſhe ſaw herſelf ſurveyed.
Very little, therefore, was the ſatisfac-
tion which this viſit procured him, for ſoon
after dinner the ladies retired; and as they
E 2 had

<page 105>
1 Jo C E C I L I A.
had an early engagement for the evening,
the gentlemen received no ſummons to their
tea-table. But he contrived, before they
uitted the room, to make an appointment
3. attending them the next morning to a
rehearſal of a new ſerious Opera. {
He ſtayed not after their departure
longer than decency required, for too much
in earneſt was his preſent purſuit, to fit him
for ſuch converſation as the houſe in Ce-
cilia's abſence could afford him.
C H A P.

<page 106>
C E C I L I A. 1 of
C H A P. VIII.
AN or ºr a R = n = a x s a 1.
THE next day, between eleven and
twelve o’clock, Mr. Monckton was
again in Portman-ſquare; he found, as he
expected, both the ladies, and he found,
as he feared, Mr. Arnott prepared to be of
their party. He had, however, but little
time to repine at this intruſion, before he
was diſturbed by another, for, in a few mi-
nutes, they were joined by Sir Robert
‘Floyer, who alſo declared his intention of
accompanying them to the Haymarket.
Mr. Monckton, to diſguiſe his chagrin,
pretended he was in great haſte to ſet off,
left they ſhould be too late for the over-
ture: they were, therefore, quitting the
breakfaſt room, when they were ſtopt by
the appearance of Mr. Morrice.
The ſurpriſe which the fight of him gave
to Mr. Monckton was extreme ; he knew
that he was unacquainted with Mr. Harrel,
for he remembered they were ſtrangers to
each other when they lately met at his
houſe ; he concluded, therefore, that Ce-
E 3 cilia

<page 107>
*~.
+.
*
**,
I O2 C E C I L I A.
cilia was the objećt of his viſit, but he
could frame no conjećture under what pre-
teſ, CC. - -
The eaſy terms upon which he ſeemed
with all the family by no means diminiſhed
his amazement ; for when Mrs. Harrel ex-
preſſed ſome concern that ſhe º obliged
to go out, he galiy begged her not to
mind him, aſſuring her he could not have
ſtayed two minutes, and promiſing, un-
aſked, to call again the next day: and when
ſhe added, “We would not hurry away
ſo, only we are going to a rehearſal of
an Opera,” he exclaimed with quickneſs,
“A rehearſal –are you really I have a
great mind to go too !” -
Then, perceiving Mr. Monckton, he
bowed to him with great reſpect, and en-
quired, with no little ſolemnity, how he
had left lady Margaret, hoped ſhe was
perfectly recovered from her late indiſpoſi-
tion, and aſked fundry queſtions with re-
gard to her plan for the winter. *
This diſcourſe was ill conſtructed for
rendering his preſence deſirable to Mr.
Monckton; he anſwered him very drily,
and again preſſed their departure.
“O,” cried Morrice, “ there's no occa-
ſion for ſuch haſte ; the rehearſal does not
begin till one.”
“ You

<page 108>
C E C I L I A. 103
s
“ You are miſtaken, Sir l’” ſaid Mr.
Monckton; “it is to begin at twelve
o'clock.” -
“O ay, very true,” returned Morrice;
“ I had forgot the dances, and I ſuppoſe
they are to be rehearſed firſt. Pray, Miſs
Beverley, did you ever ſee any dances re-
hearſed P’”
“ No, Sir.”
“You’ll be exceſſively entertained, then,
I aſſure you. It’s the moſt comical thing in
the world to ſee thoſe ſignores and ſignoras
cutting capers in a morning. And the figu-
ranti will divert you beyond meaſure; you
never ſaw ſuch a ſhabby ſet in your life:
but the moſt amuſing thing is to look in
their faces, for all the time they are jump-
ing and ſkipping about the ſtage as if they
could not ſtand ſtill for joy, they look as
ſedate and as diſmal as if they were ſo
many undertakers men.”
“ Not a word againſt dancing !” cried
Sir Robert, “it’s the only thing carries one
to the Opera; and I am ſure it's the only
thing one minds at it.”
The two ladies were then handed to
Mrs. Harrel's vis-à-vis ; and the gentle-
men, joined without further ceremony by
Mr. Morrice, followed them to the Hay-
market. -
The rehearſal was not begun, and Mrs.
Harrel and Cecilia ſecured themſelves a
E 4 boy

<page 109>
I C4 C E C I L I A.
box upon the ſtage, from which the gen-
tlemen of their party took care not to be
very diſtant.
They were ſoon perceived by Mr. Goſ-
port, who inſtantly entered into converſation
with Cecilia. Miſs Larolles, who with
ſome other ladies came ſoon after into the
next box, looked out to courtſie and nod,
with her uſual readineſs, at Mrs. Harrel,
but took not any notice of Cecilia, though
ſhe made the firſt advances.
“What's the matter now 2° cried Mr.
Goſport; “ have you affronted your little
prattling friend ?” -
, “ Not with my own knowledge;” an-
ſwered Cecilia; “perhaps ſhe does not re-
colleót me.”
Juſt then Miſs Larolles, tapping at the
door, came in from the next box to ſpeak
to Mrs. Harrel ; with whom ſhe ſtood
chatting and laughing ſome minutes, with-
out ſeeming to perceive that Cecilia was of
her party. t
“Why what have you done to the poor
girl " whiſpered Mr. Goſport; “ did you
talk more than herſelf when you ſaw her
laſt P’’
“Would that have been poſſible?” cried
Cecilia; “ however, I ſtill fancy ſhe doe
not know me.” - - --
She then ſtood up, which making Miſs
- Larolles
4.

<page 110>
C E C I L I A. Io 5
Larolles involuntarily turn towards her, ſhe
again courtſied; a civility which that young
lady ſcarce deigned to return, before, bridling
with an air of reſentment, ſhe haſtily looked
another way, and then, nodding good-hu-
mouredly at Mrs. Harrel, hurried back to
her party. -
Cecília, much amazed, ſaid to Mr. Goſ-
port, “See now how great was our pre-
ſumption in ſuppoſing this young lady's lo-
quacity always at our devotion l’’
“Ah madam l’ cried he, laughing,
“ there is no permanency, no conſiſtency
in the world ! no, not even in the tongue
of a voluble ! and if that fails, upon what
may we depend ?”
“But ſeriouſly,” ſaid Cecilia, “ I am
ſorry I have offended her, and the more be-
cauſe I ſo little know how, that I can offer
her no apology.” - -
“ Will you appoint me your envoy
Shall I demand the cauſe of theſe hoſtili-
ties P’’ -
She thanked him, and he followed Miſs
Larolles; who was now addreſſing herſelf
with great earneſtneſs to Mr. Meadows, the
gentleman with whom ſhe was converſing
when Cecilia firſt ſaw her in Portman-
ſquare. He ſtopt a moment to let her
finiſh her ſpeech, which, with no little ſpirit,
- E 5 ſlie

<page 111>
Ioff C - E C I L I A.
ſhe did in theſe words, “I never knew any
thing like it in my life; but I ſha’n’t put
up with ſuch airs, I aſſure her l’”
Mr. Meadows made not any other return
to her harangue, but ſtretching himſelf with
a languid ſmile and yawning: Mr. Goſport,
therefore, ſeizing the moment of ceſſation,
ſaid, “ Miſs Larolles, I hear a ſtrange re-
port about you.”
“Do you ?” returned ſhe, with quick-
neſs, “pray what is it ſomething mon-
ſtrous impertinent, I dare ſay, - however, I
aſſure you it i'n't true.”
“ Your aſſurance,” cried he, “ carries
convićtion indiſputable, for the report was
that you had left off talking.”
“O, was that all !” cried ſhe, diſap-
pointed, “I thought it had been ſome-
thing about Mr. Sawyer, for I declare I
have been plagued ſo about him, I am
quite ſick of his name.” -
“And for my part, I never heard it ! ſo
fear nothing from ºne upon his account.”
“ Lord, Mr. Goſport, how can you ſay
ſo I am ſure you muſt know about the
feſtino that night, for it was all over the
town in a moment.”
“ What feſtino P’’
“Well, only conceive how provoking !
—why, I know nothing elſe was talked of
for a month !”
“ You

<page 112>
C F C I L I A. Io.7
“You are moſt formidably ſtout this
morning ! it is not two minutes ſince I ſaw
you fling the gauntlet at Miſs Beverley, and
yet you are already prepared for another
antagoniſt.”
“O as to Miſs Beverley, I muſt really
beg you not to mention her ; ſhe has be-
haved ſo impertinently, that I don't intend
ever to ſpeak to her again.”
“Why, what has ſhe done *
“O ſhe's been ſo rude you've no notion.
I'll tell you how it was. You muſt know
I met her at Mrs. Harrel’s the day ſhe came
to town, and the very next morning I
waited on her myſelf, for I would not ſend
a ticket, becauſe I really wiſhed to be civil
to her; well, the day after, ſhe never came
near me, though I called upon her again;
however, I did not take any notice of that ;
but when the third day came, and I found
ſhe had not even ſent me a ticket, I thought
it monſtrous ill bred indeed ; and now there
has paſt more than a week, and yet ſhe has
never called : ſo I ſuppoſe ſhe don’t like
me; ſo I ſhall drop her acquaintance.”
Mr. Goſport, ſatisfied now with the ſubjećt
of her complaint, returned to Cecilia, and
informed her of the heavy charge which
was brought againſt her.
“I am glad, at leaſt, to know my
crime,” ſaid ſhe, “ for otherwiſe I ſhould
E 6 certainly

<page 113>
108 C E C I L I A.
º
ºf
certainly have ſinned on in ignorance, as I
muſt confeſs I never thought of returning
her viſits : but even if I had, I ſhould not
have ſuppoſed I had yet loſt much time.”
“I beg your pardon there,” ſaid Mrs.
Harrel; “a firſt viſit ought to be returned
always by the third day.”
“ Then have I an unanſwerable excuſe,”
ſaid Cecilia, “ for I remember that on
the third day I ſaw her at your houſe.”
“O that’s nothing at all to the purpoſe;
you ſhould have waited upon her, or ſent
her a ticket, juſt the ſame as if you had
not ſeen her.”
The overture was now begun, and Ce-
cilia declined any further converſation. This
was the firſt Opera ſhe had ever heard, yet
ſhe was not wholly a ſtranger to Italian
compoſitions, having aſſiduouſly ſtudied
muſic from a natural love of the art, at-
tended all the beſt concerts her neighbour-
hood afforded, and regularly received from
London the works of the beſt maſters.
But the little ſkill ſhe had thus gained,
, ſerved rather to increaſe than to leſſen the
ſurpriſe with which ſhe heard the preſent
performance,—a ſurprize of which the diſ-
covery of her own ignorance made not the
leaſt part. Unconſcious from the Hittle ſhe
had acquired how much was to be learnt,
ſhe was aſtoniſhed to find the inadequate
º - power

<page 114>
C E J C I L I A. 109
power of written muſic to convey any idea
of vocal abilities : with juſt knowledge
enough, therefore, to underſtand ſomething
of the difficulties, and feel much of the
merit, ſhe gave to the whole Opera an
avidity of attention almoſt painful from its
own eagerneſs.
But both the ſurprize and the pleaſure
which ſhe received from the performance
in general, were faint, cold, and languid,
compared to the ſtrength of thoſe emo-
tions when excited by Signore Pacchierotti
in particular ; and though not half the ex-
cellencies of that ſuperior ſinger were ne-
ceſſary either to amaze or charm her unaccuſ-
tomed ears, though the refinement of his
taſte and maſterly originality of his genius,
to be praiſed as they deſerved, called for the
judgment and knowledge of profeſſors, yet
a natural love of muſic in ſome meaſure
fupplied the place of cultivation, and what
ſhe could neither explain nor underſtand,
ſhe could feel and enjoy.
The opera was Artaſerſe; and the plea-
ſure ſhe received from the muſic was much
augmented by her previous acquaintance
with that intereſting drama; yet, as to all
noviciates in ſcience, whatever is leaſt com-
plicated is moſt pleaſing, ſhe found herſelf
by nothing ſo deeply impreſſed, as by the
plaintive and beautiful ſimplicity with
- which

<page 115>
rio C E C I L I A.
which Pacchierotti uttered the affecting re-
petition of ſono innocente 1 his voice, always
either ſweet or impºſioned, delivered thoſe
words in a tone of ſoftneſs, pathos, and
ſenſibility, that ſtruck her with a ſenſation
not more new than delightful. - -
But though ſhe was, perhaps, the only
perſon thus aſtoniſhed, ſhe was by no means
the only one enraptured; for notwithſtand-
ing ſhe was too earneſtly engaged to remark
the company in general, ſhe could not
avoid taking notice of an old gentleman
who ſtood by one of the ſide ſcenes, againſt
which he lent his head in a manner that
concealed his face, with an evident deſign to
be wholly abſorbed in liſtening: and dur-
ing the ſongs of Pacchierotti he fighed ſo
deeply that Cecilia, ſtruck by his uncom-
mon ſenſibility to the power of muſic, in-
voluntarily watched him, whenever her
mind was ſufficiently at liberty to attend
to any emotions but its own.
As ſoon as the rehearſal was over, the
gentlemen of Mrs. Harrel's party crowded
before her box; and Cecilia then perceived
that the perſon whoſe muſical enthuſiaſm
had excited her curioſity, was the ſame old
gentleman whoſe extraordinary behaviour
had ſo much ſurprized her at the houſe of
Mr. Monckton. Her deſire to obtain ſome
information concerning him again reviving,
ſhe

<page 116>
C E C I L I A. 111
ſhe was beginning to make freſh enquiries,
when ſhe was interrupted by the approach
of Captain Areſby. - -
That gentleman, advancing to her with
a ſmile of the extremeſt ſelf-complacency,
after hoping, in a low voice, he had the
honour of ſeeing her well, exclaimed,
“How wretchedly empty is the town pe-
trifying to a degreel I believe you do not
find yourſelf at preſent obſedá by too much
company "
“. At preſent, I believe the contrary 1”
cried Mr. Goſport.
“Really l’” ſaid the captain, unſuſpi-
cious of his ſneer, “I proteſt I have hardly
ſeen a ſoul. Have you tried the Pantheon
yet, ma'am "
“ No, Sir.”
“Nor I; I don't know whether people
go there this year. It is not a favourite
ſpeãacle with me ; that ſitting to hear the
muſic is a horrid bore. Have you done
the Feſtino the honour to look in there
yet "
“ No, Sir.”
“ Permit me, then, to have the honour
to beg you will try it.”
“O, ay, true,” cried Mrs. Harrel; “I
have really uſed you very ill about that ;
I ſhould have got you in for a ſubſcriber:
but Lord, I have done nothing for you i
- 3 Il
~~~~

<page 117>
1 I2 C E C I L I. A.
and you never put me in mind. There's
the ancient muſic, and Abel's concert; — as
to the opera, we may have a box between
us;—but there's the ladies concert we muſt
try for ; and there's—O Lord, fifty other
places we muſt think of 1" **
“Oh times of folly and diſſipation "
exclaimed a voice at ſome diſtance; “ Oh
mignons of idleneſs and luxury | What
next will ye invent for the perdition of
your time ! How yet further will ye pro-
ceed in the annihilation of virtue !”
Every body ſtared; but Mrs. Harrel
cooly ſaid, “Dear, it's only the man-
hater l’” -
“ The man-hater " repeated Cecilia,
who found that the ſpeech was made by the
obječt of her former curioſity; “ is that
the name by which he is known 2"
“ He is known by fifty names,” ſaid Mr.
Monckton; “ his friends call him the mo–
raliſt ; the young ladies, the crazy-man ;
the macaronies, the bore ; in ſhort, he is
called by any- and every name but his
own.”
“He is a moſt petrifying wretch, I aſſure
you,” ſaid the captain; “I am obſedé by
him partout; if I had known he had been
ſo near, I ſhould certainly have ſaid no-
thing.” -
“ That you have done ſo well,” cried
- Mr.

<page 118>
C E C I L I A. 113
;
Mr. Goſport, “ that if you had known it
the whole time, you could have done it no
better.” º
The captain, who had not heard this
ſpeech, which was rather made at him than
to him, continued his addreſs to Cecilia;
“Give me leave to have the honour of hop-
ing you intend to honour our ſelečt maſque-
rade at the Pantheon with your preſence. We
ſhall have but 500 tickets, and the ſub-
ſcription will only be three guineas and a
half.” - - -
“Oh objećts of penury and want "
again exclaimed the incognito ; “Oh vaſ.
ſals of famine and diſtreſs | Come and liſten
to this wantonneſs of wealth ! Come, naked
and breadleſs as ye are, and learn how that
money is conſumed which to you might
bring raiment and food l’”
“That ſtrange wretch,” ſaid the captain,
“ ought really to be confined; I have had
the honour to be degouté by him ſo often,
that I think him quite obnoxious. I make
it quite a principle to ſeal up my lips the
moment I perceive him.” -
“Where is it, then,” ſaid Cecilia, “ that
you have ſo often met him :
“O,” anſwered the captain, “ partout;
there is no greater bore about town. But
the time I found him moſt petrifying was
once when I happened to have the hº
O


<page 119>
114 c E C I L I A.
of dancing with a very young lady, who
was but juſt come from a boarding-ſchool,
and whoſe friends had done me the honour
to fix upon me upon the principle of firſt
bringing her out ; and while I was doing
won poſſible for killing the time, he came
up, and in his particular manner, told her
I had no meaning in any thing I ſaid I
muſt own I never felt more tempted to
be enragé with a perſon in years, in my
life.”
Mr. Arnott now brought the ladies word
that their carriage was ready, and they
guitted their box: but as Cecilia had never
before ſeen the interior parts of a theatre,
Mr. Monckton, hoping while they loitered
to have an opportunity of talking with
her, aſked Morrice why he did not ſhew
the lyons & Morrice, always happy in
being employed, declared it was juſt the
thing he liked beft, and begged permiſſion
to do the honours to Mrs. Harrel, who,
ever eager in the ſearch of amuſement,
willingly accepted his offer.
They all, therefore, marched upon the
ſtage, their own party now being the only
one that remained.
“We ſhall make a triumphal entry here,”
cried Sir Robert Floyer; “ the very tread
of the ſtage half tempts me to turn
aćtor.”
<< You

<page 120>
C E C I L I A. 15
* You are a rare man,” ſaid Mr. Goſ.
port, “ if, at your time of life, that is a
turn not already taken.”
“My time of life I’’ repeated he, “what
do you mean by that do you take me for
an old man º’ -
“No, Sir, but I take you to be paſt
childhood, and conſequently to have ſerved
your apprenticeſhip to the actors you have
mixed with on the great ſtage of the world,
and, for ſome years at leaſt, to have ſet up
for yourſelf.”
“ Come,” cried Morrice, “ let’s have a
little ſpouting; 'twill make us warm.”
“Yes,” ſaid Sir Robert, “if we ſpout
to an animating objećt. If Miſs Beverley
will be Juliet, I am Romeo at her ſer-
vice.”
At this moment the incognito, quitting
the corner in which he had planted himſelf,
came ſuddenly forward, and ſtanding before
the whole group, caſt upon Cecilia a look
of much compaſſion, and called out, “Poor
ſimple vićtim haſt thou already ſo many
º ? yet ſeeſt not that thou art marked
or ſacrifice yet knoweſt not that thou art
deſtined for prey !” -
Cecilia, extremely ſtruck by this extra-
ordinary addreſs, ſtopt ſhort and looked
much diſturbed: which, when he perceived,
he added, “Let the danger, not the
warning

<page 121>
1 16 C E C I L I A.
warning affect you ! diſcard the ſycophants
that ſurround you, ſeek the virtuous, re-
lieve the poor, and ſave yourſelf from the
impending deſtrućtion of unfeeling proſ-
perity ” -
Having uttered theſe words with vehe-
mence and authority, he ſternly paſſed them,
and diſappeared.
Cecilia, too much aſtoniſhed for ſpeech,
ſtood for ſome time immoveable, revolving
in her mind various conječtures upon the
meaning of an exhortation ſo ſtrange and
ſo urgent.
Nor was the reſt of the company much
leſs diſcompoſed: Sir Robert, Mr. Monck-
ton and Mr. Arnott, each conſcious of
their own particular plans, were each ap-
prehenſive that the warning pointed at
himſelf: Mr. Goſport was offended at be-
ing included in the general appellation of
ſycophants; Mrs. Harrel was provoked at
being interrupted in her ramble; and Cap-
tain Areſby, ſickening at the very fight
of him, retreated the moment he came
forth.
“For heaven’s ſake,” cried Cecilia, when
ſomewhat recovered from her conſternation,
“ who can this be, and what can he mean *
You, Mr. Monckton, muſt ſurely know
ſomething of him ; it was at your houſe
• I firſt ſaw him.”
“ Indeed,”

<page 122>
C E C I L I A. 117
.
.
“Indeed,”-anſwered Mr. Monckton, “I
knew almoſt nothing of him then, and I
am but little better informed now. Belfield
picked him up ſomewhere, and deſired to
bring him to my houſe: he called him by
the name of Albany : I found him a moſt
extraordinary charaćter, and Belfield, who
is a worſhipper of originality, was very fond
of him.” -
“ He's a deviliſh crabbed old fellow,”
cried Sir Robert, “ and if he goes on
much longer at this confounded rate, he
ſtands a very fair chance of getting his ears
cropt.”
“He is a man of the moſt ſingular con-
dućt I have ever met with,” ſaid Mr. Goſ-
port; “ he ſeems to hold mankind in ab-
horrence, yet he is never a moment alone,
and at the ſame time that he intrudes him-
ſelf into all parties, he aſſociates with none:
he is commonly a ſtern and ſilent obſerver
of all that paſſes, or when he ſpeaks, it is
but to utter ſome ſentence of rigid morality,
or ſome bitterneſs of indignant reproof.”
The carriage was now again announced,
and Mr. Monckton taking Cecilia's hand,
while Mr. Morrice ſecured to himſelf the
honour of Mrs. Harrel’s, Sir Robert and
Mr. Goſport made their bows and departed.
But though they had now quitted the ſtage,
and arrived at the head of a ſmall ſtair caſe
by

<page 123>
I 18 C E C I L I A.
by which they were to deſcend out of the
theatre, Mr. Monckton, finding all his tor-
mentors retired, except Mr. Arnott, whom
he hoped to elude, could not reſiſt making
one more attempt for a few moments con-
verſation with Cecilia; and therefore, again
applying to Morrice, he called out, “ I
don't think you have ſhewn the ladies any
of the contrivances behind the ſcenes P’’
True,” cried Morrice, “no more I have ;
ſuppoſe we go back : ".
“I ſhall like it vaſtly,” ſaid Mrs. Har-
rel; and back they returned.
Mr. Monckton now ſoon found an op-
portunity to ſay to Cecilia, “ Miſs Bever-
ley, what I foreſaw has exačtly come to
paſs; you are ſurrounded by ſelfiſh de-
ſigners, by intereſted, double-minded peo-
ple, who have nothing at heart but your
fortune, and whoſe mercenary views, if you
are not guarded againſt them—” .
Here a loud ſcream from Mrs. Harrel
interrupted his ſpeech ; Cecilia, much
alarmed, turned from him to enquire the
cauſe, and Mr. Monckton was obliged to
follow her example: but his mortification
was almoſt intolerable when he ſaw that
lady in a violent fit of laughter, and found
her ſcream was only occaſioned by ſeeing
Mr. Morrice, in his diligence to do the
5 honours,

<page 124>
C E C I L I A. I 19
honours, pull upon his own head one of the
ſide ſcenes | -
There was now no poſſibility of propoſing
any farther delay; but Mr. Monckton, in
attending the ladies to their carriage, was
obliged to have recourſe to his utmoſt diſ-
cretion and forbearance, in order to check
his deſire of reprimanding Morrice for his
blundering officiouſneſs.
Dreſfing, dining with company at home,
and then going out with company abroad,
filled up, as uſual, the reſt of the day.
C H A P.

<page 125>
120 C E C I L I A.
a
C H A P. IX.
A Su prl cation.
THE next morning Cecilia, at the re-
peated remonſtrances of Mrs. Harrel,
conſented to call upon Miſs Larolles. She
felt the impračticability of beginning at
preſent the alteration in her way of life ſhe
had projećted, and therefore thought it
moſt expedient to aſſume no ſingularity till
her independency ſhould enable her to ſup-
port it with conſiſtency; yet greater than
ever, was her internal eagerneſs to better
ſatisfy her inclination and her conſcience in
the diſpoſition of her time, and the diſtri-
bution of her wealth, ſince ſhe had heard,
the emphatic charge of her unknown Men-
tor.
Mrs. Harrel declined accompanying her
in this viſit, becauſe ſhe had appointed a
ſurveyor to bring a plan for the inſpection
of Mr. Harrel and herſelf, of a ſmall tem-
porary building, to be erected at Violet-
Bank, for the purpoſe of performing plays
in private the enſuing Eaſter.
When the ſtreet door was opened for her
to get into the carriage, ſhe was ſtruck with
w
|
3 the

<page 126>
C E C I L I A. I 2 I
the appearance of an elderly woman who
was ſtanding at ſome diſtance, and ſeemed
ſhivering with cold, and who, as ſhe de-
ſcended the ſteps, joined her hands in an
aćt of ſupplication, and advanced nearer to
the carriage.
Cecilia ſtopt to look at her: her dreſs,
though parſimonious, was too neat for a
beggar, and ſhe conſidered a moment what
ſhe could offer her. The poor woman con-
tinued to move forward, but with a ſlow-
neſs of pace that indicated extreme weakneſs;
and, as ſhe approached and raiſed her head,
ſhe exhibited a countenance ſo wretched,
and a complećtion ſo ſickly, that Cecilia
was impreſſed with horror at the fight.
With her hands ſtill joined, and a voice
that ſeemed fearful of its own ſound, “ Oh
madam,” ſhe cried, “ that you would but
hear me!” -
“Hear you!” repeated Cecilia, haſtily
feeling for her purſe, “ moſt certainly;
and tell me how I ſhall aſſiſt you?”
“Heaven bleſs you for ſpeaking ſo
kindly, madam l’ cried the woman, with
a voice more aſſured; “I was ſadly afraid
you would be angry, but I ſaw the carriage
at the door, and I thought I would try; for
I could be no worſe; and diſtreſs, madam,
makes very bold.”
“ Angry!” ſaid Cecilia, taking a crown
Vo L. I. F. from

<page 127>
I 22 C E C I L I A.
from her purſe, “ no, indeed!—who could
ſee ſuch wretchedneſs, and feel any thing
but pity!”
“Oh madam,” returned the poor wo-
man, “I could almoſt cry to hear you
talk ſo, though I never thought to cry
again, ſince I left it off for my poor Billy!”
“Have you, then, loſt a ſon?”
* Yes, madam; but he was a great
deal too good to live, ſo I have quite left
off grieving for him now.”
“Come in, good woman,” ſaid Cecilia,
“ it is too cold to ſtand here, and you ſeem
half ſtarved already: come in, and let me
have ſome talk with you.”
She then gave orders that the carriage
ſhould be driven round the ſquare till ſhe
was ready, and making the woman follow
her into a parlour, deſired to know what
ſhe ſhould do for her; changing, while ſhe
ſpoke, from a movement of encreaſing
compaſſion, the crown which ſhe held in
her hand for double that ſum.
“You can do every thing, madam,” ſhe
anſwered, “if you will but plead for us to
his honour: he little thinks of our diſtreſs,
becauſe he has been afflićted with none
himſelf, and I would not be ſo troubleſome
to him, but indeed, indeed, madam, we
are quite pinched for want!”
Cecilia, ſtruck with the words he little
y
thinks

<page 128>
C E C I L I A. 123
thinks of our diffreſ, becauſe he has been af-
flićted with mont himſelf, felt again aſhamed
of the ſmallneſs of her intended donation,
.. and taking from her purſe another half gui-
nea, ſaid “will this aſſiſt you? Will a
guinea be ſufficient to you for the preſent?”
“I humbly thank you, madam,” ſaid
the woman, curtſying low, “ſhall I give
you a receipt?”
“A receipt: ” cried Cecilia, with emo-
tion, “ for what? Alas, our accounts are
by no means balanced but I ſhall do more
for you if I find you as deſerving an objećt
as you ſeem to be.” -
“You are very good, madam; but I
: only meant a receipt in part of payment.”
- “ Payment for what? I don't underſtand
you.” -
“Did his honour never tell you, madam,
of our account ** -
** What account ”
“Our bill, madam, for work done to the
new Temple at Violet-Bank: it was the laſt
great work my poor huſband was able to
do, for it was there he met with his misfor-
tune.”
“ What bill 2 What misfortune 2 ” cried
Cecilia; “What had your huſband to do
at Violet-Bank P” - -
“He was the carpenter, madam. I
F 2 thought

<page 129>
124; C F C I L I A.
3.
thought you might have ſeen poor Hill the
carpenter there.”
“No, I never was there myſelf. Per-
haps you miſtake me for Mrs. Harrel.”
“Why ſure, madam, an’t you his ho-
nour's lady ?”
“ No. But tell me, what is this bill 2’”
“'Tis a bill, madam, for very hard
work, for work, madam, which I am ſure
will coſt my huſband his life; and though
I have been after his honour night and day
to get it, and ſent him letters and petitions
with an account of our misfortunes, I have
never received ſo much as a ſhilling! and
now the ſervants won’t even let me wait in
the hall to ſpeak to him. Oh madam' you
who ſeem ſo good, plead to his honour in
ouf behalf! tell him my poor huſband can-
not live! tell him my children are ſtarving!
and tell him my poor Billy, that uſed to
help to keep us, is dead, and that all the
work I can do by myſelf is not enough to
maintain us !” -
“ Good heaven l’’ cried Cecilia, ex-
tremely moved, “is it then your own money
for which you ſue thus humbly * *
“Yes, madam, for my own juſt and
honett money, as his honour knows, and
* * * x >
will tell you himſelf.
“. Impoſſible 1" cried Cecilia, “ he can-
not know it; but I will take care he ſhall
ſoon

<page 130>
C F C I L I A. 125
.
ſoon be informed of it. How much is the
bill 2 ” -
“Two-and-twenty pounds, madam.”
“ What, no more ?” -
“ Ah madam, you gentlefolks little
think how much that is to poor people! A
hard working family, like mine, madan,
with the help of 20 l. will go on for a long
while quite in paradiſe.” -
“Poor worthy woman l’ cried Cecilia,
whoſe eyes were filled with tears of com-
paſſion, “ if 20 l. will place you in para-
diſe, and that 20 l. only your juſt right,
it is hard, indeed, that you ſhould be kept
without it; eſpecially when your debtors
are too affluent to miſs it. Stay here a few
moments, and I will bring you the money
immediately.” -
Away ſhe flew, and returned to the break-
faſt room, but found there only Mr. Ar-
nott, who told her that Mr. Harrel was in
the library, with his fifter and ſome gentle-
men. Cecilia briefly related her buſineſs,
and begged he would inform Mr. Harrel
ſhe wiſhed to ſpeak to him directly. Mr.
Arnott ſhook his head, but obeyed.
They returned together, and immedi-
ately
“ Miſs Beverley,” cried Mr. Harrel,
gaily, “I am glad you are not gone, for
F 3 We

<page 131>
126 C E C I L I A.
we want much to conſult with you. Will
you come up ſtairs?”
“ Preſently,” anſwered ſhe; “ but firſt
I muſt ſpeak to you about a poor woman
with whom I have accidentally been talking,
who has begged me to intercede with you to
pay a little debt that ſhe thinks you have
forgotten, but that probably you have never
heard mentioned.” -
“ A debt: * cried he, with an immedi-
ate change of countenance, “to whom?”
“ Her name, I think, is Hill; ſhe is
wife to the carpenter you employed about a
new temple at Violet-Bank.
“ O what—what that woman 2–Welk,
well, I'll ſee ſhe ſhall be paid. Come, let
us go to the library.”
“What, with my commiſſion ſo ill exe-
cuted? I promiſed to petition for her to
have the money direétly.”
“Pho, pho, there's no ſuch hurry; I.
don’t know what I have done with her
bill.”
“I’ll run and get another.”
“O upon no account! She may ſend
another in two or three days. She deſerves
to wait a twelvemonth for her imperti-
nence in troubling you at all about it.”
“That was entirely accidental : . but in-
deed you muſt give me leave to perform my
promiſe and plead for her. It muſt be al-
moſt
|

<page 132>
C E C I L I A. 127
moſt the ſame to you whether you pay ſuch
a trifle as 20 l. now, or a month hence, and
to this poor woman, the difference ſeems
little ſhort of life or death, for ſhe tells me
her huſband is dying, and her children are
half famiſhed, and though ſhe looks an ob-
jećt of the cruelleſt want and diſtreſs her-
ſelf, ſhe appears to be their only ſupport.”
“O,” cried Mr. Harrel, laughing,
“ what a diſmal tale has ſhe been telling
you ! no doubt ſhe ſaw you were freſh
from the country ! But if you give credit
to all the farragos of theſe trumpery impoſ-
tors, you will never have a moment to
yourſelf, nor a guinea in your purſe.”
“This woman,” anſwered Cecilia, “can-
not be an impoſtor, ſhe carries marks but too
evident and too dreadful in her countenance
of the ſufferings which ſhe relates.”
“O,” returned he, “ when you know
the town better, you will ſoon ſee through
tricks of this ſort; a ſick huſband and five
ſmall children are complaints ſo ſtale now,
that they ſerve no other purpoſe in the world
but to make a joke.”
“Thoſe, however, who can laugh at
them muſt have notions of merriment very
different to mine. And this poor wo-
man, whoſe cauſe I have ventured to under-
take, had ſhe no family at all, muſt ſtill
and indiſputably be an objećt of pity her-
F 4 ſelf,

<page 133>
I 28 C E C I L I A.
ſelf, for ſhe is ſo weak ſhe can hardly crawl,
and ſo pallid, that ſhe ſeems already half
dead.” -
“ All impoſition, depend upon it! The
moment ſhe is out of your fight, her com-
plaints will vaniſh.”
“ Nay, fir,” cried Cecilia, a little im–
patiently, “ there is no reaſon to ſuſpe&t
ſuch deceit, ſince ſhe does not come hither
as a beggar, however well the ſtate of beg-
gary may accord with her poverty: ſhe only
follicits the payment of a bill, and if in
that there is any fraud, nothing can be ſo
eaſy as detection.”
Mr. Harrel bit his lips at this ſpeech, and
for ſome inſtants looked much diſturbed;
but ſoon recovering himſelf, he negligently
ſaid “ Pray how did ſhe get at you ?”
“ I met her at the ſtreet door. But tell
me, is not her bill a juſt one ** -
“I cannot ſay; I have never had time
to look at it.”
“But you know who the woman is, and
that her huſband worked for you, and
therefore that in all probability it is right,
—do you not?” - * -
“Yes, yes, I know who the woman is
well enough , ſhe has taken care of that,
for ſhe has peſtered me every day theſe nine
months.”
Cecilia was ſtruck dumb by this ſpeech:
- hitherto

<page 134>
C E C Is L I A. 129
hitherto ſhe had ſuppoſed that the diſfipa-
tion of his life kept him ignorant of his
own injuſtice; but when ſhe found he was
ſo well informed of it, yet, with ſuch total
indifference, could ſuffer a poor woman to
claim a juſt debt every day for nine months
together, ſhe was ſhocked and aſtoniſhed
beyond meaſure. They were both ſome
time ſilent, and then Mr. Harrel, yawning
and ſtretching out his arms, indolently
aſked “ Pray why does not the man come
himſelf P’”
“Did I not tell you,” anſwered Cecilia,
ſtaring at ſo abſent a queſtion, “ that he
was very ill, and unable even to work?”.
“ Well, when he is better,” added he,
moving towards the door, “ he may call,
and I will talk to him.”
Cecilia, all amazement at this unfeeling
behaviour, turned involuntarily to Mr. Ar-
nott, with a countenance that appealed for
his aſſiſtance; but Mr. Arnott hung his
head, aſhamed to meet her eyes, and
abruptly left the room.
Mean time Mr. Harrel, half turning
back, though without looking Cecilia in
the face, careleſsly ſaid, “Well, won't
you come ** - -
“ No, fir,” anſwered ſhe, coldly.
He then returned to the library, leaving
her equally diſpleaſed, ſurpriſed and diſcon-
F 5 certed

<page 135>
130 C E C I L I A.
certed at the converſation which had juſt
paſſed between them. “ Good heaven,”
cried ſhe to herſelf, “what ſtrange, what
cruel inſenſibility to ſuffer a wretched fa-
mily to ſtarve, from an obſtinate determi-
nation to aſſert that they can live! to diſ-
treſs the poor by retaining the recompence
for which alone they labour, and which at
laſt they muſt have, merely from indolence,
forgetfulneſs, or inſolence O how little did
my uncle know, how little did I imagine to
what a guardian I was intruſted l’” She now
felt aſhamed even to return to the poor wo-
man, though ſhe reſolved to do all in her
power to ſoften her diſappointment, and re-
lieve her diſtreſs.
But before ſhe had quitted the room, one
of the ſervants came to tell her that his.
maſter begged the honor of her company
up ſtairs. “Perhaps he relents l’ thought
ſhe 3 and pleaſed with the hope, readily
obeyed the ſummons.
She found him, his lady, Sir Robert
Floyer, and two other gentlemen, all ear-
neſtly engaged in an argument over a large
table, which was covered with plans and
elevations of ſmall buildings.
Mr. Harrel immediately addreſſed her
with an air of vivacity and ſaid “You are
very good for coming; we can ſettle no-
thing without your advice: pray look at
- - theſe
-

<page 136>
C E C I L I A. 131
theſe different plans for our theatre, and tell
us which is the beſt.”
Cecilia advanced not a ſtep: the fight
of plans for new edifices when the work-
men were yet unpaid for old ones; the
cruel wantonneſs of raiſing freſh fabrics of
expenſive luxury, while thoſe ſo lately
built had brought their neglečted labourers
to ruin, excited an indignation ſhe ſcarce
thought right to repreſs: while the eaſy
ſprightlineſs of the direétor of theſe revels,
to whom but the moment before ſhe had re-
preſented the oppreſſion of which they
made him guilty, filled her with averſion
and diſguſt: and, recoilećting the charge
given her by the ſtranger at the Opera re-
hearſal, ſhe reſolved to ſpeed her departure
to another houſe, internally repeating “Yes,
I will ſave myſelf from the impending dºſ-
truðion of unfeeling proſperity l’”
Mrs. Harrel, ſurpriſed at her ſilence and
extreme gravity, enquired if ſhe was not
well, and why ſhe had put off her viſit to
Miſs Larolles? And Sir Robert Floyer,
turning ſuddenly to look at her, ſaid “Do
you begin to feel the London air already ?”
Cecilia endeavoured to recover her ſere-
nity, and anſwer theſe queſtions in her uſual
manner; but ſhe perſiſted in declining to
give any opinion at all about the plans,
and,

<page 137>
I 32 C E C I L I A.
and, after ſlightly looking at them, left
the room. z -
Mr. Harrel, who knew better how to ac-
count for her behaviour than he thought
proper to declare, ſaw with concern that
ſhe was more ſeriouſly diſpleaſed, than he
had believed an occurrence which he had
regarded as wholly unimportant, could
have made, her: and therefore, deſirous
that ſhe ſhould be appeaſed, he followed
her out of the library, and ſaid “ Miſs Be-
verley, will to-morrow be ſoon enough for
your Protegeč P”
“O yes, no doubt " anſwered ſhe, moſt
agreeably ſurpriſed by the queſtion.
“Well, then, will you take the trouble
to bid her come to me in the morning?”
Delighted at this unexpected commiſſion,
fhe thanked him with ſmiles for the office;
and as ſhe haſtened down ſtairs to chear
the poor expečtant with the welcome intel-
ligence, ſhe framed a thouſand excuſes for
the part he had hitherto ačted, and without
any difficulty, perſuaded herſelf he began to
ſee the faults of his condućt, and to medi-
tate a reformation.
She was received by the poor creature ſhe
ſo warmly wiſhed to ſerve with a counten-
ance already ſo much enlivened, that ſhe
fancied Mr. Harrel had himſelf anticipated
her intended information: this, however,
ſhe
t
!

<page 138>
C E C I L I A. I 33
ſhe found was not the caſe, for as ſoon as
ſhe heard his meſſage, ſhe ſhook her
head, and ſaid “ Ah, madam, his honour
always ſays to-morrow ! but I can better
bear to be diſappointed now, ſo I'll grumble
no more; for indeed, madam, I have been
bleſt enough to-day to comfort me for every
thing in the world, if I could but keep
from thinking of poor Billy I could bear
all the reſt, madam, but whenever my other
troubles go off, that comes back to me ſo
much the harder!”
“ There, indeed, I can afford you no re-
lief,” ſaid Cecilia, “ but you muſt try to
think leſs of him, and more of your huſ-
band and children who are now alive. To-
morrow you will receive your money, and
that, I hope, will raiſe your ſpirits. And
pray let your huſband have a phyſician, to
tell you how to nurſe and manage him; I
will give you one fee for him now, and
if he ſhould want further advice, don’t fear
to let me know.”
Cecilia had again taken out her purſe,
but Mrs. Hill, claſping her hands, called
out “ Oh madam no | I don't come here
to fleece ſuch goodneſs! but bleſſed be the
hour that brought me here to-day, and if
my poor Billy was alive, he ſhould help me
to thank you!”
She then told her that ſhe was now quite
- - - rich,

<page 139>
I 34 C E C I L I A.
rich, for while ſhe was gone, a gentleman
had come into the room, who had given
her five guineas.
Cecilia, by her deſcription, ſoon found
this gentleman was Mr. Arnott, and a cha-
rity ſo ſympathetic with her own, failed
not to raiſe him greatly in her favour. But
as her benevolence was a ſtranger to that
parade which is only liberal from emulation,
when ſhe found more money not immedi-
ately wanted, ſhe put up her purſe, and
charging Mrs. Hill to enquire for her the
next morning when ſhe came to be paid,
bid her haſten back to her ſick huſband.
And then, again ordering the carriage to
the door, ſhe ſet off upon her viſit to Miſs
Larolles, with a heart happy in the good
already done, and happier ſtill in the hope
of doing more.
Miſs Larolles was out, and ſhe returned
home; for ſhe was too ſanguine in her ex-
pećtations from Mr. Harrel, to have any
deſire of ſeeking her other guardians. The
reſt of the day ſhe was more than uſually
civil to him, with a view to mark her appro-
bation of his good intentions; while Mr.
Arnott, gratified by meeting the ſmiles he
ſo much valued, thought his five gnineas
amply repaid, independently of the real
pleaſure which he took in doing good.
C H A P.

<page 140>
C. E. C I L I A. H35
º
- C H A P. |X.
A P R o v o C A T I o N.
THE next morning, when breakfaſt was
over, Cecilia waited with much im–
patience to hear ſome tidings of the poor
carpenter's wife; but though Mr. Harrel,
who had always that meal in his own room,
came into his lady's at his uſual hour, to
ſee what was going forward, he did not
mention her name. She therefore went
into the hall herſelf, to enquire among the
ſervants if Mrs. Hill was yet come 2
Yes, they anſwered, and had ſeen their
maſter, and was gone. -
She then returned to the breakfaſt room,
where her eagerneſs to procure ſome inform-
ation detained her, though the entrance of
Sir Robert Floyer made her wiſh to retire.
But ſhe was wholly at a loſs whether to
impute to general forgetfulneſs, or to the
failure of performing his promiſe, the filence
of Mr. Harrel upon the ſubjećt of her pe-
tlt1Oil.
In a few minutes they were viſited by
Mr. Morrice, who ſaid he called to ac-
quaint

<page 141>
136 C T C I L I A.
quaint the ladies that the next morning
there was to be a rehearſal of a very grand
new dance at the Opera-Houſe, where,
though admiſſion was difficult, if it was
agreeable to them to go, he would under-
take to introduce them.
Mrs. Harrel happened to be engaged,
and therefore declined the offer. He then
turned to Cecilia, and ſaid, “Well, ma'am,
when did you ſee our friend Monckton;
“ Not ſince the rehearſal, Sir.”
“He is a mighty agreeable fellow,” he
continued, “ and his houſe in the country
is charming. One is as eaſy at it as at
home. Were you ever there, Sir Robert?”
“ Not I, truly,” replied Sir Robert;
“ what ſhould I go for?—to ſee an old wo-
man with never a tooth in her head fitting
at the top of the table ! Faith I’d go an
hundred miles a day for a month never to
ſee ſuch a ſight again.”
“O but you don't know how well ſhe
does the honours,” ſaid Morrice; “ and
for my part, except juſt at meal times, I
always contrive to keep out of her way.”
“ I wonder when ſhe intends to die,”
ſaid Mr. Harrel. - -
“ She's been a long time about it,”
cried Sir Robert; “ but thoſe tough old
cats laſt for ever. We all thought ſne was
going when Monckton married her; how-
ever,

<page 142>
C E C I L I A. 137
ever, if he had not managed like a drive-
ler, he might have broke her heart nine
years ago.” - -
“ I am ſure I wiſh he had,” cried Mrs.
Harrel, “for ſhe's an odious creature, and
uſed always to make me afraid of her.”
“But an old woman,” anſwered Sir Ro-
bert, “ is a perſon who has no fenſe of
decency; if once ſhe takes to living, the
devil himſelf can't get rid of her.”
“I dare ſay,” cried Morrice, “ ſhe’ll
pop off before long in one of thoſe fits of
the aſthma. I aſſure you ſometimes you
may hear her wheeze a mile off.”
“She’ll go never the ſooner for that,”
ſaid Sir Robert, “ for I have got an old
aunt of my own, who has been puffing
and blowing as if ſhe was at her laſt gaſp
ever ſince I can remember; and for all that,
only yeſterday, when I aſked her doćtor
when ſhe'd give up the ghoſt, he told me
ſhe might live theſe dozen years.” -
Cecilia was by no means ſorry to have
this brutal converſation interrupted by the
entrance of a ſervant with a letter for her.
She was immediately retiring to read it;
but upon the petition of Mr. Monckton,
who juſt then came into the room, ſhe only
went to a window. The letter was as
follows:
To

<page 143>
138 C E C I L I A.
Miſs, ºr
at his Honour Squire Harrel's,
Theſe.
Honoured Madam,
THIS with my humble duty. His Ho-
nour has given me nothing. But I would
not be troubleſome, having wherewithal to
wait, ſo conclude,
Honoured Madam,
Your dutiful ſervant to command,
till death,
M. H I LL.
The vexation with which Cecilia read
this letter was viſible to the whole company;
and while Mr. Arnott looked at her with
a wiſh of enquiry he did not dare expreſs,
and Mr. Monckton, under an appearance
of inattention, concealed the moſt anxious
curioſity, Mr. Morrice alone had courage
to interrogate her; and, pertly advancing,
ſaid, “ He is a happy man who writ that
letter, ma'am, for I am ſure you have not
read it with indifference.” -
“ Were I the writer,” ſaid Mr. Arnott,
tenderly, “I am ſure I ſhould reckon my-
ſelf far otherwiſe, for Miſs Beverley ſeems
to have read it with uneaſineſs.”
“ How-
{
º,

<page 144>
C E C I L I A. 139
* However, I have read it,” anſwered
ſhe, “I aſſure you it is not from any man.”
“O pray, Miſs Beverley,” cried Sir Ro-
bert, coming forward, “ are you any bet-
ter to-day ''
“ No, Sir, for I have not been ill.”
“A little vapoured, I thought, yeſter-
day ; perhaps you want exerciſe.”
“I wiſh the ladies would put themſelves
under my care,” cried Morrice, “ and take
a turn round the park.”
“I don’t doubt you, Sir,” ſaid Mr.
Monckton, contemptuouſly, “and, but for
the check of modeſty, probably there is
not a man here who would not wiſh the
fame.”
“I could propoſe a much better ſcheme
than that,” ſaid Sir Robert; “what if you
all walk to Harley-ſtreet, and give me
your notions of a houſe I am about there :
what ſay you, Mrs. Harrel : *
“ O, I ſhall like it vaſtly.”
“ Done,” cried Mr. Harrel; “ 'tis an
excellent motion.”
“ Come then,” ſaid Sir Robert, “ let’s
be off. Miſs Beverley, I hope you have a
good warm cloak f"
“I muſt beg you to excuſe my attending
you, Sir.” -
Mr. Monckton, who had heard this pro-
poſal with the utmoſt dread of its ſucceſs,
revived

<page 145>
140 C E C I L I A.
revived at the calm ſteadineſs with which
it was declined. Mr. and Mrs. Harrel
both teized Cecilia to conſent; but the
haughty Baronet, evidently more offended
than hurt by her refuſal, preſſed the mat-
ter no further: either with her or the reſt
of the party, and the ſcheme was dropt
entirely.
Mr. Monckton failed not to remark this
circumſtance, which confirmed his ſuſpi-
cions, that though the propoſal ſeemed
made by chance, its deſign was nothing
elſe than to obtain Cecilia's opinion con-
cerning his houſe. But while this ſome-
what alarmed him, the unabated inſolence
of his carriage, and the confident defiance
of his pride, ſtill more ſurprized him; and
notwithſtanding all he obſerved of Cecilia,
ſeemed to promiſe nothing but diſlike ; he
could draw no other inference from his
behaviour, than that if he admired, he
alſo concluded himſelf ſure of her.
This was not a pleaſant conjećture, how-
ever little weight he allowed to it; and he
reſolved, by outſtaying all the company,
to have a few minutes private diſcourſe
with her upon the ſubječt.
In about half an hour, Sir Robert and
Mr. Harrel went out together : Mr.
Monckton ſtill perſevered in keeping his
ground, and tried, though already weary,
- to

<page 146>
C E C I L I A. I4 I
to keep up a general converſation ; but
what moved at once his wonder and his
indignation was the aſſurance of Morrice,
who ſeemed not only bent upon ſtaying as
long as himſelf, but determined, by rattling
away, to make his own entertainment.
At length a ſervant came in to tell Mrs.
Harrel that a ſtranger, who was waiting in
- the houſe-keeper's room, begged to ſpeak
with her upon very particular buſineſs.
“O I know,” cried ſhe, “’tis that odious
John Groot : do pray, brother, try to get
rid of him for me, for he comes to teize
me about his bill, and I never know what
to ſay to him.” -
“ Mr. Arnott went immediately, and
Mr. Monckton could ſcarce refrain from
going too, that he might entreat John
Groot by no means to be ſatisfied without
ſeeing Mrs. Harrel herſelf: John Groot,
however, wanted not his entreaties, as the
ſervant ſoon returned to ſummon his lady
to the conference.
But though Mr. Monckton now ſeemed
near the completion of his purpoſe, Mor-
rice ſtill remained; his vexation at this cir-
cumſtance ſoon grew intolerable ; to ſee
himſelf upon the point of receiving the re-
compence of his perſeverance, by the for-
tunate removal of all the obſtacles in its
way, and then to have it held from him by
a young

<page 147>
I 42 C E C I L I A.
a young fellow he ſo much deſpiſed, and
who had no entrance into the houſe but
through his own boldneſs, and no induce-
ment to ſtay in it but from his own imper-
tinence, mortified him ſo inſufferably, that
it was with difficulty he even forbore af-
fronting him. Nor would he have ſcrupled
a moment deſiring him to leave the room,
had he not prudently determined to guard
with the utmoſt ſedulity againſt raiſing any
ſuſpicions of his paſſion for Cecilia.
He aroſe, however, and was moving to-
wards her, with intention to occupy a part
of a ſofa on which ſhe was ſeated, when
Morrice, who was ſtanding at the back of
it, with a ſudden ſpring which made the
whole room ſhake, jumpt over, and ſunk
plump into the vacant place himſelf, calling
out at the ſame time, “Come, come, what
have you married men to do with young
ladies I ſhall ſeize this poſt for myſelf.”
The rage of Mr. Monckton at this
feat, and ſtill more at the words mar-
rfed men, almoſt exceeded endurance; he
ſtopt ſhort, and looking at him with a
fierceneſs that overpowered his diſcretion,
was burſting out with, “ Sir, you are an
impudent fellow ;” but checking him-
ſelf when he got half way, concluded with,
“ a very facetious gentleman l’’
Morrice, who wiſhed nothing ſo little as
5 diſ-

<page 148>
C F C I L I. A. I43
diſobliging Mr. Monckton, and whoſe be-
haviour was merely the reſult of levity and
a want of early education, no ſooner per-
ceived his diſpleaſure, than riſing with yet
more agility than he had ſeated himſelf, he
reſumed the obſequiouſneſs of which an
uncommon flow of ſpirits had robbed him,
and gueſſing no other ſubjećt for his anger
than the diſturbance he had made, he bowed
almoſt to the ground, firſt to him, and af-
terwards to Cecilia, moſt reſpectfully beg-
ging pardon of them both for his frolic,
and proteſting he had no notion he ſhould
have made ſuch a noiſe !
Mrs. Harrel and Mr. Arnott now haſ.
tening back, enquired what had been the
matter Morrice, aſhamed of his exploit,
and frightened by the looks of Mr. Monck-
ton, made an apology with the utmoſt hu-
mility, and hurried away : and Mr. Monck-
ton, hopeleſs of any better fortune, ſoon
did the ſame, gnawn with a cruel diſcontent
which he did not dare avow, and longing
to revenge himſelf upon Morrice, even by
perſonal chaſtiſement.
C H A P.

<page 149>
J44. C E C I L I A.
*
C H A P. XI.
A N A R R A T 1 o N.
HE moment Cecília was at liberty, ſhe
ſent her own ſervant to examine into
the real ſituation of the carpenter and his
family, and to deſire his wife would call
upon her as ſoon as ſhe was at leiſure. The
account which he brought back encreaſed
her concern for the injuries of theſe poor
people, and determined her not to reſt ſa-
tisfied till ſhe ſaw them red ciſed. He in-
formed her that they lived in a ſmall lodg-
-ing up two pair of ſtairs; that there were
five children, all girls, the three eldeſt of
whom were hard at work with their mother
in matting chair-bottoms, and the fourth,
though a mere child, was nurſing the
youngeſt; while the poor carpenter him-
ſelf was confined to his bed, in conſequence
of a fall from a ladder while working at
Violet-Bank, by which he was covered
with wounds and contuſions, and an ob-
jećt of miſery and pain.
As ſoon as Mrs. Hill came, Cecilia ſent
for her into her own room, where ſhe re-
-- 5 ceived

<page 150>
C E C 1 L I A. I45
º
ceived her with the moſt compaſſionate
tenderneſs, and deſired to know when Mr.
Harrel talked of paying her
“ To-morrow, madam,” ſhe anſwered,
ſhaking her head, “ that is always his ho-
nour's ſpeech: but I ſhall bear it while I
can. However, though I dare not tell his
honour, ſomething bad will come of it, if
I am not paid ſoon.”
“Do you mean, then, to apply to the
law º' -
“I muſt not tell you, madam; but to
be ſure we have thought of it many a ſad
time and often ; but ſtill while we could
rub on, we thought it beſt not to make
enemies: but, indeed, madam, his honour
was ſo hard-hearted this morning, that if I
was not afraid you would be angry, I could
not tell how to bear it; for when I told him
I had no help now, for I had loſt my Billy,
he had the heart to ſay, ſo much the bet-
ter, there's one the leſs of you.”
“But what,” cried Cecilia, extremely
ſhocked by this unfeeling ſpeech, “ is the
reaſon he gives for diſappointing you ſo
often ?”
“He ſays, madam, that none of the
other workmen are paid yet; and that, to
be ſure, is very true; but then they can all
better afford to wait than we can, for we
were the pooreſt of all, madam, and have
Vol. I. G been

<page 151>
146 C E C I L I A.
been misfortunate from the beginning: and
his honour would never have employed us,
only he had run up ſuch a bill with Mr.
Wright, that he would not undertake any
thing more till he was paid. We were told
from the firſt we ſhould not get our money;
but we were willing to hope for the beſt,
for we had nothing to do, and were hard
run, and had never had the offer of ſo
good a job before ; and we had a great fa–
mily to keep, and many loſſes, and ſo
much illneſs! Oh madam if you did
but know what the poor go through 1”
This ſpeech opened to Cecilia a new
view of life; that a young man could ap-
pear ſo gay and happy, yet be guilty of ſuch
injuſtice and inhumanity, that he could
take pride in works which not even money
had made his own, and live with undimi-
niſhed ſplendor, when his credit itſelf began
to fail, ſeemed to her incongruities ſo irra-
tional, that hitherto ſhe had ſuppoſed them
impoſſible. - - -
She then enquired, if her huſband had
yet had any phyſician : . -
“Yes, madam, I humbly thank your
goodneſs,” ſhe anſwered; “ but I am not
the poorer for that, for the gentleman was
ſo kind he would take nothing.” -- *
“And does he give you any hopes :
what does he ſay ”... . -
5 -" cc. He
-
K

<page 152>
C E C I L I A. 147
“ He ſays he muſt die, madam but I
knew that before.”
“Poor woman l and what will you do
then P’’
“ The ſame, madam, as I did when I
loſt my Billy, work on the harder!”
“ Good heaven, how ſevere a lot but
tell me, why is it you ſeem to love your
Billy ſo much better than the reſt of your
children : ”
“ Becauſe, madam, he was the only boy
that ever I had; he was ſeventeen years old,
madam, and as tall and as pretty a lad!
and ſo good, that he never coſt me a wet
eye till I loſt him. He worked with his
father, and all the folks uſed to ſay he was
the better workman of the two.” *
“And what was the occaſion of his
death P”
“A conſumption, madam, that waſted him
quite to nothing: and he was ill a long
time, and coſt us a deal of money, for we
ſpared neither for wine nor any thing, that
we thought would but comfort him; and
we loved him ſo we never grudged it. But
he died, madann and if it had not been
for very hard work, the loſs of him would
quite have broke my heart.” "
“ Try, however, to think leſs of him,”
faid Cecilia ; “ and depend upon my
jpeaking again for you to Mr. Harrel. You
G 2 - ſhal!

<page 153>
148 C E C I L I A.
ſhall certainly have your money; take care,
therefore, of your own health, and go home
and give comfort to your ſick huſband.”
“Oh madam,” cried the poor woman,
tears ſtreaming down her cheeks, “ you
don't know how touching it is to hear gen-
tlefolks talk ſo kindly And I have been
uſed to nothing but roughneſs from his ho-
hour ! But what I moſt fear, madam, is
that when my huſband is gone, he will be
harder to deal with than ever; for a widow,
madam, is always hard to be righted ; and
I don't expect to hold out long myſelf, for
ſickneſs and ſorrow wear faſt: and then,
when we are both gone, who is to help our
poor children?” - *
“ I will 1” cried the generous Cecilia;
“I am able, and I am willing; you ſhall
not find all the rich hard-hearted, and I
will try to make you ſome amends for the
unkindneſs you have ſuffered.”
The poor woman, overcome by a pro-
miſe ſo unexpe&ted, burſt into a paſſionate
fit of tears, and ſobbed out her thanks with
a violence of emotion that frightened Ce-
cilia almoſt as much as it melted her. She
endeavoured, by reiterated aſſurances of
aſſiſtance, to appeaſe her, and ſolemnly
pledged her own honour that ſhe ſhould
certainly be paid the following Saturday,
which was only three days diſtant. M
VIIS,
:
º
º
*
-
º
s

<page 154>
C E C I L I. A. 149
-
Mrs. Hill, when a little calmer, dried
her eyes, and humbly begging her to for-
give a tranſport which ſhe could not re-
ñrain, moſt gratefully thanked her for the
engagement, into which ſhe had entered,
proteſting that ſhe would not be trouble-
Jame to her goodnéſ; as long as ſhe could help
it; “And I believe,” ſhe continued, “ that
if his honour will but pay me time enough
for the burial, I can make ſhift with what
I have till then. But when my poor Billy
died, we were ſadly off indeed, for we could
not bear but bury him prettily, becauſe it
was the laſt we could do for him: but we
could hardly ſcrape up .# for it, and
yet we all went without our di
forward, except the little one of all. But
that did not much matter, for we had no
great heart for eating.” . . . .
“I cannot bear this 1” cried Cecilia;
“ you muſt tell me no more of your Billy;
but go home, and chear your ſpirits, and
do every thing in your power to ſave your
huſband.”
“I will, madam,” anſwered the woman,
“ and his dying prayers ſhall bleſs you !
and all my children ſhall bleſs you, and
every night they ſhall pray for you. And
oh l’—again burſting into tears, “ that
Billy was but alive to pray for you too !”
Cecilia kindly endeavoured to ſoothe her,
G 3 but
nners to help

<page 155>
150 C E C I L I A.
but the poor creature, no longer able to
ſuppreſs the violence of her awakened ſor-
rows, cried out, “I muſt go, madam, and
pray for you at home, for now I have once
begun crying again, I don’t know how to
have done " and hurried away.
Cecilia determined to make once more
an effort with Mr. Harrel for the payment
of the bill, and if that, in two days, did
not ſucceed, to take up money for the diſ-
charge of it herſelf, and reſt all herſecu-
rity for reimburſement upon the ſhame with
which ſuch a proceeding muſt overwhelm
him. Offended, however, by the repulſe
ſhe had already received from him, and
diſguſted by all ſhe had heard of his unfeel-
ing negligence, ſhe knew not how to ad-
dreſs him, and reſolved upon applying
again to Mr. Arnott, who was already ac-
quainted with the affair, for advice and
aſſiſtance.
Mr. Arnott, though extremely gratified
that ſhe conſulted him, betrayed by his
looks an hopeleſſneſs of ſucceſs that damped
all her expectations. He promiſed, how-
ever, to ſpeak to Mr. Harrel upon the ſub-
jećt, but the promiſe was evidently given
to oblige the fair mediatrix, without any
hope of advantage to the cauſe. **
The next morning Mrs. Hill again
came, and again without payment was diſ-
miſled.
Mr.
-*.
1.
~
-
:
-
-<
!.

<page 156>
C E C I L I A. 1 5 I
Mr. Arnott then, at the requeſt of Ce-
cilia, folſoved Mr. Harrel into his room,
to enquire into the reaſon of this breach of
promiſe ; they continued ſome time toge-
ther, and when he returned to Cecilia, he
told her, that his brother had aſſured him
he would give orders to Daviſon, his gen-
tleman, to let her have the money the next
day.
. The pleaſure with which ſhe would have
heard this intelligence was much checked
by the grave and cold manner in which
it was communicated : ſhe waited, there-
fore, with more impatience than confidence
for the reſult of this freſh aſſurance.
The next morning, however, was the
ſame as the laſt; Mrs. Hill came, ſaw Da-
viſon, and was ſent away. -
- Cecilia, to whom ſhe related her griev-
ances, then flew to Mr. Arnott, and en-
treated him to enquire at leaſt of Daviſon
why the woman had again been diſap-
pointed.
Mr. Arnott obeyed her, and brought for
anſwer, that Daviſon had received no or-
ders from his maſter.
“ I entreat you then,” cried ſhe, with
mingled eagerneſs and vexation, “ to go,
for the laſt time, to Mr. Harrel. I am
ſorry to impoſe upon you an office ſo diſ-
agreeable, but I am ſure you compaſſionate
G 4 theſe

<page 157>
132 c E c I L I A.
theſe poor people, and will ſerve them now
with your intereſt, as you have already done
with your purſe. I only wiſh to know if
there has been any miſtake, or if theſe de-
lays are merely to ſicken me of petition-
ing.”
"Mr. Arnott, with a repugnance to the
requeſt which he could as ill conceal as his
admiration of the zealous requeſter, again
forced himſelf to follow Mr. Harrel. His
ſtay was not long, and Cecilia at his return
perceived that he was hurt and diſconcerted.
As ſoon as they were alone together, ſhe
begged to know what had paſſed ? “ No-
thing,” anſwered he, “ that will give you
any pleaſure. When I entreated my bro-
ther to come to the point, he ſaid it was
his intention to pay all his workmen toge-
ther, for that if he paid any one ſingly, all.
the reſt would be diſſatisfied.”
“And why,” ſaid Cecilia, “ ſhould he
not pay them at once? There can be no
more compariſon in the value of the money
to him and to them, than, to ſpeak with
truth, there is in his and in their right to
it.” -
“ But, madam, the bills for the new
houſe itſelf are none of them ſettled, and
he ſays that the moment he is known to
diſcharge an account for the Temple, he
ſhall not have any reſt for the clamours i
" ; , W1

<page 158>
C E C I L I A. 153.
will raiſe among the workmen who were
employed about the houſe.”
“How infinitely ſtrange l’ exclaimed
Cecilia; “will he not, then, pay any
body ?” -
“Next quarter, he ſays, he ſhall pay
them all, but, at preſent, he has a particu-
lar call for his money.”
Cecilia would not truſt herſelf to make
any comments upon ſuch an avowal, but
thanking Mr. Arnott for the trouble which
he had taken, ſhe determined, without any
further application, to defire Mr. Harrel to
advance her 20 l. the next morning, and ſa-
tisfy the carpenter herſelf, be the riſk what
it might.
The following day, therefore, which was
the Saturday when payment was promiſed,
ſhe begged an audience of Mr. Harrel;
which he immediately granted; but, before
ſhe could make her demand, he ſaid to her,
with an air of the utmoſt gaiety and good-
humour, “Well, Miſs º º: i.
it with your protegée à I hope, at length,
ſhe is &: g But I .# beg you
would charge her to keep her own counſel,
as otherwiſe ſhe will draw me into a ſcrape
I ſhall not thank her for.” .
- . . . . .
“Have you, then, paid her?” cried Ce-
cilia, with much amazement. . . . .
. •. G 5 * Yes;

<page 159>
154 C E C I L I A.
“Yes; I promiſed you I would, you
know.” s -
This intelligence equally delighted and
aſtoniſhed her; ſhe repeatedly thanked him
for his attention to her petition, and, eager
to communicate her ſucceſs to Mr. Arnott,
ſhe haſtened to find him. “ Now,” cried
ſhe, “I ſhall torment you no more with
painful commiſſions; the Hills, at laſt, are
paid l’’
“From you, madam,” anſwered he
gravely, “ no commiſſions could be pain-
ful.” -
“Well but,” ſaid Cecilia, ſomewhat
diſappointed, “ you don't ſeem glad of
this P’’
“Yes,” anſwered he, with a forced
ſmile, “I am very glad to ſee you ſo.”
“But how was it brought about 2 did
Mr. Harrel relent 2 or did you attack him
again " -
The heſitation of his anſwer convinced
her there was ſome myſtery in the tranſac-
tion; ſhe began to apprehend ſhe had been
deceived, and haſtily quitting the room,
ſent for Mrs. Hill: but the moment the poor
woman appeared, ſhe was ſatisfied of the
contrary, for, almoſt frantic with joy and
gratitude, ſhe immediately flung herſelf
upon her knees, to thank her benefactreſs
for having ſeen her righted,
Cecilia
|
.

<page 160>
C E C I L I A. 155
*
Cecilia then gave her ſome general ad-
vice, promiſed to continue her friend, and
offered her aſſiſtante in getting her huſ-
band into an hoſpital: but ſhe told her
he had already been in one many months,
where he had been pronounced incurable,
and therefore was deſirous to ſpend his laſt
days in his own lodgings.
“ Well,” ſaid Cecilia, “ make them as
eaſy to him as you can, and come to me
next week, and I will try to put you in a
better way of living.” º
She then, ſtill greatly perplexed about
Mr. Arnott, ſought him again, and, after
various queſtions and conjećtures, at length
brought him to confeſs he had himſelf lent
his brother the ſum with which the Hills.
had been paid.
Struck with his generoſity, ſhe poured
forth thanks and praiſes ſo grateful to his
ears, that ſhe ſoon gave him a recompenſe
which he would have thought cheaply pur-
chaſed by half his fortune.
G 6 B O O K,

<page 161>
B O O K II.
C H A P T E R I.
A MAN of WEALT H.
H E meanneſs with which Mr. Har-
-rel had aſſumed the credit, as well as
accepted the aſſiſtance of Mr. Arnott, en-
creaſed the diſguſt he had already excited
in Cecilia, and haſtened her reſolution of
quitting his houſe: and therefore, without
waiting any longer for the advice of Mr.
Monckton, ſhe reſolved to go inſtantly to
her other guardians, and ſee what better
proſpects their habitations might offer.
For this purpoſe, ſhe borrowed one of
the carriages, and gave orders to be driven.
into the city, to the houſe of Mr. Briggs.
She told her name, and was ſhewn, by a
little ſhabby foot-boy, into a parlour.
Here ſhe waited, with tolerable patience,
for half an hour, but then, imagining the
boy had forgotten to tell his maſter ſhe was
in the houſe, ſhe thought it expedient to
make ſome enquiry,
No.
:

<page 162>
C E C I L I A. 157
No bell, however, could ſhe find, and
therefore ſhe went into the paſſage in ſearch
of the foot-boy; but, as ſhe was proceed-
ing to the head of the kitchen ſtairs, ſhe
was ſtartled by hearing a man's voice from
the upper part of the houſe, exclaiming, in a
furious paſſion, “Dare ſay you've filched it
for a diſh-clout !”
She called out, however, “Are any of
Mr. Briggs's ſervants below?”
“ Anan l’” anſwered the boy, who came
to the foot of the ſtairs, with a knife in one
hand, and an old ſhoe, upon the ſole of
which he was ſharpening it, in the other,
“Does any one call?” -
“Yes,” ſaid Cecilia, “ I do; for I
could not find the bell.”
“O, we have no bell in the parlour,”
returned the boy, “maſter always knocks
with his ſtick.”
“I am afraid Mr. Briggs is too buſy to
fee me, and if ſo, I will come another
time.”
“ No, ma'am,” ſaid the boy, “ maſter's
only looking over his things from the waſh.”
“Will you tell him, then, that I am
waiting?” *
* I has, ma'am; but maſter miſſes his
ſhaving-rag, and he ſays he won't come to
the Mogul till he's found it.” And then he
went on with ſharpening his knife. Thi
1S.

<page 163>
158 C E C I L I A.
This little circumſtance was at leaſt ſuf-
ficient to ſatisfy Cecilia that if ſhe fixed
her abode with Mr. Briggs, ſhe ſhould not
have much uneaſineſs to fear from the ſight.
of extravagance and profuſion.
She returned to the parlour, and after
waiting another half hour, Mr. Briggs made
his appearance. -
Mr. Briggs was a ſhort, thick, ſturdy
man, with very ſmall keen black eyes, a
ſquare face, a dark complection, and a
ſnub noſe. His conſtant dreſs, both in
winter and ſummer, was a ſnuff-colour
ſuit of cloaths, blue and white ſpeckled
worſted ſtockings, a plain ſhirt, and a bob
wig. . He was ſeldom without a ſtick in his
hand, which he uſually held to his forehead
when not ſpeaking.
This bob wig, however, to the no ſmall
amazement of Cecilia, he now brought in-
to the room upon the fore finger of his left
hand, while, with his right, he was ſmooth-
ing the curls; and his head, in defiance of
the coldneſs of the weather, was bald and
uncovered.
“ Well,” cried he, as he entered, “...did
you think ſhould not come?”
“I was very willing, ſir, to wait your
leiſure.” -
“ Ay, ay, knew you had not much to
do. Been looking for my ſhaving-rag,
- . Going

<page 164>
C E C I L I A. I 59
>
Going out of town; never uſe ſuch a thing
at home, paper does as well. Warrant
maſter Harrel never heard of ſuch a thing;
ever ſee him comb his own wig º' Warrant
he don’t know how ! never truſt mine out
of my hands, the boy would tear off half
the hair; all one to maſter Harrel, I ſup-
oſe. Well, which is the warmer man,
that's all? Will he caſt an account with
me?” *
Cecilia, at a loſs what to ſay to this ſin-
gular exordium, began an apology for not
waiting upon him ſooner.
“ Ay, ay,” cried he, “ always gadding,
no getting fight of you. Live a fine life
A pretty guardian maſter Harrell and
where's t'other ? where's old Don Puff-
about 2 ”
“If you mean Mr. Delvile, fir, I have
not yet ſeen him.” -
“ Thought ſo. No matter, as well not.
Only tell you he's a German Duke, or a
Spaniſh Don Ferdinand. Well you've me!
poorly off elſe. A couple of ignoramuſſes!
don't know when to buy nor when to ſell.
No doing buſineſs with either of them.
We met once or twice; all to no purpoſe ;
only heard Don Vampus count his old
Grandees; how will that get intereſt for
money? Then comes Maſter Harrel,——
twenty bows to a word,—looks at a watch,
—about

<page 165>
16o C E C I L I A.
—about as big as a ſix-pence,—poor raw
ninny!—a couple of rare guardians ! Well
you've me, I ſay ; mind that l”
Cecilia was wholly unable to deviſe any
anſwer to theſe effuſions of contempt and
anger; and therefore his harangue laſted
without interruption, till he had exhauſted
all his ſubjećts of complaint, and emptied
his mind of ill-will; and then, ſettling his
wig, he drew a chair near her, and twink-
ling his little black eyes in her face, his rage
ſubſided into the moſt perfeół good humour;
and, after peering at her ſome time with a
}ook of much approbation, he ſaid, with
an arch nod, “Well, my duck, got ever
a ſweet-heart yet?”
Cecilia laughed, and ſaid “ No.” . .
“Ah, little rogue, don't believe you!
all a fib! better ſpeak out: come, fit I
ſhould know; a'n't you my own ward to
be ſure almoſt of age, but not quite, ſo
what’s that to me?” -
She then, more ſeriouſly, aſſured him ſhe
had no intelligence of that ſort to commu-
111CatC. ... •
| “Well, when you have tell, that's all.
Warrant ſparks enough hankering. I'll give
you ſome advice. Take care of ſharpers;
don't truſt ſhoe-buckles, nothing but Briſ-
tol ſtones' tricks in all things. A fine
gentleman ſharp as another man. Neyer
give

<page 166>
C E C I L I A. 161
give your heart to a gold topped cane, no-
thing but braſs gilt over. Cheats every
where: fleece you in a year; wont leave
you a groat. But one way to be ſafe,
bring 'em all to me.”
Cecilia thanked him for his caution, and
promiſed not to forget his advice.
“That's the way,” he continued,
“bring 'em to me. Won't be bamboozled.
Know their tricks. Shew 'em the odds on't.
Aſk for the rent-roll,—ſee how they'll look!
ſtare like ſtuck pigs' got no ſuch thing.”
“Certainly, ſir, that will be an excellent
method of trial.” . -
- “Ay, ay, know the way! ſoon find if
they are above par. Be ſure don't mind
gold waiſtcoats; nothing but tinſel, all
ſhew and no ſubſtance; better leave the
mater to me; take care of you myſelf;
know where to find one will do.”
She again thanked him; and, being fully
ſatisfied with this ſpecimen of his converſa-
tion, and unambitious of any further coun-
ſel from him, ſhe aroſe to depart.
“Well,” repeated he, nodding at her
with a look f much kindneſs, “ leave it
to me, I ſay; I'll get you a careful huſ-.
band, ſo take no thought about the mat-
ter.”
Cecilia, half laughing, begged he would
In Ot

<page 167>
162 C E C I L I A.
not give himſelf much trouble, and aſſured
him ſhe was not in any haſte. ſ
“ All the better,” ſaid he, “ good girl;
no fear for you: look out myſelf; warrant
I'll find one. Not very eaſy, neither; hard
times 1 men ſcarce! wars and tumults |
ſtocks low ! women chargeable! but
don't fear; do our beſt; get you off ſoon.” ſ
She then returned to her carriage; full of
reflection upon the ſcene in which ſhe had
juſt been engaged, and upon the ſtrange-
neſs of haſtening from one houſe to avoid a
vice the very want of which ſeemed to render
another inſupportable ! but ſhe now found
that though luxury was more baneful in it’s l
conſequences, it was leſs diſguſtful in it’s
progreſs than avarice; yet, inſuperably
averſe to both, and almoſt equally deſirous
to fly from the unjuſt extravagance of Mr.
Harrel, as from the comfortleſs and unne-
ceſſary parſimony of Mr. Briggs, ſhe pro- - -
ceeded inſtantly to St. James's-Square, con- |
vinced that her third guardian, unleſs -
exactly reſembling one of the others, muſt
inevitably be preferable to both. -
c H & P.

<page 168>
C E C I L I A. , 163
k
C H A P. II.
A MAN of FAM I L. Y.
}
HE houſe of Mr. Delvile was grand
and ſpacious, fitted up not with mo-
dern taſte, but with the magnificence of
former times; the ſervants were all vete-
rans, gorgeous in their liveries, and pro-
foundly reſpectful in their manners; every
thing had an air of ſtate, but of a ſtate ſo
gloomy, that while it inſpired awe, it re-
preſſed pleaſure.
Cecilia ſent in her name and was admit-
ted without difficulty, and was then uſhered
with great pomp through ſundry apart-
ments, and rows of ſervants, before ſhe
came into the preſence of Mr. Delvile. ſ
He received her with an air of haughty
affability which, to a ſpirit open and liberal
as that of Cecilia, could not fail being ex-
tremely offenſive: but too much occupied
with the care of his own importance to pe-
netrate into the feelings of another, he at-
tributed the uneaſineſs which his reception
occaſioned, to the over-awing predomi-
ance of ſuperior rank and conſequence.
He

<page 169>
164 C E C I L I. A.
He ordered a ſervant to bring her a chair,
while he only half roſe from his own upon
her entering into the room; then, waving
his hand and bowing, with a motion that
defired her to be ſeated, he ſaid “I am
very happy, Miſs Beverley, that you have
found me alone; you would rarely have
had the ſame good fortune. At this time
of day I am generally in a crowd. People
of large connections have not much leiſure
in London, eſpecially if they ſee a little
after their own affairs, and if their eſtates,
like mine, are diſperſed in various parts of
the kingdom. However, I am glad it hap-
pened ſo. And I am glad, too, that you
have done me the favour of calling without
waiting till I ſent, which I really would
have done as ſoon as I heard of your arrival,
but that the multiplicity of my engage-
ments allowed me no reſpite.” -
A diſplay of importance ſo oftentatious
made Cecilia already half repent her viſit,
ſatisfied that the hope in which ſhe had
planned it would be fruitleſs.
Mr. Delvile, ſtill imputing to embarraſ-
ment, an inquietude of countenance that
proceeded merely from diſappointment,
imagined her veneration was every moment
encreaſing; and therefore, pitying a timi-
dity which both gratified and ſoftened him,
and equally pleaſed with himſelf for in-
ſpiring,

<page 170>
C E C I L I. A. 165
ſpiring, and with her for feeling it, he abated
more and more of his greatneſs, till he be-
came, at length, ſo infinitely condeſcending,
with intention to give her courage, that he
totally depreſſed her with mortification and
chagrin.
After ſome general enquiries concerning
her way of life, he told her that he hoped
ſhe was contented with her ſituation at the
Harrel’s, adding “If you have any thing
to complain º remember to whom you
may appeal.” He then aſked if ſhe had
ſeen Mr. Briggs?
“’Yes, ſir, I am this moment come
from his houſe.”
“I am ſorry for it; his houſe cannot be
a proper one for the reception of a young
lady. When the Dean made application
that I would be one of your guardians, I
inſtantly ſent him a refuſal, as is my cuſtom
upon all ſuch occaſions, which indeed oc-
cur to me with a frequency extremely im-
portunate: but the Dean was a man for
whom I had really a regard, and therefore,
when I found my refuſal had affected him,
I ſuffered myſelf to be prevailed upon to
indulge him, contrary not only to my ge-
neral rule, but to my inclination.”
Here he ſtopt, as if to receive ſome com-
pliment, but Cecilia, very little diſpoſed to
. pay

<page 171>
166 C E C I L I A.
pay him any, went no farther than an incli-
nation of the head. - - -
“I knew not, however,” he continued,
“ at the time I was induced to give my
conſent, with whom I was to be aſſociated;
nor could I have imagined the Dean ſo little
converſant with the diſtinétions of the
world, as to diſgrace me with inferior co-
adjutors: but the moment I learnt the ſtate
of the affair, I inſiſted upon withdrawing
both my name and countenance.”
Here again he pauſed; not in expe&tation
of an anſwer from Cecilia, but merely to
give her time to marvel in what manner he
had at laſt been melted.
“ The Dean,” he reſumed, “ was then
very ill; my diſpleaſure, l believe, hurt
him. I was ſorry for it; he was a worthy
man, and had not meant to offend me; in
the end, I accepted his apology, and was
even perſuaded to accept the office. You
have a right, therefore, to conſider, your-
ſelf as perſonally my ward, and though I do
not think proper to mix much with your
other guardians, I ſhall always be ready to
ſerve and adviſe you, and much pleaſed to
ſee you.
“ You do me honour, ſir; ” ſaid Cecilia,
extremely wearied of ſuch graciouſneſs, and
riſing to be gone.
“Pray ſit ſtill,” ſaid he, with a ſmile;
- cC. I

<page 172>
C E C I L I A. 167
>
“I have not many engagements for this
morning. You muſt give me ſome account
how you paſs your time. Are you much
out: The Harrel's, I am told, live at a
great expence. What is their eſtabliſh-
ment P”
“I don't exačtly know, fir.”
“They are decent ſort of people, I be-
lieve; are they not?” -
“I hope ſo, ſir!” -
“And they have a tolerable acquain-
tance, I believe : I am told ſo; for I know
nothing of them.”
“. They have, at leaſt, a very numerous
one, ſir.” -
“Well, my dear,” ſaid he, taking her
hand,” now you have once ventured to come,
don't be apprehenſive of repeating your vi-
ſits: I muſt introduce you to Mrs. Delvile;
I am ſure ſhe will be happy to ſhew you
any kindneſs. Come, therefore, when you
pleaſe, and without ſcruple. I would call
upon you myſelf, but am fearful of being
embarraſſed by the people with whom you
live.”
He then rang his bell, and with the ſame
ceremonies which had attended her admit-
tance, ſhe was condućted back to her car-
riage.
And here died away all hope of put-
ting into execution, during her mino;
the

<page 173>
168 C E C I L I A.
the plan of which the formation had given
her ſo much pleaſure. She found that her
preſent ſituation, however wide of her
wiſhes, was by no means the moſt diſagree-
able in which ſhe could be placed; ſhe was
tired, indeed, of diſſipation, and ſhocked at
the fight of unfeeling extravagance; but
notwithſtanding the houſes of each of her
other guardians were exempt from theſe
particular vices, ſhe ſaw not any proſpećt
of happineſs with either of them; vulgarity
feemed leagued with avarice to drive her
from the manſion of Mr. Briggs, and haugh-
tineſs with oſtentation to exclude her from
that of Mr. Delvile.
She came back, therefore, to Portman-
Square, diſappointed in her hopes, and
ſick both of thoſe whom ſhe quitted, and
of thoſe to whom ſhe was returning; but
in going to her own apartment Mrs. Har-
rel, eagerly ſtopping her, begged ſhe would
come into the drawing-room, where ſhe
promiſed her a moſt agreeable ſurpriſe.
Cecilia, for an inſtant, imagined that
ſome old acquaintance was juſt arrived out
of the country; but, upon her entrance,
ſhe ſaw only Mr. Harrel and ſome work-
men, and found that the agreeable ſurpriſe
was to proceed from the ſight of an elegant
Awning, prepared for one of theinner apart-
ments, to be fixed over a long deſert-table,
2 which

<page 174>
CºE C I L I A. 169
- - w -
which was to be ornamented with various
devices of cut glaſs. -
“Did you ever ſee any thing ſo beauti-
ful in your life?” cried Mrs. Harrel; “ and
when the table is covered with the coloured
ices, and thoſe ſort of things, it will be as
beautiful again. We ſhall have it ready for
Tueſday ſe’nnight.
“I underſtood you were engaged to go
to the Maſquerade?”
“So we ſhall; only we intend to ſee
maſks at home firſt.”
“I have ſome thoughts,” ſaid Mr. Har-
rel, leading the way to another ſmall room,
“ of running up a flight of ſteps, and a little
light gallery here, and ſo making a little
Orcheſtra. What would ſuch a thing come
to, Mr. Tomkins P’’
“ O, a trifle, ſir,” anſwered Mr. Tom--
kins, “a mere nothing.”
“Well, then, give orders for it, and let
it be done direétly. I don't care how ſlight
it is, but pray let it be very elegant. Won't
it be a great addition, Miſs Beverley?”
“ Indeed, ſir, I don’t think it ſeems to
be very neceſſary;” ſaid Cecilia, who wiſhed
much to take that moment for reminding
him of the debt he had contračted with Mr.
Arnott.
* Lord, Miſs Beverley is ſo grave!”
Vol. I. H * : * cried
º
º


<page 175>
17o C E C I L I A.
cried Mrs. Harrel; “nothing of this ſort
gives her any pleaſure.”
“She has indeed,” anſwered Cecilia, try-
ing to ſmile, “ not much taſte for the
pleaſure of being always ſurrounded by
workmen.”
And, as ſoon as ſhe was able, ſhe retired
to her room, feeling, both on the part of
Mr. Arnott and the Hills, a reſentment at
the injuſtice of Mr. Harrel, which fixed her
in the reſolution of breaking through that
facility of compliance, which had hither-
to confined her diſapprobation to her own
breaſt, and venturing, henceforward, to
mark the opinion ſhe entertained of his con-
dućt, by conſulting nothing but reaſon and
principle in her own.
Her firſt effort towards this change was
made immediately, in begging to be excuſed
from accompanying Mrs. Harrel to a large
card aſſembly that evening. -
Mrs. Harrel, extremely ſurpriſed, aſked
a thouſand times the reaſon of her refuſal,
imagining it to proceed from ſome very ex-
traordinary cauſe; nor was ſhe, without the
utmoſt difficulty, perſuaded at laſt that ſhe
º meant to paſs one evening by her-
felf.
. But the rext day, when the refuſal was
repeated, je was ſtill more incredulous; it
ſcemed to her impoſſible that any one *:
ha
e

<page 176>
C E C I L I A. 171
had the power to be encircled with com-
pany, could by choice ſpend a ſecond after-
noon alone: and ſhe was ſo urgent in her
requeſt to be entruſted with the ſecret, that.
Cecilia found no way left to appeaſe her,
but by frankly confeſſing ſhe was weary of
eternal viſiting, and ſick of living always in
a crowd.
“Suppoſe, then,” cried ſhe, “I ſend for
Miſs Larolles to come and fit with you?” "
Cecilia, not without laughing, declined
this propoſal, aſſuring her that no ſuch aſſiſ-
tant was neceſſary for her entertainment:
yet it was not till after a long contention
that ſhe was able to convince her there
would be no cruelty in leaving her by her-
ſelf.
The following day, however, her trouble
diminiſhed; for Mrs. Harrel, ceaſing to be
ſurpriſed, thought little more of the matter,
and forebore any earneſtneſs of ſolicitation:
and, from that time, ſhe ſuffered her to fol-
low her own humour with very little oppo-
ſition. Cecilia was much concerned to find
her ſo unmoved; and not leſs diſappointed
at the indifference of Mr. Harrel, who, be-
ing ſeldom of the ſame parties with his
lady, and ſeeing her too rarely either to
communicate or hear any domeſtic occur-
rences, far from being ſtruck, as ſhe had
hoped, with the new way in which ſhe paſ-
H 2. ſed

<page 177>
172 C E C I L I A.
ſed her time, was ſcarce ſenſible of the
change, and interfered not upon the ſub-
jećt.
| Sir Robert Floyer, who continued to ſee
her when he dined in Portman - Square,
often enquired what ſhe did with herſelf in
an evening; but never obtaining any ſatis-
faćtory anſwer, he concluded her engage-
ments were with people to whom he was a
ſtranger.
Poor Mr. Arnott felt the cruelleſt diſap-
pointment in being deprived of the happineſs
of attending her in her evening's expedi-
tions, when, whether he converſed with her
or not, he was ſure of the indulgence of
ſeeing and hearing her.
But the greateſt ſufferer from this new re-
gulation was Mr. Monckton, who, unable
any longer to endure the mortifications of
which his morning viſits to Portman-Square
had been produćtive, determined not to
truſt his temper with ſuch provocations in
future, but rather to take his chance of
meeting with her elſewhere: for which pur-
poſe, he aſſiduouſly frequented all public
places, and ſought acquaintance with every
family and every perſon he believed to
be known to the Harrels: but his patience
was unrewarded, and his diligence unſuc-
ceſsful; he met with her no where, and,
while he continued his ſearch, fancied every
evil

<page 178>
c E C I L I A. 173
evil power was at work to lead him whither
he was ſure never to find her.
Mean while Cecilia paſſed her time
greatly to her own ſatisfaction. Her firſt
care was to aſſiſt and comfort the Hills.
She went herſelf to their lodgings, ordered
and paid for whatever the phyſician pre-
ſcribed to the ſick man, gave clothes to the
children, and money and various neceſſaries
to the wife. She found that the poor car-
penter was not likely to languiſh much
longer, and therefore, for the preſent, only
thought of alleviating his ſufferings, by
procuring him ſuch indulgencies as were
authoriſed by his phyſician, and enabling
his family to abate ſo much of their labour
as was requiſite for obtaining time to nurſe
and attend him: but ſhe meant, as ſoon as
the laſt duties ſhould be paid him, to aſſiſt
his ſurvivors in attempting to follow ſome
better and more profitable buſineſs.
Her next ſolicitude was to furniſh her-
ſelf with a well-choſen colle&tion of books;
and this employment, which to a lover of
literature, young and ardent in it’s purſuit,
is perhaps the mind's firſt luxury, proved a
ſource of entertainment ſo fertile and de-
Tightful that it left her nothing to wiſh.
She confined not her acquiſitions to the
limits of her preſent power, but, as ſhe
was laying in a ſtock for future as well as
3 imme-

<page 179>
174 C E C I L I A.
immediate advantage, ſhe was reſtrained by
no expence from gratifying her taſte and her
inclination. She had now entered the laſt
year of her minority, and therefore had not
any doubt that her guardians would permit
her to take up whatever ſum ſhe ſhould re-
quire for ſuch a purpoſe.
And thus, in the exerciſe of charity, the
ſearch of knowledge, and the enjoyment of
quiet, ſerenely in innocent philoſophy paſſed
the hours of Cecilia,

<page 180>
C E C I L I A. 175
c H A P. III.
A M A sqJJ E R A D E.
HE firſt check this tranquility received
was upon the day of the maſquerade,
the preparations for which have been al-
ready mentioned. The whole houſe was
then in commotion from various arrange-
ments and improvements which were plan-
ned for almoſt every apartment that was to
be opened for the reception of maſks. Ce-
cília herſelf, however little pleaſed with
the attendant circumſtance of wantonly
accumulating unneceſſary debts, was not
the leaſt animated of the party: ſhe was a
ſtranger to every diverſion of this ſort, and
from the novelty of the ſcene, hoped for
uncommon ſatisfaātion. -
At noon Mrs. Harrel ſent for her to
conſult upon a new ſcheme which occurred
to Mr. Harrel, of fixing in fantaſtic forms
ſome coloured lamps in the drawing room.
While they were all diſcourſing this mat-
ter over, one of the ſervants, who had two
or three times whiſpered ſome meſſage to
Mr. Harrel, and then retired, ſaid, in a
H 4 voice

<page 181>
176 C E C I L I A.
voice not too low to be heard by Cecilia,
“ Indeed, Sir, I can't get him away.” .
: “He’s an inſolent ſcoundrel,” anſwered
Mr. Harrel; “however, if I muſt ſpeak to
him, I muſt ;” and went out of the room.
Mrs. Harrel ſtill continued to exerciſe
her fancy, upon this new projećt, calling
both upon Mr. Arnott and Cecilia to ad-
mire her taſte and contrivance; till they
were all interrupted by the loudneſs of a
voice from below ſtairs, which frequently
repeated, “ Sir, I can wait no longer I
have been put off till I can be put off no
more l’”
Startled by this, Mrs. Harrel ceaſed her
employment, and they all ſtood ſtill and
ſilent. They then heard Mr. Harrel with
much ſoftneſs anſwer, “ Good Mr. Raw-
lins have a little patience; I ſhall receive
a large ſum of money to-morrow, or next
day, and you may then depend upon being
aid.”
Pa; Sir,” cried the man, “ you have ſo
often told me the ſame, that it goes juſt for
nothing: I have had a right to it a long
time, and I have a bill to make up that
can’t be waited for any longer.”
“ Certainly, Mr. Rawlins,” replied Mr.
Harrel, with ſtill increaſing gentleneſs,
“ and certainly you ſhall have it: nobody
means to diſpute your right; I only beg
- you

<page 182>
C E C I L I A. 177
you to wait a day, or two days at furtheſt,
and you may then depend upon being paid.
And you ſhall not be the worſe for oblig-
ing me; I will never employ any body elſe,
and I ſhall have occaſion for you very ſoon,
as I intend to make ſome alterations at
Violet-Bank that will be very confider-
able.”
“ Sir,” ſaid the man, ſtill louder, “ it
is of no uſe your employing me, if I can
never get my money: All my workmen
muſt be paid whether I am or no; and
ſo, if I muſt needs ſpeak to a lawyer, why
there's no help for it.” * -
“Did you ever hear any thing ſo im-
pertinent 2" exclaimed Mrs. Harrel; “I
am ſure Mr. Harrel will be very much to
blame, if ever he lets that man do any
thing more for him.”
Juſt then Mr. Harrel appeared, and, with
an air of affected unconcern, ſaid, “Here's
the moſt inſolent raſcal of a maſon be-
low ſtairs I ever met with in my life; he
has come upon me, quite unexpećtedly,
with a bill of 400 l. and won't leave the
houſe without the money. Brother Arnott,
I wiſh you would do me the favour to ſpeak
to the fellow, for I could not bear to ſtay
with him any longer.”
“Do you wiſh me to give him a draught
for the money upon my own banker *
H 5 “ That

<page 183>
178 C E C I L I A.
“That would be vaſtly obliging,” an-
ſwered Mr. Harrel, “ and I will give you
my note for it directly. And ſo we ſhall
get rid of this fellow at once: and he ſhall
do nothing more for me as long as he lives.
I will run up a new building at Violet-
Bank next ſummer, if only to ſhew him
what a job he has loſt.”
“Pay the man at once, there's a good
brother,” cried Mrs. Harrel, “ and let's
hear no more of him.”
The two gentlemen then retired to ano-
ther room, and Mrs. Harrel, after praiſing
the extreme good-nature of her brother, of
whom ſhe was very fond, and declar-
ing that the maſon's impertinence had
quite frightened her, again returned to her
plan of new decorations. -
Cecilia, amazed at this indifference to
the ſtate of her huſband's affairs, began to
think it was her own duty to talk with her
upon the ſubjećt: and therefore, after a
ſilence ſo marked that Mrs. Harrel en-
quired into its reaſon, ſhe ſaid, “Will
you pardon me, my dear friend, if I own
I am rather ſurprized to ſee you continue
theſe preparations º'
“ Lord, why 2"
“ Becauſe any freſh unneceſſary expences
juſt now, till Mr. Harrel ačtually receives
the money he talks of 22 * -
- “Why

<page 184>
C E C I L I A. 179
*-
*
“Why, my dear, the expence of ſuch
a thing as this is nothing; in Mr. Harrel's
affairs I aſſure you it will not be at all felt.
Beſides, he expects money ſo ſoon, that it
is juſt the ſame as if he had it already.”
Cecilia, unwilling to be too officious,
began then to expreſs her admiration of
the goodneſs and generoſity of Mr. Arnott;
taking frequent occaſion, in the courſe of
her praiſe, to infinuate that thoſe only can
be properly liberal, who are juſt and oeco-
nomical. w w
She had prepared no maſquerade habit
for this evening, as Mrs. Harrel, by whoſe
direétion ſhe was guided, informed her it
was not neceſſary for ladies to be maſked
at home, and ſaid ſhe ſhould receive her
company herſelf in a dreſs which ſhe might
wear upon any other occaſion. Mr. Harrel,
alſo, and Mr. Arnott made not any alter-
ation in their appearance.
At about eight o'clock the buſineſs of
the evening began; and before nine, there
were ſo many maſks that Cecilia wiſhed ſhe
had herſelf made one of the number, as ſhe
was far more conſpicuous in being almoſt
the only female in a common dreſs, than
any maſquerade habit could have made her.
The novelty of the ſcene, however, joined
to the general air of gaiety diffuſed through-
out the company, ſhortly leſſened her em-
barraſſiment

<page 185>
180 C E C I L I A.
barraſſment; and, after being ſomewhat fa-
miliarized to the abruptneſs with which the
maſks approached her, and the freedom
with which they looked at or addreſſed her,
the firſt confuſion of her fituation ſubſided,
and in her curioſity to watch others, ſhe
ceaſed to obſerve how much ſhe was
watched herſelf. -
Her expectations of entertainment were
not only fulfilled but ſurpaſſed; the variety
of dreſſes, the medley of charaćters, the
quick ſucceſſion of figures, and the ludi-
crous mixture of groupes, kept her atten-
tion unwearied: while the conceited efforts
at wit, the total thoughtleſſneſs of con-
ſiſtency, and the ridiculous incongruity of
the language with the appearance, were in-
citements to ſurpriſe and diverſion without
end. Even the local cant of, Do you know
me 2 Who are you ? and I know you ; with
the ſly pointing of the finger, the arch
nod of the head, and the pert ſqueak of
the voice, though weariſome to thoſe who
frequent ſuch aſſemblies, were, to her un-
hackneyed obſervation, additional ſubječts
of amuſement.
Soon after nine o'clock, every room was
occupied, and the common crowd of regular
maſqueraders were diſperſed through the va-
rious apartments. Dominos of no charac-
ter, and fancy-dreſſes of no meaning, made,
aS

<page 186>
C E C I L I. A. 181
as is uſual at ſuch meetings, the general
herd of the company: for the reſt, the men
were Spaniards, chimney-ſweepers, Turks,
watchmen, conjurers, and old women; and
the ladies, ſhepherdeſſes, orange girls, Cir-
caſſians, gipſeys, haymakers, and ſultanas.
Cecilia had, as yet, eſcaped any addreſs
beyond the cuſtomary enquiry of Do you
know me? and a few paſſing compliments;
... but when the rooms filled, and the general
crowd gave general courage, ſhe was at-
tacked in a manner more pointed and fin-
gular.
The very firſt maſk who approached her,
ſeemed to have nothing leſs in view than
preventing the approach of every other:
yet had he little reaſon to hope favour for
himſelf, as the perſon he repreſented, of
all others leaſt alluring to the view, was
the devil | He was black from head to
foot, ſave that two red horns ſeemed to
iſſue from his forehead ; his face was ſo .
completely covered, that the fight only of
his eyes was viſible, his feet were cloven,
and in his right hand he held a wand the
colour of fire. * -
Waving this wand as he advanced' to-
wards Cecilia, he cleared a ſemi-circular
ſpace before her chair, thrice with the
moſt profound reverence bowed to her,
thrice turned himſelf around with ſundry
- - grimaces,

<page 187>
-
182 c E c 1 L I A.
grimaces, and then fiercely planted himſelf
at her ſide. - ->
Cecilia was amuſed by his mummery,
but felt no great delight in his guar-
dianſhip, and, after a ſhort time, aroſe,
with intention to walk to another place;
but the black gentleman, adroitly moving
round her, held out his wand to obſtrućt
her paſſage, and therefore, preferring cap-
tivity to reſiſtance, ſhe was again obliged
to ſeat herſelf.
An Hotſpur, who juſt then made his
appearance, was now ſtrutting boldly to-
wards her; but the devil, ruſhing furiouſly
forwards, placed himſelf immediately be-
tween them. Hotſpur, putting his arms
a-kembo with an air of defiance, gave a
loud ſtamp with his right foot, and then
marched into another room |
The vićtorious devil oftentatiouſly waved
his wand, and returned to his ſtation.
Mr. Arnott, who had never moved two
yards from Cecilia, knowing her too well
to ſuppoſe ſhe received any pleaſure from
being thus diſtinguiſhed, modeſtly advanced
to offer his aſſiſtance in releaſing her from
confinement; but the devil, again deſcrib-
ing a circle with his wand, gave him three
ſuch ſmart raps on the head that his hair
was diſordered, and his face covered with
powder. A general laugh ſucceeded, s:
* * fe
|

<page 188>
C E C I L I A, -183
Mr. Arnott, too diffident to brave raillery,
or withſtand ſhame, retired in confuſion.
The black gentleman ſeemed now to have
all authority in his own hands, and his
wand was brandiſhed with more ferocity
than ever, no one again venturing to in-
vade the domain he thought fit to appro-
priate for his own. - - -
At length, however, a Don Quixote ap-
peared, and every maſk in the room was
eager to point out to him the impriſon-
ment of Cecilia. . “. . . )
This Don Quixote was accoutered with
tolerable exačtneſs according to the deſcrip-
tion of the admirable Cervantes ; his ar-
mour was ruſty, his helmet was a barber's
baſon, his ſhield, a pewter diſh, and his
lance, an old ſword faſtened to a ſlim cane.
His figure, tall and thin, was well adapted
to the charaćter, he repreſented, and his
maſk, which depićtured a lean and haggard
face, worn with care, yet fiery with crazy
paſſions, exhibited with propriety the moſt
ſtriking, the knight of the doleful coun-
fenan Cé. . - .
The complaints againſt the devil with
which immediately and from all quarters
he was aſſailed, he heard with the moſt ſo-
lemn taciturnity: after which, making a
motion for general ſilence, he ſtalked ma-.
jeſtically, towards Cecilia, but ſtopping
ſhort of the limits preſcribed by her guard,
- - he

<page 189>
184 - C E C I L I A.
he kiſſed his ſpear in token of allegiance,
and then, ſlowly dropping upon one knee,
began the following addreſs: -
“ Moſt incomparable Princeſs :
THUS humbly proſtrate at the feet of
-your divine and ineffable beauty, graciouſly
permit the moſt pitiful of your ſervitors,
-Don Quixote De la Mancha, from your
high and tender grace, to ſalute the fair
-boards, which ſuſtain your corporeal ma—
chine.” -
Then, bending down his head, he kiſſed
the floor; after which, raiſing himſelf upon
his feet, he proceeded in his ſpeech.
“Report, O moſt fair and unmatchable
virgin daringly affirmeth, that a certain diſ-
courteous perſon, who calleth himſelf the de-
vil, even now, and in thwart of your fair in-
clinations, keepeth and detaineth your irra-
diant frame in hoſtile thraldom. Suffer then,
magnanimous and undiſcribable lady! that
I, the moſt groveling of your unworthy
vaſſals, do fift the fair truth out of this
foul ſieve, and, obſequiouſly bending to
your divine attractions, conjure your high-
neſs veritably to inform me, if that ho-
nourable chair which haply ſupports your
terreſtrial perfeótions, containeth the in-,
imitable burthen with the free and legal
conſent of your celeſtial ſpirit?”
- Here

<page 190>
C E C I L I A. 18;
ſure.”.
… Here he ceaſed: and Cecilia, who laughed
at this chara&teriſtic addreſs, though ſhe,
had not courage to anſwer it, again made
an effort to quit her place, but again by
the wand of her black perſecutor was pre-
vented.
* This little incident was anſwer 'ſufficient
for the valorous knight, who indignantly
exclaimed,
“Sublime Lady
I BESEECH but of your exqui-
ſite mercy to refrain mouldering, the clay
compoſition of my unworthy body to im-
palpable duſt, by the refulgence of thoſe
bright ſtars vulgarly called eyes, till I
have lawfully wreaked my vengeance upon
this unobliging caitiff, for his moſt diſloyal
obſtruction of your highneſſes adorable plea-
*
Then, bowing low, he turned from her,
and thus addreſſed his intended antagoniſt: -
“ Uncourtly Miſcreant,
THE black garment which envellopeth
thy moſt unpleaſant perſon, ſeemeth even
of the moſt raviſhing whiteneſs, in com-
pare of the black bile which floateth within
thy ſable exterior. Behold, then, my
gauntlet !

<page 191>
186 C E C I L I A.
gauntlet ! yet ere I deign to be the inſtru-
ment of thy extirpation, O thou moſt mean
and ignoble enemy that the honour of Don
Quixote de la Mancha may not be ſullied
by thy extinction, I do here confer upon
thee the honour of knighthood, dubbing
thee, by my own ſword, Don Devil, knight
of the horrible phyſiognomy.”
He then attempted to ſtrike his ſhoulder
with his ſpear, but the black gentleman,
adroitly eluding the blow, defended himſelf
with his wand : a mock fight'enſued, con-
dućted on both ſides with admirable dex-
terity; but Cecilia, leſs eager to view it
than to become again a free agent, made
her eſcape into another apartment; while
the reſt of the ladies, though they almoſt
all ſcreamed, jumped upon chairs and ſofas
to peep at the combat. •
In concluſion, the wand of the knight of
the horrible phyſiognomy, was broken
againſt the ſhield of the knight of the
doleful countenance ; upon which Don
Quixote called out victoria t the whole
room ecchoed the ſound ; the unfortunate
new knight retired abruptly into another
apartment, and the conquering Don, ſeiz-
ing the fragments of the weapon of his
vanquiſhed enemy, went out in ſearch of
the lady for whoſe releaſement he had
fought :

<page 192>
C E C I L I A. 187
fought: and the moment he found her,
proſtrating both himſelf and the trophies
at her feet, he again preſſed the floor with
his lips, and then, ſlowly ariſing, repeated
his reverences with added formality, and,
without waiting her acknowledgments,
gravely retired.
The moment he departed a Minerva, not
ſtately nor auſtere, not marching in war-
like majeſty, but gay and airy,
Tripping on light fantaſtic toe,
ran up to Cecilia, and ſqueaked out, “Do
you know me?” -
“ Not,” anſwered ſhe, inſtantly recol-
lečting Miſs Larolles, “ by your appear-
ance, I own but by your voice, I think. I
can-gueſs you.” . . . . . . *
“I was monſtrous ſorry,” returned the
goddeſs, without underſtanding this diſtinc-
tion, “ that I was not at home when you
called upon me. Pray how do you like
my dreſs I aſſure you I think it's the
prettieſt here. But do you know there's
the moſt ſhocking thing in the world
happened in the next room 2 I really be-
lieve there's a common chimney-ſweeper
got in . . I aſſure you its enough to frighten
one to death, for every time he moves the
ſoot ſmells ſo you can’t think ; quite real
ſoot, I aſſure you ! only conceive how
naſty I

<page 193>
188 C E C I L I A.
*
naſty | I declare I wiſh with all my heart
it would ſuffocate him l’”
Here ſhe was interrupted by the re-ap-
pearance of Don Devil ; who, looking
around him, and perceiving that his 'anta-
goniſt was gone, again advanced to Cecilia :
not, however, with the authority of his
firſt approach, for with his wand he had
loſt much of his power ; but to recom-
penſe himſelf for this diſgrace, he had re-
courſe to another method equally effectual
for keeping his prey to himſelf, for he be-
gan a growling, ſo diſmal and diſagreeable,
that while many of the ladies, and, amon
- the firſt, the Goddeſs of Wiſdom and Courage,
ran away to avoid him, the men all ſtood
aloof to watch what next was to follow.
*
Cecilia now became ſeriouſly uneaſy; for
ſhe was made an objećt of general atten-
-tion, yet could neither ſpeak nor be ſpoken
to. She could ſuggeſt no motive for be-
haviour ſo whimſical, though ſhe imagined
the only perſon who could have the aſſur-
ance to pračtice it was Sir Robert Floyer.
After ſome time ſpent thus diſagreeably,
a white domino, who for a few minutes had
been a very attentive ſpectator, ſuddenly
came forward, and exclaiming, “I’ll croſs
him though he blaſt me!”. ruſhed upon the
fiend, and graſping one of his horns, called
out to a Harlequin who ſtood near #.
&G allº-


<page 194>
C E C I L I A. 189
“ Harlequin do you fear to fight the
devil?” -
“ Not I truly 1” anſwered Harlequin,
whoſe voice immediately betrayed young
Morrice, and who, iſſuing from the crowd,
whirled himſelf round before the black
gentleman with yet more agility than he
had himſelf done before Cecilia, giving
him, from time to time, many ſmart blows.
on his ſhoulders, head and back with his
wooden ſword. - -
The rage of Don Devil at this attack
ſeemed ſomewhat beyond what a maſque-
rade charaćter rendered neceſſary ; he
foamed at the mouth with reſentment, and
defended himſelf with ſo much vehemence,
that he ſoon drove poor Harlequin into
another room ; but, when he would have
returned to his prey, the genius of panto-
mime, curbed, but not ſubdued, at the in-
ſtigation of the white domino returned to
the charge, and by a perpetual rotation of
attack and retreat, kept him in conſtant,
employment, purſuing him from room to
room, and teazing him without ceſſation
or mercy.
Mean time Cecilia, delighted at being
releaſed, hurried into a corner, where ſhe
hoped to breathe and look on in quiet;
and the white domino, having exhorted
Harlequin to torment the tormentor, and
keep
3

<page 195>
190 C E C I L I A.
keep him at bay, followed her with con-
gratulations upon her recovered freedom.
“. It is you,” anſwered ſhe, “ I ought
to thank for it, which indeed I do moſt
heartily. I was ſo tired of confinement,
that my mind ſeemed almoſt as little at li–
berty as my perſon.”
“Your perſecutor, I preſume,” ſaid the
domino, “ is known to you.”
“I hope ſo,” anſwered ſhe, “ becauſe:
there is one man I ſuſpect, and I ſhould
be ſorry to find there was another equally
diſagreeable.” -
“O, depend upon it,” cried he, “there
are many who would be happy to confine
you in the ſame manner; neither have you
much cauſe for complaint ; you have,
doubtleſs, been the aggreſſor, and played
this game yourſelf without mercy, for I read
in your face the captivity of thouſands: have
you, then, any right to be offended at the
ſpirit of retaliation which one, out of ſuch
numbers, has courage to exert in return?”
“I proteſt,” cried Cecilia, “I took you
for my defender whence is it you are be-
come my accuſer P’”
“ From ſeeing the danger to which my
incautious knight errantry has expoſed me;
I begin, indeed, to take you for a very
miſchievous ſort of perſon, and I fear the
poor devil from whom I reſcued you will
be amply revenged for his diſgrace, by
finding

<page 196>
C E C I L I A. 19.
finding that the firſt uſe you make of your
freedom is to doom your deliverer to bon-
dage.”
Here they were diſturbed by the extreme
loquacity of two oppoſite parties: and liſ-
tening attentively, they heard from one
ſide, “My angel ! faireſt of creatures
goddeſs of my heart!” uttered in accents:
of rapture; while from the other, the vo-
ciferation was ſo violent they could di-
ſtinétly hear nothing.
The white domino ſatisfied his curioſity
by going to both parties ; and then, re-
turning to Cecilia, ſaid, “ Can you con-
jećture who was making thoſe ſoft ſpeeches 2
a Shylock! his knife all the time in his
hand, and his deſign, doubtleſs, to cut as
near the heart as poſſible ! while the loud
cackling from the other ſide, is owing to
the riotous merriment of a noiſy Mentor |
when next I hear a diſturbance, I ſhall expect
to ſee ſome ſimpering Pythagoras ſtunned
by his talkative diſciples.” -
“To own the truth,” ſaid Cecília, “ the
almoſt univerſal neglect of the charaćters
aſſumed by theſe maſauers, has been the
chief ſource of my entertainment this even-
ing: for at a place of this ſort, the next
beſt thing to a charaćter well ſupported, is
a charaćter ridiculouſly burleſqued.”
“You cannot, then, have wanted amuſe-
5 ment,”

<page 197>
192 C E C I L I A.
ment,” returned the domino, “ for among
all the perſons aſſembled in theſe apart-
ments, I have ſeen only three who have
ſeemed conſcious that any change but that
of dreſs was neceſſary to diſguiſe them.”
“And pray who are thoſe 2"
“A Don Quixote, a ſchool-maſter, and
your friend the devil.”
“O call him not my friend,” exclaimed
Cecilia, “ for indeed in or out of that
garb he is particularly my averſion.”
“My friend, then, I will call him,”
ſaid the Domino, “ for ſo, were he ten de-
vils, I muſt think him, ſince I owe to him
the honour of converſing with you. And,
after all, to give him his due, to which,
you know, he is even proverbially entitled,
he has ſhewn ſuch abilities in the perform-
ance of his part, ſo much ſkill in the diſ-
play of malice, and ſo much perſeverance in
the art of tormenting, that I cannot but
reſpect his ingenuity and capacity. And,
indeed, if inſtead of an evil genius, he
had repreſented a guardian angel, he could
not have ſhewn a more refined taſte in his
choice of an objećt to hover about.”
Juſt then they were approached by a
young hay-maker, to whom the white
domino called out “ You look as gay
and as briſk as if freſh from the hay-field
after only half a day's work. Pray how is
1t

<page 198>
C E C I L I A. # 93
it you pretty laſſes find employment for the
winter 2 ” -
“How 2° cried ſhe, pertly, “ why the
fame as for the ſummer!” And pleaſed
with her own readineſs at repartee, without
feeling the ignorance it betrayed, ſhe tript
lightly on. -
Immediately after, the ſchool-maſter,
mentioned by the white domino, advanced
to Cecilia. His dreſs was merely a long
wrapping gown of green ſtuff, a pair of red
ſlippers, and a woollen night-cap of the
ſame colour; while, as the ſymbol of his
profeſſion, he held a rod in his hand.
. . “Ah, fair lady,” he cried, “ how ſooth-
ing were it to the auſterity of my life, how
foftening to the rigidity of my manners,
might I — without a breaking out of bounds
which I ought to be the firſt to diſcourage,
and a “ confuſion to all order ’’ for which
the ſchool-boy ſhould himſelf chaſtiſe his
maſter, be permitted to caſt at your feet
this emblem of my authority and to for-
get, in the ſoftneſs of your converſation, all
the roughneſs of diſcipline !”
“ No, no,” cried Cecilia, “ I will not
be anſwerable for ſuch corruption of taſte . "
“ This repulſe,” anſwered he, “is juſt
what I feared; for alas ! under what pre-
tence could a poor miſerable country pe-
dagogue preſume to approach you?-Should
Vo L. I. I I ex-

<page 199>
194. C E C I L I A.
I examine you in the dead languages, would
not your living accents charm from me all
power of reproof? Could I look at you, and
hear a falſe concord? Should I doom you to
water-gruel as a dunce, would not my ſub-
ſequent remorſe make me want it myſelf as
a mad-man? Were your fair hand ſpread
out to me for correčtion, ſhould I help ap-
plying my lips to it, inſtead of my rat-tan?
If I ordered you to be called up, ſhould I
ever remember to have you ſent back? And
if I commanded you to ſtand in a corner,
how ſhould I forbear following you thither
myſelf?”
Cecilia, who had no difficulty in know-
ing this pretended ſchool-maſter for Mr.
Goſport, was readily beginning to propoſe
conditions, for according him her favour,
when their ears were aſſailed by a forced
phthifical cough, which they found pro-
ceeded from an apparent old woman, who
was a young man in diſguiſe, and whoſe
hobbling gait, grunting voice, and moſt
grievous aſthmatic complaints, ſeemed
greatly enjoyed and applauded by the com-
an W. -
p “How true is it, yet how inconſiſtent,”
cried the white domino, “ that while we all
deſire to live long, we have all an horror of
being old ! The figure now paſſing is not
meant to ridicule any particular perſon, nor
to ſtigmatize any particular abſurdity; its
ſole

<page 200>
C E C I L I A. 195
fole view is to expoſe to contempt and deri-
ſion the general and natural infirmities of
age 1 and the deſign is not more diſguſting
than impolitic; for why, while ſo carefully
we guard from all approaches of death,
#hould we cloſe the only avenues to happi-
neſs in long life, reſpect and tenderneſs.”
Cecilia, delighted both by the under-
ſtanding and humanity of her new acquain-
tance, and pleaſed at being joined by Mr.
Goſport, was beginning to be perfectly fa-
tisfied with her ſituation, when, creeping
foſtly towards her, ſhe again perceived the
black gentleman.
“ Ah!” cried ſhe, with ſome vexation,
“ here comes my old tormentor ſcreen
me from him if poſſible, or he will again
make me his priſoner.”
“ Fear not,” cried the white domino,
“ he is an evil ſpirit, and we will ſurely
lay him. If one ſpell fails, we muſt try
another.” - -
Cecilia then perceiving Mr. Arnott, beg-
ged he would alſo aſſiſt in barricading her
from the fiend who ſo obſtinately purſued
her.
Mr. Arnott moſt gratefully acceded to
the propoſal; and the white domino, who
aćted as commanding officer, aſſigned to
each his ſtation: he deſired Cecilia would
keep quietly to her ſeat, appointed the
I 2 ſchool-

<page 201>
196 C E C I L I A.
ſchool-maſter to be her guard on the left,
took poſſeſſion himſelf of the oppoſite poſt,
and ordered Mr. Arnott to ſtand centinal in
front.
This arrangement being ſettled, the
guards of the right and left wings inſtantly
ſecured their places; but while Mr. Arnott
was conſidering whether it were better to
face the beſieged, or the enemy, the arch-
foe ruſhed ſuddenly before him, and laid
himſelf down at the feet of Cecilia.
Mr. Arnott, extremely diſconcerted, be-
gan a ſerious expoſtulation upon the ill-
breeding of this behaviour; but the devil,
reſting all excuſe upon ſupporting his cha-
racter, only anſwered by growling.
The white domino ſeemed to heſitate for
a moment in what manner to condućt him-
ſelf, and with a quickneſs that marked his
chagrin, ſaid to Cecilia, “You told me
you knew him, has he any right to follow
you?”
“ If he thinks he has,” anſwered ſhe, a
little alarmed by his queſtion, “this is no
time to diſpute it.”
And then, to avoid any hazard of alterca-
tion, ſhe diſcreetly forebore making further
complaints, preferring any perſecution to
ſeriouſly remonſtrating with a man of ſo
much inſolence as the Baronet.
The ſchool-maſter, laughing at the whole
tranſac-

<page 202>
C F C I L I A. 197
º
tranſačtion, only ſaid “ And pray, madam,
after playing the devil with all mankind,
what right have you to complain that one
man plays the devil with you?”
“We ſhall, at leaſt, fortify you,”-ſaid
the white domino, “ from any other aſſail-
ant: no three-headed Cerberus could pro-
tečt you more effectually: but you will not,
therefore, fancy yourſelf in the lower re-
gions, for, if I miſtake not, the torment of
three guardians is nothing new to you.”
“And how,” ſaid Cecilia, ſurpriſed,
“ſhould you know of my three guardians?
I hope I am not quite encompaſſed with
evil ſpirits!” - -
“ No,” anſwered he, “ you will find me
as inoffenſive as the hue of the domino I
wear ; and would I could add as in-
ſenſible ”
“This black gentleman,” ſaid the ſchool-
maſter, “ who, and very innocently, I was
going to call your black-guard, has as noble
and fiend-like a diſpoſition as I remember
to have ſeen; for without even attempting
to take any diverſion himſelf, he ſeems gra-
tified to his heart's content, in excluding
from it the lady he ſerves.” - ---
“. He does me an honour I could well
diſpenſe with,” ſaid Cecilia; “ but I hope
he has ſome ſecret ſatisfaction in his ſitua-
tion which pays him for its apparent incon-
venience.”
I 3 Here

<page 203>
198 C E C I L I A.
Here the black gentleman half raiſed
himſelf, and attempted to take her hand;
ſhe ſtarted, and with much diſplea-
ſure drew it back: he then growled, and
again ſunk proſtrate. - -
“ This is a fiend,” ſaid the ſchool-maſ-
ter, “ who to himſelf ſayeth Budge not let
his conſcience never ſo often ſay budge 1
Well, fair lady, your fortifications, however,
may now be deemed impregnable, ſince I,
with a flouriſh of my rod, can keep off the
young by recollection of the paſt, and
ſince the fiend, with a jut of his foot, may
keep off the old from dread of the future!”
Here a Turk, richly habited and re-
ſplendent with jewels, ſtalked towards Ce-
cilia, and, having regarded her ſome time,
callege out “I have been looking hard
about me the whole evening, and, faith, I
have ſeen nothing handſome before l’”
The moment he opened his mouth, his
voice, to her utter aſtoniſhment, betrayed
Sir Robert Floyer “Mercy on me,” cried
ſhe aloud, and pointing to the fiend, “who,
then, can this poſſibly be?” º
“Do you not know?” cried the white
domino.
“I thought I had known with certainty,”
~#: ſhe, “ but I now find I was miſ-
-$akë .” - * *
. . ſº ... - - , “ . He
* -
* --

<page 204>
C E C I L I A. 199
“He is a happy man,” ſaid the ſchool-
maſter, ſarcaſtically looking at the Turk,
“who has removed your ſuſpicions only
by appearing in another charaćter l’” +
“Why what the deuce, then,” exclaimed
the Turk, “ have you taken that black
- dog there for me 2"
Before this queſtion could be anſwered,
an offenſive ſmell of ſoot, making everybo-
dy look around the room, the chimney-
ſweeper already mentioned by Miſs La-
rolles, was perceived to enter it. Every
way he moved, a paſſage was cleared for
him, as the company, with general diſguſt,
retreated wherever he advanced. He was
fhort, and ſeemed ſomewhat incommoded
by his dreſs; he held his ſoot-bag over one
arm, and his ſhovel under the other. As
ſoon as he eſpied Cecilia, whoſe ſituation
was ſuch as to prevent her eluding him, he
hooted aloud, and came ſtumping up to
her; “ Ah ha,” he cried, “found at laſt ;”
then, throwing down his ſhovel, he opened
the mouth of his bag, and pointing wag-
giſhly to her head, ſaid “Come, ſhall I
pop you?—A good place for naughty girls;
in, I ſay, poke in!—cram you up the
chimney.” -
And then he put forth his ſooty hands to
reach her cap. . . .
Cecilia, though ſhe inſtantly knew the
I 4 dialeót

<page 205>
2CO C E C I L I A.
diale&t of her guardian Mr. Briggs, was
not therefore the more willing to be ſo
handled, and ſtarted back to ſave herſelf
from his touch; the white domino alſo
came forward, and ſpread out his arms as a
defence to her, while the Devil, who was
ſtill before her, again began to growl.
“Ah hal" cried the chimney-ſweeper,
laughing, “ ſo did not know me? Poor
duck won't hurt you; don't be frightened;
nothing but old guardian; all a joke?"
And then, patting her cheek with his dirty
hand, and nodding at her with much kind-
neſs, “ Pretty dove,” he added, “be of
good heart! ſha'n't be meddled with ; come
to ſee after you. Heard of your tricks;
thought I’d catch you!—come o'purpoſe.—
Poor duck | did not know me! haſ hal—
good joke enough!” . . . -
“What do you mean, you dirty dog,”
cried the Turk, “ by touching that lady ?”
“ Won’t tell l’” anſwered he ; ; “ not
your buſineſs. Got a good right. Who
cares for pearls? Nothing but French
beads.” Pointing with a ſneer to his turr
ban. Then, again addreſſing Cecilia;
“Fine doings!” he continued, “Here's a
place! never ſaw the like before! turn a man's
noddle l—All goings out; no comings in ;
wax candles in every room; ſervants thick
as muſhrooms' And where's the caſh :
+ º- Who's

<page 206>
C E C I L I A. 201
Who's to pay the piper ? Come to more
than a guinea; warrant Maſter Harrel
thinks that nothing!”
“A guinea ; ” contemptuouſly repeated
the Turk, “ and what do you ſuppoſe a
guinea will do ”
“What? Why keep a whole family
handſome a week;-never ſpend ſo much
myſelf; no, nor half neither.”
“Why then how the devil do you live 2
Do you beg ’’’ -
“Beg º' Who ſhould beg of? You?—
Got any thing to give 2 Are warm **
“ Take the trouble to ſpeak more re-
ſpectfully, ſir!” ſaid the Turk, haughtily ;
“I ſee you are ſome low fellow, and I ſhall
not put up with your impudence.”
“Shall, ſhall ! I ſay !” anſwered the
chimney-ſweeper ſturdily; “ Hark'ee, my
duck,” chucking Cecilia under the chin,
“ don’t be cajoled, nick that ſpark! never
mind gold trappings; none of his own;
all a take-in; hired for eighteen pence; not
worth a groat. Never ſet your heart on a
fine outſide, nothing within. Briſtol ſtones
won't buy ſtock: only wants to chouſe
you.”
“What do you mean by that, you little
old ſcrub l’ cried the imperious Turk; ,
“ would you provoke me to ſoil my fingers
by pulling that beaſtly ſnub noſe : * For
I 5 Mr.

<page 207>
202 C. E. C I L I A.
Mr. Briggs had ſaved himſelf any ac-
tual maſk, by merely blacking his face
with ſoot, - )
: “Beaſtly ſnub noſe!” ſputtered out the
chimney-ſweeper, in much wrath, “‘good
:noſe enough; don't want a better; good as
another man's. Where's the harmon’t 2"
... “How could this black-guard get in 2”
Cried the Turk, “I believe he’s a mere
common chimney-ſweeper out of the
Aſtreets, for he's all over dirt and filth. I
never ſaw ſuch a dreſs at a maſquerade be-
fore in my life.” -
“ All the better,” returned the other;
“would not change. What do think it
coſt Pº’ º a
“ Coſt? Why not a crown.” :
... “ A crown? haſ haſ — a pot o'beer!
Little Tom borrowed it; had it of our own
ſweep. Said 'twas for himſelf. I bid him
a pint; raſcal would not take leſs.”
“Did your late uncle,” ſaid the white
domino, in a low voice to Cecilia, “ .chuſe
for two of your guardians, Mr. Harrel and
Mr. Briggs, to give you an early leſſon up-
on the oppoſite errors of profuſion and
meanneſs?” - :
“My uncle?” cried Cecilia, ſtarting,
“ were you acquainted with my uncle?” .
“No,” ſaid he, “for my happineſs. I
knew him not.” - - -
tº You

<page 208>
C E C I L I A. 2O3
“You would have owed no loſs of hap
ºpineſs to an acquaintance with him,” ſaid
Cecilia, very ſeriouſly, “ for he was one
who diſpenſed to his friends nothing but
good.” *** - - - -
“Perhaps ſo,” ſaid the domino; “but
I fear I ſhould have found the good he diſ-
penſed through his niece not quite un-
mixed with evil l’” -
“What's here ** cried the chimney-
iſweeper, ſtumbling over the fiend, “what's
this black thing? Don't like it; looks like
the devil. You ſha’n’t ſtay with it; carry
you away; take care of you myſelf.”
He then offered Cecilia his hand; but
the black gentleman, raiſing himſelf upon
his knees before her, paid her, in dumb
ſhew, the humbleſt devoirs, yet prevented
her from removing.
“Ah hal” cried the chimney-ſweeper,
ſignificantly nodding his head, “ ſmell a
ratſ a ſweet-heart in diſguiſe. No bam-
boozling! it won't do; a'n't ſo ſoon put
upon. If you've got any thing to ſay, tell
me, that's the way. Where's the caſh? Got
ever a rentall P Are warm? That’s the
point; are warm ** -
The fiend, without returning any anſwer,
continued his homage to Cecilia; at which
the enraged chimney-ſweeper exclaimed
I-6 . . $9. Come,
*
* --

<page 209>
2O4. , C. E. C. I L I A.
“. Come, come with me! won't be impoſed
upon; an old fox,-underſtand trap' ". . . ;
He then again held out his hand, but
:Cecilia, pointing to the fiend, anſwered
“How can I come, fir?” .
“Shew you the way,” cried he, “ſhovel
him off.” And taking his ſhovel, he very
roughly ſet about removing him. . . . . . .
The fiend then began a yelk ſo horrid,
that it "diſturbed the whole company; but
the chimney-ſweeper, only ſaying: “Aye,
aya, blacky, growl away blacky, - makes ,
no odds,-” ſturdily continued his work,
and, as the fiend had no chance of reſiſting
ſo coarſe an antagoniſt without a ſerious
ſhruggle, he was preſently compelled to
change his ground. ! . . . . . .
“ Warm work 1" cried the vićtorious
chimney ſweeper, taking off his wig, and
wiping his head with the ſleeves of his
dreſs, “pure warm work this ". -
Cecilia, once again freed from her perſe-
cutor, inſtantly quitted her place, almoſt
equally deſirous to eſcape the haughty
Turk, who was peculiarly her averſion, and
the facetious chimney-ſweeper, whoſe vi-
cinity, either on account of his dreſs or his
converſation, was by no means deſirable.
She was not, however, diſpleaſed that the
white domino and the ſchool-maſter ſtill
continued to attend her.
“Pray

<page 210>
C. E. C. I. L. I. A. 205
tº “Pray look,” ſaid the white domino, as
*they entered another, apartment, “ at that
--figure of Hope ; is there any in the room
half ſo expreſſive of deſpondency?” ...
: “ The reaſon, however,” anſwered the
ſchool-maſter, “ is obvious; that light and
beautiful ſilver anchor upon which ſhe re-
:clines, preſents an occaſion irreſiſtible for
an attitude of elegant dejećtion; and the
aſſumed charašter is always given up, where
an opportunity offers to diſplay any beauty,
or manifeſt any perfection in the dear
proper perſon 1* . . . . .
. “But why,” ſaid Cecilia, “ ſhould ſhe
aſſume the charaćter, of Hope 2 Could ſhe
not have been equally deječted, and equally
elegant as Niobe, or ſome tragedy queen * *
“ſ But ſhe does not aſſume the charaćter,”
anſwered the ſchool-maſter, “ ſhe does not
even think of it: the dreſs is her objećt,
and that alone fills up all her ideas. En-
quire of almoſt any body in the room con-
cerning the perſons they ſeem to repreſent,
and you will find their ignorance more groſs
than you can imagine; they have not once
thought upon the ſubjećt; accident, or
convenience, or caprice has, alone dire&ted
their choice.”. . . . . . . . . . . . . . * :
A tall and elegant youth now approached
them, whoſe laurels and harp announced
Apollo. The white domino immediately
enquired
2.

<page 211>
.206 C E C I L I A.
enquired of him if the noiſe and turbulence
of the company, had any chance of being
‘ſtilled into ſilence and rapture, by the di-
vine muſic of the inſpired god? …
“No,” anſwered he, pointing to the
room in which was erected the new gallery,
and whence, as he ſpoke, iſſued the ſound
of an hautboy, “there is a flute playing
there already.”
* O for a Midas,” cried the white do-
mino, “to return to this leather-eared god
the diſgrace he received from him!”
They now proceeded to the apartment
which had been lately fitted up for refreſh-
ments, and which was ſo full of com-
pany, that they entered it with difficulty.
And here they were again joined by Miner-
va, who, taking Cecilia's hand, ſaid “Lord
how glad I am you’ve got away from that
frightful black maſk! I can't conceive who
he is; nobody can find out; it's monſtrous
odd, but he has not ſpoke a word all night,
and he makes ſuch a ſhocking noiſe when
people touch him, that I aſſure you it's
enough to put one in a fright.” . . . . ;
“And pray,” cried the ſchool-maſter,
diſguiſing his voice, “bow cameft thou to
take the helmet of Minerva for a foel's
cap ** . . .
! ?, Lord, I have not,” cried ſhe, inho-
- cently,

<page 212>
C E C I L I A. aq,
cently, “why the whole dreſs is Minerva's;
don't you ſee?” - - - :
* “ My dear child,” anſwered he, “ thou
couldſt as well with that little figure paſs for "
- a Goliah, as-with that little wit for a Pallas.”
… Their attention was now drawn from the
tgoddeſs of wiſdom to a mad Edgar, who ſo
vehemently ran about the room calling out.
“Poor Tom's a cold!” that, in a ſhort
time, he was obliged to take off his maſk,
from an effect, not very delicate, of the
heat - •
• Soon after, a gentleman deſiring ſome
lemonade whoſe toga ſpoke the conſular
dignity, though his broken Engliſh be-
trayed a native of France, the ſchool-maſ-
ter followed him, and, with reverence the
moſt profound began to addreſs him in
Latin; but, turning quick towards him, he
gayly ſaid “ Monſieur, j’ai l'honneur de re-
preſenter Ciceron, le grand Ciceron, pere de ſº
patrie! mais quoigue j'ai cet bonneur lá, je
me ſuis pas pedant l—mon dieu, Monſieur,
je me parle que le François dams la bonne com-
pagnie P’ And, politely bowing, he went
Oſl.
Juſt then Cecilia, while looking about
the room for Mrs. Harrel, felt herſelf ſud-
denly pinched by the cheek, and haſtily
turning round, perceived again her friend
the chimeny-ſweeper, who, laughing, cried
“Only

<page 213>
208 C E C I L I A.
.* Only me! don't be frightened. Have
ſomething to tell you; — had no luck! —
got never a huſband yet I can't find one !
looked all over, too; ſharp as a needle.
Not one to be had all catched up !” . . . .
“I am glad to hear it, ſir,” ſaid Ceci-
cia, ſomewhat vexed by obſerving the
white domino attentively liſtening; “ and
I hope, therefore, you will give yourſelf no
farther trouble.” -
“ Pretty duck!” cried he, chucking her
under the chin; “ never mind, don’t be
caſt down; get one at laſt. Leave it to me.
Nothing under a plum; won't take up with
leſs. Good by, ducky, good by muſt go
home now, begin to be nodding.”
And then, repeating his kind careſſes, he
walked away. - l
“Do you think, then,” ſaid the white
domino, “ more highly of Mr. Briggs for
diſcernment and taſte than of any body ?”
“I hope not " anſwered ſhe, “for low
indeed ſhould I then think of the reſt of
the world!” -
“ The commiſſion with which he is
charged,” returned the domino, “has then
miſled me; I imagined diſcernment and
taſte might be neceſſary ingredients for
making ſuch a choice as your approbation
would ſančtify ; but perhaps his ſkill in
guarding againſt any fraud or dedućtion º
- - tilº

<page 214>
C E C I L I A. 209
º
the ſtipulation he mentioned, may be alſ
that is requiſite for the execution of his
truſt.”
-“I underſtand very well,” ſaid Cecilia,
a little hurt, “ the ſeverity of your mean-
ing; and if Mr. Briggs had any commiſ-
ſion but of his own ſuggeſtion, it would fill
me with ſhame and confuſion; but as that
is not the caſe, thoſe at leaſt are ſenſations
which it cannot give me.” -
“My meaning,” cried the domino, with
ſome earneſtneſs, “ſhould I expreſs it ſeri-
ouſly, would but prove to you the reſpect
and admiration with which you have
inſpired me, and if indeed, as Mr. Briggs
hinted, ſuch a prize is to be purchaſed by
riches, I know not, from what I have ſeen
of its merit, any ſum I ſhould think ade-
4uate to its value.”: - -
“You are determined, I ſee,” ſaid Ce-
-cilia, ſmiling, “ to make moſt liberal
amends for your aſperity.” -
A loud clack of tongues now interrupted
their diſcourſe; and the domino, at the de-
ſire of Cecilia, for whom he had procured a
ſeat, went forward to enquire what was the
matter. But ſcarce had he given up his
place a moment, before, to her great mor-
tification, it was occupied by the fiend.
Again, but with the ſame determined ſi-
lence he had hitherto preſerved, he made
- ſigns

<page 215>
zio C E C I L I A.
ſigns of obedience and homage, and her
perplexity to conjećture who he could be,
or what were his motives for this perſecu-
tion, became the more urgent as they ſeemed
the leſs likely to be ſatisfied. But the fiend,
who was no other than Mr. Monckton, had
every inſtant leſs and leſs encouragement to
make himſelf known: his plan had in no-
thing ſucceeded, and his provocation at its
failure had cauſed him the bittereſt diſap-
pointment; he had intended, in the cha-
raćter of a tormentor, not only to purſue
and hover around her himſelf, but he had
alſo hoped, in the ſame charaćter, to have
kept at a diſtance all other admirers: but
the violence with which he had over-aēted
his part, by raiſing her diſguſt and the
indignation of the company, rendered his
views wholly abortive: while the conſtiouſ.
neſs of an extravagance for which, if diſ-
covered, he could aſſign no reaſon not li-
able to excite ſuſpicions of his ſecret mo-
tives, reduced him to guarding a painful
and moſt irkſome filence the whole evening.
And Cecilia, to whoſe unſuſpicious mind
the idea of Mr. Monckton had never oc-
curred, added continually to the cruelty of
his ſituation, by an undiſguiſed abhor-
rence of his affiduity, as well as by a mani-
feſt preference to the attendance of the white
domino, . All, therefore, that his diſap-
‘. . pointed
|

<page 216>
C E C I L I A. 2 I I
*-
pointed ſcheme now left in his power, was
to watch her motions, liſten to her diſ-
courſe, and inflićt occaſionally upon others
ſome part of the chagrin with which he was
tormented himſelf.
While they were in this ſituation, Harle-
quin, in conſequence of being ridiculed by
the Turk for want of agility, offered to
jump over the new deſert table, and deſired
to have a little ſpace cleared to give room
for his motions. It was in vain the peo-
ple who diſtributed the refreſhments, and
who were placed at the other ſide of the
table, expoſtulated upon the danger of the
experiment; Morrice had a rage of enter-
prize untameable, and therefore, firſt tak-
ing a run, he attempted the leap.
The conſequence was ſuch as might na-
turally be expe&ted; he could not accom-
pliſh his purpoſe, but, finding himſelf fal-
ing, imprudently caught hold of the lately
erected Awning, and pulled it entirely up-
on his own head, and with it the new con-
trived lights, which in various forms were
fixed to it, and which all came down to-
ther. * . .
The miſchief and confuſion occaſioned
by this exploit were very alarming, and al-
moſt dangerous; thoſe who were near the
table ſuffered moſt by the cruſh, but ſplin-
ters of the glaſs flew yet further, and as
• * > * the

<page 217>
212 c E c I L I a..
-
the room, which was ſmall, had been only
lighted up by lamps hanging from the
Awning, it was now in total darkneſs, ex-
cept cloſe to the door, which was ſtill illu-
minated from the adjoining apartments.
The clamour of Harlequin, who was co-
vered with glaſs, papier machée, lamps and
oil, the ſcreams of the ladies, the univer-
ſal buz of tongues, and the ſtruggle be-
tween the frighted crowd which was en-
cloſed to get out, and the curious crowd
from the other apartments to get in, occa-
ſioned a diſturbance and tumult equally
noiſy and confuſed. But the moſt ſerious
ſufferer was the unfortunate fiend, who be—
ing nearer the table than Cecilia, was ſo
preſſed upon by the numbers which poured
from it, that he found a ſeparation unavoid-
able, and was unable, from the darkneſs
and the throng, to diſcover whether ſhe was
ſtill in the ſame place, or had made her eſ-
cape into another. - º
... She had, however, encountered the white
domino, and, under his protećtion, was
ſafely conveyed to a further part of the
room. Her intention and deſire were to
quit it immediately, but at the remon-
ſtrance of her condućtor, ſhe conſented to
remain ſome time longer. “The conflićt
at the door,” ſaid he, “will quite over-
power you. Stay here but a few minutes,
and
- - -

<page 218>
C E C I L I. A. 213
and both parties will have ſtruggled
themſelves tired, and you may then go
without difficulty. Mean time, can you
not by this faint light, ſuppoſe me one of
your guardians, Mr. Briggs, for example,
or, if he is too old for me, Mr. Harrel,
and entruſt yourſelf to my care?”
“You ſeem wonderfully well acquainted
with my guardians,” ſaid Cecilia; “ I can-
not imagine how you have had your intel-
ligence.” -
“Nor can I,” anſwered the dormino,
“ imagine how Mr. Briggs became ſo par-
ticularly your favourite as to be entruſted
with powers to diſpoſe of you.”
“ You are miſtaken indeed; he is en-
truſted with no powers but ſuch as his own
fancy has ſuggeſted.” -
“But how has Mr. Delvile offended you,
that with him only you ſeem to have no
commerce or communication ?”
“ Mr. Delvile !” repeated Cecilia, ſtill
more ſurpriſed, “are you alſo acquainted
with Mr. Delvile?”
“ He is certainly a man of faſhion,”
continued the domino, “ and he is alſo a
man of honour; ſurely, then, he would be
more pleaſant for confidence and conſulta-
tion, than one whoſe only notion of happi-
neſs is money, whoſe only idea of excel-,
lence

<page 219>
214 C E C I L I A.
lence is avarice, and whoſe only conception
of ſenſe is diſtruſt' "
Here a violent outcry again interrupted
their converſation; but not till Cecilia had
ſatisfied her doubts concerning the white
domino, by conjecturing he was Mr. Bel-
field, who might eaſily at the houſe of Mr.
Monckton have gathered the little circum-
ſtances of her ſituation to which he alluded,
and whoſe ſize and figure exactly reſembled
thoſe of her new acquaintance.
The author of the former diſturbance
was now the occaſion of the preſent: the
fiend, having vainly traverſed the room in
ſearch of Cecilia, ſtumbled accidentally up-
on Harlequin, before he was freed from the
relicks of his own miſchief; and unable to
reſiſt the temptation of opportunity, and
the impulſe of revenge, he gave vent to
the wrath ſo often excited by the blunders,
forwardneſs, and tricks of Morrice, and in-
flićted upon him, with his own wooden ſword,
which he ſeized for that purpoſe, a chaſtiſe-
ment the moſt ſerious and ſevere.
Poor Harlequin, unable to imagine -any
reaſon for this violent attack, and already
cut with the glaſs, and bruiſed with the
fall, ſpared not his lungs in making known
his diſapprobation of ſuch treatment: but
the fiend, regardleſs either of his complaints
or his reſiſtance, forbore not to belabour
l
|
I him

<page 220>
C E C I L I A. 215
him till compelled by the entrance of peo-
ple with lights. And then, after artfully
playing fundry anticks under pretence of
Itill ſupporting his charaćter, with a motion
too ſudden for prevention, and too rapid
for purſuit, he eſcaped out of the room,
and hurrying down ſtairs, threw himſelf in-
to an hackney chair, which conveyed him
to a place where he privately changed his
dreſs before he returned home: bitterly re-
penting the experiment he had made, and
conſcious too late that had he appeared in
a charaćter he might have avowed, he could,
without impropriety, have attended Cecilia
the whole evening. But ſuch is deſervedly the
frequent fate of cunning, which while it plots
ſurpriſe and detection of others, commonly
overſhoots its mark, and ends in its own
diſgrace. -
The introdućtion of the lights now mak-
ing manifeſt the confuſion which the frolic
of Harlequin had occaſioned, he was ſeized
with ſuch a dread of the reſentment of Mr.
Harrel, that, forgetting blows, bruiſes and
wounds, not one of which were ſo frightful
to him as reproof, he made the laſt exhibi-
tion of his agility by an abrupt and haſty
Tétreat.
He had, however, no reaſon for appre-
henſion, ſince in every thing that regarded
expence,

<page 221>
2 16 C E C I L I A.
expence, Mr. Harrel had no feeling, and his
lady had no thought. º
The rooms now began to empty very
faſt, but among the few maſks yet remain-
ing, Cecilia again perceived Don Quixote;
and while, in conjunction with the white do-
mino, ſhe was allowing him the praiſe of
having ſupported his charaćter with more
uniform propriety than any other perſon in
the aſſembly, ſhe obſerved him taking off
his maſk for the convenience of drinking
ſome lemonade, and, looking in his face,
found he was no other than Mr. Belfield !
Much aſtoniſhed, and more than ever per-
plexed, ſhe again turned to the white do-
mino, who ſeeing in her countenance a ſurpriſe
of which he knew not the reaſon, ſaid, half
laughing, “You think, perhaps, I ſhall
never be gone And indeed I am almoſt of
the ſame opinion: but what can I do? In-
ſtead of growing weary by the length of my
ſtay, my reluctance to ſhorten it encreaſes
with its duration: and all the methods I
take, whether by ſpeaking to you or looking
at you, with a view to be ſatiated, only
double my eagerneſs for looking and liſten-
ing again! I muſt go, however; and if I
am happy, I may perhaps meet with you
again, though, if I am wiſe, I ſhall
never ſeek you more l’ - -
And then, with the laſt ſtragglers that
5 reluctantly

<page 222>
, C E C I L I A. £17
reluétantly diſappeared, he made his exit;
leaving Cecilia greatly pleaſed with his con-
verſation and his manners, but extremely
perplexed to account for his knowledge of
her affairs and ſituation.
The ſchool-maſter had already been gone
ſome time. ' ' ' ' " " .
She was now earneſtly preſſed by the Har-
rels and Sir Robert, who ſtill reihained, to
fend to a warehouſe for a dreſs,' and actom-
pany, them to the Pantheon; but though
ſhe was not without ſome inclination to
comply, in the hope of further prolonging
the entertainment of an evening from which
ſhe had received much pleaſure, ſhe diſliked
the attendance of the Baronet, and felt
averſe to grant any requeſt that he could
make, and therefore ſhe begged they would
excuſe her; and having waited to ſee their
dreſſes, which were very ſuperb, ſhe retired
to her own apartment. . . . . .
A great variety of conjećture upon all
that had paſſed, now, and till the moment that
ſhe funk to reſt, occupied her mind; the ex:
traordinary perſecution of the fiend excited
at once her curioſity and amazement, while
the knowledge of her affairs ſhewn by the
white domino, ſurpriſed her not leſs, and
intereſted her more. ... ." ". . . . . º
**V8 L. I. º. ºf K tº C. H. A. P.
... iſ 1922 . . . . . . 3.39.4. ) &'il i) ( . . . . . . "
7- ºi ( , ,

<page 223>
218 C E C I L I A.
- - * *
f s
s C - H A P. IV.
A N A f f RAY.
• **
THE next morning during breakfaſt,
Cecilia was informed that a gentleman
deſired to ſpeak with her. She begged
permiſſion of Mrs. Harrel to have him
aſked up ſtairs, and was not a little ſur-
prized when he proved to be the ſame old
entleman whoſe ſingular exclamations had
ź. much ſtruck her at Mr. Monckton's, and
at the rehearſal of Artaſerſe.
Abruptly and with a ſtern aſpećt advanc-
ing to her, “You are rich,” he cried;
“ are you therefore worthleſs ** -
“I hope not!” anſwered ſhe, in ſome
conſternation; while Mrs. Harrel, believ-
ing his intention was to rob them, ran pre-
cipitately to the bell, which ſhe rang with-
out ceaſing till two or three ſervants haſ-
tened into the room: by which time, being
leſs alarmed, ſhe only made ſigns to them
to ſtay, and ſtood quietly herſelf to wait
what would follow. -
The old, man, without attending to her,
continued his dialogue with Cecilia.
- * Know

<page 224>
C E C I L I A. 219
!,:
*
ſ
“ Know you then,” he ſaid, “a blame-
leſs uſe of riches? ſuch a uſe as not only in
the broad glare of day ſhall ſhine reſplen-
dent, but in the darkneſs of midnight, and
ſtillneſs of repoſe, ſhall give you reflections
unimbittered, and ſlumbers unbroken tell
me, know you this uſe?” -
“ Not ſo well, perhaps,” anſwered ſhe,
“ as I ought; but I am very willing to
learn better.” t - -
“Begin, then, while yet youth and inexpe-
rience, new to the callouſneſs of power and
affluence, leave ſomething good to work
jº. : yeſterday you ſaw the extravagance
of luxury and folly; to day look deeper,
and ſee, and learn to pity, the miſery of
diſeaſe and penury.” -
He then put into her hand a paper which
contained a moſt affecting account of the
miſery to which a poor and wretched fa-
mily had been reduced, by ſickneſs, and
various other misfortunes. *
Cecilia, “open as day to melting cha:
rity,” having haſtily peruſed it, took out
her purſe, and offering to him three guineas,
ſaid, “You muſt direét me, Sir, what to
give if this is inſufficient.” -
“ Haſt thou ſo much heart?” cried he,
with emotion, “ and has fortune, though
it has curſed thee with the temptation of
proſperity, not yet rooted from thy mind
. K 2 its

<page 225>
22O C E C I L I A.
its native benevolence 2 I return in part
thy liberal contribution; this,” taking one
guinea, “ doubles my expečtations; I will
not, by making thy charity diſtreſs thee,
accelerate the fatal hour of hardneſs and
degeneracy.” . . . . . . .
He was then going; but Cecilia, follow-
ing him, ſaid, “No, take it all ! Who
ſhould aſſiſt the poor. if I will not? Rich,
without conneétions; powerful, without
wants; upon whom have they any claim if
not upon me?” - .
“ True,” cried he, receiving the reſt,
“ and wiſe as true. Give, therefore, whilſt
yet thou haſt the heart to give, and
make, in thy days of innocence and kind-
neſs, ſome intereſt with Heaven and the
poor l’” - • * -
And then he diſappeared. -
“Why, my dear,” cried Mrs. Harrel,
“ what could induce you to give the man
ſo much money?. Don't you ſee he is crazy?
I dare ſay he would have been juſt as well
contented with ſixpence.” . . . .
“ I know not what he is,” ſaid Cecilia,
“ but his manners are not more ſingular
than his ſentiments are affe&ting; and if he
is ačtuated by charity to raiſe fubſcriptions
for the indigent, he can ſurely apply to no
one who ought ſo readily to contribute as
myſelf.” . . . . . . . . . . . . .
- -- Mr.
!

<page 226>
C E C I L I A. –221
:
º
Mr. Harrel then came in, and his lady
moſt eagerly told him the tranſačtion.
“Scandalous !” he exclaimed ; “ why
this is no better than being a houſe-breaker!
Pray give orders never to admit him again.
Three Guineas I never heard ſo impudent
a thing in my life Indeed, Miſs Beverley,
you muſt be more diſcreet in future, you
will elſe be ruined before you know where
you are.”
“ Thus it is,” ſaid Cecilia, half ſmiling,
“ that we can all lečture one another to-
day you recommend oeconomy to me; yeſ-
terday I with difficulty forbore recommend-
ing it to you.” - - - - - - -
º “ Nay” anſwered he, “ that was quite
another matter; expence incurred in the
common way of a man's living is quite
another thing to an extortion of this fort.”
“. It is another thing indeed,” ſaid ſhe,
“but I know not that it is therefore a
better.” -
- Mr. Harrel made no anſwer: and "Ce-
eilia, privately moralizing upon the diffe-
rent eſtimates of expence and oeconomy
made by the diſſipated and the charitable,
ſoon retired to her own apartment, deter-
mined firmly to adhere to her lately adopted
plan, and hoping, by the aſſiſtance of her
new and very fingular monitor, to extend
K 3 - her
* * * * * *, *, * , -
-

<page 227>
222 C. E. C I L II A.
-
her pračtice of doing good, by enlarging
her knowledge of diſtreſs. . 3
Objects are, however, never wanting for
the exerciſe of benevolence; report ſoon
publiſhed her liberality, and thoſe who
wiſhed to believe it, failed not to enquire
into its truth. She was ſoon at the head
of a little band of penſioners, and, never
ſatisfied with the generoſity of her dona-
tions, found in a very ſhort time, that the
common allowance of her guardians was
ſcarce adequate to the calls of her munifi-
cence. - -
... And thus, in acts of goodneſs and cha
rity, paſſed undiſturbed another week of
the life of Cecilia : but when the fervour
of ſelf-approbation loſt its novelty, the
pleaſure with which her new plan was be-
gun firſt ſubſided into tranquility, and
then ſunk into languor. To a heart formed
for friendſhip and affection the charms of
ſolitude are very ſhort-lived; and though
ſhe had fickened of the turbulence of per-
petual company, ſhe now wearied of paſ-
fing all her time by herſelf, and ſighed for
the comfort of ſociety, and the relief of
communication. But ſhe ſaw with aſtoniſh-
ment the difficulty with which this was
to be obtained : the endleſs ſucceſſion of
diverſions, the continual rotation of aſſem-
blies, the numerouſneſs of ſplendid engage-
frients, of which while every one com-
plained,
-
--
-
!

<page 228>
C E C I L I. A. 223
plained, every one was proud to boaſt, ſo
effectually impeded private meetings and
friendly intercourſe, that, which ever way
ſhe turned herſelf, all commerce ſeemed
impračticable, but ſuch as either led to
diffipation, or accidentally flowed from it."
. Yet finding the error into which her ar-
dour of reformation had hurried her, and
that a rigid ſecluſion from company was
produćtive of a laſfitude as little favourable
to active virtue as diſſipation itſelf, ſhe re-
ſolved to ſoften her plan, and by mingling
amuſement with benevolence, to try, at
leaſt, to approach that golden mean, which,
like the philoſopher's ſtone, always eludes
our graſp, yet always invites our wiſhes.
: For this purpoſe ſhe deſired to attend
Mrs. Harrel to the next Opera that ſhould
be repreſented. -
- The following Saturday, therefore, ſhe
accompanied that lady and Mrs. Mears to
the Haymarket, eſcorted by Mr. Arnott.
... They were very late ; the Opera was be-
gun, and even in the lobby the crowd was
ſo great that their paſſage was obſtructed.
Here they were preſently accoſted by Miſs
Larolles, who, running up to Cecilia and
taking her hand, ſaid, “ Lord, you can't
conceive how glad I am to ſee you ! why,
my dear creature, where have you hid your-
ſelf theſe twenty ages You are quite in
K. 4 luck

<page 229>
224 C F C I L I. A.
luck in coming to-night, I aſſure you; it's
the beſt Opera we have had this ſeaſon:
there's ſuch a monſtrous crowd there's no
ſtirring. We ſha'n't get in this half hour.
The coffee-room is quite full ; only come
and ſee ; is it not delightful ?” . - **.
This intimation was ſufficient for Mrs.
Harrel, whoſe love of the Opera was merely
a love of company, faſhion, and ſhew ;
and therefore to the coffee-room ſhe readily
led the way. .". -
And here Cecilia found rather the ap-
pearance of a brilliant aſſembly of ladies
and gentlemen, collečted merely to ſee and
to entertain one another, than of diſtinčt
and caſual parties, mixing ſolely, from ne-
ceſſity, and waiting only for room to enter
a theatre. ... … : :: * > . . . º
The firſt perſon that addreſſed them was
Captain Areſby, who, with his uſual deli-
cate languiſhment, ſmiled upon Cecilia, and
ſoftly whiſpering, “How divinely you look
to night !” proceeded to pay his compli-
ments to ſome other ladies. ... * *
“ Do pray now,” cried Miſs Larolles,
* obſerve Mr. Meadows I only juſt ſee
where he has fixed himſelf!!" in the very
beſt place in the room, and keeping the fire
from every body I do aſſure you that's
always, his way, and it's monſtrous pro-
woking, for if one's ever ſo cold, he lollops
: 211 3 -i ſo,
- * *

<page 230>
C E C I L I. A. 225
ſo, that one's quite ſtarved. But you muſt
know there's another thing he does that is
quite as bad, for if he gets a ſeat, he never
offers to move, if he ſees one ſinking with
fatigue. ...And beſides, if one is waiting for
one’s carriage two hours together, he makes
it a rule never to ſtir a ſtep to ſee for it.
Only think how monſtrous !” -
“Theſe are heavy complaints, indeed,”
ſaid Cecilia, looking at him attentively;
“I ſhould have expečted from his appear-
ance a very different account of his gal-
lantry, for he ſeems dreſſed with more ſtu-
died elegance than any body here.”
“O yes,” cried Miſs Larolles, “he is
the ſweeteſt dreſſer in the world; he has
the moſt delightful taſte you can conceive,
nobody has half ſo good a fancy. I aſſure
you it's a great thing to be ſpoke to by
him: we are all of us quite angry when
he won’t take any notice of us.” . . . -
“Is your anger,” ſaid Cecilia, laugh-
ing, “ in honour of himſelf or of his
eoat P* - - - -
“Why, Lord, don't you know all this
time that he is an ennuyá 2 -
“ I know, at leaſt,” anſwered Cecilia,
“ that he would ſoon make one of me.”
“O but one is never affronted with an
ennuyé, if he is ever ſo provoking, becauſe
one always knows what it means.” --- " -
K 5 “ Is
ſº
~

<page 231>
226 C E C I L I. A.
* “Is he agreeable ** 2:
º “Why, to tell you, the truth, but
pray: now don't mention it,--I think him
moſt exceſſive diſagreeable ! He yawns in
one's face every time one looks at him. I
aſſure you ſometimes I expect to ſee him
fall faſt aſleep while I am talking to him,
for he is ſo immenſely abſent he don't hear
one half that one ſays; only conceive how
horrid lº' º:
- “But why, then, do you encourage him?
why do you take any notice of him 2’’: ;
... “O, every body does, I aſſure you, elſe
I would not for the world; but he is ſo
courted you have no idea. However, of
all things let me adviſe you never to dance
with him ; I did once myſelf, and I declare
I was quite diſtreſſed to death the whole
time, for he was taken with ſuch a fit of
abſence he knew nothing he was about,
ſometimes ſkipping and jumping with all
the violence in the world, juſt as if he only
danced for exerciſe, and ſometimes ſtand-
ing quite ſtill, or lolling againſt the wainſ-
coat and gaping, and taking no more no-
tice of me than if he had never ſeen me in
his life l’” - - -
The captain now, again advancing to
Cecilia, ſaid, “So you would not do us
the honour to try the maſquerade at the
Pantheon however, I hear you had a very
brilliant
ſ
|

<page 232>
C E C I L I A. 227
!
-
brilliant ſpectacle at Mr. Harrel’s.’ I was
quite au deſºſpoir that I could not get there.
I did mon poſſible, but it was quite beyond
me.” - - --. :
i “We ſhould have been very happy,”
faid Mrs. Harrel, “to have ſeen you;
aſſure you we had ſome excellent maſks.”
: “So I have heard partout, and I am re-
duced to deſpair that I could not have the
honour of ſliding in. But I was accablé
with affairs all day. Nothing could be ſo
mortifying.” -
: Cecilia now, growing very impatient to
hear the Opera, begged to know if they
might not make a trial to get into the
pit?
- * * * * * *
“I fear,” ſaid the captain, ſmiling as
they paſſed him, without offering any aſſiſt-
ance, “you will find it extreme petrifying;
for my part, I confeſs I am not upon the
principle of crowding.” … . .
The ladies, however, accompanied by
Mr. Arnott, made the attempt, and ſoon
found, according to the cuſtom of report,
that the difficulty, for the pleaſure of talk-
ing of it, had been conſiderably exagge-
rated. They were ſeparated, indeed, but
their accommodation was tolerably good.
Cecilia was much vexed to find the firſt
aćt of the Opera almoſt over; but ſhe was
ſoon ſtill more diſſatisfied when ſhe diſco-
K 6 vered

<page 233>
228. C E C I L II A.
ºvered that ſhe had no chance of hearing
the little which remained: the place ſhe
had happened to find vacant was next to a
party of young ladies, who were ſo earneſtly
engaged in their own diſcourſe, that º
Aiſtened not to a note of the Opera, and ſo
infinitely diverted with their own witti-
-ciſms, that their tittering and 16quacity al-
lowed no one in their vicinity to hear bet-
ter than thernſelves. . Cecilia tried in vain
to confine her attention to the fingers, ſhe
was diſtant from the ſtage, and to them ſhe
was near, and her fruitleſs attempts all
‘ended in chagrin and impatience. * * *
- At length ſhe reſolved to make an effort
for entertainment in another way, and ſince
the expeétations which brought her to the
Opera were deſtroyed, to try by liſtening
to her fair neighbours, whether thoſe who
occaſioned her diſappointment, could make
her any amends. . . .” . . .
For this purpoſe ſhe turned to them
wholly; yet was at firſt in no little per-
plexity to underſtand what was going for-
ward, ſince ſo univerſal was the eagerneſs
for talking, and ſo inſurmountable the an-
tipathy to liſtening, that every one ſeened
to have her wiſhes bounded by a continual
utterance of words, without waiting for any
anſwer, or ſcarce even deſiring to be
heard. -
- - - - - º' - But

<page 234>
c E C I L I A. 229
i. But when, ſomewhat more uſed to their
idialett and manner, ſhe began better to
comprehend their diſcourſe, wretchedly in-
deed did it ſupply to her the loſs of the
Opera.” She heard, nothing but deſcrip-
tions of Utrimmings, ...and complaints of
bair-dreſſers, hints of conqueſt that teemed
with vanity, and hiſtories of engagements
which were inflated with exultation, *
ºf At the end of the act, by the crowding
forward of the gentlemen to ſee the dance,
HMrs. Harrel had an opportunity of mak-
ing room for herbyſherſelf, and ſhe had
then ſome reaſon to expett hearing the reſt
of the Opera in peace, for the company
Before her, conſiſting entirely of young
men, ſeemed, even during the dance, fear-
£ul of ſpeaking, leſt their attention ſhould
be drawn for a moment from the ſtage.
- But to her infinite ſurprize, no ſooner was
the ſeeond ačt begun, than their attention
ended ! they turned from the performers to
each other, and entered into a whiſpering,
but gay converſation, which though not
loud enough to diſturb the audience in
general, kept in the ears of their neigh-
bours, a buzzing which interrupted all
pleaſure from the repreſentation. Of this
effect of their gaiety it ſeemed uncertain
whether they were conſcious, but very evi-
dent that they were totally careleſs.
-- The

<page 235>
23o C E C I L I. A.
The deſperate reſource, which ſhe had
tried during the firſt ačt, of ſeeking enter-
-tainment from the very converſation which
prevented her enjoying it, was not now
even in ther power: for theſe gentlemen,
though as negligent as the young ladies
had been whom they diſturbed, were much
more cautious whom they inſtructed: their
language was ambiguous, and their terms,
to Cecilia, were unintelligible: their ſub-
jećts, indeed, required ſome diſcretion, be-
ing nothing leſs than a ludicrous calcula-
tion of the age and duration of jointured
widows, and of the chances and expecta-
tions of unmarried young ladies... . . . .
But what more even than their talking
provoked her, was finding that the mo-
ment the act was over, when ſhe cared not
if their vociferation had been inceſſant, one
of them called out, “Come, be quiet, the
dance is begun;” and then they were again
all ſilent attention | -
. In the third act, however, ſhe was more
fortunate; the gentlemen again changed
their places, and they were ſucceeded by
others who came to the Opera not to hear
themſelves but the performers; and as ſoon
as ſhe was permitted to liſten, the voice of
Pacchierotti took from her all deſire to
hear any thing but itſelf.
During the laſt dance ſhe was diſcovered
by

<page 236>
C E C I L II A, 231
by Sir Robert Floyer, who ſauntering down
fop's alley, ſtationed himſelf by her ſide,
and whenever the figurante relieved the .
principal dancers, turned his eyes from the
ſtage to her face, as better worth his no-
tice, and equally deſtined for his amuſe-
ment, ºn ... . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Mr. Monckton, too, who for ſome time
had ſeen and watched her, now approached;
he had obſerved with much ſatisfaction
that her whole mind, had been intent upon
the performance, yet ſtill the familiarity of
Sir Robert Floyer's admiration diſturbed
and perplexed him ; he determined, there-
fore, to make an effort to ſatisfy his doubts
by examining into his intentions : and,
taking him apart, before the dance was
quite over, “Well,” he ſaid, “ who is ſo
handſome here as Harrel's ward **
“Yes,” anſwered he, calmly, “ ſhe is
handſome, but I don't like her expreſſion.”:
“No 2 why, what is the fault of it?” .
“Proud, curſed proud. It is not the
ſort of woman I like. If one ſays a civil
thing to her, ſhe only wiſhes one at the
devil for one's pains.”
“O, you have tried her, then, have you?
why you are not, in general, much given
to ſay civil things.” .
, “Yes, you know I ſaid ſomething of
that ſort to her once about Juliet, at the
rehearſal. Was not you by ?”
“What,

<page 237>
232 C. E. C I L I. A.
: , “...What, then, was that all? and did
you imagine one compliment would do
your buſineſs with her ?” - *
“O, hang it, who ever dreams of com-
plimenting the women now 2 that's all at
an end.”.... ... * . . . . . .
“You won't find ſhe thinks ſo, though;
for, as you well ſay, her pride is inſuffer-
able, and I, who have long known her,
can aſſure you it does not diminiſh upon
intimacy.”... . . . . *
“Perhaps not, but there's very pretty
picking in 3Cool, per annum one would
not thinkº much of a little incumbrance
upon ſuch an eſtate.”
... “Are you quite, ſure...the eſtate is ſo
conſiderable? Report is mightily given to
magnify.”” . . . . . . . . . . . .
“O, I have pretty good intelligence:
though, after all, I don't know but I may
be off; ſhe'll take a confounded deal of
time and trouble.” .
Monckton, too much a man of intereſt
and of the world to cheriſh that delicacy
which covets univerſal admiration for the
objećt of it's fondneſs, then artfully en-
larged upon the obſtacles he already ap-
prehended, and inſinuated ſuch others as
he believed would be moſt likely to inti-
midate him. But his ſubtlety was loſt upon
the impenetrable Baronet, who poſſeſſed
- - - - that
*.
|

<page 238>
C E C I L I. A. 233
that hard inſenſibility which obſtinately
purſues its own courſe, deaf to what is
4aid, and indifferent to what is thought.
... Meanwhile the ladies were now making
way to the coffee-room, though very ſlowly
on account of the crowd; and juſt as they
got near the lobby, Cecilia perceived Mr.
Belfield, who, immediately making him-
ſelf known to her, was offering his ſervice
to hand her out of the pit, when Sir Ro-
.bert Floyer, not ſeeing or not heeding him,
preſſed forward, and ſaid, “, Will you let
sºme have the honour, Miſs Beverley, of
taking care of you ?” . --
- -
... Cecilia, to whom he grew daily more
diſagreeable, coldly declined his aſſiſtance,
:while ſhe readily accepted that, which had
firſt been offered her by Mr. Belfield.
: The haughty Baronet, extremely nettled,
forced his way on, and rudely ſtalking up
to Mr. Belfield, motioned with his hand
for room to paſs him, and ſaid, “Make
way, Sir!” . . . * : * : * ~ * , ºf 21; 23. -
a “Make way for me, Sir!” cried. Bel-
field, oppoſing him with one hand, while
with the other he held Cecilia...: tº , ſ: ,
“You, Sir? and who are you, Sir?”
demanded the Baronet, diſdainfully. '
º “Of that, Sir, I ſhall give you an ac-
..count whenever you pleaſe,” anſwered Bel-
field, with equal ſcorn. " . . s
<-- - - - « What

<page 239>
234 - C E C I L I A.
*
“What the devil do you mean, Sir 2"
“ Nothing very difficult to be under-
ſtood,” replied Belfield, and attempted to
draw on Cecilia, who, much alarmed, was
ſhrinking back. …" . . . . . . .
Sir Robert then, ſwelling with rage, re-
proachfully turned to her, and ſaid, “Will
you ſuffer ſuch an impertinent fellow as
that, Miſs Beverley, to have the honour
of taking your hand **
Belfield, with great indignation, de-
manded what he meant by the term im-
ºpertinent fellow ; and Sir Robert, yet more
inſolently repeated it: Cecilia, extremely
ſhocked, earneſtly befought them both to
be quiet ; but Belfield, at the repetition of
- this inſult, haſtily let go her hand and put
his own upon his ſword, while Sir Robert,
-taking advantage of his ſituation in being
-a ſtep higher than his antagoniſt, fiercely
puſhed him back, and deſcended into the
lobby. . . -
Belfield, enraged beyond endurance, in-
ſtantly drew his ſword, and Sir Robert was
preparing to follow his example, when Ce-
cilia, in an agony of fright, called out,
“:Good Heaven will nobody interfere?”
And then a young man, forcing his way
through the crowd, exclaimed, “For ſhame,
for ſhame, gentlemen l is this a place for
ſuch violence 1”
... . . .” Belfield,
__-
-
i
!
|

<page 240>
C E C I L I. A. 235
*--
ſ
Belfield, endeavouring to recover him-
ſelf, put up his ſword, and, though in a
voice half choaked with paſſion, ſaid, “I
thank you, Sir! I was off my guard. I beg
pardon of the whole company.” º
Then, walking up to Sir Robert, he put-
into his hand a card with his name and di-
rećtion, ſaying, “With you, Sir, I ſhall
be happy to ſettle what apologies are ne-
ceſſary at your firſt leiſure;” and hurried
away. . . . . . . . *
& Sir Robert, exclaiming , aloud that the
ſhould ſoon teach him to whom he had
been ſo impertinent, was immediately go-
ing to follow him, when the affrighted
Cecilia again called out aloud, “Oh ſtop
him —good God I will nobody, ſtop
him l’— ... . . . . - - * .
The rapidity with which this angry
feene had paſſed had filled her with amaze-
ment, and the evident reſentment of the
Baronet upon her refuſing his aſſiſtance,
gave her an immediate conſciouſneſs that
ſhe was herſelf the real cauſe of the quar-
rel; nwhile the manner in which he was
preparing to follow Mr. Belfield, convinced
her of the deſperate ſcene which was likely
to ſucceed ; fear, therefore, overcoming
every other feeling, forced from her this
exclamation before ſhe knew what ſhe
ſaid. … . . . .
º …'. - The

<page 241>
236 C E C I L I. A.
- The moment ſhe had ſpoken, the young
man who had already, interpoſed again
ruſhed forward, and ſeizing Sir Robert by
the arm, warmly remonſtrated againſt the
violence of his proceedings, and being pre-
ſently ſeconded by other gentlemen, almoſt
compelled him to give up his deſign. -
Then, haſtening to Cecilia, “Be not
alarmed, madam,” he cried, “ all is over,
and every body is ſafe.” . , - - -
Cecilia, finding herſelf thus addreſſed by
agentleman ſhe had never before ſeen, felt
extremely aſhamed of having rendered her
intereſt in thei debate ſo apparent ; ſhe
pourtſied, to him in ſome confuſion, and
taking hold of Mrs. Harrel's arm, hurried
heri back into the pit, in order te quit a
crowd, of which ſhe now found herſelf the
principal objećt.' ' ' ' ' ' '... . . . . . . .
Curioſity, however, was univerſally ex-
cited, and her retreat ſerved but to inflame
it: ſome of the ladies, and moſt of the
gentlemen, upon various pretences, re-
turned into the pit merely to lodkº at her,
and in a few minutes the report was current
that the young lady who had been the oc-
caſion of the quarrel, was dying with love
for Sir Robert Floyer. . . - , , , i.
a Mr. Monckton, who had kept by her
fide during the whole affair, felt thunder-,
ſtruck by the emotion ſhe had ſhewn; Mr.
- . * Arnott

<page 242>
C E C I L I. A. 237
Arnott. too, who had never quitted her,
wiſhed himſelf expoſed to the ſame danger
as Sir Robert, ſo that he might be hor
noured with the ſame concern: but they
were both too much the dupes of their
own apprehenſions and jealouſy, to perceive .
that what they inſtantly imputed to fond-
neſs, proceeded ſimply from general hu-
manity, accidentally united with the con-
ſciouſneſs of being acceſſary to the quarrel.
The young ſtranger who had officiated
as mediator between the diſputants, in a
few moments followed her with a glaſs of
water, which he had brought from the
coffee-room, begging her to drink it and
compoſe herſelf. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ;
Cecilia, though, ſhe declined his civility
with more vexation than gratitude, per-
ceived, as ſhe raiſed her eyes to thank him,
that her new friend was a young man very
ſtrikingly elegant in his addreſs. and ap-
pearance. . . . . . . • *-* - - - - - .
, Miſs Larolles next, who, with her party,
came back into the pit, ºran up to Cecilia,
crying, “O my dear creature, what a
monſtrous ſhocking thing!: You’ve no Idea
how I am frightened; do you know I hap-
pened to be quite at the further end of the
coffee-room when it began, and I could
not get out to ſee what was the matter for
ten ages; only conceive whatia ſituation l’”
. I - “ Would

<page 243>
238 C E C I L I. A.
“Would your fright, then, have been
leſs,” ſaid Cecilia, “ had you been nearer
the danger ?” ". -
* “O Lord no, for when I came within
fight I was fifty times worſe ! I gave ſuch
a monſtrous ſcream, that it quite made
Mr. Meadows ſtart. I dare ſay he'll tell
me of it theſe hundred years: but really
when I ſaw them draw their ſwords I thought
I ſhould have died; I was ſo amazingly
ſurprized you've no notion.” -
Here ſhe was interrupted by the re-ap-
pearance of the active ſtranger, who again
advancing to Cecilia, ſaid, “I am in doubt
whether the efforts I make to revive will
leaſe or irritate you, but though you re-
jećted the laſt cordial I ventured to preſent
you, perhaps you will look with a more
favourable eye towards that of which I am
now the herald.” -
Cecilia then, caſting her eyes around,
ſaw that he was followed by Sir Robert
Floyer. Full of diſpleaſure both at this
introdućtion and at his preſence, ſhe turned
haſtily to Mr. Arnott, and entreated him
to enquire if the carriage was not yet
ready. - -
Sir Robert, looking at her with all the
exultation of new-raiſed vanity, ſaid, with
more ſoftneſs than he had ever before ad-
dreſſed her, “Have you been frightened?”
“. Every

<page 244>
C E C I L I. A. 239
**
i, “Every body, I believe was frightened,”
anſwered Cecilia, with an air of dignity in-
tended to check his riſing expectations. . .
º, “There was no ſort of cauſe,” anſwered
he “ the fellow did not know, whom he
ſpoke too, that was all.” n :
* Lord, Sir Robert,” cried Miſs La-
rolles, “ how could you be ſo ſhocking as
to draw your ſword you can't conceive
how horrid it looked.” . . . . A
“Why I did not draw my ſword,” cried
he, “I only had my hand on the hilt.”
“ Lord, did not you, indeed well,
every body ſaid you did, and I'm ſure I
thought I ſaw five-and-twenty ſwords all
at once. I thought one of you would be
killed every moment. It was horrid diſ-
agreeable, I aſſure you.”
Sir Robert was now called away by ſome
gentlemen; and Mr. Monckton, earneſt to
be better informed of Cecilia's real ſenti-
ments, ſaid, with affeóted concern, “ At
preſent this matter is merely ridiculous; I
am ſorry to think in how ſhort a time it
may become more important.”
“Surely,” cried Cecilia with quickneſs,
“ſome of their friends will interfere! ſurely
upon ſo trifling a ſubjećt they will not be
ſo, mad, ſo inexcuſable, as to proceed to
more ſerious reſentment l’’: -
“Which ever of them,” ſaid the ſtranger,
. . . . 2 “ is

<page 245>
240 C E C I L I. A.
“is moſt honoured by this anxiety, will
be mad indeed to riſk a life ſo valued?”
“. Cannot you, Mr. Monckton, “ con-
tinued Cecilia, too much alarmed to regard
this inſinuation,” “ ſpeak with Mr. Bel-
field You are acquainted with him, I
know; is it impoſſible you can follow him?”
; : “I will with pleaſure do whatever you
wiſh; but ſtill if Sir Robert—” sº
“O, as to Sir Robert, Mr. Harrel, I
am very ſure, will undertake him; I will
try to ſee him to-night myſelf, and entreat
him to exert all his influence.” *
“Ah, madam,” cried the ſtranger, archly,
and lowering his voice, “thoſe French beads
and Briſtol ſtones have not, I find, ſhone in
vain l’” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . º.
At theſe words Cecilia recognized her
white domino acquaintance at the maſque-
rade; ſhe had before recollečted his voice,
but was too much perturbed to confider
where or when ſhe had heard it. . . . . . ."
1 * If Mr. Briggs,” continued he, “ does
not ſpeedily come forth with his plum friend,
before the glittering of ſwords and ſpears is
joined to that of jewels, the glare will be
ſo reſplendent, that he will fear to come
within the influence of its rays. Though,
perhaps, he may only think the ſtronger the
light, the better he ſhall ſee to count his
guineas: for as cº-º. 2 - . . . . .
c. * & “ — in
|
|
|!

<page 246>
C E C I L I A. 24. I
.
“ ——in ten thouſand pounds -*
“ Ten thouſand charms are centred,”
in an hundred thouſand, the charms may
have ſuch magic power, that he may defy
the united efforts of tinſel and knight-erran-
try to deliver you from the golden ſpell.”
Here the captain, advancing to Cecilia,
ſaid, “I have been looking for you in vain
partout, but the crowd has been ſo accablant
I was almoſt reduced to deſpair. Give me
leave to hope you are now recovered from
the horreur of this little fracas P”
Mr. Arnott then brought intelligence
that the carriage was ready. Cecília, glad
to be gone, inſtantly haſtened to it; and,
as ſhe was conduşted by Mr. Monckton,
moſt earneſtly entreated him to take an
aćtive part, in endeavouring to prevent the
fatal conſequences with which the quarre
ſeemed likely to terminate, -
**
Wo L. I. I, C H A P.

<page 247>
2
42 C E C I L I A.
C H A P. V.
A FA SH 1 O N A B L E FR I E N D.
AS ſoon as they returned home, Cecilia
begged Mrs. Harrel not to loſe a mo-
ment before ſhe tried to acquaint Mr. Har-
rel with the ſtate of the affair. But that
lady was too helpleſs to know in what man-
ner to ſet about it; ſhe could not tell where
he was, ſhe could not conjecture where he
might be.
Cecilia then rang for his own man, and
upon enquiry, heard that he was, in all
probability, at Brookes's in St. James's-
Street.
She then begged Mrs. Harrel would
write to him.
Mrs. Harrel knew not what to ſay.
Cecilia therefore, equally quick in form-
ing and executing her deſigns, wrote to him
herſelf, and entreated that without loſing an
inſtant he would find out his friend Sir Ro-
bert Floyer, and endeavour to effect an ac-
commodation between him and Mr. Belfield,
with whom he had had a diſpute at the
Opera-houſe. -
The
l
|
-:

<page 248>
C E C 1 L I A. 243
The man ſoon returned with an anſwer
that Mr. Harrel would not fail to obey her
commands.
She determined to fit up till he came
home in order to learn the event of the ne-
gociation. She conſidered herſelf as the ef-
ficient cauſe of the quarrel, yet ſcarce knew
how or in what to blame herſelf; the beha-
viour of Sir Robert had always been offen-
five to her; ſhe diſliked his manners, and
deteſted his boldneſs; and ſhe had already
ſhewn her intention to accept the aſſiſtance
of Mr. Belfield before he had followed her
with an offer of his own. She was uncer-
tain, indeed, whether he had remarked
what had paſſed, but ſhe had reaſon to
think that, ſo circumſtanced, to have
changed her purpoſe, would have been con-
ſtrued into an encouragement that might
have authoriſed his future preſumption of
her favour. All ſhe could find to regret
with regard to herſelf, was wanting the pre-
- - t- - - - -
fence of mind to have refuſed the civilities
of both.
Mrs. Harrel, though really ſorry at the
ſtate of the affair, regarded herſelf as ſo
entirely unconcerned in it, that, eaſily
wearied when out of company, ſhe ſoon
grew ſleepy, and retired to her own room.
The anxious Cecilia, hoping every in-
{tant the return of Mr. Harrel, ſat up by
L 2 herſelf;

<page 249>
244. C E C I L I A.
herſelf: but it was not till near four o'clock
in the morning that he made his appear-
all CC. -
“ Well, ſir,”, cried ſhe, the moment ſhe
ſaw him, “I fear by your coming home ſo
late you have had much trouble, but I hope
it has been ſucceſsful ?”
Great, however, was her mortification
when he anſwered that he had not even ſeen
the Baronet, having been engaged himſelf
in ſo particular a manner, that he could not
poſſibly break from his party till paſt three
o'clock, at which time he drove to the
houſe of Sir Robert, but heard that he was
not yet come home.
Cecilia, though much diſguſted by
ſuch a ſpecimen of inſenſibility towards a
man whom he pretended to call his friend,
would not leave him till he had promiſed to
ariſe as ſoon as it was light, and make an
effort to recover the time loſt.
She was now no longer ſurpriſed either
at the debts of Mr. Harrel, or at his par-
ticular occaſions for money. She was con-
vinced he ſpent half the night in gaming,
and the conſequences, however dreadful,
were but natural. That Sir Robert Floyer
alſo did the ſame was a matter of much leſs
importance to her, but that the life of any
man ſhould through her means be endan-
gered, diſturbed her inexpreſſibly.
She

<page 250>
C E C I L I A. 245
-
She went, however, to bed, but aroſe again
at fix o'clock, and dreſſed herſelf by candle
light. In an hour's time ſhe ſent to enquire
if Mr. Harrel was ſtirring, and hearing he
was aſleep, gave orders to have him called.
Yet he did not riſe till eight o'clock, nor
could all her meſſages or expoſtulations
drive him out of the houſe till nine.
He was ſcarcely gone before Mr. Monck-
ton arrived, who now for the firſt time had
the ſatisfaction of finding her alone.
“You are very good for coming ſo
early, ” cried ſhe “ have you ſeen Mr.
Belfield : Have you had any converſation
with him * *
Alarmed at her eagerneſs, and ſtill more
at ſeeing by her looks the ſleepleſs night ſhe
had paſſed, he made at firſt no reply; and
when, with encreaſing impatience, ſhe re-
peated her queſtion, he only ſaid, “ Has
Belfield ever viſited you ſince he had the
honour of meeting you at my houſe : ”
“ No, never.”
“ Have you ſeen him often in public **
“ No, I have never ſeen him at all but
the evening Mrs. Harrel received maſks,
and laſt night at the Opera.” º
“Is it, then, for the ſafety of Sir Robert
you are ſo extremely anxious?”
“It is for the ſafety of both ; the cauſe
of their quarrel was ſo trifling, that I can-
- L 3 n()t

<page 251>
246 C E C I L I A.
not bear to think its conſequence ſhould be
ferious.” -
“But do you not wiſh better to one of
them than to the other P’’
“As a matter of juſtice I do, but not
from any partiality: Sir Robert was un-
doubtedly the aggreſſor, and Mr. Belfield,
though at firſt too fiery, was certainly ill
uſed.” -
The candour of this ſpeech recovered
Mr. Monckton from his apprehenſions; and,
carefully obſerving her looks while he ſpoke,
he gave her the following account.
That he had haſtened to Belfield's lodg-
ings the moment he left the Opera-houſe,
and, after repeated denials, abſolutely
forced himſelf into his room, where he was
quite alone, and in much agitation: he con-
verſed with him for more than an hour upon
the ſubject of the quarrel, but found he ſo
warmly reſented the perſonal inſult given
him by Sir Robert, that no remonſtrance
had any effect in making him alter his re-
folution of demanding ſatisfaction.
“And could you bring him to conſent
to no compromiſe before you left him * *
cried Cecilia.
“ No; for before I got to him—the chal-
lenge had been ſent.”
“ The challenge! good heaven l—and
do you know the event?”
“ I cal-
-
.
ºi

<page 252>
C E C I L I A. 247
º
“I called again this morning at his
lodgings, but he was not returned home.”
“And was it impoſſible to follow him :
Were there no means to diſcover whither
he was gone * *
“ Nône; to elude all purſuit, he went
out before any body in the houſe was ſtir-
ring, and took his ſervant with him.”
“Have you, then, been to Sir Ro-
bert : ”
“I have been to Cavendiſh-Square, but
there, it ſeems, he has not appeared all
night; I traced him, through his ſervants,
from the Opera to a gaming-houſe, where I
found he had amuſed himſelf till this morn-
ing.”
The uneaſineſs of Cecilia now encreaſed
every moment; and Mr. Monckton, ſeeing
he had no other chance of ſatisfying her,
offered his ſervice to go again in ſearch of
both the gentlemen, and endeavour to
bring her better information. She accepted
the propoſal with gratitude, and he de-
arted. -
Soon after ſhe was joined by Mr. Arnott,
who, though ſeized with all the horrors of
jealouſy at fight of her apprehenſions, was
ſo deſirous to relieve them, that without
even making any merit of obliging her, he
almoſt inſtantly ſet out upon the ſame er-
rand that employed Mr. Monckton, and
L 4 deter-

<page 253>
248 C E C I L I A.
determined not to mention his deſign till he
found whether it would enable him to bring
her good tidings. -
He was ſcarce gone when ſhe was told
that Mr. Delvile begged to have the honour
of ſpeaking to her. Surpriſed at this con-
deſcenſion, ſhe deſired he might immedi-
ately be admitted; but much was her ſur-
priſe augmented, when, inſtead of ſeeing
her oſtentatious guardian, ſhe again beheld
her maſquerade friend, the white domino.
He entreated her pardon for an intruſion
neither authoriſed by acquaintance nor by
buſineſs, though ſomewhat, he hoped, pal-
liated, by his near connection with one who
was privileged to take an intereſt in her af-
fairs: and then, haſtening to the motives
which had occaſioned his viſit, “ when I
had the honour,” he ſaid, “ of ſeeing you
laſt night at the Opera-houſe, the diſpute
which had juſt happened between two gen-
tlemen, ſeemed to give you an uneaſineſs
which could not but be painful to all who
obſerved it, and as among that number I
was not the leaſt moved, you will forgive, I
hope, my eagerneſs to be the firſt to bring
you intelligence that nothing fatal has hap-
pened, or is likely to happen.”
“ You do me, ſir,” ſaid Cecilia, “ much
honour; and indeed you relieve me from a
fuſpence extremely diſagreeable. The ac-
commodation,

<page 254>
C E C I L I A. 249
!
t
t
commodation, I ſuppoſe, was brought
about this morning : "
“I find,” anſwered he, ſmiling, “You
now expect too much ; but hope is never
ſo elaſtic as when it ſprings from the ruins
of terror.” -
“What then is the matter? Are they at
laſt, not ſafe 2 °
“Yes, perfeótly ſafe; but I cannot tell
you they have never been in danger.”
“ Well, if it is now over I am contented:
but you will very much oblige me, ſir, if
you will inform me what has paſſed.”
“You oblige me, madam, by the honour
of your commands. I ſaw but too much
reaſon to apprehend that meaſures the moſt
violent would follow the affray of laſt night;
yet as I found that the quarrel had been ac-
cidental, and the offence unpremeditated, I
thought it not abſolutely impoſſible that an
expeditious mediation might effect a com-
promiſe: at leaſt it was worth trying; for
though wrath ſlowly kindled or long nou-
riſhed is ſullen and intraćtable, the ſudden
anger that has not had time to impreſs the
mind with a deep ſenſe of injury, will, when
gently managed, be ſometimes appeaſed
with the ſame quickneſs it is excited: I
hoped, therefore, that ſome trifling conceſ-
fion from Sir Robert, as the aggreſſor, L’’
L 5 “ Ah

<page 255>
25o C E C I L I A.
“Ah fir!” cried Cecilia, “ that, I fear,
was not to be obtained l’’
“Not by me, I muſt own,” he anſwered;
“ but I was not willing to think of the dif-
ficulty, and therefore ventured to make
the propoſal: nor did I leave the Opera-
houſe till 1 had uſed every poſſible argu-
ment to perſuade Sir Robert an apology
would neither ſtain his courage nor *. re-
putation. But his ſpirit brooked not the
humiliation.” -
“Spirit ° cried Cecilia, “ how mild a
word ' What, then, could poor Mr. Belfield
reſolve upon P’’
“That, I believe, took him very little
time to decide. I diſcovered, by means of
a gentleman at the Opera who was ac-
quainted with him, where he lived, and I
waited upon him with an intention to offer
my ſervices towards ſettling the affair
by arbitration: for fince you call him poor
Mr. Belfield, I think you will permit me,
without offence to his antagoniſt, to own
that his gallantry, though too impetuous for
commendation, engaged me in his intereſt.”
“I hope you don't think,” cried Cecilia,
“ that an offence to his antagoniſt muſt ne–
ceſſarily be an offence to me?”
“Whatever I may have thought,” an-
ſwered he, looking at her with evident ſur-
griſe, “I certainly did not wiſh that a.
ſympathy.

<page 256>
C E C I L I A. 25 tº
-
fympathy offenſive and defenſive had been
concluded between you. I could not, how-
ever, gain acceſs to Mr. Belfield laſt night,
but the affair dwelt upon my mind, and
this morning I called at his lodging as ſoon.
as it was light.”
“How good you have been l’ cried Ce-
cilia; “ your kind offices have not, I hope,
all proved ineffectual "
“So valourous a Don Quixote,” re-
turned he, laughing, “ certainly merited a.
faithful Eſquire! he was, however, gone.
out, and nobody knew whither. About:
half an hour ago I called upon him again;
he was then juſt returned home.”
“Well, Sir *
“ I ſaw him; the affair was over; and in
a ſhort time he will be able, if you will al-
low him ſo much honour, to thank you for
theſe enquiries.”
“ He is then wounded ?”
“ He is a little hurt, but Sir Robert is,
perfectly ſafe. Belfield fired firſt, and miſ-
ſed; the Baronet was not ſo ſucceſsleſs.”
“I am grieved to hear it, indeed! and
where is the wound P’”
“ The ball entered his right ſide, and
the moment he felt it, he fired his ſecond
piſtol in the air. This I heard from his
ſervant. He was brought home carefully
and ſlowly; no ſurgeon had been upon the
- ſpot,

<page 257>
252 C E C I I, I A.
ſpot, but one was called to him immedi-
ately. I ſtayed to enquire his opinion after
the wound had been dreſſed: he told me he
had extraćted the ball, and aſſured me Mr.
Belfield was not in any danger. Your
alarm, madam, laſt night, which had always
been preſent to me, then encouraged me to
take the liberty of waiting upon you; for 1
concluded you could yet have had no cer-
tain intelligence, and thought it beſt to let
the plain and ſimple fact out-run the prob-
able exaggeration of rumour.”
Cecilia thanked him for his attention, and
Mrs. Harrel then making her appearance,
he aroſe and ſaid “Had my father known.
the honour I have had this morning of
waiting upon Miſs Beverley, I am ſure I
ſhould have been charged with his compli-
ments, and ſuch a commiſſion would ſome-
what have leſſened the preſumption of this vi-
fit; but I feared left while I ſhould be making
intereſt for my credentials, the pretence of
my embaſſy might be loſt, and other couriers,
leſs ſcrupulous, might obtain previous
audiences, and anticipate my diſpatches.”
He then took his leave. -
“ This white domino, at laſt then,” ſaid
Cecília, “ is the ſon of Mr. Delvile ! and
thence the knowledge of my ſituation
which gave me ſo much ſurpriſe: — a ſon
how infinitely unlike his father l’”
“Yes,”
s
:

<page 258>
C E C I L I A. ass
“ Yes,” ſaid Mrs. Harrel, “ and as un-
Iike his mother too, for I aſſure you ſhe is
more proud and haughty even than the old
gentleman. I hate the very fight of her,
for ſhe keeps every body in ſuch awe that
there's nothing but reſtraint in her preſence.
But the ſon is a very pretty young man, and
much admired; though I have only ſeen.
him in public, for none of the family viſit
here.” -
Mr. Monckton, who now ſoon returned,
was not a little ſurpriſed to find that all the
intelligence he meant to communicate was
already known : and not the more pleaſed
to hear that the white domino, to whom be-
fore he owed no good will, had thus offici-
ouſly preceded him. - .
Mr. Arnott, who alſo came juſt after him,
had been ſo little ſatisfied with the reſult of
his enquiries, that from the fear of encreaſ-
ing Cecilia's uneaſineſs, he determined not
to make known whither he had been ; but
he ſoon found his forbearance was of no
avail, as ſhe was already acquainted with
the duel and its conſequences. Yet his un-
remitting deſire to oblige her urged him
twice in the courſe of the ſame day to again
call at Mr. Belfield's lodgings, in order to
bring her thence freſh and unſolicited intelli-
gence.
Before breakfaſt was quite over, Miſs
Larolles,

<page 259>
254 C E C I L I A.
Larolles, out of breath, with eagerneſs,
came to tell the news of the duel, in her
way to church, as it was Sunday morning!
and ſoon after Mrs. Mears, who alſo was
followed by other ladies, brought the ſame
account, which by all was addreſſed to Ce-
cilia, with expreſſions of concern that con-
vinced her, to her infinite vexation, ſhe was.
generally regarded as the perſon chiefly in-
tereſted in the accident. - -
Mr. Harrel did not return till late, but
then ſeemed in very high ſpirits: “Miſs
Beverley,” he cried, “I bring you news
that will repay all your fright; Sir Robert
is not only ſafe, but is come off con-
queror.”
“I am very ſorry, Sir,” anſwered Ceci-
lia, extremely provoked to be thus con-
gratulated, “ that any body conquered, or
any body was vanquiſhed.”
“ There is no need for ſorrow,” cried
Mr. Harrel, “ or for any thing but joy,
for he has not killed his man; the vićtory,
therefore, will neither coſt him a flight nor
a trial. To-day he means to wait upon
you, and lay his laurels at your feet.”
“ He means, then, to take very fruitleſs
trouble,” ſaid Cecilia, “ for I have not
any ambition to be ſo honoured.
* Ah, Miſs Beverley,” returned he,
laughing,

<page 260>
C E C I L I A. 255
}
laughing, “ this won't do now ! it might
have paſſed a little while ago, but it won't
do now, I promiſe you !”
Cecilia, though much diſpleaſed by this
accuſation, found that diſclaiming it only
excited further raillery, and therefore pre-
vailed upon herſelf to give him a quiet
hearing, and ſcarce any reply.
At dinner, when Sir Robert arrived, the
diſlike ſhe had originally taken to him, en-
creaſed already into diſguſt by his behaviour
the preceding evening, was now fixed into
the ſtrongeſt averſion by the horror ſhe
conceived of his fierceneſs, and the indig-
nation ſhe felt excited by his arrogance.
He ſeemed, from the ſucceſs of this duel,
to think himſelf raiſed to the higheſt pin-
nacle of human glory; triumph fat exult-
ing on his brow ; he looked down on who-
ever he deigned to look at all, and ſhewed
that he thought his notice an honour, how-
ever imperious the manner in which it was
accorded.
Upon Cecilia, however, he caſt an eye of
more complacency; he now believed her
ſubdued, and his vanity revelled in the be-
lief: her anxiety had ſo thoroughly ſatisfied
him of her love, that ſhe had hardly the
power left to undeceive him; her filence
he only attributed to admiration, her cold-
neſs to fear, and her reſerve to ſhame.
Sickened

<page 261>
256 C E C I L I A.
Sickened by inſolence ſo undiſguiſed and
unauthoriſed, and incenſed at the triumph
of his ſucceſsful brutality, Cecilia with
pain kept her ſeat, and with vexation re-
flected upon the neceſſity ſhe was under of
paſſing ſo large a portion of her time in
company to which ſhe was ſo extremely
averſe. -
After dinner, when Mrs. Harrel was talk-
ing of her party for the evening, of which
Cecilia declined making one, Sir Robert,
with a ſort of proud humility, that half
feared rejection, and half proclaimed an
indifference to meeting it, ſaid “I don't
much care for going further myſelf, if Miſs
Beverley will give me the honour of taking
my tea with her.”
Cecilia, regarding him with much ſur-
priſe, anſwered that ſhe had letters to
write into the country, which would con-
fine her to her own room for the reſt of
the evening. The Baronet, looking at
his watch, inſtantly cried “ Faith, that
is very fortunate, for I have juſt recol-
lečted an engagement at the other end of
the town which had ſlipt my memory.”
Soon after they were all gone, Cecilia
received a note from Mrs. Delvile, beg-
ging the favour of her company the
next morning to breakfaſt. She readily
accepted

<page 262>
C E C I L I A. 257
accepted the invitation, though ſhe was
by no means prepared, by the charaćter
ſhe had heard of her, to expect much
pleaſure from an acquaintance with that
lady. . . .
C H A P.

<page 263>
258 C E C I L I A.
C H A P. VI.
A FA M I LY PA R T Y.
CECILIA the next morning, between
nine and ten o'clock, went to St.James'-
ſquare ; ſhe found nobody immediately
ready to receive her, but in a ſhort time
was waited upon by Mr. Delvile.
After the uſual ſalutations, “ Miſs Be-
verley,” he ſaid, “I have given expreſs
orders to my people, that I may not be in-
terrupted while I have the pleaſure of paſ-
fing ſome minutes in converſation with
you before you are preſented to Mrs. Del-
vile.”
And then, with an air of ſolemnity, he
led her to a ſeat, and having himſelf taken
poſſeſſion of another, continued his ſpeech.
“ I have received information, from au-
thority which I cannot doubt, that the in-
diſcretion of certain of your admirers laſt
Saturday at the Opera-houſe, occaſioned a
diſturbance which to a young woman of
delicacy I ſhould imagine muſt be very
alarming : now as I conſider myſelf con-
cerned in your fame and welfare from re-
- garding

<page 264>
C E C I L I A. 259
|
garding you as my ward, I think it is in-
cumbent upon me to make enquiries into
ſuch of your affairs as become public ; for
I ſhould feel in ſome meaſure diſgraced
myſelf, ſhould it appear to the world, while
you are under my guardianſhip, that there
was any want of propriety in the direction
of your condućt.”
Cecilia, not much flattered by this ad-
dreſs, gravely anſwered that ſhe fancied the
affair had been miſrepreſented to him.
“I am not much addićted,” he replied,
“ to give ear to any thing lightly ; you
muſt therefore permit me to enquire in-
to the merits of the cauſe, and them to
draw my own inferences. And let me, at
the ſame time, aſſure you there is no other
young lady who has any right to expect
fuch an attention from me. I muſt begin
by begging you to inform me upon what
grounds the two gentlemen in queſtion, for
ſuch, by courteſy, I preſume they are called,
thought themſelves entitled publicly to diſ-
pute your favour * º
“My favour, Sir!” cried Cecilia, much
amazed.
“My dear,” ſaid he, with a compla-
cency meant to give her courage, “I know
the queſtion is difficult for a young lady to
anſwer ; but be not abaſhed, I ſhould be
forry to diſtreſs you, and mean to the ut-
moſt

<page 265>
26o C E C I L I A.
moſt of my power to ſave your bluſhes.
Do not, therefore, fear me"; conſider me
as your guardian, and aſſure yourſelf I am
perfectly well diſpoſed to confider you as
my ward. Acquaint me, then, freely, what
are the pretenſions of theſe gentlemen º’’
“To me, Sir, they have, I believe, no.
pretenſions at all.”
“ I ſee you are ſhy,”
be eaſy with me ; and when I conſider how
little you are accuſtomed to me, I do not
wonder. But pray take courage; I think
it neceſſary to inform myſelf of your af-
fairs, and therefore I beg you will ſpeak to
me with freedom.”
Cecilia, more and more mortified by this
humiliating condeſcenſion, again aſſured
him he had been miſinformed, and was
again, though diſcredited, praiſed for her
modeſty, when, to her great relief, they
were interrupted by the entrance of her
friend the white domino.
“ Mortimer,” ſaid Mr. Delvile, “I un-
derſtand you have already had the plea-
ſure of ſeeing this young lady ?”
“Yes, Sir,” he anſwered, “I have more
than once had that happineſs, but I have
never had the honour of being introduced
to her.”
“Miſs Beverley, then,” ſaid the father,
returned he, with,
encreaſing gentleneſs, “ I ſee you cannot
« I

<page 266>
C E C I L I A. 26:
!
* I muſt preſent to you Mr. Mortimer Del-
vile, my ſon ; and, Mortimer, in Miſs Be-
verley I deſire you will remember that you
reſpect a ward of your father's.”
“ I will not, Sir,” anſwered he, “ for-
get an injunction my own inclinations had
already out-run.”
Mortimer Delvile was tall and finely
formed, his features, though not handſome,
were full of expreſſion, and a noble openneſs
of manners and addreſs ſpoke the elegance
of his education, and the liberality of his
mind. >
When this introdućtion was over, a more
general converſation took place, till Mr.
Delvile, ſuddenly riſing, ſaid to Cecilia,
“You will pardon me, Miſs Beverley, if
I leave you for a few minutes; one of my
tenants ſets out to-morrow morning for my
eſtate in the North, and he has been two
hours waiting to ſpeak with me. But if
my ſon is not particularly engaged, I am
ſure he will be ſo good as to do the ho-
nours of the houſe till his mother is ready
to receive you.” -
And then, graciouſly waving his hand,
he quitted the room.
“My father,” cried young Delvile, “ has
left me an office which, could I execute it
as perfectly as I ſhall willingly, would be
performed without a fault.”
5 “ I

<page 267>
262 C E C I L I A.
“I am very ſorry,” ſaid Cecilia, “ that
I have ſo much miſtaken your hour of
breakfaſt; but let me not be any reſtraint
upon you, I ſhall find a book, or a news-
paper, or ſomething to fill up the time
till Mrs. Delvile honours me with a ſum-
mons.” -
“You can only be a reſtraint upon me,”
anſwered he, “ by commanding me from
your preſence. I breakfaſted long ago, and
am now juſt come from Mr. Belfield. I
had the pleaſure, this morning, of being
admitted into his room.”
“And how, Sir, did you find him "
“ Not ſo well, I fear, as he thinks him-
ſelf; but he was in high ſpirits, and fur-
rounded by his friends, whom he was en-
tertaining with all the gaiety of a man in
full health, and entirely at his eaſe; though
I perceived, by the frequent changes of his
countenance, ſigns of pain and indiſpoſi-
tion, that made me, however pleaſed with
his converſation, think it neceſſary to
ſhorten my own viſit, and to hint to thoſe
who were near me the propriety of leaving
him quiet.”
“Did you ſee his ſurgeon, Sir f*
“ No ; but he told me he ſhould only
have one dreſſing more of his wound, and
then get rid of the whole buſineſs by run-
ning into the country.”
2 tº Were

<page 268>
C E C I L I A. 263
}
“ Were you acquainted with him, Sir,
before this accident :"
“No, not at all; but the little I have ſeen
of him has ſtrongly intereſted me in his
favour: at Mr. Harrel's maſquerade, where
I firſt met with him, I was extremely enter-
tained by his humour, -though there, per-
haps, as I had alſo the honour of firſt ſee-
ing Miſs Beverley, I might be too happy
to feel much difficulty in being pleaſed.
And even at the Opera he had the advan-
tage of finding me in the ſame favourable
diſpoſition, as I had long diſtinguiſhed you be-
fore I had taken any notice of him. I muſt,
however, confeſs I did not think his anger
that evening quite without provocation,--
but I beg your pardon, I may perhaps be
miſtaken, and you, who know the whole
affair, muſt undoubtedly be better able to
account for what happened.”
Here he fixed his eyes upon Cecilia,
with a look of curioſity that ſeemed eager
to penetrate into her ſentiments of the two
antagoniſts.
“No, certainly," ſhe anſwered, “ he
had all the provocation that ill-breeding
could give him.”
- “And do you, madam,” cried he, with
much ſurprize, “judge of this matter with
ſuch ſeverity f"
>
“ No,

<page 269>
264 C E C I L I A.
“. No, not with ſeverity, ſimply with
candour.”
“With candour alas, then, poor Sir
Robert | Severity were not half ſo bad a
ſign for him l’” -
A ſervant now came in, to acquaint Ce-
cilia that Mrs. Delvile waited breakfaſt for
her. -
This ſummons was immediately followed
by the re-entrance of Mr. Delvile, who,
taking her hand, ſaid he would himſelf
preſent her to his lady, and with much gra-
ciouſneſs aſſured her of a kind reception.
The ceremonies preceding this interview,
added to the character ſhe had already
heard of Mrs. Delvile, made Cecilia hear-
tily wiſh it over ; but, aſſuming all the
courage in her power, ſhe determined to
ſupport herſelf with a ſpirit that ſhould
ſtruggle againſt the oftentatious ſuperiority
ſhe was prepared to expect.
She found her ſeated upon a ſofa, from
which, however, ſhe aroſe at her approach ;
but the moment Cecilia beheld her, all the
unfavourable impreſſions with which ſhe
came into her preſence immediately va-
niſhed, and that reſpect which the forma-
lities of her introduction had failed to in-
ſpire, her air, figure, and countenance in-
ſtantaneouſly excited.
, She was not more than fifty years of
age ;

<page 270>
C E C I L I A.; 26;
*
.
age; her complećtion, though faded, kept
the traces of its former lovelineſs, her eyes,
though they had loſt their youthful fire,
retained a luſtre that evinced their primeval
brilliancy, and the fine ſymmetry of her
features, ſtill uninjured by the ſiege of
time, not only indicated the perfeótion of
her juvenile beauty, but ſtill laid claim to
admiration in every beholder.
Her carriage was lofty and command-
ing; but the dignity to which high birth
and conſcious ſuperiority gave riſe, was ſo
judiciouſly regulated by good ſenſe, and ſo
happily blended with politeneſs, that though
the world at large envied or hated her, the
few for whom ſhe had herſelf any regard,
ſhe was infallibly certain to captivate.
The ſurpriſe and admiration with which
Cecilia at the firſt glance was ſtruck proved
reciprocal: Mrs. Delvile, though prepared
for youth and beauty, expected not to ſee
a countenance ſo intelligent, nor manners
ſo well formed as thoſe of Cecilia: thus
mutually aſtoniſhed and mutually pleaſed,
their firſt ſalutations were accompanied by
looks ſo flattering to both, that each ſaw
in the other, an immediate prepoſſeſſion in
her favour, and from the moment that
they met, they ſeemed inſtinétively im–
pelled to admire.
“I have promiſed Miſs Beverley, madam,”
Vol. I. M ſaid

<page 271>
266 C E C I L I A. .
ſaid Mr. Delvile to his lady, “ that you
would give her a kind reception ; and I
need not remind you that my promiſes are
always held ſacred.” º
“But I hope you have not alſo pro-
miſed,” cried ſhe, with quickneſs, “ that
I ſhould give you a kind reception, for I
feel at this, very moment extremely in-
clined to quarrel with you.” -
“Why ſo, madam?” -
“ For not bringing us together ſooner;
for now I have ſeen her, I already look back
with regret to the time I have loſt without
the pleaſure of knowing her.”
“What a claim is this,” cried young
IDelvile,” upon the benevolence of Miſs
Beverley for if ſhe has not now the in-
dulgence by frequent and diligent viſits to
make ſome reparation, ſhe muſt conſider
herſelf as reſponſible for the diſſention ſhe
will occaſion.” -
“ If peace depends upon my viſits,”
anſwered Cecilia, “ it may immediately be
proclaimed ; were to be procured only
by my abſence, I know not if I ſhould ſo
readily agree to the conditions.” -
“I muſt requeſt of you, madam,” ſaid
Mr. Delvile, “ that when my ſon and I
retire, you will beſtow half an hour upon
this young lady, in making enquiries con-
cerning the diſturbance laſt Saturday at the
2 - Opera-

<page 272>
C E C I L I A. 267
y
Opera-Houſe. I have not, myſelf, ſo much
time to ſpare, as I have ſeveral appoint-
ments for this morning; but I am ſure
you will not object to the office, as I know
you to be equally anxious with myſelf, that
the minority of Miſs Beverley ſhould paſs
without reproach.”
“ Not only her minority, but her ma:
turity,” cried young Delvile, warmly, “and
not only her maturity, but her decline
of life will paſs, I hope, not merely with-
out reproach, but with fame and ap-
plauſe !”
“I hope ſo too,” replied Mr. Delvile:
“I wiſh her well through every ſtage of
her life, but for her minority alone it is
my buſineſs to do more than wiſh. For
that, I feel my own honour and my own
credit concerned ; my honour, as I gave
it to the Dean that I would ſuperintend
her condućt, and my credit, as the world.
is acquainted with the claim ſhe has to my
protećtion.”
“I will not make any enquiries,” ſaid
Mrs. Delvile, turning to Cecilia with a
ſweetneſs that recompenſed her for the
haughtineſs of her guardian, “till I have
had ſome opportunity of convincing Miſs.
Beverley, that my regard for her merits they
ſhould be anſwered.” -
“You ſee, Miſs Beverley,” ſaid Mr.
M 2 Del-

<page 273>
268 C E C I L I A.
*~~
Delvile, “ how little reaſon you had to
be afraid of us ; Mrs. Delvile is as much
diſpoſed in your favour as myſelf, and as
deſirous to be of ſervice to you. Endea-
vour, therefore, to caſt off this timidity, and
to make yourſelf eaſy. You muſt come to
ut often ; uſe will do more towards remov-
ing your fears, than all the encouragement
we can give you.” -
“But what are the fears,” cried Mrs.
Delvile, “ that Miſs Beverley can have to
remove unleſs, indeed, ſhe apprehends her
viſits will make us encroachers, and that
the more we are favoured with her pre-
ſence, the leſs we ſhall bear her abſence.” .
“Pray, ſon,” ſaid Mr. Delvile, “what
was the name of the perſon who was Sir
Robert Floyer's opponent I have again
forgotten it.” - - -
“ Belfield, Sir.” -
“ True; it is a name I am perfeótly un-
acquainted with: however, he may poſſibly
be a very good ſort of man; but certainly
his oppoſing himſelf to Sir Robert Floyer,
a man of ſome family, a gentleman, rich,
and allied to ſome people of diſtinótion,
was a rather ſtrange circumſtance: I mean.
not, however, to prejudge the caſe; I will
hear it fairly ſtated; and am the more diſ-
poſed to be cautious in what I pronounce,
becauſe I am perſuaded Miſs Beverley has
- to O

<page 274>
C E C I L I A. 269
t
too much ſenſe to let my advice be thrown
away upon her.” - -
“I hope ſo, Sir; but with reſpećt to the
diſturbance at the Opera, I know not that
I have the leaſt occaſion to trouble you.”
* “If your meaſures,” ſaid he, very gravely,
“ are already taken, the Dean your uncle
prevailed upon me to accept a very uſeleſs
office; but if any thing is yet undecided,
it will not, perhaps, be amiſs that I ſhould
be conſulted. Mean time, I will only re-
commend to you to conſider that Mr. Bel-
eld is a perſon whoſe name nobody has
heard, and that a conneétion with Sir Ro-
bert Floyer would certainly be very honour-
able for you.” -
“ Indeed, Sir,” ſaid Cecilia, “ here is
ſome great miſtake; neither of theſe gen-
tlemen, I believe, think of me at all.”
“ They have taken, then,” cried young
Delvile with a laugh, “a very extraordinary
method to prove their indifference ".
“ The affairs of Sir Robert Floyer,”
continued Mr. Delvile, “ are indeed, I am
informed, in ſome diſorder; but he has a
noble eſtate, and your fortune would ſoon
clear all its incumbrances. Such an alli-
ance, therefore, would be mutually advan-
tageous: but what would reſult from a
union with ſuch a perſon as Mr. Belfield?
he is of no family, though in that, perhaps,
• * M 3 you:

<page 275>
270 G E C I L I. A.
you would not be very ſcrupulous; but nei-
ther has he any money; what, then, recom-
mends him ** ". . . . . . ;-->
“To me, Sir, nothing !” anſwered Ce-
cilia. - - º
“And to me,” cried young Delvile,
“ almoſt every thing ! he has wit, ſpirit,
and underſtanding, talents to create admir-
ation, and qualities, I believe, to engage
eſteem l’”
“You ſpeak warmly,” ſaid Mrs. Del-
vile; “ but if ſuch is his charaćter, he
merits your earneſtneſs. What is it you
know of him : ” - . .
“Not enough, perhaps,” anſwered he,
“, to coolly juſtify my praiſe; but he is one
of thoſe whoſe firſt appearance takes the
mind by ſurpriſe, and leaves the judgment
to make afterwards ſuch terms, as it can.
Will you, madam, when he is recovered,
permit me to introduce him to you ?” ... ,
“ Certainly ;” ſaid ſhe, ſmiling; “ but
have a care your recommendation does not
diſgrace your diſcernment.” w
“ This warmth of diſpoſition, Morti-
mer,” cried Mr. Delvile, “ produces, no-
thing but difficulties and trouble : you
neglect the connections I point out, and
which a little attention might render ſer-
viceable as well as honourable, and run
precipitately into forming ſuch as can do
- - you

<page 276>
C E C I L I A. 271
you no good among people of rank, and
are not only profitleſs in themſelves, but
generally lead you into expence and incon-
venience. You are now of an age to cor-
rečt this raſhneſs: think, therefore, better
of your own conſequence, than thus idly to
degrade yourſelf by forming friendſhips
with every ſhewy adventurer that comes in
your way.”
“ I know not, Sir,” anſwered he, “how
Mr. Belfield deſerves to be called an ad-
venturer: he is not, indeed, rich ; but he
is in a profeſſion where parts ſuch as his
ſeldom fail to acquire riches; however, as
to me his wealth can be of no conſequence,
why ſhould my regard to him wait for it :
if he is a young man of worth and ho-
In Our 2? -
“ Mortimer,” interrupted Mr. Delvile,
“ whatever he is, we know he is not a
man of rank, and whatever he may be, we
know he cannot become a man of family,
and conſequently for Mortimer Delvile he
is no companion. If you can render him
any ſervice, I ſhall commend your ſo do-
ing ; it becomes your birth, it becomes
your ſtation in life to aſſiſt individuals, and
promote the general good: but never in
your zeal for others forget what is due to
yourſelf, and to the ancient and honourable
houſe from which you are fprung.”
M 4 << But

<page 277>
272 C E C I L II. A.
, “But can we entertain Miſs Beverley
with nothing better than family lectures?”
eried Mrs. Delvile. . . . * , ,
“It is for me,” ſaid young Delvile, riſing,
“ to beg pardon of Miſs Beverley for hav-
ing occaſioned, them: but when ſhe is ſo
good as to honour us with her company
again, I hope. I ſhall have more diſcre-
tion.”
He then left the room ; and Mr. Del-
vile alſo riſing to go, ſaid, “My dear, I
commit you to very kind hands; Mrs. Del-
vile, I am ſure, will be happy to hear your
ſtory; ſpeak to her, therefore, without re-
ſerve. And pray don't imagine that I
make you over to her from any ſlight; on
the contrary, I admire and commend your
modeſty very much ; but my time is ex-
tremely precious, and I cannot devote ſo
much of it to an explanation as your diffi-
dence requires.” . . . .
And then, to the great joy of Cecilia;
he retired; leaving her much in doubt whe-
ther his haughtineſs or his condeſcenſion
humbled her moſt, - * * * *
“. Theſe men,” ſaid Mrs. Delvile, “can
never comprehend the pain of a delicate.
female mind upon entering into explana-
tions of this ſort : I underſtand it, how-
ever, too well to inflićt it. We will, there-
fore, have no explanations at all till we
- * - at C.
w-

<page 278>
C E & 1 r. p A. 273
'are better acquainted, and then if you will
venture to favour me with any confidence,
my beft advice, and, ſhould any be in my
power, my beſt ſervices ſhall be at your com-
mand.” . . . . . ! - * *
“You do me, madam; much honour,”
anſwered. Cecilia, “but I muſt aſſure you.
I have no explanation to give.”
“Well, well, at preſent,” returned Mrs.
Delvile, “I am content to hear that an-
ſwer, as I have acquired no right to any
other: but hereafter I ſhall hope for more.
openneſs: it is promiſed me by your coun-
tenance, and I mean to claim the promiſe.
by my friendſhip.”
“Your friendſhip will both honour and
delight me, and whatever are your en-
quiries, I ſhall always be proud to anſwer
them; but indeed, with regard to this af.
fair—” -
“My dear Miſs Beverley,” interrupted
Mrs. Delvile, with a look of arch incredu-
lity, “ men ſeldom riſk their lives where
an eſcape is without hope of recompence.
But we will not now ſay a word more upon
the ſubjećt. I hope you will often favour
me with your company, and by the fre-
quency of your viſits, make us both forget
the ſhortneſs of our acquaintance.”
Cecilia, finding her reſiſtance only gave
birth to freſh ſuſpicion, now yielded, ſatis-
- M 5. fied

<page 279>
274 C E C I L I. A.
fied that a very little time muſt unavoidably
clear up the truth. But her viſit was not
therefore ſhortened; the ſudden partiality
with which the figure and countenance of
Mrs. Delvile had impreſſed her, was
quickly ripened into eſteem by the charms
of her converſation: ſhe found her ſenſible,
well bred, and high ſpirited, gifted by na-
ture with ſuperior talents, and poliſhed by
education and ſtudy with all the elegant
embelliſhments of cultivation. She ſaw in
her, indeed, ſome portion of the pride ſhe
had been taught to expect, but it was ſo
much ſoftened by elegance, and ſo well
tempered with kindneſs, that it elevated her
charaćter, without rendering her manners
offenſive. - --
With ſuch a woman, ſubjećts of diſcourſe
could never be wanting, nor fertility of
powers to make them entertaining: and ſo
much was Cecilia delighted with her viſit,
that though her carriage was announced at
twelve o'clock, ſhe reluštantly concluded it
at two; and in taking her leave, gladly ac-
cepted an invitation to dine with her new
friend three days after; who, equally,
pleaſed with her young gueſt, promiſed ber
fore that time to return her viſit. º
. . .

<page 280>
c E & I L I. A. 275
-
. . . . . . . . . tº
2 : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
tº i º º - … . . . . . . . .
* * *
...'." - - - - - - , , . . .
*...* *-* * * ... I - , , ...
• *-
- ***, * >
- * * *
* * * * - : º
A N Ex AM IN AT I o N.
* .
3. ~ *
CE CILIA found Mrs. Harrel eagerly
‘ waiting to hear ſome account how ſhe
had paſſed the morning, and fully per-
ſuaded that ſhe would leave the Delviles
with a determination never more, but by
neceſſity, to ſee them: ſhe was, therefore,
not only ſurpriſed but diſappointed, when
inſtead of fulfilling her expectations, ſhe
aſſured her that ſhe had been delighted
with Mrs. Delvile, whoſe engaging quali-
ties amply recompenſed her for the arro-
gance of her huſband; that her viſit had
no fault but that of being too ſhort, and
that ſhe had already appointed an early day
for repeating it. *.
Mrs. Harrel was evidently hurt by this.
praiſe, and Cecilia, who perceived among
all her guardians a powerful diſpoſition to
hatred and jealouſy, ſoon dropt the ſubječt:
though ſo much had ſhe been charmed with
Mrs. Delvile, that a ſcheme of removal once
more occurred to her, notwithſtanding her
diſlike of her ſtately guardian. :
M 6 At

<page 281>
276 C E C I L I A.
At dinner, as uſual, they were joined by
Sir Robert Floyer, who grew more and
more aſſiduous in his attendance, but who,
this day, contrary to his general cuſtom of
remaining with the gentlemen, made his
exit before the ladies left the table; and as
ſoon as he was gone, Mr. Harrel deſired a
private conference with Cecilia. -
They went together to the drawing-room,
where, after a flouriſhing preface upon the
merits of Sir Robert Floyer, he formally
acquainted her that he was commiſfioned by
that gentleman, to make her a tender of his
hand and fortune. . . . . . . .
Cecilia, who had not much reaſon to be
ſurpriſed at this overture, deſired him to
tell the Baronet, ſhe was obliged to him for
the honour he intended her, at the ſame
time that ſhe abſolutely declined receiv-
ing it. - º º
Mr. Harrel, laughing, told her this an-
twer was very well for a beginning, though
it would by no means ſerve beyond the firſt
day of the declaration; but when Cecilia
aſſured him ſhe ſhould firmly adhere to it,
he remonſtrated with equal ſurpriſe and diſ-
content upon the reaſons of her refuſal. She
thought it ſufficient to tell him that Sir
Robert did not pleaſe her, but, with much
raillery, he denied the aſſertion credit, aſſuring
her that he was univerſally admired by the
ladies,

<page 282>
C E C I L I A. 277
ladies, that ſhe could not poſſibly receive a
more honourable offer, and that he was reck-
oned by everybody the fineſt gentleman about
the town. His fortune, he added, was equally
unexceptionable with his figure and his
rank in life; all the world, he was certain,
would approve the connexion, and the ſet-
tlement made upon her ſhould be dićtated
by herſelf.
Cecilia begged him to be ſatisfied with
an anſwer which ſhe never could change,
and to ſpare her the enumeration of parti-
cular objećtions, ſince Sir Robert was
wholly and in every reſpect diſagreeable to
her. . . . . . .
“What, then,” cried he, “could make
you ſo frightened for him at the Opera-
houſe 2 There has been but one opinion
about town ever ſince of your prepoſſeſſion
in his favour.”
“: I am extremely concerned to hear it;
my fright was but the effect of ſurpriſe, and
belonged not more to Sir Robert than to
Mr. Bełfield.” -
He told her that nobody elſe thought the
fame, that her marriage with the Baronet
was univerſally expected, and, in conclu-
fion, notwithſtanding her earneſt deſire
that he would inſtantly and explicitly in-
form Sir Robert of her determination, he
repeatedly refuſed to give him any intº
- Wºº

<page 283>
278 C. E. C. I. L. I. A.
ſwer till ſhe had taken more time for con-
ſideration. . . . .-- - ... --
º, Cecilia was extremely diſpleaſed at this
irkſome importunity, and ſtill more cha-
grined to find her incautious emotion at the
Opera-houſe, had given riſe to ſuſpicions of
her harbouring a partiality for a man whom
every day ſhe more heartily diſliked.
While ſhe was deliberating in what man-
ner ſhe could clear up this miſtake, which,
after ſhe was left alone, occupied all her
thoughts, ſhe was interrupted by the en-
trance of Mr. Monckton, whoſe joy in
meeting her at length by herſelf exceeded
not her own, for charmed as he was that he
could now examine into the ſtate of her af-
fairs, ſhe was not leſs delighted that ſhe
could make them known to him.
. After mutual expreſſions, guarded, how-
ever, on the part of Mr. Monckton, though
unreſerved on that of Cecilia, of their
ſatisfaction in being again able to converſe
as in former times, he aſked if ſhe would
permit him, as the privilege of their long
acquaintance, to ſpeak to her with fin-
cerity.
She aſſured him he could not more oblige
her. -
“Let me, then,” ſaid he, “enquire if
yet that ardent confidence in your own
ſteadineſs, which ſo much daine, my.
€al'S
... ſº . * * * * * * * * * *
-

<page 284>
C E C I L I, A, 279
fears that the change of your reſidence
might produce a change in your ſentiments,
is ſtill as unſhaken, as, when we parted in
Suffolk : Or whether experience, that foe
to unpraćtiſed, refinement, has already
taught you the fallibility of theory 3”
“When I aſſure you,” replied Cecilia,
“ that your enquiry gives me no pain, I
think I have ſufficiently anſwered it, for
were I conſcious of any alteration, it could
not but embarraſs and diſtreſs me. Very far,
however, from finding myſelf in the danger
with which you threatened me, of forgetting
Bury, its inhabitants and its environs, I
think with pleaſure of little elſe, ſince Lon-
don, inſtead of bewitching, has greatly
diſappointed me.”
“How ſo?” cried Mr. Monckton, much
delighted. -
“ Not,” anſwered ſhe, “...in itſelf, not
in its magnificence, nor in its diverſions,
which ſeem to be inexhauſtible; but theſe,
though copious as inſtruments of pleaſure,
are very ſhallow as ſources of happineſs:
the diſappointment, therefore, comes nearer
home, and ſprings not from London, but
from my own ſituation.” -
“Is that, then, diſagreeable to you?”
“You ſhall yourſelf judge, when I have
told you that from the time of my quitting
your houſe till this very moment, when I,
* *. -* - - have
*

<page 285>
to c E c 1 L I A.
have again the happineſs of talking with.
you, I have never once had any converſa-
tion, ſociety or intercourſe, in which friend-
ſhip or affection have had any ſhare, or my
mind has had the leaſt intereſt.”
She then entered into a detail of her
way of life, told him how little ſuited to.
her taſte was the unbounded diſſipation of
the Harrels, and feelingly expatiated upon
the diſappointment ſhe had received from
the alteration in the manners and condućt
of her young friend. “ In her,” ſhe con-
tinued, “ had I found the companion I
came prepared to meet, the companion
from whom I had ſo lately parted, and in
whoſe ſociety I expečted to find conſolation
for the loſs of yours and of Mrs. Charlton's,
I ſhould have complained of nothing; the
very places that now tire, might then have
entertained me, and all that now paſſes for
unmeaning diſſipation, might then have
worn the appearance of variety and plea-
ſure. But where the mind is wholly with-
out intereſt, every thing is languid and in-
fipid; and accuſtomed as I have long been
to think friendſhip the firſt of human bleſ.
fings, and ſocial converſe the greateſt of hu-
man enjoyments, how ever can I reconcile
myſelf to a ſtate of careleſs indifference, to
making acquaintance without any concern.
either for preſerving or eſteeming them, and
to
-

<page 286>
C E C I L I. A. . 281
to going cn from day to day in an eager
ſearch of amuſement, with no companion
for the hours of retirement, and no view
beyond that of paſſing the preſent moment
in apparent gaiety and thoughtleſsneſs?”
Mr. Monckton, who heard theſe com-
plaints with ſecret rapture, far from ſeek-
ing to ſoften or remove, uſed his utmoſt en-
deavours to ſtrengthen and encreaſe them,
by artfully retracing her former way of life,
and pointing out with added cenſures the
change in it ſhe had been lately compelled
to make: “.. a change,” he continued,
“ which though ruinous of your time, and
detrimental to your happineſs, uſe will, I
fear, familiarize, and familiarity render
pleaſant.” -- - - - - * * * * *
“Theſe ſuſpicions, Sir,” ſaid Cecilia,
“ mortify me greatly; and why, when far
from finding me pleaſed, you hear nothing
but repining, ſhould you ſtill continue to
harbour them ** -
“Becauſe your trial has yet been too
ſhort to prove your firmneſs, and becauſe
there is nothing to which time cannot con-
tentedly accuſtom us.”
“I feel not much fear, ?” ſaid Cecilia,
“ of ſtanding ſuch a teſt as might fully ſa-
tisfy you; but nevertheleſs, not to be too
preſumptuous, I have by no means expoſed
myſelf to all the dangers which you think
º ſurround

<page 287>
282 C E C I L I A.
ſurround me, for of late, I have ſpent almoſt
every evening at home and by myſelf.”
... This intelligence was to Mr. Monckton
a ſurpriſe the moſt agreeable he could re-
ceive. Her diſtaſte for the amuſements
which were offered her greatly relieved his
fears of her forming any alarming connec-
tion, and the diſcovery that while ſo anxi-
ouſly he had ſought her every where in pub-
lic, ſhe had quietly paſſed her time by her
own fire-fide, not only re-aſſured him for
the preſent, but gave him information
where he might meet with her in future.
He then talked of the duel, and ſolicit-
ouſly led her to ſpeak open of Sir Robert
Floyer; and here too, his ſatisfaction was
entire; he found her diſlike of him ſuch as
his knowledge of her diſpoſition made him
expect, and ſhe wholly removed his ſuſ-
picions concerning her anxiety about the
quarrel, by explaining to him her appre-
henſions of having occaſioned it herſelf,
from accepting the civility of Mr. Belfield,
at the very moment ſhe ſhewed her averſion
to receiving that of Sir Robert. . . . . ."
Neither did her confidence reſt here; ſhe
acquainted him with the converſation ſhe
had juſt had with Mr. Harrel, and begged
his advice in what manner ſhe might ſecure
herſelf from further importunity, º, . "
Mr. Monckton had now a new ſubjećt
for

<page 288>
C E C I L I A. 283
-
".
*
for his diſcernment. Every thing had con-
firmed to him the paſſion which Mr. Arnott
had conceived for Cecilia, and he had
therefore concluded the intereſt of the Har-
rels would be all in his favour: other ideas
now ſtruck him; he found that Mr. Arnott
was given up for Sir Robert, and he deter-
mined carefully to watch the motions both
of the Baronet and her young guardian, in
order to diſcover the nature of their plans
and connexion. Mean time, convinced by
her unaffected averſion to the propoſals ſhe
had received, that ſhe was at i. in no
danger from the league he ſuſpećted, he
merely adviſed her to perſevere in manifeſt-
ing a calm repugnance to their ſolicitations,
which could not fail, before long, to diſ-
hearten them both. . . . . . * * *
“But Sir,” cried Cecilia, “ I now fear
this man, as much as I diſlike him, for his
late fierceneſs and brutality, though they
have encreaſed my diſguſt, make me dread
to ſhew it. I am impatient, therefore, to
have done with him, and to ſee him no
more. And for this purpoſe, I wiſh to quit
the houſe of Mr. Harrel, where he has ac-
ceſs at his pleaſure.” -
“You can wiſh nothing more judici-
ouſly,” cried he; “would you, then, return
into the country?” -
“ That is not yet in my power; I am
. . . obliged

<page 289>
284 C E C I L I A.
obliged to reſide with one of my guardians. *
To day I have ſeen Mrs. Delvile, and —”
“ Mrs. Delvile?” interrupted Mr.
Monckton, in a voice of aſtoniſhment,
“Surely you do not think of removing in-
to that family P"
“What can I do ſo well? Mrs. Delvile
is a charming woman, and her converſation
would afford me more entertainment and
inſtrućtion in a ſingle day, than under this
roof I ſhould obtain in a twelvemonth.”
“Are you ſerious? Do you really think
of making ſuch a change?”
“I really wiſh it, but I know not yet if
it is praćticable: on Thurſday, however, I
am to dine with her, and then, if it is in
my power, I will hint to her my defire.”
“And can Miſs Beverley poſſibly wiſh,”
cried Mr. Monckton with earneſtneſs, “to
reſide in ſuch a houſe Is not Mr. Delvile
the moſt oſtentatious, haughty, and ſelf-
ſufficient of men Is not his wife the proud-
eſt of women? And is not the whole family
odious to all the world?” . . . . . .
“You amaze me!” cried Cecilia;
“furely that cannot be their general cha-
raćter? Mr. Delvile, indeed, deſerves all
the cenſure he can meet for his weariſome
‘parade of ſuperiority; but his lady by no
means merits to be included in the ſame re-
proach. I have ſpent this whole morning
- - - with

<page 290>
C E C I L I A. 285
.
with her, and though I waited upon-her
with a ſtrong prejudice in her disfavour, I
obſerved in her no pride that exceeded the
bounds of propriety and native dignity.” .
“Have you often been at the houſe?
Do you know the ſon, too?” * -
“I have ſeen him three or four times.”
“And what do you think of him?” ...
“I hardly know enough of him to judge
fairly.” - . " . . . .
“But what does he ſeem to you? Do
you not perceive in him already all the ar-
rogance, all the contemptuous inſolence of
his father?” - - -
“ O no far from it indeed; his mind
ſeems to be liberal and noble, open to im-
preſſions of merit, and eager to honour and
promote it.” -
“You are much deceived; you have
been reading your own mind, and thought
you had read his : I would adviſe you fe-
dulouſly to avoid the whole family; you will
find all intercourſe with them irkſome and
comfortleſs: ſuch as the father appears at .
once, the wife and the ſon will, in a few
more meetings, appear alſo. They are de-
ſcended from the ſame ſtock, and inherit.
the ſame ſelf-complacency. Mr. Delvile
married his couſin, and each of them inſti-
gates the other to believe that all birth and
rank would be at an end in the world, if
their own ſuperb family had not a promiſe

<page 291>
286 C E c i L 1 A.
of ſupport from their hopeful Mortimer.
Should you precipitately ſettle yourſelf in
their houſe, you would very ſoon be to-
tally weighed down by their united in-
ſolence.”
Cecilia again and warmly attempted to
defend them; but Mr. Monckton was ſo
poſitive in his aſſertions, and ſo ſignificant
in his infinuations to their diſcredit, that ſhe
was at length perſuaded ſhe had judged too
haſtily, and, after thanking him for his
counſel, promiſed not to take any meaſures
towards a removal without his advice. . .
This was all he deſired; and now, en-
livened by finding that his influence with
her was unimpaired, and that her heart
was yet her own, he ceaſed his exhortations
and turned the diſcourſe to ſubjećts more
gay and general, judiciouſly cautious neither
by tedious admonitions to diſguſt, nor by
fretful ſolicitude to alarm her. He did
not quit her till the evening was far ad-
vanced, and then, in returning to his own
houſe, felt all his anxieties and diſappoint-
ments recompenſed by the comfort this long
and ſatisfactory converſation had afforded
him. While Cecilia, charmed with hav–
ing ſpent the morning with her new ac-
:-> -
quaintance, and the evening with her old
friend, retired to reſt better pleaſed with
the diſpoſal of her time than ſhe had yet
been ſince her journey from Suffolk. -
C H A P.

<page 292>
C E C I L I. A. 287
* *
2
C H A P. VIII.
A Tête à Tête. -
THE we follºwing days had nºther
event nor diſturbance, except ſome
little vexation occaſioned by the behaviour
of Sir Robert Floyer, who ſtill appeared
not to entertain any doubt of the ſucceſs of
his addreſſes. This impertinent confidence
ſhe could only attribute to the officious en-
couragement of Mr. Harrel, and therefore
ſhe determined rather to ſeek than to avoid
an explanation with him. But ſhe had, in
the mean time, the ſatisfačtion of hearing
from Mr. Arnott, who, ever eager to
oblige her, was frequent in his enquiries,
that Mr. Belfield was almoſt entirely re-
covered.
On Thurſday, according to her appoint-
ment, ſhe again went to St. James’-Square,
and being ſhewn into the drawing-room till
dinner was ready, found there only young
Mr. Delvile.
After ſome general converſation, he aſked
her how lately ſhe had had any news of Mr.
Belfield?
“ This

<page 293>
288 C E C I L I. A.
“This morning,” ſhe anſwered, “when
I had the pleaſure of hearing he was quite
recovered. Have you ſeen him again,
Sir 2" -
“Yes, madam, twice.”
“And did you think him almoſt well ?”
“I thought,” anſwered he, with ſome
heſitation, and I think ſtill, that your en-
quiries ought to be his cure.” . . . -
“O,” cried Cecilia, “I hope he has far
better medicines: but I am afraid I have
been miſinformed, for I ſee you do not
think him better.” - -- *
“You muſt not, however,” replied he,
“blame thoſe meſſengers whoſe artifice has
only had your ſatisfaction in view; nor
ſhould I be ſo malignant as to blaſt their de-
ſigns, if I did not fear that Mr. Belfield's
aćtual ſafety may be endangered by your
continued deception.”
“What deception, Sir I don't at all
underſtand you. How is his ſafety en-
dangered?”
*Ahmadam!" ſaid he finiling, “what
danger indeed is there that any man would
not riſk to give birth to ſuch ſolicitude '.
Mr. Belfield however, I believe is in none
from which a command of yours cannot
reſcue him.”
“ Then were I an hard-hearted damſel
indeed not to iſſue it! but if my commands
2 - are

<page 294>
C E C I L I A. 289
are ſo medicinal, pray inſtrućt me how to
adminiſter them.”
“You muſt order him to give up, for
the preſent, his plan of going into the coun-
try, where he can have no aſſiſtance, and
where his wound muſt be dreſſed only by a
common ſervant, and to remain quietly in
town till his ſurgeon pronounces that he may
travel without any hazard.” - -
“But is he, ſeriouſly, ſo mad as to intend
leaving town without the conſent of his
ſurgeon?”
“ Nothing leſs than ſuch an intention
could have induced me to undeceive you
with reſpect to his recovery. But indeed
I am no friend to thoſe artifices which pur-
chaſe preſent relief by future miſery: I ven-
ture, therefore, to ſpeak to you the ſimple
truth, that by a timely exertion of your in-
fluence you may prevent further evil.”
“ I know not, Sir,” ſaid Cecilia, with
the utmoſt ſurpriſe, “why you ſhould ſup-
poſe I have any ſuch influence ; nor can I
imagine that any deception has been prac-
ticed.”
“It is poſſible,” anſwered he, “I may
have been too much alarmed; but in ſuch a
caſe as this, no information ought to be de-
pended upon but that of his ſurgeon. You,
madam, may probably know his opinion?”
Vol. I. N “ Me 2

<page 295>
290 C E C I L I. A.
“Me?— No, indeed! I never ſaw his
ſurgeon; I know not even who he is.”
“I purpoſe calling upon him to-morrow
morning; will Miſs Beverley permit me af.
terwards the honour of communicating to
her what may paſs 2" -
“I thank you, Sir,” ſaid ſhe, colouring
very high; “but my impatience is by no
means ſo great as to occaſion my giving you
that trouble.” -
Delvile, perceiving her change of coun-
tenance, inſtantly, and with much reſpećt,
entreated her pardon for the propoſal;
which, however, ſhe had no ſooner granted,
than he ſaid very archly “Why indeed you
have not much right to be angry, fince it
was your own frankneſs that excited mine.
And thus, you find, like moſt other cul-
prits, I am ready to caſt the blame of the
offence upon the offended. I feel, how-
ever, an irreſiſtible propenſity to do ſervice
to Mr. Belfield; — ſhall I ſin quite beyond
forgiveneſs if I venture to tell you how I
found him ſituated this morning?”
“No, certainly,– if you wiſh it, I can
have no objećtion.”
“I found him, then, ſurrounded by a
ſet of gay young men, who, by way of
keeping up his ſpirits, made him laugh and
talk without ceaſing: he aſſured me himſelf
that he was perfeótly well, and intended to
gallop

<page 296>
C E C I L I A. 291
gallop out of town to-morrow morning;
though, when I ſhook hands with him at
parting, I was both ſhocked and alarmed
to feel by the burning heat of the ſkin, that
far from diſcarding his ſurgeon, he ought
rather to call in a phyſician.”
“I am very much concerned to hear
this account,” ſaid Cecilia; “but I do not
well underſtand what you mean ſhould on
my part follow it?” -
“That,” anſwered he, bowing, with a
look of mock gravity, “I pretend not to
ſettle ! In ſtating the caſe I have ſatisfied
my conſcience, and if in hearing it you can
pardon the liberty I have taken, I ſhall as
much honour the openneſs of your cha-
racter, as I admire that of your coun-
tenance.”
Cecilia now, to her no little aſtoniſh-
ment, found ſhe had the ſame miſtake to
clear up at preſent concerning Mr. Belfield,
that only three days before ſhe had ex-
plained with reſpect to the Baronet. But
ſhe had no time to ſpeak further upon the
ſubjećt, as the entrance of Mrs. Delvile put
an end to their diſcourſe. -
That lady received her with the moſt diſ-
tinguiſhing kindneſs; apologiſed for not
ſooner waiting upon her, and repeatedly
declared that nothing but indiſpoſition
N 2 - - ſhould

<page 297>
292 C E C I L I A.
ſhould have prevented her returning the fa-
your of her firſt viſit. -
They were ſoon after ſummoned to din-
ner. Mr. Delvile, to the infinite joy of
Cecilia, was out. -
The day was ſpent greatly to her ſatisfac-
tion. There was no interruption from vi-
ſitors, ſhe was tormented by the diſcuſſion
of no diſagreeable ſubjećts, the duel was
not mentioned, the antagoniſts were not
hinted at, ſhe was teized with no ſelf-ſuf-
ficient encouragement, and wearied with
no mortifying affability; the converſation
at once was lively and rational, and though
general, was rendered intereſting, by a reci-
procation of good-will and pleaſure in the
converſers. . -
The favourable opinion ſhe had con-
ceived both of the mother and the ſon this
long viſit ſerved to confirm: in Mrs. Del-
vile ſhe found ſtrong ſenſe, quick parts, and
high breeding; in Mortimer, ſincerity and
vivacity joined with ſoftneſs and elegance;
and in both there ſeemed the moſt liberal
admiration of talents, with an openneſs of
heart that diſdained all diſguiſe. Greatly
pleaſed with their manners, and ſtruck with
all that was apparent in their charaćters, ſhe
much regretted the prejudice of Mr.
Monckton, which now, with the promiſe.
ſhe had given him, was all that oppoſed her
-
making

<page 298>
C E C I L I A. 293
making an immediate effort towards a
change in her abode.
She did not take her leave till eleven
o'clock, when Mrs. Delvile, after repeat-
edly thanking her for her viſit, ſaid ſhe
would not ſo much encroach upon her good
nature as to requeſt another till ſhe had
waited upon her in return; but added, that
ſhe meant very ſpeedily to pay that debt, in
order to enable herſelf, by friendly and fre-
quent meetings, to enter upon the confi-
dential commiſſion with which her guardian
had entruſted her.
Cecilia was pleaſed with the delicacy
which gave riſe to this forbearance, yet
having in fact nothing either to relate or
conceal, ſhe was rather ſorry than glad at
the delay of an explanation, ſince ſhe found
the whole family was in an error with re-
ſpect to the ſituation of her affairs.
END of T H E FIRST Vol. U M E.

<page 299>

<page 300>
~ ~ ~ ~----- ___--_-- ----
|-* - -|-- -
__---- _ - - - -*-- （…） ----

<page 301>

<page 302>

<page 303>
^ ſººn
GAYLORD
~ -- -
--- w- *: tº -
DATE DUE
Printed in u.s...A.


<page 304>
