

<page 1>
INDIANA
UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY




<page 2>

<page 3>

<page 4>
-******）
→→→→→


<page 5>

<page 6>
T H E -
FAMILY PICTURE.
1 * Two v o L U M E s.

<page 7>
A fe fuifque orfus, primum dorhum fuam coercuit,
quod plerique haud minus arduum eft, quam
provinciam regere.
Tac. in Vit. Agric.
La Magnanimité eft un noble efort de 1* orgueil par
laquel il rend l'homme maitre de lui-meme, pour
le rendre maitre de toutes chofes.
Rochefoucauit.

<page 8>
"I" H E
º
FAM I L Y P I C T U R E;
O R,
D OMEST IC DIALOGUES
O N - - --> --> →
* * * * -
AMIABLE AND INTERESTING SUBJECTS;
• 2 * * * • *
2 *
- * ~ *
I L L U S T R A T E D Box,-
Histories, ALLEGoR1Es, TALEs, ... FABLEs,
ANEcDoTEs, &c. * *
* c > c
º
º e
1 N T E N D E D T o –
st RENGTHEN and INFor M T H E MIND.
e Y
T H O M A S H O L C R O F T,
Author of DUPLICITY, a cow ebx.
-em-mm-
V O L U M E I.
-msm-
V
L O N D O N :
Printed for Lock Y E R D A v 1 s, in Holborn 3
Printer to the Royal Society.
M D c c L xxx 1 1 1.
G tº

<page 9>
- - - -
- - - -
* - C - -
* - Cº-º-
u t < * *
º -
º
* -
---
--
-
~
-
º
-
-
º
*
º
i
i

<page 10>
********śſ’%% ºesºſºſºs
r
-
|
s
*
A D V E R T I S E M E N T.
... " | "HE principal intention of this work is
*
: to give that ſtrength and fortitude to
*
N.
| *
|- in times of refinement and luxury; but which
*
moral condućt, which are ſo apt to decline
, are ſo eſſential to individual and national
happineſs. The author's claims to literary
, reputation are few: he has endeavoured, how-
ever, both in the Dialogue and Narration, to
write to the underſtanding as well as to the
heart : or, to ſelect from thoſe who had the
ſame intention. His own feelings have cer-
tainly been on the fide of propriety and vir-
tue: if he has expreſſed himſelf ſo as to in-
cite ſimilar ſenſations in others, he has ob-
Vo L. I. al - tained

<page 11>
A D V E R T I S E M E N T.
tained what he purpoſed. There can be no
doubt, but that young perſons, more eſpe-
cially, will find themſelves inſtrućied as well
as entertained: and on this account, chiefly,
the author hopes to merit the approbation
of all Thoſe, who, like himſelf, are anxiouſly
ſolicitous concerning the condućt and welfare
of the riſing generation.
C O N-


<page 12>
C O N T E N T S.
-
- v O L. i.
D I A L O GUE I.
NTRODUCTION : or the Hiſtory
! of Mr. Egerton - - - - - Page 1
s D I A L O G U E II. 18.
| Anecdote of Biſhop Bancroft - - - - ibid.
— of Cardinal Angelot—of Lewis XI.
º of France—of Ageſilaus - - - - - 19.
| Selfishness: or the Merchant of Bagdat - 20
| Anecdotes of Barnard Gilpin - - - - - 26.
º D I A L O G U E III, 30
BENEvole Nce: or the ſtory of Palamon
} and Amafina - -
- - - - - - - I.
Conjugal Affection of the Women of Wenſ- 3
berg - - - - , -, - - - - - - 47
of Arria - - - - - 48.
D I A L O G U E IV. 49.
CoquetRY: or the ſtory of Lady Wildham 56
Anecdote of King Rudolphus - - - - 65.
— of the King of Catona - - - - 66"
s — of the Cham of Tartary - - - ibid.
VANITY: or the Viſion - - - - - - - - 67
Anecdote of Pyrrhus - - - - - - - 70
Folly of Marius - - - - - - - - 71
of an Infatuated Poet - - - - - 72
Charaćter of a General—Anecdote of Han- -
nibal - - - - - - - - - - - 74.
, Vanity of Harpagus—Anecdote of Alexander
and the Pirate - - - - - - - - 76
D I A L O G U E V. 79-
Anecdotes of Ariſtides - - - - - - 86
of an Athenian Porter - - - 82
INTEMPER ANce: or the Salutiferous Foun-
tain - - - - - - - - - - - ibid.
WEALTH and its Conſequences, A Tale - 96
- D I A-
mº

<page 13>
C O. N. T. E. N. T. S.
- *- Page
D I A L O G U E VI. I O2
For titude: or the Great Traveller, Part I. I C4
Part II. 121
Part III. 14o
D I A L O G U E VII: . 16 ri |
Anecdotes of Fabricius - - - - - - 163
of Papinian and Horatius Cocles 165.
of Mutius, and Henry V. when
Prince of Wales - - - - - - - - 167
Remarkable Letter from Plutarch to the Em-
peror Trajan - - - - - - - - - - 169
from Sir Walter Raleigh to Prince
Henry, foil to James I. - - - - - - 170
D I A L O G U E VIII. I73.
TREAch ERY: or the Hiſtory of Moſes Go-
lemus, General to Scanderbeg the Great,
King of Epirus - - - - - - - - - - ibid.-
CoNscience: or the Magical Ring - - - 183
D I A L O G U E IX. 207-
FIDELITY and Conjugal Affection: A re-
markable Adventure in the Mines of Idria ibid.
Anecdotes of Regulus - - - - - - 216
Advice of Scipio - - - - - - - - 223
PATRIOTIs M: exemplified in a poor Armenian 224.
D I A L O G U E X. }
Reſpect to learning paid by barbarians——By
Alexander the Great—By the Kings of |
Macedon, &c.——By Magdalene, wife of
Lewis XI. of France - - - - - - 239
By Marcellus to Archimedes - - 240
EMULATION: or an Account of a famous - |
; German Poeteſs - - - - - - - - 247
PRIDE : or the extraordinary Hiſtory of a Ve-
netian Lady - - - - - - - - - 252
T H E


<page 14>
T H E
FAMILY PICTURE.
I N T R O D U C T I O N.
D I A L O G U E I.
Mr. EGERTON, Mr. For RESTER.
Mr. For Rest ER.
OU are certainly a very happy Man, Sir.
Happy in your fortune, happy. in your
Friends, and particularly happy in your
Family. Whence is it that your children have ac-
quired ſuch an evident ſuperiority over the young
people of their own age : I, you know, am but late-
ly come to ſettle in this neighbourhood. Reſerve,
the chara&teriſtic of an Engliſhman, I have in a ve-
ry ſtrong degree, except when I converſe with you;
but in your ſociety, though I am conſcious you are
my ſuperior, I ſeem to breathe and act with greater
freedom. You baniſh my reſtraint, you enliven my
Vol. I. B ima-

<page 15>
2 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
imagination: though almoſt a ſtranger to you, I
can aſk you queſtions with the confidence of in-
timacy, and can be of a different opinion, without
any apprehenſion of offending you. With you I be-
come unembarraſſed, and acquire an eaſe and pro- |
priety that no where elſe ſeem ſo natural to me.—
How does this happen —Nay, your preſence ſeems
to influence every thing. The ſcenery is particu-
larly chearful and beautiful in this place ; and the
ſpot you have choſen for yourſelf, is the paradiſe of
delight. Such variety, ſuch a charming aſſemblage
of hill and dale, river, brook and clear ſpring,
wood and ſhady grove, that I declare I fancy my-
ſelf in the regions of romance, and am inclined
to be poetical when I viſit you. In ſhort, Sir, I
admire you, and am afraid I ſhould be tempted to
envy any other man in ſuch a ſituation. But I
want to be informed of the reaſon of all this. Why
ſhould your arrangements be more happy, your ſer-
vants in better decorum, and your children more
accompliſhed than others ? explain theſe things
to me.
M R. E. G E R To N.
Without any affectation of modeſty, Sir, I con-
feſs that I believe what you ſay, in part, to be true. ,
—Your fancy is lively, and has heightened the co-
louring, but, in general, I am of opinion that my
family, my affairs, and my enjoyments of life, are
* different, and in ſome reſpects ſuperior, to that of |
others.
_-


<page 16>
I N T R O D U C T I O N. 3
others. But this will not appear ſo wonderful, when
the habits and events that have concurred to make
them ſo are known; and the ſhorteſt manner of do-
ing this, will be to relate the principal occurrences of
my life—to give you, in a conciſe way, my hiſtory.
Though I was the youngeſt child of a nume-
rous family, and conſequently was poſſeſſed of but
little wealth to begin the world with, yet I had one
advantage to which I attribute all my ſubſequent
ſucceſs ; I had the inſtrućtion, the experience, and
the wiſdom of an affectionate father, to guide and
direct me till I was fourteen. At this age, having
loſt my parents, though I had guardians, I be-
came leſs circumſpect. Being of a warm and en-
terprizing temper, and feeling myſelf ſuperior to
the generality of my young companions, ſchemes
of independence began to revolve in my mind, I
obſerved the ſilly actions of men, and drew infer-
ences favourable to my own prudence and capacity:
thoſe to whom I was left in charge had weakneſſes;
I ſaw them and became impatient of controul. As
I grew towards manhood, my mind became reſt-
leſs, my imagination was heated by reading the
ſtrong ſentiments and great ačtions of the ancient
heroes. The ſucceſsful career of young Scipio
charmed and fired my fancy: I panted to be diſtin-
guiſhed, and negle&ted no opportunity that could
render me remarkable ; as the following incident
will convince you. - - -
I was educated at Eton School and obſerving,
one day, two of my ſchool-fellows inſulting a
B 2. poor

<page 17>
4. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
poor woman, that was tottering under age,
it excited my indignation ſo much, that I fell
upon them both very heartily, and ſtruck one
of them an unlucky blow. They conceiv-
ing I had injured them, by interfering in a bu-
fineſs that did not concern me, and not being
able to conceal their diſgrace, complained to the
maſter, and made up a ſtory greatly to their own
advantage. I was accordingly ſummoned to anſwer
for myſelf. It happened that I had juſt before been
reading the tale of the Spartan Boy that expired
while the fox was biting him. In conſequence of
this, having at that inſtant a thorough contempt
for pain, and indeed wiſhing for an opportunity to
ſhew how much I deſpiſed it, I behaved ſullenly,
and refuſed to anſwer the maſter, except by haughtily
declaring, I had done what I thought was right, and
would, with the like provocation, do the ſame again.
This, excluſive of the crime I ſtood accuſed of, was
braving the authority of the maſter, who ordered me to
be ſeverely puniſhed; which was what I wiſhed and
expected. I ſupported the pain as if I had been inſenſi-
ble to it, and then told the maſter that he was miſ-
taken, if he ſuppoſed me capable of fearing any puniſh-
ment that he, or the worſt of tyrants could inflićt; I
had done my duty by relieving age and imbecility
from the wanton cruelty of two boys, and if he had
done juſtice he would have puniſhed them inſtead
of me. The maſter, who was a ſenſible and diſ-
cerning

<page 18>
I N T R O D U C T I O N. 5
cerning man, replied “there is ſomething peculiar
in your condućt, young gentleman, it muſt be con-
feſſed, but you do wrong in accuſing me of ty–
ranny. You have behaved with audacity, and if I
ſhould ſuffer ſuch ill manners to go unpuniſhed, it
would be impoſſible for me to preſerve any order
in this place. If, as you now ſay, you took the
part of the oppreſſed, you ſhould have condeſcended
to have ſaid ſo, when I queſtioned you at firſt. I
ſpeak thus to you, Sir, becauſe you ſeem, from what
I have obſerved of your preſent and your former
behaviour, to think ſomething deeper, and ſee a little
further than people of your age uſually do, but you
do not ſee far enough. I am no tyrant, young Sir;
you have been very rude, and though I have ſome
hope it proceeded from a good, though miſtaken mo-
tive, yet, had I not reſented it, I ſhould have ačted in-
conſiſtently, and have degraded my ſituation. Re-
colle&t yourſelf, and if you have as much ſenſe as I
believe you to have, you will ſee your error.”
This cool addreſs not only ſhewed me how
wrong I had been, in not explaining myſelf, but
quite overcame me. I burſt into tears, fell upon
my knees, and, as ſoon as I could ſpeak, aſked his
pardon for having uſed ſuch an injurious epithet to
him. I then related the ſtory of the old woman
and my ſchool-fellows, ſimply as it happened, to-
gether with my heroic imitation of the Spartan Boy.
The maſter who was evidently ſurprized and affect-
cd by my manner and condućt in this affair, ſaid to
B 3 mes,

<page 19>
.6 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
rhe, “Mr. Egerton, I am ſorry I have degraded
you by the puniſhment you have ſuffered; you are
an extraordinary young gentleman, and I have no
doubt will one day become an ornament to ſociety.
Let me, however, caution you againſt your paſ-
ſions, they are very powerful, and while they per-
ſuade you that you are doing ſomething uncom-
monly great, or good, may lead you into very dan-
gerous miſtakes. This fortitude and contempt of
pain at your age, would have been beyond praiſe,
had they been exerted upon a proper occaſion; as
it is, they can only be admired; but your generous
protection of the helpleſs deſerves every reward and
encouragement, and I hope you will hereafter con-
ſider me as your friend, and not your maſter. As
for your accuſers, there is no puniſhment I can in-
flict ſevere enough for cruelty, cowardice and lying ;
I ſhall therefore expel them, left their example
fhould corrupt others. I perceive you are going to
intercede for them : but I will ſpare you the pain of
being refuſed, by telling you, I cannot, in juſtice
to the other young gentlemen that are entruſted to
my care, ſuffer boys of ſuch vicious diſpoſitions to
aſſociate with them. Youth'is weak and inconſi–
derate, and as liable to imitate a bad as a good
aćtion ; it is my particular duty therefore not-to
permit theſe wicked boys to remain among
them.” -
. I have related this adventure, to ſhew you the
natural warmth and enthuſiaſtic bent of my temper.
I went

<page 20>
1 N T R op v c + i o s. 7
I went through a regular courſe of education under
the gentleman above-mentioned, whoſe friendſhip I
poſſeſſed till his death, and to whoſe advice and in-
ſtruction I am greatly indebted. It was the intention
of my guardians that I ſhould ſtudy the law, and be-
come a counſellor; I however had other views;
for though it is certain, no profeſſion requires great-
er acuteneſs and abilities thanºthis, yet as it is be-
come common place to call it dry, tedious, knaviſh
and ſo forth, it was little alluring to a mind like
mine, that had ſo ſtrong a propenſity to romance.
I wanted to be a hero, or a poet, or rather a ſome-
thing ſupernatural, and it was experience only that
could make me more rational. By my repeated
interceſſions and poſitiveneſs in refuſing to engage
in any other vocation, my guardians were pre-
vailed upon to buy me a commiſſion in the army;
and I entered it with an incoherent kind of hope of
doing extraordinary things; but I had not been in
it long before I diſcovered that more of mecha-
niſm than courage was required: that I muſt obey
orders, and pay a ſtrićt regard to trifles: that in
order to riſe to any very ſuperior ſtation, I muſt not
only have abilities, but powerful friends; and that
without them it was as probable I ſhould remain ob-
ſcure in this, as in any other profeſſion. I was at the
battle of Fontenoy, and, though I encouraged the
men under my command, and executed the orders I
received with the utmoſt ardor, yet I was convinced
it was very little in the power of an individual to
B 4 turn

<page 21>
8 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
turn the fortune of the day, for notwithſtanding all
my heroiſm, I was wounded and taken priſoner.
Some time after I was exchanged and ſent to Eng-
land, when it was my fortune to fall deeply in love
with my preſent wife.
Hitherto I had cared but little about riches,
nay indeed as the poets and philoſophers I had
read uſually affected to deſpiſe them, I did ſo
too, my amour however brought me to a ſevere
fenſe of the want of them. My miſtreſs was the
daughter of a very rich man, and an heireſs; I, a
younger brother with a ſmall fortune, rather dimi-
niſhed than increaſed; and as the peace and half-
pay had deprived me of any further hopes from the
army, I had no apparent means of augmenting my
wealth. This made me refle&t on the abſurdity
of thoſe viſionary hopes in the contemplation of
which I had formerly indulged myſelf. I began to
perceive there was no arriving at perfection in any
art, or knowledge, or eminence in any ſtation, but
by gradual and almoſt imperceptible degrees; my
paſſion was violent, I ſaw no probable means of
obtaining a fortune inſtantaneouſly, nor of gaining
the woman I loved without one. The father of
Mrs. Egerton ſuſpected our love, which was mu-
tual, and hinted, in an oblique manner, that he
did not wiſh to ſee me any more at his houſe. Af-
ter turning every kind of ſcheme in my mind, I con-
cluded that the moſt expeditious way of becoming
wealthy, would be by going into the ſervice of the
Eaſt India Company; which, after conſulting with
Mrs.
*

<page 22>
I N T R O D U C T I O N. g
Mrs. Egerton, and having exchanged reiterated
promiſes of fidelity, I reſolved to do.
My family connections and the money I could
command to begin with, gave the means of go-
ing out in a reſpectable light: and I embark-
ed, though with an aching heart, not without
hopes of returning to enjoy the fruits of my in-
duſtry and love. I was abroad about three years,
during which time I gained a conſiderable fund of
worldly knowledge, and an inſight in the ways,
motives and manners of men. The facts were ſome
of them not very much to their honour, but they
taught me to think more conſiſtently. I do not
mean by this to cenſure the men of the world uni-
verſally; there are many, within my own knowledge,
of the ſtrićteſt probity, but theſe I have obſerved
never, unleſs by ſome accident, become ſudden-
ly rich. For my own part, I made but mode-
rate advances, and this ſlow progreſs, with the
letters I received from Mrs. Egerton, and the con-
tinual anxiety of ſo long an abſence, made me re-
ſolve to return. When I arrived in England, I
found I had a legacy left me by a relation. This,
added to my little ſtock, made, in the whole, almoſt
eleven thouſand pounds; for I had been as ſtrićt an
ceconomiſt, while in India, as the natural warmth
of my temper would permit me to be : but there are
weak, indolent and unfortunate men in all places,
that muſt ever be a tax on the more induſtri-
ous and ſucceſsful, who have ſome pity, ſome ge-
neroſity, and no exceſſive degree of ſelfiſhneſs, among
B 5. which

<page 23>
IO T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
which number I hope I ſhall always remain: for
though it is encumbent on every man to be prudent
and affiduous, yet while I feel I have many weak-
neſſes myſelf, I truſt I ſhall always have philan-
thropy enough to look with an eye of pity on
thoſe of others, though I neither wiſh to en-
courage theirs nor my own.
We are always apt enough to indulge hopes of
fucceſs when we wiſh it. I could not ſummon up
the courage to wait on Mrs. Egerton's father and
explain myſelf to him in perſon. I knew my fortune,
tho' in this its improved ſtate, was by no means equal
to what he had a right to expect from the huſband of
his daughter. But as my family was reſpectable,
and as I had uſed ſuch efforts to make myſelf
more worthy, I ſuppoſed it poſſible, when theſe
things were enumerated, that they might have
fome influence on the mind of the old gentle-
man: for which reaſon I reſolved to write to him,
and tell him what I had done for his daughter's-ſake,
and what I would do if he would but permit her to
be mine. I did ſo, and ſoon received for anſwer
the painful mortification of a poſitive refuſal, which
threw me into a ſtate of deſpair that had like to
have proved fatal to me. An accident however ac-
compliſhed that which all my former efforts had fail-
ed to do. I received intelligence from Mrs. Egerton
that her father was going into the country, un-
der the pretence of taking her to enjoy the beauties
of the ſpring, but in reality to keep her from the
I ſight


<page 24>
I N T R O D U C T I O N. I E.
y
fight of me. I no ſooner heard this, but I reſolved
to ride after them at a diſtance, to follow them.
down, and to diſguiſe myſelf and live in the neigh-
bourhood while they ſhould remain there. It was
fortunate for her father that I did ſo. I communicat-
ed my ſcheme to Mrs. Egerton, and though ſhe diſ-
ſuaded me from putting it in praćtice, it was in a
way that ſhewed ſhe but half diſapproved my inten-
tion. I therefore executed my plan, by taking the
dreſs of an ordinary tradeſman, hiring a lodging in
the neighbourhood, and pretending I was ordered
by the phyſicians to live ſome time in the country
for a change of air, as being apprehenſive of falling
into a conſumption; and, as ill health always attends
any extraordinary agitation of the mind, I had a
temporary paleneſs and deječtion that made this pre-
text very plauſible. I had given Mrs. Egerton ſo
many proofs of the purity of my intentions, and
the ſtrict honour by which I was actuated, that I
had prevailed on her, while in town, to admit me
to converſe with her, in the preſence of her maid, in
an evening, when her father was gone to reſt: and
, this, in conſequence of the preſſing earneſtneſs of
my ſolicitations, was repeated in the country. One
evening, about midnight, when the whole houſe
except Mrs. Egerton and her maid was gone to
bed, and every thing was ſtill and filent, as we were
fitting indulging our melancholy, and renewing
thoſe proteſtations of conſtancy which lovers never
think can be often enough repeated, we heard a
B 6. . . noiſe
3.
&T) en -
& G
§

<page 25>
I2 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
noiſe over our heads, in the chamber where her father
ſlept, as of perſons walking without their ſhoes.
We were all alarmed, Mrs. Egerton particularly,
who exclaimed “Good God there is ſomebody in
my father's room, going to murder him perhaps.”
We liſtened, and preſently heard perſons ſpeaking
in a low voice, who were anſwered by the old gentle-
man; this was almoſt immediately ſucceeded by a
noiſe of ſtruggling, and the father's begging for
God’s ſake that they would ſpare his life. I
inſtantly ſnatched up the poker and the candle,
flew up ſtairs and burſt open the door, where I
beheld the old gentleman gaſping for breath, beneath
two villains who were endeavouring to ſtrangle
him. My appearance was ſo ſudden, and the force
of guilt ſo ſtrong, that I made an eaſy conqueſt.
The houſe was inſtantly alarmed by the cries of
Mrs. Egerton and her maid, and the ſervants coming
to my aſſiſtance, the aſſaſſins were bound and ſe-
cured. It appeared they were diſſolute fellows in the
neighbourhood. They had crept into the houſe,
- concealed themſelves under the bed, waited till
- they ſuppoſed every body gone to reſt, and then,
after having obliged the old gentleman to deli–
wer his keys, endeavoured to ſtrangle him, leſt he
ſhould wake his ſervants before they could accom-
pliſh their purpoſe. The horror of the attempt
made ſo ſtrong an impreſſion upon his mind, that
when he came to himſelf, and ſaw his deliver-
er, he wept, embraced me, claſped my hand, bleſ-
fed me, called me his ſon, his beſt ſon, his pre-
ſerver,

<page 26>
I N T R O D U C T I O N. I3
ſerver, and ſeemed delighted that he could, in ſome
meaſure, beſtow a recompence for the ſervice I
had done him by giving me his daughter.
You may eaſily imagine the temporary flow of
happineſs that ſucceeded "it was all rapture, love,
gratitude, thanks, acknowledgements and congra-
tulations. But theſe violent delights cannot long
exiſt; they have too often as Shakeſpeare expreſſes
it, violent ends #. This, however, happily, has not
been my caſe: they have ſubſided into a calm and
temperate tranquility. New ſcenes opened upon
me. I became a father, when the anxieties of a
parent, with the experience I had had, ſoon made
me regard my former viſionary ſchemes in a more
ſober and rational light. It is true, they left a
warm glow upon my mind, that has always kept it
alive to certain ſenſations, which thoſe who have
once poſſeſſed never wiſh entirely to loſe. It has
enlarged my ideas, and given me a habit of extend-
ing my views to obječts, that with ſome people, are
out of fight. I encourage the effuſions of fancy,
I remember the agreeable dreams of my youth with
pleaſure, and ſome of them I have realized.
One of my chief cares has been the education of
my children. I can never forget the ſtrong impreſſi-
on reading made upon me, when very young. This,
I am convinced, may be turned to the greateſt ad-
vantage, by thoſe who have the care of youth.
Moral tales, well told, in which the good and ill
effects of the paſſions are conſpicuous, have a .
greater
* Romeo and Juliet,

<page 27>
I4 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
er influence over the conduct of the youthful
mind, and will do more in the improvement
of the heart, than puniſhment or advice can ever
effect. We are the creatures of imitation, and our
moſt prevalent paſſion M vanity. This is the rein
by which the ſkilful inſtructor ſhould guide his pupil.
Till a certain age, fear and correction ſhould have
their influence; after that, praiſe and example will
be moſt prevalent. This, at leaſt, is my opinion.
For this reaſon, I have adopted the method I uſe
at preſent. I have formed a reading ſociety among
my own family. My children aſſemble every day
in the library. Hiſtory and biography are the great
reſources, as theſe furniſh continual and real exam-
ples of the effects of the paſſions; to theſe are added,
ſuch tales of fićtion as I think well calculated to
point out the good or ill conſequences of particular
virtues and vices. It has been a conſtant ſource of
delight to me, to obſerve the progreſs of the mind,
and the natural propenſity of the human heart to
rečtitude and virtue. I have five children, three
boys and two girls, the eldeſt is nineteen, and the
youngeſt eight. They have all been educated at
home, becauſe I have been afraid of their contračt-
ing the bad habits of their companions, had I ſent
them to ſchools. I am ſenſible this mode of educa-
tion has its diſadvantages, but as it has been the
buſineſs and the delight of myſelf and Mrs. Egerton,
to apply ourſelves to this, and this only, and as we
have been fortunate in finding men of genius to
aſſiſt


<page 28>
I N T R O D U C T I O N. #5
º
º:
; :
(
aſſiſt us in the taſk, I am inclined to ſuppoſe we
have avoided many of the inconveniences, and ſup-
plied ſome of the defects.
There is one thing we have been particularly atten-
tive to, which is candour. We have always ſpoken
our ſentiments with ſimplicity and ſincerity. We have
never diſguiſed our meaning by endeavouring to de-
ceive a child into virtue; for we believe all deceit to
have a dangerous tendency. We have encouraged
truth and openneſs, and taken every poſſible precau-
tion to detect, puniſh and expoſe the contrary. We
have talked to our children rather as friends than
maſters, and have become their confidants; for as
we have never expe&ted perfeótion, but have been
always ready to forgive errors that have been inge-
nuouſly confeſſed, prevarication and falſhood, after
a certain age, have ſeldom been attempted by our
pupils. It is in conſequence of ſuch methods, that
our little ſociety has acquired an air of freedom and
fimplicity, that cannot exiſt where artifice is not
deſpiſed. There is a natural averſion in the mind
to confeſs its foibles. Vanity is continually in-
tent upon drawing compariſons in its own favour, ,
and this principle is inſeparable from humanity.
To correct it, to make the mind open to convićtion,
and willing to obſerve and detect its real motives,
is peculiarly the duty of teachers. Eſtimable as
ſcientific knowledge is, this knowledge is far more
eſtimable, becauſe upon this depends our happineſs,
and the execution of all the ſocial duties.
Our

<page 29>
I6 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
Our family meet every evening, (except inter-
rupted by being viſited, or going to viſit) in the
library; which is very commodiouſly adapted for
either a ſummer or a winter room. There are
folding doors that open to the park. In the front
is an extenſive and variegated landſcape, which
includes ſome of the moſt beautiful ſcenery that
this part of England affords. On the right is a
ſtupendous craggy rock, that projećts from the ſide
of a high mountain, both of which are ſeen over a
very ſpacious foreſt. Theſe form a delightful con-
traſt to the freſh verdure, the water, the cattle, and
other paſtoral ſubjects immediately in fight. On
the left is the pleaſure garden, the ſhrubbery and
the nurſery. The ſcene is ſo capacious and pre-
fents itſelf in ſuch a variety of forms, and with ſuch
a profuſion of objećts, which the alteration of the
ſeaſons, and other accidental cauſes are continually
diverſifying, that the eye is never tired. When
the weather permits the doors are thrown open, when
it is very fine we fit on the outſide, and enjoy the
ſunſhine or cool ſhade, as circumſtances invite;
in winter the room is ſufficiently warm for the ſea-
ſon, and we ſtill enjoy the ſatisfaction of contem-
plating Nature, amidſt hoar froſts, ſnows, clouds,
ſtorms, and all the magnificence of her diſtreſs.
I am certain you perceive the egotiſm that runs
through my narrative, I perceive it myſelf, but if
I did not indulge it in this inſtance, my feelings
- - - would

<page 30>
I N T R O D U C T I O N. 17
would not accompany my deſcription, and then it
would be good for little.
MR. For Res T E R.
Your deſcription is, exactly what I approve, with.
out affectation of modeſty; and, if I can judge,
far from being exaggerated. I am become your
neighbour. You, with peculiar eaſe and good hu-
mour, invite me to a ſocial intimacy which is
exceedingly deſirable to me. I am a plain man,
my knowledge is not ſo extenſive, nor my habits of
thinking ſo refined as yours. I have a daughter to
whom I have given a certain portion of education.
You are acquainted with the anxieties of a parent.
I ſhould be happy to ſend her to your ſchool, I
mean, I ſhould be glad to have her admitted
to your evening readings and converſations;
but as I aſk this with frankneſs, I wiſh ſo to
be anſwered. You may perceive improprieties
that I do not, or you may diſcover ſuch hereafter.
I have no doubt, but in that caſe, you will, or
would, explain yourſelf, and being perſuaded of this,
I find no reluctance in making the requeſt.
M. R. E. G E R T o N.
You do me juſtice, Sir ; I would. Bring the
young lady, I have no doubt but the intercourſe
will be equally agreeable to all parties.
D I A-

<page 31>
18 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
D I A Lo G U E II.
The ſcene is the library. The company conſis of Mr.
and Miſs Forrºſier; Mr. and Mrs. Egerton; Mr.
Euſtace, the eldſ?; Mr. Charles, the Jecond, and
Mr. Harry, the young'ſ ſon ; Nancy, the eldſ?;
and Fanny, the youngſt daughter.
Mr. E. G E R T o N.
rTHOUGH there are many vices, the opera-
tions and conſequences of which are general-
ly more violent and deſtructive than that of ſelf-love,
yet there are none that render the poſſeſſor more
mean and deſpicable. The ſelfiſh and covetous man
is avoided by all who are not intereſted in his affairs,
and by them he is contemned. No rank or power
can procure him reſpect. Bancroft, Archbiſhop of
Canterbury, notwithſtanding his dignity, had the
following ſatirical epitaph beſtowed upon him, for
his covetouſneſs: -
“Here lies his Grace, in cold clay clad,
* Who died for want of what he had.”
Caligula was not more deteſted for his cruelties,
than deſpiſed for his avarice; and when Cardinal
Angelot received a ſevere chaſtiſement from the
hand
".

<page 32>
S E L F I S. H. N e s S. 19
hand of his groom, who, not knowing his maſter
in the dark, detected him ſtealing the oats from
his own horſes, his ſuffering became the ſubject of
laughter inſtead of pity.
But here, children, I muſt obſerve to you, that
parſimony and ceconomy are two very diſtinét
things. Every man muſt have a certain degree
of frugality, or he cannot continue benevolent.
Lewis, the eleventh of France, was no miſer, and
yet in the chamber of accounts, 1461, there is
two ſhillings charged for fuſtian to new ſleeve his
majeſty’s old doublet.
Nor would I have you underſtand, that I wiſh to
ſee any of you luxurious. When the Thracians
ſent preſents of meal, geeſe, honey-cakes, ſweet-
meats, wines, and other dainties to Ageſilaus, the
Lacedemonian, he only accepted of the meal; and
when they preſſed him to receive the others likewiſe,
he took them, but immediately diſtributed them
among the ſlaves, ſaying, that ſuch delicacies were
improper for men addićted to virtue, and that thoſe
things which tended to enfeeble the mind or the
body, ought never to be admitted among a free and
liberal people.
The ſocial paſſions, my children, cannot be too
intimately encouraged as long as they do not dege-
nerate into prodigality. That univerſal benevo-
lence, which inclines us to aſſiſt all thoſe whom we
have the power of aſſiſting, without materially in-
juring ourſelves, is perhaps the moſt reſplendent
of

<page 33>
20 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E,
of virtues. Selfiſhneſs hides itſelf in a corner, and,
like a cur with his paw upon a bone, ſnarles at who-
ever approaches: benevolence is frugal and ſparing
to herſelf, but opens her hand and her boſom to
hunger, wretchedneſs and diſtreſs.
Do you, Charles, read the following tale, it will
better illuſtrate my meaning than any thing which
I can ſay.
S E L F I S H N E S S,
Or the Story of C A R A z AN the Merchant of
B A G D A T.
CARAZAN, the Merchant of Bagdat, was
eminent throughout all the Eaſt for his avarice and
his wealth: his origin was obſcure as that of the
ſpark which by the colliſion of ſteel and adamant
is ſtruck out of darkneſs; the patient labour of
perſevering diligence alone had made him rich.
It was remembered, that when he was indigent he
was thought to be generous; and he was ſtill ac-
knowledged to be inflexibly juſt. But whether in
his dealings with men he diſcovered a perfidy which
tempted him to put his truſt in gold, or whether
in proportion as he accumulated wealth he diſco-
vered his own importance by increaſe, Carazan
prized it more as he uſed it leſs. He gradu-
ally loſt the inclination to do good, as he
acquired the power; and as the hand of time ſcat-
- - tered

<page 34>
s e L. F I S. H. N e S s. 21
tered ſnow upon his head, the freezing influence
extended to his boſom.
But though the door of Carazan was never open-
ed by hoſpitality, nor his hand by compaſſion, yet
fear led him conſtantly to the moſque at the ſtated
hours of prayer: he performed all the rights of de-
votion with the moſt ſcrupulous punétuality, and
had thrice paid his vows at the temple of the pro-
phet. That devotion, which ariſes from the love
of God, and neceſſarily includes the love of man,
confers new dignity upon goodneſs, and is the ob-
jećt not only of affection but reverence. On the
contrary, the devotion of the ſelfiſh, whether it be
intended to avert the puniſhment which every one
wiſhes to ſee inflićted, or to inſure it by the compli-
cation of hypocriſy with guilt, never fails to excite
indignation and abhorrence. Carazan, therefore,
locking his door, and, turning round with a look
of circumſpective ſuſpicion, proceeded to the moſque,
and was followed by every eye with filent malig-
nity. The poor ſuſpended their ſupplications as he
paſſed. Though he was known by every man, yet
no man ſaluted him. -
Such had long been the life of Carazan, and ſuch
was the charaćter which he had acquired, when no-
tice was given by proclamation, that he was re-
moved to a magnificent building in the centre of
the city; that his table ſhould be ſpread for the
hungry, and that the ſtranger ſhould be welcome to
his bed. The multitude ſoon ruſhed like a tor-
rent

<page 35>
22 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
rent to his door, where they beheld him diſtribut-
ing bread to the hungry, and apparel to the naked;
his eye ſoftening with compaſſion, and his cheek
glowing with delight. Every one gazed with aſto-
niſhment at the prodigy; and the murmur of innu-
merable voices increaſing like the ſound of ap-
proaching thunder, Carazan beckoned with his
hand. Attention ſuſpended the tumult in a moment;
and he thus gratified the curioſity which procured
him audience. -
“To Him who touches the mountains and they
fmoke, the almighty and moſt merciful, be ever-
laſting honour! he hath ordained ſleep to be the
miniſter of inſtrućtion, for his viſions have reprov-
ed me in the night. As I was fitting alone in my
haram, with my lamp burning before me, com-
puting the produćt of my merchandize, and exult-
ing in the encreaſe of my wealth, I fell into a deep
ſleep, and the hand of him who dwells in the third
heaven was upon me. I beheld the angel of death
coming forward like a whirlwind, and he ſmote me
before I could deprecate the blow. At the ſame
moment I felt myſelf lifted from the ground and
tranſported with aſtoniſhing rapidity through the
regions of the air. The earth was contraćted to
an atom between ; and the ſtars glowed round me
with a luſtre that obſcured the ſun. The gate of
paradiſe was now in ſight; and I was intercepted
by a ſudden brightneſs which no human eye could
behold. The irrevocable ſentence was now to be
pro-
. .”
X
§

<page 36>
S E L F I S. H. N. E. S. S. 23
pronounced; my day of probation was paſt, and
from the evil of my life nothing could be taken
away, nor could any thing be added to the good.
When I refle&ted that my lot for eternity was caſt,
which not all the powers of nature could reverſe,
my confidence totally forſook me; and while I ſtood
trembling and ſilent, covered with confuſion and
chilled with horror, I was thus addreſſed by the ra-
'diance that flamed before me.”
Carazan, thy worſhip has not been accepted,
becauſe it was not prompted by the love of God;
neither can thy righteouſneſs be rewarded, becauſe
it was not produced by the love of man: for thy
own ſake only, haſt thou rendered to every man
his due ; and thou haſt approached the Almighty
only for thyſelf. Thou haſt not looked upwards
with gratitude nor round thee with kindneſs. A-
round thee thou haſt indeed beheld vice and folly;
but if vice and folly could juſtify thy parſimony,
would they not condemn the bounty of heaven?
If not upon the fooliſh and the vicious, where ſhall
the ſun diffuſe his light, or the clouds diſtil their
dew Where ſhall the lips of the ſpring breathe
fragrance, or the hand of autumn diffuſe plenty
Remember, Cazaran, that thou haſt ſhut compaſſion
from thy heart, and graſped thy treaſures with an
hand of iron : thou haſt lived for thyſelf; and,
therefore, henceforth for ever thou ſhalt ſubſiſt
alone. From the light of heaven, and from the
ſociety of all beings, ſhalt thou be driven; ſolitude
ſhall

<page 37>
24. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
ſhall protračt the lingering of eternity, and darkneſs
aggravate the horrors of deſpair.’
“At this moment I was driven by ſome ſecret
and irreſiſtible power, through the glowing ſyſtem
of creation, and paſſed innumerable worlds in an
inſtant. As I approached the verge of nature, I
perceived the ſhadows of total and boundleſs va-
cuity deepen before me, a dreadful region of eter-
nal ſilence, ſolitude, and darkneſs! unutterable hor-
ror ſeized me at the proſpect, and this exclama-
tion burſt from me with all the vehemence of de-
fire. O ! that I had been doomed for ever to the
common receptacle of impenitence and guilt there
ſociety would have alleviated the torment of deſpair,
and the rage of fire could not have excluded the
comfort of light. Or, if I had been condemned
to reſide on a comet, that would return but once in
a thouſand years to the regions of light and life;
the hope of theſe periods, however diſtant, would
chear me in the dreary interval of cold and dark-
neſs, and the vicifitude would divide eternity into
time. While this thought paſſed over my mind,
I loſt ſight of the remoteſt ſtar, and the laſt glim-
mering of light was quenched into utter darkneſs.
The agonies of deſpair encreaſed every moment, as
every moment augmented my diſtance from the
laſt habitable world. I refle&ted with intolerable
anguiſh, that when ten thouſand thouſand years
£hould carry me beyond the reach of all but that
: - - power

<page 38>
S E L E M S H N E S Sw 25
:
power who fills infinitude, I ſhould ſtill look forward
into an immenſe abyſs of darkneſs, through which I
ſhould ſtill drive without ſuccour and without ſo-
ciety, farther and farther for ever and ever. I
then ſtretched out my hands towards the regions
of exiſtence, with an emotion that awaked me.
Thus have I been taught to eſtimate ſociety, like
every other bleſfing, by its loſs. My heart is
warmed to liberality; and I am zealous to commu-
nicate the happineſs which I feel, to thoſe from
whom it is derived; for, the ſociety of one wretch,
whom in the pride of proſperity I would have
ſpurned from my door, would, in the dreadful ſo-
litude to which I was condemned, have been more
highly prized, than the gold of Afric, or the gems
of Golconda.” -
At this reflečtion upon his dream, Carazan be-
came ſuddenly filent, and looked upwards in an ex-
taſy of gratitude and devotion. The multitude was
ſtruck at once with the precept and the example; and
the Caliph, to whom the event was related, that he
might be liberal beyond the power of gold, com-
manded it to be recorded for the benefit of poſ-
terity. - . .
MR. E. G E R To N.
I perceive by your countenances, children, there
is not one of you who would not dread the puniſh-
ment of Carazan, :
V o L., I, Ç - N A N c Y.

<page 39>
-
26 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
N A N c Y.
I am ſure, Sir, I ſhould ; and I am quite happy
to think it was only a dream,
E U S T A c E.
Pray, Sir, did you ever read the life of Barnard
Gilpin?
MR. E. G E R T o N.
Yes.
E U s T A c E.
And don't you think he was a very hoſpitable,
good man?
w
MR. E. G E R To N.
I do indeed; one of the beſt of men.
E U s T A c E.
Then if you pleaſe, Sir, I’ll read you a little
Extract I made from his life; I dare ſay it will be
acceptable to Miſs Forreſter and the reſt of the
company; and it will form an agreeable contraſt to
the ſelfiſhneſs ſo well deſcribed in the tale of Ca-
razan.
MR. E. G E R To N.
Do ſo, Euſtace.
E U S T A c E.
Barnard Gilpin was reëtor of Houghton le Spring,
in the reigns of the Queens Mary and Elizabeth.
At his firſt undertaking the care of a pariſh, he laid
&
- it

<page 40>
s E L E 1 s H. N e s s. , 27
v.
it down as a maxim, to do all the good in his
power, and to gain the affections of his pariſhioners.
To ſucceed in this, he uſed no ſervile compliances;
but his behaviour was free without levity, obliging
without meanneſs, and inſinuating without art.
He condeſcended to the weak, bore with the paſ-
ſionate, complied with the ſcrupulous, and in a truly
apoſtolic manner became all things to all men.
To his humanity and courteſy, he added an un-
wearied application to the inſtruction of thoſe under
his care; and with unceaſing affiduity he employ–
ed himſelf in admoniſhing the vicious and encou-
raging the well-intentioned, ſo that in a few years
he made a greater change in his neigbourhood, than
could have been imagined.
His hoſpitable manner of living, was the ad-
miration of the whole country. He ſpent in his
family, every fortnight, forty buſhels of corn,
twenty buſhels of malt, and a whole ox, beſides a
proportionate quantity of other proviſions. Stran-
gers and travellers found a chearful reception; all
were welcome that came, and even their beaſts
had ſuch care taken of them, that it was humourouſly
ſaid, “If a horſe was turned looſe in any part of
the county it would immediately make its way to
the rector of Houghton.”
Every Sunday, from Michaelmas till Eaſter, was
a ſort of public day with him. During this ſeaſon
he expected to ſee all his pariſhioners and their
families. For their reception he had three tables
well covered: the firſt was for gentlemen, the ſe-
C 2 cond

<page 41>
28 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
cond for huſbandmen and farmers, and the third
for day labourers. This piece of hoſpitality he ne-
ver omitted, even when loſſes, or a ſcarcity of
proviſion made its continuance rather difficult.
When he was abſent from home, no alteration was
made in his family expences. The poor were fed
as uſual, and his neighbours entertained.
Lord Burleigh, the Lord Treaſurer, being ſent by
Queen Elizabeth to tranſačt ſome affairs in Scot-
hand, when he came into Gilpin's neighbourhood,
ſtruck with the univerſal praiſes which filled every
mouth, he could not reſiſt his inclination to ſee
a man ſo truly reſpectable ; and although his lord-
Íhip came on him unawares, yet he received his
noble gueſt with ſuch true politeneſs, and treated
him and his retinue in ſo affluent and generous a
manner, that the treaſurer would often afterwards
fay, he could hardly have expected more at Lam-
beth. At his departure, embracing his generous
hoſt, he told him he had heard great things in his
commendation, but he had ſeen what far exceeded
all he had heard : and when he had got to the top
of a hill, which is about a mile from Houghton, he
turned his horſe to take one more view of the
place, and broke out into this exclamation, “There
is enjoyment of life indeed who can blame that
man for not accepting a biſhoprick? What doth he
want to make him greater or happier or more uſeful
to mankind.”
As Mr. Gilpin's whole life was a ſeries of pious,
generous and charitable acts, there is no doing him
juſtice

<page 42>
S e L. F r S H N E S S. 29
º
juſtice in this extra St. Mr. Gilpin was not a dig-
nitary of the church, nor did he poſſeſs a plurality
of benefices, but he exerciſed a noble hoſpitality,
and a ſeemingly boundleſs charity and liberality, with
a living of four hundred pounds a year, which he
refuſed to exchange for the biſhoprick of Carliſle,
and many rich benefices that were offered him at
different times.
MR. E. G E R to N.
I don't know, Euſtace, how to expreſs the plea-
ſure you have given me as a father, in the proof, I
have juſt now received, of your diſpoſition to admire
a truly great and moſt reſpectable charaćter. Yes,
my children, they are ſuch men as Mr. Gilpin, whom I
would recommend you to imitate. Happy in them-
ſelves, and beneficent to others, the reproach of
the vicious, and the glory of human nature, they
not only have contributed to the univerſal good of
Society, while living, but will continue to do ſo,
as long as goodneſs and good men ſhall be remem-
bered upon earth; for, thoſe who can read the life
of Barnard Gilpin, without wiſhing to be like him,
muſt be loſt to virtue indeed
MR s. E G E R T o N.
I think, my dear boy, you are entitled to the
thanks of the company, for introducing ſo vir-
tuous and valuable an example to their no-
tice. -
C 3 MR,

<page 43>
30 T H E F A M I I, Y P 1 C T U R E,
MR. Fo R RE s T R R.
I think ſo too, Madam : I, at leaſt, acknowledge
myſelf very much obliged to him ; and ſhall take
care to make myſelf a little more intimate with this
worthy Rečtor.
D I A L O G U E III.
N a N c y.
T H E accouat which my brother was ſo cilig-
- ing as to give us, yeſterday, of the rector of
Houghton, reminded me, at the time, of a ſtory
I had lately read ; in which I very much admired
the benevolent diſpoſition of a lady, who, though
ſhe certainly had great reaſon to reſent the conduct
of her huſband towards her, had the virtue and for-
titude to forget her wrongs, and act in the moſt ge-
nerous and amiable manner. I have ſhewed it my
mamma, and ſhe approved of my offering it to you,
Sir, and the preſent company, for their entertain-
ment, if you and they think proper.
M. R.
w

<page 44>
B E N E V. Os L E N C E. ' 3I
-
MR. E. G E R T o N. .
I can have no doubt of the propriety of it, my
dear, if your mamma has ſeen it, and it has had her
approbation; neither could I if ſhe had not ſeen it,
as I think, my dear, your own good ſenſe, would
have prevented you from offering us an improper
ſubjećt. But pray is it a novel, or the hiſtory of
ſome known and authentic character? -
N A N c Y. .
It is given under feigned names, and ºtherefore
has all the air of a novel; but the incidents are ſo
natural, that I cannot help believing then to be
true, at leaſt ſome of them are ſo noble, that I can-
not help wiſhing them to be ſo.
MR. E. G E R T o N.
Well, read, child, and let us hear.
B E N E V O L E N C E.
Or the Story of PAL AM on and A M As I N.A.
PAL AMON and A M As I N A were married
almoſt too young to know the duties of the ſtate
they entered into, yet both being extremely good-
natured, a mutual deſire of obliging each other
appeared in all their words and actions; and, though
this complaiſance was not owing to thoſe tender
emotions which attract the heart with a refiftleſs
C 4 force,

<page 45>
32 T H E F A M I LY P I C T U R E.
force, and bear the name of love, yet were the
effects ſo much the ſame, as not to be diſtin-
guiſhed.
The firſt year of their marriage made them the
happy parents of an heir to a plentiful eſtate.—All
their friends congratulated this addition to their
felicity; and the moſt perfeót joy and tranquillity
reigned. - -
, Amafina, after ſhe became a mother, began to
feel, by degrees, an encreaſing warmth of affection
for him that made her ſo; and having no reaſon to
doubt an equal regard from him, thought herſelf as
happy as a woman could be, and that there were
joys in marriage greater than ſhe had formerly
fuppoſed. -
Quite otherwiſe was it with Palamon : the time
was now arrived, which taught him what indeed
it was to love.—The hopes, the fears, the anxie-
ties, the impatiences, all the unnumbered cares,
which are attributed to that paſſion, now took poſ-
ſeſſion of his heart.—He pined, he languiſhed—but,
alas! not for his wife.-He had, unhappily, ſeen a
young lady at the opera, who had given his heart
fenſations and deſires unfelt, unknown before. As
he happened to fit in the ſame box with her,
he had frequently an opportunity of ſpeaking to her :
and, though only on ordinary ſubječts, every an-
ſwer ſhe made to what he ſaid, ſeemed, to him,
to diſcover a profuſion of wit and gave him the
moſt longing deſire to be acquainted with her.
- For-

<page 46>
B E N E v. o 1, E N c E. 33.
Fortune, favourable to his wiſhes, preſented her
to him the next day, in one of the public walks,.
accompanied by a lady and a gentleman, the latter
of whom he had a ſlight knowledge of. He joined
them; and perceiving it was to the other lady that
the gentleman ſeemed moſt attached, he was at the
greater liberty to ſay a thouſand tender and gallant
things to her, who was now become the object of
his wiſhes.
Belinda, who was in all reſpe&ts one of the mo–
dern modiſh ladies, received the compliments he
made her in a manner which convinced him his
converſation was not diſagreeable to her; and, ſome
mention happening to be made of a maſquerade
that night, ſhe told him, that both ſhe and her fair
companion intended to be there, and were then
going to beſpeak habits for that purpoſe.
. The hint was not loſt upon Palamon: he fol-
lowed them at a diſtance; and when the ladies had
left the ſhop he went in under pretence of hiring
a domino for himſelf. Finding the woman be-
hind the counter was no flºranger to the ladies, he
eaſily prevailed on her to let him know, not only
what dreſſes they had beſpoke, but alſo of what
condition and character they were.—She informed
him, that Belinda had a large fortune, and, her
parents being dead, was under the care of guar-
dians, though ſhe did not live with theni, but had
lodgings in an adjacent ſtreet.
C. : I'... fºot,

<page 47>
34 t H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R r.
Palamon was tranſported at this intelligence, as
it ſeemed to promiſe him an eaſy acceſs to her ac-
quaintance, and the privilege of viſiting her; which,
probably, in thoſe early days of his paſſion was all
he aimed at. His impatience, however, occaſioned
him to go betimes to the maſquerade, that he
might have an opportunity of examining every one
that came in. He ſoon diſcovered Belinda, and -
was not long in convincing her, that he was the
gentleman who made her ſo many compliments in
the morning. This greatly flattered her vanity.
She liſtened attentively to the aſſurances he gave
her of his paſſion, and frequently let fall "ſome
words, as if they eſcaped her inadvertently, that
night make him think ſhe would not be ungrateful,
if he perſiſted in giving teſtimonics of a conſtant
flame. -
Palamon was tranſported to find the offer of his
heart ſo well received; and made ſo good a uſe of
the opportunity ſhe gave him of entertaining her,
that he obtained her permiſſion to attend her home;
and, as it was then too late for them to continue
their converſation, to viſit her the next day in the
afternoon. - - -
Belinda, it is probable, had no other motive for
entertaining Palamon, and receiving his addreſſes,
than merely that of -hearing herſelf praiſed, and
giving pain, as ſhe imagined, to others of her ad-
mirers who were leſs frequently admitted. But,
how dangerous it is to encourage an intimacy with
- One

<page 48>
B E N E V O L E - N C E. 35
y
one of the other ſex, too many, poſſeſſed of a
greater ſhare of diſcretion than Belinda, have expe-
rienced.—This unwary lady in meditating new arts
to captivate her lover, became inſnared herſelf. In
ſhort, Palamon fucceeded.
Amafina, all this while, loſt ground in his affec-
tion ; ſhe every day ſeemed leſs fair, and whatever
ſhe ſaid, or did, had in it a kind of aukwardneſs
which, before, he was far from diſcovering; every
thing was now diſpleaſing in her ; if endearing,
her fondneſs was childiſh and ſilly; and if more
reſerved, ſhe was ſullen and ill-natured. One mo-
ment he was out of humour if ſhe ſpoke, and the
next offended at her ſilence. He was continu-
ally ſeeking ſome pretence to find fault with the
moſt juſtifiable condućt; and even vexed when he
had nothing in reality to condemn.—Unhappy, but
certain conſequences of a new attachment! which,
not content with the injury it does, adds to it ill
humour, and a wiſh for ſome occaſion to hate the
objećt we no longer love. - -
The poor lady could not help obſerving this al-
teration in his behaviour; but, as ſhe was far from
gueſſing the real motive, imputed it to ſome un-
lucky turn in his affairs; though of what nature ſhe
could not imagine, they having had a large fortune
ſettled on them at their marriage, beſides the re-
verſion of what his father ſhould die poſſeſſed.
For more than a whole year did ſhe combat his
ill-humour with ſweetneſs, gentleneſs, and the moſt
C 6 - oblig-

<page 49>
36 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
obliging behaviour : and, though ſhe began to
think herſelf loft to his affection, bore even that
afflićting thought with the moſt ſubmiſſive patience;
{till flattering herſelf, that, if it were even ſo, he
would one day refle&t, that ſhe did not deſerve her
ili fortune.
Jealouſy was, however, a paſſion ſhe was wholly
unacquainted with: many beautiful women viſited
at her houſe, and ſhe had never ſeen the leaſt pro-
penſity in him to gallantry with any of them; ſo
that ſhe rather imagined a diſguſt to the whole ſex
was growing on him, than an attachment to any
one in particular.
Thus did her innocence and unſuſpecting nature
deceive her, till one day a female friend, more buſy
than wife, opened her eyes to the true reaſon of
her huſband's coldneſs. This lady, by means of
a maid ſervant ſhe had lately entertained, who had
lived with Belinda long enough to know the whole
ſecret of her amour with Palamon, was made ac-
quainted with all that paſſed between that guilty
pair.—She learned from this unfaithful creature,
that Belinda had been made a mother by Palamon;
and that the child was diſpoſed of to a perſon who
for a preſent of fifty guineas, had taken the ſole
charge of it, ſo that it ſhould never appear to the
diſgrace of the unnatural parents. Not the moſt
minute circumſtance, relating to the affair, but
was betrayed by this wretch, partly in revenge for
her having been diſcarded, and partly to gain the
- favous

<page 50>
B E N E V O L E N C E. 37
º
favour of her preſent lady, who, ſhe eaſily perceived,
loved to hear news of this kind.
Amafina would fain have treated this account as
fabulous, and have perſuaded her friend to regard it
only as a piece of malice in the reporter; but the
other was poſitive in her affertion, and told her, that.
it was utterly impoſſible for ſuch a perſon to dreſs
up a fićtion with ſo many particulars, and ſuch a
ſhew of truth.—“ Beſides, added ſhe, if there were
nothing in it, we might eaſily diſprove all ſhe has
ſaid, by going to the woman who has the care of
the child, and whoſe name and place of abode ſhe
has told me.”
Compelled at laſt to believe, ſhe gave for a while
a looſe to her tears and complainings, but her good
ſenſe as well as good temper, ſoon got the better of
her paſſion; and, when her friend aſked her, in
what manner ſhe would proceed, in order to do
herſelf juſtice—What can I do? replied this charm-
ing wife, but endeavour to render myſelf more oblig-
ing, more pleaſant, and more engaging, if poſſible,
than my rival; and make Palamon ſee, he can find
nothing in Belinda, that is wanting in me?
“O Heaven! cried the lady, can you forgive
ſuch an injury?”—“Yes, reſumed Amaſina, ſtifling
her fighs as much as ſhe was able, love is an invo-
luntary paſſion.”—“And will you not upbraid him
with his ingratitude, and expoſe Belinda º ſaid
ſhe.—“Neither the one nor the other, anſwered
Amaſina coldly; either of theſe methods would in-
- deed

<page 51>
38 T H E F A. M I L Y P I C T U R E.
deed render me unworthy of a return of his affec-
tion; and I conjure and beſeech you, added ſhe,
by all the friendſhip I flatter myſelf you have for
me, that you will not make the leaſt mention of this
affair to any one in the world.”
Amaſina was no ſooner left alone, and at liberty
to meditate more deeply on the ſhocking intelligence
ſhe had received, than ſhe again began to fancy
there was a poſſibility of its being falſe: the ſuſ-
penſe, however, ſeemed more dreadful to her than
the confirmation could be, and ſhe reſolved to be
fully convinced of the truth, if there were any
means of being ſo.
The unhappy wife of Palamon, who ſoon became
aſſured of his perfidy, determined to bear it with as
much patience as ſhe was able; which was indeed
ſufficient to render her behaviour ſuch, as made him
poſitive in his own mind, that ſhe had not the
leaſt ſuſpicion of the wrong he did her; and alſo
compelled him very often to accuſe himſelf for being
guilty of what he could not anſwer to his reaſon,
though he had not reſolution enough to abandon
Belinda, notwithſtanding that the levity of her
conduct diſcovered the difference between a miſtreſs
and a wife.
Whenever Amafina refle&ted on this change in
her huſband, as ſhe had little elſe in her mind,
there was no part in the adventure appeared more
ſtrange to her, than that a lady, born and educated
in the manner ſhe knew Belinda was, and who had
ſo

<page 52>
B E N E V O L E N C F. 39
ſo far yielded to temptation as to throw off all mo–
deſty and honour, ſhould have ſo little regard for
her innocent child, as to abandon it to miſeries ſhe
knew not of what kind. This was a barbarity, ſhe
thought exceeded the crime to which it owed its
birth, and ſhe more readily forgave the injury done
to herſelf, than that to the helpleſs infant.
The more ſhe refle&ted, the more ſhe was aſto-
niſhed, that a woman ſhould act ſo contrary to na-
ture; and, by often pićturing to herſelf the woes
to which this deſerted child might probably be ex-
poſed, became at length ſo generouſly intereſted in
its fate, as to form a reſolution of which few, be-
ſide herſelf, would have been capable.
She had been informed, by her officious friend,
both of the name and habitation of the woman
with whom this little creature had been left; when,
without making any perſon privy to her deſign,
muffled herſelf up in her capuchin, and went in a
hackney-chair to the houſe. The woman received
her with a great deal of reſpect and kindneſs, ima-
gining ſhe was come on the ſame buſineſs as
Belinda.
The virtuous Amaſina bluſhed at being ſuſpected
by this woman to be guilty of an act her ſoul ſhudder-
ed at.—“I come not, ſaid the wife of Palamon, on
the buſineſs you ſeem to think, though on one which
equally requires your ſecrecy.—I have no unhappy
infant to leave with you, but am come to eaſe you
of one you have lately taken charge of.
The

<page 53>
40 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
The woman looked much ſurprized to hear her
ſpeak in this manner, and knew not well what an-
ſwer to make ; but Amaſina put an end to her ſuſ-
penſe, by telling her, that ſhe was in the ſecret of
the lady, who left a child at her houſe at a certain
time and who had given fifty guineas to be eaſed
for ever of the trouble of it.—“I am, ſaid Amaſina,
a near relation of the gentleman to whom the poor
infant owes its being, and cannot conſent, that any
thing which does ſo, ſhould be deſerted and expoſed.
I therefore deſire, that if alive, you will let me ſee
it. I will provide for it better than it can be poſ-
ſible that you ſhould do for the pittance left by the
mother.”
The woman affected to expatiate on the impoſſi-
bility of her taking the care ſhe could- wiſh to do,
with children left on theſe terms ; but that hea-
ven knew ſhe did all ſhe could, and often laid out
more than ſhe received.—She aſſured her, that the
child ſhe enquired after was alive and a fine boy,
but that he was with a perſon who indeed nurſed
for the pariſh, who yet was a very good woman,
and did her duty.
That may be, replied Amaſina, but I muſt have
him removed; and, if you can provide another
nurſe who can be depended on, I have a power from.
the father to ſatisfy you for your trouble, in a very
ample manner. In the mean time, continued ſhe,
putting five guineas into her hand, take this as an
earneſt, and let the child be brought here to -morrow
about

<page 54>
B E N E V O L E N C E. 4t
about this time, and a new nurſe, whom you can
recommend. - - -
The next day, this excellent pattern of conjugal
love took with her every thing proper for a child,
whom ſhe was determined to make her own by
adoption. She no ſooner ſaw the infant in his new
nurſe's arms, than'ſhe kiſſed him with a tenderneſs
little leſs than maternal; then, after having agreed
upon terms, ordered him to be dreſſed, in her pre-
fence, in the cloaths ſhe had brought; and, every
thing being ſettled, returned home with a content-
ment of mind which words are too poor to expreſs.
Nor was this a ſudden ſtart of goodneſs and ge-
neroſity; for the more ſhe refle&ted on what ſhe
had done, the greater was the pleaſure ſhe received.
—She never let a week paſs without going to ſee
her charge ; and had he been in reality her own, her
diligence could not have been greater.
By accuſtoming herſelf to perform the duties of
a mother to the child of Belinda, ſhe began really
to love him as ſuch ; and what, at firſt, was only
pity, converted by degrees into a tender affection.
When Palamon was abroad, ſhe would often order
him to be brought to her, and, ſending for her own
ſon at the ſame time, divert herſelf with their
ſmiles and antics. She was one day employed in this
manner, when Palamon unexpectedly returned, and
came directly into the room where they were.——
Whatever indifference he had for his wife, he had
always ſhewn the greateſt tenderneſs to her ſon; and
he

<page 55>
42 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
-
he now took him up in his arms and kiſſed him, as
was his cuſtom to do. “Here is another little one,
ſaid Amaſina, ſmiling, who alſo claims ſome por-
tion of your kindneſs;” and at the ſame time pre-
fented Belinda's child to him. “By what right,
madam replied Palamon in the ſame gay tone.—
“As he is mine,” reſumed his wife. “Yours I”
cried he-" Yes, anſwered ſhe, he is mine by
adoption; and I muſt have you look upon him as
yours likewiſe.” “My complaiſance for you may
carry me great lengths, ſaid he ; but as I know you
do nothing without being able to give a reaſon, I
ſhould be glad to learn the motive of ſo extraordi-
nary a requeſt.” *
- “ The infant you ſee, ſaid ſhe, in a more ſeri-
oustone than before, and whom I have, in reality,
taken under my care, owes its being to two per-
ſons of condition; but, being illegitimate, the care
of reputation prevailed over nature; and this inno-
cent victim of an inconfiderate paſſion I found
abandoned, either to periſh, or, ſurviving, to ſur-
vive but to miſeries worſe than death.--The thought
was ſhocking to me, and I reſolved to ſnatch him
from the threatening woes, and provide for him
out of my private purſe, in ſuch a manner as
not to make life hateful to him.” -
“An action truly charitable,” ſaid Palamon, a
little perplexed ; “ but this is not the reaſon I
expected, ſince by the ſame rule your pity might be
extended to hundreds, whom, doubtleſs, you may
find
- º-

<page 56>
| : *
B E N E v. o L E N c E. 43
find expoſed in the like manner. It muſt, there-
fore, be ſome plea more forcible than mere com-
paſſion that attaches you particularly to this child.”
Amafina, who had foreſeen what anſwer her huſ-
band would make, was debating within herſelf,
whether it would be beſt for her to evade, or to
confeſs the truth of this affair; and, not being able
to determine, appeared no leſs confuſed and diſor-
dered than ſhe would have been, if about to make
an acknowledgement for ſome great offence.—
At laſt, “ a plea there is, indeed, ſaid ſhe, but—;”
here her voice and courage failed her, and ſhe was
utterly incapable to give him the ſatisfaction he
required.
Palamon was confounded beyond meaſure. Not
knowing what to think cf a behaviour ſo new,
and which ſeemed to denote that ſhe labourcd with a
ſecret of ſome importance, he looked ſledſaſtly on
her for ſeveral minutes; and perceiving that ſhe
changed colour, and had her eyes fixed on the earth,
grew quite impatient, and cried out, “What plea?
what myſtery f" . - -
“ A myſtery, replied ſhe, which I had much
rather you ſhould gueſs at than oblige me to unra-
vel.—Oh Palamon continued ſhe, after a pauſe,
is there no inſtinét in nature that can inform you,
my affection for the father makes his offspring,
of whomſoever born, dear to me?—I cannot hate
Belinda ſo much as I love Palamon; and, while I
• ann

<page 57>
44. T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
am performing the offices of a mother to this child,
I forget the ſhare ſhe has in him—to remember what
I owe to him as yours.”
The reader's imagination muſt here ſupply the
place of deſcription.—Impoſſible it is for words to give
a juſt idea of what a huſband, circumſtanced like
Palamon, muſt feel.--To have his faults thus pal-
pably made known to her, whom he moſt deſired
ſhould be ignorant of them—to receive the higheſt
obligations where he could have expected only re-
ſentment;—and to hear the detection of what he
had done diſcovered to him by the injured perſon,
in ſuch a manner as if herſelf, not he, had been
the criminal l—his hurried thoughts, between re-
morſe, aſtoniſhment, and ſhame, left him not the
power to reply.—He walked about the room in a
diſordered motion, in vain endeavouring to recover
preſence of mind, a thing ſo neceſſary on this oc-
caſion. At laſt, throwing himſelf into an eaſy chair,
juſt oppoſite to that in which his wife was ſitting,
“Good God l cried he, am I awake!—Can it be
poſſible there ſhould be ſuch a woman in the world!”
Amafina could not ſee him in theſe agitations
without a concern, which made her almoſt re-
pent having occaſioned them.—She ran to him,
and, throwing her arms about his neck, “ My
dear, dear Palamon, ſaid ſhe, let it not trouble you
that I am in poſſeſſion of a ſecret which I nei-
ther ſought after, nor ever divulged. Conſider me
as I am,_your wife, and be aſſured you can be
guilty

<page 58>
B E N E V O L E N C E. 45
-
guilty of no errors, which I ſhall not carefully con-
ceal.-Judge of my ſincerity, continued ſhe, by my
behaviour, which, you are ſenſible, has not in the leaſt
been changed by my knowledge of this affair.”
“O Amafinal cried he, preſſing her tenderly to
his boſom, I am indeed ſenſible how little I have
deſerved fuch proofs of your amazing goodneſs;–
my ſoul overflows with gratitude and love;—yet
how can I atone for my paſt crimes?”—“Mention
them no more, interrupted ſhe, only let me ſhare in
that heart, which my want of charms denies me the
hope of wholly poſſeſſing.”
He anſwered only in broken ſentences, but ſuch
as teſtified what ſhe wiſhed to find in him more
than the moſt eloquent ſpeeches could have done.
Convinced that the vićtory gained over him was
perfect and ſincere, ſhe would have known a tranſ-
port without alloy, but for the tender pain it gave
her to ſhid ſo much difficulty in perſuading him
to forgive himſelf. -
Defirous that ſhe ſhould have nothing, for the
future, to apprehend from Belinda, he immedi-
ately wrote a letter to that lady; wherein he ac-
quainted her, that, ſenſible of the injury he had done
the beſt of wives, he was determined to purſue no
pleaſures for the future in which ſhe did not par-
ticipate. He repreſented to her the ſhame and folly
of ſuch an intrigue in the moſt pathetic terms, adviſed
her to think of living ſo as to regain that reputation
which, he was obliged to confeſs he had contri-
buted

<page 59>
46 "I H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
buted to make her loſe; aſſured her that the reſo-
lution he had made to ſee her no more, was not to
be ſhaken by arguments, and begged ſhe would en-
deavour to follow his example, and forget all that
had paſſed between them.
Though he deſired no anſwer, he received one,
filled with the moſt virulent reproaches on himſelf,
and mingled with many contempuous refle&tions
on his wife. The firſt he was unmoved at ; but
the other totally deſtroyed all the remains of re-
gard and conſideration he had for her. He tore
the letter into a thouſand pieces, and, to ſhew
this injurious woman the contempt and reſent-
ment with which he had treated what ſhe ſaid, ga-
thered up the ſcattered fragments, and ſent them
back to her under a ſealed cover, but without writ-
ing a word. -
Thus ended Palamon's amour with Belinda, and
thus Amaſina received the happy reward of her
generous and exalted condućt, by ever after poſſeſs-
ing undivided the grateful heart of her beloved huſ-
band.
MR. E. G E R T o N.
Thank you, my dear Nancy. Your Amaſina
is indeed a Heroine of the firſt order, and I will
venture to aſſert that if you become ſuch a wife,
you will be certain of having a tender and reſpect-
ful huſband ; beſide which, you will acquire the
love and admiration of every good perſon; which
in my opinion are the greateſt riches the world
Carl

<page 60>
B e. N E V O L. E N C E. 47
}
can beſtow. I dare ſay You, Miſs Forreſter, think
this lady ačted very nobly. -
Miss Fo R R e s T E R.
Yes, Sir ; I do indeed. But, to confeſs the truth,
I am almoſt afraid, if I had the ſame trial, I ſhould
not poſſeſs the ſame prudence. - -
M R. Fo R R E S T E R.
Prudence my dear—call it by ſome more ele-
wated title. Her’s was a virtue much more ſublime
than prudence.
M. R. E. G E R To N. -
I have no doubt, but that both our daughters will
endeavour to act, from motives as generous and ſu-
perior as were thoſe of Amaſina. We have numer-
ous examples upon record, of ladies, who have equal-
led the greateſt ačtions of the greateſt men, whoſe
names are the ornament of hiſtory, the honour of
their ſex, and the delight of ſociety. Who can
read the account of the ſiege of Wenſberg, in
Germany, without feeling his heart, expand to-
wards the lovely fair : When the city could
no longer reſiſt the arms of the emperor Con-
rad, and when circumſtances made it probable
that little quarter would be ſhewn to the men, the
women petitioned leave of the emperor to depart
from the city and each to take with her what ſhe
could carry. Imagine, my children, what was the
ſurprize of the emperor and his army, to ſee them
come forth, not bending beneath a load of gold and
ſilver,
Q

<page 61>
48 T H E F A M I L Y P J C T U R E.
ſilver, but each with her huſband upon her back.
The emperor and all his ſoldiers, at leaſt all that had
hearts, wept at the fight; the women were adored,
and the city was pardoned. Bodinus affirms, that
Laurentius Medices was ſo affected, only by read-
ing this ſtory, that he was reſtored to health, which
he had long in vain expected from his phyſicians.
But ſuperior in magnanimity, and equal in affec-
tion, even to this, was the behaviour of Arria, the be-
loved wife of Paetus. This unfortunate man had join-
ed in rebellion with Camillus, againſt that weak and
wicked emperor Claudius Cæſar, and his attempts
miſcarrying he was taken and ſent to Rome. The
affectionate Arria, who reſolutely followed her huſ.
band through all his fortunes, when ſhe was not
permitted to attend him in the ſame ſhip, hired a
fiſherman's bark, and expoſed herſelf to the dan-
gers of ſeas and the ſeverities of the weather, in
this frail veſſel, rather than forſake her Paetus.
When they arrived at Rome, he was condemned
to die by his own hand, and permitted to chuſe
what death he liked beſt. It was now that the
fortitude, as well as affection of the lovely Arria
were diſcovered. Paetus was timid and dreaded
death : Arria was afraid, left his timidity ſhould
prompt him to ſomething unworthy of himſelf.
She made him ſenſible that the eyes of preſent and
future generations were upon him, ſhe deſcribed
his duty, ſhe awakened his courage, and after em-
bracing him, in a manner which love like her’s
5 could

<page 62>
co Q_U E T R Y. 49
could alone inſpire, ſhe took the poniard, and with
a ſmile of pity and of love, bidding him farewel,
pierced her lovely boſom—then, while ſhe had
ſtill the power to ſpeak, exclaimed, “O my Paetus,
this wound is a pleaſant one, it is that only which
thou art going to give that is painful to me!”
D I A L O G U E IV.
MR s. E G E R To N.
O U R father, my dear girls, very kindly
took occaſion yeſterday to make an eulo-
gium on women, by introducing examples of ſome
of our moſt illuſtrious ornaments. I am far from
wiſhing to leſſen you in your own eſteem, I know
that to have a proper idea of your own character
and conſequence in ſociety, is one great induce-
ment to act up to that idea. But this has its dan-
gers ; it may make us confident, proud and aſſum-
ing: it may deſtroy that diſtruſt which gives cau-
tion, or may inſpire that arrogance which muſt
diſguſt. It is my duty to remind you that, as there
have been women dignified by their virtues, ſo have
Vol. I. D. thcre

<page 63>
50 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
there been others abhorred for their vices. This is a
painful recollection, my children, but a neceſſary
one. While our hearts are animated to connubial
love, by the example of an Eleanor, who delighted
to imbibe the poiſon that otherwiſe muſt have kill-
ed her huſband, let us mournfully remember there
were ſuch women as Tullia and Meſſalina; leſt a too
great portion of vanity ſhould deſtroy that emu-
lation, which the example of the virtuous would
otherwiſe incite. -
The ſtory which I ſhall recommend to your at-
tention, this afternoon, contains an unhappy in-
{tance of the power of vanity. It is told by the
ſuffering perſon, and with a ſufficient degree of
force to convince us ſhe had long felt it’s effects
and repented of her folly. I will read it to you
myſelf, becauſe I would have you who are inter-
tereſted in it, be particularly attentive.
C O Q U E T R Y,
Or the Story of L A D Y W I L D H A M.
BEWARE of CoQgetRY, ſaid the old lady
of Wildham Hall, to her young niece; it is not
only the moſt ungenerous, but the moſt dangerous
folly, or rather vice, to which any woman can
be addićted; it is deſtructive of its own purpoſes,
and there is no ſurer way to make any man hate,
Or

<page 64>
|
*
/
c o Q_U E T R Y. 51
or at leaſt deſpiſe you, than firſt to encourage his
addreſſes, and afterwards treat them with neglect
or contempt: it is an injury, which of all others,
man finds the greateſt difficulty in forgiving; con-
quer therefore your thirſt of praiſe, and while you
are affable, take care not to ſeem particular. It
was the want of this crudence that has rendered
above half my life, one continued round of diſ-
quietude, that has made me an acceſſary in deeds
of blood, and that gave to me, inſtead of the youth
whom I had an affection for, one who was the
ſcourge of my inſincerity and duplicity. I would
deſire you to relate your hiſtory (ſaid the young
lady) but that I fear, as you ſay it was unfortu-
nate, the recolle&tion may give you pain. Your
deſire ſhall be gratified, (replied her aunt) in hopes
that you may profit by my miſconduct, and ſubſe-
quent misfortunes.
You know, my dear, I was the only daughter of
Sir Herbert Winworth, and I believe you have
heard me ſay I received my education chiefly in the
country, at Derby, the family ſeat being in the
vicinity of that town. It is neceſſary to inform
you, that my perſon and accompliſhments made me
the toaſt and admiration of all the country gentle-
men, eſpecially the youthful and unmarried ones.
I converſed in Italian and French with eaſe and
volubility, had a fine voice, and took great delight
in my harpſichord. My underſtanding I believe
was not contemptible, and I thought it prodigious.
- D 2 With

<page 65>
52 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
With all theſe advantages, my vanity was bound-
leſs, my imagination romantic, and I was ſome-
times almoſt fit to believe no man could be worthy
of me, who had not killed a fiery dragon, and
pulled the ſultan by the beard. You ſmile, my
dear, but though my ideas might not be exactly
T---~~~1––––---------~~sºrrº - ºrre, fleeeery evułd-
be too violent for me, and however I might pre-
tend to diſbelieve, or to be diſpleaſed at hyper-
bolical praiſe and adulation, yet thoſe who had
art enough to adminiſter ſuch potions, had penetra-
tion enough to perceive how delicious they were
to my palate. Of all my admirers none had hither-
to made ſo great a progreſs as Glanmore. Others
praiſed my beauty, which was ſo univerſally ſpoken
of that I never imagined it wanted any confirma-
tion; but he told me my perſonal charms, like the
glorious light of the meridian ſun, were ſeen even
by idiots, when they preſumed to gaze, and which
they could not do without feeling their immediate
power; but as philoſophy alone had diſcovered the
ſalubrious and hidden effects of that bleſſed lumi-
nary, ſo the charms of my wit, the elegance and
propriety of my remarks, the keenneſs of my ſatire,
the ſweet flow of my language, and the convićtion
that attended all my arguments and diſcourſes
were beauties which he believed very few in-
deed were capable of properly attending to, and
which he, however great his admiration might be,
confeſſed himſelf an imperfect judge of. This groſs
- flat-

<page 66>
co Q_U E T R Y. 53
flattery pleaſed me the more, becauſe young Glan-
more was continually ſpoken of as the beſt ſcholar,
and moſt ſenſible youth in the country. -
My father, whoſe tenderneſs and love for me were
equally viſible, and who, I believe, rated my accom-
pliſhments as highly as any one, myſelf excepted, not-
withſtanding his partiality, could not help obſerving
the violence of my ruling paſſion. He beheld with
anxiety the pleaſure I took in the ſociety of the
moſt contemptible fops, and the freedoms I al-
lowed them. He ſaw with pain the chagrin my
temper was liable to if any man took the liberty
of behaving with eaſe, and paying a proper regard
to any other woman. He could not ſtop his ears
againſt the continual egotiſm of my diſcourſe ; and
if praiſe was preſumed to be given to another ob-
jećt, he could not but obſerve how ready I was
to introduce myſelf, and make a compariſon either
to my own advantage, or by tenaciouſly diſpraiſing
my abilities, when they had evidently the ſuperiori-
ty, to force others into a vindication of them, and
Violently to extort flattery. No one is ever ſo ſevere-
ly ſatirical upon perſons of this charaćter, as they
are upon themſelves, their inordinate thirſt of adu-
lation betrays them into a thouſand fooleries, and
places them perpetually in numerous ridiculous
ſituations, under which they ſhrink, and bluſh,
for a moment, and generally, in order to ex-
tricate themſelves, commit ſome temporary blunder
that heightens the ridicule. Be careful, therefore
D 3 - my

<page 67>
54. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
my dear, never te introduce yourſelf into the diſ-
courſe, either by compariſon, or inſinuation, and
whenever you obſerve ſuch a propenſity, check your-
ſelf very ſeverely, as knowing yourſelf guilty of a
mental weakneſs, very unworthy of that fortitude
of mind, which it is the greateſt happineſs to
poſſeſs. -
My father's admonitions, though given with
the utmoſt gentleneſs, were exceedingly irkſome to
me; I was unwilling to believe I had any one
foible, and that perſon who ſpoke diſreſpectfully
of coquettes was ſure to incur my diſpleaſure; nay,
when I ſometimes had the courage to reaſon with
myſelf concerning it, I could never be thorough-
ly perſuaded that I had one atom of the charac-
ter in my compoſition. The picture ſtill was
perfect, and all thoſe tints which a ſevere connoiſſeur
might poſſibly think too glaring, with me gently
glided off into ſhades of innocent gaiety, harmleſs
raillery, generous emulation, and merited praiſe.
Glanmore, who not only from motives of love
and intereſt, but likewiſe from pride, purſued the
little advantages he had hitherto gained, became
very aſfiduous in his endeavours to obtain me.
There was a certain triumph, which would have
gratified his vanity, even ſuperior to every other
confideration, which was that of winning the con–
ſent of one who had rejećted ſo many, and whom
fo many were daily wiſhing to poſſeſs. The tor-
rent of adulation, which had been daily augmented
from ſo many pretty ſtreams, had rendered me in-
ſenſible

<page 68>
* . co Q_U E T R Y. 55
w
ſenſible as yet of any ſincere and tender attach-
ment: my father from motives which you will
eaſily gueſs, was importunate with me to marry,
and Glanmore teazed me exceedingly to give him
permiſſion to obtain my father's conſent for our
nuptials. I knew Sir Herbert wiſhed me to marry
Lord Strangely, eldeſt ſon of the earl of Wild-
ham, who had long paid his addreſſes to me,
encouraged by the countenance my father gave
him, although I had conſtantly ridiculed his paſ-
ſion, and contemned his love. Unfortunate for
me that I did ſo: I have fince ſuffered ſeverely for my
injuſtice. I call it injuſtice, becauſe I think it not
only weak, but ungenerous to treat any one with
ſcorn becauſe they love. Our humanity ſhould in-
ftrućt us not to add the ſting of contempt to the
thorn of deſpair. -
Although I felt no violence of affection for
Glanmore, yet there was ſomething exceedingly
pleaſing in his flattery and affiduity, and as his
company was more agreeable to me than any other
man's, I imagined that it muſt proceed from love,
at leaſt I endeavoured to perſuade myſelf ſo, for I
was very unwilling to ſuppoſe myſelf incapable of
that paſſion, which at ſome intervals I almoſt began
to ſuſpect: partly therefore from an imaginary af-
fe&tion, and partly from a ſuppoſition that Sir Her-
bert would not give his conſent, and that conſe-
quently my promiſe would be no bar to my incli-
nations, if they ſhould happen to vary, I gave
D 4 Glan-

<page 69>
56 T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
*
Glanmore an aſſurance, if he could bring my fa-
ther to approve of our union, my will ſhould not
prove an interruption to his happineſs. He left me
when I delivered this decree in his favour, with
the moſt ardent proteſtations of his love, and rap-
turous praiſes of my condeſcenſion and goodneſs,
and flew to find Sir Herbert, promiſing to leave
nothing unattempted, that might prevail on him
to comply with his deſires. -- -
My lover’s eloquence, contrary to my expecta-
tion, ſoon prevailed with my father. Glanmore
told him that though it was true, his eſtate was
not ſo extenſive, nor his rank in life ſo elevated as that
of ſome others, who ſolicited the honour of becom-
ing his ſon-in-law, yet he hoped his endeavours,
when united with Sir Herbert's intereſt, might
enable him to deſerve and procure a title, which,
thus attained, he repreſented as being equally ho-
nourable to being born to one. Sir Herbert’s anxiety
for me, joined to a deſire of having me perfectly ſatis-
fied with the man whom I ſhould take for a huſband,
together with Glanmore's abilities, made him eager
for the conſummation of the nuptials, and by the
conſent of all parties, they were accordingly ap-
pointed to be celebrated in a month, as I could
not, without appearing childiſh and irreſolute,
obtain a longer period. I was now introduced
to all Glanmore's friends, who paid him the
higheſt compliments upon his choice, and I began
to conſider myſelf, not without frequent intervals of
doubt

<page 70>
co ou E t R x. 57
doubt and fear, in ſome degree, his wife ; while
the increaſing tenderneſs of his manner plainly
proved how happy the thoughts of this alliance
had made Him.
One afternoon, when Glanmore came to pay me
his uſual viſit, he brought a ſtranger from London,
a friend of his who had come down to ſpend a
fortnight with him, and introduced him to our fa-
mily. Here, my dear Caroline, ſaid he, when he
preſented him to me, be pleaſed for my ſake to
know Sir Harry Moreton, a diſtant relation of
mine. He is an infidel to the Cyprian goddeſs, con-
tinued he, laughing, and his amorous creed runs
thus: “I believe not in the power of Cupid,
and I deſpiſe his darts, &c.” I turn him over in-
to your hands, to puniſh him as you think proper,
you will ſoon make a convert of him. Nay,
anſwered I, if thoſe are your friend's tenets I
deſpair : unbelievers in theſe days are as reſolute
in the defence of their herefies, notwithſtanding
the badneſs of their cauſe, as the faithful them-
ſelves, who have the light of revelation to guide
them. -
Madam, replied the ſtranger, although I never
was, nor perhaps ever ſhall be ſo romantic as my
friend Glanmore pretends to be, yet I can admire
wit and beauty, without ſuperſtitiouſly adoring
them, though I aſſure you I have ſeldom met ſo.
fine a ſubject for admiration as I behold at this
inſtant.
D 5 I cur-

<page 71>
58 t H E F a M 1 l y P 1 c T U R E.
I curtſied, and Glanmore exclaimed, “Your hum-
ble ſervant, Mr. Admirer.” When Glanmore and
his friend were gone, I began to ruminate upon
the behaviour of the latter: my pride was bleeding;
I could not bear the reflection of Sir Harry's info-
lent freedom, as I thought it. Neither could I help
obſerving, that his admiration turned chiefly upon
himſelf, and that he was the hero of every topic
of converſation, wherein he bore a part. I per-
ceived the abſurdity of ſuch behaviour, and could
not avoid applying it to my own condućt; I
called him a coxcomb, and recolle&tion of paſt
incidents, joined to my preſent wounded vanity,
told me in a tone, ſomething louder than a whiſ-
per, that I was little better than a coquette. I
found an uneaſineſs attending the rememberance
of him and his indifference, and began to ſuſpect
he was to revenge upon me ſome part of the cha-
grin that I had inflićted upon others.
He came the next day with Glanmore, and not-
withſtanding I took every opportunity of extorting
compliments from him, and uſed every art I was
miſtreſs of to heighten my charms, and awaken his
attention, I found it impoſſible to fix it even for
a moment upon any objećt but himſelf.
By repeated attacks, I found the only battery
which could poſſibly be played, with any proſpect of
ſucceſs, was flattery; I was weak enough to forget
my former pride, and preſent engagements, and deſ-
perate enough to reſolve if poſſible, let what would
be

<page 72>
co Q_U E T R Y. 59
be the conſequence, to make Sir Harry acknow-
ledge my power, and bow to my charms. I ſooth-
ed my imagination with the thought of how I
would uſe him when once I had him in proper ſub-
jećtion. -
It is in vain, my dear, to endeavour to deſcribe
the meanneſſes to which pride made me ſubmit,
nor can I tell you by what unaccountable means
my mind became ſo infatuated, and my affections
enſlaved ſo entirely to an objećt, too, ſo little wor-
thy of them : yet, thus it was; and though it was
impoſſible to accuſe him of either beauty, wit,
or one exalted qualification of body or mind, I
Was unhappy when out of his ſight, and the thoughts
of my approaching nuptials filled me with the moſt
gloomy horror. -
How can we account for theſe things Why is
it that we figh and wiſh ſo earneſtly for an objećt, not
becauſe it is worthy of ſuch affection, but becauſe
we cannot obtain it? And why when by fortune or
induſtry we have gained what we deſire does it im-
mediately become indifferent to us? My only reaſon
for loving Sir Harry was, becauſe it ſeemed almoſt
impoſſible for me to have him. I believe this is an
error to which the human mind, however capa-
cious, is ever in ſome degree ſubjećt, and though,
as it is therefore indubitably a wholeſome law of
nature, which prompts us to ačtivity, yet we ſhould
be careful not to increaſe it in young or weak
D 6 minds,

<page 73>
6o T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
-
minds, by continually gratifying their deſires, and
flattering their perſons, or actions; unleſs with great
caution, and to excite emulation.
However conceited Sir Harry might be of his ac-
compliſhments, he was not ſoblind to his intereſt as to
be indifferent about his fortune; my weak behaviour,
and his own confidence of perſonal merit, ſuffici-
ently perſuaded him of the pračtibility of rivaling his
friend, and as this was a point which did not in the
leaſt deter him, it was not long before he anſwer-
ed my advances more warmly than I at firſt had
any reaſon to expect. From one indiſcretion I pro-
ceeded to another, and my negle&t, and even con-
tempt, of the man to whom I had promiſed to
give my hand, were ſo viſible, that they could not
avoid alarming his jealouſy; though the approach-
ing criſis, mine and my father's conſent, and
above all the inſignificance of his rival, contributed
greatly, I ſuppoſe, towards allaying thoſe fears. An
accident however happened, which entirely confirm-
ed Glanmore’s ſuſpicions.
As I could not invent any plauſible pretext for
breaking off the match, and as I was reſolved, at
2ny rate, to gratify my preſent inclinations, I had
conſented to a propoſal of an elopement made by
Sir Harry, and which was to have been executed
the very night preceding the day appointed for my
marriage. The myſterious air which Glanmore
obſerved the ſervants of Sir Harry to affect, and
ſome preparations they were making, for they had
-
7 all

<page 74>
co eu + T R x. 61.
all received private orders, made him ſuſpect there
was ſomething in agitation, which he had reaſon
to dread, and which was neceſſary for him to diſco-
ver. By bribes, and promiſes, he prevailed on one
of them, whom he obſerved was more loquacious
and ſignificant than the reſt, to repeat the orders
he had received from Sir Harry; which were that
Sir Harry's people were all to retire to their beds,
ſooner than uſual, where, inſtead of undreſſing them-
ſelves, they were to wait till within a quarter of
one o'clock, and then if every thing was quiet in
the houſe, and Glanmore's family all in bed, they
were to come down without their ſhoes, and
with as little noiſe as poſſible, take Sir Harry's poſt
chariot round to the corner of Sir Herbert's garden
wall, and wait for their maſter, holding themſelves
in readineſs for a journey.
Glanmore's paſſions were ſufficiently alarmed by
this intelligence : he had no room to doubt but
that Sir Harry intended to carry me off by my
own conſent. Tormented and diſtracted with jea-
louſy, hope, and fear, he at one time reſolved to
come immediately, and after upbraiding me with
my infidelity, acquaint my father with it alſo ;
then changing his intentions, he put his piſtols in his
pockets to puniſh my lover for his perfidy. At laſt,
however, he came to a reſolution to wait till night,
and plant himſelf, and ſome friends whom he could
rely on, in ſuch a ſituation as to be able to inter-
cept us, if he found his fears confirmed, which
- he

<page 75>
62 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 C T U R E.
he could not yet thoroughly perſuade himſelf were
true.
Various and afflićtive were the tumultuous feel-
ings of the parties concerned in the tranſačtions of
this unhappy night. Glanmore's condućt proved
the greatneſs of his torment: Sir Harry's, I be-
lieve, was the moſt placid : he had not ſenſibility
enough to produce any violent agitation of either
pain or pleaſure. As for me, the nearer the time
approached, the more irreſolute and diſtraćted was
my mind : I never paſſed ſo horrid an interval.
Sometimes my imagination repreſented to me the
agony of Sir Herbert at my breach of faith and
capricious condućt ; at others, I beheld Glanmore
upbraiding me, in all the pangs of deſpair, and hatred
for my duplicity : nay ſo intolerably was I oppref-
ſed with the inconſiſtency of my condućt, and the
terror of my guilt, that I ſtarted up three times
with an intention to deſtroy myſelf, but had not
ſufficient reſolution. At length, the hour arrived,
and Sir Harry entered, condućted by my maid, as
had been pre-concerted: but ſo great an impreſſion
had my fears made on me, that I wept, entreat-
ed, nay, at laſt abſolutely refuſed to go. My lover.
was not thus to be diverted from his intentions: he
reaſoned, prayed, and at length ſwore he would not
be ſo deceived, and catching hold of my arm, drag-
ged me along with him ; my fears of a diſcovery
prevented me from taking courage to reſiſt; whilſt
his

<page 76>
c o q_U E T R Y. 63
his impetuous and violent condućt made me ſhudder
at my own.
How ſhall I deſcribe the horror of the moment,
when juſt as Sir Harry was handing me into the
chaiſe, he was ſeized and intercepted by Glanmore
—“ Traitorſ” exclaimed the injured lover, trem-
bling with rage, and fury in his aſpect, “forego
your worthleſs prize, and ſatisfy my wrongs. As
for you,” ſaid he to Me, darting a look of wild de-
ſpair and terror through my ſoul, “though I ſee
my folly in conteſting a fingle moment for ſo falſe,
ſo light, ſo ungenerous a woman, yet, in your pre-
ſence, will I puniſh this inſignificant, this inſiduous
coxcomb;” then giving his antagoniſt a piſtol, and
telling him it was charged, without quitting his
hold, bade him prepare to fire! I ſcreamed ! I flew
to get between them ere the dreadful exploſion but
in vain —They both fired they both fell!
Good God! what tongue can tell, what pencil
paint, what imagination can conceive, the wild,
the tremendous deſpair of my countenance when,
by the glimmering of the moon I beheld both
my lovers weltering in their blood I ſeized one
of the piſtols, and with a violent blow laid myſelf
ſenſeleſs for a moment on the earth; then ſtarting
up, and giving a frantic ſcream, I tore my hair,
and face, while the ſervants and friends of the fal–
len, ſtood petrified with horror, unable to deter-
mine whether what they beheld were real or no.
- The

<page 77>
64. T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
The agitation my mind had undergone for ſome
hours was ſo increaſed, by this ſhocking tranſaction,
that I was carried home in violent hyſterics, which
were ſucceeded by weakneſſes and faintings to ſuch
a degree, that it was thought at one time my life
was in great danger. The youth and ſtrength of
my conſtitution, together with the almoſt miracu-
lous news of the recovery of both the combatants,
overcame my diſorder ; the ball of each had for-
tunately taken place in the ſhoulder, and by that
means eſcaped a vital part. -
Ever after this dreadful night the image of Sir
Harry was accompanied with pain and diſguſt, and
Glanmore, inſtead of ever renewing his claim, was
frequently heard to declare, that he deemed himſelf
exceedingly happy in having eſcaped an indiſſolu-
ble connexion with a woman who was capable of
ſo much injuſtice and ingratitude : for indeed he had
been a very warm and aſſiduous lover, and afterwards
proved himſelf a tender and indulgent huſband.
We have ſince regarded each other with a figh, tho’
I had far the greateſt reaſon, as my father, after this
affair, peremptorily inſiſted upon my giving my hand
to Strangely, who was now become earl of Wild-
ham, and had renewed his addreſſes to me, but
who, after his firſt tranſports, has continually up-
braided me with my ſlights to him and crimes
to others. Therefore I repeat, BEWARE OF Co-
QUETRY.
MR,
-

<page 78>
c o Q_U E T R Y. 6s
t
MR. For R ester, (To his Daughter.)
You ſee, Julia, the effects of vanity and incon-
ſtancy, which between them produce coquetry.
I have not, at preſent, any reaſon to fear you
ſhould become ſo weak as this lady was ; howe-
ver I would adviſe you, and all young ladies, to be
cautious and particularly diſtruſtful of themſelves, .
in this point; as, if my obſervations have been true,
it is the One in which they are moſt likely to err.
M R. E. G E R To N.
And give me leave to obſerve, my friend, vani-
ty, which is the ſource of coquetry, and other
follies in the ladies, is a moſt baneful antidote
to the proſperity of Men likewiſe : it makes
them commit the moſt filly actions, and fre-
quently betrays them into irretrievable miſtakes.
Rudolphus, a king of the Heruli, in a battle be-
tween his army and that of Tado, king of the
Lombards, was ſo confident of ſucceſs, that he
ſtaid feaſting, in his tent, contenting himſelf with
ſending a perſon to an eminence, to obſerve the
combat, and inform him when his troops ſhould
win the day, telling him at the ſame time, he
would behead him if he brought bad news. The
conſequence of this vanity was, his army was de-
feated, and the meſſenger, afraid to return, left the
fooliſh monarch to periſh by the ſword of the
vićtors,
- - But

<page 79>
56 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
But the inſtances of men betrayed to deſtrućtion
by their own vanity are innumerable. This paſ-
fion makes us as ridiculous, at ſometimes, as it
does unfortunate at others. The king of Catona
takes an oath, at his coronation, that it ſhall not
rain unſeaſonably, neither ſhall there be famine or
peſtilence during his reign. We think this very
ſtrange; but what ſhall we ſay of the cuſtom of
England, which, in this age of reaſon and philoſo-
phy, obliges the monarch to call himſelf king of
France, when all the world knows it to be falſe?
The Cham of Tartary, is not more ridiculous or
vain, who, when he has dined, cauſes it to be pro-
claimed by ſound of trumpet, that, now he has fi-
niſhed His dinner, all the reſt of the kings of the
earth have leave to begin theirs. -
* I met with a little ſatirical eſſay, on this ſubjećt,
which I think to the purpoſe. Here it is ; do you
read it, Charles, and do you, my children, obſerve
how the author deſcribes this paſſion to be the ge-
neral weakneſs of humanity. Remark its different
effects upon different diſpoſitions, make the appli-
cation to yourſelves, and endeavour to avoid its
influence.
VANITY,
-
K

<page 80>
*W A N I T Y. - 67
>
}
v A N I T Y,
Or the V Is I on.
OF all the articles of vulgar faith perhaps none
has greater influence than that of dreaming. Few
old women are to be found who cannot give an im-
mediate and copious explanation of all the freaks,
vagaries, and inconſiſtencies which the mind, dur-
ing her noćturnal labours, ſhall conceive.
Among the variety of dreamers in this world,
the literary ones are not the leaſt conſpicuous.
It is in vain that dreamers of this ſpecies ſhall
with a ſerious, face and long periphrafis, tell the
readers how they became weary, and where and
when they fell aſleep. Every body knows that
theirs are waking dreams. I ſhall take the liberty
to relate one of theſe which I have lately had.
I thought I was ſitting upon the croſs which is
placed upon the top of St. Paul’s, amuſing myſelf
with contemplating the care, hurry, anxiety, and
ambition, which were diſcoverable in the counte-
nances of the crowd that were buſtling beneath me.
As I was applauding myſelf for the ſagacity of my
conjećtures, and the ingenuity of my remarks, Ibe-
gan ſuddenly to wonder by what ſtrange means I was
carried thither, and whence I derived the power
and reſolution to behave with ſo much compoſure
lil

<page 81>
68 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
in ſo perilous a ſituation: when turning my head,
I beheld, at my right hand, a Being with wings to
his ſhoulders, of a beauteous and moſt alluring
countenance, and a radiant form. My ſurprize was
ſo great that I found myſelf tumbling from the hor-
rid precipice; but my preſerver caught me by the arm,
and by his ſmiles and aſſiſtance, baniſhed my fears,
and reinſtated me with ſafety on my ſeat.
“ Mortal,” ſaid he, “I am one of that order of
ſpirits which, by men, are called Genii. My name
is Hlalhlumhla, or, according to its ſignification in
your language, the Vapour of Vanity. I am like-
wiſe called by ſome Glparhja, that is, the Principle
of A&tion, alluding to the part I take in prompt-
ing men to hazardous and daring enterprizes.
That you may have ſome knowledge of the power
I poſſeſs, you ſhall, in part, feel its effects.” Im-
mediately as he ſaid this, he breathed in my face,
and his breath was ſweeter than the meadow air
while the hay is upon the ground. He had no
ſooner done ſo, than I felt myſelf elated, after a
ſurprizing manner : I believed myſelf capable of
performing any thing, and was going to leap from
the height where I ſat, confident of my ability, but
was reſtrained by my protector, who, while he held
me, touched my lips with his finger, and I inſtantly
became ſenſible of my danger, and wondered at my
temerity.
“Mighty Being,” ſaid I, bending as I ſpoke,
“I tremble at my preſumption; expoſe not thy
weak

<page 82>
W A N I T Y. 69.
>
*
weak ſervant any more to ſuch temptation.” “Liſ-
ten,” ſaid he, and fear not : “I will inſtruct thee.”
“ Next to the great ſpirit, I am the moſt pow-
erful. I am the firſt of created beings; all others
worſhip me, and thoſe who affect the moſt to de-
fpiſe me hug me cloſeſt to their boſoms. Among
men, none are ſo high or ſo low as not to feel
my influence, and women pay me the moſt ſervile
adoration. It is I who have made coblers kings,
and kings coblers. I have breathed upon the ig-
norant, and they have become philoſophers, po-
ets, painters, heroes, mathematicians. It is I who
have inſpired men to build temples, and pull them
down again. I accompanied Caeſar into Gaul,
and Alexander to the banks of the Ganges. I
levelled the Alps to Hannibal, preached againſt the
fear of pain or poverty to the Stoics, and ſent
Cincinnatus, with ſelf-ſatisfaction, to the plough.
I gave virtue to Ariſtides and Epaminondas,
made Lycurgus a legiſlator, and taught Pyrrhus *
his prayers; and I was the daemon with whom So-
crates boaſted of his familiarity. Nor is it eaſy to
determine whether I have been the occaſion of moſt
good or evil to mankind. I will cauſe thee to be-
hold examples of each. The hiſtory of the aëtions of
ſome of my votaries ſhall paſs in quick ſucceſſion
* It is recorded of Pyrrhus, that he never prayed for encreaſe
of wiſdom, wealth, or empire; he aſked only health—Was this
moderation or vanity ? Did it not imply, “ Give me health, and
I'll enſure the others ?”
before

<page 83>
70. T H E F-AM 1 L Y P 1 c t U R E.
before thee; and I will enable thee to ſee and in-
terpret.” -
As he ſaid this, he plucked a feather from his
wing and drew it acroſs my eyes. The touch im–
parted power unexperienced before ; and the great-
eſt diſtance, the moſt ſolid matter, or impenetrable
darkneſs, could no longer conceal obječts from my
fight or hearing.
“ Behold,” ſaid Hlalhlumhla, “ yonder country
gentleman, whom we will call Marius. He is walk-
ing in his garden, ſurrounded by his children, for
whom he has a particular affection, as he has like-
wiſe for their mother. He has riches enough to ſa–
tisfy his wiſh; he delights in the character which he
deſerves—it is that of a good and worthy man. He
deſires only the power to be uſeful—and he enjoys it.
. I have inſpired him with that portion of vanity which
ftimulates to virtue, and he is happy, he is be-
loved. Obſerve the change he is going to experi-
ence.” The blue vapour iſſued from the mouth of
the genius, and ran like lightning, to fulfil its de-
ſtined courſe. It finds Marius reading that anec-
.dote of Caeſar, that tells us he fetched a deep figh
at beholding the ſtatue of Alexander. He imme-
diately becomes thoughtful; ſerenity vaniſhes from
his countenance, his ſteps are ſhort and interrupt-
ed; he reads the ſtory again, and feels every thing
that is related of Caeſar. He entertains a vaſt opi-
nion of his abilities, and wonders at the former in-
ačtivity of his temper. A vacancy happens in par-
- liament
w

<page 84>
v A N I T Y. . 71
liament for a ſmall borough in his neighbourhood.
The money flies among the eleētors, and he is
returned. He hurries to town, ſwelled with am-
bition, eager for fame, and reads and loads his me-
mory with Gazettes, ſpeeches and proteſts. Magna
Charta, principles, patriotiſm, politics, ring an eter-
nal change in his brain. He goes to the play, not
for diverſion, but to ſtudy action and emphaſis. He
labours to be an orator. Hark how he thunders in
the ſenate; obſerve how he is feared, even while he is
laughed at. He intrigues with the minority, he tam-
pers with the miniſtry; he obtains a place, and he
intrigues ſtill. His thirſt of preferment is inſati-
able, and he is as troubleſome as unreaſonable.
He threatens, ſoothes, cringes, is the firſt at le-
vees, the laſt at cabals, flatters this lord’s miſtreſs,
and bows to that peer’s valet; ſplaſhes through
thick and thin, and delights to traverſe the dirty
alleys of ambition. Health, virtue, content, all
are ſacrificed. His wife deſirous of his company
and delighting in his love, follows him to town, but
enjoys them not. A lord in great power ſees her
and becomes enamoured; makes large promiſes,
and the abandoned wretch, her huſband, liſtens with
avidity to the infamous propoſal, that flatters his am-
bition. Hear him commanding her to ſubmit!—
behold her tears, her prayers, her juſt reſentment of
his wicked ſchemes he expoſtulates, he entreats, he
threatens—and ſee! the knife is lifted up!”
I could

<page 85>
72 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
I could no longer contain my emotion. I caught
the genius by the hand, and tremblingly begged of
him to allay the ſtorm which he had raiſed.
“I will indulge you,” ſaid Hlalhlumhla, “ tho’
in the opinion of the world, I ſhall ruin his fortune,
for he would certainly have made a ſhining charaćter;
he would have finiſhed whatever he had undertaken,
and would have ſcrupled no means to attain his end.”
“ Let us leave Marius reſtored to reaſon, and
the proper duties of a man, and turn our eyes to
yonder garret. You ſee the miſerable wretch that
fits ſhivering over the expiring embers, greedily de-
vouring the morſel which his oeconomy ſaved from
his laſt meal. Vanity is the ſource of his poverty.
His father was a tradeſman who had ſaved a com-
petency by his induſtry, but anxious to ſee his ſon
make a figure in the world, he reſolved upon giving
him a learned education, in which, he imagined,
were included knowledge, riches, and power.—Ac-
cordingly the boy had Greek and Latin whipped into
him; and after ſcanning hexameters and pentameters,
and drudging through logic, rhetoric, and the reſt of
the ſcholaſtic load, by which ordinary faculties, if
they are obliged to carry it, become oppreſſed, and
under which, common memories ſhrink; he, accord-
ing to that portion of my influence which was given
to him at his birth, began to be a coxcomb in verſe;
and, after diſcovering that my and thy, ſure and pure,
and, a few other inſignificant words would jin-
gle, and that a certain quantity of ſyllables would
- IIlta-
|

<page 86>
v a s , t Y. 73
meaſure a line, he fancied himſelf a poet. The
fruits of his father's induſtry were devoured by thoſe
who paid the largeſt ſhare of tribute to his maudlin
muſe. He wrote and publiſhed, and wrote again,
and publiſhed again, and wondered at the world’s
ſtupidity. In proportion to the decreaſe of his fi-
nances was the increaſe of his malady. No province
of poetry but has ſuffered an invaſion from his fury.
He has at this time piled up under his bed, three epic
poems, ſeven tragedies, thirteen farces, which he
calls comedies, all with diſſertations, eſſays, apo-
logues, prologues, epilogues, prefaces, advertiſe-
ments to the reader and dedications, ready ma-
nufactured; beſides ſatires, elegies, odes, paſtorals,
&c. &c. without number. He ſubſiſts at preſent
by colle&ting paragraphs for news-papers, and oc-
caſionally filling up a vacancy in the Poet's Corner,
which, “from his well heaped ſtore,” he is ena-
bled to do at a moment's warning.—I perceive by
your countenance you commiſerate his caſe, and
are deſirous I ſhould undeceive him, that the poor
man might ſet up ſchool-maſter, or find ſome
other rational method of employing his abilities in
what the world would pronounce to be his proper' -
ſphere: but this would be doing him a real in-
jury. At preſent he is happy; he lives in continual
hope that the period is at hand when he ſhall burſt
like the ſun from behind a cloud (to uſe one of his
favourite ſimilies) and aſtoniſh the world with the
Vol. I. E effer-

<page 87>
74 T H E F A M I L Y P I c T U R E.
efferveſcence of his rays. This hope is the cordial
that makes the bitter pill of poverty palatable.
“ Let us leave the poet,” ſaid Hlalhumhla, and
turn to the man in a general's Uniform, whom
you ſee fitting yonder with a huge folio before
him. He is reading that part of the Roman Hiſ-
tory where the ačtions of Hannibal are celebrated:
obſerve with what avidity his eyes run along the
page, and the paſſions that uſurp each other in his
countenance. He is come to the battle of Cannae;
fifty thouſand men lie dead, without extorting a
ſigh; but he feels all the rapture of a hero, or man-
killer, at the ſtratagem of the daggers *, and ſighs
only for an opportunity of gaining reputation him-
ſelf, by the like innocent method. He has a great
genius for war, and the active ſpirit with which I
inſpired him, hurries his imagination “ to ſearch
for the bubble honour in the cannon's mouth.” It
is matter of joy to him when human ſlaughter is
* Towards the latter part of the battle of Cannae, when Han-
nibal, by the ſtratagem of the retreat, had cut the Roman in-
fantry to pieces, the latter placed all their hopes in the cavalry of
the allies, which yet remained unbroken; but to theſe Hannibal
fent 5oo Numidian horſe, with daggers concealed under their coats
of mail, and gave them orders to ſurrender priſoners of war, which
they obeyed; and being, as was ſuppoſed, placed by the Romans
in the rear, they drew their concealed daggers, when the action be-
came hot in the front, and fell upon them with ſuch fury, that
the Romans were put into irrecoverable confuſion.
thus

<page 88>
v. A N I T Y. 75
thus legally committed by the ſword, to find that
it has been dreadfully great in favour of the party
whoſe commander attracts his admiration. A man
without theſe ſentiments of ambition, or whoſe
vanity is direéted to other objećts, would ſhudder
with horror, and diſſolve in pity, ſhould he tra-
verſe the field of blood, and view the herds of man-
gled bodies, and tortured dying wretches, who have
all fell ſacrifices to ſatisfy the pride of one man, or
to procure fame for another; and would almoſt curſe
that pride, or that fame, which was unreaſonable
enough to require, and wicked enough to delight in
a ſacrifice ſo dreadful. But a man addićted to pity,
according to our preſent mode of judging, is but ill-
qualified for a great king or a great hero. Theſe
people are compoſed of very inflammable matter, and
would rather ſee the earth deſolate, and the inha-
bitants cut away, than ſuffer the leaſt indignity,
or not procure themſelves a great name. Yet ſuch
a ſtrićt regard have they for juſtice, that though
the nations ſhall go to war becauſe they have a fit
of the ſpleen, though the fineſt, the healthieſt, and
ableſt men ſhall be choſen, and ſent to periſh in
deſarts, ſtarve in garriſons, and expoſe their bodies
to every inclemency of earth, ſeas, and ſkies, be-
cauſe ſome other king or hero forgot one of their
titles; yet I repeat, ſuch a ſtrićt regard have they
for juſtice, that ſhould a ſtarving wretch ſteal a loaf
or a coat, becauſe he was hungry or naked, he ſhall
- E 2 be

<page 89>
76 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
be hanged for thus diſturbing the peace and har-
mony which ought to ſubſiſt among men Ş.
“ Enough of the general,” ſaid the genius, “I
perceive a perſon whoſe hiſtory is a little extra-
ordinary. Behold yonder ſhrivelled old fellow,
his grey locks thinly ſhading his narrow face. It
is Harpagus, the uſurer. That man, who is now
worth ninety thouſand pounds, came to London
without a ſhoe to his foot, or a ſhilling in his purſe.
His thirſt of gain eaſily diſcovered itſelf by his care
in ranſacking the ſweepings of the ſhop, where
he found employment: the objećt at which his
ambition aimed was pointed out by his frequent-
ly declaring, while a boy, that he did not fear
being, ſome time or other, a very rich man;
and his ability to gratify this vanity was evinc-
ed by his facility in turning pence into ſhil-
lings, and ſhillings into pounds. His attention
was ſo totally fixed to this one objećt, that thoſe
paſſions which lead other men into expence, and
moſtly become ſources of diffipation to them, with
him all contributed to increaſe his wealth, and
promote his ultimate deſign. He fell in love—but
§ Alexander the Great having taken a pirate, and being about to
condemn him to death, firſt ſpoke to him thus : “Why,” ſaid the
hero, doſt thou trouble the ſeas P’’ “And why,” ſaid the pirate,
“doſt thou trouble the whole earth I, with one ſhip, ſeek my
adventures, and am called a pirate : thou, with vaſt armies, warreſt
againſt the world, and art called an emperor. . Where is the differ-
ence but in the name and means of doing miſchief?”
~
how 2.

<page 90>
V A N I T. Y. 77
how Not with beauty or virtue, not with a gene-
rous heart, or witty head.—It was with his maſter's
ſiſter, a rigid virgin of fixty-five, whoſe pounds ſter-
ling out-numbered her grey hairs, and who, though
her ill humours and antiquated habits were very
weighty, could not, in his opinion, preponderate
againſt the five-hundred annual prize, which ſhe
drew from the old South Sea fund. His young
companions laughed at him, but, when their extra-
vagance ſent them to borrow money of him at fifty
per cent. he laughed in his turn. Gaming was a vice.
to which his natural covetouſneſs addićted him;
but here too the ſame paſſion that prompted preſerv-
ed him, and his cunning quickly made him diſcover
the rooks, and taught him to feather his neſt with
the pluckings of the pigeons to His life has been,
with ſcarce a deviation, a life of rapacity and care.
His ideas of juſtice were, and are, that he has a
right to cheat every one who will let him, and if
any man cheat him, he will hang him if he can.
He never counted that man his friend whom he
he did not get ſomething by, and he always propor-
tioned the friendſhip to the gift: ſtill loving thoſe
beſt who gave him moſt. When he ſet out in life,
he thus ſaid to himſelf, “How famous ſhould I be
at my death if I could become richer than the 'ſquire
\
1 A rook, in the language of the gaming table, ſignifies a ſharper,
and a pigeon one who is ignorant of their tricks, and is impoſed
upon.
E 3 who

<page 91>
78 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
who is ſaid to be worth ſeven hundred and fifty pounds
a year!” His vanity has increaſed with his wealth, and
his hopes are all fixed at preſent on living long enough
to make his ninety a plumb. Thus he has lived
wretched, and will die miſerable, only to gain a plea-
ſure which he can never enjoy, namely, that of hav-
ing people's admiration after his death, and for this
purpoſe he willingly ſuffers their deteſtation while he
lives. What will not vanity prompt men to under-
take? It will ſet one man to build a pyramid, and
fend another half over the globe to meaſure it. It has
not leſs influence in the placing of a patch, than in
the diſpoſal of an army. It cauſes ſome to ſpend
their lives in rioting and pleaſures, and others in
cares, toils, and torments, and, what is more ex-
traordinary, converts theſe very torments into plea-
ſures.” … . -
The genius was proceeding, when a ſudden fright
ſeized me, and I fancied myſelf falling from the
precipice. The terror that this occaſioned, awoke
me with a ſtart, and when I came to myſelf, I drew
this moral from my dream—It is better to do one
good action that merits the applauſe of a benevolent
heart, than twenty ſplendid ones, to catch the praiſe
which a falſe judging world ſhall beſtow.
D I A -

<page 92>
1 N T E M P E R A N c E. 74
D I A L O G U E V.
Mr. E G E R To N.
U R reading and converſation has been
lately upon the effects of Selfiſhneſs, Bene-
volence and Vanity. I think, therefore, we can-
not better elucidate theſe ſubjects, than by taking
a view of Temperance, which if rightly underſtood
and practis'd, will undoubtedly promote the virtues,
and wean us from the vices of which we have
been ſpeaking. I have often told you, and I
muſt contine to remind you, my children, that al-
moſt all our wants are artificial. There is no
wealth ſo enormous as not to leave the poſſeſſor,
poor, if he does not preſcribe bounds to his ima-
ginary neceſſities. I ſcarcely need inform you,
that the greateſt part of thoſe things, which among
a certain deſcription of men are ſuppoſed abſolutely.
requiſite to exiſtence, are totally ſuperfluous ; in-
vented by caprice, claimed by folly, and too often
obtained by injuſtice. I cannot better point out
how unneceſſary theſe things are to real happineſs.
and true grandeur, than by deſcribing the temperance.
and ſimplicity which ſome of the nobleſt and moſt
exalted charaćters of antiquity maintained.
E 4. Ari-

<page 93>
8o T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
Ariſtides, one of the greateſt men Athens eve:
produced, lived in a ſtate of the moſt rigid temper.
ance, and paid ſo little regard to wealth, that when
he died he was obliged to be buried at the -ſtates
charge ; yet no perſon can ſuppoſe, were hiſtory
filent on the ſubjećt, that he who had ſo often, and
ſo eſſentially contributed to the proſperity of the
commonwealth, wanted opportunities of enriching
himſelf. This was a ſtill greater virtue in him,
becauſe his origin was poor and mean, and there-
fore he was the more likely to be tempted by wealth,
which is too often ſuppoſed to include power, fame
and all thoſe qualities at which men ſo eagerly
graſp. His acknowledged juſtice procured him:
to be elected treaſurer of the public money, and his
inflexible adherence to deconomy in this truſt, occa-
fioned Themiſtocles to accuſe him of malverſation,
for which ſuppoſed crime the giddy multitude con-
demned him in a ſevere fine. For Themiſtocles,
though a great man, wanted the virtues of Ariſtides,
and was angry becauſe he was prevented from plun-
dering the public. This ſentence, however, was
reverſed by the wiſer part of the citizens, and
Ariſtides was elečted to the ſame office for the
following year. Angry at the treatment he had re-
ceived, and reſolved to ſhew the Athenians their
folly, he neglected to examine the accounts of thoſe
who had the expenditure of the public money, and
pretended to diſapprove of his former rigor. Theſe
people who had benefited by his connivance began
then

<page 94>
I N T E M P E R A N C E. 8F
then to extol him to the ſkies, and intereſted them-
ſelves that he might continue in his office; but on
the day of election, juſt as they were going unani-
mouſly to put him in nomination, Ariſtides roſe,
with indignation in his countenance, and addreſſed
them thus: “Oh Athenians, I am more aſhamed
of the honour you intend me this day, than of the
ſentence you paſſed againſt me laſt year; and it
is with concern and ſorrow I ſee, that it is more
meritorious with you to oblige ill men, than faith-
fully to diſcharge a truſt. When I managed your
treaſure as became an honeſt man, I was treated
like a villain; but now that I have left it to the
diſcretion of theſe public robbers, I am proclaimed
a moſt excellent perſon and an amiable patriot.”
Neither was the temperance of Ariſtides leſs con-
ſpicuous as a judge, than in his former capacity.
As he was ſitting one day to decide a cauſe between
- two private perſons, one of them endeavoured to
influence him, by beginning to relate the many
injuries his antagoniſt had in his life done Ariſtides,
when he immediately interrupted him by ſaying,
“Tell me friend, what injuries he has done to
You, for it is your cauſe, and not mine, that I
ſit here to determine upon.”
I might quote numberleſs inſtances of a like na-
ture, not only of Ariſtides, but of Phocion, Pelopi-
das, Epaminondas, Fabricius, and many others, the
examples of all of whom prove that temperance is
the virtue of a truly great man, and that wealth
E 5 either

<page 95>
82 T H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c T U R E.
either when it tends to enervate the mind, or to bring
the ſlighteſt dependance, or diſgrace upon the re-
ceiver, ſhould always be reječted with poſitive and
unremitted firmneſs. Vulgar and narrow minded
men are dazzled with the ſplendor of riches, the
wiſe deſpiſe them, except as they afford the means
of doing good. When Timagoras returned to
Athens, from his embaſſy to Artaxerxes king of
Perſia, one Epicrates, a porter, who had been in the
menial train of Timagoras, and had enriched him-
ſelf by the king's preſents, propoſed in an aſſembly
of the people, that the Athenians inſtead of electing
nine archons or governors, ſhould chuſe twelve poor
citizens and ſend ambaſſadors to Perſia, in order
to be enriched by the gifts of Artaxerxes. The
abſurdity of this piece of low cunning was ſo ex-
ceedingly evident that it ſet the whole aſſembly a
laughing.
The following ſtory of the Salutiferous Fountain
is entirely applicable to the preſent ſubjećt.
I N T E M P E R A N C E,
Or the Journey of Az I BA H, in ſearch of the
Salutiferous Fountain.
TOWARDS the concluſion of the twelfth year
of the reign of Hallam, monarch of Indoſtan, Ozmah,
captain of the palace guards, came into the chamber
of Azibah, the ſon of Hedan, near the time of the
ſecond

<page 96>
I N T E M P E R A N C E. 83
*
ſecond prayer, and ſaid: “Azibah, ſon of Hedan,
I wiſh the command I am going to execute, may
prove advantageous to thee. Give me thy ſabre,
and follow me to the ſultan; for ſuch is his plea-
ſure.” The moment Azibah heard theſe words,
he fell proſtrate, and, after imploring the protec-
tion of the Prophet, ſaid to Ozmah, put thy hand.
upon my head; the Sultan is maſter of my life,
and I am his ſlave At the ſame time he delivered
up his ſabre and followed him. At the bottom of
the ſtairs, ten guards were poſted, who environed
Azibah, and condućted him into the preſence of
Hallam.
The monarch had with him Serah, general of
his forces, and Naran, chief of the Imans. Oz-
mah preſented him Azibah's ſword, and ſaid: Light
of the faithful, Azibah, without the leaſt reſiſtance,
hath ſubmitted himſelf to thy orders: may thine
enemies imitate his example. Though Azibah,
was not conſcious of having offended, yet his ſpirits.
were ſeized with terror: he, however, armed him-
ſelf, ſo as to prevent any appearance of it, in his.
countenance. As ſoon as the Sultan ſaw Azibah.
at his feet, he ſaid, “Son of Hedan, let us fall.
down before Him, who never dies.” Theſe words
increaſed the terror of Azibah. The Sultan, the
General, the Iman, the Captain of the Guards,
kneeled down, bowed their faces towards the
ground, and glorified the Prophet. Azibah,
uncertain of his fate, thus implored the protection.
E 6 - of
*

<page 97>
84 T H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c t U R E.
of Mahomet: “If my reſolutions were fincere when
I went to pay honour to thy ſhrine, and to bedev
with my tears the holy mount Arafat; if I have
made it hitherto the chief delight of my mine eyes,
to read over the divine book, be now my ſupport.
The computation of my days will ſoon perhaps
expire. I already ſee the dark and frightful angel
ready to receive me. Remember the faith I re-
poſe in thee. There is only one God, and thou art
his Prophet.”
Prayer being ended, the Sultan roſe up; and,
turning towards Azibah, ſaid, “Son of Hedan, I
have reſolved upon making thee undertake a long
voyage; bow down thine head.”—“Father of
Muſſelmen,” anſwered Azibah, “ the voyage will
be certainly long, and without return, which we
muſt all expect to make at different times. May
the moſt mighty and merciful God multiply thy
years.” Having pronounced theſe words, he ſtretched
forth his neck to meet the fatal ſtroke. The Sultan
drew the ſabre, and extended his arm ; but inſtead
of ſevering Azibah’s head from his body, he re-
turned the blade into its ſheath. Such unexpect-
ed clemency drew from the aſſiſtants loud accla-
mations of joy. Azibah again opened his eyes,
which darkneſs, the forerunner of death, had alrea-
dy cloſed : and Hallam, with a pleaſant aſpect, em-
braced him. Having placed him between Naran and
Serah, over-againſt his ſopha, he made ſigns for
Serah to ſpeak to him.
-
“My

<page 98>
I N T E M P E R A N C E. 85
“My lord, ſaid Serah, I have talked with a man,
who was three hundred and forty years old, who
had ten more to live. He was oppreſſed with
chains, in the King of Golconda’s camp, after his
defeat; and the vićtory you obtained, over that
Prince, gave this perſon his liberty. I detained him
three days, which hardly ſufficed to relate the revo-
lutions he had ſeen, during the courſe of his long
life. I did not think proper to keep him any longer,
ſo I gave him ten roupees, with liberty to go
where he pleaſed. He was a native of Bengal, and
was called the old-man of that place. His eyes
were much ſunk, his voice was clear, his hair and
beard nicely combed out, and as white as ſnow.
Though his viſage was full of wrinkles, it was en-
livened with a florid red, and eaſily might one diſ-
cover in it that gaiety which naturally accompa-
nies perfeót health. Being aſked, what means he
uſed to attain ſo very advanced an age; he told me
his father, who lived till he was three hundred and
fifty years old, had bequeathed three doſes of the
water brought from the iſland of Borico, by virtue of
which, he had been thrice reſtored to his former
youth. I cautiouſly deſired him to tell me, in what
part of the world this iſland was, and whether it was
permitted to obtain any of the water of this fountain
of life. He proteſted, he could not anſwer either of
the queſtions, and that he had ſeveral times propoſed
the ſame demands to his father, but never could be ſa-
tisfied in them. I then ſtrenuouſly preſſed him to in-
form

<page 99>
86 T H E. F. A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E. "
form me, by what means his father had found out
ſo ſurpriſing a water : he always made anſwer,
it was a preſent from VIcHNou, a god to whom
he had for a long time ſacrificed to. This, my
Lord, was all I could gather from the old man. So
fabulous a concluſion did not a little contribute to
make me deſpiſe him; for, after what manner ſoever
I queſtioned him, he ſtill perſiſted in the ſame ſtory.”
The Sultan, perceiving Serah had done ſpeaking,
looked ſtedfaſtly on Azibah, and ſaid to him: “Son.
of Hedan, if the voyage I ſeemed to threaten thee
with, could not make thee afraid, why ſhouldeſt thou.
dread going to the iſland of Borico in my ſervice f*
“Moſt potent of Kings,” anſwered Azibah, “I fear
none on earth but thee. This inſtant, I will depart
to ſearch every corner of the world, and, if I fail to
bring thee the water thou deſireſt, then ſever my head.
from my body, and end the life of a creature, no longer
worthy to live.” The Sultan, having ſtričtly charged:
all preſent to conceal the ſecret, ordered Naran to,
provide every thing neceſſary for the journey.
The next morning, as ſoon as Aurora had with-
drawn the curtains of the eaſt, and painted the:
mountain tops with glowing purple, Azibah left the:
city of Agra, and joined a caravan, going to Cam-
baye. He had no equipage, and his dreſs but ordi-
nary, though he carried about him, in gold and,
jewels, more than the value of a common city. He
generally let the company paſs on before him, that
he might enjoy the greater liberty of refle&ting on.
- the:

<page 100>
I N T E M P E R A N C E. 87.
the method of executing his commiſſion. He was
extremely penſive, for he was perſuaded of the im-
poſſibility of ſucceſs, and, therefore, looked upon the
expedition, as a baniſhment. “I am going, ſaid he
to himſelf, to wander I know not whither, in ſearch of
a fountain which has, perhaps, no exiſtence. And,
even if it have, I am entirely ignorant of the coun-
try in which it is ſituated; and am now, perhaps,
travelling the direét oppoſite way.” Theſe diſcou-
raging thoughts, however, at laſt, began to give
way to more pleaſing ſenſations, and he determined
either to find the fountain, or convince himſelf that
all ſearch was in vain. He had not travelled three
days, with the caravan, before he perceived he was
not the only perſon who had avoided company to
indulge refle&tion. A young man, well mounted,
of a very agreeable aſpect, ſeemed to be much in
the ſame melancholy mood as he himſelf was.
To meet with companions in misfortune, alle-
viates our grief. Azibah was greatly pleaſed to
find an aſſociate in afflićtion, and determined to
make him acquainted with the nature of his jour-
ney. Azibah approached him, and, after a ſhort
converſation on general ſubječts, ſaid to him, “Sir,
I perceive that your ſpirits are oppreſſed by the
hand of afflićtion: mine are alſo in the ſame condi-
tion. Let us therefore mutually impart to each
other the cauſes, from which our afflićtions flow ;
perhaps each may derive advantage from the coun-
ſel of the other.” To this, Sebah, (which was the
I name

<page 101>
88 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
* >
name of the young man) readily conſenting, Azi-
bah acquainted him with the commands he had re-
ceived from the Sultan; intimating, at the ſame
time, that he looked upon the fountain of Borico,
as a mere chimera. -
, Sebah liſtened with attention to Azibah’s rela-
tion, and after a minute's ſilence, ſaid, “Sir, I have
accidentally acquired ſome knowledge of the ſitua-
tion of that famous fountain, which I ſhall gladly
impart to you. I am the ſon of Rephan, a phyſi-
cian, well known in Sciras. And I need not ac-
quaint you, that all the youths of that city delight
in dancing, or playing on ſome inſtrument. One
evening, when the heats of the ſeaſon rendered the
night more pleaſant than the day, I left my father’s
houſe, to enjoy the refreſhing breeze, and played on
a flagelet, as I paſſed along the ſtreets. In my re-
turn home, I heard the window of a ſpacious houſe
open, and, directing mine eyes towards the place,
I ſaw, by means of the light of the moon, which
was then ſhining in her greateſt ſplendor, a moſt
beautiful lady, who ſeemed to liſten to my muſic
very attentively. Pleaſed with the adventure, I
flood ſtill, and continued playing, till ſhe withdrew;
which was not till ſome conſiderable time after I
firſt ſaw her. I took particular notice of the houſe,
determining to return the ſucceeding evening; but,
juſt as I reached home, an arrow paſſed whizzing
by my ear; I ſtarted, and looking back, perceived
a man making towards me, armed with a bow in
- his

<page 102>
• I N T E M P E R A N c E. , 89
his left-hand, and a long javelin in his right. As
he approached, he cried out, “Traitor' though I
have miſſed thee once, I ſhall be more fortunate a
ſecond time !” Seeing him alone, I took courage, -
drew my ſabre, and, having happily parried his
thruſt, gave him two wounds in the breaſt. He
inſtantly dropped, and begged his life; telling me,
he was ſon to the Baſhaw of Sciras. I immedi-
ately ſent a ſurgeon to his aſſiſtance; but, knowing
I had every thing to fear from the fury of his father,
I ſtayed no longer in the city, than to provide my-
felf with a horſe and money.
I followed the high-road, till nature, overwhelmed
with fatigue, required repoſe, when I quitted it,
and took a path between two mountains, the end of
which terminated in a wood. Alighting, and tying
my horſe to the branch of a cedar, I laid myſelf
down at the foot of a large palm-tree, and ſlept till
Aurora viſited the earth with her enlivening beams.
On my waking, I was much ſurpriſed to hear the
voice of a man ſpeaking in the following manner:
“Now is the precious hour, child, that the genii
appear under different forms to Princes who de-
light in executing juſtice, and to tyrants who de-
ſerve puniſhment. - O child ! couldeſt thou, as
clearly as I, look into the events of this moment, then
wouldeſt thou behold ſome employed in the dark
ſhades of Mezanderan, to drive the lions and tygers
from their dens, in defence of the innocent in op-
preſſion;

<page 103>
90 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
-
preſſion; and admire the facility of others, in ren-
dering the hydras and griffins tame and familiar.”
I had no longer patience to liſten to ſo ſtrange a
diſcourſe, without being curious to ſee the perſon
that delivered it. Advancing ſoftly, from one tree
to another, I came to a pretty thick grove of lau-
rels, where, concealing myſelf, I had the advantage
of diſcovering, without being perceived, a grave
old man, dreſſed in a long brown robe, and a young
maid fitting near him, in a blue veil, which co-
vered every part of her, except her face and hands.
Her eyes were modeſtly fixed on the old man, whom
ſhe ſeemed liſtening to, with great attention. I
ſhewed myſelf, and by that means interrupted their
converſation. At my appearance, the young maid
drew her veil over her face, and the old man aroſe
and met me. “You behold, ſaid I, a traveller diſ-
treſſed by hunger and fatigue, compelled to crave
your aſſiſtance.” “By Ali ! replied he, thou art
moſt heartily welcome; the ſages were never unhof-
pitable. The charity I ſhew you, will ſerve as a
new inſtrućtion for my daughter. Go, refreſh your-
ſelf in our retreat, we will join you in an hour.”
He ſhewed me, at the ſame time, a little path, which
condućted me, after ſeveral turnings, into a grotto.
Though the entrance was very narrow and ob-
feure, yet it was ſufficiently light within, and con-
tained ſeveral apartments. A ſlave, to whom I
declared my diſtreſs, and the charitable intention of
his maſter, ſet before me raiſins, piſtachoes, freſh
dates,


<page 104>
I N T E M P E R A N C E. 91
º
dates, white bread, and an excellent liquor from the
palm-tree. Whilſt I was employed in ſatisfying
the cravings of nature, I deſired him to go in ſearch
of my horſe, deſcribing, as well as I could, the
place where I left it. The ſlave accordingly de-
parted; and, after I had eaten and drank ſufficiently,
my curioſity prompted me to viſit every corner of
ſo romantic a habitation. The moſt remote ca-
vity of the grotto formed a cabinet, filled with
books, taliſmans, and figures of all kinds of plants,
and animals. Here I amuſed myſelf for ſome time,
and caſting my eyes towards the farther part of the
cavity, I ſaw, againſt the rock, the following in-
ſcription, in letters of gold: “Reader, whoever
thou art, that haſt been favoured to approach this
ſecret receſs of the ſages, ponder this, and be wiſe.
Reverence the moſt High, ſeek wiſdom, love mercy,
and be a ſhield of defence to the innocent.—Then
ſhall thy years be prolonged, unaſſiſted by the wa-
ters of Borico; nor ſhall any plagues or misfor-
tunes approach thine habitation.” While I was
attentively peruſing this inſcription, the old man
approached me, ſaying, “Son, let the precepts of
that writing be engraven, in living charaćters, on
the table of thy memory.” I thanked him for his
kind advice, and deſired him to explain what was
meant by the waters of Borico. “My ſon, ſaid
he, in the kingdom of Sofala, in Africa, is a large
lake, in the midſt of which are ſeveral iſlands, and
particularly one much larger than the reſt, called
- ~. Borico.
*

<page 105>
92 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
Borico. In this iſland is a fountain, whoſe nature
is endued with the amazing property of reſtoring
youth to thoſe who drink of it. On the borders of
this fountain grow many beautiful trees, which filk
the air with a delightful fragrance, and are always
loaded with the moſt delicious fruits. But the paſ-
ſage to this fountain is guarded by leopards, ſo that
it is almoſt impoſſible to approach it.”
The old man having finiſhed his explanation of
this myſtery, after returning him my thanks for his
kindneſs and hoſpitality, I took my leave of him,
mounted my horſe, and, after wandering a long
time through unknown parts, I had the good for-
tune to join this caravan, and to find in it a compa-
nion in misfortunes. Azibah liſtened with the ut-'
moſt attention to Sebah's narrative, being agreeably
ſurpriſed at ſo unexpected a diſcovery, and deter-
mined to direct his courſe to Africa, in ſearch of
the fountain of Borico.
At their arrival at Cambaye, Sebah was informed,
that the Baſhaw's ſon was not only recovered from
his wounds, but alſo become his friend. On hear-
ing this agreeable news, Sebah ſet out on his return.
to Sciras, and Azibah, having procured a ſhip, ſailed
for the coaſt of Africa. After a long and tedious
ſearch through uninhabited deſerts, he had the good
fortune to diſcover the lake, in the midſt of which
the iſland Borico was ſituated. Being arrived at
the ſide of the lake, he prevailed on ſome fiſhermen
to carry him to the iſland. They did all in their.
- power

<page 106>
1 N T E M P E R A N C E. 93
"y
power to diſſuade him from ſuch a raſh attempt, by
aſſuring him that it was only inhabited by wild
beaſts, from which it would be impoſſible for him
to eſcape. Theſe reaſons were loſt on Azibah, he
perſiſted in his reſolution; and the fiſhermen, find-
ing it in vain to oppoſe him, landed him on the
iſland. -
Here he wandered, ſeeking in vain the ſalutife-
ious fountain. Deſpairing of ſucceſs, he ſet him-
ſelf down in a valley, and fell aſleep. When he
awaked, he beheld a beautiful lady dreſſed in the
habit of the country, approaching him; who, with
a great deal of ſweetneſs, aſked him what he ſought.
He acquainted her with the commands of the Sul-
tan, and the reaſons which induced him to come
thither in ſearch of the fountain. “Since you con-
ſult me, anſwered ſhe, it will be your own fault,
if you do not ſucceed. As you go out of this val-
ley, you will find a cryſtal ſtream flowing from a
beautiful fountain, and diſcharging itſelf into a
large river, not far diſtant from its ſource. At the
bottom of the fountain you will find a little blue
pebble, which you muſt not fail to take up; then
follow the ſtream, till you arrive at the river,
and dire&t your courſe along the bank of it, till
it divides itſelf into two branches, and forms an
iſland, or rather garden, in the middle of which is
the ſalutiferous fountain. Over an arm of the ri-
ver, there is a marble bridge; its paſſage is defended
by twenty-ſeven leopards. Before you come in
ſight

<page 107>
94. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
fight of them, put the little blue pebble in your mouth,
and paſs boldly over the bridge, for the pebble will
render you inviſible. When you approach the foun-
tain, take up what water you intend, and return
immediately. But be careful not to eat of the fruits
of luxuriant trees growing on the margin of the
fountain.” The lady, after uttering theſe words,
diſappeared; and Azibah took the path ſhe directed.
The fountain, the pebble, the river, the bridge,
and the leopards preſented themſelves ſucceſſively
to his view. As he entered the garden, he was fa-
luted with an odour inexpreſſibly raviſhing, pro-
ceeding from the flowers and fruits, which it pro-
duced in the greateſt profuſion. Near the margin
of the ſalutiferous fountain was a tree eminently
taller than the reſt, loaded with fruit of ſo enchant-
ing an aſpect, that even imagination itſelf can
hardly paint any thing ſo beautiful. Azibah, un-
able to withſtand the temptation, took the pebble
out of his mouth, plucked off the fruit, and began
to eat. The taſte was delicious and enchanting;
but, alas ! the pleaſure was but of ſhort duration.
The leopards now caſt their furious eyes upon him,
made towards him with incredible ſwiftneſs, and
were juſt on the point of tearing him to pieces,
when the lady, who had before directed him, ſud-
denly appeared. At her preſence, theſe fierce crea-
tures returned to their ſtation, and Azibah proſ-
trated himſelf at her feet, endeavouring to expreſs
his repentance and gratitude. “You are now,
ſaid

<page 108>
I N T E M P E R A N C E. 95
ſaid ſhe, loſt to all hopes of ſucceſs; acknowledge
your fault, and ſpend the remainder of your life in
ſólitude.” Having ſaid this, ſhe took him by the
hand, and, after condućting him beyond the bridge,
charged him to return the ſame way that he came,
and to put the pebble in its place, as he paſſed by
the fountain; which he had no ſooner done, than
the whole vaniſhed from his fight; neither bridge,
river, nor fountain were any longer viſible; and, to
add to his aſtoniſhment, he found himſelf on the top
of the mountain of Arafat. - - -
Thus was the unfortunate Azibah, through his
own folly, diſappointed, when he thought the obječt,
he had purſued through ſo many difficulties, within
his reach. And hence we ſhould learn to govern
our paſſions and appetites; for, if we ſuffer them to
prevail, all our reſolution, affiduity, and perſeverance,
in any undertaking, will be rendered abortive.
Health, honour, and reputation will be ſacrificed to
the gratification of ſome mean and unworthy paſ-
fion; and, like Azibah, for the momentary pleaſure
of taſting one delicious morſel, loſe the ſalutiferous
waters of Borico.
M R. E. G E R To N.
You ſee in this tale, my children, the effects of
intemperance painted in an ingenious though ro-
mantic manner; and the lives of the illuſtrious men
I pointed out to you before, will convince you of the
neceſſity of its oppoſite, in obtaining true renown.
- M Rs.

<page 109>
96 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
f
MR s. E G E R T o N.
And that it may come ſtill more forcibly to your
boſoms, here, William, do you read this account
given by an Engliſhman, one of ourſelves, who
has very pathetically deſcribed, from his own expe-
rience, both the one and the other.
WEALTH and its CONSEQUENCES.
I WAS the ſecond ſon of a wealthy gentleman,
who reſerved the bulk of his fortune for my elder
brother, ſo that my only proviſion was a tolerable
education, and a commiſſion in the army: but being
ſoon weary of a ſoldier's life, I ſold out at the com-
mencement of the preſent American war, and though
my fortune ariſing from that ſale was but inconſider-
able, I pleaſed myſelf with the idea of independence,
and determined to enjoy it, by living within my
income. Take away ſuch a determination, and
there can be no true independence in the moſt
affluent circumſtances.
My father had by this time reſigned his breath; I
had no parental home to which I could retire, and
therefore ſet up my reſt in a country town, where I
had been formerly quartered with my regiment, and,
had made ſome agreeable acquaintances. There I paſſ-
ed my time according to my heart's deſire.—I fiſhed,
fowled, and hunted with the gentlemen of the neigh-
bourhood, who entertained me in their houſes with
the

<page 110>
I N T E M P E R A N C E. 97
the moſt cordial hoſpitality. I walked, I chatted,
I danced, and played at cards with their wives and
daughters. Delightful excurſions and amuſing par-
ties of pleaſure were planned and executed everyday.
The time ſtole away inſenſibly: I knew no care; I
felt no diſorder; I inherited from nature a vigorous
conſtitution, a happy ſerenity of temper, and was
diſtinguiſhed among my friends as the beſt humoured
fellow in the world.
In the midſt of theſe enjoyments, my heart was
touched by the amiable qualities of a young lady,
who was content to unite her fate with mine, con-
trary to the inclination, and without the conſent of
her father, who poſſeſſed a very large fortune. He
reſented her marriage with ſuch perſeverance of in-
dignation, as never to admit her into his preſence;
nor even at his death forgave her for the ſtep ſhe had
taken. His diſpleaſure, however, affected us the
leſs, as we found happineſs in our mutual paſſion,
and knew no wants, for my wife inherited from an
aunt a legacy of eighteen hundred pounds, the in-
tereſt of which, together with my little income, was
ſufficient to anſwer our deſires.
We found great ſatisfaction in contriving plans
for living ſnug upon our income, and enjoyed un-
ſpeakable pleaſure in executing the ſcheme to which
we had given the preference. Chance preſented us
with an opportunity to purchaſe a ſmall, though neat
and convenient houſe, with about twenty acres of
land, in an agreeable rural ſituation, and there our
Vo L. I. F time
-*.

<page 111>
98 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U. R. E.
time was parcelled out in a ſucceſſion of taſks, for
improving a large farm that we rented, and culti-
vating a ſweet little garden, laid out on a gentle
ſlope, the foot of which was watered by a branching
rivulet of pure, tranſparent water. Although heaven
had not thought proper to indulge us with children,
we were favoured with every other ſubſtantial bleſ-
fing, and every other circumſtance of rural ceco-
nomy proved a ſource of wealth and ſatisfaction.
The labours of the field, the little domeſtic cares
of the barn-yard, the poultry, and the dairy, were
productive of ſuch delights as none of your readers,
except thoſe who are enamoured of a country life, will
conceive. I cannot remember thoſe peaceful ſcenes
of innocence and tranquillity without regret; they
often haunt my imagination, like the ghoſt of de-
parted happineſs. Within the boſom of this charm-
ing retreat we lived, in a ſtate of uninterrupted en-
joyment, until our felicity was invaded by two unex-
pećted events, at which, I am afraid, we ſhall
always have cauſe to repine. My nephew, who had
fucceeded to my father’s eſtate, died of the ſmall-
pox; and a few weeks after this incident, my wife's
only brother broke his neck in leaping a five barred
gate; ſo that we found ourſelves, all at once, in
poſſeſſion of a very opulent fortune, and violently
tranſported from that ſituation for which our tempers
had been ſo well adapted.
In the firſt flutter and agitation of mind, occa-
ſioned by this unhoped for acceſſion, we quitted our
- romantic


<page 112>
I N T E M P E R A N C E. 99
--
romantic ſolitude, and ruſhed into all the pageantry
of high life. Thus irreſiſtibly carried away by the
vortex of diſſipation, we grew giddy in a whirl of
unnatural diverſions; we became enamoured of
tinſel liveries, equipage, and all the frippery of
faſhion. Inſtead of tranquillity, health, a continued
flow of ſatisfaction, and a ſucceſſion of rational de-
lights, which we formerly derived from temperance,
exerciſe, the ſtudy of nature, and the praśtice of
benevolence, we now taſted no pleaſure but what
conſiſted in the gratification of idle vanity, and
were toſſed for ever on a ſea of abſurd amuſements,
by ſuch loud ſtorms of riot and tumult, as drowned
the voice of reaſon and refle&tion, and overwhelmed
all the beſt faculties of the ſoul. We deſerted na-
ture, ſentiment, and true taſte, to lead a weary life
of affectation, folly, and intemperance: our ſenſes
became ſo depraved, that our eyes were capti-
wated with glitter, and our ears with clamour;
while our fancy dwelt with pleaſure on every
gew-gaw of gothic extravagance. We entertained
gueſts whom we deſpiſed; we viſited friends whom
we did not love, and invited company whom we
could not eſteem. We drank wines that we could
not reliſh, and ate vićtuals which we could not
digeſt. We frequented concerts which we did
not underſtand, plays which we did not like, and
diverſions which we could not enjoy. Our houſe
might have been termed the Temple of Uproar.
Card tables were the ſhrines, and the votaries
- F 2 - ſeemed

<page 113>
100 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c tº U R E.
ſeemed agitated by the daemons of envy, ſpite, rage,
vexation, and deſpair. In a word—all was farce
and form. All was a phantaſm, and a hideous
dream of incoherent abſurdities.
Theſe pleaſures, like brandy to a dram-drinker,
have loſt their effect; we have waked from the in-
toxication, to a due ſenſe of our miſerable condi-
tion; for the vigour both of mind and body is quite
impaired. With reſpect to each other, we find our-
felves in a ſtate of mutual diſguſt; and all the en-
joyments of life we either taſte with indifference, or
rejećt with loathing. For my own part, I am over-
whelmed with what the French call Pennui, a diſ-
temper for which there is not a name in the Engliſh
language. It may be underſtood, however, from the
following lines of the poet—
º
Thee, too, my Paridel, ſhe ſaw thee there,
Stretch'd on the rack of a too eaſy chair;
And heard thy everlaſting yawn confeſs,
The pains and penalties of idleneſs.
It is not a common vacancy of thought, or an ordi-
nary languor of the nerves, that I labour under,
but a confirmed imbecillity of mind, and a want of
reliſh, attended with a thouſand uneaſineſſes, which
render life almoſt inſupportable. I ſleep without
refreſhment; I am fatigued without labour; I am
ſcarce riſen when I wiſh the day was done; and
when night comes, I long for morning. I eat
without appetite, and drink without exhilaration:
exerciſe

<page 114>
1 N T E M P E R A. N. c E. HO1:
:
exerciſe affords no ſpirits; converſation no amuſe-
ment; reading no entertainment, and diverſion no
pleaſure. It is not from affectation, but an ac-
quired inſenſibility, that I ſee Falſtaff without a
ſmile, and The Orphan without emotion. I endea-
your to kill the time by ſhifting continually the ſcene
of diffipation, but I am cloſe purſued by diſguſt: all
is diſappointment, inſipid, nauſeous, or ſhocking.
My temper is grown ſo fretful and peeviſh, that I
quarrel by turns with my ſervants and myſelf; even
ſhe who was once the delight of my eyes, and the
joy of my heart, is now become the ſubječt of per-
petual diſquiet. I harbour wiſhes which I dare not
approve: my heart palpitates with paſſions which I
am aſhamed to avow. I am tormented by a thou-
ſand petty grievances, which riſe like angry tu-
mours, from the ebullitions of a ſoured diſpoſition;
and incidents that would move the mirth of other
men, are to me produćtive of choler and anxiety.
I have given this account of myſelf, as a
leſſon which I fear mankind will not learn, as a
warning of dangers into which, whenever they
have an opportunity, they will too eagerly ruſh.
I ſpeak this generally, for I confeſs I am not with-
out hope, that ſome very, very few, may be wiſe
enough to profit by my example, and either be happy
in mediocrity, or employ the redundancies of riches
to better purpoſes, than in ſupplying the fooliſh and
incoherent whims and caprices of faſhionable folly.
F 3 DIALOGUE

<page 115>
102 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
D I A L O G U E VI.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
HAVE frequently ſpoken to you, my children,
of the many examples which hiſtory affords of
thoſe who have become eminent by their great qua-
lities. I have endeavoured to divert while my
aim has been to inſtruct; and in giving you ſome-
times real, and ſometimes fiétitious ſtories, have
taught you what you ought to do and ſuffer in your
future commerce with the world, without exhibit-
ing the forbidding countenance of a dry and harſh
preceptor. It is my wiſh to continue this pračtice,
to inſpire you with the ardor of emulation, and to
convince you, from facts, that virtue is its own
reward. It has been my cuſtom too, in order to
diverſify the ſcene, to let you indulge, occaſionally,
in the wild fićtions of romance; for I have long
obſerved of myſelf, that I can ſtill read the moſt
romantic tales, if ingeniouſly connected, with a ſort
of ſurprize and curioſity, that lead me inſenſibly be-
yond the limits of nature, and tranſport me into a
kind of enchanted land, in which, for a time, I
take up a delightful abode. I am ſenſible that with
young people, of your age, this effect is much
ftronger. The vagaries of fancy, like “ the poet's
eye in a fine fit of phrenzy rolling, traverſe the
heavens and earth, embodying forth the forms of
things




<page 116>
F O R T I T U D E. 103
things unknown, and giving to airy nothing a local
habitation and a name.” Theſe, if not permitted
too often, ſo as to blunt the imagination by a too
repeated appeal to probability, are ſome of the hap-
pieſt deluſions of life.
Eaſtern tales are, many of them, of this ſort;
but there is this difference between them : thoſe
which are compoſed at preſent, by modern authors,
generally are intended to convey a particular moral,
whereas the old ones, I mean the Arabian Nights,
the Perſian Tales, &c. mean only to amuſe. Theſe
latter, it is true, do likewiſe inculcate morality;
they cannot avoid it; all human events do the ſame ;
but then it is in a diffuſe and different way. I
make no ſcruple of reading the former kind in this
little ſociety, becauſe they promote my plan; the
others, for the reaſons I have juſt given, I uſe In Org
ſparingly, and only for the ſake of variety. This is
not the firſt time, my children, I have hinted to you,
that I think it proper to explain myſelf thus, that
you may not have reaſon to ſuppoſe I act caprici-
ouſly. I fit among you in the ſacred chara&ter of
Father, Guide, and Inſtructor. Nature, reaſon, and
cuſtom, have allotted me a certain portion of power,
and I wiſh to convince you, that it is my endea-
vour, as well as my duty, to employ that power in
promoting your preſent and future proſperity.
As I was looking through the Perſian Tales this
morning, in order to ſee if I could find any thing
proper for our evening-meetings, I met, among
F 4 other

<page 117>
104 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
|
other things, with the voyage of Aboulfaouaris, in
which, though intermixed with the familiar inci-
dents of real life, there is an air of invention and
ſublimity that has ſometimes a grand effect. It is
rather long: you had better, therefore, two or three
of you, read by turns, and then tell me if you are
of my opinion. As I obſerved before, there is ſel-
dom any ſole and particular moral to be gained
from this kind of ſtories; the virtue, however, that
is moſt conſpicuous in the following narrative, as
well as the neceſſity of that virtue in the ſituations
deſcribed, is Fortitude. - -
F O R T I T U D E,
Or the ſingular Adventures of ABoulf Aou ARIs,
ſurnamed the GREAT TRAVELLER.
P A R T I.
I AM the ſon of a maſter of a ſhip of Baſra,
and my name is Aboulfaouaris. My father, ever
ſince my infancy, made me attend him in the voy-
ages he made in the Indian ſeas: ſo that, at twelve
years old, I knew a great many of the iſlands that
lie in the vaſt extent of them. He grew wealthy,
employed his money in trade, and in leſs than ten
years became one of the richeſt merchants of Baſra.
One day he ſaid to me, ſon, I have an important
account to ſettle with my correſpondent at the iſle
of


<page 118>
F O R T I T U D. E. IOS
of Ceylon: I am reſolved to ſend you into that
country to make an end of the affair. Whatever
regret I might have to leave my father, the deſire I
had of ſeeing the famous city of Serendib made me
accept the commiſſion he offered me with joy :
indeed I had been there before, but was not then
advanced enough in years to make obſervations on
its beauty. I ſet out in a ſhort time, and embarked
in the port of Baſra.
We had the good fortune to reach Ceylon with-
out any miſchievous accident. The firſt thing I
did was to enquire for my father’s correſpondent.
There was no body in the city of Serendib who did .
not know Signior Habib: he was one of the richeſt
traders of all the iſland, and a very honeſt man.
He gave me ſuch a reception, as I might expect
from the beſt friend my father had.
As he perfeótly underſtood buſineſs, and meant to
do nothing but what was juſt, we finiſhed our ac-
counts in a few days. At leiſure hours I viewed
the rarities of the city, which are numerous: I in-
ſtructed myſelf in the laws of the people, their oc-
cupations and government. In ſhort, at the end
of five or fix weeks, my affairs being over, and my
curioſity fully ſatisfied, I prepared for my return,
and waited not long for an opportunity. A veſſel of
Surat, which had arrived at Serendib to exchange
goods, was ready to put to ſea, and I was to em-
bark in her.
F 5 - The

<page 119>
106 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E. .
The day before my departure, as I was returning
to my hoſt about noon, a lady paſſed by, finely
ſhaped, richly cloathed, and followed by a ſlave,
who carried ſome things that ſhe had been buying.
A thick veil ſcreened the beauty of her face, but I
was ſtruck with the grandeur of her air, and the
majeſty of her mien. I ſtopt to conſider her, and
could not forbear crying out in my tranſport; What
a lovely creature! ſhe is without doubt the king's
miſtreſs. She ſtopt with ſome ſurpriſe, and looked
upon me very earneſtly; then continued her walk,
without appearing to be either pleaſed or diſpleaſed
with the freedom I had taken. I pauſed a good
while, refle&ting on the circumſtance; and, much agi-
tated by the emotions ſhe had cauſed in me, began
to feel what I had never felt before. -
Wholly filled with this idea, a ſlave accoſted me.
I remembered to be the ſame that followed the
lady: and the ſight of him redoubled my concern:
What would you have with me, friend? ſaid I.
Sir, anſwered he, with great reſpect, I have orders
to deſire you to follow, where I ſhall have the ho-
nour to condućt you. If you come from your miſ-
treſs, replied I, altogether amazed, I ſhall ſubmit to
her commands; I will readily obey them, whatever
fate is prepared for me. My miſtreſs, anſwered
the ſlave, hath not intruſted me with her intentions;
but if you comply with her requeſt, I cannot believe
you will repent it.
5
in

<page 120>
F C R T I T U D. E. 107
- In vain did I repreſent to myſelf that I was to ſet
off next day, and ought to think of nothing but my
departure. I followed the ſlave in ſpite of all that
might happen; he led me through unfrequented
ſtreets, till we came to a palace: then condućted
me to a ſpacious apartment, magnificently furniſhed,
and deſired me to wait. I was too much affected
to buſy myſelf about any thing I ſaw; I thought of
nothing but the miſtreſs of the palace.
At laſt ſhe appeared, and I found her as beauti-
ful as her ſhape had promiſed: her jewels and dreſs
added to her charms, which, indeed, had little need
of their aſſiſtance. I was confounded — ſhe per-
ceived it and ſmiled; then placed herſelf upon a
ſofa, like a little throne, while her women ranked
themſelves upon the right and left. -
Come near young gentleman, ſaid ſhe, with great
ſweetneſs; you ſeem to be a ſtranger: I will ven-
ture to tell you, that the ſtars incline me to wiſh
you well. Should you render yourſelf deſerving of
my good opinion, I may give you leave to aſpire to
pleaſe me. -
Ah, my ſultaneſs! cried I, throwing myſelf at he
feet, do I underſtand you right? To what pitch of
fortune are you pleaſed to raiſe a ſtranger, who hath
no other merit than to acknowledge you adorable?'
So much the better, ſaid ſhe, interrupting me, the
favour will be the greater, the leſs you believe
you merit it. Inform me of what country yº tº
F 6 - * ^: ; ,

<page 121>
108 T H E F A M I L Y . P 1 c T U R E.
are, what your birth, and upon what account you
came to Serendib.
I fully ſatisfied her curioſity; but when I ſaid I
was to go on board the next day, in order to return
home, ſhe diſcovered great concern. What, Aboul-
facuaris, ſaid ſhe, have you a deſign to depart ſo
ſoon? Hath not the fineſt iſland of the Indies, charms
enough to detain you longer ? Princeſs, replied I,
the city of Serendib, without doubt, can engage eyes
more difficult to pleaſe than mine; but what won-
ders ſoever are to be ſeen within the compaſs of
theſe walls, I ſhould withdraw myſelf without diffi-
culty, if this day had not offered to my fight what
is more capable of detaining me. You no longer
continue then, replied the lady ſmiling, in the reſo-
lution of a ſudden departure ? After the glorious
hopes, anſwered I, that you give me reaſon to
conceive, think you, my queen, that I can have
other inclinations than what you are pleaſed to in-
ſpire me with ?—You cannot fail, ſaid ſhe, with ſen-
timents like theſe, to pleaſe me.
Having ſaid this, ſhe bade me ſit down on the
ſofa: I made ſome difficulty, till ſhe ſaid my refuſal
would diſpleaſe her. She then informed me her
name was Canzada; that ſhe was daughter to one
of the prime vifiers of the king of Ceylon; that
the death of her father had given her the right to
diſpoſe of herſelf; that the firſt lords of the country
had paid her their addreſſes, but that ſhe was yet
diſengaged. She told me likewiſe that my perſon
|
.
*
s
had.
*

<page 122>
F O R T I T U D. E. - Io9
had ſtruck her; that her father had amaſſed immenſe
riches; and that it would be my own fault if I re-
fuſed to ſhare them with her.
I returned my acknowledgments to her in the
moſt ſubmiſſive terms. Our converſation was in-
terrupted by the arrival of twelve ſlaves, who pre-
ſently covered the table with the moſt exquiſite
fruits. Canzada made me ſit down by her : we
began to eat, and ſhe helped me to the moſt
excellent. The variety and delicacy of the wines
anfuered to that of the proviſions: they ſparkled in
cups of cryſtal, but animated me much leſs than
the looks of the lady, who, preſenting a cup to me
with a ſmiling air, kindled a flame in my heart,
which increaſed every moment.
During the repaſt, her converſation was very
lively; the pleaſantry of her humour added new
graces to it. Every time that ſhe offered me
wine, her beautiful lips taſting firſt, rendered it ſtill
more delicious ; I took the cup with tranſport, and
as I drank the liquor, ſwallowed the ſweet poiſon of
love.
At the end of the repaſt, Canzada's women di-
vided themſelves into two companies; ſome ſinging,
others dancing. While they were chanting their
ſoft airs, the eyes of Canzada and mine ſpoke in
dumb language the moſt tender and delicate ſenti-
ments. -
Night coming on, I would have taken leave of
the lady: how, ſaid ſhe to me, with an air of diſſa-
tisfaction, do you think of leaving me? After the
aſſurances

<page 123>
I IO T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
-
aſſurances you have given me of having no other
will than mine, could I expect ſo ill a compliment *
For a man in love, your impatience ſeems very ſur-
priſing. Ahmadam! cried I, how ill you interpret
the ſentiments of my heart! This reception, of which
I appear not to know the value, raiſes the ſofteſt
ideas in my ſoul. I fear to abuſe your favours,
and you ſhould rather pity me for the conflićt I feel
in offering to quit you. You deſerve little pity,
replied ſhe, for a conflićt you might have avoided;
ſuch an over-diſcretion is to be ſuſpected; I would
not adviſe you to think it meritorious. How, ma-
dam, ſaid I, could I flatter myſelf that you had deſ-
tined me to paſs the night in your palace?
In the midſt of all the ſatisfaction her goodneſs
had procured me, I could not deny but that I was
uneaſy. I related to her the reception that my
hoſt had given me at my arrival at Serendib, re-
preſenting to her that he was moſt certainly in great
uneaſineſs concerning me. -
Canzada agreed that I ought to ſend to Habib,
but ſhe would not permit me to go myſelf: ſhe only
gave me leave to write to him, but at the ſame time
forbade me to give him the leaſt hint of my adven-
ture. Her diſtruſt was ſo great, that ſhe dićtated
the letter; and I could only acquaint him, that
ſome important buſineſs had retarded my departure,
and deprived me of the happineſs of ſeeing him for
ſome days, and that I deſired he would be under no
apprehenſions on my account.
Pleaſed

<page 124>
F O R T I T U D E. III
Pleaſed that I had put off my departure, ſhe led
me into the ſeveral apartments of her palace, and
ſhewed me a magnificence that ſeemed worthy of a
prime viſier. When the hour of reſt came on, ſhe
condućted me to an apartment prepared for me. She
left me, and was no ſooner gone, but ſlaves, who
were commanded to attend me, brought every thing
that was proper for the occaſion, and put me to bed.
When I found myſelf alone, and at liberty to re-
fie&t ſeriouſly on this adventure, I ſaid to myſelf,
What will all this come to ? How richly this pa-
lace is furniſhed! Can I ever hope to be poſſeſſed of
the lady? No, Aboulfaouaris, no; this was never
deſigned for thee; ceaſe to flatter thyſelf: theſe are
ſnares which fortune hath laid, and thou wilt pre-
ſently find them vaniſhing like a dream, and deceiving
thee in thoſe ideas of greatneſs and pleaſure, which
thou imagineſt are reſerved for thee. *
This thought failed not to diſturb me. In a mi-
nute after, I fancied it was wrong to alarm myſelf;
that Canzada could have no intereſt to deceive me,
and therefore that I ought not to ſuſpect her kind-
neſs: that the behaviour of her people had appear-
ed to me very ſincere and natural; and that I had
obſerved, by her eyes, ſhe was touched with a
real paſſion for me: ſo that ſometimes repoſing an
entire confidence in her, and ſometimes giving way
to my fears, like a veſſel agitated by two contrary
winds, I paſſed the whole night without a moment
of reſt,
Break

<page 125>
II2. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
Break of day ſurpriſed me, while I was yet re-
fle&ting with great concern on what had employed
me in the night: the ſun ſhone into my apartment,
and made the rich furniture glitter: dazled by the
brightneſs, I looked upon the palace as one of thoſe
enchanted caſtles, where magic art, getting the
conqueſt of nature, boaſts the vaſt extent of its
power. I got up, and preſently the ſlaves hearing
me walk, came into the room with magnificent
robes; I took one of green ſilk, embroidered with
gold, the work and deſign of which pleaſed me in-
finitely.
I was no ſooner dreſſed, than Canzada came to
aſk me if I had reſted well; her impatience of ſeeing
me again would not ſuffer her to wait till I could go
to find her in her own apartment. I anſwered, that I
had paſſed the night in a manner that ought to haſten
the moment of my happineſs. She replied, ſmiling,
that ſhe would be more fully informed of my ſince-
rity, before ſhe made a further progreſs of ſuch
conſequence to her quiet.
I remained eight days in Canzada's palace, and
was treated with the reſpect due to a king. The
lady ſhewed a particular regard for me; ſhe refuſed
me no ſigns of tenderneſs and complaiſance that I
could deſire of her, compatible with virtue.
One day, when we were walking in the garden,
Aboulfaouaris, ſaid ſhe, I flatter myſelf that you
love me; in this confidence, I am at laſt reſolved
to compleat your wiſhes; to give you, with my
8 perſon,


<page 126>
F O R T I T U D E. II.3
perſon, the free diſpoſal of my wealth. — After
this, can you refuſe me any thing? Ah madam
ſaid I, interrupting her, with all the marks of real
gratitude, this doubt is injurious to my paſſion.
Speak' were it my life, it would be glory enough,
to ſacrifice it to the leaſt of your deſires. That
which I ſhall aſk, replied the lady, will be a favour
beſtowed on you, if you love me, as I would fain
believe. Explain yourſelf then, cried I, it is too
much to be kept in ſuſpence. The favour I have
to aſk you, ſaid ſhe, is to ſecure my repoſe and hap-
pineſs. Promiſe ſwear to me an eternal con-
ſtancy and to prevent the chagrin of ſeeing our-
ſelves ſeparated, join the gift of your hand to that
of your heart. Let us be linked together by the
ſacred tie of marriage.
Though the beginning of Canzada's diſcourſe had,
filled me with joy, her laſt words produced a quite
contrary effect. Though ſhe had behaved with the
ſtrićteſt decorum, yet I never imagined ſhe thought
of marriage, for ſhe was of the ſect of the Guebres,
who are the ancient Perſians that adore the fire, and
I a Mahometan; ſo that ſhe raiſed in me an extra-
ordinary aſtoniſhment. I was diſturbed, I grew
pale, I reddened, I caſt down my eyes; confuſion
and perplexity took poſſeſſion of thoſe cheeks, on
which joy was revelling but the moment before.
The lady, who obſerved me with attention, eaſily
penetrated the cauſe of my diſorder. I could not
have believed, ſaid ſhe, with a fierce and diſdainful
alſº

<page 127>
r14 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
air, that ſuch a propoſal would have been ſo diſa-
greeable to you; I rather expected tranſports of joy
from you, than this confuſion. What, is it a diſ-
honour to have me for your wife? Madam, anſwer-
ed I, I know the value of that glorious degree, to
which your bounty would raiſe me, but Heaven
hath placed an invincible obſtruction in the way;
and if you ſee trouble and confuſion cover my face,
it is becauſe I mourn in ſecret my misfortune, which
will not permit me to accept of an offer, which
otherwiſe would crown my glory and happineſs.
I imagined, replied ſhe, that my rank was the
ſole obſtacle to your good fortune. When I debaſed
myſelf to you, I thought I had removed all diffi-
culties: but tell me, purſued ſhe, what is that ob-
ſtacle that you take to be ſo invincible. My reli-
gion, replied I, How can I break through the
command, which prohibits us to marry a wife, who
is no follower of Mahomet. I am not leſs ſcrupu-
lous in my religion than you, replied Canzada, and
would not for an empire marry with a Mahometan.
I deſigned, therefore, to make you renounce the
falſe doctrine of your prophet, and oblige you to
embrace the ſe&t of the Guebres. I reckoned upon
your worſhipping the fire and the ſun. In ſhort,
that you would abjure your own religion to follow
mine. I confeſs, I promiſed myſelf, to have made
it a merit in the eyes of the god we adore, to make
a convert of the perſon whom I loved, even to the
degree of delivering up to him all my treaſure ; but
- you



<page 128>
F o R T 1 T U D E. 115
>
you deny me the advantage of ſuch a merit, and, de-
ſpiſing the tender I make you of a large fortune, ra-
ther than conſent to marry me, you become the
moſt ungrateful of all men. -
Theſe laſt words, and the tone in which Can-
zada pronounced them, increaſed my confuſion, and
furniſhed new occaſion to ſtir up her reſentment
againſt me. She loaded me with reproaches, and
ſhed tears, which pierced my heart every inſtant:
how formidable was ſhe in this condition to a lover
who was willing to preſerve his virtue! my own
grief, and that which ſhe felt, deprived me al-
moſt of my ſenſes. Alas ! there wanted but little
to conquer me, and I had without doubt ſacrificed
all to her tears, if, ſecretly inſpired by Mahomet, I
had not received from the grand prophet the aſſiſt-
ance I wanted: but I remained firm in my reſolu-
tion, and obſerved the precept of my religion.
Canzada was much aſtoniſhed that an adherence
to my faith was capable of making me renounce the
poſſeſſion of her and her riches. She had heard of
ſome Muſſulman leſs ſcrupulous than myſelf, and
my firmneſs grieved her much; nevertheleſs, che-
riſhing yet hopes that at the end I ſhould yield,
ſhe would not take my refuſal for a final anſwer.
The injuſtice and cruelty of your proceedings, ſaid
fhe to me, ought before now to have tired my pa-
tience; I bluſh that I am ſtill ſo weak as to have
the leaſt inclination for you. However, I will yet
believe you will change your opinion; I give you
eight

<page 129>
r 16 T H E F A M I L Y . P 1 c T, U R E.
eight days ſtill to determine: you ſhall have no cauſe
to reproach me, that I give you not time to con-
fider: but, if after that, you take not a reſolution
of doing what I require of you ; if you perſiſt to
render yourſelf unworthy of my bounty, expect all
the moſt rigorous reſentment an enraged woman
can inflićt. *
At theſe words ſhe left me with an air that might
convince me, ſhe would effectually come to the laſt
extremity, if I did not reſolve to marry her. I was
left in the moſt deplorable condition imaginable.
Nothing was equal-to my conſternation. I could
ſee no hopes that I could be happy, unleſs I would
abjure Mahometaniſm. And could I reſolve on
that charming Canzada, cried I to myſelf fighing,
I may no longer raiſe my deſires to your enjoyment.
But though I have loſt the hopes of poſſeſſing you, it
is not in my power to ceaſe loving you; at what
diſtance ſoever you are from me, you will be the ſo-
vereign of my heart.
I paſſed the eight days that were given me in la-
menting the good fortune I had once conceived
hopes of ; but I had courage enough not to alter
my reſolution. Canzada perceiving at the end of
the time ſhe had preſcribed that I was not yet
in the proper diſpoſition, granted me eight days
more; and, to contribute on her part to the vićtory
ſhe deſigned to gain, ſhe made uſe of her moſt pow-
erful charms. In ſhort, ſeeing the time elapſe again,
without having gained any advantage, ſhe ſent for
illes
-

<page 130>
F o R T 1 r u D E. 117
me. I was condućted into the moſt ſtately apart-
ment of the palace: She waited for me in the midſt
of her women, upon a throne raiſed a few ſteps from
the floor, and had more the air of a ſevere judge,
than of a compaſſionate miſtreſs.
I approached trembling, and could ſcarce make
uſe of my ſenſes. She ordered her women to leave
the room. Well, Aboulfaouaris, ſaid ſhe, have
your refle&tions inſpired your ſtubborn heart with
ſentiments that are worthy of me? I was ſtruck to
the very ſoul, and fainted at the foot of the throne.
Canzada deſcended from the throne, and was buſy
to help me. I perceived it when I came to myſelf,
and opening my eyes, fixed them on the lady.
Ceaſe, madam, ſaid I, with a low voice, ceaſe to
concern yourſelf for a wretch, who is not worthy
your care. It is true, ſaid ſhe, interrupting me
with ſome emotion, that I have reaſon to complain
of you; but it is your own fault. Forget your
injuſtice, and accept an advantage you cannot too
much cheriſh.
Alas! madam, cried I, in an accent of grief and
deſpair, what can I gain by your love on ſuch cruel
conditions as you propoſe to me? When I am the
reward of your compliance, replied the lady, ought
you to balance any conſiderations againſt ſo great an
acquiſition ? Would you have me believe, that there
is ſomething dearer to you than myſelf? You are
dearer to me than all things, replied I; but can
- - I be
.*

<page 131>
118 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
l -
#
I be worthy of you, if I have the weakneſs and
cowardice to fully my honour by renouncing my
religion . Peace, peace, perfidious man, cried
ſhe, interrupting me with the utmoſt paſſion: Make
uſe no more of your falſe reaſons to juſtify pretences
that would not diſquiet you, had you really loved me.
But go, thou art unworthy of my favours. I am
at length reſolved; and leave thee to thy own ingra-
titude. - -
At theſe words, which much agitated me, ſhe
ſtood ſilent: Then re-aſſuming her ſpeech with an
air of coldneſs, which confeſſed no leſs rage than the
accent in which ſhe ſpoke : Aboulfaouaris, purſued
ſhe, never let me ſee you more; wait my orders;
you ſhall ſoon be acquainted with what I determine
concerning your fate. In ſpeaking thus, ſhe left
the apartment with an emotion equal to mine; but
we were moved with quite different paſſions.
I then knew what I had to apprehend from the
diſpoſition in which I found things. If at times I
was ſo paſſionate a lover, as to think with pleaſure
of dying by the hands of the objećt beloved; at
others, the love for life made me think of means to
eſcape. But how ſhould I obtain my end? I was
kept always in fight, and the lady's orders were all
exactly performed. Nor could I ever find means to
inform my hoſt of the place where I was.
Every day I expe&ted to hear what ſentence ſhe
had paſſed upon me, and three weeks elapſed with-
out hearing any thing. The incertainty in which I
- lived,
~


<page 132>
F O R T I T U D E. II9
;
*
lived, had ſomething in it more terrible than any
ſentence they could pronounce. I deſired to have
an end put to this ſuſpence, let what would be the
conſequence.
In ſhort, the moment I wiſhed for came. As I
was riſing to dreſs myſelf one morning, after having
ſpent a night more troubleſome than uſual, five or
fix of Canzada's ſlaves entered my chamber. They
condućted a number of people, habited otherwiſe
than thoſe of Serendib ; he who appeared to be the
chief of theſe ſtrangers, looked upon me ſome time
with attention; and at laſt gravely broke ſilence,
and bid me follow him. He ſaid this with an ai
which made me conclude that I muſt obey him. "
We croſſed the palace, and when we were got to
the gate, I aſked one of my condućtors, whither
they pretended to carry me. That you will know
in time, anſwered he ; but we are expreſly forbid to
tell you. Theſe men condućted me to the port; I
embarked with them ; they preſently got ready; and
we ſet ſail. -
When we were out at ſea, the maſter of the ſhip
informed me, that he was of the kingdom of Gol-
conda, that Canzada had given me to him for a
ſlave, and that he was charged particularly never to
grant me liberty to return to Baſra ; he ſaid no
more, nor aſked me any queſtion about that lady.
This gave me room to judge, that ſince ſhe had hid
from him her affections for me, and the affront of
my refuſing her, ſhe had engaged him to promiſe,
- that

<page 133>
126 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
that he would not inform himſelf of the reaſons ſhe
had to rid her hands of me.
Such was the revenge of Canzada; whom I can-
not accuſe of rigour. She puniſhed me too mildly
for the crime that I had been guilty of. When I
refle&ted, however, that I ſheuld return no more to
my father, or my country, my ſlavery became inſup-
portable. I afflićted myſelf much at firſt; but
making a virtue of neceſſity, I ſtudied to ſerve my
maſter faithfully, who was a very good man, and
did not want ſenſe. I was not ſatisfied merely to do
what he ordered me, I endeavoured to prevent his
*deſires, and found from time to time he was more
and more pleaſed with me.
MR s. E G E R T o N.
* I think, Mr. Egerton, this lady, though a vir-
tuous one, was far from being ſufficiently circum-
ſpect in her behaviour.
MR. E. G E R To N.
It is very true, my love; but we muſt make an
allowance for eaſtern manners: Had ſhe aëted ſo
imprudently in England, her virtue would not only
have been ſullied, but her reputation would have been
loſt, however innocent ſhe might in reality have
been.
M1 ss Fo R REs T E R.
I think too, Sir, conſidering how violently ſhe
was in love, ſhe acted rather cruelly, to ſend her
lover into ſlavery, -
Mr. "
|

<page 134>
F O R. T. I T U D E. I2 iſ
*
M. R. E. G E R T o N.
Perhaps ſo, but in this again we muſt make an
allowance for cuſtoms and countries. Her lover,
you hear, thought his puniſhment a mild one.
CH A R L E S E G E R T o N.
But I thought, Sir, you taught us to expect
ſomething of the marvellous. I think this is tole-
rably probable for an eaſtern tale.
MR. E. G E R To N.
Have patience, and proceed.
The A D v E N T U R Es of A Bo U L F Ao U AR I s.
P A R T II.
WE ſailed round the Iſland of Ceylon to come
northward into the Gulph of Bengal, and were juſt
ready to enter the Gulph, when the moſt violent
ſtorm aroſe that was ever ſeen in thoſe ſeas. We
wanted a full ſouth wind to carry us to the north- .
ward; but a north weſt wind drove us directly
ſouth-eaſt, quite contrary to our intended courſe for
Golconda. We were driven we knew not whither;
the ſtorm wearied the art of the mariners; who
ſeeing themſelves in danger, quitted their labour,
and left the veſſel to the pleaſure of the winds and
waves, - - - *
This wind laſted fifteen days, with ſuch impe-
-tuoſity, that it carried us fix hundred leagues out of
• V o L. I. G Our

<page 135>
122 T H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c T U R e.
our courſe. It changed at laſt, and filled us with
joy; but we were diſturbed by an adventure ſo very
extraordinary as ſcarcely to appear credible.
We were on the point of the Iſle of Java, on the
eaſt ſide, when we perceived near us a man ſtrug-
gling againſt the waves, to keep himſelf from ſinking.
He kept faſt hold of a plank, that ſupported him,
and made ſigns to us to come and help him. Com-
paſſion is commendable, but ſometimes very dan-
gerous; as you will underſtand by the ſequel.
We hoiſted out our boat, and brought him
aboard. He appeared to be about forty years old;
of a monſtrous ſhape; his head large, his hair ſhort
and thick, his mouth exceſſively wide; his teeth ap-
peared long, and very ſharp: his arms nervous,
his hands large, and on each finger a long crooked
nail. His eyes, which I had done wrong to omit,
reſembled thoſe of a tiger, and he had a flat noſe,
with very open noſtrils. His whole phyſiognomy
was ſhocking, and he had a ſullen air, capable of
changing into terror that compaſſion with which
he at firſt inſpired us.
When he was brought to Dehaouſch the maſter,
he ſaid, Sir, I owe my life to you; I was upon the
point of periſhing without your aſſiſtance. It is
true, replied the maſter, you had been preſently
drowned, if you had not had the good fortune to
meet us.-It is not the ſea which I feared, anſwers
the man, ſmiling; I could live whole years in the
water without hurt. That which torments me moſt
1S

<page 136>
F O R T I T U- D. E. - 123
is a devouring hunger, that gnaws me; for it is
almoſt twelve hours ſince I have eat. Do me the
favour to bring me ſomething to repair my loſt
ſtrength after ſo long a faſt never mind after
what manner—I am far from nice.—I eat every
thing. -
We looked upon one another, and judged tha
the danger he had been in had undoubtedly diſturbed
his ſenſes, which was alſo the maſter's opinion,
who, conceiving that he had full occaſion to eat,
ordered as much as would ſerve ſix perſons; with
cloaths to cover him. As for cloaths, ſaid the
ſtranger, I need none, I go always naked. But
decency, replied Dehaouſch, will not let you ſtay
with us in the condition you are in. Ho! replied
the other rudely, you will ſoon accuſtom yourſelves
to the ſight. -
This brutal anſwer confirmed us in the opinion,
that he was not in his ſenſes. His hunger preſſed,
and he was impatient to eat. He fell to kicking the
hatches, grumbled, and rolled his eyess dreadfully.
At length he ſaw what he wanted, fell upon it
with a greedineſs that ſurpriſed us; and in a moment
diſpatched it. i * *
When he had eaten up all the proviſion that had
been brought him, with an air of authority he bid
us bring more. The maſter of the veſſel, willing
to ſee the event, ordered that he ſhould be obeyed,
but this ſecond ſervice was ſoon ſwallowed; and he
demanded more to eat, when one of the ſlaves of
G 2 the

<page 137>
, 124 T H E - F A M I L Y P I C T U R. E.
, the ſhip, provoked with the inſolence of the brute,
was going to treat him as he deſerved; but the
ſavage laid his two hands on his ſhoulders, and tore
him to pieces with his ſharp nails. In a moment no
leſs than fifty ſabres were lifted up againſt him, to
revenge this horrid murder. Each man ſtruck at
him with all the reſolution and boldneſs he was able;
but we perceived, with dread, that our enemy had
, a ſkin as impenetrable as a diamond: our ſabres .
, broke or turned their edges, without being able to
make an impreſfion. One man that was the moſt
eager againſt him he laid hold on, with an aſtoniſh-
ing force, and tore him to pieces before our eyes.
When we found our ſabres uſeleſs, and that we
could not wound him, we fell all together upon
him to throw him into the ſea; but he was im–
moveable: for, beſides prodigious ſtrength, he ſtruck
his crooked nails into the wood of the hatches, and
, kept his hold, like a rock in the midſt of the waves.
Far from being diſmayed at our attempt, he told
us, with a ſour ſmile, my friends, you have under-
taken an ill buſineſs; I have reduced thoſe who
:were as untračtable as yourſelves. If you continue
to oppoſe my will, I ſhall uſe you all I have done
your two comrades. . . .
Chilled with fear, we made no further reſiſtance.
A third time we fetched him ſomething to eat, he
ſat down to table, and as ſoon as he obſerved that
we were at laſt determined to ſubmit, he became
good humoured. He now ſeemed ſorry that we had
forced


<page 138>
F o R T 1 T U D E. . . 125:
forced him to what he had done; and told us very
calmly, that he eſteemed us for the ſervice we had
done him, in taking him out of the ſea, where he
muſt have died of hunger in a few hours: that he
wiſhed there would come ſome other veſſel well:
ſtored with proviſions, becauſe he would then throw
himſelf aboard her, and trouble us no farther. He
laughed and jeſted like a common man, and we ſhould
have found him very diverting, if circumſtances
- would have permitted us to reliſh his pleaſantry.
In ſhort, he made a fourth meal, and then ab-,
ſtained two hours from eating. During this in-
terval, he aſked us, one after another, about our
country, cuſtoms, and adventures. We hoped that
the fumes of indigeſtion would riſe to his brain,
and waited with impatience till ſleep ſhould over-
power his ſenſes, that we might throw him ſud-
denly into the ſea. This hope was our only re-
ſource; for though we had had ever ſo much provi-
ſion in our ſhip, at his way of eating, he would have
devoured it in a little time. But, alas! we flattered
ourſelves with vain hopes. This wretch, as if he
had penetrated our deſigns, informed us he never
ſlept. The quantity that I eat, ſays he, reſtores
the weakneſs of nature, and ſerves inſtead of reſt.
We underſtood with grief this ſad truth. We
deplored our ill fortune, and the maſter deſpaired of
ever returning to Golconda, when on a ſudden the
air appeared darkened, a tempeſt ſeemed gathering,
and we were the more glad of it, becauſe a ſtorm
G 3 would

<page 139>
126 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
would aſord us hopes of ſaving, ourſelves. Our
veſſel might daſh againſt a rock as we came in ſight
of ſome iſland, where we might by ſwimming, per-
haps, get rid of the monſter; who undoubtedly had
promiſed himſelf, after he had eaten up all our
proviſions, to devour the crew. -
We wiſhed therefore for a violent tempeſt, and
even prayed to heaven that we might ſink. But we
were deceived; for what we took for a gathering of
clouds and vapours, was only one of the largeſt
rokhs that was ever ſeen in thoſe ſeas. This mon-
ſtrous bird came ſouſe down impetuouſly upon the
deck, and ſnatched off our enemy from the midſt of
the ſhip's crew, who had no time to arm himſelf
againſt ſuch a ſurprize. We were not aware our-
ſelves of it till ſome moments after, when the bird
was mounted in the air with his prey.
We then ſaw an extraordinary combat; the man
finding himſelf ſuſpended in the air by the talons of
a winged monſter, which he felt the ſtrength of,
began now to defend himſelf. He had his hands at
liberty; he ſtruck his hooked nails into the body of
the rokh, and, at the ſame time, ſetting his teeth
upon his breaſt, he fell to devouring the fleſh and
feathers, when the bird made ſuch a hideous cry, as
rent the air around; and to revenge itſelf, ſtruck
out both the eyes of its enemy with one of its
talons. Though blinded he quitted not his hold,
but the rekh colle&ting together the remainder of
ftrength in death, pierced his head with one ſtroke
of

<page 140>
F O R T I T U D E. 127
of the beak; ſo that both fell down dead into the
fea. -
Thus we find that it was written upon the table
of predeſtination, that we ſhould be delivered from
this dangerous monſter. As ſoon as we ſaw our-
ſelves rid of him, we could not enough admire our
good fortune, and were ſorry for the death of the
rokh who had delivered us. We continued our
voyage, and entertained ourſelves with this adven-
ture. Having now a conſtant favourable wind,
after ſeveral days ſail, we diſcovered land. On the
firſt notice of it we took the altitudes, and found
that we were on the weſt point of the Iſle of Java,
which, with the eaſt of the Iſle of Sumatra, forms
the entrance into the Streights of Sonde, not far
from the City of Bantam. Overjoyed at this diſco-
very, we crowded our ſails; and in a little time ar-
rived at Bantam. -
There we took in freſh proviſions, and ſet ſail
for Batavia. As ſoon as Dehaouſch had finiſhed his
affairs there, we ſailed towards the kingdom of Gol-
conda, where we arrived in about a month’s navi-
gation from the Iſles of the Sonde.
My patron was received in the capital where he
reſided with a general applauſe, for he was beloved
by every body. .
After a thouſand and a thouſand careſſes from his
family, he preſented me to his wife and daughter, as
a ſlave for whom he had a particular regard, and
prayed them to take in good part the ſervices I ſhould
G 4 render

<page 141>
128 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
render them. In a little time I acquired great repu-
tation with them. The other ſlaves, far from being
jealous, appeared pleaſed to ſee me ſo well treated. It
is true that I procured them the beſt uſage I could,
and often occaſioned them to be better rewarded
than they deſerved. *
In ſhort, the friendſhip that Dehaouſch had for
me increaſed ſo much that he ſaid to me one day;
Aboulfaouaris, for I had neither hid from him my
name nor my country, you cannot but have taken
notice that I have ever diſtinguiſhed you from the
reſt of my ſlaves. At the firſt inſtant that I ſaw
you, I took a fancy to you, and I have ſpared no-
thing to ſoften the rigour of your ſlavery: I deſign
to give you yet greater marks of my affection. You
have ſeen my daughter; there is not, perhaps, a
more beautiful girl in Golconda. You ſhall marry
her; I have ſounded her upon this ſubjećt, and find
you are not diſpleaſing to her.
I was ſo ſtunned at this propoſition, that it was
not difficult for him to judge the news was not very
agreeable to me. How I ſaid he, does what I pro-
poſe diſturb you? Is the advantage of being my
heir, with the enjoyment of Facrinniſſa, ſo very in-
conſiderable, that it cannot raiſe the ambition of a
ſlave Sir, anſwered I, the honour of being your
ſon-in-law, would be ſufficient to tempt me, were
you a Muſſulman as I am; but you are a Heathen.—
If you have no other obſtacle but that, replied my
maſter, we ſhall ſoon agree; for I am reſolved to
- tllſ Il



<page 142>
F O R T I T U D E. 129
turn Mahometan, and my daughter is in the ſame
reſolution: In ſpite of the prejudices with which our
Gentile prieſts have filled my mind, I am weary of
paying divine honours to oxen and cows: I have
too much reaſon not to acknowledge it to be a
wretched ſuperſtition, and I think there is a ſupreme
Being above all other deities; ºtherefore, my ſon,
accept my propoſal, without ſcruple or delay.
Though Facrinniſſa was lovely, and the proffer
advantageous; and though, on the ſcore of my re-
ligion, I had nothing to reproach myſelf with in
marrying my maſter's daughter, I had ſtill a re-
lučtance to this marriage, which could be no more
than the effect of my remembrance of Canzada.
However, I was ſo far maſter of myſelf, as to ſay
nothing of it to my patron, who, believing that I
conſented, as I made no oppoſition to it, went to
carry the news to his wife and daughter. st
I had preſently a converſation with Facrinniſ,
who appeared ſo gay and contented, that I could not
help thinking that my perſon pleaſed her. Aboul-
faouaris, ſaid ſhe, my father hath made choice of
you for my huſband, and I doubt not of your gene-
rofity towards the promoting of my good fortune,
though at the loſs of your own. You are not de-
ceived in me, fair lady, anſwered I, there is nothing,
that I will not do for the charming Facrinniſia,
Hear me, replied ſhe, and you ſhall underſtand the
ſervice I require of you. I love the ſon of a mer-
chant of Golconda, and I am paſſionately belove;
… I G 5 by

<page 143>
130 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
by him: he hath aſked me of my father ſeveral times,
who always refuſed him, becauſe of an ancient
grudge which is kept up betwixt our families. I
would have you marry me, and, the day after our
marriage divorce me, as through anger; afterwards
feign as if you would take me again, and then chuſe
my lover for your hulla. I underſtand you, ſaid I,
you only deſire that I ſhould marry you to deliver
you up to him whom you love: very well, madam,
I agree to do ſo; how difficult ſoever it will be to
yield up the poſſeſſion of ſuch an objećt, I think my-
ſelf capable of ſo great a ſelf-denial. But what will
my maſter ſay You are not ignorant of the obli-
gations I have to him. Surpriſed at my condućt, he
will not fail to reproach me. What ſhall I anſwer
Let not this give you any uneaſineſs, replied ſhe,
follow exactly the advice I ſhall give you, and I pro-
miſe you my father will not complain of you.
Upon the faith of this promiſe, I aſſured her that
I was diſpoſed to promote her love after the man-
ner that ſhe deſired. Charmed with this aſſurance,
ſhe preſſed her father to haſten the marriage, which
was celebrated in a few days—ſhe abjured her reli-
gion beforehand, and embraced Mahometaniſm. All
I obtained from my union with Facrinniſſa, was
obliging the lady to renounce her idolatry ſooner
than ſhe would otherwiſe have done. Lovely as
fhe was, I ſacrificed the rights of a huſband to the ho-
nour of keeping the promiſe I had given; and looked
upon her only as a pledge entruſted with me, which
-- I was
2

<page 144>
F O R T I T U D E, I31
I was obliged honourably to reſtore. I was not
long charged with it. A few days after our mar-
riage I divorced her. My maſter, as I had foreſeen,
aſtoniſhed at my proceeding, came to my houſe:
for you muſt know, that the very day we were mar-
ried, we lived in a houſe by ourſelves. He aſked
me for what reaſon I had divorced Facrinniſia? I
anſwered him, that I found ſhe had a paſſion for
another, and that not being willing to poſſeſs a wo-
man againſt her inclinations, I had repudiated her.
He laughed at my niceneſs, and told me that his
daughter would by degrees love me better. In ſhort,
he exhorted me to take her again, and I pretended
I would. I will go into the city, ſaid I to him, find
out a hulla, and bring him this night before the
cady: to-morrow we will renew our nuptials, in
hopes of better ſucceſs.
My patron returned home ſomething better ſatis-
fied ; he left to me the care of chuſing a hulla, and
the reſt of the ceremony. I went and found out
Facrinniſſa's lover, and they were married before
me by the cady’s lieutenant. They paſſed the night
together, The next day the hulla refuſing to di-
vorce his wife, I went to my maſter's houſe, and
diſſembling a grief I never felt, told him that the
hulla, contrary to what he had promiſed me the day
before, refuſed to divorce the lady.
We ought to know who this hulla is, ſaid De-
haouſch ; if he is poor, I have reputation and mo-
ney enough to take my daughter from him. Dur-
G 6 ing

<page 145>
I32 T H E - F A M I L Y P I C T U R e.
ing the time he was ſpeaking, the nayb or cady's
deputy came in, and ſaid; “Sir, I come to inform
you that the hulla, whom your ſon-in-law hath cho-
ſen, is the ſon of Amer, the merchant; therefore
your daughter is loſt as to her firſt huſband, for the
fecond is reſolved never to part with her. I know
very well that Amer is not your friend, but I would
adviſe you to be reconciled to him in favour of this
marriage, and forget the hatred you have ſo long
borne towards him.” -
The mayb, not contented to exhort my patron to
an accommodation with the family of his new ſon-
in-law, offered to ſpeak himſelf to Amer, and ſpare
nothing to make them friends. Dehaouſch reaſoned
properly in this affair, and therefore was not hard to
be reconciled; and the lieutenant finding Amer in
the ſame diſpoſition, eſtabliſhed between the two fa-
thers a perfect underſtanding. But the beſt of all
was, my patron, prepoſſeſſed that I was the vićtim
of this reconciliation, pitied me, and, by way of re-
compenſe, gave me a large ſum of money, with li-
berty to return to Baſra. -
Thus was Facrinniſſa freed from a huſband for
whom ſhe had no affection, and married to her
lover. As ſoon as I ſaw their good fortune ſecured,
I went from Golconda, and joining myſelf to ſome
people who were going to Surat, got to the ſea--
ſide, embarked in a veſſel that preſently ſet ſail, and
we had a happy voyage. The next day, finding no
ſhipping ready to go for Baſra, I was obliged to ſtay:
at Surat, -
The

<page 146>
F or t t t U. D. E. 133:
The city of Surat is too agreeable, and too full
of curioſities, for one to be weary of it in a ſhort
time. I went ſometimes to the public baths, which
are very fine, and where there is better attendance
than in any other place in the world. I walked
about the city and avenues, and in the many delight-
ful gardens that are open to all ſorts of people.
One day a man ſomewhat advanced in years met
me at the turn of an alley, ſaluted me very civilly,
and we joined converſation. He appeared frank
and ſincere, told me that he was a Gentile, and that
he had in the road of Surat a veſſel belonging to:
him, in which every year he made a voyage. To
be equally free with him, I told him that I was a
Mahometan, and related to him my adventures.
He ſeemed ſo ſenſible of my misfortunes, as to
ſurpriſe me. I obſerve my ſon, ſaid he, that you'
are aſtoniſhed to ſee me take part in your af-
flićtions: but, beſides that I am naturally compaf-
ſionate, I muſt tell you that I have a great friend-
ſhip for you, though you are not of my religion, I
am concerned at the dangers you have run through;
and ſhould you tell them to your own father, he
could not feel himſelf more ſenſible of them than
I am. O young man! cried he, how fortunate that
I came to walk in theſe gardens! your converſation
is agreeable to me, and every moment increaſes the
affection I have conceived for you ; let us go into
the city and lodge together; I am old and rich;
have no child; and will make you my heir. At
* … . . theſe

<page 147>
I34- the F a M 1 l y P 1 c t w = E.
theſe words, he took me in his arms, and embraced
me with the tenderneſs of a father. - - -
I thanked him for theſe offers of kindneſs, on his
part, and made him lively proteſtations of grati-
tude on mine. In ſhort, the reſult was, that he
conducted me to his houſe, which was one of the
fineſt in Surat. When the porter opened the gate,
I perceived, inſtead of a court, two parterres, with
a profuſion of flowers, divided by a large walk made
of a compoſition as hard and beautiful as marble.
The walk led us to a fine building, where the fur-
niture, though not rich, was elegant; the hangings:
and the ſofas were of painted linen, the figures ad-
mirably wrought, and the linen exquiſitely fine.
The old man invited me to bathe with him in a
large baſon of tranſparent water, which ſerved to re-
freſh him, as well as to fulfil the duties of his re-
ligion. The ſlaves attended us with the fineſt linen :
we afterwards ſat down to a table, covered with
proviſions, ſerved up in china; and drank of a palm
wine called Taray, extremely delicious.
At the end of our repaſt, my hoſt ſaid, I will truſt
you with a ſecret that ſhall convince you of my
great kindneſs for you. I am in five days time to,
go from the port of Surat to an iſland which I viſit
every year, and you ſhall go along with me. In that
iſland, which is uninhabitable, for it is full of tigers,
there are two hundred pits that produce pearls of
an extraordinary ſize. This is only known to my-
ſelf. The captain of a veſſel, to whom I was once a
- - favourite
º

<page 148>
F- O R T I T U D. E. I35
}
favourite ſlave, diſcovered this treaſure to me, and
informed me how I ſhould approach theſe pits in
ſpite of the wild beaſts. ... • -
Certainly, ſaid I, the captain did well in teaching
you this ſecret, for the tigers are likely to give but
an ill reception to ſtrangers. It is eaſy, replied he,
to drive away the moſt furious. We muſt go aſhore
in the night with lighted torches; the fight of fire
frights them, and will make them fly from us. We
will go then, and take from thoſe precious ſources.
a large quantity of pearl, and ſell it at our return
into this city: the money we ſhall get, added to
what I have already hoarded, will make a conſider-
able fortune for you after my death.
To convince me of the truth of what he ſaid, he
took me into his cloſet, and ſhewed roupees of gold
and filver, lying in prodigious quantities. , Well,
ſaid he, does this appear worth your attention ? Have,
you any diſlike to the voyage? I anſwered, I had
not; but begged leave to write to my father of my
arrival at Surat, and the reaſons which detained me.
My hoſt conſented, and undertook that it ſhould be
delivered to my father. . .
I truſted my letter to the care of Hyzoum, which
was the Gentile's name, and we embarked at the
port of Surat: we ſet ſail, and after having been three
weeks at ſea, without any accident, we ſaw the little
deſart iſland, which my friend told me was that
where our buſineſs lay; we moored there, and wait-
ed for night that we might land. Hyzoum ordered his
ſailors
º
`

<page 149>
136 T H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c T U R E.
ſailors to remain aboard, and advanced into the iſle
with no body but myſelf. We had each of us a
lighted torch, with a number of them under our
arms, and bags to put the pearlin. We looked for
the pits, by the light of our torches, and we had not
ſearched long before we diſcovered one of the deep-
- eſt. Deſcend, my ſon, ſaid he; I doubt not but here
- are fine pearls. I deſcended by a rope, which he held,
and felt pearl under my feet. I filled the bag; the
old man pulled it up, opened the ſhells, but could
find nothing in them but pearl ſeed; he returned
the bag again, and ſaid, The pearls of this pit are
not yet in a condition to be taken. Cover them
with earth, which will make them grow, and next
year we will come and take them.
He drew me up by the rope, and we went to ano-
ther pit, in a large mountain that roſe in the midſt
of the iſland. The ſhells here were fingularly beau-
tiful. I filled the bag ſeveral times, which the old
man drew up, and emptied. Then turning to me,
laughing, ſaid, “Farewel, young man, I thank you
for the good ſervices you have done me.”—O fa-
ther, anſwered I, take me from hence—Thou, art
very well where thou art, replied the traitor; lie
- * down upon the pearls, and take thy reſt. I bring
: * hither every year a young Muſſulman like thee.
- Thou haſt nothing to do but to pray to thy prophet. -
If he be able to work miracles, as thou imagineſt, |
he will not forſake a man ſo zealous, and ſo ſtrict |
|
|
to his religion. He ſpoke theſe words, and left me
miſerable, - -
- O
*


<page 150>
F o R T 1 T U D E. I37
ſº
O wretched Aboulfaouaris, ſaid I to myſelf, to
what misfortunes hath Heaven condemned thee
What haſt thou done to deſerve this cruel fate *
But why do I complain of a misfortune I have
brought upon myſelf? Ought not I to have diſtruſt-
ed a perfidious idolater His exceſſive fondneſs!
ought I not to have ſuſpected it But O unprofi-
table regret! What avails it now to blame myſelf
for a fault which I am going too dearly to pay for,
and which it depended not on me to avoid? Alas!
it was my fate to fall into this abyſs, and the fame
power which brought me in, can take me out again.
This reflexion ſuffered me not to give way to de-
ſpair. I paſſed the night in running about the bot-
tom of the pit, which ſeemed of vaſt extent. I
found myſelf treading upon bones, and I gueſſed
that others had periſhed miſerably in this precipice.
The thought, however, did not diſcourage me.
Supported by our great prophet, who undoubtedly
inſpired me, I advanced boldly to an aperture,
whence iſſued a frightful noiſe. I ſtopt to hearken,
and, liſtening with an attentive ear, thought I un-
derſtood the cauſe of the noiſe. I was not deceived
in my conjecture: it was the fall of ſeveral waters
from the ſea, which penetrating into the mountain
by divers clefts, met together in this place. I con-
cluded from thence that they communicated with
the ſea by ſome large ſtream, by which I might paſs.
I threw myſelf in, and, almoſt ſuffocated, the waters
took away my ſenſes, dragged me along with them,
- - - and

<page 151>
138 - T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T. U R E.
and caſt me on the ſea-coaſt by a crevice that was
in the mountain.
When I regained my ſenſes, and perceived the
place through which the waters had brought me
out to day-light, I proſtrated myſelf on the ſhore,
to thank Heaven for my deliverance, and addreſſed
Mahomet in theſe terms: “O Prophet of the Faith-
ful, Favourite of the Moſt High, I have more need
than ever of thy aſſiſtance. To what purpoſe haſt
thou delivered me from the deep abyſs into which
I was caſt, if I am to be left a prey to the wild
beaſts of this iſland, or if hunger muſt put an end
to my life tº
Full of faith, after this prayer, I aroſe and walked
about the iſland, but ſaw nothing of Hyzoum’s ſhip;
that traitor had ſoon ſet ſail. Though I was not with-
out fear that the tigers would devour me, I yet ſaw
none; but ſoon perceived a large veſſel paſſing near
the iſland, and unfolded the linen of my turban to
make a ſignal for them to come to me. Thoſe on the
deck obſerved me, ſent out a boat, and I was taken
aboard.
Judge of my joy, when I found in the captain of
the ſhip an intimate friend of my father's, and ſaw
by the dreſs of the crew that they were all inhabi-
tants of Baſra. I related to them the adventure
that brought me to the iſland, and they heard me
attention. They uttered a thouſand imprecations
againſt the old man, and I aſked the captain after my
father, and about matters that related to my family.
After

<page 152>
F O R T I T U D E. 139."
After this our diſcourſe fell again on the traitor
Hyzoum, when the ſhip's company were deſirous of
making a deſcent upon the iſland to ſearch the
pits. We were too many to fear the tigers, we
had no need of lighted torches; and if my perfi-
dious old fellow took that precaution, it was be-
cauſe he would have no body partake with him in
the pearls. We then caſt anchor, and went aſhore,
without waiting for the night. Armed with darts
and ſabres, to defend ourſelves from the wild beaſts,
we deſcended by turns into the pits, where we found-
pearls in abundance. Innumerable was the quan-
tity of ſhells we took up. It employed three days
compleat to open them, and to divide the pearls;
and there fell ſo much to every one’s ſhare, that all
were ſatisfied.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
Well, friend Charles, what is your opinion of the
marvellous by this time ſ
CH A R L E S E G E R T o N.
Oh dear, ſir, I think it a charming pretty ſtory. '
M R. E. G E R T o N.
I knew you would. I remember how much I, at
your age, delighted in reading Gulliver's Travels,
without in the leaſt ſuſpecting the real intention of
the author. The paſſion of ſurpriſe has a very pow-
erful and pleaſing effect upon all minds: the only
difference ſeems to be, that it is much more difficult
to

<page 153>
* *
140 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
to raiſe when experience has preſcribed bounds to
the imagination.
N A N c Y.
But pray, fir, what is the meaning of a hulla :
M. R. E. G E R T o N.
Why, my dear, among the eaſtern nations there
is a perfect freedom of divorce, on condition that
the huſband returns the wife to her family, with her
portion entire : and as people there, as well as here,
ſometimes fall out, and are afterwards ſorry for it,
haſty divorces occaſionally take place : but in order
to prevent the abuſe that might ariſe from the ca-
prices of whim or paſſion, the laws will not permit
a man to take a woman again whom he has repu-
diated, unleſs ſhe is firſt married, and then divorced.
by another. When, therefore, a huſband repents
of his raſhneſs, in putting away his wife, he prevails
on a friend, or hires a needy perſon, to marry the
woman, and divorce her the next day, which perſon
is called a hulla. Let us return to our traveller.
The A D V E N T U R E s of A Bo U L FA o UAR I s.
P A R T III.
We now ſet ſail for Serendib to ſell our painted
callicoes of Surat, and buy cinnamon. We were
ſailing merrily, when all of a ſudden a furious tem-
peſt aroſe, which drove us out of our courſe, we
- knew

<page 154>
F O R T I Tº U. D. E. - I41
knew not whither, for ſix days together. On the
ſeventh the ſky was clear, but neither pilot nor cap-
tain could tell where we were. We knew not
what to think, or what to do; and, in ſpite of all
our endeavours, the veſſel was drawn by violence
towards a mountain, which we diſcovered on the
eighth day. -
This mountain was of great extent, and prodi-
gicus height; very ſteep, and, what ſtrangely ſur-
priſed us, bright and ſhining like poliſhed ſteel. An
old ſailor, with a profound figh, cried out, “We
are loſt I have formerly heard talk of this place.
It is fatal to all ſhips that come near it; ſo that if
once you arrive at the foot of the mountain, you
are detained there as by a charm; and are never more .
able to ſtand out to ſea, or to get away from it.”
At this relation of the old mariner, the whole
crew were immoderately afflićted. Alas! ſays one,
what are we the better for having found the pearls,
if we muſt loſe them and our lives too ! Why, ſays
another, could none among us know the danger we
were in A third made the air echo with his com-
plaints and lamentations; and a fourth, falling upon
his khees, implored the Prophet's aſſiſtance. With
reſpect to myſelf, touched more with the afflićtion with
which they were all ſeized, than at the dangers that
threatened us, I ſaid to the captain, “Why ſhould we,
ſir, thus cowardly ſubmit to ſorrow? rather let us ſeek
ſome means to extricate ourſelves out of this dif-
ficulty. As for me, I have naturally courage. Whe-
ther
-------------

<page 155>
142 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
ther Mahomet may have this moment inſpired me
or not, I am no ways diſmayed at the condition to
which we are reduced. As ſoon as we arrive at
the foot of the mountain, let us endeavour to gain
the top of it. Mounting together, we may perhaps
find a recompence for our misfortunes.
The captain, who was not the leaſt fearful among
us, anſwered, that he would, in complaiſance, do
what was propoſed; but that he had no hopes that
we ſhould ſave ourſelves. Mean while our veſſel
arrived at the foot of the mountain: the captain
and I threw ourſelves into the boat; we gained the
land, began to climb the hill, and, not without
difficulty, got to the top.
Here, with ſurpriſe, we ſaw a green dome, large
and high; upon it a column of ſteel; towards the
bottom of which was hung in chains of gold, a ſmall
drum made of aloe-wood, and a crooked ſtick.
Above the drum hung a ſquare piece of ebony, upon
which were theſe words, written in letters of gold :
“If any ſhip is ſo unfortunate as to be drawn to
this mountain, ſhe can never put to ſea again, except
after the following manner. One man of the ſhip's
company muſt give three ſtrokes with the crooked
ſtick upon the drum. At the firſt ſtroke, the ſhip
will get a bow-ſhot diſtance from the mountain: at
the ſecond, ſhe will be out of ſight; and at the third,
will be found in the very route ſhe ſhould be in ; but
the man who ſtrikes the drum, muſt voluntarily re-
main behind, and conſent to let the reſt be gone.”
When



<page 156>
F O R T I T U D E. 143
phet, and, ſecure in his protection, advanced boldly
When we had read this inſcription, which ap-
peared to us a taliſman, we returned aboard to in-
form the crew of our diſcovery. Every one was
raviſhed to know that there was a way for deliver-
ance; but no body would be the vićtim. The
meaneſt ſailor refuſed to ſacrifice himſelf for the
reſt. Well then, ſaid I, I will remain here; I am
willing to be an offering for you all, provided you
will promiſe me, that when you get from hence you
will go to Baſra ; that you will tell my father the
news, and faithfully deliver into his hands all the
pearls which have fallen to my lot. -
At this diſcourſe, they ſolemnly beſeeched Heaven
to ſhipwreck them, if they punétually performed not
what I deſired of them. The captain aſſured me,
as well as the reſt, that if I had the reſolution to
ſtay behind, they would return to Baſra without
going to Ceylon. He expreſſed alſo ſome concern
at loſing me; but I could eaſily perceive he was
glad to get out of danger. In ſhort, I embraced the
crew, and bade them all a long farewel. They
ſet me aſhore, and I aſcended alone to the top of the
mountain. Advancing towards the dome, I took
the crooked ſtick in my hand, ſtruck the drum, and
our veſſel departed from the mountain. I ſtruck
again, and at the ſecond ſtroke I loſt fight of her.
I ſtruck the third time; and then remained under
the dome ready to conſummate my ſacrifice, and un-
dergo the fate reſerved for me.
I failed not again to addreſs myſelf to the Pro-
into

<page 157>
144 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c t U R E.
into the mountain, which was above two leagues in
extent. After an hour's travel, I perceived a de-
crepit old man. He had a bald head, a long white
beard, and hollow eyes. He ſeemed to be drawing
his laſt breath, was fitting upon a ſtone at the
door of a little houſe, and had a ſhort ſtick in his
hand. I ſaluted him reſpectfully, and aſked him to
tell me, why the veſſels which paſſed at a certain
diſtance from the mountain were drawn to it in
ſpite of themſelves; and who the author of the ta-
liſman was, by virtue of which they were carried to
ſea again. -
The old man raiſed himſelf up, and returned my
ſalute, leaning upon his ſtaff, while his head ſhook
with weakneſs. He told me, that the ſhips were drawn
towards the mountain by the force of the currents:
that, as to the taliſman, which conſiſted in the drum,
he knew not who made it; but if I were curious to
know the myſtery, I muſt continue my road, and
that I ſhould meet his brother, who was much older
than he, and who could give me ſome light into
the matter. I preſently took leave of him, and found
indeed a ſecond old man, but he appeared to be more
vigorous; for he had only begun to grow grey, and
one would have thought him rather the ſon than the
ſenior brother of the other. I aſked him, as I had done
the firſt, if he knew who it was that had made the
taliſman. No, replied he, I know not who it was ;
if any one can tell you, it is undoubtedly my elder
brother, whom you will find on the road a little
further. . . . . . . . . . . . . "
º
I con-

<page 158>
F o R T 1 ºr U D e. I45
I continued to march on, and preſently perceived
a man digging. He had not a grey hair on his head,
and appeared much too ſtrong to be older than the
other two I had ſeen before. Father, ſaid I, I have
met with two old men who have bantered me. I
deſired them to tell me who was the author of the
taliſman, on the mountain. They ſaid they knew
not, but that they had an elder brother who could
inform me. The old man ſmiled at theſe words,
and anſwered, my ſon, they told you the truth, they
are both younger than I am.
If this anſwer of the third old man ſurpriſed me,
that which he added ſtill increaſed my wonder.
They call us, ſaid he, the three old men of the
mountain: the firſt that you met is much the
youngeſt ; he is not above fifty years old. The
reaſon of his being ſo worn out and decrepit is,
begauſe he had a bad wife and children, who gave
him a great deal of uneaſineſs. The ſecond is
ſeventy-five, and he is ruddier and ſtronger than
the other, becauſe he had a good wife, and no
children: as for me, I am more vigorous than my
brothers, though I am paſt a hundred, becauſe I
would never marry.
As to the taliſman, purſued he, the author of
which you deſire to know, I have heard it ſaid in my
youth, that it was compoſed by a great Indian ca-
baliſt, and that is all that I know of it. I aſked him
afterwards, if I was near any country inhabited.
Yes, anſwered he, you need but follow the road
Vol. I, H Which

<page 159>
146 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
which you are in, and you will preſently come to a
vaſt plain, which bounds another mountain, at the foot
of which there are two paths, one on the right, and
the other on the left hand. Follow the former; it
will lead you to a great city, which hath a very fine
port. Take care not to follow the left hand path,
for that will carry you into a wood, where dwell
very wicked men, the deſcendants of a monſtrous
race of giants: they are cannibals, and have women
who come to the confines of their territories, and
endeavour to entice all paſſengers by their arts and
blandiſhments to follow them into their country.
I thanked the old man for the information he gave
me, and was reſolved not to neglect his cautions.
When I had croſſed the plain, I took the road on
the right hand, and it brought me, as he ſaid, to a
very large city, well peopled. The ſtreets and the
houſes were beautiful, and the port full of ſhipping.
I gueſſed there muſt be a great trade, and I was not
deceived. I ſaw ſhips that came from the kingdom
of Canara and Viſapour loaded with pepper; others
filled with the ſpices of Cananor, and ſome with
cinnamon. I ſaw merchants of all countries. As
I was buſy in obſerving the port, a man came up to
me. . We looked upon and knew one another. It
was Habib, my father's correſpondent at Serendib.
After we had embraced ſeveral times, Who would
have thought, cried he, that I ſhould have met
Aboulfaouaris here? What fatal adventure forced
* , - you

<page 160>
F O R. T. I T : U D. E. f47
you to leave. Serendib without bidding me farewel,
without giving me, notice of your departure; and
by what unexpected good fortune are you reſtored.
to me? - . . . . . . . .
I told him my adventure with Canzada, and what
had happened to me ſince. On his ſide, he inform-
ed me, that he had a ſhip in the port; that he was
come to ſell cinnamon, that he had diſpoſed of his
cargo, and that in twenty-four hours he hoped to
be gone. I expreſſed to him the joy I had to find
him again. He condućted me on board his ſhip, and
the ſame day we ſet ſail for Serendib. I was over-
joyed to return thither, and you may think that
Canzada was the principal cauſe of the plea-
ſure that I conceived to myſelf of ſeeing that city.
again. We arrived after a ſhort voyage, becauſe
we had all along a favourable wind.
I was very impatient to learn news of Canzada,
whom I could not forbear-loving, though I had no
great reaſon to be pleaſed with the treatment ſhe had
given me. I went out one morning from Habib's,
with a deſign to ſpare no pains to get what intel-
ligence I could of her, when a kind of ſlave ſtopped
me in the ſtreet; Sir, ſaid he to me, do you remem- -
ber me? No, anſwered I, but yet your face is not
altogether unknown to me; I have a confuſed idea
of having ſeen you, but cannot ſay where. I know.
you well, replied he, you are a Muſſulman; you are -
called Aboulfaouaris; I had the honour to wait on
you during your abode with the princeſs Canzada,
º º H 2 to

<page 161>
148 t H E F A M 1 ly r 1 c T U R e.
to whom I was, and ſtill am, a ſlave. It was I that
by her order went to find out your maſter De-
haouſch, into whoſe hands you were delivered. I
was ſorry te be put upon that office, and I beg you
would believe I was.
My heart leaped with joy at the ſlave's diſcourſe.
My dear friend, ſaid I to him, making him accept
of a diamond ring, inform me, I conjure you, in
what condition is the princeſs, who is always dear
to me, in ſpite of her rigours: Is ſhe in the ſame
flate in which I left her No, ſir, replied the ſlave,
her affairs are much altered within theſe two
months: the king of Ceylon made her eſpouſe an
old lord of the court, who was in love with her.
She could not help obeying; ſhe is married.
The grief I expreſſed at this news was ſo ſevere,
that the ſlave appeared touched at it. I am ſorry,
ſaid he, that the marriage of my miſtreſs ſhould give
you ſo much trouble: It is your own fault; why
would you not renounce your Prophet? You would
then at this time have enjoyed the fineſt woman in
the world, and an immenſe treaſure. Had I been in
your place, I would not have taken ſo much time to
conſider as you did: the firſt day, the firſt hour, the
firſt minute, I would have determined to do what-
ever Canzada had deſired me. From how much
afflićtion might you have exempted both yourſelf
and her! For after your departure ſhe fell ſick, and
had like to have loſt her life.
I know

<page 162>
-
O R. T I T U D E. I49
.
I know not, continued he, whether I ſhould tell
her, that you are come to Serendib; I fear it will
renew the grief which ſhe ſo long cheriſhed, and
which is not yet diſpelled. On the other fide, I ſee
you ſo much afflićted, that I cannot reſolve to deprive
you of all conſolation. I promiſe you then, that
this day my miſtreſs ſhall know that I have ſeen you.
One of her women ſhall tell her, that you repent
of your paſt conduct, and that if you could make
amends for it, you would not heſitate a moment at
renouncing Mahomet's doćtrine for her ſake. No,
no, cried I, take care that you promiſe nothing that
I ought not to do, though it were in my power to
obtain the princeſs at the price. Tell her only that
I am in deſpair for having loſt her, and to un-
derſtand that ſhe is diſcontented with her condi-
tion. - -
The ſlave ſwore, that he would exačtly perform
the commiſſion I charged him with; then left me,
and I remained in a ſtate of mind equally mixed
with joy and grief. If the change of Canzada's
condition affliáed me, I felt ſome joy when I came
to think that ſhe might ſtill perhaps have ſome af-
fe&tion for me. Flattered with ſo agreeable an idea,
I waited every day for the ſlave's coming to in-
quire for me at Habib's, where I had told him I
lodged; but my expectation was vain; one entire
month paſſed, and I heard no news of Canzada.
H 3 I gueſſed

<page 163>
150 “T H E F A M I L Y . P I C T U R E.
I gueſſed then that the ſlave had made a wrong
judgment of his miſtreſs's ſentiments; that the lord
ſhe had married was beloved by her; or, in ſhort,
that the lady's virtue had triumphed over the incli-
nation ſhe had for me. Full of this laſt thought,
which I had the vanity to think well grounded, I re-
tired to a fine country-houſe which my father's cor-
reſpondent had, three quarters of a league from the
city of Serendib. - -
I employed my time in walking, or, more pro-
perly, in muſing as I walked, on the obječt that in-
flamed me. One day I was got inſenſibly a good -
way from Habib's houſe, and paſſing along the
"river-ſide, came to a magnificent pagod, which
was built on the bank. After having admired the
ſtructure, I ſuddenly gave attention to what ſeemed
very deſerving of it. I ſaw ſeveral Gentoo pºieſts,
who were erecting a ſort of hut with reeds, and other
combuſtible matters. I went and aſked what they
were doing. One, amongſt the reſt, anſwered ;
eertainly you have not been long at Serendib, or
you would not aſk me this queſtion. Are you
ſuch a ſtranger to the cuſtom of the Gentoos, as not
to know that this is the place appointed for fune-
rals : . It is here that we burn dead bodies; here that
the wives, ſacrificing themſelves to the manes of
their huſbands, acquire immortal glory. One of
the principal lords of the court of Serendib is dead,
his body is to be burnt on the river's fide five or
ſix hours hence, and his faithful ſpouſe will be con-
ſumed

<page 164>
F O R T I T U D E. I51
ſumed in the very flames which are to reduce him
to aſhes.
Having never ſeen this ceremony, I reſolved to
be a witneſs of it. I could not help deploring the
bigotry of theſe idolaters, whoſe ſacrilegious piety
conſecrates rage and madneſs; or, rather, I laid the
blame on their prieſts, of whom I had heard much
at Surat. This horrible cuſtom is continued amongſt
the Gentoos.
Near the hour that this deteſtable execution drew
nigh, the fields were filled with people; ſon:e on
foot, ſome on horſeback, and others on palanquins,
and preceded by ſlaves, carrying ſtandards, or blow-
ing the trumpet. The governor of Serendib was
mounted on an elephant, in the midſt of ten or
twelve perſons, fitting under a tent, which was
raiſed on the back of the animal. In two or three
hours, there were above thirty thouſand perſons
about the pagod and the hut. Not willing to let
any circumſtance of this ceremony eſcape my cu-
rioſity, I pierced the croud, and got as near the fu-
neral pile as it was poſſible. Twenty prieſts, who
had each of them a book, began all to pray while
in waiting for the vićtim. . . . . .
It was almoſt night when ſhe arrived. She was
mounted on a white horſe richly capariſoned, crown-
ed with flowers, and followed the corpſe of her huſ-
band, which ſix men carried on a ſtately palanquin.
Twelve women, adorned with jewels, bracelets,
and great rings of gold, and ſilver, attended her;
H 4. they

<page 165>
I 52 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c t U R E.
they had all long hair, with necklaces of pearl, fine
pendants in their ears, and crowns of gold, with
plates of ſilver enriched by rubies, which covered one
half of the face. Muſicians followed the women
flaves. Her parents and friends came next ſinging
and dancing, to ſhew their felicity in having, ſome
for a relation and others for their friend, ſo generous
2. WOman.
With the aſſiſtance of two prieſts ſhe diſmounted,
and was conducted to the banks of the river, where
the body of her huſband was brought; ſhe waſhed
it from head to foot; and then delivered it to the
prieſts, who carried it into the hut upon a ſtraw
mat covered with ſulphur. She roſe up, without
undreſſing herſelf, went near to the pile, walked
ſeveral times round it, and beheld the preparations
that were making for her ſacrifice with great intre-
pidity. She embraced her parents and friends, who
preſently retired; ſhe was embraced by her women
ſlaves, diſſolved in tears; to whom ſhe gave liberty,
and diſtributed the jewels and ornaments with which
ſhe was dreſſed. When ſhe took off the ſilver plate,
which covered half her face, and which, till then,
had hindered me from knowing her, gueſs at my
aſtoniſhment, when I diſcovered Canzada. All na-
ture reverſed at once, could not have more ſurpriſed
me.
Great God! ſaid I to myſelf, can I believe my
eyes? May I not doubt of what I ſee : Is it really
Canzada who is going to ſuffer ſo cruel a death 2
- - . The
t

<page 166>
F O R T I T U D. E. 153
The grief I was in, would not ſuffer me to ſee the
ſacrifice performed; I left her in the hands of the
prieſt, who having exhorted her to render herſelf
worthy, by her conſtancy, of the happineſs that at-
tended her, they put her into the hut, and preſented
to her, according to cuſtom, a lighted torch, to ſet
fire to it herſelf. I flew towards Habib's country-
houſe, in a diſpoſition of mind not to be deſcribed.
Diſturbed, forlorn, I knew not what I did; I turned
every moment my eyes towards the place of cere-
mony, and the flames of the pile which I ſaw riſing
in the air, rent my heart aſunder.
At laſt I arrived there: he aſked the cauſe of the
diſorder which appeared in me: I told it him, and
my generous friend anſwered me tear for tear. I
am ſurpriſed, ſaid he, that Canzada would periſh to
follow an old lord, whom ſhe did not love. Why,
ſaid I, was it then in her power to have ſurvived him *
Are not the wives here obliged to burn themſelves
with the bodies of their huſbands? No, replied Ha-
bib, they are not conſtrained to ſacrifice themſelves:
on the contrary, the governor of the city, by the
king’s order, cauſes the widows that ſeek this death
to come before him : he interrogates them upon the
reaſons of ſo fatal a deſign, and endeavours to
perſuade them to deſiſt from it. In ſhort, he
grants them leave to die, only when they abſolutely
demand it of him. -
Canzada, purſued he, was very willing to die,
perſuaded, as all women are, who ſacrifice them-
H 5 • ſelves,

<page 167>
I54. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
ſelves, that ſhe ſhould procure to herſelf, by a glo-
rious and voluntary death, an eternal happineſs. Be-
ſides, ſhe may have been urged on, by the honours
that are paid to thoſe miferable vićtims after their
death; for their memories here are held in venera-
tion; even ſtatues are erected to them, among
thoſe of the pagods. In a word, they are regarded
as deities; and this, no doubt, is what inſpires our
women who demand death, with that fortitude which
makes them look upon the preparation of their fa-
crifice without changing colour. -
Theſe refle&tions of Habib raiſed others in me.
I repreſented to myſelf, that if Canzada had loved
me as much as I loved her, ſhe would not have been
ſo ready to deſtroy herſelf; that ſhe would have
made me the propoſal, that if I would marry her on
the conditions which I had rejected, ſhe would not
ſacrifice hreſelf; that ſhe ought to have put me to
this proof, which undoubtedly, however, would have
very much perplexed me. - . . . . .
Sir, ſaid I to Habib, whatever reaſons I have to
forget Canzada, I deſpair of ever doing it; I cannot
ſtay at Serendib after what has happened, give me
leave to return to Baſra. My hoſt conſented; we
returned to Serendib the next morning, and the firſt
thing I did was to inquire for a ſhip that was to go
from thence to any part of India: I was informed
that one of Surat, laden with callicoes, was juſt ar-
rived in the port, and that her cargo would ſoon be
sld off. I reſolved to make uſe of this opportunity,
- - and
* *

<page 168>
F O R T I T U D E. - I 55
and waiting for the day of my departure, I led a
very melancholy life with Habib. Whatever care
my friend took to overcome my diſtreſs, he could
not conquer it ; he ſpared nothing to compaſs
his end; not a day paſſed, in which he did not find
out ſome new diverſion, and every meal we ate he
accompanied with dancing and concerts.
One day as I was ſitting thus in miſery, a ſlave
came to ſpeak with me in private. He was the
ſame that I met on my arival here, who had made
me fair promiſes, which he had not performed.
Sir, ſaid he, I proteſt it is not my fault that you have
not ſeen me ſooner; my miſtreſs forbad me to ſpeak
to you again, and I dared not diſobey her. She was
a princeſs of heroic virtue, and would have no fur-
ther to ſay to you: not content to be faithful to a
huſband ſhe did not love, ſhe gave herſelf to the
flames, to gain the veneration of the Gentoos: but
let us leave her to the enjoyment of a happineſs ſhe
dearly bought, and come to the buſineſs that has
brought me hither. I am, at preſent, a ſlave to
another lady, not leſs fair than Canzada, and who
loves you more : I underſtand you are upon the
point of embarking for Surat; but before your de-
parture, I would adviſe you to make uſe of the good
fortune that preſents itſelf. . *
. I was more ſurpriſed than pleaſed at the ſlave's
diſcourſe. Friend, ſaid I, it is with grief that I find
myſelf reduced to be ungrateful to the favourable
ſentiments your new miſtreſs hath conceived for me:
H 6 the

<page 169>
156 T H E F A M I L Y PIC TU. R. E.
the image of Canzada is always in my thoughts,
aud leaves me little reliſh for new adventures. The
lady whom you ſerve muſt pardon me, if I refuſe
her favours. Having never ſeen her, my indifference
ean be no offence.
It muſt be confeſſed, replied the ſlave, that I am
not fortunate in my negotiations; I am certain,
however, you would be charmed with her, whatever .
obligations you may have had to Canzada. You
are miſtaken, ſaid I, you are uſed to judge wrong -
of the emotions of the heart; you imagined that your
former miſtreſs loved me ſtill, and deſired nothing
more than my arrival at Serendib. You are in the
right to reproach me thus, ſaid the ſlave; but upon
this occaſion, be aſſured that I am certain of
what I advance; give me leave only to come for
you this night, and take you to the place appointed.
No, ſaid I, no, I cannot prevail with myſelf to believe
you; I know women too well, to put her upon
trial. What a vexation would ſhe be in, ſhould
fhe find that I cannot love her. In vain did the
flave aſſure me ſhe would hearken to reaſon, and
hot impute to me as a crime my conſtancy to
Canzada. I refuſed to ſee her: and perſuaded my-
ſelf I ſhould hear no more either of the ſlave or
the lady; but he found me out again at night,
and brought me a letter, which contained the ſub-
france of what follows: “ The converſation you
have had with my ſlave, gives me pleaſure; it in-
&reaſes the impatience I had to ſee to you; and if
you
º

<page 170>
F O R T L T U D E. 157
you be ſo really concerned about Canzada as you ap-
pear to be, both you and I ſhall preſently be better
ſatisfied with each other.”
This myſterious language gave me room for much
ſpeculation. I could not reſiſt the deſire I had of
clearing up the matter: I followed the ſlave, who
condućted me to a ſmall houſe, and led me into a
very plain lodging, where he left me, ſaying, he
would acquaint the lady I was there. I did not
wait long for her—ſhe came—but oh! think what
confuſion I was in, when I beheld the Princeſs Can-
zada herſelf, whom I ſuppoſed to be reduced to
aſhes
Aboulfaouaris's auditors ſtood amazed: He per-
ceived it, ſmiled, and continued his relation.
I believed it, at firſt, to be an apparition. The
features of a woman, the moſt dear to me in the
world, put me in as great diſmay, as a real ſpectre
could have produced; ſhe obſerved my confuſion,
and could not forbear laughing. Aboulfaouaris,
ſaid ſhe, ’twas not to frighten you that I deſired to
ſee you; ’tis not Canzada's ſhade you fee, ’tis ſhe
herſelf: Your ſurpriſe indeed has ſome foundation.
We cannot diſcover on a ſudden, a perſon whom
we believed to be dead, without much emotion; but
I will diſpel your fear, by convincing you that I yet
live. - -
She then told me, that ſhe had bribed the Chief
Prieſt, and in what manner that pious perſon had
faved her from the flames, for a confiderable ſum of
- º money.

<page 171>
158. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
money. He cauſed a paſſage to be made privately
under ground by the other prieſts, whom he entruſted
with the ſecret. The funeral pile was erected over
that ſubterranean paſſage, into which, ſaid ſhe, I
deſcended, after having ſet fire to the reeds that
conſumed nothing but my: huſband's body. The
night being come, and the ſpectators retired, the
Chief Prieſt himſelf conducted me to this houſe that
I had hired before-hand. -
: But, my Princeſs, ſaid I, why deceive the people
by a pretended death Why feign to follow your
aged huſband They forced-you not to die with
him; you might have ſpared that diffinulation.
No, replied the lady, I found myſelf under the ne–
cefity of doing what I have done; you will be con-
vinced of this truth, when I tell you that I have a
deſign to join my fate to your's, to abjure idolatry,
and to go to Baſra with you, and profeſs the reli-
gion of Mahomet. It muſt have been your prophet
himſelf that inſpired me with this great enterpriſe.
My relations now believing me dead, I can without
fear leave Serendib, and unite my lot to your’s.
This was the motive that urged me to an action,
that not only amazes you, but, without doubt, aſto-
hiſhes the world; for they well know, that I never
loved the old Lord whom I married in obedience to
the King. They imagine that the vanity of paſſing
for a heroine, and having a ſtatue among the pagods,
induced me to die with my huſband; but reaſon, or
perhaps my love for you, made me reflect maturely
on ſo ſuperſtitious a ſacrifice. -
And -

<page 172>
F O R T H T U D. E. : I 59 .
And is it then, my Queen, ſaid I, in favour of
Aboulfaouaris, that you have employed this inge-
nious ſtratagem : Was it to live with me, that you
reſolved to go from Ceylon Is it to crown me with
joy that you reſolve to follow the doćtrine of our
great prophet? Oh beautiful Canzada at this mo-
ment you make me the happieſt of men.—I threw
myſelf at her knees, and embraced them with tranſ-
port. Riſe up, Aboulfaouaris, ſaid ſhe, I doubt
whether you have reaſon to boaſt ſo much of your
happineſs; Canzada is no longer ſo precious a con-
queſt: Alas! I am not now miſtreſs of all the
riches I gave you with my heart: I have given the
beſt part of them to the prieſts that ſerved me; and
I paid dear to the Governor of Ceylon, for his
permiſſion to devote myſelf to the flames with my
deceaſed huſband. - - - . . . .
At theſe words, which gave me ſo fair an occa-
fion to declare my love, I looked on her with ten-
derneſs, and ſaid, how unjuſt, my charming Can-
zada, are you to ſuſpect me of not having ſentiments
as free from ſelf-intereſt as your own | When in the
{tately palace, where you detained me, you expoſed
your treaſures to my view, I call Heaven, to witn
neſs, my heart was ſet on you alone. -
- She told me, that my ſentiments were ſuch as ſhe
deſired;, that ſhe was not ſtript of all, and that ſhe
had jewels enough ſtill to make her a fortune,
wherewith I ſhould have reaſon to be content. She
ſpoke of the miſchiefs ſhe had occaſioned me, and
* . . . . . ; - faid,

<page 173>
16o T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U. R. E.
ſaid, ſhe had ſufficiently atoned for them by her
grief. We agreed after this, to go for Baſra as
ſoon as poſſible. I took leave of my landlord, con-
dućted her that night to the harbour, and embarked
with her, and ſome faithful ſlaves who carried her
jewels. -
We arrived at Surat without the leaſt danger,
and found there a Baſra ſhip that was returning
home. We made uſe of the occaſion, and, as if
Heaven were willing to let us know that it favoured
us, we arrived at Baſra with the moſt fortunate ex-
pedition.
No joy could equal that of my father when he
ſaw me again. After our firſt embraces, I pre-
ſented Canzada to him, whoſe quality needed no
boaſt: Her noble air and her beauty confeſſed at full
what ſhe was. He received her with the higheſt
tokens of eſteem, and conceived for her all the ten-
derneſs of a father. When he had heard her ſtory,
which I related to him in the terms of a paſſionate
lover, I then gave him an account of my travels.
He afterwards informed me, that he had received
my pearls from the Captain, who had taken charge
of them. . . ; : - - -
My father and I condućted the lady to the Cady,
to whom ſhe abjured her idolatrous faith, before
many witneſſes. He then aſked her, if ſhe con-
ſented that I ſhould be her huſband She anſwered,
that it was the deareſt define of her heart; and upon
that anſwer the Judge married us. My father, to
... * celebrate

<page 174>
F O R T I T U D E. 161
celebrate our nuptials, invited our relations and
friends to a ſplendid feaſt and great rejoicings,
which laſted ſix days together,
D I A L O G U E VII.
M. R. E. G E R To N.
EFORE we read our long ſtory yeſterday,
I told you, children, that the moral moſt con-
ſpicuous in it was the value and neceſſity of Forti-
tude. I ſhall now take occaſion to continue that
ſubjećt, by pointing out to you the beauty and worth
of this ineſtimable virtue. You muſt have patience,
if I ſeem prolix.
That it is the duty of a man to be equal to all
fortunes, is a doćtrine that cannot be too ſtrongly
inculcated: And the reaſons why he ſhould be ſo,
are ſo plain, ſo conſpicuous, that when I look round,
and ſee all the world, with very few exceptions,
ſhrinking from the moſt trifling degrees of pain,
grieving at inſignificant accidents, and deſponding
beneath common misfortunes, I am amazed.
Let us but reflect, that the utmoſt malice of fate
can do nothing more than deprive us of life, and
that

<page 175>
162 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
that the longeſt life muſt very ſoon inevitably end ;
and what will there remain for us to fear Beſides,
if the evils that afflićt us be in our own power to re-
move, to grieve would be ridiculous, as well as
puſillanimous ; and if they be not, but are without
remedy, to be terrified, or ſink under them, is
equally ſo. How many people make their lives
miſerable, by a continued round of falſe alarms ?
Every occurrence in the day is a misfortune. If
they cut a finger, they mourn over it; if their head
ach, they are going to die; and if the apothecary
ſends a draught, the taſte is ſo nauſeous, that, after
tormenting themſelves with irreſolute attempts to
force it down, they fling it away. At night, when
they ſhould reſt from their cares, and enjoy a tem-
porary death, the reality of which appears horrible,
they cannot ſleep, for the dread of thieves or fire ;
never conſidering that it were better to be robbed or
ſuffer almoſt any puniſhment, than live in the fear
of that puniſhment. -
Oh! my children, I would have you deſpiſe the
puſillanimity that would diſcompoſe a feature while
you ſwallow a potion, or ſtretch forth a limb to
have a wound dreſſed. Be aſſured, that pain de-
creaſes in proportion as it is defied, and becomes
horrible as the fear of it is indulged; and remember
likewiſe, that it is impoſſible to be happy, much leſs
magnanimous, till you are maſters of your own
fate, till you can behave with equanimity under all
fortunes; that is, till you are ſuperior to fear.
3. . . It

<page 176>
F O R T I T U D E. 163
.
It is only thoſe opportunities where the poſſeſſion
of fortitude is apparent, that diſcover the truly great
man. What a noble, what a ſuperior magnanimity,
did Fabricius ſhew before Pyrrhus ! The command
he had obtained over himſelf, his unſhaken ſteadi-
'neſs, and the reliance he could place on it, was ſo
great, that it was aſtoniſhing. He was ſent Am-
baſſador from the Romans, to treat with Pyrrhus
concerning the ranſom, or exchange, of priſoners.
At their firſt interview, Pyrrhus, who had heard,
from Cineas, a great charaćter of Fabricius, preſt
him to receive a valuable preſent in gold; not with a
view to engage him in anything diſhonourable, but
as a pledge of friendſhip and hoſpitality. This he
peremptorily refuſed. The next day, Pyrrhus had a
mind to make another eſſay on him, by endeavour-
ing to aſtoniſh, or rather to terrify him. He knew
Fabricius had never ſeen an elephant; he com-
manded, therefore, one of the largeſt, compleatly
armed, to be placed behind ſome curtains in the
room where they were to confer. Upon a fignal
given, the curtains were ſuddenly drawn, and the
elephant raiſing his trunk over the head of Fabri-
cius, made a moſt horrid bellowing. The Roman,
without the leaſt ſign of terror or ſurprize, turned
and looked at the beaſt; then addreſfing Pyrrhus,
with a ſmile, ſaid, “Sir, neither could your money
yeſterday, nor your monſter to-day, make the leaſt
impreſſion on me.”
r . . . . .
... The

<page 177>
164 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
The year following, when Fabricius was Conſul,
and at the head of the army, an unknown perſon
came to the camp, and delivered him a letter from
the King’s chief Phyſician, who offered to take off
Pyrrhus by poiſon, and, in that way, end the war,
without farther hazard to the Romans, provided they
would give him a reward proportionate to his ſer-
vice. Fabricius, enraged at the villainy of the
Phyſician, after bringing the other Conſul to be of
the ſame opinion, ſent diſpatches to Pyrrhus imme-
diately, to warn him of his danger. His letter ran
thus:
“ Caius Fabricius, and Quintius Emilius, Con-
ſuls of the Romans, to Pyrrhus the King; health.”
“You ſeem to have made a very ill judgment
both of your friends and enemies. You will under-
ſtand by the encloſed letter, which was ſent to us,
that you are at war with honeſt men, and truſt in
knaves and villains. We have not diſcovered this
to you to inſinuate ourſelves into your favour, but
leſt your ruin might bring a reproach upon us; as
if we had ended the war by treachery, when we were
not able to do it by our courage and our virtue.”—
Do not your hearts glow, my children, at heroiſm
like this? Will you not remember, will you not
emulate, ſuch ačtions :
I ſhall cite a few more examples of the dignity of
Fortitude, that you may perceive how reſpectable,
how ſuperior it makes men, and in what a glorious
ſanétity it preſerves their charaćters to the lateſt poſ-
...terity.
Caracalla

<page 178>
_ F o R T 1 T U D e. 165
Caracalla the emperor, that cruel and inexorable
tyrant, began his reign by murdering his brother
Geta in the arms of his mother, to whom he had
fled for refuge. Papinian was at that time a civilian
in Rome, of the greateſt eſtimation. To him Cara-
calla applied, in order to be vindicated by his writ-
ings: but Papinian, diſregarding his own life, intre-
pidly replied, “It is eaſier to commit a parricide than
to juſtify it.” For which anſwer he was beheaded,
it is true; but who does not revere the magnani-
mous, the virtuous Papinian, that had the forti-
tude to defy death, rather than, by a deſpicable, a
wicked compliance, incur the contemptuous curſe
of poſterity, only to prolong a ſhort and ignomi-
nious exiſtence
Of all nations, indeed, whether ancient or mo-
dern, the Romans appear to have poſſeſſed the moſt
ſublime, unremitted, and ſtupendous fortitude. Por-
ſenna, when he beſieged Rome, had defeated the Ro-
mans, who were flying in the greateſt conſternation,
and were purſued by the enemy to the bridge, over
which both vićtors and vanquiſhed were about to
enter the city in the confuſion. All appeared
loſt, when Horatius Cocles, who had been placed.
there as a centinel, oppoſed himſelf to the torrent
of the enemy, and affiſted only by two more, for
ſome time ſuſtained the whole fury of the aſſault,
till the bridge was broken down behind him. When
he found the communication thus cut off, plunging
with his arms into the torrent of the Tiber, he ſwam
- back
*

<page 179>
166 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
back vićtorious to his fellow-ſoldiers, and was re-
ceived, honoured, and rewarded by his countrymen,
as the ſaviour of Rome.
Still, however, Porſenna was determined upon
taking the city; and though five hundred of his men
were ſlain in a ſally of the Romans, he reduced it
to the greateſt ſtraits, and turning the ſiege into a
blockade, reſolved to take it by famine. The diſ-
treſs of the beſieged ſoon began to be inſufferable,
and all things ſeemed to threaten a ſpeedy ſurrender,
when another act of fortitude and bravery, ſtill ſu-
perior to that which had ſaved the city before, again
promiſed its deliverance. -
Mutius, a youth of undaunted courage, was re-
ſolved to rid his country of an enemy that ſo ſorely
continued to oppreſs it; and, for this purpoſe, diſ-
guiſed in the habit of an Etrurian peaſant, entered
the camp of the enemy, reſolving to die, or to kill
the king. With this reſolution, he made up to the
place where Porſenna was paying his troops, with
the ſecretary by his ſide: but miſtaking the latter
for the king, he ſtabbed him to the heart, and was
immediately apprehended and brought into the royal
preſence. Upon Porſenna’s demanding who he was,
and the cauſe of ſo heinous an action, Mutius, with-
out reſerve, informed him of his country and his
deſign, and, at the ſame time, thruſting his right
hand into the fire burning upon an altar before him,
“You ſee, cried he, how little I regard the ſevereſt
puniſhment your cruelty can inflict upon me. A
- Roman
|

<page 180>
*F O R T I T U D E. 167
s
|
.
>
Roman knows not only how to act, but how to
ſuffer. I am not the only perſon you have to fear.
Three hundred of the Roman youth, like me, have
conſpired your deſtruction, therefore prepare for
their attempts.” Porſenna, amazed at ſo much for.
titude, had too noble a mind not to acknowledge
merit, though found in an enemy. He therefore
ordered him to be ſafely conducted to Rome, and
offered ſuch conditions of peace, as were accepted.
Modern times likewiſe, my children, afford nu-
merous examples of heroic virtue and inflexible per-
ſeverance in right. I will ſelect one, and a noble
inſtance it is, from the hiſtory of our own country.
When our great Henry V. was Prince of Wales,
he, led aſtray by youthful paſſions, aſſociated him-
ſelf with the vicious and diſſolute. One of his ſer-
vants, or rather companions, was apprehended for
felony, and brought to the bar of the King's Bench,
where the chief juſtice, Gaſcoign, was then ſitting.
The prince heard of this tranſaction, and, inflamed
by the miſrepreſentations of his lewd aſſociates, flew
raging into the court, where his ſervant ſtood ar-
raigned, and commanded him to be unfettered and
ſet at liberty. The judge endeavoured to repreſs
this outrage, and appeaſe the prince, by exhorting
him to pay a proper reſpect to the ancient and eſta-
bliſhed laws of the land; and, if he wiſhed to ex-
empt his ſervant from puniſhment, to apply to the
king, his father, who alone held the power of a legal
reprieve. But the prince, indulging his paſſion, in-
ſtead

<page 181>
168 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
ſtead of liſtening to this very proper remonſtrance,
proceeded to uſe force for the releaſe of the priſoner.
The judge, foreſeeing the dangerous conſequence
of ſuch a flagrant breach of the conſtitution, ele-
wated his voice, and in a bold authoritative tone,
commanded the prince, on his allegiance, to leave
the priſoner and depart the place. The prince,
inflamed beyond all bounds flew with his drawn
ſword to the judgment-ſeat, while no one dared
to moleſt him, though all dreaded the event.
The judge alone ſeemed undiſturbed, and ſuperior
to paſſion. Without ſhrinking, with the ſame un-
altered countenance, the ſame tone of voice, the
ſame cool, undaunted, but unimpaſſioned deport-
ment, “Sir, ſaid he to the prince, recolle&t your-
ſelf—I fit here the repreſentative of the King, your
ſovereign Lord and Father—In his name I charge
you to deſiſt from your diſobedient and unlawful en-
terprize—Learn to give a good example to thoſe
who ſhall hereafter become your own ſubječts, and
for this preſent contempt and diſobedience, go You
now to the priſon of the King's Bench, whereunto
I commit you, until the pleaſure of the king, your
father, ſhall be known.” The prince, convinced
of his enormity, aſhamed of his intemperance, and
ſtruck with the ſedate and awful fortitude of the
judge, threw down his ſword, bowed to the magi-
ſtrate, and voluntarily went to priſon. “ Bleſſed
be God,” ſaid Henry IV. when he heard of this
tranſačtion, “Bleſſed be God who hath given me a
-- 8 judge
|

<page 182>
F O R T I Tº U. D. E. #69
judge that dares adminiſter juſtice, and a ſon that
dares revere the laws.”
I might relate a thouſand anecdotes, and adduce
a thouſand hiſtories, all tending to illuſtrate the doc-
trines I have been teaching: I ſhall, however, quit
this ſubjećt, after having read to you two letters,
both written from and to eminent men. . The firſt
from Plutarch to the Emperor Trajan, and the
other from Sir Walter Raleigh to Prince Henry.
I need make no comments. They both ſpeak the
dauntleſs language of men refolved to diſcharge their
duty; eſpecially the latter.
PLU T A R ch's LE t t E R to T R A JAN.
“SINCE your merits and not your importu-
nities have advanced you to the empire, permit me
to congratulate your virtues, and my own good for-
tune. If your future government prove anſwerable
to your former worth, I ſhall be happy. But if you
become worſe for power, your’s will be the danger,
and mine the ignominy of your condućt. The er-
rors of the pupil will be charged upon his inſtructor.
Seneca is reproached for the enormities of Nero,
and Socrates and Quintilian have not eſcaped cen-
ſure for the miſcondućt of their reſpective ſcholars,
But you have it in your power to make me the moſt
honoured of men, by continuing what you are. Per-
ſevere in the command of your paſſions, and make
virtue the ſcope of all your ačtions. If you follow
theſe inſtructions, then will I glory in my having
Vo L. I. I preſumed

<page 183>
170 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
preſumed to give them: if you neglect what I offer,
then will this letter be my teſtimony, that you have
not erred through the counſel and authority of Plu-
tarch.” -
Sir WA L T E R R A L E 1 GH’s LET T E R to Prince
H E N R Y, eldeſt ſon of J AM E S I.
May it pleaſe your Highneſs,
“THE following lines are addreſſed to your
Highneſs, from a man who values his liberty and
a very ſmall fortune, in a remote part of this iſland,
under the preſent conſtitution, above all the riches
and honours that he could any where enjoy under
any other eſtabliſhment.
“You ſee, Sir, the doćtrines that are lately come
into the world, and how far the phraſe has obtained,
of calling your royal father God's Vicegerent;
which ill men have turned both to the diſhonour of
God, and the impeachment of his Majeſty's good-
neſs. They adjoin vicegerency to the idea of being
all-powerful, and not to that of being all-good. His
Majeſty's wiſdom, it is to be hoped, will ſave him
from the ſnare that may lie under groſs adulations:
but your youth, and the thirſt of praiſe, which I
have obſerved in you, may poſſibly miſlead you to
hearken to thoſe charmers who would conduct your
noble nature into tyranny. Be careful, O my prince 1
hear them not, fly from their deceits; you are in the
ſucceſſion to a throne, from whence no evil can be
imputed

<page 184>
F O R. Tº I T U D E. 171
f
!
f
imputed to you, but all good muſt be conveyed from
you.
“Your father is called the Vicegerent of heaven:
while he is good, he is the vicegerent of heaven.
Shall man have authority from the Fountain of good
to do evil? No, my prince : let mean and degene-
rate ſpirits, which want benevolence, ſuppoſe your
power impaired by a diſability of doing injuries. If
want of power to do ill, be an incapacity in a prince,
with reverence be it ſpoken, it is an incapacity he
hath in common with the Deity. Let me not doubt
but all pleas, which do not carry in them the mu-
tual happineſs of prince and people, will appear as
abſurd to your great underſtanding, as diſagreeable
to your noble nature. -
“Exert yourſelf, O generous prince, againſt ſuch
ſycophants in the glorious cauſe of liberty; and aſ-
ſume ſuch an ambition worthy of you to ſecure your
fellow-creatures from ſlavery; from a condition as
much below that of brutes, as to ağt without reaſon,
is leſs miſerable than to act againſt it. Preſerve to
your future ſubjećts the divine right of being frce.
agents: and to your own royal houſe the divine
right of being their benefactors. Believe me, my
prince, there is no other right can flow from God.
While your Highneſs is forming yourſelf for a throne,
conſider the laws as ſo many common places in your
ſtudy of the ſcience of government; when you mean
nothing but juſtice, they are an eaſe and help to you.
This way of thinking is what gave men the glorious
- I 2 appellation

<page 185>
172 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R. E.
appellation of Deliverers and Fathers of their coun-
try; this made the fight of them rouſe their be-
holders into acclamations, and mankind incapable
of bearing their very appearance, without applaud-
ing it as a benefit. Conſider the inexpreſſible ad-
vantages which will ever attend your Highneſs,
while you make the power of rendering men happy
the meaſure of your actions. While this is your
impulſe, how eaſily will that power be extended.
“The glance of your eye will give gladneſs, and
your every ſentence have a force of bounty. What-
ever ſome men would infinuate, you have loſt your
ſubjećts when you have loſt their inclinations. You
are to preſide over the minds, not the bodies of men;
the ſoul is the effence of the man, and you cannot
have the true man againſt his inclinations. Chooſe
therefore to be the King or the Conqueror of your
people; it may be ſubmiſſion, but it cannot be obe-
dience that is paſſive.
I am, S I R,
Your Highneſs's
London, moſt faithful ſervant,
Aug. 12, 1611. WALTER RALEIGH.”
M R. E. G E R T on.
You will never think you admire this letter
enough, my children, when you come thoroughly
to underſtand the pernicious doćtrine it was in-
tended to combat. The divine right of kings was
the deſtrućtion of the houſe of Stuart; and, but for
very

<page 186>
T R E A C H E R Y. 173
very peculiar circumſtances, amazing exertions, and
prodigious abilities, muſt have been the deſtruction
of the conſtitution of England.
D I A L, O G U E VIII.
MR. E. G E R T o N.
Gave you many examples in our laſt converſa-
tion of the ſublime nature of Fortitude; I ſhall
now give you a tragical inſtance of a contrary kind.
As I ſo thoroughly explained myſelf upon this ſub-
jećt yeſterday, we will proceed immediately to the
ſtory, and I have no doubt, children, but you will
readily perceive the application. -
T R E A C H E R Y,
Or the History of Moses GoLEMUs, Gencral
to ScANDERBEG THE GREAT, King of Epirus.
A MONG all the heroes of ancient or modern
ſtory, there are none whoſe courage, wiſdom, and
good fortune, have been more conſpicuous than
Scanderbeg's. King only of a ſmall ſtate and a
handful of people, at a time when the Turkiſh em-
pire flouriſhed in all its ſplendor and all its ferocity;
I 3 - when

<page 187>
174 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
when Europe and Aſia trembled at the multitude and
valour of its troops, Scanderbeg nobly aſſerted and
maintained his independence, braved the fury of the
Turk, vanquiſhed his armies, and diſgraced his vic-
tories. Amurath the Second, after various ſieges
and battles, died in Epirus, before the walls of Croia,
curſing his ignominious fate, which after ſo many
ſplendid conqueſts had ſent him thus diſhonourably
to expire; baſhed by a prince whoſe territories, with
reſpect to extent, might rather be compared to the
gardens of Amurath's ſeraglio, than to the Ottoman
empire. Mahomet, his ſon and ſucceſſor, the fa-
mous conqueror, who took Conſtantinople, and
made the Chriſtian world tremble, never could ſub-
due Scanderbeg. Armies after armies invaded Epi-
rus, and were all either deſtroyed, or obliged ſhame-
fully to retreat; for of all the various battles and
ſkirmiſhes Scanderbeg was engaged in, and they
were almoſt innumerable, he loſt but one.
Mahomet, who from repeated experiments and
reiterated defeats, began at length to deſpair of ſub-
duing Scanderbeg by open war, endeavoured to cor-
rupt his generals. None among thoſe was more
renowned than Moſes Golemus. This man had
been with Scanderbeg in all his wars, was acquaint-
ed with all his reſources, all his ſtratagems, and be-
loved by all his ſoldiers. His valour and conduct
had often been proved, and always to his honour;
no man doubted his love to his country, or his loy-
- alty to his prince, whoſe confidence he fully poſ-
ſeſſed.

<page 188>
T R E A e H E R Y. I75
ſeſſed. Moſes, who as a commander was ſecond
only to Scanderbeg, lay with a ſtrong garriſon in
Dibra, a frontier town of Epirus, when Mahomet
commanded the governor of Sfetigrade to endea-
vour, by every means within his power, to ſubvert
the loyalty of Moſes. Sfetigrade was a town which
the Turks had long held in Epirus. This governor,
who from the known charaćter of Moſes had little
hope of ſucceſs, was yet obliged to make the at-
tempt, in obedience to the commands of the ſultan.
For this purpoſe he ſent a Chriſtian, an inhabitant
of Sfetigrade, whom he had won to his intereſts by
large gifts, to negotiate with Moſes. The meſſen-
ger he choſe was a ſubtle man, plauſible and diſcern-
ing, and inveſted with full powers to make the moſt
advantageous propoſals to Moſes, and to paint the
eſteem the ſultan had for him and his abilities in the
moſt flattering colours. He came to Dibra, and, .
under pretence of ſtate ſecrets, gained a private
audience of Moſes, to whöm, in the name of Ma-
homet, he offered whatever dignities the ſultan could
beſtow. By the ſame authority likewiſe he demand-
ed how he, who was known to be ſo great a cap-
tain, equal at leaſt, if not ſuperior to Scanderbeg,
could condeſcend to ſerve ſo petty a prince. . The
meſſenger ſhewed him how eaſy it would be for
him, if he had a proper confidence in his own ca-
pacity, to dethrone Scanderbeg, by cauſing a revolt
in Epirus, and putting himſelf at the head of the
Turkiſh armies. Moſes, who, till this fatal flo-
I 4 - IIlent,

<page 189>
176 T H E F A M I L y P 1 c T U R s.
ment, had lived in the full enjoyment of content
and acknowledged worth, ſunk before the treache-
rous attacks of flattery and ambition. He diſ-
miſſed the meſſenger without a poſitive anſwer, but
with ſufficient reaſon to hope for ſucceſs.
After the departure of the meſſenger, a thouſand.
troubled thoughts aroſe in the hitherto peaceful
mind of Moſes: his mirth was turned into melan-
choly; the chearfulneſs of his countenance vaniſh-
ed; diſtraćting fears and haughty wiſhes were his
ſolitary companions, and an imaginary kingdom the
idol he ſecretly adored. Several diſcerning people
obſerved this ſudden change, and ſome of his friends
aſked him concerning the buſineſs of that ſecret
meſſenger; to whom he replied, that he was a per-
fon from whom he received private intelligence of
matters that concerned the good of the ſtate. This
anſwer was ſatisfactory, for who could once think
of diſtruſting Moſes? -
It happened about this time, when the loyalty of
Moſes had been ſufficiently overthrown by various
negociations and ſplendid promiſes from the Turk,
that Scanderbeg arrived before the walls of Belgrade,
the only defeat he ever experienced from the Maho-
metans. This was what Moſes deemed the proper
opportunity to declare himſelf, this was the moment
to ſubvert his friends and ſoldiers from their alle-
giance. For this purpoſe, when the news arrived
at Dibra he pretended at firſt to be greatly afflićted,
and with many words to lament the misfortune of
- Scanderbeg,

<page 190>
T R E A C H → R Y. 177
t
Scanderbeg, and the miſeries of Epirus, taking care.
at the ſame time to deſcribe the great power of Ma-
homet, and to endeavour to fill the minds of his
hearers with diſtruſt and fear. To his intimates he
was more ſincere; he related to them the mighty
promiſes of Mahomet, the honours he would con-
fer on all thoſe who ſhould be inſtrumental to a re-
volt, and the great eaſe with which it might be then
effected. He was heard by them with aſtoniſh-
ment and pity, but, to their glory be it remember-
ed, without ſucceſs : he, therefore, thought it ſafeſt
to fly, which he did, accompanied only by a few of
the loweſt and moſt diſorderly of the common ſol-
diers, and after procuring ſafe condućt from the go-
vernor of Sfetigrade, arrived at Conſtantinople, when
he was joyſully received and greatly careſſed by Ma-
homet. -
When Scanderbeg firſt learnt the news of the re-
volt of Moſes, ſo great had been his opinion of his
fidelity, that he ſtood ſpeechleſs with aſtoniſhment.
After a little reflection, however, and finding the
fačt really to be ſo, he, with true dignity, endea-
voured to palliate inſtead of magnifying the crime:
he remembered the former virtues and ſervices of
Moſes, and ſaid, his temptations had been ſuch as
might cauſe a truly great and conſtant man to err;
he would not liſten to thoſe who appeared willing
to aggravate the offence, but ſaid, he only wiſhed
that all treaſon and ill fortune were fled with Moſes
out of Epirus; he remembered the loyalty of thoſe
I 5 whom

<page 191>
178 T H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c T U R E.
whom Moſes had tried to ſeduce, and rejoiced in
the faith and love of his ſubjećts.
Though Mahomet gladly received the fugitive
Epirot, he was not at firſt without ſuſpicion; he
knew the former ſtratagems of Scanderbeg and of
Moſes; he dreaded a counterplot, and refuſed, for
ſome time, to liſten to the ſolicitations of Moſes,
who was eager to put himſelf at the head of the
Turks, and invade his promiſed kingdom: after,
however, having placed ſpies upon him, and having
watched him himſelf, and diſcourſed with him upon
the mode of condućting the war in Epirus, and find-
ing him devoted to ambition, and eſtranged from
Scanderbeg, he gave him the command of fifteen thou-
ſand horſe, which was all Moſes defired for this con-
queſt, and ſent him againſt the foe that Mahomet moſt
hated and moſt feared. The ſoldiers appointed for this
fervice were but half willing to go; they dreaded the
fatal country of Epirus; they remembered how many
Turks had gone there, never to return; they thought
the preſent army far too ſmall, though ſuperior to
that of Scanderbeg; and nothing gave them hopes
of ſucceſs, but the great opinion they had of their
commander.
Thus furniſhed, with a fine army, and every
warlike appointment, Moſes ſet forward to carry
deſolation into the land of his nativity, and to op-
poſe his former deareſt friend, the ſovereign he
once had loved and affiſted with all his powers.
Scanderbeg,
|

<page 192>
ºt" R. E A C H E R Y. 179
| Scanderbeg, who was informed of his route, met
him upon the frontiers of his kingdom, determined
to give him fair and open battle; for he knew Mo-
ſes was too intimately acquainted with the ſtrata-
gems by which he had formerly beat the Turks, and
likewiſe with the whole face of the country, to be ſub-
dued by policy. The battle was long and deſperate;
both commanders did every thing that could be ex-
pećted from their courage and experience; they
fought with the moſt daring intrepidity, and dire&ted
with coolneſs and determined fortitude: at length
the valour and fortune of Scanderbeg prevailed, the
Turks were routed, and a terrible ſlaughter enſued.
In vain did Moſes exhort them by his words and his
example to continue the fight; the arms of Scan.
derbeg and the ſcimitars of his illuſtrious ſoldiers,
who were an army of heroes, carried death at every
ſtroke, and gave deciſive vićtory. Eleven thouſand
of the Mahometans were left upon the field, and
the reſt eſcaped, conducted by Moſes through moun-
tainous paſſages, with which he was perfectly ac-
quainted. This ſudden and entire defeat lowered
his chara&ter ſo much in the opinion of the Turks,
that they held him afterwards in the utmoſt deriſion.
He could by no perſuaſions prevail on the remainder
of his troops to accompany him in an attempt upon
Dibra, where he ſtill hoped he had friends, and
by whoſe help he thought ſtill to occaſion a revolt.
Finding no remedy, he marched them back to Con-
#antinople with a heavy heart and a deječted coun-
I 6 tenance,

<page 193>
18o T H E F A M I L Y . P 1 c T, U R E.
tenance, deſpiſed by the Turks and threatened by
the ſultan, who, had it not been for the advice of
his viziers, who ſhewed him the impolicy of ſuch
a meaſure, would have put him to death.
Of ſo little eſtimation was he now become in
the Ottoman court, that his allowance was ſcarcely
ſufficient for his maintenance ; and though he ap-
peared to bear his misfortunes patiently, he was
inwardly ſo afflićted, that he could neither eat nor
drink: the remembrance of his former treaſon was
continually before his eyes, and the diſgrace he ſuf-
fered at the Turkiſh court, tormented him with in-
tolerable grief. He was conſcious of having done
every thing in his power in the late battle; and the
frowns of Mahomet, who eſtimated abilities by
events only, filled him with a ſecret indignation.
Sometimes he thought of eſcaping from Conſtan-
tinople, and throwing himſelf upon the clemency of
his prince, whom he knew to be of a noble and for-
giving nature; but when he recolle&ted the extent
of his ingratitude, he was ſtruck with ſhame. How-
ever, after an afflićting ſtruggle of contending paſ-
ſions, he at laſt reſolved to ſubmit to the mercy of
Scanderbeg, rather chooſing to ſtand the chance of
ſuffering the deſert of his crimes in his own country,
than to have the deriſion of a people he deſpiſed. He
accordingly fled to Dibra. When the ſoldiers be-
held their old governor thus deſpondent and repent-
ing, they forgot the evils he had been the occa-
iſion of, and moved with compaſſion, received him.
- with

<page 194>
"t R e A C H E R Y. 18r
with tears and friendly embraces, and brought him
to Scanderbeg, who lay encamped not far from
them. The manner in which Moſes approached.
him was awful and humiliating. He put his girdle
round his neck, in token of his deſerts, as was the
cuſtom of the Epirots, and with the moſt ſenſible
contrition fell upon his knees before Scanderbeg,
who was walking in the front of his tent. Scan-
derbeg, as benevolent in peace as terrible in war,
raiſed him from the earth, embraced him, and, as a
certain token of forgiveneſs in Epirus, kiſſed his
cheek. He did not ſtop here; he cauſed all his
lands and riches to be reſtored, re-inſtated him in all
his former truſts and employments, and, by open
proclamation, commanded that no man ſhould here-
after mention the treſpaſs.
After this Moſes ſerved Scanderbeg in his wars
with ſtill greater zeal and aſſiduity, than he had for-
merly done; but happening in a ſkirmiſh, contrary
to the advice of Scanderbeg, to purſue a flying party
of Turks too far, he fell into an ambuſcade, was
taken priſoner, carried to Conſtantinople, and, by
the command of Mahomet, put to a cruel death;
a fate which in all probability he would never have
ſuffered, had he never been a Traitor. -
M R s. E G E R T o N.
Poor Moſes! what a pity it is ſo great a 1113 fl.
ſhould have left the paths of virtue. . .
* H A R RY

<page 195>
182. T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
H A R R Y E G E R T o N.
I am ſure, mamma, that Turk Mahomet was a
cruel good for nothing man.
CH A R L E S E G E R T o N.
Ay, brother, but what a brave hero Scanderbeg
was. I love him becauſe he was ſo courageous.
N A N c Y E G E R T o N.
And I love him becauſe he was ſo merciful.
CH A R L E s E G E R T o N.
Yes, ſiſter, ſo do I love him for that too; but if
he had not been brave, you know he would not have
had the power to be merciful.
M. R. E. G E R T o N.
But do not forget, my children, that the mis-
fortunes of Moſes ſprang from his want of forti-
tude; had he poſſeſſed that, he would have deſpiſed
the ambition which prompted him to renounce every
tie of friendſhip, gratitude, and love for his country:
he would have remembered that true greatneſs nei-
ther conſiſts in titles or power, but in an inflexible
perſeverance in doing right. As a continuation of .
the ſame ſubječt, we will read the tale of Amurath,
a moſt ingenious, original, and ſublime fable; the
moral of which is, that no man can be happy, till
he has the reſolution to liſten attentively to the
ſilent dićtates of truth and reaſon.
C O N.

<page 196>
C O N S C I E N C E. 183
C O N S C I E N C E,
Or the ST or Y of A M U R AT H.
AMURATH, ſultan of the Eaſt, the judge of .
nations, the diſciple of adverſity, records the wonders
of his life: let thoſe who preſumptuouſly queſtion
the ways of Providence, bluſh in ſilence and be
wife; let the proud be humble and obtain honour;
and let the ſenſual reform and be happy.
The angel of Death cloſed the eyes of the ſultan
Abradin my father, and his empire deſcended to me
in the eighteenth year of my age. At firſt my mind
was awed to humility, and ſoftened with grief; I was
inſenſible to the ſplendor of dominion, I heard the
addreſſes of flattery with diſguſt, and received the
homage of dependant greatneſs with indifference.
I had always regarded my father not only with love
but reverence; and I was now perpetually recol-
lečting inſtances of his tenderneſs, and reviewing the
ſolemn ſcene, in which he recommended me to
Heaven in imperfect language, and graſped my hand
in the agonies of death. “ z
One evening, after having concealed myſelf all
day in his chamber, I viſited his grave: I proſtrated
myſelf on his tomb; ſorrow overflowed my eyes,
and devotion kindled in my boſom. I felt myſelf
ſuddenly ſmitten on the ſhoulder as with a rod; and
looking up, I perceived a man whoſe eyes were pier-
cing as light, and his beard whiter than ſnow. “I
a • ams

<page 197>
184 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
am, ſaid he, the Genius Syndarac, the friend of thy
father Abradin, who was the fear of his enemies and
the deſire of his people; whoſe ſmile diffuſed glad-
neſs like the luſtre of the morning, and whoſe frown
was dreadful as the gathering of a tempeſt: reſign
thyſelf to my influence, and thou ſhalt be like him.”
I bowed myſelf to the earth in token of gratitude
and obedience, and he put a ring on the middle fin-
ger of my left-hand, in which I perceived a ruby of
a deep colour and uncommon brightneſs. “This
ring, ſaid he, ſhall mark out to thee the boundaries
of good and evil; that, without weighing remote
conſequences, thou mayeſt know the nature and
tendency of every action. Be attentive therefore to
the ſilent admonition: and when the circle of gold,
ſhall, by a ſudden contraction, preſs thy finger, and
the ruby ſhall grow pale, deſiſt immediately from
what thou ſhalt be doing, and mark down that ac-
tion in thy memory, as a tranſgreſſion of the Rule
of Right : keep my gift as a pledge of happineſs and
honour, and take it not off for a moment.” I re-
ceived the ring with a ſenſe of obligation which I
ſtrove to expreſs, and an aſtoniſhment that compelled
me to be ſilent. The Genius perceived my confu-
ſon, and turning from me with a ſmile of compla-
cency, immediately diſappeared. -
During the firſt moon I was ſo cautious and cir-
cumſpect, that my pleaſure in refle&ting that my
ring had not once indicated a fault, was leſſened by.
my doubts of its virtue. I applied myſelf to the public
buſineſs.

<page 198>
C O N S - C I E N C E. " 135
y
buſineſs. My melancholy decreaſed, as my mind
was diverted to other objećts; and, leſt the youths of
my court ſhould think that recreation was too long
ſuſpended, I appointed to hunt the lion. But:
though I went out to the ſport rather to gratify
others than myſelf, yet my uſual ardour returned in
the field; I grew warm in the purſuit, I continued
the chace, which was unſucceſsful, too long, and
returned fatigued and diſappointed.
As I entered the ſeraglio, I was met by a little
dog that had been my father's, who expreſſed his
joy at my return, by jumping round me and en-
deavouring to reach my hand; but as I was not.
diſpoſed to receive his carefles, I ſtruck him in the
fretfulneſs of my diſpleaſure ſo ſevere a blow with .
my foot, that it left him ſcarce power to crawl away,
and hide himſelf under a ſofa, in the corner of the .
apartment. At this moment I felt the ring preſs
my finger, and looking upon the ruby, I perceived.
the glow of its colour abated. s
I was at firſt ſtruck with ſurpriſe and regret; but
ſurpriſe and regret quickly gave way to diſdain.
“Shall not the ſultan Amurath, ſaid I, to whom a .
thouſand kings pay tribute, and in whoſe hand is.
the life of nations, ſhall not Amurath ſtrike a dog
that offends him, without being reproached for hav-
ing tranſgreſſed the Rule of Right º' My ring again
preſſed my finger, and the ruby became more pale:
immediately the palace ſhook with a burſt of thun-
". . . . . - der,

<page 199>
186 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
der, and the Genius Syndarac again ſtood before
Inc.
“Amurath, ſaid he, thou haſt offended againſt thy
brother of the duſt; a being who, like thee, has re-
ceived from the Almighty a capacity of pleaſure and
pain: pleaſure which caprice is not allowed to ſuſ-
pend, and pain which juſtice only has a right to in-
flićt. If thou art juſtified by power in afflicting in-
ferior beings, I ſhould be juſtified in afflićting thee:
but my power yet ſpares thee, becauſe it is direéted
by the laws of ſovereign goodneſs, and becauſe theu
mayeſt yet be reclaimed by admonition. But yield
not to the impulſe of quick reſentment, nor indulge
in cruelty the forwardneſs of diſguſt, leſt by the
laws of goodneſs I be compelled to afflićt thee; for
he that ſcorns reproof, muſt be reformed by pu-
niſhment, or koſt for ever.”
At the preſence of Syndarac I was troubled, and
his words covered me with confuſion: I fell proſtrate
at his feet, and heard him pronounce with a milder
accent, “Expect not henceforth that I ſhould an .
ſwer the demands of arrogance, or gratify the cu-
rioſity of ſpeculation: confide in my friendſhip, and
truſt implicitly to thy ring.”
As the chace had produced ſo much infelicity I
did not repeat it, but invited my nobles to a banquet,
and entertained them with dancing and muſic. I
had given leave that all ceremony ſhould be ſuſ-
pended, and that the company ſhould treat me not
as a ſovereign but an equal, becauſe the converſa-
tlCzł

<page 200>
C O N S C I e N C e. 187
;
r
tion would otherwiſe be incumbered or reſtrained;
and I encouraged others to pleaſantry, by indulging
the luxuriancy of my own imagination. But tho' I
-affected to throw off the trappings of royalty, I had
not ſufficient magnanimity to deſpiſe them. I en-
joyed the voluntary deference which was paid me,
and was ſecretly offended at Alibeg my viſier, who
endeavoured to prevail upon the aſſembly to enjoy
the liberty that had been given them, and was himſelf
an example of the condućt that he recommended.
I fingled out as the objećt of my raillery, the man who
alone deſerved my approbation: he believed my con-
deſcenſion to be ſincere, and imagining that he was
ſecuring my favour, by that behaviour which had
incurred my diſpleaſure; he was, therefore, grieved
and confounded to perceive, that I laboured to ren-
der him ridiculous and contemptible: I enjoyed his
pain, and was elated at my ſucceſs; but my atten-
tion was fuddenly called to my ring, and I per-
ceived the ruby change colour. I deſiſted for a mo-
ment; but ſome of my courtiers having diſcovered
and ſeconded my intention, I felt my vanity and my
reſentment gratified; I endeavoured to waſh away
the remembrance of my ring with wine; my ſatire
became more bitter, and Alibeg diſcovered yet
greater diſtreſs. My ring again reproached me; but
I ſtill perſevered. The vifier was at length rouſed to
his defence; probably he had diſcovered and deſpiſed
my weakneſs: his replies were ſo poignant, that I’
became outrageous, and deſcended from raillery to:
- invečtive:

<page 201>
188 . T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
-
invective: at length diſguiſing the anguiſh of his
mind with a ſmile, “Amurath, ſaid he, if the Sultan
fhould know, that after having invited your friends,
to feſtivity and merriment, you had aſſumed this au-
thority, and inſulted thoſe who were not aware that
you diſdained to be treated with the familiarity of
friendſhip, you would certainly fall under his diſ-,
pleaſure.” The ſeverity of this ſarcaſm, which was .
extorted by long provocation from a man warmed,
with wine, ſtung me with intolerable rage; I ſtart-
ed up, and ſpurning him from the table, was about
to draw my poignard; when my attention was again
called to my ring, and I perceived with ſome degree
of regret, that the ruby had faded almoſt to a perfect
white. -
But, inſtead of being reſolved to be more watch-
ful againſt whatever might bring me under this ſilent
reproof, I comforted myſelf, that the Genius would
no more alarm me with his preſence. The irregu-
larities of my conduá increaſed almoſt impercep-.
tibly, and the intinations of my ring became propor-
tionably more frequent, though leſs forcible, till at
laſt they were ſo familiar, that I ſcarce remarked
when they were given and when ſuſpended.
It was ſoon diſcovered that I was pleaſed with ſer-
vility; ſervility therefore was praćtiſed, and I reward-
edit ſometimes with a penſion and ſometimes with a
place. Thus the government of my kingdoms was
left to petty tyrants, who oppreſſed the people to €n-,
rich themſelves. In the mean time, I filled my ſe-
raglio

<page 202>
c o N s c 1 E N c e. 189
s
,
raglio with women, and abandoned myſelf to ſen-
ſuality. But I had not yet ſtained my hands with
blood, nor dared to ridicule the laws which I had
neglected to fulfil.
My reſentment againſt Alibeg, however unjuſt,
was inflexible, and terminated in the moſt perfect
hatred; I degraded him from his office; but I ſtill
kept him at Court, that I might imbitter his life by
perpetual indignities, and practiſe againſt him new
ſchemes of malevolence.
Selima, the daughter of this prince, had been in-
tended by my father for my wife : and the mar-
riage had been delayed only by his death: but the
pleaſure and the dignity that Alibeg would derive
from this alliance, had now changed my purpoſe.
Yet ſuch was the beauty of Selima, that I gazed with
deſire ; and ſuch was her wit, that I liſtened with
delight. I therefore reſolved, that I would, if poſ.
fible, ſeduce her to voluntary proſtitution; and that
when her beauty ſhould yield to the charm of va-
riety, I would diſmiſs her with marks of diſgrace.
But in this attempt I could not ſucceed; my ſoli-
citations were rejećted, ſometimes with tears, and
ſometimes with reproach. I became every day more
wretched, by ſeeking to bring calamities on others;
I conſidered my diſappointment as the triumph of
a ſlave, whom I wiſhed but did not dare to deſtroy;
and I regarded his daughter as the inſtrument of
my diſhonour. Thus the tenderneſs, which before
had ſhaken my purpoſe, was weakened; my deſire .
of

<page 203>
193 T H E F A M 1 l Y P 1 c T U R E.
of beauty became as ſelfiſh and as ſordid an appe-
tite as my deſire of food; and, as I had no hope of
obtaining the complete gratification of my luſt
and my revenge, I determined to enjoy Selima
by force, as the only expedient to alleviate my
tortment. -
She reſided by my command in an apartment of
, the ſeraglio, and I entered her chamber at midnight
by a private door, of which I had a key; but with
inexpreſfible vexation I found itempty. To be thus
diſappointed in my laſt attempt, at the very moment
in which I thought I had inſured ſucceſs, diſtraćted
me with rage; and inſtead of returning to my cham-
ber, and concealing my deſign, I called for her wo-
men. They ran in pale and trembling: I demanded
the lady; they gazed at me aſtoniſhed and terrified,
and then looking upon each other, ſtood ſilent: I re-
peated my demand with fury and execration, and to
enforce it, called aloud for the miniſters of death ;
they then fell proſtrate at my feet, and declared with
one voice, that they knew not where ſhe was ; that
they had left her, when they were diſmiſſed for the
night, fitting on a ſofa penſive and alone ; and that
no perſon had ſince, to their knowledge, palled in or
out of her apartment. - -
In this account, however incredible, they perſiſted
without variation; and having filled the palace with
alarm and confuſion, I was obliged to retire without
gaining any intelligence by what means I had been
baffled, or on whom to turn my reſentment. I re-
- viewed

<page 204>
C O N S C I e n . C. e. 191
-
y
viewed the tranſačtions of the night with anguiſh and
regret, and bewildered myſelf among the innumer-
able poſſibilities that might have produced my diſ-
appointment. I remembered that the windows of
Selima's apartments were open, and I imagined that
ſhe might that way have eſcaped into the gardens
of the ſeraglio. But why ſhould ſhe eſcape who had
never been confined If ſhe had deſigned to depart, *
ſhe might have departed by day. Had ſhe an affig-
nation ? And did ſhe intend to return, without
been known to have been abſent? This ſuppoſition
increaſed my torment; becauſe, if it were true,
Selima had granted to my ſlave that which ſhe re-
fuſed to me. But all theſe conjećtures were uncer-
tain, I determined to make her abſence a pretence
to deſtroy her father.
In the morning I gave orders that her father
ſhould be ſeized and brought before me; but while
I was yet ſpeaking he entered, and proſtrating him-
ſelf, thus anticipated my accuſation: “May the
ſultan Amurath, in whoſe wrath the angel of death
goes forth, rejoice for ever in the ſmiles of heaven
Let the wretched Alibeg periſh; but let my Lord
remember Selima with mercy; let him diſmiſs the
ſlave in whom he ceaſes to delight.” I heard no
more, but cried out, “ Dareſt thou to mock me with
a requeſt, to diſmiſs the daughter whom thou haſt
ſtolenſ Thou whoſe life, that has been ſo often
forfeited, I have, yet ſpared Reſtore her within
one hour, or affronted mercy ſhall give thee up.”
“ Oh!

<page 205>
*192 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
“ Oh! ſaid he, let not the mighty ſovereign of
the Eaſt, ſport with the miſery of the weak. If
thou haſt doomed us to death, let us die to-
gether.”
Though I was now convinced that Alibeg be-
lieved I had confined Selima, and decreed her death,
yet I reſolved to perſiſt in requiring her at his hands;
and therefore diſmiſſed him with a repetition of my
command, to produce her within an hour, upon pain
of death.
My ring, which during this ſeries of events, had
given perpetual intimation of guilt, which was al-
ways diſregarded, now preſſed my finger ſo forcibly,
that it gave me great pain, and compelled my no-
tice. I immediately retired, and gave way to the
diſcontent that ſwelled in my boſom. “ How
wretched a ſlave is Amurath to an inviſible tyrant
A being, whoſe malevolence or envy has reſtrained
me in the exerciſe of my authority as a prince, and
whoſe cunning has contrived perpetually to inſult
me, by intimating that every ačtion of my life is a
crime! How long ſhall I groan under this intoler-
able oppreſſion ? This accurſed ring is the badge
and the inſtrument of my ſubječtion and diſhonour:
he who gave it, is now, perhaps, in ſome remote re-
gion of the air; perhaps he rolls ſome planet in its
orbit, agitates the ſouthern ocean with a tempeſt, or
ſhakes ſome diſtant region with an earthquake: but
wherever he is, he has ſurely a more important
employ than to watch my condućt. Perhaps he has
| -- CO in -

<page 206>
C O N 3 C I E N C E. 193
º:
contrived this taliſman, only to reſtrain me from
the enjoyment of ſome good, which he wiſhes to
withhold; I feel that my deſires are controuled; and
to gratify theſe deſires is to be happy.” As I pro-
nounced theſe words I drew off the ring, and threw
it to the ground with diſdain and indignation: in-
mediately the air grew dark; a cloud burſt in thun-
der over my head, and the eye of Syndarac was upon
me. I ſtood before him motionleſs and filent: hor-
ror thrilled in my veins, and my hair ſtood upright.
I had neither power to deprecate his anger, nor to con-
feſs my faults. In his countenance appeared a calm
ſeverity, and he pronounced theſe words: “Thou
haſt now, as far as is in thy power, thrown off hu-
manity, and degraded thy being; thy form there-
fore ſhall no longer conceal thy nature, northy ex-
ample render thy vices contagious.” He then touch-
ed me with his rod, and, while the ſound of his
voice yet vibrated in my ears, I found myſelf in the
midſt of a deſart, not in the form of a man but of a
monſter, with the fore parts of my body like a wolf,
and the hinder parts like a goat. I was ſtill con-
ſcious to every event of my life, and my intelle&tual
powers were continued, though my paſſions were ir-
ritated to frenzy. I now rolled in the ſand in agonies
not to be deſcribed ; and now haſtily traverſed the
deſert, impelled only by the vain deſire of flying from
myſelf. I nowbellowed with rage, and now howled
in deſpair; this moment I breathed execrations
Vol, I. K againſt
º

<page 207>
194 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
againſt the Genius, and the next reproached myſelf
for having forfeited his friendſhip.
By this violent agitation of mind and body, the
powers of both were ſoon exhauſted: I crawled into
a den which I perceived near me, and immediately .
ſunk down in a ſtate of inſenſibility. I fiept; but
ſleep, inſtead of prolonging, put an end to this in-
terval of quiet. The Genius ſtill terrified me with
his preſence; I heard his ſentence repeated, and felt
again all the horrors of my transformation. When
I waked, I was not refreſhed: calamity, though it
compelled me to admit ſlumber, can yet exclude reſt.
But I was now rouſed with hunger; for hunger, like
fleep, is irreſiſtible.
I went out in ſearch of prey; and if I felt any
allevation of miſery beſides the hope of ſatisfying
my appetite, it was in the thought of tearing to
pieces whatever I ſhould meet, and inflićting ſome
part of the evil which I endured; for though I re-
gretted my puniſhment, I did not repent of my
crimes: and as I imagined Syndarac would now
neither mitigate nor increaſe my ſufferings, I was
not reſtrained, either by hope or fear, from indulg-
ing my diſpoſition to cruelty and revenge. But while
I was thus meditating the deſtruction of others, I
trembled, left by ſome ſtronger ſavage I ſhould be
deſtroyed myſelf. - t
In the midſt of this variety of torment, I heard
the cry of dogs, the trampling of horſes, and the
ſhouts of the hunters; and ſuch is the love of life,
- however

<page 208>
c O N S C I e N C E., 195
-
-
however wretched, that my heart ſunk within me
at the ſound. To hide myſelf was impoſſible, and
I was too much enfeebled either to fly or reſiſt. I
ſtood ſtill till they come up. At firſt they gazed
on me with wonder, and doubted whether they
ſhould advance: but at length a ſlave threw a net
over me, and I was dragged to the city.
I now entered the metropolis of my empire, amidſt
the noiſe and tumult of the rabble, who the day be-
fore would have hid themſelves at my preſence. I
heard the ſound of muſic at a diſtance: the heralds
approached, and Alibeg was proclaimed in my ſtead.
I was now deſerted by the multitude, whoſe curio-
ſity was diverted by the pomp of his proceſſion; and
was condućted to the place where other ſavages are
kept, which cuſtom has conſidered as part of the
regalia. -
My keeper was a black ſlave, whom I did not re-
member ever to have ſeen, and in whom it would
indeed have been a fatal preſumption to have ſtood
before me. After he had given me food, and the
vigour of nature was reſtored, he diſcovered in me.
ſuch tokens of ferocity, that he ſuffered me to faſt
many hours before I was again fed. I was ſo en-
raged at this delay, that, forgetting my dependance,
I roared horribly when he again approached me: ſo
that he found it neceſſary to add blows to hunger,
that he might gain ſuch an aſcendancy over me, as
was ſuitable to his office. By this ſlave, therefore,
I was alternately beaten and famiſhed, till the fierce-
K 2 - neſs

<page 209>
196 T H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c T U R E.
neſs of my diſpoſition being ſuppreſſed by fear and
languor, a milder temper inſenſibly ſtole upon me;
and a demeanour that was begun by conſtraint, was
continued by habit.
I was now treated with leſs ſeverity, and ſtrove
to expreſs ſomething like gratitude, that might en-
courage my keeper to yet greater kindneſs. His
vanity was flattered by my ſubmiſſion; and, to ſhew
as well his courage as the ſucceſs of his diſcipline,
he ventured ſometimes to careſs me in the preſence
of thoſe whoſe curioſity brought them to ſee me.
A kind of friendſhip thus imperceptibly grew be-
tween us, and I felt ſome degree of the affection
that I had feigned. It happened that a tyger which
had been lately taken, brake one day into my den
while my keeper was giving me my proviſion, and
leaping upon him, would inſtantly have torn him to
pieces, if I had not ſeized the ſavage by the throat,
and dragged him to the ground: the ſlave preſently
diſpatched him with his dagger, and turned about
to careſs his deliverer; but ſtarting ſuddenly back-
ward, he ſtood motionleſs with aſtoniſhment, per-
ceiving that I was no longer a monſter, but a dog.
I was myſelf conſcious of the change which had
again paſſed upon me, and leaping out of my den,
eſcaped from my confinement. This transforma-
tion I conſidered as a reward for my fidelity, and
was, perhaps, never more happy than in the firſt mo-
ments of my eſcape; for I refle&ted, that as a dog
my liberty was not only reſtored, but inſured; I was
ſºo

<page 210>
C O N S C I E N C E. 197
;
no longer ſuſpected of qualities which rendered me
unfit for ſociety; I had ſome faint reſemblance of
human virtue, which is not found in other animals,
and therefore hoped to be more generally careſſed.
But it was not long before this joy ſubſided in the
remembrance of that dignity from which I had
fallen, and from which I was ſtill at an immeaſurable
diſtance. Yet I lifted up my heart in gratitude to
that Power, who had once more brought me within
the circle of nature. As a brute I was more thank-
ful for a mitigation of puniſhment, than as a king
I had been for offers of the higheſt happineſs and
honour. And who, that is not taught by afflićtion,
can juſtly eſtimate the bounties of Heaven?
As ſoon as the firſt tumult of my mind was paſt,
I felt an irreſiſtible inclination once more to viſit
the apartments of my ſeraglio. I placed myſelf be-
hind an emir, whom I knew to have been the friend
of Alibeg, and was permitted to follow him into the
preſence. The perſons and the place, the retro-
ſpection of my life which they produced, and the
compariſon of what I was with what I had been, al-
moſt overwelmed me. I went unobſerved into the
garden, and lay down under the ſhade of an al-
mond-tree, that I might indulge thoſe refle&tions,
which, though they oppreſſed me with melancholy,
I did not wiſh to loſe.
I had not been long in this place, before a little
dog, which I knew to be the ſame that I ſpurned
from me when he careſſed me at my return from
K 3 hunting,

<page 211>
198 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
hunting, came and fawned at my feet. My heart
now ſmote me, and I ſaid to myſelf, “Doſt thou
know me under this diſguiſe Is thy fidelity to thy
lord unſhaken Cut off as I am from the converſe
of mankind, haſt thou preſerved for me an affection,
which I once ſo lightly eſteemed, and requited with
evil? This forgetfulneſs of injury, and this ſteady
friendſhip, are they leſs than human, or are they
more ?' I was not prevented by theſe reflections
from returning thoſe careſſes that I received; and
Alibeg, who juſt then entered the garden, took no-
tice of me, and ordered that I ſhould not be turned
out. -
In the ſeraglio I ſoon learned, that a body, which
was thought to be mine, was found dead in the
chamber; and that Alibeg had been choſen to ſuc-
ceed me, by the unanimous voice of the people.
But I gained no intelligence of Selima, whoſe apart-
ment I found in the poſſeſſion of another, and for
whom I had ſearched every part of the palace in
vain. I became reſtleſs; every place was irkſome;
a deſire to wander prevailed; and one evening I went
out at the garden gate, and, travelling till midnight,
I lay down at the foot of a ſycamore-tree, and ſlept.
In the morning, I beheld with ſurpriſe a wall of
marble that ſeemed to reach to heaven, and gates
that were ſculptured with every emblem of delight.
Over the gate was inſcribed in letters of gold,
“Within this wall liberty is unbounded, and fe-
licity complete: nature is not oppreſſed by the ty-
ranny

<page 212>
c o N s c 1 E N c E. -
Io9
;
-
ranny of religion, nor is pleaſure awed by the frown
of virtue. The gate is chedient to thy wiſh, who-
ſoever thou art : enter therefore, and be happy.”
When I read this inſcription, my boſom throbbed
with tumultuous expectation : but my deſire to enter
was repreſſed by the reflection that I had loſt the
form, in which alone I could gratify the appetites
of a man. Deſire and curioſity were notwithſtand-
ing predominant. the door immediately opened in-
ward; I entered, and it cloſed after me.
But my ears were now ſtunned with the diſſo-
nance of riot, and my eye ſickened at the contor-
fions of miſery: diſeaſe was viſible in every coun-
tenance, however otherwiſe impreſſed with the cha-
raēter of rage, of drunkenneſs, or of luſt. Rape
and murder, revelling and ſtrife, filled every ſtreet
and every dwelling.
As my retreat was cut off, I went forward with
timidity and circumſpection; for I imagined, that
I could no otherwiſe eſcape injury, than by eluding
the notice of wretches, whoſe propenſity to ill was
reſtrained by no law; and I perceived too late, that
to puniſh vice is to promote happineſs.
It was now evening; and that I might paſs the
night in greater ſecurity, I quitted the public way,
and perceiving a houſe that was encircled by a mote,
I ſwam over to it, and choſe an obſcure corner of
the area for my aſylum. I heard from within the
ſound of dancing and muſic: but after a ſhort in-
terval, was alarmed with the menaces of rage, the
- K. 4 'ſhrieks

<page 213>
2OO T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R F •
*
ſhrieks of terror, and the wailings of diſtreſs. The
window of the banqueting room flew open, and
ſome veniſon was thrown out which fell juſt a: my
feet. As I had eaten nothing ſince my departure
from the ſeraglio, I regarded this as a fortunate ac-
cident; and after the pleaſure of an unexpected re-
paſt, I again lay down in expectation of the morn-
ing, with hope and fear: but in a ſhort time many
perſons ruſhed from the houſe with lights, and ſeem-
ed ſolicitous to gather up the veniſon which had
been thrown out; but not being able to find it, and
at the ſame time perceiving me, they judged I had
devoured it. I was immediately ſeized and led into
the houſe: but as I could not diſcover, that I was
the object either of malignity or kindneſs, I was in
doubt what would be the iſſue of the event. It was
not long before this doubt was ſolved; for I ſoon
learned from the diſcourſe of thoſe about me, that I
was ſuſpe&ted to have eaten poiſon which had been
intended for another, and was ſecured, that the ef-
feót might either remove or confirm the ſuſpicion.
As it was not expected that the poiſon would imme-
diately operate, I was locked up in the room by my-
ſelf, where I refle&ted upon the cauſe and event of
my confinement with inexpreſſible anguiſh, anxiety,
and terror. -
In this gloomy interval, a ſudden light ſhone
round me, and I found myſelf once more in the pre-
ſence of the genius; I crawled towards him trem-
bling and confounded, but not utterly without hope.
<< Yct

<page 214>
C O N S C - I E N C E. 2O1
“Yet a few moments, ſaid he, and the angel of
death ſhall teach thee, that the wants of nature can-
not be ſupplied with ſafety, where the inordinate
appetites of vice are not reſtrained. Thy hunger
required food : but the luſt and revenge of others
have given thee poiſon.” My blood grew chill as
he ſpake, I diſcovered and abhorred my folly: but
while I wiſhed to expreſs my contrition, I fell down
in an agony; my eyes failed me, I ſhivered, was
convulſed, and expired. -
That ſpark of immaterial fire which no violence
can quench, roſe up from the duſt which had thus
been reſtored to the earth, and now animated the
form of a dove. On this new ſtate of exiſtence I.
entered with inexpreſſible delight; I imagined that
my wings were not only a pledge of ſafety, but of
the favour of Syndarac, whom I was now more than
ever ſolicitous to pleaſe. I flew immediately from
, the window, and turning to the wall through which
I had entered, I endeavoured to riſe above it, that I
might quit for ever a place in which guilt and
wretchedneſs were complicated in every objećt, and
which I now deteſted as much as before I had de-
ſired. But over this region a ſulphureous vapour
hovered like a thick cloud, which I had no ſooner
entered, than I fell down panting for breath, and
had ſcarce ſtrength to keep my wings ſufficiently
extended to break my fall. It was now midnight,
and I alighted near the mouth of a cave, in which
. I thought there appeared ſome faint glimmerings of
K 5 light,

<page 215>
2O2 T H e F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
light. Into this place I entered without much ap-
prehenſion; as it ſeemed rather to be the retreat
of Penitence, than the receſs of Luxury: but leſt
the noiſe of my wings ſhould diſcover me to any
hateful or miſchievous inhabitant of this gloomy ſo-
litude, I entered in filence and upon my feet. As
I went forward, the cave grew wider; and by the
light of a lamp which was ſuſpended from the roof,
I difcovered a hermit liſtening to a young lady, who
ſeemed to be greatly affected with the events which
ſhe was relating. Of the hermit I had no know-
ledge; but the lady I diſcerned to be Selima. I was
ſtruck with amazement at this diſcovery; I remem-
bered with the deepeſt contrition my attempts upon
her virtue, and I now ſecretly rejoiced that ſhe had
rendered them ineffectual: I watched her lips with
the utmoſt impatience of curioſity, and ſhe conti-
nued her narrative.
“I was fitting on a ſofa one evening after I had
been careſſed by Amurath, and my imagination
kindled as I muſed. Why, ſaid I aloud, ſhould I
give up the delights of love with the ſplendor of
royalty Since the preſumption of my father has
prevented my marriage, why ſhould I not accept
the bleſfings that are ſtill offered? Why is deſire re-
ſtrained by the dread of ſhame? And why is the
pride of virtue offended by the ſoftneſs of nature ?
Immediately a thick cloud ſurrounded me; I felt
myſelf lifted up and conveyed through the air with
incredible rapidity. I deſcended, the cloud diſſipat-
- ed,

<page 216>
C O N S C I E N C E. 203
ed, and I found myſelf fitting in an alcove, by the
fide of a canal that encircled a ſtately edifice and a
ſpacious garden. I ſaw many perſons paſs along;
but diſcovered in all either ſomething diſſolute or
wretched, ſomething that alarmed my fears or ex-
cited my pity. I ſuddenly perceived many men with
their ſwords drawn, contending for a woman, who
was forced along irreſiſtibly by the crowd, which
moved directly towards the place in which I was
ſitting. I was terrified, and looked round me with
eagerneſs to ſee where I could retreat for ſafety. A
perſon richly dreſſed perceived my diſtreſs, and in-
vited me into the houſe which the canal ſurrounded.
Of this invitation I haſtily accepted with gratitude
and joy: but I ſoon remarked ſeveral incidents,
which filled me with new perplexity and apprehen-
ſon. I was welcomed to a place, in which infamy
and honour were equally unknown; where every
wiſh was indulged without the violation of any law,
and where the will was therefore determined only
by appetite. I was preſently ſurrounded by women,
whoſe behaviour covered me with bluſhes; and
though I rejected the careſſes of the perſon into
whoſe power I was delivered, yet they became
jealous of the diſtinétion with which he treated me.
My expoſtulations were not heard, and my tears
were treated with merriment: preparations were
made for revelling and jollity; I was invited to join
the dance, and upon my refuſal, I was entertained
with muſic. In this dreadful ſituation, I fighed thus
K 6 - to
-

<page 217>
204 r H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c r u re.
to myſelf: “How ſevere is that juſtice which tran-
fports thoſe who form licentious wiſhes, to a ſociety
in which they are indulged without reſtraint | Who
ſhall deliver me from the effects of my own folly *
Who ſhall defend me againſt the vices of others ?”
At this moment I was thus encouraged by the voice
of ſome inviſible being: “ The friends of Virtue
are mighty; reječt not their protećtion, and thou
art ſafe.” As I renounced the preſumptuous wiſh
which had once polluted my mind, I exulted in this
intimation with an aſſurance of relief, and when
ſupper was ſet before me, I ſuffered the principal
lady to ſerve me with ſome veniſon; but the friendly
voice having warned me that it was poiſoned, I fell
back in my ſeat, and turned pale: the lady enquired
earneſtly what had diſordered me; but inſtead of
making a reply, I threw the veniſon from the win-
dow, and declared that ſhe had intended my death.
The maſter of the table, who perceived the lady
to whom I ſpoke change countenance, was at once
convinced, that ſhe had indeed attempted to poiſon
me, to preſerve that intereſt which, as a rival, ſhe
feared I ſhould ſubvert. He roſe up in a rage, and
commanded the veniſon to be produced; a dog that
was ſuppoſed to have eaten it was brought in: but
before the event could be known, the tumult was
become general; and my rival, after having ſud-
denly ſtabbed her patron, plunged the ſame poignard
in her own boſom.
y
“In

<page 218>
C O N S C I E N C E. 205
“ In the midſt of this confuſion, I found means
to eſcape, and wandered through the city in ſearch
of ſome obſcure receſs, where, if I received not the
affiſtance which I hoped, death at laſt might ſe-
cure my perſon from violence, and cloſe mine eyes
on thoſe ſcenes, which, wherever I turned, filled me
not only with diſguſt but with horror. By that
benevolent power, who, as a preſervative from mi-
ſery, has placed in us a ſecret and irreſiſtible diſap-
probation of vice, my feet have been direéted to
thee, whoſe virtue has participated in my diſtreſs,
and whoſe wiſdom may effect my deliverance.”
I gazed upon Selima, while I thus learned the ar-
dor of that affection which I had abuſed, with ſen-
timents that can never be conceived but when they
are felt. I was touched with the moſt bitter remorſe
for having produced one wiſh that could ſtain ſo
amiable a mind; and abhorred myſelf for having
uſed the power which I derived from her tenderneſs,
to effect her deſtruction. My fondneſs was not leſs
ardent, but it was more chaſte and tender; deſire
was not extinguiſhed, but it was almoſt abſorbed in
eſteem. I felt a paſſion, to which, till now, I had
been a ſtranger; and the moment love was kindled
in my breaſt, I reſumed the form proper to the na-
ture in which alone it can ſubſiſt, and Selima beheld
Amurath at her feet. At my ſudden and unexpect-
ed appearance, the colour faded from her cheeks,
the powers of life were ſuſpended, and ſhe ſunk
into my arms. I claſped her to my breaſt, and
- looking

<page 219>
206 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
looking towards the hermit for his aſſiſtance, I be-
held in his ſtead the friendly genius, who had taught
me happineſs by afflićtion. At the ſame inſtant Se-
lima recovered. “Ariſe, ſaid Syndarac, and look
round.” We looked round; the darkneſs was ſud-
denly diffipated, and we perceived ourſelves in the
road to Golconda, and the ſpires of the city ſpark-
ling before us. “Go, ſaid he, Amurath, henceforth .
the huſband of Selima, and the father of thy people!
I have revealed thy ſtory to Alibeg in a viſion; he
expe&ts thy return, and the chariots are come out
to meet thee. - Go, and I will proclaim before thee,
Amurath the Sultan of the Eaſt, the Judge of Na-
tions, the Taught of Heaven; Amurath, whoſe
ring is equal to the ring of Solomon, returns to
reign with wiſdom, and diffuſe felicity.” I now
lifted up my eyes, and beheld the chariots coming
forward. We were received by Alibeg with ſenti-
ments which could not be uttered, and by the peo-
ple with the loudeſt acclamation: Syndarac pro-
claimed our return in thunder, that was heard thro’
all the nations of my empire ; and has prolonged
my reign in proſperity and peace.
For the world I have written, and by the world
let what I write be remembered: for to hone who
hear of the Ring of Amurath, ſhall its influence be
wanting. Of this, is not thy heart a witneſs, thou
whoſe eye drinks inſtruction from my pen? Haſt
thou not a monitor who reproaches thee in ſecret
when thy foot deviates from the path of virtue
Neglect
**

<page 220>
F I D E L I T Y. 207
Negleå not the firſt whiſpers of this friend to thy
ſoul; it is the voice of a greater than Syndarac, to
reſiſt whoſe influence, is to invite deſtruction.
D I A L O G U E IX.
MR s. E G E R T o N.
ET us now, my children, relax a little from
the ſevere virtues and too daring crimes of
men, and take a view of the condućt of ſome wo—
men, who have been remarkable, by their beha-
viour, under circumſtances of oppreſſion, peril, and
temptation. -
MR. E. G E R To N.
True, my dear, it will give variety. We will
begin, if you pleaſe, with the ſtory of Count Al-
berti. I ſhall forbear to ſay any thing beforehand
of the moral it inculcates, becauſe I would not de-
ſtroy the effect the relation will probably have on
your ſenſibility.
FIDELITY and CONJUGAL AFFECTION;
or the Story of Count ALBERT1, as related by
Mr. EveRARD, in Letters to his Friend. From
the Italian.
Dear Sir,
THE pleaſure I always take in writing to you,
wherever I am and whatever doing, in ſome mea-
º fure
w -

<page 221>
208 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c r u R e.
ſure diſpels my preſent uneaſineſs; an uneaſineſs,
cauſed at once by the diſagreeable aſpect of every
thing round me, and the more diſagreeable circum-
ſtances of the Count Alberti, with whom you were
once acquainted. You remember him one of the
gayeſt, moſt agreeable perſons at the court of Vienna,
at once the example of men, and the favourite of
the fair ſex. I often heard you repeat his name
with eſteem, as one of the few that did honour to
the preſent age, as poſſeſſed of generoſity and pity
in the higheſt degree, as one who made no other
uſe of fortune but to alleviate the diſtreſſes of man-
kind. This gentleman, ſir, I wiſh I Gould ſay is
now no more ; yet too, unhappily for him, he exiſts
but in a fituation more terrible than the moſt gloomy
imagination can conceive. After paſſing through
ſeveral parts of the Alps, and having viſited Ger-
many, I thought I could not well return home
without viſiting the quickſilver mines at Idria, and
feeing thoſe dreadful ſubterraneous caverns, where
thouſands are condemned to reſide, ſhut out from
all hopes of ever ſeeing the chearful light of the ſun,
and obliged to toil out a miſerable life, under the
whips of impious taſk-maſters. Imagine to your-
felf a hole on one ſide of a mountain, of about five
yards over; down this you are conveyed in a kind of
bucket, more than a hundred fathom, the proſpect
growing ſtill more gloomy, yet ſtill widening as you
deſcend. At length, after ſwinging in terrible ſuſ-
pence for ſome time in this precarious ſituation,
you

<page 222>
F 1 D E L 1 T Y. 209
*
you reach the bottom, and tread on the ground,
which, by its hollow ſound under your feet, and
the reverberations of the echo, ſeems thundering
at every ſtep you take. In this gloomy and fright-
ful ſolitude, you are aſſiſted by the feeble gleam
of lamps, here and there diſpoſed, ſo as that the
wretched inhabitants of theſe manſions can go from
one part to another, without a guide. And yet let
me aſſure you, that though they, by cuſtom, could
ſee objećts diſtinétly by theſe lights, I could ſcarce
diſcern, for ſome time, any thing, not even the per-
ſon who accompanied me, to ſhew theſe ſcenes of
horror. From this deſcription, I preſume, you
have but a diſagreeable idea of the place, yet let me
aſſure you that it is a palace, if we compare the
habitation with the inhabitants. Such wretches my
eyes never before beheld. The blackneſs of their 2
viſages ſerves to conceal the horrid paleneſs, cauſed
by the noxious qualities of the mineral they are em-
ployed in procuring. As they in general confiſt of
malefactors condemned for life to this taſk, they
are fed at the public expence; but conſume little
proviſion, for they loſe their appetites in a ſhort
time, and commonly in about two years expire,
from a total contračtion of all the joints of the body.
In this horrid manſion I walked after my guide for
ſome time, pondering on the ſtrange tyranny and
avarice of mankind, when I was accoſted by a voice
behind, calling me by my name, and enquiring
after my health with the moſt cordial affection.
I turned,

<page 223>
2 IQ T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
I turned, and ſaw a creature all black and hideous,
who approached me, and with a moſt piteous ac-
cent crying, “ Ah, Mr. Everard, do not you
know me?” Good God! what was my ſurprize,
when, through the veil of his wretchedneſs, I diſco-
vered the features of my old and dear friend Alberti.
I flew to him with affection, and, after a tear of
condolence, aſked how he came there? To this he
replied, that having fought a duel with a general
of the Auſtrian infantry, againſt the emperor's com-
mand, and having left him for dead, he was obliged
to fly into one of the foreſts of Iſtria, where he was
firſt taken, and afterwards ſheltered by ſome ban-
ditti, who had long infeſted that quarter. With
theſe he had lived for nine months, till by a cloſe
inveſtiture of the place in which they were con-
cealed, and after a very obſtinate reſiſtance, in which
the greater part of them were killed, he was taken
and carried to Vienna, in order to be broke alive
upon the wheel. However, upon arriving at the
capital, he was quickly known, and ſeveral of the
aſſociates of his accuſation and danger witneſſing
his innocence, his puniſhment of the rack was
changed into that of perpetual confinement and la-
bour in the mines of Idria, a ſentence, in my opi-
nion, a thouſand times worſe than death. As Al-
berti was giving me this account, a young woman
who ſeemed to be born for better fortune, came
up to him : the dreadful ſituation ſhe was in was
not able to deſtroy her beauty, and even in this
ſcene

<page 224>
F I D E L I T Y. 2 II
>
S.
t
ſcene of wretchedneſs, ſhe ſeemed to have charms
to grace the moſt brilliant aſſembly. This lady
was in fast daughter to one of the firſt families of
Germany; and having tried every means to pro-
cure her lover's pardon without effect, at laſt ré-
ſolved to ſhare thoſe miſeries, which ſhe could not
relieve. With him ſhe accordingly deſcended into
theſe manſions, from whence few of the living re-
turn ; with him ſhe was contented to live, forget-
ting the gaieties of life; with him to toil, deſpiſing
the ſplendor of opulence; ſatisfied with the con-
ſciouſneſs of her own conſtancy.
I am, dear Sir,
Your's, &c.
M 1 s s Fo R R E S T E R.
Indeed, madam, this is a very melancholy ſtory.
MRs. E G E R To N.
Yes, my dear Miſs Forreſter, it is a melancholy
ſtory, and what is worſe, it is a fact and not a
novel.
N AN cy E G E R T o N.
Well, but mamma, here is another letter that
will, perhaps, tell us ſomething more about theſe
unhappy lovers.
MR. E. G E R to N.
It will, my dear. The next letter is the ſequel.
* - ** - - -
L E T T E R

<page 225>
212 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
L E T T E R II.
Dear Sir,
MY laſt to you was expreſſive, and, perhaps, too
much ſo, of the gloomy ſtate of my mind. The
deplorable ſituation of the worthy man deſcribed in
it, was enough to add double horror to the hideous
manſion. At preſent, however, I have the happi-
neſs of informing you, that I was ſpectator of the
moſt affecting ſcene ever beheld. Nine days after
I had written my laſt, a perſon came poſt from
Vienna to the little village, near the mouth of the
great Shaft. He was ſoon after followed by a ſecond,
and then by a third. The enquiry was after the
unfortunate count. Happening to overhear the
demand, I gave them the neceſſary information.
Two of theſe were the brother and couſin of the
lady, the third was an intimate friend and fel-
low-ſoldier to the count. They came with his par-
don, which had been procured by the general with
whom the duel had been fought, and who was per-
fectly recovered from his wounds. I led them with
an expedition of joy down to his dreary abode,
preſented to him his friends, and informed him of
the happy change in his circumſtances. It would
be impoſſible to deſcribe the joy that brightened
upon his grief-worn countenance, nor was the young
lady’s emotion leſs vivid at ſeeing her friends, and ,
hearing of her huſband's freedom. Some hours
Weſe

<page 226>
F I D E L L T Y. 213
were employed in repairing the appearance of this
faithful couple; nor could I, without a tear, behold
him taking leave of the wretched companions of
his former toil. To one he gave his mattock, to
another his working cloaths, to a third his little
houſhold utenfils, ſuch as had been neceſſary to him
in that ſituation. We ſoon emerged from the mine,
when he once again reviſited the light of the ſun,
which he had totally deſpaired of again ſeeing. A
poſt-chaiſe and four was ready the next morning to
take them to Vienna, where, as I am informed by a
letter from himſelf, they arrived. The Empreſs has
again taken him into favour; his fortune and rank
are reſtored, and he and his fair partner have now
the pleaſing ſatisfaction of feeling happineſs with
double reliſh, as they once knew what it was to be
truly miſerable.
I am, dear Sir,
Your's, &c.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
I am happy, methinks, to ſee you all ſo much
affected.
- N AN cy E G E R To N.
Oh dear, ſir, this is a charming ſtory.
MR s E G E R T o N.
I confeſs it has given me great pleaſure, par-
ticularly in one circumſtance, which, perhaps, you
were not all equally attentive to.
N AN cy

<page 227>
214. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
* -
N AN c Y E G E R To N.
What was that, mamma;
MR s. E G E R To N.
why, my dear, from the firſt letter, I was ſe-
cretly very much diſturbed, becauſe I had reaſon to
fear that the young lady, whoſe conjugal fidelity I
am ſure you all admire, was not the wife of Count
Alberti. How happy am I to find my ſuſpicions
were ill-founded! How reſpectable, how elevated
was the conduct of that lady! Oh, my children, I
would rather a thouſand times ſee you, like her, de-
voted martyrs to duty and virtue, than to behold
you emperors and queens. -
M R. E. G E R T o N.
The amiable virtues of this lady cannot certainly
be either ſpoken or thought of too highly. But
this is not all, children. As I moſt earneſtly de-
fire you to imitate ſuch bright examples of good-
neſs, ſo likewiſe I would wiſh you to emulate thoſe
who, joining induſtry to genius, have become fa-
mous by their talents. To be active is ſo natural
and ſo neceſſary to us, that we cannot be idle and
be happy. Beſides, it is our indiſpenſible duty,
while we live in ſociety, to contribute, by every
means in our power, to the benefit of that ſociety.
The peaſant who tills the earth that we may eat,
and the artizan who labours for our convenience,
are truly reſpe&table citizens; much more ſo, my
- - > children,

<page 228>
P A T R I O T I S. M. 2I 5
children, than thoſe weak, narrow-minded perſons,
who, from the induſtry, abilities, or rapacity of their
forefathers, find themſelves in the poſſeſſion of ac-
cidental wealth and unmerited honour. Whoever
ſuppoſes that his power, his riches, or his rank, ex-
empt him from labouring to promote the general
good, becomes uſeleſs, contemptible, and vicious. .
Such adventitious aids give the means of becoming
more eminently beneficial; and no one can be a
good or a worthy man, who does not affiduouſly
employ the advantages he poſſeſſes for the public
good. I am tranſported almoſt beyond myſelf, my
children, when I ſpeak or think on this ſubječt.
Patriotiſm, that is, the love not only of that parti-
cular country where we were born, or exiſt, but of
all countries and of all men, is ſuch a noble, ſuch a
ſuperb virtue, that I would wiſh you all to en-
counter any danger, to brave any torture, rather
than betray the cauſe of humanity, of liberty, and
the rights of men. To underſtand theſe rights, to
make them known, and to guard them, with a de-
termined hand, ſacred from violation, ſhould be the
inexorable reſolution of thoſe, who, by their opu-
lence, have the leiſure to ſtudy, and the means to
protećt. - -
But I have been inſenſibly led from the ſubjećt
I intended to introduce ; which was an account of
Louiſa Darbach, a woman famous for her genius.
Your mother wiſhed to give you more examples
of conſpicuous women. However, as I am ad-
vanced

<page 229>
216 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
* *
vanced thus far in deſcribing a duty ſo eſſential to
the charaćter of a good citizen, as that of true
patriotiſm, I am ſure I ſhall have her approbation
of my endeavours to enforce this duty. -
Numerous are the examples which both antient
and modern hiſtory furniſh of this virtue: from theſe
I will ſelect two, which, in my opinion, are con-
ſpicuouſly great. The firſt is the behaviour of Re-
gulus, a man famous for the purity of his intentions
and the integrity of his heart.
Regulus was ſuppoſed to be the beſt and moſt
conſummate warrior that Rome could, in that age,
produce. He was profeſſedly frugal and ſevere, but
leſs auſtere to others than to himſelf; he only re-
prehended thoſe faults, which he would have died
rather than have committed. His patriotiſm was
ſtill greater than his temperance: all the private
paſſions ſeemed extinguiſhed in him, or they were
all ſwallowed up in one great ruling affection, the
love of his country. In the firſt Punic war, he and
Manlius were ſent by the Romans into Africa, to
invade the territories of the Carthaginians, with the
largeſt fleet that had ever ſailed from an Italian
port: this was met and engaged by another of the
enemy’s, equally, if not more, powerful. The battle
was obſtinate and deſperate; the Roman general,
however, triumphed; he took fifty-four of the ene-
my's ſhips, and diſperſed the reſt. The conſequence
was, an immediate deſcent upon the coaſt of Africa,
and

<page 230>
P A T R I O T I S. M. 2 I-
and the capture of the city Clupea, together with
twenty thouſand men, who were made priſoners of
war. Manlius was then remanded back to Italy
by the ſenate, and Regulus ordered to remain and
proſecute his vićtories in Africa; and when his con-
ſulſhip was expired, he was continued general un-
der the title of Proconſul. Happy in the approba-
tion of his country, Regulus perſevered in his ef- .
forts and his ſucceſſes, and led his forces along the
banks of the river Bagrada.
And here an incident happened, which, as it was
very extraordinary, I ſhall ſtop to relate. While he
was waiting the approach of the Carthaginians, a
ſerpent of enormous ſize attacked his men as they
went for water, and ſeemed as if reſolved to guard
the banks of the river. It was a hundred and
twenty feet long, with ſcales impenetrable to any
weapon. Some of the boldeſt troops went up at
firſt to oppoſe its fury, but they ſoon fell vićtims to
their raſhneſs, being either killed by its devouring
jaws, or cruſhed to pieces by the windings of its
tail. The poiſonous vapour that iſſued from it,
made it ſtill more formidable; and the men were ſo
much terrified at its appearance, that they aſſerted
they would much more joyfully face the whole Car-
thaginian army. For ſome time it ſeemed uncer-
tain which ſhould remain maſters of the river, as
from the hardneſs of its ſcales no ordinary efforts
could drive it away. At laſt Regulus was obliged
to make uſe of the machines employed in battering
V o L. I. L * * * down
*

<page 231>
218 T H E F A M I L Y P I c T U R E.
down the walls of cities. Notwithſtanding this,
the ſerpent, for a long time, withſtood all his efforts,
and deſtroyed numbers of his men; but at length a
very large ſtone, which was flung from an engine,
happened to break its ſpine, and deſtroyed its
motion. By theſe means the ſoldiers ſurrounded
and killed it. Regulus, not leſs pleaſed with his
vićtory than if he had gained a battle, ordered its
ſkin to be ſent to Rome, where it continued to be
ſeen in the time of Pliny. -
After this he engaged the Carthaginians, defeated
and cut off ſome of their beſt troops, and took
above eighty of their towns; while they, in deſpair,
were obliged to ſend to Lacedemon for a general
capable of oppoſing Regulus; at the ſame time
diſpatching ſome of the principal men of the ſtate to
him, to ſue for a peace.
The Roman general had long wiſhed to termi-
nate the war, and go back to his native country.
He had even ſent to the ſenate ſome time before,
demanding a ſucceſſor, and leave to return, in con-
ſequence of an account he had received, informing
him that his ſteward who cultivated his farm, which
conſiſted but of ſeven acres, was dead, and that his
ſervant had ſtolen all the inſtruments of huſbandry
that were uſed in its cultivation. He informed the
fenate, that while he was leading on the armies of
the ſtate, his wife and children were in danger of
wanting bread, and that his little domeſtic affairs
required his preſence at home. The ſenate upon
- - this
*

<page 232>
P A T R I O T I S. M. 219
this ordered his wife and children a ſufficient main-
tenance, furniſhed his farm with proper inſtruments
of huſbandry, at the public expence, and gave him
orders to continue at the head of the army.
The negociation for peace between the nations
not ſucceeding, the Carthaginians committed the
war to the care of Xantippus, the Spartan general,
a man of conſummate knowledge in the art of war;
and Regulus was at laſt, after all his vićtories, de-
feated and taken priſoner. And now was the time
in which the virtues of Regulus ſhone forth with
ſtill ſuperior luſtre. The affairs of the Carthagi-
nians after this battle became more ſucceſsful, but
ſtill they were deſirous of a peace, and made new
propoſals, not doubting but they ſhould obtain bet-
ter terms than thoſe inſiſted on before by the Ro-
mans. They therefore reſolved to ſend to Rome
to accompliſh this buſineſs, or at leaſt to procure
an exchange of priſoners. For this purpoſe they
fuppoſed that Regulus, whom they had now for four
years kept in a dungeon, confined and chained,
would be a proper ſolicitor. It was expected that,
being wearied with impriſonment and bondage, he
would gladly endeavour to perſuade his countrymen
to a diſcontinuance of the war, which only prolong-
ed his captivity. He was accordingly ſent, with
their ambaſſadors, to Rome, but with a promiſe,
previouſly exacted from him, to return in caſe of
being unſucceſsful. He was even given to under-
L 2 $tand,

<page 233>
22O T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
ftand, that his life depended upon the ſucceſs of his
expedition.
When this old general, together with the am -
baſſadors of Carthage, approached Rome, numbers
of his friends came out to meet him, and congra-
tulate his return. Their acclamations reſounded
through the city, but Regulus refuſed, with ſettled
melancholy, to enter the gates. It was in vain
that he was intreated, on every ſide, to viſit once
more his little dwelling, and ſhare in that joy which
his return had inſpired. He perſiſted in ſaying, that
he was now but a ſlave belonging to the Carthagi-
nians, and unfit to partake in the liberal honours of
his country. The ſenate aſſembling without the
walls, as uſual, to give audience to the ambaſſadors,
Regulus opened his commiſſion, as he had been di-
rećted by the Carthaginian counſel, and their am-
baſſadors ſeconded his propoſals. The ſenate were,
by this time, themſelves weary of a war which had
been protracted above eight years, and were no way
diſinclinable to peace. It ſeemed the general opi-
nion, that the enmity between the two ſtates had
continued too long; and that no terms ſhould be
refuſed, which might give not only reſt to the two
nations, but liberty to an old brave general, whom
the people reverenced and loved. It only remained
for Regulus himſelf to give his opinion, who, when
it came to his turn to ſpeak, to the ſurprize of all
the world, gave his voice for continuing the war.
He aſſured the ſenate, that the Carthaginian re-
ſources
-

<page 234>
P A T R I O T I S. M. 22. I
..ources were now almoſt exhauſted, the populace
harraſſed out with fatigues, and their nobles with
contention: that all their beſt generals were pri-
ſoners with the Romans, while Carthage had none
but the refuſe of the Roman army: that not only
the intereſt of Rome, but its honour was alſo con-
cerned in continuing the war, for their anceſtors
had never made peace till they were vićtorious.
So unexpected an advice not a little diſturbed the
ſenate: they ſaw the juſtice of his opinion, but they
alſo ſaw the danger he incurred by giving it: they
ſeemed entirely ſatisfied of the expediency of pro-
longing the war; their only obſtacle was, how to
ſecure the ſafety of him who had adviſed its conti-
nuance: they pitied as well as admired a man who
had uſed ſuch eloquence againſt his private intereſt,
and could not conclude upon a meaſure which was
to terminate in his ruin. Regulus, however, ſoon
relieved their embarraſſment, by breaking off the
treaty, and riſing in order to return to his bonds
and confinement. It was in vain that the ſenate
and all his deareſt friends intreated his ſtay; he ſtill
refuſed their ſolicitations. Maria, his wife, with
her little children, filled the city with her lamenta-
tions, and vainly implored to be permitted to ſee
him : he ſtill obſtinately perſiſted in keeping his
promiſe; and though ſufficiently apprized of the
tortures that awaited his return, without embracing
his family, or taking leave of his friends, he de-
parted, with the ambaſſadors, for Carthage.
L 3 When

<page 235>
222 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
when the Carthaginians were informed of their
ill-ſucceſs, and the reaſon of it, by their ambaſſadors,
their rage and diſappointment rendered them inexor-
ably furious; and Regulus died, as he expected, by
the implacable hand of ſtudied torment and lingering
cruelty.
M Iss For RE s T E R.
Good Heavens ! I pity his wife and children'ſ
CH A R L E s.
I admire his reſolution.
WILLIAM.
And I almoſt envy his fame. He will never be
forgotten. I may die, and, perhaps, in a very little
time, nobody will remember I ever lived.
M. R. E. G E R To N.
I approve your emulative ſpirit, William, but
beware that it does not take an improper turn,
*Twere ſupreme happineſs rather to fink into eter-
nal oblivion, than to be remembered for our vices
or our crimes. There is another thing, my chil-
dren, which I wiſh you to remark; the patriotiſm
of Regulus extended only to his own country; it
was not that univerſal philanthropy which I am en-
deavouring to inculcate. The love of our country
ſhould make us freely devote our lives and fortunes
to

<page 236>
P A T R I, O T I S. M. 223
to protećt it from the tyranny of ambitious ma-
giſtrates, or the aſſaults of rival nations; but it ſhould
never inſtigate that partial and oppreſſive ſpirit, which
luſts for dominion, and triumphs only to extirpate.
The advice of Scipio Naſſica was not only humane,
but it was wiſe. Cato, the cenſor, and many other
Roman ſenators were perpetually engaging the
people to deſtroy Charthage. Scipio bade them
beware of that pernicious counſel; “ eraſe Car-
thage, ſaid he, and where ſhall Rome find a rival :
her military diſcipline muſt either become feeble by.
diſuſe, or be exerciſed to her own deſtruction.”
This prophecy was afterwards too fatally fulfilled.
W I LLIAM.
Indeed, Sir, I think the deſtruction of Carthage
reflects infamy on the Romans, inſtead of glory.
M. R. E. G E R to N.
Ay, William, it is one among the many black
and indelible ſpots in the annals of human nature.
I ſhall now, my children, introduce a patriot to
you, ſuperior even to Regulus, though never likely
to be ſo celebrated; a poor Armenian, who beheld
the wiſdom, knowledge, and arts of the Europeans,
and the comparative ignorance of his own country,
with an anxiety of patriotiſm that raiſes him to
the very firſt rank of men. But I will not attempt
to give you the charaćter of my hero; I am un-
L 4 : equal

<page 237>
224 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
equal to the taſk; his own letters will do it more
effectually than the eloquence of an angel. He was
a foreigner, and there are conſequently defe&ts in
his ſtile, which the intent and ſpirit of them will
induce you to overlook. His firſt letter was ad-
dreſſed to the Earl, now Duke, of Northumberland,
who patronized and recommended him to the late
Duke of Cumberland, by whom he was ſent to
ſtudy in the academy at Woolwich ; his ſecond to
Prince Heraclius, his ſovereign. Now read them,
William ; and learn, my ſons, endeavour, my chil-
dren, to catch a portion of his divine ſpirit.
P A T R I O T I S M :
Or the Letters of AMEEN, the Armenian.
L E T T E R I.
My Lord, -
I preſent you the ſpecimen of my writing I pro-
miſed. It is too bold, I am afraid, to make my-
ſelf the ſubječt, when I write for your lordſhip; but
forgive, my lord, the language of a ſtranger: I
have been in too low condition to know how
to write proper to your lordſhip; but you ſpeak
to me more kind and humble than mean peo-
ple; ſo I am encouraged. I have very good de-
ſigns, and I have ſuffered very much hardſhips for
them. I think your lordſhip will not deſpiſe a per-
ſon in a mean condition, for thinking of ſomething
more than livelihood; I have, with a good will,
thrown behind me a very eaſy livelihood for this
-
COIl-

<page 238>
P A T R I O T I S. M. 225
condition, mean as it is; and I am not troubled if I
can carry my point at laſt. As long as I can re-
member my own family, and I remember my great
grandfathers, they have been always ſoldiers, and
always did remember Chriſt, though they were torn
out of their country of Armenia, by Shaw Abbas,
and planted in Hamadan. After their captivity they
were ſoldiers likewiſe. Two of my uncles did ſpill
their blood in the ſervice of Kouly Kan: my father
was his ſlave for many years; but he was at laſt
forced to fly into India, becauſe this tyrant had
ſharpened his battle-ax againſt his own army more
than upon his enemies. Soon after my father ſent
for me to Calcutta, in Bengal, where he is a mer-
chant. There I ſaw the ſort of Europeans, and the
ſoldiers exerciſe, and the ſhipping, and that they
were dexterous and perfect in all things. Then I
grieved within myſelf for my religion and my coun-
try, that we were in ſlavery and ignorance, like
Jews, vagabonds over the earth; and I ſpoke to my
father upon all this; becauſe our fathers did not
fight for their country; but I underſtood that the
Armenians in the mountains were free, and handled
arms from their childhood; and that thoſe under
Patriarch, who are ſubječt to the Turks and Per-
ſians, did not want courage; but they are all ig-
norant, and fight only with a wild and natural
fierceneſs, and ſo they have no order, and do no-
thing but like robbers. And I reſolved I would go
to Europe to learn art military, and other ſciences
L 5 to

<page 239>
226 t H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c t U R E.
to aſſiſt that art; and I was ſure that if I could go
into Armenia, like an European officer, I may be
uſeful at laſt in ſome degree to my country; but my
father did not liſten to me, for God did not give him
underſtanding in theſe things. I could not bear to
live like a beaſt, eating and drinking, without li-
berty or knowledge:—I went to captain Fox, of ~
the ſhip Walpole, and kiſſed his feet hundred times,
to let me work for my paſſage to Europe, before he
would bend to me; but he did at laſt admit me;
and I came to England with much labour; but it did
not grieve me when I thought of my country: I
entered myſelf with my little money into Mr. Mid-
dleton’s academy: I had the honour to tell your
lordſhip ſo before : I was firſt a ſcholar, and, when
my money was gone, I was a ſervant there for my
learning; but he was broke, and I loſt every thing.
I went into the ſtreet to work for my bread, for I
could not bear to go about wagging a tail at people's
doors for a bit of meat. I will not grieve your lord-
ſhip with the miſery which I went through; I do not
want to be pitied. I got ſervice at laſt as a porter
with one Mr. Robarts, a grocer in the city: in this
time I carried ſometimes burthens of near two hun-
dred weight upon my back, and paid out of my
wages to learn ſome geometry, and to compleat
myſelf in writing, and juſt to begin a little French;
but becauſe, mylord, I almoſt ſtarved myſelf to pay
for this, and carried burthens more than my ſtrength,
Phurted myſelf ſo that I could not work any longer;
- ſo

<page 240>
P A T R I, Q T I S M, 227
ſo that I was in deſpair, and not care what become
of me: but a friend put me to write with one Mr.
Webſter, an attorney in Cheapſide, which, for a
little time got bread; but I was reſolved, in deſpair,
to go again to India, becauſe nobody would put out
his hand to help me to learn; and my uncle ſent 69
pounds to governor Davis to carry me back. I
am afraid I am too troubleſome in my accounts to
your lordſhip; but we people of Aſia cannot ſay little
in a great deal, like ſeholars. Now I met by chance
ſome gentlemen who encouraged me, and gave
me books to read, and adviſed me to kiſs colonel
Dingley's hands, and ſhew my buſineſs to him. He
was a brave ſoldier, took me by the hand, ſpoke to
his own ſerjeant, an honeſt man, to teach me manual
exerciſe, and gave me Bland's Military Diſcipline,
and promiſed to help me to learn gunnery and forti-
fication; but I was again unfortuned; for when light
juſt began to come to my eyes, he died, and I was
like before, except that I knew a little of manual
exerciſe, and read ſome of the Roman hiſtory; could
learn no more nor live. I was broke to pieces, and
bowed my neck to governor Davis, to go over to my
friends, without doing any of theſe things I ſuffered
for. I am in this net at preſent; but I am happier
than all mankind, if I can meet any great man who
can prevail upon governor Davis to allow me ſome-
thing out of the money he has only upon condition
that I return to blindneſs once again; that I may
go through evolutions with the recruits, and learn
L 6 gunnery

<page 241>
228 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 cºt U R E.
gunnery and fortification, and if there is war, to go
one year as a volunteer. If governor Davis writes,
that I have a great man here my protećtor, my father,
who looks upon me as a perſon run away and for-
ſaken, will make me an allowance to learn. If I
could clear my own eyes, and ſerve my country and
my religion, that is trod under the foot of Muſſulman,
I would go through all ſlavery and danger with a glad
heart; but if I muſt return, after four years ſlavery
and miſery, to the ſame ignorance, without doing
any good, would break my heart, my lord, in the
end. I beg pardon, I have experience of your
lordſhip's goodneſs, elſe I would not ſay ſo much ;
I would not receive, but return ; and I want no-
thing but a little ſpeaking from the authority of an
Indian governor to my friends. I have always been
honeſt. Thoſe I have been ſlave to will ſay I am
honeſt. Mr. Grey truſted me. -
Here is a ſort of ſtory nothing but your lordſhip's
good nature can make tolerable. I am much obliged
to your lordſhip for your patience. I ſhall be very
proud of giving your lordſhip all the proof in my
Power, how much I am, &c.
Joseph AMEEN.
L E T

<page 242>
P A T R I O Tº I S. M. 229
L E T T E R. H. *
To the moſt ſhining, moſt chriſtian, King Hexa-
cLIUs, of Georgia and Armenia.
My King, -
ALL things that have been made, from the be-,
ginning of the world to this day, are by the will of
God, according to the New Teſtament. All things
were made by Him; and without Him was not any
thing made that was made. God created the hea-
ven and the earth, the ſea and the land; and it is
He that made you king over two nations, Armeni-
ans and Georgians. Glory be to God the Father
of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, that made you defender
and protećtor of thoſe Chriſtian nations, and of their
faith, who have been many hundred years under the
hands of Perſian unbelievers; and being now deli-
wered by the mighty hands of your majeſty, the ſame
God will alſo, I hope, deliver thoſe Chriſtians, who
are under the hands of Othomans; for there is no
difficulty in the mighty hands of God; and whoſoever
truſt in Him, ſhall not be aſhamed. It was He that
delivered Iſrael, by the hand of the prophet Moſes,
out of the hands of Pharaoh, and fed them with
manna, according to the holy Pſalms, which ſaith,
Men did eat the bread of angels. May the ſame
God preſerve and ſtrengthen the wriſt of your ma-
jeſty, to defend us from the encroachment of bar-
barians ! Amen, -
* Again,

<page 243>
230 T H E F. A. M. I. L. Y. P-I C T-U R E.
Again, having heard the fame of your majeſty's
brave conqueſt, by which you have poſſeſſed the two
ancient kingdoms of Armenia and Georgia, and
that they are at preſent under your majeſty's pro-
tećtion, being deſirous, from the readineſs of my
ſoul, to offer your majeſty my ſervice, which I hope
you will make no difficulty to accept, as money
is far from the deſire of your majeſty's ſervant, who
wiſhes nothing but to ſerve him who has the rule
over his nation; for, while I am here, I want no-
thing: I have a great friend here, and that great
friend is my protector; and that protećtor is the ſon
of the king of England. If it pleaſe your majeſty
to inſtruct me of your will and pleaſure, that I may
petition to this great prince, in order to obtain leave
to come and to ſerve you as an European officer,
according to my low abilities; and that I may teach
your ſoldiers to fight like Europeans, who are very
well known to your majeſty, that with a few men
they overcome many.
Your majeſty has heard of the German nation,
who, with no more than twenty thouſand men, are
able to give battle to a hundred thouſand Maho-
metans, or Turks, enemies to the Chriſtian na-
tions. I would alſo acquaint your majeſty, how it
is, or by what means, that the European nations
are ſuch, conquerors, and ſo brave warriors. It is
a rule among them, that whoever is deſirous to be-
come a warrior, firſt, he is obliged to enter him-
ſelf into the houſe of exerciſe, which they call it
- - here,

<page 244>
P A T R 1 o T r s M. 231
here, an academy to learn or to ſtudy, four or five
years, the art of war, that is to ſay, to learn the
art of building ſtrong caſtles, the like of which are
not to be found in all Aſia; and alſo the art of ma-
maging great guns in ſuch a manner, as none of our
fortifications could ſtand before them for three days;
likewiſe, the manner of encamping with judgment,
and the way of ranging of the ſoldiers, ſo that they
are like a wall of iron, not to be broken ; and,
after having thoroughly compleated his ſtudy in that
art, leaves the place, goes and offers himſelf and
his ſervice to his prince or king, thereby becomes
an officer, or fighter for his king and country; and
by long experience perfeóts himſelf in that great art;
for the art of war here is not to be underſtood eaſily;
it contains many things difficult to be known, and
very much preferable to the practice of Turks
and Perſians. See, O mighty king, it is not by
ſtrength of arm, that theſe nations are called con-
querors, but by wiſdom and art. Here every thing
is by art and wiſdom; for without wiſdom the land
is not land; and the nations that dwell therein are
blind and unhappy. According to the Old Teſta-
ment, which faith, God made the heaven and the
earth by his infinite wiſdom; therefore God loveth
wiſdom for this reaſon. I ſay, whoſoever followeth
wiſdom, he is dear, or beloved of God; for from
wiſdom proceedeth all manner of goodneſs; alſo, a
man is not mighty without wiſdom, nor wiſe with-
out righteouſneſs. The ancient Romans, who were
ſo

<page 245>
232 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
ſo great, gave laws, and ſubdued all nations of the
world: this was by art and wiſdom, before our Sa-
viour, although they were heathens and idolaters;
but they were virtuous, and lived in good morals.
Another example, Peter the Great, of Ruſſia, who
could not be ſo great a warrior, and his country
could never have been ſo bleſſed, and flouriſhed, had
not he come over here to learn wiſdom, who, when
he was in Holland, ſerved in a place of ſhip-build-
ing, like one of the labourers, and humbled himſelf
therein: whoſoever humbleth himſelf ſhall be ex-
alted, &c. And when he returned into his own
country, he was full of all manner of wiſdom, by
which he made himſelf father, as well as lord and
king, over his country. Theſe are things which
have made the people of Europe to be conquerors,
and to be eſteemed more wiſe than all the nations
upon the face of the earth; for amongſt them are
learned men, who ſtudy the way in which God has
made all things according to their nature, by which
they are able to do things of great wonder and uſe-
fulneſs. They ſend likewiſe into every part of the
world, at a great expence, for to learn all things
that are produced upon or under the earth, by which
they are increaſed in wiſdom and riches; their ci-
ties are very great, their people are very happy, not
being afraid of famine or dangers, and they are un-
der excellent laws, by which no man is ſuffered to
do wrong to another, though he is weak or poor.
But this nation, this great and mighty nation, O my
- king!

<page 246>
P A T R I O T I S. M. 233
_r
king ! where I live, is not only a great and wiſe na-
tion, but alſo deſtroyers of the devourers of man-
kind. I am ſurpriſed to ſee, that even the ſheep in
this country reſt in quietneſs without the leaſt fear
of wolves. May the great God grant your ma-
jeſty's ſubjećts to follow their examples, to grow
wiſe and conquerors, under the wiſdom and cou-
rage of your majeſty, to whom God grant long life,
to trample your enemies like duſt under your feet.
May it pleaſe your majeſty to know who your
ſervant is, that raiſes his head to ſpeak to you, and
takes pains to know theſe things with much labour,
for your majeſty's ſervice, to whom God grant vic-
tory. The name of your ſervant is Emin, the ſon
of Joſeph, the ſon of Michael, the ſon of Gregory,
who is deſcended from Emin, who, in the day when
Armenia was broke under the battle-axe of Shaw
Abbas, was Minbaſhy in his country; but he was
made captive, with others, and was carried into
Perſia, and placed at Hamadan; from him your ma-
jeſty’s ſervant is come, and he is called of his name,
being born at Hamadan; but our captivity was
grievous under the Perſians, who, ſince Mahome-
taniſm, which is well known to your majeſty, are
grown quite barbarians, not being ſo civilized as
they were in antient times, (according to the hiſ.
tories I have read in this bleſſed iſland) ſo that my
father flew from Hamadan, in the time of Shaw
Thamas Kouly Kan, into India, to a place called
Calcutta, where the Engliſh have a fort, and ſol-
diers,

<page 247>
234. T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
diers, and a great trade, though their country is
ſeven months voyage from Bengal; there my father
made himſelf a merchant to this day; and would
have made me ſuch as himſelf, but I did not ſubmit
to him; for I enquired of my fathers from my in-
fancy, the reaſon why we were perſecuted by infi-
dels; and why we did refide ſo contemptibly amongſt
lawleſs nations : but they made me no anſwer, and
my heart was grieved, and I had none to comfort
me in my griefs; for I ſaid, the ants that creep upon
the earth have a king, and we have not; and the
nations of all countries make their laugh upon us,
alſo perſecuting, ſaying to us, that you are maſter-
-leſs; you have no king of your own, and that you
reſemble the Jews ſcattered upon the face of the
earth; you have no love for one another; you are
without honour; and by the diſunity of your ma-
tion, all the nations inſult you; you are contempti-
ble, and without zeal; and you are as great lovers,
of money, as the heathens did love their gods. [.
could not bear all theſe reflections, whilſt I grieved,
and found none to heal me. I obſerved watchfully
the Europeans, their wiſe cuſtoms, and their ſhip-
ping, far better both for ſailing and for war, than-
the ſhips of the Indians; and above all, the prac-
tice of their ſoldiers, who, if they were thouſands of
men, by one word of command, from their officers,
inſtantly all together move and act, as if they were:
one man. Then I thought in my mind, that it
was God that had put it in my heart to think on all
things.
i

<page 248>
P A T R I O T I S M, 235
things. Therefore, I ſpoke not to my father, but
had hopes in my heart, that if I went to England,
I ſhould learn the art of war, and I was encourag-
ed, for I then heard a little, and not much of your
majeſty's name, until I came here, where I learned
that your majeſty was eſtabliſhed in your kingdom,
and had routed a great army of Perſians. See! O
my king, what great thing the wiſdom is, by which
this nation know our country better than we do;
and that this nation are awake, and we are aſleep.
On board the ſhip I worked like a ſailor; and after-
wards, when I came here, was ſo reduced, that I
was forced by hunger, to offer myſelf to ſale upon
the Exchange, to be ſent into the new world. Oh!
my king, do not pity Me; no, not even at that
time when you hear, or ſee me ſacrificed in your
ſervice, but pity thoſe ſervants of Chriſt, who de-
ſerve pity; but the omnipotent God ſaved me by the
hands of an Engliſhman; and the ſame God who
heard the crying of my heart, did put it into the
heart of a generous nobleman, who is one of the
pillars of the throne of England, to aſſiſt me. He
made me right in the counſel of my heart; he made
me known to the ſon of the king of England; he
ſent me to the place of education, where I learnt
the art of war, according to wiſdom.
My ambition is to lay my knowledge at the feet
of your majeſty, and to ſerve you in the beſt of my
ability. For know, O my king, that what is not
built on knowledge, though it is very ſtrong and
- lofty,

<page 249>
236 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
lofty, is as if it were built upon ſand; therefore, my
purpoſe is, to go well inſtructed into your majeſty's
ſervice, and to carry with me men ſkilful in all
things, (if you give me encouragement,) to ſtrength-
en and poliſh your kingdom, like the kingdoms of
Europe: for you have a good country, and com-
mand over many brave men; and if you could ga-
ther the Armenians, a rich and trading people, who
are ſcattered to the eaſt, and the weſt, and the north,
and the ſouth, under the protećtion of your majeſty’s
arms in your own country, no kingdom in the eaſt
would be like your kingdom, for riches and glory.
May the eternal God, the Father of our Lord Jeſus
Chriſt, ſharpen your ſcymitar upon all your ene-
mies, and ſtrengthen the wriſt of your majeſty's
right hand, to protećt our diſtreſſed nation, accord-
ing to the wiſhes and labours of your ſervant.
N A N c Y.
I declare I find myſelf exceedingly intereſted in
this poor man's fate. Did he ſucceed, fir? Did he
contribute to enlighten his nation, and to ſpread
that knowledge which he had ſuffered ſuch hard-
ſhips to acquire :
M R. E. G E R T o N.
I don't know, my dear; I wiſh I could inform
you. I would give any thing to know the ſucceſs
of his labours. Alas! I am afraid he would find
but few of his countrymen actuated by the ſame
diſintereſted and patriotic ſpirit.
CH A R L E s.

<page 250>
E M U L A T I O N. 237
C H A R L E s.
And did he write thoſe letters himſelf, ſir?
W I L L I A M.
Yes, brother; you ſee here in a note, that the let-
ter to the Duke of Northumberland is printed from
the original in Ameen's own hand-writing, the cha-
raćter remarkably fair, and even mercantile, and
the other is tranſlated from the Armenian.
D I A L O G U E X.
M R. E. G E R To N (To Mrs. Fºrm.)
E will now, my dear, return, if you pleaſe,
to the ſubjećt you propoſed, and read the ac-
count of Mrs. Louiſa Darbach, or rather Louiſa
Karſch, for that is her name by her laſt huſband,
and the one by which ſhe is known among the lite-
rati of Germany.
MR s. E G E R T o N.
With all my heart, my dear; and I think it.
a-propos, as there ſeems to be ſome affinity between
your poor Armenian and Madam Darbach. They
- both

<page 251>
238 "t H e F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
both poſſeſſed a perſeverance which no diſficulties
could overcome ; both were ſuperior geniuſes, and
both were prote&ted and patronized by the great,
and they both deſerved patronage.
M R. E. G E R To N.
Yes, yes; a writer like our friend Plutarch would
draw a number of parallel circumſtances. When
I intended to introduce this ſubjećt to you, my
children, I purpoſed to inform you of the great eſti-
mation, in which learning and learned men have
ever been held, and this I ſhall now reſume. As a
ſpur to your induſtry in this particular, I muſt in-
form ſuch of you as have not made the obſervation
yourſelves, that to be illiterate now among people
of a certain rank, is to be deſpiſed. I would by no
means perſuade you to become writers, unleſs you
feel an irreſiſtible impulſe, and find that thoſe whoſe
judgment is eſtabliſhed approve your efforts, and
encourage you to proceed. Then, if with energy
and genius you can by your writings warm the
heart, and incite it to virtue, I know no charaćter
more uſeful, more reſpectable, or which I would
rather ſee you aſſume. But this is a difficult taſk,
and only to be accompliſhed by a few.
The juſt renown which has been acquired by the
exertions of genius, affords a pleaſing retroſpect to
the emulative mind. Barbarians, kings, and con-
querors, have given the moſt honourable teſtimonies
of reſpect to learning. “I dwelt, ſaith Martinius,
1 In

<page 252>
E M U L A T J O N. 239
*
in the city of Venxus, when it was ſacked by the
Tartars. I fixed over the faireſt gate of my houſe
a red paper, long and broad, with an inſcription,
ſignifying, Here Dwells the EURopeAN Doc-
ToR of the DIvine LAw.—At the entrance of
the great hall I placed my largeſt and beſt bound
books, my mathematical and optical inſtruments,
&c. by which means I not only eſcaped the violence
and plunder of the common ſoldiers, but was ca-
reſſed by the Tartarian viceroy.”
When Alexander the Great found among the
ſpoils of Darius a caſket of ineſtimable workman-
fhip, embelliſhed with gold, pearls, and precious
ftones, he kept it as a caſe for the works of Homer.
When Menander, the comic poet, travelled be-
tween Egypt and Macedon, he was attended by am-
baſſadors and a fleet, the kings of theſe places think-
ing they could never do him ſufficient honour.
Magdalene, wife of Lewis XI. of France, when
ſhe ſaw Alanus faſt aſleep, who was an old hard-
favoured, but learned man, ſhe approached ſoftly
and kiſſed him. The ladies that attended her laugh-
ed, but ſhe replied, “It is not his perſon I bear
this reverence and reſpe&t to, but the divine beauty
of his ſoul.”
Theſe kind of inſtances, my children, are almoſt
innumerable: however, I ſhall only cite another,
and that, becauſe it contains a pathetic deſcription
of the death of a moſt extraordinary and celebrated
man. This was Archimedes, the mathematician,
- who

<page 253>
240 T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
who by the profundity of his knowledge, and the
inexhauſtible reſources of his imagination, defended
the ill-fortified city of Syracuſe againſt a moſt pow- .
erful fleet and army. This city was deemed inde-
fenſible, and its riches were known to be immenſe;
the Romans ſat down before it, therefore, with the
expe&tation of a ſpeedy ſurrender and prodigious
plunder. Archimedes alone ſuſpended its fate. He
deſtroyed their men': he demoliſhed their ſhipping.
He ſo united the powers of mechaniſm, that he raiſed
their veſſels into the air, and then let them daſh to
pieces by the violence of their fall. He made uſe
of burning-glaſſes, which, at the diſtance of ſome
hundred yards, ſet the Roman ſhips and wooden
towers on fire. At laſt, however, the town was
taken, on a great feſtival, by ſurprize, and the in-
habitants put to the ſword. Previous to the ſac-
cage, Marcellus, the Roman general, had given
ſtrićt orders to ſpare Archimedes, but cruel and in-
exorable deſtiny had otherwiſe decreed. A Roman
ſoldier had broke into his houſe, with his ſword
drawn, and demanded who he was. Archimedes,
intent probably upon ſome new diſcovery, and an-
xious to preſerve a mathematical figure, which he
had drawn in the duſt, inſtead of anſwering the ſol-
dier's queſtion, called out to him not to ſpoil his
circle. The warrior underſtood not circles; he
thought himſelf ſcorned, and ran Archimedes thro'
the body
Let us now return to Louiſa Darbach. .
E M U L A-
º

<page 254>
E M U L A T 1... O N. 24. I
E M U L A T I O N.
- An Account of Madam Lo U Is A D A R B A c H,
a famous German Poeteſs.
THIS prodigy in the literary world was born in
the year 1722, upon the borders of Lower Sileſia,
between Zulichau and Croſſen, at a ſmall hamlet
called Nammer. Her father, being a brewer and
alehouſe-keeper, was the principal of ſeven poor in-
habitants, but died whilſt ſhe was ſtill a child, not
above ſeven years old. Her grandmother's brother,
an old man of good underſtanding, who lived in Po-
land, had taken her home to his houſe a few months
before this happened, and taught her to read and
write. This is the uncle to whom one of the poems
in the printed colle&tion is addreſſed. She conti-
nued with him about three years, and then returned
to her mother. The misfortunes which conſtantly
attended her, until ſhe was near forty, began at
this period. Her firſt employment was the care of .
her infant brother; but ſhe ſoon quitted that, in
order to attend upon three cows, which was her pa-
rent's whole ſtock. The firſt ſigns of her natural,
inclination to poetry had then juſt made their ap-
pearance, by an uncommon deſire to ſing. She
knew a hundred church hymns by heart, and ſung
them at her work, or whilſt watching the cattle.
Her inclination ſoon prompted her to write verſes,
V o L. I. M but

<page 255>
242 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
but ſhe does not at preſent recolle&t any part of that
firſt eſſay of her uncultivated genius, which was ac-
cidentally aſfifted by a neighbouring ſhepherd, who,
although ſeparated by a ſmall river, continued ne-
vertheleſs to lend her a few books.- Robinſon
Cruſoe, the Aſiatic Baniſe, a German romance,
and the Arabian Nights Entertainment, compoſed
the whole of her library. She read theſe with great
pleaſure, and her time paſſed away very agreeably.
But this happineſs was ſoon at an end, being obliged
to return to her former attendance upon children;
with which, and other laborious employments of a
ſervant, ſhe reached her ſeventeenth year. Her
next ſtep was matrimony; and the huſband her
mother provided her, being a wool-comber by pro-
feſſion, obliged her to prepare all the wool which he
uſed; beſides which ſhe had the whole buſineſs of
the houſe to manage, and could find no time to in-
dulge her natural propenſity to writing verſes and
reading, except a few hours on a Sunday, but took
that opportunity to write down the poems ſhe had
compoſed at her work. After having been married
nine years, ſhe was releaſed from this drudgery by
the death of her huſband; but her mother ſoon en-
gaged her to another, who was much worſe than the
former. This was the moſt unfortunate part of her
whole life, as ſhe felt with this ſecond huſband all
the hardſhips of an unhappy marriage, and great
poverty. But even in theſe circumſtances nature
had a ſurprizing influence over the genius of our
poeteſs.
z_ -

<page 256>
E M U L A T. I O N. 243
poeteſs. She got to the ſight of ſome poems writ-
ten by a clergyman, named Schonemann, who is well
known at Berlin to have been at times affected, after
a violent fever, with a ſort of madneſs, during which
he always ſpoke and preached in verſe: although
the bulk of this extraordinary man’s performances
rather indicated a diſordered imagination, than the
inſpiration of the Muſes; our poeteſs found never-
theleſs in thoſe ſhe ſaw ſomething which greatly
excited her genius.
She now became more deſirous than ever to fol-
low the natural bent of her diſpoſition, but wanted
both time and opportunity: ſhe was, however, at
laſt encouraged by ſeveral perſons to proceed, and
particularly by Profeſſor Meyer, of Halle, who was
no otherwiſe acquainted with her, than by having
ſeen one of her poems. In gratitude to her firſt
patrons and benefactors, who were chiefly inhabi-
tants of Tranſtadt, in Poland, the place where ſhe
then reſided, ſhe mentions their names in the pre-
face. M. Korber, of Great Liſa, was the firſt
who committed any of her performances to the
preſs. Theſe productions of her genius were only
ſmall ſparks of that half-extinguiſhed fire, which
the Muſes had kindled in her. The King of .
Pruſſia's vićtories gave her force to overcome ail
obſtacles, and the flames which had till then been
ſmothered, blazed out at once. She removed to
Great Glogau in the year 1755, with her huſband
and children, and gaining admittance to a book-
M 2 ſeller's

<page 257>
*4+ T H E F A M - I L Y P I C T U R E.
seller's ſhop, read many poetical and other perform-
ances with much pleaſure, but without any order
or ſettled plan. The uſe Mrs. Darbach has made
of this curſory reading, and how eaſily ſhe retained
the moſt material parts, appear throughout her
poems. She has only read a few books, and thoſe
with great expedition; but any perſon unacquainted
with the real fact, would naturally imagine the
-contrary. The remarkable war which ended in
1764, and her ſovereign's exploits, diſplayed at
large the poetical genius of this extraordinary per-
ſon. The battle of Lowofchutz gave occaſion to
her firſt triumphant ode ; and ſhe ſoon afterwards
peruſed the military ſongs of a Pruſſian grenadier,
ſome of Ramler's odes, and Mrs. Unzer’s poems.
Her ſubſequent productions on the occaſion of the
King of Pruſſia's vićtories, plainly ſhew the effect
they had upon her, and are proofs of a poetical ge-
nius already come to maturity. Our poeteſs con-
tinued ſtill, however, oppreſſed with poverty; but
Providence was pleaſed at laſt to releaſe her from
her very deplorable ſtate, under which few would have
been able to have ſupported themſelves. Baron Cott-
witz, a Sileſian nobleman, who has long been celebrat-
ed for many amiable qualifications, became acquaint-
ed with her in 1760, as he was travelling through
Glogau. His charitable diſpoſition pitied her diſ-
treſs, relieved her from it, and carried her to Berlin.
She ſoon became acquainted with ſeveral men of
learning, and judges of poetry: her genius then
ſhewed

<page 258>
E M U L A T, I o N. 245
s
ſhewed itſelf in the greateſt luſtre; ſhe was uni-
verſally admired; and it is now her happineſs to be
carefſed at the court of a prince, whoſe chara&teriſtic
it is, to be at once the judge and patron of genius.
Moſt of the poems in the preſent collection have
been compoſed ſince, and fully explain her cha-
raćter, and the latter occurrences of her life. To
the above account, it may not be improper to add a
few remarks concerning Madam Darbach’s ge-
nius, made by the editor in the preface to the col-
lečtion of her poems, from whence our narrative -
is taken, and likewiſe a ſpecimen of the poems them-
ſelves, to illuſtrate theſe remarks.
Plato, in his diſcourſe called Io, lays it down as
the chara&ter of a true poet, that he delivers his
thoughts by inſpiration, himſelf not knowing the
expreſſions he is to make uſe of. According to
him, the harmony and turn of the verſe produce in
the poet an enthuſiaſm, which furniſhes him with
ſuch thoughts and images, as in a more compoſed
hour he would have ſought for in vain; who, with-
out deſign, without art, and without inſtruction, is
arrived at a wonderful perfection in the art of poetry,
and may be placed among poets of the firſt claſs.
It is from this cauſe ſhe has been more ſucceſsful in
ſuch pieces as ſhe has written whilſt her imagina-
tion was warm, than in thoſe that ſhe has compoſed
coolly, deliberately, and in leiſure hours. The lat-
ter always bear ſome marks of art, and betray the
abſence of the Muſes. Whenever our authoreſs is
M 3 in

<page 259>
246 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
in a particular manner ſtruck by any objećt, either
in her ſolitary hours, or when ſhe is in company,
her ſpirits immediately catch the flame; ſhe has no
longer the command of herſelf; every ſpring of her
ſoul is in motion; ſhe feels an irreſiſtible impulſe to
compoſe, and with an amazing quickneſs commits
the thoughts to paper, which the Muſe inſpires her
with ; and, like a watch juſt wound up, as ſoon as
her ſoul is put into motion by the impreſſion the ob-
ject has made on her, ſhe expreſſes herſelf in poetry,
without knowing in what manner the ideas and
figures riſe in her mind. Another and more nice
obſervation of Plato is, that the harmony and turn
of the verſe keep up the inſpiration. Of this truth
likewiſe our authoreſs is a living inſtance. No
ſooner hath ſhe hit upon the tone, as ſhe calls it,
and the foot of the verſe, but the words go on
fluently, and ſhe is never at a loſs for thought or
imagery. The moſt delicate turns of the ſubječt
and expreſſion ariſe in her mind while ſhe is yet
writing, as if they were dićtated to her. Of her
extempore performances, we have an excellent ſpe-
cimen in that beautiful ode ſacred to the memory
cf her deceaſed uncle, the inſtructor of her infancy,
written in the year 1761, at a time when ſhe hap-
pened to be engaged in company of the firſt rank at
Berlin. It conſiſts of eight ſtanzas, of fix lines
each, of which the third and fixth have nine ſylla-
- bles, the other ten. It ſeems while ſhe was in this
ſelect company, ſhe was touched by a ſudden re-
fle&tion,

<page 260>
E M U L A T I O N. , 247
;
flection, with a keen ſenſe of the great difference be-
tween her preſent condition, and her ſituation in the
early part of her life; and of the great obligation
ſhe had been under to the good old man, who, by
his attention to her underſtanding, had laid the foun-
dation of her preſent happineſs. Overcome with a
ſenſe of this happineſs, and with a heart replete
with gratitude, ſhe could contain herſelf no longer,
but, before all the company, poured forth the Over-
flowings of her ſoul (it muſt have been a very af-
feóting ſcene) nearly in the following words:
“ Ariſe from the duſt, ye bones that reſt in the
land where I paſſed my infant years. Venerable
ſage, re-animate thy body. Ye lips that once fed me
with the honey of inſtruction, be eloquent.”
“Oh thou bright ſhade, look down upon me
from the top of Olympus: behold, I am no longer
following the cattle in the fields: obſerve the circle
of refined mortals that ſurround me; they all ſpeak
of thy niece's poems: Oh liſten to their converſa-
tion f° -
“ For ever flouriſh the broad lime, under whoſe
ſhade I was wont to cling round thy neck full of
tenderneſs, like a child to the beſt of fathers, whilſt
thou wert repoſing thyſelf on the moſſy ſeat, tired
as the reaper with the fatigues of a ſultry day !”
“ Under yon green arched roof I uſed to repeat
to thee twenty paſſages in praiſe of God ſupreme,
though they were much above my comprehenſion;
and when I aſked thee the meaning of many a dark
M4 - ſentence

<page 261>
248 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
ſentence in the Chriſtian ſacred records, good man,
thou didſt explain them to me.”
“Like a divine in ſable veſt, who from the lofty
pulpit points out the way that leads to life; ſo thou
didſt inform me of the fall of man and the covenant
of grace, and I, all raptures, ſnatched the words
from thy lips with eager kiſſes.”
“ Thou inhabitant of ſome celeſtial ſphere, be-
hold the ſilent tear of joy! may it often roll
down my cheeks If thou canſt ſpeak, dear ſhade,
tell me, didſt thou ever conceive any hopes of my
preſent fortune and honour, at the time when my
eyes were ſucceſſively engaged in the reading of
books every day more improving f"
“When at thy ſide, on ſome roſy bank, I ſat
weaving into chaplets for thy temples the flowers
my little hands had gathered, and looking up to
thee ſmiled filial love, did thy ſoul then preſage the
good things that are now come to paſs?”
“ Mayeſt thou be cloathed with threefold ra-
diance, and mayeſt thou be refreſhed with the ema-
nations of divine complacence more than the ſouls
of thy companions. May every drop of temporal
pleaſure with which my cup of joy overflows, be
rewarded unto thee with continual draughts from
the ocean of eternal beatitude l’’
MR. E. G E R T o N.
Well, children, what is your opinion of Madam
Louiſa Darbach: *
M R.

<page 262>
E M U L A T I O N. 249
*
M. R. W. 1 L L I A M.
I think her a prodigy, ſir.
N A N c Y. ~
And ſo I believe we all do. For my part, though
I have ſo many inſtruštors, and am taken ſo much
pains with, I am afraid I ſhall never be half ſo great
a genius. -
M R. E G E R to N.
Nay, but, my dear, you ſhould never encourage
that kind of idea. Neither do I mean you ſhould
be vain. You ſhould not arrogantly ſay, you ſee
nothing extraordinary in ſuch a perſon: I would
have you admire, but not deſpond. While you
wonder you ſhould ſay, ‘I will likewiſe endeavour
to become famous by my virtues and my talents;
I will emulate what I find every body approves.”
F A N N Y.
Yes; but, papa, as far as I find by this, one can’t
be a poeteſs unleſs one has a Muſe: now I don’t
know what that is; I never ſaw one in my life that
I know of, nor do I know where one can get
ſuch a thing—Lord, mamma, what makes you all
laugh at me ſo :
MR. E. G E R To N.
We laugh, my dear, more at the writer who has
led you into this error, than at you. The Muſe
which he talks ſo familiarly of, as if it were a real
perſonage
*

<page 263>
250 T H E F A M 1 l Y P 1 c T U R E.
perſonage ſtanding at Madam Darbach’s elbow, and
telling her what to ſay next, is an imaginary lady
that never had any exiſtence. The expreſſion, how-
ever, is become very common, though it is very
inaccurate. It only fgnifies, that the perſon thus
aſſiſted by what is called the Muſe or Muſes, has 3
more lively fancy, with greater feelings and facility
of compoſition, than others.
M R. C H A R L E s.
I have heard you ſay, fir, when you have been
ſpeaking of French poetry and French critics, that
notwithſtanding they are continually talking ſo much
about nature, truth, and probability, their tragedies
and comedies are exceedingly improbable and un-
natural, becauſe they make their charaćters ſpeak
extempore in rhime, but from this account of Mrs.
Darbach ſhe has that power.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
Yes, Charles; but there is one thing I muſt guard
you againſt, which is, that there is a natural pro-
penſity in man, when he is ſpeaking of any thing
uncommon, to exaggerate, rather than to ſimply
relate facts. I cannot aſſert that it is ſo in this in-
ſtance; but if Mrs. Darbach felt the inſpiration ſhe
ſpeaks of, that is, if in the midſt of a large com-
pany ſhe was ſenſible of no reſtraint, but was able
to burſt forth all at once into a ſtrain of extempore
poetry, connected in the ſubječt, and regular in the
compoſition,

<page 264>
E M U L A T I O N. 25 I
:
compoſition, her talents are indeed miraculous.
There are extempore poets among the Italians, the
Spaniards, and other nations, whoſe language is
ſmooth, and where almoſt every word ends with a
vowel: but the compoſitions of the very beſt of
theſe, from every account I have heard, would be
very dull and inſignificant, if committed to writing.
The German tongue, like the Engliſh, is bold, ir-
regular, abounding with conſonants, and requiring
great art and nicety, before it can be adapted to the
purpoſes of poetry, ſo as to give pleaſure. I can
readily ſuppoſe the imagination peculiarly warm at
ſome moments, teeming with imagery, and over-
flowing with words and ideas ; but the inſtant you
lay it under the reſtraint of certain rules, intricate
and ſevere in their own nature, you diſturb its con-
nexions, by dividing its attention. And as to the
pretended inſpiration ſpoken of, I think it a chi-
maera: I mean, that inſpiration which ſeems to in-
ſinuate a poet can make beautiful verſes in a kind
of dream, and without knowing what he is doing.
I ſpeak this, children, that you may not be diſcou-
raged by compariſons: that you may not conclude
you want abilities, becauſe you find them unequal
to miracles. However, I would recommend Mrs.
Darbach to you, as a very noble example of Emu-
lation.
MR s. E G E R T on.
We will now leave this amiable woman, and re-
verſe the picture; for as we wiſh, my children, to
* * ſhew

<page 265>
252 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
-
ſhew you the honours that are paid to abilities, when
virtuouſly exerted; ſo likewiſe it is incumbent on
us to deſcribe the melancholy cataſtrophe of the
vicious. It is true, there are inſtances, too many
perhaps, of wicked people, who apparently flouriſh
while they live, and have the happineſs to be for-
gotten when they are dead; but only imagine, my
children, what muſt the feelings of thoſe people
be, whoſe only hope is that men may not diſcover
their crimes at the preſent, and that their memories
may ſink into oblivion in future! Conſider this, and
conſider the calm thoughts, the ſweet content, and
the delightful retroſpect of the good, the homage
that is paid to them both living and dead, with the
certain aſſurance of having every thing to hope, and
nothing to fear; conſider theſe things, and you
cannot help being virtuous. . But come, let us hear
the hiſtory of Bianca.
P R I D E.
The extraordinary Hiſtory of BIANCA, a Venetian
Lady, from the French of M. De LA LANDE.
A BOUT the end of the fifteenth century,
Thomas Buona Venturi, a young man of Florence,
of a creditable family, but without fortune, went
to live with a merchant of the ſame country, who
had ſettled at Venice. The merchant’s houſe was
over-againſt the back-door of one that belonged to
- 2.

<page 266>
P. R. I. D. E. 253
s
a noble Venetian, whoſe name was Barthelemi
Capello. In the houſe of Capello there was a young
lady of great beauty, whoſe name was Bianca. She
was watched with great circumſpection, but Buona
Venturi frequently ſaw her at the window. He had
not the leaſt hope of an interview, yet by a natural,
and almoſt neceſſary impulſe, he did all that could be
done in ſuch circumſtances, to amuſe her, and ex-
preſſed the paſſion with which ſhe had inſpired him.
He was young and amiable; ſhe very ſoon ceaſed to
be indifferent; and after long negociation, the par-
ticulars of which are not related, the lovers found
means to accompliſh their wiſhes. Bianca went
every night after the family were retired and aſleep,
to the chamber of Buona Venturi, in the merchant’s
houſe, by means of the little back-door, which ſhe
left a-jar, and by which ſhe returned before day,
without being ſeen by any body. After this had
continued ſome time, cuſtom made her leſs cautious,
and one night ſhe ſtaid with her lover till the morn-
ing was farther advanced than uſual : it happened
that a baker's boy, who, according to the cuſtom
of the country, was taking bread from a neighbour-
ing houſe to carry it to the oven, perceived the little
back-door by which Bianca had come out, to be
a-jar, and ſuppoſing it to be left open by accident,
ſhut it. The young lady came a few minutes after-
wards, and found it faſt; in the conſternation and
diſtreſs which this accident produced, ſhe returned
to the houſe ſhe had juſt quitted, and knocking ſoftly.
at
a

<page 267>
254 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
at the door, was let in by her lover, Gratitude and
love inſtantly determined him to ſacrifice every thing
to her ſafety; he immediately quitted his fituation,
and retired with the lady to the houſe of another
Florentine, where they remained hidden with the
utmoſt care and precaution, till they found an op-
portunity of eſcaping to Florence. At Florence he
had a little houſe in Via Larga, near St. Mark’s, and
over-againſt a convent of nuns, of the order of St.
Catherine. To this little dwelling he retired with
his wife, and lived ſome time in great privacy, for
fear the republic of Venice ſhould, at the ſolicita-
tions of Capello, cauſe him to be purſued. Francis
Maria, the great duke of Tuſcany at this time, was
a native of France, the ſon of Coſmo the Firſt, and
father of Mary de Medicis. He had married Jane
of Auſtria, daughter of the emperor Ferdinand, and
widow of the king of Hungary. She was a prin-
ceſs of high eſtimation, but being at this time paſt
her youth, the duke neglected her for other women.
One of the officers of his court was the confident
of his pleaſures, who had a wife not leſs zealous to
render herſelf uſeful than himſelf. The arrival of
the fair Venetian was known at Florence, and the
rumour of her adventure and her beauty, excited a
ſtrong deſire in the Duke to ſee her, to which the
great privacy of her life contributed not a little. He
uſed every day to walk before the houſe to which ſhe
had retired, and as ſhe had no amuſement but look-
ing out of the window, it was not long before his
curioſity


<page 268>
P R I D E. 255
>
*
curioſity was gratified. She was indeed half veiled,
but he ſaw enough to judge of her beauty, of which
he became violently enamoured. His confidante
perceiving his paſſion to be unſurmountable, began
to concert meaſures for the gratification of it, and
engaged his wife to aſſiſt in the proječt. The miſ-
fortunes which Bianca had already ſuffered, and
thoſe to which ſhe was ſtill expoſed, gave this good
woman a pretence to inſinuate that ſhe had ſome-
thing of importance to communicate to her, and for
that purpoſe invited her to dinner. Buona Venturi
was ſome time in ſuſpence whether he ſhould ſuffer
Bianca to accept the invitation; but the rank of the
lady, and the need in which he ſtood of protection,
at length got the better of his caution and doubts.
Bianca was received with the moſt flattering kind-
neſs and attention; was prevailed upon to relate the
ſtory of her diſtreſs, and was heard with an appear-
ance of the moſt tender concern; obliging offers
were made her, and preſſed with ſo generous a
friendſhip, that ſhe could not refuſe to accept of
ſome preſents from the lady. The duke, informed
of the ſucceſs of the firſt viſit, hoped that he might
be preſent at the ſecond. Another invitation was
immediately ſent to Bianca, and after new marks of
eſteem and regard, new pity of her misfortunes, and
new praiſes of her beauty, ſhe was aſked if ſhe had
no deſire to make her court to the grand duke, who,
on his part, was impatient to become acquainted
with her, having already found an opportunity to ſee
- and

<page 269>
256 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
and admire her. Bianca had not fortitude and virtue
to reſiſt this new honour, which, though ſhe at firſt
affected to refuſe, her crafty ſeducer diſcovered, by
her eyes, that ſhe wiſhed to be urged to accept. .
Juſt at this criſis it was contrived that the grand
duke ſhould come in, without any appearance of
deſign; and Bianca was charmed with the modeſty of
his addreſs, the warmth of his praiſe, and the libe-
rality of his offers. Other viſits ſucceeded, and a
familiarity inſenſibly came on ; ſome preſents which
ſhe could not refuſe from her ſovereign, improved the
duke's advantage; and the huſband himſelf did not
think it prudent to break a connexion which might
be at once innocent and advantageous. The duke
was not likely to ſtop ſhort in ſo good a road; he
gained new influence over the wife by advancing the
huſband, and at laſt accompliſhed his wiſhes ſo much
to the ſatisfaction of all parties, that, as the Italians
expreſs it, he and Bianca and Buona Venturi, made
a triangul, equilatero. The huſband ſoon became
familiar with his new condition, and removed with
his wife to a houſe in the fine ſtreet that leads to
a bridge over the Arno, called Trinity Bridge.
This houſe is ſtill ſtanding; it is diſtinguiſhed
by the arms of Medicis ſurmounted by a hat, and
belongs at preſent to the Ricardi family. Buona |
Venturi ſolaced himſelf for the loſs of Bianca, by |
forming new connexions, and aſſociated with the
nobility of the country; but a change of fortune ſo
ſudden, and ſo great, rendered him inſolent, over-
bearing,

<page 270>
P R I D E. 257
bearing, and preſumptuous even in his behaviour to
the duke himſelf, and created him ſo many enemies
that he was at length aſſaſinated near the bridge that
led to his houſe. The duke and his new miſtreſs
were not much afflićted at this accident. She totally
left her reſerve and timidity, and appeared in public
with a magnificent equipage, ſetting honour and
ſhame at defiance. Jane, the grand dutcheſs, was
extremely mortified at the condućt of her huſband,
and provoked by the pride of her rival, yet ſhe ſup-
preſſed both her grief and reſentment, which, how-
ever, ſecretly ſubverted her conſtitution, and at length
put an end to her life. The death of the grand
dutcheſs opened new views to the ambition of
Bianca, who had acquired an aſcendancy over the
Duke, which rendered him wholly ſubſervient to
her will, and ſhe now exerted all her art to induce
him to marry her. The cardinal Ferdinand de Me-
dicis, who was next heir to the dukedom if his bro-
ther ſhould die without iſſue, oppoſed this marriage
in vain, and Bianca, in a ſhort time was made grand
dutcheſs of Tuſcany. After ſome time ſhe became
very deſirous of a child who might ſucceed the grand
duke in his dominions; ſhe cauſed maſſes to be ſaid,
and aſtrologers to be conſulted, but theſe, and many
other expedients proving ineffectual, ſhe reſolved to
feign a pregnancy, and introduce a ſpurious child,
of which ſhe would at leaſt have the honour. To
affiſt her in the execution of this proječt, ſhe applied
to a cordelier of the monaſtery of Ogni Sanéti, who
...Vo L. I. N - readily

<page 271>
258. T H E F A M H L Y P 1 c T U R E.
readily undertaking the affair, ſhe feigned tranſient
fickneſs, nauſeas, and other ſymptoms of pregnancy;
took to her bed, received the compliments of the
court, and the duke himſelf expreſſed great ſatisfac-
tion upon ſo happy an event. Her pretended reckon-
ing being up, ſhe ſuddenly alarmed her people in the
middle of the night, complained of labour pains,
and enquired impatiently for her confeſſor. The
cardinal, who ſuſpected the artifices of his ſiſter-in-
law, had her ſo diligently watched, that he knew all
her motions; as ſoon as he was informed that her
confeſſor was ſent for, he repaired to her anti-cham-
ber, in which he walked to and fro, repeating his
breviary. The dutcheſs hearing he was there, ſent
him a meſſage, intreating that he would retire,
becauſe ſhe could not bear that he ſhould hear the
cries which might be forced from her by her pains.
The cardinal anſwered, “ let her highneſs think
only of her own buſineſs as I do of mine.” As ſoon
as the confeſſor arrived, the cardinal ran to him,
crying out, “welcome, welcome, my dear father,
the grand dutcheſs is in labour, and has great need
of your aſſiſtance;” at the ſame time catching him
in his arms, and embracing him, he perceived a jolly
boy, juſt born, which the good father had got in his
ſleeve. He inſtantly took the child from him, and
cried out loud enough to be heard by the dutcheſs,
“ God be praiſed, the princeſs is happily delivered
of a ſon;” at the ſame time ſhewing him to all that
were preſent. The grand dutcheſs, enraged almoſt
to

<page 272>
P R. I. D. E. 259
to diſtraćtion at this inſult and diſappointment, de-
termined to be revenged on the cardinal, and the
grand duke, whoſe paſſion had ſuffered no abatement,
ſoon gave her an opportunity. They were all three
on a country party, at Poggio a Caino, and eat at
the ſame table. The cardinal was extremely fond of
blanc-manger, and the dutcheſs procured ſome that
was mixed with poiſon, and had it ſerved up. The
cardinal, who had many ſpies about her, was in-
formed of it. He ſat down at table, however, as
uſual, but notwithſtanding the moſt prefing ſolici-
tations of the dutcheſs, he would not touch the
blanc-manger. “Well, ſaid the Duke, if the car-
dinal will not eat, I will;” and immediately took
ſome into his plate. The dutcheſs not being able to
prevent his eating it without diſcovering her crime,
perceived herſelf to be undone for ever; and to avoid
the reſentment of her brother-in-law, the cardinal,
ſhe ate the remainder of the poiſoned diſh herſelf, and
died with her huſband.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
So died a grand dutcheſs, truly deſerving the
miſerable cataſtrophe her crimes involved her in.
Compare, my children, this wretched lady’s condućt
with that of the counteſs of Alberti, Louiſa Dar-
bach, or a thouſand other women, conſpicuous for
their virtues, and behold the difference. Imagine
- the

<page 273>
26o T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
the coroding paſſions, doubts, jealouſies, and anxie-
ties of the one, and the calm content and ſecret
happineſs of the other, and you will, none of you,
ever indulge the leaſt inclination to vice.
MR s. E G E R To N.
I have ſo good an opinion of you all, my children,
that I think I ſcarce need point out to you the errors
of this unhappy woman’s conduct. Had ſhe not
indulged her firſt irregular defires, her life might
have been innocent, and her end happy.
END OF THE FIRST volu ME

<page 274>
FAMILY PICTURE.
I N T W O V O L U M E. S.

<page 275>
A fe fuifque orfus, primum domum fuam coercuit,
quod plerique haud minus arduum eft, quam
provinciam regere,
Tac. in Vit. Agric.
La Magnanimité eft un noble effort de l'orgueil par
laquel il rend l'homme maitre de lui-meme, pour
he rendre maitre de toutes chofes. -
Rochefoucaul;.

<page 276>
FAM I LY P I C T U R E;
o R,
Do MEST IC DIALOGUES
O N
AMIABLE AND INTERESTING SUBJECTS;
I L L u S T R A T E D B Y.
HISTORIES, ALLEGoRIES, TALEs, FABLEs,
ANEcDoTEs, &c.
I n t E in d e D ºr o
STRENGTHEN AND INFORM T H E MIND.
Bº Y
T H O M A S H O L C R O F T,
A UT Ho R of DUPLICITY, A Co M E D Y.
-º-mºm-
V O L U M E II &
-
L O N D O N :
Printed for Lock Y E R D Av 1 s, in Holborn ;
Printer to the Royal Society.
M D cc L Xxx, 11.

<page 277>
→~~~~ ·
-_-）-- ~~~~ ! *-^-----------
---- ---------------
----~--~----
~ ~~~~*~*=~--~
,- == ！--~~~~==+++==

<page 278>
C o N T E N T S.
- V O L. II.
D I A L O G U E XI.
OVE of Fame in Alexander the Great - Page 1
- In an Indian - - - - - - 3
AMIBITIon : a Tartarian Tale - - - - 4.
MERCY : Anecdotes of Ottoman and Aliverdi 16
Love: or Idris and Mahmut - - - - 20
D I A Lo G U E XII. 28
An Account of Mahomet and Mahometaniſm 29
Mahomet’s Inducements to eſtabliſh a new
Religion -- - - - - - - - - - 30
His art in contraſting the Pleaſures of Para-
diſe and the Pains of Hell - - - - 31, 32
His tendency to miracles - - - - - - 33
Farther particulars of his Paradiſe - - - 35
— of his Hell - - - - 37
The Mahometan Hiſtory of the Laſt Day - 38
Story of the White Elephant - - - - - 41
Terrible relation of a Turkiſh Faſt - - - 43
SUPERSTITIon : or the Satirical Traveller 47
D I A L O G U E XIII. 57
CREDULITY :, or the Miraculous Cheſt - - 58
Dexterous trick of a Thief - - - - - 85
IN cREDULITY: or the ſtory of the Sultan o
Egypt - - - - - - - - - - - 86
Reſpect paid by the Athenians to Xenocrates Ioo
Anecdote of the Duke of Oſſura and a Galley-
Slave - - - - - - - - - - ibid.
TRUTH: or the ſtory of Saddyq - - - ror
Anecdote of Colonel Edmonds—of Pyrrhus III
EQUIvocation: a tragical hiſtory of itseffects 112
D I A L O G U E XV. I29.
Anecdote of Papyrius - - - - -
- I QO.
SECRESY : or the Enraged Lover - - - #:
Fable of the Herdſman - - - - - - 14o
DETRAcTION ; or the ſtory of Dorantes - 143
D I A-

<page 279>
C O N T E N T S.
- Page
D I A L O G U E XVI. I 50
Anecdote of the Emperor Trajan - - - ibid.
Remarkable Legacy of Eudamidas - - - 151
FRIEND SHIP : An Arabian Anecdote -, - 154
- The Schoolfellows. A Tale 159
D I A L O G U E XVII. 171
The Peaſant and Watch-Dog. A Fable - ibid.
Anecdote of King Philip and the Ungrateful
Courtier - - - - - - - - -, -, -, - 173
INGRATITUDE: or the Magical Candleſtick 175
GRATITUDE : or the Good Italian and the
Grateful Turk - - - - - - - - 184.
D I A L O G U E XVIII. I92
INDULGENCE : or the Two Siſters - – - ibid.
Anecdote of Xenocrates and an Athenian Youth 203
Fable of Induſtry, Curioſity, and Idleneſs - 204.
Eſſay on Induſtry - - - - - - - - 208
D I A L’ O G U E XIX. 214
Anecdote of a Gentleman and his Tenant - ibid.
— of a Generous Man - - - - 215
Gallantry of Sir Walter Raleigh to Q. Elizabeth 216
Anecdote of Archias the Spartan - - - 217
SocIAL DUTY : or, Mirza - - - - - 218
Mahmoud and the Vizier. A Fable. - - 225
PERs EveRANCE: The Hiſtory of a German
Philoſopher - - - - - - - - - - 227
HEALTH: or the Vicar. A humourous cha-
raćter -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 232.
D. I. A L O G U E - XX. 239
The Loquacious Barber - - - - - - - - 240
Youthful Levity : or the Neceſſity of
knowing your Company - - -, -, -, 243
Levity of Conduct: The ſtory of Flavilla 251
AMIABLE LEv1TY: Letter to a new-born
child - - - - - - - - - - - 273
PATERNAL FEELINGS: or the Indian – – 277
B O O. K. S

<page 280>
B O O KS printed for Locky E R D Av 1s,
Printer to the Roy AL Soc 1 ET Y.
I. R. Hooper's RATIONAL RECREATIONs.
In which the Principles of Numbers and
Natural Philoſophy are clearly and copiouſly elu-
cidated, by a Series of eaſy, entertaining, intereſt-
ing Experiments Arithmetical, Mechanical, Elec-
trical, Magnetical, Optic, Chromatic, and Acouſtic:
in Pneumatics, Hydrology, and Pyrotechnics. With
an Appendix of Miſcellaneous Recreations; and all
thoſe commonly performed on the Cards. Four
Volumes, 8vo, illuſtrated with 67 Copper Plates:
Price I l. I s. ſewed in boards.
II. Dr. Goldſmith's Rom AN HISTORY: from
the Foundation of the City of Rome to the Deſtruc-
tion of the Weſtern Empire; in Two Volumes, 8vo;.
12 s. bound, 4th Edition.
III. Dr. Goldſmith’s Roman History abridg-
ed by Himſelf, for the Uſe of Schools, and adorned
with Copper-Plates, 3d Edition, 3 s. 6d. bound.
IV. Comenii Orbis Senſualium Pičius : or a World
of Things obvious to the Senſes, drawn in 150 Pic-
tures, with a Nomenclature in Latin and Engliſh.
By the Rev. Charles Hoole, A. M, 12th Edition,
S. bound,
3 V.

<page 281>
B O O K S printed for L. D Av 1 s.
V. A KEY to the New Test AMENT: giving
an Account of the ſeveral Books, their Contents,
their Authors, and of the Times, Places, and Occa-
ſions on which they were reſpectively writtºn.
. By T H o M As Percy, D.D.
Now Lord Biſhop of Dromore. 2s. 6d. bound.
VI. The New PEERAGE :, or ancient and pre-
fent State of the Nobility of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; with their Coats of Arms, Creſts, Sup-
porters, and Mottoes engraved, 3 vol. 3d Edition,
15s. in boards. -
VII. The Abbe Raynal's History of the
Revolution of AMERICA. French or Engliſh
‘Edition, 2s. 6d. ſewed.

<page 282>
i.
*
. . . .
*
º
ILY PICTURE.
. . "
D I A L O G U E. XI.
- MR. Eotºros.
N our laſt converſation we had the hiſtory of
an ambitious woman. Let us reſume the ſub-
jećt; let us curſorily examine the paſſion of
ambition. . .
The word Ambition, like the word pride, may be
taken both in an ill and a good meaning. It is
uſually applied to thoſe deſtructive ačtions which are
inſpired by a love of fame, regardleſs of the means ;
which root out the nations, and deſolate the earth, that
the people who remain may tremble and admire.
When it takes this courſe, ambition is the moſt
pernicious of all the paſſions; becauſe the miſeries
with which it teems are ſuppoſed glorious and bene-
ficial to the conquerors; who, therefore, never
ineglect to praiſe, and almoſt idolize him who leads
them to victory. The leader fails, not to return
Vol. II. B - this

<page 283>
B O O K S printed for L. D Av 1 s.
V. A KEY to the New Test AMENT: giving
an Account of the ſeveral Books, their Contents,
their Authors, and of the Times, Places, and Occa-
ſions on which they were reſpectively writtºn.
. By T H o M As PE Ric Y, D. D.
Now Lord Biſhop of Dromore. 2s. 6d. bound.
VI. The New PEERAGE :, or ancient and pre-
fent State of the Nobility of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; with their Coats of Arms, Creſts, Sup-
porters, and Mottoes engraved, 3 vol. 3d Edition,
15S. in boards.
VII. The Abbe Raynal's History of the
Revolution of AMERICA. French or Engliſh
Edition, 2s. 6d. ſewed.
|

<page 284>
FAMILY PICTURE.
*-
D I A L O G U E XI.
M R. E. G E R to N.
N our laſt converſation we had the hiſtory of
- an ambitious woman. Let us reſume the ſub-
jećt; let us curſorily examine the paſſion of
ambition. , .
The word Ambition, like the word pride, may be
taken both in an ill and a good meaning. It is
uſually applied to thoſe deſtructive actions which are
inſpired by a love of fame, regardleſs of the means ;
which root out the nations, and deſolate the earth, that
the people who remain may tremble and admire.
When it takes this courſe, ambition is the moſt
pernicious of all the paſſions; becauſe the miſeries
with which it teems are ſuppoſed glorious and bene-
ficial to the conquerors; who, therefore, never
neglect to praiſe, and almoſt idolize him who leads
them to victory. The leader fails, not to return
Vol. II. B this

<page 285>
$2. T H E F AM 1 ly P 1 c T U R E.
this falſe praiſe—he is the firſt of heroes, and they
are the braveſt of troops. Thus each is dilated with
imaginary virtues, for actions the moſt oppreſſive,
the moſt intolerable, and the moſt wicked that
man can commit. • * ~ * -
If you wiſh for a lively pićture of the effects o
this paſſion, and the horrors I have juſt hinted at,
turn to the hiſtory of Sylla and Caius Marius, or,
indeed, to the hiſtory of any great and powerful
people, and you will ſoon be ſatiated.
Ambition is the moſt active principle in the mind,
and its effects are frequently prodigious: Many
perſons have wilfully devoted their lives to it, by
committing crimes for which they knew they ſhould
fuffer; chufing rather to endure tortures, and have
their names recorded in infamy, than to die and be for-
gotten. Such were Eroſtratus, who fired the Tem-
ple of Diana, at Epheſus; Hermoxles, who killed
Philip, King of Macedon; and many others.
Numerous are the examples too of thoſe who,
inſpired by this paſſion, have been inclined to obtain
it by virtuous means, but who could not reſiſt vi-
cious opportunities of gaining their purpoſes. Ju-
lius Caeſar, Pompey, Alexander, Pifiſtratus, &c. &c.
gave, at different times, evident proofs of their
ſenſe of, and reſpect for, virtue. They committed
likewiſe the moſt horrible crimes and devaſtations in
purſuit of glory.
The love of fame ſeems never to have been more
predominant in any perſon, than in Alexander the
- - Great.
º

<page 286>
A M B I T I O N. 3
Great. He took Caliſthenes, a man famous for
his eloquent writings, with him to his wars, that
he might be a witneſs of his ačtions, and record
them for poſterity. When he came to the tomb of
Achilles, at Sigaeum, he exclaimed, “Oh fortunate
hero, thou hadſt a Homer to make thy praiſe im-
mortal!” So lively was his own ſenſe of this paſſion,
that he could not forbear eſteeming it in others. He
had heard of a certain Indian, whoſe ſkill in archery
was ſo great, that he could ſhoot his arrows through
a ring at a great diſtance. This man was taken
priſoner, and brought to Alexander, who deſired
him to exhibit ſome proofs of his dexterity; this the
Indian peremptorily refuſed: at which Alexander
was ſo enraged, that he commanded him to be taken
away and ſlain. Being queſtioned by the ſoldiers, as
they were leading him to death, concerning the
reaſon of his obſtinacy, the Indian told them, he
had been long out of practice, and was afraid he
ſhould not be able to equal his former exploits.
Alexander immediately ordered him to be releaſed,
gave him his liberty, and loaded him with preſents:
admiring the greatneſs of that ſpirit that would ſuffer
death rather than loſe renown. - -
The word ambition, when applied to a good in-
tention, we uſually call emulation; a word too cold
to expreſs actions eminently virtuous. The follow-
ing tale will fully explain what I would have you
underſtand by Ambition in each ſenſe of the word.
B 2 A M BITION.

<page 287>
4. T H E F. A. M I L-Y P-I C T U R E.
A M B I T I O N.
KoREM and ZENDAR : A Tartarian Tale.
CORDU BA, King of Teran, in Great Tar-
tary, was a Prince adored by his ſubjećts, whoſe
felicity he conſtantly laboured to promote, during a
very long reign. Covered with glory, and bending
under the infirmities of old age, his care was to
fix upon a ſucceſſor, who ſhould cauſe him to be
the leſs regretted by his people. It was his pre-
rogative to elect one : and, having no ſon, he was
obliged, according to the law of Tartary, to com-
mit the ſceptre to him whom he ſhould chuſe to
marry his daughter, provided he were of the blood
of Tamerlane.
Akebar, King of Balk, and Mameluke, Sultan
of Cariſm, pretended, with equal ardor, to a match
that would double their reſpective powers; and, pre-
ſuming that Corduba would declare in favour of him
whoſe enmity was moſt to be dreaded, each of them
threatened to appear at the head of an army, to
make good, at Teran, his demand for Almanzaris
and her rich dowry. The old King, having con-
ſidered what was the fitteſt courſe to be taken, deter-
mined for war, and convoked the States of his king-
dom, in order to acquaint them with his reſolution.
There were now, at the court of Teran, two
younger brothers, Princes of the blood of Tamer-
lane, whoſe perſonal merit ſeemed to render them
worthy of the higheſt fortune. They entertained
6 the

<page 288>
A. M. B. I T. I O N. -- 5.
the moſt violent paſſion for Almanzaris; but, having
nothing but their birth and qualifications to recom-
mend them, they had not yet dared to declare their
intention. The King had obſerved what reſtraint
they put upon themſelves, in order to conceal their
ſentiments, and generouſly attributed this reſpectful
deportment to the account of their other merits.
The grandees having poſted up to the capital from
all parts, and the deputies of the people repaired to
the palace, the wiſe Corduba addreſſed them in theſe
terms :
“I have not yet lived too long, my people: for,
each day of my life, by being employed in pro-
moting the advantage of my ſubjećts, has been with--
out reproach. But, as my infirmities no longer
allow me to live for your ſakes, it is time for me to
depart; or, at leaſt, until it pleaſes God to cut me
off from the number of the living, I ought to employ.
the few days he grants me, in endeavouring to
prevent your being injured by my death.”
The good King was interrupted by the ſighs and
tears of the aſſembly.
* Akebar and Mameluke wiſh to reign over you,
continued the aged Monarch. They are deſtitute
of all right to my throne, as well as my daughter;
yet they threaten to acquire both by force of arms.
I am a King, I am a father, O Teranites 1 and I
know what ſort of huſband is proper for my daugh-
ter; and what Sovereign my ſubječts ought to wiſh
for. Akebar and Mameluke are alike unworthy of
B 3 my

<page 289>
6 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
my choice; and, whatever may be their force, it is
better to have them for enemies than for maſters.
Illuſtrious deſcendants of the great Timur ! brave
Korem intrepid Zendar ! to you I commit the
care of preſerving the Teranites from oppreſſion.
Divide between you the forces of my kingdom, and
march againſt my enemies. The head of my people
and the huſband of my daughter muſt be an hero:
Contend both of you for this title with a noble emu-
lation: He that ſhall have deſerved it, at the end of
this war, ſhall be King of the Teranites and the
huſband of Almanzaris.” -
Corduba diſſolved the aſſembly. They anſwered
him with ſhouts of applauſe. He diſpatched orders
for Korem and Zendar to be obeyed throughout
Teran, as if he himſelf were preſent.
Zendar laboured with extraordinary diligence in
augmenting the army he was to command: He won
the hearts of the ſoldiers by liberalities, and animated
the officers by marks of diſtinétion and the moſt flat-
tering hopes: He colle&ted vaſt quantities of pro-
viſions and ammunition, erected magazines, exer-
ciſed his levies, and took the field, as ſoon as the
ſeaſon was favourable. It was his lot to march
againſt Mameluke. As the petty republics, that
lay between the kingdoms of Teran and Cariſm,
might ſuffer themſelves to be wrought upon by the
promiſes, or intimidated by the menaces of the
Sultan, Zendar made ſure of them by ſurpriſing
their towns, putting garriſons in their fortreſſes, and
ſeizing

<page 290>
A. M. B. I T I O N. - 7.
ſeizing their arms; and, having nothing more to
fear from theſe petty ſtates, which he had rendered -
incapable of moleſting him, he poured like a torrent
into the kingdom of Cariſm.
Mameluke was too well acquainted with the pa-
cific temper of Corduba to expect ſuch vigorous
proceedings. He had not even aſſembled his army,.
when Zendar, maſter of the field, had made ſeveral
great towns open their gates to him. The General.
of the Teranites, equally ſkilful and active, attacked
ſuch places as ſhut their gates againſt him : He con-
tinued his approaches ſo artfully, carried them on ſo
vigorouſly, and ſtormed the breaches with ſo much
bravery, that, in a few days, the moſt reſolute gar-
riſons ſurrendered at diſcretion.
Already Zendar was in ſight of Cariſm, when the
Sultan, at the head of an army much more nume-
rous, advanced to oppoſe his rapid progreſs. For
ſeveral days ſucceſſively, there were ſkirmiſhes be-
tween large parties, in which the Teranites had
always the advantage. The Sultan, conſidering
thoſe loſſes as ſo many preſages of a general defeat,
in caſe he ventured a battle, made propoſals for a
peace: The principal conditions were, That he
would renounce his pretenſions to Almanzaris; that.
he would be the ally of him that ſhould marry her;
that he would render homage to the King of Teran
for the territories of Cariſm, which Zendar had put.
under contribution.
B 4. The

<page 291>
8 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
The Teranite Prince rejećted theſe propoſals as
ridiculous; Mameluke, ſaid he, relinquiſhed what
he could not any longer hope to obtain, and deſired
to become a vaſſal, when he could not avoid be-
coming a ſubječt. The battle was fought under the
walls of Cariſm, and laſted the whole day. The
Sultan behaved like a Prince whoſe only reſource
lay in a vićtory, and performed prodigies of valour.
Zendar acted the part of a great Captain and a brave
ſoldier; more than once, by his perſonal bravery,
he animated his diſordered broken troops to return
to the charge ; and, by his profound capacity, he
obviated the ill conſequences of other unlucky inci-
dents. In fine, he fixed fortune to his ſtandard;
his vićtory was complete. The Sultan, leaving
half of his army dead on the field of battle, brought
off the flower of the reſt into his capital, and there
ſhut himſelf up, reſolving to be buried in its ruins,
if the enemy refuſed to liſten to peace.
Zendar was deaf to the intreaties of the Sultan’s
deputies. After letting his army reſt a few days, he
formed his lines of contravallation round the city.
He amuſed the Sultan with all the preparations and
works requiſite for a regular ſiege, and, taking the
advantage of a dark night, ordered a general ſcalade.
The Sultan ran to that ſide where the greateſt efforts
were made, judging that Zendar muſt be there in
perſon: He beheld this implacable enemy, who,
bearing down all that oppoſed him, had already got
footing on the counterſcarp, and was preparing to
- - force

<page 292>
A M B I. T. i - O N. 9
force his way to the rampart. Urged by deſpair, or
hoping to retrieve all by ſingle combat, he cut his
way up to the Prince, and challenged him. Zen-
dar’s fortune did not forſake him; his firſt blow
laid Mameluke dead at his feet. The rumour of
his death once ſpread, the Cariſmites laid down
their arms, and implored the clemency of the con- .
queror, who, with great difficulty, drew off his fu-.
rious ſoldiers from the carnage.
At break of day, Zendar ſecured the poſts of the
city, cauſed Corduba to be proclaimed Sultan of
Cariſm, and made the inhabitants ſwear allegiance
to him ; and, as it took up no more time to ſubdue
the reſt of the kingdom, than was neceſſary to march.
through it, he returned to Teran towards the end of .
autumn, and laid at the feet of Almanzaris one of ,
the moſt conſiderable crowns of Tartary.
While Zendar filled Teran with the fame of his .
exploits, the Teranites ſcarce remembered that his
rival, Korem, had an army under his command; .
and yet he had laboured indefatigably towards the
acquiſition of a title on which his happineſs de-
pended; but he took a courſe different from Zen- .
dar's. His firſt care was to diſpel the fears and jea-
louſies of the petty republics ſituated between the
kingdoms of Balk and Teran. As pledges of his
fidelity in keeping his word with them, he gave :
them hoſtages, and thereby acquired a right to de-
mand hoſtages of them. He ſent manifeſtoes into
the provinces of Balk, ſetting forth the motives of
B 5 the

<page 293>
IO T H E F A M I l Y P 1 c T U R e.
the war, and making Akebar the cauſe of all the
calamities it might bring upon the people: Beſides
which, he ordered truſty emiſſaries to lie concealed
in the enemy's towns, to mix in company with the
citizens, to extol the condućt he propoſed to ob-
ſerve, and to exaggerate every loſs the King might
ſuſtain. Thus aſſured of the affections of the neu-
tral republics, he made no other proviſion for his
expedition, but arms and money; and, followed by
twenty thouſand Teranites, picked out of the moſt
robuſt and docible in that part of the kingdom which
had been aſſigned him for making levies, he began
his march. The punctuality with which he paid for
what he required, ſoon made his camp abound with
all kinds of proviſions; the peaſants flocked to him
with every thing they could ſpare; and, thinking
themſelves happy in a war, that inriched with-
out expoſing them to any danger; love and gra-
titude attached them to the General, to whom they
were indebted for this ſurpriſing ſcene.
So much caution and moderation gave Akebar
leiſure to aſſemble his forces: He was already on
the frontiers, with a prodigious army, not doubting
in the leaſt that he ſhould cruſh Korem ; but he
little knew what ſort of an enemy he had to deal
with. This Prince, being charged to preſerve the
Teranites from oppreſſion, contented himſelf with
protecting them. Ever upon the wing with his little
army, which he even frequently divided into flying
parties, he applied himſelf to keeping Akebar in con-
tinual

<page 294>
A M B I. T. I O N. . II.
º
tinual alarm. He made choice of poſts where he
might fight only when he pleaſed: He charged his
officers to decline every ſkirmiſh that might bring,
on a general engagement, but not to avoid any,
other action. By this condućt he ſucceeded in ſtop-
ping, fatiguing, and conſuming that numerous army,
which could not move, without being expoſed to the
ſword of the vigilant Teranites. -
Akebar, having ſeen all his foragers cut off, and.
one of his quarters beat up and plundered, reſolved
to bring the war to a ſhort iſſue, by penetrating into.
the kingdom of Teran. He entered the territories
of the neutral petty republics; but, as he was not.
diſpoſed to pay for what he thought he had a right to
exact, and as his enemy had the hearts of the people,
he ſoon found himſelf in want of proviſions.
Korem, who had foreſeen all, this, depended on.
the troops he had left on the frontier, for making.
head againſt the King. As for his part, having
cauſed part of his cavalry to take an extenſive cir-
cuit, in order to lay under contribution the pro-
vinces of Balk, which were quite bare of troops, he
followed Akebar in the rear with the reſt of his army,
inceſſantly harraffing him, retarding the arrival of
thoſe convoys which he could not cut off, and daily
reducing his army to greater ſtraits.
The peaſants, finding that the ſoldiers of Akebar
uſed them ill, annoyed them in every reſpect, and
began a kind of war that was more cruelly managed
than open hoſtilities. The contributions levied by
B 6 the

<page 295>
I2 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
the Teranite cavalry, filled the kingdom of Balk
with conſternation, and made all the people murmur.
The ſupplies, which Akebar drew from his domi-
nions, ſtopped all on a ſudden; a ſickneſs broke out
in his army; and, to complete his misfortunes,
Korem managed ſo artfully, that he cut off his re-
treat home. Thus all hearts fainted in his camp.
In ſo terrible a ſituation Akebar ſued for peace,
leaving Korem intirely maſter of the conditions, and
reſolving to die, ſhould they prove intolerable: The
Teranite Prince ſent him this anſwer:
“ Kings ſhould make war to eſtabliſh peace.
Promiſe, Sir, to obſerve faithfully the alliance with
Corduba and the ſucceſſor he ſhall pleaſe to appoint,
and repair the damage you have occaſioned to the
neutral republics and the Teranites. Would to
God we could bring the ſlain to life Then might
all be forgotten.” -
Akebar, ſtruck with admiration, fºwore to obſerve
the peace; he gave ſecurity for the performance of
articles ; and, in his march back to his capital, he
proclaimed every-where, that Korem's virtue was
equal to his talents. The Prince, after diſbanding
his army, repaired to Teran, to give an account of
his expedition. Corduba, too well informed to be
ignorant of any part of Korem's condućt, had al-
ready paſſed ſentence between the two rivals.—He
called together, however, the States of Teran, who
being aſſembled, and the Deputies of Cariſm having
been called to fit with them, Corduba thus ſpoke:
“Intrepid
|
|

<page 296>
A M B I. T. I O N. 13
“Intrepid Zendar, your courage and condućt
have acquired me a new kingdom; but the ſubječts,
which your conqueſt procures me, are only enemies
in diſguiſe, whom you add to the number of my
children. I will not, by adopting them, introduce
diſcord into my family. Let the Cariſmites have a
King, whoſe love cannot be divided between them
and another people.”
“ Go, brave Zendar, go and reign in Cariſm.
The terrible effects of your valour have made you
dreaded and admired in that fine empire. Let your
great talents reſt, and add to them virtues of a higher
value. The loſſes the Cariſmites have ſuffered by your
means, ought to be repaired; they will not allow
you to indulge your genius, and to exhibit to them
a mere conqueror on the throne of their Kings:
ſhew yourſelf to them as a father, and conſtrain
them, by continual benefactions, to bleſs the hand
that ſhed their blood.”
“As for you, generous Korem, who know how
to vanquiſh the enemies of the Teranites, and to
procure them friends; you, who love peace, under-
ſtand the art of war, and excel in the practice of
uſeful and amiable virtues, be my daughter’s Con-
ſort; receive my Scepter together with her Hand.
Under ſuch a King as you, my people have nothing
to fear either from inteſtine vices and diſorders, or
neighbouring nations. Be their maſter, and be my
ſon. You are a Hero, Zendar may become one.”
EU S T A ce.

<page 297>
I4. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
EU s T A c E.
Korem was indeed, Sir, an illuſtrious Hero. If
ever I ſhould arrive at the command of an army, I.
hope to be like him.
N AN c Y.
I hope you would; for, indeed, it makes one's
heart chill with horror when we read of ſo many.
dreadful relations of men murdering each other, of
the ſacking of towns, of killing poor helpleſs women
and children, and all the reſt of their horrible.
cruelties.
H A R R Y.
Pray, papa, can you tell me why Frenchmen
and Engliſhmen don’t love one another I am al-
ways hearing of their going to fight: and then we
ring the bells, and make bonfires, when the Engliſh
have killed a good many of the poor Frenchmen;
and, I am ſure, I can’t gueſs why; for all the
Frenchmen I have ever ſeen are ſo good-natured,
and ſo civil, that I can’t believe they would quarrel
with any body in the world by their own good-will.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
The ſubjećt we have been diſcourſing upon—
Ambition, my dear, is the cauſe. Neither French-
men nor Engliſhmen have, of themſelves, any na-
tural propenſity to hate each other, but it is the
deſtructive views of a few, who inſpire that
- paſſion,

<page 298>
- A M, B I. T. I O N. I 5
paſſion, and encourage nations to butcher each
other, to ſerve their own ſelfiſh and ambitious
purpoſes.
M Iss Fo R R Est E R.
- I have always, Sir, been a great admirer of
ſuch Kings as were rather diſpoſed to forgive than
to puniſh criminals. I have heard people ſay that
no man ought to put another to death.
M R. Fo R R E s T E R.
That is a very ridiculous doćtrine. I could wiſh
thoſe who broach it might firſt be robbed of their
property: if that will not convert them, let their
lives be attacked; and ſee what effect this would
produce. -
M R. E. G E R To N.
It is part of the novel and paradoxical philoſophy
of the preſent day, in which I am ſorry to ſay, it
does not appear to be ſo much the endeavour of our
reaſoners to enforce truth as to incite ſurprize; and
in which thoſe who are incapable of attracting the
public notice by the ſtrength of their genius, do yet
obtain a temporary admiration by the ſtrangeneſs of
their aſſertions. Mercy is undoubtedly a moſt hea-,
venly virtue; “It droppeth like the gentle rain from
Heaven on the place beneath;” but even this di-
vine attribute, even Mercy, may be miſapplied,
may become a vice, may become CRUELTY. To
let criminals of a certain complexion eſcape, is to
multiply

<page 299>
16 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
multiply crimes. Nerva, the ſucceſſor of the cruel
Domitian, carried this virtue to ſuch exceſs, as even
during his ſhort reign to become, in ſome degree,
contemptible. The following anecdotes will help
to point out the diſtinétion I mean to inculcate.
M. E. R. C. Y.
Anecdotes of OTToMAN and Aliver D.I.
OTTOMAN, the firſt Sultan of the Turks,
was of ſo mild a temper, that to this day, at the
ceremony of proclaiming the Emperors his ſuc-
ceſſors, they wiſh them his meckneſs. One day his
officers brought to him a man that had been found
concealed in the Imperial tent with a dagger under
his garment. The criminal confeſſed that he in-
tended to murder the Sultan ; and the officers waited .
impatiently for orders to execute the villain: But
Ottoman, whom nothing could warp from his good-
nature, ſaid to the officers, let the wretch go, I
cannot reſolve to ſhed blood.
This inſtance of unbounded clemency has its
value, though it is the effect of temper: But let us
fee whether clemency produced by ſentiment and re-
fledion is not ſuperior to it. -
Aliverdi, generaliſimo of the armies of Abbas the
Great, King of Perſia, and his prime miniſter, was
as good a general and as able a politician, as he
was amiable in the capacity of a courtier. From
the conſtant ſerenity of his countenance it was
judged

<page 300>
M E R - C Y. 17
judged that nothing could ruffle the calmneſs of his
heart; and virtue diſplayed itſelf in him ſo grace.
fully and ſo naturally, that it was ſuppoſed to be
the effect of his happy temper. An extraordinary
incident made the world do him juſtice, and placed
him in the rank he deſerved.
One day as he was ſhut up in his cloſet, beſtow-
ing on affairs of ſtate the hours which other men
devote to ſleep, a courier quite out of breath came
in and told him, that an Armenian, followed by a
poſſe of friends, had in the night ſurprized his pa-
lace at Amandabat, deſtroyed all the moſt valuable
furniture in it, and would have carried off his wife
and children, doubtleſs to make ſlaves of them, had
not the domeſtics, when the firſt fright was over,
made head againſt him. The courier added, that a
bloody ſkirmiſh enſued, in which his ſervants had the
advantage at laſt; that the Armenian's friends were
all killed upon the ſpot, but that their leader was
taken alive.
I thank thee, Offali”, cried Aliverdi, for afford-
ing me the means to revenge ſo enormous an at-
tempt. What! whilſt I make a ſacrifice of my
days and my repoſe to the good of Perſia; while,
through my cares and toils, the meaneſt Perſian
lives ſecure from injuſtice and violence, ſhall an
audacious ſtranger come to injure me in what is
moſt dear to me! Let him be thrown into a dun-
* The Prophet moſt revered by the Perſians next to Mahomet-
geon,


<page 301>
18 T H E F A M I L Y 'P' I C T U R E.
geon, and give him a quantity of wretched food
ſufficient to preſerve him for the torments to which
I deſtine him. The courier withdrew, charged
with theſe orders to thoſe who had the Armenian in
cuſtody.
But Aliverdi ſoon growing cool again, cried out,
What is it, O God, that I have done ! Is it thus
that I maintain the glory of ſo many years? Shall
one ſingle moment eclipſe all my virtue ! That
ſtranger has cruelly provoked me: But what im-
pelled him to it? No man commits evil merely for
the pleaſure of doing it: There is always a motive,
which paſſion or prejudice preſents to us under the
maſk of equity; and it muſt needs be ſomething
of this kind that blinded the Armenian to the dread-
ful attempt. Doubtleſs, I muſt have injured the
wretch!
He diſpatched immediately an expreſs to Aman-
dabat, with an order under his own hand, not to
make the priſoner feel any other hardſhip than the
privation of liberty. Still tranquil, after this ačt of
moderation, he applied himſelf again to public bu-
fineſs, till he ſhould have leiſure to ſift this bu-
ſineſs to the bottom. From the ſtrićt inquiries
he ordered to be made, he learned, that one of his
inferior officers had done very conſiderable damage
to the Armenian, conſidering the mediocrity of his
fortune; and that he himſelf had flighted the com-
plaints brought againſt him. Eaſed by this diſco-
very, he called for the Armenian, whoſe counte-
nance

<page 302>
M. E. R. C. Y. I9
nance expreſſed more confuſion than terror, and
paſſed this ſentence upon him. -
“Vindićtive ſtranger, there was ſome ground
for thy reſentment; thou didſt think I had juſtly
incurred thy hatred; I forgive thee the injury thou
haſt done me. But thou haſt carried thy vengeance
to exceſs; thou haſt attacked a man whom thou
oughteſt to reſpect; nay, thou haſt attempted to
make thy vengeance fall upon innocent heads:
therefore I ought to puniſh thee. Go, and refle&t
in ſolitude on the wretchedneſs of a man that
gives full ſwing to his paſſions. Thy puniſhment,
which juſtice requires of me, will be ſufficiently
tempered by my clemency; and thy repentance
may permit me to ſhorten the term.”
H A R R Y.
That Aliverdi was a very good man, papa, be-
cauſe he loved his wife and children.
MR. E. G E R To N.
Yes, my dear; but, obſerve, though he loved them
very much, he would not ſuffer either love or pity
to ſubvert juſtice.
H A R R Y.
And yet, papa, I have heard that love makes
people do ſtrange things.
- M R. E. G E R T o N.
Very true, my dear; love is a powerful paſſion,
the effects of which cannot be too cautiouſly at-
tended

<page 303>
.20. T H E F A M I L. Y. P. I c T U R E.
tended to and guarded againſt by young people. It
is a paſſion which ought not to be mentioned in a
careleſs and ſlight manner, nor without the utmoſt
purity of ſentiment. The novels which undertake
the difficult taſk of pourtraying love, generally
paint it as weak, cunning, and contemptible; but
in perſons in whom virtue and real dignity of mind
are conſpicuous, it is ſimple, chaſte, and noble.
The ſtory of Mahmut and Idris will ſhew you what
it ought to be ; I muſt only caution you all to re-
member, that in Perſia, where the ſcene is laid, the
manners are very different from ours, and that
though the refuſal of Idris to become the wife of
Mahmut, and acting, as ſhe afterwards did, would
have been wrong here, there it was not only proper
but heroic.
L O V E.
I D R I s and M A H M U T.
AMONG the dancers of the palace, in the
reign of Abbas the Great, King of Perſia, there
was a young maid, named Idris, whom the maſter
of the revels, on the report of her charms, had ſent
for from Caſbin to Iſpahan. Her mother being of
the ſame profeſſion, ſhe had followed that way of life:
But as ſhe honourably diſtinguiſhed herſelf from her
female companions, ſhe demonſtrated that virtue
is practicable in every ſituation, however ſlippery
or dangerous it may be. -
Scarcely

<page 304>
L O. W. E. 2.I
Scarcely had Idris appeared on the theatre of the
capital, but ſhe found herſelf beſet by the grandees,
who ſtrove to pleaſe her by the ſame means that had
won others in that ſtation. Every one exerted his
faculties and addreſs, in order to gain the preference
over his rivals. But Idris was not to be caught with
ſuch baits. At the palace, at aſſemblies, in the
public walks, and in all places, the diſcourſe turned
upon the new dancer: Every one talked of her
beauty, her wit, and her engaging behaviour; and,
which was more than they had ever ſaid of any other
of her profeſſion, they agreed in acknowledging her
to be virtuous. It is the property only of the
moſt exalted virtue to gain the reſpect and admi-
ration of young courtiers. Mahmut conceived a
high opinion of Idris’s virtue, from the extraordinary
effect it produced.
Mahmut bore among the young Lords of the
Court the ſame character which Idris maintained
among the dancers of her ſex; proof againſt the
defects of his equals and the vices of his ſtation. As
ſoon as he began to appear in the world, he became
ſenſible of the ridiculouſneſs of that noiſy, obſtre-
perous giddineſs, which moſt young people of qua-
lity affect; and being happily prejudiced againſt the
idle life he ſaw them lead, he took care not to follow
their example, yet without ſeeming to condemn
them. While their days were divided between the
toilet, the table, viſits, ladies’ bed-chambers, and
gaming, he ſpent the morning in his cloſet among
his

<page 305>
22 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
his books, or with thoſe whoſe converſation could
inſtrućt him better. In the afternoon he frequented
the manufactories, and working places about the
palace; talked with the ableſt hands in the ſeveral
arts; and obſerved with the utmoſt attention how
they proceeded in their works. In the evening he
went to the Play or other public entertainments, which
he enjoyed with the moderation that is ever inſepa-
rable from taſte and diſcernment: After which he
repaired to ſome of the moſt brilliant aſſemblies of
Iſpahan, as well to avoid a ſingularity that would
have rendered him odious, as to acquire a greater
fhare of the complaiſance and politeneſs which
reigned in them. Mahmut's wit, and the uſe he
made of it, rendered him ſuperior to thoſe who were
his equals in birth; and beſides the advantage of a
good figure and graceful air, he diſtinguiſhed him-
ſelf no leſs among them by his natural and acquired
talents. Idris could not behold this amiable Perſian
without emotion: She immediately ſhunned all her
importunate ſuitors; and complacently fancying
him free from all their faults, ſhe ſecretly wiſhed
that the beauty, which they had ſo highly extolled,
might make an impreſſion on him. . Her wiſhes
were met more than half-way: Mahmut ſoon let
her know that he loved her moſt paſſionately; and
her anſwer to his declaration, on account of its
ſingularity, deſerves to be given entire.
“ Doubtleſs you give the name of love (ſaid ſhe
with an enchanting ſmile) to that which is only an
effect

<page 306>
I, O. W. e, 23
effect of your taſte for novelty. I will not, my
lord, go farther at preſent on this head: 'Tis your
buſineſs to fix my judgment. I will ingenuouſly
confeſs, though it will give you an unfavourable
opinion of me, if you are not the man I take you to
be, that I am not diſpleaſed at your liking me: yet
if ever I ſee occaſion to alter the idea I have con-
ceived of you, hope not that I ſhall in the leaſt in-
dulge my inclination. I ſhall not take it ill, if you
give your heart to a more virtuous woman; there-
fore do not complain of your lot, if I diſpoſe of
mine in favour of any man whom I may find ſuperior
to you in virtue.” f -
Mahmut, ſtruck with admiration and overflowing
with joy, laboured to riſe to ſuch a pitch as might
oblige Idris to be conſtant to him. He applied him-
ſelf with freſh vigour to acquire the arts and ſciences
neceſſary for a man in his ſtation. He made it his
buſineſs to relieve indigent merit and unfortunate
virtue. His humanity, generoſity, capacity and
modeſty, were equally conſpicuous ; and Idris abun-
dantly rewarded him for all the pains he took to
pleaſe her. Praiſe grounded on truth, and coming
from the mouth of ſo charming a perſon, filled the
tender Mahmut's heart with joy and ſatisfaction.
He read in the eyes of his beauteous miſtreſs how
dear he was to her: He talked of his attachment, and
deſcribed its ſincerity; Idris liſtened to him with
pleaſure, vowed ſhe would make him a juſt return,
and thus animated him to give her no occaſion to
repent

<page 307>
24. T H e F A M I L. Y. P. I C T U R e.
repent her engagement. In theſe overflowings of
their hearts, which none but true lovers can know
and feel the ſweetneſs of, they laid open to each
other the moſt ſecret receſſes of their ſouls. Mah-
mut was grieved whenever he took leave of Idris;
nor could ſhe bear his abſence without a viſible
concern : They always parted under the greateſt
impatience to meet again. -
Between two neighbours ſo powerful as the Grand
Signior and the King of Perſia, there can be no
long peace : A war ſoon broke out, and Mahmut
was obliged to ſet out for the army. He waited
upon Idris, to deplore with her the dire neceſſity
that forced them aſunder: But while he lay at her
feet, he durſt not diſcloſe to her all his grief: The
fortitude of the fair one daunted him ; he was afraid
of leſſening himſelf in her eſteem, by diſcovering
any weakneſs. Idris perceived the fore conflićt in
his breaſt, and loved him for it the more intenſely.
Mahmut had not been gone a month, when he
gave way to his defire of an interview with Idris.
He ſlipped away privately from the army, and with
the help of relays which he had got ready on the
road, he was at the gates of Iſpahan before they
miſſed him in the camp. Alighting at the houſe of
one of his old ſervants, he diſguiſed himſelf in the
apparel of a peaſant, that he might not be known in
the city; and, impatient of an interview with his
Idris, he flew to her houſe.
• *
* The

<page 308>
L. O. W. E. . 25
The charming maid was ſitting at her balcony as
Mahmut was advancing, and knew him, notwith-
ſtanding his diſguiſe. Grieved to ſee him thus
neglect his glory and his duty, ſhe ran dire&tly to
her cloſet, charging her ſlave to admit no viſitor
whatever. She melted inte tears at the weakneſs of
her lover; but ſoon recovering herſelf, ſhe wrote
him the following billet.
IDR is to the PE As A N T.
* Friend, I know that thou art to be forthwith
at the army. Call upon Mahmut, and tell him
from me, that I deſire him to remember the con-
ditions on which the heart of Idris is to be ſecured.”
Mahmut was too much confounded with theſe few
words, to aſk any queſtions of the ſlave that deli-
wered him the billet. He went back to his domeſtick’s
houſe, to put off his diſguiſe; and fluctuating be-
tween admiration, grief, and fear, he repaired again
to the army with as much haſte as he had travelled
up to Iſpahan. His chief ſtudy being to make
amends for the fault he had committed, he behaved
the reſt of the campaign with ſo much ardor, bra-
very and conduct, that he was deſervedly promoted
to a higher poſt, which the King conferred on him,
with the moſt honourable eulogies, at the head of
the army. Idris wrote him a congratulatory letter
on his promotion, in which, without mentioning
his weakneſs, ſhe gave him to underſtand that ſhe
had forgiven him. .
Vo L. II. C Mahmut,

<page 309>
26 T H E F A M I L Y P: I C T U R E.
Mahmut, tranſported with joy, haſtened back to:
Iſpahan as ſoon as the army was ordered into winter
quarters; and liſtening to no other conſiderations
but his eſteem for the virtuous girl, he entreated her
to complete his happineſs in becoming his wife.
Your wife, my Lord! anſwered Idris, with a kind
of ſurprize mixed with indignation : What I would
Mahmut forget himſelf ſo far? In diſpoſing of your
heart, you may indeed conſult nothing but your
inclination: But when the queſtion is to chooſe a
partner in your dignity and fortune, you are ac-
countable to thoſe of whom you hold both. I that
am ready to ſacrifice my life, were it neceſſary, to
preſerve your glory, ſhall not be inſtrumental myſelf
in ſullying it. - -
Sentiments like theſe made the paſſionate Mahmut
enly more preſſing. What are thoſe things, ſaid he,
which create ſo great a diſparity between us : An
inſtant may deprive me of them: But the dowry
which you will bring me, charming Idris, is a bleſ-
ſing that depends not on men nor fortune. In
uttering theſe words, his countenance began to be
clouded with grief: Freſh denials drove him to de-
ſpair; he drew his poniard, and was going to plunge
it into his breaſt. The tender Idris could hold out
no longer: Ah! Mahmut, cried ſhe, ſtop your
hand, and live: To-morrow I ſhall be your's; grant
me this ſhort reſpite. She could not utter more;
tears put an end to her ſurprize, and ſtopt her
ſpeech. Aſhamed of her weakneſs, ſhe broke looſe
from
|

<page 310>
L O W. E. 27
from her lover's arms, withdrew to her cloſet, and
ſoon repented the promiſe ſhe had made.
In the mean while Mahmut was deſperate enough
to reſolve upon death, if ſhe denied his requeſt.
The maid, wavering between tender paſſion, and con-
cern for the glory of her lover, ſoon hit upon a de-
vice that would reconcile them. While ſhe was free,
notwithſtanding the meanneſs of her condition, ſhe
could not in honour give herſelf to him, upon any
other terms than marriage; and conſidering the diſ-
tance which fortune had put between them, ſhe was
ſenſible ſhe could not receive the title of wife with-
out diſgracing her admirer. She reſolved then to
remove thoſe obſtacles to her Mahmut's happineſs,
at the expence of what was moſt dear to her.
Wrapping herſelf up therefore in a long mantle, ſhe
left her houſe in the duſk of the evening, and ſold
herſelf to a dealer in ſlaves. After this ſhe wrote
the following letter to Mahmut.
My LoRD,
“You have not judged me unworthy to be your
wife, and I have the deepeſt ſenſe of gratitude for
this ſignal teſtimony of your eſteem. I think my
heart and my ſentiments would not have diſgraced
that honourable quality: But what would your re-
lations ſay : What would all Perſia ſay, whoſe eyes
are upon you, and who ſee nothing in me but the
mean profeſſion I was bred to ? I allow that in one
moment you may be deprived of every thing that
C 2 makes


<page 311>
28 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
makes the great diſparity between us: But if ever
you ſhould be borne down by adverſe fortune, the
whole world would be forced to acknowledge the
injuſtice, and to pity and admire you. You love
Idris : You are reſolved to die, if ſhe does not make
herſelf your's: Come then and take her out of the
houſe of the maſter, to whom ſhe has ſold herſelf, in
order that you yourſelf may become her maſter. She
is not qualified to be your wife : Take her then as
your ſlave.”
D I A L O G U E XII.
M. R. E. G E R To N.
N our converſations, children, we have had fre-
quent occaſion to mention the Eaſtern nations,
from the tales which have lately multiplied among
us; ſome of which I have introduced here, for the ſake
of their moral intent, as well as for variety. The
dočtrines of Mahomet being now almoſt univerſally
received in the Eaſt, I thought an account of the
man, and his opinions, would tend not only to in-
form your minds, but to make you tolerant in your
principles. I have, therefore, drawn up the narrative,
which I am going to read for your uſe and informa-
tion;

<page 312>
M A H o M E T A N 1 s M. 29
tion. Afterwards, I mean to give you ſome ad-
vice relative to ſuperſtition, and its pernicious
effects.
- An Account of MAHöMET and MAHomeTANISM.
OF all the paſſions incident to man, there is not
one whoſe perverſion and abuſe has proved ſo great a
ſcourge as ambition; and of all ambitious men,
there is not one, whoſe hiſtory we are acquainted
with, who has been ſo thoroughly deſtructive to the
rights and privileges of men as Mahomet. Chriſ-
tians have continued, for ages, perſecuting, burn-
ing, deſtroying, and exterminating each other.
Mahometaniſm has prevented this, by rendering its
followers ſuch entire, ſuch abſolute ſlaves, to one
man, that their paſſions and tempers ſeem ſunk into
'an indolence of habit, that is ſcarcely poſſible to be
overcome. There are various opinions reſpecting
the deſcent of Mahomet, ſome affirming him to have
been, originally, a ſlave, others that he was of the
tribe of Coraſh, the moſt opulent and powerful of
all Arabia, and that he was born at Mecca, and the
ſon of one of the moſt conſiderable people of that
tribe. This laſt is Dr. Prideaux’s account, and he
appears to have conſulted the beſt authorities. Ma-
homet, in humble imitation, as we may ſuppoſe, of
our Saviour, has two genealogies, with abundance
of hard names, one of which goes as far back as
Adam, including Abraham, Noah, and the Pa-
C 3 - triarchs.

<page 313>
30 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
triarchs. It is certain, however, that he was poor
in his youth, and became a ſervant to a rich mer-
chant’s widow, whoſe buſineſs he tranſačted for ſome
time, and, afterwards, married her. This woman's
name was Cadigha, and her wealth was the begin-
ning of Mahomet’s good fortune: for it does not
appear, that Mahomet had any thoughts of erecting a
kingdom under the cloak of religion, till he was
tolerably advanced in life. There were numerous
events and accidents, that made the age of Mahomet
the moſt proper of all others for eſtabliſhing a new
religion. The Eaſt, inſtead of that peaceful ſloth it
now enjoys, was rent into a thouſand ſects of Arians,
Trinitarians, Donatiſts, Neſtorians, Pelagians, Mo-
nothelites, Jews, Pagans, &c. &c. Mahomet in his
travels into Egypt, and over the Eaſt, as a factor to
his miſtreſs, Cadiga, had obſerved the violence and
acrimony of their diſputes, and, it is moſt probable,
had the good ſenſe to ſee their abſurdity. When,
in conſequence of his wife's fortune, and his own
intrigues, he became one of the chief perſons of
Mecca, his ambiticn prompted him to invite men of
every chara&ter to join him, and, in ſome meaſure,
to become dependant on him. Mahomet was little
better than the chief of a band of robbers, that
ſkulked about the neighbourhood of Mecca, and his
firſt appearance in the character of a hero was at the
head of theſe in the wars the Emperor Heraclius had
with the Perſians, in which, it ſeems, he gained
great applauſe. There happened a mutiny among
the

<page 314>
M A H O M E T A N "I S. M. 3I
the Arabian troops, too, and Mahomet put himſelf
at the head of the faştious, by which he became
more powerful. Indeed, if we may judge from
hiſtorical relations, it was the verſatility of the Ara-
bian temper, and their inherent diſpoſition to rebel-
lions and inſurrections, that firſt inſpired him with
the deſign of becoming a King, and a Conqueror,
by turning this diſpoſition to the advancement of his
project; and I have no doubt but every age, every
kingdom, afford men ſufficiently daring, turbulent,
capable, and ambitious, to enact the parts of Cºom-
well, Mahomet, or Julius Caeſar, were the ſame op-
portunities and circumſtances to occur. Mahomet
was peculiarly fortunate, I mean as a reſtleſs man,
who panted for renown by the beſt or the worſ' of
means. The ſectaries, that have been mentioned,
though their hatred to each other was inveterate and
implacable, had yet numerous particulars in which
they were all agreed: the ſtrong truths of morality
were ever obvious, they ever were and ever will be
the ſame. Mahomet poſſeſſed an acuteneſs that
taught him how to turn every thing to his own ad-
vantage. He took thoſe opinions that were moſt
general for the baſis of his new doctrine ; he pre-
tended to have a great reſpect for Moſes, Jeſus
Chriſt, and John the Baptiſt. He invented a very
agreeable Paradiſe, and ſuch as man would naturally
wiſh to enjoy, when he is told he may enjoy it with
innocence and ſecurity. Fruits, flowers, rivers,
women, wine, and every earthly happineſs, in the
- - - - C 4 - fulleſt

<page 315>
32 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
fulleſt perſection, were to be abundant in exceſs ; and,
on the contrary, Hell Torments were moſt liberally
denounced againſt all unbelievers. Not even do our
modern methodiſts make ſo terrible a uſe of future
miſery as did Mahomet. They burn through every
chapter of the Alcoran. “We have decorated the
Heavens with ſtars, ſays Mahomet, in the Chapter
of the Empire, we have chaſed the Devils from
thence; but we have prepared an immenſe cauldron,
and the fire of Hell for the infidels. They hear no-
thing but the frightful and horrible voice of rage and
deſpair, when they are firſt precipitated there,
when they are caſt down, when they enter into Hell,
troop after troop, and behold the tormerits, they
lament. Thoſe who hear them ſhall aſk, What!
was there no perſon on earth who propheſied, who
preached to you of the pains of Hell ? Yes, alas !
they ſhall anſwer, but we have given the lye to the
preachers; we have ſaid they were not commanded
of God, they were deceivers, who wanted us to be-
lieve lies and abſurdities. If we had liſtened to them,
if we had believed them, we ſhould not, at this day,
have been numbered among the damned. Thus
they ſhall confeſs their fins from the depths of Hell.”
Full of Hell and denunciation is the Alcoran. The
paſſage I have quoted was the firſt that preſented
itſelf on opening the book.
Mahomet was one of thoſe enterprizing empirics
who ſaw the credulity, incapacity, and ignorance of
man, and felt the power of ſuch engines.
He

<page 316>
M A H O M E T A N I S. M. 33
He was afflićted with the epilepſy, and had the
hardineſs to turn this terrible diſeaſe to the purpoſes
of fanaticiſm. A man who falls down, foams at the
mouth, gets up and tells enormous lies, which, by
their novelty and improbability, lead the imagina-
tion, amazed and ſtupified with wonder without al-
lowing it the liberty to doubt, through the wildeſt
regions of fable: he who can do this too with ineffa-
ble effrontery, is well calculated to enaët the part of
pretended inſpiration. Mahomet was as familiar
with the angel Gabriel, as Socrates was with his
daemon. Every thing was miraculous. Nothing
puzzled Mahomet, for he had a fable, or rather an
incoherent jumble of lies, to ſolve every difficulty.
The earth was ſupported by an ox, whoſe feet were
on a white ſtone; he had his head in the eaſt, and
his tail in the weſt; he had a thouſand teeth, and as
many horns, between each of which it was a thou-
ſand years journey. Under the white ſtone that he
trod on, was Zohot, a mountain of Hell, of a thou-
ſand years journey alſo, which infidels are obliged to
aſcend to be caſt down; under this are numerous
lands and ſeas; and, at laſt, the wind, thunder,
and lightening; the bloody ſea, Hell cloſed, the fiery
ſea, the dark ſea, the cloudy ſea; praiſes, giorifications,
the throne, the book, the pen, the great name of
God -
But though the ſpeculative doćtrines of Mahomet
were wild and inconſiſtent, his practical ones were
very different; for, except in ſome inſtances where
C 5 the

<page 317>
34. T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
the indulgence of his own luſt or ambition made him.
leſs ſevere, his morality was rational, juſt, and pro-
dućtive of order.
Morality is the univerſal baſis of religion; mora-
lity is a thing ſo ſelf-evidently neceſſary to the welfare
of communities, that we find none, however barba-
rous, without it. That it is incumbent on men to
be juſt and faithful to each other, the gods of all
nations, whether of wood or ſtone, comprehenſible
or incomprehenſible, ſubſtance or chimera, univer-
ſally allow, becauſe the men who have made theſe
various gods, felt themſelves liable to injury, and
wanting protećtion. Hope and fear are the maſter-
keys of the human heart, the incentives to action,
and the engines of prieſtcraft. They are the ſword
and ſhield of cunning, and by uſing theſe weapons
like a maſter, Mahomet, in reality, conquered
greater armies than ever did Amadis de Gaul, Or- .
lando Furioſo, or any other hero of romance.
Whoever reads the Alcoran, will frequently forget
that he is reading a book to which he is ſuppoſed to
be a ſtranger, and that inculcates doctrines be is
taught to abhor. The bulk of the book is little elſe
than a recapitulation of Jewiſh ſtories about Moſes,
Joſhua, David, and our great Redeemer. Theſe
are interſperſed with promiſes, threatenings, and
doctrinal points. . The moſt eſſential difference
between mahometaniſm and chriſtianity is in the
deſcription of the life to come; and however refined,
however platonic the Chriſtian ſyſtem may be, that
of

<page 318>
M A H O M E T A N I S. M. 35
}
of Mahomet is certainly much better calculated to
gratify the appetites, and delight the imaginations of
men in a ſtate of nature, becauſe the pleaſures of the
ſenſes are common to all. The rivers of Mahomet
flow with wine and oil, with milk and honey. The
plains of his heaven are rich in flowers, and ſpicy
groves, and full of the trees of concupiſcence, ſidras
and telech. His groves abound with birds of beau-
tiful plumage, the moſt enchanting ſong, and the
fineſt flavour. The trees yield the moſt delicious
fruits. The fountain Zelzibil contains a wine of
the moſt exquiſite taſte, which neither cauſes head-
achs nor drunkenneſs; and every thing is ſerved up
to them by young men handſomer than the angels.
To make theſe delights ſtill more deſirable, they are
to have virgins beautiful as the hyacinth or pearl,
free from every blemiſh, and entirely unpolluted by
angel, man, or devil; fitting in the ſhades, with
breaſts white as ſnow; and large beauteous black
eyes fixed upon their huſbands, with whom they
continue in amorous dalliance for fifty years, and
are to have their fill of pleaſure in the preſence of
God, who is not aſhamed. Another account of
Mahomet's heaven ſays, the ground is of gold, en-
amelled with emeralds and hyacinths, planted with
every fruitful tree, fertilized with ſtreams of wine,
with milk and honey. The day is of a thouſand years,
and the year of forty thouſand days. The moment
the bleſſed form a wiſh, it ſhall be gratified; they
ſhall be cloathed in all colours except green, which
* C 6 is

<page 319>
36 T H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c T U R E.
is the holy colour of Mahomet. They ſhall all be
of the ſtature of Adam, the reſemblance of Chriſt,
and ſhall never increaſe or diminiſh. As ſoon as
they enter Paradiſe, the dainty liver of the fiſh al-
behbut ſhall be ſet before them, and whatever elſe
they deſire. They ſhall have no more need to ex-
onerate than the child in the womb, for they ſhall
vent all ſuperfluities by perſpiration, which ſhall be
as ſweet as muſk. They ſhall eat for delight but not
for hunger. They ſhall eat of all fleſh except the
fleſh of ſwine, which is unclean.
Let the mind be once impreſſed with the truth of the
Mahometan doćtrine, and the reality of ſuch a hea-
ven, and it will aſſuredly wiſh to become aninhabitant-
After painting ſo luxurious a place, Mahomet, to
further his ambitious views of conqueſt, made pre-
deſtination a part of his ſyſtem, by which he taught
that no man could die till his time ſhould come; that
thoſe warriors who fell in battle, infallibly went to
heaven; that thoſe who ran away were inſtigated to
cowardice by the temptations of the devil, and for
whom there was no ſalvation. It was impoſſible to
conceive a ſtronger incitement to courage than ſuch
a paradiſe, and ſuch a certainty of enjoyment.
His hell was as tremendous as his heaven was in-
viting; there were fountains of ſcalding water for
the damned to drink; the tree ezecum for them to
feed upon, which ſhould burn in their bellies like
fire; they were to have chains of ſeventy cubits in
length, bound round and round them to keep them
ſafe.

<page 320>
M A H O. M. E. T. A N I S. M. 37
*
*
ſafe. The cinders that the fire of hell caſt forth,
were as large as towers; the floor was of burning
brimſtone, that ſent forth ſtinking and ſuffocating
flames; it was full of pits of boiling pitch and ſul-
phur, in which the damned were daily dipped; every
• thing was loathſome, every thing terrible; a col-
lečtion of obječts from which nature ſhrinks with
horror. -
Mahomet ſeemed to poſſeſs every art of leading
the imagination of the enthuſiaſt into the world of
wonders. Thus his Alcoran was ſo powerful, that
could the devils only hear it, they ſhould be con-
verted; nay more, they were once to hear it, and
once to repent. Whoever would read the Alcoran a
thouſand times over, ſhould have women with eye-
brows as large as the rainbow. The virgins who
were the lot of the bleſſed, were ſo bright, that were
one of them to come forth at midnight, in the ab-
fence of the ſun, ſhe would illumine the whole earth,
and were ſhe to ſpit into the ſea, the ſalt water
would inſtantly become ſweet. The keys of para-
diſe were, in number, threeſcore and ten thouſand,
each ſeven thouſand miles long, and kept by the
angel Gabriel, who was not able to open one of the
gates without invoking the name of God, and of
Mahomet the friend of God. The firmament is
ſupported on the horn of a buffalo, who, when he
ſtirs, occaſions earthquakes. When God ſwears,
ſays Mahomet, he is otliged to ſwear by beings in-
ferior to himſelf, as by the blowing winds the .
watery

<page 321>
38 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
watery clouds, the ſailing ſhips, the twilight and the
dawn, the guilty ſouls, the devils, the order of angels,
the Alcoran, &c. The following is the Mahometan
Hiſtory of the Laſt Day:-At the Day of Judgment
God ſhall command the angel of death to ſlay every
creature; and God ſhall aſk if any thing remain
alive? Adriel, the angel of death, ſhall anſwer “no-
thing but myſelf;” and God ſhall ſay, go thy ways
between Paradiſe and Hell, and kill thyſelf; and
Adriel ſhall go, with his foul wings, and, proſtrate
on the earth, ſhall ſtrangle himſelf with ſuch hide-
ous bellowing, that the very angels would be terrified
were they alive, and the world ſhall be empty forty
years. Then God ſhall aſk, where now are the migh-
ty men, the princes of the people whoſe is now the
kingdoms, the empires and the powers ?" Then
ſhall he raiſe up Seraphiel, and ſay to him, take thou
this trumpet (the length of the trumpet is five hun-
dred years journey) and go to Jeruſalem, and ſound;
and he ſhall ſound, and all ſouls ſhall come forth,
and the bones of the dead ſhall be gathered together;
and forty years after that, he ſhall ſound again, and .
the bones ſhall be cloathed with fleſh and ſinews; and
after forty years, he ſhall blow a third blaſt, and all
ſouls ſhall repoſſeſs their bodies; and a fire from the
weſt ſhall drive every creature to Jeruſalem, where
they ſhall ſwim in their own moiſture forty years.
After which they ſhall come, with much vexation,
to Adam, and ſhall ſay, father Adamſ father Adam |
wherefore haſt thou begotten us to theſe miſeries
- and

<page 322>
M. A. H. O. M. E. T. A N I S. M. 39
and torments why ſuffereſt thou us to hang be-
tween hope and fear? Pray to God that he will
determine for us between paradiſe and hell. And
Adam ſhall excuſe himſelf by reaſon of his unworthi-
neſs and diſobedience, and ſend them to Noah; and
Noah ſhall ſend them to Abraham, and Abraham to
Moſes, and Moſes to Jeſus Chriſt, and they ſhall
ſay to him, oh! Spirit, Word, and Power of God,
let thy pity move thee to make interceſſion for us.
And he ſhall anſwer, that which ye aſk ye have loſt.
I was indeed ſent in the power of God and the word
of truth, but ye have erred; ye have made me God,
which is more than ever I preached unto you; but go
to the laſt and greateſt of prophets, go to Mahomet.
Then ſhall they turn to Mahomet, and ſay, oh!
faithful meſſenger oh! friend of God we have
finned; hear us, holy prophet, thou art our only
hope. Then ſhall Gabriel and Mahomet go to the
throne of God; and God ſhall ſay, I know where-'
fore ye are come; far be it from me that I ſhould
not hear the prayer of my Faithful One. Then ſhall
a bridge be made over hell, whereon ſhall be ſet a
balance, in which every man’s works ſhall be
weighed; and thoſe who are ſaved, ſhall paſs ſafely
over the bridge ; and the reſt ſhall fall into hell;
and in that day there ſhall be an hundred and twenty
troops of men, and every troop ſhall be in length the
journey of a thouſand years, and in breadth five
hundred; and three troops only ſhall be found faithful.
Then ſhall death be transformed into a ram, and they
- - ſhall

<page 323>
40 T H E F A M 1 ly P I C T U R E.
ſhall place him between heaven and hell, and there
ſhall ariſe much ſtrife between the inhabitants of hell
and the inhabitants of heaven concerning death, but
the inhabitants of heaven ſhall prevail, and ſhall ſlay
death.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
No perſon, my children, can read the above ac-
count of the Day of Judgment without admiring the
ſublimity and grandeur of the images that are there
f
colle&ted. It is taken from a dialogue between
Mahomet and Abdallah Ebn Salam, a Jew, who
WaS ſuppoſed to have affiſted him in compoſing the
Alcoran. Many particulars contained in this ab-
ſtraćt, are taken from the accounts given by Com-
mentators, and many from the Alcoran itſelf.
s
CH A R L E S.
It is very wonderful indeed, Sir ; but ſurely Ma-
homet muſt have been exceedingly wicked to make
the people believe ſuch lies, and perſuade them that
he was a Prophet.
M R. E. G E R to N.
Yes, Charles, he was exceedingly wicked. I
know no wickedneſs equal to that of diffeminating
lies under the maſk of religion: that is, of propa-
gating incoherent and contradićtory opinions, of
infuſing mental terrors into the minds of the fimple
and
*

<page 324>
M A H O M E t a N I S. M. , 4r
|
and the ignorant, and of cauſing them to diſpute,
hate, and exterminate each other for ages to come,
in ſupport of do&trines which are ſo involved in
myſtery, abſurdity and falſehood, that no two men,
even among thoſe who imagine they comprehend
then, were ever of one belief.
EU S T A ce.
Certainly, Sir, we have no right to either diſturb
or deſpiſe perſons who think differently from our-
ſelves. -
M. R. E. G E R T o N.
By no means. The Ruſſians believe St. Nicholas
fvam down the river Volga on a mill-ſtone; the
Gentoos worſhip a cow; the Egyptians a cat; the
Papiſts a wafer. Theſe things are ridiculous, but
not pernicious, till they are rendered ſo by the arts
of ambition, or the zeal of enthuſiaſm. Superſtition
ſhould be pitied, not perſecuted. A King of Siam
had a white elephant, which he ſuppoſed was poſ-
ſeſſed of ſupernatural powers, and he, therefore, made
it the objećt of his adoration. The King of Pegu
was a cunning and ambitious Prince, that wanted a
pretext to make war upon the King of Siam. For
this purpoſe he likewiſe pretended to believe in the
white elephant; ordained it ſacrifices, paid it di-
vine honours, and, at laſt, ſent to demand it of
the King of Siam, that it might be ſeen and wor-
ſhipped by all the people of Pegu. The demand
Wats

<page 325>
42 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
was peremptorily refuſed by the King of Siam.
This was foreſeen by the King of Pegu, who had
previouſly taken his meaſures, and having a vaſt
army in readineſs, immediately invaded Siam, which
he conquered; added it to his own kingdom, and
took the white elephant, which, that he might ſeem
to be conſiſtent, he cauſed all his ſubjećts to adore.
The religious wars of Chriſtians, Jews, and Turks,
are not unlike the war of the white elephant; reli-
gion is the pretence, but ambition is the motive.
Men go to battle, and afterwards, with miraculous
effrontery, to the temples of the God of Benevo-
lence, to render thanks for having obtained the
power to murder and deſtroy their own ſpecies;
nay more, they pretend to faſt, and to pray that they
may induce the God of Mercy to be of their party.
Proteſtants themſelves are ſufficiently weak, ſuffi-
ciently abſurd, and have far, far too much of the
perſecuting ſpirit remaining among them. Let us,
however, do them the juſtice to acknowledge, they
are more rational, and more tolerant, than other
ſe&taries. We are but too well acquainted with the
perſecutions of the Catholics, their inquiſitions, and
their maſſacres; yet do not let us cheriſh ourſelves,
or endeavour to inſpire others with hatred towards
them : their leaders, their rulers, and their inſtruc-
tors only are guilty. -
The following account of a Turkiſh faſt forcibly
and lamentably deſcribes the power of that ſuper-
ftition of which Mahomet was the founder. The
Sultan

<page 326>
M A H O M E T A N I S. M. 43
Sultan Selim having been conſtantly defeated in his
wars with the Germans, who were commanded by
the great Eugene, and being afraid of loſing his
crown and his life by popular inſurreštions, endea-
voured to amuſe the people, and divert them from re-
bellious thoughts by proclaiming a Faſt, which ex-
hibits a melancholy picture of abject folly, and inco-
herent cruelty.
P R O C L A M A T I O N.
ASHMED Selim, Sultan, Emperor of the Eaſt
and of the Weſt, Lord of Lords, true imitator of the
prophet Mahomet, &c. The Grand Sultan being
apprehenſive, that the hand of the great God is
ſtretched out againſt his government, his ſubječts,
and his empire, ſince he permits them to be oppreſſed
and tormented by their enemies the chriſtians, who
have vanquiſhed them ſeveral times, both by ſea and
land, and taken from them a large extent of country;
and all this, as it appears to him, becauſe the muſ-
ſulmans have corrupted themſelves, and become too
confident of their power: To appeaſe the wrath of
God, therefore, and of his prophet Mahomet, he
expreſsly orders, That on Friday, after new moon,
in the fifth, ſixth, and ſeventh months, all and ſin-
gular his ſubjećts ſhall keep a rigorous faſt all that
day, and abſtain from meat and drink, from the
riſing of the ſun, till that of the ſtars. On that day,
the Mufti, and other eccleſiaſtical ſervants, cloathed
with

<page 327>
44 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R e.
with penitential garments of hair-cloth, with down-
caſt eyes, beards uncombed, and all in tears, ſhall
repair firſt to the public places, and afterwards to
the moſques, crying with all their ſtrength, “Ya
moſateth ilabwab,” [i. e. Open the gates of thy fa-
vour.] In the iſland of Mecca, the prophet's coffin
ſhall be laid open, and expoſed to public view upon
ſilver treſſels, perfumed with incenſe, and filled with
the bones of ſervants and ſpahi’s killed in the battie ;
that the prophet, moved by ſo great and ſo ſenſible a
loſs, may be induced to appeaſe the wrath of Heaven.
This to be performed three Fridays, the coffin car-
ried through the ſtreets and in the fields; and all
the pilgrims and inhabitants of the moſques, with the
Chiefs of the trades, ſhall make the round ſeven
times, ſinging, with a doleful voice, the Canticle of
Lamentation, on account of this terrible deſtruc-
, tion. No inſtrument of muſic ſhall be heard, but
cries of ſorrow and univerſal mourning; and, on
the laſt day of faſting, a ſolemn and general pro-
ceſſion ſhall be made, ten miles round, in the fol-
lowing order:
Firſt, The proceſſion ſhall begin with a coffin
filled , with dead men's bones, broken ſcimiters,
flatted cuiraſſes, broken bows, and blunt arrows.
All theſe ſhall be carried by ſix-hundred Turks
cloathed in penitential habits, bare-footed and bare-
headed, without turbans.
2. Three hundred muſſulmans ſhall follow, with
habits dyed in blood and ſtrewed with aſhes, ſtriking
their

<page 328>
M A H O M E T A N I S. M. 45
their breaſts, with lamentable outcries and doleful
howlings.
3. Six thouſand, naked from their heads to
their girdles, ſhall laſh their breaſts and ſhoulders
with thorns, till the blood droppeth on the ground,
without their wiping it off.
4. The coffin of the prophet, ſupported by thirty
Spahis without turbans, ſurrounded by four hun-
dred Baſhaws, with drawn ſcimiters, to deſtroy all
who ſhall look on the coffin without reſpect, and
whoſe bodies ſhall be caſt to the dogs.
5. At every quarter of a mile, an aſs and a Jew
ſhall be killed, and left on the ground weltering in
their blood.
6. Thirty land Baſhaws ſhall be without purple,
and with pitiful turbans of a black ſtuff dipped in the
blood of the aſs and the Jew, having one hand tied
behind to the ſhoulder; without ſcimiters, but with
. of black horſes dragging on the ground to raiſe
the duſt. -
7. Three thouſand Janizaries, without arms,
having ſticks in their hands trailing on the ground,
ſhall cry, “Alla haſbi ſagavuri !” [i. e. God is my
protećtor let him pardon me !]
8. A cheſt filled with ſilver to be thrown to the
people, but not to be gathered, till the proceſſion be
over, under pain of being impaled alive.
9. In fine, this proceſſion ſhall be cloſed by an in-
numerable multitude of people, in the midſt of whom
there ſhall be an hundred Turkiſh penitents, who
4. with

<page 329>
46 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
with knives ſhall cut off the fleſh of their arms, their
breaſts, and their faces, the better to appeaſe the
wrath of the great God and his prophet Mahomet;
and, at every quarter of a mile, they ſhall lift up
the right-hand, and cry, with all their ſtrength,
“ Alla fifai ſededni Ahday.” [i. e. I invoke God
with my mouth, that he may fortify me againſt my
enemies.]
N AN c Y.
This is a moſt barbarous and cruel ceremony,
Sir.
M R. E. G E R To N.
Ay, my dear, ſo much ſo, that I would not have
fhocked your ears with ſo black a relation of human
depravity, but that I wiſh to inſpire a univerſal de-
teſtation of the perſecuting ſpirit of ſuperſtition.
We will cloſe this ſubject with the fićtitious travels
of Scarmentado, which, though done in the form
of a novel, contain a true and melancholy collection
of facts.
S U P E R S T I T I O N :
Or Sc A R M E N T A Do. .
MY name is Scarmentado; my father was go- -
vernor of the city of Candia, where I came into
the world in the year 16oo, and I remember that
one Jro, a ſtupid and ſcurrilous poet, wrote a copy
of
-

<page 330>
S U P e R S T L T I O N. 47
of doggrel verſes in my praiſe, by which he proved
me deſcended from Minos in a direct line; but my
father being diſgraced ſome time after, he wrote
another poem, by which it appeared I was no longer
a-kin to Minos, but the deſcendant of Paſiphae and
her lover.
When I was fifteen years old, my father ſent me
to Rome, to finiſh my ſtudies. Monſignor Profonde,
to whom I was recommended, was a ſtrange kind of
man, and one of the moſt terrible ſcholars breath-
ing; he took it into his head to teach me the cate-
gories of Ariſtotle, and I narrowly eſcaped his throw-
ing me into the category of his minions. I ſaw
many proceſſions and exorciſms, and much oppreſ-
fion. Signora Fatelo, a lady of no rigid morals,
was fooliſh enough to like me: ſhe was wooed by
two youthful monks, the Rev. Father Poignardini,
and the Rev. Father Aconiti, but ſhe put an end to
the pretenſions of both of them, by granting me her
good graces ; yet, at the ſame time, I narrowly
eſcaped being excommunicated and poiſoned. I
left Rome, exceedingly well pleaſed with the archi-
tecture of St. Peter's church.
I went to France, in the reign of Lewis, ſurnamed
the Juſt; the firſt thing I was aſked was, whether
I choſe a reliſh of the Marſhal d'Ancre, whoſe body
the public had roaſted, and which was diſtributing
very cheap to ſuch as deſired the happineſs of taſting.
This nation was at that time torn to pieces by civil
wars, occaſioned ſometimes by ambition, ſometimes
by

<page 331>
43 T H E F A M I L Y P J C T U R E.
by controverſy; and thoſe inteſtine broils had for
the ſpace of forty years deluged the moſt delightful
country in the world with blood. Such were the
liberties of the Gallican church: the French, ſaid
I, are naturally wiſe; what makes them deviate from
that character : They are much given to joking and
pleaſantry, and yet they commit a maſſacre; happy
that age in which they ſhall do nothing but joke and
make merry.
From hence I ſet out for England; the ſame fa-
natical temper excited here the ſame furious zeal;
a ſet of devout Roman Catholics, had reſolved, for
the good of the church, to blow up the king, the
royal family, and the parliament, with gunpowder,
and thereby free the nation from thoſe heretics. I
was ſhewn the ſpot where the bleſſed Queen Mary,
daughter to Henry VIII. had cauſed above five hun-
dred of her ſubječts to be burnt alive. A pious
Hibernian prieſt aſſured me, it was a very laudable
aćtion, firſt, becauſe thoſe they had burped were
Engliſh; and, ſecondly, becauſe they were wretches
who never took any holy water, and did not believe
in St. Patrick.
From England I went to Holland, in hopes of find-
ing more peace and tranquillity among a more fleg-
matic people. At my arrival at the Hague, I was
entertained with the beheading of a venerable old
patriot, the prime miniſter Barnevelt, who was the
moſt deſerving man in the republic. Struck with
pity at the fight, I aſked what his crime was, and
whether
s

<page 332>
S U P E R S T I T I O N. 49
whether he had betrayed the ſtate He has done
worſe, replied a preacher with a black cloak, he
believes that we can be ſaved by good works, as
well as by faith. You are ſenſible, that were ſuch
ſyſtems ſuffered to prevail, the commonwealth could
not long ſubſiſt, and that a ſevere law is neceſſary
to check and refute ſuch ſcandalous errors. A deep
Dutch politician told me with a figh, that ſuch com-
mendable ačtions could not laſt for ever: Alas, Sir!"
ſaid he, our people naturally incline towards tole-
ration; ſome day or other they will adopt it; I
ſhudder at the thought: believe me, Sir, purſued he,
it is a mere chance that you ačtually find them ſo
laudably and zealouſly inclined as to cut off the
heads of their fellow-creatures for the ſake of reli-
gion. Such were the lamentable words of the
Dutchman; for my own part, I thought proper to
abandon a country, whoſe ſeverity had no compen-
fation, and therefore embarked for Spain.
I arrived at Seville in the fineſt ſeaſon in the year.
The court was there, the galleons were arrived, and
all ſeemed to proclaim joy, abundance, and profu-
ſion. I eſpied at the end of a beautiful alley, fulf
of orange and lemon-trees, a vaſt concourſe round
an amphitheatre richly adorned; the king, the queen,
the infants and infantas, were ſeated under a ſtately
canopy, and over againſt that auguſt family, another
throne, higher and more magnificent, had been erect-
ed. I told one of my travelling companions, that
unleſs that ſuperb throne were dedicated to the Deity,
Ve L, II, D I could
• * *

<page 333>
50 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
I could not ſee the uſe of it; but theſe indiſcreet words
being overheard by a grave Spaniard, I paid dear for
having uttered them. In the mean time, I imagined
we were to be diverted with a carouſal, wreſtling,
or bull-baiting; when I perceived the grand inqui-
ſitor aſcend that throne, and beſtow his bleſfing upon
the king and people. Then appeared an army of
monks, filing off two by two; ſome were white,
others were black, grey, and brown; ſome were
ſhod, and ſome bare-footed; ſome had beards, and
ſome had none ; ſome were with cowls, and ſome ,
without. Then came the executioner, followed by
about forty wretches, guarded by a world of gran-
dees and alguazils, and covered with garments, upon
which were painted flames and devils. Theſe fel-
lows were Jews, who would not altogether be com-
pelled to abandon the law of Moſes; and Chriſtians
who had married their godmothers, or perhaps re-
fuſed to worſhip Neuſtra Dama d’Atocha, or to part
with their money in favour of the brothers Hiero-
nymians. Prayers were ſaid very devoutly, after
which all thoſe wretches were tortured and burnt:
which concluded the ceremony, to the great edifi-
cation of all the royal family.
The ſame night, while I was going to bed, two
meſſengers from the inquiſition came to my lodg-
ings with the holy Hermandad. They embraced
me tenderly, and, without ſpeaking a word, carried
me out of the houſe, and conducted me into a dun-
geon, not incommoded by heat, adorned with a cu-
r19uS

<page 334>
S U P E R S T I T I O N. 51
rious crucifix, and a mat inſtead of a bed. After I
had been there ſix weeks, the father inquiſitor ſent
his compliments, and deſired to ſee me: I obeyed
the ſummons: he received me with open arms, and
after having embraced me with more than paternal
fondneſs, told me, he was very ſorry they had put
me in ſo bad a lodging, but that all the apartments
happening to be full, it was impoſſible to give me a-
nother; adding, however, that he hoped I ſhould be
better taken care of another time. He then aſked
me very lovingly, whether I knew why I was put in
there. I told the reverend father, I ſuppoſed it was
for my fins. Well, my dear child, replied he, but
for what ſin? make me your confident—ſpeak. I
did all I could to bethink myſelf of ſome miſde-
meanor, but in vain ; upon which, he made me re-
colle&t my imprudent words: in ſhort, I recovered
my liberty, after having undergone a ſevere diſci-
pline, and paid 30,000 reals. I went to take leave
of the grand inquiſitor; he was a very polite man,
and aſked me how I reliſhed the holidays they had
given me? I told him they were delightful, and at
the ſame time went to preſs my companions to quit
this enchanting country. They had time enough,
during my confinement, to learn all the great at-
chievements of the Spaniards, for the ſake of reli-
gion. They had read the memoirs of the famous
biſhop of Chiapa, by which it appears, that ten
millions of infidels had been murdered in America to
convert the reſt. I imagined that biſhop might ex-
D 2 aggerate

<page 335>
52 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 C T U R E.
aggerate a little, but ſuppoſing the vićtims were but
half that number, the ſacrifice was ſtill admirable.
Notwithſtanding the diſagreeable adventures I had
met with in my travels, determined to finiſh my
tour, and accordingly embarked for Turkey, fully
reſolved never more to intermeddle with other people's
affairs, nor give my judgment about public ſhews.
Theſe Turks, ſaid I, to my companions, are a ſet
of unbaptized miſcreants; and of courſe more cruel
than the reverend fathers of the inquiſition. Let
us be ſilent among the Mahometans.
I arrived at Conſtantinople, where I was ſtrangely
furprized to ſee more Chriſtian churches than in
Candia; but much more ſo, to ſee alſo a numerous
train of monks, permitted to offer their prayers
freely to the Virgin Mary, and to curſe Mahomet,
ſome in Greek, others in Latin, and ſome in Arme-
nian. How reaſonable are the Turks! exclaimed
I. Whilſt the Chriſtian world ſtains a ſpotleſs reli-
gion with blood, theſe infidels tolerate doćtrines
which they abhor, without moleſtation or inhuma-
nity. The Grecian and Latin Chriſtians were at
mortal enmity in Conſtantinople, and like dogs that
quarrelled in the ſtreets, perſecuted each other with
the utmoſt violence. The Grand Vizir protećted
the Greeks, whoſe patriarch accuſed me before him
of having ſupped with the Latins, and I was moſt
charitably condemned by the divan, to receive one
hundred blows with a lath, upon the ſole of the foot,
with permiſſion, however, to be excuſed for 5oo ſe-
t

quins.

<page 336>
S U P E R S T L T I O N. 53
quins. The next day the Grand Vizir was ſtrangled;
and the day following, his ſucceſſor, who was for
the Latin party, and who was not ſtrangled till a
month afterwards, condemned me to the ſame pu-
niſhment, for having ſupped with the Grecian pa-
triarch : and, in ſhort, I was reduced to the ſad ne-
ceflity to frequent neither the Latin nor the Greek
church. To make myſelf amends, I determined to
make love to a young Turkiſh laſs, who ſeemed to have
a diſpoſition as gentle, kind, and compaſſionate in
private, as it was pious and devout in the moſque.
One night, as I was pleading my paſſion, and com-
plaining of her cruelty, ſhe ſuddenly exclaimed, Oh
alla, alla, alla. Theſe are the ſacramental words of
the Turks, which I miſtook for the ſoft tranſports
of love, and thereſore cried out in my turn, Oh
alla, alla, alla; upon which ſhe ſaid, “Let Mahomet
be glorified, you are a Turk.” In the morning the
iman came to perform the initiating ceremony, but as
I made ſome reſiſtance, the cady, who certainly was
a very loyal gentleman, told me he intended to have
me impaled. I preſerved my religion, &c. by a
thouſand ſequins, and fled into Perſia, firmly re-
ſolved never to go to the Latin or Grecian maſs,
or to ſay alla, alla, alla, in Turkey.
At my arrival at Iſpahan, I was aſked which I
was for, white or black ſheep I anſwered, that
the fleſh of a white or black ſheep was equal to me,
provided it was tender. It ſhould be known, that
the factions of the white and black ſheep ſtill di-
* D 3 vided

<page 337>
54 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
vided the Perſians, who imagined I meant to laugh
at both parties, inſomuch that I had ſcarce entered
the city gates, when I had a ſad affair to extricate
myſelf from; which I did however with a good num-
ber of ſequins, and by their means got ſafe out of
the hands of theſe ſheep.
I went as far as China with an interpreter, who
informed me, that it was the only country where
one might live freely, gaily, and peaceably. The
Tartars had rendered themſelves maſters of it with
fire and ſword, and the reverend fathers the Jeſuits,
on one ſide, and the reverend fathers the Dominicans,
on the other, ſaid that they drew ſouls towards God
every day, without any body's knowing it. Sure
there never was a ſet of more zealous converters |
for they perſecuted one another by turns; and ſent
to Rome whole volumes of calumnies, wherein
they were reciprocally called infidels and prevari-
cators. There was particularly a terrible quarrel
among them, about the method of making a bow.
The Jeſuits taught the Chineſe to ſalute their pa-
rents after the manner of their country; and the
Dominicans, on the contrary, held that they ought
to bow to them after the manner of Rome. I hap-
pened to be taken by the Jeſuits for a Dominican,
and they told his Tartarian majeſty, that I was the
Pope's ſpy. The ſupreme council immediately or-
dered the prime mandarin, who ordered a ſerjeant,
who ordered four guards to arreſt and bind me, with
all the ceremony uſual on ſuch occaſions. I was
brought,
||-

<page 338>
* S U P E R S T R T I O N, $;
,
brought, after one hundred and forty genu-flexions,
before his majeſty, who aſked me, whether I really
was the Pope's ſpy, and whether it was true, that
his holineſs intended to come in perſon to dethrone
him : I anſwered, that the Pope was a prieſt, three-
ſcore and ten years of age; that he lived four thou-
ſand miles diſtant from his ſacred Tartaro-Chineſe
majeſty; that he had about two thouſand ſoldiers,
who mounted guard with an umbrella ; that he
never dethroned any body; and, in ſhort, that his
majeſty might ſleep in quiet. This was the laſt un-
fortunate adventure I met with in the whole courſe
of my travels. I was ſent to Macao, where I em-
barked for Europe.
I was obliged, in order to refit my ſhip, to put
into a harbour, on the coaſt of Golconda. I laid
hold of that opportunity, to go and ſee the court of
the great Aureng-zebe, ſo much renowned for its
wonderful magnificence: he was then at Delhi;
and I had the good fortune to ſee him the day of
that pompous ceremony, in which he received the
Heavenly Preſent ſent him by the ſheriff of Mecca,
viz. the broom, with which they had ſwept the holy
houſe, the Caaba, and the Beth alla. That broom.
is a ſymbol which ſweeps away all uncleanneſs of
ſoul. Aureng-zebe had no occaſion for it, ſince he
was the moſt pious man in Indoſtan. It is true, he
had cut his brother's throat, poiſoned his father, and
put to death, by torture, about twenty rayas, and as
many omrahs; yet nothing was talked of but his
- D 4 - devotion,

<page 339>
56 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
devotion, which, they ſaid, was without equal, ex-
cept that of his moſt ſacred majºſty Muley Iſmael,
the moſt ſerene emperor of Morocco, who never
failed to ſtrike off ſeveral heads, every Friday after
prayers.
. To all this I ſpoke not a word; my travels and
adventures had taught me to bridle my tongue; and
I was very ſenſible, it was not mine to decide be-
tween the piety of the emperors of India and Mo-
IOCCO.
I had not yet ſeen Africa; but whilſt I, was de-
bating with myſelf, whether it was better to ſatisfy
this laſt inclination, or ſail for Italy, my ſhip was
taken by the negroes, and I was, of courſe, carried
thither. Our captain railed againſt ſhe captors, aſking
them the reaſon why they thus outrageouſly violated
the law of nations? They replied, Your noſe is long,
and Our's is flat; your hair is ſtraight, and our wool
is curled; you are white, and we are black; con-
ſequently we ought, according to the ſacred and
unalterable law of nature, to be ever enemies.—
You buy us on the coaſt of Guinea, as if we were
not human creatures, then treat us like beaſts, and
with repeated blows conſtrain us to an eternal dig-
ging into the mountains, in order to find a ridicu-
lous yellow duſt, of no intrinſic value, and not worth
a good Egyptian onion ; therefore when we meet
with you, and happen to be ſtrongeſt, we make you our
ſlaves, and force you to till our ground, or elſe we
cut off your noſe or ears. We had nothing to ſay
againſt

<page 340>
S U P E R S T R T I O Nº. 57
againſt ſo wiſe a diſcourſe. I was employed to till
the ground of an old negro woman, having no incli-
nation to loſe either my noſe or my ears; and, after
a twelvemonth's ſlavery, was redeemed by ſome
friends I had written to for that purpoſe.
Having thus ſeen the world, and all that is great,
good, and admirable in it, I reſolved to return to
Candia, where I married preſently after my arrival,
and ſoon became an example to devotees and jealous
huſbands, by the profound taciturnity and tranquillity
which I obſerved upon all occaſions. To ſay the
truth, I found matrimony, when compared to whas
I had ſeen and ſuffered, a very tolerable evil.
D I A L O G U E XIII.
CH A R L E s.
OU were ſo good yeſterday, Sir, as to explain
the ill conſequences of ſuperſtition, and the
injuſtice of perſecution. This brought to my mind
the ſtory of the flying cheſt, which I read ſome time
ago; and I thought very diverting. As it is founded
on ſuperſtition, will you give me leave to read it *
Perhaps it will entertain the company.
- D 5 - MR,

<page 341>
58 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
MR. E. G E R T o N.
Very willingly, Charles; for though there is more
of diverſion than inſtruction in this tale, yet, as you
may be innocently merry at the incidents, and as
innocent mirth is very deſirable, I gladly give my
conſent. Neither is it without a moral; it will
caution you againſt credulity, and teach you not to
give a haſty aſſent to bold and raſh pretenders.
C R E D U L I T Y.:
Or the Story of MALEK and the Princeſs SchIRINE.
I AM the only ſon of a rich merchant of Surat.
A little while after his death, I ſpent the beſt part
of the wealth he left me. I was making an end of
the remainder with my friends, when a ſtranger that
paſſed by Surat, to go, as he ſaid, to the Iſle of
Ceylon, by chance dined at my table. They hap-
pened to talk about travelling. Some commended
the uſefulneſs and pleaſure of it, others repreſented
the dangers. Some of the company gave us an
account of their travels. The curious things they
had ſeen excited me to travel; but the dangers they
had run through, hindered me from reſolving on it.
After I had heard them all, I ſaid, one cannot
hear you ſpeak of the pleaſures you have had in
going over the world, without feeling an extreme
deſire of travelling. But the dangers that travellers
are expoſed to, take from me the inclination of
ſeeing

<page 342>
C. R. E. Dº U L I T Y. 59
f
ſeeing other countries. If one could, added I,
ſmiling, go from one end of the world to the other,
without meeting with unlucky accidents on the way, I
ſhould ſet off to-morrow from Surat. At theſe words,
which made all the company laugh, the ſtranger
ſaid to me; Seigneur Malek, if you have a deſire
to travel, and if the danger alone of meeting with
robbers hinders you from reſolving to do ſo, I will
teach you, when you will, a way to go from king-
dom to kingdom, without any danger. I believed
he was in jeſt; but after dinner he took me aſide,
and told me that the next morning he would come
to me, and ſhew me ſomething very extraordinary.
He did not fail: he came again to me, and ſaid,
I will keep my word with you; but you will not ſee
the effect of my promiſe theſe two or three days, for
it is a work that cannot be done to-day. Send one
of your ſlaves for a joiner, and let them both bring
boards with them; which was done immediately.
When the joiner and the ſlave were come, the
ſtranger bid the joiner make a cheſt ſix feet long,
and four broad. The workman went preſently to
work; the ſtranger, on his part, was not idle; he
made a great many pieces of the machine, the
vices and the ſprings. They worked all day long,
and the joiner was diſmiſſed : the ſtranger ſpent
the day following to place the ſprings, and to perfect
the work. -
At three days end the cheſt was finiſhed; it was
covered with a Perſian carpet, and carried into the
D 6 country,

<page 343>
60. T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
country, whither I went with the ſtranger: who
ſaid to me; ſend away your ſlaves, and let us ſtay
here alone, I will have none near but yourſelf to be
witneſs of what I do. I ordered my ſlaves to go
home, and I ſtaid alone with the ſtranger. I
longed to know what he would do. with this ma-
chine; he at length got in it, and at the ſame time
the cheſt raiſed itſelf up from the ground, and cut
the air with incredible ſwiftneſs; in one moment it
ſprung a great way from me, and the next was again
at my feet.
I cannot tell you how much I was ſurprized at this
prodigy. You ſee, ſaid the ſtranger to me, getting
qut of the machine, a very eaſy carriage, and you
ought to be perſuaded, that, travelling after this
manner, one need not fear being robbed on the road.
This is the method I would have you take to travel
in ſafety. I will make you a preſent of this trunk;
you may make uſe of it when you have a mind
to go into foreign countries. Think not, con-
tinued he, that there is any inchantment in what
you have ſeen: ’tis not by cabaliſtick words, nor
by virtue of a taliſman, that this cheſt raiſes itſelf in
the air. Its motion is made by an ingenious arti-
fice, that ſhews the power of mechanics, of which
I am a perfeót maſter. - -
I thanked the ſtranger for ſo rare a preſent, and
gave him, as an acknowledgment, a purſe full of
ſequins. Inform me, ſaid I to him afterwards, how
I muſt do to ſet this cheſt in motion: I will teach
you

<page 344>
C. R. E. D U L I T Y. 6f
you that preſently, anſwered he. At theſe words
he made me go into the machine with him ;
touched a ſpring, and preſently we were lifted up in
the air. Then ſhewing me what method was to be
taken to guide it right; in turning this vice, ſaid he
to me, you go to the right, and in turning that,
you go to the left; by touching this ſtring you
aſcend, and by touching that you deſcend. I
made trial of it myſelf; I turned the vices, and
touched the ſprings; the cheſt, effectually obedient
to my hand, went which way I pleaſed, and haſtened
or ſlackened the motion as I managed. After having
made a great many wheelings about in the air, we
took our flight towards my houſe, and deſcended
into my garden; which we eaſily did, becauſe we
had taken off the carpet that covered the machine,
which had a great many holes through it, as well
to admit the air, as to look through.
We were at home before my ſlaves, who were
enough ſurprized to ſee us return. I locked the
cheſt up in my apartment, where I kept it with as
much care as if it had been a treaſure; and the
ſtranger went away as content with me, as I was
with him. I continued to divert myſelf with my
friends, till I had ſpent all my patrimony. I began
alſo to borrow, inſomuch that I inſenſibly found
myſelf loaded with debts. As ſoon as it was known
in Surat that I was ruined, I loſt my credit, nobody
would lend me any thing; and my creditors, impa-
tient to have their money again, gave me notice to
pay

<page 345>
62. T H E . F. A. M. I. L. Y - P I C T U R Ee
pay it. Not knowing any longer which way to
turn myſelf, and by conſequence being liable to
troubles and affronts, I had recourſe to my cheſt : I
drew it one night out of my apartment into my
yard, I got into it, with ſome proviſions, and the
little money I had left. I touched the ſpring that
made the machine mount; then turning one of the
vices, I went far enough from Surat, and from my
creditors, without fear of their ſending any officers
after me.
I made the cheſt go all that night as faſt as poſ-
fible, and I believed that I ſurpaſſed the wind in
ſwiftneſs. At day-break, I looked through a hole
to ſee where I was, and perceived nothing but moun-
tains and precipices, a dry country, and a frightful
deſert; I could diſcover no appearance of an habi-
tation. I continued to travel through the air all that
day and the night following. The next day I found
myſelf over a very thick wood, nigh which there
was a very fine town ſituated in a plain of great
extent.
I ſtopt to look at the town, as well as at a mag-
nificent palace, that offered itſelf to my view at the
end of the plain. I deſired paſſionately to know
where I was, and had already thought on a way to
ſatisfy my curioſity, when I ſaw in the fields a
peaſant tilling the ground. I deſcended in the wood,
where I left my cheſt, and went towards the huſ-
bandman, of whom I aſked how they called the
town. Young man, anſwered he, one may ſee you
arc

<page 346>
. . . C R E D U L I T Y. 63
;
}
are a ſtranger, ſince you know not that this town is
called Gazna; the equitable and valiant King Ba-
haman makes it the place of his reſidence. And
who lives, ſaid I to him, in that palace that we ſee
at the end of the plain : The King of Gazna, re-
plied he, has built it to keep his daughter the
Princeſs Schirine in, who is threatened by her ho-
roſcope to be deceived by a man. Bahaman, to
elude this predićtion, built this palace, which is of
marble and ſurrounded with deep ditches of water.
The gate is ſteel of China; and beſides that, the
King keeps the key of it; there is a numerous guard
that watches night and day, to hinder any man
from going in. The King goes once a week to ſee
the Princeſs his daughter, and then returns to
Gazna. Schirine has no company in this palace,
but a governeſs and ſome maiden-ſlaves.
I thanked the peaſant for his information, and
went towards the town. When I was almoſt ar-
rived there, I heard a great noiſe, and prefently ſaw
many horſemen, magnificently cloathed, and all
mounted on very fine horſes that were richly ac-
coutred. I perceived, in the middle of that ſtately
cavalcade, a luſty man, who had on his head a
crown of gold, and whoſe cloaths were covered with
diamonds. I judged that he was the King of
Gazna, who was going to ſee the Princeſs his
daughter, and I underſtood in the town that I was
not deceived in my conjecture.
After

<page 347>
64 T H F F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
After I had taken a turn or two about the town,
and ſatisfied my curioſity a little, I remembered my
cheſt; and though I had left it in a place where I
had reaſon to think it ſafe, yet I was uneaſy. I
went from Gazna, and I could not be ſatisfied, till
I came where it was. Then I was at eaſe, I eat
with a good appetite what was left of my provi-
ſion, and the night coming on, I reſolved to ſpend
it in the wood. I doubted not but I ſhould ſleep
well; for neither my debts, nor the ill condition I
found myſelf in, gave me much uneaſineſs: never-
theleſs I could not ſleep; what the peaſant had told
me of the Princeſs Schirine was always in my
thoughts. Is it poſſible, ſaid I, that Bahaman ſhould
be afraid of a frivolous predićtion? Was it neceſſary
to build a palace to ſhut up his daughter in Was
ſhe not ſafe enough in his Beſides, if aſtrologers
can dive into the obſcurity of what is to come, if
they can read futurity in the ſtars, it is in vain to
endeavour to elude their predićtions, they muſt of
neceſſity be accompliſhed. If the Princeſs of Gazna
be predeſtined to be deceived by a man, it is in vain
for any one to pretend to prevent it. .
I was ſo taken up with thinking on Schirine, who
I fancied to myſelf was handſomer than all the ladies
I had ſeen, though at Surat and Goa I had beheld
many of the moſt beautiful women, who had con-
tributed not a little to ruin me. But I had a
great deſire to try my fortune. I will, ſaid I,
tranſport myſelf to the top of the Princeſs's palace,
and

<page 348>
* c R E D U L I T Y. 65
and endeavour to get into her apartment. Perhaps
I am the mortal, whoſe fortunate attempt the aſtro-
logers have ſeen written in the ſtars.
I was young, and by conſequence heedleſs; I
wanted not courage : I formed this raſh deſign, and
executed it immediately. I raiſed myſelf in the air,
and guided my cheſt towards the palace. The dark-
neſs of the night was ſuch as I could defire. I
paſſed, without being perceived, over the ſoldiers
heads, who being poſted about the ditches, kept a
ſtrićt guard. I deſcended upon the roof of the pa-
lace, nigh a place where I ſaw a light. I got out
of my cheſt, and ſlipt in at a window, that was open
to receive the freſhneſs of the air, into an apartment.
richly furniſhed, where the Princeſs Schirine was
lying on a brocaded ſopha. She ſeemed to me of a
dazzling beauty; I found her far excelling the idea
I had formed of her. • I went near to behold her,
but I could not look on ſo many charms without
tranſport; I fell on my knees before her, and kiſſed
one of her delicate hands. She waked that inſtant,
and perceiving a man in ſuch a poſture, was fright-
ened. She gave a ſhriek, and preſently her go-
verneſs, who lay in the next chamber, came running
to her. Mahpeiker, ſaid the Princeſs, come and
help me. There is a man! How got he into my
apartment? Or rather, are not you an accomplice
of his crime? Who I? replied the governeſs, your
ſuſpicion wrongs me ! I am not leſs aſtoniſhed than
you, to ſee this audacious youth here: Beſides, if I
- would

<page 349>
66. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
\
would have favoured his boldneſs, how could I have
deceived the vigilance of the guards that are about
this caſtle ; You know there are twenty ſteel doors
to open, before any can get into this apartment;
that the royal ſignet is upon every lock; and that
the King your father has the keys: I cannot com-
prehend how this young man has ſurmounted all
theſe difficulties.
While the governeſs was thus ſpeaking, I thought
on what I ſhould ſay to them; and it came in my
head to perſuade them that I was the prophet Ma-
homet. Charming Princeſs, ſaid I to Schirine, let
not yourſelf, or Mahpeiker, be ſurpriſed to ſee me
here; I am not one of thoſe lovers who make uſe of
gold, and employ every artifice to accompliſh their
wiſhes. I have no deſires that your virtue need
to be frightened at ; far be all guilty thoughts from
me. I am the prophet Mahomet. I could not,
without pity, ſee you condemned to paſs your youth-
ful days in a priſon, and I come to give you my
promiſe, that I will ſecure you from the predićtion
which Bahaman your father is afraid of. Let him
and yourſelf be both eaſy henceforth as to your future
deſtiny, which cannot but be full of glory and hap-
pineſs, ſince you ſhall be Mahomet's wife. As ſoon'
as the news of your marriage ſhall be ſpread abroad
in the world, all the Kings of the earth will fear the
father-in-law of the great prophet, and all the Prin-
ceſſes will envy your condition.
Schirine

<page 350>
c R E D U L 1 T Y. - 67
Schirine and her governeſs looked upon one ano-
ther at this diſcourſe, as if to conſult what they
ought to think of it. I had reaſon to fear, I confeſs,
that they would not believe me; but women are apt
to give into wonders. If you are the holy prophet
Mahomet, ſaid Schirine, you are pure, and free
from evil intentions; you will firſt reconcile my
father to the match, and then, on an appointed day,
perform the ceremonies proper to marriage: but if
you are an impoſtor, you will betray your wicked
deſigns. My governeſs ſhall wait in the next apart-
ment whenever you viſit me, till this be accompliſhed;
one ſhriek from me will alarm her, and ſhe will call
the guards, if your actions ſhould ſhew you are not
what you pretend. I anſwered the Princeſs by com-
mending her virtue, applauding the juſtice of the
teſt ſhe propoſed, and fixing on that day month for
the ſolemnization of our nuptials, as I hoped by that
time to find ſome lucky means of deceiving her
father into the ſame belief. Accordingly Mahpeiker
and her miſtreſs gave credit to my ſtory, and be-
lieved me to be Mahomet. After having paſſed the
beſt part of the night with the Princeſs of Gazna, I
went out of her apartment before it was day-light,
not without promiſing her that I would come the
following evening. I made haſte to my machine, I
put myſelf in it, and raiſed myſelf very high, that I
might not be ſeen by the ſoldiers. I deſcended in the
wood; I left my cheſt, and went to the town, where
I bought proviſions for eight days, with magni-
ficent

<page 351>
68 T H E F A M I L. Y. P. I C T U R E.
ficent apparel, a fine turban of Indian linen, with
ſtripes of gold, and a rich girdle. I did not forget
eſſences and the beſt perfumes. I laid out all my
money in theſe purchaſes, without perplexing myſelf
to know where I ſhould get more : I thought I
could want for nothing, after ſo extraordinary an
adventure.
I ſtaid all that day in the wood, where I em-
ployed myſelf in perfuming and ſetting myſelf out.
When the night was come, I got into my cheſt, and
returned to the top of the Princeſs Schirine’s palace.
I introduced myſelf into her apartment as the night
before. The Princeſs declared ſhe waited for
me with much impatience. O great prophet, ſaid
ſhe, I began already to be uneaſy, and I feared
you had forgot your ſpouſe. My dear Princeſs,
anſwered I, could you give way to ſuch a fear *
Since I have plighted you my troth, ought not you
to be perſuaded that I would love you always : But
tell me, replied ſhe, why have you ſo young a look? .
I thought that the prophet Mahomet was a venerable
old man. You were not deceived, anſwered I, 'tis
the idea you ought to have of me; and if I ſhould
appear to you ſuch as I ſometimes ſhew myſelf to the
faithful, to whom I deign that honour, you would
ſee me with a long white beard and a bald head; but
I thought you would better like a form not ſuper-
annuated: And, for this reaſon, I have borrowed
the ſhape of a young man. The governeſs joining
then in our diſcourſe, told me, that I had done very
well ;

<page 352>
C R E D U L I T Y. 69
well; and that whoever would perſonate a huſband,
cannot appear too agreeable.
I went again from the caſtle towards the end of
the night, for fear it ſhould be diſcovered that I was
a falſe prophet. I returned the next day, and be-
haved myſelf always ſo cautiouſly, that Schirine and
Mahpeiker could not ſuſpect the leaſt deceit in
me. It is true, the Princeſs took inſenſibly ſuch a
liking to me, that it contributed very much to make
her believe all that I ſaid to her. When we are
favourably prepoſſeſſed, we miſtruſt not ſincerity.
In a few days, the King of Gazna, attended by
his officers, went to the palace of the Princeſs his
daughter, and finding his doors all ſhut, and his ſeal
on the locks, he ſaid to his viſiers that were with
him, all is ſafe; while the doors of the palace are in
this condition, I ſhall not fear the misfortune my
daughter is threatened with. He went alone into
the apartment of Schirine, who could not conceal
her confuſion at the ſight of him. He perceived
it, and was willing to know the cauſe of it. His
curioſity augmented the Princeſs's confuſion, who
ſeeing herſelf at laſt obliged to ſatisfy him, told
him all that had paſt. -
You may imagine how much King Bahaman was
furprized, when he underſtood he was Mahomet's
father-in-law. Oh abſurdity! cried he, Oh! my
daughter, that you ſhould be ſo credulous! O Hea-
ven, I now ſee very plain, that it is in vain to en-
- deavour

<page 353>
70 T H E F A M I L Y P-I C T U R F.
deavour to ſhun the misfortunes you have reſerv-
ed for us. The fate of Schirine is inevitable. A
traitor has deceived her. In ſaying this, he ruſhed
out of the Princeſs's apartment in afflićtion, and
ſearched the palace from top to bottom. But his
ſearch was to no purpoſe, for he found no marks
of diſcovery. At this his ſurprize increaſed. Which
way, ſaid he, did this audacious fellow get into the
caſtle? 'Tis what I cannot conceive.
Then he called his viſiers and his confidents.
They ran at his call, and ſeeing him agitated,
they were afraid. What is the matter, Sir
ſaid his firſt Miniſter to him; you ſeem trou-
bled. What misfortune does the concern that
appears in your looks, declare to us? The King
told them all he had been informed of, and aſked
them what they thought of the ſtory. The
Grand Viſier ſpoke firſt. He ſaid, that the in-
tended marriage might be true, though it had the
appearance of a fable. That there were ſome noble
families in the world, who made no difficulty to aſ-
cribe their origin to ſuch like events, and that for
him he looked on the communication that the
Princeſs had with Mahomet, as a thing very likely.
The other viſiers, in complaiſance perhaps to him
anat ſpoke firſt, were of his opinion: but one of the
courtiers declared himſelf againſt it, in theſe terms;
I am ſurpriſed to ſee ſenſible men give credit to a
ſtory, ſo little worthy of belief. How can it enter
into the heads of men of ſenſe, that our great pro-
- - - phet

<page 354>
C R E D U L I T Y. 71
phet ſhould be capable of coming to ſeek women in
this world, who in his heavenly abode is encom-
paſſed by the moſt beautiful ones. It is contrary
to common ſenſe; and if the King will take my
advice, inſtead of giving ear to ſo ridiculous a ſtory,
he ſhould examine thoroughly into the affair. I
am perſuaded, that he would preſently diſcover the
deceiver, who, under that ſacred name, has the
audaciouſneſs to endeavour to ſeduce the Princeſs.
Though Bahaman was naturally credulous; though
he took his firſt Miniſter for a man of great judge-
ment; and though all his viſiers believed that
Schirine was aétually betrothed toMahomet; he de-
clared himſelf nevertheleſs for the negative. He re-
ſolved to be informed of the truth of it; but being
willing to act with prudence in this affair, and to
endeavour. to ſpeak with the pretended prophet, in
private, he ſent his viſiers and his courtiers back to
Gazna. Go back, ſaid he to them, I will ſtay
alone to-night in this caſtle with my daughter. Go;
but come hither to me again to-morrow. They
all obeyed the King’s orders. They went back to
the town, and Bahaman waiting for the night, began
to aſk the Princeſs new queſtions. He aſked her if
I had eaten with her. No, Sir, ſaid his daughter,
I offered him in vain meat and drink, he would not
touch them, and I never ſaw him take the leaſt nou-
riſhment, nor commit the leaſt indelicacy, ſince he
has uſed to come hither. Relate to me again this
adventure, replied he, and hide not from, me any
Oile

<page 355>
72 T H E F A M I I, Y P 1 C T U R E.
one particular. Schirine gave him a renewed account
of it, and the king, attentive to her relation, carefully
weighed every circumſtance.
In the mean while, the night came on ; Bahaman
ſat himſelf on a ſopha, and wax candles were lighted,
and placed before him on a marble-table. He
drew his ſcimitar to uſe it, if there ſhould be
occaſion, to waſh away in my blood the affront done
to his honour. He expected me every moment, and
in the expectation he was, of ſeeing me appear all
on a ſudden, I cannot believe he was without
trouble.
It happened that night to lighten very much. A
great flaſh chanced to dart full in the king’s eyes,
and made him ſtartle. He went to the win-
dow which Schirine told him I came in at, and per-
ceiving the air all on fire, he was much perplexed
in his thoughts. Though he ſaw nothing that was
unnatural, he could not look on thoſe meteors, as the
effects of exhalations kindled in the air; he rather
believed that the flames announced to earth, the
deſcent of Mahomet, and that the gates of heaven
unfolding to let out the prophet, made the air one
luminous body.
In the diſpoſition the king's mind was, I pre-
fented myſelf without danger before that Prince.
Far from ſhewing himſelf furious when I appear-
ed at the window, he was ſeized with reſpect
and fear. He let fall his ſcimitar, caſt himſelf at
my feet, and kiffing them, ſaid to me: O great
- - prophet,
-
---

<page 356>
G R e D U L i t Y. 73
prophet, who an I, and what have I done, to deſerve
the honour to be your father-in-law I judged by
theſe words, what had paſſed between the king and the
, princeſs, and I found that the good Bahaman was
not more difficult to be deceived than his daughter.
I was charmed, to perceive that I had nothing to do
with one of thoſe penetrating heads who would have
made the prophet undergo an examination that
would have puzzled him. Taking advantage of
his weakneſs, O king, ſaid I to him, raiſing him
up, you are of all the Mahometan princes, the moſt
firm to my ſečt, and by conſequence, he that ought
to be the moſt acceptable to me. It was recorded in
the Book of Fate, that your daughter ſhould be de-
ceived by a man; this your aſtrologers very truly
diſcovered by their ſublime ſcience, but I have
prayed the moſt High to exempt you from that
mortal affliction, and to blot out this misfortune from
the predeſtination of mankind. This he was pleaſed
to do for my ſake, upon condition that Schirine
ſhould become one of my wives. To this I con-
ſented, to recompenſe you for the good deeds you do
every day.
King Bahaman was not in a condition of unde-
ceiving himſelf. That weak prince believed all I had
told him ; and overjoyed at this alliance with the
great prophet, he caſt himſelf at my feet a ſecond
time, to ſhew me the ſenſe he had of my kindneſs.
I raiſed him up again, embraced him, and aſſured
Vol. II. E him

<page 357>
74 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
him of my protećtion, while he could not find words
to expreſs the gratitude of his mind.
The next morning the viſiers and the courtiers
returned to the princeſs's palace. They aſked the
king if he was informed of the truth of what he de-
fired to know. Yes, ſaid he, I know now to what
I am to truſt. I have ſeen and ſpoken to the great
prophet himſelf; he is to be my daughter's huſband.
Nothing is more true. Upon this the viſiers and
the courtiers, turning towards him that had oppoſed
the poſſibility of this marriage, reproached him with
incredulity; but they found him reſolute in his
opinion : He maintained it with obſtinacy, what-
ever the king could ſay to perſuade him that Ma-
homet was married to Schirine; till at laſt Bahaman
became almoſt angry with this incredulous courtier,
who was made the jeſt of the council. -
The heavens conſpired, as it were, to deceive the
King. An accident that happened the ſame day, con-
firmed the viſiers in their opinion. As they were re-
turning to the town with their maſter, a ſtorm ſurpriſ-
ed them in the plain. The lightning flaſhed in their
faces, and the thunder roared in ſo terrible a manner,
that they feared it was the laſt day. It happened
that the incredulous courtier's horſe took fright; he
pranced, flung his maſter on the ground, and broke
his leg with the fall. This event was looked upon
as an effect of the wrath of heaven. O miſerable
wretch, cried the king, ſeeing the courtier fall, this
- - kS

<page 358>
C R E D U L I T Y. 75
is the fruit of your obſtinacy; you would not believe
me, and the prophet has puniſhed you!
They carried the lame courtier home, and Baha-
man was no ſooner returned to his palace, but he
cauſed it to be publiſhed at Gazna, that all the in-
habitants ſhould celebrate with feaſting, the day
appointed for the marriage of Schirine with Ma-
homet. I took a walk in the town ; and was in-
formed of this news, as well as of the accident of
the courtier’s falling from his horſe. It is not to be
conceived how credulous and ſuperſtitious the people
were ; they made public rejoicings, and ran crying
up and down, Long live Bahaman, the father-in-law
of the great prophet !
As ſoon as it was night, I got to the wood again,
and was preſently with the princeſs. Charming
Schirine, ſaid I, going into her apartment, you know
not what has happened to day, on the plain. A
courtier, who doubted that you were to be Maho-
met’s wife, has atoned for this doubt. I raiſed a
tempeſt that frightened his horſe; the courtier fell,
and broke his leg. I did not think fit to carry
my revenge any farther ; but I ſwear by my tomb
which is at Mecca, that if any one hereafter dares to
doubt of your happineſs, it ſhall coſt him his life.
After having ſtaid ſome hours with Schirine, I re-
tired. -
The day following, the king aſſembled his viſiers
and courtiers. Let us go all together, ſaid he to
them, to aſk Mahomet's pardon for the unhappy man
- E 2 who

<page 359>
76 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
who refuſed to believe me, and who has received
the chaſtiſement of his unbelief. At the ſame they
mounted their horſes, and went to the princeſs's
palace. The king himſelf opened the doors, which
he had locked and ſealed with his fignet the day
before. He went up, followed by his viſiers, into
his daughter's apartment. Schirine, ſaid he, we are
come to deſire you to intercede with the prophet for
a man who has incurred his wrath. I know very
well what you mean, Sir, anſwered the princeſs;
Mahomet has ſpoken to me of it. She then re-
peated to them what I had told her over night,
and informed them that I had ſworn to deſtroy all
thoſe who doubted of her marriage with the
prophet.
When the good king Bahaman heard this diſ.
courſe, he turned himſelf towards his viſiers and
courtiers, and ſaid to them. Had we not hitherto
given credit to what we have ſeen, could we, after
this, diſbelieve that Mahomet is my ſon-in-law.
You find that he himſelf told my daughter, that he
had raiſed the ſtorm to revenge himſelf of that faith-
jeſs man. All the miniſters and others were con-
vinced that ſhe was the prophet's wife; they caſt
themſelves before her ; they humbly befought her to
intercede with me in behalf of the wounded courtier;
and ſhe promiſed them ſo to do.
During this time, I had conſumed all my proviſions,
and having no money left, the poor prophet Maho-
met began not to know what to do. I bethought
myſelf

<page 360>
c R E D U L i t y. 77
myſelf of an expedient. My princeſs, ſaid I, one
night to Schirine, we have forgot to obſerve one
formality concerning our wedding; you have brought
me no portion, and that omiſſion troubles me.
Well, my dear ſpouſe, anſwered ſhe, I will ſpeak of it
to-morrow to my father, who, without doubt, will
offer to you his treaſures. No, no, replied I, there
is no need of ſpeaking to him of it; I value not
all his riches: they are of no uſe to me. It will
be ſufficient to grant me ſome of your jewels; which
is all the portion I aſk of you. Schirine would have
loaded me with all her jewels, to make her portion
the handſomer; but I was contented with two great
diamonds, which I ſold the next day to a jeweller of
Gazna. I put myſelf by this means in a condition
to continue to perſonate Mahomet.
Juſt at this time, unluckily for me, an ambaſſador
arrived at Gazna, on behalf of a neighbouring king,
to demand Schirine in marriage. He had preſently
audience, and when he had declared the ſubject of his
embaſſy, Bahaman ſaid to him, I am ſorry I cannot
give my daughter to the king your maſter, I have
promiſed her to the prophet Mahomet. The am-
baſſador judged by this anſwer, that the king of
Gazna was mad. He took leave of that prince, and
returned to his maſter, who believed at firſt, as well
as he, that Bahaman had loſt his ſenſes. At length,
imputing this refuſal to contempt and ſlight, he be-
came angry, flew to his army, and invaded the
kingdom of Gazna. -
E 3 That

<page 361>
78 T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
That king, who was named Cacem, was much
ſuperior in ſtrength to Bahaman; who moreover
prepared ſo ſlowly to receive his enemy, that he
could not hinder him from making a great progreſs.
Cacem fought ſome troops that would have oppoſed
his paſſage; he came forward with all ſpeed towards
the town of Gazna, and found Bahaman's army in-
trenched in the plain before the caſtle of the princeſs
Schirine. The deſign of this provoked lover was to
attack him in his intrenchments; but his troops
having need of reſt, and he arriving not in the plain
till towards night, put off the attack till the next
morning.
In the mean while the king of Gazna, being in-
formed of the number and valour of Cacem’s troops,
began to be afraid. He aſſembled his council, where
the courtier, who was hurt in falling from his horſe,
ſpoke in theſe words: “I am amazed that the king
ihould be in the leaſt uneaſineſs on this occaſion;
what cauſe of diſmay can the father-in-law of Ma-
homet have, not only of Cacem, but of all the
princes in the world put together Your Majeſty,
Sir, has nothing to do but to apply yourſelf to your
ſon-in-law; implore the aſſiſtance of the great
prophet; he will preſently confound your enemies.
He can do no leſs, ſince he is the cauſe of Cacem’s
coming to trouble the repoſe of your ſubjects.”
Though this was ſpoken in derifion, it inſpired
Bahaman with confidence. You are in the right,
ſaid he to the courtier, 'tis to the prophet I ought to
- addreſs

<page 362>
C R e D U L L T Y. 79.
addreſs myſelf; I will pray him to drive away my
haughty enemy, and I dare promiſe myſelf he will
not reject my prayer. At theſe words he went to
Schirine; daughter, ſaid he, to-morrow morning,
as ſoon as day appears, Cacem deſigns to attack us ;.
I fear he will force our intrenchments. I am come
hither to implore the affiſtance of Mahomet. Make
uſe of all the intereſt you have with him, to engage
him to defend us. Let us join in our interceſſions to
render him propitious to us. Sir, replied the prin-
ceſs, it will not be very difficult to engage the
prophet on our ſide. He will ſhortly diſperſe the
enemy’s troops, and all the kings of the earth will
learn, at Cacem's coſt, to reſpect you. However,
replied the king, the night is come, and the prophet
does not appear. He has forſaken us! No, no,
my father, replied Schirine, think not he will abandon
us in neceſſity; he ſees from heaven the army that
beſieges us, and, perhaps, he is this moment going
to ſtrike them with terror and diſmay.
This was indeed what Mahomet had a great deſire
to do. I had all that day obſerved the troops of
Cacem afar off. I had regarded their diſpoſition,
and above all had taken great notice of the king's
quarters. I picked up great and little flones; I filled
my trunk with them, and in the middle of the night
I raiſed myſelf up in the air. I went towards Ca-
cem’s tents. I diſcovered without trouble that where
the king lay, it was a very high pavilion, finely
gilt, made in the form of a cupoll, and ſupported by
E 4 twelve

<page 363>
8o T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
twelve pillars of painted wood, that were driven into
the ground. The intervals of the pillars were filled
up with boughs of ſeveral forts of trees twiſted to—
gether. Towards the top there were two windows,
one to the eaſt, and the other to the ſouth.
All the ſoldiers that were about the tent were
aſleep, which gave me an opportunity to deſcend to
one of the windows without being perceived. I
ſaw the king lying on a ſofa, with his head on a fattin
cuſhion. I got a little out of my trunk, and throw-
ing a great ſtone at Cacem, I ſtruck him full in the
forehead, and wounded him dangerouſly. He gave a
loud cry, which preſently waked his guards and hi
officers. They ran to that prince; they found him
all over blood, and almoſt ſenſeleſs. They called out,
the quarters took the alarm, every one aſked what
was the matter. The report went that the king was
wounded; but they could not tell by whom. While
they were inquiring out the author, I raiſed myſelf
up almoſt to the clouds, and let fall a hail of ſtones
upon and about the royal tent. Some ſoldiers were
wounded, and cried out, that it rained ſtones. This
news ſpread itſelf abroad, and to confirm it, I flung
ſtones all about. Then a panic fear ſeiſed the whole
army; the officers, as well as ſoldiers, believed the
prophet was angry with Cacem, and that he declared
his wrath by this prodigy. At laſt the enemies of
Bahaman were ſtruck with diſmay, and fled with ſuch
precipitation, that they left their equipage and tents
- behind

<page 364>
C. R. E. Dº U L I T Y. 81
º
behind them, crying, we are undone, Mahomet will
deſtroy us. -
The king of Gazna was very much ſurpriſed at
day-break, when, inſtead of ſeeing himſelf attacked,
he perceived that the enemy was making off. He
preſently purſued them with his beſt ſoldiers. He
made a great ſlaughter of the fugitives, and overtook
Cacem, whoſe wound hindered him from making
ſpeed. Why, ſaid he to him, did you come into my
dominions againſt all right and reaſon What cauſe
had I given you to make war againſt me Baha-
man, anſwered the vanquiſhed king, I thought you
had refuſed me your daughter in contempt and diſ-
dain, and I was reſolved to revenge myſelf on you. I
could not believe that the prophet Mahomet was
your ſon-in-law; but I doubt it not now, ſince it is
he that has wounded me, and diſperſed my army.
Bahaman ceaſed to purſue his enemies, and re-
turned to Gazna with Cacem, who died that day of
his wound. They divided a booty which was ſo con-
ſiderable, that the ſoldiers returned hone loaded with
riches. Prayers were made in all the moſques, to
return thanks to heaven for having confounded the
enemies of the kingdom ; and when it was night,
the king went without any attendants to the prin-
ceſs’s palace. Daughter, ſaid he to her, I am come
to return thanks to the prophet; you have been in-
formed, by the courier I ſent you, of what Mahomet
has done for us; I am ſo ſenſible of his goodneſs
E 5 to

<page 365>
82 * T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
to us, that I die with impatience to embrace his
knees. - a -
He ſoon had the ſatisfaction he deſired. I entered
by the uſual window into Schirine's apartment,
where I expected to find him. He flung himſelf at
my feet, and kiſſed the ground, ſaying, O great
prophet, no words can expreſs the gratitude I feel.
Read in my heart my acknowledgments. I raiſed
Bahaman up, and kiſſed his forehead. Prince, ſaid
I, could you think I would refuſe you my aſſiſtance in
the ill circumſtances you were reduced to for my ſake? .
I have puniſhed the proud Cacem, who deſigned to
have made himſelf maſter of your dominions, and to
have taken away Schirine to place her among the
ſlaves in his ſeraglio. Fear not from henceforth, that,
any potentate in the world will dare to make war
againſt you. If any one ſhould have the boldneſs to
come and attack you, I will pour on his troops a
rain of fire, that ſhall reduce them all to aſhes.
After having aſſured the king of Gazna afreſh that
I would take his kingdom under my protection, I
told him how the enemy’s army was frightened when
it rained ſtones on their camp. Bahaman, on his
part, repeated to me what Cacem had told him, and
retired. That princeſs, who was not leſs ſenſible
than the king her father of the important ſervice I
had done the ſtate, declared to me her acknowledg-
ments in ſo tender a manner, that I had very.
nearly forgot the time : for the day appeared as I
got

<page 366>
C R E D U L I T Y. 83
y
*
got to my trunk ; but I paſſed ſo well then for
Mahomet in every body's opinion, that if the ſol-
diers had ſeen me in the air, they would not have
been undeceived. I could hardly forbear think-
ing myſelf to be the prophet, after having routed an
army.
Two days after, when they had interred Cacem,
to whom, though an enemy, they gave a magnifi-
cent burial, the king ordered public rejoicings to be
made in the city, as well for the defeat of the ene-
my's troops, as to celebrate ſolemnly the marriage
of the princeſs Schirine with Mahomet. The mor-
row was the day I had appointed upon which I
thought I could do no leſs than ſignalize, by ſome
prodigy, a feſtival that was obſerved in honour of me.
To this end I bought in Gazna ſome white pitch,
and cotton-ſeed, together with a little ſteel to ſtrike
fire with. I ſpent the day in the wood to prepare my .
fire-works. I ſteeped the cotton-ſect in the pitch;
and at night, when the people were rejoicing in the
ſtreets, tranſported myſelf above the town ; I raiſed
myſelf as high as was poſſible, for fear they ſhould
diſcern my machine by the brightheſs of my artificial
flame; then ſtruck fire, and lighted the pitch, which, .
with the cotton-ſeed, produced a wonderful effect.
This done, I retired into my wood. The day ap-
pearing a little afterwards, I went into the town, to .
have the pleaſure of hearing what they ſaid of me. .
Was not deceived in my expestation; the people :
talked extravagantly of the trick I had played then
E 6 fome

<page 367>
84 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
ſome ſaid it was Mahomet, who, to ſhew that their
feſtival was agreeable to him, had made celeſtial fires
appear; and others affirmed, that they ſaw the pro-
phet in the middle of thoſe new meteors, with a
long white beard, and a venerable air, as they
fancied. -
All this diſcourſe was exceedingly diverting to me;
but, alas ! while I was taking this pleaſure, my
trunk, my dear trunk, the inſtrument of all my
wonders, was burnt in the wood. In all appear-
ance, ſome ſpark, that I did not perceive, took hold
of my machine in my abſence, and conſumed it.
When I returned, I found it reduced to aſhes. A
father, who, returning home, ſhould ſee his only ſon
pierced in a thouſand places, and weltering in his
blood, could not be more ſhocked than I was. The
wood echoed again with my cries and groans. I
tore my hair, and rent my cloaths. I know not how
I ſpared my own life in the rage of my deſperation.
Thus ended my adventure with the princeſs
Schirine, at the very time when I had nearly accom-
pliſhed my plot; and which, though I was then in
deſpair, I have fince been happy to reflečt that it did
not proceed any further.
MR. E. G E R To N.
The foregoing ſtory, my children, however ex-
travagant and fabulous, is no bad ſatire upon Cre-
dulity; and may teach us, that though fear and ſuf-
picion are diſgraceful, yet a proper degree of doubt
and

<page 368>
C R E D U L I T Y. 85
*
ly
.
and circumſpection are neceſſary, as the following
little anecdote may ſerve to confirm. One Sunday,
in the afternoon, as two ladies were knocking at a
door, a very genteel looking man came up to the
houſe, bowed, and followed them in. After ſome
converſation, the gentleman began to wonder that
his aunt did not return from church, and to ſuppoſe
that the ſermon muſt be longer than ordinary.
Preſently afterwards, however, the lady was heard
at the door, and the gentleman inſtantly, with
great glee, propoſed a ſcheme to frighten the old
lady, his relation: I will ſlip, ſaid he, into the next
room with the filver tea-kettle and lamp, ſo that as
ſoon as ſhe calls for them, to make tea, ſhe may
conclude they are ſtolen. This was no ſooner ſaid
than done, and - our dextrous hero, covering his
prize with his hat, and hiding himſelf till the old
lady was paſt, bade the maid let him out, and told
her he ſhould be back preſently. Compliments
being paſt, the bell was rung, and tea ordered: this
ſet the viſitors a tittering, and the old lady a won-
dering, but ſhe preſently found out the cauſe; the
maid could find neither kettle nor lamp, and the
ladies in the parlour were ſo full of the joke, that
they burſt out into a loud laugh. As ſoon as their
mirth would permit, the matter was explained, the
old lady's nephew mentioned, and the plot unra-
velled: but the cataſtrophe was not happy; for the
tea-kettle and the nephew, as you may ſuppoſe, never
made their appearance in that houſe again. But,
my

<page 369>
86 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
my children, as it is neceſſary we ſhould not im-
mediately believe everything we hear, neither ſhould
we doubt of every thing which we cannot at firſt
comprehend. The ſtory of Chahabeddin, though a
mere fable, is intended to correót ſuch extreme In-
credulity.
I, N C R E D U L I T Y :
Or the Story of C H E c C H A H A B E D DI N.
THE Sultan of Egypt having ſummoned all the
learned men of his kingdom to meet on a certain
day in his palace, there aroſe a diſpute among them.
It is ſaid that the angel Gabriel, having one night
taken Mahomet out of his bed, ſhewed him what-
ever is in the ſeven heavens, in paradiſe and in hell;
and that the ſame great prophet, after having had
fourſcore and ten thouſand conferences with the
Deity, was brought back again into his bed by the
ſame angel. Some of the doćtors have advanced,
that all this was done in ſo ſhort a ſpace of time,
that Mahomet at his return found his bed ſtill warm;
and that he took up a pot of water, which was not
yet run out, though the pot had been thrown down
the very moment that the angel Gabriel carried
Mahomet out of his chamber.
The Sultan, who preſided in this aſſembly, main-
tained that this was impoſſible: You teach, ſays he,
that there are ſeven heavens; between each of which
there
i

<page 370>
I N C R E D U L I T Y. 87
!
there is a diſtance no leſs than a man can well tra-
vel in five hundred years; and that each heaven is
as thick as it is diſtant from the next to it: how
then is it poſſible, that Mahomet, after having paſſ-
ed through all theſe heavens, and after having had
fourſcore and ten thouſand conferences, ſhould at
his return find his bed ſtill warm ; and the pot thrown
down, with the water not ſpilt Who can be cre-
dulous enough to believe ſo ridiculous a fable *
Know you not that if a pot full of water is thrown
down, you will find no water in it? The literati an-
ſwered, that this indeed could not naturally be ; but
all things were poſſible to the Divine Power. The
Sultan of Egypt, who was obſtinate, and had made
it a maxim never to believe any thing contrary to
reaſon, gave no credit to the miracle; and the learn-
ed broke up their aſſembly.
This diſpute made a great noiſe in Egypt; and
the news of it came to the ears of Chec Chaha-
beddin, who, for reaſons not aſſigned in the hiſtory,
could not be preſent at the aſſembly: however, he
went to the Sultan's palace in the heat of the day.
The Sultan, informed of the Dočtor’s being come,
carried him into a ſtate chamber, and ſpoke to him.
in this manner : You need not have given yourſelf
the trouble of coming hither ; it had been enough
to have ſent one of your ſervants; for we ſhould
have granted him any thing in your name: Sir, an-
ſwered the Doctor, I am come in hopes of having
a moment's converſation with your majeſty. The
Sultan,

<page 371>
88 T. H. E. F. A. M I L Y P I C T U R E.
Sultan, who knew that this Chec was noted for be-
having” haughtily in the preſence of Princes, ſhewed
him great civilities, and made abundance of com-
pliments.
The room they were in had four windows, on
each ſide one : the Dočtor deſired the King to or—
der one of them to be ſhut. This being done, they
continued for ſome time in converſation; after which
the Dočtor deſired that one of the windows, which
had the proſpect of a mountain called Kzeldaghi,
or the Red Mountain, might be opened, and then
bid the King look out. The Sultan put his head
to the window, and ſaw on the mountain and in the
plain a body of horſe, more in number than the
ſtars of heaven, armed with bucklers and coats of
mail, with their ſwords drawn, advancing full ſpeed
towards the palace. The Prince changed colour,
and in great diſmay cried out, Heaven what dread-
ful army is this, coming to attack my palace Be
not afraid, Sir, ſays the Dočtor, there's nothing in
it. Saying this he ſhut the window, and opening
it again the next moment, the King looked out,
but ſaw not a ſingle perſon on the mountain, or in
the plain. -
Another of the windows gave a proſpect of the
city, and the Doctor opened that. The Sultan ſaw
the city of Cairo on fire, and the flames aſcending
. * The contemplative cabaliſtical Dočtors of the Eaſt are ſo proud,
that they claim reſpect from their Kings.
even

<page 372>
I N C R E D U L I T Y. 89
.
even to the middle region of the air. What dread-
ful burning is that? exclaimed the King. See my
city, my fine city of Cairo, reduced to aſhes | Fear
not, Sir, ſaid the Chec, there is nothing in it. At
the ſame time he ſhut the window, and opened it
again, when the King ſaw no more of the fiames.
The Doctor opened the third window; out of
which the Sultan perceived the Nile overflowing
its banks, and its waves rolling with fury to drown
his palace. The King, notwithſtanding what he
had experienced, was terrified at this new prodigy.
Alas! cried he, all is loſt; we are now undone
indeed. This dreadful inundation will bear away
my palace, and drown me and my people ! Fear
not, Sir, ſaid the Dočtor, there's nothing in it.
The Chec had no ſooner ſhut and opened the win-
dow again, than the Nile appeared purſuing its
courſe as uſual.
. He then opened the fourth window : the other
wonders had not more terrified than this delighted
the King. His eyes, that were accuſtomed to ſee
nothing at this window but a barren waſte, were
agreeably ſurprized to behold vineyards and gardens,
hung with the moſt delicious fruits; rivulets mur-
muring as they glided; whoſe banks were adorned
with roſes, narciſſus’ and hyacinths, at once pleaſ-
ing to the fight, and fragrant to the ſmell; an in-
finite number of turtles and nightingales, ſtraining
their little throats with their ſweet and mournful
ſongs. The King, charmed with the wonders
which

<page 373>
99 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
which now offered themſelves to his fight, believed
he beheld the garden of * Eram. What a change
is this cried he, in the exceſs of his admiration :
O beautiful garden charming abode 1–Be not ſo
tranſported, ſaid the Chec, there is nothing in it.
The Dočtor ſhut the window, then opened it again; :
and the Sultan, inſtead of theſe delightful phantoms,
ſaw nothing but the deſart.
Sir, ſaid the Chec, I have ſhewn you many won-
ders, but all this is nothing in compariſon of the
aſtoniſhing prodigy, of which I will make your ma—
jeſty a witneſs. Give your commands for a tub full
of water to be brought hither.—The King ordered
it to be done. The tub was brought into the cham-
ber. Be pleaſed, ſaid the Dočtor, to ſuffer your-
ſelf to be ſtripped, and let a towel be girt about
your loins. The King conſented to have his cloaths
taken off; and when the towel was girt about him,”
Sir, ſaid the Chec, plunge your head into the wa-
ter, and draw it out again. .
The King plunged, and in an inſtant found him-
ſelf at the foot of a mountain on the ſea-ſhore.
This prodigy aſtoniſhed him more than the others: :
Ah Dočtor, cried he, in a tranſport of rage, perfi-
dious Doctor, that haſt thus cruelly deceived me ! :
If ever I return into Egypt, from whence thou haſt
forced me by thy black and deteſtable art, I ſwear
I will revenge myſelf of thee. O mayeft thou mi-
* The name of the Terreſtrial Paradiſe, according to the Turks.
w -
* . - ſerably
d|l

<page 374>
1 N c R E D U L 1 T Y. 91
ſerably periſh He continued his imprecations againſt
the Chec; but, refle&ting that his menaces and com-
plaints would nothing avail him, he took courage,
and went to ſome men whom he ſaw cutting wood
on the mountain, reſolved not to diſcover to them
who he was. For, thought he, if I tell them I am
a King, they will not believe me; they will take me
for an impoſtor or a madman.
The wood-cutters aſked him who he was: Good
people, anſwered he, I am a merchant. My ſhip
bulged on a rock, and was daſhed to pieces. I have
had the good fortune to ſave myſelf on a plank. You'
ſee the condition I am in, which ought to excite
your pity. They were concerned for his misfor-
tune, but the poverty of their circumſtances would
not allow them to grant him any relief. However,
one of them gave him an old gown, and another an
old pair of ſhoes; and when they had put him in this
condition, they conducted him into their city, that
was ſituate behind the mountain; where they no
ſooner arrived, than they took leave of him, and,
abandoning him to Providence, went away, each to
his own home.
The Sultan was left alone; and though men take
delight in new objects, he was too much taken up
with the thoughts of his adventure, to give attention
to any thing he ſaw : he walked up and down the
ſtreets. He was weary, and, looking for a place
to lie down and reſt himſelf, ſtopped before the houſe
of an old farrier, who, judging by his looks that he
WaS

<page 375>
92 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
was fatigued, deſired him to come in. The King
did ſo, and ſate himſelf down on a bench that was
near the door. Young man, ſaid the old farrier,
may I aſk you what profeſſion you follow, and what
has brought you hither. The Sultan gave him the
ſame anſwer he had given to the wood-cutters: I
met, added he, with ſome good people, who were
cutting wood on the mountain ; and having told
them my misfortune, they were ſo kind as to give
me this old gown, and theſe cobbled ſhoes. I am
glad, ſaid the farrier, that you eſcaped being drown-
ed: comfort yourſelf for the loſs of your goods: you
are young, and will not perhaps be unhappy in this
city, where our laws and cuſtoms are very favour-
able to ſtrangers, that come to ſettle among us.
Do not you intend to do ſo? I deſire nothing bet-
ter, anſwered the Sultan, provided I could have any
proſpečt of retrieving my affairs. Well then, re-
plied the old man, follow the advice I am about to
give you. Go this moment to the public baths of
the women: ſet yourſelf down at the gate, and aſk
each lady that comes out, if ſhe has a huſband:
ſhe that ſhall anſwer you, No, muſt be your wife
according to the cuſtom of this country.
The Sultan, being determined to follow this ad-
vice, went to the gate of the baths. It was not
long ere he ſaw a lady of exquiſite beauty. Ah!
how happy ſhould I be, thought he to himſelf, if
this lovely perſon be not married were ſhe but
mine, I could forget my misfortunes. He ſtopped
her

<page 376>
I N C R E D U L I T Y. 93
her and ſaid, Fair lady, have you a huſband? She
anſwered, Yes. I am ſorry for it, replied the King:
you would have made a fit wife for me. The lady
went her way, and ſoon after came another, fright-
fully ugly: the Sultan ſhuddered at fight of her :
What a piece of deformity is this ſaid he: I had
rather be ſtarved to death, than live with ſuch a crea-
ture: I will let her paſs. The old farrier, however,
bid me aſk the queſtion of every lady. In all ap-
pearance the cuſtom is ſo, and I muſt ſubmit: how
do I know but ſhe has a huſband: ſome unfortunate
{tranger, whoſe ill deſtiny has brought him hither,
as mine has me, may perhaps have married her. In
ſhort, the King reſolved to aſk the queſtion. She
anſwered, Yes.
Next came out a third, as ugly as the other. O
heavens! ſaid the King, this is more horrible than
the laſt: no matter; ſince I have begun, I muſt go
through with it. If this have a huſband, I muſt
own there are men more to be pitied than myſelf.
As ſhe was paſſing him, he addreſſed her, and trem-
bling, ſaid, Fair lady, are you married? Yes, young
man, anſwered ſhe, without ſtopping. I am glad
of it, replied the Sultan. I bleſs my ſtars, conti-
nued he, that I am free of theſe two women. But
it is not yet time to rejoice: all the ladies are not
come out of the baths; nor have I yet ſeen her that
is deſtined for me. Perhaps I ſhall get nothing by
the change. - - -
A fourth

<page 377>
94. T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
A fourth appeared, who ſurpaſſed in beauty the
firſt, that he thought ſo charming: What differ-
ence, cried he ; there is not ſo much diſparity be-
tween day and night, as between this fine woman
and the two laſt! Are angels and devils to be ſeen
in the ſame place He advanced to her with eager-
neſs. Lady, ſaid he, have you a huſband? She an-
ſwered, No.; looking on him with as much diſdain
as attention; then went away, leaving him in deep
ſurprize. What am I to think of this, ſays he .
the old farrier has certainly jeered me. If, accord-
ing to the laws of this country, I am to marry this
lady, why did ſhe leave me ſo rudely : Why put ſhe
on that haughty and diſdainful air She viewed me
from head to foot; and I ſaw in her looks the marks
of contempt and ſcorn. The truth is, ſhe is not
'much in the wrong. In juſtice I cannot blame her.
This threadbare gown, full of holes, is not over
proper to engage a lady's heart. I forgive her for :
thinking ſhe may chance to mend herſelf. |
While thus refle&ting, a ſlave accoſted him : Sir,
ſaid he, I am ſent to find a ſtranger in tatters; and, |
by your air, methinks it ſhould be you. If you l
pleaſe to give yourſelf the trouble of following me,
I will lead you to a place, where you are expected
with great impatience. The Sultan followed the
ſlave, who led him to a great houſe, and ſhewed him
into an apartment elegantly furniſhed. He bid him
wait. The Sultan ſtaid full two hours without ſee-
Ing

<page 378>
I N C R E D U L I T Y. 05
ing a ſoul but the ſlave, who every now and then
came and deſired him not to be impatient.
At length came in four ladies, who accompanied
another, glittering in jewels, but yet more reſplen-
dent in beauty. The Sultan caſt his eyes upon her,
and recollected her to be the laſt lady that he had
ſeen coming out of the bath. She drew near
him : Forgive me, Sir, ſaid ſhe, that I have made
you wait. I was loth to appear in my undreſs be-
fore my lord and maſter. You are in your own
houſe, all you ſee here belongs to you : you are my
huſband: command me what you pleaſe, I am ready
to obey. Madam, anſwered the Sultan, not a mo-
ment ago I complained of my deſtiny, but now I am
the moſt happy of men. But ſince I am your huſband,
why did you juſt now lock ſo diſdainfully upon me
You were ſhocked, perhaps, at the fight of me;
and, to confeſs the truth, I could not much blame
you. Sir, replied the lady, I could not do other-
wiſe; the women of this city are obliged to carry
themſelves haughtily in public: it is the cuſtom.
Well, ſaid the King, ſince I am maſter here, in or-
der to exerciſe my little ſovereignty, let ſomebody
bring me a taylor and a ſhoemaker : I am aſhamed
to be ſeen in your preſence in this tattered gown,
and theſe cobbled ſhoes, which ill ſuit with the rank
I have hitherto held in the world. , I have taken
care of that already, replied the lady: I have ſent a
ſlave to a Jew, who ſells cloaths ready made, and
who will furniſh you at once with all you want :
Incaia

<page 379>
96. T H E F A M I I, Y P I C T U R E.
mean while let us take ſome refreſhment. In ſay-
ing this, ſhe led him to a table covered with all ſorts
of fruits and ſweat-meats. While they were eat-
ing, the four attendant ladies, who ſtood behind,
ſung ſongs, and played on ſeveral inſtruments; their
miſtreſs took a lute, and accompanying the muſic
with her voice, charmed the Sultan.
The concert was interrupted by the Jew tradeſ-
man, with bundles of cloaths of different ſorts. They
made choice of a white ſattin veſt, flowered with
gold, and a gown of purple. The lady admired
the King ; was very well ſatisfied to have found
ſuch a huſband; and he well pleaſed to have met
with ſo beautiful a wife.
He had lived ſeven years with this lady, by whom
he had ſeveral ſons and daughters. But both of
them taking delight in expenſive life, they outrun
the lady's eſtate, were obliged to put away their
waiting ladies and ſlaves, and to ſell their furniture
for ſubſiſtence. The Sultan’s wife, ſeeing herſelf
reduced to want, told her huſband; “As long as
my eſtate laſted, you never ſpared it: it behoves
you now to think of ſome way or other to maintain
your little family.” -
Theſe words ſtruck the King, who went to the
old farrier to aſk his advice. O my father, ſays he,
I am now in a worſe condition, than when I came
firſt to this city: I have a wife and children, and
nothing for their ſubſiſtence. Young man, replied
the aged farrier, were you not brought up to trade 2
The

<page 380>
1 N c R E D U L 1 T Y 97
The Sultan anſwered, No. The farrier put his
hand in his pocket, and giving him two * Atchas,
bid him immediately buy himſelf ſome + 1 pes, and
wait in the place where the porters plied. The Sultan
bought them, and went to ply among the porters.
Scarce was he arrived, when a man aſked him if
he would carry a burthen I am here for that pur-
poſe, anſwered the Sultan. The man loaded him
with a great ſack, which the King had much ado to
carry, and the cords wrung the ſkin off his ſhoul-
ders. He received his pay of one Aqtcha, and car-
ried it home. His wife, ſeeing no more money,
told him, that if he earned not ten times as much
every day, his family muſt ſtarve. -
The next morning, overwhelmed with grief, in-
ftead of plying among the porters, he walked to the
fea-ſide, reflecting on his miſerable condition. There
he looked very earneſtly on the place, and, re-
calling to mind his ſtrange and fatal adventure, he
ſunk into tears. The ceremony of f Ahlution being
indiſpenſible before prayers, he plunged himſelf into
the ſea; and raiſing his head out of the water, (what
aſtoniſhment!) he found himſelf again in his own
palace, in the middle of the tub, and ſurrounded by
all his officers. O barbarous Dočtor, cried he,
* Aqtcha is a coin of the value of a penny.
+ rees are cords that pºſters uſe inſtead of a knot.
# The Mahometans waſh their bodies before they ſay their prayers.
Vo L. II. F perceiving
º

<page 381>
98 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
perceiving the Chec upon the very ſpot on which he
had left him, doſt thou not dread that God will pu-
niſh thee, for having played this trick with thy Sul-
tan and thy maſter Sir, ſaid the Chec, why is your
• majeſty angry with me You but this moment
plunged your head into this water. I tell you no-
thing but the truth: if you do not believe me, aſk
your officers, who were eye-witneſſes of it. The
Sultan gave no credit to them. It is full ſeven years,
ſaid he, that this curſed Dočtor has detained me in
a foreign country by the force of his enchantments;
I married, and had children; but it is not of this I
complain ſo much, as of my being a porter. Oh
villainous Chec | couldſt thou be ſo cruel as to make
me carry 1pes :: Sir, replied the Dočtor, when you
came into this apartment, did not you leave the
beautiful Sultaneſs, Zeineb, in the pangs of child-
birth Yes, ſaid the Sultan. Lo! ſaid Chahabed-
din, here comes an officer to ſalute thee a father,
but to inform thee likewiſe that the Prophet has pu-
niſhed thy infidelity, Zeinib is dead. As the Chec
finiſhed this ſentence, the room ſhook with thun-
der, the learned Chahabeddin diſappeared, and left
the Sultan to lament his charming Zeneïh, and his
want of faith. -
D I A-

<page 382>
r R U T H. 99
D I A L O G U E XIV.
M R. E. G E R to N.
HE ſubjećt which I have ſelected for this day's
reading is of ſo much importance to your
preſent and future condućt, that I muſt intreat you
all to liſten with more than ordinary attention.
Truth is the firſt duty of man, the greateſt of
moral virtues, and the ſtrongeſt bond of ſocial af-
fećtion. Whoever poſſeſſes truth muſt, of neceſſity,
be virtuous; for he will poſſeſs that permanent and un-
ſhaken veracity which will not admit the leaſt equi-
vocation, or mental reſervation, that ſteady ſincerity
which will rather ſubmit to the ſhame of an indiſcreet,
or even the puniſhment of a wrong action, than the
greateſt of all diſgrace, the meaneſt of all vices,
lying. It is eaſy to conceive that a man who reſo-
lutely perſiſts in being fincere in telling the exact
truth, and the whole truth, though, by ſuch con-
dućt, he muſt at ſome times publiſh his own weak-
neſs, will become exceedingly circumſpect and watch-
ful over himſelf. Shame is a very powerful and
ſevere ſenſation, and few would be hardy enough to
venture on a wrong action with a certainty of its
becoming public. A determined adherence to truth
will, therefore, prevent both vice and folly, and
whoever can teach ſincerity, will, at the ſame time,
teach many other virtues. - - - - -
F 2 Strong

<page 383>
IOO T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
Strong minds alone are capable of that inflexible
veracity of which I ſpeak; and wherever this is
found, we need not heſitate to pronounce the poſ-
ſeſſor to be among the firſt of men. Obſerve there-
fore, children, whoſoever of you gives me the moſt
repeated proofs of plain, full, and unequivocal ſince-
rity, will, at the ſame time, give me the moſt un-
doubted aſſurance of ſuperior capacity, and become
moſt honoured, moſt reſpected, and moſt beloved.
The fidelity and truth of the philoſopher xeno-
crates were ſuch, that the Athenians, when he gave
evidence, would not ſuffer him to be ſworn ; his
word alone was ſufficient. This, my children, is
true, ſubſtantial, and everlaſting fame.
When the Duke of Oſſura was at Barcelona, he
went on board one of the gallies, and having the
privilege of releaſing any of the priſoners which had
been ſent there for crimes and miſdemeanors, he
began to queſtion them, in order to diſcover who
moſt deſerved his pity. All were anxious to excuſe
themſelves, by attributing their puniſhment to the
malice of their enemies, or the injuſtice of the ma-
giſtrates, excepting one man, who, when the Duke
aſked what was the reaſon of his being there, re-
plied, “I was ſent here, Sir, very deſervedly; I
committed a robbery upon the highway near Sara-
goſſa. It is true I was not only ſtarving myſelf, but
had a wife and family in the ſame condition. How-
ever, I was guilty of the fact, and deſerve my pu-
niſhment.” “Why, hey-day ! ſaid the Duke ;
here’s

<page 384>
T R U T. H. . ro1
here's an impudent fellow indeed! How dare you
intrude into the ſociety of ſuch honeſt worthy men f
Here, knock off this fellow’s irons. Get away, you
raſcal; and, do you hear, never more let me find
you in ſuch innocent company.” “No, God bleſs
your Grace,” ſaid the poor fellow ; “that I will
be anſwerable you never ſhall.” -
I quote theſe particulars to exemplify this great
point, videlicet, that truth is not only virtuous but
politic. The Orientals had a law, that whoever
was three times convicted of ſpeaking falſely, was
condemned, under pain of death, never to ſpeak
again; but continue in ſilence and reproach during
life: ſo utterly did they deteſt falſehood, and ſo con-
vinced were they of its pernicious conſequences.
And believe me, my children, though lyars are per-
mitted the uſe of their tongues, their puniſhment is
little inferior among us; for whoever is three times
detected in lying by any perſon of veracity, will
never be credited by that perſon again. Liſten,
children, to the ſtory of Saddyq, and learn wiſdom.
T R U T H :
Or the Story of SADD Y Q-
TOGAL TIMUR-CAN, King of Tartary,
was one day told that there was, in his dominions, a
man who was ſo great an enemy to lying that he
always told truth. The King had a mind to have
- F.3 him.

<page 385>
I O2 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
-
him near his perſon, and made him Maſter of the
Horſe. A courtier of ſo extraordinary a chara&ter
ſoon found enemies, who watched all opportunities
to ruin him: but the King, who was not eaſily to
be impoſed on, and who truſted to his own judge-
ment, made trial of his Maſter of the Horſe on ſe-
veral occaſions, and having always found him frank
and ſincere, gave him the ſurname of Saddyq, or
the Tiller of Truth. -
Of all Saddyq's enemies, the Viſier Tangribirdi
was the moſt inveterately bent on his ruin. He em-
ployed all forts of ſtratagems to diſgrace him in the
mind of Togaltimur: but not being able to compaſs
his defign, he diſcloſed one day to his daughter Hoſ-
chendan the uneaſineſs it gave him to be ſtill diſap-
pointed. How unfortunate am I ſaid he to her:
I have been the cauſe of the diſgrace of a thouſand
old courtiers; yet I cannot deſtroy this man, who,
though but newly ſettled at court, triumphs over all
my efforts to ruin his fortune. Hoſchendan, who
equalled her father in malice, inſtead of exhorting
him no longer to oppoſe the good fortune of Saddyq,
ſaid to him, My dear father, ceaſe to afflićt your-
ſelf: if you are abſolutely determined to bring Saddyq
into the King's disfavour, leave the care of it to my
management. Ah! replied the vifier, what method
will you take to compaſs it? Aſk me not that, Sir,
ſaid ſhe, give me leave only to go to the Maſter of
the Horſe, and I promiſe you I will bring him to a
neceſſity of telling a lie to the King. Do whatever
you

<page 386>
T R U T. H. 103
you will, daughter, ſaid the vifier, I give you free
leave. Provided you prove as good as your word,
no matter what it coſts. -
Hoſchendan was wholly intent to prepare herſelf
for the execution of the proječt ſhe had formed. She
cloathed herſelf in her richeſt apparel, and adorned
herſelf with all her jewels. In ſhort, after having
added to her natural beauty all the advantages that
art could give, ſhe went from her father's one night,
attended by ſome ſlaves, who convoyed her ſafely to
Saddyq's houſe. When ſhe was arrived, ſhe ſent
back her ſlaves, knocked at the door, and told the
ſervant that ſhe deſired to ſpeak with Saddy, about
an aifair of very great importance. They conducted
her into his apartment. She found him ſitting on a
ſopha, approached him, threw off the veil that co-
vered her face, and ſat down on the ſame ſopha,
without ſaying one ſingle word.
Saddyq who had never ſeen, not even in a dream,
ſo beautiful a perſon, was ſtruck to the heart, and
became motionleſs. The lady, whoſe deſign was to
inſpire him with love, ſpared not the means to ac-
compliſh it. She carefled him with a thouſand
dalliances; and ſaid, O Saddyq, be not ſurpriſed that
a woman who loves you, thus ſeeks for you in pri-
vate. Grant me a ſingle favour.—Soni of my ſoul!
cricó out the Maſter of the Horſe, you need only
name it. What can I refuſe to theſe powerful
charms, of which I am ſo enamoured Command
your ſlave-tell him what you wiſh. I have a mind,
F 4. replied

<page 387>
Io4 , T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
replied Hoſchendan, with a longing deſire to
eat ſome horſe-fleſh”. Kill me immediately the
fatteſt of all the King's horſes: take out the heart
and the liver, get them roaſted, and let us eat
them together. Charming lady, anſwered Saddyq,
rather aſk me my life: I have a reſpect for every
thing that belongs to the King my maſter. Let
us put off this frolick till to-morrow: I will then
buy a horſe as fat as a bacon-hog, and we wil
regale ourſelves like Princes. No, no, replied
Hoſchendan, I muſt eat of one of the King's
horſes: it is a fancy I have taken, and you muſt
gratify it. I cannot comply with your requeſt,
ſaid Saddyq: I love the King my maſter too
well to give him the leaſt uneaſineſs. Should I
prove ſo weak as to yield to your requeſt, I am
certain he would not fail to puniſh me. You need
not fear that, ſaid Hoſchendan ; ſhould the King aſk
you what was become of the horſe, ſay, that having
found him ſick, and paſt all hope of recoverſ, you
thought it beſt to kill him, left he ſhould have in-
fe&ted the other horſes with his diſeaſe. The King,
who by way of excellence has given you the ſurname
of Saddyq, will take your word for it, and even com-
mend your precaution.
The Maſter of the Horſe began to waver—What
ſhall I do? ſaid he to himſelf. On the one hand,
my reſpect for the King, and the fear of puniſhment,
keep me in awe; on the other, the charms of this
* Horſe-fleſh is a great dainty among the Tartars; ſo likewiſe is
the milk of mares.
heavenly

<page 388>
T R U T. H. FC 5.
/
heavenly face allure me. Hoſchendan, perceiving
the perplexity he was in, renewed her attacks ſo
forcibly that he condeſcended at length to her re-
queſt. They went together to the King's ſtables.
O my Prince 1 ſaid Hoſchendan to Saddyq, ſince
you grant me the favour, grant it to my wiſh ;
pray cut the throat of this black horſe, which
ſtands here apart from the reſt. O my Queen' my
Sultaneſs! cried the Maſter of the Horſe, you know
not what you aſk. You put my love to too ſevere a
trial. This black horſe is of all others that which
the King loves beſt. It is impoſſible for me to com-
ply with your deſire. Pitch upon any one of the
reſt, and his throat ſhall be cut inſtantly. This is
all that I can do for you; and, indeed, all that you
ought to expect. But the lady was not to be re-
fuſed: on the contrary, throwing herſelf at his
feet, O my Prince ſaid ſhe, my dear Maſter of
the Horſe, I conjure you not to refuſe my ſuit. I
know well that the proof of tenderneſs, which I aſk
of you, claſhes in ſome meaſure with your duty:
but women, you know, are whimſical and caprici-
ous ; whatever they ardently defire, they are obſti-
nate to obtain: comply therefore, and ſatisfy my
humour. I will for ever love you, and hold you
dearer than my life. -
Her words were accompanied with ſo many marks .
of tenderneſs, and ſuch tranſports, that the Maſter
of the Horſe could reſiſt no longer. He drew his
knife, and cut the black horſe's throat inſtantly.
F 5 Then

<page 389>
106 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
Then taking out the heart and liver, they were
roaſted, and ate in the bed-chamber. In the
morning-the lady took leave of the Maſter of the
Horſe, returned home to her father, and told him
all that had paſſed. The viſier was ſo overjoyed at
it, that he had no time to think how dear it had coſt
his daughter to play the part ſhe had ačted; but went
direétly to the palace, and told the King the adven-
ture. He took care, however, not to ſay that Hoſ-
chendan was the lady in queſtion, or that it was to
ſatisfy his hatred and envy that his daughter had
ared to tempt the integrity of Saddyq.
While the viſier Tangribirdi was making this re-
cital to the King, with all the malice of a ſtanch
courtier, who wiſhed ruin to his enemy, the Maſter of
the Horſe had come to himſelf, and made moſt bitter
refle&tions on what he had done. How void of
ſenſe are men, ſaid he, to give themſelves up to
their paſſions ! I ſhould have done much better to
have ſent away the lady with a flat denial, than to
have pleaſed her in killing a horſe that was the delight
of the King my maſter. I ſhould not then have
been agitated with all the cruel thoughts which now
diſturb my quiet. What ſhall I anſwer to the King
when he aſks me for his horſe : I, who hitherto
have made it a law to myſelf ever to tell truth, ſhall
I fly to falſehood for ſhelter, and ſhall I dare to be
found a liar in the preſence of my King This
would be adding a new crime to that I have com-
mitted. On the other hand, ſhould I make a true
- . - confeſſion,
i
i

<page 390>
ºr R U T. H., 107
º
**
confeſfion, my ſincerity muſt coſt me my life: what
‘then muſt I determine to do To lie Well, be it
ſo. Let me ſuppoſe that I am at court: let me ſup-
poſe this cap (taking it off his head, and laying it on
the floor) to be Togaltimur : het me ſee if I can
have the confidence to inſiſt upon a lie in the face of
the King. Entering into his preſence, I ſalute him.
Saddyq, ſays he, let my black horſe be got ready, I
mean to ride to-day.—Sir, an accident has befallen
him: yeſterday in the evening he would eat nothing
we could offer him, and he died at midnight; nor
can I imagine the occaſion of his death. How I my
black horſe, that carried me ſo well but yeſterday—is
he dead? Why muſt it be him rather than ſo many
others that are in the ſame ſtable : What ſtory is this
thou telleſt me? Be gone; thou art a liar. Thou,
haſt either ſold my horſe, or elſe thou haſt killed him,
in ſome freak. Think not to eſcape my vengeance.
Thou ſhalt be puniſhed according to thy deſerts.
One of you ſtab that villain to the heart this mo-
‘ment;-hack him in pieces. -
Togaltimur, purſued Saddyq, will, no doubt,
ſpeak to me in this manner; and ſuch will be the
reward of the firſt lie I ever told in my life. Now
let me conſider, if, by telling the truth, I ſhall fare
any better. Saddyq, let my black horſe be got ready:
I will ride abroad.—O King you ſee your ſervant
in the deepeſt afflićtion. There came to my houſe
laſt night a lady, who aſked me to have the heart
and liver of that horſe, and I had no power to refuſe
- . . F 6 her,

<page 391>
Io8 T H E F A M I L Y P I c T U R E.
her. What! could you kill my fine horſe to gain
a lady's favour? One of you go for the executioner;
he ſhall do his office before my face.
Behold, ſaid the Maſter of the Horſe, what re-
ception I am to expect: whether I lie, or whether I
tell truth, I am ſure to loſe my life. Wretch that I
am Curſed be the objećt whoſe charms have thrown
me into this perplexity. While he was buſied with
theſe diſmal thoughts, came one to tell him the
King would ſpeak with him. He inſtantly obeyed
the order, and found there the viſier his enemy.
Maſter of the Horſe, ſays the King, I intend to
hunt to-day: ſaddle me the black horſe. Struck
with a mortal dread, he anſwered in confuſion—Sir,
there happened laſt night a misfortune to your ſer–
vant; if your Majeſty commands me, I will tell it
you. Tell it, replied the King. Laſt night, ſaid
the Maſter of the Horſe, as I was ſitting in my
chamber, there came to me a lady in a veil. She
ſat herſelf down by me on a ſopha, unveiled, and
ſhewed me a neck and face of raviſhing beauty:
ſhe won my affection; and prevailed on me
to promiſe her the heart and liver of your black
horſe. I anſwered without heſitation, that I could
not conſent to kill a horſe that your Majeſty was ſo
fond of. But the lady threw herſelf at my feet,
and befought me in terms ſo moving, that I had no
power to reſiſt her importunity. This, Sir, is an
ingenuous recital of my adventure. I confeſs my
crime, and am ſo far from deſiring to eſcape the
puniſh-

<page 392>
T R U T H. 109
,
.
puniſhment I deſerve, by telling a lie, that I come
of my own accord to ſubmit to it.—There, Sove-
reign, is the ſabre, here is my head.
The King turned towards the vifier, and aſked
him in what manner he thought it beſt to deal with
Saddyq. Sir, anſwered the viſier, overjoyed to be
conſulted in this affair, I am of opinion, that he
ought to be burnt in a ſlow fire. A man, who has
dared to ſacrifice to his pleaſure a horſe that you
were fond of, is unworthy of mercy.—I am not of
your opinion, viſier, replied Togaltimur: I think it
more reaſonable to pardon a firſt fault, than to pu-
niſh it.—Then addreſſing his diſcourſe to the Maſter
of the Horſe, ſaid, O Saddyq' I am aſtoniſhed at
thy ſincerity, and excuſe thy weakneſs. Had I been
in thy place, I might not only have given my black
horſe, but all the horſes in my ſtables. The allure-
ments were too mighty to be reſiſted: no man
could have been ſafe againſt them. I forgive thee
the death of my horſe; and take it ſo well of thee,
that thou haſt told me the truth on this occaſion,
that I order a robe of honour to be brought for thee
immediately.
When the vifier Tangribirdi ſaw that the Maſter
of the Horſe was rewarded, inſtead of being pu-
niſhed, he was ſeiſed with a melancholy, that threw
him into an illneſs, of which he died in a few days,
and the fortunate Saddyq was made choice of to
ſucceed him in his poſt of Viſier,
N AN c Y.

<page 393>
*IIO T H E F. A. M I L Y P I C T U R E.
f
N A N c Y.
Upon my word I began to tremble for poor
Saddyq; I am quite happy that he did not tell a
lie.
E U S T A c E.
I never could be thoroughly perſuaded that he
would fiſter, though I own I was once almoſt in
doubt.
CH A R L E S.,
Well, I hope I ſhall never be put to ſuch a ſevere
trial.
M R. E. G E R To N. -
Rather hope, Charles, that you ſhall obtain ſuf-
'ficient fortitude to ſupport ſuch a trial.
M Rs. E G E R To N.
The tale you have juſt heard, my dears, points
out to you both the magnanimity and the advantages
of ſpeaking truth. But you muſt look further; you
muſt not only avoid inventing direét lies, but equivo-
cal ones likewiſe. They are equally diſgraceful,
equally guilty, and oftentimes equally fatal in their
conſequences. Theſe you muſt particularly guard
againſt. Remember, though nobody ſhould detect
you, though you ſhould paſs with impunity in the
eyes of others, yet if you can reproach yourſelves
- - with
l

<page 394>
T R U T. H. III
with the leaſt deviation from veracity, you ought to
be aſhamed of your condućt, to ſhrink from the re-
colle&tion of your weakneſs, and to take the moſt ef-
fečtual and poſitive method of preventing it in future.
Remember too, it is very poſſible for you to be guilty
of lying without ſpeaking a word. -
M R. E. G E R T o N. -
I recolle&t reading an account of the behaviour of
Colonel Edmonds, who ſerved in the Dutch wars at
Utrecht, which will teach you how you ought to
aćt on the like occaſion. As he was one day ſtand-
ing among his brother officers, one of his country-
men who had juſt arrived from Scotland, and who
wanted to inſinuate himſelf into the Colonel’s favour,
came up to him, ſaluted him, and delivered pretend-
ed meſſages from my Lord his father, from the Earl
his couſin, and various others of his relations, all of
whom, he ſaid were well. “ Gentlemen, ſaid the
Colonel, turning to his friends, do not believe that
fellow ; my father is a poor baker in Edinburgh, and
works hard for his livelihood. I am neither related
to lord or knight. He has made an impudent at-
tack upon my vanity, and has wanted to engage me
tacitly to become an accomplice in his falſehoods, for
which contemptible trick, every gentleman who has
heard him, muſt, I am ſure, deſpiſe him.”
I can never repeat too often to you that the plain
truth is beſt. When ſome young men were brought
before Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, and accuſed of
having

<page 395>
I J2 T H E F A M I L. Y. P. I C T U R E.
-
having libelled him, Pyrrhus aſked them, “Is it
true, young men did you ſay ſuch things f"—“We
did, Sir, replied one of the youths; and I am afraid
we ſhould, at that time, have ſaid many more if we
had had more wine.” No denial of the fact, no
evaſive anſwers could have pleaded ſo effectually as
the fimple truth. Pyrrhus admired the ſincerity,
was ſenſible of the force of the defence, and readily
pardoned the error of the offenders.
We will now read the hiſtory of Lady Forreſt,
which is a melancholy but ſtrong inſtance of the
danger of equivocation. •
E Q_U IV O C A T I O N. :
The Hiſtory of Lady Fo R REs T, &c.
CHARLOTTE and Maria were educated to-
gether at an eminent boarding-ſchool near London:
there was little difference in their age, and their
perſonal accompliſhments were equal: but though
their families were of the ſame rank, yet as Char-
lotte was an only child, ſhe was confiderably ſupe-
rior in fortune. -
Soon after they were taken home, Charlotte was
addreſſed by Captain Freeman, who, beſides his com-
miſſion in the guards, had a ſmall paternal eſtate:
but as her friends hoped for a more advantageous
match, the Captain was deſired to forbear his viſits,
and the lady to think of him no more. After ſome
fruitleſs

<page 396>
E Q U 1 v oc A T 1 o N. 113
fruitleſs ſtruggles they acquieſced ; but the diſcon-
tent of both were ſo apparent, that it was thought
expedient to remove Miſs into the country. She
was ſent to her aunt, the Lady Meadows, who with
her daughter lived retired at the family ſeat, more
than one hundred miles diſtant from the metropolis.
After ſhe had repined in this dreary ſolitude from
April to Auguſt, ſhe was ſurpriſed with a viſit from
her father, who brought with him Sir James Forreſt,
a young gentleman who had juſt ſucceeded to a
baronet's title and a very large eſtate in the ſame
county. Sir James had good nature and good ſenſe,
an agreeable perſon and an eaſy addreſs: Miſs was
inſenſibly pleaſed with his company; her vanity, if
not her love, had a new object; a deſire to be de-
livered from a ſtate of dependance and obſcurity had
almoſt abſorbed all the reſt: and it is no wonder that
this deſire was gratified, when ſcarce any other was
felt; or that in compliance with the united ſolicita-
tions of her friends, and her lover, ſhe ſuffered her-
ſelf within a few weeks to become a lady and a wife.
They continued in the country till the beginning of
Oćtober, and then came up to London, having pre-
vailed upon her aunt to accompany them, that Miſs
Meadows, with whom the bride had contračted an
intimate friendſhip, might be gratified with the di-
verſions of the town during the winter.
Captain Freeman, when he heard that Miſs Char-
lotte was married, immediately made propoſals of
marriage to Maria, with whom he became acquaint-
- - ed

<page 397>
114 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
ed during his viſits to her friend, and ſoon after mar-
ried her.
The friendſhip of the two young ladies ſeemed to
be rather increaſed than diminiſhed by their mar-
riage; they were always of the ſame party both in
the private and public diverſions of the ſeaſon, and
viſited each other without the formalities of meſſages
and dreſs.
. But neither Sir James nor Mrs. Freeman could re-
fle&t without uneaſineſs upon the frequent inter-
views which familiarity and confidence had pro-
duced between a lover and his miſtreſs, whom force
only had divided; and though of theſe interviews
they were themſelves witneſſes, yet Sir James in-
ſenſibly became jealous of his lady, and Mrs. Free-
man of her huſband.
It happened in the May following, that Sir James
went about ten miles out of town to be preſent at an
ele&tion of a member of parliament for the county,
and was not expected to return till the next day.
In the evening his lady took a chair and viſited Mrs.
Freemen: the reſt of the company went away early,
the Captain was upon guard, Sir James was out of
town, and the ladies after ſupper ſat down to piquet,
and continued the game without once refle&ting
upon the hour till three in the morning. Lady
Forreſt would then have gone home; but Mrs.
'Freeman, perhaps chiefly to conceal a contrary de-
fire, importuned her to ſtay till the Captain &ame
|
lily

<page 398>
E Q U 1 v oc A T 1 o N. '115
'in, and at length, with ſome reluctance, ſhe con-
ſented. -
Aboutfive the Captain came home, and Lady Forreſt
immediately ſent out for a chair: a chair, as it hap-
pened, could not be procured; but a hackney coach
being brought in its ſtead, the Captain inſiſted upon
waiting on her ladyſhip home. This ſhe refuſed
with ſome emotion; it is probable that ſhe ſtill re-
garded the Captain with leſs indifference than ſhe
wiſhed, and was therefore more ſenſible of the im-
propriety of his offer: but her reaſons for reječting
it, however forcible, being ſuch as ſhe could not al-
ledge, he perſiſted, and her reſolution was over-
borne. By this importunate complaiſance the Cap-
tain had not only thrown Lady Forreſt into confu-
fion, but diſpleaſed his wife: ſhe could not, how-
sever, without unpoliteneſs oppoſe it; and left her
uneaſineſs ſhould be diſcovered, ſhe affected a neg-
ligence which in ſome degree revenged it: ſhe de-
fired that when he came back he would not diſturb
her, for that ſhe ſhould go directly to bed; and ad-
ded with a kind of drowſy inſenſibliity, “I am more
than half aſleep already.”
Lady Forreſt and the Captain were to go from the
Haymarket to Groſvenor-ſquare. It was about .
half an hour after five when they got into the coach;
the morning was remarkably fine, the late conteſt
had ſhaken off all diſpoſition to ſleep, and Lady For-
reſt could not help ſaying, that ſhe had much rather
take a walk into the Park than go home to bed. The
Captain

<page 399>
116 T H E P A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
Captain zealouſly expreſſed the ſame ſentiment, and
propoſed that the coach ſhould ſet them down at St.
James's Gate. The lady, however, had nearly
the ſame objećtions againſt being ſeen in the Mall
without any other company than the Captain, than
ſhe had againſt its being known that they were alone
together in a hackney coach: ſhe, therefore, to ex-
tricate herſelf from this ſecond difficulty; propoſed
that they ſhould call at her father's in Bond-ſtreet,
and take her couſin Meadows, whom ſhe knew to
be an early riſer, with them. This project was im-
mediately put in execution; but Lady Forreſt found
her couſin indiſpoſed with a cold. When ſhe had
communicated the deſign of this early viſit, Miſs
Meadows intreated her to give up her walk in the
Park, to ſtay till the family roſe, and go home after
breakfaſt: “No, replied Lady Forreſt, I am de-
termined upon a walk; but as I muſt firſt get rid of-
Captain Freeman, I will ſend down word that I will
take your advice.” A ſervant was accordingly
diſpatched to acquaint the Captain, who was waiting
below, that Miſs Meadows was indiſpoſed, and had
engaged Lady Forreſt to breakfaſt. - -
The Captain diſcharged the coach; but being
piqued at the behaviour of his wife, and feeling that
flow of ſpirits which uſually returns with the morn-
ing even to thoſe who have not ſlept in the night, he
had no deſire to go home, and therefore reſolved to
enjoy the fine morning in the Park alone.
Lady
1.
f

<page 400>
E Q_U 1 v oc A T 1 o N. 117
d
Lady Forreſt not doubting but that the Captain
would immediately return home, congratulated her-
ſelf upon her deliverance; but at the ſame time, to
indulge her deſire of a walk, followed him into the
Park.
The Captain had reached the top of the Mall, and
turning back, met her before ſhe had advanced two
hundred yards beyond the palace. The moment ſhe
perceived him, the remembrance of her meſſage, the
motives that produced it, the detection of its falſe-
hood, and diſcovery of its deſign, her diſappoint-
ment and conſciouſneſs of that very ſituation which
ſhe had ſo much reaſon to avoid, all concurred to
cover her with confuſion which it was impoſſible for
her to hide : pride and good-breeding were, how-
ever, ſtill predominant over truth and prudence; ſhe
was ſtill zealous to remove from the Captain's mind
any ſuſpicion of a deſign to ſhun him, and there-
fore with an effort perhaps equal to that of a hero
who ſmiles upon the rack, ſhe affected an air of
gaiety, ſaid ſhe was glad to ſee him, and as an ex-
cuſe for her meſſage and her conduct, prattled
ſomething about the fickleneſs of woman's mind,
and concluded with obſerving that ſhe changed her’s
too often ever to be mad. By this conduct a retreat
was rendered impoſſible, and they walked together -
till between eight and nine: but the clouds having
inſenſibly gathered, and a ſudden ſhower failing juſt
as they reached Spring-gardens, they went out in-
* ſtead

<page 401>
118 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
ſtead of going back; and the Captain having put
the lady into a chair, took his leave. . -
It happened that Sir James, contrary to his firſt
purpoſe, had returned from his journey at night.
He learnt from the ſervants thathis lady was gone to
Captain Freeman's, and was ſecretly diſpleaſed that
ſhe had made this viſit when he was abſent; an in-
cident which, however trifling in itſelf, was by the
magic of jealouſy, ſwelled into importance: yet upon
recolle&tion, he reproved himſelf for this diſpleaſure,
fince the preſence of the Captain’s lady would ſuf-
ficiently ſecure the honour of his own. While he
was ſtruggling with theſe ſuſpicions, they increaſed
both in number and ſtrength, in proportion as the
night wore away. At one he went to bed; but he
paſſed the night in agonies of terror and reſentment,
doubting whether the abſence of his lady was the
effect of accident or deſign, liſtening to every noiſe,
and bewildering himſelf in a multitude of extrava-
gant ſuppoſitions. He roſe again at break of day;
and after ſeveral hours of ſuſpence and irreſolution,
whether to wait the iſſue, or go out for intelligence,
the reſtleſſneſs of curioſity prevailed, and about eight
he ſet out for Captain Freeman's; but left word
with his ſervants, that he was gone to a neighbour-
ing coffee-houſe.
Mrs. Freeman, whoſe affected indifference and
diffimulation of a deſign to go immediately to bed,
contributed to prevent the Captain's return had,
during his abſence, ſuffered inexpreſſible diſquiet:
ſhe

<page 402>
e Q- U 1 v. o c A T 1 o N. 119
3.
ſhe had, indeed, neither intention to go to bed, nor-
inclination to ſleep; ſhe walked backward and for-
ward in her chamber, diſtraćted with jealouſy and
ſuſpenſe, till ſhe was informed that Sir James was
below, and deſired to ſee her. When ſhe came
down, he diſcovered that ſhe had been in tears; his
fear was now more alarmed than his jealouſy, and
he concluded that ſome fatal accident had befallen
his wife; but he ſoon learnt that ſhe and the Cap-
tain had gone from thence at five in the morning,
and that he was not yet returned. Mrs. Freeman,
by Sir James's enquiry, knew that the lady had not
been at home: her ſuſpicions, therefore, were con-
firmed; and in her jealouſy, which to prevent a duel
ſhe laboured to conceal, Sir James found new cauſe
for his own. He determined, however, to wait with
as much decency as poſſible, till the Captain came
in ; and perhaps two perſons were never more em-
barraſſed by the preſence of each other. While
breakfaſt was getting ready, Dr. Tattle came to pay
Mrs. Freeman a morning viſit; and to the unſpeak-
able grief of both the lady and her gueſt, was imme-
diately admitted. Dočtor Tattle is one of thoſe
male goffips who, in common opinion, are the moſt
diverting company in the world. The Doğtor ſaw
that Mrs. Freeman was low ſpirited, and made ſe-
veral efforts to divert her, but without ſucceſs: at
laſt he declared, with an air of ironical importance,
that he could tell her ſuch news as would make her’
look grave for ſomething; “The Captain, ſays he,
- * - - - - - has

<page 403>
I2O T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R. E.
has juſt huddled a lady into a chair at the door of a
bagnio, near Spring-gardens.” He ſoon perceived
that this ſpeech was received with emotions very dif-
ferent from thoſe he intended to produce ; and there-
fore added, “that ſhe need not, however, be jealous;
for notwithſtanding the manner in which he had re-
lated the incident, the lady was certainly a woman of
character, as he inſtantly diſcovered by her mein and
appearance:” this particular confirmed the ſuſpi-
cion it was intended to remove ; and the Dočtor
finding that he was not ſo good company as uſual,
took his leave, but was met at the door by the
Captain, who brought him back. His preſence,
however inſignificant, impoſed ſome reſtraint upon
the reſt of the company; and Sir James, with as
good an appearance of jocularity as he could aſſume,
aſked the Captain “What he had done with his
wife " The Captain, with ſome irreſolution, re-
plied, that “he had left her early in the morning
at her father’s ; and that having made a point of
waiting on her home, ſhe ſent word down that her
couſin Meadows was indiſpoſed, and had engaged -
her to breakfaſt.” The Captain, who knew nothing
of the anecdote that had been communicated by the
Dočtor, judged by appearances that it was prudent
thus indireétly to lie, by concealing the truth both
from Sir James and his wife: he ſuppoſed, indeed,
that Sir James would immediately enquire after his
wife, at her father's, and learn that ſhe did not ſtay
there to breakfaſt; but as it would not follow that
they

<page 404>
E Q U 1 v o c A T 1 o N. I2 I
they had been together, he left her to account for her
abſence as ſhe ſhould think fit, taking for granted that
what he had concealed ſhe would alſo conceal for the
ſame reaſons; or if ſhe ſhould not, as he had affirmed
nothing contrary to truth, he might pretend to have
concealed it in jeſt. Sir James, as ſoon as he had
received this intelligence, took his leave with ſome
appearance of ſatisfaction, and was followed by the
Dočtor.
As ſoon as Mrs. Freeman and the Captain were
alone, ſhe queſtioned him with great earneſt-
neſs about the lady whom he had been ſeen to put
into a chair. When he had heard that this in-
cident had been related in the preſence of Sir James,
he was greatly alarmed leſt Lady Forreſt ſhould in-
creaſe his ſuſpicions, by attempting to conceal that
which, by a ſeries of enquiry to which he was now
{timulated, he would probably diſcover: he con-
demned this condućt in himſelf, and as the moſt
effectual means at once to quiet the mind of his
wife, and obtain her aſſiſtance, he told her all that
had happened, and his apprehenſion of the conſe-
quences: he alſo urged her to go directly to Miſs
Meadows, by whom his account would be con-
firmed, and from whom ſhe might learn farther intel-
ligence of Sir James; and to find ſome way to ac-
quaint Lady Forreſt with her danger, and admoniſh
her to conceal nothing.
Mrs. Freeman was convinced of the Captain's
ſincerity, not only by the advice which he urged her
Vol. II. G to

<page 405>
- 12.2 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T. U R E.
to give to Lady Forreſt, but by the conſiſtency of
the ſtory and the manner in which he was affected.
Her jealouſy was changed into pity for her friend,
and apprehenſion for her huſband. She haſted to
Miſs Meadows, and learnt that Sir James had en-
quired of the ſervant for his lady, and was told that
fhe had been there early with Captain Freeman, but
went away ſoon after him: ſhe related to Miſs
Meadows all that had happened, and thinking it at
leaſt poſſible that Sir James might not go direétly
home, ſhe wrote the following letter to his lady:
“ My dear Lady Forreſt,
“I am in the utmoſt diſtreſs for you. Sir James
has ſuſpicions which truth only can remove, and of
which my indiſcretion is the cauſe. If I had not
concealed my deſire of the Captain's return, your
deſign to diſengage yourſelf from him, which I
learn from Miſs Meadows, would have been ef-
fe&ted. Sir James breakfaſted with me in the Hay-
market; and has ſince called at your father's, from
whence I write: he knows that your ſtay here was
fhort, and has reaſon to believe the Captain put
you into a chair ſome hours afterwards at Spring-
gardens. I hope therefore, my dear lady, that this
will reach your hands time enough to prevent your
concealing anything. It would have been better if
Sir James had known nothing, for then you would
not have been ſuſpected; but now he muſt know
all,

<page 406>
E Q_U I v o c A T 1 o N. I23
º
all, or you cannot be juſtified. F orgive the free-
dom with which I write, and believe me moſt af-
fečtionately
Your’s,
MARIA FREEMAN.
“ P. S. I have ordered the bearer to ſay he came
from Mrs. Faſhion the milliner.”
This letter was given to a chairman, and he was
ordered to ſay he brought it from the milliner’s ;
becauſe if it ſhould be known to come from Mrs.
Freeman, and ſhould fall by accident into Sir James's
hands, his curioſity might prompt him to read it, and
his jealouſy to queſtion the lady without communi-
cating the contents.
Sir James being convinced that his lady and the
Captain had paſſed the morning at a bagnio, by the
anſwer which he received at her father’s, went di-
rečtly home. His lady was juſt arrived before him,
and had not recovered from the confuſion and dread
which ſeized her when ſhe heard that Sir James came
to town the night before, and at the ſame inſtant
anticipated the conſequences of her own indiſcretion.
She was told he was then at the coffee-houſe, and in
a few minutes was thrown into an univerſal tremor
upon hearing him knock at the door. He perceived
her diſtreſs not with compaſſion but rage, becauſe he
believed it to proceed from the conſciouſneſs of
guilt: he turned pale, and his lips quivered; but he
ſo far reſtrained his paſſion as to aſk her, without
G 2 - invečtive,

<page 407>
124 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
invečtive, “ where, and how ſhe had paſſed the
night?” She replied, “at Captain Freeman's; that
the Captain was upon guard, that ſhe ſat up with his
lady till he came in, and then inſiſting to ſee her
home, ſhe would ſuffer the coach to go no farther
than her father's, where he left her early in the
morning:” ſhe had not fortitude to relate the ſequel,
but ſtopped with ſome appearance of irreſolution and
terror. Sir James then aſked, “if ſhe came direétly
from her father's home.” This queſtion, and the
manner in which it was aſked, increaſed her confu-
ſion: to appear to have ſtopped ſhort in her narra-
tive, ſhe thought would be an implication of guilt, as
it would betray a deſire of concealment: but the
paſt could not be recalled, and ſhe was impelled by
equivocation to falſehood, from which, however,
ſhe would have been kept back by fear, if Sir James
had not deceived her into a belief that he had been
no farther than the neighbourhood. After theſe
tumultuous refle&tions which paſſed in a moment, ſhe
ventured to affirm, that “ſhe ſtaid with Miſs Mea-
dows till eight, and then came home:” but ſhe uttered
this falſehood with ſuch marks of guilt and ſhame,which
ſhe had indeed no otherwiſe than by this falſehood
incurred or deſerved, that Sir James no more doubted
her infidelity than her exiſtence. As her ſtory was
the ſame with the Captain’s, and as one had
concealed the truth, and the other denied it, he con-
cluded there was a confederacy between them; and
determining firſt to bring the Captain to account, he
- turned

<page 408>
E Q U 1 v o c A T 1 o N. 125
turned from her abruptly, and immediately left the
houſe.
At the door he met the chairman who had been
diſpatched by Mrs. Freeman to his lady; and fierce-
ly interrogating him what was his buſineſs, the man
produced the letter, and ſaying, as he had been or-
dered, that he had brought it from Mrs. Faſhion,
Sir James ſnatched it from him, and muttering ſome
expreſſions of contempt and reſentment, thruſt it into
his pocket.
It happened that Sir James did not find the Cap-
tain at home; he, therefore, left a billet, in which he
requeſted to ſee him at a neighbouring tavern, and
added, that he had put on his ſword.
In the mean time, his lady, dreading a diſcovery of
the falſehood which ſhe had aſſerted, diſpatched a
billet to Captain Freeman; in which ſhe conjured
him, as a man of honour, for particular reaſons, not
to own to Sir James, or any other perſon, that he
had ſeen her after he had left her at her father's : ſhe
alſo wrote to her couſin Meadows, intreating, that
if ſhe was queſtioned by Sir James, he might be
told that ſhe ſtaid with her till eight o'clock, an hour
at which only herſelf and the ſervants were up.
The billet to Miſs Meadows came ſoon after the
chairman had returned with an account of what had
happened to the letter; and Mrs. Freeman was juſt
gone in great haſte to relate the accident to the Cap-
tain, as it was of importance that he ſhould know
it before his next interview with Sir James: but the
- G 3 Captain

<page 409>
126 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
Captain had been at home before her, and had re-
ceived both Sir James’s billet and that of his
lady. He went immediately to the tavern, and, in-
quiring for Sir James Forreſt, was ſhewn into a
a back room one pair of ſtairs: Sir James received
his ſalutation without reply, and inſtantly bolted the
door. His jealouſy was complicated with that in-
dignation and contempt, which a ſenſe of injury
from a perſon of inferior rank, never fails to produce;
he, therefore, demanded of the Captain, in a haughty
tone, “Whether he had not that morning been in
company with his wife, after he had left her at her
father’s f* The Captain, who was incenſed at Sir
James’s manner, and deemed himſelf engaged in
honour to keep the lady's ſecret, anſwered, that
“from what he had ſaid in the morning, no man had
a right to ſuppoſe he had ſeen the lady afterwards;
that to inſinuate the contrary, was obliquely to
charge him with a falſehood; that he was bound to
anſwer no ſuch queſtions, till they were properly ex-
plained; and that as a gentleman, he was prepared
to vindicate his honour.” Sir James juſtly deemed
this reply an equivocation and an inſult; and being
no longer able to reſtrain his rage, he curſed the
Captain as a liar and a ſcoundrel, and at the ſame
time ſtriking him a violent blow with his fiſt, drew
his ſword, and put himſelf in a poſture of defence.
Whatever deſign the Captain might have had to
bring his friend to temper, and reconcile him to his
wife, when he firſt entered the room, he was now
- * equally

<page 410>
E Q U 1 v o cº A T 1 o N. 127'
-
*
equally enraged, and indeed had ſuffered equal in-
dignity ; he, therefore, drew at the ſame inſtant,
and after a few deſperate paſſes on both ſides, he
received a wound in his breaſt, and reeling back-
ward a few paces, fell down. . -
The noiſe had brought many people to the door of
the room, and it was forced open juſt as the Captain
received his wound : Sir James was ſecured, and a
meſſenger was diſpatched for a ſurgeon. In the
mean time the Captain perceived himſelf to be dy-
ing; and whatever might before have been his opi-
nion of right and wrong, and honour and ſhame, he
now thought all diſſimulation criminal, and that his
murderer had a right to that truth which he thought
it meritorious to deny him when he was his friend;
he, therefore, earneſtly deſired to ſpeak a few words
to him in private. This requeſt was immediately
granted; the perſons who had ruſhed in withdrew,
contenting themſelves to keep guard at the door;
and the Captain, beckoning Sir James to kneel down
by him, then told him, that however his lady might
have been ſurprized or betrayed by pride or fear into
diſfimulation or falſehood, ſhe was innocent of the
crime which he ſuppoſed her ſolicitous to conceal.
He then briefly related all the events as they had
happened; and at laſt, graſping his hand, urged him
to eſcape from the window, that he might be a friend
to his widow and to his child, if its birth ſhould not
be prevented by the death of its father. Sir James
yielded to the force of this motive, and eſcaped as
G 4 the

<page 411>
128 T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
the Captain had direéted. In his way to Dover he
read the letter which he had taken from the chair-
man, and the next poſt incloſed it in the following
to his lady. -
“My dear Charlotte,
“I am the moſt wretched of all men; but I do
not upbraid you as the cauſe: would to God that I
were not more guilty than you ! We are the mar-
tyrs of diffimulation. By diſfimulation dear Cap-
tain Freeman was induced to waſte thoſe hours with
you, which he would otherwiſe have enjoyed with
the poor unhappy diſſembler his wife. Truſting in
the ſucceſs of diffimulation, you was tempted to
venture into the Park, where you met him whom
you wiſhed to ſhun. By detecting diſfimulation in
the Captain, my ſuſpicions were increaſed; and by
diffinulation and falſehood you confirmed them.
But your diſfimulation and falſehood were the effects
of mine; your's were ineffectual, mine ſucceeded :
for I left word that I was gone no farther than the
coffee-houſe, that you might not ſuſpect I had learn-
ed too much to be deceived. By the ſucceſs of a
lie put into the mouth of a chairman, I was pre-
vented from reading a letter which at laſt would
have undeceived me ; and by perſiſting in diſfimula-
tion, the Captain has made his friend a fugitive, and
his wife a widow. Thus does inſincerity terminate
in miſery and confuſion, whether, in its immediate
purpoſe, it ſucceed, or be diſappointed. O my dear
Char-

<page 412>
E Q U 1 v oc A T 1 o N. I 29
Charlotte l if ever we meet again, to meet again
in happineſs is impoſſible—if ever we meet again,
let us reſolve to be fincere: to be ſincere is to be
wiſe, innocent, and ſafe. We venture to commit
faults which ſhame or fear would prevent, if we
did not hope to conceal them by a lie. But in the
labyrinth of falſehood, men meet thoſe evils which
they ſeek to avoid.—As in the ſtrait path of truth
alone they can ſee before them, in the ſtrait path of
truth alone they can purſue felicity with ſucceſs.
Adieu ! I am—dreadful l—I can ſubſcribe nothing
that does not reproach and torment me—Adieu!”
Within a few weeks after the receipt of this let-
ter, the unhappy lady heard that her huſband was
caſt away in his paſſage to France.
D I A L O G U E XV.
M R. E. G E R To N.
Y ESTERDAY you beheld me very anxious
to convince you of the abſolute neceſſity of a
ſtrićt adherence to truth. I cannot, perhaps, better
continue to effect this, than by ſhewing you the
importance of accuſtoming yourſelves to ſilence, when
G 5 upon

<page 413>
130 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
r
upon the affairs of others. This will inſenſibly give
you habits of ſecreſy, and teach you to avoid de-
tračtion, two very eſſential duties of ſociety. We
will begin with the firſt. To ſhew you how highly
the wiſeſt of men have always reverenced thoſe who
were careful not to betray the ſecrets with which
they were entruſted, I will remind you of the be-
haviour of Papyrius, and the honour conferred on
him in conſequence of it, by that auguſt aſſembly,
the Senate of antient Rome. -
It was once the cuſtom for the ſenators to take
their ſons with them to the ſenate-houſe, and among
theſe did Papyrius Praeteſtatus follow his father.
One day when an affair of great conſequence had
been in debate, and deferred till the morrow, a par-
ticular charge was given to all not to mention it
abroad. The mother of the boy, Papyrius when
he came home, aſked him what the ſenators had been
doing that day; to which he replied, it was a ſecret
that muſt not be diſcloſed. This anſwer, inſtead
of giving ſatisfaction, as it ought to have done,
only enflamed her curioſity; and, when entreaties
had no effect, made her proceed to violence, in or—
der to extort the ſecret. Papyrius, who was quite
young, finding it impoſſible to prevail, told her at
laſt, that he might avoid diſcloſing the ſecrets of the
ſenate, “it had been debated, whether it would be
moſt advantageous for one man to have two wives,
or for one woman to have two huſbands.” The
mother upon this immediately quits Papyrius, and
- running
*

<page 414>
S e C R e S Y. I31
running about among her female acquaintance, who
were as weak as herſelf, perſuades them to accom-
pany her the next day to the ſenate. The ſenators,
hearing the uproar, enquired what was the matter :
Upon which Papyrius ſtood up, and told them in
what manner he had been obliged to act. The fa-
thers were all ſo much ſurprized and pleaſed with
the invention, the reſolution, and the ſecreſy of the
boy, that they returned him public thanks; but in-
ſtantly made a decree, that the ſons of ſenators
ſhould not in future be admitted to hear their deli-
berations, Papyrius alone excepted.
Papyrius you ſee, children, notwithſtanding his
youth, had a juſt ſenſe of the dignity and import-
ance of the truſt which had been placed in him by
the ſenators. The perſon whoſe ſtory we will now
read, had neither his prudence nor his fortitude.
S E C R E S Y :
Or the E N R A G E D Lo v E R.
A YOUNG gentleman, deſcended of a good
family, but whoſe eſtate was very much encumber-
ed by the miſmanagement of his parents, was on
the point of retrieving his fortune by a marriage
with a lady, who, beſides eight thouſand pounds in
her own poſſeſſion, was the only child of one of the
moſt wealthy merchants in Briſtol.
The courtſhip between them had been kept ex-
tremely ſecret;-the lady had made no one her con-
G 6 fidants

<page 415>
132 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
fidante in the affair;-the gentleman had obſerved
the ſame caution, till, a few days before that which
ſhe had appointed for the completion of their mu-
tual wiſhes, he imparted the ſecret of his approach-
ing happineſs to a friend, from whom before he
had never concealed any thing.
This perſon had a wife whom he extremely loved,
and whoſe integrity he doubted not. He knew ſhe
wiſhed well to his friend, and that ſhe would rejoice
to hear of the good fortune he was ſo near enjoying,
therefore communicated the ſecret to her almoſt as
foon as he was informed of it himſelf; but charged
her at the ſame time to make no mention of it,
which ſhe faithfully promiſed.
It proved, however, that her mind had no ſuch
retentive quality as her fond huſband imagined. A
young lady of her acquaintance happening to viſit
her that ſame day, and ſome diſcourſe on the ill
fituation of the intended bridegroom’s affairs com-
ing on the tapis, the wife could not forbear crying
out, ‘Well, well, we ſhall ſoon ſee him redeem
all.”—“As how !’ demanded the other.— By a
marriage with ſome great fortune,’ replied ſhe.—
* Marriage!’ reſumed the young lady,+* It muſt
then be with ſome worn out virgin of fourſcore at
her laſt prayers.”—“Not ſo, I can aſſure you,” ſaid
the wife, “but a blooming young creature of ſcarce
eighteen, with a fortune of eight thouſand pounds
in her own hands, and heireſs to one of the firſt
merchants of Briſtol.”—“You amaze me,’ returned
the

<page 416>
S e C R e s Y. I33
the other, ‘ Pray who is ſhe?”—“You muſt ex-
cuſe me for that, my dear,’ anſwered ſhe, ‘ I am
enjoined ſecreſy; but I can tell you, the wedding
will be celebrated in a few days, and then all will
come out. In the mean time you may have leave
to gueſs.” -
After what ſhe had ſaid, the other could not be
much at a loſs to diſcover the perſon ſpoken of.-
• You certainly muſt mean Miſs ****. The de-
ſcription you give correſponds with no other wo-
man in this town.”—“You are perfectly right,’ re-
plied ſhe ; “but be ſure you tell nobody.”
Little did this unhappy wife imagine, to whom
ſhe had blabbed ſo dangerous a ſecret. This lady
had been courted by the gentleman in queſtion, but,
her fortune not agreeing with his circumſtances, the
match did not ſucceed. She had loved him, and her
reſentment for his not reſolving to ſuffer every thing
for her ſake, was adequate to the tenderneſs ſhe had
before had for him; and the opportunity now given
her for rendering him as unhappy as he had made
her, filled her with an ill-natured ſatisfaction.
She no ſooner got home, than ſhe wrote an ano-
nymous letter to the father of her rival, acquainting
him with the whole ſtory of his daughter's intended
marriage.—The old gentleman was equally ſurpriz-
ed and enraged; he ſearched his daughter's cabinet,
and found letters which confirmed the truth of the
advice he had received. He immediately locked
the young lady into her chamber, ſuffering no one
to

<page 417>
134. T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
to come near her, but an aunt, who was as inflexi-
ble to compaſſion for the woes of love, as a Spa-
niſh Duenna. On the third day, which was agreed
upon by the lovers for the celebration of their nup-
tials, he ſent her to a place, where it was pretty
certain ſhe could hold no correſpondence unknown
to him.
Some hours before her departure, ſhe found means
to write to her lover.—The contents of the letter
were theſe :
* The day, which I thought ſhould have given
me to you, tears me from you for ever;-the com-
munication between us, by ſome means, is diſco-
vered to my father, and I am to be ſent to baniſh-
ment; but to what part, or whether out of the
kingdom, am not able to inform you;-I only find,
by the preparations making, that I am going a long
journey.—I am carefully watched, and have juſt
time to bid you eternally farewel, and that you muſt
now give over all expectations of my ever being
your’s.’ -
P. S. “As I find the diſcovery of our loves has
been made to my father by a letter from an un-
known hand, I wiſh the misfortune may not be
owing to yourſelf, in having truſted ſome perſon
unworthy of the ſecret, ſince it has never eſcaped
my lips, even to the faithful ſervant who brings you
this, and will inform you of all my ſufferings for
theſe three cruel days.—Once more adieu, I ſhall
always wiſh you happy.”

<page 418>
s E c R E S Y. 135
The poor lady had but juſt time to inſtruct her
maid what ſhe ſhould ſay on the delivery of this
letter, when, though it was no more than four
o'clock in the morning, ſhe was called down ſtairs,
and, accompanied by her aunt, hurried into a
coach, and carried,—no one in the family knew
whither.
The maid about ſix executed her commiſſion.
The diſtraćtion of the lover, on hearing the ac-
count, and reading the letter, may more eaſily be
conceived than deſcribed;—he knew he had made
but one confident, and therefore it muſt have been
that confident, by whom he was betrayed. He flew
dire&tly to his houſe, rouſed him from his bed, and
cried out with a voice ſcarce intelligible through
rage and deſpair, “You have undone me;—I be-
lieved you my friend, and a man of honour ;—you
have baſely wronged my credulity, and are a ſcoun-
drel and a villain!’
The other, knowing this was the day agreed on
for the marriage, had imagined that he had been
called upon to be witneſs of it; but was now ſo
much ſurprized, that he had no power to make the
leaſt reply. The lover threw down the letter he had
juſt received from Miſs ****, and went on, ‘Read
that, and, if you can borrow effrontery enough from
hell, deny your perfidy, your baſe abuſe of friend-
ſhip !’
The gentleman looked at the letter in the utmoſt
conſternation, was extremely ſorry for the accident,
but

<page 419>
136 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
but certain it had not happened through his fault;
adding, that he had never mentioned the affair to
a fingle ſoul but his wife, whoſe fidelity he could
depend upon.
If anything could have added to the lover's fury,
it muſt have been the acknowledgment made by the
other, of having told the ſecret to his wife. “You
have ruined all the hopes I had on earth,’ purſued
the lover, ‘your blood is the only atonement you
can make l’—With theſe words he drew his ſword,
the other did the ſame, they exchanged ſeveral
thruſts; — the claſh of their weapons preſently
brought the ſervants into the room, but not time
enough to prevent both the antagoniſts from being
wounded.
The wife, on this dreadful alarm, jumped out of
bed, and, with only a looſe night-gown about her,
came running in, crying, ‘What has occaſioned
this ſhocking ſcene!’—‘ I hope,” replied her huſ-
band, “that you yourſelf have not occaſioned it;-
and that you never mentioned what I told you in
relation to this gentleman’s courtſhip with Miſs
**** **—‘ Oh Heavens !’ returned ſhe, “ is it on
this ſcore that you fight °–4 Anſwer not one
queſtion with another, reſumed he fiercely, “but
ſpeak the truth at once.”
She then confeſſed, that, in chatting with Miſs
L—, ſhe had unwarily dropped ſome hints in re-
gard to that affair, and that the other had gueſſed
the reſt, ‘ It is mighty well, ſaid the deſpairing
lover;

<page 420>
S E C R E S Y. I37
lover; ‘the diſcovery is made, and I am no longer
to ſeek for the author of that cruel letter, which has
undone me;—I know the reſentment Miſs L–
has to me, and muſt own, you could not have taken
more effectual meaſures to compleat my ruin.”
The huſband, who felt more ſmart from his wife's
confeſſion, than from the wounds he had received,
was beginning to reproach her in the moſt bitter
terms, when he was interrupted by the entrance of
a ſurgeon, who had been ſent for by the ſervants,
to whom turning, he ſaid, ‘You ſee here, Sir, two
perſons who have need of your help;-but I deſire
you will firſt examine the condition of my friend.’—
This complaiſance the other was far from returning,
—he would not ſuffer himſelf to be touched, ſaying,
he would receive no affiſtance in a houſe, the owners
of which had ſo baſely betrayed him;-and with
theſe words flew down ſtairs, bleeding as he was.
Fortunately, however, neither of their wounds
proved mortal, nor even dangerous, and both were
ſoon cured; but the friendſhip between them was
never again cemented, though the huſband, con-
ſcious of having been the aggreſſor, frequently en-
deavoured it. This diſunion with a perſon whom
he truly valued, made the folly, which occaſioned it,
appear in its worſt colours; and, though he conti-
nued to live with his wife, he never could bring
himſelf either to love or even to behave towards her
as before this accident.

<page 421>
138 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
As for the lover, having ſought his miſtreſs in
every place he could think of, without being able
to get any intelligence of her abode, he retired to the
ſouthern parts of France, in order to retrieve his
affairs, by living cheap. The young lady, as it was
afterwards known, had been carried into Wales, where
labouring under the weight of her father’s diſplea-
ſure, the diſappointment of her love, and the depri-
vation of all thoſe ſatisfactions her youth had been
accuſtomed to, ſhe fell into a languiſhing diſorder,
which ſoon took her from the world. '
N AN cy.
To be able to keep a ſecret, Sir, is certainly a
very neceſſary duty; but, I obſerve, that the want
of ſecreſy is always attributed to the poor women.
M R. E. G E R T o N. :
You miſtake, my dear; in the inſtance before us
the men were weaker than the women. The young
lady kept her own ſecret; and had either her lover, -
or his friend, had the ſame diſcretion, they might
have been happy.
N AN cy.
Would not you have a huſband, Sir, freely com-
municate his thoughts to a wife 2 -
M R. E. G E R To N.
By no means, if theſe thoughts are concerning
others ; he has no right ſo to do. Metellus, a very
wiſe

<page 422>
D e T R A C T I O N. I 39
-
wiſe man, ſaid, that if he thought his ſhirt was privy
to his deſigns, he would tear it off, and burn it.
MR s. E G E R T o N.
Indeed, that wife muſt very ill underſtand her
duty, who makes improper enquiries; and ſhe muſt
be exceedingly weak, ſhould ſhe think herſelf ne-
glečted, becauſe ſuch enquiries meet a repulſe from
her huſband.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
We will now proceed to another conſequence of
not keeping a guard upon the tongue, Detraction.
I need not take much trouble to convince you of the
meanneſs of this folly, which, if once indulged, de-
generates into deteſtable vice. But though you
may perceive its ill effects, and behold it with con-
tempt in others, if you be not very careful, you
may eaſily fall into it yourſelves. There is no weak-
neſs more common, nor more catching, than De-
traction; yet there is not any one more univerſally
decried. However, there is no making you avoid
this odious practice by maxims alone; if you have
not a mind ſuperior to detraction, you will infallibly
become detračtors; and if you have, nothing but a
long experience can give you the power to remain
totally innocent in this reſpešt. But remember, that
there is no ill quality which more effectually lowers
the charaćter of the poſſeſſor, or which more cer-
tainly turns to his own diſadvantage. Let us attend
to the following Fable: . º
".. - The

<page 423>
H46 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
The H E R D S M A N. A Fable.
A certain herdſman verified the maxim that
* every man may acquire a charaćter in his ſtation.”
His reputation, which was the reſult of honeſty and
plain ſenſe, made him conſiderable in his village.
All men confided in his word. Matters of property
in diſpute were depoſited in his hands, till the cauſe
was decided. His benevolence of temper diſpoſed
him always to reconcile animoſities, and his ſtrength
of underſtanding qualified him for a right deciſion,
whenever his neighbours appointed him arbitrator.
As a clear ſky gradually diſpels black clouds, and
enlightens the whole hemiſphere; ſo the report of a
good name extends to remote parts, and is univer-
ſally well received. The King, who at that time
ruled over the country, was a mild and judicious
Prince. He diſpenſed his favours impartially to
men of merit. He ſent for the herdſman, tried his
honeſty at one time, and his underſtanding at ano-
ther; and, as the latter improved, he raiſed him
from one employment to another, till our herdſman
arrived, without artifice or ambition, as it were
with the wings of a gentle breeze, to the higheſt
pitch of fortune; and had ſuch weight and authority,
that no reſolution of conſequence was taken, with-
out previouſly conſulting him. Good counſel is
the compaſs, by which a Prince ſteers his courſe.
Whilſt he follows that, all his meaſures ſucceed;
which was the caſe here. The King was in no
danger,

<page 424>
D E T R A C T I O N. I4 I
danger, for he was beloved. The people reſted in
peace, for the labourer was ſecure of his pay. In-
nocence was free from anxiety, for ſhe could rely
upon protećtion. Vice only trembled, for ſhe was
proſecuted; and envy ſat watching and diſturbed by
her ſide, for virtue was crowned by fortune.
It happened, during this general tranquillity,
that an aged man, who had formerly an intimacy
with the herdſman, returned home after a diſtant
journey. His firſt inclination was to ſee the court,
in order to worſhip that ſun which diffuſed ſo fruit-
ful a warmth over all the country. He was not a
little ſurprized to ſee the herdſman exalted to the
King’s right hand; while the herdſman, whoſe mind
continued invariably the ſame, rejoiced, in the midſt
of his grandeur, at the arrival of his friend.
In the evening, when they were retired to private
converſation, the old experienced man thought him-
ſelf obliged to admoniſh his friend. “You are now,
faid he, in the flippery road of honour, and reſemble
the blind man, who in ſearching for the ſtaff he had
loſt, among ſtones and buſhes, picked up a ſerpent
{tiff with cold. A prudent traveller, who was paſſ-
ing by, adviſed him to throw it away; but the un-
happy blind man rejećted his counſel, and thought
himſelf happy in a ſafe ſupport; till the ſerpent was
refreſhed, and bit him mortally. Your own good
ſenſe, continued he, will enable you to make the
application.”
The
*-

<page 425>
I42 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
The herdſman was ſomewhat affected by the ſtory,
but being conſcious of no evil himſelf, and not ap-
prehenſive of any deſign againſt him, perſevered in
the faithful and diligent diſcharge of the duties of his
office. He might have continued in the ſame to the
day of his death, had not the artful practices of the
envious, after ſeveral far-fetched attempts, at laſt
ſucceeded to render him ſuſpected by the King.
Their firſt pretence was, that the herdſman had
built himſelf a ſumptuous houſe, by extorting money
from the poor, and gratifications from the rich.
The King was determined to believe no eyes but
his own, in a matter which concerned the reputa-
tion of an honeſt man. He made a viſit to the
herdſman, and ſurveyed his dwelling, but found
neither the building, nor the decorations, nor the
furniture unequal to his ſtation, nor the expence
greater than conſiſted with the liberal rewards him-
ſelf had conferred upon him. The herdſman was
therefore commended for not diſgracing his rank,
and for adminiſtering to the laborious part of man-
kind that ſupport, which they have a right to expect
from men of power and fortune. The King ſum-
moned the envious accuſers, and remonſtrated to
them on the falſity of their charge. They invented
another falſehood to excuſe the former; for no ini-
quity is ſo fruitful as this; one deceit begets another,
unleſs the firſt be ſtifled in its birth. “It is very
true, Sir, ſaid they, he is cautious of expoſing his
treaſures to public view; but there is a cheſt by his
bed-

<page 426>
D E T R A C T I G. N. - I43
:
bed-fide, filled with gold and jewels; which con-
tain more property than all your ſubječts poſ-
ſeſs.” The King, being a lover of truth, repaired
once more to the herdſman's dwelling. He
found the cheſt, and commanded him to open it;
the herdſman begged to be excuſed, aſſuring him
that it contained nothing worthy of any one’s curio-
ſity; but the King's ſuſpicions were heightened by
the earneſtneſs with which he declined the order.
The cheſt was opened, and what can you imagine
were the contents : No more than a plain herdſ-
man's coat, and a ſtaff ſtripped of its bark. The
herdſman, upon this, depoſited his fine cloaths in
the cheſt, and, recolle&ting his friend’s fable of the
blind man and the ſerpent, put on his former dreſs,
walked to his native home, and could not be pre-
vailed with, by the intreaties or promiſes of the
King, to depart from his reſolution of finiſhing his
days in the cottage where he had drawn his firſt
breath.
M. R. E. G E R To N.
In this fable you may perceive detraćtion was the
child of envy; and ſo will, it ever be. A leſſon
which you may learn from the ſtory of Dorantes.
D E T R A C T 1 o N:
Or the Story of DoRANTEs.
A certain gentleman whoſe real name I ſhall
conceal under that of Dorantes, was married to a
young

<page 427>
144 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
young lady of equal birth and fortune, and who,
without being a celebrated beauty, was perfectly
agreeable. He behaved with great tenderneſs to-
wards her,-ſhe was paſſionately fond of him ;-no
couple could live more happily together, till an un-
lucky propenſity, to which women are too prone,
diſſolved the cement of their union, and made both
as wretched as before they had been bleſſed.
The wife of Dorantes was extremely intimate
with a young widow, to whom I ſhall give the name
of Clara;-they were acquainted in their childhood,
and the change of their conditions afterwards had
Smade no alteration in the ſentiments of either. Sel-
dom two days paſſed, without their ſeeing each
other; and, as Dorantes ſtaid pretty much at home,
he was very glad of a third perſon to make up a party
for ombre.
Clara was very handſome, had a regular ſet of
features,-fine hair, fine teeth;-and, above all, a
remarkably delicate complexion.—Dorantes had ſe-
veral times, occaſionally, mentioned thoſe perfeótions
in her to his wife; which, though, as will appear
by the ſequel, they not a little diſpleaſed her, ſhe
ſeemed not to take notice of, till one day, as they
were talking together on the beauty of ſome ladies
of their acquaintance, he ſaid, “Well, I ſee none
that are half ſo agreeable as your friend Clara.”—
“Clara looks. very well altogether, replied ſhe
gravely; but it coſts her a great deal of pains to do
ſo.”—“What pains,” cried he-‘Why, to tell
I you.

<page 428>
D E t R A c T 1 o N. 145.
º
you the truth, reſumed ſhe, all thoſe things you ad-
mire in her are nothing but mere art;—ſhe has ſeven
or eight falſe teeth, to my knowledge;—then, as to
her hair it is naturally inclined to red; but ſhe dyes
it with a certain water, which turns it to that fine
black it now appears; and, for her complexion,
ſhe uſes, both white and red; befides, ſhe always
ſleeps in a night-maſk, to repel pimples.”—“ Im-
poſſible, my dear!” reſumed he, “I have eyes as
well as you, and can eaſily diſtinguiſh between what
is natural and what is artificial.”
“You men are often deceived in theſe things,
anſwered ſhe ; if you were to ſee her in a morning,
you would be convinced of the truth of what I tell
you, and a great deal more ; but I kve Clara, and
would not, for the world, ſay what I have done to
any one, except yourſelf.”—“You are in the right,
ſaid he with ſome ill humour; for no-body would
believe you, if you did.” - -
“I am ſorry, then, I ever mentioned it to you,
ſaid ſhe a little haughtily.”—“ It might have been
better you had not, replied he ſternly;-becauſe it
gives me no very favourable idea, either of your ge-
neroſity or your ſincerity; and but confirms what I
have often heard of your ſex;-that no one wo—
man ever ſpoke well of the beauty of another.”—
With theſe words, he ſnatched up his hat, and went
directly out of the houſe.
- - - - ºf
The wife, who had never before been ſpoken to
in this ſharp manner by her huſband, now, doubtleſs,
Wo L. II. H repented

<page 429>
146 - -
r H E F A M H L y P 1 c T G R e.
repented of what ſhe had ſaid; but the words were
gone out of her mouth, ſhe could not call them
back; and pride and ſhame would not ſuffer her to
confeſs ſhe had been guilty of uttering a falſity.—
From this time forward, ſhe perceived a viſible decay
in that tenderneſs and reſpect with which ſhe had
been treated by Dorantes, and began to hate the
innocent Clara for a misfortune which ſhe had in-
tirely brought upon herſelf; ſhe behaved to her with
great coldneſs, and, at length, ordered her ſervants
to ſay ſhe was not at home, whenever ſhe came.
The fair widow, on this, diſcontinued her viſits;
and, as ſhe knew ſhe had done nothing to deſerve
the uſage ſhe received, thought it beneath her to
inquire into the cauſe.
From what ſmall beginnings do, ſometimes, the
greateſt feuds and diſcontents ariſe !—Dorantes,
finding that Clara did not come to the houſe as
uſual, doubted not but that his wife had either per-
fonally affronted her, or ſpoke of her, to others, in
the ſame manner ſhe had done to him; and, refle&t-
ing deeply on the injuſtice of the thing, could not
keep himſelf from entertaining a ſecret contempt,
mixed with indignation, for the author.
Chance contributed to heighten in him this ill
humour towards his wife:–he met Clara one day
by accident, and, accoſting her with his accuſtomed
politeneſs, aſked the reaſon why his wife had been
ſo long deprived of her agreeable company.—To
which the very gravely replied:—That ſhe had made
- - - ſeveral

<page 430>
, , D-E T R A c T 1 o N. Y47
ſeveral viſits, none of which being returned, ſhe
could not flatter herſelf that her company was any
longer acceptable. “Oh, madam, ſaid he, I beg
you will not ſo far wrong your own merits, or our
juſt ſenſe of them, as to harbour ſuch a thought:
I am extremely ſorry for my wife's remiſſneſs; but
I ſuppoſe ſhe depended on the intimacy between you
for an excuſe. I hope you will have good-nature
enough to forgive it, and convince us, that you do
ſo, by letting us ſee you ſoon.”—“ Sir, anſwered
fhe, when your lady thinks fit to let me know that
ſhe will be at home, I ſhall wait on her.”—She
concluded with a curtſey, and turned ſo haſtily away,
that he had no opportunity of adding any thing
further. . -
On his return home, he repeated what had paſſed
to his wife; and added, that, as he found there was
no pretence, for breaking off; the acquaintance, he
would have her ſend an invitation to her. Her
complexion grew red as ſcarlet on the firſt mention
of Clara's name; and, when he had given over
fpeaking, “I do not underſtand what ſhe means,
ſaid ſhe, by giving herſelf theſe airs; I never forbad
her my houſe, and, if ſhe thinks fit to ſtay away, I
have no reaſon to intreat her preſence; yet, ſince I
find it will ſo much oblige you, I ſhall ſend to her.”
—“Oblige me!”. cried he in an angry tone—
“Yes! ſince you intereſt yourſelf ſo far in this
affair.” This put him beyond all patience. He
told her, that ſhe behaved very ill; that ſhe diſco-
. . . . H 2. - wered

<page 431>
148 T H E F AM 1 L Y P 1 c r u R e.
wered a mean diſpoſition; and that, if ſhe perſiſted
in it, ſhe would render herſelf unworthy either of
$ove or reſpect. . . . . . . . . . . .
* “I ſee, cried ſhe, that I have forfeited both with
you; but it is not to my diſpoſition, it is to Ciara's
more prevailing charms, that I am indebted for ſo
great a misfortune.—Ungrateful, inconſtant man
is this the return for all the tender affection I have
had for you?” &
Men can ill bear reproaches, eſpecially when in-
nocent of the cauſe, as Dorantes really was.-He
replied in the moſt bitter terms, which, ſhe being
unable either to endure or retort, half-ſuffocated
her with rage. She flew into the garden, and,
throwing herſelf upon a green bank at the further
end, there gave a looſe to her tears and com-
plainings. . . . . -
One of the maids, happening to be at a window,
ſaw where ſhe lay, and had the diſcretion to run
haſtily down and remind her, that, ſome rain having
lately fallen, the dampneſs of the earth might en-
danger her health. The poor lady was as cold as
marble; though the inward agitations ſhe was in,
hindered her from feeling any exteriorinconvenience.
She roſe, however, and went into her chamber, but
fell into ſuch violent agitations, as obliged her to
go to bed, where ſhe continued very ill the whole
night. " . . . . . . . . -
Dorantes came home very late, and, being told
that his wife was indiſpoſed, ſlept in another cham-
- ber.


<page 432>
D E T R A c T. I O Nº. #49
.
ber. On hearing, in the morning, that ſhe was
much worſe, he ſent.immediately for a phyſician,
who attended the family.
He found her in a fever, and delirious ; all that
could be done for her was in vain; her diſtemper
every hour increaſed, and, in two days, her life was
deſpaired of. On the third, ſhe ſeemed, to all appear-
ance, better; the violence of her fever abated, and
her ſenſes were perfectly reſtored. Alas! the cruel,
diſeaſe had left the outward frame only to prey with
greater force upon the nobler parts.—Death had
now ſeized her, ſhe was ſenſible of it, and aſked if
Dorantes was at home. Being told he had lately
left her chamber, ſhe deſired he would come in
again; which he pref ntly did. .
He had no ſooner feated himſelf on her bedſide,
than ſhe made a ſign to thoſe who were in the room
to withdraw ; and then, taking hold of his hand,
faid to him:-“My dear Dorantes, I feel I am no
longer for this world, but cannot leave it without
confeſfing, that I have been guilty of the greateſt
injuſtice to Clara. Yet was it not malice that made:
me ſo; I endeavoured to make her. odious in your
eyes, only becauſe I feared ſhe had appeared too
amiable. It was a fault indeed, but it was the fault
of love;—as ſuch, forgive it.”—“It was a weak-
neſs, anſwered he, which I was ſorry to obſerve in
you ; for, upon my honour, I never had a thought
of Clara, or any other woman, to the prejudice of
that affection I have vowed to you.”—“How kind.
H. 3. is:

<page 433>
I50 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
is this aſſurance 1 cried ſhe, it gives me pleaſure,
even in death.”—“Talk not of death interrupted
he, tenderly embracing her; live, oh live, and be
as happy as a huſband's love can make you !”—
“It is too late,” ſaid ſhe –and, that inſtant, fall-
ing into ſtrong convulſions, ſunk under them. .
º
-
*º-º-º:
D I A L O G U E XVI.
M R. E. G E R To N.
N the commerce of life, there is a mutual con-
fidence requiſite, my children, between man and
man. To be too credulous is a weakneſs, but to be
too ſuſpicious is ſordid and contemptible. If we have
proved a perſon’s fidelity in a ſingle inſtance, it would
be mean and unjuſt ever to ſuſpe&t him, unleſs he
obliges us to it; but if after a long intercourſe no
cauſe of diſtruſt ariſes, but many of punétuality and
ſincerity, to doubt is then to deſerve treachery.
When the Emperor Trajan was told that his moſt
dear friend Surra had formed a conſpiracy againſt
his life, he went the ſame evening, uninvited, at-
tended only by two friends, and ſupped with him;
was ſhawed by his barber, and conſulted his phyſi-
i * - cian,
!

<page 434>
F. R. I E N D S H I P. 151
clan. When he returned, he was again cautioned. .
Trajan ſmiled, and told them they did not know
the man;–he did :—to prove that he did, he had
ačtually put himſelf in Surra's power, and returned,
as he knew he ſhould, ſafe and unhurt. Thus, inſtead
of meanly ſuſpecting the man whoſe love and friend-
ſhip he had had ſo many proofs of, he ſhortly after
made him Tribune; and when, according to cuſtom,
he delivered the naked ſword, he ſaid, “I give you.
this, my friend, to defend me, if I rule well; if not,
to diſpatch me.”
But it is not every perſon in whom you muſt place
ſuch abſolute confidence: few only are worthy of
the ſacred name of Friend, and thoſe few cannot be
reſpected too highly, cannot be cheriſhed too inti-
mately. Once well aſſured of a friendſhip like this,
no doubt ſhould be made of its capability to do or
{uffer all things. That friend, who makes a diffi-
culty even of death itſelf in the cauſe of honourable
friendſhip, is unworthy the name.
Eudamidas, Aretaeus, and Charixenus, were
friends; the two latter were rich, the former ex-
ceedingly poor. Eudamidas died, and left the fol-
lowing will: “To Aretaeus I bequeath my mother,
to be kept and foſtered in her old age. My daughter
to Charixenus, to be married, with a dowry as great
as he can afford. But if, in the mean time, death
ſhould happen to either of theſe men, my will is,
that the ſurvivor ſhall perform what the other ſhould
have done, had he lived.” The poverty of the teſ-
H 4 tator

<page 435>
152 'I' H E F A M H L Y P I C T U. R. E.
tator was known, the duties of friendſhip were but
little underſtood, and thoſe who heard the will of
Eudamidas departed, laughing at the legacies which
Aretaeus and Charixenus were to receive. But
thoſe to whom the bequeſts were made, had different
ſenſations; they came, acknowledged, and ratified
the will. Charixenus died within five days, and
Aretaeus, who had taken the mother of Eudamidas,
immediately ſent for the daughter likewiſe, educated
her, beſtowed her in marriage, and of the five ta-
lents which his eſtate amounted to, gave two to her,
and two to his own daughter, and had their nuptials
both celebrated in one day.
Such are the duties and privileges of friendſhip,
ſuch are the obligations you enter into, when you
fay to any one, I AM You R FRIEND.—If, therefore,
you ſhould ever raſhly make ſuch a profeſſion, and
find yourſelves unequal to the charaćter, inſtantly
recede; it is more honourable than to deceive ; go
and ſay to whoever your pretenſions may have im-
poſed upon, “I releaſe you from your obligations,
and muſt intreat the ſame of you: I feel my weak-
neſs, and am forry to find myſelf unworthy to be
a friend.”
E U s T A c E.
I think, Sir, I could rather ſuffer death than be-
tray my friend.
M R.

<page 436>
F R e s p s h : ". . . 153
TMR. E. G E R T o N.
I ſhould have a very indifferent opinion of you,
Euſtace, if at your age you did not think ſo:
however, you know I think very highly of you.
We have declared a friendſhip for each other, and
I can give you no greater proof of my eſteem.
As we are both under an obligation of openneſs and
fincerity, of having no reſerved pleaſures, no par-
tialities of which the other is ignorant, I am not.
afraid that you will form any improper friendſhips,
becauſe I am certain you would firſt conſult me, as
I always conſult you, when there is anything on my,
mind in which either of us is intereſted. -
E U S T A c E.
I am ſenſible, Sir, of the honour you do me, and
have often felt the benefit of ſo near and dear a friend.
I ſhould, indeed, be unworthy, if I concealed the
leaſt thought from you.
M R. E. G E R T o N. .
I am ſatisfied, my Euſtace, of your ſincerity, and
the generous confidence you repoſe in me. I ſhall
now be obliged to you, if you will read this Arabian
anecdote.—It is the pićture, children, of men worthy
to be friends.

<page 437>
154. T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E:
F. R I, E N D S H I P :
An A R A B1 AN AN E c DoT E.
ALI-IBN-ABBAS, favourite of the Caliph
Mamoun', and lieutenant of the police in the reign
of this prince, relates, in theſe terms, a ſtory that
happened to himſelf. “I was one evening with the
caliph, when a man, bound hand and foot, was
- brought in. Mamoun ordered me to keep a watch-
. ful eye over the priſoner, and to bring him the next
day. The caliph ſeemed greatly irritated; and the
* Mamoun, ſon of the Caliph Aroun-Alrachid. His name is
famous all over the Eaſt; and he is reckoned the greateſt prince of
the Abbaſidies family. He reigned twenty-eight years and eight
months. He was a great warrior, of a ſweet diſpoſition, and liberal
to exceſs; but what moſt immortalized him, was his love of learn-
, ing. He was himſelf deeply verſed in every ſcience, but more eſpe-
rially in philoſophy and aſtronomy. This is the prince that cauſed
the moſt valuable books to be tranſlated from the Greeks, their firſt
maſters.--The Mahometan doćtors have reproached him with in-
troducing philoſophy, and the other ſpeculative ſciences, into Ma-
hometaniſm; for the Arabians of his days were not accuſtomed to
read any other books but what related to their own religion. This
prince ſhewed equal favour to every man of knowledge, let his reli-
gion be what it would.—The queſtion about the creation, or eter-
nity, of the Alcoran, was ſtarted in his time, and occaſioned much
effuſion of blood. He, with the ſmalleſt number of doctors, held
it to be created. But the other doćtors inſiſted, that the Alcoran
being the word proceeding from God, was eternal like himſelf: this
fentiment is embraced by the preſent Mahometans, who conſider all
that deny that doğrint as infideis,
fear


<page 438>
F. R. I. E. N. D. s. H 1 P. I55
fear of expoſing myſelf to his reſentment induced me
to confine the priſoner in my haram, as the moſt
ſecure place in my houſe.
“I aſked him what country he was of. He ſaid,
Damaſcus; and that his habitation was in the quar-
ter of the great moſque. May heaven, cried I,
ſhower down the choiceſt of its bleſfings upon tile
city of Damaſcus, and particularly upon the quar-
ter where you reſided ! He was ſolicitous to know
the motive that ſo much intereſted me for that diſ-
trićt. It is, ſaid I, that I owe my life to a man that
lived there. -
“Thoſe words excited his curioſity, and he con-
jured me to gratify it. It is many years fince, con-
tinued I; that the caliph, diſſatisfied with the vice-
roy of Damaſcus, depoſed him. I accompanied the
perſon whom the prince had appointed his ſucceſſor;
and at the inſtant we were taking poſſeſſion of the
governor's palace, a quarrel broke out between the
new and the old governor; the latter had poſted
ſoldiers, who aſſaulted us: I eſcaped out of a win-
dow, and, finding myſelf purſued by other aſſaſins,
took ſhelter in your quarter. I obſerved a palace
open, and ſeeing the maſter at the door, ſupplicated.
him to ſave my life. He immediately conducted me
into the apartment of his women, where I conti.
nued a month in peace and plenty. . . -
“My hoſt came one day to inform me, th: ta.
caravan was ſetting out for Bagdad; and this if I
wiſhed to return to my own home, I could not avail
. - H 6 myńf
***

<page 439>
156 T H E F A M r-L Y P : cºr U R E.
myſelf of a more favourable opportunity. Shame
held my tongue; and I had not courage to confeſs
my poverty; I had no money, and, for want of that,
ſhould be forced to follow the caravan on foot. But
how great was my ſurprize, when, on the day of de-
parture, a very fine horſe was brought me, alſo a mule
loaded with all ſorts of proviſions, and a black ſlave
to attend me on the road! My generous hoſt preſent-
ed me at the ſame time with a purſe of gold, and con-
dućted me himſelf to the caravan, where he recom-
mended me to ſeveral of the travellers, who were
his friends. Theſe are the kindneſſes I received in
your city, and that render it ſo dear to me: all my
concern is, that I have not hitherto been able to
diſcover my generous benefactor. I ſhould die con-
tent, could I find an opportunity of teſtifying my
gratitude. . . . * -
“Your wiſhes are accompliſhed, cried my pri–
ſoner in a tranſport, I am he that received you.
in my palace. Do you not remember me? The
time that had elapſed ſince that event, and the grief
into which, he was ſunk, had greatly altered his.
face: but, on a more cloſe examination of his fea-
tures, I eaſily recollected him; and ſome circum-
ſtances he brought to my mind, left me not the leaſt
room to doubt but that the priſoner, who, was thens
in danger of loſing his life, was the very perſon who
had ſo generouſly ſaved mine. I embraced him with
tears in my eyes, took off his chains, and aſked him
by what fatality he had incurred the caliph's diſplea-
- I ſure.
:

<page 440>
F R I E N D S H. H. P. 157
ſure. Some contemptible enemies, he replied, have
found means to aſperſe me unjuſtly to Mamoun: I
was hurried away from Damaſcus, and cruelly de-
nied even the conſolation of embracing my wife and
children: I know not what fate attends me; but as
I have reaſon to apprehend my death is determined,
I requeſt you to acquaint them with my misfortunes.
“No, ſaid I to him, you ſhall not die; I dare
give you this aſſurance; you ſhall be reſtored to
your family; be at liberty from this moment. I
preſently provided ſome pieces of the richeſt gold.
ſtuffs of Bagdad, and begged him to preſent them
to his wife : depart immediately, added I, preſent-
ing him with a purſe of a thouſand ſequins; haſte
to rejoin thoſe precious pledges of your affection
which you left at Damaſcus; let the caliph's in-
dignation fall on me; I dread it not, if I am happy
enough to preſerve you.
“What a propoſal do you make me! anſwered
my priſoner; and can you think me capable of ae-
cepting it? What! ſhall I, to avoid death, ſacrifice.
that ſame life now, which I formerly ſaved Endea-
vour to convince the caliph of my innocence: this
• is the only proof I will admit of your gratitude: if
you cannot undeceive him, I will go myſelf and offer.
him my head: let him diſpoſe of my life at his plea-
ſure, provided your's be ſafe. I again entreated
him to eſcape, but he continued inflexible.
“I did not fail to preſent myſelf the next morn-
ing before Mamoun. The prince was dreſſed in a
crimſon

<page 441>
158 T H E F A M 11 y : P 1 c r U R g.
crimſon coloured mantle, the ſymbol of his anger.
As ſoon as he ſaw me, he enquired where my pri-
foner was 2 and at the ſame inſtant ordered the
executioner to attend. My lord, ſays I, throwing
myſelf at his feet, ſomething very extraordinary has
happened with regard to the perſon you yeſterday
committed to my cuſtody. Will your majeſty per-
mit me to explain it? Theſe words threw him into
a paſſion. I ſwear, cried he, by the ſoul of my an-
ceſtors, that thy head ſhall pay for the priſoner, if
thou haſt ſuffered him to eſcape. Both my life and
his are at your majeſty's diſpoſal: vouchſafe to hear
me. Speak, ſaid he. I then related to the prince,
in what manner that man had ſaved my life at Da-
maſcus; that, deſirous to diſcharge the obligation I
lay under to him, I had offered him his liberty; but
that he had refuſed it, from the fear of expoſing me
to death. My lord, added I, he is not guilty; a
man of ſuch generous ſentiments cannot be ſo.
Some baſe detračtors have calumniated him to you;
and he is become the unfortunate vićtim of their ha-
tred and envy. The caliph appeared affected, and
having naturally a greatneſs of ſoul, could not help
admiring the condućt of my friend. I pardon him,
ſaid Mamoun, on thy account: go, carry him this
good news, and bring him to me. I threw myſelf
at the prince's feet, kiſſed them, and made my ac-
knowledgments in the ſtrongeſt terms my gratitude
could ſuggeſt: I then conducted my priſoner into the
caliph's preſence. The monarch ordered him to be
- - clothed
-
:

<page 442>
FR 1 E N Dsh IP and For G 1 v E N Ess. 159
º
clothed with a robe of honour, preſented him with
ten horſes, ten mules, and ten camels, out of his
own ſtables; to all which favourshe added a purſe of
ten thouſand ſequins for the expences of his journey,
and gave him a letter of recommendation to the go-
vernor of Damaſcus.” - - " --
MR s. E G E R T o N.
To ſhew you, that I entirely approve and admire
the ſentiments of your father on the duties of Friend-
... ſhip, and the liberal principles by which it is ac-
tuated, I will read you the little hiſtory of two
French peaſants. I hope when you have heard it,
you will admire and imitate the diſintereſted, gene-
rous Colin, while you avoid and pity the condućt of
the ſimple, miſled Jeanot.
FRIEND SHIP AND FORGIVEN ESS:
Or J E A No T and Co L I N.
MANY perſons worthy of credit have ſeen
Jeanot and Colin at ſchool, at the town of Iſſoir,
in Auvergne, a place celebrated through the whole
world for its college and its kettles. Jeanot was
the ſon of a horſe-dealer of high renown, and Colin
derived his birth from an able huſbandman, who
cultivated a neighbouring farm, and who, after he
had paid the taxes, was not ſuperabundantly rich at
the year's end,
---
- *
Jeanot

<page 443>
16o T. H. F. F. A. M. I. L. Y - P I C T U R E.
r
Jeanot and Colin were comely lads for Au-
vergneſe, and had a great friendſhip for each other;
they had their little ſchemes and their tete-à-têtes,
upon which they refle&ted with pleaſure, even when
in other company. -
The time of their being at ſchool was nearly ex-
pired, when a taylor brought Jeanot a ſuit of figured
velvet, with a letter direéted to Monſieur de la
Jeanotiere. Colin admired the cloaths without
envy, but Jeanot aſſumed an air of ſuperiority, which
grieved him to the heart. From this moment Jea-
not threw aſide his book, was continually gazing in
the looking-glaſs, and ſeemed to deſpiſe the world.
Some time after a valet came poſt with another
letter direéted to Monſieur le Marquis de la Jano-
tiere, which contained an order from Monſieur his
father for his coming to Paris. Jeanot, as he got.
into the chaiſe, took Colin by the hand, and gave
him a ſmile of protection with the air of a great
man. Colin, touched with a ſenſe of his own in-
feriority, melted into tears; and Jeanot drove away
in all the glory of his new dignity.
Thoſe readers who love to comprehend every
thing as they go on, ſhould be informed, that Jea-
not, the father, had ſuddenly acquired an immenſe
fortune. If it ſhould be aſked how immenſe for-
tunes are acquired, the anſwer is ready, by being
fortunate. - Monſieur Jeanot was a likely fellow,
and madame was by no means without her charms.
It happened that, whilſt ſhe was ſtill in her bloom,
º they

<page 444>
FR 1 END SH 1 P and F o RC 1 v E N ess. 161
they were brought to Paris by a law-ſuit, which to-
tally ruined them; but Fortune, who delights in
the capricious abaſement and exaltation of mankind,
juſt then threw them in the way of a commiſſary;
who had contračted to furniſh the military hoſpi-
tals during the war. This commiſſary was a man
of talents, and could boaſt of having killed more
ſoldiers in one year, than gun-powder had killed in
ten. The wife of this extraordinary perſon was
ſmitten with Jeanot, whilſt he himſelf was ſmitten
with Jeanot's wife. Jeanot ſoon came in for a
fhare of the contract. When once a man gets into
the middle of the ſtream, the tide will carry him
along; thus Commiſſaries and Contractors get im-
menſe wealth without trouble. Such was the good
fortune of Jeanot the father, who became imme-
diately Monſieur de la Janotiere ; and ſoon after
having bought a marquiſate, which at once enno-
bled him and his children, he ſent for the marquis
his ſon from ſchool, that he might place him among
the beau-monde of Paris. -
Colin, who remembered his old ſchool-fellow
with a tender ſenſibility, wrote him a few lines of
congratulation: the new Marquis ſent no anſwer,
and Colin fell ſick with grief. - -
In the mean time the father and mother procured
a tutor for their ſon; this tutor was a man of a
genteel appearance, but who knew little, and con-
ſequently could teach little. The father was deſi-
rous the ſon ſhould learn Latin; the mother op-
poſed

<page 445>
162 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
poſed it. After much debate, it was agreed that
the queſtion ſhould be referred to a certain cele-
brated author. “Sir,” ſaid the maſter of the houſe,
“ as you are a Latin ſcholar, and a man of the
world”—“I a Latin ſcholar !” ſays the bel eſprit,
“I don’t know a word of the language; and ſo
much the better for me ; thoſe people certainly
fpeak their own language beſt, whoſe attention is
not divided among ſeveral. Conſider only the la-
dies, how much more pleaſing is their wit than
ours! their letters are written with infinitely more
elegance; and this ſuperiority is entirely owing to
their not having learned Latin.”
“Very well,” ſays madame, “am I not then in
the right? I would have my ſon a man of wit; I
would have him make a figure in the world, and
you ſee plainly that if he learn Latin he will be
undone. Are operas and plays, I’d fain know, per-
formed in Latin Do the lawyers ſpeak Latin at
the bar or do young gentlemen make love in
Latin ** - -
Monſieur de la Janotiere being wholly unable to
reſiſt this amazing force of argument, immediately
paſſed ſentence, and it was concluded that the young
Marquis ſhould not loſe his time in getting ac-
quainted with Cicero, Horace, and Virgil.
But then what ſhall he learn ? for, certainly, he
muſt learn ſomething. May he not be taught a
little geography —“Cf what ſervice will that be,”
ſays the tutor? “When the Marquis ſhall think
proper
-

<page 446>
FR 1 EN D ship and for G 1 v E N Ess. 163
n
proper to viſit his eſtates, do you think the poſtilions
will not know the road take my word for it, they
are in no danger of loſing their way. A man of
faſhion can travel very well without a quadrant,
and go with great conveniency from Paris to Au-
vergne, without knowing what latitude he is in.”
“You are certainly right,” ſays the father; “but
I have heard ſomething of a fine ſcience, which, I
think, they call Aſtronomy.”—“”Tis pity,” ſays
the tutor, “you ever heard of it all; what occaſion
is there for people in this world to regulate their
motions by the ſtars? Is it fit that a young Mar-
quis ſhould be fatigued to death by the calculation
of an eclipſe, when he may find the time exactly
by conſulting an almanack; which will alſo ac-
quaint him with all the moveable feaſts, the age of
the moon, and the age of every ſovereign prince
in Europe.”
Madame entirely agreed; the Marquis her ſon
was overjoyed, and the father was in ſuſpence.
“What then, ſays he, muſt my ſon learn ?” “To
be amiable,” replied the friend they had conſulted,
“ if he knows the art of pleaſing, he knows all that
is worth knowing; and this art he cannot fail of
learning under his mother's eye, though neither ſhe
nor you ſhould give yourſelves the leaſt trouble
about it.” l
Madame was delighted with this compliment, and
embraced the dunce who had paid it. “ Ah! Sir,
ſaid ſhe, it is eaſy to diſcover that you are wiſer than
- --- the
!

<page 447>
164 - T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
the world; my ſon will be wholly indebted to you
for his education. But, perhaps, after all, it would
not be amiſs for him to know a little of Hiſtory.”—
Alas, madam, replied the oracle, what good can
that do him? Certainly, no hiſtory is either uſeful or
pleaſing but that of the day. All ancient hiſtory,
as a certain author has juſtly obſerved, is nothing
more than fable artfully put together; and as for
modern hiſtory, it is a chaos impoſſible to be re-
duced to order. Of what importance is it to your
ſon, that Charlemagne inſtituted the twelve peers of
France : And that his ſon had an impediment in his
ſpeech And never was obſervation more juſt, than
that the young mind is too often buried under a load
of uſeleſs learning, by which its native powers are
firſt reſtrained, and then deſtroyed; but of all that is
abſurd among what are called the ſciences, the moſt
abſurd is Geometry. The obječts of Geometry are
ſurfaces, lines, and points, which have no exiſtence
in nature; and a hundred curve lines are fancied
between a circle and a ſtrait line that touches it,
though in reality there is not room for a ſtraw. In
ſhort, Geometry is no better than a dull joke. . .
Though Monſieur and Madame ſcarce underſtood
one word of this ingenious argument againſt Geo-
metry, it made a great impreſſion, and they declared
themſelves entirely of the tutor's mind. . :
• A noble Lord, continued the Tutor, like Mon-
ſieur le Marquis, ought not to puzzle his brain with
vain ſpeculation, Should he have occaſion for the
- moſt.

<page 448>
f R1 END s h IP and for G 1 v E N ess. 16;
º
ty
*
-
moſt ſublime part of this ſcience, to lay down a plan
of his eſtates, he may have them ſurveyed for a little
money; would he trace his nobility back to the re-
moteſt ages, he may, without difficulty, find a Be-
medićtine monk that will do it. The ſame may be
ſaid of all the arts. A young Lord of illuſtrious
birth is neither a painter, a muſician, an architect,
nor a ſtatuary; but he makes all theſe arts flouriſh
by his munificence; and it is certainly better to pa-
tronize than pračtiſe them. It is enough for the
Marquis to have taſte; it is the duty of artiſts to
exert their ſkill for his pleaſure and advantage; it
has been well ſaid that perſons of quality, I mean
thoſe who are very rich, know all things without
learning any; their taſte enables them to judge of
every thing for which they can pay.
You have obſerved, madam, ſays he, that the
great purpoſe of life is to pleaſe; but will any man
pretend that this purpoſe can be anſwered by the
feiences Who is there that would think of men-
tioning Geometry in good company Would any
body aſk a gentleman what ſtar roſe in a morning
with the ſun ?—Certainly not, replied the Mar-
chioneſs, whoſe charms had introduced her to the
beau monde; and it is by no means fit that my ſon
ſhould cramp his genius by the ſtudy of all this
trumpery. But what is it that we ſhall teach him
For certainly, as his father has obſerved, a young
gentleman ought to be qualified to ſhine upon occa-
ſion. I remember to have heard an Abbé ſay, that
- - there

<page 449>
I66 T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
there was one ſcience extremely agreeable and
genteel; I cannot recollect the name of it, but it.
began with a B. With a B, madam? ſays the ge-
nius, it could not be Botany!—No, replied the
lady, it was not botany, yet it ended ſomething like
that too. O ! I know what it was, ſays he, it was
Blaſonry; but I aſſure you it is by no means the
mode. At preſent, the ſtudy of heraldry would be
infinite, for there is not a barber that has not his
coat of arms; and when a thing becomes common,
you know people of faſhion ſhould always diſregard
it.—Upon the whole, this ſagacious and illuſtrious
ſociety having fairly diſcuſſed all the ſciences, it was
determined that Monſieur le Marquis de la Janotiere
fhould learn to dance. .
Nature, however, which indeed does every thing,
had given this flower of nobility a talent which very
ſoon diſplayed itſelf with aſtoniſhing ſucceſs. This
happy talent was that of ſinging a good ſong, the graces
of youth, joined to ſo füperior an endowment, drew
attention, and he was a favourite among the ladies.
Having his head full of ſongs, he formed new ones out
of old, and was continually repeating them ; but as
his verſes had commonly a foot too little, or too
much, he was at the expence of having them cor-
rečted; and he at laſt got into the literary annals of
the time. " . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Marchioneſs confidering herſelf as the pa-
troneſs of wit, gave ſuppers to the wits of the town;
the young man's head was turned; he acquired the
: - art
. . . ;

<page 450>
FRIEND s h IP and For G 1 v E N ess. 167
art of ſpeaking without knowing what he would ſay,
and by habit became perfect in being fit for nothing.
When his father found him thus amazingly elo-
quent, he very much regretted that he had not taught
him Latin, as he then might have purchaſed for him
a conſiderable department in the law. His mother,
who looked ſtill higher, undertook to get him a
regiment, and in the mean time the young gentle-
man himſelf thought fit to make love.
Love ſometimes coſts more than a regiment; his
expences were very great; and his parents run out
their fortune by living like people of the firſt qua-
lity.
But as the ſtate of their finances was known only
to themſelves, a young widow of great rank, but
fmall fortune, ſuppoſing them to be very opulent,
reſolved to ſecure their riches, by making the young
Marquis her huſband.
She accordingly threw out a lure, and brought
him to her houſe ; ſhe convinced him that he was
by no means indifferent to her; led him on by de-
grees; and at length ſo faſcinated him by her wiles
and her charms, that the conqueſt was compleat.
At the ſame time ſhe gave him ſo many commenda-
tions, and ſo much good advice, that the father
and mother conſidered her as the beſt friend they
Jhad in the world. - -
An old lady in the neighbourhood propoſed the
marriage on the part of the widow, and the father
and

<page 451>
168 T H E F A M I l y P 1 c T U R e.
w
and mother, dazzled with the ſplendor of ſuch an
alliance, accepted the propoſition with joy.
. He was kneeling one morning at the feet of the
dear angel, when a ſervant of the Marchioneſs his
mother arrived in great haſte, and with looks as
wild as if he had ſeen an apparition: I am come,
ſays he, with news very different from what you
, think of; the Sheriff's officers are in poſſeſſion of
my Lord's houſe, they have ſeized his goods, talk
of ſecuring his perſon, and, as I have not a moment
to loſe, I am going to ſecure my wages. .
Don't be in ſuch a hurry, ſays the Marquis, let
us ſee a little into this affair.—Do, ſays the widow,
run this inſtant, and puniſh the wretches for their
inſolence, - º
He haſted, and found that his father was already
carried to priſon, and the ſervants were gone off,
each having carried away what he could lay his
Ihands upon. He ſaw his mother totally deſerted,
without ſuccour and without comfort, drowned in
tears, with nothing left but the remembrance of
her fortune, her beauty, her follies, and her faults.
After her ſon had wept with her till the tumult of
his mind a little ſubſided, and he was able to ſpeak,
he endeavoured to alleviate her diſtreſs by a refle&tion
that had ſoothed his own. 'Do not let us deſpair,
fays he, the widow whom I was about to marry, is
yet more generous than rich ; I will anſwer for all
* that is in her power; I'll fly to her this moment, and
bring her hither.
He

<page 452>
FR I E N D S H IP and F o R G 1 v E N Ess. 169
He flew to his miſtreſs, and found her tete-a-
tete with a handſome young officer.—What is it
you, Monſieur de la Janotiere —ſays ſhe—what in
the name of wonder have you to do here How
could you think of leaving your poor mother Go
back to her, for heaven's ſake, and tell her how
forry I am for her misfortune. I always wiſhed her
well; and as my woman is going away, I ſhall not
think of another till I have given her the refuſal or
the place.—My good lad, ſaid the officer, you ſeem
to be well made ; if you will enter into my corps,
I will enliſt you upon good terms. . . . .
The Marquis, ſtruck ſpeechleſs with rage and in-
dignation, burſt away without reply, to his old tutor,
to pour his ſorrows into his boſom, and derive com-
fort from his advice. The tutor propoſed that he
ſhould undertake the education of children. Alas,
ſays the Marquis, I know nothing — you have
taught me nothing—and that has been the ſource
of all my misfortunes.—Write novels, ſays another;
it is an excellent expedient to get money.
Sunk deeper in deſpair than ever, his laſt reſource
was to a monk who had been his mother's confeſſor.
The Monk ran to him in a rapture of ſurprize and
joy; Monſieur le Marquis! what do you do here on
foot where is your coach The unhappy youth
replied by giving him an account of the ruin of his
family. The Monk became grave, indifferent, and
important: my ſon, ſaid he, we may now ſee plainly
what heaven intended for you; riches ſerve only to
Vol. II. I corrupt

<page 453>
170 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T & R. E.
corrupt the heart: heaven has therefore reduced you
to beggary; my ſon, adieu ! a lady of faſhion is now
waiting for me at court. -
The poor Marquis, as he ſtood ruminating in the
ſtreet, ſtupified with misfortune, ſaw a kind of cover-
ed carriage coming rumbling along, followed by wag-
gons heavily laden. In this vehicle ſat a young man,
coarſely clad, with a freſh coloured girl by his ſide.
Bleſs my ſoul, ſays he, ſurely this is Jeanot! The
Marquis ſtarted, looked up, and the driver inſtantly
ftopped. Yes, by my faith, ſaid he, it is even
Jeanot himſelf; and inſtantly caught him in his arms.
Jeanot was covered with confuſion and tears. You
have forſaken me, ſays Colin, but I am determined
to love you for all that. Jeanot told him a part of
his hiſtory. Come home with me, ſaid Colin, you
ſhall tell the reſt at your leiſure; ſalute my little
wife; this is ſhe ; let us make haſte to dinner.
Pray, ſays Jeanot, what is all this baggage; does
it belong to you ? Yes, ſays Colin, to me and my
wife, we are juſt come out of the country; I am at
the head of a great manufactory; I married the
daughter of a man who had acquired very conſider-
able ſubſtance; we work hard, providence has
bleſſed our endeavours, we continue to get forward
in the world, are happy in ourſelves, and have it in
our power to affiſt our friend Jeanot. Be a Marquis
no longer; all the great folks in the world are not
worth one true friend: you ſhall live with me in the
country, you ſhall learn my trade, and be my part-
3. - her,
:

<page 454>
FRIEND s H 1 P and For G 1 v E N Ess. 117
t
ner, and we will live chearfully in the obſcure but
happy retreat where we were born.
Jeanot heard this propoſal with ſenſations not to
be deſcribed ; his heart was divided between grief
and joy, tenderneſs and ſhame; and, turning to
Colin, he ſaid, in a low voice, “when all my gay
friends have deſerted me, Colin, whom I injuriouſly
negle&ted, has afforded me that comfort which I did
not deſerve.” -
What a le&ture is this for thoſe who are entering
into life The virtue of Colin, called out that virtue
which lay hidden in the breaſt of Jeanot, and which
all his habits of folly and diffipation had not deſtroyed.
He felt a ſecret repugnance to deſert his father and
mother. We will take care of them, ſays Colin.
Jeanot at length married Colin’s fifter, who made
him happy; and Jeanot the father, and Jeanot the
mother, and Jeanot the ſon, were made ſenſible
that happineſs is not to be found in vanity.
D I A L O G U E XVII.
M R. E. G E R T os.
A CERTAIN honeſt peaſant was poſſeſſed of
a fine watchful houſe-dog; a friend to his ſer-
vants, no enemy to his gueſts, and the terror of
thieves. His fidelity was ſo well known in the neigh-
I 2 bourhood,

<page 455>
172 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 C T U R E.
bourhood, that, after a few ſucceſsleſs attempts, not
a ſingle rogue had, for many years, dared to come
within the ſphere of this excellent centinel.
One evening, as the good man and his wife ſat
round the fire, talking of their oeconomy, “I have
been thinking, wife, ſays the farmer, that this great
dog of our's is an uſeleſs expence to us: he takes a
deal of keeping, his collars and chains coſt money,
we ſhall ſoon be obliged to build him a new kennel,
our brooms are worn out in keeping him clean,
beſide many a truſs of ſtraw that ſerves for his bed;
and all this in a place where, for many years paſt, we
have neither heard of murder nor theft,” “I have
long thought of the ſame thing, replied the wife;
our girls have other buſineſs than to wait on an idle
creature; beſides, here is my little favourite can
bark as loud as the largeſt maſtiff.”
Sentence was quickly paſſed, and the faithful cen-
tinel was put to death; but he was ſcarce covered
with earth, before a band of thieves were gathered
to conſult on the beſt means to execute their deſign.
Night came on; they broke into the houſe, and while -
the pampered favourite ſlept upon his cuſhion, rob-
bed the farmer of all his money and furniture.
I have no doubt, my children, you all underſtand
the moral of this fable, and that you think the peaſant
and his wife deſerved their puniſhment. Ingratitude
is a vice which, like lying, every body is aſhamed
of, and yet almoſt every body practiſes. The fact
is, people deceive themſelves in ſumming up the
I aCCOunt

<page 456>
I N G R A T L T U D E. 173
account of reciprocal obligation; they omit ſo many
particulars which they ought punétually to remem-
ber, and inſert ſo many which it becomes them to .
forget, that the ballance is but too generally er-
roneous. It is our duty to be equally exact in
debts of gratitude as in thoſe of trade; nay more ſo,
for an omiſſion of pecuniary commerce may ſome-
times be honourably accommodated, but the ſin of
ingratitude can never be expiated.
Philip of Macedon ſent one of his courtiers on a
voyage to tranſačt an affair of ſome conſequence,
but a ſtorm coming on, the courtier was ſhip-
wrecked, and muſt indubitably have periſhed, had
it not been for the hoſpitality of a peaſant who lived
on the ſea-ſhore, and who ventured his own life in
a ſmall boat, to preſerve that of a diſtreſſed ſtranger.
By this peaſant the courtier was taken up, brought to
his own houſe, recovered, and treated with the utmoſt
humanity; and after ſtaying with him a month,
kindly diſmiſſed and furniſhed with money to bear
his expences. At his return, the King was made
acquainted with the peril he had been in, and the
diſtreſs he had undergone, but not with the benefits
he had received. Philip, moved with the ſtory, told
him he would remember his fidelity, and the dangers
he had ſuffered for his ſake. The courtier taking
advantage of the King's promiſe, told him he had
obſerved a beautiful little farm on the ſea-coaſt, that
exačtly ſuited his taſte, on the very ſpot where he had
been wrecked, and befought him to beſtow it on him
I 3 3S

<page 457>
I 74. T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
as a monument of his eſcape, and his Majeſty's
bounty. Accordingly Philip wrote to Pauſanias,
the governor of the province, to put him in poſſeſſion
of the deſired farm. The poor peaſant, who had ſo
generouſly ſaved the life of this wretch, being rob-
bed of his right, and ſtung with the ingratitude of
of the aët, immediately made a journey to the court
of Philip, applied himſelf to the King, and related
his ſtory. Philip amazed and enraged at the ingra-
titude of his villainous courtier, had him ſeized in-
ſtantly, and marked him in the forehead with theſe
words, The UN GRATEFUL GUEST, and reſtored
the farm to its proper owner. -
-
M Iss For R E S T E R.
This courtier was a very wicked man, Sir.
M R. Egerton.
Very true, my dear Miſs Forreſter, but ingraft-
tude is always wickedneſs.
MR. For R E s T E R.
If I had been King Philip, I would have taken off
his head, he ſhould never have been ſhip-wrecked
again. -
MRs. E G E R to N.
In my opinion, Sir, his puniſhment was far more
ſevere as it was. But come, let us liſten to the ſtory
of the Derviſe and Abdallah.
IN-
&

<page 458>
1 N G R A T L T U D E. 175
I N G R A T L T U D F,
Or the CAN D L E S T 1 c k.
A Derviſe, venerable by his age, fell ill in the
houſe of a woman who had been long a widow, and
lived in extreme poverty in the ſuburbs of Balfora.
He was ſo touched with the aſſiduity and zeal with
which ſhe had aſſiſted him, that at his departure he
ſaid, -“ I have remarked that you have wherewith
to ſubſiſt alone, but that you have not ſufficient
to ſhare with your only ſon, the young Abdallah.
If you will truſt him to me, I will endeavour to ac-
knowledge, in his perſon, the obligations I am under
for your great care of me.” The widow received
his propoſal with joy; and the Derviſe departed with
the young man, informing her, that they ſhould
perform a journey which would laſt near two years.
They travelled; the Derviſe kept him in affluence,
gave him excellent inſtructions, cured him of a dan-
gerous diſeaſe with which he had been attacked; in
fine, he took the ſame care of him, as if he had been
his own ſon. Abdallah, a hundred times teſtified
his gratitude for all his bounties; but the old man
always anſwered, “my ſon, it is by actions that
gratitude is proved; we ſhall ſee in proper time and
place, whether you are as grateful as you profeſs to
be.”
One day, in a ſolitary place, the Derviſe ſaid to
Abdallah, “My ſon, we are now at the end of our
I 4 - journey;

<page 459>
176 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
journey; I ſhall employ my prayers to obtain from
heaven, that the earth may open and make an en-
trance wide enough to permit thee to deſcend into
a place, where thou wilt find one of the greateſt
treaſures that the earth incloſes in her bowels. Haſt
thou courage to deſcend into this ſubterraneous
cave ** Abdallah declared he might depend upon
his obedience and zeal. The Derviſe then lighted
a ſmall fire, into which he caſt a perfume; then
read and prayed for ſome moments, when the earth
opened:—“Thou mayeſt now enter, my dear Ab-
dallah. Remember, ſaid the Derviſe, that it is in thy
power to do me a great ſervice, and that this is,
perhaps, the only opportunity thou canſt ever have
of teſtifying thy gratitude. Be not dazzled by the
riches thou wilt find there; but think only of ſeizing
upon an iron candleſtick with twelve branches,
which thou wilt find cloſe to a door, and which is
abſolutely neceſſary to me; bring it up to me im–
mediately.” Abdallah promiſed, and deſcended
boldly into the cave. But forgetting what had been
expreſsly recommended to him, whilſt he was filling
his veſt and his boſom with gold and jewels, the open-
ing by which he entered, cloſed. He had, how-
ever, preſence of mind enough to ſeize upon the
iron candleſtick, and though his ſituation was very
terrible, he did not abandon himſelf to deſpair, but
refle&ted in what manner he ſhould get out of a place
which might become his grave. Apprehending that
the cave had cloſed becauſe he had not followed the
order

<page 460>
I ºr G R A T I T U D. E. 177
r
order of the Derviſe, he recalled to memory the
care and goodneſs he had been loaded with, re-
proached himſelf with his ingratitude, and finiſhed his
meditation by humbling himſelf in prayer. At
length, after much inquietude and pain, he was for-
tunate enough to find a narrow paſſage which di-
rečted him out; though it was not till he had per-
ſevered for a confiderable way, that he perceived a
ſmall opening covered with briars and thorns,
through which he returned to the light of the ſun.
He looked on all ſides to diſcover the Derviſe, but in
vain. He wiſhed to deliver him the iron candleſtick,
and formed a deſign of quitting him, being rich
enough with what he had taken out of the cavern, to .
live in affluence without his affiſtance.
Not perceiving the Derviſe, nor remembering any
of the places through which he had paſſed, he went on
as fortune ſeemed to direct, and was ſoon extremely
aſtoniſhed to find himſelf oppoſite to his mother’s
houſe, from which he imagined he was at a great
diſtance. She immediately enquired after the holy
Derviſe. Abdallah told her frankly what had hap-
pened to him, and the danger he had ran to ſatisfy
his ambitious deſires. He afterwards produced to
her the riches with which he was loaded. His
mother concluded, upon the fight of them, that the
Derviſe deſigned only to make trial of his courage
and obedience; and that they had a right to the
happineſs which fortune had poured upon them.
Doubtleſs, added ſhe, ſuch was the intention of the
I 5 holy

<page 461>
178 T H E F A M 1 ly P 1 c T U R E.
holy Derviſe. Whilſt, with avidity, they con-
templated upon theſe treaſures, whilſt dazzled with
their luſtre, and forming a thouſand projećts, they va-
niſhed from before their eyes. Then it was that
Abdallah moſt ſincerely reproached himſelf with in-
gratitude and diſobedience; and, obſerving that the
iron candleſtick had reſiſted the enchantment, or
rather that the puniſhment is juſt which thoſe deſerve
who do not execute what they promiſe, he ſaid,
proſtrating himſelf-" What I deſerve has happened
to me; I have loſt what I had deſigned to keep, and
the candleſtick which I intended to deliver up, re-
mains with me: it is a proof, that this rightly be-
longs to him, and that the reſt was unjuſtly acquired.”
He finiſhed with theſe words, and placed the candle-
{tick in the midſt of their little houſe.
When night came on, without refle&ting upon it,
he placed a light in this candleſtick. Immediately
they ſaw a Derviſe, who turned round for an hour,
and diſappeared, after having thrown them an
aſper *. This candleſtick had twelve branches:
Abdallah, who had been now meditating all day
upon what he had ſeen in the night, was willing to
know what would happen the next night, if he
ſhould put a light into each branch; he did ſo, and
twelve derviſes appeared at the inſtant. Theſe
turned round alſo for an hour, and each of them
threw an aſper, as they diſappeared. He repeated
every night the ſame ceremony; which had always
* A ſmall ſilver coin.
the
*
>

<page 462>
• I N G R A T I T U D E. ' 179
the ſame ſucceſs; but he never could make it ſuc-
ceed more than once in twenty-four hours. So
trifling a ſum was enough for ſubſiſtence: there was
a time when they would not have deſired more to be
made happy; but it was not confiderable enough to
change their fortune.—It is dangerous for the ima-
gination to be fixed upon the idea of riches. The
ſight of what he flattered himſelf he ſhould poſſeſs,
and, the projećts he had formed, had left ſuch pro-
found traces in his mind, as nothing could efface.
Reflecting on the ſmall advantage he drew from the
candleſtick, he reſolved to carry it back to the Der-
viſe, in hopes that he might obtain of him the trea-
ſure he had ſeen, or at leaſt recover the riches which
had vaniſhed, by reſtoring to him what he had teſti-
fied ſo earneſt a deſire for. Remembering his name,
and that of the city where he inhabited, he departed
immediately for Magrebi, carrying with him the
candleſtick; taking care to light it every night, as
by that means he was furniſhed with neceſſaries on
the road, without being obliged to implore the com-
paſſion of the faithful. When he arrived at Magrebi,
his firſt care was to enquire at what houſe, or in
what convent Abounadar lodged. Every body was.
able to tell him his habitation. He repaired thither
directly, and found fifty porters at his gate, each
with a golden-headed ſtaff in his hands. The court
of his palace was filled with domeſtics and ſlaves;.
in fine, no reſidence of a Prince could expoſe to
view greater magnificence. Abdallah, ſtruck with.
I 6. aſtoniſh-

<page 463>
180 T H E F A M I L Y. P R C T U R E.
aſtoniſhment and admiration, feared to proceed.
Certainly, thought he, I either explained myſelf
wrong, or thoſe to whom I addreſſed myſelf de-
ſigned to make a jeſt of me, becauſe I am a ſtranger.
This the habitation of a Derviſe ! It is that of a
King ! In this embarraſſment a perſon approached
him, and ſaid, Abdallah, thou art welcome ; my
maſter, Abounadar, has long expedied thee. He was
then conducted to a magnificent pavilion, where the
Derviſe was ſeated. Abdallah, ſtruck with the
ſplendor which he beheld on all ſides, would have
proſtrated himſelf at his feet, but Abounadar pre-
vented him; and, when he would have made a merit
of reſtoring the candleſtick, “ Thou art ungrateful,
ſaid he 5 doſt thou imagine that I am to be impoſed
on 2 I am not ignorant of thy thoughts. Hadſt
thou known the value of this candleſtick, never
wouldſt thou have brought it to me ! I ſhall make
thee ſenſible of its true uſe.” Immediately he placed
a light in each of its branches; and when the twelve
derviſes had turned round for ſome time, gave each
of them a touch with a cane, and in a moment they
were converted into twelve heaps of ſequins”, dia-
monds, and other precious ſtones. “ This, ſaid
he, is the proper uſe to be made of this marvellous
candleſtick. As to me, I never deſired it, but as a
curioſity in my cabinet; as a taliſman compoſed by a
Sage whom I revere; and I am pleaſed to expoſe it
ſometimes to thoſe who come to viſit me. To prove
* A Turkiſh gold coin.
|

<page 464>
I N G R A T I T Uſ D. E. 18r
to thee that curioſity was the motive of my ſearch
for it, here are the keys of my magazines, open
them, and judge of my treaſures; tell me if the
moſt inſatiable miſer would not be ſatisfied with
them.” Abdallah obeyed him; he examined twelve
magazines of great extent, and they produced new
deſires. The regret of having reſtored the candle-
ftick, without finding out the uſe of it, pierced the
heart of Abdallah. Abounadar ſeemed not to per-
ceive it; loaded him with careſſes, kept him ſome
days in his houſe, and commanded that he ſhould be
treated as himſelf. At the eve of the day which he
had fixed for his departure, he ſaid to him, “ Ab-
dallah, my ſon, I believe, by what has happened to
thee, thou art cured of the frightful vice of in-
gratitude; however, I owe thee a mark of my af-
fe&tion, for having undertaken ſo long a journey,
with a view of bringing me what I deſired ; thou
mayeſt depart, I ſhall detain thee no longer. To-
morrow, at the gate of my palace, thou ſhalt find
one of my horſes to carry thee; I make thee a pre-
£ent of it, as well as of a ſlave who ſhall condućt
thee home; and two camels loaded with ſuch gold
and jewels, as thou ſhalt chuſe for thyſelf out of
my treaſures.” Abdallah anſwered with all that an
avaritious heart could expreſs, when its paſſion was
ſatisfied; and retired to reſt till the morning arrived,
which was fixed for his departure.
During the night he was ſtill agitated, without
being able to think of any thing but the candleſtick,
and

<page 465>
182 T H E F A M H L Y P I C T U R E.
and what it had produced. “I had it, ſaid he,
long in my power; Abounadar, without me, had
never been the poſſeſſor of it. What riſks did I not
run in the ſubterraneous vault: Why does he now
poſſeſs this treaſure of treaſures Becauſe I had the
probity, or rather the folly, to bring it back to him.
He profits by my labours, and the danger I have in-
curred in ſo long a journey. And what does he
give me in return ? Two camels loaded with gold
and jewels; in one moment the candleſtick will
furniſh him with ten times as much. It is Abou-
nadar who is ungrateful: What injury ſhall I do him
in taking away this candleſtick? None certainly ;
he is rich: and what are my poſſeſſions f" Such
ideas determined him, at length, to make every
poſſible attempt to ſeize upon the candleſtick. It
was not difficult, for Abounadar had truſted him
with the keys of his magazines. He knew where
the candleſtick was placed. He ſeized upon it, hid
it in the bottom of one of the ſacks, which he filled
with the gold and other treaſure he was allowed to
take, and ſecured that, as well as the reſt, upon one of
his camels. He had no other anxiety now than for
his departure; and after having haſtily bid adieu to
the generous Abounadar, delivered him his keys,
and departed with the horſe, the ſlave, and the two
camels. -
When he was at ſome diſtance from Balfora, he
ſold his ſlave, reſolving not to retain the witneſs of
his former poverty, nor of the ſource of his preſent
riches.

<page 466>
I N G R A T I T U D E. 183
riches. He bought another, and arrived without
obſtacle at his mother's. His firſt care was to place
the lading of his camels and the candleſtick in the
moſt private room of the houſe; and, in the impa-
tience to feed his eyes with ſuch opulence, he placed
lights immediately in the candleſtick: the twelve
derviſes appearing, he ſtruck each of them with a
cane with all his ſtrength, left he ſhould be failing in
the laws of the taliſman: but he had not remarked,
that Abounadar, when he ſtruck them, had the cane
in his left-hand. Abdallah, by a natural motion,
made uſe of his right hand; and the derviſes, inſtead
of becoming heaps of riches, immediately drew each
from beneath his robes a formidable club, with
which they ſtruck him repeatedly, and leaving him
half dead, diſappeared with all his treaſure, camels,
horſe, ſlave, and the candleſtick.
Thus was Abdallah puniſhed for unreaſonable
ambition, which perhaps might have been pardon-
able, if it had not been accompanied by an ingra-
titude as wicked as it was audacious.
F A N N Y.
Lord, Mamma, what a fooliſh man that Abdallah
was but it is a very pretty ſtory though.
MR s. E G E R T o N.
Yes, my dear, and I have another very pretty
ſtory for you, as you ſhall hear. It is of a Turk,
who was as remarkable for his generous gratitude,
- aS.

<page 467>
184 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c r U R e.
*
as the perſons whoſe hiſtory you have heard were
for the contrary.
G R A T I T U D E :
Or the Story of P1 et Ro Co R N A Ro, and the
grateful TU R K.
SIGNIOR Pietro Cornaro, an accompliſhed
young gentleman of an ancient family, and of con-
ſiderable fortune in the city of Ferrara in Italy, was
induced to travel through the provinces of his cele-
brated country, that he might ſatisfy curioſity, and
enrich his mind with ſuch acquirements; as would
diſtinguiſh him, and his acquiſitions, from perſons
leſs qualified and leſs ambitious of true renown. He
arrived at Leghorn, and took up lodgings at an inn-
Happening to be placed in an apartment that opened
to the public ſtreet, he would often walk about his
room, and by looking frequently upon the ſtreet,
divert himſelf agreeably with curious obſervations
on whatever paſſed before him. It is a cuſtom of
this town to give leave to the Turks, who ſerve
them as ſlaves, to ply as porters, or betake them-
ſelves to any other drudgery, obliging them to pay
their maſters a certain proportion of what they earn,
and permitting them to keep the overplus for their
own neceſſities. Directly oppoſite to Cornaro's
chamber was a bench, on which he often obſerved a
Turkiſh ſlave, thoughtful and dejected, leaning pen-
fively his head upon his hand, and dropping now and
then
!
!

<page 468>
G R A T L T U D. E. 185
º
then a ſilent tear, which he endeavoured ſecretly to
wipe away with his knot of ropes, the wretched badge
of his unfortunate employment. The frequent re-
petition of this mournful praćtice ſtruck the com-
paſſionate Italian; who, earneſtly deſirous to become
acquainted with the reaſon of his ſorrow, ſent at laſt
a meſſenger to bring him to his apartment; and
proceeded to demand the manner of his being taken,
and how long he had continued in a ſtate of ſlavery.
With wringing hands and elevated eyes, which
ſeemed to blame his ſtars for his unpitied miſery,
the diſconſolate Mahometan began his tale; and
watered his complaints with ſhowers of tears. “I
am, ſays he, an honeſt Muſſulman, neither the friend
of war or rapine, but become a prey to both. In an
unlucky viſit made to ſee an aged father, then in
health and peace at Cyprus, now perhaps laid cold
and breathleſs, was I taken by the Chriſtians, made
a ſlave, and reduced to what you now behold.”
Theſe ſad complaints were followed by a ſincere
and full account of every accident which had con-
curred to reduce him to this ſlavery. He informed
his kind enquirer, that he had ſorrowfully ſpent four
tedious years in that condition, and had left three
wives, two ſons, now men, and nine ſmall children,
to deplore his loſs; who were wholly deſtitute of the
means whereby to know his preſent condition. The
pitying breaſt of Signior Pietro, framed for tender
and compaſſionate emotions, melted generouſly with
fympathetic diſtreſs, to find the wretched and forlorn
ſituation,
A

<page 469>
186 T H E F A M I L. Y. P 1 c T U R E.
ſituation of this complaining Muſſulman; and after
aſking his name, and other queſtions, gave him mo-
ney, and diſmiſſed him, bidding him hope for ſuccour.
The diſconſolate Turk returned to the unwelcome
practice of his daily labours. The benevolent Pietro
ſeriouſly refle&ting on this unfortunate man’s ſorrow,
and conſidering that the will of Providence, or ſome
unſuſpected turn of fortune, might one day make the
caſe his own, might teach him, by the bitter proof of
ſad experience, how to pity others’ miſeries, reſolved
to do a noble ačt of Chriſtian charity; and making
intereſt with the governor, found means to get the
Turk releaſed, for the ranſom of about one hundred
and forty-five ducats. Never could more welcome
and ſurpriſing news rejoice the gladdened heart of
a human ſufferer, than that which brought the hap-
py Turk the news of his delivery. With rapid
tranſports of ungoverned joy, he fell upon his knees,
embraced the feet of his adored redeemer, and with
numerous vows of heart-felt gratitude, entreated
Signior Pietro to inform him how he might return,
twofold, that friendly ſum, which had ſo effectually
purchaſed his liberty. The generous Italian told
him he expected no return; yet if his ſoul was no-
ble, and would urge him to be grateful, he aſked
only the ſolemn promiſe, that he would, when ar-
rived in Turkey, redeem from ſlavery ſome Chriſ-
tian, whom he might think deſerving of it, and
ſend him back, to viſit once again his native coun-
try. The redeemed Turk, ſupplied with cloaths.
and
E

<page 470>
G R A T I T U D. E. 187
and all things neceſſary, embarked on board an
Engliſh veſſel bound for Aſia, and returned to his
habitation. About three months after the Maho-
metan's departure from Leghorn, Signior Pietro,
having been the greateſt part of that time at Ve-
nice, became enamoured of a beautiful young lady,
called Maria Margarita Delfino, who had for ſeveral
years reſided in that town, under the care of a ſub-
ſtantial merchant, youngeſt brother to her father,
who with her ſiſters, and the major part of her re-
lations, lived at Malta. Nothing could perſuade
the amorous Italian from a violent expreſſion of his
growing paſſion; he ſolicited her uncle with inceſ-
ſant importunities, and at laſt engaged him to per-
mit him to addreſs her upon this condition, that he
Íhould accompany his niece and him to Malta, there
to obtain her father's approbation of his perſon and
condition. This was promiſed, and he continued four
months, daily viſiting the obječt of his affection,
till he gained entirely her conſent to marry him,
when ſhe ſhould be authoriſed by her father's or—
ders. They embarked on board a veſſel bound for
Malta, and belonging to that iſland, which they
were almoſt arrived in ſight of, when a Turkiſh
galley met them, made undiſtinguiſhed prize of all
her cargo, and conſigning Signior Pietro, with
his miſtreſs and her uncle to ſlavery, landed them
at Smyrna, together with the valuable prize in which
they were taken. I forgot to mention, that the
three companions in this miſerable ſtate had changed
their
*

<page 471>
188 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E,
their cloaths for coarſe and rougher habits, when
they ſaw the danger they were falling into ; that,
being ſo diſguiſed, they might expect a ranſom at
a ſmaller charge, than otherwiſe would ſerve; ſo
that being taken with the common people, they
were like them, in chains, condućted to the public
market, where ſlaves are bought and ſold as ſheep
or oxen. Signior Pietro and the young lady's
uncle were tied together, and placed, with many
more, to wait the purchaſe of the higheſt bidder.
Oppoſite to them the poor unhappy lady ſtood, half
dead with fear and anguiſh, with a numerous crowd of
Chriſtian women, young and old, expecting every
moment to be bought, and torn away from any
hopes of ever ſeeing her lover and relations. At
laſt a young and graceful Turk came up to the diſ-
conſolate Maria, and bargaining immediately with
the proper officer, paid the money; then throw-
ing over her a veil he had brought on purpoſe,
took her from the reſt, and carried her away with
an uncommon ſatisfaction. Many a complaining
look did the deſpairing lady give her friends, who
anſwered her with all the mournful marks of ſilent
lamentation, and were now (eſpecially the lover)
ſo confounded with their miſery, that they ſtood
like ſtatues, looking ſtedfaſtly on the ground, tak-
ing little notice of the many purchaſers, who
walked about from place to place to view the per-
ſons of the wretched captives.
*
While

<page 472>
G R A T 1 t u D E. 189
While they ſtood thus fixed in contemplation
on the tranſitory bleſfings of this mortal life, there
came a Turk from ſtall to ſtall, enquiring earneſt-
ly of every officer what quality and country their
flaves were of ; and examining particularly the
flaves themſelves, he at laſt came to Signior
Pietro, who hanging down his head, the Turk
ſtooped forward to look upon his face; a courteſy
not often practiſed by thoſe barbarous people, who,
when a ſlave refuſes to hold up his face, will gene-
rally take them roughly by the chin, as when a
jockey looks into a horſe's mouth. The Turk no
ſooner ſaw the face, but ſtarting back in great ſur-
priſe, he raiſed his arms and eyes towards heaven,
and tranſported at the ſtrange diſcovery, cried out
aloud, “I thank thee, holy prophet, thou haſt guided
well my lucky footſteps.” The grieved Italian
looking up at this ſurpriſing exclamation, ſaw before
his eyes the very man whom, in Leghorn, he had
ſo kindly freed from ſlavery. No pen can deſcribe
the raptures he conceived at this happy meeting ;
ſwift embraces, followed their ſurpriſe, and when
the wonder of the Turk gave him leave to ſpeak
again, he thus addreſſed himſelf to Signior Pietro:
* I promiſed thee, ſaid he, thou beſt of Chriſtians,
that I would certainly redeem from ſervitude ſuch
ſlave as I ſhould judge ſhould more than any elſe de-
ferve that bleſfing; and now, thanks to Mahomet!
in thee have I diſcovered him.” Inſtantly he or-
dered the officer who guarded him to ſend ſome
perſon

<page 473>
190 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
perſon for his ranſom, and to condu&t him dire&tly
to his own houſe. The overjoyed Italian heard with
pleaſure the return of his gratitude; but told him,
“If he would be doubly kind, he might redeem
his friend who ſuffered with him, and they would
find ſome ſpeedy means to reimburſe his charges.”
The propoſition was embraced as ſoon as offered,
and a perſon being ſent to take the money, received
immediately the ranſom he demanded, and return-
ing to market, left the gentlemen to the care of their
redeemer. The Turk’s two ſons, when told of the
accident by which their father met the man to whom
he owed his liberty, expreſſed ſincere and grateful
joy, and bid them welcome with inexpreſſible civi-
lity. After having heard the manner of their being
taken, and their ſorrowful complaint for the loſs
of an unhappy virgin, whom they ſo ardently loved,
the eldeſt of the two ſons cried out with earneſtneſs,
“Now, by the religion of our holy prophet, and his
people, my father's houſe contains this very virgin P’
He proceeded to inform them, that he had bought that
morning a young Chriſtian ſlave, to wait upon his
mother and his father’sother wives; that ſhe had given
the ſame account as they had done of the particulars
of her captivity; that ſhe was then above, among
the women, and he would, for ſatisfaction, fetch
her down that very moment. It is eaſy to imagine
the diſorder of their boſoms, poſſeſſed alternately by
hope and fear, till doubt gave way to certainty, and
they
|

<page 474>
G R A T L T U D E. I 91.
they beheld the perſon they had ſo lately loſt, con-
dućted to their arms by him to whom the laws of
Turkey gave her as a lawful purchaſe.
They ſtaid a week with their landlord, who would
not reſt till he had ranſomed two men ſervants, and
a maid who waited on the lady: theſe, together
with as many of the goods and cloaths as he could
purchaſe from the Turk who took them, he beſtow-
ed again on their lawful owners, gave them a con-
ſiderable ſum of money, and contrived to get them
a paſſage on board a veſſel of Marſeilles, then bound .
to Malta. Signior Pietro, the young lady, and
her uncle, frequently endeavoured to oblige this ho-
neſt Turk to take their bills, or find ſome other
method to ſecure his money, but he perſiſted in a
poſitive refuſal of all their proffers, telling Signior
Pietro the debt was paid before it was contračted;
and would often lay his hand devoutly on his boſom,
and with a zealous ſigh repeat this proverb, “The
God of Heaven has given us plenty, that we may
give Him what need requires.” When they ar-
rived at Malta, Signior Pietro ſoon obtained the
conſent of the young lady's father, and their nup-
tials were quickly after celebrated.
D I A-

<page 475>
192 T H E F A M I. L. Y. P. I C T U R E.
D I A Lo G U E XVIII.
MR s. E G E R T o N.
OU remember, my dear Fanny, that you and
- your ſiſter had a little argument this morning,
at breakfaſt, concerning what children are hap-
pieſt and beſt, thoſe who are indulged in every
thing they deſire, or thoſe who are kept in awe,
and obliged to obey. Your ſiſter, who is older,
and conſequently has more knowledge than you,
told you, that it would, perhaps, be better for a
child to ſuffer under a tyrannical parent, than be
permitted to proceed in irregularities and pettiſh
humours, which children, if they were not taught
otherwiſe, would all do. Now, you ſhall hear the
hiſtory of Charlotte and Maria Woodland.
I N D U L G E N C E :
Or the Two S I s T E R s.
IT is a remark made by almoſt every one, that
it is the unhappineſs of human nature never to be
fatisfied. Philoſophers ſay this propenſity is the
ſpring of action, therefore neceſſary. They add,
likewiſe, that there is not that diſproportion in the
happineſs of rich and poor, wiſe and fooliſh, &c.
&c, as is generally imagined; nay, many have been
bold

<page 476>
1 N p u + c e N c E. 193
bold enough to aſſert, that content is more fre-
quently found with poverty and folly, than with
their oppoſites. It is not our purpoſe to enquire,
by a dry inveſtigation of the ſubjećt, into the truth
or falſehood of theſe opinions, but to leave the
reader to make what applications he pleaſes from
the following tale; wherein, if we are not miſtaken,
he will perceive the bad effects of falſe education
built upon falſe hopes, and the neceſſity of enuring
the youthful mind, even from the cradle, to croſſes.
—Would not any man laugh to ſee a petit maitre
attempting to carry the ſide of an ox, like a porter
How then can we expect a weak enervated mind
to ſupport thoſe worſt of loads, poverty and con-
tempt : -
Mr. and Mrs. Woodland, the parents of our he-
roines, were once ſervants in the ſame family, which
being a nobleman's, where they continually beheld
the utmoſt luxury, and what is called politeneſs and
good breeding, they ſoon acquired a ſufficient de-
gree of contempt for their origin, and their former
acquaintance. Having ſaved ſome money, they
married, quitted their ſervice, and betook them-
felves to buſineſs. Here Mrs. Woodland, who, of
the two, had the moſt violent ideas of gentility, in-
fiſted upon going into a genteel buſineſs, where they
might have cuſtomers that underſtood good man-
ners, and would pay a proper reſpect to people that
$new how to bemean themſelves; for, ſaid ſhe, I
can never condeſcend to ſtand behind a counter
. . Vo L. II. K curtſeying
4.
*

<page 477>
194 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
curtſeying and ſerving out farthing candles and half-
penny-worths of tobacco to every dirty wretch that
comes in. Accordingly they opened a lace-ſhop,
which being well ſituated, anſwered their expecta-
tions to the utmoſt.
Charlotte Woodland was their firſt child, and
the only one they had in eight years after their
marriage.—Every expence was run into for the
dreſs and education of this girl. She was pretty,
and her parents thought her a cherub. She had a
ready tongue, and they were continually repeating
her ſmart ſayings and witty anſwers. She learnt an
oath from her father, and vulgarity from her mother,
before ſhe was three years old; and her exploits
were told and retold to every one that viſited her
mainina, -
As they were mutually reſolved that their daughter
fhould not labour under that want of polite educa-
tion, which they had frequent occaſion to lament
in themſelves, they ſent her at ſix years old to a
boarding-ſchool, where ſhe pickt up French phraſes
without knowing anything of the language, and run
over the keys of a harpſichord without time, tune,
or ſentiment. She, however, could draw patterns
for her aprons and ruffles, acquired every new
{titch with alacrity, and danced with more eaſe than
the generality of her ſchool-fellows; ſhe was vain
as well as handſome, and therefore bent all her
thoughts upon the means of decorating her perſon.
- - - • * * PHer
º

<page 478>
1 N du L G E N c E. 195
.
Her parents, for the firſt eight or ten years of her
life, had very great ſucceſs in trade; enough, had
they been prudent, to have made what is uſually
called a pretty fortune. It was a pity that they had
conceived ſo violent a contempt for every thing that
was low and vulgar. Mrs. Woodland could not
exiſt without ſubſcribing to the Opera, Pantheon,
&c. &c. becauſe every body did ſo. She hated hor-
rid Engliſh cottons, and filthy Spital-field tabbies:
India chintz and French luſtrings were ſo elegant!
She was ready to faint at the idea of Buckingham-
fhire lace; crown quadrille gave her the vapours;
and being black-balled at the Coterie, threw her
into hyſterics for ſix weeks.
Mr. Woodland, though at firſt very attentive to
buſineſs, ſoon fell into the mode of keeping his horſe
and his miſtreſs, and in time became acquainted
with the box and dice. -
Laboured deſcriptions are diſguſting; the read-
er's imagination will eaſily ſuggeſt to him the ef-
fe&ts of this mutually fooliſh condu&. Mr. Wood-
land, in the thirteenth year after he began buſineſs,
became a bankrupt. Every one was amazed: the
reputation of the ſhop, and the appearance he had
ſo long ſupported, had deceived the world.
Happy for their ſecond daughter, was this afflic-
tion. Affected manners, the epithets of adulation,
and the proud airs of imagined conſequence, had
not yet vitiated the tender mind of Maria; who
obtained an advantage in the death of her mo-
K 2 ther.

<page 479>
196 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
ther. Parents with bad habits and ill regulated paſ-
ſions, are a misfortune rather than a bleſfing to thoſe
who, by obſerving, learn to imitate them. Maria
was peculiarly fortunate. A widow lady with a
ſmall income, and without children or relations,
whom chance had made acquainted with the fa-
mily, obſerved the natural ſweetneſs of Maria's
temper, and the acuteneſs of her underſtanding, and
took a fancy to her. This lady was the reverſe of
Mrs. Woodland; elegance and affability had ba-
niſhed pride and affečiation. She had ſtudied in
the ſchools of adverſity, and had learnt the heavenly
leſſons of humility and humanity.—Reader—if ever
thou ſhouldſt have children, God ſend them ſuch
an inſtructor.
Be not anxious to hear trifling incidents. Be-
hold Maria in the nineteenth year of her age, with
manners that might charm wiſdom herſelf, beauty
ſufficient to aſtoniſh a Reynolds, and married to a
huſband ſuch as thou wouldſt wiſh, hadſt thou an
angel for thy child. Surely when a pair like this
are companions, the road of matrimony is paved
with pleaſures. If thy wiſhes outrun thy wants, if
thy temper is pettiſh, and thy heart proud, if thou
haſt not the art of making thyſelf beloved, think of
Clermont and Maria with a ſigh, and endeavour to
reform. - -
Different was the deſtiny of the unfortunate Char-
lotte. Uſed to the flattery of inferiors, the ſword
of neglećt wounded ſortly the pride of fallen ſupe-
3 - riority.

<page 480>
I N D U L G E N C E. 197
riority. Her father, unable to place her to advan-
tage in the world, or maintain her in the ſchool,
took her home. He now ſoon diſcovered the bad
effects of the preſent falſe mode of education.
Hardly able to provide the moſt ſcanty pittance, his
daughter became a burthen inſtead of an affiſtant.
Ill qualified for domeſtic duties, the uncleanlineſs of
the temple proclaimed the indolence of the prieſteſs.
—Oh ye fooliſh parents, why will you take ſo much
pains to teach your children ſuch affected antics'
Why will you encourage them to curl the noſe at
the ſight of an unwaſhed ſaucepan, or to ſhiver at
the touch of cold water | Muſt the happineſs of life
be ſacrificed to the whiteneſs of the hand or why
ſhould the making a pie baniſh them from the
fociety of the rational : Make them glaſs cages at
once, and ſay to unpoliſhed induſtry, “Behold what
thou ſhouldſt be l’”
But how ſhould the ſcholars be wife or virtuous,
when the teachers, generally ſpeaking, are fooliſh
and vicious
Charlotte was unhappy at the change of her ſitua-
tion, and enjoyed only thoſe moments when ſhe had
leiſure to hang ſome of that finery upon her, which
former opulence had provided. Girls are in this age
more frequently undone by falſe pride, than eaſy be-
lief, and are in greater danger from the ſupercilious
airs of a mother, than the proteſtations of a lover.
Vanity is almoſt univerſally the predominant paſſion
of youth. This was the rock on which Charlotte
K 3 ſtruck;

<page 481>
193 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
ſtruck; nor need we be ſurpriſed, when we confider
the tempeſt which former flattery and preſent indi-
gence had raiſed to overſet ſo weak a veſſel.
Among the acquaintance of her father's fortunate
days, was Mr. Benfield, a man of property, and
married. His principles varied with his paſſions,
which reigned too abſolutely; for though he made
frequent profeſſions of, and had great inclinations to
virtue, yet were they the maſters of his reaſon, when-
ever they had a ſhare in the conflićt. He had been
ſeveral times with Mr. Woodland, to viſit his
daughter while at the boarding-ſchool, and thought
her very handſome; nay, had often told her ſo, and
was therefore one of her greateſt favourites. When
misfortune had overwhelmed her father, the idea of
obtaining her for a miſtreſs being not entirely im-
probable, laid faſt hold upon his imagination. His
daily viſits were conſtrued by the father into acts of
the ſincereſt friendſhip. He affiſted Woodland with
his purſe, and that corroborated the teſtimony. His
toying with Charlotte was thought to be the effect
of former freedoms while ſhe was a child, and con-
ſidered rather as a condeſcenſion than a deſign. In
ſhort, he was continually ſpoken of by the father,
as the only virtuous man he had ever known, and
and who alone knew how to diſtinguiſh merit in
diſtreſs. -
Men, even of moderate abilities, whoſe minds are
intent upon the accompliſhment of ſo favourable a
projećt, can find plauſible arguments to deceive and
miſlead

<page 482>
I N D U L G E N C E. 199
*
'.º
miſlead girls, who have had leſs trifling educations
than was the lot of Charlotte. Benfield would often
ſeat her upon his lap, kiſs her hand in rapture, ſome-
times ſnatch one from her lips, tell her of her beauty,
call her divine, then with a ſigh ſay how happy he
ſhould have been, had heaven bleſt him with ſuch a
wife. Liberties which at firſt are alarming to vir-
tue, by repetition become familiar, and the lover
who firſt touches the mole upon his miſtreſs's neck,
and afterwards begs permiſſion to kiſs it, might not
be long, perhaps, before he would take the ſame
freedom with the one upon her knee.
When the paſſions are warm, the mind is weak.
Arguments, which to an unbiaſed ſpectator imme-
diately diſcover their own futility, appear with all
the force of truth, when they endeavour to prove
what we moſt earneſtly wiſh could be proved. Char-
lotte liſtened with avidity, while Benfield talked to
her of a ſtate of nature, and of the inefficacy of mar-
riage to bind affections, as well as the unreaſon-
ableneſs of it in conſtraining thoſe to cohabit, who
were always unhappy in each other's company. She
began to think that a noble maxim, which ſays, “they
only are truly married, who love each other, and
live together without being obliged to do ſo.” She
paid particular attention to Benfield, when he told
her it was far better for her to live without the cere-
mony of marriage, with one who paſſionately lowed
her, and would maintain her, not only above
want, but in affluence, than to be tied to another
K 4 who

<page 483>
2OO T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
who might not have ſenſe to diſcover her merit,
riches to keep her from indigence, nor love ſufficient
to uſe her with humanity.
The rude man is by no means ſo dangerous to
virtue as the plauſible. Benfield prevailed, and
Charlotte was ſeduced. He ſtole her from her fa-
ther, placed her in lodgings, and treated her at firſt
with all the enthuſiaſm of love. She, unhappy
girl, unacquainted with the caprice and mutability
of paſſion, imagined that the little endearments
were never to abate. She felt not her own growing
indifference, but was quick at the diſcovery of her
lover's. Neglect produces bickerings; diſguſt ha-
tred;—ſeparation enſues.
Keeper ſucceeded keeper, till vice became fami-
liar. But why ſhould I torture the reader with re-
lations which make the imagination gloomy? Can
the depraved life of a miſerable proſtitute afford.ſa-
tisfaction either to the hearer or the relater? Such
did the poor unfortunate Charlotte ſink into. Who
that has the feelings of a man can ſtray through the
ſtreets of this city, and ſee ſuch numberleſs young
creatures, whoſe beautiful features are deformed by
the practice of fin and the want of ſhame, and not
feel the blood cold at his heart. Who then that is
worthy to be called a man, would endeavour to en-
creaſe the number of theſe, who, of all the miſerable,
are the moſt miſerable!
Gentle reader, let me have power over thy ima-
gination for a moment Trace with me the un-
happy
-

<page 484>
1 'N'D' U L G E N c E. 2OI
happy Charlotte through thoſe ſinks of fin, the
bagnio and the brothel; cloathed by an infamous
unfeeling wretch, who receives the hire of her
proſtitution: abandoned when corroding diſeaſe
hath ſtolen the ſleekneſs of her ſkin, and the mar-
row of her bones' Behold the anguiſh of guilt prey-
ing upon her mind, and the inclemencies of the ſky
upon her body If thou art a female, tremble and
avoid;—if a man, pity the ſufferer, and deteſt ſeduc-
tion 1
In the ſituation I have deſcribed, was Charlotte
found at midnight, freezing upon a ſtep, by the
maſter of the family, who happened to be detained till
that late hour. He was not a man of marble; and
he enquired with eagerneſs and pity, if ſhe had no
place to go to that could, in ſome meaſure, ſcreen
her from the miſeries ſhe was thus expoſed to. She
faintly replied, no! but that ſhe believed ſhe ſhould
not long need aſſiſtance from hard-hearted man, for
that if her feelings informed her right, ſhe was dying.
He knocked with precipitation at the door, and was
aſked by a voice, ſweet as melody, and mild as pity,
“Is it you, my love?” His affirmation gained him
inſtant admittance. He took the light, rang the
bell for his ſervants, and, with the help of his wife,
affiſted Charlotte into the houſe. “Here is a poor
wretch, my dear, whom I found ſtarving at the door,
who tells me ſhe believes ſhe is dying.”—“God
help her—ſhe ſhall not die in the ſtreet,” anſwered
ſhe with her eyes gliſtening—“Let us ſet her to-
" * -- - K 5 wards

<page 485>
2O2 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
wards the fire, my love, and give her a cordial that
may revive her ſpirits—good God!” continued ſhe,
“I think I ſhould know that face—ſurely it is
not”—“Who, Maria? do not alarm yourſelf,
my love:”—“You are right,” anſwered Charlotte,
“ it is the wicked, the unfortunate Charlotte
Woodland, your fiſter—come in her laſt moments to
ſhew her own guilt and ſufferings, and to admire
your mercy and your virtues. Oh! pity her—For-
give her if you can P’
Merciful. God l exclaimed Maria—and ſunk inte
the arms of her huſband.
+: # * * * # *
+ *k * * *: * º
* º * *: * *
F. A. N. N. Y.
Oh, poor Charlotte | But mamma, I ſhall never,
be like her.
MR s. E. G E R T o N.
Ne, my dear, God forbid you ever ſhould: you.
have been differently educated.
M R. E. G E R to N.
I have often told you, my dears, and I cannot too.
often repeat it, that you will have no excuſe if you.
{hould not behave well, becauſe no means have been
neglected to inſtruct you, The fins of Charlotte
- may

<page 486>
1 N D U L G E N C E. 203
may find forgiveneſs from the follies of her parents.
Judge for yourſelves whether you can make the ſame
apology. By ſaying this I do not mean to court
your applauſe; we have done nothing more than
our duty. The duties of a parent are ſo nume-
rous, and demand ſuch an unremitting attention,
that, indeed, I never can hope to fulfil them per-
fe&tly. However, my children, I hope we have
omitted none of the great eſſentials, none that can
ſanctify the plea of ignorance for crimes, or for capital
errors. In proportion as you have been made ac-
quainted with right and wrong, ſo will it be ex-
pećted that you ſhould ačt; according to the
adage—“Where much is given much is required.”
Many negle&t their duty only becauſe they do not
know it; that, my children, we will endeavour ſhall
not be the caſe with any of you. Polemo was one
of the moſt abandoned youths of Athens: he ſeemed
to delight not only in vice, but its infamy likewiſe.
As he was returning one morning after ſun-riſe &
from a noćturnal revel, he ſaw the gate of Xeno-
crates, the philoſopher, ſtanding open, in whoſe
ſchool there were then aſſembled a number of grave -
and learned men. Shameleſs, and full of wine,
ſmeared with ointments, a garland on his head, and
cloathed in looſe and indecent robes, he rudely en-
tered the aſſembly with an air of ridiculous gravity; .
ſat himſelf down, and began purpoſely to offend them
with his drunken follies. All preſent were irritated
at his behaviour, Xenocrates alone excepted. He
K 6 - with ..

<page 487>
2O4. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
with the ſame undiſturbed and ſerene dignity left
the ſubječt he was ſpeaking upon, and began to diſ-
courſe on temperance and modeſty in ſo animated
and forcible a tone, that Polemo, ſtruck with a ſenſe
of the abſurdity and indecency of his own condućt,
and aſhamed of his affected feſtivity, caſt the crown
from his brows, drew his arms beneath his cloak,
and aſſumed a deportment ſuitable to the humiliating
circumſtances of his ſituation. He afterwards be-
came one of the moſt celebrated philoſophers of that
age. From this we may ſafely infer, he would
never have been guilty of ſuch diſgraceful impro-
prieties, had he before been better taught.
I am now going to recommend a duty intimately
conneéted with what we have been reading and ſay-
ing; which is Induſtry. It is the unhappineſs of
wealthy people to imagine, at leaſt much too often,
that they have no other avocations in this world,
but the purſuit of pleaſure and the decoration of their
perſons, both of which, when carried to the leaſt
exceſs, become criminal. I would have you under-
fland, my children, that though you are born to
fortunes, you are not born to indolence. It is the
duty of the rich at leaſt to be ačtive; not to men-
tion, that to be idle is to be unhappy. Liſten to
the following allegory. -
AS Induſtry was going abroad early to his labour,
and climbing, with great patience, a lofty mountain
over which he was obliged to paſs, he eſpied on the
* . . . -" ſummit

<page 488>
1 N p U s T R Y. 205
ſummit a beautiful nymph employed in ſearching for
uncommon flowers, and often viewing with great
attention the wide extended ſcenes that were
ſtretched around her. Her eyes were piercing as
the beams of the evening ſtar, with a certain twink-
ling wantonneſs in them that heightened the reſem-
blance. Her features were irregular, yet not leſs
pleaſing than thoſe of a more perfeót beauty. She
had a moſt agreeable wildneſs in her air, her dreſs,
her countenance; and ſomething ſo ſpeakably inqui-
fitive in the latter, that almoſt every feature ſeemed
to aſk a queſtion. Upon the approach of Induſtry
ſhe fell into immediate diſcourſe with him, and
aſked him, almoſt in the ſame breath, who he was,
where he lived, whither he was going, and what
there was in the neighbourhood worth ſeeing. In-
duſtry, ever accuſtomed to make the beſt of his time,
anſwered the laſt queſtion firſt. He told her that
there was nothing ſo well worth ſeeing as a beautiful
pleaſure-houſe in the adjacent wood, and offered to
condućt her to it. The nymph, whoſe name was
Curioſity, eagerly followed him, and by the number-
leſs queſtions ſhe put to him as they paſſed, diſco-
vered an inſatiable thirſt after knowledge. Induſtry,
who liked the humour of the nymph, failed not to
make every poſſible advantage of this; and though
ſhe found herſelf deceived in ſome points, when ſhe
arrived at the wood, yet ſhe was gratified in ſo many
others, that ſhe could not help loving her deceiver,
and yielding to every propoſal of his that might tend
• to

<page 489>
206 T H E P A M I L. Y. P I C T U R E.
ſation, Curioſity, in due time, brought forth a ſon,
who, by order from the Sylvan Deities, was named
Travel. He was favoured by all the gods, and in
his youth was frequently inſtructed by them in viſions.
As he grew up he diſcovered in his temper his mo-
ther's thirſt of knowledge, and his father's activity;
he never ſtaid longer in any place than, bee-like, to
colle&t the ſweets that he found there. Pleaſure and
Wiſdom were his companions, and his -attendants.
were Plenty and Variety. By obſerving the manners.”
and cuſtoms-of various nations, he became polite
and unprejudiced; and by comparing their laws,
and various, modes of worſhip and government, he ,
learned to be juſt and politic, and to ſerve the gods .
acceptably. In a large city, where much was to be -
ſeen, he had, recourſe for accommodations to the
houſe of a gentleman who was known to take a plea- -
ſure in entertaining travellers. . The name of this
perſon, was Idleneſs. . He was a corpulent good- -
natured man. - If he had but proviſion for the day, .
and a companion to laugh away the hours, which
were otherwiſe tedious, to him, he was contented. .
He never interfered in the intereſt of others, nor felt .
the emotions either of friendſhip or enmity. He :
would not, on any account, go two furlongs from .
his own door, but uſed to ſay, pleaſure and trouble
were ſuch inveterate enemies, that they could not .
poſſibly meet upon the ſame occaſion; he was much
entertained with the converſation of Travel, and con-
|
|
ceiving |
|
|
to her information. In conſequence of this conver- |
|
.
|

<page 490>
I N D U S T R Y. 207
º:
ceiving a deſign to diſſuade him from rambling any
more, that he might keep him with him, “My
friend, ſaid Idleneſs, I am amazed at your ſtrange
.diſpoſition. Who, like you, would for ever wander
about, in ſearch of pleaſure, and not ſtand ſtill a
moment to enjoy it? Why will you expoſe yourſelf
to perpetual dangers, and needleſs difficulties, and
undergo abroad a thouſand inconveniencies which
you would never meet with at home * Why ſhould
you, who are a free man, ſubmit to the arbitrary
government of a ſea captain; more boiſterous than
the element on which he commands: or to the no
leſs abſolute ſway of an itinerant coachman *
“Truce with your queries, ſaid Travel, till I have
propoſed an equal number; and then, if you pleaſe,
we will balance the account. How can you waſte
your time, and impair your health by refuſing to
give your body and mind that due exerciſe nature ſo
loudly calls for How can you confine that arduous
curioſity, which was implanted in the ſoul to urge
you on to unbounded knowledge, within the narrow
limits of a ſingle city or province Are you really
ſo deſtitute of courage as to be over-awed by viſi-
onary dangers and trivial inconveniencies " Here
ended the diſpute; Idleneſ would not be at the pains
to urge further arguments, nor, if he had, would
Travel have ſtaid to hear them.
M R. E. G E R To N.
I will continue the ſubječt, by reading you a little
eſſay, which I once wrote in anſwer to a friend of
mine,

<page 491>
208 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
mine, who ſeemed to be of opinion, that it was ra-
tional, and almoſt virtuous, for men to be idle till
they could have their property wholly to themſelves:
that is, he looked upon the taxes paid to civil and
eccleſiaſtical eſtabliſhments not only to be enormous,
but ſhamefully miſapplied. Though this aſſertion
has too many glaring and notorious fačts in its ſup-
port to leave any room for controverſy on that head,
yet I never could think my friend's inference a juſt
one. What I have ſaid was, however, but a flight
and haſty ſketch, and will be more ſuitable as a
leſſon to my children, than an anſwer to the argu-
ments of my friend. The beſt part of it is the fable
with which it concludes, and from which I would
have you draw the moral which is intended, namely,
that the application of induſtry ſhould be to great
and proper objećts, otherwiſe it becomes either tri--
vial, ridiculous, or criminal.
I N D U S T R Y: An Essay.
The general importance of induſtry to ſociety is a
thing ſo ſelf-evident, that it ſtands in need of no ar-
guments to convince mankind of its truth. Indivi-
duals are neither happy in themſelves, nor uſeful to
others, till they are induſtrious. Idleneſs reſembles
an excreſcence painful in itſelf, and diſguſting to the
beholders; and which the poſſeſſor wiſhes to cut
away, but wants reſolution. • Some men, like bene-
volent philoſophers, and true friends to the rights of
- mankind,
‘.
-
.
i
º

<page 492>
I N D U S T R Y. 209
mankind, wiſh for abſolute freedom, that men may
be encouraged to induſtry by having their property
ſole, and undivided, to their own uſe ; that they may
not be ſhackled by the degrading recollečtion of de-
pendence, nor deterred by the rapacity of power;
that is, by thoſe men who formally ſeize upon, and
lawfully rob you of, a certain part of your property,
which they appropriate, too frequently, to the moſt
deſtruštive purpoſes: namely, to that of enſlaving
you ſtill farther.
That there are wicked governments, nay, that
there are no good governments, and that there are
wicked men in the beſt of governments, may readily
be admitted. That a ſociety formed upon the liberal
principles theſe philoſophers ſo juſtly admire, would
be the only rational one among equals is likewiſe.
granted: but the fact is, men are not equal, and
this inequality precludes the poſſibility of abſolute
freedom. The cunning man outwits the ſimple,
the ſtrong ſubdues the weak; the man whoſe paſ-
ſions are inordinate, wilfully enſlaves himſelf to him
who can gratify them, and he who has had the mis-
fortune to have had a fooliſh, or a weak father, be-
comes, unhappily, the inheritor of ſlavery. This
ſlavery, however, is only partial: in the very worſt
of governments, the motives to induſtry are ſuffi-
ciently powerful and beneficial to incite men to
aćtion. Engliſhmen, in particular, have, upon com-
pariſon, great reaſon to bleſs that chance which
placed them on this ſpot rather than the generality of
others ;

<page 493>
2 IO T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
others; rather, perhaps, than any other upon earth.
Property is, here, ſo far ſecured, that no depreda-
tions can be committed, but authorized and legal
ones: and, though it muſt be confeſſed that theſe
are numerous, yet the aggregate is not ſufficient,
by any means, to damp the ſpirit of induſtry. No
titled villain lays his rapacious talons on the widow's
mite; no tyrant faſtens his diſgraceful badge upon
her offspring; no ferocious Boyar or Vaivod enu-
merates the huſbandman among the other animals
that graze upon what he unjuſtly calls his land. We
are protećted, not only from the ravages of indivi-
duals, but from the ravages of nations; and the
exactions we ſuffer make our part of the contribu-
tion to the general expence. That theſe contri-
butions are continually perverted cannot be denied ;
but, till we can find men who do not love themſelves
better than the reſt of mankind, this muſt ever be
the caſe. I do not mean to inſinuate, that we
ſhould reſt contented under impoſition, however
ſanétified by the hoary head of cuſtom, or enforced
by the iron hand of law: no, let us emancipate our-
ſelves by every worthy means, let us caſt off every
diſgraceful, galling chain; let us beware that it
does not become heavier, and more galling; but, it
is the perſevering effort of induſtry only that can
effe&t this ; and, as paſſions, affections, and weak-
neſſes, prevent us from any thing like perfeółion,
do not let us torment ourſelves, and ſlacken our la-
bours, by meditating on, and hoping for, ideal bleſ-
- fings,

<page 494>
- - I N D U S T R Y. 2 II
:
:
x *
fings, which the nature and inequality of man forbid
to be realized. I ſpeak as I think, as I feel, but
with every deference and reſpect to the arguments
of thoſe who hold contrary opinions. -
Let us amuſe ourſelves, for a moment, by ima-
gining the poetical origin, and actions of induſtry.
In the early ages of the world, before men multi-
plied and ſpread over the face of the earth, and, by
their irregularities, baniſhed the beneficent Deities
from their ſociety, the Sylvan God of the Oaks,
`-called Perſeverance, became in love with Agility,
the nymph of the rocks; and though he was neither
young, beautiful, or beloved, yet, by his inceſſant
importunities, he at length prevailed. The nymphs
of ancient, as well as modern times, have often
yielded to importunity. The child Induſtry was the
offspring of this amour. He was the beloved of his
parents, for he partook of thoſe qualities for which
each was the moſt eſteemed. He was ſtrong and
aćtive, with an ugly countenance, and broad
hands; he was not very tall, but his body was well
proportioned, and his large limbs proclaimed dura-
tion. The ſports of his infancy were peculiar.
He ſometimes amuſed himſelf with inventing inſtru-
ments of houſewifery and agriculture, and for other
uſeful and domeſtic purpoſes; and, it is ſaid, his
mother one day ſurprized him when he had juſt
finiſhed the firſt rude ſketch of a ſpinning-wheel,
and was diverting himſelf with turning it round, and
obſerving its effects. The loom, likewiſe, is ſaid
- to
*


<page 495>
“212 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
to have been one of the early efforts of his imagination;
and which procured him everlaſting honour and praiſe
among men. He preſently became a conſtant and
ſtudious obſerver of cauſe and effect; and made re-
giſters of his obſervations, at firſt, by notching the
trees, afterwards by hieroglyphics, and, laſt of all,
by various and amazingly intricate combinations of
charaćters, which yet, by his exceſſive affiduity, be-
came tolerably ſimple, and quite intelligible. This,
however, was the effect of inceſant and undeſcriba-
ble labour; for it is ſaid by ſome, that, till he came
among men, and inſtructed them, they had no re-
gular method of conveying their ideas; that they
had no language, but gabbled a few inarticulate and
unintelligible ſounds, expreſfive of rage and fear,
and ſome of the ſtronger paſſions, from which he
produced his ſyſtem. Long, however, before this,
he diſcovered, by his penetration, the metals that
lay hid and buried in the bowels of the earth; and
that had lain there from time immemorial. He
brought forth iron from a ſtone, and made of it the
axe, the hoe, the ſaw, and a thouſand curious
and uſeful implements. He obſerved the ſwine, that
uſed to root up the ground for the acorn, the pignut,
and other delicacies: he ſaw the green verdure
follow their tracks, and the young blade ſhoot where
they had ſoiled: from whence he learned the uſe of
the plough and the manure. Nothing was too vile
to eſcape his attention, nor was any thing too in-
comprehenſible to elude his enquiries. He preſently
º became
~

<page 496>
1 N D U S T R Y. . 213
became ſo renowned, by the beneficial effects of his
reſearches and labours, that he was deified, placed
with the gods, and worſhipped under various ſymbols
by the ſons of men. In the mean time his la-
bours overſpread the face of the earth: he not only
built habitations for men, defended them from wild
beaſts, took care of their ſeed time and harveſt, and
taught them the common arts of life, but he, alſo,
inſtructed them in the occult properties of nature.
He ſhewed them to heal their wounds by the green
herb, to exterminate poiſon, and to calculate the
courſe of the ſtars. For their pleaſure and conve-
nience he built cities, palaces, and temples. Mau-
ſoleums, pyramids, and towers, roſe from the hard
entrails of the rock. Mountains were levelled, ri-
vers obeyed the courſe of his dire&ting arm, and
caſtles floated upon the great waters, and defied
their fury.
*
--
Happy had it been for men, had he been as pru-
dent in his amours as his father; but, alas! he be-
came enamoured with that proſtitute Luxury. Faſ-
cinated by her ſeducing charms, and led aſtray by
her ſpecious ſophiſms, his labours have degenerated,
have become deſtructive, and, inſtead of his former
ſtupendous works, he is, at preſent, a Man-mil-
liner, ſtains tooth-picks, weaves gauze ribbands,
and metamorphoſes ſecond-hand farſnet, and twice-
died Perſian, into artificial flowers.
D I A L O G U E

<page 497>
2I4 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c TU R E.
D I A L O G U E XIX.
MR. E. G E R to N. . .
HE ſubječt of yeſterday, my children, is ſo
conſequential to happineſs, that I cannot avoid
renewing it, in order to point out ſome more of its
duties and advantages, and impreſs them ſtill ſtronger
on your memories. Perſeverance is the leading
charaćteriſtic of induſtry. By perſeverance, men of
moderate parts have accompliſhed what had be-
fore been deemed impoſſible. Liſten to the ra-
pidity, the aſtoniſhingly preciſe agreement of ideas,
in a band of muſicians; look at the exact and me-
chanical preciſion with which one man at the head
of an army regulates the aëtions of ten, twenty, or
of a hundred thouſand, and you will be convinced
of the powers of perſeverance.
A country gentleman had an eſtate of two hundred
a year, which he kept in his own hands till he found
himſelf ſo much in debt, that he was obliged to ſell
one half to ſatisfy his creditors, and lett the remainder
to a farmer for one-and-twenty years. Before the
expiration of his leaſe, the farmer aſked the gentle-
man, when he came one day to pay his rent, whether
he would ſell the land he occupied ? Why; will you
buy it? ſaid the gentleman;–if you will part with it,
and
* * * * *

<page 498>
tº e R S E W E R A. N. C. E. 215
and we can agree, replied the farmer. That is ex-
ceedingly ſtrange, ſaid the gentleman. Pray tell
me how it happens that I could not live upon twice
as much land, for which I paid no rent, and that you,
after regularly paying me a hundred a year for the
half, are able, in a few years, to purchaſe it The
reaſon is plain, anſwered the farmer ; you ſat ſtill,
and ſaid go ; I got up, and ſaid come ; you laid in
bed, and enjoyed your eaſe; I roſe in the morning,
and minded my buſineſs.
Hear another anecdote, more ſingular, but of the
ſame nature. When colle&tion was making to build
the hoſpital of Bedlam, thoſe who were employed to
gather the money, came to a ſmall houſe, the door
of which was half open; from the entry they over-
heard an old man ſcolding his ſervant maid, who,
having made uſe of a match to kindle the fire, had
afterwards indiſcreetly thrown it away, without re-
fle&ting that the match, having ſtill the ſulphur
at the other end might be of further ſervice.
After diverting themſelves awhile with liſtening to
the diſpute, they knocked, and preſented themſelves
before the old gentleman. As ſoon as they told him
the cauſe of their viſit, he went into a cloſet, from
whence he brought four hundred guineas, and
reckoning the money in their preſence, put it into
their bag. The colle&tors being aſtoniſhed at this
generoſity, which they little expected, could not help
teſtifying their ſurpriſe, and told the old fellow what
they had heard. “Gentleman, ſaid he, your fur-
priſe

<page 499>
216 T H E F A M1 L Y P 1 c T U R E.
priſe is occaſioned by a thing of very little conſe-
quence; I keep houſe, and ſave or ſpend money my
own way, the one furniſhes me with the means of
doing the other, and both equally gratify my incli-
nations. With regard to benefactions and dona-
tions, always expect moſt from prudent people who
keep their accounts.” -
Few things truly great or good, my children, can
be performed but by a perſevering induſtry. Noble
minds, with ſuch aſſiſtance, are makers of their
own fortune. There is ſcarcely any knowledge, any
art, or any dignity unattainable to thoſe who poſſeſs
underſtanding, induſtry and perſeverance. An at-
tention to little things, with a capability of great
ones, are the leading features of the charaćter I de-
ſcribe. When Sir Walter Raleigh firſt came to
London to ſeek his fortune, he was poor and un-
known, yet well-dreſſed, carrying all his riches
upon his back; for his hopes and views were com-
prehenſive. Happening one day to ſee Queen Eli-
zabeth walking till ſhe came to a dirty place, at
which ſhe ſeemed to make ſome ſcruple of ſtepping
over, he immediately pulled off his new pluſh cloak,
and ſpread it for her to tread on. The gallantry of
this action, and the obliging unembaraſſed air with
which it was performed, were a certain introduc-
tion to the court of Elizabeth. When he firſt began
to be noticed, he wrote upon a glaſs window, in the
eye of the Queen:—
“Fain

<page 500>
S O C I A L D U T Y. 217
;
“Fain would I climb, but that I fear to fall.”
º
º
Elizabeth obſerving it, wrote underneath,
“If thy heart fail thee, do not climb at all.”
Sir Walter was not really afraid, this was only an
artifice. Every body knows how great a man he
afterwards became.
When the Spartans had treacherouſly ſeized on
the caſtle called Cadmaea, and by that means-en-
ſlaved the Thebans, Archias, one of the governors in
the Spartan intereſt, was fitting at a feaſt. He re-
ceived letters which he was deſired to open and read
. immediately, for they contained information of the
greateſt importance; but Archias being full of mirth,
and heated with wine, threw them by, and ſaid,
... laughing, “buſineſs to-morrow.” This negligence
coſt him his life, for that very evening Pelopidas,
Charon, and others, having formed a reſolution
to free their country, ſlew him, and many more,
who were in the Spartan intereſt, which ſcarcely
could have happened had Archias read the letters,
they being ſent purpoſely to inform him of his dan-
ger. “Buſineſs to-morrow” became ever after a
ſatirical proverb in Greece,
I tell you theſe anecdotes, my children, to ſhew
you the conſequences of negligence, and the benefits
ariſing from perſeverance, vigilance, and induſtry;
Vol. II. I. and

<page 501>
218 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
a
and I cannot better inſtruct you to what purpoſes
theſe great and neceſſary properties ought to be ap-
plied, than by referring you to the fable of Mirza.
s O C I A L D U T Y,
Or M I R z A.
*
MR. E. G E R To N.
IT pleaſed the mighty ſovereign Abbas Caraſcan,
from whom the Kings of the earth derive honour .
and dominion, to ſet Mirza his ſervant over the
province of Tauris. In the hand of Mirza, the ba-
lance of diſtribution was ſuſpended with impartiality;
and under his adminiſtration the weak were pro-
tečted, the learned received honour, and the diligent
became rich: Mirza, therefore, was beheld by every
eye with complacency, and every tongue pronounced
bleſfings upon his head. But it was obſerved that he
derived no joys from the benefits which he diffuſed;
he became penſive and melancholy; he ſpent his lei-
ſure in ſolitude ; in his palace he ſat motionleſs upon
a ſopha; and when he went out, his walk was ſlow,
and his eyes were fixed upon the ground: he applied
to the buſineſs of ſtate with reluctance; and reſolved
to relinquiſh the toils of government, of which he
could no longer enjoy the reward.
He therefore obtained permiſſion to approach the
throne of his ſovereign; and being aſked what was
* his

<page 502>
s o c 1 A. L. D U T Y. 219
his requeſt, he made this reply, “May the Lord of
the world forgive the ſlave whom he has honoured,
if Mirza preſume again to lay the bounty of Abbas
at his feet. Thou haſt given me the dominions of a
country, fruitful as the gardens of Damaſcus: and of
a city, glorious above all others, except that only
which reflects the ſplendor of thy preſence. But the
longeſt life is a period ſcarce ſufficient to prepare for
death. All other buſineſs is vain and trivial, as the
toil of emmets in the path of the traveller, under
whoſe foot they periſh for ever; and all enjoyment
is unſubſtantial and evaneſcent, as the colours of the
bow that appear in the interval of a ſtorm. Suffer
me, therefore, to prepare for the approach of eterni-
ty; let me give up my ſoul to meditation ; let ſoli-
tude and ſilence acquaint me with the myſteries of
devotion; let me forget the world, and by the world
be forgotten, till the moment arrives in which the
veil of eternity ſhall fall, and I be found at the bar of
the Almighty.”—Mirza then bowed himſelf to the
earth, and ſtood ſilent.
By the command of Abbas it is recorded, that at
theſe words he trembled upon that throne, at the foot-
ftool of which the world pays homage: he looked
round upon his nobles, but every countenance was
pale, and every eye was upon the earth. No man
opened his mouth; and the King firſt broke filence
after it had continued near an hour.
“ Mirza! terror and doubt are come upon me . I
am alarmed, as a man who ſuddenly perceives that
1, 2 he

<page 503>
22O T H E F A M I L Y P "I C T U R E.
he is near the brink of a precipice, and is urged
forward by an irreſiſtible force; but yet I know not
whether my danger is a reality or a dream.—I am
as thou art, a reptile on the earth; my life is a mo-
ment; and eternity, in which days, and years, and
ages are nothing, eternity is before me, for which I
alſo ſhould prepare: but by whom then muſt the
faithful be governed By thoſe only who have no
fear of judgment? By thoſe alone whoſe life is
brutal, becauſe like brutes, they do not conſider that
they ſhall die? Or who, indeed, are the faithful?
Are the buſy multitudes that crowd the city, in a ſtate
of perdition ? And is the cell of the derviſe alone the
gate of paradiſe To all, the life of a derviſe is not
poſſible: to all therefore it cannot be a duty. De-
part to the houſe which has in the city been prepared
for thy reſidence; I will meditate the reaſon of thy
requeſt; and may he who illuminates the mind of
the humble, enable me to determine with wiſdom l’’
Mirza departed ; and on the third day, having re-
ceived no commands, he again requeſted an audi-
ence, and it was granted. When he entered the
royal preſence, his countenance appeared more chear-
ful; he drew a letter from his boſom, and having
kiſſed it, he preſented it with his right-hand.
“My Lord, ſays he, I have learned by this letter,
which I received from Coſrou the Iman, who now
ſtands before thee, in what manner life may be beſt
improved. I am enabled to look back with pleaſure,
and forward with hope ; and I ſhall now rejoice ſtill
- 4 to

<page 504>
S O C I A L D U, T Y. . 22 I.
1.
º
to be the ſhadow of thy power at Tauris, and to
keep thoſe honours which I ſo lately wiſhed to re-
fign.”—The King, who had liſtened to Mirza with
a mixture of ſurpriſe and curioſity, immediately gave
the letter to Coſrou, and commanded that it ſhould
be read. The eyes of the court were at once turned
on the hoary ſage, whoſe countenance was ſuffuſed
with an honeſt bluſh; and it was not without ſome
heſitation that he read theſe words:
“To Mirza, whom the wiſdom of Abbas our
- mighty Lord has honoured with dominion, be ever-
laſting health ! When I heard thy purpoſe to with-
draw the bleſfings of thy government from the thou-
fands of Tauris, my heart was wounded with the ar-
row of afflićtion, and my eyes became dim with
forrow. But who ſhall ſpeak before the King, when
he is troubled; and who ſhall boaſt of knowledge,
when he is diſtreſſed by doubt? To thee I will relate
the events of my youth, which thou haſt renewed
before me; and thoſe truths which they taught me,
may the prophet multiply to thee.
“Under the inſtruction of the phyſician Aluazer,
I obtained an early knowledge of his art. To thoſe
"who were ſmitten with diſeaſes, I could adminiſter
plants, which the ſun had impregnated with the
ſpirits of health. But the ſcenes of pain, languor,
and mortality, which were perpetually riſing before
me, made me often tremble for myſelf. I ſaw the
grave open at my feet: I determined, therefore, to
contemplate only the regions beyond it, and to de-
L 3. ſpiſe

<page 505>
222 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
ſpiſe every acquiſition that I could not keep. I con-
ceived an opinion, that as there was no merit but
in voluntary poverty, and ſilent meditation, thoſe
who deſired money were not proper obječts of
bounty; therefore money was deſpiſed. I buried
mine in the earth; and renouncing ſociety, I wan-
dered into a wild and ſequeſtered part of the coun-
try; my dwelling was a cave, by the ſide of a hill;
I drank the running water from the ſpring, and eat
fuch fruits and herbs as I could find. To increaſe
the auſterity of my life, I frequently watched all
night, ſitting at the entrance of the cave with my
face to the eaſt, reſigning myſelf to the ſecret in-
fiuences of the prophet, and expecting illuminations
from above. One morning, after my noćturnal
vigil, juſt as I perceived the horizon glow at the ap-
proach of the ſun, the power of ſleep became irre-
fiſtible, and I ſunk under it. I imagined myſelf ſtill
fitting at the entrance of my cell; that the dawn in-
creaſed; and that as I looked earneſtly for the firſt
beam of day, a dark ſpot appeared to intercept it. I
perceived that it was in motion ; it increaſed in ſize
as it drew near, and at length I diſcovered it to be an
eagle. I ſtill kept my eye ſteadfaſtly upon it, and ſaw
it alight at a ſmall diſtance, where I now deſcried a
fox, whoſe fore-legs appeared to be broken. Before
this fox the eagle laid part of a kid, which it had
brought in its talons, and then diſappeared. When
I awaked I laid my fore-head upon the ground, and
bleſſed the prophet for the inſtruction of the morning.
I re-

<page 506>
S O C I A L D U T Y. 223
º
I reviewed my dream, and ſaid thus to myſelf, .
** Coſrou, thou haſt done well to renounce the tu-
mult, the buſineſs, and the vanities of life; but thou
haſt as yet only done it in part; thou art ſtill every
day buſied in the ſearch of food, thy mind is not
wholly at reſt, neither is thy truſt in Providence
complete. What art thou taught by this viſion ? If,
thou haſt ſeen an eagle commiſſioned by heaven to
feed a fox that is lame, ſhall not the hand of heaven
alſo ſupply thee with food, when that which prevents
thee from procuring it to thyſelf, is not neceſſity,
but devotion ? I was now ſo confident of a mira-
culous ſupply, that I neglected to walk out for my
repaſt, which, after the firſt day, I expected with an
impatience that left me little power of attending to
any other obječt: this impatience, however, I la-
boured to ſuppreſs, and perſiſted in my reſolution; but
my eyes at length began to fail me, and my knees
ſmote each other; I threw myſelf backward, and
hoped my weakneſs would ſoon increaſe to inſenſibi—
lity. But I was ſuddenly rouſed by the voice of an
inviſible being, who pronounced theſe words:—
“ Coſrou, I am the angel who, by the command of
the Almighty, have regiſtered the thoughts of thy
heart, which I am now commiſſioned to reprove.
While thou waſt attempting to become wiſe above
that which is revealed, thy folly perverted the in-
ſtructions which was vouchſafed thee. Art thou
diſabled as the fox: Haſt thou not rather the powers
of the eagle : Ariſe, let the eagle be the obječt of
L 4 thy

<page 507>
224 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
thy emulation. To pain and ſickneſs be thou again
the meſſenger of eaſe and health. Virtue is not reſt
but ačtion. If thou doſt good to man, as an evi-
dence of thy love to God, thy virtue will be exalted
from moral to divine; and that happineſs which is
the pledge of paradiſe, will be thy reward upon
earth,”
“At theſe words I was not leſs aſtoniſhed than if
a mountain had been overturned at my feet. I
humbled myſelf in the duſt; I returned to the city;
I dug up my treaſure; I was liberal, yet I became
rich. My ſkill in reſtoring health to the body, gave
me frequent opportunities of curing the diſeaſes of
the ſoul. I put on the ſacred veſtments; I grew
eminent beyond my merit; and it was the pleaſure
of the King that I ſhould ſtand before him. Now,
therefore, be not offended; I boaſt of no knowledge
that I have not received: as the ſands of the defart
drink up the drops of rain and the dew of the
morning, ſo do I alſo, who am but duſt, imbibe the
inſtructions of the prophet. Believe then that it is he
who tells thee, all knowledge is prophane which ter-
minates in thyſelf; and by a life waſted in ſpecula-
tion, little even of this can be gained. When the
gates of paradiſe are thrown open before thee, thy
mind ſhall be irradiated in a moment; here thou
canſt little more than pile error upon error; there
thou ſhalt build truth upon truth. Wait therefore
for the glorious viſion; and in the mean time emu-
late the eagle. Much is in thy power; and, there-
- fore,

<page 508>
so c 1: A 1: D U T Y. 225.
fore, much is expected of thee. Though the Al-
mighty alone can give virtue, yet, as a Prince, thout
mayeſt ſtimulate thoſe to beneficence, who act from
no higher motive than immediate intereſt. Thou
canſt not produce the principle, but mayeſt enforce.
the pračtice. The relief of the poor is equal,
whether they receive it from oſtentation or charity i.
and the effect of example is the ſame, whether it be
intended to obtain the favour of God, or man. Let
thy virtue be thus diffuſed; and if thou believeſt
with reverence, thou ſhalt be accepted above. Fare-
well. May the ſmile of him who reſides in the
heaven of heavens, be upon thee! And againſt thy
name in the volume of his will, may happineſs be:
written l’” -
The King, whoſe doubts, like thoſe of Mirza,
were now removed, looked up with a ſmile that
communicated the joy of his mind. He diſmiſſed
the Prince to his government; and commanded theſe
events to be recorded, to the end that poſterity may
know, “ That no life is pleaſing to God, but that
which is uſeful to mankind l’’
MR. F. G E R To N.
The active ſpirit of induſtry, when properly
exerted, is replete with every ſocial virtue; yet even
this neceſſary, this great quality, when perverted,
becomes the ſcourge of humanity. -
The Sultan Mahmoud was ambitious of fame, and
intent on actions which he deemed worthy of princes;
1.5 that

<page 509>
226 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
that is, of conquering kingdoms, waſting provinces,
and exterminating mankind with fire and ſword. He
had a Viſier, who was a man renowned for his
ſagacity. This Viſier was ſaid to be well-ſkilled
in the language of birds and beaſts. As he was
one day converſing with Mahmoud, they ſaw two
owls; pray, ſaid the Sultan to the Viſier, what is
the preſent ſubječt of converſation between thoſe
owls Commander of the Faithful, anſwered
the Vifier, thy ſervant would gladly interpret their
diſcourſe, but he is fearful of the frowns of ma-
jeſty, which are dreadful even as the ſword of the
angeſ of death. By the beard of Mahomet, ſaid the
Sultan, no harm ſhall happen to thee; inform me
of what they are ſpeaking. They are ſpeaking, ſaid
the Viſier, concerning the marriage of their chil-
dren. The one ſays, he will not ſuffer his ſon to
marry the daughter of the other, but on condition
of his giving her fifty ruined villages for her portion.
This has been very readily agreed to, “bleſſed, ſay
they, be the ſword of Mahmoud, and may his days be
multiplied, for while he reigns, we ſhall never want
ruined villages.” Mahmoud, ſays the fabuliſt, was
wiſe, and ſaw his error; neither did he any more
ſlay men, deſtroy their cities, and diſturb the peace
of nations. -
MR s. E G E R To N to M R. E. G E R To N.
When, my dear, you were ſpeaking concerning
perſeverance, you reminded me of an account
which

<page 510>
P E R s e v E R A N c E. , 227
º
which I ſaw ſome time ſince, of a German ſhepherd,
who, under the moſt diſcouraging impediments,
taught himſelf the rudiments of philoſophy and ab-,
ſtruſe ſcience. Here it is, do you read it, Charles,
it will ſhew you what this aforeſaid perſeverance and
induſtry enabled him to perform without teachers;
and will hint to you, my children, how much you .
may do with the ſame application, and the affiſtance
you continually receive.
P E R S E V E R A N C E :
Or the H Is To R Y of Profeſſor D U W A L.
M. DU VAL, profeſſor of hiſtory and geogra-
phy in the academy of Luneville, is the ſon of a pea-
ſant, and born in Burgundy, but came into Lorrain
when a child, and was employed as a ſhepherd's boy,
at a village near Nancy. His thirſt after knowledge.
appeared in his very childhood, and, having no other
means of gratifying it, he made a colle&tion of ſnakes,
frogs, &c. amuſed himſelf with examining theſe
creatures, and was continually aſking the neigh-
bouring peaſants why thoſe animals were formed in
ſuch a particular manner but the anſwers he re-
ceived were generally ſuch, as left him leſs ſatisfied
than he was before. He once happened to ſee, in
ahe hand of a country boy, AEſop's Fables with
cuts, which made him ſtill more deſirous of learning -
than before. He could not read; and the boy,"
•. L 6 who

<page 511>
228 T. H. E. F. A. M. I. L. Y. P. I C T U. R. E.
who was capable of gratifying his curioſity, was
ſeldom in a humour to explain the animals, &c.
repreſented in the cuts. In this diſtreſs, he deter-
mined to make himſelf maſter of the introdućtion
to knowledge, however great the difficulties that
attended it might prove. Accordingly he ſaved
whatever money he could get, and gave it to other
boys who were older than himſelf, for teaching him
to read. Having, with incredible diligence, attained
his end, he happened to meet with an almanack, in
which the twelve ſigns of the zodiac were delineated.
Theſe he looked for ſo conſtantly, and with ſuch at-
tention, in the heavens, that at laſt he imagined that
he actually traced ſuch figures there; and though he
was miſtaken in this and ſeveral other particulars,
yet many of his obſervations were ſuch as few others
are found capable of, even after receiving regular
inſtructions.
As he once paſſed by a print-ſhop at Nancy, he
obſerved in the window a map of the world. This
opened a field for new ſpeculations; and, having
purchaſed it, he employed many hours every day in
peruſing it. At firſt he took the degrees on the
equator for French leagues; but upon conſidering
that, in coming from Burgundy to Lorrain, he had
travelled many ſuch leagues, though on his map that
diſtance ſeemed to take up a very little ſpot, he was
convinced of the impoſſibility of his firſt conjećture.
But it muſt have been with incredible labour, and
at the ſame time is a ſignal proof of his extraordinary
genius

<page 512>
P e R S E W E R A. N. C. E. 229
º
genius, that he acquired a thorough knowledge of
theſe and many other ſignatures on the ſeveral maps;
which, as often as his purſe could afford it, he after-
wards procured.
His inclination for ſilence and retirement, made
him weary of living among the noiſy peaſant boys;
and induced him to viſit ſome hermits who had their
cells in a wood, about half a league from Luneville.
He undertook to wait on them, and to tend ſix or eight
cows which they kept. Theſe hermits were, how-
ever, groſsly ignorant; but Du Val had an opportu-
nity of reading ſeveral books he found in their cells,
and of getting many difficulties, that occurred to
him, ſolved by perſons who came to viſit them.
All the money he could ſcrape together in his mean
circumſtances, was laid out in books and maps; and
obſerving, on ſome of the latter, the arms of ſeveral
princes, as griffins, ſpread eagles, lions with two
tails, and other monſters, he enquired of a foreigner,
whether there were any ſuch creatures in the world?
being informed that theſe figures belonged to a parti-
cular ſcience called heraldry, he minuted down this,
word, before unknown to him, and hurrying with all
ſpeed to Nancy, bought a book of heraldry, and by
that book, without any other help, he became maſter.
of the fundamental principles of that ſcience.
- In this courſe of life Du Val continued till he ar-
rived at his one-and-twentieth year, when, in the
autumn of 1717, he was diſcovered watching his
charge in the wood, and ſitting under a tree with
his

<page 513>
230 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
f -
his maps and books about him, by Baron Pſutchner.
This gentleman was then governor to the young
Prince of Lorrain, who happened to hunt that way.
The Baron thought a herdſman, with ſun-burnt -
lank hair, dreſſed in a coarſe linen frock, with a
heap of maps about him, ſo extraordinary a ſight,
that he informed the Prince of it, who immediately
rode towards the place, and put ſeveral queſtions to
Du Val about his way of living. Du Val ſhewed
by his anſwers, that he was already maſter of the
grounds of ſeveral ſciences. Upon which the
Prince offered to take him into his ſervice, and told
him that he ſhould go to court. Du Val, who had
read in ſome books of morality, that the air of
a court was infectious to virtue; and had alſo ob-
ſerved when he had been at Nancy, that the lacqueys
of great men were a riotous, debauched, quarrel-
ſome ſort of people, frankly anſwered, “ That he
choſe rather to look after his herd, and continue to
lead a quiet life in the wood, with which he was
thoroughly ſatisfied; than to wait on the Prince;
but added, that if his highneſs would give him
an opportunity of reading curious books, and of
making himſelf maſter of more learning and know-
ledge, he was ready to follow him or any body elſe.”
The Prince was highly pleaſed with his anſwer; and,
when he returned to court, prevailed on the Duke
his father, to ſend this extraordinary herdſman to
the Jeſuits College at Pont-a-Mouſſon. When
he had finiſhed his ſtudies at that ſeat of learning,
the

<page 514>
P E R S E V E R A N C E. 231
the Duke permittted him to take a journey into
France for his further improvement; and, ſoon after
his return, gave him a profeſſorſhip in the academy
of Luneville, with a penſion of 700 livres a year,
alſo made him his own librarian, which is worth
1ooo livres a year more, beſides a handſome apart-
Inent. -
He is of a moſt engaging modeſty and polite-
neſs, and, far from being aſhamed of his former
low condition, takes a pleaſure in relating the ſuc-
ceffive and gradual riſe of new ideas, in his mind,
and the pleaſing tranquillity and uninterrupted con-
tent he enjoyed in a ſituation, in all appearance,
mean and deſpicable. He ſtill keeps an apartment
in the hermitage, from whence the Duke raiſed him
to his preſent condition ; and, to perpetuate his
memory of the tranſaction, has had his picture drawn,
in which he is repreſented juſt as he was, when diſ-
covered by Baron Pſutchner, under a tree, with a
landſcape of the place, and the Prince talking to him;
this piece he has obtained leave to hang up in the
Duke's library.
N A N c Y.
Here is a humourous eſſay, mamma, which Miſs
Forreſter has pointed out to me, that I think will
divert us, if you will pleaſe to hear it. We could
not tell whether the writer meant to teach any par-
ticular duty; however, I dare ſay, my father will
draw inſtruction as well as amuſement from it, and
ſhew us its moral intention. w
MRs.
*

<page 515>
232 T H E F A M I L. Y. P. I C T U R E,
MRs. E G E R To N.
Well, my dear, pray let us hear it.
H E A L T H :
Or the V 1 c A R.
GOING to viſit an old friend at his country
feat laſt week, I found him at backgammon with
the Vicar of the pariſh. My friend received me.
with the heartieſt welcome, and introduced the Doc-
tor to my ačquaintance. This gentleman, who
ſeemed to be about fifty, and of a florid and healthy
conſtitution, ſurveyed me all over with great atten-
tion, and, after a ſlight nod of the head, ſat himſelf
down without opening his mouth. I was a little
hurt at the ſupercilious behaviour of this divine;
which my friend obſerving told me very pleaſantly,
that I was rather too old to be intitled to the Doc-
tor's complaiſance; for that he ſeldom beſtowed it,
but upon the young and vigorous: But, ſays he, you
ſhall know him better ſoon, and you will find him.
altogether as odd a charaćter, as he is a worthy one.
The Dočtor made no reply to this raillery, but con-
tinued ſome time with his eyes fixed upon me, and,
at laſt, ſhaking his head, and turning to my friend,
aſked if he would play out the other hit. My friend
excuſed himſelf from engaging any more that even-
ing, and ordered a bottle of wine, with pipes and
tobacco, to be ſet on the table. The Vicar filled
his

<page 516>
H. E. A. L. T. H. 233
his pipe, and drank very cordially to my friend, ſtill
eyeing me with a ſeeming diſlike, and neither drink-
ing my health, nor ſpeaking a ſingle word to me.
As I have long accuſtomed myſelf to drink nothing
but water, I called for a bottle of it, and drank
glaſs for glaſs with them; which upon the Dočtor’s
obſerving, he ſhook his head at my friend, and, in
a whiſper loud enough for me to hear, ſaid, “Poor
man, it is all over with him, I ſee.’ My friend
ſmiled, and anſwered, in the ſame audible whiſper,
‘No, no, Dočtor, he intends to live as long as
either of us.” He then addreſſed himſelf to me on
the occurrences of the town, and engaged me in a
very chearful converſation, which laſted till I with-
drew to reſt; at which time the Dočtor roſe from
his chair, drank a bumper to my health, and, giving
me a hearty ſhake by the hand, told me I was a very
jolly old gentleman, and that he wiſhed to be better
acquainted with me, during my ſtay in the country.
I roſe early in the morning, and found the Dočtor
in the breakfaſting room. He ſaluted me with great
civility, and told me he had left his bed and home
fooner than uſual, to have the pleaſure of taking a
walk with me. “Your friend, ſays he, is but lately
recovered from an attack of the gout, and will hardly
be ſtirring, till we have gone over his improvements.”
I accepted the propoſal, and we walked through a
very elegant garden into the moſt beautiful fields
that can be imagined; which as I ſtopped to admire,
the Dočtor began thus: “Theſe are, indeed, very
delightful

<page 517>
234. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
delightful grounds; and I wiſh, with all my heart,
that the owner of them was leſs troubled with the
gout, that I might hold him in more reſpect.’—
* Reſpect Doctor,’ ſaid I, interrupting him, “Does
a painful diffemper, acquired by no act of intem-
perance, leſſen your reſpect?’ ‘ It does indeed, and
I wiſh, in this inſtance, I could help it; for I am .
under many obligations to your friend. There is
another very worthy gentleman in the neighbour-
hood, who preſented me to this vicarage; he has
the misfortune to labour under an inveterate ſcurvy, ,
which, by ſubječting him to continual head-achs, .
muſt, of courſe, ſhorten his days; and ſo I never go
near him.’
I was going to interrupt the Dočtor again, when
a coach and ſix drove by us along the road, and in
it a gentleman, who let down the glaſs, and made
the Dočtor a very reſpectful bow; which inſtead of
returning, he looked off with a ſtately air, and .
took no notice of him. This inſtance of his beha-
viour, together with the converſation that had paſſ-
ed between us, raiſed my curioſity to a very high
degree, and ſet me upon aſking him who the gen-
tleman was. “Sir,’ ſays he, “that unfortunate ob-
jećt is a man of eight thouſand a year eſtate; and,
from that conſideration, he expects the return of a
bow from every man he meets. But I, who know
him, know alſo that he is dying of an aſthma; and
as (bleſſed be God for it) I am in perfect health, I -
do not chuſe to put myſelf on a level with ſuch a
perſon.

<page 518>
h E A L T H. 235
perſon. Health is the only valuable thing on earth;
and, while I am in poſſeſſion of that, I look upon
myſelf as a much greater man than he. With all
his fortune, he would rejoice to be the poor Vicar
of ***, with my conſtitution. I pull off my hat
to no ſuch perſons. Believe me, he has not many
months to live.
I made no reply to this converſation of the Vicar,
and he went on thus: “You are an old man, Sir,
and, I believe, were a little fatigued with your journey
laſt night, which I miſtook for infirm health, and
therefore was wanting in the civilities that I ſhould
otherwiſe have ſhewn you; but your converſation
afterwards proved you to be a very hearty man, and
I ſaw you reſolved to continue ſo by your tempe-
rance; for which I honour you, and, as I told you
then, ſhall be glad of your acquaintance. It is true,
you are old, and therefore, my inferior; but you
are healthy and temperate, and not beneath the
notice of much younger men.”
In this manner we talked on, till we came to a
hedge, where ſome labouring men were repairing
the fences. My companion accoſted them with the
utmoſt complaiſance and good nature: ‘Ay,’ ſays
he, turning to me, “ theſe are men worth mixing
with. You ſee their riches in their looks. Have
you any of your lords in town that have ſuch poſ-
ſeſſions : I know none of theſe lords,’ ſays he, “my-
ſelf, but I am told they are all ſo fickly and diſeaſed,
that a man in health would ſcorn to pull off his hat
to

<page 519>
236 T H E F A M I L. Y. P. I C T U R E.
to them.” He then entered into a familiar con-
verſation with, the men, and, after throwing them
ſix-pence to drink, paſſed on.
There now overtook us in the lane a company of
ſportſmen, ſetting out for the chace. Moſt of them
faluted the Dočtor, as they paſſed; but he took no
notice of any of them, except one, whom he ſhook
bands with over the hedge, and told him he intended
taking a dinner with him the next day. “ That
gentleman, ſays he, is worth as much health as any
man in England; he hunts only by way of exerciſe,
and never takes a leap where there is the leaſt dan-
ger. But, as for the reſt, they are flying over every
hedge and gate in their way, and, if they eſcape
broken necks in the morning, they are deſtroying
themſelves more effectually by intemperance in the
evening. No, no, theſe are no companions for me;
I hope, with the bleſſing of Heaven, to outlive a
ſcore of them.” -
We came, ſoon after, to a little neat houſe upon
the road, where, the Dočtor told me, lived a very
agreeable widow lady, to whom he had formerly paid
his addreſſes. “She had at that time,’ ſays he, “as large
a fortune of health, as any woman in the county;
but ſhe has ſince mortgaged it to the apothecary for
ſlops, and I have taken my leave of her. She was
determined to be a widow, and ſo married an officer,
who got his head knocked off at Fontenoy. Theſe
are a ſort of men that I make no acquaintance with;
they hold their lives on too precarious a tenure.”
- • But

<page 520>
H e A L *t H. 237
:
• But they are uſeful members of ſociety,” ſaid I,
* and command our eſteem.” “That may be, Sir,"
returned the Dočtor, ‘ and ſo are the miners in our
coal-pits, who are every hour in danger of being
buried alive. But there is a ſubordination of de-
gree, which ought ſtrićly to be obſerved; and a
man in ill health, or of a dangerous profeſſion, ſhould
not think himſelf on a level with people of ſound
conſtitutions and leſs hazardous employments.”
I was determined to interrupt the Doctor no more;
and he went on thus: “You may poſſibly think me
an odd kind of a man; but I am no enemy to people
of bad conſtitutions, nor ever withhold my bounty
from them, when their neceſſities demand it; but,
though I am doing them all the ſervices in my pow-
er, I cannot conſent to lower myſelf ſo far as to
make them my companions. It is more in the
power of the phyſician to confer rank, than the
King ; for the gifts of fortune are nothing; health
is the only riches that a man ought to ſet a value on;
and, without it, all men are poor, let their eſtates
be what they will. If I differ from the common
opinion in this particular, I do alſo in another. The
tradeſman or mechanic, who has acquired an eſtate
by his induſtry, is ſeldom reckoned a gentleman;
but it was always my ſentiment, that a man, who
makes his own conſtitution, has more merit in him,
than he that was born with it; the one is the work
of chance, the other of deſign; and it is for this
reaſon that I am ſeen ſo often with your friend; for,
though

<page 521>
238 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
though the gout is generally an impoveriſhing diſ-
temper, yet temperance and regularity may in time
ſubdue it; whereas the gentleman, who drove by us
with his fix horſes, has an incurable aſthma, which
renders him, with his large eſtate, as poor as the
- beggar who is dying under a hedge. The more you
think of theſe things, the more you will be of my
opinion. A poor man in health is a companion for
a king; but a lord without it is a poor man indeed:
And why ſhould he expect the homage of other peo-
ple, when the very meaneſt of his domeſtics would
refuſe to change places with him.”
My companion was ſtopped ſhort in his harangue
by our arrival at my friend’s houſe. We found him
in good health and ſpirits, which greatly heightened
the Vicar's complaiſance; and, as I took care to
conceal from him the complaints and infirmities of
old age, I paſſed a very agreeable week, and was ſo
much in his good graces, that, at my departure, he
preſented me with Dr. Turlington’s balſam, and a
paper of Dr. James's powder: There,’ ſays he,
• they may rob you of your money, if they pleaſe;
but, for bruiſes and fevers, you may ſet them at de-
fiance.” - - -
On my return home, I made many ſerious re-
fle&tions on this whimſical charaćter; and, in the
end, could not help wiſhing, that, under certain li-
mitations, the ſentiments of the Vicar were a little
more in faſhion. Health is certainly the riches of
life; and, if men were to derive their rank from that
alone,
|
|
|
|
|
|

<page 522>
H E a l T H. 239
2
alone, it would, in all probability, make them more
careful to preſerve it. Society might be benefited
by it in another reſpect, as it would tend to keep
complaining people at home, who are the perpetual
diſturbers of all companies abroad.
M. R. E. G E R To N.
Notwithſtanding the whinifical turn which is
given to this gentleman, I think his mode of eſti-
mating riches is exceedingly juſt. With reſpect to
what is called wealth, every perſon muſt feel how
inferior that is to a ſound and good conſtitution;
and even great virtues and abilities, without health,
are uſeleſs to ſociety. The moral, therefore, is
ſtrong and obvious, namely, that it is a duty we owe
to ſociety, to be careful of our health.
We are obliged to Miſs Forreſter for pointing
out to us ſo ingenious and uſeful an eſſay.
D I A L O G U E XX.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
OU know, my children, we are preparing to
leave the peaceful retirement of the country, a
little while, for town; there to ſee, and be ſeen 5
there

<page 523>
243 T H E - F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
there to remark the buſy purſuits of men, in
their chace after pleaſure, wealth, fame, titles, or
whatever elſe ſeems to them moſt deſirable. When
we are there, I ſhallendeavour, as I have before done,
to turn theſe living leſions to your advantage; but as
the preſent is the laſt converſation we ſhall enjoy in
this place till our return, I will ſpeak to you upon
the ſubječt which appears moſt immediately uſeful;
I mean Decorum, and the guarded manner in which
young people, who are not ſufficiently aware of
what are, and what are not improprieties, ought to
behave. - -
Levity, though it ſometimes is produćtive of
gaiety, and the agreeably fallies which are ſo enli-
vening to converſation, has frequently, likewiſe, in-
curred the moſt poignant diſtreſs, and involved its
poſſeſſors in irretrievable miſery and misfortune.
There are two ſorts of levity equally to be avoided;
a levity of tongue, and a levity of condućt: to in-
dulge in either is dangerous, for they are equally
difficult to ſubdue, when once habit has made them
familiar. The loquacious barber of Athens is a
ſtrong inſtance of this truth.
A barber who kept a ſhop at the extremity of the
city of Athens, was the firſt who heard of the defeat
of the Athenians, in Sicily, from a ſlave who had
fled from the field of battle. This barber, impa-
tient to be the man who ſhould firſt divulge the news,
inſtantly left his ſhop, and ran into the city, telling
every body what he had heard. Theſe diſagreeable
- tidings

<page 524>
L E v 1 T Y. 241
.
tidings preſently occaſioned a great tumult, and the
people flocking to the market-place, ſurrounded the
barber, and demanded how he came to the know-
Hedge of this defeat; to which he could give no ſatis-
factory anſwer, nor produce the leaſt ſhadow of
proof in ſupport of his aſſertion, he having, in his
eagerneſs to be the firſt narrator, forgot even ſo much
as to enquire the name of the ſlave who had told
him. This exaſperated the people, who were very
willing to believe the whole to be a lye of the barber’s
own invention, and, in their anger, they hurried
him away, and ſtretched him upon the rack for an
inscendiary. In the mean time, however, a con-
firmation of the account arrived, and the people,
eager to hear the particulars, ran and forgot the
poor barber, leaving him upon the wheel; where he
remained till the evening, when, at laſt, ſomebody
recollecting him, he was taken down. No ſooner
was he releaſed, than, inſtead of thinking about the
pain he had ſuffered, or the cure of his hurts, he
began to enquire the particulars of the battle, how
many were priſoners, how many had eſcaped, whe-
ther the General was killed, and in what manner he
died. -
F A N N Y.
Dear papa, I have often heard how curious the
women are but do you think women are as fond of
news, and tattling, as this barber
Vo L. II. M - Mr.

<page 525>
242. T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R e.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
Well bred and prudent women never are, my
dear. But there are many men beſide the barber of
Athens, who have been greatly injured by the incon-
tinence and levity of their tongues. You may learn
this from the following hiſtory, which a certain young
gentleman has given the world of his own impru-
dence. -
Y O U T H F U L L E W IT Y :
Or the Neceſſity of knowing your CoMPANY.
TO be courteous to all, but familiar with few,
is a maxim which I once deſpiſed, as originally pro-
ceeding from a mean and contračted mind, the frigid
caution of weakneſs and timidity. A tame and in-
diſcriminate civility I imputed to a dread of the con-
tempt or the petulance of others, to fears from which
the wit and the gentleman are exempted by a con-
ſciouſneſs of their own dignity, by their power to
repreſs inſolence, and filence ridicule; and a general
ſhyneſs and reſerve I confidered as the reproach of
our country, as the effect of an illiberal education,
by which neither a polite addreſs, an eaſy confidence,
or a general acquaintance with public life, is to be
acquired. This opinion, which continued to flatter
the levity and pride that produced it, was ſtrength-
ened by the example of thoſe whoſe manner, in the
diffidence of youth, I wiſhed to imitate, who entered
- a mixed

<page 526>
Y O U T H F U L L E v. I T Y. 243
ſ:
º
:
º
a mixed company with an air of ſerene familiarity,
accoſted every man like an old acquaintance, and
thought only of making ſport for the reſt of any
with whom their caprice ſhould happen to be of.
fended, without regard to their age, charaćter, or
condition.
But I now wiſh, that I had regulated my con-
dućt by the maxim which I deſpiſed, for I ſhould
then have eſcaped a misfortune which I can never
retrieve ; and the ſenſe of which I am now endea-
vouring to ſuſpend, by relating it to you as a leſſon
to others, and confidering my loſs of happineſs as an
acquiſition of wiſdom.
While I was in France with a travelling tutor, I
received a letter which acquainted me, that my
father, who had been long declining, was dead;
and that it was neceſſary I ſhould immediately return
to England, to take poſſeſſion of his eſtate, which
was not inconfiderable, though there were mort-
gages upon it to near half its value. -
When I arrived, I found a letter which the old
gentleman had written and dire&ted to me with his
own hand. It contained ſome general rules for my
conduct, and ſome animadverſions upon his own:
he took notice of the incumbrance under which he
left me the paternal inheritance, which had deſcended
through many generations, and expreſſed the moſt
earneſt deſire, that it might yet be tranſmitted intire
to poſterity: with this view, he ſaid, he had nego-
tiated a marriage between me and the only daughter
– _º - M 2 of

<page 527>
*
- o
244 r H E F A M H L y : P 1 c 1: U R E.
of his old friend, Sir George Horheſtead of the
North, an amiable young lady, whoſe alliance
would be an honour to my family, and whoſe for-
tune would much more than redeem my eſtate.
He had given the knight a faithful account of his
affairs; who, after having taken ſome time to con-
fider the propoſal and conſult his friends, con-
ſented to the match, upon condition that his daughter
and I ſhould prove agreeable to each other, and my
behaviour ſhould confirm the charaćter which had
been given of me. My father added, that he hoped
to have lived till this alliance had taken place ; but
as Providence had otherwiſe determined, he intreated,
as his laſt requeſt, that as ſoon as my affairs ſhould
be ſettled and decency would permit, I would make
Sir George a viſit, and negle&t nothing to accom.
pliſh his purpoſe.
I was touched with the zeal and tenderneſs of
parental affection which was then directing rne to
happineſs, after the heart that felt it had ceaſed to
beat, and the hand that expreſſed it was moulder-
ing in the duſt. I had ſeen the lady, not indeed
ſince we were children; but I remembered that her
perſon was agreeable, and her temper ſweet: I did
not, therefore, heſitate a moment, whether my fa-
ther's injunction ſhould be obeyed. I proceeded to
ſettle his affairs; I took an account of his debts and
credits, viſited the tenants, recovered my uſual gaiety,
and at the end of about nine months ſet out for Sir
George's ſeat in the North; having before opened
|
|
- 2n

<page 528>
Y O U T H F U L L E V I T Y. 245
an epiſtolary correſpondence, and expreſſed my im-
patience to poſſeſs the happineſs which my father
had ſo kindly ſecured.
I was better pleaſed to be well mounted, than to
loll in a chariot, or be jumbled in a poſt-chaiſe ;
and I knew that Sir George was an old ſportſman,
a plain hearty blade, who would like me better in a
pair of buckſkin breeches on the back of a good
hunter, than in a trimmed ſuit and a gaudy equi-
page: I, therefore, ſet out on horſeback with only
one ſervant, and reached Stilton the firſt night.
In the morning, as I was mounting, a gentle-
man, who had juſt got on horſeback before me,
ordered his ſervant to make enquiry concerning the
road, which I happened to overhear, and told him
with great familiarity, that I was going the ſame
way, and if he pleaſed we would travel together: to
this he conſented, with as much frankneſs, and as
little ceremony; and I ſet forward, greatly delighted
that chance had afforded me a companion.
We immediately entered into converſation, and I
ſoon found that he had been abroad : we extolled
the roads and the policy of France, the cities, the
palaces, and the villas; entered into a critical exa-
mination of the moſt celebrated ſeats in England,
the peculiarities of the building and ſituation, croſs-
ways, market-towns, the impoſition of innkeepers,
and the ſports of the field; topics by which we mutu-
ally recommended ourſelves to each other, as we had
both opportunities to diſcover equal knowledge, and
M 3 to

<page 529>
246 T H E F A M 1 l y P 1 c T U R E.
to diſplay truth with ſuch evidence as prevented di-
verſity of opinion.
After we had rode about two hours, we overtook
another gentleman, whom we accoſted with the
ſame familiarity that we had uſed to each other; we
aſked him how far he was going and which way, at
what rate he travelled, where he put up, and many
other queſtions of the ſame kind. The gentleman,
who appeared to be near fifty, received our addreſs
with great coolneſs, returned ſhort and indirect an-
ſwers to our enquiries, and, often looking with
great attention on us both, ſometimes put forward
that he might get before us, and ſometimes checked
his horſe that he might remain behind. But we
were reſolved to diſappoint him; and, finding that
his reſerve increaſed, and he was viſibly diſpleaſed,
we winked at each other, and determined the old
put ſhould afford us ſome ſport. After we had rode
together upon very ill terms more than half an hour,
my companion with an air of ceremonious gravity
aſked him, if he knew any houſe upon the road
where he might be accommodated with an agreeable
girl. The gentleman, who was, I believe, afraid
of giving us a pretence to quarrel, did not reſent this
inſult any otherwiſe than by making no reply. I
then began to talk to my companion as if we had
been old acquaintances, reminding him that the gen-
tleman extremely reſembled a perſon whom we had
once ſeen coming out of a bagnio with a certain old
acquaintance of ours; and, indeed, that his preſent
- - reſerve

<page 530>
Y O U T H F U L I, E v. I T Y. 247
reſerve made me ſuſpect him to be the ſame ; but
that as we were willing to forget the affair, we hoped
he would be ſo too, and that we ſhould have the
pleaſure of dining together at the next inn. The
gentleman was ſtill filent; but as his perplexity and
reſentment viſibly increaſed, he proportionably in-
creaſed our entertainment, which did not, however,
laſt long, for he ſuddenly turned down a lane; upon
which we ſet up a horſe laugh that continued till he
was out of hearing, and then purſuing our journey,
we talked of the adventure, which afforded us
converſation and merriment for the reſt of the
day. -
The next morning we parted, and in the evening
I arrived at Homeſtead Hall. The old knight re-
ceived me with great affection, and immediately in-
troduced me to his daughter, whom I now thought
the fineſt woman I had ever ſeen. I could eaſily diſ-
cover, that I was not welcome to her merely upon
her father’s recommendation, and I enjoyed by an-
ticipation the felicity which I conſidered as within
my reach. But the pleaſing ſcene, in which I had
ſuffered my imagination to wander, ſuddenly diſap-
peared as by the power of enchantment. Without
any viſible motive, the behaviour of the whole family
was changed, my aſfiduities to the lady were re-
preſſed, ſhe was never to be found alone, the knight
treated me with a cold civility, I was no longer a
party in their viſits, nor was I willingly attended
even by the ſervants. I made many attempts to diſ-
M 4 COWer

<page 531>
248 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
cover the cauſe of this misfortune, but without ſuc-
ceſs; and one morning, when I had drawn Sir
George into the garden by himſelf, and was about to
urge him upon the ſubject, he prevented me by ſay-
ing, that his promiſe to my father, for whom he had
the higheſt regard, as I well knew, was conditional;
that he had always reſolved to leave his daughter a
free choice, and that ſhe had requeſted him to ac-
quaint me, that her affections were otherwiſe en-
gaged, and to entreat that I would, therefore, diſ-
continue my addreſſes. My ſurprize and concern at
this declaration, were ſuch as left me no power to
reply; and I ſaw Sir George turn from me and go
into the houſe, without making any attempt to ſtop
him, or to obtain a further explanation. After-
wards, indeed, I frequently expoſtulated, entreated,
and complained; but, perceiving that all was inef-
feółual, I took my leave, and determined that I
would ſtill ſolicit by letter; for the lady had taken
ſuch poſſeſſion of my heart, that I would joyfully
have married her, though I had been ſure that her
father would immediately have left all his fortune to
a ſtranger. -
I meditated on my epiſtolary projećt all the way
to London, and before I had been three days in town
I wrote a long letter to Sir George, in which I con-
jured him, in the ſtrongeſt terms, to account for the
change in his behaviour; and infifted, that, on this
occaſion, to conceal the truth, was in the higheſt
- degree

<page 532>
: y o U T H F U L L E v. I T Y. . 249
degree diſhonourable to himſelf, and injurious to
1116.
To this letter, after about ten days, I received
. .the following anſwer: º
-
“ S I R,
“ It is with great reluctance that I reveal the mo-
tives of my conduct, becauſe they are much to your
diſadvantage. The incloſed is a letter which I re-
ceived from a worthy gentleman in this county, and
contains a full anſwer to your enquiries, which I
had rather you ſhould receive in any hand than in
inine.
I am your humble ſervant,
GEo. Homi Est EAD.”
I immediately opened the paper incloſed, in which,
with the utmoſt impatience, I read as follows:
“ S I R,
“I ſaw a perſon with your family yeſterday at the
races, to whom, as I was ſoon after informed, you
intend to give your datighter. Upon this occaſion,
it is my indiſpenſible duty to acquaint you, that if
his charaćter is to be determined by his company, he
will inevitably entail diſeaſes and beggary upon his
poſterity, whatever be the merit of his wife, or the
affluence of his fortune. He overtook me on the
3 road from London a few weeks ago, in company
with a wretch, who by their diſcourſe appeared to,
M 5 be

<page 533>
250 T H E F. A. M. I. L. Y. P. I C T U R E.
be his old and familiar acquaintance, and whom I
well remember to have been brought before my
friend Juſtice Worthy, when I was accidentally at
his houſe, as the keeper of a brothel in Covent
Garden. He has ſince won a conſiderable ſum with
falſe dice at the maſquerade, for which he was obliged
to leave the kingdom, and is ſtill liable to a proſecu-
tion. Be aſſured that I have perfeót knowledge of
both; for ſome incidents, which it is not neceſſary
to mention, kept me near them ſo long on the road,
that it is impoſſible I ſhould be miſtaken.
..I am, Sir, your’s, &c.
JAMES TRUEMAN.”
The moment I had read this letter, the riddle was
ſolved. I knew Mr. Trueman to be the gentleman,
whom I had concurred with a ſtranger, picked up
by accident, to inſult without provocation on the
road. I was in a moment covered with confuſion;
and though I was alone, could not help hiding my
face with my hands. I abhorred my folly, which
appeared yet more enormous every time it was re-
viewed.
I courted the ſociety of a ſtranger, and a ſtranger
I perſecuted with inſult: thus I aſſociated with in-
famy, and thus fly aſſociate became known. I
hoped, however, to convince Sir George, that I
had no knowledge of the wretch whoſe infamy I had
ſhared, except that which I acquired from the letter
of his friend. But before I had taken proper mea-
ſures

<page 534>
L E W T TY O F C O N D U C T. 251
ſures for my juſtification, I had the mortification to
hear, that the lady was married to a neighbouring
gentleman, who had long made his addreſſes, and
whom Sir George had before rejected in the ardor of
his friendſhip for my father.
How narrow is the path of reștitude, and how
much may be loſt by the ſlighteſt deviation 1
M. R. E. G E R To N.
You ſee, my children, how cautious you ought
to be in your behaviour, and how circumſpect in
your choice of companions.
MR s. E G E R to N.
The ſtory of Flavilla upon this ſubjećt, is a tra-
gical, and a juſt pićture of the dreadful effects
which the want of ſtrict regard to propriety and
appearances may produce ; and to which, my chil-
dren, I intreat you to liſten with more than com-
mon attention.
*
L E W I T Y of C O N D U C T :
Or the Story of F L A v I L L.A.
FLAVILLA, juſt as ſhe had entered her four-
teenth year, was left an orphan to the care of her
mother, in ſuch circumſtances as diſappointed all
the hopes which her education had encouraged. Her
father, who lived in great elegance upon the ſalary
of a place at court, died ſuddenly without having
Mi 6 made

<page 535>
252 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E,
made any proviſion for his family, except an annuity
of one hundred pounds, which he had purchaſed for
his wife with part of her marriage portion; nor was
he poſſeſſed of any property, except the furniture of
a large houſe in one of the new ſquares, an equipage,
a few jewels, and ſome plate.
The greater part of the furniture and the equipage
were ſold to pay his debts; the jewels, which were
not of great value, and ſome uſeful pieces of the
plate, were reſerved ; and Flavilla removed with her
mother into lodgings.
But notwithſtanding this change in their circum-
{tances, they did not immediately loſe their rank.
They were ſtill viſited by a numerous and polite
acquaintance; and though ſome gratified their pride
by aſſuming an appearance of pity, and rather in-
ſulted than alleviated their diſtreſs by the whine of
condolence, and a minute compariſon of what they
had loſt with what they poſſeſſed; yet from others
they were continually receiving preſents, which ſtill
enabled them to live with genteel frugality; they
were ſtill conſidered as people of faſhion, and treated
by thoſe of a lower claſs with diſtinét reſpect.
Flavilla thus continued to move in a ſphere to
which ſhe had no claim ; ſhe was remarkably tall for
her age, and was celebrated not only for her beauty
but her wit: theſe qualifications ſhe conſidered, not
only as ſecuring whatever ſhe enjoyed by the favour
of others, but as a pledge of poſſeſſing them in her
own right by an advantageous marriage.
I - There.

<page 536>
L E V I T Y O F C O N D U C T. 253
There was a faſhionable levity in her carriage and
diſcourſe, which her mother, who knew the danger
of her ſituation, laboured to reſtrain, ſometimes with -
anger, and ſometimes with tears, but always with-
out ſucceſs. Flavilla was ever ready to anſwer, that
ſhe neither did or ſaid any thing of which ſhe had
reaſon to be aſhamed ; and therefore did not know
why ſhe ſhould be reſtrained, except in mere cour-
teſy to envy, which it was an honour to provoke; or
to ſlander, which it was a diſgrace to fear. In pro-
portion as Flavilla was more flattered and careſſed,
the influence of her mother became leſs; and though
ſhe always treated her with reſpect from a point of
good breeding, yet ſhe ſecretly deſpiſed her maxims,
and applauded her own conduct. -
Flavilla at eighteen was a celebrated toaſt; and
among other gay viſitants who frequented her tea-
table, was Clodio, a young Baronet, who had juſt
taken poſſeſſion of his title and eſtate. There were
many particulars in Clodio's behaviour, which en-
couraged Flavilla to hope that ſhe ſhould obtain him
for a huſband ; but ſhe ſuffered his aſſiduities with
ſuch apparent pleaſure, and his familiarities with ſo
little reſerve, that he ſoon ventured to diſcloſe his
intention, and make her, what he thought, a very
genteel propoſal of another kind: but whatever were
the artifices with which it was introduced, or the
terms in which it was made, Flavilla rejected it with
the utmoſt indignation and diſdain. Clodio, who,
notwithſtanding his youth, had long known and
- often

<page 537>
254 T H E - F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R e.
often pračtiſed the arts of ſedućtion, gave way to the
ſtorm, threw himſelf at her feet, imputed his offence
to the phrehzy of his paſſion, flattered her pride by
the moſt abjećt ſubmiſſion and extravagant praiſe, in-
treated her pardon, aggravated his crime, but made
no mention of atonement by marriage. This parti-
cular, which Flavilla did not fail to remark, ought
to have determined her to admit him no more : but
her vanity and her ambition were ſtill predominant,
ſhe ſtill hoped to ſucceed in her project. Clodio's
offence was tacitly forgiven, his viſits were per-
mitted, his familiarities were again ſuffered, and his
hopes revived. He had long entertained an opinion
that ſhe loved him, in which, however, it is pro-
bable, that his own vanity and her indiſcretion con-
curred to deceive him; but this opinion, though it
implied the ſtrongeſt obligation to treat her with
generoſity and tenderneſs, only determined him again
to attempt her ruin, as it encouraged him with a
probability of ſucceſs. Having therefore reſolved to
obtain her as a miſtreſs, or at once to give her up,
he thought he had little more to do, than to con-
vince her that he had taken ſuch a reſolution ; juſti-
fying it by ſome plauſible ſophiſtry, and to give her
ſome time to deliberate upon a final determination.
With this view he went a ſhort journey into the
country; having put a letter into her hand at part-
ing, in which he acquainted her, “ That he had
often refle&ted, with inexpreſſible regret, upon her
reſentment of his conduct in a late inſtance"; but
that
-

<page 538>
L E W IT Y O F C O N DU C T. 255
that the delicacy and the ardour of his affection were
inſuperable obſtacles to his marriage: that where
there was no liberty, there could be no happineſs:
that he ſhould become indifferent to the endearments
of love, when they could no longer be diſtinguiſhed
from the officiouſneſs of duty: that while they were
happy in the poſſeſſion of each other, it would be
abſurd to ſuppoſe they would part; and if this hap-
pineſs ſhould ceaſe, it would not only enſure but
aggravate their miſery to be inſeparably united :
that this event was leſs probable, in proportion as
their cohabitation was voluntary; but that he wouli
make ſuch proviſion for her upon the contingency,
as a wife would expe&t upon his death.”
Flavilla had too much underſtanding, as well as
virtue, to deliberate a moment upon this propoſal.
She gave immediate orders that Clodio ſhould be ad-
mitted no more. But his letter was a temptation
to gratify her vanity, which ſhe could not reſiſt; ſhe
ſhewed it firſt to her mother, and then to the whole
circle of her female acquaintance, with all the ex-
ultation of a hero who expoſes a vanquiſhed enemy
at the wheels of his chariot in a triumph; ſhe con-
ſidered it as an indiſputable evidence of her virtue,
as a reproof to all who had dared to cenſure the
levity of her condućt, and a licence to continue it
without apology or reſtraint.
It happened that Flavilla, ſoon after this acci-
dent, was ſeen in one of the boxes at the play-houſe,
by Mercator, a young gentleman who had juſt re-
- turned
2.

<page 539>
256 T H F F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
turned from his firſt voyage, as captain of a large
ſhip in the Levant trade, which had been purchaſed
for him by his father, whoſe fortune enabled him to
make a genteel proviſion for five ſons, of whom
Mercator was the youngeſt, and who expečted to
ſhare his eſtate, which was perſonal, in equal pro-
portions at his death.
Mercator was captivated with her beauty, but
diſcouraged by the ſpiendor of her appearance, and
the rank of her company. He was urged, rather
by curioſity than hope, to enquire who ſhe was ;
and he gained ſuch a knowledge of her circum-
ſtances, as relieved him from deſpair.
As he knew not how to get admiſſion to her com-
pany, and had no deſign upon her virtue, he wrote
in the firſt ardour of his paſſion to her mother; giv-
ing a faithful account of his fortune and dependence,
and entreating that he might be permitted to viſit
Flavilla as a candidate for her affection. The lady,
after having made ſome enquiries, by which the ac-
count that Mercator had given her was confirmed,
ſent him an invitation, and received his firſt viſit
alone. She told him, that as Flavilla had no for-
tune, and as a confiderable part of his own was de-
pendent upon his father's will, he ought, therefore, to
obtain his conſent, before any other ſtep was taken.
To this counſel, ſo ſalutary, Mercator was heſitating
what to reply, when Flavilla came in, an accident
which he was now only ſolicitous to improve. Fla-
villa was not diſpleaſed either with his perſon or his
- -- addreſs.

<page 540>
1. E v i t Y of co N Duc T. 257
addreſs. The frankncſ, and gaiety of her diſpoſition
ſoon made him forget that he was a ſtranger. A
converſation commenced, during which they became
yet more pleaſed with each other ; and having thus
ſurmounted the difficulty of a firſt viſit, he thought
no more of the mother, as he believed her auſpices
were not neceſſary to his ſucceſs.
His viſits were often repeated, and he became every
hour more impatient of delay. A thought of his
father would now and then, indeed, intervene; but
being determined to gratiſy his wiſhes at all events,
he concluded with a ſagacity almoſt univerſal on
theſe occaſions, that of two evils, to marry without
his conſent, was leſs than to marry againſt it; and
one evening, after the lovers had ſpent the after-
noon by themſelves, they went out in a kind of fro-
lic, which Mercator had propoſed in the vehemence
of his paſſion, and to which Flavilla had conſented
in the giddineſs of her indiſcretion, and were mar-,
ried at May-Fair chapel.
-In the firſt interval of recollection after this pre-
cipitate ſtep, Mercator confidered, that he ought to
be the firſt to acquaint his father of the new alli-
ance which had been made in his family: but as he
had not fortitude enough to do it in perſon, he ex-
preſſed it in the beſt terms he could conceive by a
letter; and requeſted that he might be permitted to
preſent his wife for the parental benediction, which
alone was wanting to complete his felicity.
The

<page 541>
258 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
The old gentleman, whoſe charaćter. I cannot
better expreſs than in the faſhionable phraſe which
has been contrived to palliate falſe principles and
diſſolute manners, had been a gay man, and was well
acquainted with the town. He had often heard
Flavilla toaſted by rakes of quality, and had often
ſeen her at public places. Her beauty and her de-
pendence, the gaiety of her dreſs, the multitude of
her admirers, the levity of her condućt, and all the
circumſtances of her ſituation, had concurred to render
her chara&ter ſuſpected; and he was diſpoſed to judge
of it with yet leſs charity, when, as ſhe had offended
him by marrying his ſon, whom he confidered as
diſgraced and impoveriſhed, and whoſe misfortune,
as it was irretrievable, he reſolved not to alleviate,
but increaſe: a reſolution by which fathers, who
have fooliſh and diſobedient ſons, uſually diſplay their
own kindneſs and wiſdom. As ſoon as he read
Mercator’s letter, he execrated him for a fool, who
had been gulled by the artifices of a looſe woman,
to ſcreen her from public infamy, by fathering her
children, and ſecuring her from a priſon by appro-
priating her debts. In his anſwer, which he wrote
only to gratify his reſentment, he told him, that
“ if he had taken Flavilla into keeping, he would
have overlooked it; and if her extravagance had
diſtreſſed him, he would have ſatisfied his creditors;
but that his marriage was not to be forgiven; that
he ſhould never have a ſhilling of his money; and
that he was determined to ſee him no more.”
Mercator,

<page 542>
L E W P T Y O F. C. O N D U C T. 259
2.
Mercator, who was more provoked by this out-
rage than grieved at his loſs, diſdained to reply;
and believing that he had now moſt reaſon to be of
fended, could not be perſuaded to ſolicit a reconci-
liation.-
He hired a genteel apartment for his wife of an
upholſterer, who, with a view to let lodgings, had
taken and furniſhed a large houſe, near Leiceſter-
fields; and in about two months, he left her, and
made another voyage.
He had received viſits of congratulation from her
numerous acquaintance, and had returned them as
a pledge of his deſire that they ſhould be repeated.
But a remembrance of the gay multitude, which,
while he was at home, had flattered his vanity, as
ſoon as he was abſent, alarmed his ſuſpicions. He
had, indeed, no particular cauſe of jealouſy; but his
anxiety aroſe merely from a ſenſe of the temptations
to which ſhe was expoſed, and the impoſſibility of
his ſuperintending her condućt. -
In the mean time Flavilla continued to flutter.
round the ſame giddy circle in which ſhe had ſhone.
ſo long; the number of her viſitants rather increaſed
than diminiſhed; the gentlemen attended with yet
greater aſſiduity; and ſhe continued to encourage
their civilities by the ſame indiſcreet familiarity: She
was one night at the maſquerade, another night at
an opera; ſometimes at a route; ſometimes ram-
bling in parties of pleaſure in ſhort excurſions from
town;

<page 543>
260' T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
town; ſhe came home at midnight, in the morning,
and ſometimes ſhe was abſent ſeveral nights together.
This conduct was the cauſe of much ſpeculation
and uneaſineſs to the good man and woman of the
houſe. At firſt they ſuſpected that Flavilla was no
better than a woman of pleaſure; and that the perſon
who had hired the lodgings for her as his wife, and
had diſappeared upon pretence of a voyage to ſea,
had been employed to impoſe upon them, by con-
cealing her charaćter, in order to obtain ſuch accom-
modations for her as ſhe could not ſo eaſily have
procured had it been known: But as theſe ſuſpicions
made them watchful and inquiſitive, they ſoon diſ-
covered, that many ladies by whom ſhe was viſited,
were of good chara&ter and faſhion. Her condućt,
however, ſuppoſing her to be a wife, was ſtill inex-
cuſable, and ſtill endangered their credit and ſubſiſt-
ence: hints were often dropped by the neighbours
to the diſadvantage of her character; and an elderly
maiden lady, who lodged in the ſecond floor, had.
given warning: the family was diſturbed at all hours
in the night, and the door was crouded all day with
meſſengers and viſitants to Flavilla.
One day, therefore, the miſtreſs of the houſe took
an opportunity to remonſtrate, though in the moſt.
diſtant and reſpectful terms, and with the utmoſt
diffidence and caution. She told Flavilla, “ That
ſhe was a fine young lady, that her huſband was
abroad, that ſhe kept a great deal of company, and
that the world was cenſorious : ſhe wiſhed that leſs
w occaſion

<page 544>
L E W IT Y O F C O N D U C T. 261
occaſion for ſcandal was given; and hoped to be
excuſed the liberty ſhe had taken. Flavilla might be
ruined by thoſe ſlanders which could have no influ-
ence upon the great, and which, therefore, the great
were not ſolicitous to avoid.”
This addreſs, however ambiguous, and however
gentle, was eaſily underſtood, and fiercely reſented.
Flavilla, proud of her virtue, and impatient of con-
troul, would have deſpiſed the counſel of a philoſo-
pher, if it had implied an impeachment of her con-
duct: before a perſon ſo much her inferior, there-
fore, ſhe was under no reſtraint; ſhe anſwered with
a mixture of contempt and indignation, “That thoſe
only who did not know her, would dare to take any
liberty with her charašter; and warned her to pro-
pagate no ſcandalous report at her peril.” Flavilla
immediately roſe from her ſeat, and the miſtreſs of
the houſe departed without reply, though ſhe was
ſcarce leſs offended than her lodger, and from that
moment ſhe determined, when Mercator returned,
to give warning.
Mercator's voyage was proſperous, and, after an
abſence of about ten months, he came back. The
woman, to whom her huſband had left the whole ma–
nagement of the lodgings, and who perſiſted in her
purpoſe, ſoon found an opportunity to put it in exe-
cution. Mercator, as his part of the contract had
been punctually ſulfilled, thought he had ſome cauſe
to be offended, and inſiſted to know her reaſons for
compelling him to leave her houſe. Theſe ſhe was
- - very

<page 545>
262 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
very unwilling to give; and as he perceived that ſhe
evaded his queſtion, he became more ſolicitous to
obtain an anſwer. After much heſitation, which,
perhaps, had a worſe effect than any tale which ma-
lice could have invented, ſhe told him, that “ The
lady kept a great deal of company, and often ſtaid
out very late; that ſhe had always been uſed to quiet
and regularity; and was determined to let her apart-
ment to ſome perſon in a more private ſtation.”
At this account Mercator changed countenance;
for he inferred from it juſt as much more than truth
as he believed it to be leſs. After ſome moments of
ſuſpence, he conjured her to conceal nothing from
him, with an emotion which convinced her that ſhe
had already ſaid too much. She then aſſured him,
“ That he had no reaſon to be alarmed; for that
ſhe had no exception to his lady, but thoſe gaieties
which her ſtation and the faſhion ſufficiently autho-
rized.” Mercator's ſuſpicions, however, were not
wholly removed; and he began to think he had
found a confidante whom it would be his intereſt to
truſt: he, therefore, in the weakneſs of jealouſy,
confeſſed, that, “He had ſome doubts concerning
his wife, which it was of the utmoſt importance to
his honour, and his peace to have reſolved : he en-
treated her that he might continue in the apart-
ment another year; that, as he ſhould again leave
the kingdom in a ſhort time, ſhe would ſuffer no in-
cident, which might confirm either his hopes or his
fears, to eſcape her notice in his abſence; and that
at

<page 546>
L E W IT Y O F C O N DU C T. 263
at his return ſhe would give him ſuch an account as
would at leaſt deliver him from the torment of ſuſ-
pence, and determine his future conduct.”
Mercator, however, concealed his ſuipicions from
his wife; and, indeed, in her preſence they were
forgotten. Her manner of life he began ſeriouſly
to diſapprove; but being well acquainted with her
temper, in which great ſweetneſs was blended with
a high ſpirit, he would not embitter the pleaſure of
a ſhort ſtay by altercation, chiding, and tears: but
when her mind was melted into tenderneſs at his de-
parture, he claſped her in an extacy of fondneſs to
his boſom, and intreated her to behave with reſerve
and circumſpection; “Becauſe,” ſaid he, “I know
that my father keeps a watchful eye upon your con-
dućt, which may, therefore, confirm or remove his .
diſpleaſure, and either intercept or beſtow ſuch an
increaſe of our fortune as will prevent the pangs of
ſeparation, which muſt othe, wife ſo often return,
and in a ſhort time unite us to part no more.”
To this caution ſhe had then no power to reply;
and they parted with mutual proteſtations of unal-
terable love. -
Flavilla, ſoon after ſhe was thus left in a fort of
widowhood a ſecond time, found herſelf pregnant;
and within ſomewhat leſs than eight months after
Mercator’s return from his firſt voyage, ſhe hap-
pened to ſtumble as ſhe was going up ſtairs, and
being immediately taken ill, was brought to bed be-
fore the next morning. -
It

<page 547>
264. T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
f -
It was now neceſſary that the vigils of whiſt and
the tumults of balls and viſits ſhould, for a while,
be ſuſpended ; and in this interval of languor and
retirement Flavilla firſt became thoughtful. She
often reflected upon Mercator's caution when they
laſt parted, which had made an indelible impreſſion
upon her mind, though it had produced no alteration
in her condućt : notwithſtanding the manner in
which it was expreſſed, and the reaſon upon which
it was founded, ſhe began to fear that it might have
been ſecretly prompted by jealouſy. The birth,
therefore, of her firſt child in his abſence, at a time
ſo premature, was an accident which greatly alarm-
ed her: but there was yet another, for which it was
ftill leſs in her power to account, and which, there-
fore, alarmed her ſtill more.
It happened that ſome civilities which ſhe receiv-
ed from a lady who ſat next her at an opera, and
whom ſhe had never ſeen before, introduced a con-
verſation which ſo much delighted her, that ſhe
gave her a preſſing invitation to viſit her: this in-
vitation was accepted, and in a few days the viſit
was paid. Flavilla was not leſs pleaſed at the ſecond
interview, than ſhe had been at the firſt; and with-
out making any other enquiry concerning the lady
than where ſhe lived, took the firſt opportunity to
wait upon her. The apartment in which ſhe was
received was the ground floor of an elegant houſe,
at a ſmall diſtance from St. James's palace. It hap-
pened that Flavilla was placed near the window;
and

<page 548>
1. Ev 1 TY of co N DU c T. 265
and a party of the horſe-guards riding through the
ftreets, ſhe expected to ſee ſome of the royal family,
and haſtily threw up the ſaſh. A gentleman who
was paſſing by at the ſame inſtant, turned about at
the noiſe of the window, and Flavilla no ſooner ſaw
his face than ſhe knew him to be the father of Mer-
cator. After looking firſt ſteadfaſtly at her, and then
glancing his eye at the lady whom ſhe was viſiting,
he affected a contemptuous ſneer, and went on.
Flavilla, who had been thrown into ſome confuſion,
by the ſudden and unexpected fight of a perſon, who,
ſhe knew, conſidered her as the diſgrace of his fa-
mily, and the ruin of his child, now changed coun-
tenance, and haſtily retired to another part of the
room: ſhe was touched both with grief and anger
at this ſilent inſult, of which, however, ſhe did not
then ſuſpect the cauſe. It is, indeed, probable, that
the father of Mercator would no where have looked
upon her with complacency; but as ſoon as he ſaw
her companion, he recollected that ſhe was the fa-
vourite miſtreſs of an old courtier, and that this was
the houſe in which he kept her in great ſplendor.
It happened that Flavilla, ſoon after this accident,
diſcovered the charaćter of her new acquaintance;
and never remembered by whom ſhe had been ſeen
in her company, without the utmoſt regret and ap-
prehenſion. -
She now reſolved to move in a leſs circle, and
with more circumſpection. In the mean time her
little boy grew very faſt; and it could no longer be
Vol. II. N known

<page 549>
266 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R e.
known by his appearance, that he had been born too
ſoon. His mother frequently gazed on him with
overflowing eyes; and though her pleaſures were
now become domeſtic, yet ſhe feared left that which
had produced, ſhould deſtroy them. After much de-
liberation, ſhe determined that ſhe would conceal the
child’s age from its father; believing it prudent to pre-
vent a ſuſpicion, which, however ill founded, it might
be difficult to remove, as her juſtification would de-
pend wholly upon the teſtimony of her dependents;
and her mother's and her own would neceſſarily be-
come doubtful, when every one would have reaſon
to conclude, that it would ſtill have been the ſame,
ſuppoſing the contrary to have been true. -
Such was the ſtate of Flavilla’s mind, and her
little boy was ſix months old, when Mercator re-
turned. She received him with joy indeed, but it
was mixed with a viſible confuſion; their meeting
was more tender, but on her part leſs chearful; ſhe
ſmiled with inexpreſſible complacency, but at the
ſame time the tears guſhed from her eyes, and ſhe
was ſeized with an univerſal tremor. Mercator
caught the infection; and carefled firſt his Flavilla,
and then his boy, with an exceſs of fondneſs and
delight that before he had never expreſſed. The
fight of the child made him more than ever wiſh a
reconciliation with his father; and having heard, on
his firſt landing, that he was dangerouſly ill, he
determined to attempt, immediately, to ſee him;
promiſing that he would return to ſupper. He had,
- 1n

<page 550>
L E W IT Y O F C ON DU CT. 267
in the midſt of his careſſes, more than once enquired
the age of his ſon, but the queſtion had been always
evaded; of which, however, he took no notice, nor
did it produce any ſuſpicion.
He was now haſting to enquire after his father;
but as he paſſed through the hall, he was officiouſly
laid hold of by his landlady. He was not much diſ-
poſed to enquire how ſhe had fulfilled his charge;
but perceiving by her looks that ſhe had ſomething
to communicate, which, at leaſt in her own opinion,
was of importance, he ſuffered her to take him into
her parlour. She immediately ſhut the door, and
reminded him, that ſhe had undertaken an office with
reluctance, which he had preſſed upon her; and that
ſhe had done nothing in it to which he had not bound
her by a promiſe ; that ſhe was extremely ſorry to
communicate her diſcoveries; but that he was a
worthy gentleman, and, indeed, ought to know
them. She then told him, “ That the child was
born within leſs than eight months after his laſt re-
turn from abroad; that it was ſaid to have come be-
fore its time, but that having prefied to ſee it, ſhe
was refuſed.” This, indeed, was true, and con-
firmed the good woman in her ſuſpicion; for Fla-
villa, who had ſtill reſented the freedom which ſhe
had taken in her remonſtrance, had kept her at a
great diſtance; and the ſervants, to gratify their
miſtreſs, treated her with the utmoſt inſolence and
contempt.
At this relation Mercator turned pale. He now
recollected that his queſtion concerning the child's
N 2 birth

<page 551>
268 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
birth had been evaded: and concluded, that he had
been ſhedding tears of tenderneſs and joy over a
faithleſs wife, and an illegitimate child, who had
robbed him of his patrimony, his honour and his
peace. He ſtarted up with the furious wildneſs of
ſudden phrenzy; but ſhe, with great difficulty, pre--
vailed upon him not to leave the room. He ſat down
and remained ſome time motionleſs, with his eyes
fixed on the ground, and his hands locked in each
other. In proportion as he believed his wife to be
guilty, his tenderneſs for his father revived; and he
reſolved, with yet greater zeal, to proſecute his
purpoſe of immediately attempting a reconciliation.
In this ſtate of confuſion and diſtreſs, he went to
the houſe, where he learned that his father had died
early in the morning, and that his relations were
then aſſembled to read his will. Fulvius, a brother
of Mercator’s mother, with whom he had always
been a favourite, happening to paſs from one room
to another, heard his voice. He accoſted him with
great ardour of friendſhip; and ſoothing him with
expreſſions of condolence and affe&tion, inſiſted to
introduce him to the company. Mercator tacitly
conſented; he was received at leaſt with civility by
his brothers, and ſitting down among them, the
will was read. He ſeemed to liſten like the reſt; but
was, indeed, muſing over the ſtory which he had
juſt heard, and loſt in the ſpeculation of his own
wretchedneſs. He awakened as from a dream, when
the voice of the perſon who had been reading was
ſuſpended; and finding that he could no longer con-
- 4. - tain

<page 552>
L E V I T Y O F -C O N D U C T. 269
tain himſelf, he ſtarted up, and would have left the
company.
Of the will which had been read before him, he
knew nothing; but his uncle believing that he was
moved with grief and reſentment at the manner in
--which he had been mentioned in it, and the bequeſt
only of a ſhilling, took him into another room; and,
to apologize for his father's unkindneſs, told him,
“ that the reſentment which he expreſſed at his mar-
riage, was every day increaſed by the condućt of his
wife, whoſe charaćter was now become infamous,
for that ſhe had been ſeen at the lodgings of a cer-
tain woman of bad chara&ter, with whom ſhe ap-
peared to be well acquainted.” This account threw
Mercator into another agony; from which he was,
however, at length recovered by his uncle, who,
as the only expedient by which he could retrieve his
misfortune, and ſooth his diſtreſs, propoſed that he
ſhould no more return to his lodgings, but go home
with him; that he would himſelf take ſuch meaſures
with his wife, as would ſcarce fail of inducing her
to accept a ſeparate maintenance, to aſſume another
name, and trouble him no more. Mercator, in the
bitterneſs of his afflićtion, conſented to his propoſal,
and they went away together.
Mercator, in the mean time, was expected by
Flavilla with the moſt tender impatience. She had
put her little boy to bed, and decorated a ſmall room
in which they had uſed to ſup, and which ſhe had
ſhut up in his abſence; ſhe counted the moments as
they paſſed, and liſtened to every carriage and every
N 3 ſtep

<page 553>
270 T H E F A M I L. Y. P. H C T U. R. E.
ſtep that ſhe heard. Supper was now ready: her
impatience was increaſed; terror was at length
mingled with regret, and her fondneſs was only
buſied to afflićt her ; ſhe wiſhed, ſhe feared, ſhe ac-
cuſed, ſhe apologized, and ſhe wept. In the height
of theſe eager expectations and this tender diſtreſs,
ſhe received a billet which Mercator had been per-
ſuaded by his uncle to write, in which he upbraided
her in the ſtrongeſt terms, with abuſing his confi-
dence; “ of this, he ſaid, he had now obtained ſuf-
ficient proof to do juſtice to himſelf, and was deter-
mined to ſee her no more.”
. To thoſe whoſe hearts have not already acquainted
them with the agony which ſeized Flavilla upon the
fight of this billet, all attempts to deſcribe it would
be not only ineffectual but abſurd. Having paſſed
the night without ſleep, and the next day without
food, diſappointed in every attempt to diſcover what
was become of Mercator, and doubting, if ſhe
were to find him, whether it would be poſſible to
convince him of her innocence; this violent agita-
tion of her mind, produced a ſlow fever, which,
before ſhe conſidered it as a diſeaſe, ſhe communi-
cated to the child while ſhe cheriſhed it at her boſom,
and wept over it, as an orphan whoſe life ſhe was
ſuſtaining with her own.
After Mercator had been abſent about ten
days, his uncle, who perſuaded him to accompany
ſome friends to a country ſeat, at the diſtance of
near ſixty miles, went to his lodgings in order to diſ-
charge the rent, and try what terms he could make
with

<page 554>
L E v. I T Y O F C C N D U C T. 271
with Flavilla, whom he hoped to intimidate
with threats of a divorce; but when he came, he
found Flavilla finking very faſt under her diſeaſe,
and the child dead. The woman of the houſe, into
whoſe hands ſhe had juſt put her watch, and ſome
ornaments as a ſecurity for her rent, was ſo touched
with her diſtreſs, and ſo firmly perſuaded of her in-
nocence by the manner in which ſhe had addreſſed
her, and the calm ſolemnity with which ſhe abſolved
thoſe by whom ſhe had been traduced, that as ſoon as
ſhe had diſcovered Fulvius's buſineſs, ſhe threw her-
ſelf on her knees, and intreated, that if he knew
where Mercator was to be found, he would urge
him to return, that, if poſſible, the life of Flavilla
might be preſerved, and the happineſs of both be
reſtored by her juſtification. Fulvius, who ſtill
ſuſpected appearances, or at leaſt was in doubt of
the cauſe that had produced them, would not diſ-
cover his nephew; but after much entreaty and ex-
poſtulation, at laſt engaged upon his honour for the
conveyance of a letter. The woman as ſoon as
ſhe obtained his promiſe, ran up and communicated
it to Flavilla; who, when ſhe had recovered from
the ſurprize and tumult which it occaſioned, was
ſupported in her bed, and in about half an hour, after
many efforts, and many intervals, wrote a ſhort
billet, which was ſealed and put into the hands of
Fulvius. - -
Fulvius immediately incloſed and diſpatched it by
the poſt, reſolving that in a queſtion ſo doubtful
and of ſuch importance, he would no further inter-
in - ? N 4 poſe.

<page 555>
272 t H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
poſe. Mercator, who the moment he caſt his eye
upon the letter, knew both the hand and ſeal; after
pauſing a few moments in ſuſpence, at length tore it,
open, and read theſe words:
“Such has been my folly, that, perhaps, I ſhould
not be acquitted of guilt in any circumſtances, but
thoſe in which I write. I do not, therefore, but for
your ſake, wiſh them otherwiſe than they are. The
dear infant, whoſe birth has undone me, now lies
dead at my ſide, a vićtim to My indiſcretion and
Your reſentment. I am ſcarce able to guide my pen.
But I moſt earneſtly intreat to ſee you, that you may
at leaſt have the ſatisfaction to hear me atteſt my in-
nocence with the laſt figh, and ſeal our reconciliation
on my lips, while they are yet ſenſible of the im-
preſſion.”
Mercator, whom an earthquake would leſs have
affected than this letter, felt all his ſenſibility revive
in a moment, and refle&ted with unalterable anguiſh
upon the raſhneſs of his reſentment. At the thought
of his diſtance from London, he ſtarted as at a dag-
ger in his heart: he lifted up his eyes to heaven,
with a look that expreſſed at once an accuſation of
himſelf, and a petition for her; and then ruſhing out
of the houſe, without taking leave, or ordering
a ſervant to attend him, he took poſt-horſes at
a neighbouring inn, and in leſs than fix hours was in
Leiceſter-fields. But notwithſtanding his ſpeed, he
arrived too late; Flavilla had ſuffered the laſt agony,
and her eyes could behold him no more. Grief and
diſappointment, remorſe and deſpair now totally ſub-
verted

<page 556>
A M I a B L E L E V I T Y. 273
verted his reaſon. It became neceſſary to remove
him by force from the body; and, after a confinement
of two years, he died diſtraćted.
May every woman on whoſe memory compaſſion
ſhall record theſe events, tremble to aſſume the le-
vity of Flavilla; perhaps, it is not in the power
of any man, in Mercator’s circumſtances, to be leſs
jealous than Mercator.
M R. E. G E R To N.
This, my children, is a melancholy relation, and
thas affected you. Reflect on the lefton it teaches,
and be more prudent than Flavilla. For the preſent,
we will give ſome relief to this pićture, by reading a
very ingenious letter: it is the ſpirit of levity, diſ-
played in amiable and lovely colours, and refle&ts
great honour on the heart and head of the lady who
*wrote it.
A M I A B L E L E V I T Y.:
A LE T T E R from the late Miſs T A L Bo r,
To a new-born child *.
YOU are heartily welcome, my dear little couſin,
into this unquiet world; long may you continue in
it, in all the happineſs it can give ; and beſtow
enough on all your friends, to anſwer fully the im-
patience with which you have been expected. May
you grow up to have every accompliſhment, that
* A grand daughter of Lord Chancellor Talbot.
your

<page 557>
274 T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T U R E.
your good friend the * biſhop of Derry can already
imagine in you; and in the mean time, may you
have a nurſe with a tuneable voice, that may not
talk an immoderate deal of nonſenſe to you.
You are, at preſent, my dear, in a very philoſo-
phical diſpoſition; the gaieties and follies of life have
no attraction for you: its ſorrows you kindly com-
miſerate; but, however, do not ſuffer them to diſ-
turb your ſlumbers; and find charms in nothing but
harmony and repoſe. You have as yet contračted no
partialities, are entirely ignorant of party diſtinétions,
and look with a perfect indifference on all human
ſplendor. You have an abſolute diſlike to the va-
nities of dreſs; and are likely for many months to
obſerve the Biſhop of Briſtol's firſt rule of conver-
ſation, ſilence; though tempted to tranſgreſs it by
the novelty and ſtrangeneſs of all the objećts round
you. As you advance farther in life, this philoſo-
phical temper will, by degrees, wear off: the firſt
object of your admiration will probably be a candle;
and thence, (as we all of us do) you will contračt a
taſte for the gaudy and the glaring, without makhig
one moral reflection upon the danger of ſuch falſe
admiration, as leads people, many a time, to burn
their fingers. You will then begin to ſhew great
partiality for ſome very good aunts, who will contri-
bute all they can towards ſpoiling you ; but you
will be equally fond of an excellent mamma, who
w
* Dr. Rundle. -
+ Dr. Secker ; afterwards Archbiſhop of Canterbury; with
whom Miſs Talbot lived.... f - - * -
* -
will

<page 558>
A M I a B L K L E W I t Y. 275
will teach you, by her example, all ſorts of good
qualities; only let me warn you of one thing, my
dear, and that is, do not learn of her to have ſuch
an immoderate love of home; for it is quite contrary
to all the privileges of this polite age ; nor to give
up ſo entirely all thoſe pretty graces of whim, flutter,
and affectation, which ſo many charitable poets have
declared to be the prerogative of our ſex: ah! my
poor couſin, to what purpoſe will you boaſt this pre-
rogative, when your nurſe tells you, with a pious
care, to ſow the ſeeds of jealouſy and emulation as
early as poſſible, that you have a fine little brother
come to put your noſe out of joint. There will be
nothing to be done then, I believe, but to be mighty
good, and prove what, believe me, admits of very
little diſpute, (though it has occaſioned abundance)
that we girls, however people give themſelves airs
of being diſappointed, are by no means to be de-
ſpiſed: let the men unenvied ſhine in public, it is
we muſt make their homes delightful to them; and,
if they provoke us, no leſs uncomfortable. I do not
expect you my dear, to anſwer this letter yet-a-while;
but, as I dare ſay, you have the greateſt intereſt with
your papa, will beg you to prevail upon him, that
we may know by a line, (before his time is engroſſed
by another ſecret committee) that you and your
mamma are well. In the mean time I will only
aſſure you, that all here rejoice in your exiſtence ex-
tremely: and that I am,
My very young correſpondent,
moſt affectionately your’s,
.
C. T.


<page 559>
276 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
M R. E. G E R T o N.
I have now, my dear children, only a few words
to add. We are going, for a little while, from a
happy retirement, where truth and peace and inno-
cence delight to dwell, into the regions of pleaſure,
folly, and ambition. Let not your eyes be daz-
zled with falſe glare, nor your hearts tempted with
imaginary delights. Drink not too deep at the
faſcinating fountain of pleaſure, left you ſhould
either be inebriated or ſurfeited. It is true, your
preſent danger is not very great; you will have
faithful and intereſted directors, whoſe care and cau-
tion will counterbalance the impetuous ſallies of
youthful imagination; but beware of contračting
a love for fancied pleaſures, which you will behold
ſo many purſuing with thoughtleſs impetuoſity, and
who ſtop not in their career, till ſuddendly impeded
by poverty, diſeaſe, or unſuſpected ruin. Remember
the ſerene, the chearful joys you have ſo often been
partakers of in this place, and let not your paſſions
hurry you away from the calm and permanent con-
tent, which reaſon and refle&tion never fail to give.
When you go into public, be willing to be pleaſed,
but not infatuated. In ſhort, my children, remem-
ber the examples you have ſo often read of in this
happy room ; think on the inevitable conſequences
of good and bad, of wiſe and fooliſh conduct: forget
not how deeply intereſted are the mother who has done
and ſuffered ſo much for you, and the father whoſe
labours have been unceaſing to make you truly vir-
tuous and beneficent members of ſociety—forget not,
I ſay,

<page 560>
P A R P N T A L F E E L T N G s. 277
I ſay, my dear, dear children, how much it is in
your power to heap bleiſings or curſes, to render
happy or miſerable, parents, of whoſe dear and tender
affection you have had ſo many and ſuch indiſputable
proofs. You wiſl yourſelves, I hope, hereafter, be-
come happy parents; you will then know the force
of parental anxieties, and parental joys. I cannot
deſcribe them; endeavour to imagine what they are
from the following ſtory.
P A R E N T A L F E E L IN G. S :
Or the ABENAKEE INDIAN.
DURING the laſt war in America, a band of
ſavages having ſurpriſed and defeated a party of the
• Engliſh, ſuch of thoſe who were not actually killed on
the ſpot, had very little chance of getting away from
enemies who were much quicker of foot than they,
and who, purſuing them with unrelenting fury, uſed
thoſe whom they overtook with a barbarity, even in
thoſe countries, almoſt without example.
A young Engliſh officer, preſſed by two ſavages
who were making at him with uplifted hatchets,
without the leaſt hope of eſcaping death, thought of
nothing but ſelling his life as dear as he could. At
the inſtant, an old ſavage, armed with his bow,
drew near him, in order to pierce him with the
arrow; when taking aim at him, all on a ſudden
drops his point, and runs to throw himſelf between
the young Engliſhman and the two Barbarians, who
were going to maſſacre him. Theſe drew back out
of reſpect to the motions of the old man, who, with
ſigns

<page 561>
278 T H E F A M I L Y P I C T U R E.
ſigns of peace, took the officer by the hand, after
removing his apprehenſions by friendly geſtures, and
carried him home with him to his hut. There he
treated him with humanity and gentleneſs, more like
his companion than his ſlave. He taught him the
Abenakee language, and the coarſe arts in uſe
among thoſe people, and they lived well ſatisfied with
each other. One only point of the old man's deport-
ment gave the young officer uneaſineſs; he fre-
quently obſerved the ſavage fixing his eyes upon him,
and, after looking long and ſteadfaſtly at him, ſhed-
\ding tears.
On the return of ſpring, the Abenakees took the
field again, and proceeded in queſt of the Engliſh.
The old man, who had ſtill vigour enough to
bear the fatigues of war, went along with his coun-
trymen; not forgetting to take his priſoner with
him. They made a march of above two hundred
leagues, through the trackleſs wilds and foreſts of
__ that country, till at length they came within view of
a plain in which they diſcovered an Engliſh camp.
This the old man ſhewed to his young companion,
at the ſame time attentively eyeing him, and mark-
ing his countenance; “There (ſays he) are thy
brothers waiting to give us battle. What-ſayeſt
thou? I preſerved thee from death. I have taught
thee to build canoes; to make bows and arrows; to
catch the deer of the foreſt ; to wield the hatchet;
and our whole art of war. What waſt thou when
I took thee home to my dwelling? Thy hands were
as the hands of a mere child, they could ſerve thee
3 but

<page 562>
P A R E N T A L. F E E L J N G S. 279
but little for thy defence, and yet leſs for providing
thee means of ſuſtenance. Thy ſoul was in the
dark: thou wert a ſtranger to all neceſſary know-
ledge. To me thou oweſt life—the means of life—
every thing. Couldſt thou then be ungrateful
enough to go over to join thy countrymen, and to
lift the hatchet againſt us f"
The young Engliſhman anſwered, that he could
not but feel a juſt repugnance to carrying arms
againſt thoſe of his own nation, but that he would
never turn them againſt the Abenakees, whom, ſo
long as he ſhould live, he would conſider as his
brothers.
At this the dejećted ſavage hung his head, and
lifting up his hands covered his face with them, in a
deep meditation. After remaining ſome time in
this attitude, he looked earneſtly at the Engliſh
officer, and ſaid to him with a mixture of grief and
tenderneſs, “ Haſt thou a father f"—“ He was
alive, anſwered the young man, when I left my
country.”—“ Oh, unhappy man'" ſaid the ſavage.
—After a moment’s pauſe, adding, “ Doſt thou not
know that I too was once a father ?—Alas! I am
no longer one. No : I am no longer a father I
ſaw my ſon fall. He fought by my ſide: I ſaw him
die like a man, covered with wounds as he fell !
But I revenged him.”
He pronounced theſe words with the moſt pathetic
emphaſis, and ſhuddered; his breaſt heaved with
pain, and he was choaked with inward groans, which
he endeavoured to ſtifle. His eyes looked wild, but
no

<page 563>
28o T H E F A M I L Y P 1 c T u R e.
no tear fell. By degrees the violence of his agita-
tions ceaſed, and he grew calm. Turning towards
the eaſt, he pointed to the riſing ſun, and ſaid,
“Seeſt thou yon beauteous luminary, that ſun in all
its ſplendor? Does the ſight of it afford thee plea-
ſure ?”—“ Undoubtedly, anſwered the officer, who
can behold ſo fine a ſky without delight?”—“And
yet to me, ſaid the ſavage, it no longer affords any l’
Then caſting his eye on a buſh in full flower, “See
ſaid he, young man, doth not that gay appearance
of flowers give thee a ſort of joy to look at f° “It
does,” replied the officer. “And yet, ſaid the old
man, it delighteth not me!” adding, with impetu-
oſity, “ depart—haſte, fly to yon camp of thy
friends. Get thee home to thy Father, that he may
ſtill behold with pleaſure the riſing of the ſun, and
the flowers of the ſpring.”
T H E E N D. .

<page 564>

<page 565>

<page 566>

<page 567>
Date Due
+
Library Bureau Cat. No. 1137
Seckmºn ºngº,
º, sauchestar, 'º. 2
JAN 1953
**und to please.









<page 568>
*W* g \s.
A 2.2, Wid
N, 1-2-


<page 569>
|
00 15 350 19


<page 570>
