B 480803

■.'.:■''.•'■■■■•'■■ ■..-"-.1" '■■■■'•"
jgSiaglliillæiifil
- . ■■ - '■ P .-'."'■ ■
MMMKKSm
B3£

<page 1>

%
w



<page 2>
.P7

<page 3>
*

<page 4>
THE
LIFE
O F
Sir THOMAS POPE,
FOUNDER OF
TRINITY COLLEGE OXFORD.
CHIEFLY COMPILED FROM
ORIGINAL EVIDENCES.
WITH-
An APPENDIX of PAPERS,
NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.
THE SECOND EDITION,
CORRECTED AND ENLARGED.
By THOMAS WART ON, B. D.
FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, AND F. S. A.
LONDON.
PRINTED FOR THOMAS CADELL IN THE STRAND.
M DCC LXXX.

<page 5>

<page 6>
PREFACE.
iIographers, in the pursuit of infor-
mation, are naturally betrayed into mi-
nute researches. The curiosity of the reader
is seldom proportioned to that of the writer
in this species of composition. Every inci-
dent, relating to a favourite character which
the mind has long contemplated with atten-
tion, acquires importance. On these prin-
ciples we may venture to found a plausible
excuse, for the many trifling discoveries, and
intricate discussions of insignificant circum-
stances, with which personal history so /nuch
abounds.
Tp (thjs apology, which every biographer
has a rjgjxt to plead, the writer of the fol-
lowing memoirs presumes he possesses a pe-
a 2 culiar

<page 7>
iv PREFACE.
culiar claim, arising from his situation and
connections. He describes the life of a per-
son, whom the strongest principles of grati-
tude, implanted in early years, have habitu-
ally taught him to regard with united vene-
ration and affection. Under these circum-
stances, the flightest events appear interesting;
and the most frivolous anecdotes of such a life
are investigated with a pleasing enthusiasm.
In the mean time, a want of materials
might have justly been here alledged, in ex-
tenuation of an objection so constantly urged
against works of this kind. It will readily
be granted, that to record the lives of men
who have adorned their country by monu-
ments of munificence, is a tribute indispens-
ably due to public merit, and which cannot
without public injustice be witheld. But to
discharge this duty even imperfectly, and by
those means, however inadequate, which the
utmost exertions of diligent enquiry can
afford, is less unpardonable than to neglect
it

<page 8>
PREFACE. v
it entirely. When we Cannot recover a per-
fect portrait of our friend and our benefactor,
we must be contented with a few faint out-
lines. Abundance only implies rejection;
and where but little can be collected, it is
necessary to retain every thing. We must ac-
quiesce in anecdotes of inconsiderable conse-
quence, while those of more importance can-
not be procured.
These inconveniencies might have easily
been prevented. But our ancestors had no
regard for futurity. They trusted the re-
membrances of their heroes to chance and
tradition; or rather, to the laborious in-
vestigation of a distant posterity. For it is
the task of modern times to commemorate,
if they cannot imitate, the conspicuous ex-
amples of antiquity; and to compose the
panegyric of those virtues which exist no
more. Inquisitive leisure is not the lot of
earlier eras. Ages of action are succeeded by
ages of enquiry.
a 3 But
/

<page 9>
vi PREFACE.
But that species of enquiry which properly
belongs to the biographer, seems, in point of
time, to be posteriour to that which forms
the province of the historian. It does not
grow fashionable till late: it begins to be
the favourite amusement of cultivated na-
tions at their most polished periods. When
the more important and extensive stores of
historical information have been exhausted,
the growing spirit of curiosity, which in-
creases in proportion as it is gratified, still
demands new gratifications j it descends to
particularities, and delights to develope cir-
cumstances of a subordinate nature. After
many general histories have been written,
inquisitive minds are eager to explore the
parts of what they have hitherto surveyed at
large. The ardour of research, which gathers
strength from contraction, is exerted on dis-
tinct periods j and at length personal history
commences. Characters before only repre-
sented in the gross, and but incidentally ex-
hibited

<page 10>
PREFACE. vii
hibited or superficially displayed, now be-
come the subject of critical disquisition, and
a separate examination. Occurences neglect-
ed or omitted by the historian, form mate-
rials for the biographer: and men of supe-
riour eminence are selected from the common
mass of public transactions in which they
were indistinctly grouped, and delineated as
detatched figures in a single point of view.
Nor was it till late after the restoration of
literature, that biography assumed its proper
form, and appeared in its genuine character.
The Lives which were compiled at some dis-
tance after that period, are extremely jejune
and defective performances. The first which
approached to perfection were those of Pei-
refkius, by Peter Gassendus, and of Melanc-
thon, by Camerarius. It was long, before
the perseverance of investigation connected
with precision, the patient toil of tracing evi-
dences, authenticating facts, and digesting
scattered notices, grew into a science: in a
a 4 word,

<page 11>
viii PREFACE.
word, before the accuracy of the antiquarian
was engrafted on the researches of the bio-
grapher. The masterly Life of William of
Wykeham will best explain and illustrate
these reflections: a work which I chuse to
produce as an example on this occasion, not
only because it is here produced as an ex-
ample with a peculiar degree of propriety,
but because it is a pattern of that excellence
in this mode of writing, which I mean to
characterise and recommend.
As sir Thomas Pope bore some share in
the national transactions of his time, to re-
lieve the dryness of personal and local inci-
dents, I have endeavoured to render these
pages in some measure interesting to general
readers, by dilating this part of my perform-
ance, and by sometimes introducing historical
digressions, yet resulting immediately from
the tenour of my subject. Amongst these, I
flatter myself that my relation of the perse-
cutions of the princess Elizabeth may merit
some

<page 12>
PREFACE. ix
some attention: of which I have thrown
together a more uniform and circumstantial
detail than has yet appeared, with the ad-
dition of several anecdotes respecting that
transaction not hitherto published.
On the whole I may venture to affirm, that
I have at least attempted to make my work as
entertaining as possible. My materials have
not always been of the most brilliant kind;
but they are such, as have often enabled me
to enliven and embellish my narrative by pre-
senting pictures of antient manners, which
are ever striking to the imagination.
I have before hinted, that my resources
for compiling this history were slender and in-
sufficient. From books I could obtain scarce
any information. Indeed, my chief assis-
tance has been derived from manuscript au-
thorities. I have not however in this respect
found the success I wished. Yet I have
carefully consulted every record that seemed
likely

<page 13>
x PREFACE.
likely to illustrate my subject; and my refe-
rences will shew, that I have searched a
variety of authentic instruments, preserved
in the British Museum, the chapel of the
Rolls, and other repositories of valuable
originals. Of these the more important are
printed at large in the Appendix.
Among my references to manuscript au-
thorities, two sometimes occur which require
, ^ explanation. These are, MSS. Cotton. Vitel-
liust F. 5. MSS. Strype. And, MSS. F. Wife.
In the year 1709, that industrious and ac-
L curate annalist Mr. John Strype, communi-
cated to doctor Arthur Charlett, master of
University college, originally fellow of Tri-
nity college, an account of the Funeral
of sir Thomas Pope*. This account Strype
had transcribed from a manuscript of the
• See Ballard's Coll. of Letters, MSS. Bibl. Bodl. sol. xv.
pag. 31. Letter from Strype to Charlett, dated Lowlayton,
Essex, Apr. 20. 1709. See Life, infr. p. 178.
Cotton

<page 14>
PREFACE. xi
Cotton library, which he perpetually cites in
in his Ecclesiastical Memoirs, marked
Viteffius, F. 5 \ Soon afterwards it appears that
Strype sent to Charlett, perhaps at his request,
a few other notices relating to sir Thomas
Pope, extracted from the fame manuscript,
k In a letter from Strype to Charlett, dat. ibid. Apr. 5.
1769. MSS. ut supr. vol. xv. p. 31. "The kindness you bear
"\o the foundation of Trinity college, makes me inquisitive
"into the Founder's place of burial, which you find mentioned
'* in my Annals, [p. 3. edit, i.] Though I cannot easily re-
"collect every manuscript and particular place in them whence
•• I have compiled every part of the history. Yet it occurs to
"me, that u>Thomas Pope's Funeral, with the time and place,
"as also the rest of pages 30, 31, [viz.] the funerals in those
* pages mentioned, were taken frorn the volume, Vitellius
"F. 5. in the Cotton library, which is a certain brief journal
"of funerala, and as well of divers other occurrences, begin-
"ning at the year 1550, written, as it seems, by some herald,
"or Other diligent observer of his own times. There the writer
"sets down all the particular ceremonies, the solemnities, and
"mourners, at that knight's interment. Which if you have
"any desire to know, I will transcribe out of my notes and
"send you." This is an original. Then follows the letter be-
fore referred to, which is not the original, but a transcript by
the late Mr. Rawlins of Pophills in Gloucestershire, who be-
came possessed of Charlett's extensive correspondence. See Ap-
pend, p. 458. infr.
The

<page 15>
xii PREFACE.
The late learned Mr Francis Wife, keeper
of the archives, Radclivian librarian, and
fellow of Trinity college, at Oxford, copied
all the transcripts, about four or five in num-
ber, which Strype on this occasion had
made from the Cotton manuscript, by per-
mission of Charlett, among whose curious
and numerous papers they were kept j and
by Mr. Wife they were thus communicated to
me. Fortunately for the present underta-
king, the extracts had been made by Strype
before the fire happened in the Cotton li-
brary, then placed in Afhburnham house at
Westminster, by which fatal accident this
valuable volume was particularly damaged;
and, as far as I can judge from a cursory in-
spection, most of the leaves, if not all, con-
taining Strype's extracts, were either destroy-
ed or obliteratede. The reader is therefore
desired to observe, that the reference, viz.
MSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype, sig-
c But see Append. Numb, zxviii.
nifies

<page 16>
PREFACE. xiu
nisies Strype's transcripts from thenced. But
whenever this Cotton manuscript is cited
without the addition of MSS. Strype, the
reader will remember, that such citations
were faithfully transcribed by myself from,
that manuscript volume, now belonging to
the British Museum.
Mr. Wise also transcribed, and communi- ^ ^ A
cated to me, two or three other papers from '■ /
doctor Charlett's collections, beside those of
Strype which I have just mentioned". These
I have called MSS. F. Wife'. Other refe-
'See pp. 46. 86. 89. 91.
* See pp. 185. 189. And Append. Numb. xxix.
f Since my first edition, among the manuscript papers of the
Rev. Thomas Wilkea, D. D. fellow of Trinity college, Ox-
ford, and who died rector of Rothersield Greys in Oxfordshire,
in 1745,1 have met with other notices by Mr. Wife, which are
now first inserted in this edition, and are also styled, MSS. F.
Wife. These Mr. Wife seems to have had chiefly from Dr.
Charlett's collections, and the family-papers of the late fir
Harry Pope-Blount.
. As to Charlett's collections, I learn that he derived many of
his notices and informations on this subject, from Mr. Josiah
Howe, a fellow of the college; a short account of whom will
not be superfluous, as it may tend to establish their credit. He
was

<page 17>
xiv PREFACE.
rences will easily be understood, as care has
been taken to give them with equal exactness
and perspicuity.
was born at Crendon in Bucks, and elected Scholar of Trinity
college, June 12, 1632. Registr. Coll. sol. 68. b. Admitted
Fellow, being then bachelor of Arts, May 26, 1637. Ibid. sol.
72. b. By Hearne he is called, "a very great cavalier and
** loyalist, and a most ingenious man." Rob. Glouc. Gloss.
p. 669. He appears to have been a general and an accomplish,
ed scholar, and in polite literature esteemed one of the ornaments
of the university. In 1644, he preached before king Charles
the first at Christ-church cathedral Oxford. The sermon wa*
printed, and in red letters, by the king's special command.
Only thirty copies were printed. One was purchased, in 1723,
by Hearne from Dr. Charlett's library: the fame, and that per-
haps the only one extant, which is now among Rawlinson's
Books in the Bodleian. See Hearne's MSS. Coll. vol. 102. p.
8. Charlett bought this rarity many years before, at the high
price of five millings. Ibid. vol. 51. p. 176. In 1646, he was
treated Bachelor of Divinity by decree of the king, among
others who were complimented with that degree for having dis-
tinguished themselves as preachers before the Court at Oxford.
He was soon afterwards ejected from his Fellowship by the
prelbyterians, but not in the general expulsion in 1648, accord-
ing to Walker, Svff. Clerc. p. 134. Being one of the Bur-
sars of the college and foreseeing its fate, having resolved at the
fame time never to acknowledge the authority of Cromwell's
visitors, he retired, in the beginning of the year 1648, to a
college-estate in Buckinghamshire, carrying with him many ren-
tals, rolls, papers, and other authentic documents, belonging
to

<page 18>
PREFACE. xr
I must not here omit, what I am much
honoured in mentioning, that this work
to his office. He was invited to return to the college by Dr.
Harris the new prefbyterian President, on a promise, that if he
would quietly give up the official books, his submifllon to the
visitors should be dispensed with, and he should be permitted to
retain his fellowship without molestation. Harris by this artifice
having recovered the books, immediately signed an order for
Howe's expulsion j pretending -to have received an unexpected
injunction from the visitors, and professing his regret at being
obliged to remove so valuable a member from the foundation.
Hearne, MSS. Coll. vol. 89. p. 195. He was restored to
his fellowship in 1660. He has a Copy of recommendatory
English verses prefixed to the folio edition of Beaumont and
Fletcher, printed in 1647. -Another to Thomas Randoph's
Poems, reprinted at Oxford, in 1640. Another to Cartwright'j
Comedies and Poems, at Oxford, 1651. These pieces in the
witty epigrammatic style which then prevailed, have uncommon
acuteness, and highly deserve to be revived. Some others have
perhaps escaped me. In those I have mentioned, he appears in
company with Denham, Waller, J on son, Corbett, Brome,
Shirley, Mayne, and others the most ingenious men of those
times, who were of his intimate acquaintance. Wood fays that
he wrote a copy of English verses, which were much applauded,
spoken before the duke and duchess of York, in 1683, at Tri-
nity college. MSS. Mus. Afhmol. sol. 57. D. 19. He lived
forty two years, greatly respected, after his restitution, and ar-
riving at die age of ninety, died fellow of the college, where
he constantly resided, Aug. 28, 1701. He is interred, under a
small

<page 19>
xvi PREFACE.
is greatly indebted to the friendship of the
bishop of Worcester; who most obligingly
condescended to favour me with some va-
luable communications, from the family
papers of his lordship's father, the earl of
Guildford.
small marble lozenge, with a short inscription, in the college-
chapel. Hearne says, that " he lived so retiredly in the latter
"part of his life, that he rarely came abroad; so that I could
"never fee him, though I have often much desired to have a
"sight of him." Gloss, ut supr. p. 670. Compare Wood,
Ath. OzoK.ii. s. 56. And Life of Bathurst.pp. 154 211.
THE

<page 20>
THE
E
O F
Sir THOMAS POPE.
SECT. I.
THOMAS POPE was born at
Dedington in Oxfordshire, about the
year 1508 % and at the end of the reign
of king Henry the seventh.
His parents were William and Margaret
Pope b, who lived at Dedingtonc: but the
family, which seems at least to have been that
a Computed from his age at the year of his death.
k E Statut. coll. Trin. Oxon. cap. xiii. *' Majestatem tuam
"oramus, O beata Trinitas, ut animarum Margarete uxoris
"Fundatoris nostri, et Gulielmi et Margarete parentum ejuf-
«« dem, &c."
c Visitation of Oxfordshire, by Ric. Lee, Portcullis Marshall
to Clarencieux King at Arms, A. D. 1570. MSS. in Mus.
Afhniol. Oxon. Codd. A. Wood. 410. 8522, 6o, pag. 32.
A of

<page 21>
2 THE LIFE OF
of a gentleman, was originally seated in Kent,
before the reign of Edward the third*. Wil-
liam appears to have been married to a former
wife, named Julian Edmondese. His second
wife, Margaret, mother of Thomas Pope,
was the daughter of Edmund Yate, of Stan-
lake in Oxfordshire s: and after the death of
* Ex stemmate Pope, MSS. in rotulo prægrandi pergamen.
penes honoratiss. Francisc. com. de Guildford. By which it
likewise appears, that the said William Pope was the only son
of John, second son of Thomas Pope, and Grace Sampson his
wife.
c Lee's MS. visitation ut supr. ibid. And MS. pedigree os
Pope, manu A. Wood, inter MSS. Rawlins. bibl. Bodl. Com-
pared with evidence occurring hereafter. One John Edmondes
of Dedington, is mentioned in Aflimole's Berkshire, who, as I
collect, was her uncle, iii. 285. As also in Lee's MSS. ut supr,
pag. 41. Her father was probably Robert Edmondes, one of
the executors of William Pope's will. Append. Numb. I. John
Edmondes is also a subscribing witness to an Instrument, Ap-
pend. No. XXII. John Edmondes, the elder, is mentioned in
an indenture of lands between Sir T. Pope, and Trinity col-
lege, Oxon. dat. Jun. 26. 1558. In regillr. prim. sol. 20.
f From Lee's MS. visitation, ut supr. pag. 51. Compared
with pedigr. MSS. Rawlins. According to Lee, Edmund Yate
of Stanlake was third son and heir of Richard Yate of Charncy,
CO. Berks. He married Margaret, daughter of John Cornwall
of Stanlake. See the pedigree of Yate of Charney, which is
not altogether exact, in Ashmole's Berkshire, iii. 321.
Wood says, that Margaret Pope, in the text, was the daugh-
ter of Yate of Stanford in Wootton-hundred in Oxford-
shire. Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 301. But no such place
occurs in that hundred. Ashmole, Berks, iii. 295. mentions
Yate of Stanford, Berks"% which place Wood seems to have
confounded with Sandford, a village in Wootton-hundred.
Many

<page 22>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 3
William Pope, she was again married, to John
Bustarde of Adderbury in the fame county s.
Beside the abovementioned Thomas, the
principal subject of these papers, the said Wil-
liam and Margaret had one son, John; and
three daughters, Elisabeth, Julian, and Alice":
concerning all which I shall speak more at
large hereafter.
William and Margaret Pope seem to have.
lived in a decent and creditable condition, as
may be collected from the bequests of Wil-
liam's will j which also partly shews the cir-
cumstances in which his eldest ' son was left.
He bequeathcs his land to be divided between
Many of the family of Yate appear to have lived in, and about,
the villages of Charney, Buckland, and Stanford, Berks, and
Stanlake, Oxfordshire; places all of the fame neighbourhood.
What still further confirms my supposition, that Wood is mis-
taken, and that the said Edmund Yate, of Stanlake, was Mar-
garet Pope's father, is j that Peter Yate of Stanlake, whom Sir
Thomas Pope in a letter, dat. 1557, calls his cousin, appears
to have been a tenant to Trinity college, Oxford. In indentur.
dat. Jul. 3. 1556. I find likewise one Barthol. Yate, co. Berks,
who I presume was of some of the places abovementioned, or
from that neighbourhood, elected scholar of the said college, in
1569. Ex registr. prim.| dicti coll. sol. 34. But it would be
needless, end trifling, to multiply proofs.
( Ex epitaph, infra citat.
h Lee's MSS. visitat. ut supr. 32. And from evidences oc-
curring hereafter.
1 See Append. I.
A 2 between

<page 23>
4 THE LIFE OF
his wife and his son Thomas k: one hundred
pounds to the said Thomas, and forty pounds
to each daughter: a stipend to a priest to sing
for his soul one year in the church of Deding-
ton, in which he directs his body to be buri-
ed: three shillings and four-pence, respective-
ly, to the torches, the bells, Saint Thomas's
beam, and our Lady's beam, in the said
church : six shillings and four-pence to Clifton
chapel near Dedington: three shillings and
four-pence to the mother church of Lincoln j
and to each of his god-children a sheep. He
died in the year 1523 '. By an inquisition
taken after his death, it appears, that he pos-
sessed' estates, at Whitehall and Hooknorton
in Oxfordshire, of the yearly value of six
poundsm. Margaret has wife survived him
many years, and died on the twenty-fifth day
of August, 1557 % at Wroxton, in Oxford-
fc I find that Sir Thomas Pope fold the manor of Dedington,
with other possessions in the neighbourhood, to K. Henry viii.
by indent, dat. Mar. zi. an. reg. 36. But the premisses were
no paternal estate of the Popes; having been granted to Sir
Thomas Pope, but a few years before, as parcel of the priory
of Bicester, viz. Pat. 28. Hen. viii. Test. Feb. 11. par. j.
1 From the probate of his will, Append. No. I.
m See Append. No. • XII.#
n She is buried in the chancel of Wroxton church, with this
epitaph on a brass plate:
l&erelpcth tintier tljla stone bursct> ^argart ii5ustart>e.
nutirmic, sometpm? the -ait of U9tlUatn |£>opc of JDeDings
ton in tl;c connig of i>jcfort>, (Sent, ana aCten»ait> matruo
to
w

<page 24>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 5
shire, where she seems to have lived during
the latter part of her life with her younger
son, John °; her second husband, John Bus-
tarde, dying in the year I534P.
Their son Thomas received the first: rudi-
ments of grammatical learning at the public
school of the neighbouring town of Banbury;
at that time a celebrated school, and kept by
Thomas Stanbridge of Ma^ dalen college in
Oxford, an eminent instructor of youth % bro-
ther of John Stanbridge, who compiled a fa-
mous grammar, called Stanbridge-grammar'.
to Joljtr ISustarfcc, <£cnt. Daelltnge at aPttcruurp in tye
fail) count? ■ uijjtch a. tlitatn ant) Qf)argarct œtte father.
anti mother to Sit Chomao pope Stnig^t, ant) Jol)ti pope,
Csquirc. 3nD tije sail) Margaret DepavtcD oat of tJj»s
XDorloe, the rje» cap of augutt an. tint. 1557, ant) Jjopctb
to rpse anu ijbe agapne »ub Cfcttste eternall?.
0 Ex indentura quadam quadripartit. in Thesauriario Coll.
Trin. Oxon.
* From his monument at Adderbury, Co. Oxon. See Ap-
pend. No. XXVI.
1 He died 1522. Wood Ath. Oxon. Vol. 1. f. p. 26. col. 2.
Ed. ii. and p. 18. col. 1
'Hugh Oldham, Bishop of Exeter, about the year 1518,
founded a school at Manchester, and appointed the masters to
teach grammar after the use, manner, and form, of the school
at Banbury in Oxfordshire; where Thomas Stanbridge taught
the grammar composed by John Stanbridge. ibid. Oxford
Bishops, p. 658. col. 1. And Wood's School-Notes, MSS.
Muf. Afhmol. 8518, 56. Manchester.
A 3 From

<page 25>
6 THE LIFE OF
From hence he was removed to Eton college *:
but I do not find that he completed his educa-
tion at either of our universities.
It seems most probable, that he was imme-
diately sent from Eton school to some of the
inns of court. I believe, to Gray's-inn. That
he was bred to the law is certain •, and there is
undoubted evidence that he was employed,
while very young, in some of the inferior
offices of the court of chancery'. And that
he was originally destined, and regularly train-
ed, to this profession, may be conjectured from
his hand-writing; many specimens of which
remain in his college at Oxford. Nor is it
improbable, that he might be placed in his
youth, for some time at least, under the super-
intendence and instruction of some skilful
practitioner in the law, perhaps a master in
chancery; as in his will he bequeathes to his
old masters sorts majler Croke °, his black sattin
* For this we have his own testimony, in the statutes of his
college at Oxford. "Ex scholis Etonensi, vel Banburienii, in
"quibus Ipfe olim in grammatical rudimentis educatus cram."
Cap. vii.
'Apud Lit. pat. Hen. vii. an reg. 29. inf. citat. viz.
"Grandes labores, laudabiliaque obfequia, quæ dilectus nobis
"Thomas Pope, attendens negociis nostris in Cancellaria nof-
"tra predicta multipliciter impendebat, indiesque impendere
*' intendebat, merito contemplantes, &c." See Append. No.V.
* One Richard Croke is made comptroller and supervisor of
(he hanaper, in 15291 with a yearly fee of x. 1. Bill, signat.
Hen.

<page 26>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 7
gown faced with Luserne-spots w. This Croke
or Crooke, his supposed Master, seems to have
been the chief of the six clerks in chancery
who was ordered by Sir Thomas More, for the
satisfaction of the judges, and his own justifi-
cation, to make a docquet of all the Injunc-
tions which he had given to the law courts
during the time of his chancellorship *.
But whatever was our young adventurer's
situation in early life, it is remarkable that a
person of his obscure family and inconsiderable
fortune, should so soon recommend himself to
public notice, and gain access even to the
royal favour. Vigorous abilities, and an active
mind, easily surmounted all obstacles; and he
quickly became a successful candidate in the
pursuit of riches and honour.
Hen. viii. anno reg. 20. Sep. 19. He has also more grants in
the law, under other years of the fame king.
* The spotted fur of a Ruffian animal, called a Lucern,
antiently much in use and esteem. I find it mentioned in the
will of Sir John Wallop, an eminent captain and statesman in
the reign of Henry viii. May 22. 1551. "To the Sergeant
"of the kinges herthoundes my gowne furrid with lucermi."
Registr. Buck. qu. 24. cur. Prær. Cant. It is specified in our
ancient statutes. See the word in Beaumont and Fletcher, vol.
ii. p. 399.
* More's Life, by M. T. M. p. 218. 4to.
A 4. What

<page 27>
8 THE LIFE OF
What was the first step to his advance-
ment in life, and whether it arose from the
friendship of some private patron, from any
distinguished merit in his profession, a peculiar
Cast for business in general, or a lucky con-
currence of all these causes, cannot be precisely
determined, although from what follows it
may be partly conjectured. He was not much
more than twenty-seven years of age, when he
had sufficient address or interest to procure an
appointment to offices, which seem to have
been alternately bestowed upon Henry's most
eminent favourites, and the most popular cha-
racters of those times y.
Having been early initiated, as I before ob-
served, in the business of chancery, on the fifth
day October, 1533, he was constituted by let-
ters patent of Henry the eighth, clerk of tb«
briefs in the star-chamber at Westminster %
On the fifteenth day of October in the fame
year, he received by letters patent of the fame
king, a reversionary grant of the office of clerk
'Fuller in his quaint manner, observes concerning him,
"I behold him as fortunx suæ fabrum; the smith, who by
"God's blessing, hammered out his own fortune without any
"patrimonial advantage." Worthies of England, Article
London, p. 223. edit. 1662.
* See Append. No. IV.
Of

<page 28>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 9
of the crown in chancery. Of this post, very
soon afterwards, he became actually possessed;
with an annual fee of twenty pounds from the
hanaper, and also a robe with fur at the feasts
of Christmas and Pentecost from the king's
great wardrobe a.
On the thirteenth day of November 1535,
he was constituted, by the king's letters patent,
warden of the mint, exchange, and coinage,
in the tower of London, on the voluntary re-
signation, in his favour, of John Coppynger,
page of the great wardrobe b. How long-he
continued in this office I have not learned. It
seems, however, that he had quitted it within
eight years, and, as I suppose, for some more
valuable consideration c. On the twenty-third
day of December, 1536, he was likewise by
letters patent appointed, to exercise jointly
with William Smythe, the office of clerk ofjjr^t.
all the briefs in the star-chamber at West-
minster-. ^
* Pat. 29. Hen. viii. par. 5. See Append. I^o. V.
b Pat. 26. Hen. viii. par. 2. See Append. ^No. IK. See
more of John Coppynger, ibid, in the Note?.
c For in the British Museum, there is, f» Coinpotus Johan-
"nis Browne, custodis Cambii, &c. a pri/o die Jul. an. reg.
"Hen. viii. 34.". MSS. Harl. 698.—1/
* Pat. 26. Hen. viii. par. 1. Append. No. IV.
On

<page 29>
io THE LIFE OF
On February the twenty-eighth, 1538, he
obtained, at his own instance, a new royal li-
cence for exercising the office of clerk of the
crown in conjunction with John Lucas % who
was afterwards, in the reign of Edward the
sixth, an eminent crown-lawyer, and employ-
ed by that prince in many important commis-
sions f. The first of these grants he perhaps
obtained by the recommendation of Sir Tho-
mas More; who presiding as Lord Chancellor
in the court above-mentioned, where bir Tho-
mas Pope was employed when a young man,
might have taken particular notice of his pro-
mising diligence and abilities j and from which
circumstance, a lasting friendship and intimacy
between them both, as will be shewn here-
after, seems to have originally commenced.
Although there is equal reason to suppose, as
it will likewise appear in its proper place, that
he was in no less favour and esteem with Sir
1 homas More's successor, the Lord Chancellor
Thomas lord Audley j under whose immediate
inspection and authority he exercised the office
of clerk of the crown, and clerk of the briefs
in the star-chamber: and to both of which
e Pat. 29. Hen. viii. ut supr.
s Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 498. And ibid. B. ii. Ch. xxix.
pass.
depart-

<page 30>
SIR THOMAS POPE. n
departments, as I presume, he must have been
appointed by Lord Chancellor Audley's nomi-
nation g.
But these appointments were soon succeeded
by one of much greater consequence. For in
the year 1536, he was constituted, by the king,
Treasurer of the Court of augmentations of
the king's revenue, on its first establishment by
act of parliamenth.
The principal design os this court was for
estimating the lands of the dissolved mona-
steries, vested in the Crown, and for receiving
their revenues. It had moreover full power
and authority to fell the monastic possessions
for the king's service '. It was so called from
the encrease which the royal revenue received,
* Lord Audley was appointed Lord Keeper, May 20, 1532,
on the resignation of Sir T. More: And Lord Chancellor, Jan.
26, 1533. Rym. Feed. xiv. 435, 446. Dugd. Chron. Ser. pag.
82. Both offices, I apprehend, were in the appointment of the
Chancellor, as the clerk of the crown is at present: although
they passed in the king's name. The star-chamber was a branch
of chancery. Among Tanner's manuscripts there is an instru-
ment, without date, but while Audley was chancellor, relating
to the monastery of Furness, in Sir T. Pope's hand-writing.
MSS. Tanner. 164. f. 44. Bibl. Bodl.
k Siatut. Hen. viii. An. 27. Cap. xxvii. See Statutes by
Berthelette, in two vol. Lond. 1543. See vol. ii. ibid. 1551-
sol. xli. b.
'From the act.
by

<page 31>
12 THELIFEOF
by this new acquisition of property. All per-
sons holding leases and pensions, by former
grants, from any convent, exhibited their titles
before this court, and their pretensions were
allowed in proportion to their validity. And
although the governors of the religious houses,
foreseein their fate, often contrived immedi-
ately before the dissolution of their respective
societies, to forge new contracts or indentures
in favour of their friends or kindred, few
frauds of this kind took effect. For the court
seems to have been very vigilant in preventing
and exposing such specious imposturesk.
The officers of this court were a Chancel-
lor, it's superior, a Treasurer abovementioned,
who was the second officer, a sollicitor, ten
auditors, seventeen recievers, with others, be-
longing to the inferior departments. It was a
court of record, and possessed of two seals'.
The Treasurer's office appears to have been
a post of considerable profit and distinction,
and of equal trust and importance. He was
ranked with the principal officers of state in
the reign of Henry the eighth. For by statute
of the fame, he was privileged, together with
k Fuller Ch. Hist. B. vi. p. 349.
1 From the Act of parl. ut sup.
the

<page 32>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 13
the chancellor of the said court, the chancellor
os the dutchy of Lancaster, the treasurer of
the king's chamber, the chancellor of the
court of first Fruits and Tenths, the master of
the king's wards and liveries, the groom of the
stole, the warden of the cinque ports, and
other honourable personages, respectively, to
retain in his house one chaplain having a bene-
fice with cure of souls, who should not be
compelled to residence m. The Treasurer was
allowed a limited annual salary for the exercise
of his office; as also perquisites for such sums
of money as he paid to the patentees of any
office, fee, or annuity, granted under the seal
of the court: and also, for such disbursements
as he made to any other persons, by virtue of
the king's warrant or bill assigned, or by bill
assigned and subscribed by the chancellor, and
one other officer.
These fees were regulated according to the
practice of the court of the dutchy of Lancas-
ter n. The allowance of Sir John Williams,
afterwards Lord Williams of Tame, Treasurer
of this court in the reign of Edward the sixth,
was 3201. A sum, which I presume, was
B Statin. Hen. viii. an. 33. C. xxviii. And 21. xiii.
n Ex Statut. ut supr.
then

<page 33>
i4 THE LIFE OF
then the full value of this place °: but which,
although very considerable, was much inferi-
or to the emoluments of the fame office,
when in the possession of Sir Thomas Pope.
The Treasurer at his admission was sworn
before the chancellor, that he would reasonably
and honestly procure the king's profit, admi-
nister justice to the poor as well as the rich,
faithfully keep and expend the king's treasure,
and exhibit a true declaration of it without
concealment. The receivers were ordered to
pay into his hands the whole rents of all the
dissolved monasteries: concerning which he
accounted annually before the chancellor and
two auditors. The chaneellor, Treasurer, at-
torney, and sollicitor, or any two of them
were entrusted with power or licence to act
without the king's warrant'.
On the dissolution of any greater abbey,
some of the auditors, who were employed in
riding to survey the manors and lands of the
court, repaired thither, and were lodged and
° Fuller Ch. Hist. b. vi. p. 348. edit. 1651. In lieu of this
salary, queen Mary granted Sir J. Williams a pension of the
fame value, when he quitted the treafurersliip. Dugd. Bar. ii.
393. edit. 1675.
P Ex Status, ut supr.
accom-

<page 34>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 15
accommodated in the houseq; for the purpose
of acquiring intelligence, and of transacting
the necessary business relating to the several
estates, with more convenience and certainty.
The first chancellor of this court was Sir
Richard Rich, afterwards lord Rich, and lord
high chancellor of England'.
Sir Thomas Pope held the treasurerfhip of
this court about five years, and was succeeded
by Sir Edward North % privy counsellor and
executor to Henry the eighth, and created a
baron by queen Mary. About the same time
he was appointed master, or treasurer, of the
jewel-house in the tower '. The yearly sti-
pend of this office, when in the posseffion of
Thomas lord Cromwell, about five years be-
fore, was fifty pounds".
1 Thus at the abbey of Evesliam, some of the principal
lodgings are ordered to be "reserved for the king's officers of
"the court of augmentations when they shall repair thither,
"&c." Stevens, Monast. i. 402.
r Dugd. Bar. ii. 387. Sir Edward North appears to have
been chancellor of that court in 1545. From the dedication of
Sir Thomas Elliot's book, entitled, Preservative against Death.
Lond. 1545. 1 21110.
* Dugd. Ibid. p. 394.
1 Englilh Baronett. iv. 666. edit. 1741. From the informa-
tion of Sir Henry Pope-Blount, cited in the margin. But this
does not appear by the patents.
■ Dugd. ut supr, p. 370.
It

<page 35>
16 THE LIFE OF
» •
It would have broken the thread of my
narrative, if J had before observed, that in
1535» June the-twenty-sixth, beginning now
to rife in the world, he received from Barker,
otherwise garter king at arms, a patent for a
new coat of arms, to be borne by him and his
posterity w; which are the fame that are now
borne by Trinity college in Oxford: viz. Party
per pale, or and azure, on a cheveron between
three gryphons heads erased, four fleur de lys,
all countercharged1. To which it may be add-
ed here, that in the latter end of the following
year, viz. 1536, on the fifteenth day of Octo-
ber, he was knighted by Henry eighth7, amid
the solemnities attending the creations of the
earl of Southampton, and the gallant Edward
Seymour, earl of Hertford, afterwards the
a
w Penes honoratis. Francisc. com. de Guildford. See Ap-
pend. No. II.
x He ordered them to be placed in painted glass, twice in
the hall, and twice in the President's lodgings, of that college.
These escocheons were done by James Nicholson, glass-painter
Of London, each, at 6s. 8d. From a Loose Paper, in Thesaur.
Coll. Trin. Oxon. I presume they were destroyed under the ad-
ministration of the prelbyterians.
'In an instrument, in Thesaurar. coll. Trin. Oxon. dated
20 Dec. 1539. 31. Hen. viii. he is styled, " Egregius vir ma-
"gifter Thomas Pope, Thesaurarius cur. augment. &c." In
another, ibid, dated 28 Jan. 34. Hen. viii. he is called miles.
But Dugdale styles him knight, in 1539. Warw. p. .416. b.
famous

<page 36>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 17
famous duke of Somerset. At which time
Henry Howard, afterwards the celebrated and
unfortunate earl of Surrey, also received the
honor of knighthood z.
A few years after the erection of the court
of augmentations above-mentioned, the *king
perceiving that his exigencies required more
expeditious returns of money than the annual
revenues of the dissolved monasteries could pro-
duce, was necessitated to fell by one extensive
commission a very considerable part of their
lands, for the purpose of raising present supplies.
By this step the court of augmentations was
soon diminished. The causes depending in it
became few and inconsiderable, and the crown-
prosits arising from thence decreased; it's offi-
cers were numerous, and their pensions ample.
On these considerations he was induced to dis-
solve it; which he did by letters patent only:
and on the second of January, 1546, created
by the same letters patent, a new court of
augmentations, on a different and more con-
fined plan.
In an original rough draught of this new
establishment', Sir Thomas Pope is nominated,
by the king, master of the woods of the court
* Brit. Mus. MSS. Cotton Claudius. C. 3. sol. 127. b.
* In the British Museum. MSS. Harl. 600. 1.
B on

<page 37>
18 THE LIFE OF
on this side the river Trent, and Sir John Wil-
liams, Treasurer. The other principal patent-
officers, recited in the instrument, are Sir Ed-
ward North, who is appointed chancellor, Sir
Walter Mild may, and Sir Thomas Moyle, ge-
neral surveyors, Robert Henneage master of
the woods beyond Trent, Richard Goodricke,
attorney, and John Gosnold, sollicitor. The
rest are Geoffry Gates, and John Arnscott, sur-
veyors of the woods on each side Trent, and
Richard Duke. The two masters of the woods
on each side Trent, are styled the fourth offi-
cers. At this time Sir Thomas Pope was one
of the king's privy-counsellors b. The total
sum of yearly fees belonging to this court, on
its second reduced establistimemt, amounted to
7249I. 10s. 3d.c.
In the year 1553, the last of the reign of Ed-
ward the sixth, the first effort was made for the
actual abolition of this court, which by degrees
was become burthenfome, and at length super-
fluous. Accordingly, the fame year, at Mary's
b He is styled in the said instrument, " our trustie and well
"belovyd councillor." sol. 18. b. The first notice I have
found of his being a privy counsellor, occurs in Pat. 36. Hen.
viii. par. 11. Test. Mar. xxi. This was in 1 545. Where he is
called, "dilectus et fidelis confiliarius nosier."
c Fuller, Ch. hist. vi. p. 349.
accession

<page 38>
SIR THOMAS- POPE. 19
accession d it was incorporated into the exche-
quer0. Soon afterwards followed a grand sale
of lands, which formerly came within the cog-
nisance of this court, and continued in possession
of the crown, under the conduct of commissio-
ner* j one of which was the chancellor of the
exchequer. This appears from three valuable
manuscript volumes in the British Museumf,
which the learned and accurate Wanley sup-
posed to have belonged to the court of aug-
mentations. But this could not be the cafe,
as the first of them was made and begins so
late as the year 1557, four years after the abo-
lition of that court. They were however com-
piled in consequence of that institution, and
may be considered among the last remains of
its recordsg.
d Statut. Mar. i. cap. x. But I find a renewal of Sir Richard
Sackvillc's patent to the chancellorship of this court on queen
Mary's accession. Pat. I. Mar. Test. Jan. xx. par. 2. Sackville
was chancellor at the death of Edward vi. He was Constituted
pat. 1. Edw. vi. Test. Aug. ii. par. 2. on North's resignation.
• See Statut, Edw. vi. 7. C. ii.
f Viz. liber primus de lez rates ann. 2, 3. Phil. Mar. sol.
And the two following volumes, sol. MSS. Harl. 606, 607,
608. They are the originals.
* The chamber of the court of augmentations was afterwards
converted into the chamber of the court of wards, now long
since dissolved. Edward vi. at his coronation, when he came
from York-Place, is said to have robed himself in the chamber
of the court of augmentations, " now called the court ofivards,u
before he went into Westminster hall. Time's store-house,
B s B. S.

<page 39>
zo THE LIFE OF
It is commonly supposed, and it has been
said in general terms, that Sir Thomas Pope
was appointed one of the commissioners, or vi-
sitors, under Cromwell, for dissolving the reli-
gious houses. It is indeed true, that he was
one of those, into whose hands the seal of the
magnificent and opulent abbey of Saint Alban's
was surrendered on the fifth day of December,
1539, by the last abbot, Richard Stevenacheh.
This however is the only instance I can find,
that he was ever concerned in this fort of bu-
siness. His name does not appear among the
persons specially appointed by Cromwell for
this purpose; whose names are recited by Dug-
dale'' from an authentic manuscript in the
B. 5. ch. xix. pag. 502. sol. 1619. The chamber near the Ex-
chequer, where the augmentation-records are at present reposit-
ed, is not the fame. Which was the court of wards, and con-
sequently, which was the augmentation court, will appear, by
comparing the following passage of Stowe, who wrote in the
reign of queen Elisabeth. "At the upper end of the great
*• [Westminster] hall by the King's Bench, is a going up to a
"great chamber called the Whitehall, wherein is now kept the
"court of wards and liveries, and adjoining thereto is the court
"of requests." Survey Lond. p. 892. edit. 1616. The chamber
therefore within or adjoining to Westminster-hall, at the upper
end, and called the Whitehall, was the court or augmen-
tations.
h Stevens's Monasticon, i. 264. Weever's Fun. mon. p. 112.
edit. 1631.
1 Warwickshire, p. 800, seq.
Cotton

<page 40>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 21
Cotton Library. Nor does his name occur in
the private commissions, which, after a dili-
gent search, I have seen relating to this matter;
nor in any instruments of resignation, letters of
advice to the visitor general, memorials, or
other authentic papers, concerning the visitati-
on or suppression of any monastery. My opi-
nion is therefore, that he was only occasionally
employed at Saint Alban's, as being one of the
principal officers in the court of augmentations,
as the place was in the neighbourhood of Lon-
don, and as the surrender of so famous an ab-
bey was an affair of some importance. Thus we
find that the priory, now the dean and chapter,
of Canterbury, was not dissolved in the ordi-
nary way; it being thought necessary, that the
archbishop of Canterbury, the master of the
rolls, Walter Henley attorney and Nicholas
Bacon sollicitor of the augmentation-court with
four others, should be sent thither, to take the
resignation of the prior and monksk. However,
if it can be proved, that he was ever engaged on
other occasions in these violent proceedings of
an avaricious and arbitrary prince, it may at the
fame time be fairly presumed, that in an em-
ployment which afforded so many obvious
temptations to fraud, oppression and rapacity,
* Somner's Canterbury, by Batteley, Append, p. 118. It
was 31. Hen. viii.
B 2 hc

<page 41>
22 THE LIFE OF
he behaved with singular decency, moderation,
and honour. Of this we have the impartial
evidence of a prejudiced historian. For Fuller,
who is remarkably severe on the visitors in
general, and who is seldom sparing of his
invectives, wherever he can discover the
slightest foundation for abuse, mentioning
Sir Thomas Pope as an agent in these af-
fairs, immediately subjoins: "However, by
"all the printed books of that age, he ap-
"peareth one of a candid carriage; and in
"this respect stands sole and single by himself.
"That of the abbey-lands which he received,
"he refunded a considerable proportion for the
"building and endowing Trinity college in
"Oxford1." And in another place, he mentions
him with honour on the fame subject. "But
«« the most pleasant object to entertain us at
"this time in England, is the beholding of two
"fair and fresh foundations in Oxford; the
«« one Trinity college, built by Sir Thomas
"Pope, principal visitor at the dissolution of
«' abbiesm. Now as none were losers employed
"in that service, so we find few refunding back
"to charitable uses j and perchance this man
"alone the thankful Samaritane who made a
"publick acknowledgement"." At the furren-
1 Worthies.- London, p. 223.
m This is a mistake, as we have before seen.
■ Church-Hist. B. viii. p. 39.
der

<page 42>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 23
dcr of Saint Alban's Abbey, he preserved by
his interest, and particular application to the
king, the noble conventual church now stand-
ing, and made parochial °: one of the earliest
and most venerable monuments of Norman
architecture remaining in England p.
On the whole, the circumstance of his hav-
ing received grants of the lands of the monaste-
ries, seems to have occasioned the mistaken sup-
position that he was frequently and professedly
concerned as a Commissioner in the dissolution
of their foundations. That his prodigious pro-
perty was accumulated in consequence of the
destruction of the religious houses, is not deni-
ed: and the lucky oportunity of raising an es-
tate from this grand harvest of riches which
now lay open before him, seems to have divert-
ed his thoughts from making a fortune by the
law; a profession which he most probably
would have otherwise continued to cultivate
with the greatest success, and in which he
might have undoubtedly claimed the most opu-
lent and distinguished stations. I could give a
minute detail, from the most authentic evi-
dences, of the grants of abbey-land, which he
• From the information of the late Sir Harry Pope-Blount,
of Tittenhanger in Hertford (hire.
* It was built by Paulin, the fourteenth abbot, a Norman,
about the Year 1080.
B 4 received

<page 43>
24 THE LIFE OF
recieved during the reign of Henry the eighth j
but it may suffice to observe in more general
terms, that before the year 1556, he appears to
have been actually possessed of more than thirty
manors in Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, War-
wickshire, Derbyshire, Bedfordshire, Hereford-
shire, and Kent; beside other considerable es-
tates, and several advowsons. Some of these
possessions were given him by Henry the
eighth; but the greatest part was acquired by
purchase while he was connected with the
court of augmentations ,. Many of his estates
were bought of Queen Mary '.
But let us suppose, what indeed cannot be
proved, that Sir Thomas Pope was one of
Cromwell's visitors in the affair of the monas-
teries. For although I have insinuated above,
that these visitors were not on all occasions en-
tirely justifiable in their proceedings, I am yet
< See Dugdale's Warwickshire. And from the patents.
'Ex muniment, coll. prædict. And lib. prim, lex rates, ann.
J, 4. Phil. Mar. MSS. Harl. 606. 257. sol. 114. In the British
Museum, Ut supr. And lib. fecund. 607. 1. sol. 1.—13. sol 7.
b. ibid. In the charter of foundation for his college at Ox-
ford, dafr. Mar. iv. 1554, are recited twenty-seven manors and
thirteen advowsons: beside impropriations and pensions. With
all which he is licensed to enseoff the college. Two years after-
wards, viz. May 1, 1556, in the statutes of the college, he re-
cites thirty-five manors. Cap. vi. Afterwards he made other
acquisitions.
inclined

<page 44>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 25
inclined to think, that their conduct and be-
haviour were in general less blameable than
has been commonly represented.
It is no wonder, that the monks should load
those whom they esteemed the instruments of
their ruin with many calumnies j all which
were studiously propagated and heightened by
their advocates of the catholic persuasion. And
it should at the same time be remembered, that
the king's injunctions, under which they acted,
were extremely severe; insomuch, that many
fraternities desired their houses might be rather
entirely suppressed, than reformed under such
rigorous conditions.
With regard to the vices and disorders %
which they pretended to have detected in the
• Even in the Nunneries, where, among the softer sex, seme
degree of delicacy, at least of decorum, might have justly been
expected, the lowest vices, not to insist on the more criminal
irregularities, were too often practised. In the Benedictine con-
vent of Rumscy, in Hamstiire, at a visitation by Bishop Fox,
held in the year 1506, Joyce Rows the abbess is accused of im-
moderate Drinking, especially "tempore nocturno;" and of
inviting the nuns to her chamber every evening, for the purpose
of these excesses, "post completorium." The nuns are also for-
bidden to have such frequent and familiar access, at undue
times, to the house of the bailiff or chief hind of the monastery,
whence unfavourable suspicions have arisen; and the said bailiff
himself is ordered, no more to frequent the chambers of the
abbess or nuns. Some of them are enjoined to abstain " a so-
"cietate

<page 45>
26 THE LIFE OF
monasteries, their reports sometimes perhaps
deserve credit, as those enormities are too natu-
rally and unavoidably connected with the mo-
nastic institution. In this, as in all other cafes
of that fort, mutual opposition produced mu-
tual obloquy.
Nor mould it be forgotten, that the visitors
gave a favorable report of some houses. They
interceded earnestly for the nunnery of God-
stowe in Oxfordshire: declaring that the nuns
were strict in their lives; and alledging that the
suppression of this house would prove an irre-
parable inconvenience, as most of the young
ladies of the best families of that county were
sent thither for education \ From the abbey of
"cietate sacerdotum;" and the abbess in particular is com-
manded to avoid all communications with Seculars; especially
with some whose names are expressly mentioned, and who are
known to have "accessum et recursum ad Earn." One of the
injunctions to the nuns in general is, "Shiia fint sobriæ, et ft ab-
"fiintant a potu post Completorium." Apud Registr. Fox, Episc.
Wint. Lib. i. sol. 42. b. This was a rich convent, and rilled
with ladies of the best families.
1 Burnet. Reformat, i. 238. This was common in other nun-
neries. Tanner, from the accounts of the cellaress of Carhow
near Norwich, gives us a curious specimen of what was received
"pro perhendinationibus" or the board of young ladies, and
their servants, for education. "Ree. de dom. Margcria Weder-
"ley perhendinant. ibid, xi feptimanas, xiii.s. iv.d. Pro mensa
"unius famulæ dictx Margeria: per iii. septim,mas, viii.d. per
"sept. Sec." Not. Mon. sol. pref. p. xxxii. [Ex orig. Rot.
nunc in Bibl. Bodl. MSS. Tanner.]
saint

<page 46>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 27
saint Edmondsoury in Suffolk they wrote to
Cromwell, that they could find nothing scan-
dalous in the Abbot or any member of the con-
vent". After surveying the stately and ancient
abbey of Glastonbury, they recommended it to
the Lord Privy seal, that the buildings, at
least, might be suffered to remain undemolish-
ed; representing, that the structure in general
of this monastery was so magnificent, that it
might very properly be spared, and easily be
converted into a palace for the kingw. Gyffard,
in particular, one of the visitors, petitioned in
the strongest terms for the absolute continuance
of the monastery of Woolstrope in Lincoln-
shire. I will insert the words of his letter to
Cromwell j not only because they contain an
unexpected instance oscandour, compassion, and
honesty, but as they preserve a curious picture
of a well-regulated religious house, of the se-
cond magnitude, at that period. "The gover-
"nor thereof [Woolstrope] is a verie good
"huftande for the howse, and well beloved
"of all the inhabitants thereunto adjoyn-
"ynge :—a right honest man, having ryghte
"religious persones, being prests of ryght
M good conversacion, and lyvynge relygiousty:
'* having such qualities of vertue as we have
u Burnet, ibid. 236.
* Wiilis's Mitr. Abb. i. 109.
"not

<page 47>
28 THE LIFE OF
"not sound the lyke in no place. For ther Is
"not one religious person ther, but that he
"can and doth use, either embrotheryng,
«* writinge bokes with verie fair hande, mak-
"yng their owne garments, carving, paynting,
"or grafting [graving]. The howse wythout
"eny staunder or ill fame, and standinge verie
"solitarie: keepinge such hospitalitie, that,
*' except singular good provysion, it could not
'* be manytened with half so much land more
"as they may spend. Such a number of the
"pore inhabitants nigh thereunto daily reliev-
"ed, that we have not leene the lyke, havinge
"no more lands than they have. God be even
"my judge, as I do wryte unto yow the troth.
"Which verie pitie causeth me to write. The
"premises considered, I beseche yow to be a
"meane to the king's majestie, for the stand-
'« inge of the sayde Wolstrope ". The same
* Strype Eccl. Mem. i. 255. From the former part of this
letter, not printed by Strype, it appears, that the king had
been disgusted at the favorable representation made by Gyf-
sard and his associates, of this and other monasteries: but that
his Majesty's displeasure did not prevent him from telling the
truth. "And forasmuch as of late my fellowes and I wiight
"untoo Mr. Chancellor of the augmentacions, in the favour
"of thabbey of seynt James, and the nunnerie of Catesbie in
"Northamptonshire: which letters be (hewed unto the kynge's
"highnes in the favour of those howses, where the kyngis
"highnes was disfleascd, as he sayd to my servaunt, sayinge,
"that it nuas like that ive had receyved rewards, which tau/ed us
«• to

<page 48>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 29
commissioner, with three others of his associ-
ates in the visitation, pleaded in the same be-
nevolent strain for the nunnery of Catefby in
Northamptonshire. « This house we found in
"very perfett order. The priores a sure, wise,
"discreet, and very relygious woman; with
"ix nunnys under her obedyence, as relygious
"and devout, and with as good obedyence as
"we have in time paste seen, or belyke /hall
"see. The seid hovvse standyth in such a
"quarter much to the releff of the king's peo-
"pie, and his grace's pore subjects their [there]
"likewyse moo relieved. —Wherefore yf yt
"fhuld please the kyng's highnes to have eny
"remorse, that eny such religious howsc shall
"stande; we think his grace cannot appointe
"eny howse more mete to fhewe his most gra-
"cious charitie and pitey over than on the
"saide howse of Catefby V I find also Gyf-
fard interceding in the same manner for the
nunnery of Polesworth in Warwickslure.
"te wight at we tfyd; which myght putt mee in feare to
"wright: notwithstanding the sure knowledge that I have had
"allway in your indifferens, gyveth me boldness to wright to
"you in the savour of the house of Woolstrope. The Governor
«' thereof, &c." Dat. Jun. xix. 1537. Brit. Mus. MSS. Cott.
Claud. E. ir. sol. 113. The letter about Catefby will be cited
below.
r Strype ibid, who has printed it incorrectly from Bibl. Cot-
ton, MSS. Cl. iv. sol. 209. Brit. Mus. see other letters of the
like kind in Collier, Eccl. hist. p. 2. b. iii. pag. is6.
"Wherein

<page 49>
3o THE LIFE OF
"Wherein is an abbes namyd dame Alice
*« Fitzherbert, of the age of lx yeares, a very
"fadde, difcreate, and religyous woman :—
"and in the fame howfe, under her rule, are
"xii vertuous and religyous nonnes, and of
*' good conversation. —Wherefore ye myght
"do a ryght good and merytorious dede, to
"be medyatour to the kyng's highnes for the
"said howse to stande and remayne unsuppres-
*• fed.—And in the town of Polesworth are
"xliv tenements, and never a plough but
"one z: the resydue be artifycers, laborers,
'* and victellers, and live in effect by the said
'* howse, and the repayre and resorte that ys
"made to the gentylmens childern and stu-
"diountes, that ther do lyf, to the nombre
81 sometyme of xxx and sometyme xl and
"more j that their be ryght vertuoufly brought
*' upp, &c. Written at Maxstocke beside Co-
"ventree the xxviii day of July*." [1537.]
Many others of the commissioners also shewed
a compassionate concern for the religious at
their expulsion, in providing them proper pen-
z Nor was it likely there should be another, while the nun-
nery remained. The truth is, wherever there was a monastery,
idleness was encouraged, and the usual incitements to labour and
industry were superseded.
» MSS. Cotton. Claud. E. iv. ut supr. sol. 210. b.
sions

<page 50>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 31
sions, according to their age, infirmities, or
other circumstances of distress \
In the reign of Henry the eighth, Sir Tho-
mas Pope was employed in various services and
attendances about the court. He was appoint-
ed % April 21, 1544, together with Sir Ed-
ward North, afterwards Lord North, to con-
vey the great seal of England, being resigned
by the lord chancellor Audley then indisposed,
to the king at his new palace of Westminster,
who delivered it into the custody of Sir Tho-
mas Wriothessey d. There is a circumstance
b Strype, ubi supr. seq. Willis Mitr. Abb. Sec. Dr. London,
one of the visitors, thus writes to lord Cromwell about the mo-
nastery of De La Pre near Northampton. "Besechinge your
"lordlhip to be gude lorde unto herre [the abbess] and to herre
"poor sisters in their pensions." MSS. Cotton, ut supr, sol.
208.
e Perhaps as clerk of the crown.
d "Memorandum, quod die Lunæ, viz. vicesimo primo die
Aprilis, anno regni Domini nostri Henrici octavi, dei gratia,
Angliae, &c, tricesimo quinto: Thomas Audeley miles, domi-
nus Audeley de Walden, tune Cancellarius Angliæ, infirmitate
corporis debilitatus, magnum figillum .... præfato domino re-
gi, per Edvardum North militem, et Thomam Pope militem,
mifit; qui quidem Edvardus, et Thomas Pope, figillum illud,
in quadam baga de albo corio inclusum, et sigillo dicti Dom.
cancellarii munitum, regix magestati apud Palalium suum no-
•uwm Wcstmonafttritnse, in camera sua privata .... in presen-
tia Thomæ Henneage militis, et Antonii Denny armigeri, prx-
sentarunt et obtulcrunt: humiliter supplicantes .... eandem
regiam magestatem, quatenus idem D. rex figillum suum præ-
dictum

<page 51>
32 THE LIFE OF
relating to this resignation which is not men-
tioned by any of our historians. For the king
committed the seal to Sir Thomas Wriothefley,
with the title of keeper, only during the indis-
position of lord Audley; with the reservation
of reinstating him in the chancellorstiip on his
recovery \ In 1547, he seems to have been
summoned and examined by the privy council,
concerning certain treasonable expressions which
had dropped from Thomas duke of Norfolk,
afterwards condemned with lord Surrey but
not executed, in reference to the Act of
Usesf. He was a singular and most intimate
friend of sir Thomas More, who seems to
have taken early notice of him, as I before
hinted, when a young man in the court of
chancery; and was sent by the king, to notify
to that illustrious sufferer in the cause of mis-
taken conscience, the hour appointed for his
execution.
dictum recipere et acceptare dignetur. Super quo dictus D.
rex sigillum illud, per manus ipsorum Edvardi et Thorn* Pope,
recepit et acceptavit, &c. &c." Rymer, Feed. Tom. xv. p. 20.
Sufer deliberations magnifigilli.
• Rymer, ibid.
s Herbert's Hist. Hen. viii. p. 564. edit. 1649. The historian
fays, " One Thomas Pope informed the council, &c." It may
therefore be doubted whether he means sir Thomas Pope. But
it is the fame in Masters's Text of thi3 history, in Jesus college
library. MSS. No. 2098. 79. vol. 3.
As-

<page 52>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 33
As the interview between these two friends,
on this important occasion, is memorable and
interesting, I shall insert it at length.
On the fifth day of July g, 1535, he waited
on sir Thomas More, then under condemnation
in the Tower, early in the morning -, and ac-
quainted him that he came by command of the
king and council, to bring his unfortunate
friend the melancholy news, that he must suf-
fer death before nine of the clock the fame
morning, and that therefore he should imme-
diately begin to prepare himself for that awe-
ful event. Upon this message, More, without
the least surprize or emotion, chearfully repli-
ed ', "Master Pope, I most heartily thank you
"for your good tidings. I have been much
"bound to the king's highness for the benefits
"of his honors that he hath most bountifully
"bestowed upon me ; yet am I more bound to
"his grace, I assure you, for putting me here,
'* where I have had convenient time and space
"to have remembrance of my end. And so
"help me god. Most of all am I bound unto
"him, that it hath pleased his majesty so
"stiortly to rid me out of the miseries of this
"wicked world." Then Pope subjoined, that
* See More's Worses, sol. 1537. pag. 1457.
C it

<page 53>
34 THE LIFE OF
it was the king's pleasure that at the place of
execution he should not use many words. To
this More answered, that he was ready to sub-
mit to the king's commands; and added, "I
"beseech you good Mr. Pope, to gett the king
"to suffer my daughter Margaret to be present
"at my burial." Pope assured him that he
would use his utmost interest with the king
for this purpose: and having now finished his
disagreeable commission, he solemnly took
leave of his dying friend, and burst into tears.
More perceiving his concern, said with his
usual composure; "Quiet yourself, good Mr.
*' Pope, and be not discomforted•, for I trust
"that we shall one day in heaven see each
"other full merrily, where we shall be sure to
•' live and love together in joyful bliss eternal-
"ly \" But this method of consolation prov-
ing ineffectual, More to divert the melancholy
of his friend, and to dismiss him in better
spirits, called for a glass -, and applying it as an
urinal, he held it up to the light, and with the
prophetic air of a sagacious physician gravely
declared, "This man might have lived longer
"if it had pleased the kingi."
h Roper's Life of More, by T. Hearne, 4. 57.
'Thomæ Mori Vita et Exitus: by J. H. geut. Lond. 1652.
pag. 127.
In

<page 54>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 35
In consequence of sir Thomas Pope's in-
tercession with the king, agreeably to More's
earnest: and dying request, his favorite daugh-
ter, Margaret Roper, and others of his family
were permitted to be present at his interment,
which was performed immediately after the
execution in the chapel of the Tower. But
Margaret afterwards, and probably by the
fame interest, begged the body of the king,
and deposited it on the south-side of the choir
of the church of Chelsea, where a monu-
ment, with an inscription written by himself,
had been erected some time before. This
affectionate daughter, whose resolution equals
her pity, also found means to procure her
father's head, after it had remained, igno-
minioufly stuck on a pole, on London bridge,
for fourteen days. For this daring fact she
was apprehended and imprisoned; but declar-
ing in her defence before the privy coun-
cil, that she had bought it that it might not
in the end become food for fisties in the
Thames, me was discharged k. However she
carefully preserved it for some time in a
leaden box, till an opportunity offered of con-
k Weever Fun. Mon. 505, 506, 522. Biograp. Brit. More.
pag. 3165.
C 2 veying

<page 55>
36 THE LIFE OF
veying it to Canterbury, where she placed it
in a vault belonging to her husband's family,
under a chapel adjoining to faint Dunstan's
church in that city'.
1 Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. 39.

<page 56>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 27
SECT. II.
IN the reign of Edward the sixth, when
the religious and political affairs of the
kingdom took another turn, and all pub-
lic business fell into the hands of new minis-
ters and managers, sir Thomas Pope did not
comply with the times. He was appointed
to no office, nor enjoyed any favor in this
reign. He received indeed some grants of land
from the crown about the first year of this
king, with Cranmer archbishop of Canterbury,
the duke of Somerset, the earl of Warwick,
the marquis of Northampton, and several
other principal persons of the court. But these
grants were made for past services, and in con-
sideration of other claims due from the deceas-
ed king™.
■ Strype Eccl. Mem. ii. 78.—Some of the particulars may
perhaps be seen in pat. 1. Edw. vi. test. Jul. 24. par. 4.—
Likewise, in this reign, sir Richard Leigh1 is licenced to alienate
a manor to sir T. Pope, pat. 1. Edw. vi. test. Maii 27. par. 7.
—Sir T. Pope is licenced to alienate a pasture in Bermondsey
to Will. Gerrard, pat. 2. Edw. vi. test. Jan. 16. par. 3.—Sir
T. Pope is licenced to alienate the manor of Broughton, co.
Oxon. to William Godolphin and Henry Boothe, pat. 5. Edw.
vi. test. Sept. 17. par. 7. These are all the patents, of any sort,
which he received in this reign.
C 3 The

<page 57>
38 THE LIFE OF
The unlimited authority, and arbitrary do-
minion of Henry, had kept both protestants
and papists in subjection. Under such a govern-
ment they both acted uniformly, and neither
party presumed to claim any apparent superiori-
ty. But upon the decease of that uncontroulable
monarch, the people discovered their real sen-
timents without reserve, and protestantism
manifestly began to be the prevailing religion.
The protector Somerset, who had long been
a secret partisan of the reformers, on the ac-
cession of young Edward, publicly declared
his intention of forwarding and establishing
the reformation. In this scheme he was hap-
pily seconded by most of the privy council,
who after the fall of Southampton seem en-
tirely to have deserted the catholic commu-
nion. The protector wisely took care that
all persons to whom he entrusted the educa-
tion of the young king, should be attached
to these rational principles j and preferred and
encouraged those alone that appeared active in
this profession.
Thus most of the courtiers, yet more perhaps
in general from lucrative views than from real
conviction, became converts to the predomi-
nant party: amongst which, however, I do
not find sir Thomas Pope. This, at least,
shews

<page 58>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 39
shews a steadiness and uniformity of mind in
those days of change, which afford such fre-
quent instances of occasional compliance.
Nor let it be deemed any inconsistency of
character, that he, though a rigid papist,
should have been in the preceding reign an
agent for suppressing the monasteries, and a
receiver of their possessions. For the demo-
lition of these houses was not an act of the
church but of the state. It was prior to the
reformation of religion, and effected by a king
and parliament of the popish communion. It
was even confirmed by the parliament of
queen Mary".
Very few papists wrote or remonstrated
against the destruction of these societies. With-
out the least impeachment of their principles,
or suspicion of apostacy, several others, the
strictest members of the catholic persuasion, and
the most respectable characters of those times,
among which, to mention no more, was the
duke of Norfolk, accepted grants of the con-
ventual estates.
Even the clergy thought it no sacrilege to
share in these acquisitions. The dean and
■ Statut, I, 2. Phil, Mar. cap. viii. inf. citat.
C 4 chapter

<page 59>
40 THE LIFE OF
chapter of Litchfield, and the abbot and con-
vent of Westminster, made no scruple of re-
ceiving manors alienated from other religious
corporations % lately dissolved. Burnet tells
us p, that bishop Gardiner was remarkably ve-
hement in declaiming against the monasteries j
and that in many of his sermons he commend-
ed the king for suppressing them *. Queen
Mary, in the very first year of her reign, made
grants of the site of twenty religious houses,
and of very large quantities of abbey-land'.
The bishops and clergy in a catholic convoca-
tion, 1554, petitioned that the pope would
not insist on a restitution of the ecclesiastical
revenues, but rather confirm them to those
lords and gentlemen by whom they had been
obtained'. And it is notorious, that some of
the popish bishops were no less alienators of
their episcopal endowments', than many
other bishops of the protestant church proved
afterwards, in the reigns of Edward the sixth
and Elizabeth. The bishop of Chichester, in
opening the disputation of Henry the eighth
* Sec Tanner's Notit. Mon. sol. edit. pies. p. xxxix.
» Res. i. 251.
* See Fox, vol. ii. p. 426.
* Tanner, ubi supr.
.• Wilkins's Councils, iv. 101.
* Tanner ubi supr. And Collier Eccl. hist. xi. 324, 366.
Heyiin p. 121.
with

<page 60>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 41
with Lambert, in Westminster-hall, ranked
the king's disincorporation of the monks with
his rejection of the fee of Rome, his abolition
of idolatrous adoration, and the introduction of
the English bible; as a matter of an external
nature, and in no respect interfering with the
essentials of the catholic communion u. The
monastic institution was no part of the papistic
theology. Undoubtedly the suppression of the
convents facilitated the admission of protesta-
tism : but it was evidently undertaken on other
principles.
When queen Mary succeeded to the throne,
fir Thomas Pope was again taken into favour,
and soon afterwards constituted one of the
queen's privy counsellorsw. He is likewise
said to have been appointed cofferer to the
houfhold \
But before I proceed further in this reign, it
may be proper to obviate some seeming diffi-
culties and inconsistences, by premising, on
what security sir Thomas Pope, together with
many others, held his church-revenues, under
■ See MSS. C.C.C. C. cxxvii. 5.
w Hollingftiead, iii. 1159. Speed, 854.
* MSS. Rawlins. bibl. Bodl. History os Oxfordshire, Wrox-
ton. But it does not appear by the patents. And Richard
Freston is made cofferer, pat. 3, 4. Phil. Mar. par. 2.
a bigotted

<page 61>
42 THE LIFE OF
a bigotted catholic queen, and upon the resto-
ration of the popish religion. By way os pro-
curing new concessions in favour of Rome, and
to prevent unseasonable alarms, at the begin-
ning of this reign, both the queen and the
pope had given repeated assurances that the
church and abbey lands should remain, forever
unreclaimed, in the hands of their present
possessors r. But that the tenure of these pos-
sessions should not be fixed on so precarious a
foundation as that of mere promises, in 1554*
an act of parliament was passed j which, while
it restored the pope's authority, gave absolute
security to the proprietors of the ecclesiastical
estates, entirely confirmed their title beyond
the power of resumption, and, at the same
time, exempted them from the danger of spi-
ritual censures \ In the mean time, that this
measure might receive the fullest sanction, car-
dinal Pole, who was invested by the pope with
legantine jurisdiction, ratified the parliament's
decree: and, that the dispensation might be
still more ample and effectual, in consequence
of his master's commission, the legate ensured
even the property of future acquisitions of
church lands to the present receivers \
'Heylin Eccles. rest. p. 41.
z Statat. 1, 2. Phil. Mar. cap. viii.
* Ibid. And Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 159. seq. See also Harl.
miseell. vii. p. 264, 266.
Thus,

<page 62>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 43
Thus, an equivalent was granted on both
fides. The nobility and gentry were settled in
the quiet enjoyment of their estates; and the
pope, although most essentially weakened by
the alienation of that wealth on which his
power so much depended, was reinstated in his
supremacy over the church.
During this reign sir Thomas Pope was
often employed in commissions of conse-
quence. On the twenty-ninth day of July,
1553, he was commissioned by the coun-
cil, together with fir Arthur Darcy, and
others b, to apprehend lord Russel, Anthony
Browne of Essex, and several accomplices con-
cerned in the duke of Northumberland's in-
surrection; who, on the death of Edward, had
raised an army with an intent to place the lady
Jane Gray on the throne, before Mary was
proclaimed queen. The duke himself had.been
apprehended some little time before. For after
many fruitless efforts, and vain expectations
of a reinforcement, he suddenly changed his
principles, dismissed his troops, and tamely
submitted to proclaim queen Mary with all
external demonstrations of triumph and satis-
faction. Being immediately arrested by the.
b Burghley's State papers, by Haynes, p. 162.
earl

<page 63>
44 THE LIFE OF
carl of Arundel, he fell on his knees and ab-
jectly begged his life \
In the fame year, on the twenty-third day of
February, I find him directed by the council,
together with lord Rich, the master of the
rolls, the lieutenant of the Tower, and others,
to appoint a certain number of the council,
who should constantly remain, and dispatch
business, at London d. For the court, whom
the privy council always followed and attend-
ed, was often held at different palaces in the
country; as at Oatelands, Richmond, Green-
wich, and other places \ At the fame time he
is commanded, with the fame persons, to give
orders for victualling and furnishing the Tower
of London f. There was another commission,
the fame year, directed by the queen to sir
Richard Southwell, and others, for inspecting
the office of ordinance, and examining the
state of ammunition in the Tower g. By which
c Burnet, Res. ii. 239.
* Q^ Mary's council book, MSS. Harl. Brit. nms. 643.
c In the reign of Henry the eighth, the principal places of
the royal residence in the country were Richmond, Hampton
court, Windsor, Eltham, and Woodstock. In a book of Injunc-
tions for that king's houfhold, given by Cardinal Wolfey, it is
at these five palaces only, when the king is present, that the
solemnities of the Chapel and Hall are ordered to be kept.
MSS. Laud. K. 48.
1 Council book.
* Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 33.
it

<page 64>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 45
it appears, that this department had been
greatly neglected in the foregoing reign; or
that the queen was willing to take the proper
precautions against any future attack on her
title, from her factious and discontented sub-
jects. The fame year, on the twenty-ninth
day of October, he was appointed, with the
lord treasurer, the earl of Arundel, lord Rich,
sir Francis Englefield, and several others, to
examine certain offenders taken in Northum-
berland's rebellion, and to assess their fines h.
Soon afterwards, in the beginning of 1554, I
find him present, together with sir Philip
Denny, sir Thomas Brydges, and others, when
sir Thomas Wyat, and his desperate associates,
after their rash and abortive enterprise, were
led prisoners into the tower of London. On
which occasion sir Thomas Pope severely re-
proached Brett, one of the principal rebels, for
his complicated cowardice and treachery. A
charge which the prisoner could not but ac-
knowledge with much shame and confusion.
For Brett, being the captain of a detachment'
of archers in the queen's service, had privately
revolted with all his party at a time of danger,
and joined Wyat's army '.
* Burghley's State papers, ut supr. p. 193.
1 MSS. Annalt os qucent Marie her reigne. MSS. Harl. 194.
Brit. Mus.—This, and other particulars, have been transcribed
by Stowe. Annals, ed. 1615. p. 621. col. 2.—The manuscript
adds,

<page 65>
46 THE LIFE OF.
/? tf f m In the same year, sir Thomas Pope was one
^3n of the champions at a magnificent justing ex-
2 q '£ hibited before the queen at Westminster. On
which occasion the horses were richly capa-
risoned with red velvet and silver bosses, and
the helmets of the knights were plumed with
ostrich-feathers. Many Spanish noblemen
were present k.
On the fifteenth os March, 1554, he was
constituted, with sir Robert Rochester, comp-
troller of the houshold, sir Richard Southwell,
sir Thomas Cornwallis, sir Edmund Peckham,
and sir Edward North, knights, a commissio-
ner, for examining, adjusting, and balancing
the accounts of sir Thomas Grefham, who
was agent to the queen at Antwerp for taking
adds, that during the slcirmisti of Charing-crose in which Wyat
was taken, '* there stood upon the leades [of the white tower]
"the marques of Northampton, sir Nicholas Poines, Sir Tho-
"mas Pope, master John Seimer, and others." This passage is
also transcribed by Stovve. This manuscript formerly belonged
to Stowe, who drew from it great part of queen Mary's reign:
yet omiting many passages. It is cited by sir Simon Js D' Ewes,
to whom it afterwards belonged, in his tract, entit. Primitive
Praaise for preserving Truth. Lond. 1645. 4W. He fays it was
written "by a courtier under queen Mary,—the very auto-
"graph being in my library, written with his own hand."
p. 13.
k MSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype.
up

<page 66>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 47
up money of the merchants of that city'.
The commissioners are ordered to examine,
allow, and determine all receipts, payments,
charges, and discharges, declarations, or em-
ployments, of fir Thomas Grestiam, or his
agents; to assign him, by deduction, an al-
lowance of twenty shillings per day, with all
incidental expences: and finally to acquit and
discharge the said sir Thomas Grestiam: to
charge and discharge all allowances and defal-
cations in stating the account, according to
their wisdom and discretion, either of monies
taken up for Edward the sixth, or for the pre-
sent queen. For this business sir Thomas Pope
was admirably qualified, from that knowledge
and experience in stating extensive and com-
plicated accounts, which he must have acqui-
red while he was concerned in the court of
Augmentations. And for the fame reason, in
the succeeding reign, sir Walter Mildmay was
deputed by the lords, to make a general inqui-
sition of the royal revenue m.
1 Rymer's Feed. torn. xv. p. 371. Pro Thoma Grejbam de com-
miffariis ad computa examinanda. "Mary by the grace of God,
&c- To our right trustie and wel-belovid councillors, fir Rob.
Rochester, comptroller of our house, fir Rich. Southwell, knight,
sir Thomas Cornwallis, knight, and to our trustie and right
wel-belovid sir Edward North, and fir Thomas Post, knights,
Greetinge. . . . We having special trust and confidence in your
approvid fidelities, wisdomes, and circumspections, Sec."
m Strype. Ann. Res. i. 13. sect. ii.
This

<page 67>
48 THE LIFE OF
This expedient of borrowing money at an
exorbitant interest of the merchants of Ant-
werp, was a measure which Mary was oblig-
ed to put in practice more than once \ And
it had been to her honor, if {he had used no
worse. For indeed the chief object of go-
vernment, which for some time engaged her
attention, was to raise large sums by the most
irregular methods, or to extort money from
her subjects. She sometimes endeavoured to
recruit her exhausted exchequer by retrench-
ing the public expences at home. She de-
molished several forts on the river below
Gravesend, which were filled with superflu-
ous garrisons; she broke all the body guards,
half the band of pensioners, the gentlemen
of the stables, and the pages of honor:
and proposed to diiband the hundred archers
of the guard. But to frugality she added
oppression, and her unhappy necessities fre-
quently compelled her to the most violent and
unjustifiable experiments. She levied sixty
thousand marks from seven thousand yeomen,
and thirty-six thousand pounds from the mer-
chants. This was exacted, because they had
not contributed to a former loan of sixty thou-
sand pounds levied on a thousand persons, in
* Council-book. MSS. Brit. Mus. ut supr.
whose

<page 68>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 49
whose compliance, either on account of their
loyalty or their riches, she firmly confided. But
that tax not being found sufficient, she exacted
a general loan of an hundred pounds each, on
all who possessed an annual income of twenty
pounds. This imposition obliged many of
the gentry to reduce their domestic expences,
and to dismiss many of their servants, that
they might, at least more prudently, comply
with her commands. And as these servants,
having no means of subsistence, by too com-
mon a transition from that state of idleness,
betook themselves to theft and robbery, the
queen knew no better method of redressing
the grievance, than to publish a proclamation,
obliging their former masters to take them
back to their services, in order to gratify
the city of London for past favors, and to
engage them to assist her with future supplies,
she issued an edict, at their instance, prohibit-
ing for four months, the exportation of Eng-
lish clothes into Flanders. By this iniquit-
ous combination, a good market was procured
in that country for such as had already sent
thither large quantities of that fort of mer-
chandise °.
Her extravagancies proved a perpetual ob-
struction to the commercial interests of the
0 Carte, Hi. 330, 331, 337, 341.
D kingdom.

<page 69>
5o THE LIFE OF
kingdom. Her own bigottry was not always a
sufficient restraint on her conscience, to pre-
vent her from exposing to sale the revenues p
of that church, in defence of which she had
sacrificed in the flames so many victims. But
it would be endless and impertinent here, to
mention at large her multiplied extortions;
and the various imprudent or fraudulent
schemes, which her exigencies invented for
obtaining money. It may be sufficient to
add, that these expedients were employed, not
to carry on an expensive war, for she was in
profound peace with all the world; nor to
promote the national welfare by any new esta-
blishments or improvements: but to satisfy
the unjust demands of a husband, who slighted
her love, neglected her interests, and solely
consulted his own convenience.
On this occasion one cannot help observing
the weakness of the human mind under the
most powerful and importunate of passions.
Mary regarded her husband Philip with all the
fondness and sollicitude of an uncertain lover.
This attachment produced strange contradic-
tions in her sentiments and behaviour. She
was naturally too phlegmatic to be profuse;
yet, from a penurious and economical habit
'See supr. pag. 40.
of

<page 70>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 51
os mind, she suddenly became rapacious and
expensive. She persecuted the reformed with
the most barbarous severities, yet alienated
the riches assigned to support her favorite
superstitions. In this situation, {he was at
Once deserted by that cold and stoical inflexi-
bility which distinguishes her character; and
the sedate and gloomy queen suffered herself
to be betrayed into greater inconsistencies of
Conduct, than even the most unaccountable
caprice of her father Henry could have dic-
tated.
Before the reign of queen Mary, it was
the common practice with our English princes
to have recourse to the city of Antwerp for
voluntary loans; and we generally find their
Credit so low, that they were obliged to en-
gage the city of London to join in the secu-
rity. But this business seems never to have
been so effectually conducted as by that pub-
lic-spirited and enterprizing merchant, sir
Thomas Gresham, who began to be employed
in this agency by Edward the sixthq. He
Was likewise employed by queen Elizabeth
for the same purpose; one of whose first steps,
at her accession, was to procure money. She
* See Burghley's State papers, by Haynes, p. 185. And
Ward's Life of Grestiam, p. 7.
D 2 sent

<page 71>
52 THE LIFE OF
sent Gresham to Antwerp to borrow two
hundred thousand pounds, in order to enable
her to reform the coinage, at that time ex-
tremely debased. But, as a most sensible and
acute historian observes ', (he was so impolitic
as to make herself an innovation in the coin;
by dividing a pound of silver into sixty-two
shillings, instead of sixty, the former standard.
In the year 1557, on the eighth of February,
sir Thomas Pope was joined by the queen, in
a famous commission for the more effectual
suppression of heretics *, in concert with Bon-
ner, bishop of London, Thirlby, bishop of
Ely, the Lords Windsor and North, secretary
Bourne, sir John Mordaunt, sir Francis Engle-
field, sir Edward Waldegrave, sir Nicholas
Hare, sir Roger Cholmeley, sir Richard Read,
sir Thomas Stradling, sir Rowland Hill, ser-
jeant Rastall, Cole, dean of saint Paul's, Wil-
liam Cooke, Thomas Martin, John Story,
and John Vaughan, doctors of law, and Wil-
liam Roper and Ralph Cholmeley, esquires.
These commissioners were empowered to en-
quire after all persons suspected of heretical
'Hume, hist. Eliz. p. 731. edit. 410.
* Burnet's Reformation, Coll. of records, part. ii. b. ii. p.
311. •' Having special trust and confidence in your fidelities,
"wisdoms, and discretions, &c."
opinions:

<page 72>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 53
opinions: to search for and seize seditious
and heterodox books, either exposed to sale,
or secreted in private houses: to investi-
gate and examine concealments, contempts,
conspiracies, and calumnies, against the go-
vernment. They were ordered to detect those
persons who refused to preach the sacrament
of the altar, to hear mass, to take holy bread
or holy water, to frequent their respective
public churches, and to assist in the solemn
processions. They were likewise privileged
to summon what witnesses they judged most
proper, and to tender oaths to the parties
prosecuted, for answering such questions as
might be deemed most convenient for dis-
covering the truth, In this injunction how-
ever, there is a remarkable clause of restraint
upon the commissioners. For it is expressiy
commanded, that' if any person brought be-
fore them for heretical doctrines or opinions,
should still obstinately persist in his error,
"He should immediately be committed to
"his ordinary, there to be used according to
"the spiritual and ecclesiastical laws."
Bishop Burner, whose imagination was per-
petually haunted with the horrors of popery,
supposes, that something more dreadful was
intended by this commission than appears at
first sight, and that it was undoubtedly de-
D 3 signed

<page 73>
54 THE LIFE OF
signed as the tribunal of an Inquisition in
England \ But a superficial reader may plain-
ly perceive, that there is nothing of the form,
process, or power, of an Inquisition contained
in this instrument. The commissioners receive
no authority to try heterodoxy, nor to put the
offenders upon making an aft of faith. On
the contrary, they are directed to deliver up
all delinquents to the ordinary. And even
here the process is to be regulated by the laws
of the church. These circumstances seem
sufficiently to exclude the idea of an inquisi-
torial tribunal. For the proceedings of the
commissioners, however rigorously they might,
have been conducted, were not unlimited and
arbitrary j but finally determinate by the
proper ecclesiastical officer, who was himself
controlled by the spiritual constitutions of the
land, which did not at least on this occasion,
receive any degree of extension. The zealous
bishop makes the matter still more alarming,
where he tells us, that in support of such
measures, «« he finds it said, that some ad-
"vised that courts of inquisition, like those in
"France and Spain, might be set up in
'* England"." But he does not inform us by
whom this is said, nor can I find this advice
« Hist. Res, ii. 347.
"Ubi supr. p. 346.
w

<page 74>
SIR THOMAS POPE. *SS
in any of our historians. Even Fox, who
omits nothing that can expose the papists,
who has studiously recorded all the idle reports
of the times, and who supposed that the
papists worshipped one god and the protestants
another*, is silent on this important subject.
And indeed if we consider the queen's late
expostulation with the pope, in which she
declared her resolution of maintaining the
prerogative and the constitution * •, if we re-
collect that Philip's confessor, Alphonsus, ex-
pressly declaimed against persecutions in the
pulpit, by the king's own desire y: and if to
these reasons we add the distinguished lenity,
moderation, and candor of cardinal Pope; this
project of an English inquisition must appear
altogether improbable.
But whatever was the real state of the cafe,
we find that the commissioners, sensible that
persecution naturally counteracts its own pur-
w He thus rallies the devotion of the people, for praying for
Mary's happy delivery of a child, "Cry up louder you priests,
- peradventure your, cod is asleep. Vol. iii. p. 116.
x When the Pope would have obtruded a new legate, in the
place of cardinal Pole, and while he was actually on his journey
to England, the queen absolutely refused his admission into the
kingdom. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 403.
* Neal's Hist. Pur. i. 99. Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 239. Hey-
lin, p. 56. Burnet, Res. ii. 305.
D 4 pose,

<page 75>
56 THE LIFE OF
pose, and averse to measures which might pro-
bably end in the most inhuman punishments,
did little or nothing in this business *: espe-
cially as to the detection of prohibited books.
For so inactive were they, that on the sixth
of June, 1558, the queen was obliged to pub-
listi a proclamation * j in which she com-
plains, that not only numberless seditious and
treasonable treatises, were printed at home and
dispersed without controul, but even import-
ed from abroad. As the provocation was great,
so the proclamation is conceived in the most
despotic and unconstitutional terms. It sets
forth, amonst other extraordinary menaces,
that if those persons who find such unlaw-
ful books do not immediately destroy them,
they mail be reputed rebels, and executed
accordingly by martial law. The queen in-
deed had some reason for complaint, and for
substituting somewhat more effectual in the
place of her former commission by this recent
injunction. For during the actual subsistence
and authority of that commission, Knox and
Goodman printed, and imported from Geneva,
a piece entitled, The first Blast os the Trumpet
against the monstrous Regimen of Women b. In
* Hcylin, ubi supr.
* Heylin, ubi supr. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 459.
b Genev. 8vo. 1558.
this

<page 76>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 57
this performance, which is full of paradox
and enthusiasm, they call the queen Trait-
ress, Bastard, Proserpine; with other terms of
illiberal and ridiculous abuse. Goodman also
published about the same time, How superior
Powers ought to be obeyed of their Subjects, and
wherein they may be lawfully by God's Word dis-
obeyed and refisled''. But these treatises, writ-
ten chiefly for the gratification of Calvin then
living at Geneva, were not more invectives
against the invincible bigottries of Mary, and
the gross absurdities of popery, than they
were openly subversive of all established go-
vernment and religion. Just before, a book
of very pernicious tendency had appearedd,
called a Treatise of politick Powerc. Plays and
enterludes ridiculing the queen's person and
■ Genev. i6to. 1558. printed by John Crispin. Unluckily,
Mary herself while princess, in 1548, yet certainly without
any heretical intention, had published a piece, which of course
fell under the censure of this commission. It was a translation
of Erasmus's paraphrase on St. John, and done by desire of
queen Catharine Parr. The preface is written by Udall, master
of Eton-school; in which he much extolls, and I believe not
without reason, Mary's prosicience in literature.
* Collier, Eccl. Hist. p. ii. p. 404.
• Supposed to be written by Poynett, the deprived bishop
of Winton. infra citat. Stowe reports, that Poynett was in
Wyatt's army; but that finding that enterprise likely to mis-
carry, he fled, and embarked for Germany, where he joined
his reformed brethren, the religious exiles. Stowe, Ann. per
Howes, p. 620.
govern-

<page 77>
58 THE LIFE OF
government were exhibited f. Libels and sati-
res were thrown into the houses of the privy
counsellors; and even dropped in the queen's
own chamber.
Amongst other pasquinades, there were
prints, or pictures, representing her majesty,
naked, meager, withered, and wrinkled, with
every aggravated circumstance of deformity
that could disgrace a female figure, seated in a
regal chair; a crown on her head, surrrounded
with M. R. and A. in capital characters. In
the first of these was written, in small letters,
Maria, in the second regina, and in the third
Angliæ. The additional figures were a great
number of Spaniards sucking her. Underneath,
in Italian characters, were legends, signifying
that the Spaniards had sucked her to skin and
bone j as also specifying minutely the money,
rings, jewels, and other presents, with which
she had secretly gratified her husband Philip.
The queen was highly incensed at this insolent
and popular piece of ridicule; especially as she
suspected some of her own council, who alone
were privy to these transactions, and acquainted
with her secrets s.
f Council book, MSS. Harl. and Strype. Burnet,
* Carte, iii. 331.
With

<page 78>
SIR THOMAS POPE.
$9
With regard to the persecutions of this
reign, which occasioned the commission in
which Sir Thomas Pope was concerned, re-
lating to the suppression of heretics, we will
allow that the queen and her friends had
suffered, what they thought the most in-
jurious treatment j and, no doubt, when power
returned into their hands, were but too na-
turally disposed to retaliate in their own way.
These oppressions, perhaps injudiciously con-
ducted, prepared the way for popery : just as
the severities of Mary, at the succession of
Elisabeth made the protestants more violent
against the papists. In the reign of Henry the
eighth, the monasteries were destroyed, and
the wealth of the church, in which it's
strength consisted, was dissipated. Three of
the abbots, in the course of that transaction,
were unjustly put to death \ Six bishops,
amongst which were Mary's favorites, and,
the great champions of her religion, Bonner
and Gardiner, were deprived, insulted, and
imprisoned, during the reign of Edward the
sixth '. In the same reign, the queen, while
princess, was absolutely forbidden to hear
mass 5 a misfortune, in her ideas, almost equal
* Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 164.
'Spe Heylin, Eccles. Rest. sub. ann. J55J.
to

<page 79>
60 THE LIFE OF
to the loss of life k: and her friends who pri-
vately interposed to defeat the execution of
this dreadful interdiction, were sent to the
Tower'.
But as no religion can expiate, so no provo-
cation can justify, no resentment can excuse,
that uninterrupted series of deliberate barbarity
which marks every page of her unprosperous
annals with martyrdoms, hardly to be parallel-
ed in the pagan persecutions of primitive Chris-
tianity. If in the two preceding reigns, many
venerable prelates of Mary's communion had
been injuriously treated, or even put to death,
for conscientious disobedience, yet none of
them were inhumanly dragged to the flames
like the meek Latimer or the learned Rid-
ley. It is also allowed, that to burn heretics
was an established doctrine of the catholic re-
ligion. But in what age of the same religion,
or in wKat country, were these punishments
ever executed with so many circumstances of
cruelty? Her attempt to restore the monaste-
ries, however conformable to her system, was
a measure, which tended only to bring back
national poverty with national superstition : for
k See MSS. Had. Brit. Mus. 6195. 26. "Mary had ra-
•* ther lose her life than part with the mass."
1 Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 253. seq. -
it

<page 80>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 61
it is certain, that Henry's distribution of the
monastic revenues into private hands, although
dictated by selfish and sordid motives, founded
the present greatness of England. In the mean
time it will be but charitable to grant, that her
private life was confessedly blameless and un-
blemished. I will not fay whether it was her
fault or her unhappinefs, that the constancy of
her attachments seldom met with suitable re-
turns of gratitude and affection. In this at
least some goodness of heart appears, that no-
thing affected her so much, as the unkindness
of those whom she best loved. She possessed a
firmness of mind, which deserved better times j
and a vigour of understanding, which was im-
peded by religious prejudices. Her merits,
whatever they were, seem to have been over-
looked in her misfortunes: and as the latter
were aggravated, so the former were obliterat-
ed, by that blaze of prosperity which sur-
rounded the succeeding reign.
SECT.

<page 81>
62 THE LIFE OF
SECT. III.
IN the year 1555, the princess Elizabeth*
afterwards queen, having been before
treated with much insolence and inhumanity,
was placed under the care and inspection of
sir Thomas Pope *. Mary cherished that an-
tipathy to the certain heiress of her crown
and her successor, which all princes who have
no children to succeed naturally feel. But
the most powerful cause of Mary's hatred of
the princess, with whom she formerly lived
in some degree of friendshipb, seems to have
arisen from Courtney, earl of Devonshire.
The person, address, and other engaging ac-
complishments c of this young nobleman, had
* Fox, edit. 1684. iii. 798. Speed, &c.
k Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 14. 17. 82. At queen Mary's coro-
nation, the lady Elizabeth rode in the first chariot, with lady
Anne of Cleves, after the queen's litter, in the procession from
the tower to Westminster. Strype, ib. 36. See also Hollingsti.
Chron. iii. 1152. col. 1.
c He was polite, studious, and learned; an accurate master of
the languages, (killed in the mathematics, painting, and music.
He lived a prisoner in the tower, from fourteen to twenty-six
years of age; when he was set at liberty by queen Mary, at her
accession. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 339.
made

<page 82>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 63
made a manifest impression on the queen".
Other circumstances also contributed to ren-
der him an object of her affection j for he
was an Englishman, and nearly allied to the
crown j and consequently could not fail of
proving acceptable to the nation. The earl
was no stranger to these favorable disposi-
tions of the queen towards hime. Yet, he
seemed rather to attach himself to the prin-
cess; whose youth and lively conversation had
more prevailing charms than the pomp and
power of her sisters. This preference not
only produced a total change in Mary's senti-
ments with regard to the earl, but forced her
openly to declare war against Elizabeth;
The ancient quarrel between their mothers
remained deeply rooted in the malignant heart
of the queeng: and (he took advantage from
the declaration made by parliament in favor
of Catharine's marriageh, to represent her
sister's birth as illegitimate. Elizabeth's in-
clination to the protestant religion still fur-
ther heightened Mary's aversion: it offended
her bigottry, disappointed her expectations,
d Burnet, Hef. ii. 255.
* Goodwyn, p. 339.
s Burnet, Res. ii. 273. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 352, 362.
* Cam Jen, Eliz. per Hcarne, i. Apparatus, pag. 19.
a Statut. Mar, i. cap. i.
and ■

<page 83>
64 THE LIFE OF
and disconcerted her politics. These causes
of dislike, however, might perhaps have been
forgotten by degrees, or, at least, would have
ended in secret disgust. But when the queen
found that the princess had obstructed her de-
signs in a matter of the most interesting nature;
female resentment, founded on female jealousy,
and exasperated by pride, could no longer be
suppressed.
So much more forcible, and of so much
more consequence in public affairs, are private
feelings, and the secret undiscerned opera-
tions of the heart, than the most important
political reasons. Monsieur Noailles, however,
the French embassador at the court of Eng-
land during this period, with the true dignity
of a mysterious statesman, seems unwilling to
refer the queen's displeasure to so flight a mo-
tive: and assigns a more profound intrigue as
the foundation of Courtenay's disgrace. Do-
mestic incidents operate alike in every station
of life; and often form the greatest events of
history. Princes have their passions in com-
mon with the rest of mankind.
Elizabeth being now become the public
and avowed object of Mary's aversion, was
openly treated with much disrespect and in-
sult. She was forbidden to take place, in the
presence-

<page 84>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 65
presence chamber, of the countess of Lenox
and the dutchess of Suffolk, as if her legiti-
macy had deen dubious '. This doctrine had
been insinuated by the chancellor Gardiner, in
a speech before both houses of parliamentk.
Among other arguments enforcing the neces-
sity of Mary's marriage, he particularly in-
sisted on the failure of the royal lineage; art-
fully remarking, that none of Henry's descen-
dants remained, except the queen, and the
princess Elisabeth '. Her friends were neglect-
ed or affronted. And while her amiable qua-
lifications every day drew the attention of the
young nobility, and rendered her universally
popular, the malevolence of the vindictive
queen still encreased. The princess therefore
thought it most prudent to leave the court:
and before the begining of 1554, retired to her
house at Ashridge in Hertfordshire m.
In the mean time, Sir Thomas Wyat's rebel-
lion, abovementioned, broke out, in opposition
1 Goodwyn.
k Sess. sec. ann. prim. Mar.
1 Avoiding the term Jifier. Amb. de Noailles, apud Carte,
iii. 310.
■ " Wherein our most worthie and ever Famous queen
"Elisabeth lodged as in her owne, beinge then a more stately
"house, at the time of Wyatt's attempte in queen Maryes
"dayej." Norden's Di/cripthn of HartforAJhire, written 1596.
pag. 12. edit. 1723.
E to

<page 85>
66 THE LIFE OF
to the queen's match with Philip of Spain. It
was immediately pretended, that the princess
Elisabeth, together with lord Courteney, was
privately concerned in this dangerous conspi-
racy, and that she had held a correspondence
with the traitor Wyat. Accordingly n, sir Ed-
ward Hastings, afterwards lord Loughborough,
sir Thomas Cornwallis, and sir Richard South-
well, attended by a troop of horse, were ordered
to bring her to the court. They found the
princess sick, and even confined to her bed, at
Ashridge". Notwithstanding, under pretence
of the strictness of their commission, they com-
pelled her to rise: and, still continuing very
weak and indisposed, she proceeded in the
queen's litter by flow journies to Londonp.
At the court, they kept her confined and with-
"See Hollingfhed's Chron. iii. 1151. feq. From Fox.
• Amb. de Noailles, whose papers are cited by Carte, calls
this a favorable illness. "Since, he adds, it seems likely to
"save Mary from the crime of putting her sister to death- by
"violence." Carte, iii. 306.
P Her manner of coming .to London is thus described in a
manuscript chronicle, often cited hereafter, "The same tyme
"and daye, between four and fyve of the cloke at night, my
"lady Elisabeth's grace came to London, through Smithfielde,
"untoo Westminster, with c. velvet cotts after her grace.
"And her grace rod in a charytt opyn on both iydes: and
"her grace [had] ryding after her a 100. in cotts of syne
"redde gardyd with velvett; and so through fletstrete unto the
"court through the quenes garden, hir grace being sycke."
MSS. Cotton, Vitell. F. 5.
out

<page 86>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 67
out company, for a fortnight: after which, bi-
shop Gardiner, who well knew her predomi-
nant disposition to cabal and intrigue, with
nineteen others of the council, attended to
examine her concerning the rebellion of which
she was accused. She positively denied the
accusation. However they informed her, it
was the queen's resolution (lie should be com-
mitted to the Tower, till further enquiries
could be made,. The princess immediately
wrote to the queen, earnestly entreating that
she might not be imprisoned in the Tower,
and concluding her letter thus: "As for that
"Traytor Wiat, he might paraventur write
"me a letter; but on my faith I never re-
"ceved any from him. And as for the copie
"of my letter sent to the Frenche king, I
"pray God confound me eternally % if ever I
"sent him word, message, token, or letter,
"by any menes'." Her oaths, and her re-
peated protestations of innocence were all in-
effectual. She was conveyed to the tower, and
ignominioufly conducted through the Traitor's
gate'.
At her first commitment, only three men
and three women of the queen's servants, were
s Hollingstiead, ut supr.
* Camden's Eliz. per Hearne, vol i. editor, præsat. p. 78.
• May 18. As MSS. Cott. Vitell. F. 5.
E 2 appointed

<page 87>
68 , THE LIFE OF
appointed for her attendants. But even these
were forbidden to bring her meat; and she
was waited on, for this purpose, by the lieu-
tenant's servants, or even by the common
soldiers. But afterwards, two yeomen of her
chamber, one of her robes, two of her pantry
and ewry, one of her buttery, one of her cellar,
another of her larder, and two of her kitchen,
were allowed, by permission of the privy
council, to serve at her table. No stranger,
or visitor, was admitted into her presence.
The constable of the tower, sir John Gage,
treated her very severely, and watched her
with the utmost vigilance. Many of the
other prisoners, committed to the fame place
on account of the rebellion, were often exa-
mined about her concern in the conspiracy:
and some of them were put to the rack, by
way of extorting an accusation. Her inno-
cence however was unquestionable: for al-
though Wyat himself had accused her, in
hopes to have saved his own life by means
of so base and scandalous an artifice, yet he
afterwards denied that she had the least know-
ledge of his designs; and lest those denials
which he made at his examinations might be
insidiously suppressed, and his former depo-
sitions alledged against her adopted in their
stead, he continued to make the fame declara-
tions

<page 88>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 6$
tions openly on the scaffold at the time of
his execution ',
There was a pretence, much insisted on by
Gardiner, that Wyat had conveyed to her a
bracelet, in which the whole scheme of the
plot was inclosed. But Wyat acquitted her
of this and all other suspicionsu. After a close
imprisonment of some days, by the generous
intercession of lord Chandois, lieutenant of
the tower, it was granted that she might
sometimes walk in the queen's lodgings", in
the presence of the constable, the lieutenant,
and three of the queen's ladies; yet on condi-
tion that the windows should be shut. She
then was indulged with walking in a little
garden, for the fake of fresh air: but all the
shutters which looked towards the garden
were ordered to be kept close.
Such were their jealousies, that a little boy
of four years old who had been accustomed
every day to bring her flowers, was severely
threatened if he came any more-, and the
child's father was summoned and rebuked by
• Hollingshead, ut supr.
■ Strype, Ecd. Mem. iii. 97.
w Concerning these apartments in the Tower, fee the very
judicious and ingenious Mr. Walpole's Historic Douits concern'
ing Richard tbt Third.
E 3 the

<page 89>
7o THE LIFE OF
the constable. But lord Chandois being ob-
served to treat the princess with too much
respect, he was not any longer entrusted with
the charge of her; and she was committed to
the custody of sir Henry Bedingfield, of Ox-
burgh in Norfolkx, a person whom she had
never seen nor knew before. He brought with
him a new guard of one hundred soldiers,
cloathed in blue; which the princess observ-
ing, asked with her usual liveliness, If lady
"Jane s scaffold was yet taken away f
About the end of May she was removed
from the tower under the command of sir
Henry Bedingfield, and lord Williams of
Thame, to' the royal manor or palace at Wood-
stock r. The first night of her journey (he
lay at Richmond -, where being watched all
night by the soldiers, and all access of her
own private attendants utterly prohibited, she
* He was firmly attached to the queen's interests. Beside
his Government of the Tower, he was knight marshal of the
queen's army, captain of her guards, vice-chamberlain to the
queen, and a privy counsellor. She also granted him a yearly
pension of 100I. foflife, and part of the forfeited estate of sir
Thomas Wyat. Blomefield's Norfolk, iii. 481. He is often,
by mistake, written BtningfeU, Bens eld, &c.
r MSS. Cotton. Vitel. F. c. «« The xx daye of May my
"ladie Elisabeth, the quenes sister, came out of the tower, and
"toke hir barge at the tower-wharffe and so to Rychmon:),
** and from thens unto Wyndsor, and so to Wodstoke."
began

<page 90>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 7t
began to be convinced, that orders had been
given to put her privately to death. The
next day {he reached Windsor, where she
was lodged in the Dean's house near saint
George's collegiate chapel. She then passed
to lord Williams's feat at Ricot in Oxford-
shire, where she lay; and "was verie prince-
"lie entertained both of knights and ladies."
But Bedingfield was highly disgusted at this
gallant entertainment of his prisoner. During
their journey, lord Williams and another gen-
tleman playing at chefs, the princess accident-
ally came in, and told them {he must stay to
fee the game played out j but this liberty Bed-
ingfield would not permit *.
Arriving at Woodstock, me was lodged in
the gatehouse of the palace; in an apartment
remaining complete within these fifty years
with it's original arched roof of Irish
oak, curiously carved, painted blue sprinkled
with gold, and to the last retaining it's name
of Queen Elizabeth's chamber \ Hollingshead
* Hollingshead, ut supr.
* The old royal manor, or palace, at Woodstock, was be-
sieged in the grand-rebellion, and much damaged in the siege.
The furniture was afterwards sold, and the buildings portion-
ed out by Cromwell, or' his agents, to three persons. Two
fit them, about 1652, pulled down their portions for the fake
of the stone. The third suffered his part to stand, which con-
£ 4 sifted

<page 91>
72 THE LIFE OF
gives us three lines which she wrote with a
diamond on the glass of her window; and
fisted of the gatehouse in which the princess Elizabeth was
imprisoned, and some adjoining ruinous buildings. After the
rebellion, lord Lovelace turned this gatehouse into a dwelling
house, and lived in it for many years. As to its adjoining
ruins, persons now living remember standing, a noble porch,
and some walls of the hall; the walls and magnificent windows
of the chapel; several turrets at proper distances; and could
trace out many of the apartments. Sir John Vanbrugh, while
Blenheim palace was building, had taste enough to lay out
2000 1. in keeping up the ruins. But afterwards lord treasurer
Godolphin observed to Sarah, dutchess-dowager of Marlbo-
rough, that a pile of ruins in the front of so fine a scat, was an
unseemly object, all the old buildings, and amongst the rest,
die princess Elizabeth's gatehouse, were entirely demolished and
erased. Aubrey, the antiquarian, acquaints us that in the old
hall there were two rows of pillars, as in a church; and that
the arches were of the zigzag Norman shape. He has left us in
his manuscript, Drawings of the windows in the larger apart-
ments, and in the chapel and hall.' Aubrey's Chronolocia
Architectonica, MSS. in Muf. Astimol. Oxon. sol. pag. 7.
Of fair Rosamond's Bcwer, which literally signifies no more
than a chamber, and which was a kind of pleasure-house on the
south-west side of the old palace, some ruinous remains are still
remembered: particularly, au apartment over Rosamond's-well.
This well, which is a large, clear, and beautiful spring, paved
and fenced about the inside with stone, was undoubtedly a bath,
fountain, or reservoir, for the convenience of the Bower, or
perhaps of the palace. The author of the history of Allchester,
written 1622, tells us, that " the ruins of Rosamond's Bower
"are still to be seen against the court-gate." Apud Kennet's
Paroch. Antic^. p. 694. Henry vii. built much here: parti-
cularly (he front and principal gate of the palace. On this gate
was his name, and an English rhyme, importing that he was the
founder. Wake's Rex Platonicus, edit. Oxon.. 1607. pag.
6. AtO,

<page 92>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 73
Hentzner, in his itinerary of 1598% has re-
corded a sonnet, which she had written with
a pencil on her window shutter. In the
Bodleian Library at Oxford % there is an
English Translation of faint Paul's Epistles,
printed in the black letter, which the prin-
cess used while she was here imprisoned;
in a blank leaf of which, the following para-
graph, written with her own hand, and in the
pedantry of the times, yet remains. '* I walke
"many times into the pleasant fieldes of the
"holye scriptures; where I plucke up the
"goodliesome herbs of sentences by pruning,
"eate them by reading: chawe them by mus-
"ing: and laie them up at length in the hie
6. 4to. It was a favorite feat of our kings, who all resided
here from Henry I. to Charles I. Queen Elisabeth in particular,
notwithstanding her imprisonment here, parhaps on that account,
was remarkably fond of living at this palace: and flie became
a considerable benefactress to the town of Woodstock. I have
a small etching of a prospect of the Princess Elizabeth's chamber
and its adjoining ruins; done, a few years before they were
destroyed, in 1714, by J. Whood,
b Edit. Noriberg. 1629. pag. 215.
c Inter MSS. 242. umo. In the fame library is a transla-
tion by the prtr.cefs Elizabeth into Latin, of an Italian sermon
of Occhini. Calligraphy was a requisite accomplishment of
those times, and it is accordingly written, on vellum, with un-
common elegance, in her own hand. It is dedicated in Latin,
to her brother king Edward, to whom she fends it as a new-
year's gift. The dedication is dated Enfield, December xxx.
pibl. Bodl. Arch. D. 115. 8vo. . .
seate

<page 93>
74 THE LIFE OF
** seatc of memorie, by gathering them to-
"gether. That so having tasted the sweetenes,
"I maye the lesse perceave the bitternesse of
"this miserable life." The covers are of black
silk; on which she had amused hesself with
curiously working, or embossing, the follow-
ing inscriptions and devices in gold twist.
On one side, on the border, or edge, CÆ-
LUM PATRIA. SCOPUS VITÆ XPVS.
CHRISTO VIVE. In the middle a heart;
and about it, ELEVA COR SURSUM IBI
UBI E. C. [i. e. est Christus.] On the other
side, on the border, BEATUS QUI DIVI-
TIAS SCRIPIURÆ LEGENS VERBA
VERT1T IN OPERA. In the middle a
star, and about it, VICIT OMNIA PER-
TINAX VIRTUS E. C. [i. e. Elisabeth*
Captivœ; or, Elisabetha Captiva.] One is
pleased to hear these circumstances, trifling
and unimportant as they are, which (hew us
how this great and unfortunate lady, who be-
came afterwards the heroine of the British
throne, the favorite of her people, and the
terror of the world, contrived to relieve the
tedious hours of her pensive and solitary con-
finement. She had however little opportu-
nity for meditation or amusement. She was
closely guarded: yet sometimes suffered to
walk into the gardens of the palace. In this
situation, fays Hollingstiead, "no marvell, if
"she

<page 94>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 75
"she hearing upon a time out of hir gardin
"at Woodstocke a certaine milkmaide sing-
"ing pleasantlie, wished herself to be a milk-
"maide, as she was; saying that her case was
"better, and life merrier *."
After being confined here for many months,
she procured a permission to write to the
queen: but her importunate keeper Beding-
field intruded, and overlooked what she wrotee.
At length, king Philip interposed, and begged
that she might be removed to the courtf. But
this sudden kindness of Philip, who thought
Elisabeth a much less obnoxious character than,
his father Charles the fifth had conceived her
6 This circumstance has given occasion to an elegant ballad
by Shenstone.
e Hollinglhead ut supr.
s When (he came to the crown, says Hollinglhead, (he dis-
charged Bedingsield from the court, telling him, that when-
ever (he (hould happen to have a state-prisoner who required
to be *' hardlie handled and strictlie kept," (he would send for
him. Hollingfliead, p. 117. col. 2. But there is some reason
to suspect, that Fox, from whom Hollingfliead transcribes, has
aggravated, in his account, sir Henry's usage of the princess.
After (he was queen, he was very often at court, and her ma-
jesty visited him in a progress, 1578. And though (he frequent-
ly called him her Jajlor, yet this seems rather to have been a
term of royal familiarity than of contempt. Though I doubt
not that he treated the princess with no great compassion or de-
licacy; a circumstance which reflects honor on her forgiveness.
See Blomesield's No. folk, iii. 481.
to

<page 95>
76 THE LIFE OF
'to have been, did not arise from any regular
principle of real generosity, but partly from
an affectation of popularity * j and partly from
a refined sentiment of policy, which made him
foresee, that if Elisabeth was put to death,
the next lawful heir would be Mary queen
of Scots already betrothed to the dauphin
of France, whose succession would for ever
join the sceptres of England and France, and
consequently crush the growing interests of
Spain h.
In her first day's journey, from the manor of
Woodstock to lord Williams's at Ricot, a vio-
lent storm of wind happened; insomuch, that
her hood and the attire of her head were twice
or thrice blown off". On this, she begged to
retire to a gentleman's house then at hand:
but Bedingfield's absurd and superabundant
circumspection refused even this insignificant
request -, and constrained her, with much in-
* He affected to treat the princess with much respect. In an
examination, cited by Hollingshead, it appears, that accident-
tally passing her in a chamber of the palace, he paid her such
obeisance as to fall with one knee to the ground, notwithstand-
ing his usual state and solemnity. Chron. iii. 1160. col. 1.
* Camden, Eliz. per Hearne, vol. i. Apparatus, pag. 21.
However, it is said, that out of gratitude for her preservation,
she constantly kept Philip's picture by her bed-side; even to
her death, notwithstanding his perfidy after flic became queen.
Ballard's Mem. of L. ladies, p. 217.
decorum

<page 96>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 77
decorum, to replace her head-dress under a
hedge near the road. The next night they
came to Mr. Dormer's, at Winge, in Buck-
inghamshire; and from thence to an inn at
Colnebroke, where she lay. At length she
arrived at Hampton-court, where the court
then relided, but was still kept in the condi-
tion of a prisoner. Here bishop Gardiner,
with others of the council, frequently per-
suaded her to make a confession, and submit
to the queen's mercy. Dissimulation appears
to have been a conspicuous feature in Elisa-
beth's character. One night, when it was
late, the princess was unexpectedly summon-
ed, and conducted by torch light to the
queen's bedchamber: where she kneeled down
before the queen, declaring herself to be a
most faithful and true subject. She even went
so far, as to request the queen to fend her some
catholic treatises, which might confirm her
faith, and inculcate doctrines different from
those which she had been taught in the writ-
ings of the reformers. The queen seemed
still to suspect her sincerity: but they parted
on good terms. During this critical interview,
Philip had concealed himself behind the tapes-
try, that he might have seasonably interposed,
to prevent the violence of the queen's passio-
nate

<page 97>
78 THE LIFE OF
nate temper from proceeding to any extre-
mities '.
One week afterwards me was released from
the formidable parade of guards and keepers k.
A happy change of circumstances ensued; and
she was permitted to retire with sir Thomas
Pope ' to Hatfield-house in Hertfordshire, then
a royal palace m. At parting the queen began to
1 Hollingfhead ut supr.
k Burnet, Fox, Speed, &c.
1 Maister Gage, who is called the queen's gentleman-usher,
or master of the ceremonies, is said by Fox and others, to have
been joined with sir Thomas Pope in this appointment. But
he seems to have acted only as an assistant or inferior. Probably
this was sir Edward Gage, to whom the queen granted in 1556,
thirty retainers. Strype, Eccl. Mem, iii. 480. Sir John Gage
was constable of the tower; and died in 1556. Anstis, Regist.
Gart. i. 423. Notes. He [Sir John] was also chancellor of the
dutchy of Lancaster, chamberlain of the houfhold, and a privy
counsellor. Anstis, ibid.
m The present noble structure was erected by Robert, first earl
of Salisbury, about 161 o. James the first exchanged Hatfield,
with lord Salisbury, for Theobalds. It originally belonged to the
bishops of Ely, and was built by bishop Morton about 1480. The
chapel was consecrated in 1(115. See Le Neve, Prot. Bish. vol.
1, 2. pag. 144. Peacham tells us, that this chapel was adorned
with paintings, by Butler, and other eminent artists. Gentle-
man's Exercise, Lib. i. c. 3. "Robert earl of Salisbury,
•' lord high treasurer of England, who as he favoreth all learn-
"ing and excellencies, so he is a principal patron of this art;
•* having lately imployed M. Butler and many other excellent
'* artists for the beautyfying his houses, especially his chappell
*• at Hatfield." pag. 310. edit. 1661.
(hew

<page 98>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 79
shew some symptoms of reconciliation: she
recommended to her fir Thomas Pope, as a
person with whom the princess was well ac-
quainted, and whose humanity, prudence,
and other valuable qualifications were all cal-
culated to render her new situation perfect-
ly agreeable"; and at the fame time (he
presented her with a ring worth seven hundred
crowns °.
But before I proceed further in this part
of my narrative, I stop to mention a circum-
stance unnoticed by our historians: which is,
that sir Thomas Pope in conjunction with
others, had some concern about the person of
the princess Elizabeth, even when she first
retired from the court, in disgrace, to her
house at Ashridge j and before her troubles
commenced, occasioned by Wyat's rebellion;
all which I have already related at large.
When that rebellion broke out, Mary wrote
to the princess then sick at Ashridge, art-
fully requesting her immediate attendance at
the court. Elizabeth's governors at this
time, whose names are no where particularly
mentioned, waiting every day for her reco-
"See Thomas Heywood's England's Elizabeth. Lond.
l2mo. 1631. p. 202.
"Carte, iii. 326.
very,

<page 99>
80 THE LIFE OF
very, very^ compassionately declared it unsafe
yet to remove her. And the princess herself
in the mean time, signified by letter her indis-
position to the queen j begging that her
journey to the court might be deferred for a
few days, and protesting her abhorrence of
Wyat's seditious practices. Her governors
likewise, on their parts, apprehending that
this tenderness towards their mistress might
be interpreted in a bad fense, dispatched a
letter to bishop Gardiner, lord chancellor -,
acquainting him with her condition, and
avowing their readiness to receive the queen's
commands. An original draught or copy of
this letter in Sir Thomas Pope's own hand,
with several corrections and interlineations
by the fame, is now preseved in the British
Museump: from which circumstance it is
manifest that he was at this time one of these
t Brit. Mus. Bibl. Cotton. MSS. Titus. B. ii. sol. 159. Af-
ter it, follows the letter from the privy council to sir Thomas
Pope, cited below. The paper which contains both is endorsed,
"Minute of the lady Elizabeth''s Officers t» the Queen's counfail."
The letter here mentioned in the text, begins thus.
"It may please your good lordship. That albeit we at-
** tende on my ladic Elizabethes grace our mistres, in hope
"of her amendement to repair towardes the queenes highnes,
"whereof we have as yet none apparaunt likelyod of helthe;
"yet consideringe this daungeroufe worlde, the perillous at-
"temptes and the naughty endevours of the rcbelles, which
"we dayly here of against the queenes highnes our sovereigne
"ladie,

<page 100>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 8t
governors or attendants j but in what depart-
ment or capacity, I know not. However it
"ladie, we do not forgeate our most bounden dewty, nor yet
"our readynes in worde and dede to serve her highnes by all
"the waies and meanes that may stande in us, both from her
"grace our mistres, and of our owne partes also. Which thing
"although my ladie's grace our said mistres hath tofore this
"signified unto the queencs highnes, of her behalffe, by mes-
"sage; it might nevertheles tame to your good lordship, and
"the lordes of the councel, some negligence, that we did not
"make you also privy herunto. We have therefore thought
*' it our deuties to declare this unto your lordship, &c." The
whole is printed in Strype's Mem. Eccl. iii. 83, From MSS.
Petyt, Noiv in tbe lnner-Templt library. Strype fays only, that
it was written by the lady Elizabeth's governors; or, " by
"those that had the care and government of her." Among
the princess Elisabeth's domestics or attendants was John
Astley, one of Roger Ascham's literary friends, and to
whom many of his Latin letters are written. Prefixed to
Ascham's very sensible English political tract on the Af-
faires of Germ ame, and addressed to Astley, is an Eng-
lish letter, dated 1553, from Astley to Ascham, in which the
latter speaks feelingly of their frequent agreeable conversations
on learned subjects at Hatfield-house. Ascham was preceptor to
the princess. Sir Thomas Pope, in a fragment of a letter to
the president of Trinity-college Oxford, and dated Hatsield,
fays, that he had procured an Office in the Tower of London
for Maifttr Astehy. Probably this is the fame person. Ascham
in some of his Epistles complains, that he was unjustly driven
from his tuition of Elisabeth, in a consequence os a party form-
ed against him in the family of the princess. My principal
reason for mentioning these particulars is to shew, that sir Tho.
mas Pope could not have been one of Ascham's enemies on this
occasion; for, had that been the case, it is not very probable
that he should promote Ascham's friend. He was husband os
Catharine Asteley, the governess of the princess. See below,
F p. 99.

<page 101>
Si THE LIFE OF
is evident that he was removed from this
charge} when the princess, notwithstanding
her infirm state of health, was hurried up to
the court by Southwell, Cornwallis, and
Hastings: nor do we find, that from that
time he had the least concern with her during
her imprisonment in the tower and at Wood-
stock, and the rest of those undeserved per-
secutions, which preceded her enlargement
and final removal to Hatfield.
To this lady sir Thomas Pope behaved
with the utmost tenderness and respect: re-
siding with her at Hatfield, rather as an
indulgent and affectionate guardian, than as
an officious or rigorous governor. Although
strict orders were given that the mass alone
mould be used in he family, yet he connived
p. 99. Ascham mentions this Catharine Asteley in very re-
spectable terms, in a Letter to the princess, on the death of her
tutor Grindall. "Hunc dolorem, magis apud te renovando
"augere, quam consolando lenire vererer, nisi perspecta esset
"mihi prudentia tua, sic consiliis prudentiflimæ Feminæ do-
"minæ Catharinas Astleæ munita, &c." Epist. Lib. ii. p. 9;.
a. edit. 1581. See also ibid. p. 89. b. This Astely was made
master of the Jewel house at queen Elisabeth's accefli >n, with a
salary of fifty pounds. Decembr. 23. Lit. Pat. i. Eliz. Hi
wrote a treatise on Horsemanship, printed without his name,
in 1586. 4to. By the way, it appears from what has been said,
that the princess before her final settlement at Hatfield under fir
Thomas Pope's care, was occasionally shifted about to various
royal feats, of which Hatfield was one.
at

<page 102>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 83
at many protestarit servants, whom she retained
about her person *. Yet Sir John Harrington
says, that his father, a protestant, was impri-
soned in the tower for twelve months, and
fined one thousand pounds, for carrying a let-
ter to the princess, and expressing his good
wishes for her prosperity: and that, as if the
heresy of a maid of honor could do any great
harm, his mother, who was one of her favo-
rite attendants, was removed from that situati-
on, as a professed heretic, by the command of
bishop Gardiner'.
Nor was sir Thomas Pope wanting on pro-
per occasions, in studiously shewing her such
marks of regard and deference as her station
and quality demanded. This appears from
the following anecdote, which also marks his
character'.
Two of the fellows of Trinity college in
Oxford, just founded by him, had violated one
of it's strictest statutes, and were accordingly
expelled by the president, and Society. Upon
* British View of the State of the church of England, &c.
Written in the year 1608. Lund. 1653. 1 21110. p. 4J. He adds,
that when his mother was dismissed, her own father durst not
take her into his house, p. 46.
4 Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 216.
'See Append Numb. XV.
'F 2 this

<page 103>
84 THE LIFE OF
this they repaired to their founder, then at
Hatfield with the princess Elisabeth, humb-
ly petitioning a readmittance into his college.
Sir Thomas Pope probably was not a little
perplexed on this occasion; for although dis-
posed to forgiveness, yet he was unwilling to
be the first who should openly countenance or
pardon an infringement of laws which himself
had made. But perceiving a happy opportu-
nity os adjusting the difficulty, by paying at
the same time a handsome compliment to the
princess, with much address he referred the
matter to her gracious arbitration; and me
was pleased to order, that they should imme-
diately be restored to their fellowships. In
consequence of this determination, he wrote
the following letter to the President of the
college.;
"Maijler President, with my her tie commen*
'* dat ions,
"Albeit Sympfon and Rudde' have com-
"mitted such an offence, as whereby they
"have justlie deserved, not onlie for ever to
"be expulsed out of my collegge, but also to
"be ponislied besides in such sort as others
"myght fere to attempt the like: never-
"thelesse, at the desier, or rather commande-
* The two delinquents.
"ment

<page 104>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 85
"merit, of my ladie Elizabeth her grace;
"and at my wiffes request, who hath both
"sent and written to me very ernestlie j and
"in hope this will be a warnyng for theym
'* to lyve in order hereafter: I am content
"to rerrsytt this fault, and to difpence with
"theym towching the fame. So always,
•* that they openly in the hall, before all the
*' felowes and fcolers of the collegge, con-
"fesse their faultes; and besides paye such
"syne, as you with others of the collegge
"shall think meate. Which being don, I
"will the some be recorded yn some boke j
"wherein I will have mencion made, that
•* for this faulte they were clene expelled
*' the collegge; and at my ladye Elizabeth
"her graces desier, and at my wifFes request
** they were receyved into the house again.
"Signifying, that if eny shall hereafter com-
"myt the lyke offence, I am fully resolved
"ther shall no creature living, the quenes
'* maiestie except who maye commaunde me,
"cause me to difpence withall. Assuring
"yow, I never dyd eny thing more agaynst
"my hert, then to remytt this matter: the
"ponishment whereofF to the extremyte, I
"beleve wold have don more good, then in
*' this forme to be endyd; as knoweth the
«* holye gost, who kepe you in helth. Writ-
F -i "ten

<page 105>
86 THE LIFE OF
...../,
i:
•« ten at hatfelde the xxiith of August, anno
"Tour own assuredly,
T H O. POPE..
*' [P. S.] Sir, I requyre you above all
"thinges, have a speciall regard there be
"peace and concorde in my collegge'."
E. //■ /sKr Nor did sir Thomas Pope think it incon-
sistent with his trust, to gratify the princess
on some occasions with the fashionable amuse-
ments of the times; even at his own ex-
pence, and at the hazard of offending the
queen. This we learn from a passage in a
curious manuscript chronicle°. "In Shrove-
"tide, 1556, sir Thomas Pope made for the
"ladie Elisabeth all at his owne costes, a
"greate and rich mafkinge in the greate halle
"at Hatfelde; wher the pageaunts were
"marvellously furnished. There were thar
"twelve minstrels antickly disguised j with
"forty-six or more gentlemen and ladies,
* Ex autograph, in Thesaur. coll. Trin. Oxon. Superscribed
"To his Iwingfriend, Mr. Slythurst, president ofTrynitit Colkgge
'* in Oxford?. And in registr. prim, ejusdem coll. sol. xvi. b.
u MSS. Cotton. sol.Vitellius. F. 5. Brit. Mus. MSS. Strype.
See Append. Numb. XXyill.
"many

<page 106>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 87
"many of them knights or nobles, and ladies
"of honor, apparelled in crimsin sattin, em-
"brothered uppon with wrethes of golde
"and garnished with bordures of hanging
«« perle. And the devise of a castell of clothe
"of gold, sett with pomegranates about the
** battlements, with shields of knights hang-
"ing therefrom, and six knights in rich
"harneis turneyed. At night the cuppboard
"in the halle was of twelve stages main-
"lie furnished with garnish of gold and
*< silver vessul, and a banket of seventie
** dishes, and after a voidee of spices and sut-
"tleties with thirty fpyfe plates, all at the
«« chardgis of sir Thomas Pope. And the
"next day the play of Holophernes. But
"the queen percafe myfliked these folliries, as
"by her letters to sir Thomas Pope hit di4
"appear, and so their disguisinges were
*' ceased."
x> iS.?
The princess was notwithstanding some-
times suffered to make excursions, partly for
pleasure, and partly for paying her compli- 7fr
ments at court: and on these occasions she
was attended in a manner suitable to her
rank. Strype tells us, from the fame manu- ^ // ;V
script journal of memorable occurrences, writ-
F 4 ten
2 3

<page 107>
88 THE LIFE OF
it
ten about those timesw, that on February
the twenty-fifth, 15571 "" The lady Eliza-
"beth came riding from her house at Hat-
"field to London, attended with a great com-
"panie of lords, and nobles, and gentle-
"men, unto her place, called Somerset-place
"beyond Strond-bridge, to do her duty to
"the queen. And on the twenty-eighth she
"repaired unto her grace at Whitehall with
"many lords and ladies." And again, in
March, the fame year. "Aforenoon the lady
Elizabeth's grace took her horse and rode to
her palace of Shene; with many lords,
knights, ladies, and gentlemen, and a good-
ly companie of horse V In April the same
/;•' //. /(■ year, (he was escorted from Hatfield to En-
/./ > 7 r field-chase, by a retinue of twelve ladies clothed
'/ in white sattin on ambling palfries, and twenty
yeomen in green, all on horse back, that her
grace might hunt the hart. At entering the
chase, or forest, me was met by fifty archers in
scarlet boots and yellow caps, armed with
gilded bows; one of whom presented her a
silver-headed arrow, winged with peacock's
feathers. Sir Thomas Pope had the devising
of this show. By way of closing the sport,
or rather the ceremony, the princess was grati-.
w Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 444, 445,
* Strype Eccl. Mem. iii. 336,
fled
.'.> >i

<page 108>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 89
>-IQ
fkd with the privilege of cutting the throat of
a buck y. In the same month she was visited E.tf. K
by the queen at Hatsield: when the great //.
chamber was adorned with a sumptuous suit
of tapestry, called the Hanginge of the Jiege of
Antioch, and after supper a play was performed
by the choir-boys of Saint Paul's2.
In the summer of the same year, the prin- £. H. tf. yj,
cess paid a visit to the queen at Richmond.
She went by water from Somerset-place in -
the queen's barge j which was richly hung
with garlands of artificial flowers, and cover-
ed with a of canopy green sarcenet wrought
with branches of eglantine in embroidery,
and powdered with blossoms of gold. In the
barge me was accompanied by sir Thomas
Pope, and four ladies of her chamber. Six
boats attended on this procession, filled with
her highness's retinue, habited in russet da-
mafke and blue embroidered sattin tasselled
and spangled with silver, with bonnets of
cloth of silver plumed with green feathers.
She was received by the queen in a sump-
tuous pavilion, made in form of a castle,
with cloth of gold and purple velvet, in the
labyrinth of the gardens. The walls, or
T Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Cotton. MSS. Strype ut supr.
* MSS. Ibid. See Hist. Eng. Poetry, ii. 392.
sides

<page 109>
9o THE LIFE OF
sides of the pavilion were chequered into
compartments, in each of which was alter-
nately a lily in silver and a pomegranate in
gold. Here they were entertained at a royal
banquet j in which was introduced a sottletie*
of a pomegranate- tree bearing the arms of
Spain. There were many minstrels, but no
masking or dancing. Before the banquet, the
queen was long in consultation with sir Tho-
mas Pope. In the evening the princess with
all her company returned, as they came, to
Somerset place j and the next day retired to
t- ., jj Hatsield \ During her residence at Hatfield,
'^, }s,i the princess was also present at a royal
l_qo Christmas, kept with great solemnity by the
•'
queen and king Philip at Hampton-court.
On Christmas-eve, the great hall of the pa-
lace was illuminated with a thousand lamps
curioufly disposed. The princess supped at
the same table in the hall with the king and
queen, next the cloth of state: and after sup-
per, and served with a perfumed ^napkin and
plates of confects by the lord Paget. But
she retired to her ladies, before the revels,
masking, and disguisings began. On faint
Stephen's day she heard mattins in the queen's
closet adjoining to the chapel, where she was
■ A curious devise in cookery or confectionary.
fc MSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. MSS. Strype, ut supr.
attired

<page 110>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 91
attired in a robe of white sattin, strung all
over with large pearls. On the twenty ninth
day of December, she fate with their ma-
jesties and the nobility at a grand spectacle
of justing, when two hundred spears were
broken. Half of the combatants were ac>?
coutred in the Almaine, and half in the
Spanish fashion c. Thus our chronicler, who
is fond of minute description. But these and
other particularities, insignificant as they seem,
which he has recorded so carefully, are a
vindication of Queen Mary's character in the
treatment of her sister: they prove, that the
princess, during her residence at Hatsield, lived
in splendor and affluence, that she was often
admitted to the diversions of the court, and that
her present situation was by no means a state of
oppression and imprisonment, as it has been re-
presented by most of our historians.
We have before seen that sir Thomas f /{ K X /.
Pope, during his attendance on this lady,
was engaged in the foundation of his college.
An undertaking of such a nature, could not
fail of attracting the attention of the young
Elisabeth; whose learned education and pre-
sent situation naturally interested her in the
progress of a work so beneficial to the in-
* Vitell. F. 5. Cotton. MSS. Strype, ut supr.
crease
1

<page 111>
92 THE LIFE OF
crease of her favorite pursuits, and carried
on by one with whom me was so nearly con-
nected. Accordingly this subject was often
matter of conversation between them, as ap-
pears from part of a letter written by sir Tho-
mas Pope: which also still further proves the
friendly terms on which they lived together.
"The princess Elisabeth her grace, whom I
"serve here, often afkyth me about the course
"I have devysed for my scollers: and that
"part of myne estatutes respectinge studie I
"have shewn to her, which (he likes well.
"She is not only gracious, but most lerned,
"as ye right well know V
d Dat. Hatsield, 1556. To the President. Ex Autograph, ubi
supr. Ascham, in one os his Latin Epistles, gives the following
interesting account of Elisabeth's progress in literature, when
she was very young, under the year 1550. Among the learned
daughters of Sir Thomas M re, he fays, the princess Elisabeth
shines like a star of distinguished lustre; deriving greater glory
from her virtuous disposition, and literary accomplishments, than
from the dignity of her exalted birth. I was her preceptor in
Latin and Greek for two years. She was but little more than
sixteen, when she could speak French, and Italian, with as much
fluency and propriety as her native English. She speaks Latin
readily, justly, and even critically. She has often conversed with
me in Greek, and with tolerable facility. When she transcribes
Greek or Latin, nothing can be more beautiful than her hand-
writing. She is excellently skilled in music, although not very
fond of it. She has read with me all Cicero, and great part of
Livy. It is chiefly from those two authors alone, that she has
acquired her knowledge of the Latin langnage. She begins the
day

<page 112>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 93
While sir Thomas Pope was concerned in
this superintendance of the princess, he re-
ceived a letter from Heath, archbishop of
York and lord chancellor, the bishops of
Rochester and Ely, lord Arundel, and sir
Henry Jernegan, dated July N the thirtieth,
1556, by which it appears, that the privy
council placed much confidence in his pene-
tration and address, and greatly depended on
day with reading a portion of the Greek testament, and then
studies some select Orations of liberates and the tragedies of So-
phocles. From these authors, I was of opinion, that me would
adom her style with the most elegant diction, enrich her mind
with the most suitable precepts, and frame her high station of
life to every fortune. For her religious instruction, after the
Scriptures, she adds to the classics Saint Cyprian and the Common
Places of Melancthon, with other writers of that school, who
teach purity of doctrine with elegance of expression. In every
composition, she is very quick in pointing out a far- fetched word,
or affected phrase. She cannot endure those absurd imitators of
Erasmus, who mince the whole latin Language into proverbial
maxims. She is much pleased with a Latin Oration naturally
arising from its subject, and written both chastly and perspicu-
ously. She is most fond of translations not too free, and with
that agreeable clash of sentiment which results from a judicious
comparison of opposite or contradictory passages. By a dili-
gent attention to these things, her taste is become so refined, and
her judgment so penetrating, that there is nothing in Greek,
Latin, and English composition, cither extravagant or exact,
earless or correct, which she does not in the course of reading
accurately discern; immediately rejecting the one with disgust,
and receiving the other with the highest degree of pleasure.
Akham. Efistol. Lib. i p. 1$. a. edit. Lond. 15S1.
his

<page 113>
94 THE LIFE OF
his skilful management of her highness at
this critical period*
In consequence of Wyat's unsuccessfull at-
tempt, new efforts were made to foment a
second insurrection. Many of Wyat's adhe-
rents, of which the principal was one Dudley
Ashton*. had fled into France where they were
well entertained* Astlton being connected
with both kingdoms sent over from France
6ne Cleyberye, a condemned person, who pre-
tended to be the earl of Devonshire. The
conspirators at the fame time, in the letters
and proclamations which they dispersed, made
use of the lady Elisabeth's name, and pro-
pagated many scandalous insinuations against
her reputation and honoure. They proceeded
so sir, as at Ipswich to proclaim lord Courte-
hey and the princess, king and queen of Eng-
land s. In how licentious a manner her cha-
racter was abused, appears from a curious
manuscript paper preserved in the British Mu-
seum, entitled, " A relation how one Cleber,
"1556, proclaimed the ladie Elisabethe quene,
"and her beloved bedfellow, lord Edwarde
*« Courtneye, kynge«." It was thought pro-
• Strype Eccl. mem. iii. 336.
f Carte iii. 3*7.
« MSS. Harl. 537. aj-
per

<page 114>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 95
per that the truth of this affair should be
made known to the princess; and as the
communication of it was a matter of some
delicacy, and that misrepresentations might
be prevented, the council above-mentioned
order sir Thomas Pope, "Because this mat-
"ter is spread abroad, and that paradventure,
"many constructions and discourses will be
"made thereof, we have thought meet to
"signisie the whole circumstances of the
"cafe unto you, to be by you opened to the
"ladie Elisabeth's grace at such time as ye
"shall thinke most convenient. To the end
** it may appear unto her, how little these
"men stick, by falshood and untruthe, to
■*' compass their purpose: not letting, for that
"intent to abuse the name of her grace, or
"any others: which their devises neverthe-
*' less are (god be thanked) by his goodness
"discovered from time to time, to their ma-
"jesties perseverance, and confusion of their
"enemies. And so we bid you hertily well
"to fare. From Eltham the xxxth of July,
"1556. Tour loving friends, &c
h '»
In consequence of sir Thomas Pope's ex-
planation, the queen herself wrote a letter to
h Burner Hist Res. Records. Numb, xxxiii. pag. 314. And
Hist. p. 351.
the

<page 115>
96 THE LIFE OF
the princess, in which she expressed her ab-
horrence and disbelief of these infamous for-
geries. It was answered by the princess,
who declared her detestation of the conspi-
rators, and disclaimed the least knowledge of
their malicious designs. Undoubtedly having
suffered so severely, and perhaps unjustly, in
the affair of Wyat, {he judged it expedient
to clear her character even from the most
improbable suspicions. Commissioners were
immediately appointed for examining into
this conspiracy, sir Francis Englefield the
comptroller, sir Edward Waldegrave, sir
Henry Jernegan, sir Edward Hastings, and
Cordall the queen's sollicitor; and several of
the parties were apprehended, and condemned
at Guildhall1. When war was next year pro-
claimed against France, this secret concurrence
of the French court, with the machinations of
Dudley Asliton and his accomplices, was ex-
pressly specified, amongst other articles in the
declaration k.
Soon afterwards, Eric king of Sweden
sent by his ambassador, a message secretly to
the princess at Hatfield, with a proposal of
juarriage. King Philip had just before pro-
'Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 336, 337.
* Camden, Eliz. per Hearne. i. Appetrat. pag. 22.
posed.

<page 116>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 97
posed to the queen to marry her to the duke
of Savoy'; with a view perhaps of retaining
the duke who was an able general, in his
interests against France, with which Philip
was at this time engaged in open hostilities.
This proposal of the king of Sweden she
wisely rejected, because it was not conveyed
to her by the queen's directions. But to
this objection the embassador answered, that
the king of Sweden his master, as a man of
honor and a gentleman, thought it most
proper to make the first application to her-
self: and that having by this preparatory
step obtained her consent, he would next, as
a king, mention the affair in form to her
majesty. But the final answer of princess
was an absolute denial: and she desired the
messenger to acquaint his master, that as me
could not listen to any proposals of that na-
ture, unless made by the queen's advice or
authority; so she could not but declare, that
if left to her own will, slie would always pre-
fer a single condition of life. The affair soon
came to the queen's ears; who sending for
sir Thomas Pope to court, received from
him an entire account of this secret transac-
tion i ordering sir Thomas at the fame time
to write to the princess, and acquaint her
'Strype, Eccl. Mem., iii. 317.
G how

<page 117>
98 THE LIFE OF
how much she was satisfied with this prudent
and dutiful answer to the king of Sweden's
proposition. Sir Thomas Pope very soon
afterwards returned to his charge at Hatfield;
when the queen commanded him, not only to
repeat this approbation of the conduct of the
princess relating to the proposed match from
Sweden, but to receive from her own mouth
the result of her sentiments concerning it;
and at the fame time to take an opportunity
of sounding her affections concerning the
duke of Savoy, without mentioning his name.
The imperial ambassadors Mountmorency lord
of Courieres, and Bouchard, were still in
England, waiting for the event of the lat-
ter negociation m. For the Emperor Charles
the fifthn, who was now become her friend,
and had before interested himself in her fa-
vor, was anxious, by such an important
connection, to form a potent and lasting
alliance between the British and Imperial
crowns. But I shall insert sir Thomas Pope's
letter, written in-consequence of this commis-
sion, to the queen or council; by which he
seems perfectly to have understood Elisabeth's
real thoughts and disposition.
ro Carte, iii. 307. «
■ See Hume, Hist. iii. 386. seq. Ed. 4W. And Dr. Robert-
son's masterly History of Charles the fifth.
"First

<page 118>
SIR THOMAS POPE.
99
"First after I had declared to her grace,
how well the quene's majestie liked of her
prudent and honorable answere made to
* the same messenger; I then opened unto
« her grace the effects of the sayd messengers
'credence: which after her grace had hard,
« I sayd, the queenes highnes had sent me
'to her grace, not onlie to declare the same,
* but also to understande how her grace
'liked the sayd motion. Whereunto after
'a little pause taken, her grace answered
* in forme following. Maister Pope, I re-
« quyre you, after my most humble com-
* mendacions to the quenes majestie, to
* render untoo the fame lyke thankes, that
'it pleased her highnes of her goodnes, to
'conceive so well of my answer made to the
'same messenger; and herwithal, of her
* princelie consyderation, with such speede
'to command you by your letters to sig-
'nyfie the fame untoo me: who before re-
'mained wonderfullie perplexed, fering that
* her majestie might mistake the fame: for
'which her goodnes I acknowledg myself
* bound to honour, serve, love, and obey
'her highnes, during my liffe. Requyring
1 you also to faye untoo her majestie, that
'in the king my brothers time, there was
'offered me a verie honorable marriage or
G 2 "two

<page 119>
ioo THE LIFE OF
•* two: and ambassadors sent to treat with
'* me touching the same0; whereupon I made
"my humble suite untoo his highnes, as
"some of honour yet livinge can be testi-
*' monies, that it would lyke the fame to
«' give me leave, with his graces favour, to
•' remayne in that estate I was, which of all
«« others best lyked me or pleased me p. And
• Viz. in 1552, the eldest son of the king of Denmark.
Heylin, Eccl. Rest. Eliz. p. 99.
f She was not however perfectly satisfied with this state,
at that time; as appears from many curious anecdotes of
her early coquetry with lord Thomas Seymour, high ad-
miral, who married Catharine Parr, widow of Henry viii.
Burghley's State Papers, vol. i. by Haynes. p. 96. "From
"the consejfion of Thomas Parrye her cofferer. I do remember
"also (lie [Catharine AJhley\ told me, that the ad mi rail loved
"her but too well, and had done soo a great while: and
"that the queen was jealouse on hir and him, insomuche,
"that one tyme the quene suspecting the often accesse of the
"admirall to the lady Elizabeth's grace, cam fodenly upon
"them, when they were all alone, he having her in his armes.
"Frcm the confeffion of Catharine AJblcy, her waiting 'woman,
"or governess. She faith at Chelfy he would come many
"mornyngs into the said lady Elizabeth's chamber, before she
"were re.ly, and sometyme before lhe did rife.—And if (he
*'. were in hir bed, he wold put open the curteyns, and bid hir
"good morrow, &c. And one morning he strave to have
"kissed her in bed.—At Hanworth, in the garden, he wrated
"with her, and cut her gown in an hundred pieces, being
"black cothes. An other tyme, at Chelsey, the Lady Eliza-
* beth hearing the pryvie-lock undo, knowyng that he would
•' come in, 'ran out of hir bed to hir maydens, and then went
"behynd the curteyn of the bed, &c—At Seymour-place, . . .
"he

<page 120>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 101
"in good faith, I pray you say untoo her
"highness, I am even at this present of the
"fame minde, and so intende to continewe
'• with her maiesties favour: and assuringe
"her highnes, I so well like this estate, as
"I perswade myselfe ther is not anie kynde
'* of liffe comparable unto it. And as con-
"cerning my lyking the sayd mocion made
"by the sayd messenger, I beseeche you say
"unto her maiestie, that to my rememb-
"raunce I never hard of his master before
"this tyme j and that I so well lyke both
"he did use a while to come up every mornyng in his nyght-
"gowne, barelegged in his flippers, where he found com-
"monly the lady Elizabeth up at hir boke.—At Hanworth,
"the queene told this examinate, that my lord admirall look-
"ed in at the galery wyndow, and fe my lady Elizabeth
"cast hir armes about a man's neck. 7'he which heryng,
"this examinate cnquyred for it of my lady's grace, who de-
"nyed it weepyng, and bad ax all hir women. Thei all
"denyed it. And she knew it could not be so, for ther came
"no man but Gryndall, the lady Elizabeth's scholemaster.
"Howbeit, thereby this examinate did suspect, that the quene
"was jelous betwixt them; and did but feyne this, to then-
"tente that this examinate should take more hede, and be,
"as it were, in watche betwixte hir and my lord admirall.
"She faith also, that Mr. Ashley, hir husband, hath diver*
"tymes given this examinate warnyng to take hede, for he
"did fere that the lady Elizabeth did ber some affection to
"my lord admirall, she semyd to be well plesed therwith,
"and sometyme she wold blush when he were spoken of."
Ibid. p. 99. This was in 1548. Parrye was afterwards made
treasurer of her houshold.
G 3 "the

<page 121>
161 THE LIFE OF
the message and the messenger, as I shall
most humblie pray God upon my knees,
that from henceforth I never hear of the
one nor the other: assure you, that if it
should eftsones repaire unto me, I would
forbeare to speak to him. And were there
nothing els to move me to miflyke the
mocion, other than that his master would
attempte the fame, without making the
queen's maiestie privie therunto, it were
cause sufficient."
'* And when her grace had thus ended,
*' I was so bold as of mysclfe to fay unto her
"grace, her pardon first requyred, that I
"thought few or none would beleve, but
"that her grace could be ryght well con-
«* tented to marrie, so ther were some ho-
"norable marriage offered her by the queen's
«' highnes, or her maiesties assent. Wher-
"Unto her grace answered, What I (hall do
*' hereafter I knowe not: but I assure you
"upon my truthe and fidelitie, and as God
"be mercifull unto me, I am not at this
"tyme otherways mynded, than I have de-
*' clared unto you j no, though I were offered
*' the greatest prince in all Europe.—And
f* yet percafe the queen's maiestie may con-
M ceiv©

<page 122>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 103
"ceive this q rather to proceed of a maidenlie
** shamefastnes, than upon anie such certaine
"determination.
THOMAS POPEr."
Courtney earl of Devonshire being now
dead', the queen grew less jealous of the
princess, and seemed almost perfectly recon-
ciled. In November, 1556, she was invited
to court; and accordingly came to London
with much parade '. The principal reason
1 In MSS. Harl. [ut inf.] it is, " this my ans-wer rather,
"etc." As if it was the speech of the princess continued.
r Brit. Mus. MSS. Harl. 444. 7. viz. "The ladye Eliza.
"beth hir graces aunswere made at Hattfield, the xxvi of
"Aprill 1558, to sir T. Pope knt. being sent from the queues
"majestie to understand howe hir grace lyked of the mocyon
"of marryage, made by the kynge ellect of Swethelandes
"messenger." sol. 28. See also the fame, ibid. MSS. Cot-
ton, Vitell. xii. 16. 8. It is also among Petyt's Manuscripts,
now in the Library of the Inner Temple : from whence it is in-
correctly printed by Burnet, ubj supr. No. 37. p. 335. See
ibid. Hist. p. 361.
• He was imprisoned in Fotheringay-castle, on suspicion of
being concerned with the princess Elisabeth in Wyat's rebel*
lion. Being released, he travelled into Italy, and died at Pa-
dua, aged thirty. He was the last earl of Devonshire, of the
noble family of Courtenay. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 338, 339.
Some fay he was poisoned,
1 " The xxviiith daye of November, came ryding thrugh
"Smythfelde and Old Balee, and thrugh Fleet-street, unto
"Somersett-plasc, my good lade Elisabeth's grace the quenet
G 4 "syster;

<page 123>
io4 THE LIFE OF
of this invitation, was formally to propose
to her in person a marriage with Philibert
Emanuel, the duke of Savoy, which sir Tho-
mas Pope, by the queen's commands, had
before hinted at a distance, as we have seen
in the preceding letter. This proposal the
princess declined j but disguised her refusal
with the same earnest professions of her un-
changeable devotion to a state of virginity,
which she had before made to sir Thomas
Pope on account of the Swedish match. Great
court was paid to the princess during her abode
at Somerset-house ". Her amiable condescensi-
on, obliging address, and agreeable conversati-
on, procured her new interests and attach-
ments, and even engaged the best part of the
lords of the council in her favor.
Her beauty perhaps had no great share in
these acquisitions; such as it was, it still re-
tained some traces of sickness, and some shades
of melancholy, contracted in her late severe but
useful school of affliction.
"syster; with a grate company os velvett cotts and chaynes,
"hir graces gentyllmen : and aftyr, a grate company of her
"men, all in redd cotts gardyd with a brod gard of blake
«' velvett and cutts, &c." Vitell. MSS. Cott. F. 5. ut supr,
Strype cites a part of this passage, Eccl. Mem. iii. 309.
• Carte, iii. 331.
She

<page 124>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 105
She found however that retirement best
suited her circumstances, as it did her inclina-
tions j and although she had been invited to
pass the whole winter in London, after a short
stay of one week only, she returned to her
former situation at Hatsield w.
One should have expected that the queen
would have parted in disgust with the prin-
cess, at this rejection of a match, recom-
mended by Philip, and so convenient to his
purposes. But it appears, that the queen
was extremely backward in promoting her
husband's desire of marrying Elisabeth to the
duke of Savoy. On this account, Philip
employed Alphonsus, a franciscan frier, his
confessor, to confer with her majesty on
the subject of this marriage. She told him,
that she feared, without consent of parlia-
ment, neither her husband Philip, nor the
nation would be benefited by this alliance.
She added, that me could not in point of
conscience press this match upon her sister j
w " Hir grace did loge at hir plase [Somerset house] till the
"iii day of Dessember. The third day of Dessember cam ryd-
"ing from hir plase my ladie Elisabeth's grace from Somerset
"plase down Fleetstrete, and thrugh Old Bailee and Smyth-
"fclde, &c. And so hir grace toke hir waye towards byfhope-
•f hatscld plase." MSS. Cott. Vittell. F. 5. ut supr.
meaning

<page 125>
io6 THE LIFE OF
meaning perhaps that it would be unjust, to
force the princess to be married, after her
resolute declarations against wedlock; or im-
proper and dishonorable, to match her be-
neath the dignity of a crowned head. The
theological reasonings of Alphonsus were too
refined for the understanding, or too weak
for the conscience, of the queen, who still
remained inflexible in her former opinion.
Upon this, Philip wrote to her in his usual
authoritative style, advising her to examine
her own conscience, and to consider whether
her opinion was founded in truth or in ob-
stinacy -, adding, that if the parliament op-
posed his request, he should lay the blame
upon her \ The queen, in her answer, beg-
ged that he would, at least, defer the mat-
ter till he returned into England: and that
then he might have a better opportunity
of judging, what attention her reasons de-
served. That otherwise, she should live in
jealousy of his affections, a state of mind
to her worse than death; but which, to her
great disquietude, she had already began to
feel. She observed, with many expressions
of deference to his superior judgment and
authority, that, whatever her conscience might
have determined, the matter could not be
* Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii, 317. seq.
possibly

<page 126>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 107
possibly brought to any speedy conclusion, as
the duke would be immediately ordered into
the field.
This letter which is in French, and print*
ed by Strype y, is no less a specimen of her
implicit submission to Philip, than the whole
transaction is, at the fame time, an in-
stance of that unconquerable perseverance
which the queen exerted on certain occasions.
Philip persisted in his design: and with a
view to accomplish it more effectually, dis-
patched into England the duchess of Parma
and the duchess of Lorraine, whom he com-
missioned to bring back with them the prin-
cess Elisabeth into Flanders. Philip was in
love with the duchess of Lorain j and the
splendor of her table and retinue, which she
was unable to support of herself, made the
queen extremely jealous. She was therefore,
whatever her companion might have been, a
very improper suitress on this occasion. The
queen would not permit the two duchesses
to visit the princess at Hatfield j and every
moment of their stay gave her infinite uneasi-
ness. But they both soon returned, without
success z.
f Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. Append. Numb. LVI.
* Carte, iii. 338.
Perhaps

<page 127>
108 THE LIFE OF
Perhaps the growing jealousy of the queen,
a passion which often ends in revenge against
the beloved object, might at least have some
share in dictating this opposition to Phi-
lip a. At length the remonstrances of the
queen, and the repeated disapprobation of the
princess, prevailed; and it is certain, what-
ever Mary's real motives might be, that the
proposal was suddenly laid aside. But Mary
so far concurred with Philip's measures, as
the next year to declare war against France b j
in which the duke of Savoy was Philip's chief
commander at the battle and siege of faint
Quintin c.
As to the king of Sweden, he afterwards,
in the year 1561, renewed his addresses to
Elisabeth, when (he was queen of England:
at which time, he lent her a royal present of
1 Philip, while abroad, had shewn her so many marks of
indifference, and had trifled with her so frequently about his
return to England, that once, in a fit of rage, she tore his pic-
ture. Carte, ibid. 329.
h Yet the public finances were at this time so low, that she
could not procure a single vote from her privy-council for the
declaration of war: and she therefore threatened to dismiss
them all from the board, and to appoint counsellors more obse-
quious. Hume, iii. 391. ed. 4to.
c Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 317. Hollingshead, Chron. iii.
1134. col. 1, 2.
eighteen

<page 128>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 109
eighteen large pyed horses, and two ships
laden with riches d. At the fame time, some
stationers of London had published prints of
her majesty Elisabeth and the king of Swe-
den in one piece. This liberty, as it was
called, gave great offence to the queen, who
ordered secretary Cecil to write to the lord
mayor of London, enjoining him diligently
to suppress all such publications; as they
implied an agreement of marriage between
their majesties. Cecil takes occasion to add,
"her majestie hitherto cannot be induced,
"whereof we have cause to sorrow, to allow
"of any marriadg with any manner of per-
"son\" Soon afterwards the king of Swe-
den was expected to pay the queen a visit
at Whitehall; and it is diverting to observe
the perplexity and embarrassment of the
officers of state about the manner of receiv-
ing him at court, "the queenes majestie being
"a maide1"
But she still persisted in those vows of vir-
ginity which she had formerly made to sir
Thomas Pope at Hatsield; and constantly re-
fused not only this, but other advantageous
d Strype, Ann. Res. i. p. 271.
* Burghley's State Papers, by Haynes. p. 367.
'Ibid. p. 371.
matches.

<page 129>
no THE LIFE OF
matches. One of them was with the Duke
D'Alenzon, whom she refused, jft after some
deliberation, because he was only a boy of
seventeen years of age, and she almost in her
fortieth years. A husband, I suppose, al-
though a young one, would have been at
that time perhaps inconsistent with her pri-
vate attachments j and the formalities of mar-
riage might have laid a restraint on more
agreeable gallantries with the earl of Essex
and others, Bayle h assigns a curious physical
reason for Elisabeth's obstinate perseverance in
a state of virginity.
The four last years of queen Mary's reign,'
which the princess Elisabeth passed at Hat-
field with sir Thomas Pope, were by far the
most agreeable part of her time during that
turbulent period. For although she must
have been often disquieted with many secret
fears and apprehensions, yet she was here per-
fectly at liberty, and treated with a regard
due to her birth and expectations. In the
mean time, to prevent suspicions, she pru-
dently declined interfering in any fort of
business, and abandoned herself entirely to
t Camd. Eliz. p. 269. per Hearne.
k Dict. Artie. Elizabeth.
books

<page 130>
SIR THOMAS POPE, m
books and amusements'. The pleasures of
solitude and retirement were now become
habitual to her mind; and she principally
employed herself in playing on the lute or
virginals, embroidering with gold and silver,
reading Greek, and translating Italian. She
was now continuing to profess that character
which her brother Edward gave her, when he
used to call her his sweet Jijler Temperance *..
But she was soon happily removed to a reign
of unparalleled magnificence and prosperity.
Upon the accession of the new queen, who
was resident at Hatfield when her sister
Mary died on November the seventeenth,
1558, it does not appear that sir Thomas
Pope was continued in the privy-council.
This circumstance may justly be interpreted
to his honor. Elisabeth, to prevent an
alarm among the partisans of the catholic
communion, had prudently retained thirteen
of Mary's privy counsellors. These were,
Heathe, archbishop of York, and lord chan-
cellor ., the marquis of Winchester, lord
treasurer, the earls of Arundel, Shrewsoury,
Pembroke, and Derby; the lords Clinton, and
Howard , sir Thomas Cheyney, sir William
1 Burnct, Hist. Res. ubi supr. p. 363.
■ k Camd. Eliz. per Hearne, Apparat. vol. i. p. 14.
Petre,

<page 131>
ii2 THE LIFE OF
Petre, sir John Mason, sir Richard Sackville,
and Doctor Wootton, dean of York and
Canterbury'. But most of these had com-
plied with all the changes which were made
in the national religion since the latter end
of Henry's reign j and were such dexterous
adepts in the fashionable art of adapting
their principles to the variable complexion
of the times, that they were still employed in
every new revolution.
1 Burnet, Reformat, ii. 375.
SECT.

<page 132>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 113
SECT. IV.
•
WE have now done with fir Thomas
Pope's political character; and are
entering on that most memorable circum-
stance of his life, before incidentally men-
tioned, by which he secured immortality to
his name, and conferred a perpetual emolu-
ment on his country; I mean, the foundation
of Trinity college in Oxford. His good
fense and good disposition led him to reflect,
that he could not bestow a competent pro-
portion of those riches which he had so
largely received, with greater propriety, uti-
lity, and generosity, than in the service of the
public. I shall therefore make no apology
for delivering at large a history of his pro-
ceedings in forming and completing this li-
beral design.
And perhaps there are some of my readers,
who will be more pleased to view him in the
milder and more amiable light of the father of
ingenuous education, dispensing rewards to
science and virtue, than in the more active yet
turbulent scenes of public life, diversified only
H by

<page 133>
H4 THE LIFE OF
by the vain vicissitudes of human affairs, or
fraught with the crimes and misfortunes of
mankind.
About the year 1290, Richard de Hoton,
prior, and the monks, of the cathedral con-
vent of Durham, erected a college in the
northern suburbs of Oxford, for the education
of the novices of their monastery; to which it
was considered as an appendage \ This was af-
terwards increased, with the addition of revenues
and books, by Richard of Bury, bishop of Dur-
ham, in the year 1345. It was at length entire-
ly rebuilt, more effectually established, and
more amply endowed, for eight benedictine
monks and eight secular students, in the year
1370, by the munificence of Thomas Hatsield,
bishop of the same see b. About the year
1541, this college was dissolved by Henry the
eighthc: at which time, all its estates, its site,
precinct, chapel, bellfry, buildings of all forts,
* See grant in the Appendix, Numb. VI. Which, as it pro-
bably contains the first and early separation of the ground on
which Trinity college now stands, with its precincts, or of the
greatest part of these, to the purposes of learning, was thought
too curious to be omitted among the original papers.
b The monks were allowed annually ten pounds each, and
the seculars five marcs. It is remarkable, that the stipend of these
monks is treble to most of the fellowships then in Oxford.
c See Stevens's Monast. vol. i. p. 343. from MSS. A. Wood.
with

<page 134>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 115
with the entire appurtenances of the fame,
were granted by the king to his new dean and
chapter of Durham cathedral, which, as I
presume, they now possess d. Its site only re-
verted to the crown; for Edward the sixth, in
the seventh year of his reign, by letters patent
dated February the fourth, 1552 % granted
the site of this college to George Owen, of
Godstowe, the king's physician, and William
Martyn, gentleman.
On this ground sir Thomas Pope determined
to found his intended college. Accordingly,
by indenture, dated February the twentieth,
1554', he purchased the premises of the said
Owen and Martyn. In the same year he ob-
tained from Philip and Mary a royal licence,
or charter, dated March the eigthth, 1554*,
empowering him to create and erect a certain
college within the university of Oxford, con-
sisting of one president a priest, twelve fellows,
four of whom should be priests, and ei.5ht
scholarsh: and liberally and sufficiently to en-
dow the same and their successors with certain
manors, lands, and revenues. In the fame
'See Append, Numb. • VII *.
* See Append. Numb. VIII.
'See Append. Numb. IX.
* See Append. Numb. X.
* This Number he afterwards encreascd to fwtl<vt.
H 2 charter,

<page 135>
u6 THE LIFE OF
charter, and with the estates and possessions
therein recited, he likewise obtains licence of
the king and queen to found and endow a school
at Hokenorton in the county of Oxford, to be
called Jesus Scolehouse; and to give statutes as
well to the college, as to the first and second
masters of the said school'. On the twenty-
eighth day of March, 1555, by deed so
datedk, he declares his actual erection and
establishment os the said college: and con-
signs the site and place above-mentioned, to
Thomas Slythurste, S. T. B. President: Ste-
phen Markes, A. M. Robert Newton, John
Barwyke, James Bell, Roger Crispin, John
Richardson, Thomas Scotte, George Symp-
son, Bachelors of Arts, Fellows: And John
Arden, John Comporte, John Perte, and
John Langsterre, Scholars. In the morals,
learning, and studious diligence of all which
persons, he therein declares that he much con-
1 '* Ac eciam ulterius damus et concediraus eidem Thomæ
"Pope, militi, plenariam facultatem et auctoritatem condendi
"et sanciendi, pro bono regimine didtorum Collecii et Scolæ,
"ac terrarum, tenementorum, hereditamentorum, bonorum et
"catallortim, corundem, quecunque statuta, ordinationes, et
"regulas, per dictos, Presidentem Socios et Scholares, Archidi-
"dafcalum, Hypodidascalum, et eorum quemlibet, observanda, &c."
Ex Chart, ut supr.
k See Append. Numb. XI.
fides.

<page 136>
SIR THOMAS POPE. u7
fides. Reserving to himself, at the same time,
the right of nominating the remainder.
With this deed the sounder himself, the
same day, came to Oxford; and in consequence
of it, in his own person delivered possession of
the college to the said President, Fellows,
and Scholars, in the presence of John War-
ner, vice-chancellor of the university, war-
den of All Souls college, and archdeacon of
Cleveland, and of Ely ' j Owen Oglethorp,
president of Magdalene, and dean of Wind-
sor m j Robert Morwent, president of Corpus
Christi; Walter Wryght, archdeacon of Ox-
ford; John Browne, canon of Windsor" j Ed-
mund Powel, esquire °, Edward Love, John
Bylling, Simon Perrot, John Heywood, Henry
Bryan, Arthur Yeldard, John Myleward, John
Edmundes, John Beresford, Ralph Dodmer,
John Lawrence, Bartholomew Plott, Humfrey
1 He was also or had been, professor of Physic in Oxford,
and prebendary of Winchester and Salisbury. He died Dean of
Winchester. A small History of All Souls college occurs in his
hand-writing, about the year 1560, in Cod. MSS. Rawlins.
236. sol. Bibl. Bodl.
m Afterwards bilhop of Carlisle: in which character he
crowned queen Elizabeth.
■ See Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. F. p. 65. edit 2.
* Of Sandford, near Oxford.
H 3 Edmundes,

<page 137>
n8 THE LJFE OF
Edmundesp, gentlemen, and many othersq. In
consequence of this last-mentioned deed, by
an instrument dated the fame day and year,
Thomas Slythurste appoints Stephen Markes ,
and Robert Newton, his lawful attornies, to
enter, in his name and stead, into a certain
messuage or building, with its appurtenances,
in Oxford, called Trinity college, of the
foundation of sir Thomas Pope, knight -, and
of the fame to take .full and peaceable posses-
sion; and to keep and retain it for the uses
and purposes of the said Thomas Slythurste,
according to the force, form, and effect, of a
certain grant made to him and others by the
said sir 1 homas Pope \
In May following, the founder furnished
his college with necessaries and implements
of every kind \ To the library in particular
he gave no inconsiderable collection of valu-
able and costly books, both printed and ma-
nuscript '. But above all, he adorned the
t Indorsed on the instrument cited Append. Numb. XI.
i Many of these persons occur in different parts of these me-
moirs; and their characters, and connections with sir Thomas
Pope, are explained in their proper places.
'See Append. Numb. XII.
* Ex indent, dat. Maii 5. ii. iii. Phil. Mar. In Thesouriar.
et Registr. prim. Coll. sol. 5.
« Ibid.
chapel,

<page 138>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 119
chapel, as appears by a deed dated the fifth
of May, 1555 u, with silver vessels, embroi-
dered vestments, copes of tissue, crosses, and
illuminated missalsw. The next year, he
transmitted to the society a body of statutes,
dated the first of May, 1556. On the eighth
of the fame month, he gave them one hun-
dred pounds for a stock to begin withx.
Matters being thus duely prepared and ad-
justed, and his endowment y <3j£^tjhe college
consisting of manors, lands, and impropria-
tions, having effectually taken place before
or upon the feast of the annunciation, 1556 *;
the first president, fellows, and scholars, no-
minated by himself, were formally and ac-
» See Append. Numb. XVI.
w The altars of the chapel were dedicated the following
year, as appears from the following entry, in Comp. Burss.
1556, anno primo Coll. "Sol. pro Obfoniis datis Dom. Epis-
"copo Glocestrensi et Ministris ejus in confecratione altarium,
*' xviijs. xd. ob."
z Ex acquietantia in Registro primo, sol. 6. b.
'See an instrument signed with his own hand, viz. "A
"Valcwe of all the Manors, Limits, Tenements, and Heredita-
"mentes, -which I Sir Thomas Pope, Knigbte, Founder of Trinitie
"colledge •within the Univcrfitie of Oxford, have given to the Pre-
"fsdense, Fellovies, and Scholars, of the fame, and to their Succef-
"fort for ever. As well at the first Er ed ion of the colledge, as here-
"after follovjithe, &c." Ad. Calc. vet. Libri Statutor. in per-
gamen. penes Prxsid. sol. 109. b. etc.
* Comput. Burss. anno primo Coll.
H 4 tually

<page 139>
120 THE LIFE OF
tually admitted within the chapel, on the
thirtieth day of May, being the eve of Tri-
nity Sunday, the same year, yiz. 1556. They
were all, the graduates at least, taken from dif-
ferent colleges in Oxford j except one, who
was of Cambridge. Their names, dignities,
colleges, degrees, counties, and appointments
in the new society, as far as notices have oc-
curred, are here specified *.
PRESIDENT.
Thomas Slythurjle, S. T. B. Canon of Wind-
sor. County, Berkshire.
FELLOWS.
Arthur Teldarde, Fellow of Pembroke-Hall, ifi
Cambridge, A. M. Northumberland.—
Appointed philosophy - lecturer by the
founder.
Stephen Markes, Fellow, and Rector, os Exeter
College, in Oxford, A. M. Cornwall.—
Appointed vice-president by the founder.
'John Barwyke, of Magdalen College, in Ox-
ford, A. M. Devonshire.—Appointed
dean by election.
* See Append. Numb. XIII.
James

<page 140>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 121
'James Bell, Scholar of Corpus Christi College,
in Oxford, A. B. Somersetshire.—Ap-
pointed rhetoric-lecturer by election.
John Richardson, Scholar of Queen's College,
in Oxford, A. B. Cumberland. — Ap-
pointed bursar by election.
George Sympson, Scholar of Queen's College, in
Oxford, A. B. Cumberland.
George Rudde, Scholar of Queen's College, in
Oxford, A. B. Westmoreland.
Thomas Scotte, Scholar of Queen's College, in
Oxford, A. B. Cumberland.
Roger Cryspin, Fellow of Exeter College, in
Oxford, A. B. Devonshire.
Roger Evens, A. B. Cornwall.
"John Perte, A. B. Warwickshire.—Appointed
bursar by election.
Robert Bellamie, of Exeter College, in Oxford,
A. B. Yorkshire.
SCHOLARS.
John Langjlerre, of Brasen-Nose College, in
Oxford, A. B. Yorksliire.
Reginald Braye, A. B. Bedfordshire.
John Arden, or Arderne, Oxfordshire.
John Comporte, Middlesex.
Robert

<page 141>
122 THE LIFE OF
Robert Tbrajke, Somersetshire.
William Saltmarfie, Yorkshire.
John Harrys, Gloucestershire.
/7.X On saint Swithin's day, being the fifteenth
y/ ?s/? of July, in the fame year, the founder paid
a visit to his college. He was accompanied
by the bishops of Winchester and Ely, and
other eminent personages. He dismounted
from his horse at the college gate, where he
was received by the president, who stood at
. his stirrup. At entering the gates he was sa-
luted in a long and dutiful oration by the
vice-president: after which the bursars of-
fered him a present of embroidered gloves.
From thence he was conducted with the
rest of the company into the president's great
chamber: the fellows and scholars standing
on either side, as he passed along the court.
Having viewed the library and Grove, they
proceeded to dinner in the hall, where a
sumptuous entertainment was provided. The
president fate on the left hand of the founder,
* One Starkie was also nominated; but he not appearing
Edmund Hutchins, the founder's nephew, was admitted in his
room by the founder's mandate, Octob. 3. Registr. Coll. prim.
sol. 3. b. And Registr. Kettell. citat. apud Append. Numb.
XXV.
yet

<page 142>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 123
yet at some distance, and the rest of the guests,
and the society, were placed according to
their rank, and in their proper order. There
were twelve minstrels present in the hall j
and among other articles of provision on this
occasion, four fat does, and six gallons of
Mufcadel, are mentioned. The whole expence
of the feast amounting to xij/. xiij s. \xd.
After dinner they went to evening mass in
the chapel, where. the president celebrated
the service, habited in the richest cope: and
the founder offered at the altar a purse full of
angels. They then retired to the Bursary;
where the founder paid into the hands of the
Bursars all the costs incurred by this visit:
and gave them besides, at the fame time, a
silver goblet gilt, which being silled with
hypocrasse, he drank to the Bursars, and to
all the company present. He then departed
towards Windsor: but before he left the col-
lege, gave with his own hands, to each of
the scholars, one marc c.
In November following, I find a letter to
the president from the founder; in which,
as likewise in eighteen others written after-
« See Append. Numb. XXIX.
wards

<page 143>
124 THE LIFE OF
wardsd, are many marks of his attention to
the affairs and economy of his college, and
of his sollicitude about fettling every article
of the new foundation in the most effectual
manner: as also of his readiness to assist on
all necessary occasions. In the letter just
mentioned, among several other particulars,
he tells the president, in consequence of a
conversation which had lately passed between
them both at Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire,
by what expedient certain extraordinary ex-
pences of the college, in the late visitatione of
d Fourteen of these letters are the originals in his own hand,
preserved in the treasury of the college. The rest are copies in
the first register. ,
• Concerning which I find the so'lowing entries, in Comp'.
Burst. 1556. "Expensæ eqjjitantium.—Sol. per dom.
Perte in equitando ad sundatorem primo, ij j. ijd.—Sol. dom.
Bellamie equitanti ad Mag. Love [the founder's receiver] ut
certiorem eum redderet de adventu visitatorum, et pro ex-
pensis propriis. xj d.—Sol. pro obsoniis, aliisque rebus, pro
visitatoribus reverendiffinii Cardinal is Pole. xxiv/. ix d. SoL
in regardo ministris visitatorum. xxvj."—For an account of
this visitation, see Wood, Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. Lib. i. p.
278. col. ii. The visitors were Brookes bishop of Glocester,
Cole dean of Saint Paul's, Morwent president of Corpus, Wright
archdeacon of Oxford, and Ormanet the pope's datary. Their
design was to restore the pope's authority in the university, and
to eject all students who were disaffected to the catholic cere-
monies. The visitation seems to have ended in burning a con-
siderable number of English bibles, and in removing the body
of Peter Martyr's heretical wife from the cathedral of Christ-
church.
the

<page 144>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 125
the university by the deputies of cardinal Pole,
and in some other instances, should be dis-
charged. He commissions him to thank mas-
ter Rawes, a canon of Windsor f, for a present
of books intended for the library. He desires
the president would bargain for him with mas-
ter Freere g, for one thousand load of stone, to
s He Iks buried under the fourth arch of the south ile, on
the choir side, of St. George's chapel, at Windsor, with a plate
of brass on his grave, much injured; having the figure of a
priest in a canon's mantle, with St. George's arms on his left
shoulder, with this inscription.
Orate pro anima Magistri Thomæ Rawes hujus facri collegii
Canonici, qui obiit xii. die Maii anno dni millesimo quingen-
tesimo quinquagesimo sexto. Cujus anime propicietur dcus.
Amen.
In Rymer's Foed. Tom. xv. p. 463. is queen Mary's grant
of his canonry to Richard Brevvarne, canon of the first stall of
Christ Church, Oxford, dated May 24, 1557, in which instru-
ment he is called "nuper defunctus." According to Frithe's
Catalogue of canons of Windsor, in Ashmole's Berkshire, vol.
iii. p. 260. he was also vicar of Wantage, Co. Berks. His
books, consisting of near fifty volumes in folio, came to the
college in 1557. He was of Oxford, where he occurs deter-
mining in Arts, 1518. Wood MSS. Afhmol. E. 6.
8 William Freer, of the city of Oxford, whose father Edward
married Anne the daughter of John Bustarde, second husband of
the founder's mother. Lee's MSS. Visitation, ut supr. pag. 24.
I find one Thomas Freer, admitted Probat. Soc. of Trin. coll.
Jun. ix. 1560. Dioces. Lond.—Registr. coll. prim. I find also
the following article, in Comp. Burss. 1561.-2.
"Sol. xxvii. Novemb. pro ex pens. Dni Freer perferentis col-
"legii literas et librum statutorum ad episcopum Wynton,
*' vij s. viij J.
He

<page 145>
i26 THE LIFE OF
be carried to the college for beginning a wall
round the Grove. He talks of having moved
my lord cardinal Pole's grace, for licence for
three of the fellows to preachh: a matter
concerning which very rigid injunctions had
been published, at the restoration of the ca-
tholic religion by queen Mary. He mentions
having sent to the college, for the service of
the chapel, two pair of censers of one fashion,
two cruets, two candlesticks for the high
altar, one strip, and one pax of ivory:
"trusting, or it be longe, ye shall have the
"lyke thynges of Jylver." He adds, " and
•* forasmoch as it is evill carriage of my
"organes this wynter, Mr. White', at my
He was afterwards M. D. and gave to the college-library, in
1566, a beautiful and valuable MS. on vellum, in folio, of
Gregory Nazianzen. Edward Freer, above-mentioned, was
buried in the church of All Saints Oxon. Jan. 27, 1564.
Registr. Parochial, eccles. pnedict.
fc " Concerning Lycence for Mr. Markes, Mr. Yeldard, and
*• Mr. Barwyke, to preach, I have already moved my lord Car-
"dinall's grace ;; who answered the bulliop might give ly-
"cence: but understonding syns by Mr. Yeldard she contrary,
"I sliall eftsones move his grace therein." Queen Mary, Aug.
29, 1553, commissioned Gardiner bishop of Winchester, Lord
Chancellor, to grant Licences for preaching. Rym. Feed. xv.
337. See form of a licence for this purpose in Collier, Ecd.
Hist. ii. Records, Numb. 78. pag. 82.
'Sir Thomas Whyte, who at this time was engaged in found-
ing St. John's college. I find him entertained at Trinity college
more than once, viz. in Comp. Burss. Coll. Trin. 1562.-3.
» Sol.

<page 146>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 127
"request, is content you shall have [keep]
"his littell organs till the beginning of so-
"merk, when I may convey myne to you
"without hurtyng them. And bycause ye
•« write, ye have grete nede of a standing cup
"to drynke wyne in; Mr. Sowtherne's ' mo-
*' ney shall be bestowed in ii. standing cuppes
"gilt with covers, or ells in. one faire stond-
"ing cupp with a cover, and ii. fylver fakes
"with a cover; and if they come to more
** money, I will pay the fame myself. Ye
"(hall receive by master Yeldard a rentall
"of all such londes as I have given your col-
"lege; which, till I appoint more scollers,
"as, god suffering I intend fhortely, is a iust
"proportion to bear all the charges of your
"Sol. ex bellariis insumptis in Fundatorem Collegii sancti
"Johannis, iiij s. ixJ." And again the same year, " In datis
"Fundatori Collegii sancti Johannis cum viseret collegium."
The two sounders seem to have been intimately acquainted
and connected; as appears not only from this, but from ano-
ther passage, in the letter before us. " Mr. [Sir] Thomas White
"and I ar almost at a point with fir John Master for his woode;
"and I believe shall conclude for the same within this ii. or iii.
•• dayei."
k Accordingly, his own being.received, sir Thomas Whyte's
organ was returned to St. John's college, as appears from Comp.
Curls, toll. Tjin. 1556 7. viz.
"Sol. pro organorum ad Collegium sancti Johannis vectur*.
"iiij,/."
1 See an account of him, Append. Numb. XIII. Notes.
"colledge.

<page 147>
128 THE LIFE OF
'* colledge. And thus beseeching you with
«« my hertie commendacions to all the fel-
"lowes and scollers of my college, desiring
"the same to remember me with their
*« prayers, I bid you farewell. Wrytten at
** Clerkynwell the xxviith of November,
"1556. Your assured loving friend,
"THOMAS POPEm."
From other letters, written to the presi-
dent, it appears that during his life-time he
paid all the university expences of degrees,
regencies and determinations, for the fellows
and scholars \
On the twentieth of January 1557. he
sent to the college for the second time °, and
again on the twelfth of April following for
the third time p, various articles of costly fur-
niture for the chapel and hall, consisting of
rich copes, service books, &c. as before; and
several pieces of silver plate. The whole
quantity of plate which he gave them at
m Ex autograph.
0 I find him paying, at once, to Proceeders of his college,
perhaps for the whole year, the sum of vj /. xiij s. vrd. From
letter, dat. St. Thomas's day, al Tytttabanger, •without the year.
• See Append. Numb. XVII.
» See Append. Numb. XVIII.
these

<page 148>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 129
these three several times, is as follows. A
standing cup of silver gilt, with a cover, em-
bossed with pomegranates % and a sheaf of
arrows, weighing thirty-three ounces. Two
gilt saltes, weighing thirty-nine ounces. Three
cups of silver gilt, weighing more than thirty-
one ounces. Twelve silver spoons beside one
before sent, parcel-gilt, with knobs of sculp-
ture. These were for the hall. For the
chapel they received, two cruets of silver gilt,
weighing nine ounces. An holy-water-stop
and aspergoire of silver parcel-gilt, weighing
more than eighteen ounces. A sacring bell of
silver gilt, weighing five ounces. A pax of
silver gilt, with a crucifix, and the images of
Mary and John, weighing near seventeen
ounces. Two pair of censers, for frankin-
s The Pomegranate first became an ornament on silver plate,
particularly on silver embossed standing cups, in the reign of
Henry vii. It was in compliment to prince Arthur who matched
with Spain. Among the badges on his tomb in Worcester Cathe-
dral, Pomegranates are introduced with his father's portcullis
and fleur de lis. In the reign of Henry viii. who married Ca-
tharine of Spain, Arthur's widow, they were often used as an
ornament in the furniture of masques and pageants, exhibited
for the entertainment, and in honor, of the queen. See Hol-
lingshed, Chron. iii. 8oz, 807, 808, 839, Sec. Hence they
became al 'o a decoration in architecture ; as in the turrets of the
great gate of Christ Church, at Oxford, built by Wolsey. They
were again revived, and grew very fashionable, in the reign of
queen Mary, after her marriage with Philip of Spain.
I cense,

<page 149>
i3o THE LIFE OF
cense, of silver parcel-gilt, weighing seventy
ounces. A (hip of silver with a spoon for
frankinsence, parcel-gilt, weighing near eigh-
teen ounces. Two chapel-basons of silver par-
cel-gilt weighing more than thirty seven
ounces. A fair cross of silver gilt, with
images of Mary and John, garnished with
chrystal and precious stones, with a foot of
silver gilt, weighing together, beside the chry-
stal and stones, twenty-four pounds and five
ounces. Two candlesticks of silver, for the
high altar, parcel-gilt, weighing near thirty-
two ounces. A monstrans of silver gilt, weigh-
ing twenty-one ounces. A patin with a cha-
lice of silver gilt, weighing twenty ounces.
Another patin with a chalice of silver parcel-
gilt, weighing thirteen ounces. A pipe of sil-
ver parcel-gilt, weighing thirteen ounces. He
gave them besides, by his last will, several other
pieces of plate, for the service of the hall,
which I (hall enumerate hereafter.
In September, 1557, he made considerable
additions to the foundation; on the tenth of
which month, he conveyed', or rather con-
firmed to the Society the manors of Dun-
'With a condition of exchange : and he afterwards exchang-
ed them for possessions of greater value in Essex and Gloucester-
shire, 1558. Additam. ut infr. sol. 115.
thorp

<page 150>
sir Thomas pofe. i3t
thorp and Seawell in Oxfordshire. With these
new revenues he ordains and endows five obits,
or dirges, yearly to be fung and celebrated as
festivals, in his college'. These are, for queen
Mary and her most noble progenitors, on the
day of the assumption of the holy virgin; for
dame Margaret his late wife, and Alice his
daughter, deceased, on the day of the concep-
tion of the holy virgin; for dame Elizabeth
his present wife, on the day of the nativity of
the holy virgin; and for William and Marga-
ret, his father and mother, on the day of the
annunciation of the holy virgin. And on Jesus
day, the seventh of August, he appoints an
• " Additamentum ex liberalitate dom. Thome Pope, FunJa-
"torts collegii san3<t et individutt Tflnltath, in uninjer/itate Oxort.
"peft ereejionem dieii collegii; tarn pro augendo numero fchelarium,
"qitam pro alt is rebus in eodem peragendis."
"Cum, haud multum post collegii mei erectionerii, ingente
"turn et insolica rerum omnium caritate ct penuria, mifere
«• ubique sæviente; Ego de exequiis et hujufmodi aliis re-
•* bus statuendis, qux oblivione in initio erant prætermissæ,
"nonnulla præterea alumnis mcis perquam necessaria deesse
"adhuc viderem: Perpetuam ejusdem collegii mei perduratio-
"nem conservationemque in omnibus ex animo cupiens at-
"que volens, precedenti Beneficio meo hoc insuper addidi*-
"Sec."—" Dat. in Ædibus meis Clarkenwell, Septemb. io-
"1557." Addjtam. ad tale. libri Statutorum. sol. 97. Not-
withstanding, he had before thought of many of these particu-
lars. They were not, however, till now, fully and effectually
established.
I 2 Obit

<page 151>
132 THE LIFE OF
Obit or dirge', annually to be celebrated, as
well during his life, as after his decease, for
himself and all christian souls. At which
time, during his dirge and mass, he orders
that twelve poor men and twelve poor wo-
men shall be present in the chapel, and aster-
wards receive each a competent allowance of
money, bread, and drink, within the col-
lege at the entrance into the hall: and after
the mass of his obscquie was fung", that
bread and drink be annually distributed the
fame day among the poor prisoners in Oxford.
From the fame revenues he likewise grants a
1 By deed dat. Decemb. xxiv, i Eliz. 1558, he likewise
founded a dirge on the same day, in the church os Much-
Waltham in Essex; for which he gave a pension of xxvj/. viij*/.
to Bryan Needham, vicar of Much-Waltham, and to his suc-
cessors, " That the said Bryan Nedeham, and his successoures,
"(hall yerly for ever, upon the feast day of Jesus in the monthe
"of August, fay, or cause to be said, one Dirige; and the
"next day following one Masse, for the sowle of sir Thomas
"Pope, and all cristen sowles: And after the said masse fy-
"nislied, that then the said Bryan Nedeham, and his succes-
"soures, shall ymmediatelie gyve unto fyve poore folkes,
"which shall be present at the said Dirige and Masse, to pray
"for the sowle of the said sir T. Pope, and all cristen sowles
"to euerie of them, four-pence."—" Sig. S. and D. in the Pr.
*' of John Bersford, and John Milward." In Thesauriar. coll.
Trin. Oxon. I find the said Bryan Needham supplicating for
the degree of M. A. at Oxford in the year 1556. Registr. I.
Congreg. et Convoc. sol. 169. a. sol. 160. b. In Turri Scho-
larum.
■ Registr. Coll. ut supr. sol. 14. seq.
weekly

<page 152>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 133
weekly allowance to the said prisoners; with
various other improvements, and augmenta-
tions of former appointments. And because he
once intended to found a School at Hokenorton
in Oxfordshire j with the endowment intended
for that purpose, he now founds from these
lands, four additional scholars in his college:
By which judicious alteration of his original
plan, the number of the scholars was increased
to twelve, and equalled to that of the fellows.
He tells us that he rejected the scheme of
founding a schoolw as an appendage to the
college, being persuaded that it would prove
more beneficial to the public, to restore in
some measure, and encrease the number of
scholars in the university of Oxford, of late
much diminished and still continuing to de-
* " Cum ante annos aliquot decreveram, unam perpetuam
"ac liberam Scholam apud Hokenorton,in com. Oxon. crigere
"etstabilire; ejusque rei Licentia, quemadmodum et fundandi
"mei collegii, ab illustrisi. Phil, et Mar. ice. mihi facta fit.—
"Atque a gravissimis prudentifSmisque hominibus, Reipublicx
"me consultius facturum fit indicatum, si numerura scholarium
"Oxoniz jam multum diminutum, ac indies magis magisque
"deficientem, augerem ac restaurarem, quam si hujusniodi
"Scholarum multiplicarem numerum; præsertim cum conltet
"in oppidis illi loco vicinis, varias Scholas, easque doctis or-
"natas instructoribus, ob discipulorum accedentium paucitatem,
"non satis frequentatas. Illorum rationibus atque consilio
"ductus, Sec." Ex ADDiTAMENTo, ut supr. He first intend-
ed to found this school at Dedington, his native town. For an
account of it, fee Append. No. XIV.
I 3 cay

<page 153>
i34 THE LIFE OF
cay, than to multiply the number of gram-
mar schools; especially as those situated in
the neighbourhood of the place abovemen-
tioned, although properly filled with learned
masters, were so little frequented and en-
couraged.
In December, the same year*, he declares
his intention of building a commodious edi-
fice at Garsington near Oxford, to which the
society might retire in time of pestilence,
then no uncommon malady. For this pur-
pose, in case he should not accomplish it in
his life-time, as he intended, he left by his
will five hundred marks, and the building,
consisting of a fair quadrangle of stone, was
accordingly raised after his death r.
When sir Thomas Pope had founded his
college, the university of Oxford compliment-
ed him with their letters of thanks and
acknowledgment, in consideration of his hav-
* Indent. dat.'Dec. t. 1557- Registr. prim. sol. 16. b.
And Append. XXIII. XXIV.
r See articles of his will, insr. Great part of it has been
demolished, as useless. One range, or side, of the building now
remains; containing an arched entrance, with many large apart-
ments having arched windows, and the kitchen at one end with
a spacious fireplace as in our colleges. It was not completely
finished till 1570. Ex comp. Burss. 1570.--1.
ing

<page 154>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 135
ing added a new college to the former num-
ber j which were delivered to the founder
by the president \ Indeed they had no small
reason, at this time, to acknowledge with
pleasure and gratitude this accession to their
constitution. Heylin very justly remarks, that
queen Mary, in rebuilding the public schools
at Oxford "gave encouragement to two
"worthy gentlemen to add two new col-
"leges to the former, Trinity and faint
"John's. Had it not been for these Foun-
"dations, there had been nothing in this
"reign to have made it memorable, but only
"the misfortunes and calamities of it \"
He might have added, that this liberality
* The letter was accompanied with a present of rich gloves,
viz. Ex comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1556.—" Sol. per dom. Bel-
"lamie pro deferendis literis et chirothecis ab universi-
"tate ad president pro Futdatore. ij 1. xj d."—The president,
I suppose, was then in London, waiting for this purpose. Bel-
lamie is one of the fellows. See Append. Numb. XXV. Arti-
cle, Bei.lamie. In a Computus of Dr^W. Tresham, commissary
of the university in the aforesaid year, I find the following arti-
cle, viz. *' Here solotvith other charges <wkicb I William Trcjbam
"as commijsarie have leyde out for the univer/itie os Oxford sit hence
"the xxiitie day os April an. dm 1556.—Item for gloves sent
"to sir Thomas Pope, and my lady his wife, with letters of
"thankesgiving from, the universitie, vj /. viij d." Among the 1
auditors of this computus are Thomas White, Walter Wryght,
Thomas Slythurst, and Robert Morwent. Ex orig. in Bibl.
Bodl. Codd. MSS. A. Wood.
1 Eccles. Restaurat. Hist, of Q^Mary. p. 84.
I 4 could

<page 155>
!36 THE LIFE OF
could not have been conferred at a more sea-
sonable time on the university. And of this
fir Thomas Pope was very sensible* as we
have before seen, when he substituted an ad-
ditional number of academical students in the
place of a grammar-school.
But that it may further appear, how much
these encouragements were now wanted, it
will be necessary to look backwards upon the
state of learning in England, particularly at
Oxford i and from thence to trace its progress,
and the causes of its decline, down to the
times with which we are concerned. An en-
quiry not less instructive than entertaining,
and naturally connected with the present
subject.
About the close of the fifteenth century,
a taste for polite letters, under the patronage
of the popes, began to be revived in Italy.
But these liberal pontiffs did not consider at the
fame time that they were undermining the pa-
pal interest, and bringing on the Reforma-
tion. This event is commonly called the
Restoration of Learning j but it should rather
be styled the restoration of good sense and
useful knowledge. Learning there had been
before, but barbarism still remained. The
most

<page 156>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 137
most acute efforts of human wit and penetra-
tion had been exerted for some centuries, in
the dissertations of logicians and theologists j
yet Europe still remained in a state of super-
stition and ignorance. What philosophy could
not perform, was reserved to be complet-
ed by classical literature, by the poets and
orators of Greece and Rome, who alone
could enlarge the mind, and polish the man-
ners. Taste and propriety, and a rectitude
of thinking and judging, derived from these
sources, gave a new turn to the general sys-
tem of study: mankind was civilized, and re-
ligion was reformed. The effects of this happy
revolution by degrees reached England.
We find at Oxford, in the latter end of
the fifteenth century, that the university
was silled with the jargon and disputes of
the Scotists and Thomistsj and if at that
time there were any scholars of better note,
these were chiefly the followers of Wicliffe,
and were consequently discountenanced and
persecuted. The latin style then only known
in the university, was the technical language
of the schoolmen, of casuists, and metaphy-
sicians. At Cambridge, about 1485, nothing
was taught but Alexander's Parva Lo-
gicalia, the trite axioms of Aristotle, which
were never rationally explained, and the pro-
found

<page 157>
138 THE LIFE OF
found questions of John Scotus \ At length
some of our countrymen, the principal of
which were Grocyn, Latymer, Lillye, Lina-
cer, Tunstall, Pace, and fir Thomas More,
ventured to break through the narrow bounds
of scholastic erudition, and went over into
Italy with a design of acquiring a knowledge
in the Greek and Latin languagesc. The
Greek, in particular, was taught there with
much perfection and purity, by many learned
Greeks who had been driven from Constan-
tinople. In 1488, Grocyn and Linacer left
Oxford, and studied Greek at Florence under
the instruction of Demetrius Chalcondylas,
and Politian; and at Rome under Hermo-
laus Barbarus d. Grocyn returned an accom-
plished master in the Greek, and became
the first lecturer of that language at Oxford,
but without any settled endowmente. Ele-
gance of style began now to be cultivated,
and the study of the most approved antient
writers became fashionable.
* Erasm. Epist. H. Bovillo. dat. Roffæ. 1516.
* Leland. Encom. pag. 74. edit. 4W. 1 589. viz.
Omnes Italiam petierunt sydere fausto,
Et nituit Latiis terra Britanna Scholis.
* Wood Ath. Oxon. i. 1;, 19, 20. See Stapleton de tribus
Thomis. cap. i.
* Wood. Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 246.
in

<page 158>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 139
In 1496, Alcock bishop os Ely, founded
Jesus college in Cambridge, partly for a cer-
tain number of scholars to be educated in
grammar '. Degrees in grammar, or rhetoric,
had been early established at Oxford. But the
pupils of this class studied only systems of
grammar and rhetoric, rilled with empty defi-
nitions and unnecessary distinctions, instead of
the real modelsg. In 1509, Lillye, the fam-
ous grammarian, who have learned Greek at
Rhodes, and afterwards improved himself
in latin at Rome under Johanes Sulpitius
and Pomponius Sabinus, was the first teacher
of greek at any public School in England.
This was at faint Paul's school in London
then newly established, and of which Lillye
was the first Master \ And that ancient pre-
'See Lit. Pat. Hen. vii. quod Johannes Episcopus Eliens.
sundare poflit quoddam collegium de uno magistro, et sex sociis,
et certo numero scholarium in Grammatica erudiendorum. Ry-
mer. Feed. xii. 633. and Knight's Life of Colet, p. 19.
8 Walter de Merton, in the statutes of Merton college at
Oxford, appoints a grammarian in that society. "Sit etiam
'" in ipfa congregatione grammaticus unus, qui studio gram-
"maticæ totaliter vacet.— Et eorum qui studio grammatica;
"fuerint applicati curam habeat: et ad ipfum etiam provectio-
"res in dubiis fuæ facultatis fine rubore habeant regressum,
"&c." Statut. coll. Mert. cap. ii. These statutes were given
in August, A. D. 1274.
* Knight's Life of Colet, p. 19.
judices

<page 159>
i4o THE LIFE OF
judices were subsiding apace, and a national
taste for critical studies and the graces of
composition began to be diffused, appears
from this circumstance alone; that from the
year 1502, to the reformation, within the
space of thirty years, there were more gram-
mar schools founded and endowed in England
than had been for three hundred years be-
fore '. Near twenty grammar schools were
instituted within this period; before which
most of your youth were educated at the mo-
nasteries k.
1 Knight ubi supr. p. 100.
k It is not to be doubted, that William of Wykeham's am-
ple foundation at Winchester, formed on a plan perfectly ori-
ginal, and that of Henry vi. at Eton, its transcript, were very
conducive, although distant, instruments in preparing and fa-
cilitating this great work. And indeed long before the pe-
riod at which we began, William of Wainflete, sensible of the
expediency of grammar learning, had sounded two considerable
schools. John Leland, or Leilont, taught grammar in Peck-
water-inn at Oxford, of which he was principal, about the
reign of Henry vi. He wrote a Grammar, which I have seen,
in the black letter, entitled Gram mat ica Nova. Prefixed
are some recommendatory epigrams " Carmeliani poette." One
of these is entitled " In rfutrendum dominant Gulielmum efiscopum
"Wintonieitfem." That is, William of Waynflete. It is closed
with this distich:
Hoc opus auctor enim, tc persuadenti, Joannes
Edidit, &c.
Whence it appears that John Leland, the author, wrote this
Grammar by the advice and encouragement of William of
Waynflete;

<page 160>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 141
In 1517, that wise prelate and bounti-
ful patron, Richard Fox, founded his col-
lege ' at Oxford, in which he constituted,
with competent salaries, two lectures for the
latin and greek languages m. This was a new
and noble departure from the narrow plan of
academical education % The course of the la-
tin lecturer was not confined to the college,
but open to the students of Oxford in gene-
ral. He is exprefily directed to drive barba-
rism from the new college °. And at the fame
time it is to be remarked, that Fox does not
appoint a philosophy-lecturer in his college,
as had been the practice in most of the pre-
vious foundations; perhaps thinking, that
such an institution would not have coincided
Waynflete; probably while the latter was master of Winches-
ter school, as Leland died in the year 1428.
1 Statut. C. C. C. Oxon. dat. Jun. xx, 1517. Cap. xx. sol.
51. fiibl. Bodl. MSS. Laud. I. 56.
ra Beside a third in theology.
n It is not however to be forgotten here, that at the founda-
'tion of Christ's college in Cambridge a lecturer was established,
who, together with logic and philosophy, is ordered to read
** vel ex poetarum vel oratorum operibus." Cap. xxxvii. These
statutes were given in the year 1506. In the statutes of King's
at Cambridge, and New college at Oxford, both much more
antient, an instructor is appointed by the general name of Infor-
matcr only, who taught all the learning then in vogue.
0 " Lector feu professor artium humaniorum . . . barbaritm
"e nostro alveario extirpet."
with

<page 161>
I42 THE LIFE OF
with his new system of doctrine, and that it
would be encouraging that species of science
which had hitherto blinded mens under-
standings, and kept them so long in ignorance
of more useful knowledge. The greek lectu-
rer is ordered to explain the best greek clas-
sics j and those which the judicious founder,
who seems to have consulted the most capital
scholars of his age, prescribes on this occasion,
are the purest, and such as are most esteemed
at this day.
These happy beginnings were seconded by
the munificence of cardinal Wolfed. About
the year 1519, he founded a public chair at
Oxford for rhetoric and humanity; and soon
afterwards another for the greek tongue: en-
dowing both with ample stipends p. But these
innovations in the plan of study were greatly
discouraged and opposed by the scholastic bi-
gots, who called the greek language heresy.
Even bishop Fox when he founded the greek
lecture above-mentioned, was obliged to
cover his excellent institution under the ve-
nerable mantle of the authority of the church,
lest me should seem to countenance a dan-
gerous novelty. For he gives it as a rea-
son, or rather as an apology, for this new
r Wood Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon, i. 245, 246.
lecture-

<page 162>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 143
lectureship, that the sacred canons had com-
manded, that a knowledge of the greek
tongue mould not be wanting in public se-
minaries of educationq. The university of
Oxford was rent into factions on [account of
these attempts; and the defenders of the new
erudition, from disputations, often proceeded
to blows with the rigid champions of the
schools. But these animosities were soon
pacified by the persuasion and example of
Erasmus, who was about this time a student
in faint Mary's college at Oxford, opposite
to New-Innr. At Cambridge however, which,
in imitation of Oxford, had adopted greek,
Erasmus found greater difficulties. He tells
us himself that at Cambridge he read the
1 " Quern prxterea in nostro alveario collocavimus, quod
"sacrosancti canones commodissime pro bonis literis et impri-
"mis christianis instituerunt ac jusserunt, eum in hac univer-
"sitaie Oxon. perinde ac paucis aliis celeberrimis gymnasiis,
•* nunquam defyderari. Nee tamen eos hac ratione excusatos
"volumus, qui Gntcam lectionem in ea suis impenfis sustentare
"bebent." Statut. C. C. C. ut supr. By these sacri canonu
he means a decree of the council of Vienne; which enjoined
that professors of Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic should be insti-
tuted hi the universities of Oxford, Paris Bononia, Salaman-
ca, and the court of Rome. Gregory Typhernas, one of the
learned greek fugitives, about the year 1472, offered to teach
greek in the university of Paris, and asked a stipend for his la-
bour, under this canon. Naud. apud Hod. de Grxc. illustr.
lib. ii c. 3. pag. 234. See also Hod. ibid. pag. 233.
'Wood Hist. Antiq univ. Oxon. i. 237.
greek

<page 163>
144 THE LIFE OF
greek grammar of Chrysoloras to the bare
walls': and that having translated Lucian's
dialogue called Icaro-menippus, he could
find no person in the university able to tran-
scribe the greek with the latin'. His edition
of the greek testament was entirely proscribed
there; and a decree was issued in one of the
most considerable colleges, ordering that if
any of the society was detected in bringing
that impious and fantastic book into the col-
lege, he should be severely finedu. One
Henry Standisti, a doctor in divinity and a
mendicant frier, afterwards bishop of faint
Asaph, was a vehement opponent of Erasmus
in this heretical literature; calling him in a
declamation, by way of reproach, Graculus
ijle, which afterwards became a synonymous
term for an heretic w.
But neither was Oxford, and for the fame
reasons, entirely free from these contracted
notions. In 1519, a preacher at faint Mary's
church harangued with much violence against
these pernicious teachers, and his arguments
occasioned no small ferment among the stu-
* Epift. cxxiii Ammonio dat. 1511, torn. iii. p. 140. Opp.
'Epist.cxxxix.dat. 1512. Ibid. p. 120.
• Epist. cxlviii. H. Bovillo. dat. 1513. Ibid. p. 126.
w Knight's Life of Colet. p. 14. See Erafm. Op. torn. ix.
1440. _
dents.

<page 164>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 145
dents. But Henry the eighth, who was
luckily a patron of these improvements, being
then resident at the neighbouring royal manor
of Woodstock, and having received a just state
of the case from Pace and More, immediately
transmitted his royal mandate to the university,
ordering that these studies fhoud not only be
permitted but encouraged \ Soon afterwards
one of the king's chaplains preaching at
court, took an opportunity to censure the
new, but genuine, interpretations of scrip-
ture which the grecian learning had intro-
duced. The kin r, when the sermon was
ended, which he heard with a smile of con-
tempt, ordered a solemn disputation to be
held, in the presence os himself; at which
the preacher opposed, and sir Thomas More
defended, the use and excellence of the greek
tongue. The divine, instead of answering
to the purpose, fell upon his knees, and beg-
ged pardon for having given any offence in
the pulpit. After some little altercation,
the preacher, by way.of a decent submission,
declared that he was now better reconciled
to the greek tongue, because it was derived,
from the hebrew. The king, amazed at
his ignorance, dismissed him, with a charge
that he mould never again presume to preach
* Erasin. epist. ccclxxx. ut inf.
K at

<page 165>
146 THE LIFE OF
at courty. In the grammar-schools esta-
blished in all the new cathedral foundations
of this king, a master was appointed with a
competent skill not only in the latin, but
likewise in the greek language *. This was
an uncommon qualification in a school-
master.
At length ancient absurdities universally
gave way to these encouragements: and at
Oxford in particular, these united efforts for
establishing a new system of rational and manly
learning were finally consummated in the
magnificent foundation of Wolsey's college,
to which all the Learned of Europe were
invited.
But these auspicious improvements in the
state of learning did not continue long. A
change of the national religion soon hap-
f Erasm. epist. P. Mosellano. dat. 1519. ccclxxx. pag. 408.
torn. iii.
2 " Statuimus præterea, ut per Decanum, &c. unus \_Archi-
"didnscalus]'eligatur, latine et Græte doctus, bo æ famæ, &c."
Statut. eccles. cathedr. Roffens. cap. xxv. They were given
Jun. 30, 1545. In the same statute, the second master is re-
quired to be only Latine doctus. It is remarkable, that cardinal
Wolsey does not order greek to be taught in his school at Ip-
swich, sounded 1528. See Strype's Eccl. Mem. i. Append,
xxxv, pag. 94. seq.
pened,

<page 166>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 147
pened, and disputes with the Lutherans en-
sued, which embroiling the minds of learn-
ed men in difference of opinion, disunited
their endeavours in the cause of literature,
and diverted their attention to other enquiries.
Mar.y of the abuses in civil society are
attended with some advantages. In the be-
ginnings of reformation, the loss of these ad-
vantages is always felt very sensibly; while
the benefit resulting from the change, is the
flow effect of time, and not immediately
percieved or enjoyed. Scarce any institution
can be imagined less favorable to the in-
terests of mankind than the monastic. Yet
a great temporary check given to the progress
of literature at this period, was the dis-
solution of the monasteries. For although
these seminaries were in general the nurseries
of illiterate indolence, and undoubtedly de-
served to be destroyed, yet the still contained
invitations and opportunities to studious lei-
sure and literary pursuits. On this impor-
tant event therefore, a visible revolution and
decline in the state of learning succeeded.
Most of the youth of the kingdom betook
themselves to mechanical or other illiberal
employments, the profession of letters being
now supposed to be without support and re-
K 2 ward.

<page 167>
148 THE LIFE OF
ward. By the abolition of the religious
houses, many towns and their adjacent vil-
lages were utterly deprived of their only
means of instruction. What was taught in
the monasteries was perhaps of no great im-
portance, but still it served to keep up a cer-
tain degree of necessary knowledge. Hence
provincial ignorance became almost universally
established.
Nor should we forget, that several of the
abbots were persons of public spirit: by their
connection with parliament, they became ac-
quainted with the world; and knowing where
and how to chuse proper objects, and having
no other use for the superfluity of their vast
revenues, encouraged, in their respective circles,
many learned young men.
It is generally thought, that the reformation
of religion, the most happy and important
event of modern times, was immediately suc-
ceeded by a flourishing state of learning. But
this, in England at least, was by no means
the cafe; and for a long time afterwards an
effect quite contrary was produced. Yet, in
1535, the king's visitors ordered lectures in
humanity to be founded in those societies at
Oxford where they were yet wanting: and
these

<page 168>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 149
these injunctions were so warmly seconded
and approved by the scholars in the largest
colleges, that they seized on the venerable
volumes of Duns Scotus, and other irrefrag-
able logicians, and tearing them in pieces,
dispersed them in great triumph about their
quadrangles, or gave them away as useless
lumber *. The king himself also established
some public lectures, with large endow-
ments b. Notwithstanding, the number of
students at Oxford daily decreased: insomuch
that, in 1546, there were only ten incep-
tors in arts, and three in jurisprudence and
theology c.
In the mean time, the greek language
flourished at Cambridge, under the instruc-
tion of Cheke and Smyth d; notwithstanding
the unreasonable interposition of their chancel-
lor, bishop Gardiner, about pronunciation.
But Cheke being soon called up to court,
both universities seem to have been reduced
* See Dr. Layton's Letter to Cromwell. Strype's Ecd. Mem.
i. 210.
* Wood. Hist. Antiq. univ. Oion. i. 261. col. 1. ii. 36. col. 2.
* Wood. ibid. sub. anno.
* Strype's Lives of Cheke and* Smyth.
K 3 to

<page 169>
i5o THE LIFE OF
to the same deplorable condition of indigence
and illiteracy*.
During the reign of Edward the sixth,
whose minority, which promised many vir-
tues, was abused by corrupt counsellors and
rapacious courtiers, little attention was paid
to the support of literature. Learning was
not the fasliion of the times: and being dis-
couraged or despised by the rich who were
perpetually grasping at its rewards, was neg-
lected by those of moderate fortunes. Ava-
rice and zeal were at once gratified in rob-
bing the clergy of their revenues, and in re-
ducing the church to its primitive apostolical
state of purity and povertyf. A favorite
nobleman of the court held the deanery and
treasurerlhip of a cathedral, with some of its
best canonries: while his son enjoyed an an-
nual income of three hundred pounds from
the lands of a bifhoprick *. In every robbery
of the church, the interests of learning suf-
fered. Exhibitions and pensions were sub-
"Roger Ascham acquaints us, that about this time, the
doctrines of Original Sin and Predestination were much can-
vassed at Cambridge. But he laments, that in these enquiries
they followed Pigbius, whom yet he much commends, rather than
faint Austin. Asch. Epistol. lib. ii.
f See Collins's Eccl. Hist. Records, 67. pag. 80.
* Burnet, Res. P. ii. 8.
stracted

<page 170>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 151
frractcd from the students in the universities \
At Oxford the public schools were neglected
by the professors and scholars, and allotted to
the lowest purposes '. All academical degrees
were abrogated as antichristian ". The spiri-
tual reformers of those enlightened days pro-
ceeded so far, as to strip the public library,
established and enriched by that noble patron
Humphrey duke of Gloucester, of all its
books and manuscripts; to pillage the ar-
chives, and disannul the privileges of the
university'. From these measures many of
the colleges were in a short time entirely
deserted.
His successor, queen Mary, took pains to
restore the splendor of the university of Ox-
ford. Unamiable as stie was in her temper
and conduct, and inflexibly bigotted to the
glaring absurdities of catholic superstition,
she protected, at least by liberal donations,
the interests of learning. She not only con-
h See Wood ibid. sub. ann. 1550. scq. See also a letter to
seer. Cecyl. dat. 1552. In Strypc's Life of Cranmei, Append.
Numb, xciii. p. zzo.
'" In scholis artium pannos exsiccabant mulierculæ lotrices."
Wood, ibid. p. 273. col. 2.
k Catal. MSS. totius Angliæ. sol. edit. 1697. In Hist. Bibl.
Bodl. ibid. Præf.
i Wood, ut supr.
K 4 tributed

<page 171>
i52 THE LIFE OF
tributed large sums for rebuilding the public
schools, but moreover granted the university
three considerable impropriations. In her
charter reciting these benefactions, she de-
clares it to be her determined resolution, to
employ her royal munificence in reviving its
ancient lustre and discipline, and recovering
its privileges. These privileges me reesta-
blished with the addition of fresh immuni-
ties ": and for these good offices the univer-
sity decreed for her, and her husband Philip,
m See Wood, ut supr. i. 274. 278. ii. 17. 426. She gave al-
so to Trinity college in Cambridge, where she rebuilt the cha-
pel, ccclxxvj/. per annum. Fuller Hist. Cambr. p. 122. Par-
ker's Seel. Cant. ed. Hearne, p. 245. And to Christ-Church,
Oxon. Ixxiv/. viij/. ivd. per annum. Strype Ann. Res. iv. 243.
Willis, Cathedr. Oxford, pag. 429.
Sanders flourishes on this subject, in his usual declamatory
strain. "Ita ergo academia, et reliqua respublica, ab heres,
*' eos fæcibus, quantum tarn brevi potuit, spatio, purgatis,
"restituuntur et ornantur passim ecclesiæ, altaria eriguntur et
•' consecrantur, Collegia nova amplijjfima dote fundantur,
"cœnobia. . . . reædificantur." De Schism. Angl. edit. Col.
** Agrippin. 1628. lib. ii. pag. 246. It is true, that she re-
founded, or founded anew, some considerable monasteries: re-
established saint Patrick's cathedral in Dublin, the bishoprick
of Durham, and the hospital os the Savoy. She restored to the
clergy the first-fruits and tenths, impropriations, and many
estates alienated from diverse episcopal sees. Burnet, Res. ii.
340. Collier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 398. Biogr. Brit, artic. Basnet.
Strype's Grindal, p. 158. Willis's Cathedrals, Durham. Stat.
2. 3. Phil. Mar. cap. iv. Ashmole's Berks, ii. 426. Heylin, &c.
an

<page 172>
SIR THOMAS POPE. I53
an anniversary commemoration". I need not
recall to the reader's memory, that sir Tho-
mas Pope, and sir Thomas Whyte, were still
more important benefactors by their respec-
tive foundations. Without all these favors,
although they did not perhaps produce an
immediate improvement, the university would
still have continued to decay: and they were
at least a balance, at that time, on the side
of learning, against the pernicious effects of
returning popery.
In the beginning of the reign of Elisabeth,
which soon followed, when protestantism
might have been expected to produce a speedy
change for the better, puritanism began to
prevail, and for some time continued to retard
the progress of ingenuous and useful know-
ledge. The English reformed clergy, who
during the persecutions of queen Mary had
fled into Germany, now returned in great
numbers; and in consideration of their suffer-
ings and learning, many of them were prefer-
red to eminent stations in the church. They
brought back with them those narrow prin-
ciples about church-government and ceremo-
nies, which they had imbibed, and which did
well enough, in the petty states and republics.
* Wood, ut supr. i. 278. col. 2.
abroad,

<page 173>
154 THE LIFE 6F
abroad, where they lived like a society of
philosophers; but which were inconsistent
with the genius of a more extended church,
established in a great and magnificent nation,
and requiring a settled system of policy, and
the observance of external institutions. How-
ever, they were judged proper instruments to
be employed at the head of ecclesiastical af-
fairs, by way of making the reformation at
once effectual. But unluckily this measure,
specious as it appeared at first, tended to draw
die church into the contrary extreme. In
the mean time their reluctance or absolute
refusal to conform, in many instances, to the
established ceremonies, and their speculative
theology, tore the church into violent divi-
sions, and occasioned endless absurd disputes,
unfavorable to the progress of real learning,
and productive of an illiterate clergy, at least
unskilled in liberal and manly science.
In fact, even the common ecclesiastical
preferments had been so much diminislied
by the seizure and alienation of impropria-
tions, in the late depredations of the church,
which were not yet ended, that few persons
were regularly bred to the church, or, in
other words, received a learned education.
Hence almost any that offered themselves,
were

<page 174>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 155
were without distinction admitted to the sa-
cred function. Insomuch, that in 1560, an
injunction was directed to the bishop of Lon-
don from his metropolitan, ordering him to
forbear ordaining any more artificers, and
other unlearned persons who had exercised se-
cular occupations °. But as the evil was un-
avoidable, this caution took but little effect.
About the year 1563, there were only two
divines, the dean of Christ Church, and the
president of Magdalene college, who were
capable of preaching the public sermons at
Oxford p. Many proofs have been mentioned
of the extreme ignorance of our clergy at
this time: to which I (hall add one, which
is curious and new. In 1570, Home bishop
of Winchester enjoined the Minor canons
of his cathedral to get by memory, every
week, one chapter of faint Paul's epistles in
latin: and this task, beneath the abilities of an
ordinary school-boy, was actually repeated by
some of them, before the bishop, dean, and
prebendaries, at a public episcopal visitation of
that church *.
The taste for latin composition, and it was
fashionable both to write and speak in that
0 Strype's Life of Grindai. b. i. ch. 4. pag. 40.
'Wood, ut supr. i. 285.
« Registr. Home, Episcop. Winton. sol. 80. b.
language,

<page 175>
156 . THE LIFE OF
language, was much worse than in the reign of
Henry the eighth, when juster models were
studied. One is surprized to find the learned
archbishop Grindal, in the statutes of a school
which he founded and amply endowed, pre-
scribing such strange classics as Palingenius,
Sedulius, and Prudentius, to be taught in
the new seminary \ Much has been said
about the passion for reading Greek which
prevailed in this reign. But this affectation
was confined to the queen, and a few others:
and here it went no farther than ostentation
and pedantry. It was by no means the na-
tional study j nor do we find that it improved
the taste, or influenced the writings, of that
age. But I am wandering beyond the bounds
which I first prescribed to this necessary di-
gression.
Yet I must add an observation or two.
In government, many shocks must happen
before the constitution is perfected. In like
manner, it was late in the reign of Elisabeth,
before learning, after its sinews had been re-
laxed by frequent changes and commotions,
recovered its proper tone, and rose with new
vigor, under the genial influence of the
'Strype's Life of Grindal. B. ii. ch. 17. pag. 312. This
was A. D. 1583.
protestant

<page 176>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 157
protestant religion. And it may be further
remarked, that, as all novelties are pursued
to excess, and the most beneficial improve-
ments often introduce new inconveniencies,
so this influx of polite literature destroyed
philosophy. On this account, sir Henry Sa-
vile, in the reign of James the first, establish-
ed professors at Oxford for astronomy and
geometry; because, as he declares in the
preamble of his statutes, mathematical stu-
dies had been totally deserted, and were then
almost unknown in, England *. Logic indeed
remained; but that science was still cultivated,
as being the basis of polemical theology, and
a necessary instrument for conducting our con-
troversies against the church of Rome.
* See Rym. Fœd. xvii. 217. It is observable, that he entirely
interdicted the teaching of judicial astrology to his professor of
Astronomy. Statut. Savil. cap. ii. These statutes are dated
Aug. 11. 1619. ,:

<page 177>
i58 THE LIFE OF
SECT. V.
IN the year 1556, sir Thomas Pope having
now finished the foundation of his col-
lege, made his last Will % which is dated
the sixth of February the fame year, he being
then no more than forty-seven years of age.
Of the several bequests and appointments
contained therein, and in the codicil annexed
dated the twelfth of December 1558, I mall
insert a summary \
He desires to be buried in the church of
faint Stephen's Walbrook, London, in the
tomb, or vault, in which his first wife dame
Margaret, and his daughter, were interred.
His funeral to be without pomp, "or hersc of
"wax," and only two tapers of virgin wax
with branches, to burn on his hearse, in the
church of the parish in which he shall happen
to die, for the space of one week.
"Registr. Cheyney, qu. 10. 86. In cur. Prærogat. Cant.
b The probate is dated May vi. 1559. About three months
after hit death. Before Dr. Walter Haddon, keeper of the
spiritualities and commissary, in the vacancy of the arch-
bishoprick.
He

<page 178>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 159
He gives "blacke cootes or gownes," to
all his executors, his retainers, his household
servants; and all such of his overseers, friends,
and kindred, as shall happen to be in his house
at the time of his decease.
He bequeaths xx/. or more to be distri-
buted in alms to the Poor, in general, at his
burial: and at the fame time, xl s. besides,
to twenty poor men, and as many poor wo-
men, in parricular, with "a gowne of good
"mantill fryse each:" and when his obse-
quies were finished, v/. more at least, to be
distributed in alms. He gives also xxj. to
a discreet preacher for two funeral sermons:
one to be preached in the church of the
parish in which he shall die j and the other in
the church of saint Stephen's Wallbrook, at
the time of his interment.
To the prisons of Newgate, Ludgate,
Counter of Bread-street, Poultry-Counter, the
Fleet, King's Bench, Marshalsca, New Coun-
ter in Southwark, Gate-house, saint Alban's,
and Hertford, xviij /. To be given within one
month after his death.
To

<page 179>
160 THE LIFE OF
To several of his kindred ccccccclxxxiij /.
v s. and xl. marksc. Beside certain smaller be-
quests to some others.
To his cousin Jane Hankes one new gilt
standing cup of silver, with a cover, weigh-
ing twenty-five ounces. To his son in law
John Basford, or Beresford, the third part of
all his d armour " and artillerie'," his best
gauntlets and target, and his best horse.
To Mr. Thomas Abrydge, "his stele sad-
*' dill gilte, and all the harnes of crymsyn
c Amongst others, he leaves to the children of William
Hyde, of Denchworth, co. Berks, xx /. He is buried in the
church of Denchworth; where on a brass-plate it is said, that
lie and his wife Margery had xxx children. He was related to
fir T. Pope, by means of Hyde marrying into fare of Berks.
This I chiefly mention, to confirm what is said above, pag. 2.
concerning the family of fir Thomas Pope's mother. See Asti-
mole's Berks, iii. 322. There is another William Hyde, who
died 1567, with Alice his wife, buried in the fame church.
They had ten children.
* " My harneys."
• That is Sinus and arrows, and perhaps cross-bows, lances,
guns, &c. See Ascham's Toxophil. f. 19. a. edit 1571. But
the word Artillery, that is Art telaria, as appears from
many other passages in Afcham, was originally and properly re-
strained to the Bmv and Arrovj. Compare Engl. Bibl. i. Sam.
xx. 38. 40. And Maundrell's Travels, p. 19. Sund. Mar.
7. See also Du Cange, Gl. Lat. V. Artillaria. edit. 1733.
"velvett

<page 180>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 161
"velvett belonging to the same." To mis-
tress Staveley, his mother in law, and to three
others of his kindred, each, a fair new cup,
or bowl, of silver, weighing each twenty
ounces. To his son in law, John Dodmer,
fifty angels to make him a chain j and his
mother's picture in the bracelet of gold,
"which I ware about my arrne, and the ring
"of gold hanging at the samej which brace-
"lett was the first tokyn that ever his mo-
"ther gave me."
To nine of his servants by name,
lviij/. xiijj. x\d. Beside gratuities to all the
rest of his servants, of every sort, living in
his house at the time of his decease'. Pray-
ing his executors, that if his wife should
not find it convenient to retain them after his
death, they would help the said servants to
some worshipful man's service *.
To Trinity college in Oxford, by him
founded, c/. for building a wall round the
Grove of the said college.
s To many of them, v/. To others, vj /. xiij s. iiij d. To
Ncne, less than xl s. «
* But he permits all his servants to remain, and to be main-
tained, in his house, for one quarter of a year aster his death;
in which time they may provide themselves with other services'.
L To
."

<page 181>
162 . THE LIFE OF
To the said college five hundred marcs for
building at Garsington near Oxfordh, a house
to accommodate the said college, in time of
the plague at Oxford j in case he should not
live to accomplish the same: And then char-
ging his wife, if the said sum should not be
found sufficient, as he believes and intends it
to be, fully to supply the defect.
To the said college, beside those which he
before gave for the service of the hall, the
following pieces of silver plate, viz. Three
goblets gilt, weighing together threescore
and three ounces. Six plain cups gilt, each
with one handle, weighing together seventy-
seven ounces and an half. Three other
goblets parcel gilt, with covers, weighing
sixty ounces. Thirteen spoons, one com-
pletely gilt, weighing together forty ounces
and an half. All the foregoing to be new
made. He likewise bequeathes to the said
college, the largest of his standing cups with
a cover, completely gilt, weighing twenty-
three ounces and a half. Alfa one of his
h He repeats this charge to his wife at the end of his Will.
"I beseech my good wife most hartely, that in case I do not in
"my life make a Howse for my Scolers of my College to re-
"pare thereto at Garsington in sicknes tyme, that stie will in
"as convenyent fpede, &c."
basons

<page 182>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 163
basons and ewers parcel-gilt, weighing three-
score and fifteen ounces '.
To the Nuns of the convent of Syon v/.
To the Friers Observants in the chapel of the
Holy Cross at Greenwich, v /. To the Black
Friers at London, v /.
To faint Bartholomew's hospital in West-
Smithfield, cc /. To be bestowed in con-
structing a conduit for conveying water to
the said hospital. Otherwise, to be expended
in purchasing an estate of x /. per annum, for
providing coats, shirts, and gowns, for the
sick and poor at their first reception into the
house k.
To the repair of the church os Clerken-
well, London, xl/. To Wallbrook church
for opening the vault therein for his sepul-
ture, xx j. To the vicar of Clerkenwell
church, xs. And to the vicar of Ridge in
Hertfordshire, xs.
1 They were received May 25, 1564. Ex acquietant. in
Regist. prim. sol. 22.
k " For such as from tyme to tyme (hall enter into the said
"hospitall, being diseased and wanting the same things at
"their entre."
L 2 To

<page 183>
164
THE LIFE OF
To John Heyward1, his "trewe frynd,"
one of his gowns of silk. To Mr. Croke,
his old master's son, his gown of black sattin
faced with luserne spots m. To lord Vaulx,"
c/. To sir Nicholas Shirley, 1/. in abatement
of cccl /. owed, and payable at Midsummer
next. Beside debts forgiven to some of his
poor relations.
1 See Append. Numb. IX. In the Notes.
■ He is painted in such a gown by Hans Holbein. At Tri-
nity college, there are live portraits of him, all of the fame di-
mensions, dress, and attitude. A sixth, a most high-sinilhed old
portrait, was lately given by the college to the picture gallery
at Oxford, instead of another now in the library. One of these
six, and the oldest, came to the college 1596. Ex Comp. Anni.
Another is mentioned as hanging in the chaperi634. E- Corns.
Anni. One of all these which is now in the Hall, was painted
by Francis Potter, a curious mechanic and mathematician, and
a member of the college, about 1637. Another, mentioned
above, was painted in 1665, at the expence of the college, for
the picture gallery. This is now in the college library. Another
lately purchased, a copy of Holbein, the painter unknown, is in
theBursary. There is a seventh at Tyrtenhanger in Hertfordshire.
They are all supposed to be copies from a valuable picture by
Hans Holbein, in the possession of lord Guildford at Wroxton.
It is not, however, quite improbable that Holbein might have
painted some of the supposed copies.—Sir Thomas Pope fate to
Hans Holbein, for his picture, in the chamber within the gal-
lery gate-house at Whitehall, designed by Hans Holbein, and
lately demolistied. Hans Holbein painted many of his pictures
in this chamber, which was used by king Henry the eighth as a
study or library.
To

<page 184>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 165
To Mr. Gerrard, the queen's attorney ge-
neral, one ring of fine gold. To Thomas,
Slythurste, clerk, president of Trinity college
aforesaid, one ring of fine gold. Another to
Sir Arthur Darcy, knight. Each ring to
weigh one ounce, with the initials of his
name on one side, and a Death's head on
the other.
To the children of several poor tradesmen
and others, xxx/. and five marcs.
Of this his last will and testament, he
constitutes his wife Elisabeth, his most true
and assured friend Nicholas Bacon, esquire,'
afterwards sir Nicholas, and his wise's bro-
ther, William Blount, esquire, Executors.
He also appoints his most trusty, worshipful
and loving friends, sir Thomas Cornewallys,
knight, comptroller of the king's and queen's
houfhold, sir Francis Englefield, knight, sir
Edward Waldegrave, knight, sir Richard
Southwell, j knight, sir Robert Southwell,
knight, William Cordall, esquire, sollicitor
general to the king and queen, Richard
Goodryck, esquire, John Wyseman, esquire,
and Antony Wayte, gentleman, overseers of
the fame. To each of the said overseers he
gives a ring of gold, of the fashion of those
L 3 before-

<page 185>
i66 THE LIFE OF
before-mentioned. To Nicholas Bacon, one
of his executors, he gives his whistle, shaped
like a dragon \ and set with stones, which
he commonly wore at his chain8. To his
other executor, William Blount, he gives xl
angels, to make him a chain p.
n He is painted by Hans Holbein with a whistle hanging to
his chain, shaped like a mermaid.
• John de Veer, earl of Oxford, by Will dat. Apr. 10,
1508, devises his "chain with the whistel), having six score
•' and one links, weighing xcviii ounces, to be sold." Registr.
Fettyplace, Cur. Praer. qu. 11.—Sir Edw. Howard by will,
dat. 1512, bequeathes to " sir Charles Brandon the roope of
"bowed nobles that he wore his great whistle by, and to the
"kings grace his greate whistle." Ibid. qu. 18. About the
year 1519, Hall mentions the earl of Surrey *' on a great
"coursir richely trapped, and a greate whistle of gold set with
"stones and perle, hanging at a great and massy chayne bau-
"drick^wise." Hall's Chronicles, p. 65. a. The curious
Mr. Anstis endeavours to prove, by these and other instances,
that the IVhiflle was the badge, or emblem, of admirals. Or-
der of the Garter, ii. 121. But it is certain, from the passage
in the text, and other places, that it was often indiscriminately
used. It was perhaps even a common ornament. Robert Ar-
derne, a gentleman of Oxfordshire, bequeathes his best whistle,
silver and gilt: and his second whistle, silver and gilt. Aug. xx.
1593. Registr. Cur. Cancell. Oxon. G G. sol. 203.
* He heartily desires the said executors, and overseers, " not
"to waye my simple gifts any other than as a remembrance of
"my unsayned good will and disposition towards theym in my
"lyfe tyme." He at first had bequeathed to each of the
Overseers " a fair jugge of silver," to be new made, weighing
xxiv ounces: With a death's head in a roundell, and the ini-
tials of his name, graven on the covers. But this bequest was
afterwards altered in the codicil, as in the text.
To

<page 186>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 167
To Elisabeth his wife, and Executrix,
whom he declares ever to have found, ho-
nest, true, faithful, loving, and obedient, he
bequeathes the residue of his moveable goods,
leases and debts: praying her heartily that
she would bestow part of the fame among
the Poor q. He commissions his said wife, to
furnish Trinity college aforesaid, with copes,
vestments, and ornaments for divine service,
and houshold necessaries. But all these
things he completely accomplished himself,
in his own life-time, as has been already re-
lated. He requires his said wife, in case
John Pope, his only brother, should be
without a male heir when Elisabeth Pope,
daughter of the said John, marries, to be-
stow ccc marcs, otherwise bequeathed to the
said Elisabeth Pope for a marriage-portion,
in deeds of charity.
As to his estates, not settled on Trinity col-
lege, he wills that they should remain, as is
expressed and covenanted in a certain pair of
quadripartite indentures, dated April the first,
* " Being hartely sory I am able to give her no more, to re-
"compcns her most honest, obedient, and womanly behaviour
"towardes me in my life tyme, which hath byn such as well
"hath meryted a thowfand tymes more than I am able any
"waye to give her, &c."
L 4 1554.

<page 187>
168 THE LIFE OF
1554'. By which indentures it appears, that
the prinepal demises of the fame were made
to Elisabeth his wife, John Pope his brother,
John Edmondes his uncle, and Edmund
Hutchins his nephew *.
He further wills, that all manors, lands,
tenements, and hereditaments, whatsoever,
by him lately given to the president, fellows,
and scholars, of Trinity college aforesaid,
shall for ever remain under the first assurances
by which they were by him settled upon
the said college j without interruption or
claim of heirs, executors, and assigns, or
disturbance of any other person claiming in
in their right, name, or title.
During the time of sounding his college,
he chiefly resided at Clerkenwell, Lon-
'In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon. Saepius citat. Between sir
Thomas Pope, and Elisabeth his wife, on the one part; And
sir Arthur Darcy, Richard Catelyn serjeant at law, deceased,
Richard Goodrick, and Antony Waite, on the other. Dat.
April i. i Phil. Mar"y
* But in case of non-performance of covenants and condi-
tions therein specified, he orders many of them to be given to
"king Henry the eighth's house of poor in West-Smithsield,"
1. e. faint Bartholomew's hospital; to which he actually be-
queathed, as above, 200 /. After his death, an inquisition was
taken of all his lands and possessions, at Chipping-Norton, com.
Oxon. In which the said quadrip. indenture is recited.
don,

<page 188>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 169
don', within the dissolved priory of Black
nuns": to the repair of the conventual
church of which, being left standing at the
dissolution, he gave the sum of forty pounds*.
The buildings and site of this religious house,
containing fourteen acres, had been granted
by king Henry in 1545, to sir William Hen-
ley and sir John Williams \ In the country,
he lived much at Tyttenhanger, in the parish
of Ridge, in Hertfordshirey; which had been
the country-feat of the abbots of faint Al-
ban's, and was conveyed to sir Thomas Pope
by Henry the eighth, in the last year of his
reign, 1547, but not confirmed to him till
by letters patent of Edward the sixth, dated
July the twenty-fourth, in the following
year". However, it appears that he bought
* From his letters to the college. And other evidences, ibid.
"In a deed of dame Elis. Paulett, dated Feb. i. 35 Eliz. in-
fra citat. This mansion is called the " capital messuage and
"scyte of the late dissolved monastery of Clerkenwell." It was
granted him by queen Mary, Pat. Phil. Mar. an. 3, 5. Febr. i.
par. 4. "Rex et Regin. concess. T. Pope, et al. Pardonatio-
'* nem alienationis pro scitu monasterii de Clerkinwell in com.
"Middl." In an indenture dat. May xxx, 1538. 30 Hen.
viii. he is styled Thomas Pope os London, esquire^
w See pag. 163. supr.
"Weever, Fun. Mon. p. 428. Tanner Not. Mon.sol. p. 299.
* The Statutes of his college are dated there.
* Liber secundus de Lts Rates, ann. 3, et 4. Phil. Mar. sol.
MSS. Harl. 607. 1. sol. 1. Brit. Mus.—See also pat. Edw. vi.
an. 1. J11I. xxiv. par. 4. Where the grant specifies " Scitum
"Capitalit

<page 189>
170 THE LIFE OF
this estate of Queen Mary, June the six-
teenth, 1557, for twenty years purchase*:
notwithstanding, in a deed dated 1555, he
styles himself of Tyttenhangerb, and in the
charter of his college, 1554, mentions Tyt-
tenhanger as one of his manors. The house
was built by John Moot, one of the abbots-
of faint Alban's, in 1405% and much en-
larged and adorned by his successors, parti-
cularly the learned and munificent John
Whethamstede, in the reign of Henry the
sixth d, The chapel was an elegant edifice:
and the wainscott, behind the stalls, was
beautifully painted with a series of the figures
of all the saints who bore the name of John.
The windows were enriched with painted
glass, which sir Thomas Pope brought hither
from the choir of faint Albans abby, when
that church was, by his interposition, pre-
served from total destruction. Sir Thomas
Pope also erected over the vestibule of the
great hall a noble gallery for wind-music *.
This house was so large, that in the year
•' Capitalis manswtiit de Tyttenhanger, ac Manerium de Tyt-
"tenhanger, &c.
• Ibid. MSS. Harl.
fc See Append. Numb. XI.
c Willis Mitr. Abb. i. 22.
* Weever Fun. Mon. p. 565. edit. 1631,
"From the Information of Sir Harry Pope-Blount, ut supr.
1528,

<page 190>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 171
1528, King Henry the eighth and his
queen, with their retinue, removed hither
from London, during the continuance of the
Sweating sicknesse. But this antient and
stately mansion was intirely pulled down,
and that which is now standing built in its
place, about 1654, by sir Henry Blount, the
famous travellers. Of this county, and of
Essex, sir Thomas Pope was twice sheriff,
in the years 1552, 1557 '.
I must pot here forget, that the learned
and candid John de Feckenham, the last
abbot of Westminster, and a great friend
to the princess Elisabeth, about the reign of
Edward the sixth, often visited sir Thomas
Pope, at Tyttenhanger-house; who never
suffered him to depart without a present.
Once in particular he gave Feckenham, at
parting, a purse filled with twelve angels,
his picture in enamel, a silver crucifix studded
with pretious stones, and a large missal richly
ornamented with thirty-six historical pic-
turesh. On the mention of Feckenham, I ob-
* Holiinfli. Chron, vol. iii. p. 906. 10. col. 2.
s Engl. Baronet, iv. 669. edit. 1741.
* Chauncy's Hertfordshire, p. 23. Fuller, Worthies, p.
jji. fays, that as to their Sheriff, Hertfordshire and Essex were
united till the ninth of Elisabeth, 1567.
* From the information of sir Harry Pope-Blount, ut supr.
serve

<page 191>
172 THE LIFE OF
serve here, perhaps out of place, that Sir Tho-
mas Pope is said to have joined with abbot
Feckenham in an application to queen Mary,
to spare the life of fir John Cheek; in conside-
ration of Cheek's eminent learning and inte-
grity, and on condition that he would renounce
the heresies of the reformation'. It is cer-
tain that this admirable scholar, the restorer
of the Greek tongue, would otherwise have
been executed in the flames. Yet he did
not long survive the remorse of a recanta-
tion. His own conscience had all the severi-
ties of a martyrdom.
To resume the course of our narrative.
He seems also, for some time, and so early
at least as 1546, to have been settled at
Bermondsey in Southwark k; at which place,
and in the neighbourhood, he had ac-
quired a very considerable property'. Here,
1 MSS. F. Wife.
k Ex indenture dat. May xiit.*38. Hen. viii. MSS.F.Wise.—
He also styles himself of Bermondsey, in a deed without date:
which however appears to have been made after 7 Edw. vi. In
Thesauriar. coll. Trin. The earliest notice of his connection
with this place appears from the Patents. Pat. Hen. viii. an.
33. Jan. xvi. par. 5. Edward Powell is licensed to alienate a
messuage in Bermondsey to Thomas Pope, knight. This year the
monastery there was dissolved.
1 Pat. supra citat.
as

<page 192>
SIR THOMAS POPE. i73
as I conjecture, he built a house on the
ruins of the dissolved abbey of Cluniac
monks which he probably purchased of
his friend sir Robert, or sir Richard, South-
well, to one of whom that monastery was
granted at the dissolutionm. This house,
which Stowe calls '* a goodly house builded
of stone and timber," afterwards came into
the possession of the earls of Sussex n.
What was sir Thomas Pope's last illness,
or the particular circumstances of his death,
I have not found. It is not improbable, but
that he was carried off by a pestilential fever,
which began to rage with uncommon vio-
lence in the autumn of the year 1558, and
before the end of the succeeding winter,
seized three parts in four of the people of
England*j destroying in the general devasta-
tion, thirteen bishops, and several other per-
sons, both men and women, of the most emi-
nent rank and qualityp. His last letter to
his college, which having established by his
munificence, he lived near five years to pro-
"Tanner, Not. Mon. sol. p. 535.
■ Stowe ubi supr. p. 344. Aubrey's Surrey. V. 39.
0 Cooper's, or Lanquette's Chronicle, 4to. 1560. p. 377. •
J • Godwyn, p. 340. Engl. edit. 1630. Stowe, by Howes,
£34. Sirypc, Ann. Res. i. 30, 31.
tect

<page 193>
i74 THE LIFE OF
tect and assist with his patronage, is dated
August the eighth, 1558 p- While he medi-
tated further benefactions for the encrease of
its endowment % he died the twenty-ninth
day of January following, 1559, on Sexage-
sima Sunday, at his house in Clerkenwell, in
the fiftieth year of his age r.
He was magnificently buried, with the
following solemnities'. His body was first
carried to the church of Clerkenwell in Lon-
don, where it was laid under a herse, or
shrine, illuminated with wax tapers, for the
space of one week. On the seventh day of
February, began his funeral procession to the
church of faint Stephen's Wallbrook: to
which he was conveyed with a standard, a
Coat, a penon or banner of arms, a target,
helmet, sword, and four dozen of arms, with
twelve for the branches of wax tapers, and
six for the body, or shrine. He was attended
by two heralds at arms, Clarencieux and
York. The first bore the coat, and the lat-
ter the helmet and crest. Twenty poor men
* Registr. prim. Cell, prxdict. sol. 23. b.
* See Append. No. XXV. Under John Perte.
* From an inscription on his Picture, in Trin. coll.—And
Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 301. col. 2.
« MSS. Cotton. Vitell. F. 5. In the British Museum. See
Append. Numb. XXVIII.
and

<page 194>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 175
and twenty poor women, carried torches.
The men were cloathed in mantle frieze
gowns, and the women in' rails, which he
gave them. Sir Richard Southwell, and sir
Thomas Stradling, knights, and diverse gen*-
tlemen and others, all in black, where mour-
ners, to the number of sixty or more. All
his house at Clerkenwell, and the church,
were hung with black, with escotcheons of
his arms. After the heralds had offered the
sword, target, coat, and helmet at the high
altar, and other ceremonies were performed,
the company returned back to his house to
a banquet, where they were refreshed with
spiced bread and wine. The next day fol-
lowed his morrow mass, in the said church;
at which were three Songs, two being prick-
ed songs, and the third the mass of requiem,
all fung by the Clerkes of London. He was
-then buried; after which they went back to
his house to dinner, " being, as my manu-
"script says, a very great dinner, and plenty
"of all thinges." Then followed a great
dole of almes distributed among the Poor.
Stowe insinuates, that he was interred in
• A sort of white veil, often mentioned as part of the mourn-
ing-dress of women, at antient funerals. See Strype, Eccc
M'M. iii. 385.
the

<page 195>
i76 THE LIFE OF
the north ile of the choir of Wallbrook
church. Here was a vault, in which before
had been buried his wife Margaret, hi?
daughter Alice, and Anne Pope his sister in
law. Stowe adds the following inscription,
which was evidently placed there before his
death, and I suppose immediately upon the
decease of dame Margaret. It was destroyed
with the old church.
Hie jacet Thomas Pope Primus Thesaura-
rius Augmentationum, et domina Mar-
gareta uxor ejus, quæ quidem Marga-
reta obiit xvi Jan. mdxxxviii".
But in 1567, eight years after his death, his
body and the body of dame Margaret afore-
said, were removed from saint Stephen's
Wallbrook to the chapel of Trinity college
in Oxford; where they were again interred
on the north side of the altar, under a state-
ly tomb of good gothic workmanship, oh
which are the recumbent figures of sir Tho-
mas Pope in complete armour, and of his
second wife Elisabeth, large as the life, in
alabaster, with this inscription.
■ Fol. edit of Stowe's Survey. 1633. p. 245.
J£)ic

<page 196>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 177
Die jacent corpora Cftome jpope milirte
funijato?i0 &ujus co[\z$ii Crinitatis er oo*
mine Cli^aoerfje er agargarire uroris ejtuef.
Bui quiDem Cbomas obiir rrir. Die 3la-
nuarii, 39.;©. 15131313.
Quod taciturn vests nemini dixeris".
That the body of the founder was actually
removed hither, appears unquestionably from
the Will of Elizabeth his second wife, who
desires expreflly to be buried in a vault or
tomb in Trinity college chapel in Oxford,
'* wherein lieth the corps of my late good
"husband sir Thomas Pope*." This is also
further confirmed from the testimony of An-
thony Wood: who in the Appendix subjoin-
ed to his History of the University of Oxford,
containing omissions and mistakes of the
translator in the Text of that elaborate work,
observes; that notwithstanding the inscrip-
tion in saint Stephen's Wallbrook, his Tran-
slator, according to the original English copy,
ought to have expressly inserted, in the place
■ It originally stood within a grate of iron. Arms, 13c. by
Lee, ut inf. f. 74. The greatest part of its elegant workman-
ship is now concealed, and the effect of the whole destroyed, by
an alcove, corresponding to another on the Opposite side: both
which, considered in a general view, are most injudicioufly in-
troduced, and are perhaps the only blemishes of the present
beautiful chapel.
w Infra citat.
M where

<page 197>
i78 THE LIFE OF
where sir Thomas Pope's burial is mention-
ed, " Sed sepultus suit in capclla coll. S. S.
"Trinitatisx". In the mean time, it is ex-
traordinary that no mention mould be record-
ed of this Removal of the founder's body
in any register of the college. That this
tomb in the college chapel was standing in
the year 1567, at least, that the founder was
then removed thither, may be fairly con-
cluded from the two following entries in the
computus of the Bursars of that year, and
they are the only notices that any where
occur concerning it, viz.
**. Sol. Mar. 10. tribus Oper arm labor-an-*
*' tibus per quatuor dies in facello circa
«' fepulcrumfundatoris, xs. xiijd.
"Sol. pro quinque modiis calcis circa Jc-
"pulcrumfundatoris, ijs.xjd7.
* In Appendic. Hist. Antiq. Oxon. p. 447. Although this
point needs no further authentication, I will add part of a let-
ter written from Strype to Dr. Charlett, master of University
college, Oxford. "The funeral of sir Thomas Pope, as it i*
•* sett down in the Cotton volume, [fee Append.] I mention-
'« ed to you in my last, you (hall have at the foot of this letter.
"His body, I find, was soon removed from Clerlcenwell
"[Walbroke] to the college which he founded, and honoured
"deservedly with a monument there." Dated Low-Layton,
April xx, 1709. This letter, as I am informed by the very learn-
ed and communicative Dr. Ducarrell, was given by Dr. Charlet
to Dr. Dobfon, president of Trinity college. The fame, being
the original, is now in the Bursary of Trinity college. A copy
of it is among Cod. MSS. Ballard. Bibl. Bodl. vol. zr. 31.
y Comp. Burst*. 1566.-7.
This

<page 198>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 179
This monument was probably given by
Elizabeth his second wife in her life-time.
It was certainly erected after his death, viz.
after 1559, as the inscription, which is
wrought in large gothic characters out of the
substance of the stone, minutely specifies the
date of his decease. Elizabeth survived her
husband more than thirty years; and, if at all,
she must have erected it before 1567, when it
appears to have existed. But of this I shall
have occasion to bring further evidences.
M 2 SECT.

<page 199>
i8o THE LIFE OF
SECT. VI.
I Now proceed to throw some collateral
light on sir Thomas Pope's history, by
giving a detached and distinct account of his
brothers, sisters, wives, and friends: most of
which have already been occasionally men-
tioned in the course of this narrative.
His brother John Pope, who was one of
his heirs, and to whom he granted large es-
tates, appears to have been settled at Wroxton
in Oxfordshire, in the reign of Edward the
sixth \ I find John purchasing of Henry the
eighth, in the year 1544, estates belonging
to the dissolved canons of Kenilworth in
Warwicmire, for 1501/. 13J. 8</\ In the
fame year he recieved a grant of the site of
the house of Franciscan friers at Lincoln b:
as also, jointly with others, the site of the
black friars at Beverly in Yorkstiire e. In
x Ex Indentur. dat. Aug. i. 5 Edw. vi. Wroxton was a
priory of Augustine Canons. See Append. Numb. XVII.
* Dugd. Warw. p. 474.
* Tanner's Not. Mon. sol. g. 281.
e Ibid. p. 689.
*545>

<page 200>
SIR THOMAS PO PE. 181
1545, he received some lands belonging to
the priory of Bileigh in Essexd. I could give
many more instances from the patents, and
privy seals. I find him often entertained at
Trinity college, Oxford: and once with his
second wife Elizabeth Brockett e. He was
three times married. But as a further ac-
count of him, his marriages, issue, and their
descendants, would take up too much of our
time here, and on other accounts requires a
* Newc. Rep. ii. 610.
e Comp. Burss. 11,61.—2. "Sol. pro vino, pyris, aliisque
"bellariis, insiimptis in Magistrum Pope visitantem colle-
"gium. ij /. vj d.
Comp. 1562.—3. "Sol. ex cerasis, fragis, vino, pom, ct sac-
"caro, datis Magistro Pope et uxori ejus viscntibus colle-
"gium. iij s. xd.
Comp. 1562.—3. "Sol. 7 Mart, pro vino, pomis, etc. datis
"Magistro Pope visenti collegium, xviij d.
Comp. 1563—4. "Sol. 23 Feb. ex beliariis iusumptis in
'• Magistrum Pope visentem collegium, xviij d,
"Sol. Magistro Pope invisenti collegium, xix d.
Comp. 1564.- 5. •' Sol. in bellariis Magistro Pope, et quibus-
"dam advenis, vifentibus collegium, xxij d.
Comp. 1568.--9. "Allocat. in epulis Magistri Pope et Ma-
•♦ gistri Billinge in temp, seffionum. iij /. viij d.
Comp; 1572.—3. "Allocat. pro epulis pro Magistro Johanr.e
"Pope fratre fundatoris quum hie nos inviseret, vj /.
"vij d. ch.
Comp. 1573.-4. "Allocat. In epulis pro Magistro Pope fra.
"tre fundatoris invisente collegium, vj/. viij d.
Comp. 1581.-2. "Allocat. in epulis pro Magistro Pope.
4* XJ. vjd."
M 3 more

<page 201>
i8z THE LIFE OF
more minute and separate consideration, these
particulars shall form an article for the
Appendixs.
Sir Thomas Pope's sisters were Alice, Eli-
zabeth, and Julian, as I before observed.
Alice was married to Edward Love, gentle-
man, of Aynhoe, in Northamptonshire e;
whose name often occurs in the affairs of
Trinity college aforesaid about th,e time of
its foundation, and who appears to have act-
ed as the founder's receiver in Oxfordshire
and other counties'1. She died 1534, and
they are both buried in the church of Stoke-
Lyne near Bicester in Oxfordshire, with an
inscription on a brass-plate '. Elizabeth his
f Numb. XXVI.
« Ex Evident, in Coll. antedict.
* Registr. prim, dicti Coll. sol, 7. b. Et ali,bi. See Ap-
pend. Numb- XXI. in the Notes. Among Rawlinfon's antient
original charts, there is an indenture, by which John, Prior of
Nottley Abbey in Bucks, and his convent, lease their appropriate
parsonage of Stokelyne to this Edward Love, for sixty one
years. Dat. in Dom. Capital. Mar. 6. A. D. 1524. MSS.
Rawlins. Bibl. Bod. 1322,. Ch. ult. in pergamen. The lessee
is herein discharged from an annual pension, which the convent
paid from the said church to saint Frideswyd's priory at Oxford.
1 Over this inscription are the images of a man in armour,
and of a woman, both kneeling before desks: behind bin five
boys, and behind btr three girls. Over their heads, DcliHaju-
•ventutis nostrte et ignorantiai hi memineris dom'wt. Arms, viz.
second

<page 202>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 183
second sister was married to Richard Hutch-
ins, of Chipping-Norton in the fame county,-
and afterwards to John Orpewood of the
fame place". The third sister Julian was, as
I conjecture, a nun at Godstowe; and upon
the dissolution of that convent, received a
grant of an annual pension of vj/. xiij s. ivd1.
~ ) A lyon ramp, with a cross patee on his shoulder. Lev i.
) Parti p. fese indent, in chief 3 martlets..
1 Love, hi supra.
Impel. > Erm. a- Ms ehequee, a crescent for a difference.
J Ardes.
One of their daughters, Elizabeth, was married to Simon
Parrot, or Perrot, fellow of Magd. coll. Oxon. Who are both
buried, with an inscription on a brass-plate, in faint Peter's,
Oxon. For this Simon Parrot, fee Wood, Hist, et Antiq. ii.
$9. and ib. 421. And Smith's Annals Univ. coll. p. 147. See
also Append. Numb. XXI. The name of one Parrot, undoubt-
edly this Simon Parrot, often occurs in papers ard accounts re-
lating to the affairs of Trinity college, at its foundation, viz.
Append. Numb. XVII. "Three antiphoners of parchmente
"bought by Mr. Parrot for the queere." And Comp. Burss.
1556.-7. "Sol. pro Campanae fecundd reportatione a Ma-
"gistro Parrot." That a person, at least of this name, was
one of the sounder's agents in this business, with Edward Love,
I find in other articles: and from the following passage of one
of the founder's letters to the president, 27 Nov. 1556. "In
"your next letters send me a bill declaring, particularly, such
"bokes, and other thinges, as ye have receyved ether from me
"or els of Mr. Perrot." See supr. p. 117.
k By the first ihe had one son Edward, or Edmund: and four
daughters, Anne, Bridget, Jane, and Mary. By the second,
two daughters, Frances and Winifred. Ex testam. T. P. And
Lee's MSS. Visit. Oxf. f. 3a.
1 Willis, Mltr. Abb. ii. 179. And Append, ibid. 13.
M 4 which

<page 203>
184 THE LIFE OF
which she continued to possess, 1553. This
is a larger pension than was usual: which
probably she got by the interest of her brother
sir Thomas Pope. And this is more probable,
as among other notices, it appears from an in-
dorsement on a fragment of a rental of that
nunnery in the hand-writing of sir Thomas
Pope, that on their dispersion, he gave a
gratuitous donation of forty marcs to twelve of
its nuns, who were friendless and born in
Oxfordshire m. She, if the same, was however
married, before the year 1556, to Henry
Bryan of Cogges in Oxfordshire", who seems
to have been but in moderate circumstances \
As to the wives of sir Thomas Pope, he
was three times married. His first wife was
Elisabeth Gunston, from whom he was di-
vorced by Richard Gwent, doctor of decrees,
archdeacon of London, and principal official
in the court of Canterbury, July the eleventh
1536, by the authority of the king and par-
m I know not exactly whether it is of Godstowe or Bicester
Priory, both in Oxfordshire. Of the latter, in the Bursary of
Trinity college, are two beautiful Audit rolls on vellom, one
of the year i 393, the other of 1443.
■ Testam. Dom. T. Pope.
0 Comp. Buiss. 1562.-3. " Sol. in vino infumpt. inMagistrum
"Breanum de Cogges. 24 Jun. xiij d.
Comp. 1569.-.70. '' Sol. pro prandio Magistri Bryan fratris
"domini fundatoris. xij d.
liament.

<page 204>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 185
liamentp. His second wife was Margaret
Dodmer, widow, to whom he was married
at London, July the seventeenth, 1536% by
licence from archbishop Cranmer, authorised
by parliament for this purpose'. Margaret
Dodmer's maiden name was Townsend, and
she was a native of Stamford in Lincoln-
shire4. She was the relict of Ralph Dod-
v Collectan. MSS. F. Wife.
* From fir T. Pope's Breviary §, written and illuminated,
given by John Aubrey the Antiquarian to the Alhmolean Mu-
seum. No. 55. In it, among others, are the following entiies.
"Meinorand. quod Margaretta uxor Thomæ Pope equitis
"obiit die Lunæ viz. xvic. die Januarii, A. Dni M. D.
"xxxviii. circa horam decimam ejusdem diei postmeridianaro,
"et sepulta erat die dominical, sequent, in ecclia Sti Stephani
"in Walbroke.
"Alicia filia Thomæ Pope nata erat die dominicæ, viz.
"xvi. die Aprilis, A", xxviii". dom. H. viii. circa horam no*
"nam ejusdem die post meridiem, A*. Dom. M. D. xxxvii.
"Matrimonium inter Thomam Pope primarium Thesaurari-
"um augment. Revent. coronae Dom. R. et Dnam Margaretam
"Dodmer, Viduam, solemnizatum erat in London, xvii. die
"Julii A", xxviii. Dom. Hen. viii. Anno Dni. M. D. xxxvi.
"t°.—Quod taciturn velis nemini dixeris.—Thomas Pope,
«♦ MiUt.
'" Authoritate Parliamenti ad infra scripta fulcitus." Col-
lectan. MSS. F. Wife. Ex Licent.
* So indorsed on the said licence.
§ This Breviary Aubrey had intended to place in its proper repository, Trinity
college Library j but having conceived some prejudice against Dr. Bjthutst the pre-
sident, he changed his design and gave it to the Astimolean. From his Lettjr
to A. Wood, dat. 1674. Cod. Ball. Bibl. Bodl. vol. xiv.
mer,

<page 205>
186 . THE LIFE OF
mer, mercer and sheriff of London, 1524;
afterwards knighted ', and mayor of London,
1529". She was married to the said Ralph,
by licence from cardinal Wolsey, dated
November the twentieth, 1527*. By this
fir Ralph Dodmer, she had two sons Ralph
and John, both living 1554% and two daugh-
ters, Ann and Maryr. By sir Thomas
Pope, her second husband, she had only one
* At Yorke-place, 21 Hen. viii. MSS. Bibl. Cott. Claud, c.
3. sol. iii. The same fir Ralph Dodmer was also major es tie
Jlaple at Westminster, 230 Feb. 23 Hen. viii. Madox, Formul.
Angl. pag. 20.
■° Stowe's Strrvey of London Edit. sol. 1633. P- S^°» 579-
He was also sheriff of London 1529. See edit. 1599. 4W. p.
444, 445. Ralph's father was Henry, of Pickering-Leigh,
Yorkshire. Stowe, ibid.
w Collectan. MSS. F. Wife.
* Ex indentura quadripaitit. prædict.—John is mentioned in
Testam. T. P. 1556.
'These two daughters, with the two sons aforesaid, are all
mentioned in a grant of lands va sir T. Pope, pat. 28. Hen.
viii. Test. Mar. i. par. 5.—" Prolibus Rad. Dodmer militis,
"civis London." Sir T. Pope, in his will, requests his exe-
cutors, &c. " to help to sett forward" the children of his Jaw
wife Marg. Dodmer, " which be fryndless." Stowe in-
forms us that, "near Thames streete is Grantham lane, so call-
"ed of John Grantham sometime mayor and owner thereof,
"whose house was very large and strong, builded of stone, as
"appeareth by gates arched yet remaining. Ralph Dodmer
** first a brewer, than a mercer, mayor 1529, dwelled ther,
"and kept his mayoralty in that house, &c." Survey, ut sopr.
edit. 1599- p. 183,
daughter

<page 206>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 187
daughter Alice, born April the sixteenth,
1537', who died very young. Lee, in a
book of arms, chiefly of Oxfordshire, drawn
by himself in 1574, gives us the arms of
Dodmer impaling Pope, from an efcocheon
of painted glass in a window at Trinity col-
lege, since destroyed with many others: viz.
Four lozenges meeting in point, gules, be-
tween four roses of the fame: Upon a chief,
gules, a wheat sheaf between two annulets,
Or \ But these arms do not agree with an
engraving of the arms of sir Ralph Dodmer
given by Stowe \ With this lady Margaret,
sir Thomas Pope seems to have lived in the
greatest harmony and happiness; for in his
Will he mentions with much affection, "her
"womanlie behaviour, trewth, and honestie,
"used towards me," and makes this the sole
cause of his kind remembrances and gifts to
her son; beseeching his executors, and ho-
norable friends, to treat all her children as
his own. She died the sixteenth day of
January, 1538'.
1 From sir T. Pope's Breviary, ut supr.
a Mus. Aslimol. Oxon. MSS. Codd. A. Wood. D. 14. pag.
74. His arms are not tricked (as those of other knights are)
in the manuscript cited above, viz. Claud, c. 3. sol. ill. hribl.
Cotton.
fc Ubi supr.
* From sir T. Pope's Breviary, supr. And her Tomb.
His

<page 207>
i88 THE LIFE OF
His third wife, who deserves more parti-
cular notice, was Elizabeth the daughter of
Walter Blount, esquire, os Blount's Hall in
Staffordshire, and Mary his wife, descended
from the illustrious family of Dudley Sutton,
of which were the famous, John Dudley
duke of Northumberland, and Robert earl
of Leicester. The said Elizabeth when mar-
ried to sir Thomas Pope, was relict of
Anthony Basford, or Beresford, esquire, of
Bentley in Derbyshire, by whom (he had
an only son John*1. It is said by one who
4 The true name is Beresford, at appears from a pedigree
of the family in MSS. Visitation of Derbyshire, taken by
Flower and Glover, 156?, sol. 25. b. Mus. Ashmol. Codd.
Ashmol. 728. As also from a deed recited above, where John
Beresford, probably her son, mentioned in the text, is a sub-
scribing witness. I likewise find one Beresford, perhaps the
fame, buried as it seems in (he college, 1567. Comp. Burn, ut
sopr. An. 1566.-7.
"Alloc. in prandium famulis dominæ fundatricis cum per-
•' solverentur justa Magistro Beresford, xs.
This respectable family came originally from Staffordshire,
where is a village so called: and flourishes still in Derbyshire.
See Visitation if Stafford/hire, in 1963, and 1664. By Dugdale
Norr. Herald. MbS. Coll. Armor. C. 36. sol. 114. And
Lodge, Peer. Ireland, ii. 210. ed. 1754. As to her son John,
the sounder sent him to Trinity college, Oxford, to be edu-
cated under Arthur Yeldard one of the fellows : with a letter
printed in Append. Numb. XXV. In another letter, to the pre-
sident, the founder desires the lecturers, " to tech him and to
"rede him Erasmus pistells and Tully's piflells, which he shall
r •' "lerne,

<page 208>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 189
knew her welle, that sir Thomas Pope was
induced to marry this lady principally on
account of her charitable disposition, and
and other excellent qualifications; and that (he
heartily concurred with her husband's pious
intention of founding a college. They
were married by licence from archbishop
Cranmer, the first of January, 1540 '. They
had no issue. After the death of sir Thomas
Pope in January 1559, she was married, for
the third time, before or in December fol-
lowing5, to sir Hugh Powlett of Hinton
faint George in Somersetshire: concerning
whose life and character, it may not perhaps
be thought too great a digression to mention
some few particulars.
Sir Hugh Powlett was the son of sir Amias
Powlett knight, of whom it is remembered,
that having incurred the displeasure of car-
dinal Wolfey, to produce a reconciliation, he
"leme to translate well." He is a witness to the codicil of sir
T. Pope's will.
'Dr. Ralph Kettell, president of the college. See Append.
Numb. XXX.
'MSS. Collectan. F. Wife.
* As appears from Comp. Burss. coll. Trin. 1560.-1. viz.
"Sol, Decemb. i. pro pari Chirothecarum dat. dom. Powlett
"et dominæ fundatrici. xvj /.
This present, I presume, was a compliment on their marriage.
re-

<page 209>
i9o THE LIFE OF
re-edified the gate of the middle temple,
where he was treasurer, in a most superb
manner, introducing among other decora-
tions, the cardinal's arms, cognisance, and
badgesb. Sir Hugh, during the reign of
Henry the Eighth, was much in favor with
that king. He was invited, in 1537, with
the principal nobility, to attend the magni-
ficent baptism of prince Edward'. He wad
knighted for his gallant services against the
French in the wars of that reign: particu-
larly for his behaviour at taking the Brey, at
the siege of Boloigne, in the presence of the
king". He was treasurer of the king's army
at the siege of Boloigne1. In consideration
of these merits, he was rewarded by Henry
the eighth with several grants of manors and
lands m. By that king he was likewise ap-
pointed surveyor of the rents of the dissolved
* Dogd. Orlg. Jurid. p. 188. In the British museum, there
is a translation of a French romance into English, entitled L'
Histoire dt la Ducbest de Sawye, by sir Hugh Powlett. Par
Hugues les Is des Men/. Aime Powlett, &C. MSS. Harl. 1315. 4W.
It is probably one of his juvenile exercises in the French
language.
1 Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 5.
k Collins, Peer. iii. 223. ed. 2. He was knighted Octob.
}S. 1536. MSS. Cotton. Claud, iii. c. sol. 127. b.
1 Falle's Jersey, edit. 1694. p. 91.
"Collins, ut supr.
monastery

<page 210>
SIR THOMAS POPE, 191
monastery of Glastonbury \ In the third
year of Edward the sixth, he was knight-
marshal of the army commanded by lord
Russel lord privy seal, and sent against the
rebels of Cornwall and Devonshire, whom
he totally defeated °. For these services he
Was, the year following, appointed, for life,
governor of the isle of Jersey and Mount-
Orgueil-castlep. In 1551, the fifth year of
the last-mentioned king, he was installed
knight of the garter, at a chapter held in the
royal palace of Greenwich9. In 1559, the
the first year of queen Elizabeth, the privy
council constituted him vice-president of the
marches of Wales, in the absence of lord
Williams, president'. In 1563, he was
made governor of Havre de Grace *, then in
the hands of the English. The next year, he
was one of the principal commanders who
so bravely defended Newhaven against the
French. On this occasion, when Montmo-
rency, constable of France, sent a trumpet
■ May ii. Priv. Sig. Ann. 37. Hen. viii.
0 Hollingstied, Chron. iii. 1026.
> Pat. 4. Edw. vi. Test. Mar. xxi par. 9. In (^Mary's coun-
cil-book, MSS. Hail, ut supr, are many letters to him from
the privy-council, relating to this office.
h Anstis, Order of the Garter, vol. ii. 446.
* ctrypt's Res. i. 23.
■ Falle, ibid.
to

<page 211>
z92 THE LIFE OF
to the earl os Warwick summoning him to
surrender, sir Hugh Powlett was deputed
by the earl to assure the Constable, that the
English were prepared and resolved to suffer
the last extremity before they would yield
the town, without the queen's express orders.
And when the English army was at length
so miserably reduced by a pestilence, that her
majesty in compassion to those gallant sol-
diers who still survived, gave directions to
lord Warwick to deliver up the place; sir
Hugh Powlett was the chief of the commis-
sioners who conducted the conferences with
the constable of France for the capitulation *.
He was in a word, beside the character of
singular prudence and integrity, one of the
most intrepid and experienced officers of his
time u. He was father, by a former wife, of
sir Amias Powlett w, a privy counsellor and
an eminent statesman, in the reign of queen
Elizabeth". Sir Hugh died in 1571, being
• Stowe, per Howes, 665. Camden. E!iz.
"See Burghley's State papers, by Haynes, p. 407. Stowe
ut supr. 653.
w FaJle, ibid.
* In the year 1586, Mary queen os Scots was committed to
his .custody. This trust he so honourably discharged, that when
secretary Walsingham persuaded him to suffer one of his ser-
vants to be bribed by the agents of the queen of Scots, for the
fake of better intelligence, he rejected the proposal with indig-
nation. Camd. Eliz. ed. Hearne, ii. 533. 488. Fuller's Wor-
thies.

<page 212>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 193
then representative in parliament for the
county of SomersetY, and without issue by
this lady.
This Lady, whom we must now call Dame
Elizabeth Powlett, did not, however, from
her new connection discontinue that previous
and natural attachment, which, in the cha-
racter of foundress, she bore to the founda-
tion of her former husband sir Thomas Pope.
She possessed indeed no small jurisdiction over
the transactions of the society: for the foun-
der had delegated to her the authority of
nominating it's scholars, and presenting to
it's advowsons, during life". And this power,
thies. Somtrfctjbirc. I find him, before he was knighted, visit-
ing the fellows and scholars of Trinity college, Oxford, at
Garsington, in time of the plague. Comp. Burss. 1571.—2.
"Alloc. pro epulis quo tempore Magistre Amisius Powlett
"veniebat ad collegium Garsingtoniæ. iv/. ivd. y."
Lord Bacon, when very young, attended him on an embassy
into France, Dugd. Bar. ii. 438. See Strype's Ain. Res iii.
360. Where is a letter written to him by the queen, with her
own hand, superscribed, to my faithful! Amyut, and in which
she calls him, my Amyas. Compare licarne, Rob. Gi.ouc. p.
673. seq. And MSS. Ilarl. 6994. 29. 30. And Ballard's
Learned Ladies. In Add. and Ccrr..
y Willis, Notit. Parl. p. 94.
z Once, by the fame authority, she nominated a president.
See Append. Numb. XXV. It appears, however, that the col-
lege once rejected her nomination to a scholarship, and chose
another candidate. Upon this (he appealed to Cooper bishop of
N Winchester,

<page 213>
194 THE LIFE OF
yet with some interruptions *, she continued
tp exercise till her deathb. Nor was {he
wanting in proper marks of affection to a
place, to which she was by the strongest
ties so nearly related. She engaged her
husband, sir Hugh Powlett, to join with her
in protecting the interests of the college.
She added, in part, to the founder's endow-
ment, after his death, the rectory of Ridge
in Hertfordshire, and the advowson to the
vicarage c. She freely fulfilled the founder's
unlimited charge, in which she was bound to
finish the house at Garsington abovemen-
tioned; the cost of it having exceeded the
five hundred marcs which he specified by
will for that purpose: and accordingly we
find her, from time to time, advancing with-
out reserve, the necessary supplies of timber
and moneyd. She appears often to. have in-
Winchester, the visitor, who superseded the person elected by
the college, and decreed that her nomination should take place.
Aug. ii. 1592. Rcgistr. prim, did coll. sol. 48. b.
* Particularly, from 1563 to 1578 inclusive, it does not ap-
pear by the register, that she used her privilege of nominating
to the scholarships. But she afterwards resumed it. She some-'
times nominated the fellows.
b Registr. prim. coll. antedict. passim.
c Ex indentur. dat. April. 1. 22 Elist. apud coll. prardict.
See Append. Numb. XXX. And registr. prim. sol. 46.
* Viz. the sum of 28/. 9/. 3 </, in 1566. Ex Registr. in
4to. ut supr. And Comp. 1566.—6. Beside timber in 1561.--2.
and

<page 214>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 195
tercsted herself in the affairs of the society,
and to have lent her assistance and advice on
many occasions: for which me frequently re-
ceived their testimonies of respect and re-
gard'. Once I find her present at the college
and 1564. Ex Comp, et Registr. prædict. She alfo glased the
house. Comp. 1570.--1. "Sol. pro ex pens. Magistri Præfidi*
"et magistri Chambrelen proficisc. Londinum ad dom. funda-
"tricem ad parandum vitrum pro domo apud Garsington.
M xxx 1. yd." Glass, at this time, was neither a cheap nor a
common commodity. The glasing of a large building was a
considerable work.
1 From the following articles, among many others.
Comp. Burss. 1560.--1. "Sol. pro expens. Magistri Prscsidi*
"equitantis ad dom. fundatricem de vifitatione sntura.
"XXXIXI. vjd."
Comp, x 563.-4. "Sol. Maii 24. pro expens. Magistri Prassi-
"dis et duorum famulorum dorninæ fundatricis venieH-
"tium Londino, circa neceflaria collegii negotia, et Ma-
"giltri Prxsidis illuc eadem de causa profecti. xxs. xd. ■
——" Sol. eod. die pro expens. eorundem [famulorum] dura-
"Oxoniæ manerent. xsxijd."
Comp. 156j.—4. "Sol. Jan. 27. ex pari chirothecarum dat.
"dom. fundatrici. ivj. iv d.
Comp. 1566.-7. "Alloc. in prandium famulis dom. funda-
"tricis. xi.
Comp. 1568.-9. "Sol. pro duobus paribus chirothccarum
"miffis ad domini Powlett et fundatricem. xs.
> " Sol. pro epulis famuli fundatricis. ijj. ob. q.
Comp. 1569—70. "Sol. pro chircthecis missis ad dom. fun
"datricem. vj 1.
Comp. 1570.--1. "Sol. pro epulis famuli fundatricis. iij/,
"ix J.
Comp. 1574.—5. "Dat. famulo fundatricis, adreTenti feri-
** nam. »}/.
N t Comp

<page 215>
i96 THE LIFE OF
in 1565, viz. "So/, pro Refectione data Fun-
•* datrici, liij s. iiij df." Sir Edward Hoby,
an eminent statesman and scholar, in the
reigns of queen Elizabeth and James the
first, styles her in a latin epistle8, " præno-
"bilis heroina;" and adds the great obliga-
tion she had conferred upon him in admitting
into the college, Bernard Adams h, afterwards
Comp. 1579.—80. "Sol. pro chirothecis dom. episcopi Wyn-
"ton, et dominæ fundatricis. xviij /. vj d.
Comp. 1589.—90. "Sol. Magistro præsidi proftciscenti ad
"dom. fundatricem. iij /. xvt. vd.
Comp. 1590.--1. "Sol. pro chirothecis dom. fundatricis. vj/.
"Sol portanti strenam [a new year's gift] ad dom. fun-
"datricem. vjj.
In a letter written to her by the society, dated June xvii.
1573. they tell her, "Wysfhyng you hartily that it wold
"pleasse your ladifliip to visytt your college, and us your
"daily orators, now in your journey downe into Summersett-
"sliyre, which thynge would be a greate comsorte to us all."'
In Thefauriar. predict. I have seen a sermon, preached at St.
Paul's, dedicated to this Lady, by Bartholomew Chamberleyn,
an eminent preacher, and fellow of the college. Lond. 8vo.
1589. [One Mr. Chamberlayne of Oxford occurs among many
eminent divines who preached in the Churcst of Stevington.
[f. Berk's,] from A. D. 1573, to 1578. MSS. Had. 2396. 123/
f. iS7.]
f Comp. Burss. 1565.
« MS. To Dr. Ralph Kettell, abovementioned. Dat. 1613.
In Bibliothec. Coll. antedict.
h Schol. Maii 30. 1583. Soc. Jun. 3. 15R8. E Registr. prim.
—Consecrat. Episc. Limericenf. 1604. Wood, Ath. Oxon. i.
730. Hoby's words axe, " Arctiori etiam vinculo constrinxit
"frirM-

<page 216>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 197
bisliop of Limerick. Sir Hugh Powlett assis-
ted the college with his patronage, in a trou-
blesome and expensive law-suit against lord
Rich, and enabled them to overthrow their
"pranobilit biroina Fundairix vestra, quo tempore Bernardum
"Adamum, nunc Limbricensem Episcopum, pro amore in mt
"Juo, in Albo vestro conscripsit, sustentavit, aluit." I find this
notice occurring, concerning bishop Adams, in Comp. Burss.
coll. Trin. 1619.--20. "Exp. quardo collegium recepit rev.
"in Christo patr. Episcop. Limbricens. iij/. i/. v\)d." Waie
says, that Adams adorned his cathedral with a new organ, and
other costly furniture. Præsul. Hibern. p. 189. His pic-
ture, a good old portrait on board, is at Trinity college.
When queen Elisabeth visited Oxford, 1566, a book was pre-
sented to her majesty, by Nele, the Hebrew Professor, entitled
Collegiorum Sckolafumque Publicarum Acad. Oxon. Topographic*
DiliKcatto. With verses under each. Under Trinity College
are the following lines, some of which particularly respect this
lady, as a patroness of her husband's foundation.
Urbis at egresso jam mænia, proxima fedes
Occurrit, Thomæ sumptibus aucta Popi:
Quam lacro-sanctæ Triados cognomen habere
Jussit inauratus Miles, Equestre Decus.
Hujus adhuc teneros Fcetus pia mater adauget
Conjux, tarn digno Conjuge digna suo.
Vid. H. Dodwelli Parm. equestr. by Hearne, pag. 142. And
J. Bereblock's Relation of the queen's visit to Oxford, apud
Hist. Ricard. ii. per Hearne, p. 183. See also Miles Wind-
sore's Europæi Orbis Academiæ, Load. 1590. A copy of
these pictures and verses is in the archives of the Bodleyan Li-
brary, probably the fame which was presented to the queen.
The verses were written by Nele; and the buildings delineat-
ed by John Bcreblock abovementioned, a fellow of Exeter
College,
N 3 powerful

<page 217>
198 THE LIFE OF
powerful antagonist'. He generously gave
them a present of twenty pounds in silver,
in 1566, for finishing the stone wall round
their Grove*. I find him entertained with
them on Trinity Sunday the preceding year'.
I find him also visiting them 1567, viz.
"Allocat. Jun. xxviii. pro dapibus domini
"Paulett visentis collegium, vj s. viij d.
"Item pro cerasis et vino eodem tempore,
*< ij s. ivd. [ixj.]m.
But I proceed to some other particulars
concerning Dame Elizabeth Powlett. In the
year 1560, she placed in rich painted glass in
a window of the choir, or chancell, of the
church of Broadwell in Oxfordshire, an
image of the Holy Trinity, with the figures
1 About 1561. From a latin epistle of the college to him,
dat. Jun. xiv. 1566. ut infr.
k For these things they tell him, " Maximum quod a nobi»
"dari potuit munus, Dominationi tuæ detulimus: ut primas tu
"quidem post Fundatorem nostrum, cujus laudes nulla obli-
"vionis ærugine exedi, nullis unquam sordibus obsoleseere po-
"terunt, inter omnes qui de nobis benemerendo nominis im-
"mortalitatem confequuntur, tuo jure teneres." From the fame
latin epistle. It is addressed "Ornatislimo viro et patrono nos-
"fro dignissimo D. Huconi Paulett." In Thesaur. ut
supr. In the law-suit, they acknowledge themselves aslisted,
"tuo consilio et industrial*
1 From a foul copy of the said latin epistle.
"Comp. Burst". 1566.—7.
Of

<page 218>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 199
of herself and Sir Thomas Pope", both kneel-
ing in their heraldic surcoats of arms. But
this window was removed or destroyed the
following year by own her command, being
censured as superstitious °. In the following
year, she gave a great clock to the late conven-
tual church of Clerkenwell in Londonf.
This was a considerable benefaction, and not
unworthy to be mentioned here; as clocks,
if of any size, were at that time uncommon
and very expensive. In 1564, she placed anew
pair of organs, with a picture of the Passion
of Saint Sebastian, in the chapel of Tytten-^
hanger-house \ In the year 1592, being desi*
rous of perpetuating her affection to her
native town of Burton upon Trent in
Staffordshire, by the memorial of somS
public benefaction, she gave an annuity of
* Probably the reason why she did not place here the figure
«f her present husband Sir Hugh Powlett, rather than that of
Sir Thomas Pope, was because this picture was intended as a
memorial of the college to which the church belonged. In the
large old mansion house at Filkins, a hamlet of Broadwell,
pulled down about fistv years ago, there were on the spouts die
initials E. P. for Elisabeth Powlett, and the date 1592.
• MSS. F. Wise.
r MSS. F. Wise.
1 MSS. F. Wise. This article, arfd the two foregoing, I believe,
were communicated to Mr. Wife by the late fir Harry Pope-
Blount, who seems to have had them from some family papers
Or memoirs.
N 4 fifteen

<page 219>
2oo THE LIFE OF
fifteen pounds issuing from her estate in
Clerkenwell, and all her lands and possessions
at Bentley in Derbyshire, for improving the
salaries of the first and second masters of the
free-school, and also for the perpetual main-
tenance of five poor women, aged and un-
married, in that town*1. At length this pi-
ous and respectable lady having lived to a
very great age, died the following year 1593,
on the twenty-seventh day of October, at
Tyttenhanger in Hertfordshire'. When her
body was carried from thence, to be buried
at Oxford, five pounds in money, and large
provisions of meat and drink were distributed
'Ex indenture, dat. 1 Feb. 35 Eliz. apud Burton pnedict.
By this benefaction, the schoolmaster is to receive yearly, iij/.
And the usher vj /. The poor women are provided with a lodg-
ing each: fewel, with other necessaries; one frieze gown, one
apron, one smock, and xxvj s. viij d. in money, yearly. She
refers to these charities in her will.
r From Wood's original English of History and Antiquities of
the Vniiterstty of Oxford, MSS. Autograph, olim in Archivii
Univ. Oxon. Nunc Bibl. Bodl. She chiefly lived at Tyt-
tenhanger and Clerkenwell. There are three of her letters to
Trinity college ; the first of which is dated Tyttenhanger, Sept.
23. 1 $59. Registr. prim. sol. 24. b. The second, Tytten-
hanger, Sept. 5. 1570. Ibid. sol. 23. The third, Clerken-
well, Jun. 12. 1590. sol. 46. Ibid. In the year 1578, she was
visited at Tyttenhanger by queen Elizabeth, in a royal pro-
gress. Blomefield's Norfolk, iii. 481. See also Strype, Ann.
Ref. ii. p. 542. ed. 2. And W. Lilly's Life, p. ii. edit.
»774-
to

<page 220>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 201
to the Poor, at the gate of Tyttenhanger-
house'. On the first of November following,
the corpse arrived at Oxford, where, not so
much on account of her rank, as in regard to
that public relation which her former husband
sir Thomas Pope bore to the university, it
was laid in state, in faint Mary's church'.
The next day it was conveyed with proper
solemnity to Trinity college, attended by the
president, fellows, and scholars of the fame,
all cloathed in mourning at her own charge";
where with great pomp she was interred in
the chapel, with sir Thomas Pope and his
former wife Margaret. Three pennons, con-
taing impalements of all her three hus-
bands, Beresford, Pope,.and Powlett, were
hung up over the tomb". Twenty-five of
the poorest women which could be found in
Oxford, were ordered to be present at the in-
terment, habited in black gowns of frieze.
On this occasion, a sumptuous dinner was
provided in the hall of the college, for the
whole society, and attendants of the funeral.
The remains of the entertainment were dis-
tributed to the poor at the college-gate, and
* Ex testam.
• Wood, MSS. ut supr.
■ Ex testam.
w From MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. Num. 1724.
five

<page 221>
202 . THE LIFE OF
five pounds in money. At the fame time, a
legacy of ten shillings was delivered to each
of the scholars. All this was by her own di-
rections x. She bequeathed xj/. vj. to seve-
ral prisons: and to every single prisoner at
Oxford one stone of beef. To the poorest
and most diseased patients in the hospital of
saint Bartholomew y in West-Smithfield, xl s.
to be delivered to each of them respectively,
within one week after her decease. Among
other bequests to her honorable friends and
relations, she leaves, to lord keeper Pucker-
inge a standing cup with a cover, of silver
gilt. To lord treasurer Burleigh a ring of
gold garnished with a diamond, pointed up-
wards and downwards, which Was sometime
the ring of lord keeper sir Nicholas Bacon,
and by him fold to sir Arthur Darcy, who
fold the fame to sir Thomas Pope for one
hundred pounds. To the earl of Ormond
her black ambling horse. z To the countess
of Warwick, aunt of sir Philip Sydney,
two long cushions of red cloth of gold, for
the furniture of a bow window; and an ewer
x Ex testam.
* " Amongest the poorest, most ficklye and diseased people
'• within that house."
z Thomas earl of Ormond lord high treasurer os Ireland, and
the queen's General in the Irish rebellion. See Carte's Or-
mond, vol. i. Introduct. p. liii. edit. sol. 1736.
Of

<page 222>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 203
of silver, suitable to the bason which she gave
her at the last" New yeres tide," for a new
year's gift \ To lady Stafford, lady of the
queen's privy chamber, a candlestick of silver,
weighing twenty two ounces, suitable to two
others before givenb. To lady Scudamore, a
very fair casting bottle of silver gilt, weighing
fifteen ouncesc. To her sister lady Sydenham,
* She was Anne, daughter of Francis earl of Fedford, third,
wife of Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick, high in favor with
queen Elisabeth, and who died in 1595. Dugdal. Warw. p.
539. Sec the large inscription on this earl's tomb in the Virgin
Mary's chapel at Warwick. To his countess, the fame that is
mentioned in the text, sir Philip Sydney bequeathed one of his best
jewels, in 1 $89. See Mem. prefixed to Collins's Sydney-Papers,
p. ill. And ibid. p. 42. She is often mentioned in the Sydney-
Papers, and on important occasions. Shedied in 1603. Collins's
Mem. ut supr. p. 42. See Norden's Hartfordshire, p. 20.
Strype, Ref. iii. 598. Ames, Hist. Print, p. 425.
b Mary daughter of Edward earl of Darby, wife of Edward,
Baron lord Stafford. See Dugdal. Baron, i. 171.
c This lady occurs more than once in the Sydney-Papers.
—Rowland Whyte to Sir Robert Sydney, 1597. "Upon fun-
day in the afternoone, my Lady Skudamore gott the Queene
"to reade your letter, who asked of her how yt came to her
"handes. She answered, that my lady Sidney desired her to
"delyver yt to her majestie from her hulbande. Do you know
"the contents of it, fayd the queene? No, madam, fayd she.
"When her majestie fayd, here is much ado about the Cinq^ue
"Ports. I demanded of my lady Skudamore, what she ob-
"served in her majestie while (he was a reading of it: who
"fayd, slie read yt all over with two or three pughs." vol. ii.
p. 97. Again, Whyte to sir Robert Sydney, 1599. "Yester-
"day the countess of Leicester sent to the queene a curious
"syne gowne, which was presented by Lady Skudamore, &c."
ibid.

<page 223>
204 THE LIFE OF
a nest of silver bowls, two trencher Salts of
silver, and her bed, with all its rich furni-
ture, of cloth os'1 stamel colour'. These par-
ticulars acquaint us with her connections, and
shew the manners of the times.
She had two brothers; William Blountf
an executor, with Nicholas Bacon, of sir Tho-
mas Pope's will: and Walter Blount, nomi-
nated a scholar of Trinty college, Oxford,
by the founder, and admitted January the
ninth, 1557 8- Her sisters were Mary,
ibid. p. 174. Some of the court history of this family is pro-
bably couched under the adventures of Syr. Scudamorb in
Spenser's Faerie Quelne.
* A light red. See Steevens's Shakespeare, vol. i. p. 62, 63.
edit. 1779. Dr. Borde, in his Dietarie of helthe, written
in 1541, fays, under the chapter of Apparel, " in somer use to
"weare a fkarlet petycote of stamel or linsie wolsie." ch. viii.
* Ex testam. dat. April, xvi. 1593. Probat. Feb. viii. 1594.
In Registro Dixey, 83. 15. Cur. Prærog. Cant. The execu-
tors are, William Weston, Pope Blount, Edward Blount, and
Edward Blount.
f He married Frances, one of the three daughters of Ed-
ward Love, and Alice his wife, sister of fir Tho. Tope above-
mentioned. He was settled at Olberston, co. Leicester, and
dying 1 592. Nov. xxvi, was buried in the church of Ridge,
the parish church of Tyttenhanger, co. Hertford, See Burton's
Leicestershire, p. 21 o. 211.
* Registr. prim. sol. 4. See Append Numb. XXV. He left
the college soon afterwards, as appears from the following
extract of one of the founder's letters. "I am content to dis-
"pens with my wiffs brother for his scholers ronie, which I
"do

<page 224>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 205
Anne and Ellen \ William Blount's heir
Thomas', who was settled at Tyttenhanger
in Hertfordshire about 1593, prefixed Pope
to the name of Blount, in remembrance of
"do the rather, for that I believe he ment to lese his rome
"[place] by his abscns. I wold he mold be broken of some
"part of his witt; assuringe you from henceforth I will for no
"mans pleassure living brelce my statutes, neither in that, nor
"in eny other poynt. For when I (hall goo about to breke my
"estatutes in my owne life, howe maye I hope to have theyra
"kept after I am gone?" To the President, without Date.
But my chief reason for citing this passage, is to shew his im-
partiality and disinterestedness, and at the fame time his resolu-
tion and prudence, in keeping up the statutes of his college
which he had once given, even against the benefit and conveni-
ence of his own relations, and in a cafe where he might have
acted just as he pleased.
* Ex Test. T. P. Mary was married to ; Siden-
ham knight, perhaps fir George, of Combe Sydenham, co.
Som. as appears by Anne Blount's epitaph in the church of
Cleikenwell. Stovve's Survey, edit. 1618. p. 819. Also from
lady Powlett's Will; and these notices in Comp. Burst", coll.
Trin.
Comp. 1574.--5. "Sol. pro duobus paribus chirothecarum
"pro domina fundatrice et domino Sydenham. xj t.
Comp. 1573—4. "Alloc. pro cena Magistri Sydenham,
"fratris fundatricis, nos invifentis. vs.
Ellen, as I guess, was married to Gcodwyn. Anne, buri-
ad as above, died unmarried.
1 He was knighted by James^I. at Theobalds, 1603. And
offered by him the dignity of a baronet. Collins's Bar. iv. 667.
—He occurs matriculated of Trin. coll. 0.\on. by the name of
Thomas Pope-Blount, Æt. 18. Nov. xi. 1574. Wood MSS.
Mus. Alhm. E. 5.
sir

<page 225>
2o6 THE LIFE OF
sir Thomas Pope; as many of his lineal de-
scendants have done.
Of this family of Blount there were after-
wards three eminent writers: sir Henry
Blount knight, sir Thomas Pope-Blount
knight, and baronet, and Charles Blount,
esquire. Concerning whom a few words
may not be perhaps impertinent or unaccepta-
ble. Sir Henry Blount was admitted a gentle-
man-commoner of Trinity college Oxford,
in 1615', under the tuition of the learned
Robert Skynner one of the fellows, after-
wards successively bishop of Bristol, Oxford*
and Worcester, in the fourteenth year of his
age: where, at that early period of life, he
attracted the peculiar attention and esteem of
the society, more from his own personal and
intrinsic accomplishments* his amiable dispo-
sition, lively conversation, engaging address,
genius, and taste for polite literature, than
from his family connections, and his near re-
lation to the founderm. In 1636, He pub-
lished his VOYAGE INTO THE LEVANT*
which became exceedingly popular, and was
'Ex Registro in 4to. apud Coll. Trin. supr. chat. I find
kis elder brother Thomas, admitted with him a Con.victor of
the superior ranks ibid. Thomas quitted the college ia 1615.
Henry in 1619. ibid.
* Wood, Ath. Oxon. ii. 712.'
frequently

<page 226>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 207
frequently reprinted. But to say the truth,
this little work is the voyage of a sceptic:
it has more of the philosopher than the tra-
veller, and would probably never have been
^written, but for the purpose of insinuating his
religious sentiments. Yet his reflections are
so striking and original, and so artfully inter-
woven with the thread of his adventures, that
they enliven, instead of embarrassing, the nar-
rative. He has the plausible art of colouring
his paradoxes with the resemblance of truth.
So little penetration had the orthodox court
of Charles the first, that merely on the merit
of this book, he was appointed one of the
band of Pensioners'0. Sir Thomas Pope-
Blount his eldest son was born in 1649, and
was educated under his father's inspection.
His Censura celebriorum Authorum,
which is a compilation of great erudition and
labour, is well known to the critic and the li-
terary historian. Niceron unfortunately com-
pares the Censura with Baillet's Juge-
ment des Savans \ But Baillet has the
vanity and injustice to report the opinions of
other writers in his own words: our author
has the modesty and fidelity to transcribe and
* For some of his other pieces, see Wood'-s Ath. Oxon. ii.
712. And Langbaine's Dram. Poets, p. 327.
■ Mmo 1 res fetir/ir-vir, &C. torn. Xxiii. p. 399.
to

<page 227>
ao8 THE LIFE OF
to cite his authorities. His Essays on vari-
ous subjects are learned and judicious, and
they have the ease and freedom, without the
singularity, of Montaigne. Another of his
works, which has been superseded by those
who have used its materials, is Remarks on
Poetry. Of this piece it will be sufficient
to say, that it was honoured with the appro-
bation of lord Mulgrave, the most elegant
critic of the author's age. Charles Blount,
or Pope-Blount, esquire, second son of sir
Henry abovementioned, inherited his father's
philosophy. From an abhorence of super-
stition, he appears to have adopted the most
distant extremes of the theistic system. His An i-
ma Mundi, Oracles of Reason, Life
of Appollonius Tyanaeus, and Dia-
na of the Ephesians, written with great
learning, sagacity, wit, and force of reason-
ing, are the consolation of infidels, and are
melancholy monuments of admirable abilities
abused in the defence of a futile but danger-
ous cause °. In conformity to these princi-
ples, he died by his own hand in 1693. Bayle
has inaccurately represented the affecting story
of his death p.
0 See the Miscellaneous Works of Charles Blount, pub-
lished by Charles Gildon in 1693. And Wood, ubi supr.
» Artie. Apollonius Tyanaeus. The true story is this.
Mr. Blount, on the death of his wife, fell in love with her lister, a
1 lady

<page 228>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 209
I close my account of Dame Elizabeth
Powlett, and her nearer relations, with a few
words concerning the antiquity and dignity of
her family. Its ancestor was Le Blound lord
of Guifnes in Normany, whose sons Robert
and William le Blound, both entered Eng-
land with William the conqueror. William
was one of the captains in that expedition,
and quartered, with other Norman knights,
on the monks of Ely. Robert was created by
the conqueror, baron of Ixworth in Suffolk;
in which county he received a grant of thir-
teen lordships. Gilbert, his son, founded an
Augustine priory at Ixworth, in the reign of
William Rufus, which he endowed with
fourteen knights fees. One of Gilbert's de-
scendants was killed at the battle of Lewes,
lady of great beauty and accomplishments: she was not insensi-
ble to his attachment, bat was scrupulous about the legality of
marrying her sister'1, late husband. On his application to the
most learned civilians, and the archbishop of Canterbury, he
was informed, that such a match could not take place. On this,
the lady positively refused her consent, and Mr. Blount in a sit
of despair shot himself through the head. The wound not im-
mediately proving mortal, he lived five days: during which
time, he received no sustenance or medicines but from the hands
of the lady, who attended him with the most sympathetic ten-
derness till his last moments. This account I received from the
late sir Harry Pope-Blount, baronet, the last of the family, and
a diligent and faithful antiquary.
O in

<page 229>
aio THE LIFE OF
in the reign os Henry the third, where he
was standard-bearer to Mountford earl of
Leicester. In the progress of it's descent, this
family numbers many persons of singular
eminence and high stationq; and is, besides,
nobly connected by marriages. On the sides
of the tomb in Trinity college chapel above-
mentioned, are two coats: Pope impaling
Quarterings of Blount, viz. Barry, Nebule of
six, Or, and fable; And of Roger de Sutton,
ancestor of Elizabeth's mother, viz. A lyon
rampant. This is one coat. The other con-
sists of quarterings of Blount, Of the said Ro-
ger de Sutton; and, Of Nicholas de Wichard
lord of the manor of Olberston aforesaid in
the reign of Henry the third, marrying into
the said Roger, viz. Azure, a cheveron Ar-
gent, between three martletsr Or. These
arms are an additional and evident proof,
that Dame Elizabeth Powlett erected this
monument j in decorating which, slie was
so studious to introduce the ensigns and ho-
nors of her own family8.
* See Peacham's Complsat Gentleman, edit. 1661. pag.
.230. And Eng. Baronet, iv. 665. 675. 576. And ii. 367.
r See Burton's Leicestershire, p. ill.
* There is an old portrait of lady Powlett, in the Bursary at
Trinity college, painted, ai I judge from the drapery and the
age of the countenance, about the middle of Q. Elisabeth's
reign; by which me appears to have been handsome. This
picture

<page 230>
SIR THOMAS POPE, 211
picture was in the college at least before 1613. It is mentioned
in Comp. Burss. coll. 1612 13. I have been told that this
picture was painted by sir Antonio More, portrait and history
painter to Philip and Mary. Several of his pictures were in the
collection of king Charles the first, and at sir Philip Syden-
ham's at Brympton in Somersetshire, a family (as we have seen)
nearly related to Lady Powlett. More had one hundred ducats
for his common portraits. He died in 1575. I rather think
this picture is a copy of an original by More.
O2 SECT.

<page 231>
212 THE LIFE OF
\
SECT. VII.
IT may be necessary to speak of sir Tho-
mas Pope's friends, and of those with
whom he seems to have maintained any par-
ticular intimacy, connection, or intercourse;
notwithstanding most of their names have
before occurred incidentally. These were
sir Thomas More, lord Audley, sir Richard
Southwell, sir Thomas Stradling, sir Nicho-
las Bacon, sir Thomas Cornewallys, sir Fran-
cis Englefield, sir Robert Southwell, sir Ed-
ward Waldegrave, William Cordall, esquire,
Richard Gooderick, John Wyseman, sir Ar-
thur Darcy, sir Gilbert Gerrard, lord Vaulx,
sir Thomas Brydges, cardinal Pole, Thirlby
bishop of Ely, sir Thomas Whyte, lord Wil-
liams of Thame, Whyte bishop of Winches-
ter, and Thomas Slythurste, president of Tri-.
nity college so often mentioned.
I need not repeat his last interview with
sir Thomas More: of whom it will be
sufficient to add here, that he was the great-
est ornament of the Englisli nation at the res-
toration of polite literature; that he was a
man

<page 232>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 213
man whose life and death are equal prodigies,
and whose valuable virtues and untimely fate
are alike admired and lamented \ Thomas
lord Audley, made lord high chancellor of
England on fir Thomas More's resignation in
1533, was probably sir Thomas Pope's parti-
cular patron, and perhaps not a little instru-
mental towards his rife in the world, as has
been already hinted. In how great confidence
and esteem sir Thomas was held by lord Aud-
ley, is further manifested, from his being ap-
pointed, with sir Edward North, and two
others, an executor of lord Audley's willb j
in which, among several other directions, they
are requested to deliver, the next new year's
day after his decease, one hundred pounds to
the king j from whom the testator professes
to have received all his reputations and benefits c.
Few of the favorites of Henry the eighth
appear to have more successfully recom-
mended themselves to their sovereign than
* Erasmus who always preserved the highest opinion of More,
has, with great elegance and truth, drawn hit character at full
length, Epist. 447. See also 605. More was among Erasmus*!
most intimate friends.
k Registr. Allen. Cur. Prarog. qu. i. dat. April, xix. 1544
'He bequeathes the residue of his plate, goods, and chattels,
to lady Elizabeth his wife, fir Edward North, and sir Tho-
mas Pope, knights, and his servants Edmond Martyn and
Thomas Barbour. And "the sum of eclj /. to either of the
«• said sir Edward and sir Thomas."
O 1 lord

<page 233>
214 THE LIFE OF
lord Audley. But although by his perseve-
rance in the business of the Divorce, and the
dissolution of the monasteries, he so gratified
the kings private views, as " to sustain, ac-
** cording to his own declaration, much da-
"mage and infamy •," yet the best historians
admit, that he opposed the dangerous designs
of his arbitrary master in a matter of the
highest importance. In 1539, many severe
acts were made, in which those styled the six
bloody articles were included; and the pre-
rogative was carried to such an enormous
height, that the king's proclamation was al-
lowed to attain the force of a law. It does
not very plainly appear who were his majesty's
principal counsellors in this affair: but we
arc assured, by concurrent and undoubted
authorities, that the rigorous execution of
those laws which the king had at first in-
tended, was prevented by the spirited inter-
position of lord Audley d. But I forbear en-
tering further into the history of this distin-
guished statesman and lawyer; who bore so
considerable and so public a share in the most
important transactions of the reign of Henry
the eighth. I shall only add, that with sir
Thomas Pope, he was an encourager of li-
terature; and the sounder, or restorer, of
4 See Biograph. Burr. Vol. i. Audliy.
Magdalen

<page 234>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 215
Magdalen college in Cambridge c. Sir Ri-
chard Southwell was one of the chief
mourners at sir Thomas Pope's burial. He was
educated at Bennet college in Cambridge, and
from thence removed to the inns of courtf.
He was summoned, in 1537, with many
lords and knights, to attend the baptism of
prince Edward *. He was a visitor at the
dissolution of religious houses h, privy coun-
sellor to Henry the eighth, and an executor
of his will*. In 1545, although a strict ca-
tholic, he protected, in his house called
the Charter-house at London, his tutor at
Cambridge, one John Loude, a polite scho-
lar, who was persecuted for heresy, being a
friend to his literature notwithstanding his
religion *. When fir Thomas More wa»
committed to the tower, he was sent by the
king, with Rich the sollicitor-general, to take
away More's books'. Henry the eighth left
him by will two hundred pounds™. In the
■ Fuller, Hist. Cambr. pag. 120.
f Strype, Eccl. Mem. i. 385.
* Ibid. ii. 5.
fc Rymer, Feed. xiv. 558.
1 Masters's History of C. C. C. C. p. 373.
k Strype, ut supr. i. 386.
1 See this whole transactiou in the State Trtali.
■ Rymer, Fœd. xv. 117.
O 4 reign

<page 235>
2i6 THE LIFE OF
reign of Edward the sixth, he was appointed
one of the counsellors to the young king,
during his minority11. In 1551, he was con-
cerned with lord Wriothesley, and others, in
bringing about the fall of the protector So-
merset; who was become odious to the peo-
ple on accont of his ambitious views, and
the riches he had amassed in plundering the
revenues of the church and crown. But in
consequence of this intrigue, which was
deemed a faction, he was imprisoned, but
pardoned. At the accession of Mary, he
received a grant from the queen of an annual
pension of one hundred pounds", for his ser-
vices in opposing the duke of Northumber-
land who disputed her title, and was accord-
ingly beheaded for rebellionp. In the fame
reign, 1553, he was master of the ordinance
and armory *; the nature of which, at that
time, appears from the following warrant,
requiring him to deliver, "towardes the fur-.
■ Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 457.
0 This affair is related, perhaps with some partiality, in an
old treatise entitled, " A short treatise of politilce power and
"of the true obedience, etc. Compyled by D. J. P. B. R. VV.
"1556." i2mo. It is supposed to be written by Doctor John
Poynet bisliop os Rochester, then of Winchester. See iignat.
iiii. The book appears to be printed abroad. See supr. p. 58.
» Rymer, Feed. xv. 355.
* Viz. Maii 2. Lit. Pat. Mar. an. reg. i. Par. 4. With a so.
Iary of cc marcs.
niture

<page 236>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 217
*' niture of the bande of horsemen, appoint-
"ed presently to attend upon her Grace,
"theis parcells of armour; four hundred
"demy launces, with all their furniture, five
"hundred corseletts, one hundred and fiftie
"fhirtes of mail, with morions to the fame."
Afterwards mention is made of " two hun-
•• dred bowes, with fhefts of arrowes, two
"grosse of bowstringes, fifty partizans [hal-
"berds] and five hundred pikes'." In 1554,
the queen gave him a licence for forty re-
tainers ', an honor only granted to persons
of uncommon distinction. In this reign he
was also one of the privy council, and re-
peatedly joined in the most important com-
missions ' i one of which he executed in con-
junction with sir Thomas Pope. In the
first year of queen Elizabeth, he was con-
tinued master of the ordinance and ar-
mory; when he made suit to the lords,
that he might exhibit a declaration of the
state of his office, and of the military stores
then remaining in his posession. In a letter
to Slythurste, the first president of Trinity
college, dated Whitmonday 1558, sir Tho-
mas Pope proposes to place his son in law
• Burghley's State Papers, p. 166. 169.
• See Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.
• Burghley's Pap. ut supr, paffim. And Strype, Rymer, ice.
John

<page 237>
2i8 THE LIFE OF
John Beressord abovementioned, a student in
his college, and concerning whose success in
life he appears to have been very sollicitous, as
a page with fir Richard Southwell, and his
brother sir Robert, " to lerne there amonge
"his [sir Richard's] childern, the Latin
'* tonge, the French tonge, and to playe at
"wepons u." These at this time, were
probably the sole and complete accomplish-
ments of a gentleman. Sir Thomas Strad-
ling w, another of the chief mourners at sir
Thomas Pope's funeral, was of faint Do-
nat's castle in Glamorganshire. When queen
Mary succeeded to the crown*, 1553, he
was appointed, with others, a muster-master
to the queen's armyy, and a commissioner
for the marches of Walesz. In the fame
0 Sir Richard Southwell's children were placed, in his own
house, under the care of John Loude. Of whom he used to say,
"He will make my boy, like himself, too good a Latinist, and
?' too great a heretic." Strype, Eccl. Mem. i. 386.
Tusser the poet, in his Husbandrie, mentions fir Richard
Southwell, as a most bountiful patron. Edit. 1593, 4to. pag.
>59-
w Knighted Feb. 17. 3 Edw. vi. MSS. Cotton. Claud. C.
3. sol. 190.
x In the reign of Henry viii. the king grants " Thomas
'* Stradlyng, uni Dapiferorum fuorum, officiom Bedelli" of
certain lordships in Glamorganshire, &c. Bill. Signat. Hen.
yiii. An. 17. Sept. 19.
1 Burghley's State Papers, p. 158,
1 t Ibid. 201,
ye
ar

<page 238>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 219
year he was representative in parliament for
East-Grinstead in Sussex; and, the follow-
ing year for Arundel in the same county \
In 1558, he was joined with sir Thomas
Pope, and others, in a commission, before
mentioned at large, for the suppression of
heretics b. He was father of sir Edward Strad-
ling, remarkable in the reign of Elizabeth,
for his critical skill in the British language,
and his patronage of the Welch antiquarian
literature c. Sir Thomas Stradling magnifi-
cently repaired the ancient castle of faint
Donat's d; and built faint Mary's chapel,
adjoining to faint Donat's church, in which
he was buried c.
Sir Nicholas Bacon, one of the exe-
cutors of sir Thomas Pope's will, in which
he likewise remembers him with a token of
"Willis, Notit. Parl. p. 30. 38.
* See supr. p. 52.
c See Joannis Stradlingi Epicrammatum libriquatuor. Lond.
1607. 8vo. He was nephew to sir Edward, lib. i. pag. 3. See
also Wood's Ath. Oxon. i. 350, 351.
* As appears from an epitaph upon him in Stradling's epi-
grams, where arc the following lines, p. 10.
Hie Donataea quondam fulgebat in arce,
Castra diu proavis nobilitata suis.
Omnia qua; vincit, castra hxc abfumpferat setas,
Hujus at ingonio pæne novata vides.
e Wood, ut supr.
affection

<page 239>
220 THE LIFE OF
affection, calling him moreover" his most
** true and assured friend," was sir Thomas
Pope's neighbour at Gorhambury near faint
Alban's; where he built in 1566, a beautiful
house, which still remains a monument of
ancient magnificence and manners, with much
of its original furniture and decorations f.
He was likewise sollicitor', while sir Thomas
was treasurer, of the first court of Augmen-
tations. During the reign of Henry the eighth,
having enjoyed many marks of royal favor,
more from virtuous industy than from mean
submission, he was made by queen Elizabeth,
1559, lord keeper of the great seal, and a
privy counsellorh. In these stations, he
behaved with that wisdom and integrity
which their importance and dignity required.
To this character it may be superfluous to
add, what alone might supply the place of a
prolix panegyric, that he was the father of
Francis lord Verulam.
Sir Thomas Cornewallys, one of the
Overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will, all
'In Aubrey's MSS. Lives, Mus. Afhmol. is a particular
description of it.—It is now destroyed, 1779.
* Batteley's edition of Somner's Canterbury. App. p.118.
Birch's Mem. of Q^ Elizabeth, i. 10.
* Pugd. Bar. ii. 437. And Orig. Jurid. Chron. fer. p. 90,
whom

<page 240>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 221
whom he styles his most trujly and loving
friends, was sheriff of Norfolk just before
queen Mary's accession, where he raised a
considerable force against those disaffected
and factious subjects who opposed her title.
For this seasonable and serviceable assistance,
he was immediately made one of her privy
council, treasurer of Calais ', and comptrol-
ler of her houfhold". When it was debated
in council to fend the princess Elizabeth out
of the kingdom, in order that she might be
excluded from the succession, he boldly dis-
suaded the queen from a proceeding at once
unjust and imprudent1. Sir Francis En-
glefield, a second overseer of sir Thomas
Pope's will, and joined with him in a com-
mission, was knighted by Edward the sixth™,
but afterwards imprisoned in the Tower by
the protector Somerset, because he concurred
with sir Edward Waldegrave, and others, in
suppressing the commands of the privy coun-
cil for the prohibition of mass in the family
of his mistress the princess Mary, with whom
he then resided at Copped-hall in Essex \
'Viz. Maii 7. Lit. p:it. I Mar. par. 7.
k Dugd. Bar. ii. 480. And from his monument in the
church of Brome, co. Suffolk. Sec Wever, Fun. Mon. p. 764.
1 Camden's Eliz. edit. Hearne. Vol. i. Apparatus, p. 21.
m Dugdale's Warw. ed. 2. ii. 891.
■ Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 151. seq.
But

<page 241>
222 THE LIFE OF
But when Mary, succeeded to the throne,
he was constituted a privy-counsellor, consta-
ble of Windsor castle, and master of the
great wardrobe °. She also granted him one
hundred retainers b. In the reign of Eliza-
beth, he left the kingdom, and retiring into
Spain, became a zealous advocate to king
Philip in favor of Mary queen of Scots'.
But Elizabeth, highly provoked at the inso-
lence of a man who presumed to plead the
cause of a lady more beautiful than herself,
commanded him to be outlawed and attaint-
ed r. This bigotted knight was much of-
fended at the singular forbearance and indul-
gence shewn to the celebrated Roger Ascham,
whom he looked upon as a most dangerous
heretic, during the rigid reign of queen Mary:
but there are papers to prove, that it was
principally by sir Thomas Pope's influence
and earnest interposition, that Englefield was
persuaded to abandon a violent prosecution
which he had commenced against Ascham \
• Burnet, Res. ii. 308. Collins Peer. iii. 259. ed. 2.—And
Lit. pat. Mar. an reg. i. par. 6. Et ibid. par. 10.
t Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.
1 Strype, Ann. Res. i. 371.
'See cafe in Coke's Reports, p. vii. sol. 11.—And Strype,
Ann. Res. ii. 26. 538. iii. 246, &c.
• See Strype's Life of Sir T. Smyth, p. 65. I was informed
by the late sir Harry Pope-Blount, that a most valuable portrait
of

<page 242>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 223
Sir Robert Southwell, another of the
overseers of sir Thomas Pope's will, and
brother to sir Richard, was made master of
the rolls, 1542, by Henry the eighth', and
continued in that office till about the middle
of Edward the sixth, 1550". In 1542, he
was representative in parliament for the
county of Surrey, and often afterwards for
the county of Kent, and several boroughs, in
the reigns of Edward and Mary w. He was
a receiver of abby lands from Henry the
eighth*. He died in November, 1559y.
Queen Mary granted him twenty retainers ".
He was appointed a delegate and commissary
in the first year of queen Mary, with many
civilians, and others of the first honor and
quality, for the restitution of bishop Bonnera.
He was one of the attornies, while sir Tho-
mas Pope was treasurer, of the court of aug-
of Roger Ascham, painted by Hans Holbein, was removed
from Tyttenhanger-house, about the reign of king William.
This had undoubtedly been placed there by fir Thomas Pope.
See supr. p. 81.
1 Dugd. Orig. Jurid. Chron. Ser. p. 85.
* Ibid. p. 89.
* Willis, Notit. Parl. p. 7, 20, 21, 27, 49, 56/
x Tanner, Notit. Mon. sol. edit. p. 228, 535, 560.
* Strype, Ann. Res. i. 193.
1 Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.
* Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 23. See also ibid. 2B9.
mentations.

<page 243>
224 THE LIFE OF
mentationsb. Sir Edward Waldegrave,
another of the overseers of sir Thomas Pope's
will, was a principal officer in the houstiold
of the princess Mary, and committed to close
imprisonment to the Tower, with sir Francis
Englesield, and sir Robert Rochester, for
omitting to forbid the celebration of mass
in her house \ The princess when she suc-
ceeded to the crown, had him much in
esteem; and in consideration of his sufferings
and unshaken constancy, she constituted him
a privy-counsellor, master of the great ward-
robe d, and chancellor of the duchy of Lan-
caster c. He was created knight of the
carpet, by lord Arundel, the day following
her majesty's coronation r. He was appoint-
ed one of the executors of cardinal Pole's
will j in which the cardinal assigns him a
gratuity of fifty pounds'. In the year 1561,
he was ordered, with his lady, to the Tower,
for hearing mass in his family h. Strype, in
the spirit of his honest simplicity, tells us ',
h Weever, Fun. Mon. pag. 109.
c Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 253. seq.
* Viz. Jan. 16. Lit. pat. Mar. an. reg. 1. par. 2.
e Collins, Peer. iii. 553. ed. 2.
s Collins, ibid. But fee Strype, ut supr. iii. Append p. II.
« Life of Pole, P. ii.
k Strype, Ann. Res. i. p. 233.
1 Ibid.
that

<page 244>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 225
that " this knight and his lady had the cha-
*' raster of very good alms-folks, in respect
"of their great liberality to the Poor."
Three other Overseers of sir Thomas Pope's
will were sir William Cordall, Richard
Gooderyke, and John Wyseman. Sir Wil-
liam Cordall was lent reader of Lin-
coln's inn, 1553", and afterwards frequently
governor of that house '. In the same year
he was appointed sollicitor-genera-1, by queen
Marym; and in 1557, master of the rolls0.
Sir Thomas Pope mentions him in this ca-
pacity,, in a letter to the president of his col-
lege, dated at Clerkenwell, on Whitmonday,
1558. "I (hall buy of the master of the
"rolles, ii fayre manors with two advowsons
*' in Lyncolnshere which I entende to gyve
"to my collegge, &c °." He was one of
Mary's privy counsellors p, who granted him
the privilege of twelve retainers 4. He was
one of the executors of cardinal Pole's will,
k Dugd. Orig. Jurid. p. 252. col. 2.
1 Ibid. 260. col. 1.
m Ibid. Chron. Ser. p. 81.—In the patent he appears to have
belonged to the court of Augmentations. Lit. pat. Mar. an.
reg. 1. par. 8.
n Dugd. ibid. p. 91.
• Ex Orig. Thes. coll. Trin. ut supr.
t Council-book, MSS. Harl. ut supr.
* Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii. 480.
P with

<page 245>
226 THE LIFE OF
with a bequest of fifty pounds'. He was
likewise an executor, and is styled a beloved
friend, of the great earl of Dorset*. In 1558
he was speaker of the house of Commons'.
The mastership of the rolls he kept late in
the reign of Elizabeth, with much respect,
till 1581". William Lambarde's famous book,
entitled Archaionomia or system of Saxon
laws, translated into Latin, and printed at
London in 1568, is dedicated to this sir
William Cordall; and in the dedication, the
learned editor acknowledges the many obli-
gations and encouragements he had received
from sir William's patronage in the prosecu-
tion of that valuable work. Abraham Fle-
ming also dedicates his translation of The
General Dolitrine of Earthquakes to this wor-
thy patron w. He is said to have been a great
encourager of Saxton, who published maps of
England, in the reign of queen Elizabeth".
He was appointed visitor of faint John's col-
lege in Oxford, during life, by the founder
sir Thomas Whyte; and is supposed to have
'Life of Pole, P. h.
* Ex testam. 8 Eliz. apud Collins Peer. i. 517. ed. i.
1 Willis, Not. ParL Spbakers, pag. 113.
* Dugd. ubi supr. p. 97.
w Lond. 1580. 8vo.
1 Hcarne's coll. MSS. Bibl. Bodl. vol. 123. p. 143.
drawn

<page 246>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 227
drawn up the statutes of that society by the
founder's desirey. He lived at Long-Mel-
ford in Suffolk1: and, in 1578, gave exam-
ple for the magnificent feasting of queen
Elizabeth in that county; into which her
majesty was received by three troops, one
of two hundred young gentlemen cloathed
in white velvet, another of three hundred
gentlemen of the county apparelled in black
velvet coats and costly chains, and a third
of fifteen hundred attendants well mounted
on horseback \ Richard Gooderyke ap-
pears to have been a lawyer of great emi-
nence j and his name is frequently mention-
ed, with other chief lawyers and noblemen,
in various commissions and proclamations,
during the reigns of Henry the eighth, Ed-
ward, Mary, and Elizabeth \ Leland, in
1 His arms were in the windows of the chapel and hall of
faint John's college. Mutton's Collections, MSS. Bibl. Bodl.
p. 202. In Museol. Bibl. They have been long since destroy-
ed. There is a curious old picture of him, in faint Jchn's col-
lege, by one Ctrneliut dt Zum. These statutes are digested from
those of New-College in the fame University.
* Collins, Peer. ii. 266. ed. i. He founded a hospital, at
Long-Melford, for a warden and twelve brethren. Strype's
Parker, p. 23. B. i. ch. vi.
* Hollingfhed, Chron. iii. 1287. Compare Wcever, p. 748.
And Camd. Eliz. vol. ii. p. 322. edit. Hearne.
* Strype, Eccl. Mem. and Ann. passim.
P 2 the

<page 247>
228 THE LIFE OF
-
the Encomia1 of illustrious persons, compli-
ments him when a young man, for his pro-
mising virtues and abilities j and from thence
infers his future reputation in the profession
of the lawd. He was an attorney % while
sir Thomas Pope was master of the woods,
of the second court of Augmentations. Ed-
ward the sixth, in 1551, granted him an an-
nuity of one hundred poundsf. He was of-
ten a representative in parliament%. He was
c Principum ac illujirium aliquot et eruJittrum in Angli* •viro-
rum Encomia, i3c. edit. 1389. qu. pag. 108. In the preface
to Ascham's Scholemaster, printed 1589, fir Richard Sack-
ville at a conference with Afcham about education, mentions,
"our deare frende, good master Geodericke, whose judgment I
"cold well beleevc, &c." This is perhaps the fame.
* Ad RiCARDUM GOODERICIUM.
Magnificum retines, Goderici candide, nomen,
Quod vel Sazonicum recte idioma probat.
Sic bonus ac dives diceris jure latino;
Moribus hoc nomen convenit omne tuis.
Nominis ilia tui, tarn bella notatio non te
Constituit ditem, constituitve bonum.
Splendida feliceni te virtus reddidit una,
jjt Macte hac virtute, et dona beata feres.
Causidico sic fama foro tua, lausque nitebit,
Et te patronum percolet ipse cliens.
Nee fie contentus virtuti imponere morem,
Sufpice doctrinac lumina clara piæ.
Ilia tuas possunt ad cœlum tollere laudei,
Te quoque per nireas condecorare notas,
• Rym. Feed. xv. 334.
f Strype, Eccl. Mem. ii. 498.
« Willis, Notit. Parl. pp. 12. 73. 91.
born

<page 248>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 229
born in Yorkshire 1524 \ and was high-
sheriff of that county 1579 '. He was nearly
related to Goodryke bishop of Ely, high
chancellor of England k. John Wyseman'
was of Canfield-Hall in Essex n. I find him
one of the commissioners for certifying to
Henry the eighth, the value of all the mo-
nastic and other spiritual foundations in the
county of Essex". He was a member of par-
liament, in 1554, for Maiden in Essex: and
in the following year, for East-Grinstead
in Sussex".
Sir Arthur Darcy, to whom fir Thomas
Pope bequeathes a valuable memorial in his
will, and with whom he was joined in a com-
mission, is said to have been " a soldier of
"great sideline and trust '." Upon informa-
* Collins, Bar. ii. 259.
'Drake's Eborac. p. 354.
* Collins, ubi supr. See Strypc's Craijmer, p. 221.
1 Sir Thomas Pope is licenced to alicmre to this John Wysei
man, and others, the manors of Ditton, Brainpton, and Syfling-
ton, in Kent. Pat. Phil. Mar 3. 4. Test. Apr. 9. Par. 8.
4
■ Collins. Peer. p. 530. Waldigra-vt. Ed. ii.
■ In the instrument he is styled Auditor. I suppose of the ex-
chequer, or augmentation office. DateJ 26 Men. viii. Jan. 30.
MSS. Tanner. Bibl. Bodl.
* Willis Not. Parl. p. 42. 51.
I Letter of sir Ph. Hoby in Burghley's State papers, ut supr.
p. 125.
P 3 tion

<page 249>
i3o • THE LIFE OF
tion given to Henry the eighth, that the
emperor Charles the fifth had threatened war
against England, in 1532, and by some secret
negotiations, engaged James the fourth of
Scotland to his assistance j he entered Scotland
with an army, and wasted the country. In the
same year he was deputed captain of the Isle
of Jersey j and afterwards, in 1551, by Ed-
ward the sixth, lieutenant of the tower of
London*. He was moreover an encourager of
polite learning, then begining to grow fashion-
able, as we learn from Leland; who addresses
a copy of verses to him in the Encomia';
and fays, that sir Arthur Darcy was present,
and countenanced him when he presented, in
1545, his new years gift to the King'. Sir
Gilbert Gerard, to whom sir Thomas
Pope also leaves a memorial, was autumnal
reader of Gray's-inn, 1553'; and in the fol-
lowing year, treasurer of that society with
Nicholas Bacon \ He was appointed, by
i Dugd. Bar. i. 374. seq. And MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus. 284.
—61. sol. 94. He was made knight of the garter at Green-
wich, Apr. 23. 6 Edw. vi. Anstis, Ord. Gart. i. 446.
'Leland calls him,
Doctrinx eximium politioris
Cultorem. p. 36. edit, ut supr,
* Leland, ibid.
* Dugd. Orig. Jurid. p. 293. col. 2.
■ Ibid. p. 298. col. 1.
queen

<page 250>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 231
queen Elizabeth, at her accession, 1559, at-
torney general w, and on the death of sir Wil-
liam Cordall, in 1588, master of the rolls *;
in which station he remained till 1594y,
when he probably died. The memorable
William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, appoin-
ted him in 1569, with others his good lords
and friends, an overseer of his will, with a
reward of fifty pounds, to be given him in
money, plate, or jewels1. William Lord
Vaulx, of Harwedon, to whom sir Thomas
Pope leaves a legacy of one hundred pounds,
was summoned to parliament 1557. He
founded an hospital at Irtlingburgh in North-
amptonshire \ In 1582, he was accused
before lord Burghley and sir Walter Mild-
may, and heavily fined, for harbouring Cam-
pion the Jesuit, but was afterwards reconciled
to the queen ". Notwithstanding this popish
attachment, he was one of the noblemen ap-
pointed to conduct her majesty from Hatfield
w Ibid. Chron. Ser. p. 91.
* Dugd. ubi supr. p. 97.
1 Ibid. p. 99. He was knighted at Greenwich, 1579. 5 Jul.
MSS. Cotton. Cland, C. 3. sol. 245. b.
1 Registr. Lyon. Cur. Prser. Cant. qu. 15.
1 Dugd. Bar. ii. 305.
* Strype, Ann. Res. iii. 126. And MSS. Harl. Brit. Mus.
859. 4.
P 4 to

<page 251>
224 THE LIFE OF
to London, on the Death of her sister Marye.
Sir Thomas Brydges, to whom, by the
name of Mr. Thomas Abrydge, sir Thomas
Pope also bequeathes a remembrance, was
brother to John first earl of Chandoisd. In
Mary's reign he was lieutenant of the Tower
of London e. Fox mentions a friendly reli-
gious conference between him, secetary
Bourne, and Bishop Ridley, in the Towerf.
When the princess Elizabeth was confined
in the tower, he saved her life, by detecting
and communicating a plot which bishop Gar-
diner is said to have contrived for her imme-
diate executionE. When he led, as lieutenant
of the tower, lady Jane Gray to the scaffold,
Jje begged her to bestow on him some small
present, which he might keep as a perpetual
memorial of her \ She gave him her table-
book, where she had just written three senten-
ces on seeing her husband's headless body
c Strype, ibid. i. Append, p. ■>.
* Sec Strype, F.ccl. Mem. iii. 62. 478.
e Both sir John and sir Thomas Bridges, knights, occur lieu-
tenants of the tower in Q^ Mary's reign. Baker's Collectan. ex
MSS. Camdert. Brit. Mus. 7033. Vol. vi. pag. 341. As was
Edmund, the second earl. Dugd. Bar. ii. 595. See HollingiV
head, iii. 1099 >>00, 1103. In one of which places sir "John
is put for sir Thomas.
f Martyrol. ii. IZ97.
• Hollingsh. ut supr. pag. 1130.
k Ibid. IIco,
carried

<page 252>
SIR THOMAS POPE. zn
carried back to the tower in a cart. They
were written one in Greek, another in Latin,
and a third in English'. That sir Thomas
Pope was nearly connected with Cardinal
Pole, appears from passages in his letters. I
have before mentioned his application to the
cardinal, for obtaining a licence for three of
his fellows to preach. Sir Thomas Pope in a
letter to the president of his college, 1558,
1 Heylin, 167. But by mistake he fays it was sir John Gage.
See what is said of sir Thomas Brydges, supr. p. 45. And of
John lord Chandois, p. 69. It may be added, that this Thomas,
or sir, Bridges, who was of Cornebury in Oxfordshire, occurs
in a grant of lands to sir T. Pope, Pat. 31. Hen. viii. par. 4.
And sir Thomas Bridges is mentioned as one of the gentlemen
of Oxfordshire, present at Cranmer's execution. Strype's Cran-
mer, png. 384. b. iii. ch. si. I presume he had some appoint-
ment in the court of Henry viii. For he attended at the funeral
of the king; on which occasion he bore the dragon-standard
between two serjeants at arms with their maces. Strype, Eccl.
Mem. ii. Append. Numb. x. He was a considerable lharer of
abbey lands in Oxfordshire, with Sir T. Pops; particularly
of the lands of the monastery of Bruerne: As appears by the
patent above cited. In his Will, he mentions the Man/ton-
bouse of Bruerne; which, I suppose, was the monastery. Also
the demesnes of that house, and several of its estates. In the
fame will he bequeathes to lord Chandois twenty corslets: to his
son Henry the rest of armour, and his best chain of gold. To
lord Grey of Wilton, in consideration of his loss by being ap-
prehended at Gynes, 50 1. Testam. Th. Brydges. dat. Octob.
18, 1559. Probat. Feb. 13, 1559. In. Cur. Prærog. Cant,
registr. Melerfh, qu. 13. He received from Edward vi. a grant
of the abbey of Keinsham near Bristol. Tanner's Not. Mon.
edit. sol. pag. 469.
speaks.

<page 253>
fc34 THE LIFE 6f
speaks of procuring a prebend for one Hey-
wood, and adds, "my lord cardinalls Grace
M and my lord of Elie [Thirlby] are both
'* willing." In another letter to the fame,
dated 1557, he fays, "Towching Mr. Hey-
** wood's recompens, I wold be glad to un-
"derstonde what he wold have; and therup-
'* pon wold make my sute to my lord cardi-
"nail's Grace, and my lord of Elie, accord-
"inglie k." In another to the fame, and
On the fame business, without date, he fays,
"my lord cardinall's grace has promised me
"a prebend of xx /." In another to the
same, dated July the ninth, 1558, he tells
the president, that if his son in law John
Beresford, or Basford, mentioned above, then
at Trinity college, should prove a good pro-
k This Mr. Heywood was 'Richard Hay-ward, rector of Gar-
sington, in Oxfordshire, to which he was presented by the crown
about August, 1556. Rym. Feed. xv. p. 442. The next year sir
Thomas Pope purchased the said rectory os Philip and Mary,
and annexed it to the presidentship of Trinity college. This
application to cardinal Pole, and the bishop of Ely, was un-
doubtedly to dispossess Hayward, by procuring him some equi-
valent, that the president might immediately succeed to the
rectory. Which appears to have been done, yet not without
some difficulty, nor in consequence of these applications. Re-
gistr. prim. coll. Trin. sol. 122. b. Arthur Yeldard, President,
was instituted to this rectory, on the resignation of R. Hay-
wood, Sept. 8. 156a. REGisTR.Episcopat.Oxon. Sede Va-
cant, sol. 219.
ficient

<page 254>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 235
ficient in the latin tongue, " I will not fail
"to sue to my lord cardinally grace for
"him:" in order that he "might, as is said
"in another letter, attende uppon his grace."
Of the cardinal's character it will be suffi-
cient to observe, that he is more endeared to
posterity by private virtues and amiable qua-
lifications, than ennobled by birth and dig-
nities. Instead of imbruing his hands in the
blood of martyrs, and loading the consciences
of mankind with arbitrary decrees and unna-
tural edicts, he corresponded with learned
men, and introduced into England the pure
and useful elegancies of classical composition'.
1 t have before referred the reader to Wood's History and
ANTiquinEs of the university of Oxford, for an account of
Pole's visitation of the university. I will here add an anecdote
relating to that transaction not mentioned by Wood. The car-
dinal finding saint Mary's college, (where Erasmus had studied,
but which had been dissolved as a seminary for various mona-
steries of augustine canons,) although very ruinous, a place
which might be made convenient' for the reception of students,
ordered it to be repaired and fitted up for that purpose, Sept.
17. 1556. Accordingly, a principal was appointed to it: yet
on condition, that he mould resign his office, in case the cardi-
nal should ever be disposed to convert the said college into a
house of religious. The principal's name was Alexander El-
cocke, A. M. But John Wayte lord as tbtsoil of the said col-
lege refused entry to the new principal into the premisses, '• ot
"paret cubicula studiosis." Registr. Cur. Cancell. Oxon. GG.
sol. 63. in Archiv. Univ. Oxon. I know not what was the
immediate consequence of this proceeding: but it is certain
that

<page 255>
236 THE LIFE OF
Sir Thomas Pope submitted to the cardi-
nal the statutes of his college, as appears
from a letter to the President: which, while it
pays a compliment to the cardinal's taste,
likewise illustrates what has been before ob-
served about the state of literature at this pe-
riod. "My lord cardinally grace has had
■' the overseeinge of my statutes. He much
"lykes well that I have therein ordered the
*' latin tongem to be redde to my fchollers.
"But he advyses me to order the greeke to
"be more taught there, than I have provyd-
"ed. This purpose I well lyke: but I fear
"the tymes will not bear it now". I re-
"member when I was a yong scholler at
"Eton, the greeke tongue was growing
"apace: the studie of which is now alate
"much decaid"." The passages in the let-
ters above cited likewise inform us, how far
that neither of the cardinal's schemes took effect. Erasmus in
some of his Epistles speaks feelingly of the repose which he
enjoyed, and the felicity witX which he prosecuted his studies,
for two years, in this retired house. The chapel, no inelegant
fabric, containing the curious monuments of the founder Tho-
mas Holden and his wife, together with the cloister, was not
completely demolished till the year 1656. Nothing now re-
mains but a part of the gatehouse, which fronts westward.
■ The elastics.
* Vid. supr. p. 156.
• To the president, dat. Hatfield. 1556.
sir

<page 256>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 237
sir Thomas Pope was connected with Thirl-
by, bishop of Ely '. He was constituted the
first, and only bishop of Westminster by
Henry the eighth5. He was, by Edward
the sixth, translated to Norwich, and after-
wards by queen Mary to Ely >, by whom he
was also appointed a privy counsellor', and
joined in commission with sir Thomas Pope
and others for the suppression of heretics \
By all these princes he was much esteemed
for his experience in political affairs, and fre-
quently employed as an envoy to foreign
courts. In the reign of Elizabeth he was'
ejected and imprisoned for persevering in po-
pery; but was afterwards received into the
family of archbishop Parker, who, not more
on account of his former dignity, than of
his learning, candor, and affability, treated
him with due respect and humanity \
Whyte, bishop of Winchester, became the
first visitor of Trinity college in Oxford. It
is reasonable to suppose, that sir Thomas
Pope's real motive for appointing the bishops
of Winchester to be visitors of his college,
'See also Append. Numb. xix.
* Burnet, Res. RicorJi. i. 246.
'Goodwyn, ut supr. p. 333.
• See supr. p. 52.
1 Goodwyn, ubi supr.
originated

<page 257>
ztf THE LIFE OP
originated from Gardiner, who was the bishop
of Winchester when the foundation was pro-
jected 1 and who, moreover, had been gover-
nor of a college at Cambridge j was now
chancellor of that university, a learned civi-r
Jian, a scholar of the first rank, an eminent
patron of literature", and bore the greatest
* Gardiner's literary character has been commonly overlooked
in his political, and is rarely regarded or acknowledged. He
was admirably skilled in the Greek language, at a time when
it was cultivated in England only by a few neglected scholars.
His ideas of pure Latinity were refined to a fault; and he car-
ried -his notions of the chaste Roman phraseology to such a
nicety, as to be esteemed a Ciceronian by his cotemporaries.
Leland, the most polite classical writer in Eagland at that pe-
riod, congratulates some of his elegant friends, on their being
educated in the college over which Gardiner presided at Cam-
bridge; and which, under such a governor, had become the
seat of eloquence and of the choir of the Muses. Leland also
characterises Gardiner by the epithet Disertus, or the master
of genuine Latinity; and calls him the restorer of classical
composition, and the study of philology, at Cambridge. En-
com. p. 100. edit. 1589. Le'and paid these compliments
before Gardiner was a bishop, and when there were no tempta-
tions to flattery. Many of Ascham's terse Latin epistles are ad-
dressed to this prelate: in which, his distinguished learning, his
sollicitude for the revival of ancient letters, and his general pa-
tronage, are repeatedly displayed in the highest yet unaffected
terms of panegyric. In one of these, Ascham expresses his
great satisfaction, that Gardiner, who excells all others in cri-
tical discernment, had so warmly approved his Toxophilvs,
then just published, and written with a view to teach a just
English style; and desires that the bishop, fro to amort quo Ult-
rat tt tarum cultoris unkt ampUatris, would recommend that
book

<page 258>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 239
sway in all civil and ecclesiastical affairs. But
Gardiner dying while the statutes were yet
book to the king. Lib. ii. p. 85. b. edit. 1581. In another,
be thanks the bishop for honouring him with To many ma:is of
notice and attention, when he came, an unknown and obscure
academic, to court. He recommends a tutor to the duke of
Norfolk's nephew; and wishes that Gardiner, who is so emi-
nent a judge and protector of literary merit, would ratify the
choice. Ibid. p. 92. a. In a third, lamenting the untimely
death of king Edward the sixth, he petitions Gardiner among
other requests, to intercede with queen Mar)', for the copdnu-
ance of his pension originally granted by king Henry die
eighth, as a reward for his Toxophilus : professing his confi-
dence in the bishop's known erudition, authority, liberality,
prudence, and activity, to quiet the distractions which not only
the civil but literary state of the kingdom would probably suffer,
from that unexpected and calamitous event. Ibid. p. 154. b.
Dat. 1553. In the next, he presents the bilhop, then just re-.
leased from imprisonment in the Tower at the accession os
Mary, with a Greek Translation of the Psalms, pr.ob.ably/.
the Metaphrase of Apollinarius : enforcing the propriety
of his present by observing, that it was written in a languages
in which the bishop so much delighted, and that poetry had,
been his chief amusement during the tedious hours of his laic
confinement. Ibid. p. 157. b. See also, p. 65. a. With the
next, dated 1554, as a slender remembrance of the numerous
savors he had recently received, he fends the bishop an antient
golden Roman coin. Ibid. p. 163. a. In three or four others,
evidently written during the reign of Mary, he complains ot'
many unjust taxations and oppressive exactions, imposed by some
late innovators on the university of Cambridge; supplicating,
the assistance of Gardiner as their Chancellor, and expatiating
largely on his accustomed indefatigable endeavours to support
the rights and promote the honour of the university. Ibid. p.
194. b. seq. In another letter, to one of Margaret Roper's
learned daughters, dated 1554, Ascham speaks of being called
from

<page 259>
24o THE LIFE OF
under consideration, and Whyte succeeding
to the bislioprick, although not confirmed till
from Cambridge by the special favour and appointment of
bishop Gardiner, to serve the queen in the very liberal office of
Latin secretary. Ibid. p. 162. b. In a letter to the learned
Sturmius, dated at Greenwich 1555, he declares, "I would
•* not exchange the Office of Latin Secretary for any situation
•• in life. Bishop Gardiner has treated me with the greatest
*' kindness and indulgence in this affair: and I can hardly fay,
"whether Lord Pagett has shewn more readiness in naming me
** to the queen, or the bishop in pleading my cause and recom-
■* mending my character. There are seme who have endeavour-
"ed to stop the course of the bishop's benevolence, on account
"of my religious principles, but without effect. I therefore
"am deeply indebted to his humanity, and it is a debt which
"I willingly owe. I am indeed but one among many who
"have experienced his generosity. I have often thought of
*' talking to him about your noble work of the Analytics.
"For I well know his predilection to polite letters, and think
"his patronage would be of service on this occasion, &c.''
Ibid. p. 45. b. seq. It appears also, that Gardiner procured
from queen Mary for Ascham, a renewal of the royal pension
for his Toxophilus, with the annual addition of ten pounds.
Ibid. ibid. p. 45. b. And Grant's Vita, p. 21. Ascham's
Latin. Epist. edit. Oxon 1703. By the fame interest, Ascham
was suffered to keep his fellowship and public orator's place at
Cambridge, during a long absence from the university, while
he was Latin secretary and abroad in Germany. Ibid. p. 22.
Nor was Ascham the only learned protestant whom Gardiner
countenanced in the reign of queen Mary. Throughout the
persecutions of that unhappy period, he permitted Sir Thomas
Smith, one of the restorers of Greek, and secretary of state in the
reign of Edward the sixth, to enjoy the comforts of a studious
retirement with a pension of one hundred pounds. Strype'sSM ith,
p. 60. feq. I forbear to enlarge on Gardiner's high celebrity as a
civilian and canonist: and shall only add on that heal, that
Henry

<page 260>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 241
after they were actually delivered to the new
societyw, the founder by this unexpected
change of circumstances was not so far reduced
to a state of indetermination and indifference,
as to wish to depart from his appointment.
Sir Thomas Pope in a letter to the president of
the college, dated May the twenty-sixth, 1558,
acknowledges a very particular favor, which
"my lord of Wynchester and others the
"commissioners for spiritual matters ,"
had promised to grant him for the college.
In another letter, dated the same year, to the
same, he says "my lord of Wynchester
"has bene sycke with me at Tyttenhanger,
"but now returns to the corte. He has pro-
•' mysed to give his coat-armur for the grete
Henry the eighth would take no step in the business of his di-
vorce, however eager for a decision, till Gardiner could be con-
sulted, who was absent at Rome. I suspect he was but moderate-
ly skilled in scholastic theology.
w Gardiner died in Novemb. 1555. The statutes of Trinity
college were given May i. 1556. The bulle of pope Paul W,
for Whyte's transtation and inthronisation is dated, Prid. Non.
Jul. 1556. He was inthroned Sept. 21. 1556. Registr. Whyte,
Episc. Winton. sol. 1. a. seq.
Some say, that upon Gardiner's decease it was intended car-
dinal Pole should hold the see of Winton with that of Can-
terbury in commendam. But this scheme being f^und unpo-
pular or impracticable, Whyte was bound to pay Pole yearly
1000/. out of his episcopal revenues, for the better support of
the cardinal's dignity. See Wood, Athen. Oxon. i. 132. Col-
lier, Eccl. Hist. ii. 387. Goodwyn de Præsul. ut supr.
0^_ "glas-

<page 261>
242 THE LIFE OF
"glas-windovve ther in my hallx." In a
manuscript greek psalter on vellum, in the
college library, I find the following entry in
sir Thomas Pope's own hand. "Mem. that
"the reverend father in god, John bushop of
•' Wynton gave me three bokes. Tho.PopeV
Whyte, who was first schoolmaster ", and
afterwards warden of Winchester college *,
was made successively bishop of Lincolnb
and Winchester" by queen Mary\ He was
a man of learning and eloquence'; but his
1 1 presume in the hall of his house at Tyttenhanger. It was
customary for gutsts of rank, after a long visit, to give an
escocheon of their arms in painted glass to the bow-window of
the hall. An estimate of the price of painted glass, particular-
ly of Arms, in the preceding century, may be partiy gathered
from the following disbursement for painting the Arms of bishop
William of Wykeham, sounder of New-college Oxford, in win-
dows of the churches of Newton-Longueville, Whaddon, and
Great-Horwood, Bucks. "Solutum Vitriario de .Aylibury
"pro Arm is domini fundatoris positis in Ecclcsiis de Newnton,
«' Whaddon, et Horwoode, xiij j. iiij</." Comp, burst" Collegii
Novi Oxon. A. D. 1479. See supr. p. 16.
r See Append. Numb. XXIX.
* A. D. 1534- Tanner, Bibl. 761.
* A. D. 1541. Willis, Mitr. Abb. i. 333.
b Consecrat. April. 1. 1554- Le Neve, Fast. p. 141.
c See supr. p. 237.
* Goodwyn, p. 300.
e He was not an inelegant latin poet. As a specimen of his
latin poetry, he has left Diacosio-martyrion,^!* diutntorum
I'irorum ttstimonia de •vtrilate cerporii, etc. Lond. 4tO. in æd. R.
Cali, 1553. See also his verses on the marriage of Philip and
Mary,

<page 262>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 243
religious prejudices of course disqualified him
from retaining his preferments after the first
year of Elizabeth; who was much offended
at the panegyric which he too liberally be--
stowed on Mary, when he preached at her
funeral '; and soon afterwards commanded
him to be imprisoned for making a public
appearance in his pontifical vestments . He
had also incurred no small share of the
queen's displeasure for his behaviour at the
solemn conference held in Westminster-hall,
before her majesty, the privy council, and
both houses of parliament; at which, with
three other catholic bishops, he was appoint-
ed to dispute against a select number of the
reformed party h. He was a benefactor to
Mary, Hollinfh. Chron. iii. 1120. Wood, ubi supr, mentions
one book of latin epigrams, MS. Fox has preserved many
of his disputations, orations, &c. Fox and Pits, according to
custom, have both equally gratified their respective prejudices
in representing the character of this prelate. Pits fays, " Eras
"fane vir pietate et doctrina conlpicuus. Acutus poeta, orator
"eloquens, Theologus solidus, concionator nervosus." Angl.
Script. Parisiis, 1619. pag. 763. The learned and candid arch-
bishop Parker styles him, "ambitiofisfimus antistes." Antiq.
Eccl. pag. 527. edit. Drake.
f Council-book, MSS. Harl. ut supr. viz. Jan. 19. 1559.
See Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. 131. seq. Strype, Eccl. Mem. iii.
App. 277. who has printed the sermon.
* Strype, Ann. Res. i. p. 145.
* See Strype, ibid. ch. 5.
Q_2 both

<page 263>
144 THE LIFE OF
both Wykeham's colleges' in which he had
the happiness to be educated. Of sir Thomas
Pope's intimacy with sir Thomas Whyte,
the founder of faint John's college in Oxford,
I have before mentioned proofsk. And to
these evidences we may add, that their inter-
ests and attachments tended the fame way:
for we find sir Thomas Whyte affording sig-
nal services to queen Mary against the rebel
Wyat and his followers, while lord mayor of
London ' -, in consequence of which, he was
knighted by the queen". But a similitude of un-
dertakings for the propagation of letters might
otherwise have naturally produced a friendship
between sir Thomas Whyte and sir Tho-
mas Pope; as they were both, at the fame
1 To New College, Oxon. he gave the manor of Hall-place
in Hampshire. Wood, Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 131. To
Winchester college he gave his mitre and crosier, a silver goblet
gilt, a bason and ewer of silver, a rich carpet, with other valu-
able presents. E Registr. Benef. coll. Winton. In the warden's
lodgings at Winchester, there was lately a bedchamber, with
* curious old pannelled cieling; having in each compartment
a cypher of the initials of Whyte's name, and of king Henry
viii. It was put up by him in that reign. His epitaph, written
by himself, remains on a large brass plate, under which he in-
tended to de buried, in the antechapel of the college. But dy-
ing 11. Jan. 1559, he was interred in his cathedral.
k See supr. p. 124.
1 Hollinshed, Chron. iii. 1096.
m MSS. Rawlins. Bibl. Bodl.
time

<page 264>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 245
time, employed in the same acts of public
and literary beneficence. Lord Williams
of Thame generously concurred with sir
Thomas Pope in treating the princess Eliza-
beth, amidst her unmerited and oppressive
persecutions, with proper regard". He is
mentioned in a letter of fir Thomas Pope to
the president of Trinity college °: " I wold
"be glad to lerne whether my lord Williams
"and Mr. Aslifeld p, gave the ii Buckes to
"my college at the [act] commensement."
Lord Williams having enjoyed many eminent
favors from Henry the eighth, and Edward
the sixth, was by queen Mary created a baron
in reward for his faithful services at her ac-
cession. He continued to receive fresh ho-
nors from queen Elizabeth, and was ap-
pointed president of the council in the prin-
cipality of Walesq. Bishop Ridley, when
bound to the stake, requested lord Williams
then present, to sollicit queen Mary, that the
episcopal leases which he had granted, while
bishop of London, to many poor tenants,
might remain and be confirmed. This was
■ See supr. p. 71.
* It is without date. Lord Williams is mentioned in another
of his letters concerning a purchase.
* Probably sir Edmund Astifield os Tame co. Oxon.
9 Dugd. Bar. ii. 393.
0.3 the

<page 265>
246 THE LIFE OF
the sole anxiety that disquieted the compo-
sure of the dying martyr. But lord Williams
promised to recommend this petition to the
utmost of his power, and it was accordingly
performedr.
It is natural to suppose, that sir Thomas
Pope was nearly connected with several other
persons of eminence and distinction in the
courts of Henry the eighth and queen Mary.
That he was in high confidence and esteem
with the latter, may, beside many other ar-
guments, be concluded from a passage in the
statutes of his college: by which it appears,
that he expected her majesty, who professed
herself so zealous a patroness to the univer-
sity, together with king Philip, would ho-
nor the college with a royal visit',
But among his friends I must not forget
to mention Thomas Slythurste ', whom
he appointed the first President of his col-
lege; and had before probably preferred, by
'Fuller's Worthies, p. 109. Fox, Martyrolog.
'Statut. coll. Trin. Oxon. "Nisi quando forsan Angliæ
"Reges et Reginæ, eorumve primogeniti, Collegium invisere
"dignabuntur: quos sic quidem advenicntes, cum omni honore
"et obsequio excipiendos præcipio et statuo." cap. acxvi.
* See more of him in Append. Numb. XXV.
his

<page 266>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 247
his interest with the queen, to a canonry of
Windsor. He seems to have conceived a
high opinion of Slythurste's learning and pru-
dence; whom, from the trust committed to
his charge, we reasonably may imagine to
have been a person of distinguished worth
and abilities. In a general Address to the
new society, annexed to the statutes of the
college, he particularly compliments the pre-
sident for his remarkable moderation of tem-
per, his eminent learning, experience, pru-
dence, and probity; observing moreover, in
justification of his choice, that he should have
acted in vain, if he had not added to the
benefit of his foundation such a governor, so
properly qualified in every requisite accom-
plishment; one completely fitted for the dif-
ficult and critical task of conducting the first
beginnings of a recent institution, and to
whom therefore, borrowing the character of
a father in that of a founder, he with plea-
sure entrusted the education of his children.
On various occasions, sir Thomas Pope ap-
pears to have placed the greatest confidence
in his friendship, advice, and judgement.
Many of the founder's letters to Slythurste
contain free consultations about adjusting the
Q^4 endow-

<page 267>
a48 THE LIFE OF
endowment, amending the statutes", and re-
gulating other articles of his young society;
and sometimes relate to the domestic con-
cerns of his own family. I find him fre-
quently visiting the founder at Clerkenwell
and Tyttenhanger. The sudden revolution,
however, of religion, at the accession of
queen Elizabeth, prevents us from knowing
much more of his chaaracter and behaviour
in this situation: for in September, 1559, he
"In the first copy of the statutes dated ie;6, signed by the
founder, are several erasures and interlineations in the hand of
Slythurste, made by the consent and authority of the sounder:
and the text of this copy thus corrected, is that which is now
in use. Many of these alterations appear to have been made
in this book, between them both at Tyttenhanger, or Clerken-
well, as I collect from a letter from the founder to the vice-
president, dat. 28. Jan. 1557, in which be saya, that he (hall
send by the president, an altered and improved copy of his
statutes, which he had ordered to be forthwith ingrossed in
parchment. In another letter to the president, dat. 25. Feb.
1557, the founder tells him, " I trust ye will not forget to
"make an Index Capitvlorum Statutorum, which we
"forgott when we were together." In this copy, corrected by
Slythurste's hand, Londtx, the place from which they were origi-
nally dated, is struck out for Tyttenhanger. The altered
and Improvtd copy, mentioned above, ingrossed on parchment,
and signed with his own hand throughout, with the Addita-
ment annexed, appears to have been delivered to the society,
but with the original date of 1556 preserved, in, or soon aster,
April, 1558. See his letter, Append. Numb. XXV. Under
John Pertk.
was

<page 268>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 249
was ejected from his headship by the Queen's
visitors, and committed a prisoner to the
Tower of London; where he died of grief,
1560, partly for the death of his honored
friend and munificent patron the founder,
and partly for the loss of his preferments.
SECT.

<page 269>
250 THE LIFE OF
SECT. VIII.
AN anecdote equally ridiculous and scan-
dalous, has been propagated by Antony
Wood, highly injurious to the honor of sir
Thomas Pope; which, notwithstanding it
appears at first sight strongly to confute itself,
I shall here examine and disprove *. It origi-
nated from Henry CufFe, the famous secretary
of the unfortunate earl of Essex, who was
executed, soon after his master, in 1601.
CufFe, being a boy of the most promising
abilities and uncommon proficiency in litera-
ture, was sent at fifteen years of age, by Lady
Elizabeth Powlett, often mentioned above,
from Hinton faint George in Somersetshire,
to Trinity college in Oxford, where he was
elected scholar on the twentyfifth of May,
* Although possessed of the proper information and evidence,
I had long ago, and for many reasons resolved, never to enter
into a particular discussion of this idle calumny. But as, since
the appearance of my first edition of this work, it has been
circulated both in conversation, and by more biographers than
one, as a pleasant ancedote, I could no longer forbear using the
means in my power of exposing its falsity and futility.
1578.

<page 270>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 251
1578 \ Within five years he was admitted
fellow, May 30, 1583*. But even in this
situation, the same discontented and arro- ■
gant spirit, which afterwards hurried him to
an ignominious end, could not be suppressed.
Soon after his admission, when he was now
not more than twenty years of age, and in
the year of his probation, he endeavoured to
defame his founder by a false insinuation,
which savored alike of petulance and ingrati-
tude; and which, had it been true, deserved
animadversion. The matter being reported to
Lady Powlett the foundress, she transmitted a
mandate to the college, ordering him to be
instantly removed from his fellowship. This
we learn from the words of the college regis-
ter. "Refignante Cuffo, et locum Litteris
"Fundatricis dantei." The cause of his amo-
tion is twice mentioned by the Oxford anti-
quary. In the Athenæ he fays, that Cusse
*' was forced to resign his fellowship of Tri-
"nity college, for speaking certain matters
*' though true, which redounded to the great
"discredit of the Founder*." In another
place, however, he tells the whole story with-
h Recistr. Prim, sol, 37. b,
c Ibid. sol. 42.
* Ibid. sol. 4*. b.
e Athen. Oxon. vol. i. col. 307. edit. 2.
out

<page 271>
252 THE LIFE OF
out reserve, and produces his authority.
"Doctor Bathurst told me that our CufFe
"was of Trinity college, and expelled from
"thence upon this account: the founder,
"sir Thomas Pope, would, whersoever he
*' he went visiting his friend, steal one thing
"or other he could lay his hands on, put it
*' in his pocket, or under his gown. This
"was supposed rather an humour than of
"dishonesty. Now Cuffe, upon a time, with
*' his fellows being merry, said, a pox this
*' is a poor beggarly college indeed, the
"plate that our founder stole would build
"such another, which coming to the Pre-
"sident's ears, he was thereupon ejected'."
The reader must have already noticed the
glaring inconsistency of these two curious
narratives. In the first, sir Thomas Pope, is
by implication at least, represented as a
thief: in the next, his dishonesty is softened
into humour and jocularity. That the whole
is a misrepresentation, and a jumble of cir-
cumstances, appears from an original paper
in the hand-writing of Doctor Bathurst.
** Secretary CufFe was expelled from a fel-
"lowfhip of Trinity college, on this ac-
•' count. Our founder, when upon a visit,
"would often carry away a silver cup under
f See Hearne's Lib. Nic. Scac. p. 593.
"his

<page 272>
SIR THOMAS POPE. a5i
"his gown for the joke-fake, fending it
"back the next day to laugh at his friend.
'* Cuffe being merry at another college
"with some of his boon companions, said,
"A pox this is a beggar lie college indeed, the
"plate that our founder Jlole would build another
"as good. These words being told to the
"President, he was ejected. This I have
"often heard from my predecessour doctor
"president Kettell who was contemporarie
"with Cuffe «." In the margin, Bathurst
has recorded the name of the other college,
which Cuffe was pleased to treat in such
terms of contempt, and which needs not here
to be mentioned. Indeed, it was no part of
the accusation against Cuffe, that, as Wood's
context insinuates, his pleasantry led him to
depreciate the buildings of his sounder: but
that he wantonly converted one of his practi-
cal jokes, a species of humour not uncommon
among our festive ancestors, into a petty
larceny. On the whole, we now perceive
that Wood has inaccurately related this story
from a casual conversation with Bathurst,
which he remembered as imperfectly. As
to Cuffe, I know not whether he still con-
tinued at Oxford after this ejection. But
I Bathurst Papers, MSS. In the possession of the late Mr.
Payne, can:n of Wells.
having

<page 273>
254 THE LIFE OF
having great address, and much real merit,
about three years afterwards, that is in the
year 1586, he was chosen fellow of Merton
college. Being an admirable Grecian, he
was about the fame time made professor of
Greek in the university. It was in this de-
partment, that he assisted Columbanius in the
first edition of Longus's elegant pastoral
Romance, which was printed at Florence
in 1598 \ He was no less eminent as a
logician and a disputant. His intimate friend
Camden, to whose Britannia, at its first
appearance, he prefixed an excellent Greek
epigram, characterizes Cuffe, as a man of
exquisite learning and genius, but of a fac-
tious and perverse temper '. Notwithstand-
ing the severe check he received at Trinity
college, he generously presented to the library
there several volumes. Perhaps some readers
will be candid enough to think, that his ex-
pulsion from this society was rather owing to
an unguarded vivacity of disposition, than to
any malignity of mind. Our historians fay,
that the earl of Essex, who began, after a
* Coll. MSS. T. Hearne, vol. xiii. p. 236. Columbanius
fays in the Dedication, p. ii. "Qua in re operam mihi fuam,
*' non ingratam illam quidem, navarunt viri omnium literatiflt-
** mi atque officiolissimi Herricus Coftus Anglus, &c."
1 Camd. Eliz. p. 869. edit. Hearn.
tedious

<page 274>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 255
tedious confinement, to feel the dangers of
his situation, dismissed Cuffe from his ser-
vice and family, for turbulence and inso-
lence k. Essex was unfortunate in not having
before perceived these qualities, in a man who
shared so much of his confidence.
k Camden, ubi supr. p. 827. 833.
SECT.

<page 275>
256 THE LIFE OF
SECT. IX.
FR O M a recapitulation of what has been
said, the following character of sir Tho-
mas Pope arises. He appears to have been a
man eminently qualified for business; and al-
though not employed in the very principal
departments of state, he possessed peculiar
talents and address for the management and
execution of public affairs. His natural abi-
lities were strong, his knowledge of the world
deep and extensive, his judgment solid and
discerning. His circumspection and prudence
in the conduct of negociations entrusted to
his charge, were equalled by his fidelity and
perseverance. He is a conspicuous instance
of one, not bred to the church, who without
the advantages of birth and patrimony, by
the force of understanding and industry,
raised himself to opulence and honorable
employments. He lived in an age when the
peculiar circumstances of the times afforded
obvious temptations to the most abject de-
sertion of principle: and few periods of our
history can be found, which exhibit more
numerous examples of occasional compliance
with

<page 276>
SIR THOMAS POPE. 257
with frequent changes. Yet he remained
unbiassed and uncorrupted amid the general
depravity. Under Henry the eighth, when
on the dissolution of the monasteries, he was
enabled by the opportunities of his situa-
tion to enrich himself with their revenues by
fraudulent or oppressive practices, he behaved
with disinterested integrity; nor does a single
instance occur upon record which impeaches
his honor. In the succeeding reign of Ed-
ward the sixth, a sudden check was given
to his career of popularity and prosperity:
he retained his original attachment to the
catholic religion; and on that account, lost
those marks of favor or distinction which
were so liberally dispensed to the sycophants
of Somerset, and which he might have easily
secured by a temporary submission to the
reigning system. At the accession of Mary,
he was restored to favor; yet he was never
instrumental or active in the tyrannies of
that queen which disgrace our annals. He
was armed with discretionary powers for the
suppression os heretical innovations j yet he
forbore to gratify the arbitrary demands of
his bigotted mistress to their utmost extent,
nor would he participate in forwarding the
barbarities of her bloody persecutions. In
the guardianship of the princess Elizabeth,
R the

<page 277>
258 THE LIFE OF
the unhappy victim of united superstition,
jealousy, revenge and cruelty, his humanity
prevailed over his interest; and he less re-
garded the displeasure of the vigilant and
unforgiving queen, than the claims of injur-
ed innocence. If it be his crime to have ac-
cumulated riches, let it be remembered, that
he consecrated a part of those riches, not
amid the terrors of a death-bed, nor in the
dreams of old age, but in the prime of life,
and the vigour of understanding, to the pub-
lic service of his country; that he gave them
to future generations, for the perpetual sup-
port of literature and religion.
FINIS.

<page 278>
U <tt 3 U «J oj -D <Q ff* iO ^p Q æ> ^* x* T* <f% 5J *> .Q Tj rj jt »i
APPENDIX
CONTAINING
Original EVIDENCES and PAPERS.
NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.
^J1 O 'LP stt °» <□> an an o JJ Q <T5 Q O ffp al n* .Tp ffj as Jp al ŒJ Jp

<page 279>

<page 280>
CONTENTS
OF THE
APPENDIX.
Numb. I.
TH E last will of William Pope of Dedington,
father of fir Thomas Pope. Dat. 1523.
Numb. * II *. An Inquifitio post Mortem, &x.
Numb. II. Grant of arms to Thomas Pope of
Dedington. Dat. 1535.
Numb. III. Grant to Thomas Pope, from Henry
viii. of warden of the mint, &c. in the Tower.
Dat. 1535.
Numb. IV. Grant from Henry viii. to Thomas
Pope, for exercising, with W. Smyth, the office of
clerk of the Crown. Dat. 1536.
Numb. V. Grant to Thomas Pope, and John
Lucas, from Henry viii. of clerk of the Crown.
Dat. 1538.
Numb. VI. The charter of Mabill, abbess of
Godstowe, " made* to God and our lady, and to
"fcynt Cuthberte, and to the priour and convente
"of Dureham, from a certeyne diche thurte over
"in Bewmonte," circ. 1286.
R 3 Numb.

<page 281>
262 CONTENTS.
Numb. VII. Grant from Henry viii. of Bernard
college, with half the grove of Durham college, to
the dean and chapter of Christ Church, Oxford.
Dat. j 548.
Numb. * VII *. Part of the Charter of foundation
of the Dean and Chapter of Durham cathedral, 1541.
Numb. VIII. Grant of Durham college in Ox-
ford, to G. Owen and W. Martyn, from Edward
vi. Dat. 1553.
Numb. IX. Purchase of Durham college afore-
said, by sir Thomas Pope, of G. Owen and W.
Martyn. Dat. 1554.
Numb. X. Preamble of Letters Patent from Philip
and Mary, for founding Trinity college at Oxford.
Dat. 1554.
Numb. XI. Part of the charter of establishment
of the said college, in consequence of the foregoing
letters patent. Dat. 1555.
Numb. XII. Letter of attorney from Thomas
Slythurste, for taking possession of a certain messu^
age in Oxford, called Trinity college. Dat. 1555.
Numb. XIII. Admission of the first president, fel-
lows, and scholars, of the said college, May xxx.
1556.
Numb. XIV. Conditions relating to the founda-
tion of a free grammar-school at Dedington, co.
Oxon. by sir Thomas Pope. Dat. 1555.
Numb. XV. Account of a petition referred to the
princess Elizabeth at Hatfield, by sir Thomas Pope,
1556.
Numb. XVI. An indenture, made May v. 1555,
"witnessing

<page 282>
CONTENTS. 263
"witnessing that the president, fellows, and scho-
"lars of Trinity college, Oxford, have received, of
** their Founder, such parcells of church playte and
"ornaments of the church as hereafter followethe."
Numb. XVII. Indentura de ornamentis et joca-
libus missis per Dorhinum fundatorem tarn ad orna-
tum sacelli quam aulæ. Dat. 1557.
Numb. XVIII. Indentura de ornamentis et jocali-
bus missis per Dominum fundatorem ad collegium
tertia vice. Dat. 1557.
Numb. XIX. Bishop Home's letter to the said
college, concerning the removal of superstitious or-
naments from the chapel. Dat. 1570.
Numb. XX. Letter from Q^ Elizabeth's com-
missioners, relating to the business of the last-men-
tioned letter. Dat. 1570.
Numb. XXI. Compofitio collegiorum, coll.
Magd. et coll. Trin. Oxon. Dat. 1559.
Numb. XXII. Articles relating to certain build-
ings and utensils of Wroxton-Priory, co. Oxon.
Dat. 1537.
Numb. XXIII. Rate of the purchase of the rec-
tory of Garsington, co. Oxon. by sir Thomas Pope,
from Philip and Mary, under certain considerations.
Dat. 1557. An extraft.
Numb. XXIV. An instrument concerning the
recession of Trinity college from the university, to
Garsington aforesaid, in time of the plague, 1577.
Numb. XXV. Account of the first president, fel-
lows, and scholars of Trinity college, Oxford, no-
minated by sir Thomas Pope, and admitted May
R 4 xxx.

<page 283>
%64 CONTENTS.
xxx. 1556. And of such Others as were afterwards
nominated by the fame authority.
Numb. XXVI. Account of the marriages and
descendants of John Pope, esquire, of Wroxton.
Numb. XXVII. Pedigree of the family of Pope.
Numi. XXVIII. Account of sir Thomas Pope's
burial, 1559, from a Manuscript in the Cotton lib-
rary, Brit. Mus.
Numb. XXIX. Visit of the founder to Trinity
college, Oxon. 1556.
Numb. XXX. Dr. Ralph Kettel's testimonial of
dame Elizabeth Paulet.
NUMB.

<page 284>
APPENDIX. 265
NUMB. I.
The last Will os William Pope os De-
dington, father of fir Thomas Pope,
Dat. 1523/.
IN the name of our Lorde, Amen. The se-
cond day of Februarie in the yeare of our
lorde one thousand five hundreth and twentie. I
William Pope, hole of minde, make my will in
this maner. First, I bequeathe my foul to allmighty
god to his blified moder Mary: and my bodie
to be buried in the pariihe chirche of Dadington.
To the mother chirche of Lincoln iijj. n'ljd. My
londe, my wiffe to have the one halfFe of the rent,
and the rest to bee kept to the use of my sonne till
hee bee of lawfull age. Item, I bequeathe to Tho-
mas Pope an hundreth more; and to everie dough-
ter fourtie pownde: and if enie of them dye, their
parte to remaine to other. And to have a preste
synginge one yeare. And my wyffe and my sonne to
occupie my holdinges, the which I hold now, as
longe as she is widowe, and after, Thomas Pope to
have the occupying and thuse of theym. And the
■ Mus. Aslimol. MSS. D. 15. 4W. pag. 31. b. Inter Codd.
A. Wood, Mann. Rad. Sheldon. Et Registr. Bodefelde, Cur.
Pnerog. qu. vii..
refidew

<page 285>
a66 APPENDIX.
residew of my goodes I gyve and bequeathe to
Thomas Pope my forme, Margarett my wyffe, Ro-
bcrte Edmondes, and Richarde Swifte, myne execu-
tours, to dispose for the welthe of my sowle; and
mailter William Farmer to be overseer to the perfor-
maunce of my will- Item, I bequeathe to the tor-
chis, the bellis, our ladie beame, faint Thomas
beame, to everyche one of theym, iij s. iiij d. Item,
to Clifton chapel, vjs. viiiji. Item, to everie god-
childe a schepe.
Præsentib. temp, lecturæ supradicti Testam. Wil-
lielmo Farmer, vicario de Dadington. Joanne
Smith, et Thoma Anne.
Proved before the Commissaries of Cardinal Wolfey, and
William Warebam, archbishop of Canterbury, in the
cathedral church of faint Paul, London, May 11, 1523.
NUMB.

<page 286>
APPENDIX. i$7
NUMB. *II\
An Inquisitio post Mortem rela-
ting to the estate of William Pope,
father of sir Thomas \
POPE. Terræ ct possesliones Will. Pope in
Com. Oxon. Duo messuagia, sex virgatæ
terræ, decem acræ prati, viginti acræ pasturæ, et tres
acræ bosci cum pertin. in Whithill, tent, de dom.
rege, ut de hundredo suo de Wotton, pro redditu
xij d. per annum, et secta ad curiam hundredi præ-
dicti. Et valent per ann. in omnibus exitibus, ul-
tra reprisas, Ixj. Prout per quandam Inquifitionem
inde compertam apud Oxon, xv° die Septembr. anno
dicti domini regis xv°, coram Roberto Woodcock ar-
migero, escheatore ibidem, (virtute brevis ejusdem re-
gis de diem claufit extremum, eidem escheatori post:
mortem Willielmi Pope directi: qui obiit xvi* die
Marcii, anno dicti dom. regis xiiii0: cujus filius et
hæres propinquior est Thomas Pope, ætatis xvi an-
norum et amplius,) plenius continetur. Dicta Messua-
gia, quatuor virgatæ terræ, decem acræ prati, vi-
ginti acræ pasturæ, et tres acræ bosci, cum pertin.
jn Hokenorton, tenentur de Carolo duce Suffolciæ,
b Ex Inquisit. post Mortem in Anglia, Temp. Hen.
V«i. MSS. Rawlins. Num. 1386. Bibl. Bodl. sol.
Ut

<page 287>
j68 APPENDIX.
ut de manerio suo de Hokenorton, per quæ servicia
ignoratur. Et valent in omnibus exitibus ultra rc-
prisas, ut per dictam Inquisitionem, Ixj. De quibus
quidem præmiffis, quidam Rogerus Lupton et alii
fuerunt seisiti sicut de feodo, ad usum Willielmi
Pope et hæredum, ficut in dicta Inquifitione plenius
patetb.
Sum ma totalis valoris terrarum
et possessionum nuper Willielmi J- vl
Pope in Comitatu praedicto,
* See supr. p. 5. 265.
h
NUMB.

<page 288>
APPENDIX. 269
N U M B. II.
Grant of Arms to Thomas Pope, esquire,
dat. Jun. 26. 1535 c.
TO all present and to come, thies present
letters receyving or heyring. I Christofore
Berker, esquier, alias gartier chief and principall
kyng of armes of Englishmen, send due humble
recommendation and greeting. Equite willith, and
reason ordainith, that men virtuose and of commenda-
ble disposition and lyvyng, be by their merits re-
noumed and had in perpetuall memory, for their good
name and fame. And not all oonly they in their par-
sons in this mortall lyfe so bryef and yansitory; but
also, after theym, Those that of their bodies shall
come, discende, and procreate, to be in all placys of
honnour and worship, with other, renoumed and en-
nobled by shewing certeyn enfignes and demonstrati-
ons of honnour and nobles: That is to witt, the Bla-
son of Armes Helme and Crest, with their apperte-
naunces: to the intente, that by their ensample
other shall the more enforce theym perseverantly to
use their tyme in deeds of honnour and worship,
and other virtuouse workes, to obteyn and gett the
renoume of auneyent noblenesle in their ligne and pos-
'Ex Orig. penes Honoratiss. Francise. Com. de Goidsord.
teritc.

<page 289>
27o APPENDIX.
tcrite. And therefore, I the said gartier principall
kyng of armes, which not all-only by comon re-
noume, but also by the reporte and witness of sun-
dry noble gentilmen of name and of armes, with
other credable and noble parsons, am verily informed
and advertysed: That Thomas Pope, of Dodyng-
ion in the countie of Oxenford, esquire, hath long
continued in Vertue, so that he hath deserved, and is
well worthy, he and his posteritie to be in all places of
honnour and worship renoumed, compted, nombred,
admitted, accepted and receyved, into the nombre,
and of the company, of other auncyent gentilman j
And for the remembrance and confideracion of the
same his Vertue, Gentilness, and Abilitiej By au-
thorite and power unto myne office annexed and at-
tributed, have devised, ordeyncd, and assigned, unto
and for the said Thomas Pope, and his Posteritie,
the Armes, Helme, and Creste, in manner and
fourme following. That is to say, Party per pale,
gold and asure, acbiveron thereon 4. flour defaces, between
3 griffons beddes rafyd counterchangyd on the fielde.
Upon bis Crest, 2 dragons beddes indor/ant, rajyd, a
crownette abowte their necks langued countercbaunged,
set on a wreathe gold and vert, the mantlets gueules dou-
bled silver botoned gold, To have and
to hold, unto the said Thomas Pope, and to his
Posteritie, with their due difference to to be revested
to their honour for evermore. In witness whereof,
I the said gartier principall king of armes, have
signed these presents with myne owne hande, and
sett thereto the seall of myne Office, with the seall
of myne Armes. Given at London the 26th daye
of

<page 290>
APPENDIX. 271
of June, in the yere of our lorde god 1535, and
of reighn of our foveraigne lord king Henry the
eighth, by the grace of God king of England
and of Fraunce, defensor of the feith, lorde of Ire-
lande, and in earth under Chriit the supreme head
of the church of England, the 27th yere*.
* In lord Guildford's Pedigree of Pope, which is on
parchment beginning with " Thomas Pope Com. Cant.
"Armiger," before or about the reign of Edward the third,
and continued below sir Thomas Pope, a different coat of
arms, curiofly depicted, is affixed to each person through-
out; without any insertion at the proper place, or continuance
afterwards, of the new coat granted in this instrument. How-
ever it is evident that the family had no real title to that an-
cient coat, otherwise sir Thomas Pope would never have pro-
cured a new grant of arms : and it appears from tombs and
painted glass at Wrozton, that the family after him constantly
used this new coat granted by Barker, xxvii. Hen. viii.
Christopher Barker who grants this patent, was famous in his
office. Carte fays, that he proclaimed Q^Mary in Cheapfide,
1553. But this is a mistake; for he died Jan. a.—iii Ed. vi.
Anslis, Ord. cart. ii. 378. Compare Carte, Hist. Iii. 285.
NUMB.

<page 291>
37* APPENDIX.
. N U MB. III.
Grant from Henry the eighth to Tho-
mas Pope, gent, of Warden of the
Mint, &c. in the Tower, Nov. 13.
1535'-'
Pro Tb. ^jn
Be Concessions, j AY E X omnibus ad quos, etc.
Salutem. Cum Henricus nuper rex Angliæ septi-
mus, pater noster carissimus, de gratia i'ua special!,
per Literas iuas patentes gererttes datum vicesimo
quinto die Septembris, anno regni sui primo, dede-
rit et concesserit dilecto sibi Willielmo Stafford * tam
officium Custodis Cambii et Monete infra Turrim
suam London, quam Custodiam Cunagiorum auri et
argenti infra Turrim predictam et alibi infra regnum
» Sec. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. An. Reg. z6t0. Ex Orig. in
Capella Rotulorum.
* In the British Museum may be seen, " Particule Compoti
"Willelmi Stafford Armigeri, Custodis Cambii et Monete in-
•' fra Turrim London, viz. de Auro et Argento ibidem ope-
"' ratis, fabricatis, et monetatis, a festo S. Michaelis Archan-
•« geli, Anno 14 RR. Henrici vii. usque festum S. Michaelis
"Archangeli, Anno i6to." MSS. Harl. 698. 29. p. 76. See
•Iso.—30. pag. 62.
suum

<page 292>
APPENDIX. 273
suum, Anglie; habend. et occupand. Officium et
Custodiam illam per se vel per suum sufficientem
deputatum, aut suos sufficientes deputatos, a vicesi-
mo sccundo die Augusti tune ultimo preterito, ad
terminum vite ipfius Willielmi; percipiendo in et
pro dictis Officio et Custodia vadia, ultimo Edwardi
tereii, et primo Ricardi secundi, nuper regum Ang-
lic, annis, eisdem Officio et Custodie debita et con-
sueta, de exitibus et proficuis Cambii et Monete, et
Cunagiorum, predictorum, provenientia, per manus
suas proprias, una cum omnibus feodis, proficuis,
regard is, commoditatibus, domibus, mansionibus,
jurisdictionibus, libertatibus, et aliis emolumentis,
eisdem Officio et Custodie, feu eorum alteri, quali-
tercunque pertinentibus five spectantibus, in tarn
amplis modo et forma prout aliquis alius, five aliqui
alii, Officium et Custodiam prædicta, tempore pre-
fati dni Edwardi tereii, aut aliquo alio tempore,
melius tenuit et occupavit, tenuerunt et occupave.
runt, ac in eisdem percepit et perceperunt, prout in
eisdem literis patentibus plenius apparet. Cumque
eciam Nos, per alias literas nostras patentes geren*
tes datum duodecimo die Augusti, anno regni nostri
ieptimo, de gracia nostra speciali, dederimus et con-
cesserimus dilecto Servienti nostro Johanni Copyn-
gerb generoso, ac pagetto offieii nostre garderobe ro-
b But I find an absolute grant of this office made to him
three years before, Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 4. April,
vi. I find also the following grants made to the said John
Copynger within the fifteen first years of Henry viii. viz.—
Priv. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 1 April, x. He, with James
Worfley, has from the king, certain tenements within the pa-
- - S rifh

<page 293>
274 APPENDIX.
barum, tarn Officium predictum Custodie Cambii et
Monete infra turrim nostram London, quam Custo-
diatn cunagiorum auri ct argenti infra Turrim pre*
dictam ct alibi infra rcgnum nostrum Anglic predic-
tum, habend et occupand. Officium et Custodiam
illam, per se vel per suum sufficientem deputatum,
aut per suos fufficientes deputatos, quandocumque
primo et proxime idem officium, feu custodia, per
morcem predicti Wiilielmi, aut per sursirai reddicio*
rifh of faint Austin, in London, ad plaertum.—J* riv.. Si fpll. Hon.
viii. an. rcg. 3. Novemh. xiii. He has die oriicc Ballivi Dmi-
nii de Grays tburk, CO. BJsex, ad •vifam.—Bill. SJgntt. Hen. viii.
an. reg. 6. Octobr. xix. He has the office Clerui Exituum Curue
de Banco, cum radio, xj. —Prit. Sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 6.
Novemb. xxvii. He has the office Cujhdii Porci dtOrkicj a>.,
Ghute/fr.—Priv. Sigill. Hen. vm. an. reg. 8. Maii. xx. He
has the office of keeper of the king's wardrobe within the
castle of Nottingham, ad lutam. He being then " Pagettu*
"Garderobe nojlre"—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 8. Febr.
xii. He being it Hospitio nojtro, has a special pardon.—Bill.
Signat. Hen. -viii. an. reg. 9. Octobr. xvfi. He has a special
pardon.—Priv. Sigill. Hen. yHi. an. reg. to. j til. xvi. He
has the office of keeper of the tang's wood de Cbefiemomdt
a. Cant. cum. <vadie ild. per diem ad vitam.—Hill. Signal. Hen.
viii. an. reg. 15. Dccembr. 12. The king grants to John
Copynger Grometto robarum Juarum, custodiam platen i/ecat.
Bridewell cum Pertitt. juxta 'Civit. London, cum -vad. rv d. per
diem ad <vitam, from the revenues of the duchy of Cornwall.—
Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 7. Febr. viii. Thomas Ryder,
and John Copynger, have grant of a corrod y within the monas-
tery of Milton in Dorsetshire.
What was the stipend of the Gardianus Monetœ in Turn, does
not appear. Bnt John Browne has an annuity of xviij /. vj s.
viij d. in consideration of resigning this office. Priv. Sigill.
xxiy. Maii, an. 06. Hen. vii.
nem

<page 294>
APPENDIX. 275
nem predictarum literarum patencium, feu quocum-
que alio modo, vacare contigislet, pro termino via
ipsius Johannisj pcrcipiendo annuatim, in et pro
dictij Officio et Custodia, vadia, ultimo Edwardi
tercii, et primo Ricardi secundi, nuper regum
Angliar, annis, eisdem Officio et Custodie debita et
consueta, de cxitibus et proficuis Cambii et Monete
ac cunagii predictorum provenientia, per manus
suas proprias, una cum omnibus feodis, proficuis, re-
gardis, commoditatibus, domibus, manfionibus, ju-
risdictionibus, libertatibui, et aliis emolumentis-
eidem Officio et Custodie, et eorum alteri, qualiter-
cumque pertinentibus five spectantibus, in tarn am-
plis modo et forma prout aliquis alius, five aliqui
alii, Officium et Custodium predicta, tempore prefa-
ti dni Edwardi tercii, ant aliquo alio tempore, meli-
us tenuerit et occupaverit, tenuerint et occupaverint,
ac in eisdem percepit et perceperint, prout in eildem
literis nostris patentibus plenius apparet. Ac jam
intelleximus, quod prefatuj Gulidmus Stafford mor-
tuns est; cujus pretextu prefatus Johannes Copynger
officium predictum, virtutc literarum nostrarum pre-
dictarum, adhuc exercuit et occupavit, et ad presens
exercet et oexupat: Ac modo prefatus Johannes Co-
pynger in voluatate existit literas predictas, sibi ia
forma predicta factas, nobis restituere in cancella-
riam nostram, ibidem cancellandas; ea intencionc
quod nos alias literas ngstras patentes de officio pre-
dicto ac ceteris premiffis, Dikcto nobis Thome
Pope, Generoso, pro termino vite ipfius Thome,
concedere dignaremur. Nos premissa considerantes,
pro eo quod litere patentes, dicto Johanni, ut pre-
S 2 mittitur

<page 295>
ty6 APPENDIX.
mittitur, facte, ad presens cancellate existunt, de
gracia nostra speciali, necnon in consideracionc veri
et fidelis servicii, nobis per predictum Thomam
antehac impensi, et imposterum impendendi, dedi-
mus et conceflimus, ac per presentes damus et con-
cedimus, eidem Thome, tam predictum officium
Custodie Cambii et Monete infra Turrim nostram
London, quam predictam Custodiam Cunagiorum
auri et argenti infra Turrim predictam, et alibi infra
regnum nostrum Anglie: Habend. et occupand.
Officium et Custodiam illam per fe, vel per fuffici-
entem deputatum fuum aut per fuos deputatos fuffi-
cientes, a festo fancti Michaelis ultimo preterito ad
terminum vite ipsius Thome: Percipiendo, in et
pro dicto Officio et Custodia, vadia ultimo Edwardi
tercii et primo Ricardi fecundi, nuper regum Anglie,
annis, eisdem Officio et Custodie debita et consueta
de exitibus et proficuis Cambii et Monete, ac Cuna-
giorum predictorum, provenientia, per manus fuas
proprias, una cum omnibus feodis, proficuis, regardis,
commoditatibus, domibus, mansionibus, jurisdic-
tionibus, libertatibus, et aliis emolumentis, eisdem
Officio et Custodie, feu earum alteri, qilalitercum-
que pertinentibus five fpectantibus, in tam amplis
modo et forma prout aliquis alius, five aliqui
alii, Officium et Custodiam predicta, tempore pre-
fati Edwardi tercii, aut aliquo alio tempore, melius
tenuit et occupavit, tenuerunt et occupaverunt, ac
in eisdem percepit et perceperunt. Eo quod expressa
mencio,

<page 296>
APPENDIX. 277
mencio, etc. In Cujus, etc. T. R. apud Westmon.
xiii. die Novembr.
P. ipsum Regem et de dat. predict, etc.
Concordat cum Orig. in Capetla Rolul.
Hen. Rooke, Cler. Rotul. (1764.)
S 2 NUMB.

<page 297>
478 APPENDIX.
NUMB. IV.
Grant from Henry the eighth to Tho-
mas Pope and William Smytha, for
their joint exercise of the office of
Clerk of the briefs in the star-cham-
ber* Decemb. 23. 1536 \
T)e Concess. pro Thoma TTJ E X omnibus ad quos,
Pope, et Will. Smyth. X\ etc. salutem. cum
nos per literas nostras patentes, quarum dat. eft
quinto die Octobris, anno regni nostri vicesimo
quarto, inter alia fecerimus, constituerimus, et or-
dinaverimus, dilectum nobis Thomam Pope, cle-
ricum omnium singulorum brevium et processuum
nostrorum, coram nobis et concilio nostro in camera
nostra Stellata apvtd Westmonasterium, tarn ad sectam
nostram, quam ad sectam alicujus ligeorum nostro-
rum, et aliorum quorumeunque, faciendorum et
retornandorum; viz. quod idem Thomas extunc de
tempore in tempus, durante vita sua, per se vel per
■ Another patent is herein recited, by which the said king
granted to Thomas Pope the office of clerk of the briefs in
the star-chamber, an. reg. 24. Octobr. v. viz. A. D. 1533.
b Prim. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. Anno Reg. 26. Ex Orig. in
Capell. Rot.
sufficientem

<page 298>
APPENDIX. 279
sufficientem deputatum suum five sufficientes depu-
tatos suos, omnia et singula brevia de subpena, atta-
chiamenta, commissiones, tam ad examinandos testes,
quam ad recipiendas refponsiones •, nee Jion ad quaf-
cumque materias finaliter determinandas, quam alias
commissiones quascumque, injunctiones, brevia de
executione judieii, et alios proceflus quoscumque,
cujufcumque nominis generis feu nature forent, co-
ram nabis et consilio nostro apud Westmon. retorna-
tos, feu quoquo modo ibidem per decretum consilii
noftri predicti qualitercunque emanames, seu per
dicti consilii nostri decretum ibidem faciendos, Scri-
beret, faceret, et componeret, et cujuflibet [cuilibet]
hujusmodi brevium et processuum nomen suum ap-
poneret seu apponi faceret; ita quod nullus clericus
cancellarie nostre predicte, neque aliquis alius in
scribendo seu faciendo hujusmodi brevia seu pro-
cefius, seu aliqua eorumdem, quoquomodo se intro-
mitteret, seu intromitterent, fine licentia ipsius
Thome Pope. Habend. occupand. gaudend. et exer-
cend. officium predictum prefato Thome Pope, per
se, vel sufficientem deputatum suum, five deputatos
suos sufficientes, durante vita sua, cum vadii's et feo-
dis *, pro hujusmodi brevibus et processibus faciea-
dis, ab antiquo debitis et consuetis absque aliquo
compoto, seu aliquo alio, proinde nobis vel beredi-
bus nostris reddendo, solvendo, feu faciendo, prout
in eiidem literis nostris predictis inter alia plenius
e Edmund Martyn and Thomas flowle were appointed to
this office, witb an annual fee of xx 1. Bill. Signal. Hen. viii.
«*■ Kg- 3*.
S 4 contine-

<page 299>
28o A P P E N D I X.
continetur. Et quia prefatus Thomas in volun-
tare existit, literas nostras predictas, sibi in forma
predicta factas, quoad dictum Officium clerici
omnium et fingulorum brevium et processuum
nostrorum, coram nobis et confilio nostro in ca-
mera nostra Stellate apud Westmon. faciendorum
et retornandorum, nobis in cancellariam nostram
restituere ibidem cancellandas •, ea intencione, quod
nos alias literas nostras patentes prefato Thome
Pope, ac cuidam Willielmo Smyth, de dicto Officio
clerici processuum nostrorum predictorum in forma
fequenti concedere dignaremur: Nos, pro eo quod
litere nostre predicte quoad dictum Officium clerici
processuum nostrorum predict, prefato Thome Pope
facte, ad presens cancellate existunt, de gratia nostra
fpeciali ac ex certa sciencia et mero motu nostris, fe--
cimus, constituimus, ordinayimus ipsos Thomam
Pope et Willielmum Smyth et eorum alterum diutius
viventem, clericos omnium et fingulorum brevium
et processuum nostrorum coram nobis et concilio
nostro in Camera nostra Stellata apud Westmon. tarn
ad fectam nostram quam scctam alicujus ligeorum
nostrorum et aliorum quorumcunque faciendorum et
retornandorum: viz. quod idem Thomas Pope et
Williemus Smyth, et eorum diutius vivens, ex nunc
de tempore in tempus durante vita sua per fe vel per
sufficientem deputatum suum, five sufficientes depu-
tatos fuos, omniaet fingula, brevia de subpena, ar.ta-
chiamenta, commissiones, tarn ad examinandos testes
ad recipiend. responsiones, necnon ad quascunque
materias finaliter determinandas, quam alias commis-
siones quascunque cujuscumque nominis, generis, feu
nature,

<page 300>
.APPEND! X. 281
nature, fucrint, coram nobis et consilio nostro apud
Westmon. retornat. feu quoquomodo ibidem per de-
cretum consilii nostri predicti faciend. vel e dicto
consilio nostro extra predictam cameram Stellatam
per decretum consilii nostri predicti qualitercumque
emanantes, feu per dicti consilii nostri decretum
ibidem faciendas, scribant, faciant, et componant,
et cujuslibet [cuilibet] hujusmodi brevium, et proces-
suum nomina sua propria, vel nomen eorum alterius
apponant feu apponat, vel faciat; ita quod nullus
clericus cancellarie nostre predicte, neque aliquis
alius in scribendo feu faciendo hujusmodi brevia vel
processus, feu aliqua eorundem, quoquomodo etc.
intromittant vel intromittat, sine licencia ipibrum
Thome Pope et Willielmi Smyth. Habend. occu-
pand. gaudend. et exercend. officium predictum pre-
fatis Thome Pope et Willielmo Smyth, et eorum
alteri diutius viventi, per fe vel per sufficientem de-
putarum suum, five deputatos suos sufficientes, du-
rante vita ipsorum Thome Pope et Willielmi Smyth,
et eorum diutius viventis, cum vadiis et feodis pro
hujusmodi brevibus et proceflibus faciendis ab anti-
quo debitis et consuetis, absque aliquo compoto feu
aliquo alio, proinde nobis vel heredibus nostris red-
dendo solvendo feu faciendo. Et ulterius de uberiori
gracia nostra, dedimus et licentiam conceflimus pre-
fato Willielmo Smyth, quod ipse omnia et singula
brevia, processus, necnon literas nostras patentes quos-
cunque, ac alios processus quoscunque cujuscumque
nominis generis feu nature fuerint in eadem curia
cancellarie nostre faciendos, ex nunc durante vita sua
predicta, nomine suo proprio, vel nomine magistri
rotulorum,

<page 301>
28i APPENDIX.
rotulorum, aut nomine alicujos magistri de curia
cancellarie nostre predicte pro tempore existentis, ad
libitum suum scribere, facere, et componcre possit
et valeat licite et impune, absque molestatione, con-
tradictione, feu impedimento, magiitri rotulorum
cancellarie nostre pro tempore existentis, feu alicujus
alterius persone, five aliquarum aliarum personarum
quarumeunque, in curia cancellarie nostre predicte
uunc existentis, aut in posterum fiendi •, proceffibus
offieii clerici corone ejuidem cancellarie nostre, sex
clericorum cancellarie nostre predicte ac clericorum
de parva baga ejusdem cancellarie nostre quoquo-
modo pertinentibus five spectantibus duntaxat ex-
ceptis. Et hoc absque fine feu feodo magno et
parvo in hanaperio cancellarie nostre predicte pro-
inde reddendo, solvendo, feu faciendo. Et quod ex-
presia mencio de vero valore annuo, aut de certitu-
dine premifforum, feu eorum alicujus, aut de aliis
donis five conceflionibus per nos prefatis Thome
Pope et Willielmo Smyth ante hæc tempora factis
in presentibus minime facta existit, aliquo statuto
actu ordinacione provifione feu restrictione inde in
contrarium habito, facto, ordinato, five proviso:
aut aliqua alia re causa vel mareria quacumque in
aliqua re non obstante. In cujus, etc. T. R, apud
"Westmon. vicesimo tercio die Decembr.
Per ipsum regem, et data predicta auctoxii.
tate parliamenti.
Concordat cum Orig. in Capell. Ret.
Hen. Room. (i764->
NUMB.

<page 302>
APPENDIX. 383
'NUMB. V.
Grant from Henry the eighth to Tho-
mas Pope and John Lucas, of Clerk
of the Crown in Chancery *, February
xxviii. 1538 b.
Pro Tboma Pope, et Job. T} E X omnibus ad quos,
Lucas, de Conceffione ad AY etc. Salutem. Cum
Vitam. Nos decirno quinto die
Octobris, anno regni nostri vicefimo quarto per
lireras nostras patentes, recitantes in eisdem, quod
nos per alias literas patentes, quarum quedam date
fuerunt sexto die Marcii, anno regni nostri tercio de-
cirno de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa sciencia et
mero motu nostris, dederimus et concesserimus di-
lecto nobis Radulpho Pexallc Officium Clcrici Co-
1 Specifying a former grant of the fame made to Thomas Pope
alone, Octob. xv. 1533. an. reg. 24.
k Quint. Part. Lit. Pat. Hen. viii. An. Reg. 29*. Ex Orig.
in Capel. Rotul.
« Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 6. Decembr. xvi. and an.
reg. 4. The said Rad. Pexall, and Edith his wife, have
fpecialtm liberationtm. — Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 11.
April, xvi. The king appoints the said Ralph FeoJarium fuum
to. Suthamton.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 15. Septembr.
xvi. He has a grant of a corrody within the monastery of
Thetford.

<page 303>
284 APPENDIX.
rone Cancellarie Anglie: habend. occupand. et exer-
cend. Officium illud eidem Radulpho ad terminum
vite sue, per se, vel per sufficrentem deputatum suum,
five per sufficientes deputatos fuos, cum omnibus ju-
ribus, proficuis, commoditatibus, et emoluments,
eidem Officio qualitercumque pertinentibus five
spectantibus, in tam amplis modo et forma prout
Johannes Tanworth, Galfridus Marten, et Thomas
Ive, temporibus Edwardi quarti, nuper rcgum An-
glie, ac Willielmus Porter nuper Officium illud ha-
bens tempore nostro, separatim tenuerint, occupave-
rint, et exercuerint: ac eciam viginti libras annuas
prefato Radulpho, pro occupatione et exercicio Of-
ficii predicti, dederimus et concesserimus, per pre-
dictas literas nostras patentes, habend. et singulis
annis percipiend. prefato Radulpho, durante vita
sua, de exitibus, proficuis, et revencionibus Hana-
perii Cancellarie nostre predicte, per manus custodis
ejusdem Hanaperii pro tempore existentis, prout
dicti Johannes Tanworth, Galfridus Marten, et
Thomas Ive, temporibus predictis, ac Clemens
Clerke tempore bone memorie dni Henrici regis
patris nostri, ac dictus Willielmus Porter tempore
Thetsord.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 16. Mar. vi. He
is made Clerk of the Crown.—Bill. Signat. Hen. viii. an.
reg. 19. [Situ D. Me/is.] He has licence " quod ipse pannos
"laneos latos, ac pannos laneos vocat. Kerseys, ac quofcunque
"pannos, plumbum, etc. unde custume et siibsidia ad sura-
"mam cccc/. attingent, solvendo custumas aJ finem an. quin-
"que post estimacionem, etc. poffit emere, etc." I find a grant
of the priory of Bradenflocke to one Richard Pexall. Bill. Sig-
nat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 38. Octobr. viii.
nostro,

<page 304>
APPENDIX. 285
nostro, in Officio predicto, separatim tenuerunt, et
perceperunt: necnon Liberatam Vesturam et Fur-
ruram d, prout Ricardus Sturgyon et Thomas Ive,
tempore bone memorie dni Henrici sexti nuper regis
Anglie progenitoris nostri, et dictus Willielmus Por-
ter tempore nostro, tenuerunt et perceperunt, ha-
bend, et percipiend. annuatim prefato Radulpho,
pro termino vite sue, ad magnam Garderobam nos-
tram, per manus custodis ejufdem Garderobe nostre
pro tempore existentis, erga festa Natalis Domini et
* In the reign of Edward the fourth, the expenee of furring
the liveries or robes of the fellows of New college, Oxford, for
one year, is very considerable. Rot. Comp. Coll. Nov. Oxon.
A. D. 1479. "Solutio pro Furrura. Et Sol. pro lv
"fociis pro Furrura hoc anno, xviij /. vj /. viij J." The fol-
lowing notices also (hew the very general and early use of this
article of dress, with its prices. Comp. Coll.Winton. A. D. 1399-
"Custus Consanguineorum DOMtNi.—In stipendio j pel-
"liparii furrantis ij togas de albo russctto [for two scholars]
"erga festum Omnium Sanctorum viij d. In ij novis furruris
"emptis pro eisdem simul cum stjpendio pelliparii furrantis ij
"togas de Liberata [Livery] Domini Episcopi [fundatoris]
"erga festum Natalis Domini iij/. xd." Comp. Coll. Winton.
A, D. 1396. "Liberata. Et in xxj furruris albis emptis pro
"Liberata Capellanorum [the fellows] valectorvm et
"ball ivor um erga festum Natalis Domini xx.xj 1. vj d."—
Comp. ibid. A. D. 1394. —" Liberata. Et in iiij fur-
"ruris emptis pro Liberata Willielmi Pope [steward] et
"• iij ferviencium Collegii (pret. furrure xviij d.) vj/."—.
Milton, in Com us, uses the word sur fot'robe in general, in con-
sequence of its constantly making a part of the scholastic
habit, ver. 707.
Doctors of the stoick Furr.
The poet means, those morose and unfeeling teachers, who wear
the gown which distinguishes the sect of the stoic philosophers.
'■■ Pcntecostis,

<page 305>
zt6 APPENDIX.
Pentecostis, prout in literis ill is plenius contineba-
tur: Gran des labores, laudabiliaquc obsequia, quae
dilcctus nobis Thomas Pope, attendens negociis
nostris in Cancellaria nostra predicta multipliciter
impcndebat, indiesque impendere intendebat, mcrito
contemplantes -, de gracia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
sciencia, et mero motu nostris, dederimus et con-
ceflerimus prefato Thome Pope, inter alia, predic-
tum Officium Clerici Corone Cancellarie Anglic, ha-
bend, occupand. et excrcend. Officium illud eidem
Thome Pope, ad terminum vite sue, per se, vel per
fufficientem deputatum suum, five sufficientes depu-
tatos suos, cum omnibus juribus, proficuis, commo-
ditatibus, et emolumentis, eidem Officio qualitercum-
que pertinentibus five spectantibus, immediate post
mortem, dimisiioncm, sursum reddicionem, seu soris-
facturam ipsius Radulphi, velquam cito Officium
illud ad manus nostras quocumque alio modo dcve-
nire contigisset, ac eciam viginti libras annuas prefa-
to Thome Pope, pro occupacione et exercicio Officii
predicti, dederimus et conceflerimus, per easdem li-
teras nostras patentes, habend. et fingulis annis per-
cipiend. prefato Thome Pope, durante vita fua, im-
mediate post mortem, dimislionem, sursum reddicio-
nem, seu sorisfacturam, ipsius Radulphi, vel quam
cito Officium illud ad manus nostras quocumque
alio modo devenire contigisst-t, de exitibus, profi-
cuis, et revencionibus, Hanaperii Cancellarie nostre
predicte, per manus custodis ejusdem Hanaperii pro
tempore existentis, necnon Liberatam Vesturam et
Furruram, habend. et annuatim percipiend. prefato
Thome Pope, pro termioo vite sue, ad magnam
Garderobam

<page 306>
APPENDIX. a«7
Garderobarn nostratn, p>er manus custodis ejusdem
Garderobe nostre pro tcmpore existentis, crga festa
Natalis Domini et Pentecostis, immediate poll mor-
tem, dimissionem, sursum reddicionem, feu forofac-
turam ipfius Radulphi, aut quam cito Officium il-
lod ad manus nostras quocumque alio modo deve-
nire contigisset, in tam amplis modo et forma prout
predictus Radulphus Officium predictum tune ha-
bens, feu aliquis alius, five aiiqui alii, Officium
predictum ante ea tempore habens, feu habentes,
habuiflfet feu peroepislet, vel percepissent, in et pro
exerckrio ejusdem, prout in literis nostris patentibus
predictis, datis decimo quinto die Octobris anno
regni nostri vicesimo quarto supradicto, plenius
continetur. Ac postmodum dictus Radulphus diem
suum clausit extremum; quo pretextu, Officium
illud ad prefaturn Thomam Pope, virtute literarum..
nostrarum patencium predictarum, devenit •, ipseque
in Officium predictum, post mortem predicti Radul-
phi intravit, illudque exercuit et occupavk, et ad-
huc occupat, juxta tenorem literarura nostrarum
predictarum: Quas quidem liceras nostras patentes,
eidem Thome Pop* de Officio predicto factas, pre-
fotus Thomas Pope in voluntate existit nobis in
Cancellariam nottram, quoad Officium, predictum
neenon omnia et singula premisla idem Officium
concemtntia, reftituere, ibidem cancellandas; ea in-
tencione, quod nos alias literas nostras patentes de
Officio illo eidem Thome Pope et cuidam johanni
Lucas concedere dignaremur. Nos premissa confi-
derantes, ac pro eo quod Jitere patentes predicte,
prefato Thome Pope in forma predicta facts, ad
presens

<page 307>
288 APPENDIX.
presens cancellate existunt, de gratia nostra specials
ac ex certa scientia et mero motu nostris, dedimus et
conccssimus, ac per presentes damus et concedimus,
prefatis Thome Pope et Johanni Lucas dictum Of--
ficium Clerici Corone Anglie; ipsosque, et eorum
Utrumque, Clericos Corone Cancellarie Anglie faci-
mus, constituimus, et ordinamus, per presentes:
Habend. occupand. et exercend. Officium illud eis-
dem Thome Pope et Johanni Lucas, ad terminum
vite ipsorum Thome Pope et Johannis Lucas, et
eorum alterius diutius viventis, per fe, vel per eo-
rum alterum, aut per fufficientem deputatum suum,
five deputatos fuos sufficientes, cum omnibus juri-
bus, proficuis, commoditatibus, et emolumentis, ei-
dem Officio qualitercumque pertinentibus five spec-
tantibus: Ac eciam viginti libras annuas prefatis
Thome Pope et Johanni Lucas, pro occupacione
et exercicio Officii predicti damus et concedimus
per presentes: Habend. et singulis annis percipiend.
prefatis Thome Pope et Johanni Lucas, durante
vita ipsorum Thome Pope et Johannis Lucas, et
eorum alterius diutius viventis, deexitibus, profi-
cuis, et revencionibus, Hanaperii, pro rempore ex-
istentis: Necnon liberatam vesturam et Furruram,
habend. et annuatim percipiend. prefatis Thome
Pope et Johanni Lucas, pro termino vite ipsorum
Thome Pope et Johannis Lucas, et eorum alterius
diutius viventis, ad magnam Garderobam nostram^
per manus custodis ejusdem Garderobe nostre pro
tempore exillentis, erga fella Natalis Domini et
Pentecostis, in tarn amplis modo et forma prout
predictus Radulphus, feu aliquis alius, five aliqui
alii,

<page 308>
APPENDIX. 289
alii, Officium predictum ante hæc tempore habens,
feu habentes, tenuerit five perceperit, tenuerunt vel
perceperunt, in et pro exercicio Officii predicti: Et
hoc ablque fine seu foedo, magno vel parvo, in Ha-
naperio Cancellarie nostre, feu alibi, ad opus nos-
trum proinde reddendo, solvendo, aut faciendo. Eo
quod expressa mencio, etc. In Cujus, etc. T. R.
apud Westmon, xxviii. die Februarii.
Per ipsuni Regem, etc.'
Concordat cum Orig. in Capella Rotul.
Hen. Rooke, Cler, Rotul. (1764.)
NUMB.

<page 309>
a90 APPENDIX.
NUMB. VI.
The Charter of Mabill Abbesse of God-
stowe % made to God and oure lady
and to feynt Cuthberte, and to the
Priour and Convent of Dureham,
from a certeyne diche thurte over in
Bewmounte \
TH E sentence of this charter is, that Mabile
Abbesse of Godstowe, and the convent of the
fame place, with one afient and consent, yave, etc.
* Her riame was Mabile Wasre. She was the eighth abbess,
and presided about the year 1286. Willis, Mitr. Abb. ii. 178.
b From the Chartulary of the Nunnery of Godilow. MSS.
Rawlins. 1,300. foK Bibl. Bodl.
Vi2. All the charters and evidences of the said nunneryv
from the foundation, abstracted into English, by " a pore bro-
"der and welwylher to the good Abbes of Godestowe, dame
«* Alice Henly, and to all hyr covent." Alice Henly, or Alice
of Henly, was abbess about 1464. Temp. Edw. iv. In the
prologue or preface, (sol. 1.) the writer fays, that he translates
their register, or ledger book, into English, for the benefit of
religious women, who are not supposed to understand Latin.
It is the original, on vellum.—Tanner, (Not. Mon. sol. p.
423.) informs us, that this curious manuscript formerly belong-
ed to sir James Ware, and afterwards to Henry earl df Claren-
don. The nuns are here often called Mjncbons. So the nunnery
ac

<page 310>
APPENDIX. 491
to god, and to oure lady seynt Maria, and to, feync
Cuthberte, and to the priour and convent of Pure-
ham, and to ther successoures, or their assignes, all
what so ever they were, all ther arable londs, the
which they had fro a diche thurre over in Bvwmonted,
that is to fay, fro the londe 0/ Philipp Ho Burgeys
of Oxenforde, unto the londe that was of Roger
Semer, in the fame tilthe % in the fubarbis of Oxen-
forde; whereof thre acres lye beside the londe of
Walter Bost of the north partc, and one acre lieth
of the southe parte of the londe of the said Walter
Bost, bitwene the londe of Thomas Lewes and the
at Littlemore near Oxford, is called the Minchery, that is, the
Minchionry, or house of nuns. Hearne gives another in-
terpretation of Minchery. Hist. Antio^ Glastonb. Pref. p.
xxi. edit. 1722. It was customary for the bishops in their visi-
tations of the religious houses, to deliver their Injunctions, not
only to the monks, but even to the female convent;, drawn up in
the Latin language; which the nuns understood just as well as
their Latin leases, and had therefore a fair excuse for not ob-
serving. Sometimes, however, but very early, they were given
to the nunneries in French.
d Some antiquaries suppose that Oxford was a Roman City,
called Bellositum: an hypothesis almost as chimerical as the
fable of Brutus being the founder of the university. The
truth is, King Henry the first gave his palace at Oxford, the
Norman or French appellation Beaumont. This was soon
latinised into Bellositum : which at length became a name
for the town in general. Others pretend, that the original
antient university which flourished before king Alfred's time,
was styled Bellositum, and that it stood detached from the
present, in or about Saint Giles's field. This is another fiction
of the monks, which originated after the eleventh century.
1 Tillage. A field.
T 2 lortdc

<page 311>
292 APPENDIX.
londe of the same Roger Semer: and one hede of
all the said londe buttith to the walks f towarde the
west, and another hede buttith unto the kyngis hye
waye of Bewmonte, toward the est. Also with vi
penyworth of yerely rente to be taken of one acre
of the londe of Thomas Lewes, with the tythes of
the fame acre, and the tythes of an acre of Walter
Boste in the fame tylthe; with all his pertynantis,
longyngi bothe to the londe, and to the rent and
tythes. They willed also and graunted to the fame
priour and covent aforesaid, that they stiold have
whatsoever right they had in voide groundes beside
bPeralowse Hall in Horsemongerstrete'. To be had and
to be hold to the priour and convent of Dureham,
and to ther successoures or ther assigns, All of
Them, and ther church of Godstowe, frely, quyetly,
holy, wele, and in pease, for ever; with all liberties,
eschetes, customes, tithes, eysementisk, with en-
f Of the city.
* Belonging.
* Aula Periculosa.
1 Where a large stone-edislce now stands called Ktiiel-Hall;
built by Dr. Ralph Kettcl, president of Trinity college, about
1615. For building this Kettel-hall, a house was pulled down
inhabited by George Cawfield, recorder of Oxford, who was
buried in faint Mary Magdalene's church, xx. Octob. 1603.
MSS. Wood, Mus. Aslim. Collectao. e Rcgifir. Parochial. Ci.
<vi/at. Oxon. D. 5. 4to. Duiing Cromwell's usurpation, such
of the academics as had been famous for acting plays in'the
late king's time, used to act plays by stealth in this Hall.
Wood's Life, vol. 2. p. J48. edit. 1772.
k Easments. .'
tryngis

<page 312>
APPENDIX. 293
tiyngis and goyng owte, aud sutes of course-, and
all other thynges and actions in only wife longyng to
the said londe, rente and tythes, with all ther per-
tynantis. Yelding thereof yerely to them, and to
ther successoures, or to their assignes whosoever the
be, x s. of silver, and at michelmasse v s. of silver,
for all servyce, customs, exactions, sutis of courtes,
and secular demaundes. And yf hit happen the said
priour and convent, and ther successoures, or ony
maner assignes of them, to be behynde, of [or] to
faile in the payment of the said yerely rente, (that
god forbede-,) the foresaide priour and convente
grauntith for them and their successoures, and all
maner of assignes, that hit sholde be wele lawfull
to the foresaid abbesse and convente of Godstowe
and to ther successoures, or mynystris or servauntis,
who soever the be, to entre, destrayne, and nyme',
all tenements that they had, or myght have, in the
subarbis of Oxenforde towarde the northe fro the
the fornamed diche thurte over Bewmounte, unto Horse-
monger strete also; and all the londes aforesaid, from
day unto day, for the foresaid yearely x s. without
ony agayn sayinge"' or lette of the foresayde priour,
covente, successours, or assignes, whosoever they be,
tille hit were fully satisfyed to the sayde abbesse and
covente of Godestowe, and to ther successoures and
assignes, all of the forsaide rente. And the foresaid
1 To take for a pledge. To seize. See Dufrcsiie, Lat. Gl.
V. Namiuni, Namiare, &c. And Lye's Sax. Goth. Dictionary,
V. Niman.
n Gainsaying.
T 3 abbesse

<page 313>
2$4 APPENDIX.
abbesse and coventc of Godestowe, and ther succes-
loures, warrantized, aquyted, and defended for the
forsaide rente of xs. all the foresaide londes, sixc
penyworthe of yerely rent, and tythes of ii acres of
Walter Bost, and Thomas Lewes, with all ther per-
tynantis as hit is said afore, to the foresaide priour
and covenre of Durham, and to ther successoures,
and to ther assignes, ayenst all men and women.
Furthermore, the said abbresse and covente of Gode-
stowe willed and graunted for them and ther succes-
soures, or assignes, whych soever they fholde be,
that they sholde be quyte from yevyng all tythes,
bothe of more and lesse ", in the forsaid covente sot-
ever. And for this gyfte, etc. the foresaide prior
and covente yaf to them aforehandes xx marke of
sterlyngis. Jn witness of all those thyngis, &c. °
■ Great and Small Tythes.
"The original is in Thefauriar.-coll. Div. Joh. Bapt. Oxon.
among other instruments of Godstowe nunnery. In an abstract
from which, Wood gives the names of the witnesses, viz.
"Phil, de Ho, tune Majori Oxon. Hcnr. Howayne, Johan.
'« de Ho, Will, le Specer. Tho. Sowey." Muf. Alhm. 8513.—
Philip tie Ho, O, or Eu, occurs mayor of Oxon, 1276, 1286,
1 295/, 1296, 1299. A. Wood's Cat. of Mayors, etc. of Oxfords
pag. 66. seq. MSS. ut supr. D. 7.
About the fame time, two plots of ground lying in Magda-
lene parish, were confirmed to them by the convent of faint
Fridefwidc's. [See Br. Twyne, MSS. «. p. 259.] And in 1291,
their precincts and possessions were enlarged by grants of more
ground lying in and about their house. Wood's City of Ox-
ford, MSS. Muf. Alhmol. All this they enjoyed till their
dissolution.
NUMB.

<page 314>
APPENDIX. 295
NUMB. VII.
Grant from Henry the eighth of Bar-
nard College^ with half the Grove of
Durham College, to the Dean and
Chapter of Christ Church, Oxford,
Decemb. u. 1548*.
RE X, etc. Salutem, sciatis-quod nos, de gracia
noftra specials ac ex certa sciencia et mero
motu nostris, Dedimus et concessimus, ac per præ-
sentes damus et concessimus, decano et capititlo
ecclesie cathedralis Chrifti Oxon, ex fundatione nof-
tra, inter multa alia Totum ilium Icitum, septum,
circuitum, ambitum, et precinctum, totius illius
collegii, vulgaritur nuncupati Barnardes Coi«-
ledge b in civitate nostra Oxon, cum suis juribus
» In Capell. Rot.
b Bernard college, (now faint John's) was inhabited by stu-
dents, under that name, in the year 1549; and, as I conjecture,
two or three years afterwards. I find a Manciple es Bernard
college suing for battels in the vice-chancellor's court, 1549.
Registr. cur. cancell. Oxon. G G. sol. 37. Its last prefect,
called Promisor, before its endowment by sir Thomas Whyte,
was Dr. Kennall. It had been an academical convent of Ber-
nardines, built by archbishop Chichely. Pat. ann. 15. Henr.
vi. membr. 24. [A. D. 1437.] The king sets forth, that
whereas

<page 315>
296 APPENDIX.
membris, et pcrtinenciis universis; Ac omnia et sin-
gula domos, edificia, structuras, ortos, pomeria,
gardina, stagna, vivaria, terras, et solum nostra,
infra dictum scitum, septum, circuitum, ambitum,
feu precinctum, dicti collegii vocati Barnardes
College, existentia; ac omnia et singula, muros,
menia, fossata, parietes, et cetera inclosamenta que-
cunque, eundem scitum, septum, circuitum, ambi-
tum feu precinctum, ambientia aut quocunque modo
includentia: Ac eciam Dimidium, five Medietatem,
totius illius Horti collegii vocati Durham CoUedge in
parochia sancte Marie Magdalene in suburbiis dicte
civitatis Oxon, collegio vocato Durham Colkdge du-
dum spectantis et pertinentis: Habend. tenend. et
gaudend. predictum scitum, et cetera Premissa pre-
dicta, eisdem Decano et capitulo, et successoribus
suis imperpetuum. Teste R. apud Westmon. xi. die
Decembris, anno R. Hen. octavi xxxviii.
whereas Henry [Chicheley] archbishop of Canterbury intends
to found " quoddam congruum et notabile man sura collegiale,
"in honocem gloriosiffimae virginis Mariæ fanctique Bernardi,
"in vico vulgariter nuncupato Northgatti strite, vel saltern
"prope dictum vicum, in parochia sanctx Marix Magdalenx,
"juxta et extra portam borealem villæ Oxon, in solo ipsiuj ar-
"chiepiscopi continente quinque acras terræ vel circiter, quæ
"de nobis tenentur in capite, Sec." In a roll, in the Court
of augmentations, the site and garden of Bernard college con-
taining two acres, with all its edifices, and the garden of
Durham college, is valued at xxi. per arm. Pyx. S. Fridks-
wydb. Oxon.
NUMB.

<page 316>
APPENDIX. 297
NUMB. *VII*.
Part of the Charter os foundation of
the Dean and Chapter of Durham
cathedral, given by King Henry the
eighth, A. D. 1541 \
"T^\AMUS etiam,ac per præsentesconcedimus,
l^y præfato Decano et Capitulo, totum illud sci-
tum, circuitum, ambitum, et præcinctum, cujus-
dam nuper Collegii vocati Duresme College infra vil-
lain Oxon, in com. nostro Oxon. Ac totam illam
ecclesiam five capellam, campanile, ccemeterium,
ejusdem nuper collegii, una cum omnibus domibus,
ædificiis, pomariis, gardinis, hortis, et solo, tarn in-
tra quam extra, juxta et prope icitum, ambitum, et
præcinctum ejuldem nuper collegii. Ac totum illud
tencmentum in Hamborowe in dicto com. nostro
Oxon Ac totam illam rectoriam et ecclesiam nos-
tram de Frampton in com nostro Lincoln. Ac to-
tam illam rectoriam et ecclesiam nostramde Roding-
ton in com. nostro Nottingham. Ac omnes illas
rectorias et ecclesias nostras de Fishlake, Bossal,
* In Archivis Eccl. Cathedr. Dunelm. MS. Et in Capcll.
Rotul. viz. Lit. Pat. Henr. viii. ann. reg. 33.
et

<page 317>
a9& APPENDIX.
et Brantingham, in com. nostro Ebor. Ac quan-
dam annuitatcm five annualem redditum quatuor
librarum exeuntium et annuatim percipiendarum de
rectoria five ecclesia nostra de North Allerton
in dicto com. nostro Ebor, ad festa Annunciatio-
nis beatæ Mariæ Virginis et sancti Michaelis
Archangeli, annuatim solvendum. Ac totam illam
pensionem, five annuum redditum, sedecim librarum
exeuntium et annuatim percipiendarum de Vicario
de North Allerton prædicti pro tempore exis-
tente. Quæ quidem rectoriæ, annuitates, et penfio-
nes prædictæ dicti nuper Collegii, prædicto nuper
Monasterio sancti Cuthberti Dunelmensis prædicti
spectabant et pertinebant, aut parcellæ et possessiones
ejusdem nuper Collegii et dicti nuper Monasterii
extiteruntb."
b Durham College, tster it* dissolution, was inhabited for
some time by Waiter Wryght archdeacon of Oxford, who pre-
sided in it over a sew students. But before or about the year
1552, it was totally desolated, and the buildings being intirely
neglected, began to be ruinous. Wood, MSS. Muf. Afhmol.
IX 3. pag. 208. See also Rcgistr. Cur. Cancell. Oxon. G G.
sol. 55. 68. 76. And Stevens. Mokast. i. 343. Also, Ap-
pend. Numb. viii. Wood tells us, that before the reign of
Edward the sixth, " Collegium vero Dunelmenfe et Bernardi-
'• num snow faint John's college] vacua parne jacebant ....
"unde canilia lustra, joco populari, vocabantur: usquedum
"Thomæ Pope et Thomje Whyte militum, pietate, latisun-
'* diis essent locupletata." Hist. Antio,. Univ. Oxon. i. 281.
col. 1. [From Br. Twyne, MSS. Archiv. Oxon. s. sol. 23$.
4to.] And Camden Britann. p. 271. Dobun. edit. 1607.
sol. viz. «• Nostra itidem memoria, ut novisetiam benesieiis Mu-
•' fas complecterentur, Thomas Pope vir ordinis equestris Du-
"nelmense collegium, et Thomas White civis senatorque Lon-
"dinensis,

<page 318>
APPENDIX. e99
** dinensis, et equestris itidem ordinis, Bernardi collegium, quse
"siiis Ttideribos sepulta jacuerunt, excitarunt, novis sedificiis
"instaurarunt, latifundiis locupletarunt, et novis nominibus
"exornarunt. Hoc enim S. Joanni Baptists, illud Sacrosanctae
"Trinitati dicarunt." Doctor T. Cay thus speaks of Durham
college, in a passage which for the elegance of its latinity alone
deserves to be transcribed. "Fuit aula ilia de qua mentio est
"apud eundem Aungervillium, aula Dunelmensis, intra paucos
"annos Collegium Dunelmense, et hodie Collegium Trinitatis,
"vocata. Hanc bonus ille episcopus primus eicxit, construda
"inibi bibliotheca optimis libris referta, ceteraque ibi dispo-
"suit juxta lormam illam a se in Philobiblo descriptam, qui
"deinceps habitus est ejusdero fundator. Donee regnante Ri-
"cardo ejus appellationis secundo, Ricardus Hatefelde episco-
"pus item Dunelmensis ordinarct, ut secularibus aulæ Aunger-
"villianæ Schol.isticis certus monachorum Dunelmensium
"numerus adjungeretur, qui Oxoniam, studendi causa, Prioris
•• semper Dunelmensis nutu perpetuis post temporibus aman-
"darctur, domumque revocaretur. His ita prospectum est ah
*' Hatefeldo. ut datis abunde ad illorum fustentationem reddi-
"tibus, fine ullis monasterii impensis ibi studerent. Quo bcue-
"ficio ita sibi monachos demeruit, ut, oblivioni tradito Aunger-
"villii nomine, solus ille collegii fundator usque ad monaste-
"riorum eversionem haberetur. Hodie tanien insigne Musaecm
"sub nomine, ut dixi, Trinitatis, a bonae memorise Domino
*' Thoma Pope equestris ordinis viro resuscitatum; qui id
"longe quam antea præstantius, atque adeo studiosis quos fre-
"quentes alit commodius efFeclt. In ejus collegii bibliotheca,
"postremis Henrici octavi annis, vidi ac perlegi hunc Aunger-
"villii librum cui Pwilobibli titulum indidit, eundem ipfum
"indubie, quem ipsemet bibliotheca: illi vivus contulem."
Thoma; Caii Vindiciæ Antiquitat. Acad. Oxon. edit. Hearnc,
Oxon. 1730. vol. ii. pag. 432.
%* Catalogue of the Wardens of Durham Collice.
The governors of this house were not styled Wardens, but
Priors, till the foundation was fully settled. They were ap-
pointed by the Priors of the cathedral-convent of Durham.
I. John

<page 319>
3oo APPENDIX.
I. John of Beverly occurs about the year 1333. See
Stevens, Mcnast. i. p. 340. Twyne, Apol. Acad. Oxon.
p. 170. edit. 1609.
II. William Appulby was appointed by John of Heming-
burgh, Prior of Durham, Aug. 14. 1404. Stevens, ubi supr.
He was buried in the college. Wood, MSS. Muf. Ashmol.
D. 19. 4W. It may be doubted whether he was the second.
III. Thomas Rome occurs in 1413. Stevens, ibid. He
was Prior of Persliore in Worcestershire. Reyner, p. 1/5. He
was buried in Durham-college. Wood, MSS. ut supr.
IV. William Ebchester, D. D. occurs about the year
1440. Stevens, ubi supr. He was made Prior of Durham
in 1446, and dying in 1456, was buried in his church. Whar-
ton, Angl. Sacr. i. 777. See Rites of Durham Cathed-
ral, &c. by I. D. 167*. p. 50.
V. Robert Ebchester. He was made bachelor of divi-
nity, Dec. 24. 1469. Being then styled Gardianus Colltgii
Dunelm. Wood, MSS. Muf. Ashm. D. 3. sol. 126. Compare
Stevens, ubi supr. p. 343. col. 2. He was made Prior of
Durham in 1478, and died and was buried there in 1484.
Wharton, ut supr. p. 778. 789. Rites of Durham, ut
supr. p. 5J.
VI. Thomas Swawell occurs in 1502. Stevens, ut supr.
p. 342. He was made doctor in divinity, in 15 01. Wood,
Fast. Oxon. i. p. 4.
VII. Thomas Castell occurs in 1511. Stevens, ubi modo
supr. He was made bachelor of divinity at Oxford in 1510.
Wood, MSS, Muf Ashmol. D. 3. sol. 15. And D. D. in
Ijli. Wood, Fast. i. 18. 20. He must not be confounded with
Thomas Castell, who died Prior of Durham in 1519. Wharton*
ut supr. p. 781,
VIII. Hugh Whithead succeeded Castell in 1512. Pro-
ceded bachelor of divinity at Oxford Mar, 14. 1511. Wood,
Ath. Oxon. Fast. i. 17. See also MSS. Wood, E. 9. ubi supr,
viz. Oppon. in Theology. Created Doctor, May 13. 1513.
Ath. Oxon. i. Fast. zo. Appointed Prior of Durham in
- 1524-

<page 320>
APPENDIX. 3<jj
1524. During his priorate, which he held twenty four years,
he rebuilt many houses at Bear-park; and at Pittintown erected
a new hall called the Prior's hall, with other edifices annexed.
He was the last Prior of Durham; and, on the change of the
foundation by Henry the eighth, was constituted the first Dean
in 1541. He died in 1547, and was buried in the church of
the Minories at London. Wharton, ubi supr. p. 782. Wood,
Ath. Oxon. i. Fast. 20. Willis's Cathedrals, Durham, p.
252. Rites of Durham, p. 92.
IX. Edward Henmarsh occurs in 1527. Stevens, ut supr,
p. 342. He was made S. T. B. in 1513. Ath. OxoNt i. Fast,
p. 20. See Wood, MSS. Mus. Ashmol. D. sol. 177. 180.
He probably presided till the final Dissolution of this college
in ij+o.
NUMB.
1

<page 321>
SOI APPENDIX.
NUMB. VIII.
Grant os Durham College in Oxford,
from Edward the sixth, to George
Owen, and William Martyn. Dat.
Feb. iv. 1553 a.
EDWARD US scxtus dei gratia, etc. omni-
bus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis, quod nos
in confideratione boni, veri, fidelis, et acceptabilis
servieii, per servientem nostrum dilectum, Georgium
Owen, armigerum, unum medicorum nostrorum,
etc. de gratia nostra speciali, etc. Dedimus et con-
cessimus, etc. prefato Georgio Owen, etc. Ac etiam
totum illud messuagium, five nuper Collegium nos-
trum, vocatum Durham Colledge, in univ. Oxon.
Ac totum illud Scitum, Circuitum, Ambitum, et
Precinctum dicti nuper collegii vocati Durham
Colledge in univ. Oxon. predicta, cum suis juri-
bus, membris, et pertineneiis, universis: Ac omnia
et fingula, domos, edificia, ortos, pomaria, gardinos,
terras, tenementa, et solum nostrum, infra dictum
scitum, circuitum, feu precinctum ejusdem nuper
* Ex copia quadam abbreviat. In Thesauriario Coll. Trin.
Oxon. Compared with the original by sir Thomas Pope.
collegii

<page 322>
APPENDIX. 303
collegii existentia, ac modo, vel nuper, in tcnura
five occupatione Waltcri Wryghtfc, doctoris in jure
civili, vel assignatorum suorum: Necnon omncs
illos boscos nostros, et arbores nostras, vulgariter
nuncupatas Elm es, crescentes et existences in le
Backside dicti nuper collegii, vocati Durham
Colledge, et e'rdem nuper collegio dudum spectan-
tes et pertinentes: Ac terram, fundum, et solum,
eorundem boscorum et arborum, habend. tenend. et
gaudend. etc. ac prædictum scitum dicti nuper colle-
gii, prefato Georgio Owen, et Willielmo Martyn, ac
hæredibus et assignatis ipsius Georgii imperpetuumc.
b About the year 1 540, he was principal of Peckwater-inn
at Oxford. In 1543, he was made archdeacon of Oxford,
while the cathedral subsisted at Oseney. Installed a prebendary
of Winchester cathedral, Jan xi. 1559. A prebendary of
North-Grantham in the church of Salisbury. He was several
times a commissary, and visitor, of the university of Oxford.
Wood, Ath. i. F. 63. Willis's Cathedrals, cath. Oxford,
p. 447. Gale's Winchester, p. 119. On the ruin or demo-
lition of Durham college, where he lived a few years after it»
dissolution, he retired to Exeter college, where he died, May x.
1561. viz. " D. pientiflimus Walterus Wryght, mortem obiit
"in fuo infra collegium nostrum, cubiculo, anno posteriore
"[viz. 1561.] x. Maii. Et voti compos, in sacra xde 8. M.
"in Oxon. fepultus est. Qui ex testamento oobis dono dedit
"craterem unum deauratum, feptem libris ponder, cum UL
"libr. in pecunia." E Registr. coll. Exon. Oxon. sol. 76.
c I have before observed [Life, pag. 115.] that all the
estates of Durham college, together with its site here specified,
were granted by Henry viii. May xii. 1541, to the new dean
and chapter of Durham. The said estates still remain in the
posjjssion of that cathedral. But how or when the said//* re-
verted to the crown, so as to be granted by Edward the sixth to
Owen

<page 323>
304 APPENDIX.
Tenend. etc. etc. ac prædictum scitum dicti nu-
per collegii, etc. de nobis, hæredibus et successori-
bus nostris, in socagio, ut de Honore nostro de
Ewelme in dicto com. nostro Berks d. per-fidelita-
tem tantum, et non in capite. Ac reddend. annu-
atim nobis, etc. de et pro prædicto scitu et terris dic-
ti nuper collegii vocati Durham Colledge, viginti
sex solidos et octo denarios legalis monetæ Angliæ,
etc. ad festum sancti Michaelis archangeli singulis
annis solvendos, pro omnibus redditibus, scrviciis, et
demandis quibuscunque, proinde nobis, hæredibus,
vel succefforibus nostris, quoquomodo reddendis,
Iblvendis, vel faciendis, etc. In cujus Rei, etc. Teste
meipso apud Westmon. quarto die Feb. anno regni
nostri scptimo.
f Exam, et concordat cum Liter, pat. remanent. penes
«* dom. G. Owen. Tho. Pope" e.
Jur. in Offitio* Johannis Pycharell auditoris
ibid*.
Owen and Martyn, I know not; unless this resumption was
made, when the bifhoprick of Durham was dissolved by Ed-
ward the sixth, An. reg. vii. 1552.
* In Oxfordshire. These inaccuracies are not uncommon in
antient instruments.
• Manu (ua.
f Lege, Officina.
» Sc. Scaccarii.
NUMB.

<page 324>
APPENDIX. 305
N U M B. IX.
Purchase of Durham college aforesaid,
by sir Thomas Pope, of G. Owen
and W. Martyn. Dat. Feb. xx. 1554*.
OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus, ad quos hæc
præsens carta nostra indentata pervenerit,
Georgius Owen, armiger, unus medicorum regis et
reginæ b, et Willielmus Martyn, generosus, salutem
in domino sempiternam. Sciatis nos prefatos G.
Owen, et W. Martyn, pro quadam competenti pe-
cuniæ summa nobis per Thomam Pope de Tytten-
• Thesaur. ut supr.
b Georcb Owen was a man of great learning, and emi-
nent in his profession. He was successively physician to Henry
the eighth, Edward the sixth, and Philip and Mary. He at-
tended Henry on his death-bed, who made him a witness to
his last will, in which he bequeathed him 100/. He was also
present at the death of Edward the sixth, and attended the
princess Elizabeth in her imprisonment. Leland has compli-
mented him in his Encomia of the learned men of those times.
Edit. 1589. p. 96. He died 1558. Beside the grant of Dur-
ham college from Edward the sixth, he received with its adjoin-
ing estates a grant of the nunnery of Godstowe, near Oxford j
the buildings of which he converted into a dwelling-house,
with some few alterations and improvements.
U hanger

<page 325>
3o6 APPENDIX.
hanger in Co.Hertf. militem,præ manibus benect fide-
liter persoluta, unde fatemur nos et quemlibet nostrum
fore plenarie satisfact. et content, eundemque Tho-
mam Pope, militem, heredes, et a.dministratores suos
inde acquietat. et exornerat. esse per præsentes, Dedifle
et concefllsse, et præsenti carta confirmasle prefato
Thomæ Pope, militi, totum illud messuagium, five
nuper collegium nostrum, vooatum Dyrram College
in univ. Oxon. Ac totum ilium scitum, circuitum,
ambitum et præcinctum nostrum, dicti nuper col-
legia vocati Dyrram College in univ. Oxon. pre-
dicta; cum suis juribus, membris, et pertinenciis
universis: Ac pmnia et singula, domos, edificia,
ortos, pomaria, gardina, terras, tenementa, et so-
lum nostrum, infra dictum scitum, septum, circui-
tum, feu præcinctum, ejusdem nuper collegii exis-
tentia, ac modo, vel nuper in tenura five occupati-
one Walteri Wryght, doctoris in jure civili, vel
assignatorum suorum: Necnon omnes illos boscos
nostros, et arbores nostras, vulgariter vocatas Elmes,
crescentes et existentes in le Backside dicti nuper col-
legii vocati Dyrram College, et eidem nuper collcgio
dudum lpectantes et petinentes: Ac terram, fundum,
et solum nostrum eorundem boscorum et arborumc:
c The grove of Durham college was much larger at the dis-
solution of the said college, than at th? time.of {his purchase.
Part of it was rented by Cernard College, now faint John's.
Bernard college was dissolved by Henry the eighth, who gave
^he said college and its appurtenances, together with a part,
called half, of Durham college grove, to his new cathedral of
Christ church, 1545^. This part, or half, I presume, was that
which had been rented, as above, by Bernard college, and
was

<page 326>
APPENDIX. 307
Ac reverfionem et reversiones quascunque omnium ac
singulorum præmissorum, etcujuslibet inde parcellæ,
necnon redditus et annualia proficua quæcunque
reservata super quibuscunque dimissionibus et con-
ceffionibus de præmiflis, feu de aliqua inde parcella
was therefore considered, at the time of this donation, as in
usual appendage. In the year 1555. sir Thomas Whyte, pur-
chasing from Christ-church the said Bernard college, purchased
likewise of the same, the part or halsoi Durham college grove
above-mentioned. This part, or half, is what now makes the
outer grove, and perhaps much more, of faint John's college.
See Wood, Hist. Ant. ii. 25 z.—Stevens, Monast. ii. 53. Wood,
MSS.Mus. Ashm.8513.—And especially, Numb. VII. Append.
Thus the outlet, or grime, in the text, included only what re-
mained to Durham college after the aforesaid aliena.ion made
by Henry the eighth. When Trinity college and saint John's
were sounded, the two founders jointly erected the stone wall
which now separates the groves, or gardens, of the two col-
leges. That this was done by agreement between them both, I
collect from the words of a letter from sir Thomas Pope, to the
president, dat. Jul. xxiv. 1557, in which, he desires the presi-
dent to bespeak for him, a certain large quantity of stone, "for
"so much I think I shall occupie/ir my fart of Mr. [sir Tho-
"mas] White's wall." Afterwards, sir T. Pope surrounded the
whole grove of Trinity college with a stone-wall: and I find ex-
pended thereon exx, /. The stone was purchased of William
Freere of Oxford, who, with Agnes his wife, got possession of
the houses called Dominican and Franciscan Friers at Oxford,
soon after their dissolution, and demolishing the buildings fold
the materials. See Life, p. 125. And Wood, Hist. Antiq.
Univ. Gxon. lib. i. pag. 66. col. 2. William's elder brother
Edward was afterwards fettled at Water-Eaton near Oxford.
Arms in the windows of the house of Mr. Freer, at Oxford,
are described by Lee, 1575. Arms, &c. Mus. Astimol. MSS.
Codd. A. Wood. D. 14.
U 2 factis:

<page 327>
3o8 APPENDIX.
factis: Adeo plene, libere, et integre, ac in tam
amplis modo et forma, prout illustrissimus princeps,
nuper rex Edwardus, ejus nominis sextus, prædictum
messuagium five collegium et cetera fingula premissa
nobis prefato G. Owen et W. Martyn, ac heredibus
et assignatis Mei prefati Georgii imperpetuum, per
literas suas patentes, sub magno sigillo suo Angliæ
confectas, gerentes datum apud Westmon. iv. Feb.
anno nuper regni sui septimo, dedit et concessit.
Adeo plene ac libere et integre, ac in tam ampl is
modo et forma, prout prædictum messuagium five
collegium ac cetera premissa modo habemus feu tene-
mus, virtute et vigore literarum patentium præ-
dictarum dicti nuper dom. regis, aut aliter quocum-
que modo. Habend. tenend. et gaudend. predictum
messuagium five collegium vocatum Dyrram College
in dicta univ. Oxon. et cætera premissa, cum eorum
pertinentiis universis prefato Thomæ Pope, militi,
heredibus, et assignatis suis, ad solum Opus et Usum
ipsius Thomæ Pope, militis, hæredum et assignato-
rum fuorum, imperpetuum. Tenend. per redditus et
servicia inde prius debitaet de jure consueta. Et nos
vero præfatus G. Owen, ac W. Martyn, ac hæredes
et assignati Mei præfati Georgii, dictum messuagium
five collegium vocatum Dyrrbam Colledge, et cætera
præmissa, cum pertinentiis præfato Thomæ Pope,
ac hæredibus et assignatis suis, contra nos et hæredes
noflros warrantizabimus et imperpetuum defendemus
per præsentes. Et cum per prædictas lit. pat. qui-
dam annualis redditus viginti sex solidorum et duo-
rum denariorum reservatus sit, annuatim solvendus
dicto nuper regi hæredibus et successoribus suis, si-
cut

<page 328>
APPENDIX. 309
cut ibidem plenius apparet, Sciatis me prefatum G.
Owen, converiisie et concessisse per præsentes, pro
me, hæredibus, executoribus, ac administratoribus
meis cum præfatoTHOMA Pope, hæredibus et assig-
natis suis, non modo quod eos et eorum quemlibet
indempnes et sine dampno et detrimento de soluci-
one dicti redditus, et cujuslibet inde parcellæ, de cæ-
tero imperpetuum lervabo, ac de omnibus oneribus
et incumberantiis quibuscunque dictum collegium et
cætera præmissa, feu eorum aliquod concernentibus
per ipsos Georgium et Willielmum, feu eorum alte-
rum, antehac habit, fact, aut præmissis, fed etiam,
quod quandocunque et quoties contigerit, dictum
redditum, feu aliquam inde parcellam, levari de
prædicto collegio, situ et cæteris præmissis præcon-
cessis feu de aliqua inde parcella, quod tune et toties,
ego præfarus Georgius, et hæredes ac asilgnati mei
forisfaciemus prædicto Thomæ hæredibus et assigna-
natis suis quadraginta Solidos nomine Pænæ: Et quod
tune et toties bene licebit prædicto Thomæ Pope hæ-
redibus et assignatis suis, in omnia maneria, terras, tene-
menta, et hæreditamenta mea infra com. Oxon. et
Berks. intrare,et distringere, tarn proprædictis redditu,
feu arreragiis ejusdem, aut aliqua inde parcella, sic
ut præfertur, aliquo tempore posthac de eodem col-
legio, et cæteris, præmissis, levatis, quam pro foris-
factura pænæ prædictæ, levatis, quam ac pro om-
nibus expensis et costagiis per eundem Thomam
Pope, hæredes, vel assignatos suos, per circa et
concernentibus solucionem dicti redditus, pænæ, aut
arreragionem ejusdem, sustinendis ac solvendis: Et
U 3 distric-

<page 329>
3ia APPENDIX.
districtiones sic captas abducere et asportare, et penea
fe retinere, quousque idem Thomas Pope, hære-
des et assignati sui, sint inde plenarie satisfacti et con-
tend. Sciatis insuper, nos prefatos G. Owen, et W.
Martyn, fecisse, ordinasse, constituisse, deputasse, et in
loco nostro posuisse dilectos nobis in Christo, Williel-
mum Hemerford*, theologiæ bachalarium, Johannem
Heywood',EdwardumLove,ttJohanem Mikvarde', gene-
4 Concerning whom I find nothing more, than that he was
of Oxford j where he took the degree of A. B. in Decem-
ber, 1553, as Capelianusseailaris. Also Mar. xx, 1541, the de-
gree of master of arts. MSS. A. Wood, Muf. Afliraol. E. 29.
And E. 6.
• Probably the fame whom fir T. Pope calls, in his Will,
his *' trfwe frynd," and to whom he bequeathes a meir.orial.
See Life, p. 164.. John Heywood is also one of the witnesses to
the codicil of said Will.
f Sir T. Pope, in hi9 Will, calls this "John Milixardt his
Clerk, and leaves him a legacy of xx/. He appears to have
been related to Dame Elizabeth Powlett, widow of fir T.
Pope, and was probably of her neighbourhood in Derby/hire.
Ex Testam. More os' the name are mentioned in her Will.
William and Robert are witnesses to her deed of gift at Burton
upon Trent. Life, p. 200. Sir T. Pope, in a letter to the pre-
sident of his college, without date, speaks of " Henry Mil-
"warde my friend:" and one of that name Occurs among the
first Famuli of the college at the foundation. Comp. Burss
1556.-7. As to the said John Mikvarde, mentioned in the
text, he was, beside what has been already said, one of the
witnesses to the codicil of .sir T. Pope's will. He was also a
witness to the instrument concerning the dirge at Much-Wal-
tham. Life, p. 132. On sirT. Pope's death he became steward,
or receiver, to fir Hugh Powlett. Registr. prim. coll. Trin.
sol. 24. b. In 1561, Decemb. vii, the said college appoint-
ed

<page 330>
APPENDIX. 311
fdsos, ridstros veros et legitimos attornatos, conjunctim
etdivifitrjjad intrandum et ingrediendum in prædictum
messuagium, five collegium et cætera præmissa et in
quamlibet inde parcellam, ac plenam et pacificam po-
sessionem statum et seisinam inde, vice et nominibus
nostris, capiendum: Et post hujusmodi possesfionem
statum et seisinam inde sic captam et habitam, dein-
de dadem ad dandum et deliberandum præfato Tho-
mæ Pope, militi, aut suo in ea parte attornato, se-
cundum vim, formam, et effectum hujus presentis
carte nostre: Ratum ac firmum habentes, et habituri,
totum et quicquid attornati nostri fecerint, feu eorum
aliquis fecerit, in premissis. In cujus rei testimo-
hium huic presenti carte indentate partes prædifte fl-
ed him their attorney in a certain law-suit, calling him in
their Appointment, "Joannem Milwarde generrsum, clarijjimi
"Hugonit Paukt militis fumulum." Registr. ut supr. sol. 29.
He occurs often as an agent between the said college and Dame
Powlett the foundresse; as I collect from these articles, viz.'
Comp. Burst". 1561.—2. "Sol. pro uno pari chirothecarum
"dat. Mag. Joh. Milwarde ex mandato præsidis et officialio-
"rum, ij/. iv^."—Comp. 1563.--4. "Sol. Jul. xxii. pro
"cena mag. Milwarde adferentis mandatum a domina sunda-
"trice de lustranda porcione silvæ, ij 1. viij d." Again in the
same year. *' Sol. pro epulis insumptis in mag. [Simon.] Par.
"rett, etc. et Joannem Milwarde, vx. viij d." He sometimes
acted as deputy-steward to Dame Elizabeth Powlett. I find him
more than once, presenting a new-year's gift to the college;
and as late as 1582. He also occurs on some other occasions.
One Arderne Milwarde is elected schol. coll. Trin. e com. Oxon,
in 1583. Ex registr. That the family was of Derbyshire, as
above hinted, I conclude from the foil wing entry. "Henri-
"cus Milwarde silius Johannis de Snitterten, co. Deri. Sec." Ex
Registr. in pergamen. ab A°. 1665. sol. 7.
U 4 gilla

<page 331>
3i2 APPENDIX.
gilla sua alternatim apposuerunt. Datum vicefimo
die Februarii, Annis regnorum Philippi et Mariæ,
etc. etc. primo et secundos.
Per me Georcium Owen.
WlLLIELMUS MaRTYN.
« It appears, that in process of time, the pension of xxvj /.
Viij</. herein mentioned, remained unpaid into the exchequer for
several years, through the neglect of the heirs or assigns of
George Owen: insomuch, that the payment of the same fell on
the new college, to the amount of about twenty pounds. Where-
upon, on due representation, James the first orders Abbot arch-
bishop of Canterbury, Williams bishop of Lincoln, and lord
keeper, and Andrewes bishop of Winchester, " out of his gra-
"cious and princely care of the good of all colledges," to
direct a precept to the said heirs, requiring them forthwith to
repair to the president; and to make full satisfaction for the
past, and entirely to relieve the college for the future. Which
they did, by an instrument dated at Whitehall, Feb. xix. i6z2.
and signed with their own hands. In Thesauriar. coll. Trin.
NUMB.

<page 332>
APPENDIX. 313
N U M B. X.
Preamble os Letters Patent, from Phi-
lip and Mary, for sounding Trinity
College at Oxford. Dat. Mar. viii.
1554—5 "•
PHILIPPUS et Maria, dei gratia, rex et re-
gina Angliæ, Franciæ, Neapolis, Jerusalem,
et Hibemiæ, sidei defenibres, principes Hispania-
rum et Siciliæ, archiduces Austriæ, duces Mediolani,
Burgundiæ et Brabantiæ, comites Haspurgiæ, Flan-
driæ, et Tirolis, omnibus ad quos præscntes liters
pervenerint salutem. Cum prædilectus et fidelis con-
siliarius noster Thomas Pope, miles, instinctu cha-
ritatis, divina præveniente gratia, in animum indux-
eritquoddam Collegium de uno præsidente, prefbi-
tero, et de duodecem sociis, graduatis, quorum qua-
tuor semper crunt presbyteri, ac de octo scholaribus,
infra univerfitatem nostram Oxon, in quadam domo
five messuagium vulgariter vocato Derbam Colledgey
ac infra et scitum et precinctum ejusdem, de novo
• Thes. ut supr, in Cist. Et in 1. Part. Orig. de Ann. 1, j.
Phil, et Mar. In Offic. Rememorat. Scaccar. Et inter Lit. Pat.
Phil, et Mar. Ann. Reg. i, z. Part. 5. In Capel. Rotul.
erigere,

<page 333>
3*4 APPENDIX.
erigere, creare, et in tempus perpetuum stabilise, in
honorem sanctæ et individuæ Trinitatis, et dei
omnipotentis gloriam: Ac etiam unam liberam Sco-
Iam, infra villam de Hokenorton, vel alibi infra
com. Oxon. in honorem nominis Je*u, vulgariter
vocandam Jesus Scolebowse: Ac idem Collegium, ma-
neriis, terris, redditibus, et proventibus, ex sua
rhunificentia, ad sufneientem sustentationem eOrundem
Collegii et Schole, liberaliter dotare, ac ornamentis,
utensilibus, et aliis bonis convenientibus, sufficien-
ter ornare, in maximum scolarium literis ibidem
incumbenitum solamen et incitamentum, optimum-
que omnibus simile posthac imitandum præbens
exemplum) ac etiam in communem utilitatem om-
nium subditorum nostrortim: Nosque igitur, ut
hiec fua devota intentio debitum et perpetuumr
nostra regia mediante auctoritate et sacultate, for-
tiatur effectum, ad humilem petitionem ejusdem
Thomæ, etc. etc. etc.
Tejiil/us nebis ipjis apud IVestmen. oflavo die Marcii,
annis regnorum nostrorum primo et secundo. Per ipsos
Reg. et Reginb.
b Signed Hare, i. e. sir Niibtlas Hart, master os the rolls.
NUMB.

<page 334>
APPENDIX. 315
NUMB. XI.
Part of the Charter os Establish-
ment of the said college, in conse-
quence of the foregoing Letters Pa-
tent. Dat. Mar. xxviii. 1555*.
OMNIBUS Christ! fidelibus ad quos hoc
scriptum pervenerit. Thomas Pope, de Tyt-
tenhanger in com Herts, miles, salutem in domino
scmpiternam. Sciatis, quod ego prefatus Thomas,
licentia regia ad omnia et singula subscripta perfkien-
da primitus habita et obtenta, prout per literas fuas
patentes, gerentes datum apud Westmon. octavo
die Marcii, annis regnorum suorum primo et secun-
do, plenius liquet et apparet: Ad dei omnipotentis
gloriam, ac in honorem sanctæ et individuæ Trini-
tatis, per præsentes, virtute licenciæ prædictæ, eri-
go, creo, stabilio, et fundo, unum collegium de
uno præsidente prefbytero, duodecem soeiis- gradua-
tis, quorum quatuor erunt presbiteri, ac de octo
scholaribus, perpetuis duraturis temporibus infra fei-
tum et præcinctum cujusdam domus meæ, vulgari-
ter vocatæ Derbam College, situatæ et existentis infra
"In Thesauriar. praedict.
univ.

<page 335>
2x6 APPENDIX.
univ. Oxon. Et ulterius volo et ordino, quod
idem collegium, sic per me creatum et erectum,
Collegium sanftœ et individual Trinitatis in universitate
Oxon. ex fundatione Thomœ Pope militis, nuncupabitur
et appellabitur. Et ut collegium prædictum de per-
sonis congruis et convenientibus adimpleatur et deco-
retur; sciatis, Me prefatum Thomam Pope, de mo-
ribus, doctrina ac industria, dilecti mihi in Christo
Thome Slythurst, clerici, sancte Theolog;.æ Bacca-
larei, et cæterorum hie per me nominandorum, plu-
rimum confidentem •, constituisse et ordinasse prefa-
tum Thomam Slythurst primum et modernum
præsidentem presbyterum dicti collegii: et Stepha-
num Markes, artium magistrum, Robertum New-
ton b, Joannem Barwyke, Jacobum Bell, Rogerum
Crispyn, Johannem Rychardeson, Thomam Scotte,
Georgium Sympson, artium baccalareos, primos et
modernos socios et scholares dicti collegii: et Johan-
nem Arden, Johannem Comporte, Johannem Perte,
et Johannem Langsterre, primbs et modernos scho-
lares ejusdem collegii: Reservans mihi, et executo-
ribus meis, authoritatem et plenam potestatem nomi-
nandi et eligendi residuos socios et scholares, usque
ad completionem numeri in licentia regia contenti.—
Sciatisque ulterius, ut omnia et singula premissadebi-
tum et perpetuum sortiantur estectum, quod ego
b At this time fellow of Exeter college. The next year, viz.
xvii. Oct. 1557, he was elected annual rector of the said house.
Wood MSS. Mus. A(hm. E. 29. Afterwards he was elected
the second perpetual rector of that college, Nov. ii. 1570. This
office he resigned Oct. iv. 1578. Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ.
Oxon. ii. 94. col. 2.
Thomas

<page 336>
APPENDIX. 317
Thomas Pope, do, ac per præsentes concedo, eisdem
præsidenti, sociis, et scholaribus, totum illud mes-
suagium (five nuper collegium) meum, vocatum
Derbam college in univ. Oxon. ac totum ilium scitum,
etc. adeo plene, libere, integre, ac in tarn amplis
modo ac forma, prout prædictum messuagium—nu-
per habui.virtute ac vigore perquisitionis inde per me
factæ de Georgio Owen, etc. etcc.
Dat. Mar. xxviii. 1, 2. Phil. Mar.
Sub Sigillo et Manu Bom. Thomæ Pope.
s The remainder, in which it is specified that they shall be
a body politick in nemint andre, shall plead and be impleaded,
with other privileges usual in forms of this kind, is therefore
omitted. Together with a Grant of new Lands, &c.
NUMB.

<page 337>
3i8 APPENDIX.
NUMB. XII.
Letter os Attorney from Thomas Sly-
thurste, for taking possession of a cer-
tain messuage in Oxford, called Tri-
nity College. Dat. Mar. xxiii. 1555*.
NO V E R IN T universi per præsentes, me
Thomam Slythurste, Canonicum five Pre-
bendarium libere capelle sancti Georgii martyris in-
fra castrum regium de Wyndesore in com Barks,
sacre theologie bacalarium, fecifie, constituisse, et in
loco meo posuifse, dilectos mihi in Chriito Stepha-
num Markes, artium magistrum, et Robertum
Newton, artium bacalarium, meos veros et legiti-
mos attornatos conjunctim et divisim, ad intrandum
et ingrediendum, pro me, vice et nomine meo, in
unum messuagium cum pertinenciis suis universis in
univ. Oxon. vocatum Collegium sanEle et individue Tri-
nitatis in univ. Oxon. prædicta, ex fundatione venera-
bilis viri Thome Pope, militis, ac plenam et pacifi-
cam possessionem et seisinam inde capiendam: et
post hujusmodi seisinam sic inde receptam et habitam,
eandem ad meum proprium usum retinend. et custo-
* Thcsauriar. ut supr.
diend.

<page 338>
APPENDIX. 319
diend. secundum vim, formam et effectum cujusdam
donationis, Mihi et aliis facte per prefatum venera-
rabilem Thomam Pope, militem, ut per eandem do-
nationem inde confectam, cujus Dat. xxviii. die
menfis Martii annnis reg. Phil, et Mar. reg. et regin.
prim, et seg. manifeste liquet et apparet. Cæteraquc
omnia ac singula quæ in premissis, vel circa ea, ne-
cefTeria fuerint feu quomodolibet oportuna, vice et
nomine meo facienda, exequenda, et finienda, adeo
plenarie ac integre prout facere possem feu deberem,
si in premissis personaliter interessem. Ratum gra-
tumque habens et habiturus, totum et quicquid dicti
mei attornati conjunctim et divisim meo nomine fe-
cerint in premissis per præsentes. In cujus rei testi-
monium, sigillum meum apposui. Dat. apud ChaU
font sanfli Petri, xxviii. Marcii, annis regnor. Phil,
et Mar. etc. primo et secundo.
Per me Thomam Slythurste b.
b Manu et sigill. ipsius.
NUMB.

<page 339>
320 APPENDIX.
9K9oaeoe£3eoeoK3KXGoe3K3oe3oC3oC3eGeoK3eoooeex(9K3ec9eC3ecxGeGee
NUMB. XIII.
Admission of the first President, Fel-
lows, and Scholars, of the said col-
lege, on the Eve of Trinity-Sunday,
May, xxx, 1556 \
OM N I B U S Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc
præsens Scriptum pervenerit, Salutem in Do-
mino sempirernam. Sciatis, quod anno domini mil-
lefimo quingentefimo quinquagefimo sexto, tricefimo
die menfis Maii, qui eo anno vigilia sanctiffimæ
Trinitatis extitit, in presentia Mri Roberti Mor-
went", præfidis collegii Corporis Christi in univ.
■ Registr. prim. dict. coll. sol. i. a.
b I find the fame person, at the time of sounding saint John's
college, employed by sir T. Whytei xviii. Jan. i, 2. Phil.
Mar. to take possession of Bernard college, and its appurte-
nances, just before granted from Christ Church to the said
fir Thomas Whyte for the foundation of faint John's college.
Collectan. MSS. Wood, Mus. Afhmol. 8513. He was no.
ninated one of the first fellows of C. C. C. by bishop Fcx, the
founder, and appointed by him, perpetual vice-president. H«
died 1558. Wood, Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 232. He was
eminent fur his learning, and a singular encourager of litera-
lure. Fulman, in his manuscript corrections of Wood's Hist.
and

<page 340>
APPENDIX. 321
Oxon. et notarii publici infrascripti, ac aliorum quo-
rum nomina inferius in hoc instrumento continen-
tu'r: Magister Thomas Slytburste, sacræ theologiæ
bacalarius, et canonicus prebendarius liberæ capellæ
regis et reginæ in castro luo de Wynddbre, oriundus
ex com. Berks. Sarum dioces. primus præses no-
minatus ac affignatus collegii sanctissimæ et indivi-
duæ Trinitatis in univ. Oxon. prædicta, ex funda-
tione venerabilis viri domini Thomæ Pope militis,
juramentum subiit in Sacello dicti collegii de Officio
Præiidis rite et fideliter ibidem administrando j
magistro Roberto Morwent prædicto hujusinodi ju-
ramentum, virtute literarum sibi a Fundatore mis-
sarum ac ibidem palam et publice lectarum, exi-
gente. Forma autem juramenti ab eodem præstiti
de verbo in verbum sequitur. Ego Thomas S!ytburjie>
&c, &c. Qui quidem præses sic juratus, eisdem
die, loco, et anno, a magistris, Arthuro Teldarde,
com. Northumberl. Dioces. Dunelm. et Stephano
Market, com. Cornub. Dioces. Exon.—in facultate
artium magistris: Et magistro Joanne Barwyke, com.
Devon. Dioces. Exon. in facultate artium incep-
tore: et dominis Joanne Bell, com. Somerset. Bath,
et Well. Dioces.—Joanne Richardson, com. Cum-
berland. Dioces. Carliol. — Ceorgio Rudde, com.
Westmoreland. Dioces. Dunelm. — Thoma Scotte,
com. Cumberland. Dioces. Carliol.—Rogero Crifpyn,
and Antio^ Oxon. informs us, that Morwent was appointed
by bishop Fox to succeed Claymond, the first president of that
college, without election. MSS. Mus. Aihmol. D. 9. 4to.
pag. 40.
X com.

<page 341>
32t APPENDIX.
com. Devon. Dioces. Exon.—Roberto Evans, com.
Cornub. Dioces. Exon.—Joanne Perte, com. War-
wic. Dioces. Litchf. et Cov. — Roberto Bellamie,
com. et Dioces. Eboraci, artium bacalariis, et in
Socios dicti collegii per prefatum Fundatorum no-
minatis et ascitis, juramentum ad Sociorum Offici-
um, juxta statutorum dicti collegii normam, bene et
fideliter præstandum, exigebat. Tenor autem jura-
menti ab ipfis tune præstiti fie habet. Ego. &c. Off.
Eodem etiam die, sine temporis intervallo domini
Johannes Langjierre, com. et Dioces. Ebor. annos
natus novemdecim ad festum divi Joannis Baptis-
tæ proxime precedens, et Reginaldus Braye, com. Bed-
ford. Dioces. Lincoln, annorum octodecim ad festum
divi Johannis prædictum, artium bacalarii : Joannes
Arden, com. et Dioces. Oxon. annorum octodecim
ad festum Pasche proxime precedens, Joannes Com-
porte, com. Middlesex. Dioces. London, annorum
octodecim ad initium quadragesime precedentis, Ro-
bertus Thrajke, com. Somerset, dioces. Exon. anno-
rum octodecim ad festum purificationis precedens,
Culielmus Saltmarjhe, com. et dioces. Ebor. annorum
octodecim ad festum divi Lucæ precedens, et Jaco-
bus Harrys, com. Glouc. dioces. Bristol, annorum
septemdecim ad festum divi Johannis Baptistæ pre-
cedens, in facultate artium studentes non graduati, in
Scolares dicti collegii per Fundatorem nominati
et asciti; dicto Præsidi juramentum, de officio Sco-
larium in ipso collegio humiliter et prompte per
ipsos et ipsorum quemlibet præstando, dederunt, in
hunc qui sequitur modum. Ego, &V. &c. Sociis
autem

<page 342>
APPENDIX. 323
autem et Scholaribus fie juratis, ad Offici a rio-
rum electionem processum eft pro anno illo instanti.
In qua quidem electione, magister Markes ad Vice-
pæsidentis officium, ex mandato domini Funda-
toris deputatus est: magister Barwyke in Deca-
num, dominus Richardson ac dominus Perte, in
Bursar ios, per electionem aflumpti sunt: ma-
gister Yeldarde, ex Domini Fundatoris voluntate
Lectoris Philosophic^ dominus Bell, Lecto-
Ri8 Retorici, per electionem, onera suscipiunt.
Horumque singuli, juxta statuta de suo cujus-
que fideliter obeundo officio, corporale juramentum
dederunt, in presentia omnium Sociorum et Schola-
rium. His demum ita peractis, prefatus magister
Robertus Morwent, Præsidis et Officiariorum mani-
bus sigillum commune collegii, a Fundatore prius
acceptum et apud fe interea temporis reservatum, tra-
didit: quo in collegii Gazophilacio firmiter reposito,
dictus Præses, Socii, et Scolares, vespertinas preces,
cum cantu et hota, solemniter sactissimæ Trinitati ea
nocte persolverunt. Ac in crastino, matutinas, et
alias diei horas, una cum mifia honorifice celebra-
runt. Inter cujus quidem misiæ solennia, habita est
a Præside concio ad populum % qui frequens illuc
c This Sermon, (improperly styled ad populum,) of the first
President, was in the hands of Dr. Charlett: and I find the fol-
lowing short extract from it, among the papers of Mr. Wife.
[MSS. F. Wife.] " Jam vero quibus orationis præconiis oportu-
"nam venerabilis admodum Fundatoris nostri Munificen-
*• tiam prædicare pergam, qui caducam hujus Academise
"famam redintegrare, fortunasque bonarum literarum collapsaj
"in solidum revocare, Colleoium novum stabiliendo, pro-
"ventusque et possefiiones ampliter elargiendo, ut videtis,
X: «' obnixe

<page 343>
324 APPENDIX.
et multus confluxerat gratulabundus, et omnia fausta
nascenti collegio exoptaturus. Qui quidem univerfus,
una cum collegiorum præfidibus, splendido et mag-
nifico, eo die, excepti sunt convivio. Et ut hinc
facile conjiciatur, quanto cum applausu et gratula-
tione exordium sumpserit hoc collegium; ac præ-
terea ut optime meriti beneficiorum suorum memo-
ria, ac debita laude, non fraudentur: visum est hie,
in perpetuum rei monumentum, commemorare, quæ-
nam donaria a quamplurimis munificis viris, in
ipsius veluti crepundiis, acceperit hoc collegium.
Primo, a venerabili sacerdote, magistro Thoma So-
thernd, ecclesiæ cathedralis Exonienfis Thesaura-
"obnixe laborat? Studiorinn tantae jam nunc, et antea fue-
"' runt angustiæ, ut de artibus et scientiis penitus actum esset,
"nisi hujus unius auctoritate, prudentia, gratia, voluntate, li-
** heralitate, res nostra; constitissent. Id quod vivus etiamnum
"valensque prxstitit; horum beneficiorum teslis oculatus ipse
"futurus. Quam magnis et præmiis et commodis ex ejus in-
«' figni pietate studia nunc instaurabimus, hi parietes quasi
"pleno disertoque ore loquuntur. Taceo hoc in loco, ubi
"tot ejus AlUMNos eruditione celebres aspicio, ut literatos
•' homines unice semper amaverit. et muneribus et favbre coni-
"plexus affidue fuerit, Vir ampliffimub, et ipse literis ac
"doctrinis rite excultus. Fariter etiam novistis, quam largus
"est in pauperes et egeuos, in rebus gerendis dexter, strenuuj,
"et officiosus, religionis avitaj tenax, &c.'r No great credit
is due to professed panegyrics. But these commendations are
neither extravagant, nor unsupported by facts.
* Thomas Southern was elected fellow of Magdalene col-
lege, Oxford, about 1500, and occurs as such at a visitation
of that college by bishop Fox, in 1506. He is otherwise call.
ed one of Ingledew's chaplains there, with a salary of ten
marcs. Registr. Fox. Winton. lib. ii. sol. 44, 51, b. 52.
b. et

<page 344>
APPENDIX. 3*5
rio, * viginti libras aureas monetæ optimæ, dono ac-
cepitj ultra quinquaginta libras, quas eidem post
mortem fuam, per testamentum legaverat. Deinde,
ad convivium in ipso sanctifllmæ Trinitatis die splen-
didius ac liberalius faciendum, Mag. Edovardus
Love f, generosus, collegio misit cunicellos quadra-
te et seq. He was elected boreal proctor of the university
of Oxford, May 2, 1511. Wood, Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. ii.
417. He was also fellow of Eton college, in 1,512. Willis,
MSS. collectan. co. Bucks, sol. N°. 23. in bibl. Bodl. He
was instituted vicar of Modbury, co. Devon. Mar. 17. 1517,
at the presentation of Eton college, registr. Oldham, Exon.
This vicarage he resigned in 1523. registr. Veyfey, Exon.
He was instituted rector of Farringdon, co. Hants, Jun. 5.
1519, being then styled A. M. at the presentation of Hugh
Oldham, bilhop of Exeter: which rectory he resigned in 1524.
registr. Fox. Winton. lib. iv. sol. 15. b. and lib. v. sol. 168.
He was made treasurer of Exeter cathedral, May 8, 1531.
Le Neve's Fasti, p. 91. He was appointed, by the name of
*' Thomas Sothern clerke," a commissioner, with others, for
suppressing heresies in the diocese of Exeter, Feb. 16, 1556.
Wilkins, Concil. iii. 140. He died in 1557. Wood. Athen.
Oxon. i. f. 8. His will is dated April 30, 1556. Proved Jul.
24, 1557. In registr. Wrestley. qu. 2j. cur. praerog. Cant.
The legacy mentioned in the text proved to be a mistake.
By the said will, he bequeathes the sum of xiij /. vj 1. viij d.
to the fabric of Exeter cathedral; and orders the whole choir
of the church to attend his obsequies: from whence it may be
concluded that he was buried in his cathedral. He likewise
sounds an obit in the said church. Ingledew's chaplains, or
fellows, abovementioned, were restrained to natives of the dio-
cese of York and Durham.
e See Life, p. 127.
f The founder's brother in law, and steward. See Life,
p. 182. These things, I presume, he sent by the sounder's
orders.
X 3 ginta

<page 345>
$26 APPENDIX.
ginta octo, agnos tres, capones novemdecim, por-
cellos tres, anserulos quatuordecim, pipiones quin-
quies duodenas, damas duos, et vitulum unum:
Dominus Georgius Gyffbrde *, miles, cunicellos
viginti quatuor, et pullos gallinaceos duodecem:
Magister Crockerh, generosus, dimidiatum bovem,
et agnum unum: Magister Edmundes', generosus,
damam unum, et vitulum unum: Magister Anto-
* George Gyfford occurs dubbed a knight of the carpet,
by queen Mary, the day following her coronation, in the cham-
ber of presence at Westminster. MSS. Dugd. Mus. Ashm.
B. 173. A visitor of the monasteries. Dugd. Warw. p. 800.
A supervisor of chantries in com. Bucks, 1549. Willis, Mitr.
Abb. ii. 38. He interceded with lord Cromwell for the pre-
servation of the monastery of Wolstrope, and other houses,
which he visited. See Life, p. 27. He was buried, Jan. 7,
1557, according to Strype, with much magnificence. Eccl.
Mem. iii. 389. He was of Buckinghamshire; of which county
he was a representative in queen Mary's first parliament held at
Oxford, 1554. Willis, Not. parl. ed. 1730. p. 89. Compare
Miscellaneous Antiquities, pp. 37. 40. Numb. i. Print-
ed at Strawberry Hill, 1772. 4to.
k The founder mentions him in a letter to the president,
15 Feb. 1557. "I have sent you by Mr. Crocker your Cross
"with a case." He was probably of Hook-Norton, co. Qxon.
See Strype's Annals, Vol. iv. 123. N. 79. App. One John
Crocker, esquire, of Hook-norton,is mentioned by Dugdale, pre-
senting to the church of Warmington, in Warwickshire, Sept.
10, 1554. Warwickshire, p. 417. Many of the name are
buried in Hook-Norton church. Particularly John Croker,
1568. See also Lee's Visitation, MSS. ut supr. p. 26. I find
Sir Edward North alienating to John Croker the manor of
Melcomb, co. Oxon. Licent. Alienat. 7 Feb. 35 Hen. viii.
Part. 18.
1 The sounder's uncle. See Lira, p. 2.
nius

<page 346>
APPENDIX. 3*7
nius Ardernk, generosus, vitulum dimidiatum, an-
serulos duos, porccllum unum, et caponem unum:
Magister Ricardus Ardern, generosus, panes sex soli-
dorum: Magister Platte', generosus, ovem unam,
et anserulos duos: Magister Yates"', generosus, ovem
unam: Orpewoode" de Northlea ovem unam: Bri-
anus de Cogges ° anserulos duos, et pullos duos:
Magistra Irifhep, oppidana, lagenam vini unam:
k The founder's relations. See Life, p. 121. 183. He
mentions John Arden of Cottisford, co. Oxon. in his will.
And in Comp. Burss. 1587.—8. I find,
"Sol. magistro Seller equitanti Kirtleton cum xeniolo ad
Mag. Ardern. ivJ. [This was Antony •.]
"Sol. pro chirothecis magistri Ardern. vt. .
This name is often written Arden. It was an ancient family,
originally of Warwickshire. Dugd. Warw. and MSS. Lee,Visit.
Oxfordsh. I cannot find out "Panes sex folidorum," but sup-
pose it was some fine species of manchet. In lord Guilford's
pedigree of Pope, Ar Jen occurs very early.
1 Or Plotte. Bartholomew Plotte of Sparfholt, in Berkshire,
appears to have married the founder's uncle's daughter. Ash-
mole's Berks, iii. 28;.
"A college tenant, and one of the founder's mother's rela-
tions. See Life, p. 2. and Indentur. in Registr. prim. coll.
sol. 13.
"Alice Orpwood, mother of Rob. Parrot, whose descendant*
were connected with Northly, died 1558. See Life, p. 183.
and App. XXI.
0 Both, the founder's brothers in law, and, I suppose hit
tenants or retainers. See Life, p. 184.
'In whose house Cranmer and Ridley were confined, at Ox-
ford; her husband, a vintner, being mayor of the city. Rid-
* (See Rejistr, Pikrot, infra citati Numb, xxi, sol. 112, a,)
X4 1«7

<page 347>
328 APPENDIX.
Magister Furse% oppidanus, lagenam vini unam:
Magister Bridgcman', oppidanus, dimidiatam vini
lagenam, cum fragis. Convivio autem finito % et
actis Altiffimo gratiis, decedentes hospites et extranei
omnes, Sociis et Scolaribus fuum collegium bene
ley particularly mentions her in a letter, dat. May 31, 1555*
but with no very favorable circumstances. "Viro, in cuju*
"aedibus ego custodior, uxor dominutur—vir ipse, Iri/cbiut
"nomine, satis mitis est omnibus: uxori vero plufquam obse-
*' <juentiflimus." Ridley's Lite of Ridley, 589, 663.— She
was buried in St. Martin's church, Oxon. 1556. MSS. Wood.
Bib. Bodl. Rawl.
* I find Thomas Furres, or Firse, senior bailiff of the city,
1556. Wood's Cat. of Mayors, &c. MSS. Mus. Afhm D. 7.
—p. 118. I find also'John Bridgeman, senior bailiff, 1531.
ibid, with Wood's note, in marg. that he married Mary the
sister of fir Thomas Whyte, founder of St. John's, p. 114.
'Bridgeman was perhaps a vintner of the city of Oxford,
as were Furse and Irishe, here also mentioned. Registr. Cur.
Cancel!. Oxon. notat. GG. sol. 32. " Feb. iii. 1548. Quo die
"compar. personaliter, Magister Edmundm Iryjbe, &c. &c.
"Thomas Furse, &c. &c. and in the presens of them al], Mr-
"Chauncellor dyd decreye, that they and every of theym
•' shall sell redde wyne, claret wyne, and whyte wyne, after
"xiiij d. the gallon. And all other, sellynge the same wynes
•* within the citie of Oxforde, shall selle after the same rate."
Archiv. Univ. Oxon.
* Concerning this feast, I find the following articles, Comp.
Burss. 1556.
"Sol. in regardo famulis diversorum generosorum appor-
tantibus a dominis suis missa munera, et aliis occupatis
in curandis cibis, aliisque negotiis, in die sancte Trinita-
ris. xviij^. yd.
•• Sol. in expensis factis in festo sanctiss. Trin. ultra omnem
allocationem. xzvij s. v d.
precantes

<page 348>
APPENDIX. 329
precantes relinquunt; aptum post quietem adeptam,
futurum musis ac bonis literis domicilium '.
Acta sunt hæc, co quo scribuntur modo, Anno
Dom. prædict. necnon die et men se prædictis, in
presentia publici notarii subscripti, et Magistrorum
Roberti Morwent, Arthuri Yeldarde, testium meo-
rum, et aliorum plurimorum. Et ego, &c. [Deeji
nomen notarii.~\
At anticnt feasts it was the custom for friends to fend in
presents of provision. Thus at the inthronifation-feast of arch-
bisliop Wareham, in 1504. "In Expensis necessariis, ana
"cum regardis datis diversis personis venientibus cum diversis
"exhenniis." Batteley's Canterbury. Lond. 1703. Append.
Suppl. p. 58.
'It appears however that although the whole number, one
scholar excepted, was first admitted in a formal and legal
manner on this day, that ten fellows and seven scholars had
lived in the college, and received all emoluments and alloca-
tions, for nine weeks before, viz. from the feast of the Annun-
ciation preceeding, with which day the first Computus begins.
In which nine weeks, I find also,
"Sol. pro quatuor diebus pietanciæ in feptimana Paschae
præcedentis, viz pro ipso die Pasehæ, et tribus feriis se-
quentibus. xxvj.s. viij.4.
"Sol. pro quatuor diebus pietanciæ in feptimana Pente*
costes præterlapsæ, dominica viz. et tribus feriis se-
quentibus. xxvj. s viij. J.
And although this Computus ends at Michaelmas following,
I find,
"Sol. pro uno die pietantiæ anticipate ex mandato Funda-
toris, viz. pro obitu Fundatoris in men fe novembris futu-
ro [die 16.]
Which obit was afterwards appointed to the seventh of August,
On which it is still continued. And though the obit for his wife
1 Margaret

<page 349>
33© APPENDIX.
Margaret was then on Jan. 16, yet they kept it within the time
of this Accompt. viz Term, ii Septim i.
"Sol. pro uno die pie tan use, viz. pro obitu Domine Mar-
garete uzoris nostri Fundatoris. vj s. viij d.
This Computus begins with the feast of the Annunciation,
and ends with the Michaelmas following. Some articles are
charged for one term, or quarter, that is from Trinity to Mi-
chaelmas, and some for the whole half year, viz.
"Sol. lectori philosophico per annum dimidiatunt
** Sol. lectori linguae la time pro uno termino ....
"Sol pulsanti organa pro uno termino. . .
•' Sol. celebrantibus missam matutinalem pro 1 termino,
et tertia paste precedent is. . .
"Sol. pro focalibus, viz. pro carbonibus et ligno ab initi*
eollegii usque ad felt. S. Mkhaelis archangeli proxime
feq. per xvii Septim an as ....
From all which circumstances, taken together, it is manifest,
that they were resident, though perhaps not fully settled, in the
college, before the formal admission specified in this instru-
ment.
NUMB.

<page 350>
APPENDIX. 331
NUMB. XVI.
Conditions relating to the intended
Foundation of a free gram mar-
School, at Dedington, Co. Oxon.
by Sir Thomas Pope \
"T* H E said president, fellowes, and schollers,
*' X [of Trinity college Oxfords shall yerely for
"evermore give and pay unto one hable person,
"well and sufficiently lerned and instructed in
"gramer and humanitie, which mail be Schole-
"Master of and at a frescole, to be called Jljestlg
"fe>toIe of the foundation of the said sir Thomas
"Pope, to be erected at Dedington in the said
"countie of Oxon, and to teach children gramer
"and humanitie there frely, for his yerely salarye
"and wages, xx markes, of good and lawfull
*' money: And to one other hable and lerned per-
"son in gramer to be Usher within the said fre-
"schole, yerely viii / of good and lawfull money, to
"teache children likewise ther frely. The same seve-
"rail salaries and wages to be paid to the said scole-
* Ex Indentura quadripart. Dat. April 1. I, z. Phil, et Mar.
1555. In Thesauriar. predict.
** master

<page 351>
332 APPENDIX.
"master and usher yerely, at two termes in the
"yeare: that is to saye, at the feast of Thannun-
"ciacion of our ladie saint Marie and saint Mighell
"Tharchaungell, or within one quarter of a yere
"next after any of the said feastes, by even portions.
*' And that the said scolemaster and usticr, after the
•' erection of the said scole, to be in the said scole,
"as is aforesaid, shall be from tyme to tyme for
"ever namyd and appoynted by the president, fel-
"lows, and scollers, of the said colledge, and of their
** successoures or the most part of them. And the
"said scolemaster and usher so to be namyd and ap-
"poyntyd, to have and enjoye the said offices of
"scolemaster and ushershipp during lyf; unless some
"fawlt, offence, or notable cryme, be commytted
"or don by any of them, and sufficiently proved
"agaynst any of them, that then uppon such
"fawlt or cryme so commytted or don, and pro-
"ved, as is aforesaid, the partie commyttinge
"such fawlt, offence, or cryme, to lose his said
"rome, and a new to be namyd for him, as is
"aforesaid. And the said scolemaster, and usher
*' and scollers, that shall be in the said scole, xo be
"furder and otherwise ordered concerninge the order
"and rules of the said Scole, and good contynu-
"aunce thereof, as fhal be appoynted by the said fir
"Thomas Pope in his life, or after his death by the
*' said dame Elisabeth his wife, within the statutes of
"the said colledge, or by any other writing sealed
"and subscribed by the handes of either of them.
*• And the residew of the said revenues and profitts
"[besides certain other uses] for the charge of the re-
"paracion*

<page 352>
APPENDIX. 333
paracions of the said scolehouse and other reason-
able charges that such of the said colledge as shall
yearlie survey the said scolehouse, for the perfor-
mance of the good orders therein to be con-
tinualie kept, shall be put unto, about the said
survey.—"
NUMB.

<page 353>
334 APPENDIX.
t+t+t+t<tt+t-M'+t+t+t+t+t+t+t+t*t+t+t+t
NUMB. XV.
Account os a petition referred to the
princess Elisabeth at Hatfield, by fir
Thomas Pope, in August, 1556*.
AD futuram rei memoriam, atquc ut alienis pe-
riculis edocti præsentes ac futuri hujus colle-
gii socii ac scolares, cautius quod ad statutorum
observantiam pertinet sese gerere discant. Sciatis,
quod vicefimo die Augusti, anno Domini millesimo
quingentefimo quinquagesimo sexto, et hujus collegii
anno primo; Dominus Geogius Sympson, lector
philosophicus, et Dominus Georgius Rudde, artium
bachalarii, et dicti collegii socii, ob violatum statu-
tum Be muris noctu nonscandendis, juxta ejusdem sta-
tuti exigentiam perpetuæ amotionis et expulsionis
a collegio pœna fuisse punitos, fine spe regreflus
quam ullo modo in eodem habebant reliquam.
Unde ad venerabilem virum Dominum Thomam
Pope, dicti collegii Fundatorem, tanquam ad Sacram
Ancboramy confugere conati, de perpetrato crimi-
ne impunitatem, aut saltern poenæ mitigationem,
fuppliciter petituri. Ægre tandem, ac nonnisi medi-
* Registr. prim. Coll. predict, sol. 7. a.
antibus

<page 354>
A P P E N D I .X. 335
antibus ac intercedentibus excellentiflima principe
Domina jElizabetha, sereniflimæ Mariæ sorore, cui
tune ab intimis consiliis dictus Fundator suit, ac
ctiam propria conjuge, prænobili femina Domina
item Elizabetha, exauditi funt. Atque ita datis li-
teris ad mag. Thomam Slythurste, turn collegii sui
Præsidem, dicti duo bachalarii publice in communi
collegii aula, crimen suum coram omnibus turn
soeiis turn scolaribus agnoscentes, in societatem de-
nuo recepti funt: indicta illis per dictum præsidem
et officiarios mulcta viz. vj. s. viij. d. ad duas corti-
nas bombycinas emendas, pro Summi Altaris, in Sa-
cello collegii, ampliori ornatu. Literarum autem
proditarum tenor de verbo in verbum ad hunc qui
fcquitur modum fe habetb.
* Inserted in Life, pag. 84.
NUMB.

<page 355>
-336 APPENDIX.
NUMB. XVI.
An indenture made May 5, 1556,
witnessing that the president, fel-
lows, and schollers of Trinity col-
lege Oxford, have received of their
founder, such parcells of churche
playte and ornamentes of the
"church, as hereafter followethe"."
<<
u
(C
11
F
F YRS T, a chalice with a patent [paten] gilt,
weyingee xx. oz. iii. quarters \ Item, one
* E Registro prædia. sol. 8. a.
b Of all the plate given by the sounder, this is the only
piece now remaining. All that he gave, enumerated in various
parts of this work, was either abolished as superstitious
in the year 1570, this piece excepted, or granted to king
Charles the first in the year 1642. It is well known that all
the colleges in Oxford contributed their plate to that monarch's
necessities. A laudable and very seasonable proof of loyalty,
but much regretted by the lovers of antient art, as it destroy-
ed many valuable specimens of curious workmanship not else-
where preserved, in an article which our magnificent ancestors
carried to a most superb and sumptuous excess.—I take thi6 oc-
casion of mentioning here two pieces of plate formerly belonging
to the said college, granted with the rest to king Charles,
which

<page 356>
APPENDIX. 337
other chalice with a patentc, parcell gilt, poz. xiii.
oz. di. Item, a pipe of sylver, parcell gilt, poz. xiii.
oz. di. Item a pax of ivory garnyshed with sylver
and gilt, and sett with counterfeete stones. Item, a
chappel-crosse of copper, with Marye and John,
and a foote to the fame, gilt. Item, a pair of cen-
sors of copper, item, ii. pair of latten candlestick.es
for the altar. Item, a holye water-stop of latten.
Item ii crewettes of tynne. Item a pint bottell of
tynne for the chappell. Item a deflce to lay a mass
booke upon, pained grene. Item, a lectorned of
waynscott for the quere [choir.] Item, ii. fair anty-
phoners ' of parchmente lymned r with gold. Item,
a fair legeant * [legend] of parchmente lymned with
which would at present have been great curiosities: their in-
scriptions are thus recorded. "Poculum collegii S. et indivi-
"duae Trinitatis Oxon. ex dono Joannis Denham unici filii
"Joannis Denham niilitis et unius baronum scaccarii. 1631."
17 oz. This was Denham the poet, author of Cooper's Hill,
&c. The other was inscribed, " Ex dono Jacobi Harrington
"equitis aurati filii natu maximi et hujus collegii comm."
13 oz. dim. 3. d. No date. This was Harrington, author of the
Ocean a. [Ex quadam schedul. in thesauriar. Coll. antedict.]
Who little suspected, that this innocent memorial of gratitude
to the place of his education, would be converted into a contri-
bution, however inconsiderable, for the support os royalty.
c Paten.
* Properly a deflc for reading the lessons. Lutrin. Fr.
c Antiphonarium. Lat.
r Illuminated.
* Or Lectionary, which contained all the lessons, whether
from scripture, or other books, which were directed to be read
in the course of the year. Rot. Comp. Coll. Winton. A. D.
1479. MS. *• Pro reparacione magne Legende, iij;. iv d.
Y gold.

<page 357>
338 APPENDIX.
gold. Item, iiii. graylesh of parchmentc lymned with
gold. Item a rector chori of parchmente lymned
with gold. Item, a fair mass booke of parchmente
lymned with gold, and covered with blacke velvette.
Item, a mass-booke of parchmente covered with lea-
ther. Item, a psalter for the quere printed with note.
Item a suite of vestmentes of red clothe of tissue or-
phrysed with needle worke, with iii. albes, stoles,
and fannels1, agreeable to the fame. Item, ii. copes
of red clothe of tyssue, orphryfed with needle worke,
and a running orphrise of green clothe tyssue. Item,
ii. copes of yellowe baudkyn, woven with scallop-
shells, orphrised with grene clothe of tyssue. Item,
a suite of vestmentes of blewe velvette, orprised with
needle worke, with albes stoles and fannels agreeable
to the fame. Item, a suite of vestmentes of red
clothe of bawdkyn, orphrised with needle-worke,
with albes, stoles, and fannells, agreeable to the
lame. Item, a suite of vestmentes of red bawdkyn,
woven with birds, orphrised with blewe bawdkyn,
with albes, stoles, and fannels, agreeable to the fame.
Item, a cope of blewe baudkyn, woven with fonnes
[funs], orphrised with needle worke. Item, a cope
of red bawdkyn woven with birdes of gold, orphris-
ed with needle-worke. Item, a cope of whyte da-
mafke with flowers of gold, orphrised with needle-
worke. Item, a vestment of white damaske orphris-
ed with needle worke, with an albe, stole, and fan-
h The Grail or Gradual contained all that was fung by the
chair at high mats.
* See Dufresne, Lat. Gloss. V. Fano vel Phano.
nclJ,

<page 358>
APPENDIX. 339
nell, to the same. Item, a vestmente of blacke vel-
vette for a masse of requiem k. Item, a vestment of
blewe grogreyn' powdered with crownes of needle-
worke, with albe, &c. Item, a vestmene of whyte
fatten of Brydges [Bruges], with a grene crosse of
fatten of Brydge, powdered with flowers, with albe,
&c. Item, a vestment of whyte for Lent, with
an albe, &c. Item a vestmente of whyte fustion
for Lent having a crosse of reade [red] fustion, with
an albe, &c. Item, ii. alter-clothes for the high
alter; that is to fay, i. for the upper parte, and i.
for the nether part, of checker bawdkyn, pained »
with crymson velvette, powdered with flowers and
angels of gold, Item, ii. like alter-clothes for the
said alter of blewe bawdkyn, pained with red velvette
woven with bookes of golde. Item ii. like alter-
clothes, for the said alter, of whyte fatten of Brydges,
powdered with birdes of gold Item, ii. nether alter-
k In marg. "Note the albe, stole, and fannel to the blacke
"vestmente is lacking, which shall be sent."
1 I know not exactly the meaning of this word, but it is used
in the Inventory of the goods of Curtese bishop of Chiches-
ter, who died in 1587. "One silk grograim gowne faced
"with velvet.—Another grograim gowne, &c." Stxype, Ann.
Ref. vol. i. B. i. tli. 26. pag. 332. edit. 1728. I suppose it to
be from the Fiench grot grain, and that grogram is its cor-
ruption.
œ Striped or edged. In the romance of Twain and Gaways
(MSS. Cott. Galb. E. xi.) we have this apposite passage.
"And with a mantcll fche me clad. It was of purpur fayre
"and syne. And the pant of riche ermine." That is, The
btrdtr was of ermine.
Y 2 clothes

<page 359>
340 APPENDIX.
clothes for the alters in the Body of the chappell, of
read bawdekyn woven with flowers and castles of
gold, and payned with white damaske, and greene
n brydge-satten powdered with droppes of velvette,
and Jesus of gold. Item, the upper and nether
clothe for the Sepulchre0, pained with whyte and
red brydge-satten. Item, a herse clothe of blacke
fustion of Naples powdered with images, birdes,
and rolles of needle-worke, with a crosfe of whyte
fustion, and the dove in the myddest, of needle-
worke. Item, a clothe for the Sacrament of whyte
tasfata edged with bone worke and tassels of gold.
Item, a corporas caiie [cafe] of blewe cloth of golde,
and reade velvette, with Jesus on it of stole-worke of
golde wherein is also a syne corporas. Item, i. other
corporas cafe of reade bawdkyn wherein is also a syne
corporas. Item, ii. other corporas cafes, whereof
the one is of tasfata, and other of whyte fustion,
in every of which cases is also a syne corporas. Item
a clothe of canvassc to lye uppon the high alter iii.
yerdes long. Item, ii. lynnen clothes to lay uppon
■ Bruges.
• The following appointment occurs in the Pounder's Addi-
tamentum before-cited, sol. ult. "Volo, ut duodecim de-
"narii annuatim concedantur, ad Sepulcrum Domini in
"sacello collegii mei, in die Parasceves et Vioilia Paschæ,
"pernoctantibus et vigilanubus, ad laborum suorum ea in re
•' compensationem." Sec an account of a pompous Sepulchre
of this sort made for Radcliffe church at Bristol, in 1470, in
Walpole's Anesd. Paint, vol. i. pag. 45. edit, i.—Rot. Comp.
Coll. Wint. 1395. MS. "Et in i. carpentario conducto per
"ii. dies ad faciendam domum Sepulcri in choro, &c. vjV.
thf

<page 360>
APPENDIX. 34i
the altars in the Bodie of the chappell, cont. iii.
elles and a quarter the pece. Item, iiii. Towelles for
the High' altar, and iiii. towelles for the nether
altarsp. Item, ii. cusshens, of redde fylke for the
chappel woven with flowers of golde. Item, a great
waynscot coffer to put in all the ornaments aforesaid.
All which parcells, &c. In witness, whereof, &c.
Moreover, the within named president, fellowes,
and fcholers, have receaved of the said sir Thomas
Pope, their founder, ii. procefsionalls, and a gos-
pell boke.
* " Quatuordecim Tuallise de panno lineo pro siimmo altari,
"&c.—Qulnque parvæ Tualliæ pro manibus tergendU." [Coll.
Windes.] Dugd. Mon. iii. Eccl. Coll. p. 85. col. 2. "Duo
"Abstersoria de panno lineo ad extergendum digitos post per-
* fusion em in majori altari." Dugd. Append. Hist. Eccl. S.
Paul. p. 217.—Rot.Comp.Coll.Winton. MS. 1395. "Et in zi
"ulnis de panno de Westnale emptis per dictum Thesaurarium
"[de Wolvesey] et liberatis collegio xix die Marcii pro tuellis
"altarium capellæ, \i. iij</."
Y3 NUMB.


<page 361>
34* APPENDIX.
NUMB. XVII.
Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus
miflis per dominum Fundatorem,
tam ad ornatum Sacelli quam Aulæ,
Jan. xx. 1557 \
FF I R S T E, a ffayre cope of rede sylke lyned
with tafFata, and having images of gold wrought
upon the fame, the orphises [orphreis] being needle-
worke, and having a narrowe cape. Item, i. vest-
ment of red velvette, with a Crosse of gold of stole-
worke, and ymbrawdered with floure de luces, an-
gels, and fpred eagles of gold, with stole, and ffan-
nell of blacke velvette, with an albe; belonginge to
a vestment of blacke velvets, which is mentioned in
the first indenture made by the colledge, declaringe
the receyte of the ffirst church-stuffe and playte,
and the lacke of the said stole, fannel, and albe,
noted in the margent of the faide indenture. Item,
a vestment of blewe filke lyned with taffata, and
woven with burdes and flowers of Colen [Colognb]
gold, with stole, &c. Item, a rich clothe or ca-
» Registr. ut supr. sol. 17. a.
k Or, Colonia in Italy.
napye

<page 362>
APPENDIX. 343
napye to hange over the blessed sacrament on the
altar made with cypers % and perled with golde, and
frynged with sylver, being hemmede with a lace of
silke and golde. Item, a faire canapye to cary over
the blessed sacrament upon Corpus Christi daye,
made of yalowe silke, velvet, and clothe of golde
fryngede. Item, iiii. paynted staves to cary the said
canapye uppon. Item, a ffaire corporas cafe of
clothe of golde, and a fine lynen clothe within the
fame. Item, one other fair rich corporas cafe, with
images of golde of bothe sydes, having a border
about the fame on both sydes, garnished with feed
perle; on the one syde of which corporas cafe is our
Lady and her sonne on horsc-backe, and on the
other syde our ladye and her sonne sittingc in a
chaire, and a syne lynnen clothe within the same.
Item, one other corporas cafe of red silke and golde,
with a syne lynnen clothe d within the fame. Item,
ii. faire quyshions of red silke, and flowers of golde
wrought in the fame, for the chappell. Item, a fair
payr of Organs % which, with the carryage from
c Q^ Cyprus-lawn. "Quinque aurifrygia, quorum tria sunt
"opere Cyprensi nobilislimo, et unum est de opere Angli-
"cano." Lib. Anniv. Basilic. Vatican, apud Rubeum in
Vit. Bonifacii. viii. PP. p. 345. Also Carpender's Sdfpl. Gl.
Cang. torn. i. col. 391. "Unum pluviale de canceo rubeo
"cum aurifrixio de opere Cyprensi."
Milton's cyprus lawn, in II Penseroso, is written cifru, in
the first edition.
* In marg. "The clothe promysed but not sent."
• In the college-statutes the following clause occurs, •' In
"die Veneris Officium de Nomine Jesu, in die Sabbati vero, de
T 4 benedicta

<page 363>
344 APPENDIX.
London to Oxford, costx/f. Item, a depe bayson
of puter to stand in the bodye of the chappel instede
"benedicta Virgine matre, cum cantu et organis solemniter
"septimanatim celebrari debcre statuo." And in the same
statute it is injoined. "Primas ac secundas vesperas, completo-
*' ria, et matutinas et altas missas, ac proceffiones, devote ac
"distinct.fi, cum cantu et nota, secundum consuetudinem et
"usum ecclefiæ cathedralis Sarum, celebrent et cantent."
Cap. xii. De Horis canonicis, Mijps et aliis suffragiis dicendis, de
modo in Cborosedendi. [See Life, p. 129.] The organ, men-
tioned in the text, was removed from the chapel, where it
stood over the screen, into the bursary, about the year 1645.
At length, under the administration of the presbyterians, it
totally disappeared. After the parliamentary ordinance "made
in the year 1644, it is extraordinary, that the magnificent
organ on the north side of the chapel of faint John's college,
Oxford, (which continued in use till the year 1768,) should
have been suffered to remain: more especially, as it had been
erected under the patronage of archbishop Laud ; and as Crom-
well's visitors had ordered fir William Paddy's donation for
founding the choral service in that chapel, to be entirely ap-
plied to the augmentation of the President's salary. Original
Rtgister os the Visitation of vitiv. Orxon. A. D. 1648. MS. Archiv.
Oxon. 4W. At New-college, the organ, given by William
Port in the year 1458, which stood at the stall-end of the
north fide of the choir near the vestry, supported by wcodcn
pillars, was destroyed in the year 1646. Wood's manuscript
Englijb History of the University of Oxford, vol. ii. sol. 245.
The present organ in that chapel was erected in the year 1663.
But the beautiful screen, on which it is placed, without any
design of supporting an organ, was constructed in the year
1636: and in the fame year, continues Wood, " the old stalls
"and deskes being pulled downe, those that arenotvstanding were
"set up; and the wainscott adorned with curious painting,
"containing the figures of apostles, faints, &c." MS. ibid.
sol. 246.
s A new organ was bought, in 1529, for the new, large and
beautiful

<page 364>
APPENDIX. 345
of a fonte. Item, a faire staffe to carry the best
crosse withall, covered and garnished with copper
and gilt. Item, a fhipp of puter to putt in franken-
fence. Item, a paire of crewettes of pewter. Item,
a pax of everie [ivory]. Item ii. faire bell candle-
stickes of latten, to sett tallow candles in upon the
altar. Item, iii. Antiphoners of parchmente, bought
by Mr. Parret for the queere. Item, ii. proceslio-
nails and a gospell-boke, which were conteyned in
the backside of the said first indenture made by the
colledge for receipt of the first plate and ornamentes
of the churche. Item, ii. altar clothes, the one for
the upper parte, and the other for the nether parte
beautiful church of Holbech in Lincolnshire, for 3/. 6 s. %d.
Stukeley's Itin. Curios, p. 20. Gray, archdeacon of Berks,
bequeathed 4/. in 1521, to St. Mary's church at Oxford, for a
nezu payr of organs. Registr. univ. Oxon. Archiv. A. 166. sol.
66. According to Dugdale, an organ was purchased for the
church of Sutton-Colsield in Warwickshire, by Vesey bilhop
of Exeter in the reign of Henry the eighth, at the cost of
14/. is. S./. Warwicksh. p. 667. In the year 1439, a new
organ was made for the choir of Merton-college, by William
Wootton, organ-builder at Oxford, for the sum of 28/. Ant.
Wood's Merton-Papers, MS. Bibl. Bodl. [Cod. Ballard.]
Whethamstede abbot of Saint Alban's, about the year 1450,
gave to his church a pair of organs; for which, and their erec-
tion, he expended fifty pounds. No organ in any monastery of
England was comparable to this instrument, for its tone and
workmanship. Chroi/. Whethamst. per Hearne, vol. ii. p.
$39. About the year 1476, Thomas Wyrcester, abbot of Hyde
near Winchester, gave eight marcs and a horse, to purchase an
organ for his church. "Octo marcas et unum equum bonum
"pro novis organis musicalibus." MSS. Archiv. Wolves.
apud Winton.
Of

<page 365>
346 APPENDIX.
of the altar, paned with red clothe of tyssue and
purple-velvets, rychlie imbrowdered with angels and
skitchins [escutcheons] of the paslion. Item, a deflce-
clothe paynede with bawdkyn of sundry collers and
edgede with whyte. Item, a cope of blacke silke
with stripes of golde, having a rich orphes.
Item, a stondinge cup of silver gilt, with a cover
graven with the pommegranet and a sheiff of ar-
rowes, poz. xxxiii. oz. Item, ii, gilte fakes without
a cover, poz xxxix. oz. iii. quarters. Item, iii.
playne drynkin potts of silver gilt, whereof one hath
a cover, poz. xxxi. oz, iii quarters. Item, ii. crewettes
of silver gilt, poz. ix. oz. Item, a holie-water stoppe
and a sprinkell of silver, parcell gilt, poz. xviii. oz.
iii. quarters. Item, a sacringe bell of silver gilte,
poz. v. oz. quarter. Item, a pax of silver gilt, with
a crucifix and Mary and John, poz. xvi. oz. iif.
quarters. Item, ii. pair of silver sensers, parcell
gilt, poz. lxx, oz. Item, a ship of silver with a
lyttell spone for frankensens g, parcell gilt, poz. xvii.
oz. di. Item, ii. chappell bayfens of silver, parcell
gilte, poz. xxxvii. oz. di. Item, a ffaire crosse of
silver and gilte with Marye and-John, garnystiede
with crystall and stones, with a foote of silver and
gilt to the fame, weinge together, besydes the gar-
nyshing of crystall and stones, xxiiii. I. v. oz.
Item, ii. candlestickes of silver parcell gilte, poz.
xxxi. oz. iii. quarters. All whiche parcells, &c.
In witnesse whereofF, 6?c.
* A species of Censer. See Dogd. Mon. iii. 276. 311. 294.
Ibid. Eccl. Coll. 84.
Item,

<page 366>
APPENDIX. 34*7
h Item, receved from the Founder, iii. Marche,
a baner of grene sylke, wrapped in grene bokram,
with ii, knoppes gylted for the fame. — Item, re-
ceeived the second day of Aprile, an image of
Christes resurrection, with a case for the same having
locke and kaye. Item, receved from our said foun-
der the vi. daye of Aprile, a deske-clothe of dyverse-
coloured sylke.
* Added in the register, ad calc. instrumenti.
NUMB.

<page 367>
348 APPENDIX.
NUMB. XVIII.
Indentura de ornamentis et jocalibus,
miflis per dominum Fundatorem ad
collegium tertia vice. April. 12,
1557"-
F FIRST, two tunicles for a diacon and sub-
diacon of white fatten with fiowres of gold,
with albes, stoles and parrys to the fame to matche
with the vestment of white damaske — [before recei-
ved,] Item, a banner clothe for the Crofle, of
grene sarcenett; on the one side whereoff is paynted
the Trinitie, and on the other fyde our Ladye.
Item, a crucifix of woodde, paynted, with the foure
evangelistes, to set at the Entry of the Queereb in
the saide college. Item, one image of woode of the
resurrectyon paynted, to sett upon the altar at Eas-
ter; and a box, lyned with cotten with a locke and
kaye to putt the same image in. Item, ii. bookes
of parchment lymned with gold; the one of which,
beinge a gospellar, is covered on the one fyde with
fylver, and havinge a crucifix on the fame copper
• Registr. sol. 10.
b Choir.
and

<page 368>
APPENDIX. 349
and gilte: And the other boke, being a pistoler% is
lykewise covered on the one syde with sylver, hav-
ing upon the same an image of St. Paule being
sylver and gilte. Item, a faire cope of clothe of
golde, with an orphrese * of clothe of sylver, and a
running orphrese embrodered. Item, a vestment
and ii. tunicles of cloche of sylver, having orphreses
of clothe of golde, and a running orphrese embroder-
ed, as the cope hath, with faire syne new albes,
stoles, phannells, and gyrdles, for the fame, with
iii. bags of lynen clothe to put the fame in. Item,
a faire canapie of blue clothe of gold, paned with
riche redde tynsell, with thredes of golde and a faire
fringe of sylke, and the inside of the valence lyned
with fatten of Bridges. Item, a hearse-clothe of the
same blue clothe of golde and red tynsell frynged
with sylke. Item, six albes furnished for Boyes to
c Epistoler. For the Epistle.
d That is an embroidered edging. From Avrifrasium,
corrupted from aurifrisium, properly perhaps aurjfhri-
gium. Fr. Orsray. Hence the Italian fregiato d' ero, that is,
as our elder poets express the phrase, fretted with gold. Ariosto
has, "D'oro freglata 1' armatura," Orl. Fur. xxv. 97.
And, "Ricche di gioie, e ben freciata d' oro," Ibid,
xxxviii. 78. Menage supposes Auriphrygium to be " Phry-
"gian work or embr. idcry in gold." It is certain that Phry-
gium is used simply and subllantively for this fort of ornament
in a robe. "Obtulit S. Benedicto planetam [a Cope] aureis
"Phryciis, menfium 12 signa infra habentibus, ornatam."
Leo Olticns. Chron. Cas. Lib. ii. c. 24. In Chaucer's Drems
of Chaucer, Phrygius is written Fregius, v. 1070. Some
difficulty is thrown on this specious etymology by the Anglo-
saxon verb ppætban. t0 adorn,
carye

<page 369>
35o APPENDIX.
carye candlestick.es and sensors, whareof two of them
be hymmede* with clothe of golde, of the fame
clothe of gold that the cope before remembered is
of. Item, ii. tunicles of white Brydges saten, or-
phrefed with grene Brydges saten, for such to weare
as shall carye the crosse and holie-water stoppe. Item,
ii. faire copes of tyssue, with fair orpheses of nedle-
worke. Item, a cope of blewe baudkin with flowres
of golde, and with an orphrese of yelowe tyssue,
havinge a running orphefe of red velvet. Item,
another faire cope of white damaske with angells and
arch-angells of gold, havinge a faire orphefe of nee-
dle worke. Item a faire vestment and two tunicles
belonging to the fame, of the fame redde clothe of
tyssue that the ii copes before remembered are of,
having orpheses of needleworke and armes upon the
fame, and having new albes, stoles, and parrys be-
longing to the fame. Item, a deske-clothe made of
olde churche stuffe of sundry fortes. Item, a quission
to lay the crosse on in the Sepulchre, made of iiii.
scochyns wherein armes are wrought. Item, a mon-
stransf of fylver gilt, poz. xxi. oz. All which par-
cells of plate, books, and ornaments, &c. In wit-
nesse, &c.
* Item, Receyved from our founder, in the month
of June, 1558, these bookes followinge. In primis,
Jofephus Græce. One booke [ volume ] of St.
Beede's works. Another, intitled Sanctiones Eccle-
• Hemmed.
f A box for relics, or the Sacrament.
* Ad calc. instrument!, in Registr.
siasticse.

<page 370>
APPENDIX. S5i
siasticæ. One other of St. J ustines workes the mar-
tir. And one Greeke Psalter covered with clothe of
golde. Item syx proceffionalls printed. — Item, two
clothes of payned velvets for the sepulcher. Item,
two clothes of saten Brydge3 for the lowe alters.
Item, eight sconsys. Item, a bible in Englifhe,
with a Psalter, and a . . . . booke. Item ii books of
common prayerh in latten'.
k Mass-book.
1 See Numb. XIX.
NUMB,

<page 371>
352 APPENDIX.
NUMB. XIX.
Bishop Home's Letter to Trinity col-
lege concerning the Removal of su-
perstitious ornaments from the cha-
pel \ Dat. 1570 \
To the worshipsull my loving friends the president and
fellowes of Trynitie college in Oxford.
A
F T E R my hartie commendations: Whereas
I am informed that certaine monuments
* Registr. sol. 138. b.
b Soon after the Act of Uniformity had been promulged in
1558, in the first year of queen Elisabeth, instead of removing
the fopperies of the antlent worship, or at least suffering them
gradually to wear away by time and neglect, this society ap-
pears to have spared no expence to retain and renew these
solemn toys. This may be gathered from the following articles
in Comp. Burst". 1560,-1.
•' Sol. pro quatuor ulnis panni vocati Fitivicb pro altari-
"bus, i)s. vij d. ob.—Sol. pro clavis exiguis ad eadem pendi-
"lia [curtains] affigenda, ij </.—Sol. pro Iongis lathes qua; in-
"serviebant circa pendilia altarium, xxij d.—~Sol. pro ulna
"canabei panni ex qua fiebant pendilia supra oslium cruci-
*' pixORii, xjd. ob." The last article is for a curtain to hang
over the little folding-doors which inclosed the Crucifix
standing on the principal altar.
tending

<page 372>
APPENDIX. 353
tending to idolatrie and popish or devills service, as
Crosses, Censares, and such lyke fylthie stusse used
in the idolatrous temple, more meter for the fame
than for the house of god, remaynethe in your col-
lege as yet undefaced; I am moved thereby to judge
great want of good will in some of you, and no
less neglygence in other some, as in beinge so remisse
to performe your duties towards god, and obedience
unto the prince. Wherefore I can do no lesse, as in
respecte of my Office and Care I have of you, but
verie earnestlie forthwith, uppon the receite hereof,
will you to deface all manner suche traihe, as in
the church of Christe is so noysome and unseemlie;
and to convert the matter thereof to the godlie use,
profett, and behoofe of your house. And further
to have in mynde the motion made by the graunde
commissioners c. If anie do make doubt of your
c Notwithstanding this Injunction, I find Bishop Home visit-
ing the college, by his commissary, G. Acworth, L. L. D. four
years before, Nov. 19, 1566, who finds " Nihil reformations
*' ciignum." Registr. Horne, sol. 52.
I shall give some other instances of his reforming genius,
from his said Register, penes CffHciar. Epifc. Winton.
Injunctions, among others, At a Visitation es the Cathedral
tf Winchester, Oct. 2, 1571. Reg. ut supr. sol. 83.
"Item, That the roode loft in the bodye of churche be
"mured upp, and some parcell of feriptur be written ther.
"Item, That the tabernacles of images now standing vnyde
"in the bodye of the churche may be taken away, or filled
"upp, and the places made plane. Item, That all images
"of the Trinitye in the glasse windows, or other places of the
"churche, be putt oute and extinguished, together with the
"stone crosse in the churche-yarde. Item, That the inven-
Z "torye

<page 373>
354 APPENDIX.
statutes, in that parte, as some more obstinate than
zealous may doe; I do fignifye unto you, That I
"torye of all the churche stuffe, as copes, vestiments, albes,
"chalices, pixes, service books, and such other whatsoever, be
*' brought and exhibited to the ordinarye within two monthes
"next after, with a certificate of all the images that wer in
"the churche."
At a Visitation of Winchester College, Oct. 2. 1571, sol. 88.
seqq. "Item, That the organs be no more used in servyce-
"tyme, and the stipende for the orgayne-player, and that
"which was allowed to a chapplen to fay masse in the chappell
"in the doyster, fhalbe hereafter torned to some other godlye
"use and necessaryc purpose in the colledge chappell. Item,
"The prayers which the choristers use dailye to saye in lattyn
"in frontons $ chappell, fhallbe no mor used, but instead there-
"of some other prayers, or psalmodie. Item, That for the ser-
*• mons aforesaid, to be preached by the warden and fellowes,
"there be a decent pulpit made removeable, and to be sett
"upp by the greces beneath the communion-table for the ser-
"xnon tyme; and that the rood-lofte be taken down to a com-
"petent height for hindering the hearers. Item, That the holie
"communion ihall be ministered in the said colledge, withoute
•* any cope having images or pictures."
At a Visitation os Ne-w college in Ox/or J, Aug. 29, 1567. sol.
65. "Item, Ut tabulata inter chorum capellæ et navem ejus-
"dem amoveantur et prosternantur, usque ad altitudinem sedi-
"Hum ejusdem chori, et ut omnes et singular imagines ibidem
'* olim stantes igni committantur. Item, Ut amotis tegminibus
"orientalis partis chori ejusdem capelle, parietes ibidem oburn-
"brentur plane, dealbentur, et sententie sacre scripture ibidem
"scribantor. Neque soeii, scholares, aut ministri chori, se
"convertant in divinis, more papistico, ad orientem, cum can-
"tatur Gloria Patri." Against the eastern wall of this magni-
ficent' chapel over the altar, the pride of Gothic architecture
§ FroBtnd's.
was

<page 374>
APPENDIX. 355
have perused the statutes, and do fynde, that, the
fame well considered, and the words thereof trulie
was richly displayed in imagery, niches, pinnacles, groupes of
tracery, and other sumptuous ornaments of curious workman-
ship. These were destroyed or defaced by this injunction of
bishop Home; who not only removed the statues, but broke or
rilled up the niches, and reduced the whole, which must have
formed a beautiful and characteristical termination of the vista
from the choir-door, to a plain superficies of plaister and white-
wasti. This wall, or screen, is thus described by the sounder
in the statutes of the college. Statut. Coll. Nov. Rubr.
lxiii. "Item, qui a in inttrmedio ca si tali five transversals muro
"capelle ttoftri collegii supradidi, ubi qudiim murus lapideus inter
"ipsam capellam et aulam ipfittt collegii median noscitur ac eciamse-
"parare ; ymago sanliijsime ac individue Trinitatis, patibu'.um sanctc
*' crucit, cum jmagine crucifixi, beate Marie virginit, Janitor unique
"plurium aliorum ytnagines, sculpture, fenestre -vilree, ac pi dare
"varie, nonnullaqut alia opera sumptuosa, ad del laudem gloriam et
"honor em ipsiusquc matrii prcdide, subtilittr sabricata, <variisqui
"coloribui perirnata, devotijsme situantur, ac multipharie collocan-
"tur, &c." In the year 1695, in resitting the altar and its
environs, it was found that much of this antient Gothic work-
manship still remained under the surface of the wall, covered
with a thick coat of cement or plaister, in tolerable preserva-
tion. See Life of A. Wood. vol. ii. p. 392. edit. 177*.
To return to Home. That he might contribute all the assist-
ance in his power, towards purging away the dregs of popery,
I find him while bishop of Winchester, very frequently visiting,
his cathedral, Winchester college, New college, Magdalene,
Corpus Christi, and Trinity, colleges, in Oxford; but St. John's
not once. Ex Registr. Home, prædict. He began this business
the year after his entrance into the bishoprick. At Trinity col-
lege he visited in person, 24 Sept. 1561, when I find expended
upon him in dinner, wine, and gloves, iv/. ixj. xd. Afterwards
the following notices occur.
Z * Comp.

<page 375>
356 APPENDIX.
interpreted, you may lawfullie withoute infringinge
of any parte thereof, deface the same abuses, and
receave the commoditie that may be had thereof, to
t.huse of your house. So trustinge to hear shortlie
that the same shall be accomplished esfectualie, I
wishe to you all the encrease of the grace of godes
holie spirite. From fValtbam, the xixth day of July,
1570. Your loving friende,
Robert [Horne] Winton*.
Comp. Burst". Coll. Trin. 156$.—6. "Alloc. in epulis datis
"commissario episcopi Winton. visitanti collegium, die Sep^
"[Nov.] 19, 1566. x\i.
Comp. 1575.—6. "Sol. 6. Jul. 1576. Apparatori D. Epis-
"copi Wynton. adferenti literas citatorias. vs.
"Sol. pro i Pari chirothecarum datoDom.Episc. Winton. iv/.
•* Allocat. in epnKs datis Dom. Episcopo Winton, visitanti
"collegium, sec. die Augusti, A. D. 1576. vj /. ij /. ij</. qu.
Home was a learned man, but a zealous and active puritan.
While Dean of Durham, in the reign of Edward vi. he de-
molished many very elegant and very harmless monuments of
ancient art, in that noble cathedral. The author of a curious
book, entitled Antient Rites of the Cbureb of Durham, Lond. 1672.
p. 122. written by one who lived while the monastery subsisted,
tells us, that he destroyed the history of St. Cuthbert beautifully
painted in glass throughout the cloyster-windows. This havock,
he adds, was made by dean Home, "who could never abide
"any ancient monuments, acts, or deeds."
* See the next Article.
NUMB.

<page 376>
APPENDIX. 357
NUMB. XX.
Letter from Queen Elizabeth's Com-
missioners relating to the Business
of the last-mentioned Letter, dat.
1570 '•
To the president, fellowes, and /cotters, of Irjniti*
college, Oxford.
WE will and commaunde you, by Vertue of
the Queries majesties commission to us direc-
ted, that before the xiith daye of Julye next en-
fuenge the date hereof, you cause to be defaced all
the church Plate and church Stuffe, belonging to1
your colledge; in such forte, that it never maye be
used agayne, as it hath bin. Otherwise, as to you'
shall seeme best, to the most profett and behoffe of
your said colledge. And that you so doe it, as
either one of her Majesties commissioners may fe it\
or you the president, by your othc, testifie to"u», or
our colleagues, to be doen, according to the tenour
herof, the next court daye after the daye abovemen-
tioned. Returnyng then agayne this our Precept
'Ibid. sol. 139.
Z 3 with

<page 377>
35» APPENDIX.
with you. "Whereof fayle you not, as you will
answer to the contrarie at your perrel \ This xxviii.
June, 1570. 'Thomas Cooper, L. Hums He, H. West-
phalinge, W. Colec.
b However, a few months before, they demolished the stone-
altars in the chapel, and placed in their stead, a communion-
table, &c. as appears by the following entries.
Comp. Burst". 1569.—70. "Sol. Iapicidinis per duos dies in
"sacello laborantibus. Iv s. ivd.
"Sol. 10. feb. pro communionis mensa et fluteis in sacello, xj /.
Soon afterwards, the Metrical psalms, after the plan of Ge-
neva, growing fashionable, I find the first mention of the fol-
lowing article.
Comp 1575.—6. "Expos, a decano pro sex libris pfalmorum
"in usum sacelli. xij j."
c The queen's commissioners for abolishing popisli supersti-
tion in the university of Oxford. They sate in the divinity
chapel, in Christ-church cathedral. Cooper was dean of
Gloucester, afterwards bishop of Winchester. Humphrey was
president of Magdalene. Wcstphalinge was canon of Christ-
church, afterwards bishop of Hereford. Cole was president of
C. C. C. Oxon. See Wood Hist. Antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 291.
Godwyn informs us, that Westphalinge was a person of such
consummate gravity, that during a familiar acquaintance with
him for many years, he never once saw him laugh.—" Nun-
"qiuun in risum liiderim folutum." De Præsul. ed. 1616. pag.
546. ed. 4to. His arms are elegantly painted in the great
window of the Chapter-house at Christ-church, with an Inscrip-
tion, and the date 1601.
NUMB.

<page 378>
APPENDIX.. .359
NUMB. XXI.
Compositio quædam Collegiorum, Coll.
Magd. et Coll. Trin. Oxon. Dat.
Feb. 26, 15581.
OMNIBUS Christi fidelibus, ad quos hoc
præsens scriptum indentatum pervenerit: Nos
Thomas Coveney, præsidens collegii B. Mariæ Mag-
dalenæ in universitate Oxon. et scholares ejusdem
collegii, salutem in domino sempiternam. Cum
Alicia" Parret, nuper de parochia sancti Petri in
oriente Oxon. vidua, ac bonæ memoriae matrona,
ejusque c testamenti unicus executor Simon Par-
ret d, generosus, nuper prædicti collegii socius, ob
magnæ devotionis fervorem, et affectionem in præ-
• In Thesauriar. Coll. Trin. et Registr. prim. sol. 22, b. Ec
Muniment. Coll. Magd.
k Daughter os Robert Gardiner, mentioned below, of Sun»
ningwell, Berkfliire, and Alice Orpewood. See p. 327.
c Dat. suit testamentum 21 Mar. 1556. Probat. 4 Jul. 1556.
Offic. Testam. Oxon.
4 In the British Museum are manuscript letters of one Simon
Parrett, certainly not the fame, dat. Oxon. 1582. concerning a
new edition of Fox's Bed of Martyrs, written to Fox. MSS.
Harl. 416.
Z 4 fatum

<page 379>
36o APPENDIX.
fatum collegium, inter se dederint, et manibus suis
propriis tradiderint, partim Owino Oglethorpe nuper
præsidenti collegii prædicti, et scholaribus ejusdem
collegii, partim nobis præfato Thomæ Coveney
nunc præsidenti dicti collegii, et scholaribus ejusdem
collegii, centum viginti et quatuor libras bonæ ac
legalis monetæ Angliæ, ad emendum et perquiren-
dum terras et redditus ad verum annuum valorem
sex librarum, ultra omnes reprisas, quas vocant,
habend. et tenend. nobis præfatis præsidenti et scho-
laribus collegii B. Mariæ Magdalenæ in univerfitate
Oxon. et successoribus nostris, in perpetuum; ad
effectus quosdam pios infra-scriptos: præcipue vero,
pro perpetuis duabus Exhibitionibus in dicto col-
legio fundandis, et aliis non minus piis, quam ne-
cessariis, sustentationibus pauperum scholarium stu-
dentium in dicto collegio. Nos igitur, præsati præ-
fidens et scholares, tarn insigni pietate moti, rursus
nee ferentes tarn pium desiderium præfatorum Ali-
ciæ et Simon1 is effectu spoliari, nee defunctam sua
extrema voluntate fraudari, fed mandatum ejus ad
eiFectum perducere conantes •, præfatam iummam,
vel saltern majorem ejus partem, quadruplo erogavi-'
mus in emptionem terrarum, nuper de Roberto
Radborne de Stanlake in com. Oxon. perquisitarum,
et reliquam summam, prout opportunitas fe offeret,
in similes usus applicabimus. Quos quidem reddi-
tus sex librarum per annum, nos præsati præsidens
et scholares promittimus, et per præsentes obliga-
mus nos et succefibres nostros, ad specialem requi-
fitionem præsati Simonis Parret, Præsidenti Sociis
tt Scbelaribus Collegii Jancla et individua Trinitatis in
univerfitate

<page 380>
APPENDIX. 339
univerfitale Oxon. ex fundatione Thomæ Pope miltHis,
quod nos et fuccessores nostri deinceps perpetuis fu-
turis temporibus, deo volente, colligemus, expone-
mus, et solvemus, vel solvi faciemus, per manus
bursariorum dicti collegii, secundum voluntatem
prædictæ Aliciæ, ad hunc qui sequitur modum.
In Prim is, promittimus, et obligamus nos et fuc-
cessores noltros, quod deinceps in perpetuum erit
unus sociorum dict collegii B. Mariæ Magdalenæ in
universitateOxon.sacris initiatus, viz. presbiter bonæ
conversations integræque famæ, qui orabit pro ani-
mabus Roberti Parret et Aliciæ uxoris ejus,
Simonis Parret et Elisabethæ uxoris ejus, Jo-
hannis Kele et Edmundi Kele, Roberti Gardenar
et Aliciæ uxoris ejus, et pro animabus omnium Fide-
lium defunctorum, bis singulis hebdomadis, cum
cel'ebraverit Missam. Qui quidem prefbiter recipiet in
fi.^e cujuslibet anni termini decem solidos, de prædic-
tis sex libris j viz. in toto per annum, et sic de anno
in annum, quadraginta solidos. Cujus e!ectio ac
præfectio deinceps erit penes præsidentem prædicti
collegii B. Mariæ Magdalenæ pro tempore existen-
tem, si domi fuerit, vel si intra unum mensem ad
dictum collegium redierit post recessum, decessum,
obitum, resignationem, vel deprivationem, prædicti
socii, sic ad hanc electionem admissi. Quod si præsi-
dens ultra mensem abfuerit a prædicto collegio, turn
penes vice-præsidentem erit novum sufficere prestsite-
rum in vacantis locum. Tenebiturque admittendus
ad hanc exibitionem, eodem die, aut saltern intra tres
dies immediate scquentes ejus admissionem, hanc
Compositionem legere. Insuper, nos præfati præ-
sidens

<page 381>
362 APPENDIX.
fidens et scholares obligamus nos et successors nos-
tros ad celebrandas Exequias dominica secunda post
festum Paschatis quo die obiit piæfatus Robertus
Parret, et missam die sequent! fingulis annis in
perpetuum, pro animabus supranominatorum, cum
expressione nominum eorum. Et ad distribuendos
viginti solidos inter præsidentem dicti collegii et so-
cios ejusdem, qui interfuerint exequiis et mhTæ præ-
dictis solummodo: nisi forte præsidens, aut sociorum
aliquis abfuerit in negotiis collegii; in quo casu
nolumus eorum aliquem sua fraudari portione. Nec-
non ad solvendum Choristis dicti collegii, vel eo-
rum locum tenentibus, quinque solidos et quatuor
denarios •, et Præceptori eorum sexdecim denarios,
fingulis annis in perpetum. Et ulterius promittimus,
quod eodem die quo celebrabitur Missa pro anima-
bus supranominatorum, tresdecim solidi et quatuor
denarii insumentur in uberiorem refectionem præsi-
dentis et scholarium prædictorum, prout fieri consue-
vit in exequiis aliorum Benefactorum dicti collegii.
Decernimus etiam, ut qui admissus sit ad hanc exhi-
bitionem, fingulis annis, eodem die celebrabit Mis-
sam, et vocabitur Capellanus Aliciæ Parret.
Item, quod communi campanario, more Oxoniæ
solito, pro animabus prædictorum publice procla-
manti, in die dictarum Exequiarum, annuatim da-
buntur quatuor denarii, pro labore ejus. Præterea,
nos præfati præsidens et scholares obligamus nos et
successores nostros, per præsentes, quod deinceps
fingulis annis ad terminum viginti annorum, primo
die Maii, quo die obiit præfata Alicia, nos præ-
fati præsidens et scholares, et successores nostri, de-
liberabimus.

<page 382>
APPENDIX. 363
liberabimus viginti solidos capellano fie electo; ut
is, ct unus Gardianorum ecclesiæ sancti Petri in
oriente Oxon. singulis annis, in exequiis celebrandis
in parochia prædicta sancti Petri pro animabus præ-
dictorum, juxta eorum discretionem, singulis annis,
durante termino prædicto, distribuant ct erogent in
pios usus: viz. in neceflarios sumptus Exequiarum
et Missæ, et in sustentationem Indigentium commo-
rantium in dicta parochia sancti Petri. Et ulterius
decernimus, quod elapsis viginti annis, et debitis
factis distributionibus in parochia prædicta, quod
extunc nos præfati præfidens et scholares, singulis
annis imperpetuum, deliberabimus, per manus bur-
sariorum prædicti collegii, viginti solidos alicui socio
dicti collegii, vel scholari, eligendo et nominando,
more capellani prædicti, ad orandum pro animabus
prædictorum. Præterea ordinavimus, quod resi-
duum sex librarum prædictarum remaneat ad opus
ec usum dicti collegii imperpetuum. Postremo, ut
Compositio et hæc præscns Ordinatio firma sit et
perpetua, nullisque injuriis antiquanda, nos præfati
præsidens et scholares concedimus per præsentes,
pro nobis et successoribus nostris imperpetuum;
quod si per nos præfatum præsidentem et scholares,
vel successores nostros, steterir, quo minus hæc
Ordinatio non plenarie fuerit satisfacta, fed incuria
vel culpa nostra aut exhibitiones non solvantur, vel
defunctis Justa non persolvantur, vel distributiones
omittantur; quod tune, quoties id contigerit, bene
licebit Præfidenti Sociis et Scbolaribus Collegii sanftœ et
individual Trinitatis in universitate Oxon. ex fundatione
Thomæ Pope militis, imperpetuum, in omnes ter-
ras
s

<page 383>
3<54 APPENDIX.
ras nostras, nuper perquisitas de præfato Roberto
Radborne in Stanlake prædicta, intrare et distrin-
gere, districtionesque sic captas licite asportare, ab-
ducere, effugare, et penes fe retinere, ac ad eorum
usum recipere et habere, ad tantum valorem quanti
valoris fuerit onus five exhibitio dicti socii vacan-
tis supra tempus limitatum, aut distributio ulla, ut
superius constituitur, omissa. In cujus rei testi-
monium, uni parti hujus scripti indentati penes nos
præfatos præfidentem et scholares collegii B. Mariæ
Magdalenæ in univerfitate Oxon.-et successores nos-
tros remanenti, Prasidens Socii et Scholares Collegii
Jantlx et individuæ '■srinitatis in univerfitate Oxon. ex
fundatione Thomæ Pope militis, Sigillum suum
commune apposuerunt; et alteri parti hujus scripti
indentati, penes præfatos Præfidentem Socios et Scho-
lares Collegii fan ft'a et individual Trinitatis in univerfi-
tate Oxon. ex fundatione Thomæ Pope militis, et
successores eorum, remanenti, nos præfati præfidens
et scholares collegii B. Mariæ Magdalenæ Oxon.
Sigillum nostrum commune apposuimus. Datum
xxvi. die februarii, anno regni serenissim^ nostræ
principis Elisabethæ, dei gratia, Angliæ, Franciæ,
et Hiberniæ Reginæ, fidei defensoris, etc. primo".
[1558.-9]
* By another instrument, mutually given as above, bearing
date Sept. 1, 1579, this Composition, on account of the refor-
mation of religion, was altered, as it is to this day observed
by Magdalene college. In Registr. Coll. Trin. prim. sol. 40.
Et in Munim. Coll Trin. et Magi. ut supr.—Wood is mistaken in
saying, that this Alicia Parrel was the itiise of Simon, for stie
was his mother. Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ii. 190. But he after-
wards

<page 384>
APPENDIX. 365
wards corrected the mistake, Athen. Oxon. i. fast. 23. col. 1.
Vide Lee's MSS. Visitat. Oxfordfh. pp. 12, 13. In the altered
Composition, where mention is made of the itisiributio in choris-
tas, it is added, " Quia dictus Robertus Perott, al. Parret, pater
"dicti Simonis, suit olim preceptor choristarum in dicto colle-
"gio." He was an eminent musician for his time; and gra-
duated in music at Oxford, before the year 1515. And dying-
April 21, 1550, aged 72, was buried in the church of St. Peter
in the East at Oxford. The fame Robert Perrot was a sharer
of abbey-land, and bought Rewley abbey at Oxford on the
dissolution. Wood, MSS. Cit. Ox/. No. 8491. Muf. Asturt.
Healfo occurs receiver general of the archdeaconry of Bucking-
ham, in 1534, Willis, Catb. Ox/, p. 119. He was also receiver
of rents for Christ-church, Oxford, in the twenty-sixth year of
Hen. viii. MSS. in Ojfic. Primit. He is mentioned, in lord Wil-
liams's Charter for founding Thame-school in Oxfordshire, dated
1574, to have been receiver of the rents for Littlemore Pri ry
nearOxford. Compare Life,p. 117, 183. and Append. Numb.
IX. in the notes. And p. 327. notes. Also Wood, Fast. Oxon.
i. 69, 70. And Morton's Northamptonsh. p. 460.
But a curious authentic manuscript has lately been communi-
cated to me, containing various evidences and notices of the
family of Perrot: the following extracts from which will con-
Arm or correct what is here, or has been before in other parts
of this work, either imperfectly or erroneously observed con-
cerning the said family, viz. " sol. 5. b. Simon Parret is made
"n tary public, 22 May, 1546.—sol. 7. a. S. Parret is con-
"tlituted registrar of Bucks, with a fee of five marks and a
"robe annually, 20 Jul. 1547.—sol. 3.8. S Parret, of Ox-
"ford, gentleman, is appointed steward of diver:, manors, to
"dame Elizabeth Pope, widow, 20 Jan. 1559.—sol. 6. b.
"He is made, by Edward the sixth, bailiff of the chantry-
"lands within the county of Oxon, 2. Feb. 1550, with a fee
"of v/. vj j. viij*/.—sol. in. b. He, then aged xxxvi years,
"marries Elizabeth Love of Aynhoe, 28 Sept. 1550.—sol. 78.
"b. He fells his lease of the parsonage of Stoke-lyne to his
"brother in law Edward Love, 1561.—sol. 7. a. . His son
•■ Simon

<page 385>
366 APPENDIX.
"Simon comes to a court at Northleigh, co. Oxon. ij68.—
** sol. 111. a. He dies aged 71, 24 Sept. 1584, and is buried
"in St. Peter's church in the East at Oxford.—sol. ri i.'a. His
"wise Elizabeth, married at nineteen years of age, and by
"whom he has nineteen children, dies in 1572, and is buried
"in the said church.—sol. 72. a. Robert Parret of Oxford
"esquire, [the musician] father of the first Simon, occurs in
•• 1549.—sol. 12. a. Robert's will is dated 18 Apr. ijco, he
"being then of St. Peter's, Oxon. Therein he gives to his
"wife Alice his patent of 4 marcs annually from the king,
"ending with the life of G. Pigott. In the fame he mentions
"his son Simon.—sol. in. b. He dies 21 Apr. following,
"buried ibid.—sol. 13. a. The will of the said Alice is dated
"2t Mar. 1556. Therein (he mentions Elizabeth the wise of
n her son Simon, to whom she gives her best cajsocke ofclcthe and
"sattin iyrtell. She dies [Alice] 2 Jul. 1558.—sol, in. b.
•* The lame Alice, mother of the said Simon, daughter of Alice
*' Orpcwood, dying 1558, is buried in the said church—sol.
"37. a. Articles of marriage between Simon Parret [the
"younger] and Avis White, dated 1573." MS.fol.olimGulie'tmi
Perrot, armig. de Northleigh to. Oxon. Nuncpenes mt, ex dono JR. V.
Joanna Price, Protobibl. Bod/.
On the whole it appears, that Simon, fellow of Magdalene
college, mentioned in this instrument, who married Elisabeth
Love, was the person whose name occurs in papers and accounts
(See Life, 183.) at the foundation of Trinity college, and who
was the founder's agent.
The manor of Northleigh aforesaid, being parcel of Nettley
abbey in Hampshire, was granted to fir Thomas Pope and his
heirs in the year 1545, by patent of Henry the eighth, anno
regn. 36. Jul. 28. par. 8. From him it descended to his widow
dame Elisabeth. Late in the reign of queen Elisabeth, it ap-
pears to have been vested in the descendants of Robert Parrot,
or rather Perrot, abovementioned; whose son Simon, as we
have seen, married Elisabeth Love, sir Thomas Pope's niece.
Wood [Ath, Oxon. i. Fast. 23. ut supr.] is mistaken in faying,
that the said Robert, the founder of this family in Oxfordshire,
was

<page 386>
APPENDIX. 367
was the second son of George Perrot of Haroldston near Haver-
ford west in Pembrokfhire. It is proved from better authority,
that he was born at Hacknes in the North riding of Yorkshire.
MS. Registr. Parrot, ut supr. sol. m. b. The family of
Perrot lived at Northleigh, in their antient capital mansion
house, till within these sew years: but are now extinct, at least
in the lineal succession. This estate was lately purchased by the
duke of Marlborough.
NUMB.

<page 387>
368 APPENDIX.
NUMB. XXII.
Articles relating to certain Buildings
and Utensils of Wroxton Priory in
Oxfordshire, soon aster the Dissoluti-
on. Dat. Aug. 16, 1537*.
H
Ereafter ensueth, aswell certeyne buildyngs be-
longing to the late Monastery of Wroxtone
■ In Thesaur. Coll. Trin. prædict. Manu Dora. Thorn*
Pope. Where are several original instruments relating to this
monastery. The most antient (not yet printed) are the two fol-
lowing, being nearly coeval with the foundation.
I. " Universis fancte matris eccleste filiis literas istas fuspec-
"turisvelaudituris,magisterMiCHAELBELETsaJuten) indomino.
*' Noverit universitas vestra, quod ego dedi et conceffi domine
"abbatisse de Godesthovgh et monialibus ibidem deo fervi-
"cntibus, redditum quadraginta folidorum annuatim percipien-
"dorum ad duos terminos: fcil. viginti folidos ad octabas Pen-
"tecostes, et viginti ad octabas fancti Martini in hyeme. Quos
"prcdictos quadraginta folidos predicte moniales recipiant an-
"nuatim per manum prioris et canonicorum de Wrokstan:
"quibus ego aflignavi certum redditum in certo loco ad cer-
"turn tei minum in manerio nieo de Sychtstan. Ut sine omni
"impedimento postint eos percipere, et predictis monialibus
"reddere ad predictos terminos. Feci et prcdictos canonicos
"in periculo animarum fuarum, et jurare, visis
"facro-fanctis, quod sine dolo et fraude, omni impedimento et
"occasione

<page 388>
APPENDIX. 369
sold by William Rayneseford, esquier, to Thomas
Pope, esqyer, the xvith day of August, A0, xxix.
"occasione ceslante, solvant predictum reJditum predictis mo-
*• nialibus: Ut autem ha:c mea donatio et conceffio rata sit
"et firma, presens scriptum figilli inei munimine roboravi.
"Hiis testibus, domino Rad. de sanilo Amanda, dom. Job. dt
"Brucbton, Alex, dt Barton, Hervte Belet, Philip dt Mtrula,
** Roberto dt Sycbestan. Rob. Parvo de IjProxton, Rob. dt Cerce-
"dint, Nich de Wroxftan, et multis aliis." No date, cum sigill.
Michael Btltt founded the monastery early in the reign of Henry tht
third, about the year I 230.
II. " Universis sancte matris ecclesie filiis literas istas visu-
"ris vel audituris. Hugo, Prior loci sancte Marie de Wrokes-
"tan, et totus conventus qui ibidem serviunt deo e: beate
"Marie, Salutem in domino. Noverit universitas vestra, quod
"nos obligamus nos et successores nostros in perpetuum, ad
"reddendum abbatissc et conventui de Godestowe annuatim
"quadraginta solidos argenti: seil. viginti solklos aJ octabas
"sancti Martini in hyeme et viginti ad octab. Pentecostes.
"Quos quadraginta solidos patronus noster magister Michaei
"Bel et aflignavit nobis percipiendos in manerio suo de Sicbef-
"tan: ubi ipse dedit nobis dccem libratas tcrre. Sicut carta
"ejus testatur quam habemus. Et predictam obligationem
"multis modis fecimus, quia juravimus in animas nostras
"quod predictam solutionem trium marcarum sine fraude et
"occasione, ceslante omni contradictione et impcdimento, fa-
"ciemus ad predictos terminos: et sigillo nostro conventuali,
"quod huic scripto appensum est, confirmavimus: sub pena
"viginti solidorum pro quolibet defectu si contingat. Subjeci-
"mus etiam nos specialises in hac parte jurisdictioni episcopi
"Lincoln, qui fuerit pro tempore, et Arailiter Archidiacono
"Oxon: ut illL duo, vel unus corum, poslit nos sine omni
"contradictione compellere id predictam solutionem, et ads
"penam si fuerit commissa. Et quicunque electus fuerit in
"priorem, jurabit quod fideliter hanc obligationem observabit.
"Him testibus, domino Nicolao restore eclesie de Brocktvn,
A a "dom.

<page 389>
37o APPENDIX.
[Hen. viii.] as also certeyne utensils-belonging to the
said monastery, being sold unto the said William
"dom. Bernardo vfcario edesie de Bkkkejbam, "Jacobs de
"Haicntya tune feneseallo de Godefttnue, Petrt le Butelir de
"Mildecumb, Henr. de Lingitre, Rad. de Middletun, Will, de Hed-
"dindun, Hear. Merjet, et aliis." With the seal of the monas-
tery; reversed with Saint Michael killing the dragon, and
exergue Eleemosina Michaelis Belet. Hugh was the se-
cond prior, and died before the year 1263.
Our next original instrument, in point of antiquity, is a char-
ter of Henry the ivth, granting free warren to Richard the
prior, and his convent, in the manors of, Wroxton Oxfordshire,
Thorpe Underwood Northamptonshire, and Sifon Lincolnmire,
"Hiis testibus, Th. Cantuar, H. Ebor, R. London, H. Wyn-
* ton, Th. Dunolm, N. Bathon. et Wellens, Henr. principe
•' Wall, filio nostro primogenito, carislimo consanguineo nostro,
"Edwardo Duce Ebor, Thoma Arimdell, Ric. Warr. et Rad.
"Westmorl. comitibus, Thoma Beaufort cancellario nostro,
♦' Joh. Stanley feneseallo hospieii nostri, et Mag. Joh. Prophete
*' custode privati sigilli nostri, ac aliis. Dat. &c. decimo die
•* octobr. ann reg. nostri duodecimo." A. D. 1410. with the
broad seal in green wax.
Here is also a charter of King John (printed by DugdaTe)
recited by inspeximus of Henry the fourth, ann. regn. ib.
Octobr. 25. cum magn. figill. [See Dugdal. Mon. ii. p. 326.
50.] This inspeximus recites a charter of Richard the second,
who cites Edward the third, who cites Henry the third his
father, who cites John his father. In this inspeximus Edward
the third confirms the previous charters. "Hiis testibus, J.
"Archiep. Cant. W. Winton. episc. Thesaurar. nostro. Henr.
•• com. Lancastr. Will, de Bohun. com. Northampt. Henr. de
"Percy, Thoma Wake de Lydell, Ric. Talebott feneseallo
"hospieii nostri, et aliis. Dat. per manum nostram apud West-
"mon. 26. die Jan. ann. reg. 22." A. D. 1348.
From these evidences, Willis's list of the priors of this mo-
nastery might be enlarged or authenticated, viz. Hugh occurs
Prior,

<page 390>
APPENDIX. 37t
Rayncsford by our Souveraigne lord the lung's offi-
cers, That is to saye.
Prior, ut supr.—Richard, ut supr.—Thomas Grove, with-
out date.—William Braddenham, A- D. 1490. Also Feb.
1, 5 Hen. vii.—Richard, 1504. For, Dec. 6, that year, T.
Sidnall Capcllanus de Wroxstan, by will, bequeaths to the said
Richard and his convent many legacies : particularly his body
to be buried in the conventual church before the great cross,
and one pound of wax to burn before the cross in the parochial
church of Wroxstan.—Thomas Smith, ann. 4. 7. 20. Hen.
viii. He continued to the dissolution. See Willis Mitr. Abb.
ii. p. 188, 334. Concerning {he abovementianed p-nsion of
forty millings, paid by this monastery to Godstowe nunnery, I
find the following original instrument, made in 1539. "This
'* byll made the xxist day of October, the x*xth yere of the
"reign of our soueraign lord kyng Henry thp viiith, witness-
"eth, that I Richard Gwent clerk, Deane of the Arches,
"have received of Thomas Pope esquier, thirtie poundes ster*
*' lyng, to the use of Dame kateryn Bukley, Abbes of the
"mpnastery of Godstowe iq the countie of Oxford, and the
"convent of the fame, fqr the purches of a certayn annuytip
"of xl s. by yere goyng out of certayne londcs and tenements,
'• &c. being parcell of the possessions of the late monastery of
"Wroxton in the said countie. l,n witnes whereof, I have
"fubserybed this byll with my oyvn hand, the daye and yere
"above written, per Me Richard Gwi^t." In the Bur-
sary of Trinity college Oxford. Where is also a Release for
the same by the said abbess, with the beautiful seal of Godstowe
abbey appendant. Catharine Bukley, or Bulklcy, was the last
abbess. See her Letter to lord Cromwell, complaining of the
injustifiable proceedings of Dr. London, who came with a pre-
tended commission for dissolving her convent. Burnet. Ref. vol.
iii. p. 130. Rec. Num. 54. I also find [Thesaur. Coll. Trin.]
a fragment of a letter from her, to sir Thomas Fopc, desiring
him to intercede with lord Cromwell on this business. See
supr. Life, p. 184.
A a 2 First,

<page 391>
372 APPENDIX.
First, the Wall of the Churche on the outside
next the cloyster from the foote of the great window
downwards.
Item, The south ile joyning to the dorterb, with
ii. litell iles north est from that joyning to the
fame ile.
Item, The dorter, with the roffe thereof.
Item, The ffrater howfe on both sides.
Implements and Utensils.
Item, The condyte as it is, with all the Lede
thereto belonging.
Item, ii. brasse Potts in the Kichyn to sythe
mete in.
Item, In the Brewhowse ii. grete ledes ffast sett
in a frame, ii. small ledes sett in curbes. One
greate troffe of lede sett in the grounde.
All which implements before rehersed, I the said
William Raynseford covenenteth and promyseth by
thes presents at such time as I shall leve the ffarme
which I nowe hold of the said Thomas Pope in
Wroxton, to leve well and sufficyently repayred and
mainteyned, and in as good cafe as they be now at
the makyng of thes presents.
Tho. Pope. W. Raynesford*.
b Dormitory.
1 Of Great-Tew, in Oxfordshire.
Witnes

<page 392>
APPENDIX. 373
Witnes at the making thereof John Edmondes11,
gent. John Marshall. Richard Hochynson •. John
Ridley, and John Menefye.
d He occurs supr. See Life, p. 117,326.
e He received a grant of lands with Sir T. Pope, pat. 30,
Hen. viii. par. 8. supr, citat.
A 33 NUMB.

<page 393>
374 APPENDIX.
NUMB. XXIII.
Rate os the Purchase os the Rectory
of Garfingtona, in Oxfordshire by-
Sir Thomas Pope," from Philip and
Mary, under certain Considerations.
Jan. 22, 1557. An Extractb.
PHilip and Marie. By the King and Queen.—
Forasinoche as Sir Thomas Pope, knightc, as
as we are credybly enformed, entendeth, if he might
purchase the said parsonage, to gyve the same to the
presydent fellows and scollers of Trinitie college in
the universitie of Oxford, and to their fuccesiburs
■ It was given by R{chard ii. to the eel! of the holy Trini-
ty at Wallingford, Berks, ann. reg 15. Feb. 9. A. D. 1392.—
Anthony South prior, and the convent of the said cell, pre-
sented William Dayfote, bachelor in decrees, to the said rec-
tory: saving a pension of 100 s. doe to themselves, and of 40/.
due to S. Frideswides, at Oxford. Dat. in dom. capit. Jun.
4. 1479. E. Registr. Mon. S. Albani. MSS. Tanner. Bibl.
Bodl. sol. This priory was annexed to S. Alban's abbey. It
was granted to Cardinal Wolsey: but by forfeiture reverted to
the crown.
b E Lib. sec. Let Rates, 3, 4. Phil. Mar. British Mus.
MSS. Harl. 607. sol. 7. b. ut supr.
for

<page 394>
APPENDIX. 375
for ever, and at his chardge to erect an howse there,
for the said president, fellows, and scollers, to repose
them in, when any plage shall happen within the said
univerfitie: We mindinge the furtherance of that
good acte, and therwithal consideringe the Buyldinge
of the same howse will be no lytle chardge to the
said Sir Thomas, are pleased, etc. etc. Dat. 22 Jun.
1557-
A a 4 NUMB.

<page 395>
lib A P P E N D I X.
NUMB. XXIV.
In the year 1577, when a mortal epidemical distemper*
prevailed at Oxford, the College retired to the aforesaid
bouse at Garjingtonb: relating to which occasion the
following very singular instrument, dat. April 3,
1577, still remains.
Instrument concerning the Recession os
Trinity College from the University
to Garsington aforesaid, in time of
the Plague, 1577.
TO all christian people to whom this present
writinge shall come to be reade or hard. Ar-
* In the Statutes of Trinity college, given in 1556, the
Founder allows a salary of vj/. xiij/. \vd. to the President, if
removed and rendered incapable of serving his office, propter iit-
Jirmitatem ccntagiosam, qua nunc 'videtur pcrfttua futura. Cap.
xviii. This disease, I presume, was the Sweating Sickness.
b E Registr. prim. Coll. Trin. Oxon. sol. 144. a. They
likewise had before retired hither in the year 1570, or the
next, the plague then raging at Oxford. Ex Comp. 1570,
—I. In which plague fix hundred persons died at Oxford.
Wood, Hist. Antiqu. Univ. Oxon. i. 291. In this house they
lived as at the college, and performed here, not only the
collegiate, according to their own statutes, but all academical
exercises

<page 396>
APPENDIX. 377
thur Yeldarde president of the college of the holic
and undivided Trinitie in the univerfitie of Oxforde,
exercises necessary for their degrees, by permission of the uni-
versity. In the Computus of the last-mentioned year, I find
many curious particulars relating to their manner of living in
this retirement, and to the general distress of the times. Among
others, more than once, this article.—M Sol. pro armis ad luen-
"dam domum. viz. iii. black [iron] b^lleS- iiij /. vjd." Again,
1570.-1.—" Pro carta ad usum Bursariorum apud Garsington.—
"Pro epulis peregrinorum, pistoris aliorumque potum adferen-
"tium.—Pro equo Mag. Orpwoode euntis ad Abington ad pa-
'* randum panem et potum pro collcgio apud Garsington.—Pro
"expensis ejusdem apud Woodstocke et apud Kidlington variis
"temporibus circa panem et potum parandum pro iis qui re-
"manent Oxoniæ." It appears that they carried with them,
from the college, to this place, proper necessaries and utensils,
not only for their kitchen and buttery, but also for divine ser-
vice. This was by the founder's directions; who moreover
leaves this restriction, *' Reliqua vero jocalia, et vasa argentea,
"tana sacelli quam aulæ usui a me concessa, et alia ornaments
"majoris prelii, in alium tatiortm locum infra universitatem
*' Oxoniensem, curabunt perferenda." Additam. ad statut.
ut supr. sol. 104. During this secession, they are also directed
to leave four persons in the college, " ad tutiorem collegii cus-
"todiam." Ibid. Concerning whom this article often occurs.
Comp. 1570.-1. Pro antidoto contra pestem ad usum corum
qui domi remanserunt. vs. ivd.—
Also, Datum N. pro labore suo in custodiendis Januis, et aliter,
tempore pestis
And, Oct. 25. Sol. T. C. pro labore suo in proficiscendo heb-
domadatim, pro decem hebdomadis, Woodstockiam, ad
emenda obsonia pro iis qui domi remaiicnt.—
By which last article, as in some preceeding, it appears, that it
was unsafe, or perhaps impossible, to purchase provisions at Ox-
ford, in this calamitous season. Again, in the same year. "Pro
"expens.

<page 397>
378 APPENDIX.
of the ffoundation of Sir Thomas Pope, kt. and die
fellows and scollers of the fame colledge, fend greet-
ing in our lord god everlasting. Know yee, that wee
the said president, fellowes and scollers, have appoin-
ted, constituted, and assigned, and do by these pre-
sents ap. cons, and ass. Thomas Blocksome, of
Garfington in the Countye of Oxforde, butcher, to
provide and bye for us foe many calses, and the fame
to kill, as shall serve to our necdsarye use for the
sayde colledge and companye there, from the making
hereof, unto the ffirst day of June next folowinge
"expens. Mag. Orpewood et Chambre'en apud Woodstocke
"quando solvebant pecuniam pistori, et ctnfirmabatur pa&um
"turn eodem pro pane et potu pro Collegio [apud] Oxon." I
find a great reparation of this house, 1596. Ex Comp. Anni.
In the year 1603, the plague broke out again at Oxford, when
they probably retired hither as before. But the chief notice
that occurs, under that year, concerning it, is,
Alloc. pro expens. tempore pestis, xiij /. iij 3. iv</.
In the year 1563, the plague raging at Oxford, before this
house was finished, I find them retiring to Woodstock, where
they hired houses for their accommodation. About which sin-
gular migration I have extracted these entries, from Comp.
1563-4.
Sol. per totum tempus pestis pro puescrvantibus mithridato
et pillulis, diversis temporibus, xij t. x </.
—- Pro prandio infumpto in medicum nostrum, iij s. ivtf.
Pro stipendio ministri ecclesiæ Woodestock, ij s.
■ Ad usum templi in Woodestock, xx i.
—— Pro expens. Greenwoodi [ a fellow ] peste mortui,
vis. \xi.
— Pro expens. Bursariorum dum profecti funt ad Woode-
stock ad Computum [genera/em] faciendum ....
■■ ■ Sol. Woodstockii pro nocturnis vigiliis.—
"the

<page 398>
APPENDIX. 379
the date hereof: prayinge all justices of peace, and
and others the quenes majesties officers, quietlye to
permits the said Thomas Blocksome to carye, drive
and passe throughe their libertyes, with all such
Wares as he shall bye [buy] for such purpose before
named. In witness whereoff, we the sayd president,
fellowes, and scollers, have sett our common seale to
these presents, the thirde daye of Aprill in the year
of our soveraigne ladye Elizabeth, by the grace of
God, quene of England, Ffraunce and Ireland, de-
fenderesse of the faithe, the xixth. [1577.c]
c In an exhibitory bill, or schedule, os expences for their re-
moval this year, as it seems, mention is made of carrying the
Cl ck from the college-hall to Garsington-house. Also for car-
riage of surplices, viz. "Sol. operariis pro vectura linostolio-
"rum Mag. Præsidis, Sociorum, et Scholarium, ad ecclesiam
"de Garsington." And the two following articles occur. "Pro
"lectis et hofpitiis extra domum pro firmariis [farmers] aliis-
"que in Computo Bursariorum et Ballivorum tento apud Gar-
"sington hoc anno."—" Pro luminibus in choro ecclesiae de
"Garsington, xvijs. ivd."
NUMB.

<page 399>
380 APPENDIX.
NUMB. XXV.
Account os the first President, Fel-
lows, and Scholars, os Trinity
College, Oxford, nominated by Sir
Thomas Pope, and admitted May
30, 1556. And of such others as
were afterwards nominated by the
fame Authority.
First President.
Thomas S l y t h u r s t e.
BO R N in Berkshire. He took the degree of
A. B. at Oxford, Feb. 27, 1529*. He deter-
mined in the fame term \ Made M. A. at Oxford,
Feb. 25, 1533 '• These are sufficient proofs that he
was educated at Oxford •, but in what college is un-
■ Wood, Extracts from Regg. univ. 0>on. MSS. Mus.
Astim. E. 6.
b Id. Ib. F. 14.
'Id. Ib. E. 29. where it is not said that he was incorptrateti
M. A. These extracts from the Univ. Regg. were made by
Wood, after the publication of Hist, et Antiq. Univ. Oxon.
certain.

<page 400>
APPENDIX. 381
certain. Probably at Brazen-nose, or Magdalen.
Antony Wood affirms, that he was - incorporated
Master of Arts from Cambridged. But no such
person occurs taking any degree in that university6.
He was admitted at Oxford B. D. Nov. 21, 1543s.
He was instituted Feb. 11, 1545, to the vicarage of
Chalfont St. Peters, Bucks, at the presentation of
Robert Drury, esquireE; and on the decease of Ro-
bert Harrison \ On Feb. 21, 1554, he supplicated
for the degree of D. D. et Oxford ', which he never
tpok. He was created canon of Windsor by letters
patent of Queen Mary, Apr. 2, 1554 k. He was
* Hist, et Antiq. ii. 295. col. 1. But he retracts this asser-
tion in his English MS. copy of that work; and owns that he
had applied a reference, belonging to Yeldarde nextmentioned,
to Slythurste.
e In Registr. Univ. Cant. And Dr. Richardson's MS. index
to Cambridge graduates from 1500. See also the last note.
f Wood Athen. Oxon, fast. 67. col. 1. [In Sion College.
library there is a quarto manuscript entitled Fasti Cantabm-
G 1 f NsEs ai aim. I 500 ad ana. 165S. j
« MSS. Br. Willis, fpectant. ad Co. Bucks, No. xii. part 2.
pag. iz. sol, In Bibl. Bodl.
h Willis, ibid. He is buried in the church, with this In-
scription. "Of your charity pray for the fowl of Sir Robert
"Harison sum tyme vycar of thys church and of lyttyl Myssen-
"den which deceffid the xxv day of August, A0. Dni. M° Vc
"XLV. whose fowl God pardon."
'Wood MSS. ut supr. E. 9. But no mention occurs of the
supplication under the year in his Fasti. It is thus entered in
the registr, "Qua ten us studium in eadem facultate per 20 an-
"nos hie ct alibi, &c." Registr. I. sol. 149. a.
k Rymer, Feed. xv. pag. 382. col. 2. But he did not suc-
ceed

<page 401>
382 APPENDIX.
instituted, Feb. 13, 1555. to the rectory of Chal-
fonte St. Giles's Bucks at the presentation of Wil-
liam Sothold '; and on the death m of William
Franklyn, fellow of King's college Cambridge n,
prebendary of York and Lincoln0, arch-deacon » and
chancellour, of Durham, master of St. Giles's'
hospital at Kepyer near Durham, and dean of Wind-
sor \ He was installed president of Trinity College
Oxford, according to the founder's nomination, May
30, 1556. About the fame time he resigned the
vicarage of Chalfonte St. Peter's'. I find him ap-
pointed, by the convocation of the university of Ox-
ford, with others, Nov. 11, 1556, to regulate or
supervise the exercises in theology, on the election of
cardinal Pole to the chancellorship \ He was de-
prived of the presidentship of Trinity college by
queen Elisabeth's visitors in September, 1559. On
ceed to the canonry of Richard Arche, deprived; as Willis
observes in MS. notes on Le Neve's Fasti, MSS. Willis, Bibl.
Bodl. For fee Rymer, ubi supr. 36;.
1 MSS. Willis, spect. ad co. Bucks. No. 33. sol. ubi supr.
m Willis, ibid.
n Frithe's Catal. MS. decan. et canon. Vinsor.
0 Willis, Cathedr. York, p. 165. And Lincoln, p. 199.
t Ibid. Durham, p. 259.
* Rymer, Feed. xix. 282.
'Willis, ibid.
* MSS. Frithe, ut supr.
* For Edm. Dorman occurs vicar in 1557. Willis, MSS. ut
supr. No. 33.
■ Registr. I. Congr. et Conv. sol. 163. b. Select delegates
are also appointed for other services, " difpicere quid in una-
•' quaque re optimum fuerit." See also sol. 166. b.
which,

<page 402>
APPENDIX. 383
which, being commited to the Tower of London,
he died there, about 1560".
Richard Slythurst, with Thomas Broke, was
made keeper of the park of Ewelme, Oxfordshire,
by licence from Henry viii. with a fee of ij d. per
diem, Apr. 24, 1513*. William Slythurst receiv-
ed a lease from Henry viii. of certain pofltssions in
Watlington, Oxfordshire, Jan. 27, 1522 y. Ano-
ther Richard Slythurst, of Berkshire, and of Brasen-
nose college Oxford, occurs taking the degree of
M. D. at Oxford, 1566% He was a physician at
Oxford, and died there in the parish of St. Peter in
the East, 1586 V Another Richard Slythurst also
was fellow of Magdalene college in Oxford, and
supplicated for the degree of B. D. in 154.3 ". John
Slythurst was a monk of the monastery of Missen-
w Wood. Hist, et antiq. ut supr. ii. 295. col. 1.
* Priv. sigill. Hen. viii. an. reg. 4. Apr. 24.
Is Bill, iignat. Hen. viii. an. reg. 13. Jan. 27. "Ad finem
"21 annorum. reddendo [regi] annuatim, liij/. \\\)d. And
"xiijj. ivd."—Part of these possessions is called " U btybouft
•• M,ipoU:*
1 Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 9. Some of his dispensations
for the said degree are granted, amongst others, " ut crearetur
"doctor ante adventum reginx, et paratus sit ad disputandnm
"coram ilia." Ex Registr. Univ. ibid. chat.
• Wood, ibid. Et ex Testam. dat. 20. Jan. 1586. Prob.
23. Feb. seq. Registr. Ail. cur. cancellar. Oxen. GO. sol. 253.
» Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 5- compared with MSS. E. 9.
den,

<page 403>
384 APPENDIX.
den, Bucks, and a priest, 1539'. Probably these
persons were all of the family of Thomas Sly-
thurst, the subject of this article-, some of them
being connected with his neighbourhood in the
country, and others with the university of Oxford:
Especially, as the Name is very singulard. He cer-
tainly had a brother, named John *; whom I con-
clude to have been the monk abovementioned.
First Fellows.
1. Arthur Yeldard.
Born at Houghton-Strother near the river Tyne,
in the county of Tindall, in Northumberland'.
He was educated in grammar and singing, as a boy
of the almonry, or chorister, in the Benedictine con-
vent, now the Dean and chapter, of Durham *. He
c Willis, Mitr. Abb. ii. p. 3!. I likewise find one Henry
Slythurste presented to the vicarage of Dedham, co. Essex, by
the bilhop of London, Octob. 11, 1555. Newcourt, Repertor.
it, p. 210.
* It is sometimes written Slighwrst; as in a Will, where
Thomas, the subject of this article, is remembered, dat. 1553.
In registr. testam. archidiaconat. Buckingh. temp, regin. Mar.
His ejection from his preferments is mentioned by Sanders,
Visibil. Monarch, lib. vii. p. 668. edit. 1592. sol.
e From an entry in a book in the library of Trinity college,
viz. Polyanthea, Basil. 1512, sol. given, among others,
by Thomas Slythurst the president.
'Registr. prim. coll. Trin sol. I. b. et 25.
« MSS. F. Wife.
became

<page 404>
APPENDIX. 385
became afterwards one of the masters or assistants of
Rotheram college in Yorkshire \ He was admitted
a sizar of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, 15441. He took,
the degree of A. B. in January 1547 k, and was
elected fellow of Pembroke-Hall before 1550 '. He
occurs junior treasurer of that house 1551 m. He
took the degree of M. A. in the same university
1552 ". At Pembroke-hall he became tutor to
Henry and Antony, sons to fir Antony Denny °, who
were matriculated Nov. 27. 1552 p. He afterwards
k Ibid. For an account of this college, fee Hearne's Lib.
Nig.ScAcc. p.68s. It had a provost, three fellows, six choristers,
two masters in grammar, and another in music.
1 Lib. Matric. univ. Cant. Where his name is spelt Yddart.
k Registr. Univ. Cant, et Colleaan. MSS. V. rev. et doctiss.
Gul. Richardson, coll. Eman. Mag.
1 Collectan. MSS. mag. Atwood, olim aul. Pemb. sec.
■ In bishop Wren's manuscript Historiola of the master
and fellows of Pembroke-hall, collected, as it seems, about
1624, these notices occur concerning Arthur Veldard. "Yelder
"ve! Yelderd. Northumbranus, artium baccalaureus, et thefau-
"rarius junior, anno 1551. Post biennium desiit nominari.
"Illud nomen nunc forte pronuntiamus Geldar;:—Arthurus
"Ybldar ei nomen est. SS. theologiæ doctor, et secundus
"præfectus collegii SS. Trinitatis apud Oxonienscs, Sic." MSS.
penes magistr. aul. Pembr. Cant.
■ Registr. Univ. Cant, et collectan. MSS. D. Richardson,
ut supr.
0 See Dedication, infra citat. Notes. Denny was the only person
of the court, who dared to inform king Henry the eighth of
the probability of his approaching Death, and one of the exe-
cutors of that king's will.
* Lib. Matric. univ. Cant.
B b attended

<page 405>
386 APPENDIX.
attended these young gentlemen on their travels'.
While at Cambridge, for his better support in study,
he received an annual exhibition from the princess,
afterwards queen, Mary, by the hands of Dr. Fran-
cis Mallet, her chaplain and confessor, the last mas-
ter of Michael-house in Cambridge, and, beside
other promotions in the church, dean of Lincoln'.
In the year 1553, he appears to have been at Dilling
in Flanders': but he certainly did not go abroad,
as Wood insinuates', on account of the reformation
of religion in the reign of Edward the sixth; dur-
all which it is manifest that he was resident at Cam-
bridge. He seems to have left the kingdom on ac-
count of his two pupils above mentioned; with
whom he travelled, as I have before observed. In
the first year of queen Mary, 1553, while at Dil-
ling, he translated from greek, into latin, Documen-
ta quxdam admonitoria Agapti diaconi ". It is dedi-
cated to the queen -, and in the dedication, dated
, at Dilling, he mentions her majesty's many rare
accomplishments j in particular, her knowledge of
the latin and greek tongues". A manuscript of
1 Sed Dedication, infra citat. not.
'Tanner Bibl. pag. 504.
• See Dedication, infra citat. not.
1 Hist. Antiq. Univ. Oxon. i. 282. col. 2.
■ Autograph. MSS. Brit. Muf.—Inter. MSS. Bibl. Reg. 7.
D. iv.
w To confirm and illustrate this and other postages in the
text, I give the following Extracts from this Dedication.
"Ut difficillimis his christians reipublicx temporibus, charitate
«« ubique frigeseente, vera religione oppressa et prope extincta,
atque

<page 406>
APPENDIX. 387
this piece is in the royal library, now part of the
British Museum; and is the fame that was presented
"atque (ut uno verbo dicam) rebus omnibus fere ad fummam
"desperationem adductis; earn nobis [D. O. M.] donavit
"Reginam, quæ ita est omni scientiarum cognitione exculta,
"ita et Græce quæ rara est in sæmina virtus, et Latine docta,
"ut in paucissimis Viris par similisque doctrina inveniatur; ut
"nulla his fere in rebus ei admonitore sit opus. Quippe qua;
"omnium præclarorum principum exempla quæ quidem literis
"continentur, ad mores recte formandos pertinentia, in
"promptu habeat, eorumque optima semper in rebus gerendis
"imitetur et exprimat. Quæ, etiam ab infantia, ita pietatis
"semper et veri cultus divini suit fludioia; ut ob vitæ fanc-
"titatem, quantum homines conjectura aflequi possum, digna
•* sit adeo judicata, ad quam Religio hoc toto fere regno
"exulans, tanquam in portum profugeiet, &c."—'* Quum
"ergo viderem admonitorias hafce Agapeti Sententias, et
"breves et nervofas, a nemine hactenus quod sciam digne
"donatas Latinitate; et statuissem aliquo grati animi indicio
"significare, me non esse immemorem beneficiorum, a Celsitu-
"dine tua per man us Doctoris Malletti acceptorum, quibus
*' Cantabrigiæ juvenis in studiis alebar: Judicavi eas esse
"dignas in quibus ita elaborarem, &c."—" Restat ergo, ut
"immortales gracias Majestati tuæ habcam perpetuo, quod
"Discipulos meos mihi a parentibus erudiendos traditos, nobi-
"les illos quidem summæque spei adolescentulos Denneios, et
"patre et matre jam orbatos, tanto amore profequuta fueris,
"eorumque tutelam tam charam habueris, ut ne mater quidem
"indulgentius illorum inculumitati providers potuisset, quam
*■ est a te provisum: Quæ, etsi earn ipsis longinquas regiones
"petendi facultatem annuere non es dedignata, quam parentes
"in vita fæpe promiferant; tamen id omnino permittere noluit
"pietas tua eximia, antequam et Puerorum educationem ex-
"ploraveras, et de tutorum etiam fide quorum curæ coinmiifi
"sunt accurate inquifiveras, Verumenimvero hujos tantæ in
"illos indulgentix uberrimi, deo favente, brevi percipientur
B b 2 fructus:

<page 407>
388 APPENDIX.
to queen Mary. He translated into Greek Sir Tho-
mas More's Consolatory Dialogue against
Tribulacion, written in the year 1534, and in the
Tower of London". On the foundation of Tri-
nity college at Oxford, he was admitted, by the
founder's nomination, a fellow of the fame, May
30, 1556, and was incorporated M. A. in that uni-
versity, Nov. 12, the fame year y. The circumstance
of his having been patronised in his studies at Cam-
bridge by the princess Mary who was now queen,
and his connection with the family of Denny, must
have been instrumental to this nomination. He ap-
pears to have been in high favor and esteem with
the founder; who appointed him the first philofo-
"fructus: Quum, tua providentia, scientiarum linguarumque
*• variarum cognitiooe ornati, et multarum rerum usu atqoe
"experientia instructi, Viri in patriam redibunt; Majeslatique
"tuæ et reipublicæ huic florentissimæ ea fide servient, qua
"Patri tuo primum, deinde Fratri, regibus æterna memoria
"dignislimis, servivit ipsorum pater prudentislimus Ant ho-
"nius Denneius miles. Quod ut fiat, non modo precibus
"asliduis D. O. M. urgebo, verum etiam ipse opera et in-
"dostria mea, quantum potero, juvabo."—" Datum Dal-
"lanciæ duodecimo Die Decemb. Anno regni tui augustiss.
"primo." Inscribed, " Mariæ, Angliæ, Fsranciæ et Hy-
"berniæ, Reginæ serenislimæ, Arthurus Yeldardus Salu-
"tern optat æternam."
x MS. F. Wife. Who fays he had seen it among the curious
manuscripts of Mr. Farmer of Tusmore in Oxfordshire. But it
is not, I believe, to be found there at present. More's book is
supposed by some to have been translated from the Latin os one
Hungarus: and was printed at Antwerp by John Fowler in
1573. i2mo.
t Wood Ath. Oxon. i. f. 85.
phy-

<page 408>
APPENDIX. 389
phy lecturer in his college, yet permitted him to be
absent, and to serve that office by deputy, for many
months1. I have before taken notice", that the
founder placed his son in law, John Beresford, at
Trinity college, under the tuition* of this learned
and experienced preceptor: to whom on that occasi-
on, he sent the following letter.
"Mr. Yelder, with my right berty commendations.
"I send to yow my son Mr. Basford, whom with
"the rest committed to your charge I requyre yow
"so to instruct as theye may proffytt in lernynge:
"ffor doing whereofF ye shall not fynde me unthank-
"full. I will not forget yow, so soon as I shall see
"convenyent tyme. and thus fare ye well. Written
"at London the xiiith of July, anno 1557.
Your loving ffrend,
Tho. Popec.
* Ex Comp. Burss. 1556,
* Supr. p. 188.
b All the Conditions admitted into the college, are ordered
to be placed under the tuition of one of the fellows. It seem*
also, that these were attended by their private preceptors. For
in the Statutes of the college, where mention is made of the
number of Con-viSores to be admitted, it is immediately added,
"cum DiDASCALis_/a/V ipfit comitantibus." Cap. x.
c Ex Autograph, ubi supr.
B b 3 He
"■

<page 409>
39o APPENDIX.
He wrote latin prose with great elegance and perspi-
cuity. He seems to have been employed in the verbal
composition of the college-statutes; for the founder
in a letter to the president, Nov. 26, 1556, orders
a reward to" Maister Yeldard, in consideration of
"the paynes he took to pen my statutes." On the
deprivation of Slythurste, the first president, above-
mentioned, 1559, ne was presented, with Stephen
Markes, mentioned in the next article, to Dame
Elisabeth Pope, the foundress; who nominated him
president, and he was accordingly admitted Sept. 26,
1559 d, to the great satisfaction of the society*. He
took the degree of B. D. Jun. 24, 1563 '. And of
D. D. Feb. 15, 1565 s. He was presented by the
same Dame Elisabeth, Feb. 12, 1571, to vicarage of
Much-Waltham in Essex \ In September, 1566,
* Wood says, " Visitatorom jussu succeslit." Hist. Ant.
univ. Oxon. i. 282. But this is a mistake; for he was re'
gularly and duly nominated and admitted. Registr. predict,
sol. 24.
* From their letter to the foundress, ibid. In which they
fey, that both the candidates are, " moste worthye the office,
"bothe for the meyntenaunce of good and godlie livinge,
"and also for the commoditie of the coledge in politike af-
"faires." The foundress, in her answer, says, she has chosen
him, trusting " it shall be for the comoditie of the coledge, and
** also for all your comfrethe and quietness." ibid. sol. 24. b.
'Wood Ath. Oxon. i. Fast. 92.
* Ibid. 95.
* The next person presented to the same, but by the presi-
dent and fellows of Trinity college, Oxon. was Nicholas Yel-
dard; I suppose, his brother, but not of the college, Sept. 10,
•574-

<page 410>
APPENDIX. 391
he disputed in divinity before queen Elisabeth, du-
ring her magnificent reception at Oxford-, Juel,
bishop of Salifbbury, being the moderator' He
was appointed, Jul. 13, 1580, by the earl of Lei-
cester, vice-chancellor of the universityk. I find
him commissioned, Jun. 10, 1583, with four other
Doctors, to recieved Albertus de Lasco a prince of
Poland, accompanied by lord Leicester and other,
nobles, at their public entry into Oxford: who
were entertained in the university for the four fol-
lowing days, with sumptuous banquets, disputa-
tions, orations, sermons, and two plays presented
in Christ Church hall'. In the year 1576, he was
empowered, in conjunction with others, to correct
and reform the whole body of the statutes of the
university m. He continued president of the college
thirty-nine years, four months and three days ». He
died Feb. 2, 1598-9 °, and was buried in the chapel
1574. Registr. prim. coll. sol. 29. b. And Newcourt, Reper-
tor. ii. 632. Afterwards the fame dame Elisabeth made over
the advowson, pro hac vice, to the said Arthur Yeldard, and he
presented Rob. Palmer, not a fellow, Octob. 6, 1585. Registr.
Grindall, episc. London. And Newcourt, ut supr. 633.
1 MSS. Baker, vol. vi. p. 141. b. Brit. Mus. Harl. MSS.
7°33-
k Wood, Hist, antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 429.
1 Ibid. i. 299. Hollinih. Chron. iii. 1355.
m Wood, Hist, antiq. univ. Oxon. i. 294. col. 1.
■ Registr. prim, dicti coll. sol. 53.
0 Ibid.
B b 4 of

<page 411>
392 APPENDIX.
of the collegef. He has a copy of latin verses,
among others of the capital scholars of those times,
viz. Alexander Nowell, Herbert Westphalinge,
Thomas Bodley, George Buchanan, etc. at the end
of Humphreys's Life of bishop Jewel, 1573 '• He
has likewise a latin poem prefixed to John Case's
Speculum Moralium Quastionum^ Oxon. 1585. It ap-
pears that he died very old, by another latin copy of
verses' written by him, in a collection of Oxford
verses, on the death of Sir Richard Unton'.
'As I collect from the following articles in Comp. Burst".
1598—9.
"Sol. operariis et cænæ funebri defuncti præfidentis, et pro
"jentaculis sociorum proficisc. ad episcopum Winton, et
"pro cæna eorundem post reditum, x\s. tb. f.
'* Sol. pulfanti campanam. ij./.
'* Sol. pro ly bellman, ij d.
'Johannis Juelli Vita, &c. Lond. 410.
'Of which he fays,
Qua; dolor atque amor extorfere feni meditanti.
His will is dated Jan. 8, «598. Proved April 16, 1599.
Apod Registr. Allor. cur. cancellar. Oxon. G G. sol. 178. b.
archiv. acad. Oxon. It contains nothing remarkable. He leaves
all his effects, of every kind, to Eleanor his wise; whom he
likewise appoints executrix. Except that he bequeathes fix
volumes of the Centuriæ Magdtburgenfts to the college library.
* Intitled, " Funebria nobilistimi ct præstantislimi equitis D.
"Henrici Vntoni ad Gallos bis legati regii, &c. a. Musis
"Oxoniensibus apparata, 1596. 4to." It was made and
published by Doctor Robert Wright, fellow of Trinity college,
Oxford, afterwards bishop of Lichfield and Coventry. Who
has also prefixed a good latin preface. Wood (Ath. Oxon. ii.
1137.) does not mention this publication by Dr. Wright. The
collection is closed with two copies by Wright.; the last of
which,

<page 412>
APPENDIX. 393
which, being in a singular strain, and much superior to the taste
of those times, I am tempted to insert.
Hæc, Untone, tuo cecinere in funere" musz
Oxonides, tristes munera ad inscrias:
Oxonides muss, quarum es nutritus in ulnis:
Heu, teneras lacrymarum imbre rigante genas!
Quæ tibi postremo nostri pro munere amoris,
Curavi in memores jam referenda typos.
Accipiant læti mines studia ista tuorum,
At tu, patrone o dulcis, ave atque vale!
By the former of these two copies, it appears, that Wright ac-
companied sir Henry Unton, in one of his embassies into France,
to the French king's camp at Lafere, in which sir Henry died,
1595. See Ashm. Berksh. i. 190. iii. 313. In Thomas New-
ton's Encomia, printed 1589, is an epigram addressed, "Ad
"eruditiffimum virum Robertum Wrichtum nobilissimi
"Esscxiæ comitis famulum primarium." p. 124. This I judge
to be the fame Robert Wright j especially from the two con-
cluding lines.
Ubera cui Charites dant, et favet innuba Pallas,
Quemque beat docta doctus Apollo chely.
Dr. Robert Wright was born at Saint Alban's, and elected
scholar of Trinity college, Oxford, aged fifteen, jun. 7. 1574.
Registr. Coll. prim. f. 36. Fellow, being then bachelor of
Arts, May 25, 1581, Ibid. f. 39. He was successively chap-
lain to queen Elisabeth, and king James the first. He was pre-
sented, by lord keeper Egerton, to the rectory of Brixton De-
verel in Wiltshire, Nov. 29. 1596. MS. Tanner, ad Wood's
Athen. ii. 1135. He was instituted Rector of Hayes in Mid-
dlesex, on the presentation of William lord Pembroke, Apr. 4.
1601, Admitted Dec. 21. in the same year canon residentiary
and treasurer of Wells. He was also vicar of Sunning in
Berkshire, and Rector of Bourton upon the Water in Glouces-
tershire. See Newc. Repertor. i. 641. In 1613 he was ap-
pointed the First Warden of Wadham college, by the foundress
dame Dorothy Wadham. In 1622, consecrated bishop of
Bristol; and in 1632, translated to the see of Lichfield and
Coventry.

<page 413>
354 APPENDIX.
2. Stephen Markes.
Born in Cornwall. He was a fellow of Exeter
college, Oxford, where he took the degree of A. B.
1552'. Made A. M. Jul, 11, 1554". On Octob.
17, 1555, he was elected rector of the said college,
Coventry. Prynne say, that bishop Wright placed a " goodly
"crucifixe in a frame with the pictures of men and women de-
"voutly praying to it," above the altar in Litchfield cathedral,
and that he was greatly concerned in composing the late canons,
oaths, &c. That at Bristol, he sued the Dean and chapter for
opposing him in placing Imaget in the cathedral, and other
churches, there. That he introduced many superstitious inno-
vations at Bristol " to humour Canterbury [Laud,] by whose
"means he was translated to Coventry and Litchfield." Anti-
pathic os the Englijb Lordly Prelacie, fcff. Lond. 1641. 410. ch.
v. pag. 292. ch. vi. Bristoll.
In 1641. he was one of the protesting bishops, with eleven
mdre: and before his committment to the Tower, spoke an
eloquent oration at the bar of the House of Commons, which
is extant. He died in the year 1643, at his palace at Eccleshall
while it was besieged by the rebels. Of this venerable prelate
there is preserved a good old portrait on board at Trinity col-
lege, concerning which the following notice occurs, Comp.
Burst", coll. Trin. 1632.—3. "Pro imagine episcopi Lichfield-
•* ensis adornanda, xyj s." At sir Charles Adderley's house in
Warwickshire, there was a picture of bishop Wright, with a
long inscription. Antiquities op Litchfield Cathedr.
Lond. 1717. pag. 51. Another belonging to sir John Davics
at Bere Court in Berkshire, Ashm. Berk.su. ii. 337. (See also
ibid. 397.) There is another at Wadham-college.
« Wood. MSS. ut supr. E. 5.
« Id. ib. E. 29.
then

<page 414>
APPENDIX. 295
then an annual office, and held by the fellows w. In
the year of his rectorship he was admitted, as above,
a fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. May 30, 1556. At
the fame time he was appointed vice-president of
the fame by the founder. He was in nomination
for the presidentship with Arthur Yeldard, in Sept.
1559, on tne deprivation of Slythurstej as was ob-
served in the preceding article. He supplicated for
the degree of B. D. Octob. 10, 1559". He had
quitted his fellowship before the end of the year
1560 r.
3. John Barwyke.
Born in Devonshire. He was of Magdalene col-
lege, Oxford. He appears to have been recom-
mended to the founder by Alexander Belsire, the
First President of Saint John's x. Took the degree
of A. B. 1549. And of M. A. April 27, 1556*.
w Id. D. 2. pag. 306.
x Registr. I. Congreg. et Conv. sol. 185.
'Ut patet ex Registr. coll. prim. sol. 140.
1 MSS. F. Wife. Formerly fellow of New college, and canon
of Christ Church.
• Wood, MSS. Ib. D. 6. And E. 29. One John Barwicke
was ordained an Accolyte in Baliol college * chapel, Mar. g> .
1554. Being then Scholar is colkgii Magdalemt. Registr.
Rob. King, Episeop. Oxon. f. 80. Also a John Barwicke oc-
curs, at the lame time and place, ordained Subdeacon, he being
then bachelor of arts and fellow of Magdalene college. Ibid.
By the way, it appears from this register, which begins 1543,
that bishop King, the first bishop of Oxford and last abbot of
Oseney,

<page 415>
396 APPENDIX.
Admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. by nomina-
tion as above. At the fame time appointed dean by
election. He quitted his fellowship about the year
l565 b-
4. James Bell.
Born in Somersetshire. Was scholar of C. C. C.
Oxon, where he took the degree of B. A. 1551 c.
From thence admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as
above. At the fame time appointed rhetoric-lecturer
by election. He left his fellowship about Michael-
mas, in the year of his admissiond, and suddenly
became a zealous assertor of the reformation; in
Oseney,usually held his ordinations in Captlla Manerii de Tbamt-
Parte.
* Comp. Burss. 1564—j.
c Wood, MSS. ut supr. D. 6. and Athen. Oxon. i. f. 75.
* Registr. Kettell. viz. cui tit. "Alumni illi quos ve-
"nerabilis vir, Thomas, cognomento Pope, ordinis militaris,
"in hoc domicilio alendos statuit: et non solum ipsorum vic-
"tui moribusque prospexit, verum etiam ut bona ingenia
"bonis artibus et disciplinis imbuerentur, ad sinceram Christi
"Religionem populo Christi strenue commendandam, impense
"curavit." Apud Coll. Trin. in pergamen. sol. It was drawn
up by Dr. Kettel, president; and continued, by him, from
the foundation to the year 1602, inclus. The original draught
of this Register, in Kettel's own hand, is in the Aslimolean
Museum, codd. A. Wood, 8490. sol. 28. with many interpo-
lations, corrections, and additions, in the hand of its collector.
This last-mentioned copy of the said register, which seems to
have been given to A. Wood by Dr. Buthurst, president, is here
cited, and will be often afterwards, in the course of this article
of the Appendix.
defence

<page 416>
APPENDIX. 397
defence of which he published several pieces, here
enumerated. A translation of Luther's treatise of
Christian Liberty. Lond. 1579. 8vo. A translation
of John Fox's Sermon of the Evangelical Olive. Lond.
1578. A translation of Fox's Sermon preached at the
Christening of a certain Jew at London, 15JJ. i6mo.
A translation of Fox's and Haddon's Answer apologe~
tical to Hierome Osorius bis flanderous Invective. 1581.
4to€. A translation of Fox's Pope confuted. Lond.
1580. 4to. In the preface of this last piece, the
translator, Bell, mentions his happy conversion to
protestantism from popery. "I wandered long in
"the selfsame mizmaze, nooseled therein by the
"grayheaded of that schoole, whose countenance
"carried me from my Christe to the swinstie of
** the Sorbone, which had swalowed me up, if the
** Lord had not prevented me betimes." In the
fame, he takes notice of being " taxed by a friend
"with apostasy." Wood calls our author " a great
"admirer of John Fox, the martyrologist'."
Among the manuscripts of the royal library, now
in the British Museum, is one entitled, James Bell's
account of Cecilia princess of Sweeden her travelling
into England, 1564, dedicated to Q^ Elisabeth g. He
was installed, Feb. 13, 1595, into the prebend of
Holcombe in the cathedral church of Wells; and
Octob. 11, the fame year, into the prebend of
• See Strype, Ann. Res. i. p. 433.
s A then. Oxon. i. 232.
« 17. C. XXIX. charts.
v
Combe

<page 417>
398 APPENDIX.
Combe in the same church \ Tanner, having men-
tioned Bell's preferments at Wells, adds, "Hie
"jacobus Bell mihi videtur ille Somersetenfis, qui
'• primo scholaris collegii Corporis Christi Oxon,
*' baccalaureus artium admissus A. 1551, et postea
"sub finem mensis Maii, A. 1556, socius collegii
"Trinitatis electus. Refrdgari tamen videtur atas."
Tanner means, that he was rather too old, to have
lived to take these preferments. But he might be
admitted at the university, as was antiently the cus-
tom, very young: and, beside the circumstance
of his county, his sudden departure from the col-
lege, and the history of his religious principles, all
taken together, render it highly probable that he was
the fame person.
5. John Richardson.
Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's
college \ Oxford; where he took the degree of
fc Tanner, Bibl. pag. 95.
1 1 know not if scholar is here the proper style. Nor do I
fully comprehend the system of the antient foundation of
Queen's college. But the members are thus distinguished in the
establishment of an Obit in the chapel there, dated Oct. 6.
1538. The provost if present is to receive ijj. "Every
"felowe and scoler beyng present, xxd. Every chaplayne,
"vj J. Every mayster of the chyldrene, vj d. Every chylde
•* of the taberd, iiij</. Every clerk of the chapcll, iiij/.
•• Every poyr [poor] chylde, ij d. Archiv. Coll. Regin. Oxon.
"[MSS. Ed. R. Mores, sol. 116.]" And in another Obit,
dated Febr. 21. 1516. "To every felowe, chaplayne, mayster
"of the chyldren, and to the chyldren of the howse, the
*• clerkes

<page 418>
APPENDIX. 399
B. A. in March 1553". From thence admitted
fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. At the fame
time appointed bursar by election. He had quitted
the college before the end of 1560'. He was
afterwards, as I collect, instituted to be rectory
of St. Saviour's, in York, 1567, where he died
1591-.
6. George Sympson.
Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's
college, Oxford j where he took the degree of B. A.
in March, 1553 \ From thence admitted fellow
of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. Made M. A. Jul.
8, 1558 '. He was ejected for popery about 1561,
and ordered, with others, not to be seen within
twenty miles of either of the universities, under
severe penalties p.
7. George Rudde.
Born in Westmoreland. Was scholar of Queen's
college, Oxford; where he took the degree of B. A.
"clerkes of the chapel, and to every scoler beyng poyr chy Me,
"&c." Ibid. [MSS. ut supr. sol. 113.]
k Wood, MSS. ut supr. D. 6. and E. 5. He was ordained
subdeacon, rationey/W// ultra dtcennium continvati, in Oxford ca-
thedral, Sept. 19. 1556. Registr. Episc. Oxon. sol. 90.
1 Ex Comp. Burss.
m Drake'j Ebor. p. 311.
» Wood, Ibid.
0 Wood, MSS. E. 29.
» See Strype, Ann. Res. iv. 275. compared with MSS. Ket-
tel. supr, citat.
in

<page 419>
4oo APPENDIX.
in March, 1553'. From thence admitted fellow
of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He was made M. A.
Jul. 8, 1558'. He quitted his fellowship about
Easter, in 1563 *.
8. Thomas Scott e.
Born in Cumberland. Was scholar of Queen's
college, Oxford; where he took the degree of B. A.
Jul. 5, 1554'. Admitted, from thence, fellow of
Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He took the degree
of M. A. Jul. 6, 1556 ". He was elected one of
the proctors of the university, Apr. 25, 1560".
But the fame year, or very soon afterwards, he
was ejected from his fellowship, with others, for re-
fusing the oath of supremacy to queen Elisabeth \
9. Roger Crispin.
Born in Devonshire. Elected fellow of Exeter
college, Oxford, 1550 s, where he took the degree
of B. A. Dec. 8, 1554'. From thence admitted
* Wood, D. 6. E. 5.
■ Wood, MSS. E. 29.
* MSS. Kettel.
« Wood, E. 6. and E. 5.
■ Id. E. 29.
w Wood, Hist, antiq. ii. 426.
■ Ibid. i. 284.
r Wood, MSS. D. 2. p. 42.
* Ibid. D. 6. This person, and seme others of Exeter col-
lege, recited in these two lists of the First Fellows and
Scholars, were recommended to the Founder by John Holy-
man,

<page 420>
A P P £ » B U. #>t
fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above. He took
the degree of M. A. Jul. 8, 1558*. He quitted
his fellowship about the feast of All Saints in 1562*.
10. Roger Evans.
Bom in Cornwall'. Perhaps of Exeter college.
I find nothing of him in the university registers, or
elsewhere, but that he was admitted when A. B. a
fellow as above; and that he left his fellowship at
the end of 1559 c, I suppose on the accession of
Elisabeth, and the change of religion.
man, the second bishop of Bristol in 1554, originally fellow of
New-college, chen a monk of Reading abbey, and afterwards,
on the dissolution of his monastery, a retired student in Exeter
college till about 1553. MSS. F. Wife. In an Epistle to the
University of Oxford, dated 1530, from Hugh Faringdon abbot
of Reading, he is characterised as a theologist and a preacher of
great erudition. Registr. FF. sol. 101, 102. Alexander Belsire
his cotemporary in New-college, and the First President of
Saint John's, was his intimate friend to his death. Dying in
1558, he bequeathed several books to the library of Winchester
tollege.— For the character of abbot Hugh Faringdon, above-
mentioned, Holyman's patron, fee Hist. Engl. Poetjt. vol.
ii. p. 446. And Willis, Mm. Abb. i. 161. See also Wood,
Hist. Antio^. Univ. Oxon. i. 252. a. ii. 95. b. 136. a.
» Wood, MSS. E. 29.
b MSS. Kettel. The following article occurs concerning
him in the beginning of the fame year, Comp. Burss. 1591 —2.
"Solut. 16 Jan. pro expens. magistri Crispin equitantis ad1
"Londinum ad emenda salsamenta et halecia pro quadragefi-
"ma, x /.
« Registr. MSS. Rad. Kettel. ut supr.
C c 11, John

<page 421>
402 APPENDIX.
ii. John P e r t e.
Born in Warwickshire. Took the degree of A. B.
May 8, 1556 *. Admitted fellow of Trin. coll. by
the founder's nomination, as above. Admitted, at
the fame time, one of the bursars by election. I
find him often mentioned in the founder's letters,
as employed in transcribing the college-statutes',
He left the college in 1558 s, being, as I suspect,
* MSS. Wood, ut supr. D. 6.
* This is the oldest copy now remaining irt the college; ex-
cept the original one, signed and sealed by the sounder. It is
on parchment. The next, in point of antiquity, is one sent to
the bishop of Winchester , which is also on parchment, and
bears the following inscription prefixed.
"Reverendiflimo in Christo patri, et dignislimo patrono prov
tectorique nostro unico, domino Episcopo Winton."
"Quod per hos decem annos subinde desideravit amplitudo
vestra, clariflime Præsul, curavimus tandem cftectum dare.
Humillime offerimus exemplar Statutorum illorum, quæ in.
junxit nobis beatæ memoriæ Funoator noster fingularis, do-
minus Thomas Pope, miles; et quorum observantise invigilat
felicucr eximia vestra sollicitudo. Unaque cum ipsis, nosinet,
nostrum statum fidemque nostram, vestræ, colendiflime Antis-
TES, fidissimæ tutelar, favorique benignisiimo, unanimiter et
supplicissime cupimus esse in perpetuum o.ncreditos et commen-
datos. Dat. Oxon. April j. A. D. 1609. Vestne amplitudini
devotiffime devincti, Præs. et Soc. Coll. Trin. Oxon. &c."
[Compare p. 125. supr. Note, g. And p 248. Note, a ] In
the beginning of Cromwell's usurpation, on the dissolution of
the bisliopricks, this copy was returned to the college, by the
deprived bishop Morley, where it now remains.
* Registr. Ketell.
removed

<page 422>
APPENDIX. 40J
removed for turbulence and contumacy. It appears
by the founder's letters, that he had excited and
encouraged a faction in the college, under pretence
that the statutes were unreasonably strictB. This
affair seems to have given the founder much un-
easiness and concern; and he frequently speaks of
it in his letters to the president. At length, it oc*
cafioned the following address in form to the whole
society.
* By the same letters It appears, that he was ordered to
appear before the founder, 1 suppose, at London ; and to bring
with him his objections to the statutes drawn out in form,
whith now remain. These objections the founder intended to
lay before the dean of St. Paul's: this was Dr. Henry Cole,
who also was, or had been, warden of New college Oxford,
provost of Eton, prebendary of faint Paul's and Salisbury, arch-
deacon of Ely, and vicar general of the spiritualties under Car-
dinal Pole. He was likewise an eminent civilian, and joined
in a commission with Sir Thomas Pope. He is celebrated as a
classical scholar in Inland's Encom. p. 79. edit- 1589.
Ascham has left this testimony of Cole's literature and hu-
manity. • " Tantum ego et communi omnium voci de tua
"eruditions, et frequenti Morysini sermoni de tua humanitate,
"semper tribui, doctissime humanissimcque Cole, ut imperitus
"ipse si te uon colerem, et inhuinanus si nou amarem, mcrito,
"videri possim," Epistol. R. Ascham. lib, iii. Asch. Colo,
edit. Lond, 1581. p. 154 b 121110. with a present of Aristae-
as, &c. Sr Richard lyiorysine, or Morison, here mentioned,
was one of Aseham's most distinguished literary friends, a great
friend to the Reformation, and sent by Henry the eighth, and
''his successor, an embassador to the emperour Charles the fifth,
■He died, an exile for religion, at Strasburgh in 1556.
C c 2 .«■ To

<page 423>
404 APPENDIX.
"To his lovinge ffriends the fellowes of Trinitie
"college in Oxforde.
"With my hartie commendations. As I was
"not a little greved of the reporte of late made
"unto me, that, contrarie to my expectations, there
"fholde be any such lyghtness amonge you, as not
"to approve those my Statutes which I sent you;
"being drawen and collectede, as well oute of the
'* good orders of other colleges, as also by the ad-
"vise and cownsell of diverse most sage and wise
"heddes; and that for the rigour of them, as it
** was termed, moste parte of you would wantonlie
"forsake my college, and the Benefit you had by
** me there; So fyndinge by letters comynge from
"diverse of you, the same reporte to be untrue;
'* have conceived better opinion of you, occasion-
** inge me the lese to repente my Charge, which
"I have, and shallh, bestowe amonge you. And
"as I cannot but much commende and allowe the
h In a letter from him to the president, dat. Whitmonday,
1558, he fays, " I shall by [buy] of the mailer of the Rolls
"ii, ffaier manors with ii. advowfons in Lyncolnlhere, which
"I entende to gyve to my collegge." Amongst others, he
might perhaps here mean this intended donation; which, how-
ever, never took effect. I suppose, on account of the founder's
death, which happened a few months afterwards. In another
letter, from and to the fame, without date, but written 1558,
he promises to assure to the college three other advowfons with
all convenient speed. But, I suppose, for the reason abovemen-
tjoned, they never came to the college.
"stayed

<page 424>
A P P E N D I JL 405
** stayed witte and mature discretion of those among
"you, which do declare themselves content with
"such my Ordinances as I gave unto you, whom
"as occasion shall serve I must allwaye thynke
"worthye to be had in my memorie; so I require
'* you All, quietlie to receive these Statutes which
** 1 eftsones' send you, sealed and subscribed with
"my hande k: myndinge not for any man's plea-
'* sure, hereafter, to alter and change any of them.
"Signifieinge the gryeffes that have been exhibited
*' unto me by some of you; and [that] being pe-
"rused and scene of diverse honorable, wise, and
"learned men, with the Statutes thereunto apper-
** tayninge', [they] are in no wife" lyked or
"thought mete to be altered. Wherefore, if any
** among yowe cannot persuade himselse to be con-
"tent with thde my Orders and Decrees, I hartyly
"require the fame, without disturbance, to gyve
*' place unto such others as will obediefitlie lyve
"under the fame j and, when he ihall see his tyme,
"to departe from my saide college, which to do
*' he shall have my goode wille and favour. And
*' thus praying you to have me in remembrance,
"with your prayers to God, I bid you all fare»
s Forthwith, ir again.
k See note in pag. 348.
1 Addilamtntum. See ibid.
m " Lyked—to be altered." i. e. No alteration is approved or
Ijktd.
C C 3 "well.


<page 425>
4©$ APPENDIX.
M well. Written at London, the xxvth of Aprill,
*' Your loving ffrende,
"T. Pope
11 »»
*f* When this person was removed from his fel*
lowfhip, the founder intended, partly on the recom-
mendation of cardinal Pole, to place in his room
the learned William Alan, a name equally celebrated
among the catholics, and proscribed by the protes-
tants. But that design did not take effect; he being
promoted about the same time, and probably by the
interest of fir Thomas Pope, to a canonry in the
cathedral of York °. Alan was an able controver-
sialist in defence of the declining doctrines of the
church of Rome: educated at Oriel college, and
about the year 1556, appointed Principal of faint
Mary's Hall, and elected one of the proctors of
the university of Oxford. Upon the accession of
queen Elisabeth, he retired to Louvain, where he
wrote his famous book on Purgatory and Prayers
for the Dead, which abounds in rhetoric more
than argument, and contains much ingenious decla-
mation and sophistry. Soon afterwards he returned
to England, where he published many specious apo-
logies for his religion, which he dispersed with
great art and industry. But the treatise just men-
"E Registr. primo coll. prædict. sol. 16. b.
0 MSS. F. Wise, ut supr.
tioned

<page 426>
APPENDIX. 407
tibned was the basis of his polemical reputation.
As he wrote chiefly for the conviction of his coun-
trymen, molt of his compositions are in English;
and are not inelegant specimens of style, at a time
when the state of our language was rude and un-
settled. A solid old English critic pronounces one
of Alan's tracts to be " a princely, grave, and
"flourishing piece of natural and exquisite Eng-
"lifh p." Being again driven abroad, he was re-
warded with a canonry in each of the churches of
Cambray and Rheims. At length standing high in
the esteem of pope Sixtus the fifth, he was consti-
tuted a Cardinal, and archbishop of Mechlin in
Brabant,. It is not the least of his dignities, and
it is a proof of the universality of his literature,
that he was librarian of the Vaticanr. His activity
was indefatigable in the support of his profession.
He was a principal instrument in establishing the
English catholic seminaries at Doway and Rheims,
and several others in Spain and Italy. His intem-
perate papistic zeal, which he imprudently carried
into the dangerous politics of the times, and which
prompted him to circulate seditious papers in Eng-
land to prepare the way for the Spanish invasion,
was censured even by those of his own intolerant
persuasion. He died aged only sixty three years,
» Eolton's HyptucRiT. iv. §. 2.
* Wood, Ath. Oxon. v 268. And his Life, written by
Nich. Fitzerbert. Antw. 1621. 8vo.
r Miræus, Script. Sæc. xvi. p. 68.
C c 4 in

<page 427>
4o3 APPENDIX*
in 1594'. Vertue had a curious cast of his head,
from an original medallion.
t
12. Robert Bellamie.
Born in Yorkshire. Of Exeter college, as I col-
lect. Took the degree of B. A. May 8, 1556'.
He was admitted fellow of Trin. coll. Oxon. as
above, viz. May 30, 1556. I find him nominated
one of the first fellows of St. John's college, Ox-
ford, by sir Thomas Whyte, the founder, in his
charter, dat. Mar. 7, 1557-8"; This appointment
he did not, however, accept; for he occurs one of
the bursars of Trinity college 1565 ". He took the
degree of M. A, May 28, 1560". He afterwards
proceeded in physic; and, as I suppose by dispen-
sation, took the degree of M. B. Dec. 16, 1562/.
On Jun. 23, 1571, he took the degree of M. D.
having quitted his fellowship 1565, and removed to
St. John's college, as an independent memberx.
Higgs, in his catalogue of fellows of St John's
college, mentions him as one of the first fellows of
the fame; but Wood, in the margin, fays he was
* Wood, ut supr. Pits. 792.
« Wood, MSS. ut supr. D. 6.
■ MSS. Catal. Gr. Higgs, ut inf.
w Comp. Burss. 1564—5. And Registr. Perrot, supr, ci-
tat. (Numb, xxi.) sol. 112. a.
* Wood, MSS. ut supr. E. 8.
r Ibid.
» Wood Ath. i. f. 105.
fellow

<page 428>
APPEND 1 X. 409
fellow of Trinity college". Wood also omits him
in his first fellows of St, John's; where he was only
nominated, and never admittedb. In Nov. 1589,
he was made master of Shireburne hospital, near
Durham, by bishop Hutton; who, in a letter to
the lord Treasurer, calls him " an honest man, a
"preacher and a physician; to have charge both
*' of the souls and bodies of the poor, impotent,
"sick, persons of that hospitalc." On Octob. 31,
I573> he was installed canon of the third stall of
Durham cathedral. He was also rector of Hough-
ton in the bifhoprick of Durham 4. He was living
1590*. He is characterised, with others of the
church of Durham, in a latin manuscript poem,
preserved among Wood's papers in the Afhmoleaa
Museum, entitled Iter Bore ale f, written by Dr. Ri-
chard Eedes, canon of Christ Church, Oxon, and
» MSS. Mus. Aslim. F. 28. sol. 204. b.
b Hist. Ant. ii. 303.
'Dat. March, 1590. apod Strype, Ann. iv. p. 15.
* Willis, Cathedrals, cath. Durham, p. 266, 278, 280.
€ Hutton's letter in Strype, ubi supr. Willis, ut supra, says,
by mistake, that he died 1588. One Robert Bellamie occurs a
seminary priest in 1588. Strype, iii. 260. ut supr.
f 8553.91. It has marginal notes by the author. Concern-
ing this Robert Bellamie, the fame, as I presume, I find the
following entry in the Register of the University.. "April 10,
"1562. Suplicat Robertus Bellamie A. M. quatenus graciose
"cum eo dispensetur ut amplius praltgtrt non teneatur. Causa
"est, quia tot et tantis negotiis domi irapeditur ut nullo pacto
"prttltgtrt poflit. Concess. modo sublluuat alium. Nenof-
*' ftrvat tonditicnem" Registr. Congr. et Cony. I. sol 203. a.
afterwards

<page 429>
4io APPENDIX.
afterwards dean of Worcester. This journey was
taken 1584.
First Scholars.
i. John LanCsterre. [or Langaster'.]
Born in Yorkshire. Of Brasen-nose college, Ox-
ford, where he took the degree of B. A. Mar. 26,
1556'. Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon.
May 30, 1556. Ætat. 19. Made probationer fel-
low, by the founder's mandate, Dec. 25, 1556h,
and actual, on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558'.
Made M. A. May 15, 1560 k. He quitted his fel-
lowship about the year 1563 '.
2. Reginald Brayl.
Born in Bedfordshire, and descended from sir Re-
ginald Bray of Eton-Bray in that county, famous
in the reign of Edward the fourth™. Took the
f 1. e. Lancaster.
« Wood, MSS. D. 6.
* Registr. prim. coll. sol. 4. b.
'Registr. ibid. sol. 4. b. His year of probation was pro-
tracted by the sounder's command, who fays in a letter to the
president, "Concerning sir Langester's yeare of probation I
"will he be ordered therein according to the statutes." Dat.
27 Nov. 1556.
k Wood, MSS. E. 29.
1 Comp. Burst. 1562—3.
m Lee's Visit. Oxp. 1574. ut supr. pag. 45.
degree

<page 430>
APPENDIX. 4it
degree of A. B. at Oxford, May 8, 1556'. Ad-
mitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above, aged
18. He left the college in Hilary term the fame
year °.
3. John A r d e n.. [or Ardern.]
Born in Oxfordshire, and of an antient and re-
spectable family settled at Cottisford, or Kirtlington.
Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon. as above,
Æt. 18. Related to the founderp. Left the col-
lege about Michaelmas, in 1558 ,. Afterwards he
gave eighteen volumes or more to the library'.
4. John Comport e.
Born in Middlesex. Admitted scholar of Trin.
coll. Oxon. as above. Æt. 18. He took the degree
of A.B. May 23, 1558'. Made probationer fel-
low, by the founder's mandate, on Trinity Sunday,
Jun. 7, 1558'. He left his fellowship in the end
of the year 1560". He gave to the library Robert
Holcot upon the Sentences ".
"Wood, MSS. D. 6.
e MSS. Kettel.
P See supr. p. 327.
* MSS. Kettel.
'In which he is stiled aRmicem.
* Wood, MSS. E. 6.
1 Rcgistr. coll. ut supr. sol. 4. b.
■ MSS. Kettel.
* Fol. See Lib. Benef. bibl. coll. Trin. in pergam.
5. Robert

<page 431>
412 APPENDIX.
5. Robert Thrakse.
Born in Somersetshire. Admitted scholar of Trirt.
coll. Oxon. as above, Æt. 18. He left the college
about Michaelmas 1558% having taken the degree
pf A. B. the lame year, Feb. 1r.
6. William Saltmarshe.
Born in Yorkshire. He seems to have been first
of Brazen-nose collegez. Admitted scholar of Tri-
nity college. Oxon. by the founder's nomination, as
above, aged 18. Took the degree of A. B. May
23, 1558 \ Made probationer fellow, by the foun-
der's mandate, on Trinity Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558".
He took the degree of M. A. Decemb. 1, 1562 c.
He is mentioned in the Will * of Edward Hyndmer,
a fellow of the college*, and a memorable bene-
factor to the library, viz. "I bequeathe to my old
"good friende sir Henrie Saville, knight, warden
•* of Merton colledge in Oxford, my houpe gold
5* ring; and to Mr. Thomas Allen my old friende
■ MSS. Kettel.
r Wood, MSS. E. 6.
* MSS. Wood, E. 6. in Marg. sob. an. 1558.
* MSS. Wood, E. 6. scil. ut sopr.
fc Registr. coll. sol. iv. 6.
« MSS. Wood, E. 29.
* In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon.
* Admis. schol. Jun. 4, 1561, soc. 1568, Jun. 7. Registr.
coO.
"■ and

<page 432>
APPENDIX. 4ij
w and fcllowe in Trinitie colledge, but now of
** Gloucester-halle, my golde ringe with deathes
"heade inameled, which was sometime our friendc
*' Mr. Saltmarjhes'" I conjecture, that he was in-
clined to the catholic persuasion; not only from his
connections with this Edward HyndmerE, and. Thc«-
1 This will is dat. Notcmb. 15, 1607.
* It seems probable chat this Edward Hyndmer had a strong
tendency to the catholic persuasion, from the circumstance of
his quitting his fcllowfliip when he ought to have taken orders.
He was admitted M. A. on Decemb. 4, 1570, and left the
•college about 1576- MSS. Wood, E. 29. and Comp. Bur/H
■coll. Trin. 1.575—6. I likewise find in a book of his private
accounts, made long after he left the college, *' Expended for
"a Bkeviarie, xviz." In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. He appears
to have lived many years in the family of fir Robert Dormer,
at Winge in Bucks. Ex chartis, ibid. By his will, mentioned
in the text, and written with his own hand, he leaves to sir
Robert Dormer, " iij fpurr-royalls and a double duckatt," as
a small remembrance of great savours received from him. Ta
lady Elisabeth Dormer, " my honorable mistris,"' two twenty-
milling pieces; and to their son, fir William Dormer, forty
{hillings in angels. He bequeathes legacies to all sir Robert
Dormer's servants by name. He leaves to Trinity college,
legacies to the amount of 157 /. 14/. part of which was ex-
pended in furnishing the library with book-cases. [Ex Chart,
ibid, et Comp. Burls.] Likewise to the library, a great num-
ber of books; many of them French and Italian. To the
poor of the parish of Winge, v /. He appoints the fellows
of Trinity college, aforesaid, executors of his will; and. fir
Henry Saville, " my verie honorable friende," overseer. He
desires to be buried in the chapel of Trinity college; but- by a
discretionary power lest with his executors, he was interred in
the enurch of Winge, Aug. 20, 161$. Ex chart, ut supr. He
was near eighty years of age when he died, and was born in
Westmore-

<page 433>
4H APPENDIX.
mas Allen, the famous mathematician and antiqua-
rian, but because he left his fellowship about the
Westmoreland. Registr. coll. Trin. In the said Will, he re-
members many of his relations, of his own same, living at
Kirkbie.Stephen in Westmoreland.
He was in high favour with the foundress : as appears from
the following entry, written by Ralph Bathurst, fellow, after-
wards president of Trinity college, Oxford, in a blank leaf of
Budden's Life of bishop Wainflet, edit. 1602, in the
library of that college, "Bibliotbeae coil. Trin. Oxon. hbellum
"hunc inter alias compluns legaruit D. Edwardus Hindmer.
*' !%uo procurante, auSor (jus, Johannes BIIDDEMVI, Scbolaris lo-
*' cum ex gratia dotnuuc fundatricis apudnos obtinuit, A. D. 15 83,
"Inde post annos aliquammultos ad prœllSoris pbih/opbici munui
"a Magdalenenfibus eleclus, bane H'ainsttti/ui \~\*\iy$tit7ia» edidit,
"^uam egregii iiiri D. Job, Bowman et D. Fr. Field, colltgii'
"nostri tune temporis saeii, eju/que ibidem cotetanei, prout in registre
"collegiipatet, elogiis peeticis exornarunt. R. B. 1655." Budden,
Waynflet's biographer, was first of Merton college: where ho
was taken particular notice of by fir Henry Saville, who recom-
mended him to his friend Edward Hyndmer above-mentioned,
as a proper candidate for a scholarship of Trinity college. To
which he was elected May 30, 1583. After five years, intend-
ing to study the civil law, he left Trinity college, and retired
to Gloucester-hall; chiefly for the conversation of the learned
Thomas Allen, mentioned in th's art-cl.-. Afterwards he was
appointed philosophy-reader in Magdaler.e college, principal of
New Inn-Hall, king's professor of civil law, and principal of
Broadgates-hall. He wrote sonic other pieces. He died 1620,
About the fame time, and for the ame reason, I find one
Thomas Warren, fellow of Trinity college, retiring to Glo-
cester-hall. [Schol. Jun. 14, 1568. Soc Jun- 3. 157?. Re.
gistr. Kettel.J The motives for his recession, hinted above,
expressly appear from the following entry concerning him,
Registr. Thcsaurkr. 4to. "Post /u/ceptum gradum Artium Ma*
"gistri

<page 434>
A P P E N D'l X. 415
year 1566, when he must have been called, by the
statutes of his house, to take Ordersk. It is not
improbable, that he retired to Gloucester hall, or
Hart-hall; both which places, particularly the first,
were the receptacles, about this time, of such fel-
lows of colleges, as could not, on account of their
private attachment to popery, consistently pr con-
scientiously retain their fellowships. I find him,
about the year 1570, visiting Trinity college with
Leonard Fitzimmonds, mentioned below, who had
"Pfir* annB 1"artc I1 579] reeeffil adaulam Okctstren/em'' Ho
was afterwards buried in the chapel of Trinity college, April
28, 1598. Wood's Collectan. e Parochial. Registr. Oxon. Pa.
roeb. S. Thome. Muf. Aslimol. D. 5. George Blackwell also,
fellow of the said college, receded to Glocester-hall, " where
"he was held in good repute by Edm. Rainolds and Tbomat
"Allen, the two learned seniors," about 1568. Wood. Ath.
Qxon. i. p. 382. Numb. 449. [See Lei. Itin. il. 10;. edit.
1745 ] Afterwards he went to Rome :where, by Henry Car-
dinal Cajetane he was constituted arch-prelbyter of the Eng-
lish clergy at Rome, and by Pope Clement the eighth, notary
qf the apostolic fee, in the year 1598. He was intimately
connected with Garnet, provincial of the Jesuits in England.
See Camd. Elizab. p. 900. edit. Hearn. His works, recited
by Wo d, are learned, and were much esteemed by those of
his persuasion. He is mentioned more than once by Casaubon,
as the friend and coadjptor of Garnet, in a long epistle which
cpnuini many curious anecdotes of Garnet's history, not else-
where to be sound. Casaub. Kpistol.—Epist, 624. Frontoni
Due. Dat. 1 ondin. 161 1. edit. 1656. p. 762, 796. He rc»
turned to England in 1607, and died in London 1612. [Schol.
Maii 2-, 15O2. Sof. Jun. 18, 1565. Com. MiddJ.]
.» Comp Burss. coil. Trin. 1566—7.
quitted

<page 435>
'4iS A P P E N D I X.
quitted his fellowship of that college, and retired t<J
Hart-hall, for this reason'.
1 As did Thomas Allen, above-mentioned, to Gloucester-
kail, in 1570. See his Life by Campbell, in the Biographia Brit.
vol. i. And Hearne's Lib. Nig. Scacc. Praefat. p. xxx. §. x.
And Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. col. 546, 106, 174, 467, 485. F.
248. Allen gave some manuscripts to the Bodleian library.
One of them is Augustinut dt Ct-oiiatt Dei, to which is added
Gregorii Mcralia in Jobum. MSS. Bodl. 198. The history of
this venerable volume is carious, and deserves to be developed
at large. It is beautifully written on vellum in folio; and ori.
ginally belonged to Robert Grollhead bishop of Lincoln in the
thirteenth century, in whose hand are many notes in the mar-
gins. Grosthead gave it to the convent of Friars Minors at
Oxford. These Friars gave it to the famous theologist Thomas
Gafcoigne, under their seal, about the year 1433. Gaseoigne
presented it to Durham college at Oxford, and at length
Allen placed it in the Bodleian library. At the end of this
manuscript there is a long note written by Gaseoigne, which
Tanner has printed, Bibl. p. 311. All the books belonging to
the library of Richard de Bury in Durham college, were dis-
persed soon after the dissolution of that house. Some were re-
moved to the Humsredian library, and others to Baliol college;
but the greater part became the property of Doctor Owen, to
whom Durham college was granted. Archbishop Parker pro-
cared many Saxon manuscripts of Doctor Owen. In the Cotton
library, there is a volume consisting os a collection of charters,
and other antient writings, transcribed by Jocelyn, Parker's
chaplain: who has inserted this note at many of the pieces.
'The archkijhop of Canterbury had this charter from Dr. Oivcu. At
some others, The copy of thit Dr. Talbot bad of Dr. Owen. Vi-
tell. D. 7. Robert Talbot, the annotator on Antoninus, was
employed by the archbishop to collect antient manuscripts,
chiefly Saxon. Many of Parker's books, now in Bennet college
library at Cambridge, appear to have belonged to Talbot. The
archbishop's principal collector was Bateman, another of his
chaplains;

<page 436>
APPENDIX. 417
chaplains; who fays, that he "gathered within four years,
"under his graces commission, fix thousand seven hundred
'* books." Bateman's Doom •warning all men to judgment, t£c.
Lond. 1 58J. 4W. pag. 400. It should not be forgotten here,
that Thomas Langley bishop of Durham, by will dated Dec.
17. 1437, gave a large legacy of books to the library of Dur-
ham college. Wharton Angl. Sacr. i. p. 776. As did John
Longland bisliop of Lincoln, who djed in 1547. -Tanner, Bibl.
485. But the college was dissolved, before that be/juest coujd
take place. I should speak here of Bury. This prelate was one
of the earliest English restorers of literature. Of his Philobib-
lon, I have spoken at large in the second Dissertation
prefixed to the first volume of the History of Encljsij
Poetry. He held some of the highest offices both in church
and state under Edward the third, whose education he had su-
perintended. In the year 1331, he was sent by that king to
Avignon, to negotiate some business with the pope. Rymer,
Foed. ii. 59. He there lodged in the house of cardinal Colonne,
where Petrarch at that time also resided. Petrarch embraced
the fortunate opportunity of consulting this learned Englishman,
then only a private ecclesiastic, about the situation of the antient
Thule, supposed to be one of the British islands: for the geo-
graphy of antiquity was one of Petrarch's favorite studies. Be-
ing without his books, of which he had amassed a prodigious
collection, he prproised to transinitt to Petrarch the best infor-
mation he jco.uld obtain on this subject, aster his return to Engr
land. Whajt had immediately given rise to Petrarch's curiosity
about this island, probably was Giraldus's sabulous account of
Thule, in his Mirabilia Hiberniæ, a work just publish-
ed, and .recently translated into French by John of Meun, author
of the Romaunt dt la Rose. Petrarch wrote frequently to Richard
of Bury to know the result of his promised enquiries about
Thule; but, perhaps in consequence of Bury's important occu-
pations, never received any answer. See Petrarchæ Epistol.
iii. 1. In this epistle, Petrarch calls Bury, " Virum ardentis
-" ingenii nee litcrarum inscium, abditaruznque rerum supra
"fidem curiosurn." The ingenious author of La Vie db P«»
trarojie, thinks that Petrarch's letters to Bury are now in
D d seme

<page 437>
4i8 APPENDIX.
"Alloc. po epulis Mag. Saltmarshe et Mag.
Fitzimmonds, x\d"k.
j. John Harrys.
Born in Gloucestershire. Related to the founder'.
Admitted scholar of Trin. coll. Oxon as above,
Æt. 17. Admitted probationer fellow on Trinity
Sunday, 1559 m. He left the college about the latter
end of the fame yearn.
8. Edmund Hutchins.
Born in Oxfordshire, the founder's nephew, and
one of his heirs °. Admitted scholar of Trin coll.
Oxon. Octob, 3, 1556, by the founders mandate %
some library of England. Tom. i. Liv. ii. p. 169. Amst. 1764.
4to. I have searched for this treasure, but without success. See
Wharton, Ancl. Sack. i. 765. Leland and his transcriber
Trithemius are mistaken in what they have asserted about Pe-
trarch's correspondence with this prelate. From what is here
said, may be also corrected two slight mistakes in the French
Encyclopede, under the article Bibliotheque.
k Comp, Burss. ut supr. 1569—70.
1 From the will of Edmund Hutchins, mentioned in the
next article.
- MSS. Kettel.
« Ibid.
0 See supr. p. 122. 168. In a letter to the president without
date, from Tyttenhanger, he says, " I beseech you see that
"Mr. Basford and Huchyns applye their studye."
f Registr. coll. sol. iii. b. "per authoritatem et mandatum
*' venexabilii

<page 438>
APPENDIX. 419
Æt. 22. He quitted the college about Christmas
1558 '. He lived at Dumbleton in Gloucestershire,
where he was Lord of the Manor, and married the
Daughter of Thomas Cockes, esquire '. By his will,
dat Jan. 28. 44 Eliz. and proved soon afterwards,
he left to Trinity college aforesaid the advowlbn to
the church of Dumbleton. Also estates, worth per
ann. 33/. 6 s. %d. part of which the said college was
annually to pay to certain charitable uses, and to
have the residue'. But his coheirs claiming the pre-
misses, the whole benefaction was set aside by a de-
cree of chancery'. He left besides, other charitable
bequests to places with which he was connected. He
was a benefactor to the library, in 1592. On a but-
tress, on the south side of the college % the following
memorial of him remains, cut in the stone. "Jesu
have M. O. E. Hutchins." 1558. i. e. Jesus have
mercy on Edmund Hutchins.
"venerabilis viri dom. Thomae Pope militis, coll. prædicti
"fundatoris, ad fupplendum oSonarium in eodem collegio nu-
"merum, aseitus." He is placed here on account of the last
mentioned circumstance. For the time of his admission does not
strialy correspond with that of the seven preceding.
1 MSS. Kettel.
* Atkyns's Gloucestershire, p. 406.
* In Thesauriar. coll. Trin. Oxon.
1 Registr. prim. sol. 124. b. et chartis in Thesauriar. an-
tedict.—His pedegree is in Mus. Astimol. Codd. Astun. 836.
Pag- fy
u Facing the north-side of the Chapel of Baliol college,
D d 2 Afterwards,

<page 439>
420
APPENDIX.
Afterwards, as places became vacant, the Foukceji
nominated the five following Schollars*.
.... P 1 G G O T T,
No notice of him occurs in the register. Bat
such a person was scholar 1557 r, and I presume was
nominated by the founder; who mentions him with
great regard in a letter to the president, dat. Whit-
mondœy,"i55&. Understandinge... that sir Pigott woH
*' at Trynite Sunday next yeld upp his fellowship
"[icholarfhip] and neverthelesse desireth to remayne
*' in the college as a sojorner; I have thought good,
"for that he is honest and a vertuos yong man,
"to desire you he may remayne in his chamber as a
"sojorner, and that he be well entreatyd in everye
M condition: for to be playne with you, I entende
"assoone as he shall be priest, to have hym in my
"house iff I maye." And again, in another to the
same, dat. 2.5 May, 1558. "iff Pigott-depart, then
"may the pore boye for whom the bishopp of Bris-
** towe's chanceller maketh sute, be preferryd to his
** rome: but in any cafe let Pigott be a comoner in
"the house." Accordingly he quitted the founda-
"tion, 1558.
Walter Blount.
Born at Blount's Hall, in Staffordshire. The
founder's nephew. Admitted scholar Jan. 9, 1556.
* One of whom he nominated to a fellowship.
J Comp. Burss. 1556—7- S«e supr. p. 366.
Æt.

<page 440>
APPENDIX. 421
Æt. 18*. He left the college about Michaelmas,
1558 \ This was the last instance in which the
founder ordered any person to be admitted, except
at the statutable time of election. Concerning
which he tells the president in a letter, dat. 27
Nov. 1556. "When my wiffs brother is ons
"placed, I woll for no man's fute the statutes of
"my college be broken in that poynt: and that
"the election shall alwaies be uppon Trynytie Son-
"day." One Gualter Blount, esquire, is returned
a Justice of the peace for Worcestershire, "as very
"honest and religious," among the rest of that
county, by Freake the bishop, to the lord Trea-
surer, Oct. 6, 1587".
Richard Southern.
Born at Exeter. Admitted scholar on Trinity
Sunday, Jun. 7, 1558. Æt. 16c. I presume he
was a relation of Thomas Southern, the treasurer
of Exeter cathedral, mentioned above. In a letter
-to the president, dat. 27, Nov. 1556, the founder
says, " Mr. Sowtherne shall have his scholler placed
*' as sone as any rome [place] is voyd, and one
"man sped to whom I have made promyse." And
in another to the same, dat. 24 Jul. 1557, he says,
g Registr. coll. sol. 4.
* MSS. Kettel. See supr. p. 204.
* Strype Ann. Res. iii. App. 174. One Walter Blount oc-
curs a seminary priest, 1588. Ibid. p. 260.
« Registr. sol. 68. b.
D d 3 "I am

<page 441>
42i APPENDIX.
'* I am sorye to here your vice-president is sick,
"but I hope in god he shall shortly rere his helth;
'• for which as I shall pray, so 1 requyre you tell
"hym, I am content young Sowtherne shall be at
"the scoler's commens, his ffrends peyinge for the
"fame, till he can be placyd in my collegge." He
left the college, 1560.
Francis Butler.
Born at Bristol. Admitted scholar the same day.
Æt. 17*. The founder, beside what is mentioned
in the article of Piggott, mentions him in a letter
to the president, dated Whitmonday preceding, "I
"will that the pore fcholer of Bristow, for whom
"Mr. Dalby e . . . labor, be admytted. Mr. Dal-
"bye is the bisshoppes chanceller, and a man to
"whom I am beholdinge; and the pore man he
** laboreth for is very towardlye, and his sfryndes
"not habell to fynde hym to scole." He left the
college 1560 s. The sudden departure of this per-
son, and some others, about this time, it may be
supposed, was owing to the change of religion at the
accession of queen Elizabeth.
* Registr. ibid.
• William Dalby was presented to the rectory of Littleton,
Bristol. Dioces. 1556. He was made prebendary of Bristol,
1558, being then chancellor of that diocese. He was ejected
from his preferments by Q^ Elizabeth. Rym. Feed. xv. 450.
And Willis, Cathedr. Bristol, p. 788. The bishop of Bristol
Was Holyman, mentioned above, p. 400.
» MSS. Kette}.
Leonard

<page 442>
APPENDIX. 423
Leonard Fitzsymons.
Born at Dublin8. Was chapel-clerk of C. C. C.
Oxon h. Being a native of Ireland, he was, from
thence, admitted scholar, not only by the nomina-
tion, but by the dispensation, of the founder, on
Trinity Sunday above-mentioned, and at the earnest
suit of Thomas Marshall, the second dean of Christ-
church, in 1558, aged seventeen'. He took the
degree of A. B. the next year, 1559, May 8 k.
By the same authority, without having passed
through the usual year of probation, he was admit-
ted actual fellow, on Trinity Sunday, June 9,
1560'. He took the degree of M. A. May 4,
1563. But being averse to the rites and Orders
of the church of England, he retired to Hart-hall
about 1571m, and afterwards became a popish
priest \ Hollinshed, from Stanihurst, calls him
"a deepe and pithie clerke, well scene in the Greeke
"and Latine tongue, sometime fellow of Trinitie
"colledge in Oxford, perfect in the mathemati-
• Registr. prim. coll. Trin. sol. 4.
k Wood, Ath. Oxon i. 199.
1 Registr. ut supr. And MSS. F. Wise. Marstiall had been
a fellow of C. C. C. Oxon.
k Wood, ubi supr. F. 88.
1 It is said in the Register, " per dispensationem venerabili*
"et præpotentis militis Thomæ Pope." sol. 26.
m Rather 1570.
* Wood, ubi supr. And F. 92.
D d 4 "cals,

<page 443>
4H A P H N 6 i X.
*' cals, and a paynefull student in divinitie •."
Wood acquaints us, that he was eminent for his
learning in Ireland in 1580, and that he published
several pieces, the titles of which are unknown.
He seems to have died in Ireland, where he pro-
bably spent the latter part df his life''. He had a
brother educated at Cambridge, and afterwards be-
neficed in Ireland*. To mathematics he joined a
knowledge of music, as appears from the following
article in Comp. Burls, coll. Trin. 1561—2.
"Solut. dm. Fitzfimmons pulsanti organa fir
"annum, xx s \
• Chron. vol. i. p. 41. e. vii. Stanihurst's words' are " pro-
"fondus clericus, qui utrasque linguas, theologiam et mathe-
"maticam-, admodum callnit et coluit." Descript. Hibem.
cap. vii.
r Wood, ubi supr. i. 199. And "fanner, Bibl. p. 185.
^ Stanihorst, ubi supr.
'The statutable salary, although fie was a ftlWw of the col-
lege. In consequence of the dissolution of the monasteries, and
of the reformation of religion, church music received an almost
irreparable blow. Few were then educated at least to the me-
chanical part of the profession; and when the splendor of the
popilh worship was restored, after a long intermission, by queen
Mary, it was difficult to procure instrumental practitioners, pro-
perly qualified to assist it the solemnities of the mass. Under
these circumstances in order to facilitate and secure so precarious
an acquisition, Sir Thomas Pope found it necessary to provide in
his statutes, that there should be constantly one person admitted
into the society, competently skilled in music, who might be
able to execute the office of organist to the college. That this
was the case, the provision itself seems to imply; as well as
the reason which the founder expressly suggests for it, and the
manner

<page 444>
APPENDIX. 425
manner in which it is worded. "Hie autem, quoniam opu»
"est, et maxime convenit, ut per hanc electionem protidiatar
"nequando dictum Collegium OrCanorum Pulsatore fit
"drftiiutum, nee tali: abijue inven:ri poffitfacile, liberam dictis
*' electoribus potestatem facio et permitto, unum aliquem talem
"de quoeunque potent loco eligendi, qui ludendi organis pe-
"ritus, et in grammatics etiam rudimentis competenter erudi-
"to", in dictorum scholarium numerum, modo sit pauper, ad-
"mittatur; et organa in dictis festis, aliasque in oHiciis divi-
"nis, more in ecclesiis consueto, pulsare tenebitur: nisi Socio-
"rum quisquam id præstare muneris melius noverit et potent.'*
Statut. coll. Trin. cap. vii. In the Additament, where the
salary mentioned in the text is afiigned, he is likewise obliged,
"Scholares ad cantandum in choro idoneos reddere."
I am not in the mean time ignorant, that antiently in our
foundations of churches and colleges, no separate or distinct
offices, by the name of organist, was ever appointed. This
duty was subordinate, and appears to have been commonly per-
formed by one of the clerks. In the statutes of Corpus Christi
college at Oxford, given in 1517, two chapel-clerks are estab-
lished, one of whom is also to be the Qrganorum fulsator. Cap.
Xvii. The first instance of the mention of an Organ in any
collegiate statutes which I have had the opportunity to examine,
occurs in those of Eton college, made about the year 1440.
Where one of the four clerks who is appointed to instruct the
choristers, is moreover ordered jubilan organis. Cap. x. Here
also, for the first time, Cantus erganicus is mentioned. In the
new cathedral-foundations of king Henry the eighth, a master
or teacher of the singing boys is appointed: and besides, he is
to be " cantandi, et organa pulsandi, peritus." Statut. Eccles.
Roffens. dat. A. D. 1545. Cap. xxii. AtNew college Oxford,
King's at Cambridge, and Winchester-college, in each of which
ire ample choirs, there is no provision by statute, not even for
an hfermator Cbarisiarum. Although such an officer occurs in
the early rolls of New-college. At Magdalen college Oxford,
founded about the year 1459, there is also no mention of aft
organist: but it is enjoined that one of the chaplains, or clerks,
OT

<page 445>
426 APPENDIX.
or some other skillful person, shall educate the choristers in the
plain chant and pricked song. Cardinal Wblsey in the statutes
of his college at Oxford, given 1525, mentions a mu/u-master,
not by the name of an organist, who is to be musicit peritiffimut.
MSS. James, vol. vii. p. 89. Bibl. Bodl. In the year 1446,
the abbot and convent of Muchelney in Somersetshire, granted a
corrody of five marks, with seven gallons of ale, and seven
loaves called le old mycbts, every week, and a gown and four
loads of wood annually, to Ralph Drake cantor, or chanter, pro
Jervicio nobis in ilia Jciencia mujica; and on condition, that he
attend the choir every day, and teach four boys, and one of the
monks, or as many as chose, to play on the organ. Hearne's
Ad. Domerh. vol. i. Append. Præf. p. lxxxii. edit. Oxon.
1727. In a catalogue of the service-books of faint Paul's ca-
thedral, taken in the year 1295, Liber Organorum occurs more
than once. Dugd. Hist. p. 220. By which, I believe, we are
not to understand any species of music-books for that instrument.
The Organ was so essential a circumstance of divine worship,
that the mass, and other holy offices, were called Organum.
Charpentier, Svppl. Gloss. Lat. Du Cange. torn. iii. p. 89.
in V.
To recur to the first part of this note. There is a curious
passage in Erasmus's Annotations on the New Testament, writ-
ten about the year 151 2, which admirably displays the state of
our church-music, just before the Reformation. Epist. Corinth,
i. xiv. 19. [Opp. Tom. vi. C. 731. N. 26.] "We have in-
"traduced into the churches, a certain elaborate and theatrical
"species of music, accompanied with a tumultuous diversity of
"voices. All is full of trumpets, cornets, pipes, fiddles, and
"singing. We come to church as to a play-house. And for
"this purpose, ample salaries are expended on organists, and
"societies cf boys, whose whole time is wasted in learning to
"sing. Not to mention the vast revenues which the church
"• squanders away in the stipends of singing-men, who are com-
"monly great drunkards, buffoons, and chosen from the lowest
*' of the people. These fooleries are become so agreeable, that
"the monks, especially in England, think of nothing else.
"To this end, even in the Benedictine monasteries of
"EnGLANDj

<page 446>
APPENDIX. 427
\* In the year 1559, nine scholars were admit-
ted; and in the fame year, the founder's institution
of four additional scholars took place. Mysore-
going list of the first eight, would have been incom-
plete, without some mention of the first Jour addi-
tional scholars; which are included in the follow-
ing nine scholars ', admitted in the year 1559:
concerning each of which, I shall therefore subjoin
an account, however short and imperfect.
Leonard e Perse y, [or Piercie.']
He left the college, 1562 e.
. . . Wood.
He left the college, 1560".
"England, many youths, boys, and other vocal performers,
"are sustained; who, early every morning, sing to the organ
"the mass of the Virgin Mary with the most harmonious mo-
"dulations of voice. And the bishops are obliged to keep
"choirs of this sort in their families."
* It is remarkable, that no mention is made at all of the four
first, in the college register: nor of the icholarships of four others,
(fellows) afterwards mentioned. This defect, as will appear by
the references, I have supplied from Registr. Kettel. Which is
founded on evidences equally authentic, and still remaining.
• MSS. Kettel. Not in Registr. coll.
■ Ibid. Not in Reg.
. . . DOWLE,

<page 447>
428 APPENDIX.
... Dowle, [or DowJit.]
He left the college the same year *.
.... Prince.
He left the college, 1562 *.
Richard Basset'.
Born in Yorkshire. Afterwards admitted proba-
tioner fellow, by nomination of the foundress, Jun.
4, 1561 ".
Christopher Wharton*.
Born in Yorkshire. Afterwards admitted proba-
tioner fellow by nomination, and dispensation, of
the foundress, his county being full, May 26,
i562b. Soon after c the year 1564, he left his fid-
* Ibid. Not in Reg.
* Ibid. Not in Reg.
y MSS. Kettel. ex Comp, burss. 1. nc* fti registr. it sdiol.
* Registr. sol. xy.
* MSS. Kettel. ut sopr. non in registr. ut schof.
b •' Qui virtute literarum domitie fundatricis admissuS erat,
*' alias admitfi non potuit ex eo quod numerus ejusdeni comi-
"tatus erat completus. Registr. sol. 26. b.
e I find the following entry in Registr. cur. cancell. Oaron.
GG. supr, citat. sol. 89. "Nomina [cum tutoribus] scholasti-
"corum degentium in domibus privatis, 1562.—Bartholomew
"Chamberlayne, dominus Wharton tutor." Bartholomew
Chamber.

<page 448>
APPENDIX. 429
lowstiip, being averse to the religion and orders of
the church of England; and retiring to the college
at Doway, an expedient not uncommon at this time,
was made a catholic priest. He then returned to
England, and officiated in that character; being in
high reputation and esteem for his learning and piety,
among those of his own persuasiond. At length
being imprisoned for the public exercise of his pro-
scribed function, and for disclaiming the queen's
supremacy, he was executed at York, in the fortieth
year of his age, Mar. 28. i6ooc.
Jo#n Halsiy', [or Haulsei.]
Born in Hertfordshire. I find him nominated one of
the first fellows of Sr. John's college Oxford, by the
founder, sir Thomas Whyte, in his charter, dated
Mar. 28, 1557—8 S, at which time he seems to have
Chamberlayne was perhaps a fellow of Trinity college after*
wards, mentioned p. 195, 196. And his tutor, the subject of this
article. These tutors did not live with their pupils in the
private houses; the latter attended upon the former, who for
the most part were fellows of colleges, occasionally for instruc-
tion, &c.
d See Thorefby's Lttdti. p. 521.
* Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. F. p. 93. col. I. And Worthing-
ton's Catahgm Martjrum fro Religiorte Catbolica in /4nglia ac-
ci/orum. Edit. 1614. 8vo. pag. 43. where he is called, "Qgl-
"legii Duaci alumnus."
'MSS. Kettel. ut flipr. non in registr. ut fchol.
1 Wood, Hist, antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 303. col. 2. And Catal.
foe. coll. di. Jo, Bapt. Oxon. per Griffin Higges. MSS. Mus.
Afhmol. F. 28. sol. 204. supra citat.
been

<page 449>
430 APPENDIX.
been conviUor, or commoner, in Trinity collegeh.
It appears, however that he did not accept of this
offer at St. John's college, being elected scholar of
Trinity college, the following year, 1559. After-
wards admitted probationer fellow of the fame, May
26, 1562'.
Edward T r e w e l k.
Born in Hertfordshire. Afterwards admitted pro-
bationer fellow, by nomination of the foundress,
Jun. 9, 1560'.
Thomas Orpewoode".
Born in Oxfordshire. The founder's nephew or
near relation". Afterwards admitted probationer
fellow, by nomination of the foundress, Jun. 6,
1563 '■
k Wood, ut supr.
* Registr. ut supr. sol. 26. b.
k MSS. Kettel. ex Comp. 2. Boris, ut supr, non in Registr.
ut supr.
1 Registr. ut supr. sol. 26.
» MSS. Kettell. at supr.
■ See p. 327.
0 Registr. ut supr, sol 3. "Ex nominatione piæ ac vene-
"rabilis dominæ Pope, uxoris Thomas Pope militis, Fundatoris
•« jam defundli." Although (he was now married to fir Hugh
Paalet,
NUMB.

<page 450>
APPENDIX. 431
1
NUMB. XXVI.
Account of the Marriages, and Descen-
dants, of John Pope, of Wroxton,
esquire.
JOHN POPE, only brother to fir Thomas
Pope, was settled at Wroxton in Oxfordshire,
in or before the reign of Edward the sixth; where
he was buried Jun. 24, 1583". He was married
thrice. His first wife, was, as I conjecture, Anne
Staveley b, daughter of Staveley of Bignellc
1 Registr. parochial, de Wroxton, co. Oxon. See also Re-
gistr. Parret, (citat. supr. Numb, xxi.) sol. 6. b. sol. 3. a.
b Ex testamento Dom. T. Pope. :•
c Concerning this family of Staveley, I find that William
Staveley, lord of the manor of Bignell, who died 1498, be-
queathes his body to be buried in the church of Bicester, co.
Oxon. and was a benefactor to Bicester priory. By Alice his
wife he had George, William, John, Mary, and Isabel!. The
said George, 16 Hen. viii. leaves provision for certain masses,
&c. in University college. Kennet's Paroch. Antio^. p. 680.
seq. And Wood Hist, antiq. univ. Oxon. ii. 59. col. 2. Willit
recites an epitaph to Thomas Giffard of Twiford, co. Bucks,
marrying Mary, daughter of William Staveley of Bignell, who
died 1450. Hist, of Bucks, p. 335. One of the name is bu-
ried in Bicester church, with the date 1485. What is here
said

<page 451>
432 APPENDIX.
in the laid county. She died before 1554"1, and
was buried in St. Stephen's, Wallbrook c; leaving
one daughter, Elizabeth, to whom sir Thomas Pope
bequeathed 300 marks for her portion in marriage s,
and who married, 1573, Edward Blount, of Burton
upon Trent in Staffordshire8. The said John Pope's
second wife was Elizabeth h, daughter of sir John
Brockett, of Brockett-Hall at Hatsield in Hert-
fordshire', to whom he was married before 1554 k.
His third wife was Jane, daughter of sir Edmund
said of the Staveley family, corrects a passage in Leland, Itik.
vii. fol.'8. "There is buried in the quier of the paroche
"churche of Burcester, one Wijljam Standlty, esquier, lord of
"Bygnelle, &c." Read Steeutley. I take this opportunity of
pbserving that Leland mentions sir T. Pope twice, Itin. vol.
iv. P. ii. pag. 91, 59. edit. 1744.
* Ex indentur. quadripartit. supr, citat.
1 See p. 167.
f Ex testam. dora. T. P.
* From articles of agreement relating thereto, dat. Febr.
15. 14EI1Z.—Edward Blount occurs in dameEliz. Paulet's will,
and, I suppose, was her nephew.
fc Lee's MSS. Visitat. ut supr. pag. 32. And from other
evidences.
4 See Chauncy's Herts, p. 312. John Brockets receives, with
others, parcell of the possessions of St. Bartholomew's priory in
London, at the dissolution. Ibid. 324. Sir John Brockett, km.
is member of parliament for Hertfordshire, 1553. Willis, Not.
parl. ed. ii- p- 27. He was knighted lEdw. vi. Feb.22. MSS.
Cotton. Claud. C. 3. sol. 172. b.
k She is mentioned in Indentur. quadripartit. supr, citat.
Wyndham,

<page 452>
APPENDIX. 433
Wyndham, of Somersetshire, by whom he had no
issue1.
But by the second wife, Elizabeth Brockets, the
said John Pope had issue three sons, Thomas,
George, and William •, and six daughters, Georgia,
Penelope, Mary, Susannah, Anne, and Jane m. Tho-
mas died an infant 1564". George appears to have
studied one year under the tuition of John Sellar °,
in Trinity college, Oxford, which he left May 3,
1587, having been admitted in the rank of cowvictor
primi ordinis p. But he died soon afterwards. The
only surviving son, and heir, William, in 1573%
and at fourteen years of age, was admitted, a convic-
tor primi ordinis, into the aforesaid college, Jul. 7,
1 She is buried in the church of Fellbridge in Norfolk,
with this epitaph. "Here Heth the bodie of Jane Conningsbie,
"widdowe, and one of the daughters of sir Edmond Wind-
■" ham, knt. deceased : first married to John Pope in the countie
"of Oxford, esquire, and after his decease to Humphrie Con-
*' ningsbie, esquire. She departed this life without issue of her
"bodie, the xx daie of November, in the yeare of our Lord
*' 1608, and of her age 67." The said Humphrie Conningsbie
was of Hampton-court, co. Hereford. She must have been mar-
ried to John Pope between 1573 and 1583. See Cat. of Mr.
West's Books, p. 220. Num. 4299.
m Lee's MSS. Visit, ut supr — Registr. Wroxton.—Registr. ia
410 in Thesauriar. coll. Trin.—And MSS. Pedigr. Rawlins.
■ Registr. Wroxton.
• B. D. Afterwards in 1597 rector of Ickford in Bucking-
hamshire.
f Ex registr. quodam in 4W. in Thef. coll. Trin. supr, citat.
< Registr. Wroxton.
E e 1587,

<page 453>
434 APPENDIX.
1587, which he quitted April 12, 1591 r. He was
entered a student in Gray's-Inn, 1594'. On the ar-
rival of James the I. in England, he was created
in the great gallery of St James's palace, Jul. 24,
1603, a knight of the bath'» and on May 22,
1611, a baronet, by the style of sir William Pope
'Ex Registr. in 4to ut supr.
'MSS. Harl. 1912. pag. 60.
'The ceremony of this creation is thus described by Howes,
Stowe's continuator. "Sunday the twenty-foure [1603] was
M performed the solempnity of knights of the bath riding
"honorably from St. James to the courte, and made sliewe
"with their squires and pages about the Tilte-yarde; and
"after went into the parke of St. James, and there lighted
*' all from their horses, and went uppe to the king's majesties
"presence in the gallerie where they received the order of
"knighthood of the bathe." Stowe's Ann. by Howes, pag.
827. But fee Anstis, who fays this creation was on the day
of the king's coronation, viz. Jul. 25. Knighthood of tbt Bath,
App. pag. 57.
There is an old play addressed to this sir William Pope,
written by Barnaby Barnes. It is a tragedy, entitled the Divil's
Charter, on the story of pope Alexander the sixth; acted be-
fore James the first on Candlemas night, and printed Lond. 1607.
quarto. "Dedicated to the honbuiable and his verie deare
"friends sir W. Herbtrt, and fir W. Pope, knights, associates
"in the noble order of the Bath," This author Barnes wrote
Four becks of Offices about Primes, &c. Lond. 1606. sol.
Also A divine century of spiritual sonnets, Lond. 1595- Sir Wil-
liam Herbert, here mentioned* was afterwards earl of Pem-
broke, and Chancellor of the university of Oxford- He was
himself a writer of poetry, and published a book of poems.
Some of his sonnets were set to music by Henry Lawes. Pern*
broke college is named after him.
Of

<page 454>
APPENDIX. 435
of Wilcott" in Oxfordshire w. Afterwards, Octob.
16, 1629% he was made by Charles I. baron of
Bellturbetr, and earl of Downe, in Ireland. On oc-
casion of the last mentioned dignity, supporters were
a William Pope os Wilcott, occurs high-sheriff of Oxfordshire,
43 EIf*»—Fuller's Worth, pag. 344. edit. 1662. The manor
of Wilcott, or Wivilcote, is said by Plott to have been antient-
ly the head of a barony ; and he supposes that one of its barons
is buried in the neighbouring church of Northleigh. See Plott's
Oxf. ch. x. $. 134. p. 154. But the person there interred,
with his wife, both whose recumbent figures, large as life, and
richly habited, are on a beautiful alabaster tomb within an ele-
gant chantry, is ... . Wilcotes, or Willycotes, esquire. They
have both a collar of esses, but no baronial badges j and from
the style of the architecture, I take this chantry not to be older
than Henry the sixth. The family were indeed lords of the
manor of Wilcott; and they were of great note in Oxfordshire,
but now long since extinct. See Kennet's Paroch. Antiq. p.
$61. 527. Their escocheon was an eagle's head with wings.
The two figures on the tomb just mentir-ned, which arc as large
as life, I take to be John and Alicia Wilcott, whose daughter
Elizabeth married into Raynesford of Great-Tew in this coun-
ty, and whose arms appeared in the windows of the manor-
house there, with this remarkable inscription. "3oI)n t©t>U
« cotcc et aPitcia n-cr cjn0, ob. 1400 et scmcl." i. e. 1401.
or 1410. Leland says, " Wivelcote, alias WiLCOTE,a knight
"that iuas owner of the lcrdfiip of Tew, and dwelled in the
"maner place there, is buried in a faire tumbe of marble in Teiut
"churche." Itin. iv. f. 16. pag. 14. edit. 1744. Compare
Hearne's Trokelowe, Append, p. 319. 334. In the church
of Great Tew, if I recollect right, there is a tomb, perhaps
the fame, with the Cross of Raynesford and the Eagle of Wil-
cott.
w Dugd. Antient use of bearing arms, &c. 1682. pag. 3z.
x Pat. Car. I. an. reg. 4. part 39.
E e 2 granted

<page 455>
436 APPENDIX.
granted to the antient coat by Segar, otherwise
garter king at arms, on the twenty-third of Decem-
ber followingr. He died Jul. 2, 1631 x, at Wrox-
ton, and was buried in the church, on the north
fide of the altar, under an alabaster monument of
elegant and costly workmanship, on which are the
recumbent figures of himself and his lady, large as
life. This monument was made by Nicholas Stone *.
He left by will to Trinity college, Oxford, one
hundred poundsb, and a beautiful edition of Or-
telius's Geography, printed 1584 c. He married in
1595, or in the year followingd, Anne, daughter
of sir Owen Hopton, lieutenant of the tower of
London, and relict of Henry lord Wentworth, ba-
ron of Nettlesteade. She died at Wroxton, and
r MSS. F. Wife.
* Ex tumul. apud Wroxton.
* From Mr. Venue.
b Comp. Burs. coll. Trin. 1630— 1. Bursariis Antonio Far-
rington et Gulielmo Chiluncworth.
c Ex lib. benefactor, biblioth. coll. Trin.
d See Collins, Peer. in. p. 60. ed. i.
* MSS. pedigr. Rawlins. And from empalements in paint-
ed glass at Wroxton. At the fame place there is a fine old
portrait of sir Owen Hopton, dated 1590. His daughter,
Anne landy Wentworth, as mentioned in the text, had by
her former husband, lord Wentworth, two sons, Thomas and
Henry. They were both sent together to Trinity college, Ox-
ford, and matriculated Novemb. 12, 1602. Thomas, lord
Wentworth, being it, and his brother Henry 8 years of age.
Colkaan. t lib. Matric. MSS. A. Wood. Mus. Alhm. D. I.
In the college-computus of that year, viz. 1601—2, I find the
following entry.
- Sol.

<page 456>
APPENDIX. 437
^as buried there May 10, 1625 s. In the reign of
James I. the said William, lord Downe, built a
large mansion-house at Cogges in Oxfordshire, now
partly standing, on the sue and ruins of the priory,
dissolved by Henry VI *. He likewise built from
"Sol. pro chirothecis magistri Pope, xxxij /."
This, I suppose, was a compliment to their father-in-law Wil-
liam Pope, when he brought the boys to the college. Thomas,
now fourteen years old, appeared among the young nobility of
the university, in the choir of Christ church cathedral, before
James the first and his queen, in the year 1605. Wake's Rex
Plat. p. 35. edit. 1607. In 1610, he was made knight of
the Bath, at the creation of prince Henry. He was in high
savour with James I. And by Charles I. with whom he was in
equal esteem, he was created earl of Cleveland. His loyalty
and intrepidity make a conspicuous figure in the grand rebel-
lion. Dugd. Bar. iii. 310. col. t. Lady Anne, abovemen-
tioned, also by her first husband left a daughter, Jane, mar-
ried to sir John Finett, knight, of Westkele in Kent, who
was sent an envoy into France, 1619, and knighted the next
year. In 1626, he was constituted master of the ceremonies
to Charles the first, having been assistant-master in the foregoing
reign, during which office, he wrote a book, now very scarce,
entit. Finetti Philoxenis, Somt thoict observations, C3"s.
which contains a curious description of the ceremonies of an
age of ceremony. See Collins, ut supr.—Birch's Pr. Henry,
p. 192.—Wood's Ath. Oxon. i. F. 270.—See also the Phi-
loxenis, p. 167, 199. edit. 1656. 8vo. This book has been
translated into German.
At lord Guilford's, abovementioned, there is a picture large
as life, of Anne lady Wentworth, and her three children, Tho-
mas, Henry, and Jane, which she had by her first husband, lord
Wentworth. It is painted by Vansomer, 1596.
'Registr. Wroxton.
« MSS. Wood, Mus. Afhm. E. 1. 410. p. 45.
E e 3 the

<page 457>
438 APPENDIX.
the ground, and finished in the year 1618', the
present mansion • house at Wroxton; where his
love of the Arts appears in the east-window of
of the chapel, the glass of which he caused to be
decorated, in 1623, by Van Ling', with histories
from the new testament, and family Arms k. At this
place, but probably in the old abbey house', he was
visited by James f. in a progress; where he enter-
tained the king with the fashionable and courtly di-
versions of hawking and bear-baiting. At the fame
time his lady having been lately delivered of a
daughter, the babe was presented to the king, hold-
ing the following humorous epigram in her hand,
with which his majesty was highly pleased m.
k Date ibid, in the hall.—In the year 1600, I find him
living at Ilook-norron, co. Oxon. Ex chart, in tbrsaur. cell,
præiia. This was in a house built by the Brandons dukes of
Suffolk. The manor of Hook-norton now belonging to the
bislioprick of Oxford, was granted to sir Thomas Pope, by Pat.
1. Mar. regiu. Test. Jun. 20. par. 5. "Cum peninentiis in
'* com. Oxon. etc,"
'From the window.
k Among the beautiful fragments of old painted glass, with
inscriptions, in lord Temple's Gothic temple, at Stowe, is a
pane inscribed sir William Pope and Anne Hopton; which,
I suppose, came from this window.
1 Which stood in the Garden on the east side of the present
house.
m It is supposed to have been written by Dr. Richard Corbet
then a young student of Christ Church, Oxon. afterwards
Bishop of Norwich. "In 1605, he was esteemed one of the
"most celebrated Wits in the university, as his potnu, jests, ro-
"mantic fancies and exploits, which he made and performed ex-
*' temport,

<page 458>
APPENDIX. 439
See this little mistres here,
Did never fit in Peter's chaire,
Or a triple crowne did weare •,
And yet she is a Pope.
No benefice she ever sold,
Nor did dispence with sins for gold;
She hardly is a sev'nnight old,
And yet she is a Pope.
No king her feet did ever kislse,
Or had from her worse look than this:
Nor did she ever hope,
To saint one with a rope;
And yet she is a Pope.
A female Pope youll fay, a second Joan;
No sure—she is Pope Innocent or none".
*' lemport, shewed. Afterwards entering into holy Orders, he
"became a most quaint preacher, and therefore much followed
"by ingenious men. At length being made one of the chap-
"lains to his majesty king James the first, who highly valued
"him for his Jim fancy and preaching, he, was by his favour
"promoted, &c." Wood, Ath. Oxon. i. col. 600. Corbet,
however, was a man of real wit, and possessed a vein of high
humour, which would have pleased a more delicate taste than
that of James. His Poetica Stromata were printed in
1647.
■ Fuller's Worthies, London, pag. 223. Ed. 1662. At
Wroxton there is a very curious picture of prince Henry while
a boy. The date is 1603, and the prince's age is marked 11.
But he was then only 9. Vertue could not discover the painter.
He is represented large as life, cutting the throat of a stag after
£ e 4 hunting.
'

<page 459>
44° APPENDIX.
Before I speak particulary of his Children, I
return to his sisters above-mentioned. Of whom,
Anne, the eldest, married John Spurling, esquire,
of Baldock in Hertfordshire \ Georgia was born
at Wroxton, 1563% and married Robert Raynes-
ford, esquire, of Staverton in Northamptonshire '.
Jane, the third, married Francis Combes, esquire, of
hunting. At some little distance is sir John Harrington, a
youth, the prince's intimate friend, as appears by his arms
hung up in a tree. This piece was probably painted to com-
pliment some boyish atchievement in hunting performed by the
prince; for, almost from his infancy, he was remarkably fond
of hunting. In the great hall of the old royal palace at Wood-
stock, where he resided, there was preserved a prodigious pair
of stag's horns, with an inscription importing that the stag war
hunted and killed by prince Henry. Probably the prince ac-
companied the king at this visit.
0 MSS. Pedigr. of Pope, penes honoratiss. com. de Guild-
ford.—In the herald's office, there are two or three pedigrees
of this family. But they are in general false and defective.
That which I have cited, as being among MSS. Raiulivs. BM.
Until. Manu A. Wood, seems to be taken from one of these.
Perhaps the most correct one in that office, is G. 3. 26 . Offic.
Arm. They have been obligingly compared for me by Ralph
Bigland, esquire, Somerset-herald, and examined by Mr. Astle
of the Paper Office.
» Registr. Wroxton. Where it is said that George Carleton,
tsquier, was her godfather. He was of Brightwell, in Oxford-
shire, and related to this family by marrying Elisabeth, daugh-
ter of sir John Brockett, son of fir John Brockett, mentioned
above. See Chauncy's Herts, p. 313.
i MSS. Wood, Mus. Aslimol. E. 1. pag. 115.
Hempstead

<page 460>
APPENDIX. 441
Hempstead in Hertfordshire r. Penelope was born
1568'. Mary was born 1569'. Susannah, the se-
r MSS. pedigr. of Pope, penes honoratiss. com. de Guildford.
Their son Francis Combe, was gentleman-commoner of Trinity
college, Oxford, under the tuition of Mr. John Bowman,
which he quitted in 1602. Lib. Caut. in quarto. He was an
elegant scholar, especially in the Greek tongue. The books
which he left to Trinity college library, are a proof of his taste
and learning. He died in 1641, and lies buried at Hempstead
in Hertfordshire. See Salmon's Hertfordshire, pp. 95.
116. edit. sol. 1728. His numerous benefactions are recorded
on his wife's monument in the southern chancel of the church
of Abbats Langley in Hertfordshire.
* Registr. Wroxton. Where it is said that Edward Boughton
was her godfather. He was of Lawford in Warwickshire, and
married Susannah a daughter, as it seems, of the first sir John
Brockets. Dugd. Warw. p. 66. From Chauncy it appears,
that sir Nicholas Barrington, who died 1521, married Elisabeth,
a daughter of sir John Brockets, afterwards married to William
Boughton, esquire. Herts, p. 367.
* Registr. Wroxton. Her godfather, Anthony Bustard, to
whom sir Thomas Pope bequeathes by will x I. He was the
son of John Bustarde, second husband to sir Thomas Pope's mo-
ther Margaret, buried in a chapel on the south side of Adder-
bury church, near Deddington, in Oxfordshire, with this in-
scription on a large monument of stone. "Nere unto this
"tombe lyeth buried the bodyes of John Bustarde esquire and
*' Elizabeth his wife, and Jane Bustarde wife to Anthonie Buf-
"tarde, son and heire to the said John: which John had by
"the saide Elizabethe xvii children. And the said John dyed
"anno dom. 1534. The said Elizabeth anno 1517, and the
"saide Jane anno 1568." Arms above. On a be-
tween 3 raundells, 3 bustardes, a bard. ingr. The same impal. a
ebeveron tngr. between 3 unicorn's heads erased. See Life. p. 5.
In the fame church is a monument erected by the said Anthony
to his daughter Mary, and her husband Edward More who died
1586.

<page 461>
4+2 APPENDIX.
1586. Of the daughters of the said John:—Joanne marries
William Chauncey, esquire, of Edgcote, co. Nor,thampt. who
died 1585. She dies 1571. Hist of Nortbamptonstt. i. 119.
Christian marries Edward Wilmot of Witney, co. Oxon. and,
afterwards, William Bury of Culham, co. Berks. MSS. Wood,
Ut supr. E. 1. pag. 21. Anne marries Edward Frere, esquire,
of the city of Oxford. See supr. p. 307. I find one John
Bustarde, a subscribing witness to an instrument in Trinity col-
lege, Oxon. dat. Apr. 1. it Eliz. Also one John Bustarde of
Oxford/hire, a fugitive for popery. Strypis Reformat, ii. App.
103. John Bustarde is also removed from New college, Oxon.
1560. Wood. Ant. ^83. The father of John Bustarde, buried
in Adderbury church, as above, if not the fame, is perhaps
John Bustarde mentioned in the will of Rich. Fox, of Bere-
ford St. Michael's, co. Dorset da<. May 31, 1502. In which
the said Richard Fox leaves to the guild of Deddington, xx/.
To buying a bell for ths church there, xij i. To the light of
our lady of pity there, that is, of the holy virgin holding our
saviour in her arms after his crucifixion, sometimes called the
image of Pile, vjj.'viij</. With other benefactions and be-
quests. The residue of his goods to be disposed of for his
children by Rich. Fox, and John Bustarde. Ex Registr.
Blaymir. qu. 15. cur praer. Cant. Unless Dodynton in Somerset-
shire be here intended. The earliest notice I find of the name
is in 7 Edw. ii. 1313, when one John Bustarde is pardoned as
an adherent to Thomas earl of Lancaster, concerned in the
death of Pierre Gaveston. Rym. Feed. iii. 444. Gavefton
was detained a prisoner at Deddington for some days before
his execution near Warwick. Dugd. Bar. ii. 44. One Wil-
liam Bustard, S. T. B who probably was of this family, was
appointej one of the priests of the chantry of Guy-cliff, near
Warwick, Jul. 29, 1520.—Priv. figill. Hen. viii. an. reg. it.
Jul. 29. Also Robert Bustard is presented to the vicarage of
Newenham by St. Alban's abbey, 24 Feb. 1468. Registr.
Mon. S. Alban. John Bustard of Oxfordshire, appears as a fu-
gitive for religion, about the middle of Elisabeth's reign. Peck's
Dlsid. Curios, lib. ii. ad calc——On mentioning the name
9f

<page 462>
APPENDIX. 443
cond, was married, Nov. 12, 1583, to Daniel
Danvers, of Culworth in Northamptonshire".
I now return to the issue of the aforesaid William
Pope first earl of Downe, and his countess, Anne.
These were two sons, William and Thomas: and
one daughter, Anne", who died, as appears, un-
married, and was buried at Wroxton, Jul. 13,
1629 \ As to the sons, William Pope, ancestor of
Henry earl of Litchfield, was born at, Wroxton,
1596 r. He was knighted by James I. at the royal
manor of Woodstock, Jul. 28, i6l6z. He was mar-
bs Freer in this note, I take this opportunity of inserting the
following notice concerning William Freer, [see p. '07.] ex-
tract d from the Journal book of txptnces of building Cardinal Wol~
seyt colltgt, now Christ Church, Oxford. MSS. Br. Twyne, no-
tat. R. archiv. Oxon. p. 3c 1. It is ann. zo Hen. viii. "Paid
"to WilHam Freer of Oxford, for the new makinge, mend-
'' inge, and repairinge of the high waye leadinge between
'* Bjllstiipton and the crosse standing uppon Heddington-
"hills, for the more speedy conveyance of stone, tymber, and
•* lyrrie, to be carried from sundrie places to the saide worke,
"over and above, xvl. paidc by the handes of Mr. Nicholas
"Townly, master of the works, as by a booke of parcells
"thereof made by the saide William Freer, then being survey-
"our of the saide workes, doth plainly appear at large,—
'' xxxivl. vijji. vd."
0 Registr. Wroxton,
w Inscript. sepulchral, ibid. Perhaps the infant presented to
king James.
* Registr. ibid.
* Ibid.
1 MSS, Dugdale. Mus. Alhmol. R. sol. 215.
ried,

<page 463>
444 APPENDIX.
ried, 1615, in St. Margaret's church Westminster,
to Elisabeth', eldest daughter of fir Thomas Watson,
knight, of Halstead in Kent\ He died in 1624,
while his father William was yet living, and was bu-
ried, Aug. 29, at Wroxtonc. His relict after-
wards married sir Thomas Pennistone, knight and
baronet, of Cornwell in Oxfordshire*. The laid
William and Elizabeth Pope had issue three sons,
Thomas, William, and John; and two daughters,
Anne and Elizabeth'. Anne born at Wroxton,
1617', married sir Samuel Danvers, baronet, of
Culworth aforesaid8. They had a son christened
Pope, who gave a large embossed silver goblet to
Trinity college, Oxford, which lately preserved the
following Inscription.
a Registr. Wroxton.
* A memorable benefactor to the church of Halstead, 1610:
adorning it with a beautiful painted window, steeple, porch,
&c. In the same church is a stone to the memory of lady
Watson hit wife, placed there by Thomas Pope, second earl
of Downe, her grandson. See Harris's Kent, p. 141, 14.2.
And Philpot's Villare Cant. p. 177. Whose mistakes are here
corrected.
c Registr. Wroxton.
* MSS. Pedigrees in Mus. Afhmol. sol. F. 2. pag. 102.
* Ex Testamento Avi, Gulielmi Pope, dat. Dec. 31, 1630.
when they were all living.
f Registr. Wroxon.
« MSS. pedigr. Rawlins. ut supr. Collins is here corrected,
Peer. ii. 383. Ed. i. And Hist. Northamptonshire, i. 164.
Ex

<page 464>
APPENDIX. 445
Ex dono Pope Danvers, flit unici Samuelis Danvers
de Culwortb in agro Northampton baronetti, ex ma-
tris parte Fundatoris consanguinei, et bujus collegii
primi ordinis commenfalis, an. dom. 1602.
The younger sister, Elizabeth, born at Halstead,
Decemb. 19, 1618 s, was married to George Ra-
leigh, esquire, of Farmborough in Warwickshire \
To return to their Brothers above-mentioned, Tho-
mas, William, and John. Of William I find no
more than his name recited in his grandfather's will:
and that he was born at Cogges, Jan. 11, 1624*.
John was allo born at Cogges Nov. 2, 1623, where
his father resided \ Of Thomas I must speak more
at large, whom I therefore mention last.
He was born at Cogges, 1622'. At the age of
nine years, on the death of his grandfather William,
viz. Jul. 1631, he became a baronet, and second
earl of Downe, by succession. He was educated at
home under a careful tutor"; and in June, 1639,
was matriculated a nobleman of Christ Church,
* Registr. Wroxton.
} MSS. Pedigr. Rawlins.
J Registr. Cogges.
k Registr. Wroxton. Mrs. [i. c. Lady] Elizabeth Pope of
Cogges, occurs in 1636, in Registr. Parret, [citat. supr.
Numb, xxi.] sol. 106. b. This must have been their mother.
1 Registr. Wroxton.
■ Wood, Ath. Oxon. ii. 543.
Oxford.

<page 465>
446 APPENDIX.
Oxford". He married Lucy, daughter of John
Dutton, esquire, of Sherborne in Gloucestershire °.
She died Apr. 6, 1656, and lies buried in the
church of Cubberley, near Cheltenham, in the said
county p. Having suffered severely, for his activity
in the royal cause during the grand rebellion, inso-
much that he was compelled to fell his house and
estate at Cogges, he left the kingdom about the
beginning of Cromwell's usurpation ,: and making
an advantage of his persecutions, took the oppor-
tunity of improving himself by visiting foreign
countries'. About the time of the restoration he
■ MSS. Wood, collectan. e lib. matric. ut supr.—See also
Laud's Chaiiccllorjbip, p. 190. seq.
* And not Elisabeth, as Wood fays, Ath. Oxon. ubi supr.
See Atkyns's Gloucesterihire, p. 377, 378, 646. Elisabeth
married John Colt, esquire. Atkyns, ibid.
* Inscript. sepulchral, ibid.
* Whitelock mentions a fine imposed on the earl of Downe
by the parliament, assigned to the garrison at Abingdon, in
1645. Mentor, p. 1 86. Other evidences specify a fine of 6000/.
These confiscations were often granted to the prefbyterian mi-
Bisters, for the better support of enthusiastic prayer, and of
sermons which had no end.
'In his distresses, Trinity college, Oxford, granted him sums
of money, as appears by a schedule in the college-Treasury.
"Mem. A. D. 1647, Given to the earl of Downe, piji finitum
"Computum, by order of Mr. President and Officers,
145/. 13/. ifd." And in the following year, the college gave
a present to sir Thomas Pope, knight, his Uncle, afterwards
a baronet, and in 1660, the third earl of Downe, hereafter-
mentioned, who was also a considerable sufferer in the royal
cause, viz. Comp. Burss. 1648. "Concess. domino Thomas
"Pope,

<page 466>
APPENDIX. 447
returned home; and dying at Oxford', Decemb.
28, 1660, was interred before the altar in the church
of Wroxton, with the following inscription, which
further illustrates his character, and confirms many-
particulars here mentiond.
H. S. E.
Illustrissimus dom. dominus Thomas Pope, de
wllcott in agro oxoniensi baronettus,
baro bellturbet, comes dunensis, in hl-
BERNIA.
Vir, in qua nihil defidtres prater vitam diuturnam:
cui ad eximiam corporis elegantiam, et miram felicitatem
ingenii, accejfit morum integritas, et rerum scientia non
zulgaris. In quo eminere pojset erga patriam affeElus,
nifi quod par ejjet ejus in amicitiis fides. In omnibus
recti et aqui observantiffimus; super catera, in regent
pius. Quern pojiquam a perduellibus nefario hello la-
ceffitum, jujliflimis fed male felicibus juvijfet armis;
affliflis jam domi rebus, in exteras regiones proficijcitur:
Inter quas, ubi quæ Europai mundi bumaniores sunt
partts non incurius aut frustra perlustra£et; reverfus in
patriam, quum illic etiam sereniflimum principem tanto
patre dignum, Haredem reducem vidijjet Utus; saltern
"Pope, xlv/." • One is surprised at those donations, under the
government of doctor Robert Harris, Cronwell's prefbyterian
President. But Harris was a man of candour, and I believe a
majority of the old loyal fellows still remained.
• MSS. Wood, ut supr. No. 8466. 4. pag. 100,
(quod

<page 467>
448 APPENDIX.
(quod unurn reliquum erat) cbarijstmx filia deminæ Eli-
zabeth* ' cum domino Francisco Henrico Lee de Ditcb-
leyy baronetto, auspicatijstmas feliciter celebraffet nuptias,
(quia jam fpes omnesjic suas impleverat,) diuturni per-
vicaciis morbi patientia superatis, non illibenter fato
cessit.
Anno\
Bom. 1660.— "Dec. 28.
Æt. 39.
They had one only daughter, Elizabeth, who mar-
ried sir Francis Henry Lee, baronet, of Ditchley
in Oxfordshireu, by whom she had two sons, Ed-
ward-Henry, created earl of Litchfield by Charles
II w, grandfather by this match to Heniy earl of
Litchfield, chancellor of the university of Oxford:
and Francis-Henry, a gentleman-commoner of Tri-
nity college aforesaid \ She was afterwards mar-
ried to Robert earl of Lindfey r. Of this lady there
1 Bom at Cogges, April 15, 1645. Registr. Cogges.
■ Ex epitaph, modo citat.
w Collins, Peer. ii. 390. Ed. i.
1 Ex Regilir. in Pergamen. coll. Trin. ab ann. 1683. sol. 6.
1 Registr. prædict. And MSS. Wood, modo citat. ——
Wood in another MS. mentions Philip Bertie, a younger son
of Rob. earl of Lindfey, of Trin. coll. who speaks a copy of
English verses, in the theatre at Oxford, 1683, to the duke
and dutchefs of York, the lady Anne, &c. They were written
by Creech, then A. B. of Wadham college, and are printed in
Examen Poeticum, or vol. ill. of Miscellany Poems. D. 19.
4to. pag. 56. MSS. Mus. Ashm. In Monmouth's Rebellion,
in the year 1685, the fame Philip Bertie, being half-nephew to
the

<page 468>
APPENDIX. 449
is a capital picture at lord Litchfield's at Ditchley,
by sir Peter Lely.
the Earl of Abingdon then Lord Lieutenant of Oxfordshire, was
Captain of a company chiefly of his own college, in the militia
of the University, which he trained in Trinity college grove.
Wood, MSS. ibid. pag. 76. b. Under that year, I find the
following notices relating to this business in Comp. Burss. Coll.
Trin. Oxon. viz. 1685. «* Dat. Tubicinibus Comitis de Ab*'
"ingdon, xs." Again, "Pro armamentis Collegii expolien-
"dis et emendandis, xvi/." — And, "Pro festivis ignibus
"[bonfires] post devictos rebelles, i /. xij s. x d." In the fame
Computus are disbursements for horses hired to serve against
the rebels.
These notices relating to the troops raised by the university
of Oxford in Monmouth's rebellion, remind me of a curious
anecdote concerning Smith's famous Ode entitled Pocockius,
which I give from MSS. Cod. Ballard, vol. xix. Letter 104.
"In Monmouth's Rebellion, the university of Oxford raised
"a regiment for the King's service, and Christ Church and
"Jesus college made one Company, of which lord Norris,
** since earl of Abingdon, was captain: who presented Mr.
"Urry a Corporal [Serjeant] therein with a halbard. Upon
•* Dr. Pocock's death, Mr. Urry lugged Captain Rag [Smith]
"into his chamber in Peckwater, locked him in, put the key
"in his pocket, and ordered his bedmaker to supply him with
"necessaries through the window, and told him he should not
•* come out, till he made a copy of verses on the Doctor's death.
"The sentence being irreversible, the captain made the Ode»
"and sent it with this Epistle to Mr. Urry, who was a well
"built man, and large limbed: who [Smith] thereupon had
'* his release." Pococke died in 1691. Urry, a student of
Christ-church, was the editor of Chaucer. The Epistle, here
mentioned, is a ludicrous prose analysis of the Ode, beginning
Opufiulum tuum, Halberdaric amplijfimt, dsV. and is lately printed
in Dr. Johnson's English Poets, vol. 4. p. 62. The writer
of this anecdote is Mr. William Brome of Ewithington in
F f Hereford-

<page 469>
45* APPENDIX.
I now return to Thomas Pope, the second son or
William first earl of Downe, uncle to Thomas
above-mentioned the second earl, and ancestor to
Francis the present lord Guildford. He was born
1598 \ He was knighted by Charles I. at the royal
manor of Woodstock, Aug. 1, 1625". He married
at Wroxton, Apr. 20, 1636, Beata, Daughter of
Sir Henry Poole of Saperton in Gloucestershire,
baronetb. He appeared in arms for the royal cause.
On the death of his nephew Thomas, he became by
succession, Decemb. 28, 1660, a baronet, and third
earl of Downe. He died Jan. 11, 1667, and was
buried at Wroxton: as was his countess Beata, Jul.
18, 1678 c. They had three sons, Thomas, Henry,
and a second Henry; and five daughters, Elenor,
Anne, Beata, Frances, and Finctta. Thomas was
born, 1640, and on the death of his father, Jan. 11,
16671 became by succession a baronet, and fourth
Herefordshire, who died, aged 82, in 1745. He was of Merton-
college Oxford, an excellent scholar, and a very learned anti-
quary: intimately acquainted with Smith and Urry, and with
Lord Oxford, John Philips, &c. In one of his Letters he
fays, that Philips dedicated and sent to him the Splendid
Shilling in manuscript, and that he sent Philips in return a
pound of tobacco. Ibid. Lett. 78. Compare Letters, 72. 74.
x At Wroxton there is a picture, dated 1606, of William
Pope, aged 10, and of his brother Thomas* here mentioned,
aged 8.
• MSS. Dugdale, Muf. AstunoJ. R. sol. 232.
v Registr. Wroxton. There is a valuable portrait of" this
lady at Wroxton, by the second Vansomer.
c Registr. Wroxton.
and

<page 470>
APPENDIX. 4St
and last earl of Downed. These dignities he enjoyed
but a few months; for he died May 18, 1668%
and was buried with his ancestors, in a vault under
the chancel at Wroxton. The first Henry was born
Apr. 11, 1643, and died an infantf. The second
Henry was born Jan. 27, 1645 r, and died at
Oxford in Trinity college, where he was a student,
aged 19, Jun. 20, 1665 \ Of the daughters, Ele-
nor died an infant 1637 '. Anne was born 1637 k,
and married sir Edward Boughton, baronet, of Law-
ford in Warwickshire'. Beata, born 1639, was mar-
ried Febr. 15, 1668, to William Soames, esquire,
of Thurlowe in Suffolkm. Frances, born 1647,
was married March 5, 1671, to sir Francis
North, afterwards lord keeper, and lord North of
of Guildford"; and from this match, grandfather
to the present Francis lord North and Guildford.
She died Nov. 15, 1678 % and was buried at Wrox-
* There are pictures at Ditchley of the two last earls of Downe.
e Registr. Wroxton.
f Ibid.
t Ibid.
k Ex Tumul. ibid. I find the countess of Downe, his mo-
ther, making a present to the college, "in memoriam silii sui
"Dni Henrici Pope hujus collegii comm. desunQi." Registr.
ibid, in pergamen. ab ann. 1665, sol. 46. Where ihe is called,
by mistake, Elisabetha instead of Beata.
1 Registr. Wroxton.
k Ibid.
1 MSS. Pedigr. Rawlinf.
m Registr. Wroxton.
» Ibid.
* Ex Epitaphio.
F f 2 ton •,

<page 471>
452 APPENDIX.
ton; where is an epitaph on her monument, written
by Dr. Henry Paman, public orator of the univer-
sity of Cambridge, who is said to have been well
acquainted with her amiable characterp. The young-
est daughter, Finetta, was married May 4, 1674,
to Robert Hyde, esquire % son of Alexander Hyde,
bishop of Salisbury r. Thus by the death of male
issue, and marriage of the female, this family and
name, at least in this branch, became extinct soon
after the restoration of Charles the second.
For from what is here collected on this subject, it
must appear, that our great poet, Alexander
Pope, was related to this family only by some colla-
teral branch. I have mentioned all the male issue,
and. their marriages; except the marriages of John
t North's Life of lord keeper North, 4». p. 84.
1 Registr. Wroxton. See Wood, Ath. Oxon. ii. 543.—f.
235-
* Whose elder brother Laurence Hyde, esquire, of Heale near
Salisbury, married Mary the daughter of Antony Warton,
rector of Bremor in Hamfhire, about the reign of Charles
the first, and great grandfather to the father of the author of
this work. This lady, when a widow, for many days conceal-
ed and accommodated in her house at Heale, aforesaid, king
Charles the second after his hazardous flight from the battle of
Worcester, in the year 1651, and furnished the means for hi*
escape into France. At the restoration, the king gave her a
very valuable picture of himself, when a boy, a half-length,
painted by Vandyck, and now in the posseslion of my brother
doctor Warton of Winchester. See Clarendon's Hist. vol. iii.
p. 331. edit. sol. 1704.
and

<page 472>
APPENDIX. 453
and William, two younger sons of fir William Pope
knight, of Cogges: both which, I suspect, died
young; but if ever married, either of them may
reasonably be supposed rather too young * to have
been the father of the elder Alexander Pope, who
was born »642'. Besides, had the poet been de-
scended from either of these two younger sons, the
title of earl of Downe could not have failed during
his own and his father's life-time. Mr. Pope tells
us, that, his "Father [Alexander] was of a gentle-
cc man's familv in Oxfordshire, the head of which
"was the earl of Downe, whose sole heiress married
"the earl of Lindsey. His mother was the daughter
"of W. Tumor of York: She had three brothers,
"one of whom was killed, anothes died in the ser-
u vice of king Charles." Notwithstanding what I
have here said, I imagine that Mr. Pope alludes to
Thomas Pope the second earl of Downe, whose epi-
taph I have given, no less than to his mother's bro-
thers, in the following lines.
• The eldest of them, John, was born Nov. 2, 1623. If-it
can be proved that he was the father of the elder Alexander
Pope, it will follow that Thomas Pope, second earl of Downe,
was his uncle: and consequently, that fir Thomas Pope, the
founder of Trinity college, was the poet's uncle, to a high de-
gree. It may perhaps be trifling to mention, that Alexander
Pope occurs twice as a name in this family, in, and about,
Temp. Edw. iii. — MSS. Pedigr. penes honorariss. com. de
Guildford.
1 Ex Epitaphio.
Ff 3 Of

<page 473>
454 A P P E N D I X.
Of gentle blood, part shed in honour's cause*
"While yet in Britain honour had applause,
Each Parent sprung u.
And on the whole from my researches on this
head I am inclined to determine, that our poet was
descended from a branch of this family, viz. Pope
of Dedington w, which settled at Ginge, near Wan-
tage in Berkshire. They have still, or lately had, in
the family, which 1 believe has now lost the name
o£ Pope* a picture of fir Thomas Pope, and esco-
cheons of his arms.
'_. For the convenience of the reader, the following
short Scheme, being a comprehensive recapitulation
of what has been said, both here and in the Life,
concerning this family, with some improvements, is
annexed.
■ Warb. Pope, iv. 43. ed. 1752.
w Thomas Pope, grandfather of William Pope, sir Thomas
Ptfpe's father, had seven sons: William, the eldest, married
Jmt Bmit. MSS. Pedigr. modo citat. penes honoratiss. com.
de Guildford. .
NUMB.

<page 474>
-tt.
P P E N D I X. 455
NUMB. XXVII.
Gulielm«7s Pope de Dedington, to. Oxon. Gen. ob. 15C3.
II
Habuit Filium primogenitum
Thomam Pops, mil. Fvndatoreu Coll. Trin. Oxoh.
1554. ob. 1558. Jan. 29.
Qui habuit Fratrem unicum, præter tres Soreres,
Johannem Pope de Wroxton, CO. Oxon. Armig. ob. 1583.
11
Habuit Filium, præter duos alios, et tex Filias,
Gulielmum Pope, nat. 1573. factum Equit. de Bain. 1603.
Baronett. 1611. Comitem de Downe, 1629. ob. 1631.
I
Habuit Filios duos, pr*ter unicam Filiam,
II. fl
Majorim, ft MlNORXM,
Goi.izi.mum Pope, ntt. 15*6. y& Thomam Pqpe, n»t. 159I. ftctum
factum mil. 1616. ob. vivo Guji- ft mil. 1615. baronett. et com. ten.
dmo Patse, 1604. ft oe Downe, moituo TaeMAsepb-
|| ^ te, 1660. ob. 166S.
Habuit filium, preter atios, et <taas ft |
filias, Thomam Pope, nat. »6xa. ft Habuit filium, prater duos alios et
baronett. et com. sec. de Downe, & filias quinine, Thomam Pope,
mortuo avo Cumiimo, 1J31. ft nat- -*6*0, <om• V*111, K ,lu de
ob. iSSo. f£ Downe, 1668. ob. eod. anno.
'1 » «
Habuit unicam filiam, et barredenj, ft Qm babuit in coha»edom, una cum
Elisabetham Pope, nuptam D. ft duabus e siliabus prædictis, Fran-
Francisco - Hunrico Lee de & cue am Pope, oat. 1647.*, 1678,
Ditcbley, c«. O*on. Baronettoi. & Xuptam D, f»/iicw» North,
j| & facto baroni de GuUdford, rt8}.
Habuere fiKutn, prater alinrn, Ed- ft ob. t6t$.
wardum-Franciscum Lee, Ba- )K II . . .
ronett. factum comitem de Litch- ft Habuere filium, prater treJ ahos, et
field, 1674. ob. 171*. "ft Alias duas, F**nci«:«M North,
|| ft bar. de GuiUsord, 1685- ob- »7*9«
CioioiuM-HiNaicuM Lee. com. ft H
de Litchfield, 1716, ob. 1743. ft Franciscum North, bar. «k GuUd-
|) ft ford, 1729. com. 175a. Hodie su-
Georcium-Hikricum Lee, com. "ft perstitem, 1771. ThsUn umnstua
de Litchfield. 1743. Nupcr aca- ft et honoribus majorem.
demiæ Oxon. honuratissimum can- ft
cellarium, 1772. ft
f, Renuptam Roberto Comiti de Lindsey.

<page 475>
456 APPENDIX.
, - - 11*
NUMB. XXVIII.
Account of Sir Thomas Pope's Burial,
1559 *•
}''V-■" Hp H E vi day of ffebruary whent to the
j X churche to be beried at Clarkenwellb sir
"Thomas Pope knyght, with a standarde, a cott %
"pennon of armes, a targets, ellmett and sworde,
"and iiii dosen of armes, and xii for the branchys,
"and vi for the bodie, of bokeram: and ii ha-
*' rolds d of armes, Mr. Clarenchus c and Mr.
"Yorke. Mr. Clarenchus bare the cott, and Mr.
"Yorke bare the helmett and crest. The gayff xl
£• .; y. '* From MSS- Cottoh. sol. Vitellius, F. 5. Brit. Muf. It
u H ''' >» a journal of occurrences chiefly in and about London, by
. P ( ft cotemporary and a curious observer, from 4 Edw. vi. to 5
Eliz. viz. 1563. This article is almost the only one, of any
length, now remaining clear and legible in the whole manu-
script; which in many parts is burnt to a cinder, and otherwise
much injured.
b This is inaccurately said. The body only laid in state in
the church os Clerkenwell.
• ■ Coat.
* Heralds.
* Clarencieux.
mantyll

<page 476>
APPENDIX. 457
"mantyll ffrys gownes [to] xx men and xx wo-
"men: the xx men bare torchys, the women ii
"and ii together, with rayles. And ii grett whyt
"branchys and iv branchys [of] taperys of wax;
"garnissshed with armcs and with iv dosen of pen-
"sels. Sir Richard Sowthwell, knyght, and fir
"Thomas Stradling, and dyvers oders morners in
"blake, to the nomber of lx and mo in blake.
"And all the howsse and the chyrche with blake
*' and armes: And aftyr, to the playse to drynke
"with spyse-brede and wynes. And the morrow
"masse iii songes, with ii pryke songes, and the iii
"[third] of Requiem, with the clarkes of Lon-
"don s. And after, he was beried: And that done,
"to the playse to dener; for ther was a grett dener,
"and plente of all thynges, and a grett doll of
«• money V
'So at abbot Iflip's funeral in Westminster abbey, 1532.
The dirge being fung, they werp entertained with " spiced
"bread, suckett, marmylate, spiced plate, and divers forts of
"wine.'1 Widmore's West. Abbey, p. 208.
* A society of fingers who were hired to assist on these occa-
sions. See Hist. Enol. Poetr. ii. p. 396.
11 See Life, p. 178. From this passage Strype drew what is
mentioned in his Annals, viz. "And sir Thomas Pope, a
"great man with the former queen [Mary,] buried with much
"much magnificence in Clerkenwell." [r. Walbroke.] Vol. i.
p. 32. Lond. 1725.
NUMB.

<page 477>
458 APPENDIX.
NUMB. XXIX.
Account os the Founder's Visit to Tri-
nity College Oxford, on St. Switfain's
Day, 1556'.
SC IA N T posteri, quod ad collegium venit D.
Fundator in fetto Sancti Swithini, A. D. 1556.
Ei ab equo descendenti adstitit ad frena magister
* MSS. Wife. This paper was transcribed by the late Rev.
Francis Wife, fellow of Trinity college, and Radclivian libra-
rian, from the original, which was in the possession of the learned
Dr. Arthur Charlett, master of University college, and formerly
fellow of Trinity college. It was written in the hand of Dr.
Arthur Yeldard, the second president of Trinity college; and
seemed to be intended for'an entry in the college-register, where
it does not appear. Mr. Wife told me, that he saw other ori-
ginal papers relating to Trinity college in Dr. Charlett's lib-
rary. Dr. Charlett seems to have made these collections for a
work which he left behind him in manuscript, entitled, " An
"Alphabetical Catalogue of die Presidents, Fellows, Scho-
"lars, and Benefactors of Trinity college, Oxford, to the
'* year 1692." This catalogue was in the hands of Mr. Raw-
lins, of Pophills in Gloucesterfliire, but is not now to be found.
See what is said of it in Hearne's MSS. Collections, vol. 130.
pag. 110. sub. ann. Bibl. Bodl. cod. Rawlins. And compare
Lite, p. 178. in the notes. In a letter from Dr. Richard Raw-
linson to Mr. George Ballard, author of the Learned Ladies,
dated

<page 478>
APPENDIX. 459
Præsidens: et mox, in pom-collegii, oratione satis
longa et officii plena exceptus elt a magistro Markes,
vice-præsidente •, ubi etiam humiliter eidem obtule-
runt et donarunt buriarii cirothecas aurifrigiatas.
Dein ad magnam præsidentis cameram eunt, sociis
et scholaribus utrinque stantibus. Comitabantur au-
tem D. Fundatorem episcopi Wintoniensis b et Eli-
enfis, aliique plures ex aula magnates. Postquam
Bibliothecam et Arbustum lustraverant, ad pran-
dium in magna aula collegii processum eft: ubi
laute et opipare convivium instruebatur, ad levum
D. Fundatoris, paulo tamen distantius, adsidente
Præsidente, ac dein ordine cæteris. In hoc convivi-
um, in quo aderant etiam duodecim ministralli, et
afierebantur inter alia plurima quatuor pingues
damæ, necnon octo lagenæ Muscadeli, alloca-
bant bursarii xij/. xivj. \xd. Quin et pro cirp-
thecis xxivj. x]d. Post, ad missam velpertinam in
choro capellæ præsens erat dictus D. Fundator, cum
dated Jun. 16, 1751, is the following passage. "Since my
"last, I call to mind that our friend Mr. Rawlins actually fold
"some of his MSS. Particularly I remember a large folio of
"Miscellanies [miscellaneous papers] mostly relating to Ox-
"ford, and partly in Dr. Chariot's hand, sold to Mr. Taylor
*' of Worcestershire": as also a copy of Wood's Antiquities of
"Oxford, Latin, with originals [interpolations] by Mr. Wood
"himself, &c." Letters, Cod. Ballard. vol. ii. Let. 138.
folio. Bibl. Bodl.
b But he was not yet inthroned. He had custody of the
Temporalities, 16 Maii, 1556. Rym. Feed. xv. 437. And the
licence of election is dated Jul. 16. ib. 441. See supr. Life,
P 237.
episcopis

<page 479>
460 APPENDIX.
episcopis et aliis, ubi divina celebrabat Præsidens
optima capa indutuse. Et obtulit D. Fundator
unam bursatn plenam Angelorum. Hujus autem
diei totas expenses statim ante discessum, pro sua
munificentia, rependebat integre D. Fundator in ma-
nus bursariorum, in scaccario computi, una cum *
ciffo argenteo deaurato. Dictus autem ciffus statim
ibidem implebatur vino mcdiato % vocato Ipocraffey
et ex eo fine mora propinabat D. Fundator Bursariis
et aliis praesentibus. Ac denique divertebat eo ves-
pere versus Windlesoram. Ac dedit D. Fundator
unicuique scholarium propria manu unum marcam.
'Who is ordered to celebrate "in sestis magis duplicibus, et
"principalibus, et in die Exequiarum mearum, totum diei Offi-
"cium ac Missam, cum diacono et subdiacono." Statut.
Coll. Trin. Cap. xiii.
* Leg. Cyphb.
* Legend. /. medicato.
NUMB.

<page 480>
APPENDIX. 461
NUMB. XXX.
Testimonium de Dom. Elisabetha Pau-
let, D. Thomæ Pope uxore secunda.
A Radulpho Kettell conscriptum \
E
Lizabetha, inter clarisfimas foeminas,
ob corporis animique praestantes dotes, in-
* Manu sua, inter chartaj manuscriptas A. Wood, Bibl.
Bodl. Oxon. Viz. A loose paper inserted in A. Wood's MS.
English History of the University of Oxsotd, torn, ii. sol. 388.
Dr. Ralph Kettel was president of Trinity college, and an ex-
cellent governor, for near fifty years. He had been fellow and
scholar of the college for fourteen years, during the life-time of
this lady. His family lived in her neighbourhood, at King's
Langley in Hertfordshire. She probably sent him to the col-
lege, where he was admitted scholar, Jun. 16, 1579. Registr.
prim. sol. 30. He was chaplain to Bilson bishop of Winches-
ter, and to lady Walsingham, widow of the Secretary. A good.,
old portrait of him, in a brown furred gown, is in the college.
Aubrey fays,that his picture was drawn by Mr. Bathurst, one of
the foundation of Trinity college, from memory three years
after his death, which was a strong likeness. Surrey, torn.
v. p. 406. His Life, but with many mistakes and absurdities,
is among Aubrey's manuscript Lives in the Aslimolean Mu-
seum.
The following anecdote is recorded of Dr. Kettel, which I.
relate, because it is imperfectly told by Aubrey, and as it marks
the

<page 481>
462 APPENDIX.
"gcnium, multiplicem cognitionem, sermonis fa-
"cundiam, morum integritatem, pietatem, et muni-
"siccntiam merito celebranda, orta ex Blounto-
** rum splendida familia in comitatu StafFordiensi de
"Burton ad Trent, connubio tradita est Antonio
«* Basford, viro inter armigeros infigni. Qui, sus-
** cepto filio unico Joanne Basford, Elizabetham
"reKquit superstitem, fama vitaque adeo celebrem,
** ut venerabilis Fundator noster Thomas Pope,
** tune temporis, opibus, dignitate, et gratia, apud
*' omnes ordines plurimum pollens, hanc fibi con-
*' sortem dignissimam adsciverit. Quae jam denuo
"conjux facta, propendebat admodum in opera
"quaeque insigniora; inter quae collegium hoc
"meritissime reponimus. Ad quod fundandum,
"omni conatu et fuasu Fundatorem nostrum con-
the times. While president, it was his custom to attend daily
the Disputations in the college-hall, on which occasion he
constantly wore a large black-furred muff-. Before him stood an
hour-glass, brought by himself into the hall, and placed on a
table, for ascertaining the time of the continuance of the exer-
cise, which was to last an hour at least. One morning, after
Cromwell's soldiers had taken possession of Oxford, a halberdier
rustled into the hall during this ceremony, and plucking off our
venerable doctor's muff, threw it in his face; ar.d then with a
stroke of his halberd broke the hour-glass in pieces. The doc-
tor, though old and infirm, instantly seized the soldier by the
collar, who was soon overpowered by the assistance of the dis-
putants. The halberd was carried out of the hall in triumph
before the doctor; but the prisoner, with his halberd, was
quickly rescued by a party of soldiers, who stood at the bottom
of the hall, and had enjoyed the whole transaction. MS. Papers
cf Df. Batkurji.
"tinuo

<page 482>
APFENDTX. 463
"• tinuo adhortata est. Unde evenit, ut ubi A.
"1558 b, Januarii 29, dominica Sexagefima, 2
** Ckrkemvell ad electos iuos spiritus deus dictum
"Thomam transtulerit, Elizabetham autem ad
"pkbis suae Christianae summum solatium super-
«* esse voluerit, Fundator huic summam auctorita-
"tern et potestatem in nos, Alumnos ipsius, de-
*' mandaverit. Hinc, magis magisque illustris, et
"conspicua omnigenis virtutibus, nupsit venerabili
"atque inter splendidos militaris ordihis viros egre-
"gio, Hugoni Powlett Somersctensi. Ita nu-
"perrime Domina Pewlett appellari coepit, apud
"George-Hinton inter Somersetenses, apud Titten-
** hanger inter Hartfordierises, et apud Clerkenwell
•• inter fuburbanos Londinenses, celeberrima. Hu-
"jus memoriam fingulari cum pietate et observantia
tc recolimus, collegii hujus alumni: cum ob aucto-
"tatem, quam ei, quousque in vivis esset, Funda-
"tor contulit; turn ob munificentiam, quam dunt
"vixit exercuit in nos: qUaque ad rem literariam
"confirmandam, et rem familiarem amplisicandam,
"quotannis in perpetuum gaudere hoc collegium
"voluit electa Dominac. Utcunque enim veneranda
b Sc. 1558—9.
c The circumstances of her whole benefaction where these.
Richard Bloant of London §, esquire, her nephew, bequeathed
by will 100/. to maintain an exhibitioner in the said college.
On his death, dame Elisabeth Powlet covenanted with Blount'i
executors, to give to the said college, in consideration of the
$ I find one Richard Blount, admitted a gentleman-eommoner, Jan. ji, 1579.
And leaving the college, Feb. aS. 15S1. E Libra primo Cautionum.
said

<page 483>
464. APPENDIX.
« matrona, hinc a Tyttenhanger A. 1593, zf
"Octobris, ad superos concesserit; acceflerunt ta-
"men ad Lectoris philosophic! et rhetorici stipendia
«* duplicanda, atque ad Focalium onus fublevandum,
«.' in annos singulos decem librae, ex ejusdem larga
"benesicentia."
laid sum of 100/. to her made over, the rectory of Ridge in
Hertfordshire, for the maintenance of the said exhibitioner,
and for the purposes mentioned in the text. She added also,
in the contract, the advowson to the vicarage of Ridge, now
lost. "For the great affection, good will, and favour, which
"she the fame dame Elisabeth beareth towards the sayde col-
"lege, being founded by her late deare husband sir Thomas
«« Pope." Ex Indentur. Dat. April I, an. 22 Elizab. Regin.
A. D. 1581.
This Memoir was probably drawn up by Dr. Kettel, as was
the preceding narrative of the Founder's Visit to the College,
by Dr. Yeldard, with an intention of inserting it in the college-
register: but, like that, it was mislaid or forgotten, and never
entered. See p. 458. supr, in the notes. The manuscript seems
to have been procured by Antony Wood from Dr. Ralph Ba-
thurst, who became possessed of many of Dr. Kettel's papers.
FINIS.

<page 484>

<page 485>
■&gWM 5

<page 486>
Af^U I^I'a
rv 2«. -w
^ ii., cj 2, a y?! / (T/
re
■0»vite/( i \7,117^ Us
F^n<U^ WvA,- ^'"'^'?
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN

II

3 9015 06829 3086


<page 487>
<.>
^^m
Hi
IB95K


<page 488>
