The history of the life and adventures of Mr. Duncan CampbellDaniel Defoe, William Bond, Duncan CAMPBELL, John Ruddle, McManus-Young Collection (Library of Congress)

<page 1>


<page 2>
J>3 lij-.CU
r
. i

<page 3>

<page 4>

f.
1.. ''

<page 5>

<page 6>

<page 7>


<page 8>
HIS TO R Y
O F T H E
LIFE
AND
ADVENTURES
O F
Mr. Duncan Campbell,
A
Gentleman, who tho' Deaf and Dumb,writcs
down any Stranger's Name at first Sight:
with their future Contingencies of Fortune.
Now Living
In Exeter-Court over-against the Savoy in the
Strand.
Gentem quidem nullam video neque tarn bumanam atque doil.m;
neque tarn immanem tamque barbaram-, qua non significari fu-
tura oy a quibusdam intelligi frudicique pojse cenfeat.
Cicero de Divinacione, lib. x.
€Ue ^ecotTD (EDitton coirecteD.
LONDON:
Printed for E. C u R L l : And fold by W. M £ a R s
and T. ] A u N c Y without Temple-Bar, W.
Meadows in Cornhill, A. Bettesworth
in Pater-Nofler-Roxo, W. Lewis in C,vent-
Garden, and 7 GRAVES in St. James's-Strest.
MDCCXX.

<page 9>
, ' * 3

<page 10>
^ visv
"J

TO THE
LADIES
AND
GENTLEMEN
O F
GREAT-B KIT JIN.
A M not unacquainted, that,
ever since this Book was jirji
promised by Way of Advertise-
ment to the World, it was gree-
dily coveted by a great many Persons of
airy Tempers, for the fame reason, that it
has been condemned by those of a more
A 2 formal


<page 11>
iv Epistle Dedicatory.
formal Class, who thought it was cal-
culated partly to introduce a great ma-
ny new and diverting Curiosities in the
way of SuperJlition,3 and partly to di-
vulge the secret Intrigues and Amours
of one part of the Sex, to give the
other part room to make favourite Scan-
dal the SubjeSi of their Discourse j and
so to make one half of the fair Species
very merry, over the Blushes, and the
"Mortifications of the other half But
when they come to read the following
Sheet j,r they will find their Expecta-
tions disappointed, (but I hope I may
fay too) very agreeably disappointed.
'they will find a much more elegant
"Entertainment than they expected- In-
stead of making them a Bill of Fare out
of patchwork Romances of polluting
Scandal; the good old Gentleman who
wrote the Adventures of my Jjfe} has
made it his Business to treat them with
a great variety of entertaining Passa-
ges, which always terminate in Morals
that tend'to the Edification of all Rea-
ders^

<page 12>
Epistle Dedicatory. v
ders, of whatsoever Sex, Age, or Pro-*
session. Instead of seducing young, in-
nocent, unwary Minds into the vicious
^Delight, which is tod often taken in
reading the gay and bewitching Chi-
meras of the Caballifisj and in per-
using the enticing Fables of new invent-
ed Tricks of Superstition, my ancient
Friend, the Writer, strikes at the very
Root of these Superstitions, and shews
them, how they may be satisfyrd in
their several Curiosities, by having re~
course to Me, who by the Talent of
the Second-sight {which he so beauti-
fully represents, how 'Nature is so kind
frequently to implant in the Minds of
Men born in the fame Climate with
my self) can tell you those Things na-
turally, which when you try to learn
your selves, you either run the Hazard
of being imposed upon in your sockets
, by Cheats, Gypsies and common Fortune-
tellers, or else of being imposed upon,
tit a still iporse way, in your most last-
ing Welfare, by having recourse to
A 3 Conjurers

<page 13>
vj Epistle Dedicatory.
Conjurers or Jnchanters that deal in
Black Arts, and involve all their Con-
falters in one general Partner flip of
their execrable Guilt j or lastly, of
imposing worst of all on your own selves,
by getting into an Itch of practising
and trying the little Tricks of Female
Superstition, which are often more
officiously handed down, by the Tradi-
tion of credulous Nurses and old Wo-
men, from one Generation to another,
-than the first. Principles of Christian
DoBrine, which 7tis their Duty to
instill early into little Children. But
J hope when this Book comes to be
pretty generally read among you La-
dies, (as by your generous and numerous
Subscriptions, 1 have good reason to
expeSt) that it will afford a per fed
Remedy and a thorough Cure to that
Distemper, which frjt took its Rife
from too great a Growth of Curiosity,
and too large a Stock of Credulity, nur-
sed prejudicially up with you in your
more tender and infant Tears.
a Whatever

<page 14>
Epistle Dedicatory* vij
Whatever young Maid hereafter
has an innocents but longing Desire to
know who jhall be her Husband, and
"what time jhe Jhall be marry d, willy
I hope, when she hds read in the fol-
lowing Sheets of a Man that can set
her right in the Knowledge of those
Points, surely by possessing the Gift
of the Second-fight, sooner have re*
course innocently to such a Man, than
use unlawful Means to acquire it,
such as running to Conjurers to have
his Figure shewn in their inchanted
Classes, or using any of those traditio-
nal Superstitions, by which they may
dream of their Husbands, or cause
visionary Shapes of them to appear on
such and such Festival Nights of the
Tear * all which Practices are not
ordinarily wicked and impious, bus
downright diabolical. I hope that the
next twenty ninth of June., which it
St. John BaptistY Vdy, I pall not
fee the several Pasture Fields adjacent
A 4 U

<page 15>
viij Epistle Dedicatory.'
to this Metropolis, especially that b^
hind Montague House, thronged, as
they were the last Year, with well
drest young Ladies crawling bujily up
and down upon their Knees, as if they
were a parcel of Weeders, when all
the Business is to hunt supersiitiously
after a Coal under the Root of a Plan-
tain, to put under their Heads that
Night, that they may dream who
should be their Husbands. In order
to shame them out of this filly but guilty
PraBice, I do intend to have some
Spies out on that Day, that shall dis-
cover who they are , and what they
have been about j and I here give notice
to the Publick, that this ill-aSled Co-
medy (if it be aBed at all this Tear)
must begin according to the Rule of
their Superstition, on that Day precisely
at the Hour of Twelve. And so much
for the pretty Weeders : But as you,
(Ladies) have had several Magical
Traditions delivered to you, which, if
you put in Exercise and PraBice, will
be

<page 16>
Epistle Dedicatory. ix
be greatly prejudicial to your: Honour
and your Virtue, let me interpose my
Counsels, which will conduB- you inno-
cuously to the fame End which some
Ladies have laboured to arrive at by
these Impieties. Give me leave frst
to tell you, that tho what you aim at
may be arrived to by these Means, yet
these Means make that a miserable
. Fortune which would have been a good
one • because in order to know human
Things before-hand, you use preterna-
tural Mediums, which dejlroy the Good-
ness of the Courses, which Nature
her self was taking for you> and an-
nex to them diabolical Influence^
which commonly carry along with them
Fatalities in this World as well as the
next. You will therefore give me your
Far don likewise, Ladies, if I relate
some other of these Tra&ices, which
bare relation of it self, after what I
have said before, seems to me sufficient
to explode them*
Another

<page 17>
x Epistle Dedicatory.
Another of the Nurses Prescriptions
is this. 'Upon a St. Agnes'/ Night,
the i\fl Day of January, take a Ron?
of Pins, and pull out every one, one
after another, faying a Pater-noster,
or Our Father, flicking a Tin in your
Sleeve, and you will dream of her
yon shall marry. Ben. Johnson in one
of his Masks makes some mention of
this.
And on sweet St. Agnes Night
Please you with the promised Sight,
Some of Husbands, some of Lovers,
* Which an empty Dream discovers.
Now what can be more infinitely pro-
phane than to use the Prayer of our
Lord instituted in such a Way?
There is another Prescription, which
is as follows: You musk lie in another
County, and knit the left Garter about
the right-legged Stocking (let the other
Carter

<page 18>
Epistle Dedicatory. xj
Carter and Stocking alone) and as you
rehearse these following Verges, At eve-
ry Comma knit a Knot,
This Knot I knit,
To know the Thing I know not yet,
That I may fee,
The Man that malt my Husband be.
How he goes, and what he wears,
And what he does all Days and
Years.
Accordingly in your Dream you *wiU
fee him: If a Musician, with a Lute
or other Instrument * if a Scholar^ with
a Book, Sec. Now I appeal to youy
Ladies, what a ridiculous Prescription
is this? But yet as flight a Thing as it
is, it may be of great Importance if
it be brought about, because then it
wust be construed to be done by preter-
natural Means, and then those Words
are nothing less than an Application to
the Devil.

<page 19>
xij Epistle Dedicatory.
Mr. .Aubrey of the Royal Society
says, a Gentlewoman that he knew,
confessed in his hearing that foe used
this Method, and dreamt of her Hus-
band whom she had never seen: About
two or three Tears after, as flje was
one Sunday at Church, up fops a young
Oxonian in the Pulpit ; jhe cries out
presently to her Sifter, this fa the very
Face of the Man I saw in my Dream.
Sir William Somes'j. Lady did the
like*
Another way is to charm the Moon
thus, (as the old Nurses give out . ) At
the frft Appearance of the Moon after
New-years-day, ( some say any other
New Moon is as good) go out in the
Evening, and ftdnd over the Sparrs
of a Gate or Stile, looking on the Moon
(here remarks that in Yorkshire they
kneel on a Ground-faji Stone) and
All

<page 20>
Epistle Dedicatory, xiij
AH hail to the Moon, all hail to thee,
I prithee good Moon reveal to me
This Night; who my Husband shall
be,
Ton must presently after go to, Bed:
The aforesaid Mr. Aubrey knew two
Gentlewomen that did thus when they
were young Maids, and they had
Dreams of those that married them*
But a great many of the wittiest
part of your Sex laugh at these common
Superstitions j but then they are apt to
run into worse: They give themselves
up to the reading of the Cabalistical
Systems of Sylphs, and Gnomes, and
Mandrakes, which are very wicked
and delusive Imaginations,
r
I would not have you imagine, {La*
dies) -that I impute these Things as In*
frmities and Frailties peculiar to your
No • Men, and great Men too,
4 and

<page 21>
xiv Epistle Dedicatory:
and Scholars, and even Statesmen and
Princes themselves have been tainted
with Superstitions j and where they in-
fect the Minds of such great Persona*
ges, they make the deeper Impression,
according to the stronger and more Man-
ly Ideas they have of them. Their
greater degree of Strength in the In-
tellect only subjects them to greater
Weaknesses j such was even the great
Paracelsus, the Wonder and Miracle
of Learning in the Age wherein he
lived, and such were all his Followers,
Scholars, Statesmen, Divines, and Priti*
ees that are Talismanists.
These Talismans that Paracelsus
pretends to owe to the Excogitation and
Invention of hones Art, seem to me to
l?e of a very Diabolical Nature, and
to owe their Rife to being dedicated
by the Author to the Heathen Gods.
Thus the Cabalists pretending to a vast
Penetration into Arts and Sciences (tho>
all their Thoughts are Chimeras and
Extra-

<page 22>
Epistle Dedicatory. xv
"Extravaganciesj unless they le helped
by preternatural Means) fay they have
found out the several Methods appro~
priat ed to the several Planets: They
have appropriated Gold to the Sun on
the Sunday^ Silver to the Moon on the
Mondayy Iron to Mars on the Tues-
day, Quicksilver to Mercury on the
Wednesday, Tin to Jupiter on the
Thursday, Copper or Brass to Venus
on the Friday, and Lead to Saturn
on the Saturday. The Methods they
take in forming these Talismans are
too long to dwell upon here. But *the
Properties which they pretend belong
to them, are, that the first Talisman,
or Seal of the Sun, wits, make a Man
beloved by all Princes and Potentates^
and cause him to abound with all the
Riches his Heart can wish. The fe
cond preserves Travellers from 'Dan-
ger, and is favourable to Merchants3
Tradesmen, and Workmen. The thirds
carries DefiruBion to any Place where
Tt is put' and 'si/ said that a certain
• great

<page 23>
xvj Epistle Dedicatory:
great Minister of State ordered one of
these to be carry* d into England in
the Times of the Revolution of Govern*
ment caused by Oliver Cromwell.
The fourth, they pretend, cures Fevers
and other Diseases ; and if it be put
under the Bolster, it makes the Pro-
prietor have true Dreams, in which
he fees all he desires to know. The
fifth, according to them, renders a
Man lucky and fortunate in all his
Businesses and Undertakings. It disfi'
pates Melancholy, drives away all
importunate Cares, and banishes pa-
nick Fears from the Mind. The sixth,
by being put into the 'Liquor which any
one drinks, reconciles mortal Enemies,
makes them intimate Friends j it gains
the hove of all Women, and renders
the Proprietor very dextrous in the Art
of Mustek. The seventh, makes Wo-
be easily brought to Bed without Pain j
and if a Horstman carries it in his left
Boot, himself and his Horse become in*
vulnerable.
This

<page 24>
- Epistle Dedicatory. xvLj
This Paracelsus and his learned
Followers jay is owing to the Influence
vf the Stars; but I can't help arguing
these to be Acts of diabolical Impiety.
But as these Arts are rarely known a>-
mong the middling fart 'of Mankinds I
JJjall neither open their Myferies, ncir
inveigh -against them any farthen
The Persons j who are most to b~e
avoided j- are your ordinary Fortune-
telling Women and Men about this Town.,
whoje Houses ought to be avoided ax. a
Plague or a Pestilencey either because
they are Cheats and Impostors, or because
they deal with Black Arts, none of them
that I know having any Pretensions to
the Gift of a, Second*fight. Among ma-
ny, a few of the most notorious, that I
can call to mind now,' are as follow.
The jtrst, and chiefest of these mischie-
vous Fortune-tellers U a Woman that
does not live far front > the Old Baily.
And truly the suffice Ball in that Place
a U

<page 25>
xviij Epistle Dedicatory.
is the properejl Place for her to appear
at j where, if she was trfd for pre-
tending to give Charms written upon
Paper with odd Scrawls, which Jhe
calls Figures, foe would be probably
conviSied, and very justly condemned,
and doomed to have her last Journey
from the Old Baily to Newgate, and
from Newgate to Tyburn. The other,
is a Fellow that lives in Moorsields^ in
which Place, those who go to consult
him, ought to live all their Life-times
at the famous Palace of the senseless
Men : He is the Successor of the fa-
mous Dr. Trotter, whose Widow he
marrfd j and from being a Taylor and
patching Mens Garments, he now cuts
Flourishes with his Sheers upon Parch-
ment, considers the Heavens as a Gar-
ment, and from the Spangles thereupon,
he calculates Nativities, and sets up
for a very profound Astrologer. The
third is an ignorant Fellow that kaws
out Jirange Predictions in Crow-Alley,
of whose croaking Noise I ft all here
± take

<page 26>
Epistle Dedicatory. xix
take no Notice; he having been suffici-
ently mawPd in the most ingenious Spe-
ctators. These, and such Counterfeits
as these, I would desire all Gentlemen
and Ladies to avoid. The only two
really learned Men, that I ever knew
in the Art of AJirology, were my good
friends Dr. Williams and Mr. Gad-
bury' and I thought it necessary to
pay this Esteem to their Manes., let
the World judge of them what it will.
I will here fay no more, nor hinder you
any longer, Gentlemen and Ladies,
from the Diversion which my good old
friend, who k now departed this Life,
has prepared for you in his Book,
(which a young Gentleman of my Ac-
quaintance revised,) than only to sub-
scribe my self,
Yours, Sec.
Exeter-Court,
April jth,
J720.
Duncan Campbell.
a 2 THE
4

<page 27>
, - .*
*
. * .1
.»•.
* * • ,
. - •
1 l*
•
* * . . .
»i , . V.
,
......•7', '*""
a" * * . • **'
-
. ,\ * T
i c ... . .
.'V. .
'( i y \ • '.
. +• r -
f • * *
^ • *.\ *. . *;
. *.V:\a v..
* V
f t
€.» IV 1 * "'
,•.-.'.-Vv.-.J .
. '. V'\\ Xt.. '.
*
. . . i ."
-
:f h t

<page 28>
: THE
CONTENTS-
CHAP. I. . v. .
R. Campbell'j- Descent, Fa-
mily, .'Birthj &c. Page 8.
Also an Account of Mr. Ar-
chibald CampbellV Tra-
vels into Lapland, where he married
a rich Lady of that Countryy who
was Daughter to the Under-Præfect
or Deputy Governor of the DistriSt
of UmaLapmjrk ; with some Let-
.', ters from, him to his Father in the
\. Isle of Schetland in Scotland, 'far*
. t'icular/y one, concerning the Birth of
piJ' Son our present Mr. Duncan
. Campbell. ,• p.. 16.
v,;. , * C H A P.


<page 29>
The Contents.
.
chap. n.
After the Death of Mr. Duncan
Campbell's Mother in Lapland,
his Father Mr. Archibald Camp-
bell returned into Scotland with his
. little Son and Family. His second
"Marriage 5 and how hk Son being
born Deaf and Dumby was first
learn d to read and write. p. 32.
CHAP. III.
The Method of teaching Deaf and
, Dumb Ter sons to write} ready and
underhand a Language. p. 38.
CHAP. IV.
Young Duncan Campbell returns with
his Mother to Edinburgh. The Earl
of Argyll's Overthrow. The Ruin
, of Mr. Archibald Campbell, and
his Death: Young Duncan's Pra-
4 Bice

<page 30>
The Contents.'
Bice in PrediStion at Edinburgh, while
yet a Boy. p. 55.
C H A P. V.
An Argument proving the Perception,
which Men have had, and have,
by all the Senses, as Seeing, Hearing,
Sec. of Dæmons, Genii, or Fami-
miliar Spirits. p. 78.
CHAP. VI.
A Narrative of Mr. Campbell'/ com-
ing to London, and taking upon
him the Profession of a TrediSior *
together with an Account of many
flrange Things that came to pass juji
as he foretold. p. 124
G H A P. VII.
A Philosophical Discourse concerning the
'I Second-sight. p. 175
CHAP.

<page 31>
The Co; n tents,
i&n a p. viil .
A Dissertation upon Magidk under alt
itsJW'anches j with some remarkable
. Particularsy relating to Mr. Camp-
bells private Life. p. .205.
the frfl Obje&ion against the Existence
. of Spirits} and the Refutations there-
of p. 160
.1' .'. /. ')
The second Objection againjl the Ex~
,w iflence of Witches. p. 270
The Appendix.
p. 2^7*
X .

.;i7
THE

<page 32>
»


<page 33>


<page 34>

'.•./3'io •{..•. ;.;•!(. *.;.'!.,.-.'. .!.T •'. -7'
burpnzing A d v & N t u r e s
i; I io r:oi£.]!$ jplort'.v £ 'ri-
, ii I' .it 'I i i'.i 1 'J -i f"ssl *->ti r ' ii' V"i
F all the Writings delivered in ad
Historical Manner to the World,
.none certainly were ever held
in greater Esteem, than those,
which give us the Lives of distior
guished private Men at'full length; and, as I
B ttiif


<page 35>
z The Life and Advent ub.es

may say,to the Life. Such curious Fragments of
Biography are the Rarities, which great Men
seek after with eager Industry; and, when
found,prize them as theChiefJewels and Orna-
ments, that enrich their Libraries : And deser-
vedly ;for they are the Beauties of the greatest
Men's Lives handed down by way of Example
or Instruction to Posterity, and commonly
handed down likewise by the greatest Men.
Since therefore,Persons distinguished for Merit
in one Kind or other, are the constant Subjects
of such Discourses, and the most Elegant
Writers of each Age have been usually the
only Authors, who chuse upon such Subjects
to employ, their Pens; and since Persons of
the highest Rank, and Dignity, and Genij of
the most refined and delicate Relish, are fre-
quently curious enough to be the Readers of
them, and to esteem them the most valuable
Pieces in a whole Collection of Learned
Works: It is a wonder to me, that when
A Man's Life has something in it peculiarly
Great and Remarkable in its Kind, it should
not move some more skilful Writer than my
self to give the Publick a Taste of it, because
it must be at least vastly Entertaining, if it
be nor, which is next to impossible, im-
mensely Instructive and Profitable withal.
If ever the Life of any Man under the
Sun was Remarkable, this Mr. Duncan Camp-
bell's, which I am going to treat upon, is so,
to a very eminent Degree.
z It

<page 36>
ef Mr. Duncan Campbell \
It affords such variety of Incidents; and is
accompanied with such diversity of Cir-
cumstances, that it includes within it, what
must yield: entire Satisfaction to the most
learned, and Admiration to Persons of a mo>.
derate Understanding. The Prince and the
Peasant will have their several Ends 01
thy Delight in reading it ; and Mr. Camp?
bells Life is of that Extent, that it concerns
and collects (as I may fay) within it self
every Station of Life in the Universe. Besides,
There is a Demand in almost every Pagej
that relates any new Act of his, for the finest
and closest Disquisitions that Learning can
make upon Human Nature, to account how
those Acts could be done by him. For he
daily practised, and still practises those Things
naturally, which puts Art to the rack to find
©ut how Nature can so operate in him and
his fleshly Body, by these Operations, is a
living, practical System or Body of new Phi-
losophy, which exceeds even all those that
have hitherto: been compounded by the La-
bour and Art of many Ages.
If one,: that had speculated deep into ab*
strufe Matters, and madd it his Studv, not
only to know how to. assign natural Reasons
for some strange new Acts, that looked like
Miracles by being peculiar to the individual
Genius of some particular admired Man, but
carrying his Enquiry to a much greater
Height, had speculated likewise, what might
B i 'possibly

\

<page 37>
4 TbiLiiE and Adventures
possibly be atchieved by a human Genius in
the full Perfection of Nature, and had laid it
down as a Thesis by strong Arguments, that
such Things might be compasied by a Human
Genius (if in its true degree of Perfection)
as are the Hourly Operations of the Person's
Life I am writing, he would have been count-
ed a wild Romantick Enthusiast, instead of
a Natural Philosopher. Some of the wisest
would be Infidels to so new and so refined a
Scheme of Thinking, and demand Experi-
ment, or cry it was all against Reason, and
would not allow the least Tittle to be true
without it. Yet the Man that had found out
so great a Mystery, as to tell us, what might
be done by a Human Genius, as it is here actu-
ally done, would have been a great Man with-
in himself; but wanting farther, Experimen-
tal Proof, could lay no claim to the Belief of
others, or consequently to their Esteem: But
how great then is the Man, who makes it con-
stantly his Practice, actually to Do, what
would not otherwise have been thought to be
of such a Nature, as might ever be acquired
by mortal Capacity, tho' in its full Comple-
ment of all possible Perfection? He is not only
great within himself, he is great to the World;
his Experiments force our Belief, and the
amazing Singularity of those Experiments,
provokes both our Wonder and Esteem.
~ If any learned Man should have advanced
this Propositipn,That rneer Human Art could
* . .; i si give



<page 38>
Of Mr. D U NCA N CAMPS ELI? J
give to the Deaf Man what should be equal to
his Hearing, and to the Dumb Man an Equi-
valent for his want of Speech, so that he
should converse as freely almost, as other
Hearing or Talking Persons; that he-might,
tho' born Deaf, be by Art taught, how to
Read, Write, and understand any Language,
as well as Students that have their Hearing j
would not the World, and many even of the
Learned Part of it fay, that nothing could be
more extravagantly Wild, more Mad and
Frantick? The learned Dr. Wallis, Geome-
try-Profeflbr of Oxford, did first of all lay
down this Proposition, and was counted by
many to have overshot the Point of Learning,
and to have been the Author of a whimsical
Thesis. And I should not have wondered,
if, after a Man's having averted This might
be done, before it was actually done, some
blind devout People, in those Days, had ac-:
cused him of Heresy, and of attributing* to
Men a Power of working Miracles. The No-
tion of the Antipodes was by the most learn-
ed Men of the Age in which St. Augufiin
lived, and by the Great St. Austin himself
treated in no milder a manner ; yet if the Abi-
lity of teaching the Deaf and the Dumb a Lan-
guage, proved a Truth in Experience after-
wards, ought not those to turn their Con-
tempt into Admiration, ought not those very
People to Vote him into the Royal Society for*
laying down this Proposition, who, before* &
proved true in Fact, would have been vefy-
B 3 forward

<page 39>
4> TheLiiE and Adventukss
t
forward to have sent him to Bedlam? The
first Instance of this Accomplishment in a
Dumb Person, was proved before King
Charles II. by this fame Dr. Wallis, who was
a Fellow of the Royal Society, and one of the
most ingenious of that Society. . j
But notwithstanding this, should I come
afterwards and fay, that there is now living
a Deaf and Dumb Man, and born so, who
could by dint of his own Genius teach all
others Deaf and Dumb to Read, Write, and
Converse with the Talking and Hearing Part
of' Mankind; some would, I warrant, very
religiously conclude, that I was. about to in-
and Impostor into the World ; with a Design
of setting up some new Sect of Antichristia-
nism, as formidable as that of the Brachmans.
Should I proceed still farther and fay, that
this fame Person so Deaf and Dumb, might
be able also to shew a presaging Power, or
kind of prophetical Genius (if I may be al-
lowed the Expression) by telling, any strange
Persons he never saw before in his Life, their
Names at first Sight in Writing, and by tel-
ling them the past Actions of their Lives, and
predicting to them determined Truths of fu-
ture Contingencies; notwithstanding what
Divines fay, that Infuturis contingentibus ntm
datur determinata veritas, wouid (not jtjiey
conclude that I was going to usher in a fcew
Mahomet >/Sin,ce.rtherefore there' does exist
sireh a Man in JU>ndont who actually isDeaf

*
and

<page 40>
of Mr. D U N C A: N C A M P B fi L t. 7

and Dumb, and was born so, who docs Write
and Read, and Converse as well as any Body,
who teaches others Deaf and Dumb to Write
and Read, and Converse with any Body;
who likewise can, by a presaging Gift, set
down in Writing the Name of any Stranger
at first Sight, tell him his past Actions, and
predict his future Occurrences in Fortune;
and since he has practised this Talent as a
Profession with great Success, for a long Series
of Years, upon innumerable Persons in every
State and Vocation of Life, from the Peeress
to the Waiting-Woman, and from the Lady
Mayoress to the Milliner and Sempstress;
will it not be wonderfully Entertaining to
give the World a perfect History of this so
singular a Man's Life? And while we are
relating the pleasant Adventures with such
prodigious Variety, can any Thing be more
agreeably instructive in a New Way, than to
intersperse the Reasons, and account for the
manner how Nature, having a mind to be
remarkable, performs by him Acts Xo myste-
rious.
I have premised this Introduction, com-
pounded of the Merry and the Serious, with
the Hopes of engaging many curious People
of all sorts to be my Readers; even from the
Airy Nice Peruser of Novels and Romances,
neatly Bound, and finely Gilt, to the grave:
Philosopher, that is daily thumbing over the
musty and tatter'd Pieces of more solid Anti-
B 4 quity.

<page 41>
SiT The Life and Adventures
quity. I have all the Wonders to tell, that
such a merry kind of a Prophet has told, ter
Entertain the Fancies of the first gay Tribe,
by which means I may entice them into some
solid Knowledge arid- Judgment of Human
>|ature; and I have several solid Disquisi-
tions of Learning to make, accounting for
the manner of these Mysterious Operations,
never touched upon before, in due Form and:
Order, by the Hands of the Antient or Mo-
dern Sages, that I may Bribe the Judgment'
of this last Grave Class so far, as to endure
the trit rmixing of Entertainment with their .
severer Studies.' ';." -
c: '"• ?y-:"..-' "i. •
IT :*.. J. J Cl H A P. I,.:
Mir. Campbell's Descent, Family, Birth, &c.
* . ^" * •'
f~Y$ . tile Goodness and Antiquity of the
Name and Family of this Gentleman,
nb!Boidy can ever make any Question : He
is' a: GUmpbell, Lineally Descended from the
House of Argyll, and bears a distant Relation
to'the present Duk6 of that Name in Scot-
Iknd, and who is now Constituted a Duke of
England, by the Stile and Title of the Duke
of Greenwich J''
-'It happens frequently, that the Birth of
Extraordinary Persons is so long disputed by
diferent People, each claiming him for their
owh^Mr :the^eai Place where he first took-
'* I Breath
it . »I •

<page 42>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 9
Breath grows at last dubious : And thus it
fares with the Person who is the Subject of
the following Sheets; as therefore it is my
Proposal to have a strict regard to Historical
Faith, so am I obliged to tell the Reader, that
I can, with no certainty, give an Account of
him, till after he was Three Years Old ;from
which Age I knew him even to this Day:
I will answer for the Truths which I impart
to the Publick during that Time ; and as for
his Birth and the Circumstances of it, and
how the first Three Years of his Life pasted,
I can only deliver them the same Account I
have received from others, and leave them
to their own Judgments, whether it ought
to be deemed Real or Fabulous.
The Father of our Mr. Duncan Campbell
fas these relate the Story) was from his In-
sancy of a very curious inquisitive Nature,
and of an Enterprizing Genius j and if he
heard of any Thing surprizing to be seen, the
Difficulty in Practice was enough to recom-
mend to him the attempting to get a sight of
it at any Rate or any Hazard. It is certain,
that during some Civil Broils and Troubles in
Scotland, the Grandfather of our Mr. Camp-
bell was driven with his Wife and Family by
the Fate of War into the Isie of Schetlan'd,
where he lived many Years; and during his
Residence there, Mr. Archibald Campbell,
the Father of our Duncan Campbell, was
Born.
Schet-


<page 43>
xp The Life and ApvENtURis

Schetland lies North-Eaft from Orkney, be-,
tween 60 and 61 Degrees of Latitude. The
largest Isle of Schetland, by the Natives cal-*
led the Main-Land, is sixty Miles in Length,
from South-Weft to the NorthÆaJl; and from
sixteen, to one Mile in Breadth. T,S ., t
The People who live in the smaller Ifle6,
have Abundance of Eggs and Fowl ; which
contributes to maintain their Families during
the Summer. , r, I .i, ot
The ordinary Folks are mostly very nim-.
ble and active, in climbing the Rocks in quest
of those Eggs and Fowl. This Exercise is far
more diverting than Hunting arid Hawking
among us ; and would certainly, for the Plea-
sure of it, be followed by People of greater
Distinction, was it not attended with very
great Dangers, sufficient to turn Sport into
Sorrow, and which have often prov d fatal to
those,, Who too eagerly pursue their Game*
Mr. Archibald Campbell, however, delighted:
extreamly in this way of Foiling, and used
to condescend to mix with the Common Peo-
ple for Company, because none of the Youths
of his Rank and Condition were venturesome;
enough.to go aldng-wich him*) stb. tWAta*i
The most remarkable Experiment of thiss
Sort, is at the Isle called the Noss of Braffak >
The Noss standing at sixteea Fathom Distance
from the Side" of1 the opposite .Main ;. the
higher and lower R<acks. have; two..Stakes,
fasten'd in each of them, and to these there
are

<page 44>
of Mr. D u N c A n C a m p b fe m£ x r
are Ropes tied : Upon the Ropes there is an
Engine hung, which they call a Cradle ; and
in this a Man makes his way over from the
greater to the smaller Rocks, where he;
makes a considerable Purchase of Eggs an4i
Fowl: But his Return being by an Ascent,
makes it the more dangerous; tho' those ofi
thfc great Rock have a Rope tied to the Cra-
dle, by which . they draw it and the Man
safe over for the most part. Over this Rock,
Mr« Archibald. Campbells and Five others, were
in that manner let down by Cradles and'
Ropes ; but before they could!be all drawrt
back again, it grew dark ; and their Associ-
ates not daring to be benighted, Vere*forced
to withdraw ; and Mr. Campbell was the un-
fortunate Person left behind, having wan*
dered too far, and not minded how the Day
declined, being intent on his Game. He pas-
sed that Night, you may easily guess, with-
out much Sleep, and with great Anxiety of
Heart. The Night too (as he lay in the open
Air) was, to add to his Misfortune, as boi-
sterous and tempestuous as his own Mind:
But in the end the Tempest prov'd very hap-
py for him. The Reader is to understand,
that the Hamburghers, Bremeners and HoL
Jandehi carry on a great Fish Trade there.
Accordingly a Holland Vessel, that;Was just
coming1in the! Sound of Brajsab, was by this
"Tempest driven into a Creek of the Rock,
whicBc Nature had made into a Harbour;
oil}" and

<page 45>
iz The LiiE»and Adventures
and they were Providentially laved from the
Bottom of the Sea by a Rock, from which,
humanly speaking, they could expect nothing
but Destruction, and being sent to the Bot-
tom of that Sea. As never could a Man be
taken hold of with so sudden and surprizing a
Disaster, so no body could meet with a
more sudden and surprizing Relief than Mr.+
Campbell found, when he saw a Ship Ib'
near. He made to the Veslel, and begged
the Hollanders to take him in : They asked
Him, what he would give them ? or, said the
Barbarous Sailors, we will even leave you
where you are. He told them his Disaster;
but they askeel Money, and nothing else would
move them. As he knew them a self-inte-
rested People, he bethought himself, that if
he should tell them of the Plenty of Fowls
and Eggs they would get there, he might
not only be taken in a Paslenger, but made a
Partner in the Money arising from the Stock:
It succeeded accordingly, when he proposed it;
the whole Crew were all at work, and in
four Hours pretty well stored the Veslel; and
then returning on Board, set Sail for Holland.
They offered Mr. Campbell to put. him in at
his own Island j but having a mind to see
Holland, and, being a Partner, to learn
their Way of.! Merchandize; which.' he-
thought he might turn to his Country?)
men's Advantage ; he told them he :would'
go the Voyage out with them, and fee,
L-3 , the

<page 46>
of Mr. DuncanCampbe l is. *rj
fthe Country of those who were his De-
liverers : A necesiary way of Speech, when
_one has a Design to sooth Barbarians ; who,
but for Interest, would have left him unre-
- deemed, arid, for ought they knew, a perpetu-
al sole Inhabitant ofia dreadful Rock, incoiri-
,pass'd roundwith Precipices, some Three Hun-
dred Fathom high.' Not To. the Islanders;
r(;who are wrongly called a Savage Set of
Mortals;) no .; they Came in quest of him after
so bitter a Night, not doubting to find him,
but fearing to find him in a lamentable Con-
dition. They hunted and ransack'd every lit-
tle Hole and Corner in the Rock, but all in
•vain. In one Place, they saw a great Slaugh-
ter of Fowls, enough to serve 'Forty, Families
(for; a Week; and then they guested, tho'
they had not the ill Fortune' to meet the
Eagles, ( frequently noted to.v hover about
those Isles) that they might have devoured
Part of him on some Precipice of the Rock,
and dropt the Remnant into the Sea. Night
came upon them, and they 'were afraid of
falling into the fame Disaster they went to
relieve Mr. Campbell from. .. They returned
each to their proper Baskets and were drawn
up safe by their respective Friends ; who were
amazed that one Basket , was a'rftwn up
empty, which was. let down for Mx.-Campbellf;
and that there was not the least Intelligence
to be had concerning! ihijm, but the supposi-
titious Story c£ hjs^vjng been devourd by
Liit" Eagles.

<page 47>
14 The Life and Adventures
fcagles. The Story was told at Home j and,
with the Lamentation of the whole Family,
and all his Friends, he was look'd upon to be
murthered, or dead. - J*.r- . -ml
Return we now to Mr. Archibald Camp-
bell still alive, and on Board the Holland
Veslel ; secure, as he thought within himself,
•that from the Delivery he lately had by the
Gift of Providence, he was not intended to
be liable to any more Misfortunes and Dan-
gers of Life, in the Compaft of so small a
Voyage* But his Lot was placed other-
wise in. the Book of Fate, than he too
fondly imagined : His Time of Happinefe
was dated some Pages lower down ; and more
llubs and Difficulties were to be encounter'd
witfis before his Stars intended to lead him«6
the Port of Felicity. Just as he arrived with-
in sight of Amjlerdamy a terrible Storm arose,
fend, in danger of their Lives for many Hours,
they weather'd out the Tempest; and a Calm
promising fair afresh, they made to the
Coast of Zealand; but a new Hurricane
prevented the Ship from coming there also.:
,And after having lost their Masts and Rig-
ging, they were driven into Lapland. There
they went ashore, in order to careen aild
repair their Ship, and take in Provisions.
While the Ship was Repairing by the Thach^
our Islander made merry with the Inhabit
tants; being the most inclined to their Super-
stitious Customs. He there became acquainted

<page 48>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell^ *iy
with a very beautiful Woman, who fell in
Love with him ; and after a Very short Space
of Time, he married her. About the Time
when the Ship departed, his Wife ( who #as
very rich) :'was big with Child of a Stfn;
namely, -Mr. Duncan Campbell. He wrote ft
Letter by the Master of the Vqllej .cp his Pi-
rents in Scbetland, concerning the various
Adventures hehad met with j which wafccjet-
liver'd the Jme following, about the Time
of Fishing, to his Parents ; and several Per-
sons: hod- Copies thereof,; and: for ought I
know, some retain them td this very Day.
Sure I am, that many remecnbgrrthe Particu-
lars of this surprizing Affair^ who are now
living in that Island.' 'V; .v.J: j •:•»;:
.~. hshe Letter-being veny. remarkable, and
"singular ist: ail Its Circumstances, I /hall pre-
sent it the Reader word for word,, as it was
given into my Hands, together with some
others which he wrote afterwards ; in all
which, I am aslured by vpry credible Per-
sons, and undoubted Authorities, there are
not the least Alterations, but what the Verv
sion of it from the then Scots Manner of Ex-
pression into ra more Modern Engkjb Drels,
¥nade absplutelylnecejUary; v. s .
l»,' ry.\ i rvn?. r. v I ..'-'•! r "..j ..'i. , \ j.')
*"i-T '\Li'\C 'I '.I z.rl "Nos f-" .! • t.-v[t

<page 49>
i6 The Life and Adventures

,! ."

H E same odd Variety of Accidents,
which put it out of my Power to be
perlonally present with you for so long a
Time, put it likewise out of my Power to
write to you. At last Fortune has so ordered
it, that I can send a Letter to you, before I can
come my self; and it is written expresly to tell
.you the Adventures I have met with, which
'have detained me this tedious Space of Time
from my Dear Father ; and because the lame
•Captain of a Ship, that brings you this, might
as easily have brought your Son to speak for
himself; I shall, in the next place, lay before
you the Necessity there is for my Stay a lit-
tle longer among the strange Natives of the
Country where I now inhabit, and where I
am in a manner become Naturalized. ; r ,.;,,
You have, no doubt of it, been irtform'd by
my Companions, ( some of whom I hope got
safe back again, if not all) that I was lost,
X where many a brave Man has perisii'd before
me) by going over the high Precipices of the
Mountain Erajsah in a Basket, sliding dowiji
by a Rope. I must suppose I have given you
the Anguish of a Father for a Son, who, you
thought, had lost his Life by such a Fool-har-
dy Attempt j and I implore your Pardon with
all the Power of Filial Contrition, Penitence
and Duty. You have always mewed me such
singular

<page 50>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell . 17
singular Marks of Paternal Affection, that I
know your Receipt of this Letter will fill
your Heart with Joy, and cause you to sign
me an Absolution and free Pardon for all
the Errors I have committed ; and think
the Sufferings I have undergone for my
Rashness and Indiscretion, a sufficient Atone-
ment for my Crime of making you, by my
Undutifulness, a Partner of my Sorrows. To
free you the more from thisUneasiness,I know
I need only tell you, that every Grief of mine is
gone, excepting one, which is, that I must still
lose the Pleasure of seeing you a little longer.
There was never surely a more bitter Night,
than that which must by me be for ever
remember'd ; when I was lost in the Moun-
tain of Braffah, where I must for ought I know
have liv'd for ever, a wild, single Inhabitant,
but that the Storm (which made the Night
so uneasy to me) render'd the first Approach
of Daylight beyond Measure delightful. The
first Providential Glimpse of the Morning,
gave me a View of a Ship driven by the Tem-
pest into a Creek of the Rock, that was by
Nature form'd like a Harbour ; a miraculous
Security of Deliverance, as I thought, both
for the Ship's Crew, and my self. I made all
the Haste I could, you may be sure, to them;
and I found them to be Dutchmen, that were
come for Fish : But in Lieu of Fish, I in-
structed them to load it with Eggs and Fowl;
which we compassed very happily in a short
, C Space

<page 51>
18 TkLiFE ot^Adventures
Space of Time ; and I was to be a Sharer
with the Captain in the Lading, and bargain-
ed to go for Holland, to fee the Sale, and the
Nature of Traffick : But when we were at
Sea, after much bad Weather, we made to-
wards Zealand; but we were driven upon the
Coast of Finland by a new Storm, and thence
into Lapland, where I now am, and from
whence I send you this Letter.
I could not come into a Place so properly
named for my Reception. As I had been
undutiful to you, and Fortune seemed to
make me an Exile, or banished Man, by way
of Punishment for the Vices of my Youth;
so Lapland ( which is a Word originally de-
riv'd from the Finland word Lappi, that is,
Exiles; and from the Swedish word Lap,
signifying Banished ; from which Two King-
doms most of our Inhabitants were banish'd
hither, for not embracing the Christian Reli-
gion ;) was certainly the properest Country
in the World to receive me.
When first I enter'd this Country, I
thought:I was got into quite another World:
The Men are all of them Pigmies to our tall,
brawny Highlanders : They are, generally
speaking, not above Three Cubits high ; in-
somuch that tho' the whole Country of Lap-
land is immensely large, and I have heard
it reckon'd by the Inhabitants to be above
a Hundred German Leagues in Length, and
Fourscore and Ten in Breadth : Yet I was
i the

<page 52>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 19
the tallest Man there , and look'd upon as a
Giant. The District in which I live now,
is called Uma Lapmark. You must under-
stand, Sir, that when I landed at North
Cape^ in Kimi-Lapmark, another District of
Lapland; there was at that Time a most
beautiful Lady come to fee a Sick Relation
of her Father's, who was Prefect, or Governor
of Uma Lapmark ; which is a Post of great
Distinction.—This Lady, by being frequently
in the Company of French Merchants, (who
Traffick now and then in that Province of
Uma Lapmark) understood French; and ha-
ving heard of a Man Six Foot and a half high,
desired to fee me; and when I came, she
happen'd mightily to like my Person : And she
talk'd French; which when I anlwer'd, /he
• made great Signs of Joy, that she could
communicate her Sentiments to me; and she
told me who she was, how rich, and that
not one in the Company besides could un-
derstand a Syllable we said, and so I might
speak my Mind freely to her. She told me
the Customs of the Country ; that it was
divided into Cantons, like our Shires, and
those Cantons into Rekars, or certain Grounds
allotted to Families, that are just like our
Clans. As she was beyond measure beautiful,
slie was extreamly good-humour'd, (a Thing
rarely to be met with among LaplandWomen)
of better Stature than her Country-Women;
very rich, and of good Birth : I thought
Ci it

<page 53>
ao The Life and Adventures
it would be a prodigious Turn of Fortune
for a Man in my Circumstances, if I could
make any Progress in her Heart ; which she
seem'd a little to open to me, in such a man-
ner, for the beginning, as if such a successful
Event, if managed with Prudence, might
not be despaired of. Souls that are Gene-
rous, are apt to Love j and Compassion is the
best Introducer of Love into a generous Bo-
som ; and that was the best Stock I had to go
upon in my Courtship. I told her of all my
Calamities, my Dangers, and my Escapes;
the Goodness of my Birth ; as being allied to
one of the greatest Nobles in our Island : And
still she would ask me to tell it her over again;
tho' every Time I told it, just at such and
such Paslages, me was forced to drop the
Tears from her Eyes. In fine, I grew more
in Love with her, out of a Sense of Gratitude
now, than by the Power of her Charms be-
fore. The Matter in a few Days went 'so
far, that she owned to me I had her Heart.
As to Marriage, I did not then know the
Custom of the Nation: I thought that if it
proved only dangerous to me, I lov'd her so
well, that I intended to marry her, tho' the
Law was to pronounce me dead for it; but I
did not know whether it might not be peri-
lous for her too, to engage in such a State
with me ; and I resolved in that Case, rather
to be singly unhappy, than to involve her in
Distress, and make her the fair Companion
of

<page 54>
of Mr. Dunca n Campb ellT Zl
of my Woes. I would not tell her so, for
fear she mould out of Love hide from me
those Dangers ; and therefore using a kind
Sort of Dissimulation, I conjured her to tell me
the Laws and Customs of Marriages in that
Country to a Tittle ; and that nothing should
hinder us from Happiness. She told me
exactly, as I find since. Our Marriage, said
she, will be very hard to compals ; provi-
ded we follow the strict Rule of the Coun-
try. For our Women here are bound not
to see the Men who make their Addresses to
them, in some Time. His way of Courtship,
is to come 'to the Parents ; and his nearest
Friends and Relations must make her Father
Presents, and supplicate him like a King, to
grant him his Daughter. The Courtship
often lasts two or three Years, and sometimes
has not its Effect at last : But if it has, the
Woman is dragged by her Father and Bro-
ther to Church, as unwilling to go to be mar-
ried ; which is look'd upon as a greater Part
of Modesty in her, according to the greater
Disinclination she shews. My Father and
Brother, said Ihe, will both be against it: You
have no Relations in this Country to move
your Suit : I cannot be so hypocritical, as to
be dragged unwillingly to him I own I de-
sire for my Lawful Husband ; and therefore,
as I have an Inclination to you, and I dare
own I have, I will not follow those Methods
which I disapprove. I have talked with sc-
C 3 veral

<page 55>
'ii The Life and Ad ventures
veral Swedes, and several Polite Frenchmen,
about their Manner of Espousals ; and I am
told, that when Souls are naturally united
by Affection, the Couple so mutually and
reciprocally loving, tho' they had rather
have their Parents Leave, (if likely to be got)
yet unwilling to be disappointed, only go to
the next Minister's, and marry for better for
worse. This way I approve of; for where
two Persons naturally love each other, the rest
is nothing but a, modest Restraint to their
Wishes : And since 'tis only Custom, my own
Reason teaches me, there is no Error com-
mitted, nor any Harm done in breaking
thro' it, upon so commendable an Occasion.
I have, added she, a Thousand Rain-Deer be-
longing to me, beyond my Father's Power
of taking away; and a Third Share in a Re-
kar, or Clan, that is Ten Leagues in Corn-
pals, in the By ar or Canton of Una Lap-
mark. This is at my own Disposal; and it
is all your own, if you please to accept of it
with me. Our Women are very coy, when
they are courted, tho' they have neve* so
much an Inclination to their Suitor; but
good Reason, and the Commerce I have had
with Persons of Politer Nations than ours is,
teach me, that this proceeds entirely from Va-
nity and Affectation ; and the greatest Proof
of a Woman's Modesty, Chastity, and
Sincerity, certainly consists (contrary to the
general corrupted Opinion) in yielding up

<page 56>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell \$,
her self soon into the Arms of the Man she
loves. For she that can dally with a Heart
she prizes, can give away her Heart ( when
she is once baulked) to any Man, even tho'
she dislikes him. You must judge, ( my dear
Father) I must be touch'd with a Woman
that was exceeding beautiful beyond any of
her Nation, and who had Thoughts as beau-
tiful as her Person : I therefore was all in
Rapture, and long'd for Matrimony j but
still loved her enough to propose the Questi-
on I resolved to her; viz. If it would not be
in her Nation accounted a Clandestine Mar-
riage, and prove of great Damage to her?
To this she answer d, with all the Wisdom
which could be expected from a Woman,
who had given such Eminent Tokens of her
Judgment on other Points, amidst a Nati-
on so barbarous in its Manners, and so cor-
rupt in its Principles as Lapland is. I am,
said she, answerable to my Father for no-
thing, by our Laws ; having no Portion of
him, but only what was presented me by
my Relations, at my Birth, according to
Custom, in Lands and Rain-Deer. My Fa-
ther is but Deputy-Governor; tis a Swede
who is the Governor of Uma ; and if I
pay to him at every Mart and Fair, the
due Tribute, (which must either consist of
Fifty Rain-Deer, or One Hundred and Fifty
Rixdollars) he will have the Priest that mar-
ries us present at the Court of Justice, accor-
C 4 ding

<page 57>
24 The Life and Adventures
ding to our Custom, and lieep us in Poslessi-f
on of our Rights, that we may be enabled to
pay Tribute to the Crown of Sweden. In-
deed, before the Abolition of the Bkkarti,
which were our Native Judges, we could
not have Married thus without Danger to us
both ; but now there is none at all.
My dear Father^ You must easily imagine
that I could not help embracing with all
Tenderness so dear and so lovely a Woman.
In fine, I am Married to her; I have lived
very happily hitherto, and am now grown
more happy, for she is big with Child ; and
like, before my Letter comes to your Hands,
to make you a Grandfather of 'a pretty Boy.
You will perhaps wonder, that I name the
Sex of the Child before it comes into the
World ; but we have a way in Lapland of
finding that out ; which tho' some Judicious
People :all superstitious, I am really persua-
ded of by Experience ; and therefore I in-
dulged my dear Wife's Curiosity, when she
signified to me, Ihe had a Mind to make the
usual Tryal, whether the Child she ;was going
to be deliver'd of, would be a Boy'or a Girl?
You must understand, {,My Dear Fathers
the People here judge of the Sex of the Child
by the Moon,' unto which they compare a
big-belly'd Woman. If they fee a Star appear
just above the Moon, it is' a Sign it will be a
Boy ; but if the Star be just below the Moon,
they conjecture her to be big with a Girl.
'This .
!

<page 58>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell" z$
This Observation and Remark of Laplan-
ders has (1 know) been accounted by some,
and those wise and judicious Men too, to
be ridiculously superstitious ; but I have been
led into an easy Belief of this'Mystery, by a
Mistress (that is superior to Wisdom it self)
constant, and therefore probably infallible,
Experience. I therefore indulg'd my Wife
in this her Request, and went with her to the
Ceremony : The Star appeared above the
Moon, which prognosticates a Boy , which
I wish may, and I scarce doubt will prove
true; and when she is brought to Bed, I
will fend you word of it. It is remarkable
likewise, that a Star was seen just before the
Moon, which we also count a very good
Omen. For It is a Custom likewise here in
Lapland, to consult the Moon as an Oracle,
about the Health and Vigor of the Child.
If a Star be seen just before the' Moon, we
count it a Sign of a lusty and well-grown
Child, without Blemish ; if a Star comes just
after, we reckon it a Token, that the Child
will have some Defect or Deformity, or die
soon after it is born.
,•• Having thus told you the Manners of the
Country I live in at present, as much at large
as the Spaceof a Letter will permit, and rela-
ted to you my own happy Circumstances, and
the kindly Promises of the Heavens, that are
lishering'•Jin>f'the Birth of my Child ; I
would not Mve you think that I addict my
t.' self

<page 59>
i6 Thehirn and Adventures
self to the Superstitions of the Country, which
are very many, and groundless ; and arising
partly from the Remainder of Pagan Wor-
ship, which is still cultivated among some
of the more obstinate Inhabitants. I have,
on the contrary, (since I married her ) en-
deavour d to repay my Wife's Temporal
Blessings to me, with those that .are en dless:
instructetf b,er. in all the Points of Religion,
and made her perfectly a (Christian : And
/he, by her Devotion and Prayers for me,
makes me such Amends for it, that I hope in
Us Two St. Paul s Saying will be verified; viz.
That the Woman foall be santlified in her
Hnjhand, and she Husband shall be sanBified
in his Wife. "1n;;
;.: However, I must take notice in this Place,
with all due Deference toChristianity,that dip
I am obligd to applaud the Prudence and Pi-
ety of Charles the Ninth, King of Sweden,
who constituting Swedijb Governors over this
Country, abrogated their Practice of Superr
stitions, and Art Magick, upon Pain of Death:
Yet that King carried the Point too far, and
intermingled with these Art^the Pretensions to
the Gift of a Second Sight j which you know
how frequent it is with us in Scotland, and
which I aslure you, my Wife (tho' she durst
;not publickly own it, for fear of incurring
the Penalty of those Swedifo Laws) does as
it were inherit ( for all her Ancestors before
her have had it from Time immemorial;) to
a great-

<page 60>
os Mr. Duncan Campbell^ rj_
a greater Degree, than ever I knew any of
our Countrywomen, or Qountrymen.
One>Day this last Week she distracted me,
between the Extreams of Joy and Sorrow:
She told me I mould fee you shortly; and that
my coming Son would grow to be one of the
most remarkable Men in England and Scot-
land, for his Power of Foresight : But that
I should speedily lose her, and meet with
Difficulties in my own Country, in the fame
manner as my Father (meaning you, Sir)
had done before me, and on the fame Ac-
count; viz. of Civil Broils, and intestine
Wars in Scotland.
These unfortunate Parts of her Relation, I
would not conceal from you ; because the
Veracity of her Notions should appear, if
they are true ; tho' you may be sure I much
wish they all may prove false to the very
last, excepting that wherein she tells me, my
Son will be gres^y remarkable, and that I
shall shortly Ice my dear Father, which I dai-
ly long for, and will endeavour to do as soon
as possible. Pray remember me to all Friends;
being,
'_ Honour d Sir,
Tom moft Dutiful
and Loving Son,
Archibald Campbell.
•'.The

<page 61>
28 The Life and Adventures
The Second Letter.
IAm now the happiest Man alive : The
prosperous Part of my Wife's Predicti-
ons, which I mention'd to you in my last,
is come in some measure to pass. The Child
she has brought me proves a Boy, and as
fine a one as ever I beheld ; if Fondness for
my own makes me not blind. And sure it
can't be Fondness, because other plain Cir-
cumstances join'd at his Birth, to prove it a
more than ordinary remarkable one. He
was born with a Cawl upon his Head ; which
we count one of the luckiest Signs that can
be in Nature: He had likewise Three Teeth
ready cut thro' the Gums ; and we reckon
that an undeniable Testimony and Promise,
given to the World by Nature, that she in-
tends such a Person for her extraordinary Fa-
vourite, and that he is born fer great Things;
which I daily beg of Heaven may come to
pass.;
Since I have known for some Months
what it is to be a Father, it adds a conr.
siderable Weight to those Affections which
I had for my Wife. I thought that my
Tenderness for her was at the Heighth of
Perfection before; which shews how little
we know of those Parts of Nature, that
we have yet never tried, and of which
we have not yet been allotted our Share to

<page 62>
os Mr. Duncan Campbell . z9
act upon the Stage of Life. I find that I
did love her then, as well as a Husband could
love a Wife, that is, a Wife without a Child,
but the Love to a Wife that has a Child, is a
feeling wonderful and inexpressibly different.
A Child is the Seal and the Pledge of Love;
Meditating upon this, has likewise doubled
my Affection to you ; I loved you before as
a Son, and because as such I felt your Ten-
derness ;but my Love is much increased now,
because I know the Tenderness which you
felt for me as a Father: With these pleasing
Images of Thought, I often keep you nearer
Company at this vast distance, than when I
lived irregularly under your Eye. These Re-
flexions render a Solitary Life dear to me.
And tho I have no manner of Acquaintance
with her Relations, who hate me as I am
told, nor indeed with almost any of the In-
habitants, but my own Domesticks, and
those I am forcep! to deal with ; yet I have as
much methinksj' as I wish for, unless I could
come over to Schetland, and live with you;
which I the more ardently desire, because
I think I and my Wife could be true Com-
forts to you in your advanced Years; now
I know What living truly is. I am daily per-
suading my Wife to go with me ; but she
denies me with kind Expressions, and fays,
she owes too much to the Place ("however
less pleasant in it self than other Climates)
where she had the Happiness of first joining
Hands

<page 63>
3o The Life and Adventures
Hands with me in Wedlock, ever to part
from it. But I must explain how I ask, and
how she refuses. I resolv'd never directly
and downrightly to ask her, because I know
{he can refuse me nothing; and that would
be bearing hard upon the Goodness of her
Will : But my way of persuading her, con-
sists in endeavouring to make her in Love
with the Place, by agreeable Descriptions
of it, and likewise of the Human Temper of
the People ; so that I shortly shall induce her
to signify to me, that it is her own Will to
come with me ; and then I shall seem rather
to consent to her Will, than to have moved
it over to my own. These Hopes I have of
seeing my dear Father very shortly; and I
know such News would make this Letter
C which I therefore fend) more acceptable
to him, to whom I will be
A mo [I Dutiful and
AffeBionate Son till Death,
Archibald Campbell.
P. S. If I cannot bring my Wife to change
this Country for another, I have brought her
to that Pitch of Devotion, that whenever Pro-
vidence (which, notwithstanding her Pre-
dictions, I hope will be long yet) shall call
her to change this World for another, it will.

<page 64>
of Mr. Duncan CampbeliI
be happy with her there. She joins with me,
in begging your Blessing to me, her self, and
our little Duncan ; whom we Christen'd so,
out of a Respect to the Name you bear.
The Third Letter.
My Dear F a t h e r, .a
IAm lost in Grief. —I had just brought my
Wife ( Her that was my Wife, for I have
none now ; I have lost all Joy ;.) in the Mind
of coming over to be a Comfort to you : But
now Grief will let me say no more, than that I
am coming to beg Comfort from you ; and by
this I prepare you to receive, when he comes,
a Son in Tears and Mourning,
Archibald Campbell.
P. 5. I have a Babe not much above Two
Years old, must bear the Hardships of Tra-
velling over the Ice, and all thro' Muscovy;
for no Ships can stir here for many Months,
and I cannot bear to live in this inhospitable
Place, (where Ihe died, that only could
make it easy to me;) one Moment beyond
the first Opportunity I have of leaving it. She
is in Heaven ; that should1 make me easy:
But I cannot; I am not so good a Christian
as me was : I am lost and ruin'd.:
CHAP.

<page 65>
Jx The Li*e and Adventures
G H A P. II.
After the Death of Mr. Duncan Campbells
Mother in Lapland, his Father Archibald
returned with his Son to Scotland. His Se-
cond Marriage, and how his Son was
taught to Write and Read.
MR. Archibald Campbell, having bu-
ried his Lapland Lady, returned to
Scotland; and brought over with him his
Son Mr. Duncan Campbell. By that time he
had been a Year in his own Country he
Married a Second Wife, a Lady whom I had
known very well for some Years, and then
I first saw the Boy; but as they went into
the IVeftern Islands, I saw them not again in
three Years. She being (quite contrary to the
cruel way much in Use among Step-Mothers,)
very fond of the Boy, was accustomed to
say, she did, and would always think him
her own Son. The Child came to be about
Four Years of Age (as me has related to
me the Story since) and npt able to speak
one Word, nor to hear any Noise the Fa-
ther of him used to be mightily oppressed
with Grief, and complain heavily to his new
Wife, who was no left perplexed that a Boy
so pretty, the Son of so particular a Woman,
which he had made his Wife by strange Ac-
cidents and Adventures, and a Child coming

<page 66>
of Mr. Duncan Cam pb^lL 33
into the World with' so many amazing Cir-
cumstances attending his Birth, mould lose
those precious Senses, by which alone the So-
cial Commerce of Mankind is upheld and
maintained ; and that he should be deprived
of all Advantages of Education,' which could
raise him to the Character of being the great
Man, that so many concurring Incidents at
his Nativity promised arid betokened he
would be.
One Day a Learned Divine, who was of
the University of Glascow, but had visited
Oxford, and been acquainted with the chief
Men of Science there, happening to be in
Conversation with the Mother-in-Law of this
Child, me related to him her Son's Misfor-
tunes, with fb many Marks of Sorrow, that
she mov'd the good old Gentleman's Compas-
sion, and excited in him a Desire to give her
what Relief and Consolation he could, in
this unhappy Case. His particular Inclination
to do her good Offices, made him recollect,
that at the Time he was at Oxford, he had
been in Company with one Dr. Wallis, a Man
famous for Learning; who had told him,
that he had taught a born-Deaf and Dumb
Man to Write and to Read, and even to
litter some Sounds articulately with his
Mouth; and that he told him^ he was then
going to commit to Print the Method he
made use of, in so Instructing that Person*
that others in the like unfortunate Conditions
D might

<page 67>
34 The Life and Anventures
might receive the same Benefits and Advan-
tages from other Masters, which his Deaf
and Dumb Pupil had received from him. A
Dumb Man recovering his Speech, or a
Blind Man gaining his Sight, or a Deaf one
getting his Hearing, could not be more over-
joyed, than Mrs. Campbell was at these un-
expected Tidings ; and shc wept for Glad-
ness, .when he told it. The good Gentle-
man animated and encouraged her with
the kindest Promises; and, to keep alive her
Hopes, allured her he would fend to one of
the Chief Booksellers in London, to enquire
after the Book; ( who would certainly pro-
cure it him, if it was to be got;) and that
afterwards he would peruse it diligently,
make himself Master of Dr. WaUiss Method j
and tho' he had many great Works upon his
Hands at that Time, he would steal from his
other Studies Leisure enough to compleat so
Charitable an Office, as teaching the Dumb
and Deaf to Read and to Write, and give
her Son, (who was by Nature deprived of
them) the Advantages of Speech, as far
as Art' would permit that Natural Defect
to be supplied by her powerful Interposi-
tion. , A '.
When the Mother came Home, the Child
(who could hear no knocking, and therefore
it must be by a strange and inexplicable In-
stinct in Nature ) was the first that ran to
the Door 'r and falling in a great Fit of Laugh-
: , ter,

<page 68>
of Æsr. Duncan Campbell. \$
i
ter, (a Thing it was not much used to before,
having ort the contrary rather a melancholy
Cast of Complexion ;j it clung round its
Mother's Knees, incessantly embracing and
kissing them ; as if just: at that Time it had
an Insight into what the Mother had been
doing for it, arid into its own approaching
Relief from its Misery.
When the Mother came with the Child in
her Hand to the Father, to tell him the wel-
come News ; the Child burst afresh into a
great Fit of Laughter, which continued for
an unusual Space of Time ; and the Scerie of
such reciprocal Affection and Joy between a
Wife and her own Husband, on so signal an
Occasion, is a Thing easier to be felt by Pa-
rents of a good Disposition,, (imagining them-
selves under the same Circumstance, with Re-
gard to a Child they loved with Fondness)
than to be express'd, or describ'd by the Pen
of any Writer. But it is certain, whenever
they spoke of this Affair, ( as any body, who
knows the Impatience of Parents for the
Welfare of an only Child, may guess they
must be often discoursing it over, and wish-
ing the Time was come;) the Boy, who used
seldom so much as to smile at other Times,
and who could never hear the greatest f^oise
that could be made, would constantly look
wishfully in their Faces, and laugh immode-
rately; which is a plain indication, that
there was then, a wonderful Instinct in Na-
D a ture,


<page 69>
3<$ Tta Life and Adventures
ture, as I said before ; which made him fore-
taste his good Fortune, and, if I may be al-
lowed the Expression, The Dawnings as it
were of the Second Sight, were then preg-
nant within him.
To confirm this, the happy Hour of his
Deliverance being come, and the Doctor
having procur'd Dr. Wallic's Book, came with
great Joy, and defir'd to see his Pupil. Scarce
were the Words out of his Mouth, when the.
Glild happen'd to come into the Room, and
running towards the Doctor, fell on his Knees,
kisled his Hand eagerly, and laugh'd as be-
fore ; which to me is a Demonstration, that
lie had an Insight into the Good which the
Doctor intended him.
It is certain, that several Learned Men,
who have written concerning the Second1 Sights
have demonstrated by uncontestable Proofs,
and undeniable Arguments, That Children,
riay, even Horses and Cows, see the Second
Sight, as well as Men and Women advanced
in Years : But of this I shall discourse at large
in its proper Place ; having allotted a whole
future Chapter for that fame Subject of Se-
cond-sightedness.
In about Half a Year, the Doctor taught
his little Dumb Pupil, First, to know his
Letters ; then to name any Thing whatsoever;
to leave off some Savage Motions,, which he
lrad taken of his own accord, before to sig-
nify his Mind by, and to impart his
. Thoughts

<page 70>
cf Mr. Dunca n Campb ell. 37
Thoughts by his Fingers and his Pen, in a
Manner as intelligible, and almost as swift
thro' the Eyes, as that is of conveying our
Ideas to one another by our Voices, thro' the
Conduits and Port-holes of the Ears. But in
little more than Two Years, he could write *
and read as well as any body. Because a
great many People cannot conceive this, and
others pretend it is not to be done in Nature,
I will a little discourse upon Dr. Wall is's Foun-
dation, and shew in a Manner obvious to the
most ignorant, how this hitherto mysterious
Help may be easily administred to the Deaf
and yie Dumb ;which shall be the Subject of
the ensuing Chapter.
But I cannot conclude this, without telling
the handsome Saying, with which this Child,
(when not quite Six Years old ) as soon as he
thought he could express himself welJ, paid his
first Acknowledgment to his Master; and
which promised how great his future Genius
was to be, when so witty a Child ripen'd into
Man. The Words he wrote to him w ere »
these ; only alter'd into English, from the Scots
Dialect.
'Sir, It is no little Work you have accom-
plished: My Thanks are too poor an Amends:
The World, Sir, foall give you Thanks ; for
as I could not have express d piy self without
your Teaching me, so those that can talk,
tho they have Eyes, cannot fee the Things
D 3 which

<page 71>
38 The Life and Adventures
which I can see, and (hall tell them ; so that,
in doing me this, you have done a General
Service to Mankind.
C H A P. III.
The Method of Teaching Deaf and Dumb
Persons to Write, Read, and understand
a Language.
... i
IT is, I must, confess, in some Measure
amazing to me, that Men (of any mo-
derate Share of Learning) should not natu-
rally conceive of themselves a plain Reason
for this Art, and know how to account for
the Practibility of it , the Moment they
hear the Proposition advanced ; the Reasons
for it are so obvious to the very first Con-
sideration we can make about it. It will
be likewise as amazing to me, that the most
ignorant should not conceive it, after so plait;
a Reason is given them for it, as I am now
going to set down. . .-"
To begin: How are Children at first
taught a Language that can hear I Are they
not'taught by Sounds? And what are those
Sounds, but Tokens and Signs to the Ear,
importing and signifying such and such a
Thing ? If then there can be Signs made
to the Eye, agreed by the Party teach.r

<page 72>


<page 73>


<page 74>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 39
ing the Child, that they signify such and such
a Thing ; will not the Eye of the Child con-
vey them to the Mind, as well as the Ear?
They are indeed different Marks to different
Senses 5 but both the one and the other do
equally signify the same Things or Notions,
according to the Will of the Teacher, and
consequently, must have an equal Effect with
the Person who is to be instructed : For tho'
the Manners signifying are different, the
Things signified are the same.
For Example : If, after having invented an
Alphabet upon the Fingers, a Master always
keeps Company with a Deaf Child, and
teaches it to call for whatsoever it wants, by
such Motions of the Fingers, which if put down
by Letters, (according to each invented Mo-
tion of each Finger) would form in Writing
a Word of a Thing, which it wanted; might
not he, by these regular Motions, teach its
\ Eye the same Notions of Things, as Sounds
do to the Ears of Children that hear \ The
Manner of Teaching the Alphabet by Fin-
gers, is plainly described in this Plate.
When the Deaf Child has learn'd by these
Motions a good Stock of Words ; as Chil-
dren that hear, first learn by Sounds ; we
may methinks call (not improperly) the Fin-
gers of such a dumb Insant its Months and
the Eye of such a deaf Child its Ear. When
he has learn'd thus far, he must be taught to
'D 4 ] write


<page 75>
40 The Life and Adventures
write the Alphabet, according as it was adapt-
ed to the Motions of his Fingers. As for In-
stance, the Five Vowels, a, et i, ?, u; by
pointing to the Top of the Five Fingers; and
the other Letters, b, c, d, &c. by such other
Place or Posture of a Finger, as in the Plate
is represented ; or otherwise, as shall be
agreed upon. When this is done, the Marks
B, R, E, A, D, (and so of all other Words)
corresponding with such Finger, conveys
thro' his Eyes unto his Head the seme Noti-
on, viz,, the Thing signified, as the Sound
we give to those same Letters, making the
Word Bread do Mid our Heads thro' the
Ears.
This once done, he may be easily taught
to understand the Parts of Speech ; ss the
Verb, the Noun, Pronoun, &c. And so by
Rules of Grammar and Syntax, to compound
Ideas, and connect his Words into a Lan-
guage. The Method of which, since it is
plainly set forth in Dr. Walliss Letter to
Mr. Beverly, I shall set it down by way of
Extract ; that People in the same Circum-
stances with the Person we treat of, and of
the like Qenius, may not have their Talents
Jost for want of the like Assistance.
When once a Peas Person has learn'd so far,
as to understand the common Discourse of
others, and to'express his Mind (tolerably'
well) in Writing; I fee no Room, to dqubt, but
that; (provided Nature h,as endow'd him with
k "u '»• • :' apre^
"!'''

<page 76>
of Mr. Dunc an CampbeliI 41
a proper Strength of Genius, as other Men
that hear) he may become capable (upon
farther Improvement) of such farther Know-
ledge as is attainable by Reading. For I
must here join with the Learned Doctor
Walks, in averting, fas to the present Case
before us) that no Reason can be assigned,
why such a Deaf Person may not attain the
understanding of a Language as perfectly as
those that hear,* and with the fame Learned
Author, I take upon me to lay down this
Proposition as certain, that allowing the
Deaf Person the like Time and Exercise, as
to other Men is requisite in order to attain
the Perfection of a Language, and the Ele-
gance of it, he may understand as well, and
Wrife as good Language as other Men ; and
abating only what doth depend upon Sound,
as Tones, Cadencies, and (uch Punctilio's,
no whit inferior to what he may attain to, if
lie had his hearing as others have.
An Extras from Dr. Wallis, concerning the
Method of Teaching the Deaf and Dumb
to Read.
IT is most natural (asChildren learn the
Names of Things) to furnish him (by
Degrees) with a Nomenclator, containing
a Competent Number of Names of Things
common and obvious to the Eye (that you
may shew the, Thing answering to such a
.'• / •" 4 'Name)


<page 77>
42. The Life and Adventures
Name) and these digested under convenient
Titles ; and placed under them, in such con-
venient order Cin several Columns, or other
orderly Situation in the Paper) as (by their
Position) best to express to the Eye, their
Relation or Respect to one another. As
Contraries or Correlatives, one against the
other; Subordinates or Appurtenances under
their Principle, which may serve as a kind of
Local Memory.
- Thus (in one Paper) under the Title Man-
kind, may be placed snot confusedly, but in
decent order) Man, Woman, Child Boy,
Girl.
In another Paper, under the Title Body^
may be written ("in like convenient Order)
Head ("Hair, Skin, Ear) Face, Forehead,
Eye (Eyelid, Eyebrow) Cheek, Nose, ("No-
stril) Mouth (lip, Chin) Neck, Throat,
Back, Breast, Side, CRight-Side, Left-Side)
Belly, Shoulders, Arm (Elbow, Wrist J Hand,
(Back, Palm) Finger (Thumb,Knuckle,Nail)
Thigh, Knee, Leg, (Shin, Calf, Ancle) Foot,
("Heel, Sole, Toe.)
And when he hath learned the Import of
Words in each Paper, let him write them
in like Manner, in distinct Leaves, or Pages
of a Book ("prepared for that Purpose) Bq
confirm his Memory, and to have Recourse
to it upon Occasion.
In a Third Paper, you may give him the
Inward Parts j as Skull (Brain) Throat
fWind-

<page 78>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 4;
(Windpipe, Gullet) Stomach, Guts, Heart,
* £ungs. Liver, Spleen, Kidney, Bladder (U~
fine) Vein (Bloods Bone (Marrow) Flesti,
Fat, &c. - •'
In another Paper, under the Title Beast,
may be placed Horse (Stone-Horse, Gelding,)
Mare (Colt) Bull (Ox) Cow, Calf, Sheep,
Ram (Wether) Ewe (Lamb) Hog, Boar,
Sow, Pig, Dog (Masting Hound, Greyhound,
Spaniel) Bitch (Whelp, Puppy) Hare, Rab-
bet, Cat, Mouse, Rat, &c.
Under the Title Bird or Fowl, put Cock,
Capon, Hen, Chick, Goose (Gander) Gosling,
Puck (Drake) Swan, Crow, Kite, Lark, &c.
Under the Title Fish, put Pike> Eel, Place,
Salmon, Lobster, Crab, Oyster, Crawfish,
&c.
You may theh put Plants or Vegetables,
under several Heads or Subdivisions of the
fame Head, as Tree (Root, Body, Bark,
Bough, Leaf, Fruit, Oak, Ash, Apple-tree,
Pear-tree, Vine, &c. Fruit; Apple, Pear,
Plumb, Cherry, Grape, Nut, Orange, Le-
mon. Flower j Rose, Tulip, Gillyflower. Herb;
(Weed) Grass, Corn, Wheat, Barley, Rye,
Pea, Bean.
And the like of Inanimates ; as Heaven,
Sun, Moon, Star, Element, Earth, Waters
Air, Fire j and under the Title Earth, Clay?
Sand, Gravel, Stone. Metal, Gold, Silver,
Brass, Copper, Iron (Steel) Lead, Tin (Pew-
ter) Glass. Under the Title Water, put Sea,
•' "•'. Pond,

<page 79>
44 The Life and Adventures
Pond, River, Stream. Under that of Air,
put Light, Dark, Mist, Fog, Cloud, Wind,
Rain, Hail, Snow, Thunder, Lightning,
Rainbow. Under that of Fire ; Coal, Flame,
Smoak, Soot, Allies.
Under the Title Cloatbs, put Woollen
(Cloth, Stuff) Linnen (Holland, Lawn,
Lockarum) Silk (Satin, Velvet) Hat, Cap,
Band, Doublet, Breeches, Coat, Cloak,
Stocking, Shoe, Boot, Shirt, Petticoat,
Gown, &c.
Under the Title House, put Wall, Roof,
Poor, Window, Casement, Room.
Under Room, put Shop, Hall, Parlour,
Pining-Room, Chamber, Study, Closet,
Kitchin, Cellar, Stable, &c. . •
And under each of these, as distinct Heads,
the Furniture or Utensils belonging there-
unto; with Divisions and Subdivisions, as
there is Occasion; which I forbear to Men-
tion, that I be not too Prolix.
And in like manner, from Time to Time,
may be added more Collections, or Clauses
of Names or Words, conveniently digested,
under distinct Heads, and suitable Distribu-
tions; to be written in distinct Leaves, or
Pages of his Book, in such Order, as may
seem convenient.
When he is furnished with a competent
Number of Names, though not so many as
I have mentioned : It will be seasonable to
teach him, under the Titles Singular and
Plural.

<page 80>
of Mr. Duncan CampbelL 4j
Plural j the Formation of Plurals from Sin-
g ulars, by adding S or Es. As Hand.
Hands, Faec Faces, Fish Fifties, &c. with some
few Irregulars, as Man Men, Woman Wo-
men, Foot Feet, Tooth Teeth, Mouse Mice,
Lowse Lice, Ox Oxen,. &c.
'. Which, except the Irregulars, will serve for
Posiessives, to be after taught him \ which are
formed by their Primitives by like Addition of
S or Es, except some few Irregulars, as My
Mine, Thy Thine, Our Ours, Your Yours,
His, Her, Hers, Their Theirs, &c \
. And in all those, and other like Cases, it
will be proper first to shew him the Parti-
culars, and then the General Title. 1, •
. :Then teach him.in another Page, or Paper,
the Particulars, a, an, the, this, that, these,
those.
And the Pronouns, I, me, my, mine, thou,
thee, thy, thine, we, us, our, ours, ye, y ou,your,
yours, he, him, his, she, her, hers, it, it's, they,
them, their, theirs, who, whom, who's.
Then under the Titles Substantive Adje-
Bive, teach him to Connect these ; as, My
Hand, your Head, his Foot, his Feet, her
Arm, her Arms, our Hats, their Shoes, Johns
Coat, Williams Band, &c.
And in order to furnish him with more
Adjectives, under the Title Colours, you
may place, Black, White, Gray, Green, Blue,
Yellow, Red, &c. And having shewed the
Particulars, let him know that these "are
called

<page 81>
46 The Life and Adventures
called Colours, the like for Taste arid Smefl,.
as Sweet, Bitter, Sour, Stink.
And for Hearing; Sound, Noise, Word;!;
Then for Touch or Feeling : Hot, Warm,
Cold, Cool, Wet, Moist, Dry, Bard, Softy
Tough, Brittle, Heavy, Light, &c.
From whence you may furnish him with
more Examples of Adjectives with Substan-
tives; as, White Bread, Brown Bread, greeri
Grafs, soft Cheese, hard Cheese, black Hat,
my black Hat, &c. '.<''.
And then inverting the Order, Substantives.
Adjective, with the Verb Copulative between.
As, Silver is White, Gold is Yellow, Lead is
heavy, Wood is light, Snow is white, Ink is
black, Flesh is soft, Bone is hard, I am sick,
I am not well, &c. which Will begin to give
him some Notion of Syntax.
. In like Manner, when Substantive and Sub-
stantive are so connected ; as Gold is a Me-
tal, a Rose isa Flower; they are Men, they are
Women, Horses are Beasts, Geese are Fowls,
Larks are Birds, c2y.
Then as those before relate to Quality, you
may give him some other Words relating to
Quantity; as long, short, broad, narrow,
thick, thin; high, tall, low ; deep, shallow,
great, big, small (little) much, little; many,
few, full, empty ; whole, part, piece; al],
some, none, strong, weak, quick, slow, equal,
unequal, bigger, less.
z , Then

<page 82>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell 47
Then Words of Figure ; as Strait, Crook-
ed, Plain, Bowed, Concave, Hollow, Con-
vex; Round, Square, Three-Square, Sphere,
Globe, Bowl, Cube, Die, Upright, Sloping,
leaning Forward, leaning Backward, Like,
Unlike. , . •.
Of Gesture; as Stand, Lie, Sit, Kneel,
Sleep. .' ,/r-.= .-. ..; i .;
Of Motion; as Move, Stir, Rest, Walk,
Go, Come, Run, Leap, Ride, Fall, Rife, Swim,
Sink, Drawn, Slide, Creep, Crawl, Fly, Pull,
Draw, Thrust, Throw, Bring, Fetch, Carry. •
. Then Words relating to Time , Place,
Number, Weight, Measure, Money, &c. zte
in convenient Tiraej to be.stiewed him di-
stinctly for which the Teacher according to:
ruY Discretion, may take a convenient Sea-,
son.
:As likewise the Time of the Day ; the
Days of the Week, the Days of the Mqnth,
the Months of the Year; and other Things-
relating to the Altpanack, which he will
quickly be capable to understands if once.
Methodically shewn him.
As likewise the Names, and Situation d$:j
Places, and Countries, which are convent*-:
ent for him to know ; which may be order-
ly'Written in his Book, and shewed him in
the Map of London, England, Europe, the
World, &c. . , . . .
But these may be done at leisure, as like-
wise the Practice of Arithmetick, and other
like Pieces of Learning.
In

<page 83>
48 The Life And Adventures
In the mean time, after the Concord of
Substantive and Adjective, he is to be shew-
ed by convenient Examples, that of the No-
nt 'mative and Verb. As for Iristartce: I go,
you see, he fits, they stand, the Fire burns,
the Sun shines, the Wind blows, the Rain
falls, the Water runs; arid the like, with the
Titles in the top Nominative, Verb.
After this, (under the Titles Nominative,
Verb, AccusativeJ give him Examples of
Verbs Transitive ; as, I fee you, you see me,
the Fire burris the Wood, the Boy makes the
Fire, the Cook roasts the Meat, the Butler
lays the Cloth, we eat our Dinner.
Or even with a double Accusative ; as you
teach me Writing or to Write, John teacheth
me to* Dance, Tbomai tells me a Tale,
&c. :-
After this, you may teach him the Flexi-
on Or Conjugation of the Verb, or what is
Equivalent thereunto ; for in our English
TortgUe, each Verb hath»but two Tenses, the
Present and the Preter, two Participles, the
Active and the Passive, all the rest is perform-
ed by Auxiliaries^ which Auxiliaries have no
more Tenses than the other Verbs.
Those Auxiliaries are, Doj did$ will, would,
shallj should, may, might, can, could, must,
Ought, to, have, had, am, be, was. And if by
Examples you can insinuate the Signification
of these few Words, you have taught him the
whole Flexion of the Verb.
. . And

<page 84>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 49
And here it will be convenient,, once for
all-, to write him out a full Paradigm ot some-
one Verb, (suppose to see) through all thole
Auxiliaries. ,.v/i
The Verb it self hath but these Four Words*
to be learnd; fee, saw, seeing, seen ;*.save
that after thou, in the Second Person Singu-
lar, in both Tenses, we add eft; and in the
Third Person Singular, in the Present Tense,
etb or es, or instead thereof, Jf, tb, s ; and
so in all Verbs.
. : Then to the Auxiliaries, do did, will would,
shall mould, may might, can could, must
ought to, we join the Indefinite fee. And
after have, had, am, be, was, the Passive Par^
tide seen :. And so for all other Verbs. , ,;.
But the Auxiliary Am or ite, is somewhat
Irregular in a double Form*: . '.0
." Am art is; Plural are :: Was wast was j
Plural were. . • . . '^fi ;'•'.,
Be beest be ; Plural be : Were wert were;
Plural were. .!.
Be, am» was, being, been.
, Which, attended with the other Auxilia-
ries, make up the whole Passive Voice. ,:
AU Verbs, without Exceptions, in the A-
.jctive Participle, are fdrm'd by adding hig;
as, fee seeing, teach teaching, &c-.
1 The Preter Tense and the Participle are
formed regularly, by adding ed; but are oft
subject to Contractions, and other Irregulari-
ties : sometime, the same in both, sometime

<page 85>
50 The Life and Adventures
different ; and therefore it is convenient here
to give a Table of Verbs, especially the most'
usual, for those Three Cases, which may at
once teach their Signification and Formats
on : As, boil boiled, rost rosted rosted, bake
baked baked <&c' teach taught taught, bring
brought brought, buy bought bought, &c.
fee saw seen, give gave given, take took ta-
ken, forsake forsook forsaken, write wrote
written, &c< with many more, fit to be
learned.
The Verbs being thus dispatched, he is
then to learn the Prepositions; wherein lies
the whole Regimen of the Noun. For Di-
, versitv of Cases we have none ; the Force of
which is to be insinuated by convenient Ex-
amples, suited to their different Significati-
ons. As for Instance, Of ; a Piece of Bread,
a Pint 0/Wine, the Colour of a Pot, the Colour
fl/'Gold, a Ring f/Gold, a Cup of Silver ; the
Mayor of London, the longest of all, &c.
And in like manner, for off on upon to
unto, till until, from at in within, out with-
out, into out of, about over under, above be-
low, between among, before behind after,
for, by, with, through, against, concerning:
And by this Time, he will be pretty well
enabled to understand a single Sentence.
» In the last Place; He is in like manner
to be taught Conjunctions, which serve to
'eerinect not Words only, but Sentences : As,
.and also, likewise, either or whether, neither
nor,

<page 86>
of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbel i. 51
nor, if then, why, wherefore, because, there-
Fore, but, though, yet, &c. and these illu-
strated by convenient Examples in each Case:
As, Because I am coldj therefore I go to the
Fire, that I may be warm, for it is cold Wea-
ther.
If it were fairy then it would be good
Walking ; but however, though it rain, yet I
must go, because I promised : With other
like Instances.
And by this Tirile, his Book, if well fur-
nifh'd with Plenty of Words^ and those tyell
digested under several Heads, and in good
Order, and well recruited from Time to Time
as new Words occur, will serve him in the
Nature of a Ditlionary and Grammar.
And in case the Deaf Person be otherwise
bf a good Natural Capacity, and the Teach-,
ef of a good Sagacity; by this Method, pro-
ceeding gradually Step by Step, you may^
(with Diligence, and due Application of
"readier and Learner,) in a Year's Time, ot
thereabouts, perceive a greater Progress than
you would expect, and a gdod Foundation
laid for further Instruction in Matters of Re-
ligion , and other Knowledge which may be
taught by Books. ".'.[•
It will be convenient all along to have
Pen, Ink, arid Paper ready at Hand, to write
down in a word what you signify to him by
Signs, and cause him to write, or shew how
to write, what he signifies by Signs ;: which
F. %' way

<page 87>
5i The Lie£ and Adventures
way of signifying their Mind by Signs, Deaf
Persons are often very good at. And we
must endeavour to learn their Language, if I
may so call it, in order to teach them ours;
by (hewing what Words answer to their
Signs.
'Twill be neceflary also, as you go
along, after some convenient Progress made,
to express (in as plain Language as may
be) the Import of some of the Tables : As,
for Instance,
The Head is the highest Part of the Body,
the Feet the lowest Part : The Face is the
Forepart of the Head : The Forehead is over
the Eyes; the Cheeks are under the Eyes:
The Nose is between the Cheeks ; the Mouth
is under the Nose, and above the Chin,
&c. -' .:
And such plain Discourse put into Writing,
and particularly explain'd, will teach him by
degrees to understand plain Sentences. And
like Advantages a Sagacious Teacher may
take, as Occasion offers it self from Time to
Time.*
This Extract is mostly taken out of the In-
genious Dr. Wallis; and lying hid in that
little Book, which is but rarely enquir'd af-
ter, and too scarcely known, died in a man-
ner with that Great Man. And as he de-
signed it for the General Use of Mankind,
that labour d under the Misfortune of losing
those Two valuable Talents of Hearing and
v .7- Speak-

<page 88>
cf Mr. Duncan Campbell.
Speaking; I thought it might not be amiss,
(in the Life of so particular a Dumb Person as
I am writing) to give them this small but par-
ticular Fragment of Grammar and Syntax. l ''
It is exactly adjusted to theEnglifiTongue;
because such are the Persons with whom the
Doctor had to deal, and such the Persons
whose Benefit alone I consult in this Treatise.
One of the Chief Persons, who was taught
by Dr. Wallu, was Mr. Alexander Popbam;
Brother-in-Law (if I am not mistaken) to
the present Earl of Oxford; and he was a
veryx great Proficient in this way; and, tho'
he was born deaf and dumb, understood
the Language so well, as to give under his
Hand many rare Indications of a Masterly
Genius.
The Uncle of his present Sardinian Ma-
jesty, as I have been credibly informed, had"
the want of the fame Organs; and yet was'a
perfect Statesman, and wrote in Five or Six
different. Languages elegantly well.
Bishop Burnet, in his Book of Travels, tells
us a Story almost incredible ; but tells it as *
Paslage that deserves our Belief. It is con-
cerning a young Lady at Genoa, who was
not only Deaf and Dumb, but Blind too (it
seems) into the Bargain ; and this Lady, he
aslures us as a Truth, could, by putting her
Hand on her Sister's Mouth, know every
Thing she said.
'. . . '. • .1.- . :,{ ..»- • V
E 3 But

<page 89>
5*4 The Life and Adventures
But to return back to England : We have
many rare Instances of our own Country*
men, the Principal of whom I Ihall mention,
as their Names occur to my Memory. Sir
John Garvdy, Sir Thomas Knotcliff, Sir , ., •
Go ft wick, Sir Henry Lydall, and Mr. Richard
Lyns of Oxford, were all of this. Number;
and yet Men Eminent in their several Capa-
cities, for understanding many Authors, and
expressing themselves in* writing with won-
derful Facility.
In Hatton-Garden, there now lives a Mi-
racle of Wit and Good Nature ; I mean the
Daughter of Mr. hoggin ; who, tho' bom
deaf and dumb, (and she has a Brother who
has the fame Impediments) yet writes her
Mind down upon any Subject with such
Acuteness, as would amaze Learned Men
themselves, and put many Students, that
have pass d for Wits, to. a Blush, to fee them-
selves so far surpassed by a Woman, amidst
that Deficiency of. the Common Organs. If
any body speaks a word distinctly, this Lady
will, by observing narrowly the Motion of
the Speaker s Lips, pronounce the Word af-
terwards very intelligibly. -
As there are a great many Families in Eng-
land and Ireland, that have several, and some
even have Five or Six Dumb Persons be-
longing to them and as a great many
more believe it impossible for Persons bora
Deaf and Dumb to. Write and Read, and
.1 . if "'• have

<page 90>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell, $f
have thence taken'Occasion to fay and afifert;
. that Mr. Campbell could certainly speak ; 1 » %
could never think it a Digression in the Histo-
ry of this Man's Life, to let down the Gram-
mar by which he himself was taught, and
which he has taught others : (Two of which'
Scholars of his, are Boys in this Town;) part-
ly to confute the Slander made against him,
and partly for the Help of others Dumb and
Deaf; whose Parents may, by these Examples,
be encouraged to get them taught. w
,-. . •• - . r..' , ,
"V C h a r. IV.
Toung DuriCaniCampbell returns with his Mo-
ther ^Edinburgh; The Earl of Argyll's Over-
'verthrpw. The Ruin of Mr. Archibald Camp-
bell, and his Death. Toung Duncan j Pra&he
in Predi&ion at Edinburgh, 'whileyet a Boy.
OU R young Boy, now between Six and
Seven Years of Age, Half a Highlander
and Half a Laplander, delighted in wearing a
little Bonftet and Plaid, thinking it look'd very
Manly in his Countrymen ; and his Father, fo
soon as he was out of his Hanging-Sleeves, and
left off his Boy's Vest, indulged him with that
Kind of Dress, which is truly Antique and
Heroick. In this early Part of his Nonage,
he was brought to Edinburgh by his Motlier-
in-LaW ; where I my self grew afreft"^
quainted with her, his Fathef heing then but
lately dead. Just after the Civil Commo-
E 4 tion,

<page 91>
56 The Lite and Absentivb.es
tion , and off and on have known him ever
since, and conversed with him very frequent-
ly during that Space of Time, which now is
about Three or Four and thirty Years ; so that
Whatever I say concerning him in the future
Pages, I shall relate to the Reader from my
own certain Knowledge; which, as I resolve to
continue Anonymous, may perhaps not have
so much Weight and Authority, as if I had
prefix'd my Name to the Account. Be that
as it will j there are Hundreds of living Wit-
nesses, that will justify each Action I relate;
and his own future Actions while he lives, will
procure Belief and Credit to the precedent ones
which I am going to record : So t.hat if many
do remain Infidels to my Relations, and will
not allow them Exact, (the Fate of many as
credible, and more important Historians than
my self) I can however venture to flatter my
self, that greater will be the Number of those
Who will have a Faith in my Writings, than
of those who wisl reject my Accounts as in-
credible. • ,, \ st ':!' .H
. Having just spolje of the Decease of Mr.
Archibald CampkeUy the Father of our young
Duncan Campbellrj.it will not be. amiss here
to observe, how /true the Predictions, of his
Lapland Mother, were,; which arose from Se-
cond Sight, according to the Notices.given by
the Child's Father to, its Grandfather, in his
Letter from Lapland, even before it was. bflrn;
which shews, that tdie Infant held this Se-
,bn.:* ry'Uvs.yofo teals 3I.7T .brjj v$g«J


<page 92>
os Mr. Du N G A N CKM P B E L L. 57

eond Sighted Power, or Occult Faculty of
Divination even by Inheritance.
In the Year 1685, the Duke of Monmoutb
and the Earl of Argyll sailed out of the Ports
of Holland without any Obstruction,, the
Earl of Argyll in May with three Ships for
Scotland, and Monmoutb in June with the
fame Number for England.
The Earl setting out first, was also the first
at Landing. Argyll having attempted to
Land in the North of Scotland, and being
disappointed by the Vigilance of the Bishop
of the Orcades, Landed in the Weft, and
Incamped at Dimftafne Castle in the Province
of Lorn, which had belonged to him. He
omitted nothing that might draw over to him
all the Malecontents in the Kingdom, whom
he thought more Numerous than they after-
wards appeared to be. He dtspersed about
his Declarations, wherein, after protesting,
that he had taken up Arms only in Defence
of Religion and the Laws, against an unjust
Usurper (To he stiled King James the Second)
he invited all good Protestasts, and luch Scots
as would allert their Liberty, to join him
against a Prince, he said, who was got into
the Throne, to ruin the Reformation, and to
bring in Popery and Arbitrary Power. Next
he lent Letters to those he thought his Friends,
f among whom was Mr. Archibald Campbell,
who according to the vast deference paid
by the Scots to their Chief, joined him, tho'

<page 93>
58 The Life and Adventures
in his Heart of a quite different Principle
to call them to his Assistance : He De-
tached two of his Sons to make Inroads in
the Neighbourhood, and compel some by
Threats, others by mighty Promises to join
him. All his Contrivances could not raise
him above three Thousand Men, with whom
he Incamped in the Isle of Boot, where he
was soon in a manner Besieged by the Earl
of Dimbarloft, with the King's Forces, and
several other Bodies Commanded by the
Duke of Gordon, the Marquis of Athol, the
Earl df Art an, and other Great Men, who
came from all Parts to quench die Fire before
it grew to a Head.
The Earl of Argyll being obliged to quit
a Post he could not make good, went ovej?
into a Part of the Country of his own Name*
where having hastily Fortified a Castle called
Ellingrey, he put into it the Arms and Anv
munition taken out of his Ships, which lay
nt Anchor under the Cannon of a Fort he
Erected near that Place. There his Rout be-
gan; for going out from the Castle with his
Forces to make an Incursion, one of his Par-
ties were Defeated by the Marquis of Athol,
.who slew Four Hundred of his Men j and
Captain Hamilton who Attacked his Ships
with some of the King s, and took theni
without any Resistance.
ori: '* . The


<page 94>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 59
The Earl of Dunharton advancing towards
him, at the fame time, by long Marches,
while he endeavoured to secure himself by
Rivers, surprized him passing the Clyde in
the Village of Killern, as he was Marching
towards Lenox. Dnnbarto?i coming upon
them at Night, would have staid till the
next Day to Attack the Rebels, but they
gave him not so much time, for they pasted
the River in the Night, in such Confusion,
that being overcome with Fear they dispersed
as soon as over. Argyll could scarce rally so
many as would make him a small Guard,
which was soon scattered again ; Dunbarton
having palled the River, and divided his For-
ces to pursue those that fled. . Argyll had ta~
ken Guides to Conduct him to Galloway; but
they mistaking the Way, and leading him
into a Bog, most of those, that still followed
him, quitted their Horses, every Man misting
for himself.
Argyll himself was making back alone to-
wards the Clyde, when two Resolute Servants,
belonging to an Officer in the King's Army
meeting him, tho' they knew him not, bid
him Surrender. He fir d at, and misled them j
but they took better Aim, and wounded him
with a Pistol Ball. Then the Earl drawing
his two Pistols out of the Holsters, quitted
his Horse, that was quite tired, and took the
River. A Country Fellow, who came with
those two that had first assaulted him, pur-
V,j," ";' ''' sued


<page 95>
60 Ik Life W Adventures
sued him with a Pistol in his Hand; the Earl
would have fired one of his, but the Flint fail-
ing he was dangerously wounded in the Head,
by the Peasant.He discovered himself, as he fell
Sensless, crying out, Unfortunate Argyll. This
Nobleman how far soever he may be thought
misled in Principle, was certainly in his Person
a very Brave and a very Gallant Hero. They
made haste to draw him out and bring him to
himself; after which,being delivered up to the
Officers, the erring unfortunate Great Man was
conducted to Edinburgh and there Beheaded, i
Many Gentlemen that followed the For-
tunes of this Great Man, tho' not in his Death,
shared in all the other Calamities attending
his Overthrow. They most of them fled in-
to the remotest Isles and the obscurest Cor-
ners of all Scotland; contented with the sa-
ving of their Lives ; they grew Exiles and
Banished Men of their own making, and
Abdicated their Estates before they were
known to be Forfeited, because, for fear of
being informed against by the Common Fel-
lows they Commanded, they durst not ap-
pear to lay their Claims. Of this Number
was Mr. Archibald Campbell; and this new
Disaster wounded him deep into the very
Heart, after so many late Misadventures,
and sent him untimely to the Grave. He
perfectly pined away and wasted; he was
between his Last Breath and his way


<page 96>
of Mr. Dun can Cam p b 'exl. 61
of Breathing during all that time, was only
that he expired with a greater Sigh than he
ordinarily fetched every time when he drew
his Breath.
Every Thing the Lapland Lady had Pre-
dicted so long before* being thus come to
pass, we may the less admire at the Wonders
performed by her Son, when we consider
this Faculty of Divination to be so derived to
him from her, and grown as it were Here-
ditary.
Our Young Prophet, who had taught most
of his little Companions to converse with
him by Finger, was the Head at every little
Pastime and Game they play'd at. Marbles
('which he used to call Children's playing at
Bowls J yielded him mighty Diversion ; and
he was so dextrous an Artist at shooting
that little Alabaster Globe from between the
end of his Fore-finger and the Knuckle of his
Thumb, that he seldom misled hitting Plum
('as the Boys call it) the Marble he aimed at,
tho' at the distance of two or three Yards.
The Boys always when they play'd coveted
to have him on their Side, and by hearing that
he foretold other Things, used to consult him,
when they made their little Matches (which
were Things of great Importance in thehj
Thoughts) who should get the Victory. Hq
used commonly to leave these Trifles undeci-
ded, but if ever he gave his Opinion in these
trivial Affairs, the Persons fared well by
their

<page 97>
£i The Life and Adventures
their Consultation, for his Judgment about?
them was like a petty Oracle, and the End
always Answered his Prediction. But I
would have my Reader imagine (that tho'ouf1
Duncan Campbell was himself but a Boy) He
Nvas not consulted only by Boys ; hi$ Pene-
tration and Insight into Things of a high
Nature, got Air, and being attested by cre-
dible Witnesses wort him the Esteem of Per-
sons of Mature Years and Discretion!.
If a Beautiful young Virgin languished fttf
a Husband ; or a Widows Mind was in La-
bour to have a second Venture of Insants by
another Spouse: If a House-keeper had lost
any Thing belonging to her Master, still little
Duncan Campbell was at Hand; he was the
Oracle to be applied to, and the little Chalk'd
Circle, where he was diverting himself with
his Play-Fellows near the Cross at Edinburgh j '^
Was frequented with as much Solicitation arid
as much Credit, as the Tripos of Apollo was
at Delphos in Ancient Times.
It was highly Entertaining to see a Young
Blooming Beauty come and stily pick up the
Boy from his Company, carry him home with
as much eagerness, as (lie would her Gallant,
because she knew she should get the Name of
her Gallant out of him before he went, and
bribe him with a Sugar-Plumb to write down
the Name of a Young Scots Peer in a green
Ribbon that her Mouth watered after.
! . . ..
< How
\

<page 98>
of Mr. D u ncanCampbeil 6 j
How often, after he has been wallowing in
the Dust, have I my. self seen nice squeamish
Widows help him up in their gilded Chariots
and give him a pleasant Ride with them,
that he might tell them they should not long
lie alone; little - Duncan Campbell had as
much Business upon his Hands as the Parsons
of all the Parishes in Edinburgh: He com-
monly was consulted, and named the Couples
before the Minister joined them. Thus he
grew a rare Customer to the Toyshop, from
whence he most an end received Fees and
Rewards for his Advices, If Lady Betty
such a one, was foretold that she should
certainly have Beau such a one in Marriage;
then little Duncan was sure to have a Hobby-
Horse from the Toyshop as a Reward for
the promised Fop. If such a Widow that
was Ugly but very Rich, was to be pushed
hard for, as she pretended ftho' in reality
easily won) little Duncan upon ensuring her
such a Captain, or such a Lieutenant Colonel,
was sure to be presented from the same Child's
Warehouse with a very handsome Drum, and
a Silver'd Trumpret.
. .If. a Sempstress had an Itching desire for a
Parson, she would upon the first Assurance
of him, give this little Apollo a Pastboard
Temple, or Church finely painted, and a
Ring of Bells into the Bargain, from the
fame Toy-Office.
z If

<page 99>
64 The Life and Adventures
If a Housekeeper lost any Plate, the Thief
was certain to be catch'd ; provided she took
little Master into the Store Room, and ask'd
him the Question, after she had given him
his Belly-full of Sweetmeats.'
•••• Neither were the Women only his Consul-
ters : The grave Merchants, who were anxi-
ous for many Ventures at Sea, applied ten
the Boy, for his Opinion of their Security; and:
they look'd upon his Opinion to be as safe, as
the Insurance-Office for Ships. If he but told
them, (tho' the Ship was just set Sail, and
a Tempest rose just after on the Ocean,) that
it would have a successful Voyage, gain the
Port designed, and return home safe laden
with the Exchange of Traffick and Mer-
chandize ; they dismiss d all their Fears, ba-
nish'd all their Cares, set their Hearts at Ease,
and safe in his Opinion, enjoy'd a Calm of
Mind amidst a Storm of Weather. .
I my self knew one Count Cog> an Eminent
Gamester; who was a Person so far from be-
ing of a credulous Disposition, that he was an
Unbeliever in several Points of Religion, and
the next Door to an Infidel. Yet as much as
he was a Stranger to Faith, he wras master'd
and overpower d so far in his Incredulity,
by the strange Events, which he had seen
come frequently to pass from the Predictions
of this Child, that he had commonly daily
Access to this Boy, to learn his more adverse
and more prosperous Hours of Gaming. At
.: first

<page 100>
of Mr. DuncaKCampbell. 6$
first indeed he would try, when the Child
foretold him his ill Fortune, whether it would
prove true; and relying upon the mere Hazard
and Turn of the Dye, he had always (as he
observed) a Run of ill Luck on those forbid-
den Days, as he never fail'd of Good, if he
chose the fortunate Hours directed by the1
Boy. One Time above all the rest, just be-
fore he was departing from Edinburgh , and
when the Season of Gaming was almost over*
most Persons of Wealth and Distinction with-
drawing for Pleasure to their Seats in the
Country, he came to young Duncan Campbells
to consult ; and was extremely solicitous to
know, how happily or unluckily he Ihould
end that Term ("as we may call it) of the
Gamesters weighty Buji?iessi viz. Flay; there
being a long Vacation likely to ensue, when
the Gaming-Table would be empty* and the
Box and Dice lie idle, and cease to rattle.
The Boy encouraged him so well with his
Predictions on this Occasion, that CounE
Cog went to the Toy-shop, brought him
from thence a very sine ivory Totunt, (as
Children call it) a pretty Set of painted and
gilded little Nine-pins and a Bowl, and a large
Bag of Marbles : And what do you think
she Gamester got by.this little Present, and
the Prediction of the Boy ? Why* without
telling the least Tittle of Falshood, within the
Space of the last Weeks Play, the Gains of
Count Cog really amounted to no less thart
i...' F "Twen>

<page 101>
66 The Life an J Adventures
Twenty Thousand Pounds Sterling, Nett
Money.
Having mention'd these Persons of so many
different Professions, by borrow'd Names, and
perhaps in a manner seemingly ludicrous ; I
would not have my Reader from hence take
Occasion of looking upon my Account as fa-
bulous : If I was not to make use of borrow'd
Names, but to tell the Real Characters and
Names of the Persons, I should do Injury to
those old Friends of his, who first gave Cre-
dit to our young Seer ; while I am endeavour-
ing to gain him the Credit and Esteem of new
ones, in whose way it has not yet happen'd
to consult him. For many Persons are very
willing to ask such Questions as the foregoing
ones; but few or none willing to have the
Publick told they ask'd them ; tho' they suc-
ceeded in their Wish, and were amply satisfy'd
in their Curiosity. I have represented them
perhaps in a ludicrous manner ; because tha
they are mysterious Actions, they are still the
Actions of a Boy; and as the Rewards he re-
ceiv'd for his Advices did really and truly
consist of such Toys as I mention'd, so could
they not be treated of in a more serious man-
ner, without the Author's incurring a Magi-
sterial Air of Pedantry, and shewing a Mind,
as it were, of being mighty grave and senten-
tious about Trifles. There are however some
Things of greater Weight and Importance^
done by him in a more ad vanc'd Stage of Life,
2 which

<page 102>
tf Mr. Duncan Campbell. 67
\vhich will be deliver d to the Publick with
that Exactitude and Gravity which becomes
them; and in some of those Relations* the
Names of; some Persons that are concern'd,
shall be printed; because it will not at ill be
injurious to them, or because I have their
Leave, and they are still living to testify what
I shali relate.
In the mean time, as the greatest Part df his
Non-age was soetit in Predicting almost innu-
merable Things, which are all however redu-
cible to the General Heads above-mention'd •
I will not tire, the Reader with any Particu-
lars; but instead of doing that, before I come
to shew his Power of Divination in the more
active Parts of his Life, and when, after Re-
moving from Edinburgh to London, he at last
made it his publick Profession; I mall ac-
count how such Divinations may be made j
and divert the Reader with many rare Ex-
amples (taken from several faithful and un-
doubted Historians ) oi Persons, who have
done the like before him, some in one ivay,
and some in another ; tho' in this he seems to
be peculiar, and to be>(if I may be allow'4
the Expression ) a Species by himself alone in,
the Talent of PrediBhn; that he has colleB*
ed within his Own individual Capacity, alt
the Methods which others severally us'd, arid
with which they were differently and singly^


<page 103>
68 The Life and Adventures
This Art of Prediction is not attainable
any otherwise, than by these Three Ways:
Fir fly It is done by the Company of Familiar
Spirits and Genij ; which are of Two Sorts,
(some good, and some bad)who tell the gift-
ed Person the Things of which he informs
other People, zdly, It is perform'd by the
Second Sight; which is very various, and dif-
fers in most of the Posieslors; it being but
a very little in some, very extensive and
constant in others ; beginning with some in
their Infancy, and leaving them before they
come to Years : Happening to others in a
Middle Age ; to others again in an old Age,
that never had it before, and lasting only for
a Term of Years, and now and then for a
very Ihort Period of Time ; and in some in-
termitting, like Fits as it were of Vision, that
leave them for a Time, and then return to be
as strong in them as ever : And it being in a
manner Hereditary to some Families, whose
Children have it from their Infancy (with-
out Intermission) to a great old Age, and
even to the Time of their Death,; which they
often foretel before it comes to pals, to a Day,
bay, even to an Hour. ^dly, It is attain'd by
,the diligent Study of the lawful Part of the
Artr of Magick.
/ Before I give the Reader an Account, (as
J[ slmrf do in Three distinct Discourses) xjl,
Concerning the Intercourse which Familiar
Spirits, viz. the good and bad Genij, have had,
'• -' .' and

<page 104>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 69
and continue to have to a great Degree with
some select Parts of Mankind, idly, Concern-,
ing the wonderful and almost miraculous
Power of a Second Sight, with which many
(beyond all Controversy) have been extraor-
dinarily, but visibly gifted. And ylly, Con-
cerning the Pitch of Perfection, to which the
Magick Science has been carry d and promo-
ted by some Adepts in that mysterious Art:
I will premise a few Particulars about the Ge-
nij, which attended our little Duncan Camp-
bell, and about the Second Sight, which he had
when yet a Child, and when we may much
more easily believe, that the Wonders he
perform'd and wrote of, must have been ra-
ther brought about by the Intervention of
fiich Gem], and the Mediation of such a Sight j
than that he could have invented such Fables
concerning them, and compass'd such Predi-
ctions, as. feem'd to want their Assistance, by
the mere Dint of a Child's Capacity.
One Day, I remember, when he was
about Nine Years of Age, going early to the
House where he and his Mother liv'd, and
it being before his Mother was stirring *,,I
went into little Duncan Campbell's Room, to
divert my self with him : I found him sitting
up in his Bed, with his Eyes broad open, but
as motionless as if he had been asleep, or even
(if it had not been for a lively, beautiful Co-
lour, which the little, pretty, fair, Sil ver-hair d
Boy always had in his Cheeks.;) as if he had
F 3 been

<page 105>
7© The Life and Adventur es
been quite dead. He did not seem so much as
to breathe : The Eyelids of him were so fix'd
and immovable, that the Eyelashes did not so
much as once make, which the least Motion
imaginable must agitate : Not to soy that he
was like a Person in an Ecstafy, he was at least
in (what we commonly call) a brown Study to
the highest Degree, and for the largest Space
of Time I ever knew. I, who had been fre-
quently inform'd by People, who have been
present at the Operations of Second-sighted
Persons, that, at the Sight of a Vision, the
Eyelids of the Person are erected, and the
Eyes continue staring till the Object vanishes ,
I, I fay, fat my self softly down on his Bedside,
and with a quiet Amazement observd him;
avoiding diligently any Motion, that might
give him the least Disturbance, or cause in him
any Avocation, or Distraction of Mind, from
the Business he was so intent upon. I re-
marks, that he held his Head sideways, with
his Mouth Wide open , and in a liflning Po-
sture ; and that after so lively a manner, as, at
the first general Thought, made me forget his
Deafness, and plainly imagine he heard some-
thing, till the Second Thought of Reflection
brought into my Mind the Misfortune that
shut up all Pamge for any Sound through
his Ears. After a stedfast Gaze, which lasted
about Seveil Minutes, he smil'd, and stretch'd
Jiis Arms, as one recovering from a Fit of In-
flolence? and rubb'd his Eyes ; then turning
< tpwards

<page 106>

<page 107>


<page 108>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell, ri
towards me, he made the Sign of a Salute,,
and hinted to me upon his Fingers his De-
fire for Pen, Ink and Paper; which I reach d
him from a little Desk, that stood at his Bed's
Feet.
Placing the Paper upon his Knees, he wrote
me the following Lines; which, together with
my Answers I preserve by me, for their Ra-
rity, to this very Day; and which I have
transcribed Word for Word, as they form a
little Series of Dialogue.
Duncan Campbell. I am sorry I cant flay
with you; but 1 Jbali see my pretty Touth and
my Lamb by and by, in the Fields near a lictle
Coppice, or Grove, where J go often to play with
them ; and I would not lose their Company for
the whole Wirld: For they and I are mighty fa-
miliar together; and the Boy tells me every thin*,
that gets me nty Reputation attiong the Ladies
and Nobility ; and you mist keep it secret.
My Question. I will be sure to keep it se-,
cret. But how do you know you are to meet
them there To-day? Did the little Boy ap-
point you?
Duncan Campbell. Yes, he did j and signi-
fied, that he hadseveralThings toprediH to me,
concerning People that, he foreknew would corns
to me the Week following, to ask me Questions.
My Question. But what was you ltarlng ar,
when I came in?
Duncan Campbell. Why, at that little Boy,
F 4 that

<page 109>
yz The Life and Adventures
that goes along with the Lamb I speak of; and
'treat then he made, me the Appointment'
My Question: How docs he do it ? Does he
write?
Duncan Campbell. No, he writes sometimes,
but oftner he speaks with his Fingers, and migh-
ty svift: No Man can do it so quick, or write half
so soon. He hat a little Bell in his Hand, like
that which my Mother makes me a Sign to jhake,
when jbe wants the Servants; with that he tic-
kles my Brain strangely, and gives me an incredi-
ble Delight of Feeling in the Inside of my Head;
he usually wakes me with it in the Morning,when
he comes to make me an Appointment. 1 fancy,
'tis what you call Hearing, which makes me
mighty desirous I could hear in your way; Tis
sweeter to the Feeling, methinks, thananyThing
js to the Tafte: It is just as if my Head was tic-
kled to deaths as my Nurse used to tickle my Sides;
but tit a different Feeling, for it' makes Things
like little Strings, tremble in my Temples, and
behind my Ears. Now J remember, I will tell
you what 'tis like, that makes me believe 'tis
like your Hearing, and that strange Thing,
which you, that can speak, call Sound or Noise:
. Because, when I was at Church with my Mo-
ther, who fold me the Bells could he heard ring-
ing a Mile off; as I was kneeling on the Bench,
and leaning over the Top ofthePew, and gnaw-
ing the Board; every time the Man pull'4 the
Rope, I thought all' my Head beat, as if it
would come to Pieces t. but yet it pleased me,
methoughti

<page 110>
of Mr. Dun can Campbell. 73
tnethought., rather than paind me, and 1 would
be~ always gnawing the Board, when the Man
pulfd the Rope, and I told my Mother the Rea-
son: The feeling of that was something like the
little Bell, but only that made my Head throb
as if it would break, and this tickles me and
makes, as it were, little Strings on the back
of my Ears dance and tremble like any Thing;
is not that like your way of Hearing ? —If it
be, it is a sweet Thing to hear. —It is more
pleasant than to see the fineft Colours in the
World. — It is something like being tickled in
the Nose with a Feather till one Sneezes, or
like the feeling, after one strikes the Lea, when
it has been numb or asleep; only with this dif-
ference, that those Two Ways give a Fain and
the other a Pleasure; J remember too, when I
had a great Cold for about Two Months, I
had a feeling something like it, but that was
blunt, dull, confused and troublesome. Is nojt
this like what you call Hearing?
My Question. It is the finest kind of hear-
ing, my DearT it is what we call Mustek.
But what fort of a Boy is that, that meets
you? And what fort of a Lamb?
Duncan Campbell. Oh ! tho they are like
other Boys and other Lambs which you fee,
they are a Thousand Times prettier and finer;
you never saw such a Boy nor such a Lamb
in your Life-time.'
My Question. How big is hel As big as
you are? And what fort of a Boy is he?
i.1" Duncan;

<page 111>
74 The Life and Adventures
Duncan Campbell. He is a little pretty
Boy, about as tall as my Knee, his Face is as
white as Snow, and so are his little Hands;
his Cheeks are as red as a Cherry, and so are his
Lips ; and, when he breathes, it makes the Air
snore perfumed than my Mothers sweet Bags
that fie puts among the Linnen; he has got a.
Crown of Roses, Cowslips, and other Flowers
rtpen his Head, such as the Maids gather in
May; his Hair is like fine Silver Threads,
and shine like the Beams of the Sun \ he wears
a loose Veil down to his Feet, that is as Blue
as the Sky in a clear Day, and embrroiderd
with Spangles, that look like the brightest Stars
in the Night ; be carries a Silver Bell in one
Hand, and a Book and Pencil in the other;
and he and the little Lamb will dance and
leap about me in a Ring as high as my Head;
the Lamb has got a little Stiver Collar with
Nine little Bells upon it; and every little
piece of Wooll upon its Back, that is as white
. as Milk, is tied up all round it in Puffs like a
little Misses Hair, with Ribbands of all Co-
lours; and round its Head too are little Roses
and Violets /luck very thick into the Wool that
grows upon its Forehead, and behind and be-
tween its Ears in the Shape of a Diadem.
They fir/1 meet me dancing thus ; and after
they have dancdsome time,the little Boy writes
down wonderful Things in his Book, which I
write down \n mine ; then they dance again,
till he rings his Bell, and then they are gone

<page 112>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell . j$
all of a sudden I know not where * but I seel
the Tickling in the Inside os my Head, catisd by
the Bell, less and less, till I don t feel it at all;
and then I go home, read over my Lesson in my
Book, and when I have it by heart, I burn the
written Leavesy according as the little Boy
bids me, or he would let me have no more.
But I hear the little Bell again; the little Boy
is angry with me; he pull'd me Twice by the
Ear, and I would not displease him for any
"Thing ; so I must get up, and go immediately^
to the Joy and Delight of my Life.
I told him he might, if he would promise
me to tell me more another Time : He said
he would, if I would keep it secret. I told
liim I would and so we parted : Tho' just
before he went, he said he smelt some Venison,
and he was sure they would shortly have
some for Dinner : And nothing was so fore,
as that my Man had my Orders to bring a Side
of Venison to me the next Day to Mrs. Camp-
bell's ; for I had been Hunting, and came thi-
ther from the Death of a Deer that Morning;
and intended, as usual, to make a Stay there
for Two or Three Days.
There are, I know, many Men of severe
Principles^ and who are more Strict, Grave
and Formal, in their Manner of Thinking,
than they are Wife ; who will be apt to judge
of these Relations^ as Things merely Fabulous
and Chimerical, and, not contented with be-
ing Disbelievers by themselves, will la-
: ''- bour

<page 113>
j6 The Life and Adventures
bour to insinuate into others this pernicious
Notion, that it is a Sign of Infirmity and
Weakness in the Head, to yield them Credit.
But tho'I could easily argue these Sir Gravities
down; tho' a Sentence or.Two would da
their Business, put them beyond the Power
of replying, and strike them dumb ; yet do
I think it not worth my while : Their greatest
and most wonted Objection against these Eu-
dæmons and Cacodœmonsibeing, that it arises all
from the Work of Fancy, in Persons of a me-
lancholick Blood. If we consider the Nature
of this Child's Dialogue with me, will it not
be more whimsically strange and miraculous,
to say, that a Child of Nine Years old had
only a Fancy of suchThings as these, of which
it had never heard any body give an Account,
and that it could by the mere Strength of Ima-
gination predict such Things as really after
came to pass; than it is (when it does so
strangely predict Things) to believe the Child
does it, in the Manner it self owns it does;'
which is by the Intervention of a good Dœmony
or a happy Genius .<? Departing therefore from
these singular wise Mens Opinions, who will
believe nothing Excellent can happen to o-
thers, which it has not been their Lot to en-
joy a Share of; I shall take my Farewel hasti-
ly of them (without losing my own Time,
or theirs) in the Words of the Ingenious and
Learned Monsieur Le Clerc: Acerbos homings
non motori Indignos quippe, qui h&c Studitz
trafienty

<page 114>
of Mr. Duncan Gampbell. 77
traBent, aut quorum Jadicij ulla ratio habe-
atur.
I shall rather see how far these Things have
lain open to the Eyes of, and been explain'd
by the Ancient Sages : I will relate who
among them were happy in their Genij> and
who among the Moderns ; whose Examples
may be Authorities for our Belief. I will set
down as clearly as I can, what Perception
Men have had of Genij, or Spirits, by the
Sense of Seeing; what by the Sense of Hear-
ing j what by the Sense of Feeling, Touching
or. Tasting ; and, in fine, what Perception o-
thers have had of these Genij by all the Senses j
what by Dreams, and what by Magickj a
Thing rarely to be met with at once in any
single Man, and which seems particular to
the Child who was the SubjecV'of our last
little Historical- Account., When I have
brought Examples, and the Opinions of wise
Philosophers, and the Evidence of undeniable
Witnesses; which one would think sufficient
to evince Persons, of the Commerce Men have
with Spirits, if they were not past all Sense of
Conviction ; I shall, not so much to corrobo-
rate what I say, as to shame some Wiseacres,
•who would by their frail Reason scan all
Things, and pretend to solve the Mysteries
ascribed to Spirits, as Facts merely natural,
and who would ..b'aaish from the Thoughts
of Men all Belief of Spirits whatsoever ; I
shall, I say, (in order to put to flume these Wise-
acres.
9

<page 115>
jS The LiFfi and Adventures
acres, if they have any Shame left) produce
the Opinions of the Fathers as Divines, shew
the Doctrine of Spirits in general to be con-
sistent with Christianity; that they are deli-
ver'd in the Scripture, and by Christian Tra-
dition; in which if they will not acquiesce, I
shall leave them to the Labyrinth of their
own wild Opinions, which in the end will
so perplex their Judgments of Things, that
they will be never able to extricate themselves.
And these different Heads will be the Subject
of the Chapter ensuing j and will (or I am
greatly mistaken) form both an instructive,
edifying and entertaining Discourse, for a Rea-
der really and truly intelligent, and that has a
good Taste and Relish for sublime Things,
i•.'' . .. 7
'«• •.> • ", , ", i"" '1 'i "1
. r . t
G H A P. V.
An Argument, proving the Perception which
Men have had, and have, by alt the Senses,
as Seeing, Hearing, &c. o/' Dæmons, Ge-
'nij, or Familiar Spirits.
IT is said in the Ninth Book of the Mo-
rals of Aristotle, It is better to come at
the probable Knowledge of some Things above
us in the Heavens^ than to be capable of gi-
ving many Demonstrations relating to Things
here below. This is, rto doubt, an admira*
ble Proposition, and speaks the lofty Aim*

<page 116>
os Mr. Duncan Campbell 79
of that sublime Mind from whence it pro-
ceeded. Among all the Disquisitions in this
kind, none seem to me more excellent, than
those, which treat concerning the Genii, that
attend upon Men, and guide them in th<f
Actions of Life. A Genius or Dæmon of the
good Kind is a fort of mediate Being, between:
Human and Divine, which gives the Mind of
Man a pleasant Conjunction with Angelick
and Celestial Faculties, and brings down to
Earth a faint Participation of, the Joys of
• Heaven. That there have been such fortu-
nate Attendants upon wise Men, we have;
many rare Instances. They have been aserir
bed to Socrates, Ariflotle, Plotinus, Porphyri-
fiy, Jamblicm, Chicits, Scaliger and Cardan*
The most celebrated of all thefc Ancients was
Socrates ; and as for his having a Genius or
Dæmon, we have the Testimonies of Plfito,
Xenophon and Antifihenes, hisQontfcmporarieSfr
confirm'd by Laerthis, Plutarch, Maximtg
Tyrius, Dion Chrysoflomut, Gicftfo, Apuleius^
Ficinw, and others, many of the Moderns be*.
fides Tertullian, Origen,Clemens AUxandrinus^
Aujlin and others ; and Socrates himself iff
Plato's The age, fays, By some Divine Lot f
have a certain Dæmon, wkjftkspas followed
me from my Childhood a& an,Qr#$U i and in th$
same Place intimates, that the Way he gain'd
his Instruction was by hearing {he Damons
Voice. Nothing is certainly ib eaiy as for
Men to be able to contradict Things, tho' ne,>
-

<page 117>
80 The Life and Adventures
ver so well attested with such an Air of Truth,
as to make the Truth of the History doubted
by others as well as themselves where no
demonstrative Proof can be brought to con-
vince them. This has been the easy Task
of those who object against the Dæmon of So-
crates ; but when no demonstrative Proof is
to be had on either Side, does not Wisdom
incline us to lean to the most Probable? Let
• us then consider whether the Evidences arc
not more credible, and Witnesses of such a
Thing are not Persons of more Authority,
than these Men are, who vouchsafe to give
7to reason but their own Incredulity for main-
taining the contrary; and whether those there-
fore by the right Rule of judging, ought not
much sooner than these,. to gain over our
Aslent to their.Asseftions? . ."« %
. We will however, laying aside the Histo-
ries of those ancient Times, the Sense where-
of, by various Readings and Interpretations
being put upon the Words, is render d ob-
scure and almost unintelligible,, descend to
more modern Relations, the Facts whereof
mall be placed beyond doubt, by reason of the
Evidences we will bring to attest them, and
mail consequently prove the Perception Men
have of Spirits or Genij by every Sense.
SE CT I 0 N I.
- We will first begin as to the Perception of
Spirits by the Sight.
Mr.

<page 118>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell^ 8i
Mr. Glanvil, in his Collection of Relations,
for proving Apparitions, Spirits, &c. tells us
of an Irijbman, that had like to have been
carried away by Spirits, and of the Ghost of
a Man who had been Seven Years dead, that
brought a Medicine to his Bedside.
The Relation is thus:
A Gentleman in Irelandr near to the Earl
ofOrrery sending his Butler oneAftemoon to
buy Cards ; as he pals'd a Field, to his Won-
der , he espy'd a Company of People sitting
round a Table, with a deal of good Chear
before them, in the Midst of the Field : And
he going up towards them, they all arofe and
saluted him, and desir'd him to sit down with
them; but one of them whisper'd these Words
in his Ear Do nothing this Company invites
you to. Hereupon he refus'd to sit down at
the Table ; and immediately Table and all
that belong'd to it were gone, and the Com-
pany are now dancing and playing upon Mu-
sical Instruments. And the Butler being de-
sir'd to join himself with them, but he refu-
sing this also, they all fall to work ; and he
not being to be prevail d with to accompany
them in working, any more than in feasting
or dancing, they all disappears, and the But-
ler is now alone : But instead of going for-
wards, Home he returns, as fast as he could
•drive, in a great Consternation j and was no
sooner enterd his Master's Door, but he fell
down, and lay some Time senseless; but coming
G again

<page 119>
Bt The Life and Advent UA e%
again to himself, he related to his Master
what had pasted. .,..-.:.
The Night following, there comes one of
his Company to his Bedside, and tells him,
That if he offered to fiir out of Doors the
next Dajfy. be would, be tarried away. Here-
upon he kept within; but towards the Even-
ing' having need to make Water, he adven-
turd to put one Foot over the Threshold,
several standing by ; which he had no sooner
done, but they espy'd a Rope cast about his
Middle; and the poor Man was hurried
away with great Swiftness, they following
him as fast as they could, but could not over-
take him : At length they espy'd an Horse-
man coming towards him, and made Signs
to him to stop the Man whom he saw co-
ming near him, and both Ends of the Rope,
but no body drawing. When they met, he
laid hold of one End of the Rope, and imme-
diately had a smart Blow given him over his
Arm with the other End j but by this means
the Man was stopp'd, and the Horseman
brought him back with him.
The Earl of Orrery hearing of these strange
Passages, sent to the Master, to desire him to
fend this Man to his House j which he ac-
cordingly did; and the Morning following, or
quickly after, he told the Earl, that hisSpe&rc
had been with him again, and assur'd him,
that that Day he should most certainly be
carry'd away, and that no Endeavours should
:. avail


<page 120>
*f Mr. Duncan Campbell. 8j
avail to the saving of him. Upon this, he was
kept in a large Room, with a considerabl6
Number of Persons to guard him ; among
whom was the famous Stroaker, Mr. Grea-
trix, who was a Neighbour. There were,
beside other Persons of Quality, Two Bishops
in the House at the same Time, who were
consulted concerning the making use of a Me-
dicine, the Speftre or Ghost prescribed j of
which Mention will, be made anon j but they
determine! on the Negative.
- Till Part of, the Afternoon was spent, all
was quiet; but at length he was perceiv'd to
rife from' the Ground ; whereupon Mr. Grea-
trix and another lusty Man clapt their Arms
over his Shoulders, one of them before him,
and the other behind, and weigh'd him down
with all their Strength ; but he was forcibly
taken up from them, and they were too weals
to keep their Hold; and for a considerable
Time he was carry'd into the Air, to and fro
ever their Heads ; several of the Company
still running under him, to prevent his recei-
ving Hurt, if he mould fall: At length he felj?
and was caught before he came to the Groundj
and had by that means no Hurt.
All being quiet till Bed-time, My LORD
order'd Two of his Servants to lie with him;
and the next Morning he told his Lordship,
that the SpeSre was again with him, and
brought a wooden Dish with grey Liquor in
itj and bid him drink it off At the first Sight
G a of


<page 121>
84 The Life and Adventures
of theSpeflre, he said, he endeavour'd to awake
his Bed-fellows ; but it told him, that that
Endeavour should be in vain ; and that he
had no Cause to fear him, he being his Friend,
and he that at first gave him the good Advice
in the Field, which had he not followed, he
had been before now perfectly in the Power
of the Company he saw there. He added, that
he concluded it was impossible, but that he
should have been carried away the Day be-
fore, there being so strong a Combination
against him ; but now he could aslure him,
there would be more Attempts of that Na-
ture ; but he being troubled with Two Sorts
of fad Fits, he had brought that Liquor to
cure him of them, and bid him drink it: He
peremptorily refusing, the Spe&re was angry,
and upbraided him with great Disingenuity;
but told him, however, he had a Kindness
for him; and that if he would take Plantain
Juice, he should be well of one Sort of Fits,
but he should carry the other to his Grave.
The poor Man having by this somewhat re-
cover'd himself, ask'd the Spe&re, whether by
the Juice of Plantain, he meant that of the
Leaves, or Roots ? It reply'd, the Roots.
Then it ask'd him, whether he did not
know him ? He answer'd, No. It reply'd, I
am such a one : The Man answer d, he had
been long dead. I have been dead, said the
SpeBre or Ghost, Seven Years ; and you know
that I liv'd a loose Life, and ever since I have
been

<page 122>
of Mr. DuncanCampb ell. 85.

been hurried up and down in a restless Con-
dition with the Company you saw, and shall
be to the Day of Judgment. Then he pro-
ceeded to tell him, that had he acknowledge
God in his Æto, he had not suffer d such se-
vere ThingBP their Means. And sarther
said, You never pray'd to God that Day,
before you met with this Company in the
Fields.
This Relation was sent to Dr. Henry More,
by Mr. E. Fowler; who said, Mr. Greatrix
told it several Persons. The Lord Orrery al-
so own'd the Truth of it : And Mr. Greatrix
told it to Dr. Henry More himself; who par-
ticularly enquir'd of Mr. Greatrix about the
Man's being carried up into the Aii', above
Men's Heads in the Room; and he did expresly
affirm, that he was an Eye-Witness thereof.
A Vision which happend to the ingenious
and Learned Dr. Donne, may not improperly
be here inserted. Mr. Isaac Walton, writing
the Life of the said Doctor, tells us, That the
Doctor and his Wife living with Sir Robert
Drury; who gave them a free Entertainment
at his House in Drury-Lane ; it happen d, tlut
the Lord Haye was by King James sent in an
Embassy to the French King, HenrylV. whom
Sir Robert resolv'd to accompany, and en-
gage! Dr. Donne to go with them; whose
Wife was then with Child, at Sir Roberts
House. Two Days after their Arrival at Paris,
Pr. pqnne was left alone in that Room» in
G 3 'which

<page 123>
$6 The Life and Adyentur es

which Sir Robert and he, and some other
Friends, had dined together. To this Place
Sir Robert return'd within Half an Hour ; and
as he left, so lie found Dr. Donne alone, but
in such an Extasy, and so alter'd in his Looks,
as amaz'd Sir Robert to behold him ; inso-
much that he earnestly desir'd Dr. Donne to
declare, what had befallen him in the short
Time of his Absence ? To which Dr. Donne
was not able to make a present Answer ; but
after a long and perplex d Pause , did at last
say, I have seen a dreadful Vision, since I saw
you : I have seen my dear Wife pass Twice
by me, through this Room, with her Hair
hanging about her Shoulders, and a dead
Child in her Arms : This I have seen, since I
saw you. To which Sir Robert reply'd, Sure,
, Sir, you have slept since I saw you ; and this
is the Result of some melancholy Dream;
which I desire you to forget, for you are now
awake. To which Dr. Donne s Reply was, I
cannot be surer that I nono live , than that I
have not slept since I saw you ; and am as
sure, that at her second Appearing^ she stopp'd,
and look'd me in the Face, and vanifid. Res}
and Sleep had not alter d Dr. Donne's Opini-
on the next Day ; for he then affirm'd this
Vision with a more deliberate and so con-
firm d a Confidence, that he inclind Sir Ro-
bert to a faint Belief that the Vision was
true ; who immediately sent a Servant to
Drury-House, with a Charge to hasten back,

<page 124>
osMr. DuncanCampbeli^ 87
and bring him word whether Mrs. Bonne
were alive ; and if alive, what Condition
she was in as to her Health. The Twelfth
Day the Meslenger return'd with this Ac-
count: That he found and left Mrs. Donne
very Sad and Sick in Bed ; and that after
a long and dangerous Labour, she had been
deliver'd of a dead Child : And upon Exa-
mination, the Abortion prov'd to be the fame
Day, and about the very Hour., that Dr. Bonne
affirm'd he saw her pass by in his Chamber.
Mr. Walton adds this, as a Relation which
will beget some Wonder; and well it may;
for most of our World are at present pos-
sess'd with an Opinion, that Visions and Mi-
racles are ceas'd : And tho' 'tis most certain,
that Two Lutes, being both strung and tuned
to an equal Pitch, and then one play'd up-
on, the other, th^t is not touch'd, being laid
upon the Table, at a fit Distance, will (like
an Eccho to a Trumpets warble a faint au-
dible Harmony, in Answer to the fame
Tune 5 yet many will not believe, that
there is any such Thing as a Sympathy with
Souls, &c.
section n.
. 'i . , . ( »• . . . ,
I shall next relate some little Histories,
to Ihew what Perception Men have had of
Spirits by the Sense of Hearing : For ( as
Wierw fays) Spirits appear sometimes invU
q4 M


<page 125>
88 ,.The Lite and Adyeutures
sibly, so thajt only a Sound, Voice or Noises
is perceived by Men; viz. a Stroke, Knock-
ing, Whistling, Sneezing, Groaning, Lament-
ing, or Clapping of the Hands, to make Men
attent to enquire or answer.
In Luther's Colloquia Mensalia, or Table-
Talk, set forth in Latin at Frankfort, Anno
1557, (it being a different Collection from
that of Aurifaber, which is translated from
High-Dutch into English ;) we have the fol-
lowing Relation.
It happen'd in Prujfia, that as a certain
Boy was born, there presently came to him
a Genius, or what you please to call it, (for
I leave it to Men's Judgments;) who had so
faithful a Care of the Infant, that there was
no need either of Mother or Servant; and
as he grew up, he had a like Care of him.
He went to School with him j but so, that
he could never be seen, either \?y himself,
or any others, in all his Life. Afterwards
he travels d into Italy; he accompanied him,
and whensoever any Evil was like to hap-
pen to him, either on the Road or in the
Inn, he was perceiv'd to foretel it by some
Touch or Stroke : He drew off his Boots,
as a Servant. If he turn'd his Journey ano-
ther way, he continued with him ; having
the same Care of him in foretelling Evil.
At length he was made a Canon; and as
on a Time he was sitting and feasting
with his Friends, in much Jollity, a vehe-
ment
»

<page 126>
of Mr. Dun can Campbell? 89
mcnt Stroke was struck on a sudden, on the
Table, so that they were all terrify'd : Pre-
sently the Canon said to his Friends, Be not
afraid ; some great Evil hangs over my Head.
The next Day he fell into a great Fever, and
the Fit continued on him for Three whole
Days, till he died miserably.
Captain Henry Bell, in his Narrative pre-
fix'd to Luther s Table-Talk, printed in Eng-
lish, Anno 165%, having acquainted us how
the German Copy printed of it had been dis-
covers under Ground, where it had lain hid
Fifty two Years ; that Edition having been
suppress'd by an Edict of the Emperor Rudol-
phus II. so that it was Death for any Person
to keep a Copy thereof: And having told us
that Casparus Van Spar, a German Gentleman,
with whom he was familiarly acquainted,
while he negotiated Affairs in Germany for
King James I. was the Person that discover'd
it, Anno 1626, and transmitted it into Eng-
land to him, and earnestly desired him to
translate the said Book into English, says, he
accordingly set upon the Translation of it
many times, but was always hinder d from
proceeding in it, by some intervening Business.
About Six Weeks after he had received the
Copy, being in Bed with his Wife one Night,
between Twelve and One of the Clock, fshe
being asleep, but himself awake;) there ap-
pear d to him an ancient Man standing at his
Bedside, array d all in White, having a long
ana



<page 127>
$>6 Tb* Liftand Adventures

and ifow/fctf Beard, hanging down to
his Girdlewho taking him by his right Ear,,
said thus to him : Sirrah! Wil! you not take
Time to translate that Book, which is sent
unto you out of Germany i I will shortly pro-
vide for you both Place and Time to do it:
And then he vanijb'd. Hereupon being much
affrighted, he fell into an extream Sweat; so
that his Wife awaking, and finding him all
Over wet, Ihe ask'd him what he ail'd ? He
told her what he had seen and heard; but he
never regarded Visions nor Dreams, and so
the fame fell out of his Mind. But a Fort-
night after, being on a Sunday at his Lodging
in Kings-streets Westminster, at Dinner with
his Wife, Two Messengers were sent from
the whole Council-Board, with a Warrant to
carry him to the Gatehouse, there to be kept
till farther Order from the Lords of the
Council j upon which Warrant he was kept
there Ten whole Years close Prisoner, where
he spent Five Tears of it in Translating the
said Book ; having good Cause to be mindful
of the Old Mans Saying, I will shortly pro-
vide for you both Place and Time to Tran-
slate it.
'Tho' the Perception of Spirits chiefly af-
fects the Hearing and Seeing Faculties, yet
are not the other Senses without some Par-
ticipation of these Genial ObjeUs, whether
Good or Evil : For, as St. Justin fays, the
Evil Work of the Devil creeps through aft
the


<page 128>


of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 9t
the Paslages of the Senses ; he presents him*
self in Figures, applies himself to Colours,
adheres to Sounds, introduces Odors, infuses
himself in Savours, and fills all the PasiageS
of Intelligence; sometimes cruelly torment-
ing with Grief and Fear, sometimes sporting-
ly diverting Man, or taunting with Mocks:
And, on the other Hand, as the learned Wal-
ter Hinton (a great Master of contemplative
Life) in his Scale of Perfection, sets forth,
that Appearances or Representations to the
Corporeal Senses, may be both Good and
Evil.
But before I conclude upon this Head, to
give still more Weight and Authority to the
Perception Men have had of these Genij,
both by the Senses of Hearing arid Seeing, I
will relate Two very remarkable Fragments
of History of this kind, told us by Persons
who demand our Credit, and done within
the Memory of our Grandfathers and Fa-
thers.
The first is concerning the Duke of Buck-
ingham, who was stabb'd by Felton, August
the 23d, x6xZ.J\
Mr. Lilly the Astrologer, in his Book enti-
tled, Monarchy or no Monarchy in England,
printed in Quarto, 165-1, having mention'd
the Duke of Buckingham, writes as fol-
lows : Since I am upon the Death of Buck-
ingham, J Jhall relate a true Story of his being
admo-


:

<page 129>
$t TheLui and Adventures
admonished often of the Death he should die*
in this manner.
An aged Gentleman, one Parker, as I now
the Duke, or of great Acquaintance with
the Duke's Father, and now retired, had a
Damon appear'd several Times to him, in the
Shape of Sir George ViUars, the Duke's Fa-
ther. This Damon walk'd many times in.
Parkers Bed-Chamber, without any Action
of Terror, Noise, Hurt or Speech j but at
last, one Night, broke out in these Words:
Mr. Parker, I know you lov'd me formerly,
and my Son George at this Time very well:
I would have you go from me, (you know
me very well to be his Father, old Sir George
ViUars, of Leicejierjhire j) and acquaint him
with these and these Particulars, &c. and
that he above all refrain the Council and
Company of such and such, (whom he then
nominated1) or else he will come to Defin-
ition, and that suddenly. Parker, tho' a ve-
ry discreet Man, partly imagin'd himself in
a Dream all this Time ; and being unwil-
ling to proceed upon no better Grounds, for-
bore addressing himself to the Duke ; for he
conceived, if he should acquaint the Duke
With the Words of his Father, and the Man-
ner of his Appearance to him, (such Appa-r
ritions being not usual) he should be laugh'd
ut, and thought to dqat% in regard he was
aged. Some few Nights pafc'd without fur-

ther

<page 130>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell* 9$
fcher Trouble to the old Man : But not very
many Nights after, old Sir George Villars ap-
peared again, walk'd. quick anafurioufly in
the Room, seem'd angry with Parker, and at
last said, Mr. Parker, I thought you had been
my Friend so much, and lov d my Son George
so well, that you would have acquainted
him with what I desired j but I know you
have not done it. By all the Friendship that
ever was betwixt you and me, and the great
RespeS you bear my Son, I desire you to de-
liver, what I formerly commanded you, to
my Son. The old Man seeing himself thus
solicited, promised the Damon he would ; but
first argued it thus ; That the Duke was not'
easy to be spoken withal; and that he would
account him a vain Man, to come with fitch
a Message from the Dead: Nor did he con-
ceive the Duke would give any Credit to
him. To which the D&mon thus answerd : If
he will not believe you have this Discourse
from me, tell him of such a Secret, (and nam'd
it) which he knows none in the World ever
Jknew but my self and him. Mr. Parker be-
ing now well satisfied that he was not afleep,
and that the Apparition was not a vain Delu-
sion, took a fit Opportunity, and seriously ac-
quainted the Duke with his Fathers Words,
and the Manner of his Apparition. The Duke
laughd heartily at the Relation, which put
old Parker to a Stand ; but at last he aslum'd
Courage, and told the Puke, that he acquaint-
ed

<page 131>
P4 The Leee and ADTiMtxrkfi.
cd his Father'sGhost, with whit he fourid
rtow to be true; iHK Scorn.mi Derision:
But, my Lord, fays he, your Father bid me
acquaint you by this Token ; and he said, it
was such as none ia the World but your Two
sehe* did yet know. Hereat the Duke was
amazed, and. much astonished, but took no
Warning or Notice thereof; keeping the same
Company still, advising with such Counsel-
lors, and performing such AUicns, as his Far-
ther by Parker countermanded. Shortly after,
old Sir George VUlars, in a very quiet but
sorrowful Posture, appears again to Parker,
ana1 said, Mr. Parker, I know you deliver'd
my Words to George my Son ; I thank you
for so doing ; but he flighted them : And now
I only request this more at your Hands, That
once again you repair to my Son, and tell .
him, that if he will not amend, and follow
the Counsel I have given him, this Knife or
Dagger (and with that he pull'd a Knife or
Dagger from under his Gown) shall end him:
And do you, Mr. Parker, set your House in Or-
der, for you shall die at such a Time. Mr.
Parker once more engag'd, tho' very unwil-
lingly, to acquaint the Duke with the last
Menage j and so did ; but the Duke desir'd
him to trouble him no further with such Mes-
sages and Dreams, and told him he perceiv'd
he was now an old Man, and doated. And
within a Month after, meeting Mr. Parker on
Lambeth-Bridge, said, Now, Mr. Parker, what
say


<page 132>
ef*M.K DU N C A NT C A M P B E LXV

say you of your Dream? Who only return'd,
Sir, I wifo it may never have Success, &c.
But; within Six Weeks after, he was stabb'd
witha Knifes according to his Fathers Ad-
monition beforehand i and Mr.. Parker died
soon after he had seen the Dream or Vision
personnel. .v! - w \ x\ s,lj , j f...
This Relation is inserted also in the Great
Lord Clarendons History, and in Sis,Richard
Bakers Chronicle. The Lord Clarendon, ill
his History, Vol. I. £. i> having given some
Relations, fays, that amongst others, there
was one (meaning this of Parker) which was
upon a better Foundation of Credit, than usu-
ally such Discourses are sounded upon. And
he tells us, that Parker was an Officer in the
King's Wardrobe in Windsor-Cafilei of a good
Reputation for Honesty and Diseretion, and
then about the .Age of Fifty Years, or more.
This Man had in hi$ Youth been bred in a
School in the Parish where Sir George Villars
(the Father of the Duke) liv'd ; and had been
much cherish'd and oblig'd in that Season of
his Age, by the said Sir George, whom after-
wards he never saw. About Six Months be-
fore the miserable Ea<i of the Duke of Buck-
inghamy the Apparition was seen : After the
Third Appearance, he made a Journey to
London, where the Court then was : He was
very well known to Sir Ralph Freeman, one
of the Masters of the Requests, who had
married a Lady that was near allied to the
vl - J Duke,
I

<page 133>
$6 The Life and Adventures
Duke, and was himself well receiv'd by him.'
He iriform'd the Duke with the Reputation
and Honesty of the Man ; and Sir Ralph Free-
man carry'd the Man the next Morning, by
Five of the Clock, to Lambeth, according to
the Duke's Appointment, and there presented
him to the Duke ; who received him courte-
ously at his Landing, and walk'd in Conference
near an Hour with him ; and Sir Ralph's and
the Duke's Servants at such a Distance, that
they heard not a word : But Sir Ralph always
fix a his Eyes on the Duke, who sometimes
(poke with great Commotion and Disorder:
And that the Man told Sir Ralph, in their
Return over the Water, that when he men-
tion d those Particulars that were to gain him
Credit, the Duke's Colour changed, and he
swore he could come to that Knowledge only
by the Devil; for that those Particulars were
Imown only to himself, and to one Person
more, who (he was sure) would never speak
of them. So far the Lord Clarendon.
I will now subjoin an authentick Relation,
which Dr. Beaumont tells us at the End of
his Book of Genij, or Familiar Spirits, print-
ed in the Year 1705., he had just before re-
ceived from the Mouth of Dr. Fowler, then
Bishop of Gloucester, himself. It is as fol-
lows, Word for Word.
Sir Charles Lee, by his first Lady, had only
one Daughter, of which she died in Child-
birth ; and when she died, her Sister, the
v Lad£
x

<page 134>
ef Mr.DuncatJ Campbell . 5>7
Lady Ever ar d desir'd to have the Education
of the Child; and she was by her very weil
educated, till she was Marriageable ; and a
Match was concluded for her with Sir Wil-
liam Perkins, but was then prevented in art
extraordinary manner. Upon a Thursday-
Night, me thinking she saw a Light in her
Chamber after me was in Bed, knock'd for
her Maid, who presently came to her ; and
Ihe ask'd why she left a Candle burning in
her Chamber? The Maid said, she left none;
and there was none, but what she brought
with her at that Time., Then Ihe said it was
the Fire : But that, the Maid told her, was
quite out; and said, me believ'd it was only
a Dream ; whereupon she said, it might be
so ; and compos d her self again to Sleep : But
about Two of the Clock she was awaken'd a-
gain, and saw the Apparition of a little Wo-
man, between her Curtain and her Pillow
Who told her, she was her Mother; and that
she was Happy ; and that by Twelve of the
Clock that Day, she should be with her:
Whereupon she knock'd again for her Maid,
called for her Cloaths ; and when she was
drelsd, went into her Closet, and came not
out again till Nine ; and then brought out
with her a Letter seal'd to her Father, brought
it to her Aunt, the Lldy Everard, told her
what had happen d ; and desir'd, that as soori
as she was dead, it might be sent to him i
But the Lady thought ihe was suddenly fallen
H Mad i

<page 135>
98 The Life and Adventures
Mad ; and thereupon sent presently away to
Chelmssord, for a Physician and Surgeon, who
both came immediately ; but the Physician
could discern no Indication of what the Lady
imagined, or of any Indisposition of her Bo-
dy; notwithstanding the Lady would needs
have her let Blood, which was done accor-
dingly : And when the young Woman had
patiently let them do what they would with
her, she desir'd that the Chaplain might be
called to read Prayers ; and when Prayers
were ended, she took her Guittar and Psalm-
book, and fat down upon a Chair without
Arms, and play'd and fung so melodiously
and admirably, that her Musick-Master, who
was then there, admir'd at it : And near the
Stroke of Twelve, Ihe rose and fat her self
down in a great Chair with Arms ; and pre-
sently fetching a strong Breathing or two,
immediately expir d ; and was so suddenly
cold, as was much wonder'd at by the Physi-
cian and Surgeon. She died at Wahham, in
EJsex, Three Miles from Chelmsford ; and the
Letter was sent to Sir Charles, at his House
in Warwickshire ; but he was so afflicted with
the Death of his Daughter, that he came not
till she was buried: But when he came, he
caus'd her to be taken up, and to be buried
by her Mother at Edmonton, as she desir'd
in her Letter. This was about the Year One
Thousand Six Hundred and Sixty Two, or
Sixty Three. And this Relation the Right
a Reve-

<page 136>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 99
Reverend the Lord Bishop of Gloucester had
from Sir Charles Lee himself; and Dr. Beau-
mont printed it in his Book abovementioned,
from the Bishop's own Mouth.
The Relations which I have given above,
are not like the trifling Accounts too often
given of these Things, and therefore causing
grave ones to be ridicul'd in common with
them.T They are of that Nature, that who-
ever attempts to ridicule them, will, instead
of turning them into Jest, become the Object
of Ridicule himself.
The first Story, which has in it such ama-
zing Circumstances, and such uncommon and
dreadful Incidents concerning the Butler in
Ireland, is (as the Reader fees)' attested by no
less a Personage than an Earl of Orrery * Two
Bishops, and many other Noblemen and Gen-
tlemen, being present, and Eye-witnesles of
what the Earl said. What greater Testimony
would the most Incredulous have? They
lay, such Things are told for Interest : What
Interest could an Earl, and many Noblemen
have, in promoting such an Imposture ? The
Incredulous fay likewise, Great and Learned
Men delight sometimes in putting Frauds up-
on the World, and after laugh at their Creduli-
tv. Would a Number of Noble Laymen chuse
Two Prelates to carry on such a Fraud > And
would Two Pious Bifiops probably combine
with several, and some Servants there present,
in spreading such a Deceit? Tis past belie-
H z ving,

<page 137>
ioo The Life and Adventures
ving, and it demands the strictest of Moral
Faith that can be given, to the most unque-
stion'd History that the Pen of Man ever
wrote.
The Second Story is founded, first, upon
the Experience of one of the most ingenious
Men of that Age, Dr. Donne ; and then upon
the Proof made by his Friend, Sir Robert
Drury, who could at first scarce believe it:
And shall we doubt the Credit of Men, whose
Company (for their Credit be it spoken) a
British Ambaslador was proud of gaining?
The Third Story is told by Luther himself,
who began the great Work of the Reformation.
The Fourth is told by one that was a King's
Publick Minister, and told from his own Tri-
al of the Matter, where he could have no In-
terest in the telling it.
The Fifth is related by those great Histori-
ans, the Lord Clarendon, and Sir Richard Ba-
ker; as a Truth rely'd upon by themselves,
and fit to be credited by their Readers.
The Sixth and last was related to Dr. Beau-
mont, by the Lord Bishop of Gloucester, who
receiv'd the Account from Sir Charles L,ee
himself, to whose Grand-Daughter the Mat-
ter happen'd.
Men, who will not believe luch Things as
these, so well attested to us, and given us by
ftch Authorities, because they did not fee
them themselves, nor any Thing of the like
Nature, ought not only to deny the Damon
of

<page 138>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell, ioi
of Socratesbut that there was such a Man
as Socrates himself. They mould not dispute
the Genij of Cesar, Cicero, Brutus, Marc
Anthony ; but avow, that there were never
any such Men existing upon Earth, and over-
throw all credible History whatsoever. Mean
while, all Men, but those who run such
Lengths in their fantastical Incredulity, will,
from the Facts above-mention'd, rest satisfied,
that there are such Things as Evil and Good
Genij ; and that Men have sometimes a Com-
merce with them by all their Senses, particu-
larly those of Seeing and Hearing; and will
not therefore be startled at the strange Frag-
ments of Histories, which I am going to re-
late of our young Duncan Campbell, and look
upon some wonderful Adventures which he
perform'd by the Intervention of his Familiar
'Dæmon or Genius, as Falshoods, only because
they are uncommon and surprizing; more
especially since they were not done in a Corner,
but by an open way of Profession of a Predi-
ctor of Things, in the Face of the Metropolis
of London, where he settled young; as will
appear in the Progress of his Life. However,
some People, notwithstanding all this, may
alledge, that tho' a Mart may have a Genius
appear to him, so as to convey into his Mind,
thro' his Senses, the Knowledge of Things
that are to come to pass; yet this happens
but on very eminent and extraordinary Occa-
sions. The Murder, for Example, of a Prime
H 3 Mini-

<page 139>
ioz The Life and Advintur es
Minister, and the Favourite of a Monarch,
in such a manner as it was performed on the
Great Buckingham by Felton, was a Thing
so uncommon, that it might perhaps deserve,
by the Permission of Heaven, an uncommon
Prediction. The others likewise are Instances
eminent in their way, particularly that of
the Lady Everards Niece : For that young
Lady being then Marriageable, and a Treaty
for that End being on Foot with Sir William
Perkins ; the Divine Providence foreseeing
that such a State might call away her
Thoughts, hitherto bent on him and Spiritual
Affairs, and fix them on the Trifles of this
World, might perhaps permit her to be cal-
led by a Holy Mother to the State of Hap-
piness she before her enjoy d, lest her Daugh-
ter s Mind should change, and she go into
the Ways of a Sinner. But if these super-
eminent, these scarce and rare Examples may
be admitted, of Man's holding a Conversati-
on with the spiritualizd Beings of another
World; it will, however, be far below the
Dignity of Hurnan Reason, methinks, to make
such large Concessions to People, who pre-
tend to converse that wonderful way, as to
allow them the Credit of being able, to do
\t upon every slight Occasion, and every in-
different Occurrence of Human Life.
I cannot help acknowledging, that a Mart
of Wisdom may, at first Thought, make such
an Objection ; but Reflection will presently
. .. . jit.' retract

<page 140>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 103
retract it; and the same good Sense that taught
him to make an Objection so well upon the
first Thought, will teach him, upon second
Thoughts, to acquiesce in the Answer.
Infants may have, no doubt, the Benefit of
such an attending Genius, as well as People
more advanc'd in Years ; as may be seen in
one of the Instances, which is a very samous
one, relating to the Boy born in Tntffta, who
was attended by one constantly from the
Time of his Birth to his Death. Besides,
it is a Mistake in the Understanding, to ima-
gine, that Death, which is the Determinati-
on and End of Life, is of more Consequence
to be known, than the Manner of regulating
that Life. For, in Reality, according to the
right way of considering, Death, or the De-
termination of a Man's Life, derives its Im-
portance from the Steps which he took in
the due Regulation of it; and therefore e-
very the least Step , proper to be taken' for
the due Regulation of Life, is of more Con-
sequence to be known, than the Death of
a Person ; tho' this, at first Sight, carries
the Face of Significance, and the other no-
thing better than the Look of a Trifle. Mar-
riage, for Example, is a Step in Life of the
utmost Importance, whether we consider that
Estate with Regard to this, or the next World.
Death is but the Finishing of one Person ; but
Marriage may be the Introducing of many
into the World with Happiness : It is there-
H 4 fore

<page 141>
104 The Life and Adventur es .
fore a Thing of more importance to be known
beforehand, and consequently more worthy
of the Communication of a Genius to the Man
with whom he convers'd. PoJJidonius tells
us, that a certain Rhodian dying, nominated
Six of his Equals, and said who mould die
first, who next, and so on, and the Event
answer d the Prediction ;why then (tho' some
People are apt to make a Jest of it) may not
a Man by the intervention of his good Ge-
nius, tell a Woman, that is to have six Huf.
bands, who she shall have first, who next,
and so on, and the Event answer the Predi-
ction ? If Men of Learning may acquire such
Knowledge, as to attain to extraordinary
Things by their ordinary Faculties, why may
not ordinary Things be taught others in this
extraordinary Way? For will any Body lay
yhat it is easier for a Man to accommodate
himself to the knowledge of a Dæmon or Ge-
nius, than for a Dæmon or Genius to accom-
modate himself to the knowledge of a Man?
Certain it is indeed that if this good Genius
(that endues a Man with a prophetick kind
of Science) be any Thing resembling a good
Angel, the primary end of his being permitted
to direct Mankind, must consist in Things re-
lating more to their Welfare hereafter j yep
J know not why they may not sometimes in-
spire, or openly direct them in human Know-
ledge, and in Things relating to Human Life,
so they are of a good Tendency ; more espe-
, < cially

<page 142>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell/ io?
cially since such a good Inspiration may be
a Counter-balance to the bad Knowledge which,
some have been inspir'd with by evil Spirits.
I would not be thought to go too far in a
Point of this Nature, and have therefore
(though perhaps I could fay much more if I
follow'd entirely my own private Opinion,
and would venture to introduce it here, in
order to communicate it to others, and make
it a publick one) said no more on this Head
than what Divines generally teach.
But the most unexceptionable Mistress, that
teaches these Things to be in Nature, is Ex-
perience. If we had very many People gifted
this Way, the extraordinary Thing would have
been become ordinary, and therefore I can't
help wondering that it should be so ordinary
a Thing for wife Men themselves to wonder
too much at Things, because they are extra-
ordinary, and suspect them as Frauds, because
they are uncommon.
There has scarce been any Period of Time,
in which some Person of this Prophetick Class,
has not existed, and has not been consulted
by the greatest of Men, and their Predictions
found at the long run to come true; ignorant
Men always rise to their Belief of them by
Experience, and the most learned Men sub-
mit their great Opinions to Experience, but
your Men of middling Talents, who make up
their want of Reason with bustling Obstinacy
and noify Contradiction, have been anpl still
. . , con-

<page 143>
x66 The Life and Adventures
continue to be their own Opposers, and with-
out discovering the reason for what they say,
they content themselves with having the
Laugh on their Sides, and barely affirming
without proving, that it is a kind of ideal
Juggle zndintelle&ual Legerdemain, by which,
these Modern Predictors impose Things up-
on the Eye of Reason, as the corporeal Eye is
impos'd upon by sleight of Hand; but it is a
strange Thing that Men of such quick Reason
can't give us a Sample of the Frauds. Thus I
remember to have read (I can't tell where) a
Story of some Courtiers, who when a great
Artist of Legerdemain was to act before the
King, pretended to be so quick-sighted, that
nothing he did should escape their Discovery,
were left by his nimble Fingers in the Dark,
and fore d at last with Blushes to own they
had no better Eyes than other People. In a
word, if People will be led by Suspicions and
remote Possibilities of Fraud and Contrivance
of such Men, all Historical Truth shall be
ended, when it consists not with a Man's pri-
vate Humour or Prejudice to admit it. Now
therefore to prove by Experience and undeni-
able Testimonies, that these kind of Genij
will submit to little Offices in order to bring
Men to greater Good ; I will give the Reader
Three or Four curious Pallages, that will set
the reasonable Reader at ease,and prepare hirrj
for reading the Passages of Mr. Campbells Life
with Pleasure, and as a fine History of won-'
derfui

<page 144>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell^ 107
derful Facts, that though they seem to sur-
pass Belief, yet ought to have his Credit.
What in Nature can be more trivial than
for a Spirit to employ himself in knocking on
a Morning at the Wainscot by the Beds-head
of a Man who got Drunk over Night, ac-
cording to the Way that such Things are or-
dinarily explain'd? And yet I shall give you
such a Relation of this, that not even the most
devout and precise Presbyterian will offer to
call in Question. For Mr. Baxter in his Histo-
rical Discourse of Apparitions writes thus.
There is now in London an understanding
sober pious Man, oft one of my Hearers, who
has an elder Brother, a Gentleman of consi-
derable Rank, who having formerly seem'd
Pious, of late Years does often fall into the
Sin of Drunkenness ;he often Lodges long to-
gether here in his Brother's House; and when-
soever he is Drunk and has slept himself So-
ber, something knocks at his Bed s-head, as
if one knock'd on a Wainscot: When they
remove his Bed it follows him :Besides other
loud Noises, on other Parts where he is, that
all the House hears ; they have often watch d,
him, and kept his Hands lest he should do it
himself: His Brother has often told it me,
and brought his Wife, a discreet Woman, to
attest it ; who avers moreover, that as stie
watch'd him, she, has seen his Shoes under
the Bed taken up, and nothing Visible to
touch them. They brought the Man himself

<page 145>
lotf TbeLiiE and Adventures
to me, and when we ask'd him, how he dare
Sin again after such a Warning, he had no
Excuse: But being Persons of Quality, for
some special Reason of Worldly Interest I
must not name him.
Two Things are remarkable in this Instance,
(says Mr. Baxter ; ) 'first, What a powerful
Thing Temptation and fleshly Concupiscence
is, and what an harden'd Heart Sin brings
Men to ; if one rose from the Dead to warn
such Sinners, it would not of it self persuade
them.
Secondly, (says Mr. Baxter) It poses me
to think what kind of Spirit this is, that has
such a care of this Man's Soul, which makes
me hope he will recover. Do good Spirits
dwell so near us, or are they sent on such
Meslages ? Or is it his Guardian Angel? Or
is it the Soul of some dead Friend that suf-
fers; and yet retaining Love to him as Hives
to his Brethren,wouId have him saved ? God
yet keeps such Things from us in the Dark.
So far we have the Authority of the re-
nown'd and famous Mr. Baxter, who makes
this knocking of the Spirit at the Beds-head
(though what we commonly call frivolous)
an important Errand.
Another Relation of this Kind was sent to
Dr. Beaumont fwhbm I my self personally
knew, and which he has inserted in his Ac-
count of Genii or familiar Spirits) in a Letter
by an ingenious and learned Clergyman of
Wiltshire ; who had given him the Relation
likewise

<page 146>
of Mr. Duncan Camp belt. "109
likewise before by Word of Mouth. It is as
follows.
Near Eighty Years since, in the Parish of
Wilcot (which is by the Devizes) in the Vi-
car's House, there was heard for a conside-
rable Time the found of a Bell, constantly
tolling every Night ; the Occasion was this,:
A debauch'd Person who liv'd in the Parish,
came one Night very late and demanded the
Keys of the Church, of the Vicar, that he
might ring a Peal, which the Vicar refused
to let him have, alledging the unseasonable-
nefs of the Time, and that he mould by grant-
ing his Desires give a Disturbance to Sir George
Wrought on and his Family, whose House ad-
joined to the Church-yard. Upon this Refu-
. sal the Fellow went away in a Rage, threat-
ning to be reveng'd of the Vicar, and going
some time after to the Devizes, met with one
Cantle or Cant low, a Person noted in those
Days for a Wizard; and he tells him how
the Vicar had serv'd him, and begs his Help
, to be even with him. The Reply Cantel
made him was this: Does he not love Ring-
ing? He shall have enough of it : And from
that Time a Bell began to Toll in his House,
and continued so to do till Cantell's Death,
who confessed at Fifoerton Goal in Sarum,
f where he was confin'd by King James du-
ring his Life J that he caus'd that Sound, and
that it should be heard in that Place during
Life. The Thing was so notorious, that
Persons

<page 147>
iio The Life and Adventures
Persons came from all Parts to hear it. And
King James sent a Gentleman from London,
on Purpose to give him Satisfaction concern-
ing the Truth of the Report. Dr. Beaumont
had likewise this Story as he tells, from the
Mouth of Sir George Wroughten's own Son j
with this remarkable Circumstance, That if
any in the House put their Heads out of the
Window, they could not hear the Sound; but
heard it immediately again, as soon as they
stood in the Room.
"." The Reader here fees, that good and bad
Gem] exercise themselves upon very little
Functions ; Knocking at Bed's-Heads, and
Ringing of Bells. For Proof of this, we have
the Testimonies of Two Divines, of a Man
of Quality and Probity, and the fame Satis-
faction that a Learned King had, who sent to
enquire into the Matter : And after this, there
can be, I think, no room for DoubV.
But to carry the Point still nearer Home:
Inasmuch as I know some will leave no Stone
unturn'd, to make the Extraordinary Actions,
which the Person whose Life I write, has
performed, appear Impostures; and inasmuch
as for this End they may fay, that tho' many
People may have been gifted in this extraordi-
nary manner, yet not so as to make a Pro-
fession of it, and therefore from thence they
take their Suspicions ; I shall, in this Place, to
remove every nicest Scruple they can have
touching this Affair, give the Reader one
x . Instance
-

<page 148>
os Mr. Duncan CampbeIl tw
Instance of this kind likewise, before I pro-
ceed with my History.
There liv'd, not many Years since, a very.
aged Getlewoman in London, in Water-Lam
by Fleetjireet, whose Name was Pight, who
was endow'd With a Prophetick Spirit : And
the ingenious Dr. Beaumont (whom I perso-
nally knew, and who had a Familiar Genius
himself) gives the World this Account of her.
She was very well known, says he, to many
Persons of my Acquaintance, now living in
London: Among others, a Gentleman, whose
Candour I can no way suspect, has told me,
that he often resorted to her, as to an Oracle;
and that as soon as he came into her presence,
me would usually .tell him, that she knew what
he was coming for, for that she had seen his
Spirit for some Time before : And without
his saying any Thing to her, Ihe would com-
monly tell him what the Business was, which
he came to consult her about, and what the
Event of it would be ; which he always found
to fall out as she laid ; and many other Per-
sons now living, can testify the like Experi-
ence of her as to themselves. '!
Before I conclude this Chapter, I am wil-
ling to give the Publick one farther little Hi-
:ltory of the like kind with the foregoing ones;
with this only Difference, That if it be values!
according to the Worth the World has al-
ways attributed to the very ingenious Person
.whom it concerns,, it will be far the most fa-
mous

<page 149>
Hi The Life and Adventures
mous of them all, and therefore fittest to fi-
nish this Chapter, and to crown this part of
the Work, in which we are mowing that Per-
sons have had a Perception of Genii or Spirits,
not visible at the same time to others.
The famous Torquatus Tajso Prince of the
Italian Poets, and scarce inferior to the im-
mortal Virgil himself, and who seems to en-
joy the intermingled Gifts of the most ac-
curate Judgment of this Latin Poet, and the
more fertile and copious Invention and Fancy
of the Greek one, Homer, strongly asserted his
own Experience in this kind.. His Life was
written and published in French, Anno 1692,
by D. C. D. D. V. who, in his Preface tells
us, that, in what he writ, he has followed
chiefly the History given us in Italian by
John Baptifla Manso, a Neapolitan Gentle-
man, who had been a very intimate Friend to
Tasso. In his Life, among other Things, he ac-
quaints us, that Tajso was naturally of that me-
lancholick Temperament, which has always
made the greatest Men, and that this Tem-
perament being aggravated by many Hard-
ships he had undergone, it made him some-
times beside himself, and that those melan-
cholick Vapours being dispatched, he came
again to himself, like those, that return from
Fits of the falling Sickness, his Spirit being
as free as before. That, near his latter End,
he retired from the City of Naples, to his
Friend Manso, at Eisaccia, a small Town in
. the

<page 150>
of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbel t. zif
the Kingdom of Naples, where Manfo had a
considerable Estate, and pass'd an Autumn there
in the Diversions of the Season.
And here the French Author gives us an
Account of TdJso\s sensible Perception of a
Genius, as follows. As, after these Amuse-
ments, he usually retir'd to his Chamber, to
entertain himself there with his Friend Manfo,
the latter had the Opportunity to enquire into
one of the most singular Effects of Tajfos
Melancholy, (of this Heroick Melancholy as
I may call it) which rais'd and brighten'd his
Spirit ; so far it was from depressing, or ren-
dring it obscure ;; and which, among the An-
cients, would have reasonably caus'd them
to have aserib'd a Familiar Damon to him, as
to Socrates. They were often in a warm De-
bate, concerning this Spirit, with which Taf-
fo pretended to have so free a Communicati-
on. I'm too much your Friend, said Manfo
to him one Day, not to let you know what
the World thinks of you concerning this
Thing, and what I think of it my self. Is it
possible, that being enlighten'd as you are,
you should be fallen into so great a Weakness,
as to think you have a Familiar Spirit? And
will you give your Enemies that Advantage,
to be able to prove by your own Acknowledg-
ment,' what they have already published to
the World? You know, they say you did not
publish your Dialogue of the Messenger, as a
xitfion; but you would have Men believe,
I' that

<page 151>
n4 The Life Adventures
that the Spirit, which you make to speak
there, was a real and f n/<? Spirit: Hence Men
have drawn this injurious Consequence, That
your Studies have embroil d your Imaginati-
on ; so that there is made in it a confused
Mixture of the Fictions of the Poets, the In-
ventions of the Philosophers, and the Doctrine
of Religion. ,
I am not ignorant, answer'd Taffb, of all
that is spread abroad in the World, on the
Account of my Dialogue : I have taken care
divers Times to disabuse my Friends, both
by Letter and Word of Mouth : I prevented
ev'n the Malignity of my Enemies, as you
know, at the Time I publish'd my Dialogue.
Men could not be ignorant, that I compos'd
it for the young Prince of Mattua ; to whom
I would explain, after an agreeable manner,
the principal Mysteries of the Platonick Phi-
Ibsophy. It was at Mantua it self, after my
Second Flight from ¥ err ar a, that I form'd the
'Idea of it; and I committed it to Paper a lit-
tle after my unfortunate Return. I address'd
it to this Prince ; and all Men might have
read in the Epifile Dedicatory, the Protestation
I there make, that this Dialogue being writ
according to the Doctrine of the Platonicks,
which is not always conformable to reveald
Truths ; Men must not confound what I ex-
pose there as a Philosopher, with what I be-
lieve as a Christian. This Distinction is by so
much the more reasonable, that at that Time
A nothing

<page 152>
of Mr. Duncan Camp tiitl its
slothing extraordinary had happen'd .to me;
'and I spake iiot; of any Apparition. This can
pe attested/Dy all those with whom I lodg'd, or
whom I frequented in this Voyage; and there-
fore there is no Reason for confounding the Fi-
ction of my Dialogue^ with what has happen'd
to me since. I am persuaded of all you say to
me, reply'd Manso ; but truly I cannot be, of
what you believe, at present, concerning your
self. Will you imagine, that you are in Com-
merce with a Spirit? And I ask you, of what
Order is that Spirit? Shall we place him in
the Number of the Rebels, whom their Pride
precipitated into the Abyss ? Or of the Intel-
ligences, who continued firm in Faith, and
Submission to their Creator? For there is no
Mean to take in the true Religion; and we'
must not foil into the Extravagances of the
Gnomes and Sylphs of the Cabalijis.
Now the Spirit in Question cannot be a
Dæmon. You own, that instead of inspiring you
with any Thing contrary to Piety and Religion,
he often fortifies in you the Maxims of Chri-
stianity J he strengthens your Faith by pro-
found Reasonings, and has the fame Respect
.with you for sacred Names and Things. Nei-
ther can you fay that it's an Angel; for. tho'
you have always led a regular Life, and far
from all Disloluteness ; tho', for some Years
past, you have apply'd your self after a par-
ticular manner to the Duties of a true Chri-
stian ; you will agree with me, that these Sorts
h of

<page 153>
116 The Life and Adventures
of Favours are not common ; that a Man must
have attained to a high Degree of Sanctity,
and not be far from the Pureness of Cœlestial
Spirits, to merit a familiar Converse, and bear
a Harmony with them. Believe me, there
is nothing in all these Discourses, which you
imagine you have with this Spirit. You know,
better than any Man, those Symptoms, which
the black Humours, wherewith you are tor-
mented, causes in you. Your Vapours are
the Source of your Visions; and yourself would
not judge otherwise of another Person, to
whom a like Thing mould happen : And you
will come to this in your own Respect also,
if you will make a mature Reflection, and
apply your self to blot out, by an Effort of
Reason, these Imaginations, which the "Vio-
lence of your evil Effects causes in you. You
may have Reason, reply'd Tajso, to think so
of the Things that pass in me 5 but as to my
self, who have a sensible Perception of them,
I am forced to reason after another manner.
If it were true, that the Spirit did not shew
himself to me, but in the violent Affault of
my Vapours ; if he offer'd to my Imagina-
tion, but wandring and confus'd Species,
without Connection or due Sequel; if he us'd
to me frivolous Reasonings, which ended in
nothing ; or if, having begun some solid Rea-
soning, he broke it off" on a sudden, and left
me in»Darknefs ; I should believe with you^_
that all Tilings that pass, are but mere Dreams

<page 154>
es Mr. Duncan Campbell^ 117,
and Phantoms. But it's quite otherwise:
This Spirit is a Spirit of Truth and Reason y
and of a Truth so distinct, of a Reason so
sublime, that he raises me often to Know-
ledges that are above all my Reasonings, tho'
they appear to me no less clear ; That he
teaches me Things, which, in my most pro-
found Meditations, never came into my Spi-
rit, and which I never heard of any Man,
nor read in any Book. This Spirit therefore
is somewhat of real; of whatsoever Order he
be, I hear him and fee him, nevertheless for
its being impossible for me to comprehend
and define him. Manso did not yield to these
Facts, which To/so would have palsd for
Proofs: He press'd him with new Questions,
which were not without Answers. Since you
will not believe me on my Word, laid Tajfso
to him, another Day, after having well dis-
puted, I must convince you by your own
Eyes, that these Things are not pure Imagi-
nations. And the next Day conversing toge-
ther in the fame Chamber, Manso perceiv'd,
that on a sudden he fix'd his Eyes towards
the Window, and that he stood, as it were,
immovable ; he call'd to him, and jogg'd him
many times: But instead of answering him;
See there the Spirit, says Tajso at last, that
has been pleased to come and visit me, and to
entertain himself with me: Look on him, and
you will acknowledge the Truth os what /say.
,*!' I I ( Manso


<page 155>
1*6 The Life and Adventures
Manso, somewhat surprized, cast his Eyes
towards the Place he shew'd him, and per-
ceiv'd nothing but the Rays of the Sun pas-
sing through the Glass ; nor did he fee any
Thing in all the Chamber, tho' he cast his
Eyes round it with Curiosity : And he desir'd
him to shew him the Spirit, which he look'd
for in vain, while he heard Tajso speak with
much Vehemency. He declares in a Letter,
which he writ concerning this to the Admi-
ral of Naples, that he really heard no other
Voice but Tajso s own : But there were some-
times Questions made by him to the pretended
Spirit, sometimes Answers, that he made to
the pretended Questions of the Spitit ; and
which were couch'd in such admirable Terms,
so efficacious, concerning Subjects so ele-
vated and so extraordinary, that he was ra-
visiYd with Admiration, and dared not to
interrupt him. He hearkend therefore .at-
tentively; and being quite beside himself at C
this mysterious Conversation, which ended
at last by a Recess of the Spirit, as he found
by the last Words of Tafso. After which, Tajso
turning himself to him, Well, said he, are your
Doubts at last dissipated i On the contrary,
ansvver'd Manso; I am more embroil'd than
ever : I have truly heard wonderful Things;
but you have not shewed me what you pro-
mis'd me. You have seen and heard, resum d
Taj/h, perhaps more than . .., .. He stopp'd
here; and Manso, who could not recover
him-

<page 156>
of Mr. Dunca n Campb ei t. 1x9
liimself of his Surprize, and had his Head fil-
led with the Ideas of this extraordinary En-
tertainment, found himself not in a Condition
to press him farther. Mean while he engag'd
himself not to speak a Word to any Man of
these Things he had heard, with a Design to
make them Publick, tho' he should have Li-
berty granted him. They had many other
Conversations concerning this Matter ; after
which, Manso own'd, he was brought to that
Pass, that he knew not what to think or say j
only, that if it were a Weakness in his Friend
to believe these Visions, he much fear'd it
would prove contagious to him ; and that
he should become at last as credulous as him-
self.
Dr. Beaumont, who is still living, and with
whom I have had formerly some Acquaint-
ance my self, has set down, among others,
this Relation at large concerning Tajso; and
gives this Reason for it: Because, says tlje
Doctor, I think it contains a sufficient Answer
to what many Learned Friends have said to
my self on the like Occasion.
Perhaps it may not be ungrateful to the
Reader, if I subjoin here the short Elogium
writ on Tajst^by the famous Thuanin; which
is as follows.
Torquatus Taslb died about the Forty fifth
Tear of his Age; a Man of a wonderful and
prodigious Wit, who was seized with an incu*
fable Fury in his Touth, when he lived at the
I ^ Court
'

<page 157>
izo The Life and Adventur es
Court of Ferrara, and nevertheless, in lucid
Intervals, he writ many Things, both in Verse
and Prose, with so much Judgment, Elegancy,
and extreme Correctness of Stile, that he turn d
at length that Pity, which many Men had con-
ceiv'd for him, into an Amazement; while by
that Fury, -which, in others, makes their Minds-
outrageous, or dulls them, after it was over, his
Understanding became as it were more purified,,
more ready in inventing Things, more acute in
aptly disposing them after they were inv€nted,and
more copious in adorning them with choiceWords
flndWeight of Sentences; and that whicbaMan
•of the soundest Sense would scarce excogitate
at his Leisure, with thegreatest Labour andCare
imaginable, he, after a violent Agitation of
the Mind set beside it self naturally perform d
with a wonderful Facility , so that he did not
seem struck with an Alienation of Mind, but
with a divine Fury. He that knows not these
Things, which all. Men know that have-been in
July, and concerning which himself sometimes
complains, tho' modestly, in hie Writings; let
him read his Divine Works, and he must necejsa-
rify conclude, either that / speak of another Man
tbanTaflb, or that these Things were written
by another Mai\ than Taslb. < ,T r- * > •' * .
After having given my Readers so many
memorable Accounts, concerning the Percep-
tion Men have had in all Ages, and still conti-
nue to have, of Genij, or Familiar Spirits, by
all the Senses, as,S&eing, Hearing, &c. whicl}
\ , . k; Accounts

<page 158>
tf Mr. D u N ci N G AtM p b e i l i
Accounts have been attested by Men of the
greatest Learning and Quality; if any of them
stili remain dislatisfied, I am contented, and
desire them, for their Punishment, to lay
down the Book, before they arrive at the
•more pleasant Parts of it, which are yet to
'•'come, and not to read one Tittle further.
These unbelieving Gentlemen shall then be
at Liberty, according as their different Spi-
rits dictate, to ridicule me in the lame man-
ner; as many more learned and greater Men
than I have b?en satyriz'd, before my Time,
by Persons of a like infidel Temper, who
would fain pasit Incredulity :upon the World,
as Wisdom ; and they may, with all the Free-
dom in Nature, bestow upon me those merry
.Appellations, which I very well know, such
extraordinary Free-thinkers imagine to be-
long of Right to any Author, that either be-
lieves himself, or would possess the World
with an Opinion and Belief, that there is such
a Thing, as the holding Commerce and Con-
versation, in this habitable World, with Ge-
nii and familiar Spirits, I shall only first tell
them all I have to fay to terminate the Di-
spute between them and me.
Those, who, to give themselves the Air
and Appearance of Men of solid Whclom and
Gravity, load other Men, who believe in Spi-
rits, with the Titles of being Men of Folly,
Levity, or Melancholy, are desired to learn,
that the fame Folly (as they are pleas'd to
„' term

<page 159>
i'.i* The Life and Adventures
termit) of Opinion is to be found in the great-
est Men of Learning that ever existed in the
Universe. Let them, in order to be convin-
ced of this read, Apuleius's Book de deo So-
traU Censorinus's Book de die Nat. c. 3. Por-
phyrius in his Book de Abflinentia, Agrippa in
his Treatise de Occult. Phil. I. 3. c. 1.%. and
also c. Nat alts Comes in his Myth. I. 4.
c. 3. Maraviglia in his Pseudomantia. Disser-
tation. 9. and 11 .and Animadversion. 10. Pla-
to in his Timœus & Cratylus, Ammianus Mar-
tellinuss History, Book %t. Hieronimus Car-
danus in his Book de vitd pioprid. c. 47. The
great Kircher in hlsOedipus Oegyptiacus.Vol
3. p. 474. Pausanius in Cliac. Pqfter. That im-
mortal Orator Cicero Lib. 1. de divinatione.
Lib. i. de Naturd Deorum 5 the Hifloire pro-
digieuse, written by Pere Arnault. Ana a
Book intituled Lux e Tenebris, which is a Col-
lection of modern Visions and Prophecies in
Germany, by several Persons ; translated into
Latin by Jo. Amos. Comenius, Printed at Am-
sterdam, 1655'. And if they will be at the
pajns of having due recourse to these Quota-
tions, they will find, that all these Men, whose
Learning is unquestionable, and most of whom
have been in a firm and undisputed Possession
of Fame for many Centuries, have all una-
nimously agreed in this Opinion,Chow foolish
soever they may think it) that there ever was
and ever would be a Communication held be-
tween some select Men and Genii or familiar
*' '. '. Spirits.

<page 160>
of Mr. Dun cjLn Campbell jij
Spirits. I must therefore desire their Pardons
if I rejoice to see them remain Wise by them-
selves, and that I continue to be esteemed by
them a Fool among so much good Company.
Others, out of a meer contempt of Reli-
gioripor cowardly, for fear of being thought
Pusillanimous by Men, turn Bravo's to Hea-
ven, and laugh at every Notion of Spirits, as
imbibed from the Nurse, or imposed upon us
by Priests, and may top these Lines upon us
with an elegant and a convincing magisterial
Sneer, though the divine Socrates was of our
Opinion, and even gxperienc'd it to be true,
having a Genius himself.. V'
The Priests hit finish, what the Nurse began^
And thus the Child imposes on the Man. \£
ffhese bring into my Mind, a Saying of Sir
Roger L' Estrange on Seneca, which I must
apply to Socrates : 'I join in Opinion with a
f Christian Heathen, while they remain Hea-
* then Christians.
The Third Sort, out of a pretended Vene-
ration to Religion and Divinity, may call
me Superstitious and Chimerical. To them
I answer, I will continue Chimerical and Su-
perstitious with St. Justin ; who gives the
fame Opinion in his Civitate Dei with Ludo-
vicns Vives ; let them be solider and more
religious Divines than St. Justin in disown-
ing it. Thus I bid these austere Criticks
hear-

<page 161>
ii4 The Lit* and Adventure's
. »
heartily sarewel ; but let my better natured
Readers go on and find a new Example
of this Conversation, being held with the Ge-
nii by our Duncan Campbell.
\. G H A P. VI.
A Narrative of Mr. Campbells coming to
London, and taking upon him the Profession
of a PrediBor ; together with an Account
of many strange Things that came to pass
just as he foretold. ,
TO proceed on regularly with the Life
of young Duncan Campbell, I must let
the Reader know that he continued thus con-
versing with his little Genius, as is set forth
above in the Dialogue he had with me, and
predicting many Things of the like Nature,
as I have described, till the Year 1694, when
he was just Fourteen Years of Age, and then
he left Scotland.
But before I come to speak of the manner
of his departure from thence, his half native
Country, inasmuch as his Father was of that
Country, and he had his Education there,
(what Education he could have, being Deaf
and Dumb) I must let the Reader know that
in the Year 1691, my very good Friend Mrs.
Campbell, his Mother-in-La\v, died, and left
... .. him

<page 162>
if Mr. Duncan Campbell tif
him there at Edinburgh, an Orphan of
Twelve Years of Age.
He was, I may venture to fay, the most
beautiful Boy of his Age I ever knew; and
the sensible Reader, who considers a Child of
good Birth, with the Misfortunes of being
Deaf and Dumb, left Fatherless and Mother-
less in the wide World, at Twelve Years Old,
without any Competency for his Mainte-
nance and Support, without any Relations,
in a manner that knew him or assisted him,
all the little Fortune his Father had, having
been lost in the civil Commotions in Scotland,
as I have related above, need not hear me
describe the Compassion, I and many more,
had for him ; because such a Reader must
certainly feel in his own Bosom the fame
lively Acts of Pity and Commiseration, aft
the hearing of such a Mishap, as I had at the
seeing it, or at least as I have now revives
afresh within me at the relating it.
However, it came so to pass, that a Person,
of the Name of Campbell, and who was a di-
stant Relation of the Boy, though he himself
was but in indifferent Circumstances, was re-
solv'd to fee him provided for one way or ano-
ther, In a manner somewhat suitable to his
Condition, and till that Time to take the best
care of him himself, that he was able. '' '' .
Several Ladies of Quality, who had known.
his Perfections, coveted to make the Boy one
of their Domesticks, as a Page, or Play-
, . -. . fellow

<page 163>
ji6 The Life and ADVENtURE*
fellow to their Children ; for though he could
not speak, he had such a Vivacity in all his
Actions, such a Sprightlinefs of Behaviour,
and such a Merriment accompanying all his
Gestures, that he afforded more Entertain-
ment, than the prettiest and wittiest little-
Prattlers at those Years are wont to do. Mr.
Campbell had certainly accepted of some of
these fortunate Offers for his little Cousin,
which were many of them likely to prove
Very Advantageous, if it had not been put
in his Head by some Friends, particularly
my self, that if he had a: mind to dispose of
the Boy in that manner, the best way he
could take, would be, to present him to the
late Earl of Argyll, who for his Name s Sake,
and for his Father's Sake, as well as the Qua-
lifications and' Endowments' of the Boy,
would more naturally (according to all Pro*
bability) take a greater Pleasure and Delight
in him, and consequently provide better for
him, and with a more lasting Care, than
any other Person of Quality, that had a
sodden liking to him, which might change,
and took him as a Stranger out of a bare Cu-
riosity. Mr. Campbell was by these Reasons
over-rufd in the disposal of his little Dumb
Prophetical Cousin, as he call'd him, and re-
solv'd that an Offer should be made of him
to the present illustrious Duke of Argyll's most
noble Father. But it so unfortunately hap-
pened, that the Earl making very much a
v: 'longer

<page 164>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell! %zj
longer stay at London than was expected,
Mr. Campbell, the Uncle, sent our young Bun-
can Campbell, his Nephew, handsomely ac-
couter'd, and with a handsome Sum of Mo-
ney in his Pocket, by Sea, With Captain
Meek of Kircaldie to London, with Letters
of Recommendation to the Earl's Favour;
and just a few Days before young Duncan
arrived in London, the Earl was set out on
hit Journey to his Seat in Scotland.
I had now left him for near Three Years,
not having seen him since about a Year after
his Mother's Death ;and then coming to Lon-
don, I had by mere Accident an Appointment
to meet some Scots Gentlemen at the Buffalo's
HeadTavematCharing-crofs. There happen'c}
at that Time to be a great Concourse of Scots
Mobility there at an Entertainment, and on?
of the Ladies and Gentlemen pasting by and
seeing one of my Friends, desir'd him to come
in, and told him both he and his Compani-
ons should be very welcome to partake of the
Diversion. The Lady told him they had got
a lovely Youth, a Scots Miracle among them,
that would give us exquisite Delight, and
write down to us all the Occurrences of our
future Lives, and tell us our Names upon our
first Appearance. The Moment I heard of
it, Duncan Campbell came into my Head j but
as it is a Thing not rare to be met with in
Scotland, for second-sighted Persons to tell
such Things, and as the Earl of Argyll was

<page 165>
ii8 The Life and Adventures^ •
in the North, I thought little Duncan had
been under his Protection, and with him, and
did not dream of meeting with him there,'
and accordingly told my Friend, before It
went in, that I believed I knew a Lad in
Scotland would exceed this in Foresight, let
him be as dextrous in his Art as he would.
As soon as I enter'd the Room, I was sor-
priz'd to find my self encompass'd and fur-
rounded by a Circle of the most beautiful Fe-
males that ever my Eyes beheld. In the Centre
of this Angelick Tribe was seated a heavenly,
Youth, with the most winning comeliness of
Aspect, that ever pleased the Sight of any Be-
holder of either Sex; his Face was divinely
Fair, and ting'd only with such a sprightly
Blush, as a Painter would use to Colour the
Picture of Health with, and the Complexion
was varnifh'd over by a Blooming, like that
of flourishing Fruit, which had not yet felt the
first Nippings of an unkind and an uncivil Air;
with this Beauty was join'd such a smiling
Draught of all the Features, as is the result
of Pleasantry and good Humour. His Eyes
were large, full of Lustre, Majestick, well
set, and the Soul shone so in them, as told
the Spectators plainly, how great was the in-
ward Vivacity of his Genius: The Hair of
his Head was thick and reclin'd far below
his Shoulders; it was of a fine Silver Colour,
and hung down in Ringlets like the curling
Tendrils of a copious Vine. He was by the
Women
i

<page 166>

<page 167>


<page 168>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. izp
Women entertain d, according to the Claim,
which so many Perfections joining in a Youth
just ripening intaManhood, might lay to the
benevolent Dispositions of the tender Sex.
One was holding the Bason of Water, ano-
ther washing a Hand, a Third with a Towel
drying his Face, which another Fair had gree-
dily snatch'd the Pleasure of washing before,
while a Fourth was disposing into order his
Silver Hairs with an Ivory Comb, in an Hand
as White, and which a Monarch might have
been proud to have had so employ'd in adjust-
ing the Crown upon his Head j a Fifth was
setting into Order his Cravat; a Sixth stole a
Kiss, and blush'd at the innocent Pleasure,
and mistook her own Thoughts as if she kiss'd
the Angel and not the Man; and they all ra-
ther seem'd td adore than to love him, as if
they had taken him not fdr a Person that en-
joy'd the frequent Gift of the second Sight,
but as if he had been some little Prophet pe-
culiarly inspired; and while they all thus ad-
mir'd and wonder'd,they all consulted him as
an Oracle. The Surprize of seeing a young
Man so happy amidst the general concurring
Favours of the Fair, made me be for a while
lost in a kind of delightful Amazement, and
the Consideration of what Blifi he was pos-
sessed, made me scarce believe my own Eyes,
when they told me it was Duncan Campbell,
who I had left an unhappy Orphan at Edin-
burgh. But fa it was* though he was much
. K altered

<page 169>
130 The Life and AdventhM^
altered in Stature, being now shot up pretty
fast in his Growth since I had seen him, and
having gain'd a kind of a fix.'d Comportment,
sueh as we may daily observe in those, who
are' taking leave of their Minority, and step-
ping into a Stage of matureflLife.
The first remarkable Thing I knew him do
in London, being in this splendid Company,
where there were so many undoubted Wit-
nesles of Quality too, that had Ocular Proof
of his Predictions, was at that Tavern :,I
chuse to Record it here, according to its due
Order. It was in the* Year 1698.
• Among this Angelical Class of Beauties,
were' Dr. W-bv-as Lady and: Daughter,
tipoh Earth there was not sure a moire beau-
tiful Creature than ' the Daughter j me was
the'leading Light of all the sparkling Tribe;
and Otmnys Character suits her exactly j for
Ate' was," '. .'' . .' . ;,:
./^iong Ten Thousand, eminently Fair.
One would imagine prosperous and lucky
Fortune was written upon her Face,and thatnc-
thing unhappy could be read in so fair a Book;
and it was therefore the unanimous Consent
6f all, that, by way of good Omen to the
rest; his Predictions;mould begin to be open'd
luckily that Day, and jhat therefore he should
first* of all be consulted about her.
Accordingly the Mother to be satisfied of
his Talent, before, me proceeded to any o-
&et Questions, ask d. him in Writing, if he
knew

<page 170>
of Mr. Duncan Cam pbeliT iji
knew the young Lady, her Name, and who
Ihe was. After a little; ruminating and pon-
dering upon the Matter,^ afad taking an exact
View of:the Beauty, he wrote down-her
Name, told Mrs. W-lvo-d slie was her Daugh*
ter,. and that her Father was a Physician;,
Convinced by his so readily telling the Name
and Quality of Persons he had never seen'in
his Life-time, that Fame had\ not given a; false
Character of' his Capacity, she proceeded.in
. her Questions as to her future Fortune.! He
gaz'd afresh at her very eagerly for some
time, and his Countenance' during that time
of viewing her seem'd to be ruffled with abun-
dance pf Disturbance and Perplexity.5 -We
all imagin'd that the Youth was'a' little
touch'd at the Heart himself with what he
saw, andithat instead of telling hers, he had
met in her bright Eyes with his own Destiny^
the Destiny of being for ever made a Slave
and a Captive, to so many powerful arid al*
most irresistible Charms. • -ninv rii
At length, after having a long Debate
within himself, which we thought proceed-
ed from the Stragglings of Love and Passions
he fetching a great Sigh, which still don*
vinced us more, took the Pen and wrote to
Mrs. W-lw-d, that he begg'd to be exdus'd^
and that his Pen might remain as Dumb
and Silent as his Tongue, . on that Affaist
By this Answer we concluded one and all*

<page 171>
i^i The Life and Adventures
that our former Conjectures were true, and
we join'd in pressing him the more earnestly
to deliver his real and sincere Opinion con-
cerning the Accidents upon which the future
Fortunes of her Life were to turn and de-
pend. He shew'd many mighty Reluctances
in the doing it ; and I have often since con-
sidered him in the fame Anguish as the late
great Dr. Radcliffe, who was endeavouring by
Study to save a certain Fair One, whom he
lov'd with a vehemence of Temper, and who
was (as his Reason told him) got far away
beyond the reach of the Art of Physick to
recover. At last he wrote in plain Terms,
that his Backwardness and Unwillingness to
tell it, arose from his Wishes that her For-
tune would be better than his certain Fore-
knowledge of it told him it would be, and
begg'd that we would rest satisfied with that
general Answer, since it was in so particular
a Case, where he himself was a Well-wisher
in vain, to the Lady about whom he was
consulted. The young Lady herself thinking,
that, if she knew any Disasters, that were to
befall her, she might by knowing the nature
of them beforehand, and the time when they
were likely to happen, be able by timely
Prudence and Forecast to avert those Evils;
with many Beseechings, urg'd him to reveal
the fatal Secret. After many Struggles to
avoid it, and as many Instances made to him,
both by Mother and Daughter, for the Dis-
covery

<page 172>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell? ijj
oovery of his Prescience in that Point, he
complied with very great Difficulty, and blot-
ting the Paper with Tears that trickled fast
from his Eyes, he gave her the lamentable
Scroll, containing the Words that follow, via.
I wish it had not fallen to my Lot to tell this
Lady, whom every Body, that but once looks
at her, must admire, though they must not
have leave to love, that she is not much
longer to be Posleslbr of that lovely Face,
which gains her such a number of Adorers.
The Small Pox will too soon turn a Ravisher,
and rifle all those Sweets and Charms that
might be able to vanquish a King, and to
subdue a Conqueror of might/ Battels.
Her Reign is doom d alas to be as short as
it is now Great and Universal! I believe /he
has internal Beauties of the Mind, not the
least inferior to those external Excellencies of
the Body, and she might perhaps by the
Power of her Mind alone, be absolute Queen
of the Affections of Men, if the Small Pox
threaten cl not too surely to be her farther
Enemy; and, not contented to destroy the
Face, was not perverfly bent to destroy the
whole Woman. But I want Words to ex-
press my Sorrow. —I would not tell it, if
you did not extort the baneful Secret from my
Bosom. —This fair Creature, whose Beauty
would make one wish her Immortal, will by
the cruel means of the Small Pox, give us too
sudden a Proof of her Mortality. —-But nei-
K 3 rjr' ther

<page 173>
IJ4 Life and Adventuris.
ther the Mother nor herself ought too much
to repine at this, seeing it appears to be the
Decree of Providence, which is always to be
interpreted as meant for our, Good, and fee-
ing it, may be the means of translating her
the sooner only: to hejr kindred Angels, whose .
Beauty she so much resembles here on Earth,
and to be among the lowest Class of whom,
is better than being the: greatest Beauty of the
World here below,, and wearing an Imperial
Crowni *.—While I comfort you, I can't help
the force of NftSure, .which makes me grieve
my self, and I only give you because you
compel me to it, ,so particular and so exact
an Answer, to so particular and so exacting a
Question.: . . 'i,
The Mother, who took the Paper, was
prudent enough to conceal from the Daugh-
ter what he laidj but Nature would(force its
Way, and bubbled from her Eyes ; ,and the
Daughter perceiving that, prested hard to fee
it, and wept at the Consideration of that hard
Fate ("though she knew not particularly what
Way) was to befall her. Never surely was
any Thing so beautiful in Tears* and I obtain'd
of the Mother to fee the Writing, —r:At last,
in general Terms, to free her from a suspense
of Mind, it was told her that some Trouble
should happen to her that would ^diminish her
Beauty. She had Courage enough to hear
that Misfortune ityjth Disdain, aadnctying, If
that be all, I,am, 4*W dj J.don't place much
F /' Pride

<page 174>
os Mr. Duncan Campbell/ v\.$
Pride in that, which I know Age must shortly
after destroy, if Trouble did not do* it be-
fore ; arid she dry'd up her Tears, and (If
what Monsieur de la Bruyere fays be true/
That the loft Thing a celebrated Woman thinks
of when fie 'dies, is the loss of her Beauty)
me shew'd an admirable Pattern of Female
Philosophy, in bearing fiich a cruel Predicti-
on with such unspeakable Magnanimity, ass
exceeded even the Patience of stern Stoifm,
considering she was a Woman, to whom
Beauty is more dear than Life.
If any Evil that is impending over Peo-
ples Heads could be evaded by Foreknow-
ledge, or eluded by Art, she had the fairest
Opportunity of having this Prediction annul-
led ("which would have been more to the sa-
tisfaction of the Predictor than knowing it
verified) than ever any Woman had. Her
Mother was specifically told, that the fatal Di-
stemper should be the Small Pox; her Father
was, and is still a very eminent Physician;
and Distempers of that Kind, especially, are
much rhore easily prevented by Care, than
curd by Art, and by Art more easily set
aside, when: there is a timely warning given
to a Physician to prepare the Body against
the Danger of the Poison, than wh^^he Di-
stemper has once catch'd hold of a Body at
unawares,- when it is unpurg'd of any gross
Humours that may accompany it. But nei-
ther thef! Foreknowledge and Caution of the
'i K 4 Mother


<page 175>
2^6 The Life and Adventur es
Mother, nor the Skill and Wisdom of the
great Physician her Father, were sufficient
to ward off the approaching Harm, that was
written in the Books of Fate. Not many
Suns had finished their yearly Courses before
slie was forc'd to submit to. the inevitable
Stroke of Death, after the infectious and ma-
licious Malady had first ravag'd her Beauty,
rioted in all her Sweets, and made an odious
deform d Spectacle of the Charmer of Man^
kind. The predicted Fate of the Daughter
workd Ib hard upon the Mothers Bowels,
that it dragged her first, with a broken Heart
to the Grave.
This Lady, whose Fortune so great and so
distinguifli'd an Asiembly had chosen to hear
as a happy Forerunner and lucky Omen of
all their own, which were to be ask'd after-
wards in their Turns, proving so contrary to
their Expectations already unfortunate in the
Prediction, and having been in Tears about
the Matter, dishearten'd all the rest of the
Beauties from consulting him farther that
Day. The Person, who kept the Tavern,
by Name Mrs. Irwin, alledg'd that as some
People were very fortunate, and others un-
fortunate upon the same Day ; so one Lady
might be before told a Mishap one. Mi-
nute, and another Lady all the Prosperity in
Nature the very next Minute following; and
therefore that what the unfortunate Lady had
heard was not to be taken as Ominous^ or
r, .. :.. . . t as

<page 176>
of Mr, Duncan Campbell' 137
as what could malignantly influence the Day,
neither ought it to be the least hindrance to 1
any who had the curiosity of being let into
the Secrets of Time before-hand. However,
whether the Ladies were convince! or noj
if she prevail'd over their Belief in that Point,
she could not prevail over their Humour,
which Cthough they might not believe the
former Prediction ominous to themselves)
was naturally aw'd for fear of the like, per-
adventure, for a Time \ and so it was agreed,
nemine Contradkente, as a witty Lady wrote
it down, that no more Petitions should for
that Day be presented by any of that Com-
pany to his Dumb, yet oracular. Majesty.
Mrs. Irwin, however, would have her way;
said, she did not presume to such Honour as
to call her self of that Company, and that:
therefore she might consult him without
breaking through the Votes of the Assembly.
Many endeavour d to diflwade her, but as she
was passionately fond of knowing future E-
vents; and had a mighty Itch to be very in-
quisitive with the Oracle, about what might
happen, not only to herself, but her Posterity;
it was agreed that he should have the liberty
of satisfying her Curiosity, since she presum'd
her Fortune was sure to be so Good, and
was so forward and eager for the knowledge
of r it. But (alas i) such is too often the
fantastical Impulse of Nature unluckily de-
praved, djat it carries us often into Wishes of
. L'... . * know-
f

<page 177>
i$8 The Life and Ad ventures
knowing, that when known we would be-
glad to unkriow again, and then our Memo-
rywill not let us be untaught.
0 'Mrs.- Ifarirt was-at that time in a pretty
commodious way of Business, every Thing in
Plenty fourid about her, and liv'd more like
a" Person of Distinction, that kept such a-Cel-i
ter1 of'Wme, tfperi House, and a free Table,
tfoan' like one who kept a Tavern. She
brought irt^her three pretty Children, that
^ere1 then almost Babies, the youngest having
fl^c i long been put of the Nurse's Arms, or
tttfsted to the Use of its own Legs* These
Children sh6 lovd as a Mother should loW
Children $ they1 were the Delight of her Eyes
all. Day, and ttie Dream of her Imagination
«fl Night.! All the Passions of her Soul were
dorifiri'd to them j she was never pleas'd but'
wlien they were so, and always angry if they
w^re crois'd; her whole Pride was eenter'd
hfthem,'and they were cToath'd and went
attended naofe like the Infants of a Princess,
than of a -Vintner s ReUct. The Fortune of
these was what-me had near at Heart, and of
which she *#as' ib eager of being immediately
apprized\ Herlmpatienbe wirfs proportiona-
Bl^to *ferLoVe (he had for them, and wmch
made her wist* to foreknow all the Happineft
th&fc was H&eto attend them. She fate chear-
fully down,- presented one - to him, and smi^
ling, Wrote the Question in general Terms,
Is this Boy to be Happy or Unhappy?

<page 178>
of Mr. Dunc an Campbell . 159.
A-melancholy Look once more'spread it self
ail over the Fatie of the Predictor, when he'
read the too inquisitive Words; and he seem'd
mightily to regret being asfc'd a Question, ito-
which he was, by his Talent of Foreseeing*
compell'd to give so unwelcome an Answer..
The Colour of the poor Woman flush'd and
vanish'd alternately, and very quick and Ihe
look'd not quite like the Picture of Despair,'
but a disconsolate Woman, with little Hopes
on one Hand, and great Doubts* and dismal
Fears on the other. She profefe'd, she read
great Evil in the Troubles of hisFace ; thanks
him for his good Nature ; tord .him, that they
all knew, that tho' he could? foretel, he could
not alter the Acts and Decretals of Fate ; and
therefore desir'd him to tell her the worst ; for
that the Misfortunes, were they never so
great, would be less dreadful to .her, than re-
maining in the State of Fear and Suspension.
He at last wrote down to her, that great and
unexpected, and even unavoidable Accidents,
would involve the whole Family in new Ca-
lamities ; that the Son me ask'd him about,
would have the bitterest Task of Hardship
to go thro' withal, while he lived; and that
to finish all'more unhappily, he would be
basely and maliciously brought to an untimely
End, by some mortal Enemy or other; but
that she should not trouble her self so much
on that Head, she would never see it, for it
would happen some Years after she was de-
, parted

<page 179>
140 The Life and Adventures
parted from the World. This melancholy Ac-
count clos'd up the Book of Predictions for
that Day, and put a sad Stop to all the pro-
jected Mirth and Curiosity. Now I must tell
the Reader, how and when the Event an-
swer'd the Prediction: And in a few Words,
it was thus : Poor Mrs. Irwin, by strange Ac-
cidents decay'd in the World, and dying Poor,
rjer Sons were fore'd to be put out Apprenti-
ces to small Trades ; and the Son, whom the
abovemention'd Prediction concern'd, was,
for stealing one Cheese from a Man' in the
Hay-Market> severely prosecuted at the Old-
Baily ; and on Wednesday, the Twenty-third
of December 1713, hang'd at Tyburn with se-
veral other Criminals.
The Two foregoing Pasiages are of so Tra-
gical a Nature, that it is Time I should re-
lieve the Minds of my Readers, with some
Histories of Ladies, who consulted him with
more Success and Advantage ; to whom his
Predictions were very entertaining, When they
so came to pals in their Favour ; the Relation
whereof will consequently be agreeable to all
Readers, who have within them a Mixture of
happy Curiosity, and good Nature.
Two Ladies, who were the most remark-
able Beauties in London, and the most courted,
turn'd at the fame Time their Thoughts to
Matrimony ; and being satiated, I may say
wearied, with the Pleasure of having conti-
nually after them a great Number and Variety
.

<page 180>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell! 141
of Adorers, relblv'd each, about the fame
Time, to make Choice of their several Men,
to whom they thought they could give most
Happiness, and from whom they might re-
ceive most. Their Names (for they are both
Persons of Distinction) shall be Chriftailina,
and Urbana. Chrifiallina was a Virgin, and
Urbana a young Widow. Chrijiallina engrofs'd
the Eyes, the Hearts, and the Sighs of the
whole Court, and whereever she appear'd, put
any Court-Lady out of her Place, that had
one before in the Heart of any Youth ; and
was the celebrated Toast among the Beau
Monde. Urbanas Beauty made as terrible Ha-
vock in the City : All the Citizens Daugh-
ters, that had many Admirers, and were in
fair Hopes of having Husbands, when they
pleas'd themselves; as soon as Urbana had lost
her old Husband, found that they every Day
lost their Lovers ; and 'twas a general Fea*
among the prettiest Maids, that they should
remain Maids still, as long as Urbana remain'd
a Widow. She was the Monopolizer of City
Affection ; and made many Girls, that had
large Stocks of Suiters, Bankrupts in the Trade
of Courtship, and broke some of their Hearts,
when her Charms broke off their Amours. —
Well j but the Day was near at Hand, when
both the Belles of the Court, and the City
Damsels, were to be freed from the Ravages,
which these Two Tyrants, triumphant in
Beauty, and insolent in Charms, made among
..: the

<page 181>
i4x TheLivE and Adventures
the Harvest of Love. Each had seen her
proper Man, to whom the Enjoyment of her
Person was to be dedicated for. Life: But it
being an Affair of so lasting Importance, each
had a Mind to be let into the Knowledge
of the Consequences of such a Choice, as far
as possible, before they stepp'd into the irre-
vocable State of Matrimony. Both of them
happen'd to take it into their Heads, that the
best way to be entirely satisfied in their Curi-
osity, was to have Recourse to the great Pre-
dictor of future Occurrences, Mr. Duncan
Campbell, whose Fame was at that Time spread
pretty largely about the Town. Chriftallina
and Urbana were not acquainted with each
other, only by the Report which Fame had
made of Beauty. They came to Mr. Camp-
bell's on the same Day, and both with the
fame Resolution of keeping themselves con-
ceal'd, and under Masks, that none of the
Company of Consulters, who happen'd to be
there, might know who they were.' It hap-
pen'd that on that very Day, just when they
came, Mr. CampbeWs Rooms were more than
ordinarily crowded with Curious Clients of
the Fair Sex; so that he was oblig'd to desire
these Two Ladies, who express'd' so much
Precaution against, and Fear of having their
Persons discover d, to be contented with only
one Room between them ; and with much
ado, they comply'd with the Request, and
condescended to. sit together Incog. Distant
Com-

<page 182>
os Mr. DuncanCampbell.
Compliments of Gesture passd between them,
(the Dress and Comportment of each making
them appear to be Persons of Figure and Breect-
Ing; .) and after three or fourMpdim Courte-
sies, down they sat^ without so rmieh as pnc£
opening their Lips, or intending so to do. .Tfye
Silence between them was very formal and
profound, for near Half anHour:; and nothing
Was. to be. heard; but the; Snapping of . Fans,
which they both did very tuneably, and wit£
great Harmony, and play'd (as, it were ). in
Consort. .. . , . r, r ,(.
At last one of the Civil, well-bred Mutjes
happening to sneeze, the other very gracefully
bow'd ; and, before she was.wejl aware, out
popp'd the Words—^-Bless you, Madam ; The
fair Sneezer return'd the Bow,. , with an
thank you, Madam. They, founja, they did
hot know one another's Voices"4 and they
began to talk very merrily together, with
pretty great Confidence ; and they taking a
mutual Liking from Conversation , so much
Familiarity grew thereupon instantly between
them, that they began not only to unmaskj
but to unbosom themselves to one another,
and confess alternately all their Secrets. Chrh>
Jlallina own'd who stie was; and told Urbana
the Beau and Courtier, that had her Heart,.
Urbana as frankly declar'd, that Vshe was a
Widow ; that she would not become the La-
dy's Rival ; that she had pitch'd upon a Se-
cond Husband, an Alderman of the City.


<page 183>
144 The Life and Adventures
just by that Time they had had their Chat
out, and wish'd one another the Pleasure of
a successful Prediction, it came to Christ allina's
Turn to visit the Dumb Gentleman, and re-
ceive from his Pen Oracular Answers, to all
the Questions Ihe had to propose. Well ; he
accordingly satisfy'd her in every Point she
ask'd him: But while she was about this,
one of Mr. Campbell's Family going with Ur-
bana, to divert her a little ; the Widow rail'd
at the Virgin as a Fool, to imagine that she
should ever make a Conquest of the bright-
est Spark about the Court; and then let fly
some random Bolts of Malice, to wound her
Reputation for Chastity. Now it became the
Widow's Turn, to go and consult : And the
lame Person of Mr. Campbell s Family, in the
mean Time entertain'd Christallina. The
Maid was not behind-hand with the Widow i
She rail'd against the Widow j represented her
as sometimes a Coquet, sometimes a Lady
of Pleasure, sometimes a Jilt; and lifted up
her Hands in Wonder and Amazement, that
Urbana should imagine so Rich a Man, as
Alderman such a one should fall to her Lot.
Thus Urbana swore and protested, that Chri-
st allina could never arrive -at the Honour of
being the Wife to the Courtly Secretaries, let
Mr. Campbell flatter her as he would : And
Christallina vow'd, that Campbell must be a
downright Wizard, if he foretqld, that such
a one as Urbana would get Alderman Stiff-
rump

<page 184>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 14^
•ftimp for a Husband, provided a Thing so im-^
probable should come to pass.
However, it seems, Duncan had told thetri
their own Names, and the Names of their
Suiters; and told them farther, how soon
they were both to be married, and that too,
directly to their Hearts Content; as they said
rejoicingly to themselves,, and made their
mutual Gratulations.
. They went away, each satisfied that she
should have her own Lover ; but Chriftallina
Jaugh'd at Mr. Campbell, for assigning the Al-
derman to Urbana; and Urbana laugh'd at
him, for promising the Courtier to the Arms
of Chriftallina.
This is a pretty good Figure of the Tem-
pers of Two reigning Toasts, with regard to
one another.
First, Their Curiosity made them, from
resolving to be concealed, discover one ano-
ther wilfully ; from utter Strangers, grow as
familiar as ol4 Friends in a Moment ; swear
one another to Secrecy, and exchange the
Sentiments of their Hearts together, and from
being Friends, become envious of each other's
enjoying a Similitude of Happiness. The
Compliments made on either Side, Face to
Face, werei,- upon the turning of the Back,
turn'd into Reflections, Detraction and Ridi-
cule: Each was a Self-Lover, and Admirer
of her own Beauty and Merit, and a Despi-
ser of the other's.
L How-
/

<page 185>
146 The Lite/W Adventures
However, Duncan Campbell prov'd at last
to be in the right: Urbana was wrong in her
Opinion of Christallina s want of Power over
Secretarw; and Chrijlallina was as much out
in her Opinion, that Urbana would miss in
her Aim of obtaining Stifrump : For they
both prov'd in the right of what they thought,
with regard to their own dear single Persons,
and were made happy according to their Ex-
pectations, just at the Time foretold by Mt.
Campbell.
Chrijlallina s ill Wishes did not hinder £7r-
hana from being Mistress of Alderman Stiff-
rump's Person and Stock ; nor did Urbana s
hinder Chrijlallina from mewing her self a
shining Bride at the Ringy in Secretarhtss gild-
ed Chariot, drawn by Six Prancers of the
proud Belgian Kind, witn her Half Dozen of
Liveries, with Favours in their Flats, waiting
lier Return at the Gate of Hide-Park:
Both lov'd, and both envy'd ; tut both al-
low a of Mr. Campbell's Foreknowledge.
Having told you Two very sorrowful Pas-
sages, and one tolerably successful and enter-
taining; I shall now relate to you another of
rny own Knowledge, that is mix'd up with
the Grievous and the Pleasant, and chequer d,
as it were, with the Shade and the Sunshine
of Fortune.
Though there are Vicissitudes in every
Stage of Life under the Sun; and not one
ever ran continually on with the fame Series
of

<page 186>
of Mr. Duncan Cam pbJl& 1.4?
Of Prosperity ; yet thdfe Conditions, which
are the most liable to the fignalrAlturations of
Fortune, are the Conditions of Merchants:
For profess d Gamesters I reckon, in a man-
ner, as Men of rto Condition of Lift; at all, but
What comes under the Statute of Vagabonds.
It was indeed, as the Reader would guess j
a worthy and a wealthy Merchant, who was
to run thro' these different Circumstances of
Being : He. came and visited our Mr, Camp-
bell, irt the Year 1707 : He found him amidst
a Crowd of Consulters f and being very cad-
ger and solicitous td know his own Fortunes
just at thatCritical Juncture of Time, hebeggd
of himj, if possible, to adjourn his other Clients
to the Day following, and sacrifice that' one
wholly to his Use ; which, aS it was probably
more important than all the others together,
(q He wrote down, that he would render the
Time spent .about it more advantageous to
Mr. Campbell; and, by way of previous En-
couragements threw him down Ten Guineas,
as a retaining Fee. ,
Mr. Campbell, who held Money in veryioV
tie Esteem, and valued it so much too littles
that he' has often had my Reprehensions ion'
that Head, paused a little ,• and after looking
earnestly in the Gentleman's Face, and read-
ing there. as i suppose, in that little Space of
Time in general, (according to the Power of
the Second Sight) that what concern d hint
•was highly momentous ; wrote him this An-
L z swet 1

<page 187>
148 The Life and Adventures
swer ; " That he would comply~-witkJiis
"Requests, adjourn his other Clients to the
"Day following, and set. apart all the Rem-
"nant of that, till Night, for inspecting the
"future Occurrences, of which he had a
,rt Mind to be made a Master.
There is certainly a very keen Appetite in
Curiosity ; it cannot stay for Satisfaction ; it
is pressing for its neceslary Repast, and is with-
out all Patience. Hunger and Thirst are not
Appetites more vehement, and more hard and
difficult to be repress'd, than that of Curiosi-
ty : Nothing but the present NOW is able to
allay it. A more expressive Picture of this I
never beheld, than in the Faces of some, and
the Murmurs and Complaints of others, in
that little inquisitive Company, when the
unwelcome Note was given about, signifying
an Adjournment for only Twenty four Hours,,
The Colour of a young Woman there came
and went a Hundred times (if possibles in the
Space of two Minutes: She blusiYd like a
red Rose this Moment; and in the Switch of
an Eyelash, she was all over as pale as a white
one. The Suiter, whose Name her Heart
had gone pit-a-pat for the Space of an Hour,
to bt inform'd of from the Pen of a Seer, was
now deferr'd a whole Day longer ; she was
once or twice within an, Ace of swooning
away; but he comforted her in particular, by
telling her j (tho' he said it only by way of

<page 188>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell? 149
Jest) that the Day following would be a more
lucky Day to consult about Husbands, than
the present that she came on. The Answer
was a kind of Cordial to her Hopes, and
brought her a little better to her self.
Two others, I remember, Sisters and old
Maids, that it seems were Misers, Women
ordinarily dress'd, and in blue Aprons, and yet
fby Relation) worth no less than Two Thou-
sand Pounds each, were in a Peck of Troubles
about his going and leaving them unsatisfied.
They came upon an Enquiry after Goods that
were stolen; and they complained, that by
next Morning, at that Time, the Thief might
be got far enough of£ and creep into so re-
mote a Corner, that he would pu'tlt feeyond
the Power of the Devil; jand'the Art of Con-
juration to find him out, and bring him back
again. The Disturbance and Anxiety that
was to be seen in their Countenances, was
just like that which is to be beheld in the
Face of a losing Gamester, when his All, his
last great Stake lies upon the Table, and is
just sweeping off by another winning Hand,
into his own Hat.
The next was a Widow j who bounc'd, be-
cause, as she pretended, he would not tell
Jier what was best to do with her Sons; and
what Profession it would be most happy for
them to be put to : But in Reality, all the
Cause of the Widow's fuming and fretting,
was, not that she wanted to provide for her
L 3 Sonj

<page 189>

Sons, but for her self: She wanted a Second
Husband ; and was not half so solicitous about
being put in a way of Educating those Chil-
dren she had already, as of knowing when
slie should be in a Likelihood of getting more.
This was certainly in her Thoughts ; or else
she would never have flounc'd about in her
Weed from one End of the Room to "the
other, and all the while of her Passion, smile
by Fits upon the Merchant, and leer upon a
young pretty Irijb Fellow that was there.
The young Irishman made use .of a little Eye-
Language : She grew appeas'd ; went away in
quite a good Humour; skuttled too airily down'
Stairs, for a Woman, in her Cloaths j and the
Reason was certainly, that she knew the Mat-
ter before, which we t;ook noticp of presently
after.. The Irijlnmn went precipitately after
her down Stairs, without taking his Leave.
~ .But neither- were the Two Misers; fpr their
Gold, the Virgin for a first; Husband, nor the
Widow for a Second, half so eager, as ano-
ther married Woman there was for the Death
of her Spouse. She had put the Queslipn in.
so expecting a manner for a lucky Answer,
and with so much keen Desire appearing plain-
ly" in her Looks, that no big-belly'd Woman
. was ever more .eager for devouring Fruit;
no young hasty Bridegroom, just married to
.a Beauty, more impatient for Night and En-i
thought a more happy Moment, the Moment

f j.

<page 190>
Of Mr. DUNCA N CAMPB EI.L. I51
of her Husband's last agonizing Gasp. As her
Expectation was the greatest, so was her Dis-
appointment too, and consequently Jier, Dis-
order upon his going and leaving h^r unre-
solv'd. She was frantick, raging and impla-
cable: Sjhe.was in such aTury at the Delay of
putting off her Answer to the Day following,
that in her Fury she acted as if she would have
given her self an Answer, which of the Two
should die first, by choaking her self upon the
Spot, with the Indignation that swell'd in her
Stomach, and rose into her Throat on that Oc-
casion. It may look like a Romance to say it;
but indeed they were forc'd to cut her Lace;
and then she threw out of the Room with
great Passion—But yet had so much of the
enraged .Wife left, (Jbeyond the enrag'd Wo-
manJ as to return instantly up Stairs, and
signify very calmly, she would be certain to
be there next Day ; and beseech'd earnestly,
that she *might not meet with a Second Dit-
appointment. .
All this Hurry and Bustle created a Stay, a
little too tedious fpr the Merchant; who be-
gan so be impatient himself, especially when.
Word was brought up, that a fresh Company
y/as corrie in :' But Mr. Campbell was deny'd
to thetjjj; and to put a Stop to any more In-
terruMionsy the Merchant and the Dumb
Gentleman pgreed to slip into a Coach, drive,
to a Tavern in the City, and settle Matters o\
futurity'AVer a Bottle of French Claret,. r ,M.
œw^jHtif , r[x6

<page 191>
xsz The Life and Adybntur es
The first Thing done at the Tavern, was£
Mr. Campbell's saluting him upon a Piece of
Paper by his Name, and drinking his Health.
The next Paper held a Discourse of Condo-
lance, for a Disaster that was past long since;
namely, a great and considerable Loss that hap-
pen'd to his Family, in the dreadful Confla-
gration of the City of London. In the Third
little Dialogue which they had together, he
told the Merchant, that Losses and Advan-
tages were general Topicks, which a Person
unskill'd in that Art might venture to assign
to any Man of his Profession ; it being next to
impossible, that Persons who traffick, should
not sometimes gain, and sometimes lose.—--
But, said Mr. Duncan Campbell, I will sketch
out particularly, and specify to you some fu-
ture Misfortunes, with which you will una-
voidably meet: 'Tis in your Stars; it is in
Destiny, that you should have some Trials;
and therefore when you are forewarn'd, take
a prudent Care to be forearm'd with Patience j
and by Longanimity, and meekly and resign-
edly enduring your Lot, render it more easy,
since Impatience can't avert it, and will only
render it more burthensome arid heavy. He
gave these Words to the Merchant j who
press'd for his: Opinion that .Moment. By
your Leave, freluming thePen, said the Dumb
Gentleman in writings we will have this
Bottle out firs):, and tap a fresh brie, this you
may be warm'd with Courage enough-'to- *e-
Gi r :* ceive

<page 192>
of Mr. Duncan Campbeli? i^j
ceive the first speculative Onset of ill Fortune,
that I shall predict to you, with a good Grace;
and that may perhaps enable you to meet it,
when it comes to reduce it self into Action^
with a manful Purpose, and all-becoming Re-
solution. The Merchant agreed to the Pro-
osal, and put on an Air of the careless and in-
ifferent as well as he could ,,to signify, that he
had no need to raise up an artificial Courage
from the auxiliary Forces of the Grape. But
Nature, when hard press'd, will break thro'all
Disguises; and not only, notwithstanding the
Air of Pleasantry he gave himself, which ap-
pear'd forc'd and constraint, but in Spite of
two or three sparkling and enlivening Bum-
pers, a Cloud of Care would ever and anon
gather and shoot heavily cross his Brow, tho'
he labour'd all he could to dispel it as quick-
ly, and to keep fair Weather in his Counte-
nance. Well; they had crack'd the first Bot-
tle, and the Second succeeded upon the Table,
and they call'd to blow a Pipe together. This
Pipe Mr. Campbell found had a very ill Effect:
It is certainly a pensive kind oflnstrument, and
fills a Mind any thing so disposed, with disturb-
ing Thoughts, black Fumes, and melancholy
Vapours, as certainly as it doth the Mouth
with Smoke. It plainly took away even the lit-
tle Sparks of Vivacity, which the Wine hact
given before ; so he wrote for a Truce of Fi-
ring those Sort of noxious Guns any longer;
and they laid down their Arms by Consent, and
* drank

<page 193>
Y$4 7^!LlFE **d Adventures' .
drank off the Second Bottle. A Third jro>
VnediateLy supply'd its Place; and at the firt^
'Glass of the opening of the Bottle,, Mr. Camp*
bell began to open to him his future Cafe, in the
sowing Words: e Sir, You have now some
t, Ventures at Sea, from such and such a Place,
£j to such aValue: Don tl^ediscomforted at the
'i.jNc.ws which you certainly will have within,
'thjree Months, t(but 'twill be false at last) that
'they are,by thicee diffe^entTempests ma^ethe
'Prey of it^great Ocean, and enrich the Bot>
,o: torn of tti&Sea^the Palace of Neptune. A worse
*-.Storm than, all these attends you at homej a
f, 'Wife who is,and will be more the Tempest of
c, the House, wherein me lives, fine high an/i
\. .lofty Winds of her Vanity, will blow dow^
'^e Pillars, of your House acid Family ; t;he
'High-tide 9s her Extravagance, will roll on
', like a resistless Torrent, and leave you at low
f-Water,. a^i; the.Ebb of,.a$ your Fortunes.
rjPk? is; the highest,and the most cutting Di*
faster (hat is to befal you. real Ship-
\ fi%d^ f\qt foreign, but cfomestick j your
',£osom-Friend i$ to be your greatest Foe,!^!
Ireyeriiypur,p9iwerfuiy ndoer for aTime. Marfe
'ywljat I say, and take Courage; it shall be but
ji.for a Visile, provided you take Courage. It
t; will* vp,Qg tfat.£ondition,be only a short and
.V^holsome, |Ta^e of Adversity given to you,
f^hat yourqay relisli returningProsperity with
i .yirtue^nd.WAtih a greater Return of Thanks
%t$r him.,',tnat' d senses it at Pleasure to Man-
inzih * kind.


<page 194>
of Mr. Du n.c a n Cam % bp l%j $ 5 j
t kind. Remember, :Courage and Resignation
* is what I advise you to ; use it £as becomes
* you) in your Adversity; and believe, that as
'J foretold that Adversity, -sol can foretel, a
1 Prosperity will again be the .Consequence of
* (those Virtues; and the more you feel the one,
1 ought not to cast you dawn, but raise your
i. Hopes the more, that he who (foretold you
'.that so exactly, could likewise forptel you the
K other.' TheMerchant was by .this put iqta
ja great Suspense of Mind ; but sqmpwhat, ^
sier,' by the second Prediction; )^>eing annex'd
fo kiadly to the first fatal one. They crown d
the Night with a Flask of Burgundy ; and t&en
parting, each wpnt to their;respective Homes. <
Thejleader may perchance^Qncjler,; how I>
who make no mention of my being, there,, (as
in Truth I was not at theTavefnJ mould jbe
able to relate this as of my o.\yn Knowledge;
but if he pleases to have Patience to the End
of the Story, he will hajve entire Satisfaction
in that Point.
. About Half a Year after, theMerchant came
again, told hjm that his Prediction was too
,far , verify'd, . to ,h is very dear Cost \ and that
he was now utterly undone, and beyond any
visible Means of a future Recovery j and doubt-
ing Jest the other fortunate Part of the Pre-
diction was only told him by ,way of Encou-
ragement, (for groundless Doubts and Fears
ja^ways attend a Mind implung'd in Melan-
choly ;)-besought him very earnestly to tell
him

<page 195>
^$6 The Life and Adventures
him candidly and sincerely, if there was no
real Prospect of Good, and rid him at once
of the Uneasiness of such a Suspension of
Thought : But pray, too, said he, with all
the Vehemence of repeated Expostulation, sa-
tisfy me, if there are any farther Hopes on
this side the Grave?
To this, Duncan Campbell made a short, but
a very significant Reply in Writing. 'May the
'Heavens preserve you from athreatningDan-
* ger of Ltfe. Take care only of your self;
* great and mighty Care ; and if you outlive
'Friday next, you will yet be great, and more
'fortunate tfyan ever you was, in all the
'Height of your former most flourishing Space
c of Life.' He colour'd inordinately, when Dun-
can Campbell said Friday; and conjur d him to
tell him as particularly as he could, what he
meant by Friday? He told him, he could not
particularize any farther; but that great Dan-
ger threaten'd him that Day ; and that with-
out extraordinary Precaution, it would prove
fatal to him, even to Death. He shook his
Head, and went away in a very sorrowful
Plight. Friday past, Saturday came ; and on
that very Saturday Morning came likewise the
joyful Tidings, that what Ventures of his
were given over for lost at Sea, were all
come safe into the Harbour. He came the
Moment he receivd those Dispatches from his
$gent, to Mr. Duncan Campbells Apartment,
'embrac'd him tenderly, and saluted him with
much

<page 196>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell! 157
much Gladness of Heart, before a great Room
full of Ladies, where I happen'd to be pre-
sent at that Time ; crying out in a loud
Voice, before he knew what he said, that
Mr. Campbells had sav'd his Life ; that Friday
was his Birth-day, and he had intended (with
a Pistol) to moot himself that very Day. The
Ladies thought him mad j and he, recover'd
from his Extacy, said no more, but sat down,
till Mr. Campbell'dismiss'd all his Clients and
then we Three went to the Tavern together,
where he told me the whole little History, or
Narrative, just as is above related.
! The Fame which Mr. Duncan Campbell got
by the foregoing, and several other Predicti-
ons of the like kind, was become very large
and extensive, and had spread it self into the
remotest Corners of this Metropolis. The
Squares rung with it ; it was whifper'd from
one House to another, thro' the more magni-
ficent Streets, where Persons of Quality and
Distinction reside ; it catch'd every House in
the City ; like the News of Stock from Ex-
change-Alley, it run noisily thro' the Lanes
and little Thoroughfares where the Poor in-
habit : It was the Chat of the Tea-Table, and
the Babble of the Streets ; and the whole
Town, from the Top to the Bottom, was full
of it. Whenever any Reputation rises to a
Degree like this, let it be for what Art or Ac-
complishment, or on what Account soever it
will; Malice, Envy and Detraction, are sure
to'

<page 197>
i58 The Life and Adventures
to be the immediate Pursuers of it with full
Molith, and to hunt it down, if possible,' with
full Cry. Evert the great Nostradamus, tho*
favourd by Kings and Queens, (which alwaysf
without any Other Reason. creates Enemies)'
Was not more pursued by .Envy and Detra-
ction, for tiis Predictions in Paris, and through-
out France, than our Duncan Campbell wa$
London, and even throughout England.
Various, different,' dnd many were the Ob-
jections tzisd, to blot his Character, arid ex-
tenuate his fame ; that, when one was con-
futed, another might not be wanting to sup-
ply its Place ; arid so maintain a Course and
Series of back-biting, according to the knowri
Maxirri,—'throw Dirt, and if it does not sticky
throw Dirt continually, dndsome willstick. ,
Neither is there any wonder ; for a Man
tfh'at has got Applauders of all Sorts and Con*
ditions, must expect Condemners and Detra-
ctors Of all.Sorts and Conditions likewise. If
a Lady of high Degree, for Example, should.
fay, smiling, (tho' really thinking absolute-
ly what she layji) for fear of being tb.dught
over-credulous:~ Well, I vow^ some Things
* Mr. Campbell does, are surprizing, after all;
c they would be apt to incline one to a Beliefs
'that he is a Wonder of a Man, for one would
* imagine the Things he does impossible—Why
then a Prude, with art aiTumed, supercilious
Air, and a scornful Tehee, would, in order to
leem more wise than (he wats, reply, c La*d,^
t Madams


<page 198>
of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbexlI 15-9
'Madam, 'tis more a Wonder to me, that you
* can be imposed upon so.^-I vow to Gad,
4 Madam, I would as soon consult an Almanack*
'Maker, and pin my Faith upon what he pricks
'down; or believe like my Creed, in the Croft
'which I make upon the Hand of a Gypsies*
* Lard, Madam, I assure your La ship he knbws
* no more than I do of you.—I aslure you fbs
* and therefore believe me.—He has it all by
'Hearsay .'—If the Lady that belie v'd it, should
. reply,4 That if he had notice of every Stranger
* by Hearsay, he must be a greater Man tharl
'she suspected, and must keep more Spies iri
f Pay than a Prime Minister :' The Prude s
Answer would be with a loud Laugh, and gig-
gling out these Words : —4 Lard, Madam, I
'aslure you, nothing can be more easy; and so
* take it for granted/ Because she was inclin'd
to fay so, and had the Art of Wisdom on her
fide, forsooth, that she appear'd hard of Be-
lief, ( which some call hard to be put upon )
and the other Lady credulous, ( which some,
tho' believing upon good Grounds, are
call'd) and so thought foolish ; the Prude's
Answer would be thought sufficient artd con-
vincing.
Thus Malice and Folly, by Dint of Noise
and Impudence, and strong tho' empty As-
sertions, often run down Modesty and good
Sense. Among the common People it is the"
fame, but only done in a different manner.'
For Example: An ordinary Person, that had
a eoni-

<page 199>
166 The Life and Adventures
consulted, might say, ( as he walk'd along J
There goes the Dumb Gentleman, who writes
down any Name of a Stranger at first Sight.
Steps up a blunt Stranger, that takes Stub-
bornness for Sense, and says,—That is a con-
founded Lye ; he is a Cheat and an Impostor,
and you are one of his Accomplices. He'll
tell me my Name, I suppose, if you tell it
him first. He is no more dumb than I am j
he can (peak and hear as well as us: I have
been with those, that fay they have heard
him. I wish I and Two or Three more had
him in our Stable ; and I warrant you, with
our Cartwhips, we would lick some Words
out of his Chops, as dumb as you call him.—
I tell you, 'tis all a Lye, and all a Bite.—-If
the other desires to be convinc'd for himself
by his own Experience—the rougher Rogue,
who perhaps has stronger Sinews than t'other^
answers, If you lye any farther, I will knock
you down : And so he is the vulgar Wit, and
the Mouth of the Rabble-Rout. And thus
the Detraction spreads below with very good
Success, as it does above in another kind. . •
As there are Two Comical Adventures in
his Life, which directly suit and correspond
with the foregoing Reflections, this seems the
most proper Place to insert them in. The
first consists of a kind of Mob Way of Usage
he met with from a Fellow, who got to be an
Officer in the Army, but by she following
Behaviour, will be found unworthy of the
.Name, and the Commission, In

<page 200>
es Mr. Duncan Campbell
.
In the Year 1701, a Lady of good Quality
came and address'd her self to him much after
the following manner. She told him she had
Choice of Lovers, but preferr'd one above
the rest ;but desired to know his Name, and
if she made faim her Choice, what would be
the subsequent Fate of such a Matrimony.
Mr. Duncan Campbell very readily gave her
down in Writing this plain and honest Re-
ply ; that of all her Suiters she was most in-
clin'd to a Captain, a distinguish'd Officer,
and a great Beau, f naming his Name) and
one that had a great many outward engaging
Charms, sufficient to blind the Eyes of any
Lady that was not thoroughly acquainted
with his Manner of living. He therefore as-
sured her, (and thought himself bound, be-
ing conjured so to do, having received his
Fee, though there was Danger in such plain
and open Predictions,) that he was a Villain
and a Rogue in his Heart, a profligate Game-
ster, and that if she took him to her Bed,
she would only embrace her own Ruin. The
Lady's Woman, who was present, being in Fee
with the Captain, resolving to give Intelli-
gence, for fear the Officer her so good Friend
should be disappointed in the Siege ;slily shuf-
fled the Papers into her Pocket, and made a
Present of them to the military Spark. Fir'd
with Indignation at the Contents, he vow'd
Revenge ; and in order to compass it, con-
spires with his Female Spy about t,b,e Means.
M In

<page 201>
\6i The Life and Adventurer
In fine, for fear of losing the Lady though
he quarrel d with Duncan Campbell, a Method
was to be found out how to secure her by the
very Act of Revenge. At last it was re-
solv'd to discover to her, that he had found
out what she had been told by Mr. Campbell,
but the Way how he had been inform'd
was to remain a Secret. He did do so,
and ended his Discovery with these Words:
I desire, Madam, that if I prove him an Im-
postor, you would not believe a Word he
says. —The Lady agreed to so fair a Propo-
sal. -——Then the Captain swore that he him-
self would never eat a Piece of Bread more
till he had made Mr. Campbell eat his Words;
nay he insisted upon it, that he would bring
him to his Tongue, and make him own by
Word of Mouth, that what he had written
before was false and calumnious. To which
the Lady answer'd again, that, if he perform d
what he said me would be convinced. This
brave Military Man, however, not relying
upon his own single Valour and Prowels, to J
bring about so miraculous a Thing as the ma-
king a Person that was dumb to speak ; he took
with him for this End three lusty Assistants to
combine with him in the Aslassination. The
Ambuscade was settled to be at the Five Bells
Tavern in Wkh-Jlreet in the Strand. After
the Ambush was settled with so much false
Courage, the Business of decoying Mr. Campbell
into it, was not practicable any other way,. ,

<page 202>
os Mr. Duncan Campbell. 165
than by sending out false Colours. The La-
dy's Woman, who was by her own Interest
tied fast to the Interest of the Beau, was to
play the Trick ofDalilah, and betray this deaf
and dumb Sampson (as he will appear to be a
kind of one in the Sequel of the Story) into
the Hands of these Philistines. She smooths
her Face over with a complimenting Lye
from her Mistress to Mr. Campbell; and acted
her Part of Deceit so well that he promis'd to
follow her to the Five Bells with all haste;
and so she skuttled back to prepare the Cap-
tain, and to tell him how lucky (he was in
Mischief; and how she drew him out by
Smiles into Perdition. The short of the Story
is, when they got him in among them, they
endeavour'd to assassinate him ; but they mifs'd
of their Aim; yet 'tis certain they left him
in a very terrible and bloody Condition ;and
the Captain went away in as bad a Plight as
the Person was left in, whom he assaulted so
cowardly with Numbers, and to such Disad-
vantage. I was sent for to him upon this
Disaster, and the Story was deliver'd to me
thus, by one of the Drawers of the Tavern,
when I enquir'd into it. They began to ban-
ker him, and speaking to him as if he heard,
ask'd him if he knew his own Fortune; they
told him it was to be beaten to Death. This
was an odd way of addressing a deaf and
dumb Man. They added they would make
him speak before they had done. The Boy
M 2. 'seeing

<page 203>
164 The Life and Adventures
seeing he made no Reply, but only smiled j
thought what pass'd between them was a Jest
with an old Acquaintance, and withdrew
about his Business. The Door being sasten'd,
however, before they began the honourable
Attack, they vouchsafed to write down their
Intent in the Words above-mentioned which
they had uttered before, to make sure that
he should understand their Meaning, and what
this odd way of Correction was for. All the
while the Maid, 'who had brought him into
it, was peeping through a Hole, and watch-
ing the Event,' as appears afterwards/ Mr.
Campbell wrote them the following Answer,
viz. that he hop'd for fair Play ; that he un-
derstood Beargarden as well as they ; but if
a Gentleman was amongst them, he would
expect Gentlemanly Usage. The Rejoinder
they made to this consisted, it seems, not of
Words but of Action. The Officer, in Con-
junction with another Ruffian, one of the
strongest of the Three he had brought, com-
menced the Assault. As good Luck would
have it, he warded off their first Blows (it
seems} with tolerable Success ; and a Wine-
Quart-Pot standing upon the Table, Duncan
took to his Arms, and at Two or Three quick
Blows, well manag'd, and close laid in upon
the AslailantSjfell'd them both to the Ground:
Here it was :that the Maid discover'd her
Knowledge of it, and Privity to the Plot, to
the whole House for stie no sooner sees the'

famous

<page 204>
.osMr. DuncxnCampb.ei£. 16$
fatuous Leader, the valiant Captain, lie sorau*
ling on the Floor with bleeding Temples, but
she shriek'd out, with ,all' tho Voice she eoul4
exert, Murder, Murder* Murder! Alarmd
at this Out-cry, the Master and all the At-
tendants of ithe' Tavern scamper'd up Stairs
burst into the Room, and found Duncan Camp-
bell struggling with the other Two, and the
Quart-Pot:still fast clenchM in. his Hand,
.which they.were .endeavouring to wrench
from hiiriv. The Drawers rescu'd him, out of
their Hands* and enquir'd into the Mattes.
The Maid in a Fright confess d the whole
Thing. The Officer and his Aslbciate rubb'd
their Eyes, as recovering from a stunning
Sleep, reef d as they went to rife, paid the
, Reckoning, and slunk pitifully away, (or a#
the Rakes Term for it is*) they brush'd of£
and for all their odds had the worst of the
Lay. I who had some Authority with Mr.
Campbell, by.reafoh of my Years, and the strict
Acquaintance I had with; his Mother,, when
I came and found hirri.in that Pickle* and had
the whole Relation told me by the People of
the House* though I could not forbear pitying
him within my own Mind, took upon trie to
• reprehend him, and told him that these Hard-
ships would by Providence be daily permitted!
to fell upon him (for he met with them
Twenty Times) while he continued in that
irregular way of Living arid spending his
Tirnej that might be so precious to himself
M 3 arief

<page 205>
i66 The Lite and Adventures
and many others, in Drunkenness and De-
bauchery ; and I think the Lesions I wrote
down to hinrupon that Head, though a lit-
tle severe just at that Juncture, were notwith-
standing well-tim'd, and did, as I guess'd
they would, make a more solid Impression in
him than at any other. In all these Scuffles
("whether it is that being deaf and dumb an
Affront works deeper upon a Man, and so
renders him far more fierce or resolute) it
must be said, that though Nature has been
kind in making him very Strong, Robust,
and Active withal, yet he has bore some
Shocks, one would imagine beyond the
Strength of a Man, having sometimes got
the better of Five or Six Ruffians in Rencoun-
ters of the like kind. 'I *
The next Banter he met with was in a
genteelerWay,from an unbelieving Lady, and
yet she came off with very ill Success, and
-the Banter turn'd all upon herself in the End.
r A Lady of Distinction (whose Name shall
therefore be conceal d in this Place,) came
"with Two or Three of her special Friends
"who took her for the most merry innocent
spotless Virgin upon Earth, and whose Mo-
desty was never suspected in the least by her
Relation's or Servants that were nearest a-
- bout her; after having rally'd Mr. Caifipbell
with several frivolous Questions, doubting his
-iSapacity, and vexing and teazing him with
, gay Impertinencies beyond all Patience, was
C' by

<page 206>
os Mr. Dunca n Campb ell.' Ix6j
"By him told, that he did not take Fees in his
Profession to be made a Jest of like a comm<3ti
Fortune-teller, but to do real Good to those
who consulted him, as far as he was able By
his Predictions; that he was treated with more
Respect by Persons of a higher Condition,
though .her own was very good, and so of-
fer'd her Guinea back again with a Bow and
2. Smile. She had a little more Generosity of
Spirit than not to be a little nettled at the
Proffer me had caus'd by so course an Usage.
She affected appearing grave a little, and told
him she would be serious for the future, and
ask d him to set down her Name, which Jhe
had neglected before, to ask other Questions
that were nothing to the Purpose. He pro- ,
mis'd to write it down, but pausing a little
longer than ordinary about it, me returned
to her former way of uncivil Merriment and
ungallant Raillery. She repeated to him in
• Three or Four little Scraps of Paper one after
another as fast as shc could write them, the
fame Words, viz. -—^Fhat tie could not tall
her Name, nor whether she was Maid, Wife,
or Widow; and laugh'd as if she would split
~her Sides, triumphing to the rest of her Com-
panions, over his Ignorance and her own Wit,
'as if fte had pos'd him and put him to an
.entire Stand. But see what this over-ween-
ing Opinion of Security ended in : The Man
of the Second-Sight was not to be so easily
baffled. Vex'd at being so disturb'd, and cO-
M 4
mmg


<page 207>
i6$ The Life: and Adventur
ming out of his brown Study, he reaches tke
Paper, and begins to write.—Now it was the
Lady 's Turn to suffer ; she had deserv'd hearty
Punishment, and it came into her Hands with
the Note, to a Degree of Severity ; as you
will perceive by the Contents of it just now.
— She read it, and swooning away, dropp'd
from her Chair. The whole Room being in
a Bustle, L that'waa in the outward Chamber,
ran in. While Mr. Campbell was sprinkling
Water in her Face, a Lady snatch'd up the
Note to read it, at which he seem'd mighti-
ly displeas'd : I therefore, who understood his
Signs, recover'd it out of her Hands by Stra-
tagem, and ran to burn it; which I did so
quick, that I was not difcover'd in the Curi-
osity, which I must own I satisfied my self
in, by reading b first : A Curiosity raisd too
high, by so particular an Adventure, to be
overcome in so little a Time Of Thought, as
I was' to keep it in my Hands; and so I came
by the Knowledge of it my self, without being
inform'd by Mr. CampbelL This shews, how
a sudden Curiosity, when there is not Time
given to think and correct' it,' may overcome
a Man as well as a Woman : For I was never
over-curious in my Life ; and tho' I was
pleas'd with the Oddness of the Adventure, I
often blush'd to my self since^ for the unmanly
Weakness of not being able to step with a
Note, from one Room to another, to the Fire-
fide, without peeping into the Contents of if.
The

<page 208>
os Mr. Duncan Camp^eii^ 169
The Contents of it were these:" Madam,finceK
** you provoke me, your Name is ———
"You are no Widow, you are no Wife, an<L
** yet you are no Maid : You have a Child at
. *' Nurse at such a Place, by such a Gentleman;
€t and you were brought to Bed in Leicestershire.
The Lady* convinc'd by this Answer, of his
strange and mystical Power, and pseasd with
his Civility in endeavouring to conceal from
others the Secret, after so many repeated Pro-
vocations, tho' she fliew'd great Disorder for
that Day, became one ot his constant At-
tendee some Time after, and would not take
any Step in her Affairs without his Advice;
which, she often has said since, she found very
much to her Advantage. She was as serious in
- her Dealings with him afterwards, and im-
prov'd by being so, as she was gay and turbu-
lent with him before, and smarted for it. In
fine, she was a thorough Convert, and a Vo-
tary of his; and the only Jest she us'd after-
Wards to make concerning him, was a Civil
Witticism to his Wife ; to whom she was wont,
every now and then, smiling, to address her
.self after this manner: 'Your Husband, Ma-
'dam, is a Devil; but he is a . very hmd-
some, and a very civil one.
Not long aft^r this came another Lady,
with a like Intent to impose upon him ; and
was resoiv'd (as she own'd) to have laugh'd
him to scorn, if she had succeeded in her At-
: tempt. She had very dextrously dress d her
:' self
:

<page 209>
r jo The Life and Ad ye ntures
self in her Woman's Habit, and her Woman
in her own ; 'her Fbotman squired the new-
made Lady in a very, gentlemanly Dress, hir'd
for that Purpose of a Disguise from MonmoUth-
street. The strange and unknown Masquera-
ders enter'd Mr. Campbell's Room with much
Art. The Fellow was by Nature of a clean
Make, and had a good Look, and from fol-
lowing a genteel Master, when he was young,
copyd his Gait a. little, and had some Appear-
ance of a Mien, and a tolerable good Air
about him. But this being the first time of
his tyeing so fine, and he a little vain in his
Temper ; he over-acted his Part; he strutted
too much ; he was as fond of his Rufflesj xhis
Watch, his Sword, his Cane, arid his Snuff
Box, as a Boy of being newly put into Breech-
es j and view'd them all too often to be thought'
.the Posleslbr of any such Things long.The Affe-
ctation of the Chambermaid was insufferable j
She had the Toss of the Head, the Jut of the
.Bum, the side-long Leer of the Eye, the impe-
rious Look upon her Lady, now degraded in-
to her Woman, that me was intolerable, and
a Person without the Gift of the Second-Sights
would have guess'd her to have been a prag-
matical Upstart, tho' 'tis very probable, that
•Huring that time, flhe fancy'd herself real-
ly better than her Mistress: The Mistress
'acted her Part of Maid the best, for it is. ea-
sier for genteel Modesty to act a low Part,thast
*for affected Vanity to act a high one. She
kepfi

<page 210>
of Mr. Duncan GamMeit" 171
jcept her Distance like a Servant ;• but would j
to disguize Things the better, be every now
and then pert, according to their way, and
give Occasion to be chid. But there is an
Air of Gentility, in-born and in-bred to
some People ; and even when they aim to be
awkward, a certain Grace will attend all their
minutest: Actions and Gestures, and command
Love, Respect and Veneration. I must there-
fore own, that there was not need of a Man s
being a Conjurer , to guese who ought to be
the Lady, and who the Maid ; but to know
-who absolutely was the Lady, and who was
the Maid, did require that Skill. For how
many such real Ladies have we, that are made
so from such Upstarts i And how many gen-
teel Waiting-Women of great Descent, that
are born with a Grace about them, and are
bred to good Manners? Mr. Campbell's'An
made him positive in the Case : He took the
Patches from the Face of the Maid, and plac'd
them on the Mistress's: He pull'd off her Hood
and Scarf, and gave it the Lady ; and taking
from the Lady her Ridinghood, gave it the
Maid in Exchange j for Ladies at that Time of
Day, were not enter'd into that Fa/hion ©f
Cloaking themselves. Then he wrote down,
that he should go out, and ought to fend his
Maid in, to undress them quite, and give the
Mistress her own Cloaths, and the Maid her's;
and, with a Smile, wrote down both their
Barnes, and commended her Contrivance. But
vafter

<page 211>
i?t The Life and Adventur.e8
after that, it was remark'd by the Lady, that
he paid her left Respect than she expected*
and more to her Footnian, who was in a Gen-
tleman's Habit ; whom he took aside, and
told a great many fine Things ; whereas he
would tell the Lady nothing farther. The
Ladyj nettled at this, wrote to him, that she
had Vanity enough to believe, that she might
. be distinguish'd from her Maid in any Dress;
but that he had shown his want of Skill, in not
knowing who that Gentleman was. Mr. Camp-
tell told her her Mistake in sharp Terms; and
begging her Pardon, aflur'd her he knew se-
veral Chambermaids as genteel and as well-
born as her, and many Mistresses more auk-
ward and worse-born than her Maid : That
he did not go therefore by the Rule of Guess
and Judging what ought to be, but by the
Rule of Certainty . and the Knowledge of
what actually was. She; however, unfetisfy'd
with that Answer, perplex d him mightily to
know, who the Man was. He anfwer'd, he
would be a Great Man.—.The Lady laugh'd
scornfully, and said, she wanted to know who
he was, not what he would be.—He an-
fwer'd again—He was her Footman; but
that she would have a worse.—She grew
warm, and desir'd to be inform'd, Why, since
he knew the Fellow's Condition, he rejected
her so little, and him so much i And accus'd
him of want of practising Manners, if he had
not want of Knowledges He anfwer'd,. "Ma-
it •
* aams

<page 212>
of Mr. Duncan Campbel^. 173
f* dam, since you will be asking Questions too
fc far—This Footman will advance himself to
fc she Degree of a Gentleman, and have a Wq-
f* man of Distinction to his Wife j while you
*c will degrade your self by a Marriage, to be
"the Wife os' a Footman. His Ambition is
"laudable, your Condescension mean'; there-
<c fore I give him the Preference. I have givejrf
"you fair Warning, and wholsome Advice:
** You may avoid your Lot by Prudence; bu£
"his will certainly be what I tell you.
This coming afterwards to pals exactly as
was predicted, and his disappointing so many
that had a Mind to impose upon him, has
render d him pretty free from such wily Con-
trivances since '-i tho' now and then they have
happen'd, but still to the Mortification and
Disappointment of the Contrivers. But as
we have not pretended to fay, with regard
to these Things, that he has his Genius always
at his Elbow, or his Beck, to whisper in his
Ear the Names of Persons, and luch little
constant Events as these j so, that we may not
be deem'd to give a fabulous Account of his
Life and Adventures,, we think our selves
bound to give the Reader an Insight into the
particular Power and Capacity which he has,
for bringing about these particular Perform-
ances, especially that of writing down Names
.Of-Strangers at first Sight ; which, I don't
doubr? will be done to the Satisfaction of all
. Per-

<page 213>
174 Tke%tvB and Adventures
Persons, who shall read the succeeding Chap-
ter, concerning the Gift of the Second-Sight.
Chap. VII.
A Philosophical Discourse concerning the
;" SECOND-SIGHT.'
MR. Marten has publish'd a Book, en-
titled, A Description of the Western
ljles of Scotland, called by the Ancient Geo-
graphers, Hebrides : It contains many Curious
Particulars, relating to the Natural and Civil,
History of those Islands, with a Map of them.
And in his Preface he tells us,' That perhaps
* it is peculiar to those Isles, that they have ne-
'ver been describ'd till now, by any Man that
'was a Native of the Country, or had travell'd
* them, as himself has done:' And in the Con-
clusion of the said Preface he tells us, * He has
* given here such an Account of the Second-
'Sight, as the Nature of the Thing will bear,
* which has always been reckon'd sufficient a-
? mong the unbiass d Part of Mankind :But for
* those that will not be satisfy d, they ought to
* oblige us with a new Scheme, by which we
£ may judge of Matters of Fag.' The chief Par-
ticulars he has given us concerning the Second
Sight, are here set down, by way of Abstract,
or Epitome, that they may not be too tedious
to the Reader.

<page 214>
of Mr. Duncan Ca mpbell 175
.1. In the Second-Sight,, the Vision makes
lucri a lively Impression on the Seers, that they
neither fee nor think of any Thing else but the
Vision, as long as it cqntinues : And then they
appear Tensive or Jovial, according to the
ObjeB which was presented to them.. ,. ,
, z. At the Sight of a Vision, the Eyelids of
the Person are erected, and the Eyes continue
staring till the Objects vanish; as has often
been observ'd by the Author, and others pre-
sent. .
3. There is one in Skye, an Acquaintance
of whom observ'd, that when he sees a Vision,
the inner Part of his Eyelids turns so far up-
wards, that, after the Object disappears, he,
must draw them down with his Fingers j and
sometimes employs others to draw them
down, which he finds to be much the easier
,way.
4. The Faculty of the Second-Sight does not
lineally descend in a Family, as some ima-
gine j for he knows several Parents that are
endow'd with it, but not their Children ; and
so on the contrary : Neither is it acquir'd by
aay previous Compact. And after a strict En-
quiry, he could never learn from any among
them, that this Faculty was communicable
any way whatsoever.
Tsote, That this Account is differing from
the Account that is given by Mr. Aubrey, a
Fellow of the Royal Society: And I think
Mr. Martens Reason here, against the Descent
of

<page 215>
176 The Lite and Adventures
of this Faculty from Parents to Children, is
not generally conclusive. For tho' he may.
know Parents endow'd with it, and not Chil-
dren ; and so vice versa ; yet there may b©
Parents who are endow'd with it, being qua-
lify d as Mr. Aubrey has said, (via. both be-
ing Second sighted, or even one to an extra-
ordinary Degree) whose Children may have
it by Descent. And as to this Faculty's being
any otherways communicable, ( since the Ac-
counts differ) I must leave it to a farther Exa-
mination.
$. Ttye Seer knows neither the Object,
Time nor Place of a Vision^ before it appears;
and the fame Object is often seen by different
PersonSj'living at a considerable Distance from
one another. The true Way of Judging, as'to
the Time and Circumstance of an Object, is
by Observation : For several Persons of Judg-
ment, without this Faculty, are more capable
to judge of the Design of a Vision, than a No-
vice that is a Seer. As an Object appears in
the Day or Night, it will come to pass sooner
or later accordingly.:
6. If an Object be seen early in the Morn-
ing,' (which is not frequent) it will be accom-
plisiVd in a few Hours afterwards: If at Noon,
it will commonly be accomplish'd that very
Day : If in the Evening, perhaps that Night;
if after Candles be lighted, it will be accom^
plish'd that Night. It is later always in Ac-
complishment,1 by Weeks, Months, and some-
times


<page 216>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 177
times Years, according to the Time of the
freight the Vision is seen.
7. When a Shroud is perceiv'd about one,
it is a sure Prognostics of Death. The Time is
judg'd according to the Height of it about
the Person ; for if it be not seen above the
Middle, Death is not to be expected for the
£pace of a Year, and perhaps some Months
Jonger :And as it is frequently seen to ascend
higher towards the Head, Death is concluded
to be at hand iri a few Days, if not Hours*
as daily Experience confirms. Examples of
this kind were shown the Author, when the
Persons (of whom the Observations -were
made) enjoy'd perfect Health;
"There was one Instance lately of a Pre-
diction of this kind, by a Seer that was a
Novice, concerning the Death of one of the
Author's Acquaintance : This was cohirriuni-
cated to a few only, and with great Confi-
dence : The Author being one of theNsumber,
did not in the least regard it, till the Death
of the Person!, about the Tirhe foretold, cort- 1
firm'd to him the Certainty of the Prediction.
The fdrefeid Novice is now a skilful Seer? as
appears from many late Instances : He lives
in St. Mary s Parish, the most Northern in
Skye.
8. If a Woman be seen standing at a Man's
left Hand, it is a Presage that Ihe will be his
Wife j whether they are married to others, or
unmarriedj at the Time of the Apparition.
N If

<page 217>
The Life and Adventures
if Two or Three Women are seen at once,,
/landing near a Man's Left Hand ; she that is
jlext him will undoubtedly be his Wife first,
and so on, whether all Three, or the Man,
be single or married, at the Time of the Vi-
sion ; of which there are several late Instances
of the Author's Acquaintance. It is. an ordi-
nary Thing for them to fee a Man, that is to
.come to the House shortly after ; and tho' he
,be not of the Seers.Acquaintance, yetfrenot
only tells his Name, but givet such a lively
Description of hi* Stature, Complexion, Ha-
bit, &c. that upon his Arrival, he answers the
Character given of him in all Respects.. If
the Person so appearing be one of die Seers
Acquaintance, he can tell by his Countenance
whether he conses in good or bad Humour,'
The Author has been seen thus by Seers of
both Sexes, at some Hundreds of Miles Di-
stance. Some that saw him in this manner^
had never seen him personally, and it hap-
pen'd according to their Visions, without any
previous Design of his to go to those Places;
his coming there being purely accidental. And
in the Nineteenth Page of his Book, he tells
.us, that Mr. Daniel Morrison (a Minister) told
him, that upon his Landing in the Island Re*-
ma, the Natives receiv'd him very affectio1.
nately, and address'd themselves to him with:
this Salutation: 'God save you, Pilgrim ! Yoit
* are heartily welcome here; for we have had
'* repeated Apparitions of your Person amongst

<page 218>
of Mr. DuncanCampbell . 179
*. us ; viza after the manner of the Second-
* Sight. r ...
9. It is ordinary wish them to see Houses,
Gardens and Trees, in Places void of all
Three ; aud this, in Process of Time, uses to
be accompiish'd : Of which he gives an In-
stance in the Island of Stye.'
10. To-seba Spark of Fire fall upon one's
Arm, or Breast, is a Forerunner of a dead
Child, tp be seen in the Arms of those Per-
sons of which there are several fresh In-
stances; 1 ! •.•,' t '.
To see a. Seat empty at thb Time of one's
fitting iri it, is a Presage of that Person's Death
-quickly aftef* *
Whert a 'Novice, or one that has lately
obtain'd the Second-Sight, sees a Vision in the
Night-time without Doors, and comes near a
: fire, he presently falls into a Swoon.
Some find themselves as it were in a Croud
of People, having a Corpse which they carry
along with them ; and after such Visions, the
Seers come irt sweating, and describe the Peo-
ple that appear'd. if there are any of their
Acquaintance among them, they give an Ac-
count of their Names, and also of the Bear-
ers-: But they know nothing concerning the
Corpse.'
All those that have the Second Sight, dd
hot always fee these Visions at once, tho"
they are together at the Time : But if one1
who has this Faculty, designedly touch his
N 2 Vellor-v~

<page 219>
180 TheLit*, and Adventures
Fellow-Seer, at the Instant of a Vision's ap*-
pearing, then the Second fees it as well as the
First.
11. There is the way of foretelling Death
by a Cry, that they call Taijk, which some
call a Wrath in the Low-land. They hear a
loud Cry without Doors, exactly resembling
the Voice of some particular Person1, whose
Death is foretold by it ; of which he gives a
late Instance, which happend in the Village
Rigg, in Skye-Ifte.
12. Things are also foretold by Smelling
sometimes, as follows : Fish of Flesh is fre-
quently smelt in the Fire r- when at the fame
Time neither of the two are in the House,
or, in any Probability, like to be had in it
for some Weeks or Months. This Smell se-
veral Persons have, who are endued with the
Second-Sight; and it is always accodiplifh'd
soon after.
13. Children, Horses and CoftSf haVe the
Second Sight, as well as Men and Women ad-
vanced in Years.
That Children fee it, is plain, from their
crying aloud at the very Instant that a Corpse,
or any other Vision appears to an ordinary
Seer: Of which he gives an Instance in a
Child, when himself was present.
f '• That Horses likewise see it, is very plain,.,
from their violent and sudden Starting, when
the Rider, or Seer in Company with them,
sees a Vision of any kind by Night or Day. IlLs
obfer-

<page 220>
6fMr. Duncan Campbell. i8r
observable of a Horse, that he will not go
forward that way, till he be led about at some
Distance from the common Road, and then
he is in a Sweat. He gives an Instance of
this in a Horse, in the Isle of Skye.
That Cows have the Second-Sight, appears
from this ; That if a Woman milking a Cow,
happens to see a Vision by the Second-Sight,
the Cow runs away in a great Fright at the
fame Time, and will not be pacify d tor some ; •
Time after.
In Reference to this, Paracelsus, Tom. 9. ,
L. de Arte pr&sagd, writes thus: * Horses a 1(6
'have their Auguries; who perceive, bv their;-
* Sight and Smell, wandring Spirits, Witches * %,
* and SpeUres, and the like Things ; and Dogs .
* both see and hear the (ame. *
Here, in the next place, the Author an-
swers Objections, that have lately been made
against the Reality of the Second-Sight. .'
Fit ft, It is objected, that these Seers are
Visionary and Melancholy People, who fancy
they fee Things, that do not appear to them
or any body else. , 5
He answers; The People of these I/les, and
particularly the Seers, are very temperate,
and their Diet is simple and moderate, in
Quantity and Quality ; so that their Brains
are not, in all Probability, disorder d by un-
digested Fumes of Meat or Drink. Both
Sexes are free from Hyjlerick Fits, Convul-
sions, and several othci? Distempers ©4 that
'N ^ Sort

<page 221>
;8x The Lite find Adventures,
Sort. There are no Madmen among them,,
nor any Instance of Self-Murther. It is ob-
serv'd among them, that a Man drunk, never'
has a Vision of the Second-Sight ,v ar>d-he that
is a Visionary, would discover himself in other
Things as well as in that. Nor are such as have
the Second Sight, judgd to be Yijfana?)$f, by
any of their Friends or Acquaintance,.: c.. ,
Secondly, It is objected, that there are none
- -among the Learned, able to oblige the World
with a satisfactory Account of these Visions j
therefore they are not to be believed.
He answers; If every Thing, of which the
Learned are not able to give a satisfactory Ac-
count, shall be condemn d as False and Impos-
sible, we shall find many other Things, gene-
rally believ'd, which must be rejected as such. •
Thirdly, It is objected, that ike Seers are Im-
postors; and the People, who believe them,
are credulous, and easy to be impps'd upon.
He answers; The Seers are generally illi-
terate and well-meaning People, and altoge-
ther void of Design : Nor could faeever learn
that any of them made the least Gain of it;
neither is it reputable among them, to have
that Faculty. Jieside, the People of tjie Isles
are not so credulous as to believe, an Impos-
sibility, before the Thing foretoW he accom?
plish'd; but when it actually conies to pass,
afterwards it is not in their Power so deny it,
without offering Violence to their Senses and
Hea^ori. Beside, if the Sters were f)ef eivers^

<page 222>
cf Mr. DuncaW Campb ell.'-
can it be reasonable to imagine, that all the .
islanders, who b,ave n°t tne Second Sights
ihould combine together, and offer Violence
to their Understandings and Senses, to force
themselves to Relieve a Lye from Age to Age J
There are several Persons among them, whose
Birth and Education raise them above the
Suspicion of concurring with an Imposture,
merely to gratify an illiterate and contempti-
ible Sort of Persons* Nor can a reasonable
Man believe, that Children, Horses and Cbn.y,
could be engaged in a Combination, to per-
suade the World of the Reality of a Second-
Sight.
Every Vision that is seen, comes exactly
to pass according to the Rules of Observati-
on ; tho' Novices, and heedless Persons, do
.not always judge by those Rules : Concern-
ing which he gives.Inflance>\
There are Visions seen by several Persons*
in whoise Days they are not accomplish d $
and this is one of the Reasons, Why soixe
Things have been seen, that are said never to
have come to pass ; and there are also several
Visions seen, which are not understood till
they are accomplish'd.
. The Second-Sight is not a late Discovery,
seen by qae pr two in a Corner, "or a remai^ a
IJle ; but it is seen by many Persons' of both
Sexes,.in several Isles, separated about Forty
pr,Firty Leagues from one another. The In-
habitants' p£ many of these Isles never had
,,'..!.. t: . 'tfiC

<page 223>
184 The Life and Advintur es
the least Converse by Word or Writing. And
this Faculty of seeing Visions having conti-
nued, as we are insorm'd by Tradition, ever
since the Plantation of these Isles, without
being disproved by the nicest Sceptick, after
the strictest Enquiry, seems to be a clear Proof
of its Reality.
It is observable, that it was much more
common Twenty or Thirty Years ago, than
at present; for One in Ten does not fee it
now, that saw it then.
The Second-Sight is not confin'd to she We-
stern Isles alone ; the Author having an Ac-
count that it is in several Parts of Holland, but
particularly in Eommel, where a Woman has
it, for which she is courted by some, and
dreaded by others. She fees a Smoak about
one's Face, w hich is the Fore-runner of the
Death of a Person so seen ; and she actually
foretold the Deaths of several that lived there.
She was living in that Town a few Winters
ago.
The Second-Sight is likewise in the IJle of
Man, as appears by this Instance : Captairj.
Leathes, the Chief Commander of Belfast, in
his Voyage i6po? lost Thirteen Men by a vio1
lent Storm ; and upon his Landing in the Iste
of Man, an ancient Man, Clerk to a Parish
there, told him immediately that he had lost
Thirteen Men there. The Captain enquir'd,
how he came to the Knowledge of that ? He
answerd,that it was by Thirteen Lights,which

<page 224>
of Mr. Duncan Gampbelj.^ 185:
he had seen come into the Churchyard;
Mr. Sacheverell tells us, in his late Descripti-
on of the Isle of Man. Note, That this is
like the Sight ot the Corpse-Candles in Wales,
which is also well attested.
Here the Author adds many other Instances;
concerning the Second.Sight, of which I mall
set down only a few.
A Man in Anockoxv, in St. Marys Parish,
(the Northernmost Part of Skye') being in
perfect Health, and sitting with his Fellow-
Servants at Night, was on a sodden taken
ill, dropp'd from his Seat backward, and then
fell a vomiting j at which the Family was
much concern'd, he having never been subject
to the like before :But he came to himself soon
aftery arks had no Sort of Pain about him.
One of the Family, who was accustom'd to
see the Second-Sight, told them, that the Man s
Illneis proceeded from a very strange Cause,
which was thus : An ill-naturd Woman
(whom he nam'd) who lives in the next adja-
cent Village of Bornjkittag, came before him;
in a very angry and furious Manner ; her
Countenance full of Passion, and her Mouth
full of Reproaches ; and threaten'd him with
her Head and Hands, till he fell over, as you
have seen him. This Woman had a Fancy
for the Man, but was like to be disappointed
as to her marrying of him. This Instance
was told the Author, by the Master of the
- '. • Fami-

<page 225>
iS6 The Life and Adventurer
Family, and others, who were present wfiea
it happen'd.
; Sir Norman MacVlead, and some others,
playing at Tables,'at a Game called in Irish
talmermore; wherein there are Three of a
Side, and each of them throw the Dice by
Turns; there happen cl to be one difficult Point
in the disposing or one of the Table-men. This
oblig'd the Gamester to deliberate, before he
was to change, his Man; fuice, upon the dis-
posing of it, rfye winning or losing of the Game
depended, length the Butler,' wno stood
behind, advised the Player where to place
the Man, with which he comply'd, and won
the Game. . This being though): extraordi-
nary, • and Sir Herman hearing one whisper
him in the Ear, ask'd who advis'd him so
skilfully > He answer'd, it was the Butler ; but
|his seem'd more strange, for it was generally
thought he could not play at Tables. Upon
this, Sir Norman ask'd him, how long it was
fince he had learn'd to play? And the Fellow
own'd, that he had never pl^y'd in his Life,
but that he law the Spirit Browne (a Spirit
usually seen in that Country) reaching his
Arm over the Player's Head, and touching the
Part with his Finger, where the Table-man was
to he placed. This was told the Author by
Sir Norman, and others, who happen'd to be
present at the Time. , 01 ?r
. , Daniel Bow, alias Black, an Inhabitant of
Bomfkhtag, who is one of the precisest Beers
if?


<page 226>
of Mr. Dunca.nCampb&ll^ 187.

in the Isles, foretold the Death of a young
Woman in Minginis, within less than Twenty
four Hours before the Time ; and accordingly
she died suddenly in the Fields ; tho' at the
Time of the Prediction, she was in perfect
Health: But the Shroud appearing close about
her Head, was the Ground of his Confidence
that her Death was at Hand.
The same Person foretold the Death of a
Child in his Master's Arms, by seeing a Spark
of Fire fall on his Left Arm; and this was like-
wise accomplished soon after the Prediction.
Some of the Inhabitants of Harries sailing
round the Isle of Sfye, with a Design to go to
the opposite Main-Land, were strangely sur-
prized with an Apparition of Two Men,
hanging down by the Ropes that secur'd the
Mast, but could not conjecture what it meant,
, They pursued their Voyage ; but the Wind
turning contrary, they v\ ere fore d into Broad-
ford, in the JJle of Skye, where they found
Sir Donald Mackdonald keeping a Sheriff s
Court, and two Criminals receiving Senrence
of Death there, The Ropes and Mast of
that very Boat, were made use of to hang
those Criminals, This was told the Author
by several, who had this Instance related to
them by the Boat's-Crew.
Several Persons, living in a certain Fami-
ly, told the Author, that they had frequently
seen Two Men standing at a Gentlewoman's
Left Hand, who was their Masters Daughter:
They

<page 227>
>38 TbeLiTE and Adventures
they told the Men's Names, and being her .
Equals, it was not doubted but she would be
marry d to one of them j and perhaps to the
other after the Death of the first. Some time
after a Third Man appeared who seemed
always to stand nearest to her of the Three,
but the Seers did not know him, though they
could describe him exactly ; and within some
Months after, this Man, who was seen last,
actually came to the jHouse, and fully an-
swerd the Description given pf him, by those,
who never saw him but in a Vision ,• and he
marry'd the Woman shortly after; They live
in the IJle of Skye, and both themselves and
others confirm'd the Truth of this Instance,
when the Author saw them.
Archibald Mac Donald, of the Parift of St.
Marys in the Isle of Skye, being reputed fa-
mous in his Skill of foretelling Things to come
by the Second-Sight, happening to be in the
Village Knockow one Night, aind before Sup-.
per, told the Family, that he had just then
seen the strangest Thing he ever saw in his
Life: viz. A Man with an ugly long Cap,
always making his Head; but that the strangest
of all was a little kind of an Harp, which he
Had with Four Strings only, and that it had
Two Harts-horns fix d in the Front of it: All
that heard this odd Vision fell a Laughing at
Archibald, telling him, that he was dreaming,
or had not his Wits about him., since he pre~
tended to see a Thing which. had no Being*
and


<page 228>
es Mr. Duncan CampbeIi?
^nd was not so much as heard of in any Part
of the World. All this could not alter Archi-
bald's Opinion, who told them, that they must
excuse him if he laugh'd at them, after the
Accomplishment of the Vision. Archibald re-
turned to his own House, and within Three
or Four Days after, a Man with a Cap, Harp,
&c. came to the House, and the Harp, Strings,
Horns, and Cap, anfwer'd the Description of
them at first View, and he shook his Head
•when he play'd ; for he had two Bells fix'd
to his Cap. This Harper was a poor Man,
who made himself a Buffoon for his Bread,
and was never seen before in those Parts, and
at the Time of the Prediction he was in the
Isle of Ban ay, which is about Twenty Leagues
distant from that Part of Skye. This Rela-
tion is vouch'd by Mr. Daniel Marten and all
his Family, and such as were then present,
and they live in the Village where this hap-
pened.
One Daniel Nicholson, Minister of St. Ma-
rys in Skye., the Parish in which Mr. Archi-
bald Mac Donald lived, told the Author ; that,
one Sunday, after Sermon, at the Chapel
Uge, he took an Occasion to enquire of Archi-
bald, if he still retain d that unhappy Faculty
of seeing the Second-Sight, and wish'd him to
get rid of it, if possible ; for, said he, it is no
true Character of a good Man. Archibald was
highly displeas'd, and anfwer'd that he hoped
he was no more unhappy than his Neighbours,

<page 229>
Stoo The Li Ft and AdvEntuileS
tor seeing what they could not perceive, t
had , said he, as serious Thoughts as my
Neighbours, 1st Time of hearing a Sermon to-
day ; and even then I saw a Corpse laid on the
Ground, close .fo the Pulpit; arid I asliire you*
it will be acconiplish'd shortly, for it was ut
the Day-time* There were rione in the Pa-
rish then sick, and few are buried in that lit-
tle Chapel; nay, sometimes rtbt fcrie iri a Year.
Vet when Mr. Nicholson return'd.to preach iri
the Iaid Chapel: a Foftriight of. Three Weeks
after y he founa one buried iri the very Spotj
named bV Archibald. This Story is vouch'd
by Mr. Nicholson, the Minister, and several
of the Parishioners still living.
Note) That it is counted by many ah Argu-
ment of somewhat Evil attending this Facul-
ty of the Second-Sights because there are Iii-
•stances given of some Persons who have been
freed of it, upOrt using some Christian Pra-
ctices. But I slmll hereafter mow^ that this
Opinion cannot be entirely true.
Sir Norman Mac-Lead, who has his Reft,
» science in the Isle of Bernera, which lies be-
tween the Jjles of N. Vijl and Harries, went
to the Isle of She about Business, without ap-
pointing any Time for his Return: His Ser-
vants, in his Absence, being all together id
the large Hall at Night; one Of them, who
had the Second-Sight, told the rest they must
remove, for there would be Abundance of o-
ther Company iri the Hall that Night. One of
2 his

<page 230>
os Mr. D u nganCampb6ll . i$i
his Fellow-Servants answer'd, that there was
very little Likelihood of that, because of the
Darkness of the Night, and the Banger of
coming thro' the Rocks, that lie round the
IJle: But within art Hour after, one of Sir
Wormaris Men came to the House, bidding
them provide Lights, &c. for his Master had
«ewly landed. •
Sir Norman being told of this, called for
the Seer, and examin'd him about it. He an-
swer d, that he had seen the Spirit Browne,
in human Shape, come several Times, and
make a Show of carrying an old Woman (that
fkt by the Fire) to the Door ; and at last
feem'd to carry her out by Neck and Heete;
which made him laugh heartily, and gave Oc-
casion to the rest to conclude him Mad, to
laugh so much without any Reason. This
Instance was told the Author^by Sir Norman
himself. .
Four Men from the Isle of Skye and Harries
w^nt toBarbadoes, and itay'd there some Year*;
•who, tho' they had wont to see the Second-
Sight in their native: Country, never saw it m
BarbaJoes; but upon their Return to England?
the first Night after their Landing, they saw
the Second-Sight; as the Author was told by
several of their Acquaintance.
John Morrison, who lives in Bernera of Has-
tiesi wears the Plant called Fuga Damonum,
sewed in the Neck of his Coat, to prevent
his seeing of Visions ; and fays, he never (aw
.' any

<page 231>
i$i .The Life and AdventUS.es
any since he first carried that Plant about
him.
A Spirit, by the Country People called
'Brownie, was frequently seen in all the most
considerable Families in the Isles; and North
of ScotIanJ,'mtheShi.pe of atallMan, having
very long brown Hair: But within these
Twenty Years past he has been seen but
rarely.
Tfaere were Spirits also that appeared in
the shape of Women, Horses, Swines, Cats,;
and some like fiery Balls, which would fol-
low Men jin the Fields, but there have been
but few Instances of these for upwards of
Forty Years past;
These Spirits us'd also to form Sounds in
the Air, resembling those of art Harp, Pipes,
crowing of a Cock, and of the grinding of
Hand-mills: And sorrietisties Voices have been
heard in the Air at Night, singing Irish Songs;
the Words of which Songs some of the Au-
thor's Acquaintances still retain j One Of them
resembled the Voice of a Woman, who died
lbme time before, and the Song related to her
State in the other World* AU these Accounts,
the Author fays, he had from Persons of as
great Integrity as any are in the World. So
sar Mr. Marten, whose Account is so long,that
I have given the Reader only a short Abridg-
ment thereof j and shall therefore satisfy my
self, without relating any further Pasiages, by
directing the Reader to others also, learned

<page 232>
of Mr. DuncAn Campbell. 195
Men, who have written on the same Subject,
Laurentius Ananias printed a Volume in Latin
at Venice, Anno 1581, about the Nature of
Dæmons, where, in the Third Book, he writes
concerning the Second-Sights—The Learned
Camerarius does the like ; and names a Per-
son of his bwn Acquaintance, whom he te>
.ctifies to have had that Gift. St. Austin him-
self testifies something (not very different from
what we now call theGift of the Second-Sight)
of one Curina, who lived in the Country of
Hippo, in Africa. --^Bonaysteau tells us some-
thing like it, in his Disc. de Excell. & Dig.
Hominis, concerning the Spirit of Hermoti-
ntus.—So do likewise Herodotus and Maximus
Tyrius, about the Spirit of Aristœus.—Cardan
does the lame, in his De Rerum variet. 1. 8. c.
84. of his Kinftnan Baptista Cardan, a Student
at P avia.——Baptifia Eulgofm tells us of -what
we call the Second-Sight, in other Words, iti
his L. 1. Faff. & DitJ. memorab. c. 6. Among
our own Countrymen, the Lord Henry How-
ard, in the: Book he writ against supposed Pro*
phecies, in his Seventeenth Chapter, tells us
a wonderful Story of this Kind of Sight; and
sure that Noble Lord may be lodk'd upon as
an unexceptionable Testimony, in a Story he
relates of his own Knowledge, he having o-
therwise little Faith in Things of this Kind.
Mr. Cotton Mather, a Minister oŒew-England,
in his Relation of the Wonders of the Invisible
Wirld, inserted in his Ecclesiastical History of
O that

<page 233>
194 TbeLtti and Adventures
that Country, printed in London, Anno ijotj
in Folio, has given us several Instances of this
kind, as also of many other Diabolical Opera-
tions. Mr. Baxters Book concerning the Cer-
tainty of the World of Spirits, has the like
Proofs in it. Mr. Aubrey, Fellow of the Roy-
al Society, has written largely concerning Se-
cond-sighted Persons ; so has Dr. Beaumont, in
his Book of Genij and Familiar Spirits, who
has collected almost all the other Accounts
together and many others, whole very
Names it would be tedious to recite. How-
ever, as there are a few more Paflages very
curious in themselves, I will venture so fas
upon the Reader's Patience, as not only to
recite the Names of the Authors, but the Ac-
counts themselves, in as succinct and brief a
manner as it is possible for any one to do.
Mr. Th. May, in his History, Lib. 8. writes,'
That an old Man (like an Hermit) Second-
sighted, took his Leave of K. James I. when
he came into England: He took little Notice
of Prince Henry j but addressing himself to
the Duke of Tork, [since K. Charles I.] fell a
weeping, to think what Misfortunes he should
undergo; and that He should be one of the
most Miserable and most Unhappy Princes
that ever was.
A Scots Nobleman sent for one of these
Second-sighted Men out of the Highlands, to
give his Judgment of the then Great George
Villars, Duke of Buckingham. As soon as ever
a" he

<page 234>
of Mr. Duke an Campbell, i^j
he saw him ; Pish, said he, He will come to
Nothing : /see a Dagger in bis Breast. And
he was stabb'd in the Breast by Captain Tel-
ton, zs, has been at large recounted in some
of the foregoing Pages.
Sir James Melvil hath several the like Pas-
sages in his History. 1
A certain old Man in South-Wales i told a
great Man there of the Fortune of his Family;
and that there should not be a Third Male
Generation; It has fallen out accordingly.
Sir William Dugdale, with his own Mouths
ihform'd several Gentlemen, that Major-Ge-
neral Middleton (since Lord) went into the
highlands of Scotland, to endeavour to make
a Party for King Charles I. An old Gentle- •
man (sthat was Second-sighted) came and told
him, that his Endeavour was good, but he
would be unsuccessful : And moreover, That
they would put the King to Death ; and that
several other Attempts would be made, but all
in vain. But that his Son would come in, but
not reign in a long 'Time ; but would at lafl
be restored. This Lord Middleton had a great
Friendship with the Laird Bocconi ; and they
made an Agreement, that the first of them
that died, should appear to the other in Ex-
tremity. The Lord Middleton was taken
Prisoner at Worcefler Fight, and was Prisoner
in the Tower of London, under Three Locks.
Lying in his Bed, pensive, Bocconi appear d to
him : My Lord Middleton ask'd him, if he
O % were

<page 235>
it>6 The Life and Adventures
were dead or alive? He said, dead; and that
he was a Ghost : And told him, that within
Three Days he should escape ; and he did so,
in his Wife's Cloaths. When he had done his
Meslage, he gave a Frisk, and said,
Givanni, Givanni, 'tis very strange,
. In the World to fee so sudden a Change:
And then gather'd up, and vanish'd. This Ac-
count Sir William Dugdale had from the Bi-
shop of Edinburgh ; and this Account he hath
writ in a Book of Miscellanies, which is now
reposited (with other Books of his) in the
'Museum at Oxford.
Thus the Reader fees, what great Autho-
rities may be produc'd to prove, that wonder-
ful and true Predictions have been deliver'd
by many Persons gifted with the Second-Sight:
The most learned Men in almost ill Nations,
who are not in all Likelihood deceiv'd them-
selves ; the most celebrated and authentick
Historians, and some Divines, in England,
who, 'tis not to be thought, have combined
together, and made it their Business to obtrude
upon us Falshoods ; Persons of all Ranks,
from the highest to the lowest, in Scotland,
who (it would be even Madness to think)
would join in a Confederacy to impose Tricks
upon us, and to persuade us to the greatest
of Impostures, "as solemn Truths delivered
from their own Mouths : All these, I say,
have unanimously, and (as it were) with one
Voice aslerted, repeated, and confirm'd to us, .
that

<page 236>
of Mr. Dunc an Ca m p b el l. 197
that there have been at all Times, and in
many different Nations, and that still there
are Persons, who, posless'd with the Gift of a
Second-Sight, predict Things that wonderfully
come to pals, and seem to merit very little
less than the Name of Prophets, for their mi-
raculous Discoveries. Now if any Man should;
come, and without giving the least manner
of Reason for it, ( for there is no Reason to be
given against such Assertions j) declare his
Disbelief of all these authentick, tho'firange,
Accounts ,, can he with Reason imagine, that
his Incredulity shall pals for a Token of Wf-
dom ? Shall his Obstinacy confute the Learned?
Shall his Want of Faith be thought justly to
give the Lye to so many Persons of the highest
Honour and Quality, and of the most undoubted
Integrity .*? In fine, shall his Infidelity, by a re*
verse kind of Power to that which is attribu-.
ted to the Philosopher s Stone, be able to change
the Nature of Things, turn and transmute
Truth into Faljhood, and make a downright
plain Matter, of FaB, to be no more than a
Chimœra, or an Ens Rationis j? And (hall a wiif
nifeft Experience be so easily exploded? \
Taking it therefore for granted, that no
modest Man whatsoever, (tfe>' never so hard
of Belief, which is certainly as great a Weak-
ness as that of too much Credulity ;) will
make bold openly to declare his Disbelief -of
Things so well attested ; and taking it much
more for granted still, that it is impossible for
O 3 any

<page 237>
198 The Lite and Adventures
any Man of common Sense to have the Front
of declaring his Disbelief of them in such a
manner, as to urge it for an Argument, and a
Reason, why others should disbelieve them
too : Taking this, I lay, as I think I very
well may, for granted ; I think there remains
fiothing farther for me to offer, before I con-
clude this Chapter, except a few Remarks, as
to the Similitude there is between those Acti-
ons, which I have related above to have been
perform'd by Mr. Campbell, and these Acti-
ons which Ib many Learned, Ingenious, and
Noble Authors as I have just now quoted, have
asserted to have been perform'd by Persons,
whom they knew to be gifted with the Se-
cond-Sight.
As to what is said, (several Pages above J)
concerning Duncan Campbell, when a Boy at
Edinburgh, that he even told his little Com-
panions, who would have Success at their
little Matches, when they play'd at Marbles;
and that he inforrn'd a great Gamester there,
( whose Name I have dvsguizcd under that of
Count Cog') what Times he should chuse to
play, if he would win ; as ludicrous as it may
have appear cl to„be, and as much as it may
have secmd to my Readers to carry with it
nothing better than the Face of Invention,
and the Air of Fiction : Yet if they will be at
the Pains of comparing that Paslage of Dun-
can Campbell's, with the Account given in
this Chapter from the Mouth of Sir Norman
Mac-

<page 238>
of Mr. Duncan Campb eil. 199
Maclead, concerning a Man who (tho' he
never play'd at Tables in his Life) instructed
a skilful Gamester, when he was at a Standy
to place one of his Men right, upon which
the whole Game depended ; which the igno-
rant Fellow, when ask'd how he came to do
it, said, he was directed to it by the Spirit
Browne : Whoever, I say, will be at the Pains
of comparing these Passages together, will find
they bear a very near Resemblanceand that
the way we may most reasonably account for
Duncan Campbells Prediction, when he was a
Boy, must be, that he was at that Time di-
rected by his little Genius, or Familiar Spirit,
Cwhich I defcrib'd in the precedent Pages) as
this Fellow was by the Spirit Brorcne, accor-
ding to Sir Norman Maclead's Aslertion. Which
Spirit Browne, as Mr. Mart en (a very good and
credited Writer) asiures us, in his History of
the Western Islands, dedicated to the late
Prince George of Denmark, is a Spirit usually
seen all over that Country.
If the Reader recollects, he will remember
likewise, that in the little Discourse which
I mention'd to have been held between me
and this Duncan Campbell ('when a Boy J con-
cerning his little Genius, I there say, the Boy
signified to me that he smelt Venison, and
was sure that some would come to his Mo-
ther's House shortly after: Accordingly I came
thither that Morning from the Death of a
Deer, and order d a Part of it to be brought
O 4 after

<page 239>
4,oo The Lite and Adventures
after me to her House. Now Mr. MaHeris
Twelfth Observation about the Second-Sight,
in this Chapter, clears it plainly up, that this
Knowledge in the Boy proceeded from the
Gift of Second-Sight. Not to give the Rea-
der too often the Trouble of looking back, in
order to judge of the Truth of what I fay,
I will here repeat that Observation ; which
is as follows. 'Things are also foretold by
Smelling sometimes: For Example; Fijh or
c Flejb is frequently smelt in the Fire, when
J at the same time neither of the two are in
4 -the House, or, in any Probability, like to be
'had in it for some Weeks or Months. This
* Smell several Persons have, who are endued
* with the Second-Sight; and it's always ac-
'compUsh'd soon after. - - .• . . .
But I will here omit any farther Remarks,
by way of accounting how he compass d his
Predictions when a Boy, either by the In-
tervention of his Genim, or the .Gift of & Se-
cond-Sight ; and examine how nearly those
Things, which I have related to have been
done by him in his more advanc'd Years,
when he took up the Profession of a Prediftot
in London, correspond with the Accounts gi-
ven us in this Chapter about a Second Sight;
and how near a Resemblance the Things
done by him, bear to those Things that are
so well attested to have been perform'd by
Others, thro' the efficacious Power of this
.wonderful Faculty. , y. ",. , .

<page 240>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell . zoi
First then, if we have a mind to make a
tolerable guess, which way *Mx.Campbell came
acquainted that the Death of the beautiful
young Lady, Mrs. W-lxa-d was so near at
Hand, and that, tho' (he was so universally
admired, she would Die unmarried; the Ac-
counts given of other Second-sighted Persons
in the like Cases, will put us in the most pro-
bable way of guessing right. This is ex-
plains by the Seventh Observation in this
Chapter, where it is said from Mr. Marten,
that when a Shroud is perceiv'd about one,
it's a sure Prognostick of Death ; the Time is
judg'd according to the Height of it, about
the Person; for if it be not seen above the
Middle, Death is not to be expected for the
space of a Year or longer, but as it comes
nearer to the Head it is expected sooner ; if
to the very Head, it is concluded to be at
Hand within a few Days, if not Hours. Of
this we have an Example of which Mr. Mar-
ten was an Eye-witnels, concerning the Death
of his own Acquaintance; but he did not in
the least regard it, till the Death of the Per-
son, about the Time foretold, confirm'd to
him the Certainty of the Prediction.
Secondly, As to the ignominious Death that
Irzvin came to, and which He predicted to his
Mother, so long before, when stie was in
flourishing Circumstances, and when there
Was no Appearance, that any of her Children
should be brought to a beggarly Condition,
\ - *. and

<page 241>
toz The Life and Adventures
arid learn among base (jangs of Companyjaa
thieve, and be earned to the Gallows: The
Story told in this Chapter of some of the In-
habitants of Harries, sailing round the Isle of
Skje, and seeing the Apparition of two Men
hanging by the Ropes on the Mast of theit*
Veslel, and when they came to the opposite
Main.Land, finding two Criminals just sen-
tenced to Death, by Sir Donald Mac Donald,
and seeing their own very Mast and Ropes
made choice of for their Execution, clears up
the manner how Mr. Campbell might predict
this of Jrw'm likewise by the force'of the
Second-Sight.
Thirdly, As to Mr. Campbell's telling Chri*
flaifina the Belle, and chief Toast of the Court,
aad Vrbana the reigning Beauty of the City,
that they mould shortly be married, and who
were to be their Husbands; it is a Thing he
has done almost every Day in his Life to one
Woman or other, that comes to consult him
about the Man she is to be married to; the
manner, he probably takes in doing this, may
be likewise explain'd by the foregoing Story
in this Chapter, about the Servants, who said
they saw three Men standing by the left
Hand of their Master's Daughter ; and that
he that was nearest would marry her firsts
whom they plainly and exactly described, tho
jthey had never seen him but in their Vision,
as appeared afterwards. For within some
Months after, [the very Man described, did
come

<page 242>
of Mr. Duncan CAMPBitiT
pome to the House, and did marry her. Vidp
the Eighth Observation of the Second-Sight.
Fourthly, As to the predictions deliver'd
by Mr* Campbell to the Merchant, which are
set down at length in the foregoing Chapter,
I know no better way at guessing the manner
horn the Second-Sight operated in him at that
Time, than by comparing them to these Two
Instances, which I briefly repeats because
they are set down at length before in this
Chapter. And first it may be ask & how did
the Second-Sight operate in Mr. Campbell, when
it gave him to know, that the Merchant's
Ships, which repeated Intelligences had \A
appearance confirm'd to be lost, were at that
time safe, and would return securely home
into the Harbour designed ? The best way of
accounting for it, that I know, is by the Story
that Sir Norman Maclead is above affirm'di
to have told with his own Mouth concerning
a Servant of his, who rightly foretold his re-
turning Home, and landing on the Isle of
Bernera one Night, where his Residence is*
When there was very little or no likeiihood of
it, because of the Darkness of the Night, and
the Danger of coming through the Rocks that
lie round the Ifle. When Sir Norman exa-
min'd him about it; he answer'd that he knew
it by a Vision of the Spirit Browne; and hence
it may be the most probably conjectured, that
Mr. Campbell's Knowledge of the Merchant's
Ships being safe, came irom a Vision of his
particular

<page 243>
ao4 The Life and Adventures
particular Genius or familiar Spirit', which we
spoke of before. What I have already in-
stanced in, is (1 think) sufficient with regard
to the wonderful Things which Mr. Camp-'
bell has perform'd, either by the Intervention
of a Genius, or the Power of a Second-Sights
But as he has frequently done a great many
amazing Performances, which seem to be of
such a Nature, that they can't be well and
clearly explain'd to have been done either by
the Intervention of his familiar Spirit and
Genius, or by the Power of thtSecond-Jighted
Faculty, we must have recourse to the Third
Means, by which only such Predictions and
Practices can be compass'd, before we expound
these new Mysteries, which appear like incre-
dible Riddles, and Ænigma's at, the first ; and
this Third Means which we must have re-
course to for expounding these strange Acts
of his, is a due Consideration of the Force
and Power of Natural Magick, which toge-
ther with a Narrative of the Acts, which he
seems magically to bring about, will be the
Subject of the following Chapter.
,. , . ->. .',:
,: CHAP.
f . . . .... .J

<page 244>
bf Mr. Duncan Campbell" . Voj
; • c ii a p. VIII. .:
A Dissert at km upon Magick. under all its
'Branches, with fame remarkable Particu-
'•' lars, relating to Mr. Campbells private Life.
BU T before we proceed to our Disqui-
sitions concerning the Power and Effi-
cacy of natural Magick,and examine what my-
sterious Operations may be brought atout and
eompafs'd by magical Practices. And before
we take a farther Survey of what Mt. Camp-
bell has personnel in this Kind, that relates
to his Profession and the publick Part of his
Life, Which concerns other People as well as
himself; I shall here relate some singular Ad-
ventures that he passd thorough ira'his private
Life, and which regard only his own Person.
In order to this I must return back to thd
Year 1702, about which time some unac-
countable Turns of Fortune attended him in
his own private . Capacity, which must be
very surprizing and entertaining to my Rea-
ders, when they find a Man whose Foresight
was always so great a Help and Assistance to
others, who consulted him in their own fu-
ture Affairs, helpless (as it has been an Ob-
servation concerning all such Men in the Ac-
count of the Second-Sight) and blind in his
own future Affairs, tois'd up and down by
inevitable and spightful Accidents of Fortune,
and made the May-game of Chance and Ha-
zard,

<page 245>
io6 the tun and Adventures!
2ard, as if that way-ward arid inconstant
Goddess was resolv'd to punish htm,' wheri
she catch'd him on the blind Side, for having
such a quick Insight and penetrating Faculty
in other Peoples Matters, arid scrutinizing
too narrowly into her Mysteries, and so some-
times preventing those fatal Intentions of Jiers,
into which she would fain lead many Mor-
tals hood-wink'dj and before they knew where
they were. In this Light, these mighty and
famous Seers seem to be born for the Benefit
and Felicity of others, but at the lame time
to be born to Unhappiness themselves. And cer-
tainly, in as much as we consider them as useful
and beneficial often, but always satisfactory to
Persons who are curious in their Enquiries
about their Fortunes ; it will be natural to
those of us, who have the least Share of Ge-
nerosity in our Minds, to yield Our Pity and
Qonvpassion to them* wh.ert they are remar-
kably unfortunate themselves ; especially when
that Calamity seems more particularly to light
upon them for their Ability, and endeavour
to Consult the good Fortune of other Folks.
Aboutthe above-mentioned Year ijox,Dun-
fOinCampbel-grew a little tired of his Profession.
Such a multitude of Followers troubled him^
several of whom were wild Youths and came
to banter him, and many more too inquisitive
Females, to teaze him with endless Imper-
tinences, and wrjo, the more he told them^
bad still the more to ask, and whose Curio*
sky was never to be satisfied: And besides this*
he

<page 246>
of Mr. Duncan Cam pbelv 2.07
he was so. much eavy'd, and had so many
malicious Artifices daily practised against him,
that he resolv'd to leave off his Profession.
He had (I know) follow'd it pretty closely
from the time I first saw him in London^which
was I think in the beginning of the Year 1698,
till the Year 1702, with very good Success;
and in those few Years he had got together
a pretty round Sum of Money. Our young
Seer was now at Man's Estate,and had learn d
the Notion that he was to be fyis own Gover-
nor, so far as to be his own Counsellor too
in what Road of Life he was to take ; and.
ttns Consideration (no doubt) work'd with a
deeper Impression on his Mind, than it usu-.
ally does on others that are in the same blos-
soming Pride of Manhood, because if might;
appear more natural for him to believe, that
he had a sufficient Ability to be his own pro-
per Adviser, who had given so many others,
and some more aged than himfelf, Counsel,
with very good Success. Now every expe-
rienc'd Person knows, that when Manhood is
yet green,itis still in the fame dangerousCon-
dition as a young Plant, which is liable to be
warp'd by a Thousand cross fortuitous Acci-
dents, if good Measures be not taken to sup-
port it against all the contingent Shocks it
may meet with from the Weather or other-
wise. 'Now it was his Misfortune to be made
averse to Business, which he iov'd before, by
having too much of it, and to be so sowred;
by meeting with numerous Perplexities and
mali-

<page 247>
io8 The Life and Adventures
malicious Rubs laid in his way by invidious*
Pecple,f who are the useless and injurious Busy-
bodies, that always repine at the good of*
others, and rejoice to do harm to the Diligent
and Assiduous, though they reap no Profit by
it themselves;) that he was disgusted and de-
terr'd entirely from the Prosecution of a Pro-
fession, by which he got not only a compe-
tent but a copious and plentiful Subsistence.
Nay, indeed this was another Mischief arising
to him from his having so much Business,
that he had got Money enough to leave it ofTJ
when the Perplexities of it had made him
willing to do so, and to live very comfortably
and handsomely, like a Gentleman without
it for a time ; and we know the youngest
Men are not wont to.look the sarthest before
them in Matters that concern their own Wel-
sare. Now inasmuch as he had thus taken
a Disgust to Business and Application,and was
surfeited (as I may say J with the Perplexities
of it, it must be as natural for him, we know,
to search for Repose in the contrary Extream j
vi&. Recreation and Idleness, as it is for a
Man to seek Rest after Toil, to sleep after a
Day's Labour, or to sit down after a long and
tiresome Walk. But there are two very di-
stinct Sorts of Idleness, and two very different
Kinds of Recreation ; there is a shameful Idle-
ness which is no better than downright
Sloth ; and there .is a splendid kind of Indo-
lence, where a Man having taken an Aversion
4

<page 248>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 2Ck)
to the Wearisomeness of a Business which pro-
perly belongs to him, neglects not however
to employ his Thoughts, when they are va-
cant from what they ought more chiefly to
be about, in other Matters not entirely un-
profitable in Life, the Exercise of which he
finds he can follow with more abundant Ease
and Satissaction. There are some Sorts of
Recreations too, that are mean, sordid, and
base; others, that are very innocent, tho'
very diverting, and that will give one the
very next most valuable Qualifications of a
Gentleman, after those which are obtained
by a more serious Application of the Mind.
The Idea which I have already given my
Readers of our Duncan Campbell, will easily
make them judge, before I tell them, which
way (in these two ways) his Genius would
ilaturally lead him ; and that, when he grew
an idle Man, he would rather indulge him-
self with applying his Mind to the shining
Trifles of Life, than be wholly slothful and
unactive ; and that when he diverted him-
self, he would not do it after a sordid, base
manner, as having a better Taste, and a Relish
for good Company ; but that his Recreations
would still be the Recreations of a Gentle-
man. And just) accordingly, as my Readers
would naturally judge beforehand in his Case^
so it really happen'd : The Moment he shook
off Business, and dismiss d the Thoughts of
k} his Genius led him to a very gallant
P Way

<page 249>
aio The Life and Adventures
Way of Life ; in his Lodgings, in his Enter-
tainments, in paying and receiving Visits, in
Cofiee-Houfes, in Taverns, in Fencing-Schools,
in Balls and other Publick Aslemblies ; in all
ways, in fine, both at home and abroad, Dun-
can Campbell was a Well-comported and Civil
Fine Gentleman : He was a Man of Pleasure;
and nothing of the Man of Business appear'd
about him. But a Gentleman's Life, without
a Gentleman's Estate, (however mining and
pleasant it may be for a Time) will certainly
end in Sorrow, if not in Infamy. And com-
paring Life (as Moralists do) to a Day,
one may safely pronounce this Truth to
all the splendid Idlers I have mention'd;
That if they have sunshiny Weather till Noon,
yet the Afternoon of their Life will be very
stormy, rainy and uncomfortable, and per-
haps just at the End of theirjourney, (to carry
on the Metaphor throughout) close in the dark-
est kind of Night. Of this, as I was a Man of
Years, and more experience! in the World
than he, I took upon me to forewarn Mr.
Campbell, as soon as I perceiv'd the first dange-
rous Fit of this elegant Idleness had seiz'd
him. But when will young Men, by so much
the more headstrong, as they have less of the
Beard, be guided, and brought to learn? And
when ihall we fee that happy Age, in which,
the grey Heads of old Men shall be clapp'd
upon the Shoulders of Youth? I told him,
that in this one Thing he ought to consult me,

<page 250>
of Mr. DuncanCampbell. zii
and acknowledge me to be a true Prophet,
if I told him the End of the seeming merry
Steps in Life he was now taking, would in-
fallibly bring him to a. Labyrinth of Difficul-
ties ; out of which if he extricated himself at
all, he would at least find it a laborious Piece
of Work. His Taste had lieen already vitia-
ted, with the Sweets which lay at the Top of
the bitter Draught of Fortune ; and my honest
rugged Counsel came too late to prevail, when
his Fancy jhad decoy'd and debauch'd his
Judgment, and carry d it over into another
Interest. I remember I writ down to him
the Moral Story, where vicious Pleasure and
Virtue are pictur'd by the Philosopher to ap*
pear before.Hercities. to court him into two
several Paths. I told him more particularly,
since he had not an Estate to go thro' with
the Gentlemanly Life, ("as he calfd it) that
if he fbllow'd the alluring Pleasures, which
endeavour d to tempt Hercules, he would in-
volve himself at last in a whole Heap of Mise-
ries, out of which it would be more than an
Herculean Labour for him to disentangle
.himself again. If he had been a Man that
could have ever heard with either, I would
have told the Reader in a very familiar Idi-
om, that he turn'd the deaf Ear to me; for
he did not mind one Syllable nor Tittle of the
Prescriptions I set down for him, no more
than if he had never read them ; but, varying
the Phrase a little, I may say at least, when


<page 251>
iii The Life and ADVENfUREs^
he should have look'd upon my Counsel with
all the Eyes he had, he turn'd the blind Side;
upori it. I was resolv'd to make use of the Re-
venge natural to a Man of Years, arid there-
fore apply'd that reproachful Proverb to him,
which we Ancients delight much in making
use of to Youths, that follow their own false
and hot Imaginations, and will not heed
the cooler Dictates of Age, Experience, and
Wisdom. Accordingly I wrote down to him
these Words, arid left him in a seeming Pas-
sion. * I am very well assitr'd, young Man,
* you think me, that am old, to be a Fdol; but
i 1, that am old, absolutely know you (who are
'ayoung Fellow) to be a downright Fopl; and
* so I leave you to follow your own Nftays, till
* sad and woful Experience teaches you to
'know it your own self, and makes you come
4 to me, to own. it of your own accords As I
was going away, after this tart Admonition and
severe Reprimand, I had a Mind to observe
his Countenance, and I saw him smile.; which
I rightly construed to be done in Contempt of
the Advice of Age, and in the Gaiety and Ful-
ness of Conceit, which Youth' entertains of
its own fond Opinions, and hair-brain'd rash
Resolves. He was got into the Company of
a very prdtty Set of Gentlemen, whose For-
tunes were sar superior to his; but he follow'd
the same genteel Exercises, as fencing, &c.
and made one at all their Publick Entertain-
ments : AndJ so. being: at an equal Expence
'* with

<page 252>
.osMr. DUNC AN CAMPB£ll; zi 3
,with those who could well afford to spend
what.they did out of their Estates, he went
on very pleasantly for a Time ; still spending,
and never getting ; without ever considering,
that it must, by inevitable Consequence, fall
to his Lot as last, to be entirely reduc'd to a
^tate,of Indigence and Want. And what com-
monly heightens the Misfortunes of such Men,
(and so of all Gentlemen's younger Brothers,
who live yppn the ready Money that is given
them for their Portions j) is, that the Prospe-
rity they live in for a Time, gains them Credit
enough just to bring them in Debt, and ren-
der them more miserable than those very
Wretches, who never had either any Money
or Credit at all. They run themselves into
Debt out of Shame, and to put off the evil
Day of appearing ruin'd Men as long as they
can ; and then when their Tempers are sour'd
by Adversity, they grow tir'd of their own
Lives ; and then in a Quarrel, they, or some
other Gentleman, may be, is run through;
or else "being hunted by Bailiffs, they exer-
cise thejr Swords upon those Pursuers. Thus,
where Gentlemen will not consider their Cir-
cumstances, their very Prosperity is a Cause
of, and aggravates their Misery; their very
Pride (which was a,decent Pride at first) in
keeping up and maintaining their Credit, sub-
jects them too often to the lowest and the
meanest Acts ; and their Courage, which was
qf a laudable Kind, turns into a brutish and
P 3 fa-

<page 253>
2r4 The Life and Acv e nturis
iavage Rage ; and all the fine, esteem'd-flou-
rishing and happy Gentleman, ends, and is
lost, in the contemn'd, poor and miserable
Desperado ; whose Portion at last is Confine-
ment and a Gaol, and sometimes even worse,
and what I shall not so much as name here.
Into many of these Calamities Mr. Campbell
had brought himself before it was lon^, by
his Heedlelhess, and running (according to the
wild Dictates of Youth) counter to all found
and wholsome Advice. He had:, it seems,
run himself into Debt ; and one Day, as he
was at a Goffee-House, the Sign of the Three
Croxvns in Great Qiteenfireet, in rush'd Four
Bailiffs upon him, who being directed by the
Creditors Wife, had watchcl him into that
House, and told him they had a Warrant a-
gainst him ; and upon his not answering; they
being unacquainted with his being deaf and
dumb, ofler'd: to seize his Sword. He start-
led at their offering of Violence ; and taking
them for Ruffians, (which he had often met
with) repcll d the Asiaufeers ; and'drawing his
Sword, as one Man ('more bold than'the rest)
closed in with him, he shorten'd his Blade,
and, in the Fall, pinn'd the Fellow thro' the
Shoulder, and himself thro' the Leg, to the
Floor. After that he stood at Bay with all
the Four Officers, when the most mischievous
Asiailant of them all (the Creditors Wife)
venturd to step into the Fray, and' very bar-
barously took hold of that nameless Part of
. C ^ the

<page 254>
of Mr. Duncan Campb ell. 115.
the Man, ffor which, as she was a married
Woman, Nature, methinks, should have taught
her to have a greater Tenderness;) and almost
fqueez'd and crusiYd those Vitals to Death.
But at last he got free from them all, and was
going away as fast as he could, not knowing
what Consequences might ensue : But the
Woman, who aim'd her self at committing
Murder, in the most savage and inhuman
manner, ran out after him, crying out Mur-
der, Murder, as loud as she could, and alarm-
ed the whole Street. The Bailiff following
the Woman, and being bloody from Head to
Foot, by means of the Wound he receiv'd,
gave Credit to the Outcry. The late Earl Ri-
vers's Footmen happening to be at the Door,
ran immediately to stop the suppos'd Mur-
derer j and they indeed did take him at last,
but perceiv'd their Mistake, and discovers,
that instead of being Assistants in taking a
Man, whom they thought to be a Murderer,
endeavouring to make his Escape from the
Hands of Justice, they had only been trick'd
in by that false Cry, to be Adjutants to a Bai-
lifFin retaking a Gentleman, w ho by so gallant
'^ a Defence, had rescu'd himself from the Dan-
gers of a Prison ; and when they had disco-
ver'd this their Mistake, they were mighty
sorry for what they had done. The most active
and busy among the Earl s Footmen, was a
Dutchman ; and the Earl happening to be
in a Room next the Street, and hearing the
P 4 Out-

<page 255>
ri6 The Life arid Apventub.es
Outcry of Murder, steppdtothe Winddw.; and
seeing his own Servants in the Midst of the
Bustle, examin d the Dutchman how the
Matter was : And being told it ; he1 chid the
Man, for being concern'd in stopping a Gen-
tleman, that was getting free from such trou-
blesome Companions. But the Dutchman ex-
cused himself like a Dutchman, by making a
merry Blunder for a Reply. 4 Sacramente,
• said he to his Lord ; if I had thought they
'were Bailiffs, I would have fought for the
f poor dumb Gentleman ; but then why had
• not he told me they were Bailiffs,, my Lord?
In short, Duncan Campbell was carry d ofF
as their Prisoner ; but the Bailiff that was
wounded, was. led back to the Coffee-House,
where he pretended the Wound was mortal;
and that he despair'd of living an Hour. The
Proverb, however, was on the Fellow's Side;
and he recover d sooner than other People ex-
pected he could. As. soon as all Danger was
over, an Action for Damages and Smart-Mo-
ney ("as their Term is) was brought against
Mr. Campbell; the Damages were exaggera-
ted, and the Demand was so extravagant,that
Duncan Campbel was neither able, just at that
Time, nor willing, had he been able, to pay
so much, as he thought, in his own Wrong,
and having no Bail, and being asham'd to
make his cafe known to his better sort of
Friends, who were both able and willing to
hejp hiiU & £.4ead Lift, hq was hurry'd away
• ..>.! , .: to

<page 256>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell 3.17
to Gaol by the Bayliffs, who shew'd such a
malignant and insolent Pleasure, as commonly
attends powerful Revenge, when they put
him into the Marshalfea. There he lay in
Confinement six Weeks, till at last Four, or
Fiye of his chief Friends came by mere
Chance to hearof .it ; immediately they con-
sulted about his Deliverance,and unanimously
resolved to contribute for his Enlargement,
and they accordingly went cross the Water
together, and procured it out of Hand.
i Two of his Benefactors were'Officers, and
were just then going over to Flanders. Dun-
can Campbell, to whom they communicated
their Design, was resolved to try his Fortune
in a Military Way, out of a roving kind 0/
Humour raised in him, partly by his having
taken a fort of Aversion to his own Profession
in Town, and partly, by his finding that he
•could not live, without following a Profession
as he had done, any longer. He over a Bot-
tle frankly imparted his Mind to them at
large ; he signify'd to them that he hoped,
since they had lately done him so great a Fa-
vour, in freeing him from one Captivity, they
woujd not think him too urgent, if he press'd
for one Favour farther, upon Natures so ge^
nerous as theirs, by whom he took as great
a Pleasure in being obliged, as he could rer
ceive in being capable of obliging others. He
wrote to them that the Favour he meant was
*o redeem him from another Captivity, al-
most

<page 257>
218 The Life and Adventures
most as irksome to him, as that, out of which
they had lately ransom'd him. This Captivity,
continued he, is, being either sore d to follow
my old Profession, which I have taken an en-
tire Disgust to, for a Maintenance, or being
sore d to live in a narrower Way than suits
with my Genius, and the better Taste I have
of higher Life. Such a State, Gentlemen, you
know is more unpalatable than Half-Pay; it
is like either being sore d to go upon the for-
lorn Hope, or else like a Man's being an entire-
ly cashier'd and broken Officer, that had no
younger Brother's Fortune, and no other Sup-
port but his Commission. Thus though yon
have set my Body at Liberty, my Soul is still
under an Imprisonment, and will be till I
leave England, and can find means of visiting
Flanders, which I can do no otherwise than
by the Advantage of having you for my Con-
voy. I have a mighty longing to Experience
some part of a Military Life, and I sancy, if
you will grant me your Interest, and intro-
duce me to the vaJiant young Lord Lome,
and be Spokes-men for a dumb Man, I shall
meet with a favourable Reception ; and as
for you (Gentlemen) after having named that
great Patron and Pattern of Courage and
Conduct in the Field, I can t doubt but the
very Name I bear, if you had not known me,
would have made you taken me for a Person
of a Military Genius, and that I mould do
nothing but what would become a British
Sol-

<page 258>
of Mr. Du ncanCam t» b e l 'iii 2x9
Soldier and a Gentleman; nothing in fine
that should make you repent the Recom-
mendation. " Y-j' ,' V. ",'; a.
• These generous and gallant Friends of his,
it seems, comply'd With his Request, and pro-
mised '^hey WOufcl make Application for him
to the Lord IJdrne ; and Duncan Campbell had
nothing to do'but to get his Bag and Baggage
ready and provide himself witfrasE&fS. His
Baggage was ndt very'long getting together,
and he had Xt m tolerable good Order -and
as for his Pa&, , a: Brother of the Lord
Forbes was so kind, as* to prOettre ,htm one
upon the first Application Duncan made to
him.'
>rr Accordingly in a few Days afterwards they
went on Board, and having a speedy and an
easy Paslage, arrived soon at Rotterdam. Dun-
can met with some of his 'English Acquain-
tance in that Town, and hisMdd being pret-
ty much bent upon rambling^ and seeing all
the Curiosities, Customs, and Humours, he
could, in all the Foreign Placed he was* to pass
thorough; lie went out of; a'Frolick with
some Gentlemen, next Day, in a Boat to an
adjacent Village, to make merry over a home-
ly Dutch Entertainment, the intended Repast
being to consist of what the Boors there count
a great Delicacy, brown Bread and white
Beer. He walk"d out of sight from his Com-
pany, and they lost one another ;and strolling
about by himself at an unseasonable Hour, as

<page 259>
zzo The Life and Adventures
they call it there aster the; Bell has toll'd,
Duncan Campbells who neither knew their
Laws, nor if he had, was capable of being
guided by the notice which their Laws ordain,
was taken into Custody in the Village for that
Night, and carry'd away the next Day to
William ft adt, - where he was taken for a Spy,
and put into a close Imprisonment for Three
or Four Dayi ...i .:
But some Scots Gentlemen, who had been
in Company ;'with Mr. Campbell at Mr. Cloy-
Jlermaris a Painter in Covent-Garden, made
their Application to the Magistrate, and got
him released : He knew his Friends the Of-
ficers that carried him over were gone for-
ward to the Camp, and that there was no
Hope of finding them at Rotterdam, if he
should go thither, and so he resolv'd since he
had had so many Days Punishment in Wil-
liam (I adt, to have Three or Four Days Plea-
sure there too by way of Amends, before he
would set ouf on his Journey after his Friends.
But on the Third Night he got very much in
Drink; and as he went very boisterously and
disorderly along, a Centinel challengd him;
and the want of the Sense of Hearing had like
to have occasion'd the Loss of his Life. The
Centinel fir'd at him and narrowly miss d him;
He was taken Prisoner, not without some Re-
sistance, which was so far Innocent, as that
he knew not any Reason why he should be
. seized ;but yery troublesomeand unwarrantar

<page 260>
of Mt. Duncan Camp bel jT iii
fcle in so orderly a Town; so the Gbvern6rV
Secretary, after the Matter was examined' in-
to,' judging it better for the unhappy Gentle-
man's future Safety, advis'd him to return'
home to his own Country, and accordingly
bespoke him a Place in a Dutch Ship called
Tons row Catherine, for his Pasiageto England'.
"Duncan Campbell] had taken up his Hu-
mour of rambKng first, of his own accord*
dtid the Troubles which he had run himself
into by it, we may reasonably suppose, had
pretty' well curd him of that extravagant
Itch ; and there is little doubt to be made,
but that he rejbyc d very heartily, when he
was got on Board the Ship to return to Eng-
land ; and that, in his new Resolutions, he
had reconciled himself to the Prosecution of
his former Profession, and intended to set up
for a Predi&or again as soon as he could arrive
at London. But now Fortune had not a Mind
to let him go off' so; he had had his own
Fancy for rambling, and now she was resolv'd
to have hers, and to give him his Bellyful of
Caprice. Accordingly when the Dutch Ship
called Tows row Catherine, was making the best
of her Road for London,, and each Person in
the Vessel was making merry, fill'd with the
Hopes of a quick and prosperous Pasiage; a
French Privateer appeared in sight, crouding
affi she Sails she could, and bearing' towards
them with all Haste and Diligence. The Pri-
vateer was double.mann'd, and carry d Thif.r1
.am ty

<page 261>
%a> TbetiTE and Adventures
ty Guns: The Dutch Veslel was defenslese
in comparison; and the People on Board had
scarce time to think, and to deplore that they
should be made a Prey of before they actu-
ally were so, and had Reason enough given
them for their Sorrow. All the Paslengers, to
a single Man, were stripp'd, and had French
Seamens Jackets in exchange for their
Cloaths. Duncan Campbell had now a Taste
given him of the Fate of War, as well as of.
the Humour of travelling, and wislfd himself
again, I warrant him, among his greatest:
Croud of Consulters, as tiresome as he thought
Business to be, instead of being in the Middle
of a Crew of Sea-Savages. The Town, where
the Dumb Prisoner was at last confin'd, was
Denain. There happened to be some English
Fryars there, who were told by the others
who he was, and to them he apply'd himself
in Writing, and receiv'd from them a great
a*eal of civil Treatment. But a certain Man
of the Order of Recolletfs, happening to sec
him there who had known him in England,
and what Profession he followed, caused him,
to be called in Question as a Man that made
use of ill means to tell Fortunes. When he
was questions by a whole Society of these
religious Men, he made them such pertinent
and satisfactory Answers in Writing, that he
convinced them he had done nothing for
which he deserv'd their Reprimand ; and they
unanimously acquitted him. The Heads of

<page 262>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell." 215
his Defence, as I have been informed, were
these.
Fief, He alledg'd that the Second-Sight was
in-bom and in-bred in some Men ; and that
every Country had had Examples of it more
or less ; but that the Country of Scotland, in
which he was educated from an Infants a-
bounded the most of any with those fort of
People : And from thence he said he thought
he might very naturally draw this Conclu-
sion, that a Faculty that was in-born and in-
bred to Men, and grown almost a National
Faculty among a People who were remark-
ably Honest, Upright, and well-meaning Peo-
ple, could not, without some Impiety, be im-
puted to the Possessors of it as a Sin. And
when one of the Fathers rejoin'd, that it was
remark'd by several Writers of the Second
Sight, that it must be therefore Sinful, be-
cause it remain'd no longer among the People
when the Doctrines of Christianity were ful-
ly propagated, and the Light of the Gospel
increased among them ; and that afterwards
it affected none but Persons of vicious Lives
and an ill Character: To this Objection Mr.
Campbell reply'd, that he knew most (even
ingenious) Writers had made that Remark
concerning the Second-Sight, but begg'd leave
to be excused, if he ventured to declare, that
it was no better than a vulgar and common
Error ; and the Reasons were these which he
alledg'd in his own Behalf, and to confirm his
Assertion.

<page 263>
Vt4 The Life and Adventures
Assertion, he told them Men of undoubted
Probity, Virtue and Learning, both of their
Own Religion, (viz. the Roman Catholick)
and also of the Reformed Religion, and in seve-
ral Nations had been affected, and continued
all their Lives to be affected, with this Second-
sighting Power, and that there could be there-
fore no room to fix upon it the odious Cha-
racter of being a sinful and vicious (not to say
that some call'd it still worse, a diabolical)
Talent. He said he would content himself
with making but two Instances, because he
believ'd those Two would be enough to give
Content to them, his Judges too, in that
Case. In his first Instance he told them that
they might find somewhat relating to this in
Jtficolaus Hemingius, who in his Tract dt Su-
perjlitionibus Magicis, printed at Copenhagen,
Anno 1575, informs the World; " That Petrus
*' Paladins, Bishop of Seelandt, and Professor'
"of Divinity at Copenhagen, could, from a
"part of his Body affected, foretel from what
"part of the Heavens Tempests would come,
"and was seldom deceivd". One of the
Fathers immediately ask'd him, if he un-
derstood Latin ?—To this Duncan Campbell re-
ply'd no. Oh! Said the Fryar then, I don't re-
member that Book Was ever translated into
English that you mention:— But rejoind Dun-
can Campbell, The Pasiage I mention'd to you,
I have read in an English Book, and Word for
Word, according to the best of my Memory $
r - 4 as

<page 264>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 225
as I have written it down to you. —-In what
Englifi Book, said the Fryar ?—I don't re-
member the Name of the Book, Duncan Camp-
- bell answer'd, but very well remember the
Paslages ; and that it Was in a Book of Au-
thority, and which bore a Credit and good Re-
pute in the World; arid you being Scholars^
may, if you please, have recourse to the learn-
ed Original; and I doubt not, but you'll find
what I fay to be a Truth.-—For the Second
Instance, he told them. That in Spain, there
are those, they call Saludadores, that have this'
kind of Gift. There was (continued he in
writing) one of your own Religion, Vene-
rable Fathers, and of a Religious Order, nay,
a Fryar too, that had this Gift : He was a
noted Dominican, said he ; and tho' I forget
his Name, you may, by writing a Letter to
England, learn his Name. He was a devout
Portuguese, belonging to Queen Catharine
Dowagers Chapel; and had the Second-Sight
to a great degree, and was famous and eminent
for it. They then ask'd him, what was the
full Power he had to do by the Second-Sight X
He anfwerd, that as they had intimated that-'
they had perused some of the skilful Wri-
ters concerning the Second-Sight, he did not
doubt but they had found (as well as he could'
tell them) that as to the Extent of People's
Knowledge in that secret way, it reach'd both
present, past, and future Events. They fore-
see Murders, Drownings, Weddings,- Burials,'
s. -' ) Q. Com-

<page 265>
zz6 The Lhe and Adventuj.es
Combats, Manslaughters, &c. of all which,
there are many Instances to be given. They
commonly foresee sao* Events, a little while
before they happen. For Instance ; If a Man's
fatal End be Hanging* they'll fee a Gibbet, or
Rope about his Neck ; if Beheading, they'll
fee a Man without a Head j if Drowning,
they'll fee Water up to his Throat; if Stab-
bing, they'll fee a Dagger in his Breast ; if un-
expected Death in his* Bed, they'll see a Wind-
ing-Sheet about his Head. They foretel not
Only Marriages, but of good Children ; what
kind of Life Men (hall lead, and in what Con-
dition they shall die ; also Riches, Honours,
Preferments, Peace, Plenty, and good Wea.*
ther.lt is likewise usual with Persons that have
lost any Thing, to go to some of these Men,
l?y whom they are directed how, with what
Persons, and in what Place they mall find
their Goods. It is also to be noted, that these
Gifts bear a Latitude, so that some have it in
a sar more eminent Degree than others. And
what I have here written down to you, you
need not take as a Truth from me, but as it
concern d me so nearly: I remember the Pas-
sage by heart, and you will find it very near
Word for Word, in Dr. Beaumont's. Book of
Familiar Spirits. Aye, said the Fryars ; but you
have a Genius too, that attends you, as we are
ifiform'd. So (reply'd Duncan Campbell) have
all Persons, that have the Second-Sight in any
eminent Degree : And to prove this, I will
,i.. J' bring

<page 266>
of Mr. Duncan Cam pbe-il . 117
faring no lesii a Witness than K. James 1. who,
in his T>&m6mlogy, (Book III. and Chap. x.)
mentions also a Spirit caH'd Browne, that
was wont formerly to haunt divers Houses,
without doing any Evil, but doing (as it
were) neceflary Turns up and down the
House.. He appear'd like a rough Man : Nay,
some believ'd, that their House was all the
Sonfier, as chey called it; that is, the more
lucky or fortunate, that such Spirits resorted
there. With these Replies the Fryars began
to own they were very well satisfy'd, and ao
quiesc'd in the Account he had given of him-
self, as a very good, true, and honest Account.
But they told him, they had still a further Ac-
cusation against him ; and that was, that he
practis'd Magick Arts j and that he us'd, as
they had been inform'd, unlawful Incanta-
tions.; To this he made Answer, That these
were two Kinds of Magick ; of which, he
knew, they that were Men of Learning could
not be ignorant. 1 The Art Magick, which is
wicked and impious, continued he, is that
which is profess d, and has been profess'd at
all Times in the World, by Witches, Magii
cians, Diviners, Inchanters, and such like no-
torious Profligates ; who, by having an unna-
tural Commerce with the Devil, do many
strange, prodigious, and præternatural Acts,
above and beyond all human Wisdom : And
all the Arguments I ever did, or ever will de-
duce (continued he) from that black Art, is a
2. good
r

<page 267>
az8 ,The Life and Adventures
good and a shining Argument. It is this, O
Fathers : I draw a Reason from these prodi-
gious Practices of Wizards, Magicians, In-
chanters, &c. and from all the Heathen Ido-
latry and Superstition,, to prove, that there
is a Deity : For, from these Acts of theirs, be-
ing preternatural and above human Wisdom,
we may consequently infer, that they proceed
from a supernatural and immaterial Cause,
such as Dæmons are. And this is all the Know-
ledge I ever did, or ever will draw from that
black, hellish Art. But (Fathers,) there is
another Kind of Art Magick, calfd Natural
Magick, which is directly opposite to theirs;
and the Object of which Art is to do spiritual
Good to Mankind, as the Object of theirs is
to torment them, and induce them to Evil.
They afflict People with Torments • and my
Art. relieves them from the Torments they
cause. The publick Profession of these Ma-
gical Arts has (as you know, Fathers, 'tis a
common Distinction between Black and White
Magick,') been tolerated in some of the most
famous Universities of Christendom; tho' af-
terwards, for a very good Reason in Poli-
ticks, making it a publick Study to such a
degree, was very wisely retrench d by a Pro-
hibition. If this therefore be a Fault in your
own Opinions, hear my Accusers ; but if not,
you will not only excuse, but commend me.
• The Fry ar s were extreamly well pleased
with his Defence: But one of them had a
,. .jI. - „ > Mind

<page 268>
cf Mr. Dunca"n CampbEtis 1x9
Mind to frighten him a little if he could, and
ask'd him, what he would say, if he could pro-
duce some Witches lately feizd, that would
Iwear he had been frequently at their unlaw-
ful Aslemblies, where they were making their
waxen Images, and other odd mischievous
Inventions in Black Magick, to torment Folks?
What if I can produce such Evidence against
you, wrote the Father to him by way of
strengthning the Question ; will you not own
that we have convicted you then? And when
he had wrote the Note, he gave it Duncan
Campbell, with a Look that seem'd to express
his Warmth and Earnestness in the Expostula-
tion. Duncan Campbell took the Paper, and
read it ; and far from being startled, return'd
this Answer, with a Smile continuing in his
Face while he wrote it. "No, said he, Fathers,'
"by your Leave, they will only prove me a
£C good Magician by that Oath, and themselves'
cc more plainly Witches. They will prove their
t£ Love to torment good Folks, and only shew
"their Hatred to me an innocent Man; but
w wise enough to torment'em, by hindring'em
"from tormenting others." The Fathers were
well pleas'd with the Shrewdness of the An-
swer : But Duncan Campbell had a Mind,to,
exert his Genius a little farther with the good
Fry ar, who thought likewise he had put him
a very shrewd Question : So taking up ano-
ther Sheet of Paper; Fathers, said he, fliall
*f I entertain you with a Story of what pals'd,
Q. 3 _uPost

<page 269>
'13a The Life *nJ Adv e n tukES
"upon this Head, between two religious Fa-
"thers fas you all of you are) and a. Prince of
"Germany ; iri which you will find, that mine
"ought to be reputed a full Answer to the
"Question the last learned Father Was pleased
"to propose tbmt! The Story is somewhat
? long, but very much t6 the Purpose, and en.1
"; tertaining. I rdmember it perfectly by hearts
l'^and if you will have Patience while I am
f writing it, I don't doubt but that I fliall not
"only'satisfy you* but please you, and oblige
"yoou with the Relation. The Author I
*:* found it in, quotes it from Fromariniis, (I
"think the Man's Name was so , and I am
f sure my Author calls him a very learned
f Man ;) in his Third Book of Magical In*
imitation ; and tho' I don't understand the
'* Language the Original is writ in, yet I dare
¥ venture to fay, upon the Credit of my Eng-
^...lijh Author, ('from whom I got the Story by
heart) that you will find me right, whenever
c' you shall be pleased to search. . .
'The Fry ar s were earnest for the Story,
and expreis'd a Desire that he would write
it: down for them to read ; which he did in
the following Words. Note, That I have
fence icumpard Mr. Duncan Campbell Y Mamt-
Jmipt with the Authors Page out.of which be
took it, and find it Word for Word'the fame:
Which jhews how incomparable a. Memory this
3eaf and dumb Gentleman has got^ be fides his
,L.. \ .. .., .j vr..'. ,..'•'„ . ri other
n<;'

<page 270>
of Mr. Duncan Gamp b e 1,1.' Z31
other extraordinary Qualifications. The Sto-
ry is this.
"A Prince of Germany faulted two Religi-
u ous Fathers, of ennnent Virtue and Learn-
"ing, to Dinner. The Prince, at Table,
** said to one of them; Father! Think *you
"we do right in hanging Persons, who are
"accused by Ten or Twelve Witches, to
"have appear d at their Meetings or Sab-
"baths .<? /somewhat/tfdT we are imposed on
"by the Devil, and that it is not a safe
"Way to Truth, that we walk in by these
tc Accusations ; especially, since many Great
tc and Learned Men every where begin to cry
tc out againf it, and to charge our Consci-
"ences with it: Tell me therefore your Opini-
"on. To whom the Fathers, being somewhat
"of an eager Spirit, laid ; What should make
"us doubtful in this Cafe? Or what mould
"touch our Consciences, being convicted by
<c so many Testimonies 1 Can we make it a
"Scruple, whether God will permit inno-
"cent Persons mould be so traduc'd ? There
"is no Cause for a Judge to stick at such a
"Number of Accusations, but he may pro-
"ceed with Safety. To which when the
"Prince had reply'd, and much had been
"said Pro and Con on both Sides about it,
"and the Father seem'd wholly to carry the
Point ; the Prince at length concluded the
"Dispute, saying, I am sorry for you, Fa-
* ther, that in a Capital Cause you have con-
4 "demnd

<page 271>
•asp. TJ?e Life and Adventures
". demnd your self, 'a.ndyou cannot complain if
"I commit you to Custody : For no less than
"Fifteen Witches have deposed, that they
"have seen you j ay, start not! you your own
"jse/f, at their Meetings. And to fiowyou that
j" Jam w£ injeft, I will presently cause the
"Publick ABs to be brought, sorrow to
," them. Xhe;jFV*r/;><?>• stood in amaze j and,
-ft with a 4*je&td Countenance, had nothing
•" here to oppose bxxt Consufton and Silence, for
"'auT:bis Learned Eloquence.
Q . As soon as Mr. Campbell had wrote down
the .Story, the Fathers perused it, and seem'd
mightily entertain'd with it., It put an End
. to all jurther Qustions ; and the Man, whom
t iey had been trying for a Conjurer, they
join'd in desiring, upon distinct Pieces of
• Paper, under their several Hands, to come
frequently and visit them; as being not only
a harmless and innocent, but an extraordina-
ry well-meaning, good and diverting Com-
panion. They treated him for some Time af-
terwards, during his Stay,. with the Friend-
ship due to a Countryman, with the Civi-
lity that is owing to a Gentleman, and with
.the Assistance and Support which belong'd to
a Person of Merit in Distress. Money they
had none themselves, it seems, to give him,
• being Mendicants by their own Profession;
but they had Interest enough to get him quite
free from being Prisoner. He participated of
thdvElemofinary Table j had a Cell allow'd him
\,\.wA . among
'.V ,

<page 272>
of Mr. Dunc an Campbell. 23.5
among them in what they call their Dormi-
tory ; he had an odd Coat and a pair of Trow-
zers made out of some of their brown coarse
Habits, by the poor unfashionable Taylor or
Botcher belonging to the Convent, and at last'
they found means of recommending him to a
Master of a French Veslel, that was ready to
set Sail, to give him a cast over the Channel
to England; and to provide him with the Ne-
cessities of Life till he got to the Port. This
French Veslel was luckier than the Dutch one
had been before to our dumb Gentleman, it
had a quick and prosperous Paslage, and ar-
riv'd at Portsmouth ; and.as soon as he landed
there, he having experienc'd the Misfortunes
and Casualties, that a Man in his Condition
wanting both Speech and Hearing was liable
to, in Places where he was an utter Stranger
to every Body, resolv'd to make no Stay, but
move on as fast as he could towards London*
When he came to Hampton-Town, considering
the indifferent Figure he made in those odd
kind of Cloaths which the poor Fryars had
equipp'd him with, and that his long Beard
and an uncomb'd Wigg added much to the
Disguise ,• he was resolv'd to put on the best
Face he could, in those aukward Circum-
stances, and stepp d into the first Barber s
Shop he came at, to be trimm'd, and get his
Wigg comb'd and powder d. This proved
a very lucky Thought to him; for as soon as
he stepp'd into the Barber's Shop, who
should

<page 273>
3.}4 "ft* LitE and Adventures
mould prove to be the Master of it, but one
Tobit Yeates, who had served him in the lame
Capacity at London, and was but newly set
up in the Trade of a Barber-Surgeon at Hamp-
ton-Tdtvn, and followed likewise the Profes-
sion of School-master. This 'Tobit Yeates had
shaved him quite, before he kfiew him in
that Disguise ; and Mr. Campbell, though he
knew him presently, had a mind to try if he
Ihould be known himself first : At length the
Barber finding him to be a dumb Man by his
ordering every Thing with Motions of the
Hand, and Gestures of the Body, look'd at
him very earnestly, remember'd him, and in
a great Surprize, called for Pen, Ink and Pa-
per, and begg d to know how he came to be
in that Disguise ; whether he was under any
Misfortune, and Apprehension of being dis-
covers, that made him go in so poor and so
clownish a Habit, and tender'd him any Ser-
vices, as far as his little Capacity would reach,
and desir d him to be free, and command him,
if he was able to assist him in any Thing.
These were the most comfortable Words,
that Duncan Campbell had read a great while.
He took the Pen and Paper in his Turn ; re-
lated to him his whole Story, gave the poor
Barber thanks for his good natur'd Offer, and
said he would make so much use of it, as to
be indebted to him for so much Money as
would pay the Stage-Coach, and bear him
in his travelling Expences up to London, from
whence

<page 274>
es Mr. D u ncanCamp b e iil 43 j
whence he would rpeedily return the Favour
with Interest. The poor honest Fellow, out
of Gratitude to a Master, whose Liberality
he had formerly experience; immediately
furnish'd Mr. Duncan Campbell with that little
Supply, expressing the Gladness of his Heart
that it lay in his Power; and the Stage Coach
being to set out within but a few Hours, he
ran instantly to the Inn to fee if he could get
him a Place. By good luck there was Room,
and but just Room for one more, which pleas'd
Duncan Campbell mightily when he Was ac-
quainted with it by his true and trusty Ser-
vant the Barber ; for he was as impatient to
fee London again, it seems, as he had been
before to quit it. Well, he had his Wish;
and when he came to London, he had one Wish
more for Fortune to bestow upon him, which
appear d to begin to grow kind again, after
her fickle Fit of Cruelty was over; and this
Wish was that he might find his former
Lodgings empty, and live in the fame House,
as he did, when he follow d his Professions
T/his too succeeded according to his Desire,
dnd he was happily fix'd once more to his
Heart's Content in his old Residence, with
the same People of the House round about
him, who bore him all that Respect and Af-
fection sand Ihew'd all that Readiness and
Willingness to serve him on every Occasion
and at every Turn) which could be expected
from Persons, that let Lodgings in Town to
a Gen-

<page 275>
*3<S The Life <jW Adventures
a Gentleman, whom they esteem'd the best:
Tenant they, .ever had in their Lives or ever
could have.
Immediately the Tidings of the dumb Gen-
tleman's being return'd home from beyond
Sea, spread throughout all the Neighbour-
hood, and it was nois'd about from one
Neighbourhood to another, till it went
through all; Ranks and Conditions, and was
known as well in a Day or Two's Time all
the Town over, as if he had been some great
Man belonging to the State, and his Arrival
had been notified to the Publick in the Ga-
zette, as a Person of the last Importance.
And such a Person he appear'd indeed to be
taken for, especially among the fair Sex, who
throng'd to his Doors, Crowd after Crowd,to
consult with him about their future Occur-
rences in Life. These curious Tribes of Peo-
ple, were as various in their Persons, Sex,
•Age, Quality, Profession, Art, Trade, as they
were in the Curiosity of their Minds, and the
Questions they had intended to propound to
this dumb Predi&or of strange Events, that
lay yet as Embrios in the Womb of Time, and
were not to come, some of them, to a Matu-
rity for Birth, for very many Years after, just
as porcelain Clay is stored up in the Earth by
good Artificers, , which their Heirs make Chi-
na of half a Century, and sometimes more
than an Age afterwards.
These

<page 276>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell 237
These Shoals of Customers, who were to
fee him well for his Advice as we may sup-
pose, now he stood in need of raising a fresh
Stock, were unquestionably as welcome and
acceptable to him as they appeared too trou-
blesome to him before, when he was in a
State of more Wealth and Plenty; .:
Fortune, that does nothing moderately,
seem'd now resolv'd, as she had: been ex-
treamly cruel before, to be extreamly kind
to him. He had nothing to do from early
in . the Morning till late at Night, but to
read Questions, and resolve them as sast, as
much frequented Doctors write their Pre-
scriptions and Recipes, and like them al-
so to receive, Fees as fast. Fortune was
deed mightily indulgent to the Wants Ihe had
fe suddenly reduced him to, and relieved him
as suddenly by these Crowds of Cursvsos, who.
brought him a Glut: of Money.i'j But one'
single fair Lady, that was one of his very first ,
Consulters after his Return, and 'who had;
receive! satisfactory Answers from him m\
other Points, before he went abroad ; prov'd.
(so good Fortune would have it) worth alii
the rest of his Customers together, as nume-
rous as they were, and as I have accordingly
represented them. ,
This Lady was the Relict or Widow of a.
Gentleman of a good Estate, and of a very'
good Family, whose Name was Digby, and
a handsome Jointure, she had Out of the E-
state. This Lady, it seems, having been with
: him

<page 277>
2.38 TheLiTE and Adventures
him in former Days, and Teen him in a more
shining Way of Life, (Tor he had taken a
Humour to appear before all his Company in
that coarse odd Dress made out of the Fryar's
Habit, and would not be persuaded by the
People of the House to put on a Nightgown,
till he could provide himself with a new
SuitJ was so curious, among other Questions,
as to ask him, whether he had met with any
Misfortunes, and how he came to be in so
slovenly and wretched a Habit i Here Mr.
Campbell related the whole Story of his Tra-
vels to her, and the Crosses and Disappoint-
ments he had met with abroad. The Tears,,
he observ'd, would start every now and th.en
into her Eyes when (he came to any doleful
Paslage, and me appear d to have a mighty
compassionate kind of feeling, when she read
of any Hardship more than ordinarily me-
lancholy that had befallen .him. Mr. Camp-
bells it is certain, had then a very good Pre*
fence, and was a handsome and portly young
Man ; and, as a great many young Gentle-
men derive the seeming Agreeableness of their
Persons from the Taylor and the Barber,
the Shoemaker and Hosier, so Mr. Camp-
Mi's Person on the other Hand gave a good
Air and a good Look to the aukward Garb
he had on ; and, I believe, it was from feeing
him, in this odd Trim (as they call it,) the
Ladies first took up the Humour of calling
him the handsome Sloven: Add to this, that
:: ,• . .'. . he

<page 278>
os Mr. Duncan Ca mpbeiiI a,;gi
lie look'd his Misfortune in the Face with a;
'jolly Countenance, and smil'd even while he
was penning the Relation of his Calamities:
All which are certainly Circumstances, that
first sooth a generous Mind into a State of
Compassion, and afterwards heighten it in the
Breast wherein it is conceiv'd. Hence it came,
that this pretty and good-natur'd Widow,
Mrs. Ttigby, when she had exprelsd her Com-
miseration of him by her Looks, began to take
the Pen, and express it in very, tender Terms.
Neither did she think that Expression it*
Words a sufficient Testimony of the Com-
passion (he bore to him ; the Generosity of
her Mind led her to express it in a more sijb-n
stantial Manner still, and that was to shew;
it plainly by a very generous Action. She
laid a Purse of Twenty Guineas upon the
Table, and at the fame Time failing, point-
ed to the Gokl, as signifying her Desire that
he would accept it; and running to the Door,*
droppd a Curtsy, andskuttled away : And by
the fame Civil Act as she oblig'd him, she
put it out of his Povyex to refuse being so ob-
lig'd; so that tha the Present was very
handsome, the Manner of giving it was still
handsomer. If being a handsome young Man 1
of Merit in Distress, and bearing his Misfor-
tunes with an equal Mind, are powerful Mo-.
tives to excite Compassion in the Mind of a .
generous Lady ; so the Generosity of a young
agreeable Widow, express d in Ib kind and fo,
bene-

<page 279>
The Lite and Adventures
benevolous a way to ayoungGentleman,when
he had been tasting nothing but the bitter
Draughts of Fortune before, must stir up an Af-
fection, in a Mind that had any Sense of Grati-
tude. And truly just such was the Effect that
thisLady's Civility had upon Mr. Duncan Camp-
bell: He conceiv'd from that Moment a very
great Affection for her, and resolv'd to try
whether he could gain her j which he had no
small Grounds to hope, from the Esteem which
ihe appear'd to bear towards him already. I
remember, Mr. Dry den makes a very beauti-
ful Observation, of the near Alliance there is
between the Two Passions of Pity and Love
in a Woman's Breast, in one of his Plays. His
Words are these: • ,! *'
For Pity (till foreruns approaching Love,
As Lightning does the Thunder - , , ■
Mr. Bruyere, a most ingenious Member of the
French Academy, has made another Remark,
which comes home to our present purpose. He
says, That many Women love their Money bet-
ter than their triends^butyet value their Lovers
more than their Money. According to the Two
Reflections of these fine Writers upon the Tem-
pers of the Fair, Mr. Campbell had hopes-e-
nough to ground his Courtship upon; and it
appeared so in the End by his proving Suc-
cessful: She from being a very liberal and
friendly Client, became at last a most Affe-
ctionate Wife. He then began to be a House-
keeper, and accordingly took a little neat one, .

<page 280>
os Mr. Duncan Campbell. ±4i
fetid very commodious for his Profession, in
Monmduth-Court. Here I must take Leave to
make this Observations; That if Mr. Camp-
hell inherited the Talents of his Second.sight-
id Mother, he seem'd likewise to be an Heir
to his Father, Mr. Archibald Campbell, both
in his strange and accidental Sufferings by
Sea, arid likewise in his being reliev'd from
them, after as accidental and strange a man-
ner, by an unexpected Marriage, just like
his Father's. And here we return again, to
take a new Survey of him, in the Course of
his publick Practice, as a ?rediBor. The Ac-
counts I shall give of his Actions here^ will be
Very various in their Nature from any I have
yet presented to the Reader : They are more
mysterious in themselves ; and yet I shall en-
deavour to make the Manner of his operating
in this kind, as plain, as I think I have the
foregoing ones ; and then I flatter my self,
they must afford a fresh Entertainment for
every Reader, that has any Curiosity, and
a good Taste for Things of so extraordinary
a Kind. For what I have all along pro-
pounded to my self from the Beginning, and
in the Progress to the End of this History,
is, to interweave entertaining and surprizing
Narratives of what Mr. Campbell'has done,
with curious and instructive Enquiries into
the Nature of those Actions, for which he has
render'd himself so singularly famous. It was
hot therefore suitable to my Purpose, to clog
R the


<page 281>
242. The Life Adventures
the Reader with numerous Adventures* al-
most all of the fame Kind ; but out of a vast
Number of them, to single feme few of those
that were most remarkable, and that were
Mysteries, but Mysteries of very different forts.
I leave that Method of swelling distorted and
commented Trifles into Volumes, to the
Writers of Fable and Romance : If I was to
tell his Adventures with Regard, for Exam-
ple, to Women that came to consult him .t
I might, perhaps, have not only written the
Stories of Eleven Thousand Virgins that died
Maids, but have had Relations to give of as
many marry'd Women and Widows ; and the
Work would have been endless. Ail that I
mall do therefore, is to pick out one Particu-
lar, each of a different Kind$ that there may
be Variety in the Entertainment. Upon Ap-
plication to this Dumb Man, one is told in
the Middle of her Health , that she (hall die
at such a Time ; another, that she shall sicken,
and upon the Moment of her Recovery, have
a Suiter, and a Husband : A Third, who is a
celebrated Beauty, with a Multitude of Ad-
mirers round about her; that she shall never
become a Wife : A Fourth, (hat is marry'd;
when she shall get rid of an uneasy Husband:
A Fifth, that hath lost her Goods; who stole
them ; where and when they shall be resto-
red ; A Sixth, that is a Merchant; when he
stiall be undone; and how . and 'When he
fliall recover his Losses, and bq^as great on

<page 282>
of Mr. Duncan Cam pbell. 243
the Exchange as ever : A Seventh, that is a
Gamester ; which will be.his winning, and
which his losing Hour: An Eighth,, how he
shall be involves in a Law-Suit; and whether
the Suit will have an adverse or a prosperous
Issue : A Ninth, that is a Woman, with
Choice of Lovers; and who she shall be most
happy with for Life: And so on to many
others ; where every Predictiort is perfectly
new and surprizing, arid differs from the o-
ther in almost every Circumstance. When
a Man has so extensive a Genius as this at
foretelling the future Occurrences of Life^
one Narrative of a Sort is enough in Con-
science to present the Reader with; and se-
veral of each kind would not fmethinks) be
entertaining, but tiresome : For he that can
do one Thing in these Kinds by the Power
of Predictiort, can do Ten Thousand : And
those who are obstinate in extenuating his
Talents, and calling his Capacity in Question,
and that will not be cohvirtc'd by one In-
stance of his Judgment, would not own the
Conviction, if Ten Thousand Instance's were
given them. The best Passage's I can recom-
mend to their Perusal, are those, Where Per-
sons, who came purposely to banter him,
under the Colour of Consulting him, and
cover'd over their sly Intentions with bor'-
row'd Disguizes, and came in Masquerades
found all the Jest turn'd upon themselves iri
the End, which they meant to our famous
R * Pre<

<page 283>
144 Tb* Liie imJAvityfixxtLtS
Bredi&or ; and had the Discouragement of
seeing their most conceal'd and deepest,laid
Plots discover'd, and all their most witty
Fetches and wily Contrivances defeated ,• tils
they were compell'd universally to acknow-
ledge, that endeavouring to impose upon
the Judgment of our Seer T by any hidden
Artifice and Cunning whatsoever, was effe-
ctually imposing upon their own. His unu-
sual Talent in this kind was so openly known,,
and so generally confessed, that his Know-
ledge was celebrated in some of the most
witty Weekly Papers that ever appear'd in
Publick. Isaac Bickerfiaff, who diverted alf
the Beau Monde for a long Space of Time with.
his Lucubrations, takes Occasion in several of
his Papers, to applaud the Speczdations of
this Dumb Gentleman, in an admirable Vein
of Pleasantry and-Humour, peculiar to the
Writer, and to the Subject he writ upon.
And when that bright Author, who join'd
the uttermost Facetiousnefc with the most
solid Improvements of Morality and Learn-
ing in his Works, laid aside the Title of a
Tattler^ and asiumed the Name of a Spe3a-
tor, iatid 'Censor of Men's Actions, he still
Cevery now' and then) thought our Dtmcart
Campbell a Subject worthy enough to em-
ploy his farsher Considerations upon, I must
take notice of one Letter sent concerning him
to the SpeUaior? in the Year 171 z.' (N \ 474.)
Which was at a Time when a Lady wanted
, him,.

<page 284>
.of Mr. Dunc an Campbell^ 145
Slid, after he had remov'd from Monmoutb-
Street to Dntry-Lane.:
Mr. S P E"C t A tO R,
A Bout two Years ago I was call'd upon
u by the younger Part of a Country
Family, by my Mother's Side related to
me, to visit Mr. Campbell, the dumb Man;
<c for they told me, that was chiefly what
*' brought them to Town, having heard
*c Wonders of him in Essex. 1, who always
wanted Faith in such Matters^ was not
** easily prevailed on to go ; but lest they
"should take it ill, I went with them ; when9
** to my own Surprize, Mr. Campbell related
"all their-past Life : (In short, had he not
<c been prevented, such a Discovery would
*c have come out, as would have ruin'd their
next Design of coming to Town, vitz.
<c buying Wedding-Cloaths.} Our Names-—
** tho' he never heard of us before, and we
"endeavour d to conceal, were as familiar
"to him as to our selves. To be sure, Mr.
"Spectator, he is a very learned and wise
** Man. Being impatient to know my For-
tune, having paid my Respects in a Family
"Jacobus, he told me (after his manner)
** among several other Things, that in a Year
tc and Nine Montiis I should fall ill of a
"new Fever, be given over by my Physici-
{( ans, but should with much Difficulty re-
R 3 "cover:

<page 285>
The Life and Adventures t
fi cover : That the first Time I took the Air
"afterwards, I should be address'd to by a
*' young Gentleman of a plentiful Fortune,
f good Sense, and a generous Spirit. Mr.
"Speffator, he is the purest Man in the
'I World, for all he said is come to pass 5
"and I am the Happiest She in Kent. I
'? have been in Quest of Mr. Campbell these
'c Three Months, and cannot find him out:
Now hearing you are a dumb Man too, I
4' thought you might correspond, and be a-
"ble to tell me something ; for I think my
"self highly obliged to make his Fortune,
as he has mine. 'Tis very possible your
"Worship, who has Spies all over this Town,
"can inform me how to fend to him : If you
"can, I beseech you be as speedy as possible,
"and you will highly oblige your constant
*' Reader and Admirer,
Dulcibella lhankley\
The SpeUators Answer.
Ordered, 5 That the InfpeEior I employ about
'Wonders, enquire at the Golden-Lyon, op-
* posite to the Half-Moon Tavern in Drury-
'Lane, into the Merit of this Silent Sage,
• and report accordingly. :'. -
But;

<page 286>
os Mr. Dunca n Campb ell."
But now let us come to those Paslages of
his Life the most surprizing of all, during
the time that he enjoy'd this Reputation, and
when he prov'd that he deserved the Fame
he enjoy'd. Let us take a Survey of him
while he is wonderfully curing Person's la-
bouring under the Misfortune of Witchcraft;
of which the following Story: will be an
eminent Instance, and likewise clear up how
he came by his Reputation in Essex,,as; men-
tioned in the above-mentioned Letter to tne;
Spectator. JUU'J' •'~1
In the Year 1709, Susanna Johnson,
Daughter to one Captain Johnson, who liv'd,
at a Place adjacent to Rumsord m~EJJ$xil
going one Morning to that Town to* btiy^
Butter at the Market, was met there by an
old miserable looking Woman, just as she.
had taken some of her Change of the M^Lr-"'
ket-woman in Copper, and this old Woman,;
rather demanded than begg'd the Gentle-
woman to give her a Penny. Mrs. Johnson
reputing her to be one of those, hateful People
that are call'd sturdy Beggars, refused it her,
as thinking it to be no Act of Charity, and
that it would be rather gratifying and indulg-
ing her Impudence, tharf supplying or sa-
tisfying her Indigence. "Upon the Refusal,
the old Hag with a Face more wrinkled stills,
if possible, by Anger than it was by Age,'
took upon her to storm at young Mrs. John-
R 4 son

<page 287>
V48 The Life and Adventures
son very loudly, and to threaten and me-
nace her: But when she found her common
Threats and .Menaces were of no avail, she
swore she would be revengd of the young;
Creature in so signal a manner, that she
should repent the Denial of that Penny from
her Heart before she got home, and that it
should cost her many Pounds to get rid of
the Consequences of that Denial and her
Anger. The poor innocent Girl despised
these last Worcls likewise, and getting up on
Horseback return'd Homewards ; but just
as she got about half way her Horse stopp'd,
and pos means that she could use would make
him advance one single Step ; but she staid
aLwJiile to see if that would humour him
tp' -go on. At last the Beast began to grow
unruly, and shorted and trembled as if he had
seen or smelt something that frighted him,
ana" so fell a kicking desperately till he threw
the Girl from the Saddle, not being able to
cling tp it any longer, tho' a pretty good
Horsewoman of her Years; so much were
the Horses Motions and Plungings more than
ordinarily violent;. j ./ '•;
. As Providence would have it she got not
much harm by the Fall, receiving only a
little Bruise in the right Shoulder ; but she
was dreadfully frighted. This Fear added
Wings to her , Feet,, and brought her home

<page 288>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell . %4§
as speedily of her self as Ihe usually came on
Horseback. She immediately, without any
other Sign of Illness than the pallid Colour
with which Fear had disorder'd the Com-
plexion of her Face, alarm'd all the Family
at home with the Story, took, her Bed ^up-
on it, complain'd of inward packings of the
Belly, and was never at ease unless she lay
doubled up together her Head to her Knees,
and her Heels to her Rump, just like a Fi-
gure of 8. She could not be a single Mo-
ment out of that Posture without shrieking
out with the violence of anxious Torments
and racking Pains.
In this Condition of Misery, amidst this
Agony of Suffering, and in this double Po-
sture was the poor wretched young Gentle-
woman brought to Town: Physicians were
consulted about her but in vain; she was
carry d to different Hospitals for Assistance,,
but their Endeavours likewise prov'd ineffe-
ctual. At last me was conducted to the Col-
lege of Physicians ; and even the collective
Wisdom of the greatest Sages and Adepts in
the Science of Physick was posd to give her.
any Prescription that would do her Service,
and relieve her from the inexplicable Ma-
lady she labour'd under. The poor incurable
Creature was one constant Subject of her
complaining Mother's Discourse in every Com-
pany she came into. It happen'd at last, and ve-

<page 289>
a^o The Lipe and Adventures
ry providentially truly, that the Mother was
thus condoling the Misfortune of her Child
among five or six Ladies, and telling them
among other Things, that by the most skil-
ful Persons she was looked upon to be be-
witch'd, and that 'twas not within the power
of Physick to compass her Recovery: They
all having been acquainted with our Mr.
Duncan Campbell, unanimously advised her to
carry her Daughter to his House, and consult
with him about her. The Mother was over-
joy'd at these Tidings, and purposed to let no
Time slip where her Child's Health was so
deeply concerned. She got the Ladies to go
with her and her Child, to be Eye-witnesles
of so extraordinary a Piece of Practice, and
so eminent a Tryal of Skill.
As soon as this dismal Object was brought
into his Room, Mr. Duncan Campbell lifted
up her Head and look'd earnestly in her Face,
and in less than a Minute s time signify'd to
the Company, that she was not only be-
witch'd, but in as dreadful a Condition al-
most as the Man that had a Legion of Fiends
within him. .
At the reading of these Words the unhap-
py Creature rais'd up her Head, turnd her
Eyes upwards, and a Smile (a Thing she
b.ad been a Stranger to for many Months)
overspread her whole Face, and such a kind

<page 290>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell." 23?!
©f Colour as is the flushing of Joy and
Gladnese, and with an innocent Tone of
Voice Ihe laid, (he now had a firm belief fie
Jhould fiortly he deliver d. The Mother and
the rest .of the Company were all in Tears,
but Mr. Campbell wrote to them that they
should be of good Heart, be easy and quiet
for a few Moments, and they mould be corn
vinced that it was Witchcraft, but happily
convinced by seeing her so suddenly well
again. This brought the Company into
pretty good Temper ; and a little after Mr.
Campbell desired she might be led up Stairs
into his Chamber and left there alone with
him for a little while ; this occasioned some
small Female Speculation, and as much Mirth
as their late Sorrow, alleviated with the hopes
of her Cure, would permit.
This you may be sure was but a snatch of
Mirth, just as the nature of the Thing would
allow of; and all forts of Waggery being
laid instantly aside, and remov d almost as
soon as conceived, the poor young Thing was
carryed in that double Posture up Stairs. She
had not been much above half an Hour thare,
when by the help only of Mr. Campbells
Arm she was led down Stairs, and descended
into that Room full of Company as a, Miracle
appearing in a Machine from'above- Qie was
led backward and forward in the Room,
wfule all ga?'d at her for a while with joy-

<page 291>
iji T^Life tf^ Adventures
ful Astonilhment, for no Arrow was ever
more strait than she. Mr. Campbell then pre-
vailed with her to drink a Glass of Wine, and
immediately after Ihe evacuated Wind, which
she had not done for some Months before, and
found her self still more amended and easy;
And then the Mother making Mr. Campbell
some small Acknowledgment at that time,
with the Promise of more, and her Daugh-
ter giving Thanks, and all the Company com-
mending his Skill, took their Leave and de-
parted with great Demonstrations of Joy. I
shall here, to cut the Story, short signify, that
she came frequently afterwards to make her
Testimonials of Gratitude to him, and con-
tinues to enjoy her Health to this very Day
at Greenwich, where she now lives, and will
at any time, if call'd upon, make Oath of
the Truth of this little History, as she told
me her self with her own Mouth.
The next Thing therefore it behoves'me
to do in this Chapter, is, to give some satis-
factory Account of Magick, by which such
seeming mysterious Cures and Operations
are brought about.
This Task I would perform in the most
perspicuous and most convincing manner I
can ; for Magick I know is held to be a very
hard and difficult Study by those Learned,
and universally unlawful and diabolical by
ttyose Unlearned, who believe there is such
a Science

<page 292>
cf Mr. D U NC A N C A M P B E X £ 255
a Science attainable by Human Genius. On
the other Hand, by some Learned Men, who
believe there is no such Science, it is repre-
sented as an inconsistent System of Supersti-
tions and Chimeras ; and again laugh'd at as
such by the Unlearned, who are of an incre-
dulous Temper: What I would therefore
undertake to do in this Place, is to (hew the
Learned Men, who believe there i&iuch an
Art, that the Attainment to a tolerable Know-
ledge of the manner how magicas Practices
may be brought about, is no such difficult
Matter as they have represented it.'to.them*
selves ; and by doing this, I shall make the
System of it so plain, that while the Learn-
ed approve of it, the Unlearned too, who
are not of an unbelieving Kind, may under-
stand clearly what I lay; and the Learned
Men who have rejected this Science as Chi'
irierical, may be clearly convinced it is real;
and then there is nothing left but obstinate
.'' unbelieving Ignorance, which I shall not here
pretend by Arguments to lead into Sense,
but leave it to the work of Time. In fine,
I will endeavour to induce Men of Sense to
. say, that, what has been accounted mysteri-
ous, is delivered in a plain, easy, and con-
vincing manner, and to own that they ap-
prove ; while Men of the lower Class of Un*
derstanding, shall confess and acknowledge
that they themselves understand it, and that
•' . what

<page 293>
£5.4 ^2 Life and Adventures
what has hitherto been represented as ar»
duous and difficult to a great Genius; is adap.»
ted and render'd not only clear,. but familiar
to Persons of middling Talents. In this Work
therefore I shall follow the strictest Order I
can (which of all Things render a Discourse
upon any Subject the most clear ;) and that
it may be plain to the commonest Capacity y
I will first set down what Order I intend td
follow.
Firs}, I will speak of Magick in general.
Secondly, Of Magick under its several Di-
visions and Subdivisions.
Thirdly, Concerning the Object of the Art j
as it is Good or Bad.
r. Fourthly, Of the Persons exercising that
Art in either Capacity of Good or Bad, and
by what means they become capacitated to
exercise it.
In the Fifth Place I shall come to the se-
veral Objections against the Art of Magick,
and the Refutation of those Objections.
The first Objection shall be against the Ex-
istence of good and bad Spirits. The Refu-
tation of which will consist in my proving
the Existences of Spirits both Good and Bad,
by Reason, and by Experience. ,
The second Objection that will be brought,
is to contain an Allegation that there are no
such Persons as Witches now* and an Ar-
gument to support that Allegation, drawn
Irom the Incapacity, and Impossibility of any
Things

<page 294>
of Mr. Duncan CampbeIi" zfj
Thing's making (while it. self is incarnate) a
Contract with a Spirit. This Objection will
be answered by proving the Reality of Witches
from almost/Universal Experience; and by
explaining rationally the Manner how the
Devils hold Commerce with Witches: Which
Explication is back'd, and authorizd, by the
Opinion of the most Eminent Divines, and
the most Learned Physicians., .-/*
From hence, Sixthly and Lastly ^ We
.shall conclude on the Side ofthe good Ma-
gick, that as there are Witches; on the one
hand, that may afflict and torment Persons
with Damons; so, on the other hand, there
are lawful and good Magicians, that*may cast
out Damons from People that, are posleftcl
with therri.. .
And, Fir/i, As to Magick in general: Ma-
gick consists in the Spirit by Faith; for Faith
is that Magnet of the Magicians, by
which they draw Spirits to them* and bywhjch
Spirits they do great Things, that appear like
Miracles. •*'
Secondly, Magick is divided into Three
Sorts; viz. Divine, Natural, and Diabolical.
And Natural Magick is again subdivided in-
to Two Kinds, Simple and Compound : And
Natural Compound Magick is again likewise
divided into Two Kinds; viz. Natural Di-
vine Magick, and Natural Diabolical Ma-
gick.
Now

<page 295>
2.56 The Liri and Adventures
Now to give the Reader a clear, and a Di-
stinct Notion of each several Species of Ma-
gick here mention'd, I set down the following
Desinitions.-~Divine Maghk is a Celestial Sci-
ence, in which all Operation? that are won-
derfully brought about, are performed by
the Spirit of God.— Natural Magick is a
Science, in which all the mysterious Acts
that are wrought, are compass'd by Natural
Spirits.- But as this Natural Maghk may
be exercised about Things, either in a manner
indifferent in themselves, or mere morally
good, and then it is mere Natural Magick;
or else about Things Theologically good, and
transcendently bad ; and then it is not mere-
ly Natural Magick, but Mix'd and Com-
pound. If Natural Magick. be exercised a-
bout the most Holy Operations, it is thert
mix'd with the Divine, and may then be cal-
led Cnot improperly^ Natural Divine Magick.
But if' Natural Magick troubles it self about
compassing the wickedest Practices, then is
it promiscuous with the Dxmoniacaly and may
not improperly be called Natural Diabolical
Magick.
Thirdly, The Object of this Art is doing;
Wonders out of the ordinary appearing Courie
of Nature, which tend either to great Good
or Bad, by the Help' and Mediation of Spirits
good and bad. • . ; : ' - '.'
Fourthly,

<page 296>
6s Mr. Duncan Cam pb£li.' 157
. Fourthly, As to the Persons exercising that
Art in either way, whether good or bad, and
by what Means they become capacitated to
act it ; the Notion of this may be easily de*
duced from the Notions of the Art it self,
as consider'd above in its each different Spe-
cies : For as all Magick consists in a Spirit,
every Magician acts by a Spirit.
Divine Magicians, that are of God, are spo-
ken of in Holy Writ ; and therefore I shall
not mention the Paslages here, but pals them
over (as I ought in a Book like this) with a
profound and reverential Silence , as well as
the other PafTages, which speak of Natural
and Demoniacal Magicians ; and in all I mall
speak of them in this Place, I shall only
speak of them with Regard to Human Rea-
son and Experience, and conclude this Head
with saying, That Natural Magicians work
all Things by the Natural Spirits of the Ele-
ments; but that Witches and Demoniacal Ma-
gicians, as "James and Jambres in Ægypt
were, work their Magical Performance's by
the Spirit of Demons : And 'tis by the Means
of these different Spirits, that these diffe-
rent Magicians perform their different Ope-
rations.
These Things thus distinctly settled and ex-
plains, 'tis now we must come and ground
the Dispute, between those who believe there
are no such Things as Magicians of any Kind,
S * and

<page 297>
ij8 The Life /^Adventure!
and those who assert there are of all the Kinds
above specify'd.
Those who contend there are, have Re-
course to Experience, and relate many welf-
witness'd Narratives, to prove, that there have
been in all Times, and that there are still
Magicians of all these Kinds i But those, who
contend that there are no. such Persons, wilt
give no Ear to what the others call plain Expe-
rience: They call the Stories (let whatever
Witnesses appear to justify them) either fabu-
lous Legends, invented' by the Authors, or
else Tricks of intellectual Legerdemainr im-
posed by the Actors, upon the Relators of
those Actions. Since therefore, they sayr
tlio' the Believers in Magick brag of Expe-
rience never so much, it may be but a fal-
lible Experience ; they reasonably desire tcy
know, whether these Gentlemen' that stand
for Magick, can answer the Objections which.
they propose, to prove, that the Practice of
Magick, according to the System taid down,,
is inconsistent with Reason, before they will
yield their Assent i Let the Stories be never fo
numerous, appear never so credible, these un-
believing Gentlemen desire to be try'd by Rea-
son, and aver till that Reason is given, they
will not be convinc'd by the Number of Sto-
ries, because, tho' numerous, they are Stories
still ; neither will they believe them, because
they appear credible : Because seeming so, i»
not

<page 298>
os Mr. DuNdan Campbell. a??
mot being so ; and Appearances, tho' neves
so fair, when they contradict Reason, are not
to be swallow'd down with an implicit Faith
as so many Realities. And thus far, no doubt,
the Gentlemen, who are on the unbelieving
Side, are very much in the right on't. The
learned Gentlemen, on the other hand, who
are persuaded of this mighty mysterious Pow-
er being lodg'd in the Hands of Magicians,
answer, That they will take upon them to re-
fute the most subtle Objections, brought by
the learned Unbelievers, and to reconcile the
Practicability of Magical Mysteries by the Ca-
pacity of Men, who study that Art, to right
Rulesand Laws of Reasoning; and to shew,
that some Stories (tho' never so prodigi-
ous ) which are told of Magicians, demand
the Belief of wise Men on Two Accounts:
Because, as'Experience backs Reason on f ne
one handy Reason backs Experience on the
other; and so the Issue of the whole Argu-
ment ("whether there are .Magicians or not)
is thrown upon both Experience and Reason.
These Arguments on each Side, I shall draw
up fairly Pro and Con ; for I don't pretend to
be the Inventor of them my self; they belong
to other Authors many Years ago: Be it enough
for me to boast of, if I can draw them up in a
better and closer Form together, than they
have yet appears! in : In that I take upon my
self a very great Task; I erect my self as it were
.-Sa;, -into
v :.l
t

<page 299>
z6o TheLm and Adventub.es
into a kind of a Judge : I will sum up the
Evidences on both sides ; and I shall, where-
ever I see Occasion, intimate which Side of
the Argument bears the most Weight with
me. But when I have enforc a my Opinion
as far as I think needful, my Readers (like a
Jury) are still at Liberty to bring in their Ver-
dict, just as they themselves shall fee fit. And
this naturally leads me, where I promised to
come to in the Fifth Part of this Discourse, to
the several Objections against the Power of
Art Magick, and the Refutation of those Ob-
jections. •
The First ObjeBion being againjl the Exi-
stence of Spirits, and the Refutations
thereof.
'H E First Objection, which they who
j| reject Magick make use of, is, deny-
ing that there are any such Things as Spirits;
about which, since those who defend the
Art, say it entirely exerciseth it self, the Ob-
jectors contend, That if they can make out
that there are no such Beings as Spirits, all
Pretensions to the Art must be entirely ground-
left, and for the suture exploded.
To make this Part out, that there are no
Spirits; the first Man they produce on their
'.'Side, is undoubtedly one of very great Cre-
*dit and Authority, inasmuch as he has justly.
born for many Centuries the Title of the

Prince

<page 300>
os Mr. Duncan Campbeil z6x
Prince of Philosophers. They say, that Aristo-
tle, in his Book deMundo, reasons thus against
the Existence of Spirits; viz. 'That since God
* can do all Things of himself, he doth not
'stand in need of Ministring Angels and Dæ-
'mons: A Multitude of Servants shewing
* the Weakness of a Prince.
The Gentlemen who defend the Science,
make this Reply : They allow the Credit and
Authority of Aristotle, as much as the Ob-
jectors; but as the Objectors themselves de-
ny all the Authorities for the Spirits, and de-
fire that Reason may be the only Ground
they go upon, so the Refuters, on their Parts,
desire, that Ariftotk's—ipse dixit may not be
absolutely pass'd upon them for Argument j
but that his Words may be brought to the
seme Touchstone of Reason, and prov'd if
they are Standard. If this Argument, say
they, will hold good, Aristotle should not
suppose Intelligences moving the Celestial
Spheres ; for God fufficeth to move all with-
out Ministring Spirits; nor would there be
need of a Sun in the World, for God can
enlighten all Things by himself; and so all
Second Causes were to be taken away : There-
fore there are Angels and Ministring Spirits
in the World, for the Majesty of God, not
for his Want of them ; and for Order, not
for his Omnipotency. And here, if the Ob-
jectors return, and fay, Who told you tha t
there are Spirits ? Is not yours a precariou s
S 3 typo.

<page 301>
i6z The Life and Adventures
Hypothesis? Mayn't we have Leave to recri-
minate in this Place ? Pray, who told Aristo-
tle, that there were Intelligences that mov'd
the Celestial Spheres ? Is not this Hypothesis
as precarious, as any Man may pretend that
of Spirits to be ? And we believe there are
few Philosophers at present, who agree with
Ariflotle in that Opinion : And we dare pro-
nounce this to be ours, that Aristotle took his
Intelligences from the Hebrews, who went
according to the same whimsical (tho' pretty}
Notion, which first gave Rise to the Fiction
of the Nine Muses. But more than all this, it
is a very great Doubt among learned Men, whe-
ther this Book, De Mundo, be Aristotle s or no.
, The next Thing the Objectors bring a-
gainst the Existence of Spirits, is, That it is
Nonsense for Men to say that there are
such Beings, of which it is impossible for a
Man to have any Notion ; and they insist up-
on ir, that it is impossible for any Man to form
an Idea of a Spiritual Substance. As to this
Part, the Defendants rejoin, That they think
our late most judicious Mr. Locke, in his ela-
borate and finish'd EJsay on Human Under-
standing, has fairly made out, that Men have as
clear a Notion of a Spiritual Substance, as they
have of any Corporeal Subflance, Matter, or
Body ;, and that there is as much Reason for
admitting the Existence of the one, as of the
other ; for that if they admit the latter, it is
but Humour in them to deny the former. It
■

<page 302>
tfMr. Duncan Campbell? , if%
is in his Second Book, Chap.xy. where he rea-
sons thus : " If a Man will examine himself,
concerning his Notion of pure Substance in
'general, he will find he has no other Idea of
it, but only a Supposition of he knows not
what Support, of such Qualities which are ca-
pable of producing simple Ideas in us j which
.•Qualities are commonly called Accidents.
Thus if we talk or think of any particular
Sort of Corporeal Substance, as Horse, Stone,
i&c. tho the Idea we have of cither of them
be but the Complication or Collection of
those several simple Ideas, or sensible Quali-
ties, which we use to find united in the Thing
call'd Horse or Stone; yet because we can-
not conceive how they should subsist alone
not in one another, we suppose them to ex-
ist in, and be supported by some common Sub-
ject; which Support we denote by the Name
of Substance ; tho* it be certain, we have no
clear or distinct Idea of that Thing we sup-
pose a Support. The same happens concern-
ing the Operations of our Mind, viz,. Think-
ing, Reasoning, and Fearing, &c. which we
concluding not to subsist of themselves, and
not apprehending how they can belong to
Body ; we are apt to think these the Acti-
ons of some Substance, which we call Spirit.:
Whereby it's evident, that haying no other
Notionr of • Matter, but something, wherein
those many sensible Qualities, which affect our
Senses, do subsist, by supposing a Substance',
S 4 where-

<page 303>
z6q The Life and Adv e ntur.es
wherein Thinking, Know ing, Doubting, and a
Power of Moving, &c. do subsist ; we have as
clear a Notion of the Nature or Substance of
Spirit, as we have of Body ; the one being
supposed to be, without knowing what is
the Substratum to those simple Ideas which
we have from without, and the other supposed
(with a like Ignorance of what it is) to be
the Substratum of these Operations which we
experiment in our selves within. "Tis plain,
then, that the Idea of Corporeal Substance
in Matter, is as remote from our Concepti-
ons and Apprehensions, as that of Spiritual
Substance; and therefore, from our not having
any Notion of the Substance of Spirit, we can
no more conclude its Non-Existence, than we
can for the same Reason deny the Existence
of Body ; it being as rational to affirm there
is no Body, because we cannot know its Es-
sence, as jx is called, or have the Idea of the
Substance of Matter, as to say, there is no
Spirit, because we know not its Eslence, or
have no Idea of a Spiritual Substance." Mr.
Locke also, comparing our Idea of Spirit with
our Idea of Body, thinks there may seem ra-
ther less Obscurity in the former than the
latter. Our Idea of Body, he takes to be
an extended solid Substance, capable of com-
municating Motion by Impulse; and our Idea
of Soul is a Substance that thinks, and has a
Power of exciting Motion in Body, by Will
dr Thought. Now, some perhaps will say,
they

<page 304>
of Mr. Dunc an Campbell 265
they comprehend a thinking Thing which
perhaps is true; but, he fays, if they con-
sider it well, they can no more comprehend
an extended Thing; and if they fay, they
know not what it is thinks in them, they
mean they know not what the Substance is
of that thinking Thing ; no more, says he,
do they know what the Substance is of that
solid Thing; and if they sayj they know
not how they think, he says, neither do
they know how they are extended, how the
solid Parts are united, or where to make Ex-
tension, &c. ''.
The learned Monsieur le Clerc, who gene-
rally knows how far human Reason can bear,
argues consonantly to what is before deliver d
by Mr. Locke in his Coronis, added to the
Fourth Volume of his Philosophical Works,'
in the third Edition of them, where he writes
as followeth.
When we contemplate the corporeal Na-
ture, we can fee nothing in it but Exten-
sion, Divisibility, Solidity, Mobility, and va-
rious Determinations of Quantity or Figures;
which being so, it were a rash Thing, and
contrary to the Laws of right Reasoning, to
affirm other Things of Bodies ; and confe- \
quently from mere Body, nothing can be
deduced by us, which is not joined in a ne-
ceslary Connexion with the said Properties:
Therefore those, who have thought the Pro-
perties

<page 305>
4&£ TheLiiE and Adventures
perties of perceiving by Sense, of Under-
standing, Willing^ Imagining, Remembring,
and others the like, which have no Affinity
with corporeal Things,to have risen, from the
Body, have greatly transgressed in the Me-
thod of right Reasoning and Philosophising,
which hath been done by Epicurus, and
those, who have thought as he did, having"
affirmed our Minds to be composed of cor-
poreal Atoms : But whence shall we say they
have had their Rife? Truly, they do not
owe their Rise to Matter which is wholly
destitute of Sense and Thought, nor are they
spontaneously sprung up from nothing, it
being an ontological Maxim of most evident
Truth, that nothing springs from nothing.
Having thus given the Reader the primary
Objections made against the Existence of
Spirits, and the Refutations thereof, I must
now frankly own on which side my Opinion.
Jeans, and for my Part, it seems manifest to ,
me that there are two Beings, we conceive
very plainly and distinctly, vii%. Body and
Spirit; and that it would be as absurd and
ridiculous to deny the Existence of the one,
as of the other : And really, if the Refusers
have got the better in their Way of Rea-
soning, they have still a much greater Ad-
vantage over the Objectors, when they come'
to back these Reasons with fresh Arguments
drawn from Experience. Of this, there ha-

<page 306>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell 167
ving been many undoubted Narratives given
in the foregoing Pages, concerning the Ap-
paritions of Spirits, I shall refer the Reader
back again to them, and only subjoin here
one or two Instances, which, may, if re-
quired, be proved upon Oath, of Spirits
seen by two Persons of our Duncan Campbell s
own Acquaintance. In the Year 1711, one
Mrs. Stephens, and her Daughter, were to-
gether with Mr. Campbell, at the House of
Mr. Ramell's, a very great and noted Weaver
at Haggerjlone, where the rainy Weather de-
tained" them till late at Night, Just after the
Clock struck Twelve, they all of them went
to the Door to see if the Rain had ceased,
, being extreamly desirous to get home. As
soon as ever they had opened the Door and
were all got together, there appeared before
them a Thing all in White, the Face seemed
of a dismal pallid Hue, but the Eyes thereof
fiery and flaming like Beacons, and of a
fewcer Size. It made its Approaches to
them, till it came up within the Space
of about three Yards of them, there it fixt
and stood like a Figure agaze for some Mi-
nutes; and they all stood likewise stiff like
the Figure, frozen with Fear, Motionless, and
Speechless : When all of a sudden it vanish'd
from their Eyes ; and that Apparition to the
Sight was succeeded by a Noise, or the Ap-
pearance of a Noise like that which is occa-
sioned

<page 307>
2.68 The Life and Adventures
sioned by she Fighting of twenty MastirTDogs.
•Not long after, Mrs. Anne Stephens, who
lived in Spittlejtelds, a Woman well known
by her great Dealings with Mercers upon
Ludgate-Hill, sitting in her House alone, and
musing upon Business, happened by Accident
to look behind her, and saw a dead Corps, to
her thinking, lie extended upon the Floor,
just as a dead Corps should be, excepting
that the Foot of one Leg was fixd on the
Ground as it is in a Bed, when one lies with
one Knee up ; Ihe look'd at it a long while,
and by degrees at last stole her Eyes from so
unpleasing and unexpected an Object. How-
ever, a strange kind of a Curiosity overcome
her Fears, and she ventured a second Time to
turn her Head that Way, and saw it as before,
fix'd for a considerable time longer, but
durst not stir from her Seat ; she again with-
drew her Eyes from the horrible and melan-
choly Spectacle, and resum'd the Courage,
after a little Reflection, of viewing it again,
and resolving to ascertain her self if the Vi-
sion was real, by getting up from her Seat
and going to it, but upon this third Retro-
spection she found it vanisli'd. This Relation
she writ down to Mr. Duncan Campbell, and
has told before Mrs. Ramell, her own Sister,
and many other very creditable Persons. Now
as to these Arguments from Experience, I
shall also deliver my Opinion. I dispute not
but that Learned Men, who have obstinate
Prepos-

<page 308>
of Mr. DuNCAtf CampbeiiI x6<)
Prepossessions, may produce plausible Argu-
ments, why all Things should be thought to
be done by Imposture which seem strange to
them, and interfere with their Belief; and
truly thus far their Humour may be indulged,
that if only one Person relates a very strange
and surprizing Story, a Man may be more
apt to think it is pojjible for that Person to lie,
than that so strange a Relation should be
true; but if a considerable Number of Per-
sons of several Countries, several Religions,
several Professions, several Ages, and those
Persons look'd upon to be of as great Saga-
city as any the Country afford, agree in Re-
lations of the same Kind, tho' very strange,
and are ready to vouch the Truth of
them upon Oath after having well con-
sider d Circumstances ; I think it a Vio-
lation of the Law of Nature to reject all
these Relations as fabulous, merely upon a
self-presuming Conceit; unless a Man can sair-
ly shew the Things to be impossible, or can
demonstrate wherein those Persons were im-
posed on ; for, from hence I form the fol-
lowing conclusive Argument. What is pos-
sible according to Reason grows probable ac-
cording to Belief, where the Possibility is.
attested to have reduced it self into Action
by Persons of known Credit and Integrity.
Now, not only the Possibility of the Ex-
istence of Spirits, but the actual Existence
thereof is proved above by Logical Demon-

<page 309>
ijo The Life and Adventures
stration ; therefore are we to believe both by
the Course • of Logical Reason, and Moral
Faith, that those Existences have appeared to
Men of Credit, who have attested the Re-
ality thereof upon Oath. -r:
H E S E Objectors go on to say j that
an Existence of Spirits, yet that would be
still no Argument how Magick should subsist,
because they deny that it is possible for a
Man in his Body to have a Commerce, much
less make a Contract with Spirits. But here
again the Refuters alledge they have both
Experience and Reason on their Sides. As
a joint Argument of Reason and Experience,
they tell you, that the numerous Witches
which have in all Countries been arraigned
and condemned upon this Occasion, are evi-
dent Testimonies of this Gofrimerce and
Contract being held and made with Spirits.
They pretend to fay, that thefe Objectors
call not (theirJ the Refuters Judgment1 so
much in Question, who contend that there
is a Magick Art, as they call in Question the
Judgment of all the wisest Legislative Power*
in Christendom, who have universally agreed
in enacting penal Laws against such capital
Offenders. 1


provided they should allow there is
But
4

<page 310>
of Mr. Du n cAn'Camp be n! £71
. But here the Objectors return and say, that
it being impossible for us to shew the manner
how such a Contract should be made, we can
never, but without Reason, believe, a Thing
to be, of which we can- form no perfect:
Idea. The Refuters, on the other Hand, re-
ply with the learned Father le Brune ; it is
manifest, that we can seeibut two Sorts of
Beings, Spirits and Bodies, and that sirtce We
can reason but according to our own Ideas,
we ought to ascribe'to Spirits what cannot be
produced by Bodies. Indeed, the Author of
the Nouvel/es ae la Republique des Lettres,
for the Month of August, Anno 1686, has
given us a rough'Draught for writing a good
Tract of Witchcraft, which he looks upon
as a Desideratum. Where among other Things
he writes thus 4 Since this Age is the true
time of Systems, one should be contriv'd
concerning the Commerce that may be be-
twixt Dæmons and Men. ,:; ,'< oil j
On this Passage, Father le Brune writes
thus. "Doubtless here the Author complies
with the Language of a great marty Persons;,
who, for want of Attention and Light, would
have us put all Religion into Systems. What-
ever Regard I ought to have for many of
those Persons, I must not be afraid to fay*
that there is no System to bejmade of those
Truths, which we ought to learn distinctly
by Faith, because we must advance nothing
'} \.i :. • .\ here,

<page 311>
172 T<&<?Life and Adventures
here, but what we receive from the Oracle,
We must make a System to explain the Ef-
fects of the Loadstone, the Ebbing and Flow-
ing of the Sea, the Motion of the Planets j
for that the Cause of these Effects is not evi-
dently signified to us, and many may be con-
ceived by us ; and to determine us, we have
need of a great Number of Observations,
which, by an exact Induction, may lead us to
a Cause that may satisfy all the Fhænomena.
1 It is not the fame in the Truths of Religion,
we come not at them by groping, it were
.to be wish'd Men spoke not of them, but
after a decisive and infallible Authority. It is
thus we should speak of the Power of Dæ-
mons, and of the Commerce they have with
Men ;it is of Faith that they have Power, and
that they attack Men, and try to seduce them
divers Ways. It is true indeed, they are
sometimes permitted to have it over the Just,
tho' they have it not ordinarily, but over those,
that want Faith, or Fear, not to partake of
their Works; and that to the last particular-
ly, the disordered Intelligences try to make
exactly succeed what they wish ; inspiring
them to have Recourse to certain Practices by
which those seducing Spirits enter into Com-
merce with Men. Thus far Father le Brune.
But still these Objectors demand to know, by
what Means this Commerce maybe held be-
tween Dæmons and Men, and urge us to de-
scribe the Manner ; or pretend that they have
still

<page 312>
of Mr. DuncAn Campbeli. ijl
still Reason to refuse cdming into the Belief
of a Things which we would impose upon
them, tho wholly ignorant of it our selves;
To that, the Refuters answer thus : That both
Christian pivlties and Physicians agree,- (as
to the Manner how, which they are so curi-
ous in enquiring after-J that Dæmons ftir up
Raptures and Extasies itf Men, binding or
loosing the exterior Senses^ and that either by-
stopping the Pores of the Brain^ so that the
Spirits cannot pals forth, ("as it is dOrie riatti-
rally by Sleeps) Or by recalling the sensitive
Spirits, from the outward Senses to tsie5iH-
ward Organs, which he there retains i So tne
Devil renders WOmeri-Witches extatical and
Magicians, who, while they lie fast asleep in
one Place, think they have been in divers Pla-
ces, and dorte many ThingSi This, the learned
Objectors fay, proceeds trom rto Dæmon, but
from the Disease calf d an epilepsy. BusV ori
the other hand, the more learned Refuters
insist upon it, that these Extasies are noiEpi-
teptick SeizuresThis, fay they, appears from
Bodin, in'his Theatre'of Universal Nature j
where he fays, "That those that are wrapt
"by the devil, feel neither Stripes nor Cut-
"tings, rtor no Wtesting of their Limb^ lhqr
"burrting .Tortures, 'not the Application qf
<r a red-hot' Irbrt ; nay, not is the . Beat of
"the Pulse, nor the Motion of the Heart .per-
"ceived, in them ; but afterwards, returning
tf to themselves, they feel most bitter Pains
.'*jrj;:t\ J t£r s/r]',"i j j hjiimi "0f

<page 313>
174 Tfo Life and Advent tlft.ES
of the Wounds receiv'd, and tell of Things
"done at Six Hundred Miles distance, and af-
"firm themselves to have seen them done."
The ingenious Dr. Ader makes an admirable
Physical Distinction between this Kind of Ex-
tasy, and a Syncope, or Stupor, caused by
Narcotick Medicines. Sennertus, in his In-
Jlitutio Medica, writes of the Dæmoniacal So-
por of Witches, who think they are carry'd
thro' the Air, dance, feast, and have Copula-
tion with the Devil, and do other Things in
their Sleep ; and afterwards believe the fame
Things waking. Now, he fays, "Whether
"they are really so carry'd in the Air, &c. or
"being in a profound Sleep, or only dream
"they are so carry'd, and persist in that Opi-
"nion after they are awake; these Facts or
"Dreams cannot be natural : For it cannot
," be, that there should be so great an Agree-
"ment in Dreams, of Persons differing in
."Place, Temperament, Age, Sex, and Stu-
"dies, that in one Night, and at the fame
"Hour, they should, in Concert, dream of
"one and the fame such Meeting ; and should
"agree as to the Place, Number, and Qua-
"lity of the Persons, and the like Circum-
"stances : But such Dreams are suggested
"from a preternatural Cause, viz. from the
"Devil to his Confederate, by the Divine
." Permission of an Almighty Power, where
"Punishments are to be permitted to be in-
"flicted upon reprobate Sinners.
Whence

<page 314>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. zys
Whence also, to those Witches sincerely
converted, and refusing to be any more pre-
sent at those Diabolical Meetings, those Dreams
no longer happen j which is a Proof that they
proceeded, not before, from a natural Cause.
Here begins the great Point of the Dispute,
as to that Branch of Magick, which we call
Natural Magick The Objectors may tell us,
that they will freely own, that there may
be an Existence of Spirits; that there may
be an Existence of Witches ; that by a divine
Power, Men may be influence! so far, as to
have a Communication with good Spirits, and
that from thence they may become spriritual,
divine Magicians. They will likewise, perhaps,
as freely grant, that by the Intervention of a
Dæmon, Things preternatural may be brought
about by Persons who have studied the De-
moniacal Magick ; but then, what they prin-
cipally insist upon, is, that it must be con-
tradictory to all Human Reason to imagine,
that there can be such a Thing as Natural
Magicians : And thus far they may form their
Argument. They fay, that the Persons who
contend for the Magick Art, own, that all
that is brought about by Magick, is by the
Assistance and Help of a Spirit j and that
consequently, what is effected by it, must be
preternatural. Now, fay they, it is a Thing
inconsistent by a Natural Power, to bring
about a preternatural Effect ; therefore, there
T. » ) -j . can
•• :*. 'V

<page 315>
7.y6 Tfoetxti and Adventures
'can be no such Thing as Natural Magics
which his within it self the Efficacy of de-
stroyirlg those Acts done by Magicians, in the
Diabolical. ..
. To this, the Refusers take Leave to reply,
That the Foundation upon which the Argu-
ment is built, is wrong grounded : They have
admitted, if hat in Diabolical Art Magkk, these
may be a Commerce held between Men and
Spirits, bj which several preternatural Effects
may be brought about: And the Reason they
assign1 for it there, is, Because there is a pre-
ternatural Agent concern'd therein, the Devil r
Burthen, fay stockist Natural Magick, you
Can pretend to no such Agent, arrd there-
fore' to; rio such preternatural Effect. This
Argutrient contains within it Two Fallacies:
First,; As to the Commerce held between a
Man and a Dœttion, there is nothing pre-
ternatural in getting the Acquaintance : The
Will of the Mars *i# entirely natural ; either
naturally good, or; naturally corrupted. The
black Spirit that cbnverseth with him, it is
: acfcrt$vsed*;'d is not so; but it is from the
\yfllsdf ,tire Mar^ not from the Power vested
^rhfteDevii; that the Acquaintance first grows,
'thereWe the Acquaintance it self is natural,
tho' it arises from the last'Corruption and De-
pravations of 'Nature j but being made with
a preternatural'' Existence, tho' the Cause of
the Acquaintance be corroptedly natural, yet
the intermediate Cause or Means after that
Acquain-

<page 316>
tf Mr. DuncanCampbei^ zy'f
Acquaintance is not so, and therefore the Ef-
fect of that intermediate Cause may be won-
derful, and seem to be out of die ordinary
Course of Nature. Now, since it is gene-
rally'aHow'd, that there are Natural Spirits
of the Elements, as well as Divine and In-
fernal j what we have to prove, is only
this ; That Man, by Natural Magick, may
have a Commerce with Natural Spirits of their
Elements', as Witches may have with tire
Spirits, or Dfmons. Now, as we said before,
the Commerce k self depends upon the Will
of the Person, and is 'therefore natural, and
consequently may as well subsist between the
one as the other ,' for the Devil cannot force
a Mart to' hold a Commerce with him wile1
ther;he;will or no. The Second Fallacy is,
calling the Effect preternatural, no other-
wise; than; as it 'connotates the Agent that
brought it about, which is a spiritual Agent:
For the Effect is (in it self considers) natural,
and brought about by Second Causes that are
natural ; by the Devil's Penetration, who is
subtle enough to make use of them for such
and such Ends. Now Men, by Natural Spi-
rits, which are of a Faculty thoroughly sub-
tle, may as well With Natural Second Causes
compass the Remedy of an Evil Spirit, as the
Devil is able to infect Men with it. From
these Speculations, a sarther plain Consequence
maybe dedue'd, How aMan may, by tsle pure
Force of Natural Magickj cure a Person that

<page 317>
rj% TheLiiz and Adventures
is infested with Evils by a Dæmon : for how
is it, that a Dœmo?i infests any body with his
evil Motions ? It is true, he is a preternatural A-
gent; but the evil Effect he does, is brought
about by Natural Causes. For how does a Dæ-
mon stir up Raptures orExtasies in Men ? Why,
he does it (as we are told above J by bind-
ing or loosing the Exterior Senses,, by stop-
ping the Pores' of the Brain, so that the Spi-
rits cannot pass forth : And this the Art of
Physick can compass by its Drugs; and Sleep
causes the same Thing very naturally of it self:
Therefore as the Evil it self is natural, the Re-
medy, that is natural, will certainly overr
come it. But then, say you, why can't those
Persons be cur d by Physicians? I answer;
Not because their Remedies are not in them-
selves sufficient to cure the Evils themselves;
but because, generally, Physicians don't ad-
minister their Drugs as Christians, but as Phy-
sicians ; and when they prescribe them to the
Sick, they generally prescribe to them only,
purely consider'd as Patients, not as Christians;
and therein they come to fail : Because the
Agent, the Devil, is a subtle Spirit, that brings
the Evil, and alters its Situation before the
Remedy (which would master it otherwise )
can take any Effect : Which Agent, the Devil,
is employ d by the horrible and impious Faith
of the Anti-Physician, viz. the black Magi-
cian. But if the Physiciarj would act the Chri-
stian, at the fame Time, se far as. to have a
Faith

<page 318>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell^ 279
Faith that Things ordain'o* in the Course of
Nature, for the Good of Man, would have
its Effects in Spite of a Devil, if taken with ,
a good Faith by the Patient: That all good
Things, ordain'd to be for the natural Re-
covery of Men, if they took it with Thank-
fulness to the Sender, would have due Effect:
Why then the Natural Spirits of the Elements
would resist the farther Agency of the Dæ-
moniacal Spirit j and then nothing but the
Natural Evil (caused at first by the Dæmons
remaining in the Person, without the sarther
Superintendency of the Dæmon, might de-
monstratively be taken away by the mere na-
tural Remedy or Medicine. And thus good
and pious Physicians, making use of such pro-
per Remedies as their Skill teaches them, and
having an honest Faith, that the Goods of
Nature, (intended for the Use and Benefit of
Man) if receiv'd by the Patient with the same
good Faith, is' above the Power of the Devil so
frustrate, may not improperly be call'd Natu-
ral Magicians. These Arguments of mine, I
shall now take Leave to back by Experience.
Besides what we have urged from Rea-
son, concerning the Power of Natural Ma-
gick, we lhall only subjoin, that Divines
themselves hold that Natural-Magick, and
also Natural-Divinations and Prophecies , are
proved by Quotations from that Venerable
Writ which-is their Guide ; and bring Proofs
from the fame also, that by Natural Magick,
T 4 Dæmon t








<page 319>
2,8o The Life and Ad? entuf.es
Dæmons are also cast forth, but not all Kinds
of Dfiwcns, and so many Works of Effica-
cy arc wrought by Natural Magick : They
tell you, such was the Pythonijsa, that raised
the Apparition to SauU which appear'd in
a Body of Wind ;and Air. "thus, if a Per-
son, by Natural Magick, should cast out
mons ; it does not follow, that this was also
from Divine Magick: And. if Dæmons are
cast out by Natural Magick, by one that is
in the Fear of God, it does not follow, that
he is a true Magician of God ; but if it exor-
bitates to D&ntoniacaly then it is condemn'd.
And when Natural Magick keeps within its
Bounds, the Divines tell us, it is not con-
demn'd in the Venerable Book which is the
Christian's sure Guide. But in^asmuch as the
Lawfulness even of Natural Magick has been
call d in Question by others, I shall, in an Ap-
pendix join'd to this .Treatise * examine that
Matter, both according to the. Reasons of our
English Laws, and according to the best stated
Rules of Casuistry that I am Master of;
still submitting my Judgment to the superior
Judgment of those who are profefs'd Divines
and Lawyers: And if my Opinions prove
erroneous, I am willing to retract them. And
therefore, in this;Place, there remains nothing
farther for me ,tp do, but only, as 1 have
ihewn, on the one hand, how Natural Ma-
gick, and its powerful Operations, are prov'd
by Reason ; to shew, on the other hand, how
far







<page 320>

of Mr. DtiN c an Campbell^ 2.81
far Reason in these Cases, is likewise back'd
and supported by well-evidenc'd Practice,and
notorious Experience. And to do this, after
having mentioned one memorable Instance,
which I refer the Reader to in the Body of
the Book, concerning the Performances of
Mr. Greatrix, to which the Lord Orrery was
a Witness in Ireland ; I shall, to avoid Pro-
lixity, bring the other Testimonials of Pra-
ctice, from the Success which our Duncan
Campbell himself has had in this Way on
other Occasions.
In the Year 1713, lived in Fenckurch-Jlreet^
one Mr. Coates, a Tobacco Merchant,whohad
been for many Years sorely tormented in his
Body, and had had Recourse for a Cure to all
the most eminent Physicians of the Age, even
up to the great Dr. Ratcliff himself ; but all
this mighty Application for Relief was still in
vain: Each Doctor own'd him a Wonder
and a Mystery to Physick, and left him as
much a Wonder as they found him. Nei-
ther could the Professors of Surgery guess ac
his Ailment, or resolve the Riddle of his Di-
stemper ; and after having spent, from
first to last, above a Thousand Pounds in
search of proper Remedies, they found the
Search ineffectual : The Learned all agreed,
1 that it could proceed from nothing else but
Witchcraft; they had now indeed guess'd
the Source of his Illness, but it was an Ill-
ness of such a Kind, that, when they had
found

<page 321>
z8* The Lite and Adventures
found it out, they thought themselves not
the proper Persons to prescribe to him any
Remedies. That Task was rescrv'd, it seems,
for our Duncan Campbell, who, upon some
Body's Information or other, was sent
for to the bewitched Patient Mr. Coates,
who found him the Wonder that the others
had left him, but did Wonders in undertaking
and compacting; his Cure. I remember, one
of the Jngjredients made use of, was boiling
bis o wn. Water,. !but I can't tell how 'twas
used ,* and, upon turning over the Books of
some great Physicians since, I have found,
that they themselves have formerly delivered
that, as one part of the Prescriptions for the
Cure of Patients in like Cases. But as there
are other Tilings, which Mr. Campbell per-
forms, that seem to require a Mixture of the
Second-sight, and of this Natural Magick be-
fore they can be brought about, I will enter-
tain the Reader with one or two Pasiages of
that fort likewise, and so conclude the Histo-
ry of this so singular a Man's Life and Ad-
ventures. ,
In the Year 1710, a Geritlewoman lost
about Six Pounds Worth" of Flanders-Lace^
and inasmuch as it was a Present made
to her Husband, she was concerned as much
as if it had been of twenty Times the Va-
lue; and a Lady of her Acquaintance com-
ing to visit her, to whom me unfolded a-
mong other Things in Discourse this little
Disaster :The Lady siniling, reply'd, with this
1 Question,

<page 322>
of Mr. Duncax Camps 1,1.1. z8$

Question, Did you never hear, Madam, of Mr.
Duncan Campbell? It is but making your Ap-
plication to him, Things that are lost are im-
mediately found; the Power of his Know-
ledge exceeds even the Power of Laws; they
but restrain, and frighten, and punish Robbers,
but he makes Thieves expiate their Guilt, by
the more virtuous Way of turning Restorers
of the Goods they have stoln. Madam, re-
joined the losing Gentlewoman, you smile
when you tell me this ; but really a,s much
a Trifle as it is, since 'twas a Present to my
Husband, I can't help being sensibly concern-
ed at it; a Moment's Disappointment to him
in the least Thing in Nature, creates in me
a greater Uneasiness, than the greatest Dis-
appointment to my single self could do, in
Things of Moment and Importance. What
makes me smile, laid the Lady when I speak
of it, or think of it, is the Oddness and Pe-
culiarity of this Mans Talent in helping one
to such Things ; but, without the least Jest, I
assiire you, that I know, by Experience, these
Things come within the Compase of his Know-
ledge ; and I must seriously tell you, for your
farther Satisfaction, that he has help'd me,
and several of my Friends, to the finding a-
gain Things lost, which were of great Value.
And is this, without laughing, true, said the
losing Fair, very gravely and demurely, like a
Person half believing, and desirous to be fully
confirmed in such a Belief? The. Lady she
aavisQ

<page 323>
x84 The Life and Adventures
advis'd with, did then ascertain her of the
Truth of the Matter, alledging that, for a
single half Guinea, he would inform her of
her Things, and describe the Person that con-
vey'd t^iem away. No sooner was this Gentle-
woman convinced, but she was eager for the
Tryal, solicited her Friend to conduct her to
Mr. Campbell; and upon the first Word of
Consent, she was hooded and scarfed imme-
diately, and they coached it away in a Trice
to Mr. Campbell's House, whom they luckily
found within.
fore he wrote down the Name of this new Cli-
ent of his, exactly as it was, via. Mrs. Saxon.
Then she was in good Hopes, and with much
Confidence propounded to him the Question
about the Lace. He paused but a very little
while upon the Matter before he describ'd
the Person that took it, and satisfy d her, that
in two or three Days she would be Mistress
of her Lace again, and find it in some Book,
or Corner of her Room. She presented him
a Half-Guinea, and was very contentedly go-
ing away; but Mr. Campbell very kindly
stopp'd her, aind signify'd to her,that if she had
no more to offer to him, he had something
of more Importance to reveal to her : She
sate full of Expectation while he wrote this
new Matter ; and the Paper he deliver d to
her contain'd the following Account. As
the Loss of a little Bit of Lace, it is a
mere


<page 324>
of Mr. Du NCAN Ca Ms f K,hp 28$"

mere Trifle ; you have lost a great many
Hundreds of Pounds, which your Aunt (nam-
ing her Name) left you, but you are bub-
bled out of that large Sum. For while you
was artfully required down Stairs about some
pretended Business or other, one Mr. H -tt-n,
convey d your Aunt's Will out of the Desk,
and several other Things of Value. And wri-
ting down the Names of all the Persons con-
cern'd, which put Mrs. Saxon in a great
Consternation ,, he concluded this Paper,
with bidding her go home with a contented
Mind, she should find her Lace in a few Days,
and as she found that Prediction prove true,
she should afterwards come and consult about
the rest.
- When she came home Qt, seems) big at
first wish the Thoughts of what me had been
told, she rifled and mmack'd every Corner,
but no Lace was to be met with ; all the
next Day me hunted in the like manner,
but frighten'd the whole Time, as if slie
thought the Devil was the only Person could
bring it, but all to no Purpose; the third
Day foer Curiosity abated, she gave over the
Hopes of it, and took the Prediction as a vain
Delusion, and that, what Ihe gave for it, was
only more Money thrown away after what
had been lost before. That very Day, as it
commonly happens in such Caiesy when she
least dream'd of it, she lighted on it' by Acci-
dent and Surprize. She ran with it in her
*n Hand

<page 325>
\26. The Life and Adventures
Hand immediately to her Husband, and now
she had recovered it again, told him of the
Loss of it, and the whole Story of her ha-
ving been at Mr. Campbell's about it ; and
then amplifying the Discourse about what lie
had told her besides, as to more considera-
ble Affairs, she said, she resolved to go and
consult him a little farther about them, and
begg'd her Husband to accompany her. He
would fain have laugh'd her out of that Opi-
nion and Intent ; but the End was she per-
suaded him into it, and prevailed upon him
'to seem at least very serious about the Matter,
and go with her to the Oracle, assuring him
there was no room for doubting the fame
Success.
Well! to Mr. Campbell's they accordingly
came, and after Mr. Saxon, in Deference to
his Wife's Desire, had paid our Predictor a
handsome Compliment of Gold; Mr. Dun-
can Campbell saluted him in as grateful a
manner, with the Assurance, that there was
in Kent a little Country-House with some
Lands appertaining to it, that was his, in right
of his Wife : That he had the House, as it
were, before his Eyes, that tho' he had ne-
ver actually seen it, nor been near the
Place where it stood, he had seen it figura-
tively as if in exact Painting and Sculpture,
that particularly it had four green Trees be-
fore the Door ; from whence he was positive,
that if Mr. Saxon went with him in quest
of

<page 326>
of Mr. Duncan CaSipbeix^ 187
of ir, he should find it out, and know it as
well the Moment he came near it, as if he
•had been an Inhabitant in it all his Life.
Mr. Saxon, tho' somewhat of an Unbe-
liever, yet must naturally wish to find it true,
you may be sore; and yet partly doubting the
Event, and partly pleased with the visionary
Promise of a fortune he neves expected,
laugh'd very heartily at the Oddness of the
Adventure, and said, he would consider, whe-
ther it would not savour too much of Quix-
otism, to be at the Expence of a Journey on
. such Frolicks, and on such a chimerical Foun-
I dation of airy Hopes, and that then he would
call again and let Mr. Campbell know his
Mind upon that Point.
In every Company he came into, it ferv'd
for Laughter and Diversion ; they alj, how-
'ever, agreed twas worth his while, since the
Journey would not be very expensive, to go it
. by way of Frolick. His Wife one Morning
saying, that (he did remember some Talk of'a
House, and such Things as Mr. Campbell had
describ'd, put him forward upon the Adven-
ture; and upon Mr. Saxons proposing it to
his Brother Barnard, Mr. Barnard lavour'd
the Proposal as a Joke, and agreed upon the
Country Ramble. They came on Horseback
toMr.Campbell's, with a third Horse,on which
. the Dumb Predictor was mounted, and so on
they jogg'd into Kent towards Sevenoak, be-
ing the Place which he describ'd. The first Day
they set out was on a Saturday Morning \njune,

<page 327>
a88 T^LiFfe and Adventures
and about Five that Afternoon they arrived
dt the Black-Bull at Sevenoak in Kent. It
being a delicate Evening, they took an agree-
able Walk up a fine Hill gracefully adorn'd
with Woods, to Knollei an ancient Seat of
the Earl of Dorset's, meeting, by the way,
with an old Servant of the Earl's, one PerkinS
he offered Mr. Barnard> who (it seems) was
his old Acquaintance, to give them all a Sight
of that fine ancient Seat.
After they had pleased themselves with
viewing the antique Nobility of that stately
Structure, this Perkin went back with them
to their Inn, the Bull at Sevenoak. They
that could talk were very merry in Chat j and
the Dumb Gentleman', who saw them laugh*
and wear all the Signs of Alacrity in their
Countenances, was resolv'd not to be behind
with their Tongues, and by Dint of Pen, Ink,
and Paper, that he made Signs should be
brought in, was resolv'd (if orte might be said
to crack without Noise') to crack his jest as
well as the best of them; for it may be tru-
ly said of him, that he seldom comes into
any even diverting Company, where he is
not the most diverting Man there,and the Head
(tho' we can't call him the Mouth) of the
chearful Society. After having eyd this Per-
kins a little, and being grown by his Art,
as we may suppose, as tamiliar with the Man's
Humour, as if he had knbwrt him as many
Years as Mr. Barnard: Pray, Mr. Betrndra^

<page 328>
os Mr. Duncan Campbell? 289
quoth he, in writing) how comes it, you,
that are so stanch and so rigid a Whig, should
be so acquainted and so particularly familiar
with such an old Papiji, and so violent a Ja-
cobite, as I Enow that Mr. Per kin f whom
I never saw, nor had any Notice of in my
Life) to be? And pray, reply'd Mr. Bar-
nard, what Reason have you, beyond a Pun,
to take him for a Jacobite .*? Must he be so,
because his Name W' Per kin? I do asiure
you, in: this you shew your self but little
of a Conjurer: If you can tell no more of
Houses than you do of Men,- we may give
over our Search after the House you spoke
of: (Here the Reader must understand, they
discoursed on their Fingers, and wrote by
Turns.) Mr. Campbell reply'd seriously, Lay-
ing a Wager is no Argument in other Things,
I own ; but in this I know it is ; because I
am sure, after we have laid the Wager, he
will fairly confess it among Friends, since it
will go no farther : And I, said Mr. Campbell,
will lay what Wager you will apiece with you
all round. Hereupon, Mr. Barnard, who had
known him a great many Years, was the first
that laid; and many more, to the Number
of Five or Six", follow'd his Example. The
Decision of the Matter was deferr d till next
Day, at the Return of the old Man to the
Inn ; they being about to break up that Night,
and go to Bed.
': U - The

<page 329>
190 The Lit* and Adventures
, The next Day, being Sunday, the Land-
lord carry'd his Guests to fee the Country;
and after a handsome Walk, they came thro'
the Churchyard. They were poring upon
the Tombs ; no Delight can be greater to
. Mr. Campbell than that: And really, by the fre-
quent Walks he usually takes in Wejlminjler-
Abbtys ,and the . Churchyards adjacent to this
Metropolis, one would imagine he takes De-
light to stalk along by himself on that dumb
silent Ground, where the Characters of the
Persons are only to be known, as his own
Meaning is,, by Writings and Inscriptions on
the Marble. (When: they had sufficiently
iurvey'd the Churchyard, it grew near Din-
ner-time, and they went homewards ; buc
before they had got many Yards dut .of the
Churchyard, Mr. Campbell makes.a full Stop,
pointing up to a House; and stopping his
Friends a little, he pulls out of. his Pocket a
Pencil and Paper, and. writes down the fol-
lowing Words : That., That is the House my
Vision presented to me y I could swear it to be
the same I know it To be the same :, I am
certain os it. The Gentlemen with him re-
mark'd It ; would not take any farther No-
tice at that Timey intending to.enquire into
it with Secrecy j and rfo went ion to the Inn
to Dinner. • .,:: ';o •; .'' • \ . •
As merry as they had been the' Night be-
fore after Supper, they were stilktngre inno-
cently chearful this Day after Dinner, till the
Time

<page 330>
of Mr. DuNq an Camp bel £. 29* *
Time of; Service began. When the Duty of
the. Day, was. perform d and over, they- re-
turn cj.:to .dijvert and unbend their Minds,
.with;pleasant' but harmless Conversation; J
suppose no body, but a Set of very great
Formalijis, willbe offended with Scandal or
Scruples, that, to Travellers just ready to de-
part the Town, Mr. Perkin came on that
goodiDay^ and decided the Wagers, by ovvn-
ing to aJl the Company (Secrecy being first
enjoined) that he wajs a; Roman Catholick;
tho' no body of the-Family knew - it in so
many Years as he ha4 fev'd there, which was
before Mr. Campbell was born. This, and
other innocent Speeches, afforded as much
Chearfulness :as the Lords-Day would al-
low Of. •; 0. i . ., ;. { {v • r i.
On the. next Day,'being Monday, they sent
for one Mr. Toland Tokr, an Attorney of the
Place, to find out to whom that House be-
long'd ; but by all the Enquiry that could pos-
sibly he made, ('with convenient SecrecyJ no
body coujd; find it out for a long Time ; but
a): last it camfe to tight, and appear'd to be just-
ly to a Tittle as Mr. Campbell had predicted.
Being now; satisfy'd,. the next Day our three
Travellers fetura'd for]London ; and the two
Vocal Men were very jocular upon their Ad-
venture, and by their outward Gesticulations,
gave the pirophetical Mute his Share of Di-
version* Mr. Barnard, f as: they pafs-'d into a
Farm-Houfe Yard, remark'd, that all the Hogs
U z fell
i

<page 331>
291 TheLirt and Adventure^
fell a^grunting and squeaking more ancl more,
as Mr. Campbell came nearer; ( who, poor
Man! could know nothing of the Jest, nor
the Cause of it, till they aliglited, and told
it him by Signs and Writing;) and said to Mr.
Saxon, laughing, Now we have found out our
House, we shall have only Mr. Campbell home
again by himself; we have no sarther need
of the Devil, that accompany'd him to the
Country, up to Town with us ; there are o-
ther Devils enow to be met with there, he
knows ; and so this, according to the Fashi-
on of his Predecessor Devils, is enter'd into the
Herd of Swine.
However, the Event of this Journey ("to
cut the Story short) procur'd Mr. Saxon a
great Insight (upon Enquiry) into several Af-
fairs belonging to him, of which he would
otherwise have had no Knowledge ; and he
is now engag'd in a Chancery-Suit to do him-
self Justice, and in a fair way of Recovering
great Sums of Money; which, without the
Consultation he had with this Dumb Gen-
tleman , he had in all Likelihood never
dreamt of.
In the Year 1711, a Gentleman, whose
Name shall be, in this Place, Amandiis; fam'd
for hisexquisiteTalents in all Arts and Sciences,
but particularly for his Gentleman-like and
entertaining Manner of Conversation ; whose
Company was affected by all Men of Wit,
who grew his Friends, and courted by all
Ladies


<page 332>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 195
Ladies of an elegant Taste, who grew his
Admirers : This accomplished Gentleman, I
sey, came to Mr. Campbell, in order to pro-
pound a Question to him j which was so ve-
ry intricate, and so difficult to answer, that
if he did answer it, it might administer to
himself, and the Ladies he brought with
him, the Pleasure of Admiration, of seeing
a Thing so wonderful in it self perform d:
Or, on the other hand, if he did not make
a satisfactory Reply to it, then it might af-
ford him and the Ladies a very great De-
light, in being the first that puzzled a Man,
who had had the Reputation for so many
Years, of being capable of baffling all the
wittiest Devices and shrewd Stratagems that
had been, from Time to Time, invented to
baffle his Skill, and explode his Penetration
in the Second-Sight, and the Arts which he
pretended to. The Persons, whom Amandu
s
brought with him, were the illustrious La-
dy Delphina, distinguished for her great Qua-
lity, but still more celebrated for her Beauty j
his own Lady, the admif'd Amabella, and a
young, blooming, pretty Virgin, whom we
will call by the Name of Adeodata about
which last Lady, the Question was t,o be put
to Mr. Campbell. Adeodata, it seems, was the
natural Daughter of this very fine Gentleman,
who had never let her into the Knowledge
of her own Birth, but had bred her up from
her Infancy under a borrowed Name, in the
U 3 '* Notion

<page 333>
294 The Life and Adventures
Notion that she was<. a TLelatio n s Daughter,
and recommended to His Care in her Infan-
cy. Now the Man that had the Second*
Sight was to be. try'd :' It was now to' be
put to the Proof, if he could tell Names, or
no. Amandiis was so much an .Unbeliever,
as to be willing: to hazard the Discovery.
Amabella and Delphina were Strangers, to
her real Name ; and ask'd Duncan Camp-
bell; not doubting, but he would set down
that which she ordinarily went by. Ama-
bella had indeed been told by Amaridiis, that
Adeodata was the natural Daughter of a near
Friend of his; but who this near Friend
was, remain'd a Secret : That was the Point
which lay upon our'Duncan Campbell to disco-
ver. When the Question was proposed to
him, what her Name was; he .look'd at her
very stedfastly, and shook his Head ; and after
some Time, he wrote down, that it Would
be a very difficult Name for him to fix up-
on. And truly so it. prov'd : He toil'd for
every Letter till he sweated ; and the La-
dies laugh'd incontinently, 'imagining that
he was in an Agony of Shame and Confu-
sion, at finding himself pos'd. He desired
Amandus to withdraw a' little, for that he
- could not so well take a full and proper Sur-
vey of Ladies Faces,' when a Gentleman was
by. This Disturbance and Perplexity of his,
afforded them'"'still:more Subject of Mirth;
and that Excuse was taken as a Pretence, and
- •' a Put-

<page 334>
Of Mr. DUNCA&GAMPBELit zp$
a Put-riff^' to cover his Shame the better, and
hide from one at least,'that he was but a
downright Bungler, in what he pretended
to be so wonderful an. Artist. However,
after two Hours hard Sweat and Labour, and
viewing the Face in different Shades and
Lights, (for I must observe to the Reader,
that there is a vast deal of Difference some
lie can tell in a Minute or two, with Ease;
some not in less than four or five Hours, and
that with great Trouble ;) he undeceived
them with Regard to his Capacity. He wrote
down, that Adeodata's real Name was Aman-
da, as being the natural Daughter of Aman-
dus. Delpbina and Amabella were surpriz'd
at the Discovery j and Amandus, when he
was call'd in, owning it a Truth, his Wife
AmabeUa applauded the curious Way of her
coming by such a Discovery, when Adeodata
was just marriageable; took a Liking to her,
as if her own Daughter; and every Thing
ended with Profit, Mirth and Chearfulness. I
could add a Thousand more Adventures of
Mr. Campbells Life, but that would prove te-
dious ; and as the Town has made a great De-
mand for the Book, it was thought more pro-
per to conclude it here. The most diverting
of all are to be found, best to the Life, in
Original Letters that pass'd between Mr. Camp-
bell and his Correspondents ; some select ones
of which will be shortly publiffi'd, with a
Continuation of his Life to the present Tim e*
U 4 v for

<page 335>
%$6 The Life and Adventures, &c.!
for the farther Entertainment of such Read-
ers as shall relish this Treatise : In which,
the Author hopes, he shall be esteem'd to have
endeavour'd at the Intermingling of some
curious Disquisitions of Learning, with enter-
taining Paslages ; and to have ended all the
merriest Adventures with a sober, instructive,
and edifying Moral; which, to those who are
not willing to believe the Stories, is reckon'd
sufficient to recommend even Fables them-
selves.

THE

<page 336>
*9 7

THE
A P PEN D I X.
T is not that Mr. Duncan Camp-
bell stands in need of my Argu-
ments, to prove that he is in no
respect liable to the Acts of Par-
liament made against Fortune-
tellers, &c. that I undertake the writing of
this Appendix, the true Reason thereof, be-
ing the more completely to finish this Un-
dertaking : For having, in the Body of the
Book it self fully proved a Second-Sight,
and that the same frequently happens to
Persons, some of them eminently remark-
able for Piety and Learning, and have from
thence accounted for the Manner of Mr.
Campbell's performing those Things he pro-
fesies, to the great Surprize, and no less Sa-
tisfaction of all the Curious who are plea-
sed to consult him ; and at the same time
proved the Lawfulness of such his Perfor-
mances


<page 337>
29§ The Life and Adventures
mances from the Opinions of some of the
most.Lea rned in holy Science; I thought
it not improper to add the following shor't
. Appendix, (being a Summary of several
Actsof Parliament made againfaFortune-tellers,
^~^Twjurfrty Gipsies (i. e. Eg-yptiani), Sorcerers,
Pretenders to Prophesy, &c. with some
proper Remarks, suited to our present Pur-
pose) as well to satisfy them who are fan-
tastically Wife, and obstinately shut their
Eyes against the most refulgent Reason,, and
are wilfully deaf to the most convincing
and persuasive 'Arguments, and thereupon
cry out, that Mr. Campbell is either an Im,-
postor and a Cheat, or at least a Person
who acts. by the Assistance of unlawful
Powers ; as also to put to silence the no
less waspish Curs, who are always snarling
at such, whom Providence. has distinguish a
by more excellent Talents than their Neigh-
bours. True Merit is always the Mark,
against which Traducers level their keenest
Darts; and Wit and Invention oftentimes
join Hands with Ignorance and Malice to
foil those who excel. Art 'has no greater
Enemy than Ignorance ; and were there no
such Thing a!s Vice, Virtue would not shine
with half its Lustre. Did ' Mr. Campbell
perform those wonderful Things' he is so
deservedly famous for, as these Cavillers
fay, by holding Intelligence with Infernal'
Powers, or by any unjustifiable Means, ' f
am

<page 338>
of Mr. Dun canCampbell . a^9
am-of Opinion, he would find very few, in
this Atheistical Age, who would open then-
Mouths against him, since none love to act
•Counter to the Interest of that Master they
industriously serve. And did he, on the other
Hand, put the Cheat upon the World-, as they ,
maliciously assert, I fancy he would then be
more generally admired, especially, in a Coun-
try Where the Game is so universally, art-
fully, and no less profitably play'd, and that
with Applause, since those Pretenders to
Wisdom merrily divide the whole Species of
Mankind into the two Classes of Knaves and
Fools^ fixing the Appellation of Folly only
upon those whom they think not Wise, that
is, wicked enough to have a Share with
them in the profitable Guilt.;
Our Laws are as well intended -by their
wife Makers to skreen the Innocent, as to
punish the Guilty ; and where their Penal-
ties are remarkably severe, the Guilt they
punish is of a proportionable Size Art,
which is a Man's Property when acquires
claims a Protection from those very Laws
which false Pretenders thereto are to be try'd
and punished by, or else all Science would
soon have an end ; for no Man would dare
make use of any Talent Providence had
lent him, and his own industrious Applica-
tion had improved, should he be immedi-
ately try'd and condemn'd (by those Statues,
which

<page 339>
}oo The Life and Adventures
which are made to suppress Villains,) by eve-
ry conceited and half learned Pedant.
'Tis true indeed, those excellent Statutes,
which are made against a sort of People,
who pretend to Fortune-telling, and the like,
are such as are well warranted, as being
built upon the best Foundation, viz. Reli-
gion and Policy; and were Mr. Campbell
guilty of any such Practice, as those are
made to punish, I openly declare, that I
mould be so far from endeavouring to de-
fend his Cause, that I would be one of the
first that should aggravate his Crime, there-
by to enforce the speedier Execution of
those Laws upon him which are made against
such Offenders. But when he is so far from
acting, that he doth not even pretend to any
such Practice, or for countenancing the same
in others, as is manifest from the many De-
tections he has made of that sort of Villany,
which the Book furnishes us with, I think
my self sufficiently justified for thus pleading
in his Defence.
I cannot but take Notice, in Reading the
Statutes made against such Offenders, our
wife Legislature hath not in any part of
them seem'd so much as to imply, that
there are in reality any such wicked Persons
as they are made against, to wit, Conjurers,
&c. but that they are only Pretenders to
those infernal Arts, as may reasonably be
, - inferr'd

<page 340>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell^ 301
inferr'd from the Nature of the Penalties
they inflict; for bur first Laws of that Ibit
only inflicted a Penalty, which asfected the
Goods and Liberty of the Guilty, and not
their Lives, tho' indeed they were afterwards
forced to heighten the Punishment with a
Halter; not that they were better convinc'd,
as I humbly conceive, but because the Crimi-
nals were most commonly Persons who had
no Goods to forfeit, and to whom their Li-
berty was no otherwise valuable, but as it gave
them the opportunity of doing Mischief. In-
deed our Law-Books do furnish us with ma-
ny Instances of Persons, who have been try'd
and executed for Witchcraft and Sorcery, but
then the wiser part of Mankind have taken the
Liberty to condemn the Magistrate, at that
time of Day, of too much Inconsideration,
and the Juries of an equal share of Credulity:
And those who have suffer'd for such Crimes
have been commonly Persons of the lowest
Rank, whose Poverty might occasion a Dis-
like of them in their Fellow-Creatures, and
their too artless Defence, subject them to
their mistaken Justice; so that upon the
whole, I take the Liberty to conclude, and,
I hope, not without good Grounds, that
those Laws were made to deter Men from
an idle Pretence to mysterious and unjusti-
fiable Arts, which, if too closely pursued,
commonly lead them into the darkest Villa-
ny, not only that of deceiving others, bu^
as

<page 341>
jo* The Life and A d v e n t.ur es
as far as in them lye, making themselves
Slaves to the Devil? And not to prevent
and hinder Men from useful Enquiries, and
from the Practice of sueh Arts, which tho*
they are. in themselves :mysterious, yet are,
and may be lawful. . : n .
I would not however be thought, in con-
tradiction to my former Arguments, to as-
sert, that there..never were, or that there
now are;no Persons, such as Wizards, Sor-
cerers, &c. for by so doing, I should be as
liable to be censored for my Incredulity, as
those who defame Mr. Campbell on that Ac-
count, are for their want of Reason and com-
mon Honesty. Holy and Prophane Writ,: I
confess, furnishes us with many Instances of
such Persons ; .but we must not from thence
hastily infer, that all those Men are such who
are spightfully branded with theodious Guilt;
for were it in the Devil's Power to ,:make
every wicked Man a Wizard ,-and Woman a
Witch, he soon would have Agents enough
to shake this lower World • to Atoms; but
the Almighty,) who restrains.'him, likewise
restrains those,.:: • : .,• .r
Having premised thus much, I shall'now
proceed to consider some of the Acts of Part
liament themselves; the Persons against whom
they weUe made, and the Necessity of making
the fame. And some of the first Acts we
meet with, were those which were made
against a sort of People . called Gfpsw%
4,,v Persons,

<page 342>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell
Persons, who, if in reality such, might, if
any, be suspected of practising what we call
the Black An, the same having been for
many Ages encouraged in their Country;
nay, so much has it been by them favour'd,
that it was introduced into their superstiti-
ous Religion (if J may without an Absur-
dity call it so} and made an essential Part
thereof: And, I believe, Mahometanism has
not much mended the Matter, -since it has
imperiously reigned there, or in any respect
reform'd that Idolatrous Nation. Now the
Mischief these Persons might do (being so
much in the Devil's Power) among the un«
wary, was thought too considerable not to
be provided against ,• and therefore our wise
Legislature, the more effectually to prevent
the same, by striking at the very Founda-
tion, made an Act in the iz H. VIII.
That if any, calling themselves Gypsies,
do come into this Realm, they shall forfeit
all their Goods; and being demanded, shall
depart the Realm within fifteen . Days, upon
pain of Imprisonment ; and the Importers of
them by another Act, were made liable to
a.heavy Penalty. This Act was continu'd by
the i LPh. and Ma. Conjuration, Witchcraft,
Inchantmenty and .'So rcery, to get Money, or
consume any Person in his Body, Members,
or Goods, or to provoke any Person to un-
lawful Love, was by the 33 if. VIII. 14. and
the' 5 Eliz, 16. and the 1 Jac. I. iz. made
(.yfjjj.tr Felony

<page 343>
304 The Lin and Adventures
Felony ; and by the same 33 H. VIII. 14. it
was made Felony to declare to another any
false Prophecies upon Arms, &c. but this
Act was repealed by the 1 Ed. VI. 12. but
by another Act of the 3 and 4 of Ed. VI.
15.. it was again enacted, that all such Per-
sons who should pretend to Prophecies, &c.
mould, upon Conviction for the first Offence
forfeit Ten Pounds, and one Year s Impri-
sonment ; and for the second Offence, all his
Goods and Imprisonment for Life. And by
the 7. Ed. VI. 11. the same was made to
continue but till the then next Sessions of
Parliament. And by the 5. Eliz. i?. the
fame Act was again renewed against fanta-
stical Prophesiers, &c. but both those Acts
were repealed by the 1 Jac. I. 12.
Thus sar we find, that for Reasons of State,
and for the Punishment of particular Persons,
those Acts were made and repealed, as oc-
casion required, and not kept on foot, or in-
deed were they ever made use of, as I can
remember in my reading, against any Per-
sons whose Studies led them into a useful
Enquiry into the Nature of Things, or a
lawful Search into the Workings of Na-
ture it self, by which means many Things
are foretold long before they come to pals,
as Eclypses, and the like, which Astrologers
successfully do, whose Art has been in all A-
gcs held in so great Esteem, that the first Mo-
narches of the Eajl made it their peculiar
Study,

<page 344>
os Mr. Duncan Camfbjeli." 305-
Study, by which means they deservedly ac-
quired to themselves the Name of Magi or
Wife Men; but, on the contrary, were pro-
vided against Persons profligate and loose,
who, under a Pretence and Mask of Science,
commit vile and roguish Cheats; and this
will the more plainly appear, if we consider
the Letter and express Meaning of the follow-
ing Acts, wherein the Perfonslam speaking of
are described by such Characters which suf-
ficiently prove the Aslertion : For in the 39
of Eli&. 4. it was Enacted, That all Persons'
calling themselves Scholars going about beg-
ging,Sea-faring Men pretending Losses of their
Ships and Goods at Sea, and going about the
Country begging, 01 using any subtile Craft,
feigning themselves to have Knowledge in Phi-
sicgnomy, Palmistry, or any other the like
crafty Science, or pretending that they can tell
Destinies, Fortunes, or such like fantastical
Imaginations, shall be taken and deem'd
Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and shall
be stripp'd naked from the Middle upwards,
and whipp'd till his,or herBody be bloody .And
by the 1 Jam. 1. iz. for the better restraining
of the said Offences, and for the farther pu-
nishing the fame, it was farther enacted, That
any Person or Persons using Witchcraft Sor-
cery, &c. and all their Aiders, Abettors, and
Counsellors, being convicted, and attainted
of the fame Offences, shall suffer Pain of
Death as Felons, without the Benefit of Cler-
X gy;


<page 345>
306 The Life and Adv^ntur es

gy : Or to tell and declare in what Place any
Treasure of Gold and Silver should or might
be found in the Earth, or other secret Places:
Or where Goods or Things lost or stol'n
should be found: Or to provoke any Person
to unlawful Love, such Offender to suffer
Imprisonment for one whole Year without
Bail or Mainprize, and once in every Quarter
of the said Year mail in some Market-Town,
or upon the Market-Day, or at any such Time
as any Fair shall be kept there, stand openly
in the Pillory for the Space of six Hours, and
there shall openly confess his or their Offence;
and for the second Offence shall suffer Death
as Felons without the Benefit of Clergy.
That these Laws were made against a Set
of Villains, whose natural Antipathy to Ho-
nesty and Labour, fumish'd them with Pre-
tensions to an uncommon Skill, thereby the
more easily to gull and cheat the superstiti-
oufly credulous, and by that means discover
from them some such Secrets that might far-
ther them in perpetrating the more consum-
mate Villany, is plain from the very Words
and Expressions of the very Acts themselves,
and the Description of the Persons they are
made against; and not, as I before observed,
to prevent and hinder Men from the lawful
Enquiry after useful, delightful, a,nd profitable
.Knowledge.
Mr. Campbelly who has been long a settled
and reputable Inhabitant in many eminent
y' Parts

<page 346>
of Mr. Duncan Campb el il 307

Parts of the City of London, cannot., I am
lure, be look'd upon as one of those these
Acts of Parliament were made against, un-
less we first strip the Acts themselves of their
own natural, express and plain Meaning, and
cloath them with that which is more obscure,
unnatural, forced, and constraint ; a Practice,
which, if allowed, would make them wound
the Innocent and clear the Guilty, and ren-
der them, not our Defence but our greatest
Evil ; they would, by that means, become
a perfect Æriigma, (or Riddle) and be so far
from being admired for their Plainness, that
they would be even exploded like the Oracles
of the Heathens for their double Meaning.
If Mr* Campbell has the Second-Sight, as is
unquestionable from the allowed Maxim, that
what has been may be again, and by that
means can take a View of Contingencies, and
future Events ; so long as he confines these
Notices of approaching Occurrences to a good
Purpose, and makes use of them only inno-
cently and charitably to warn Persons from do-
ing such Things, that according to his Con-
ceptions would lead them into Misfortune,
or else in putting them upon such Arts that
maybe of Use and Benefit to themselves and
Posterity, always having a strict Regard to
Morality and Religion to which he truly ad.v
heres : Certainly, I think, he ought so much
the more to be admired for the fame, by how
much the more this his excellent Knowledge
X 1 is

<page 347>
^o8 The Life and Adventures
is surpassing that of other Men, and not be
therefore unjustly upbraided with the injuri-
ous Character of a Cheat, or an ill Man:
However, this I will presume to affirm, and I
doubt not but to have my Opinion confirm'd
by the Learned Sages of the Law, that this
innocent Practice, and I venture to add, ho-
nest one too, doth by no means entitle him
to the Penalties of the before-mentioned
Laws made against Fortune-tellers, and such
sort of profligate Wretches ; which it as great
an Absurdity to decry, as it would be to call
him, who is a settled and reputable Inhabi-
tant, a Stroler or wandring Beggar.
Again, It is true that Mr. Campbell has re-
lieved many that have been supposed to have
been bewitched, as is related and well attested
in this Account of his Life j but will any one
from thence argue that he himself is a real
Conjurer or Wizard, because he breaks the
Chains by which those unhappy Wretches were
bound ? No surely, for if that were the Case,
we might then as well indict the Physician
who drives away a malignant Distemper, and
roots out its latentCause by his mysterious Skill
in Plants and Drugs; or conclude, that the
Judge who condemns a Criminal is for the
fame Reason guilty of the self-same Crime for
which the Offender is so by him condemned.
Persons who delight in such unnatural Con-
clusions, must certainly be in love with the
greatest Absurdities, and must entirely aban-
don

<page 348>
of Mr. Duncan Campbell. 309
don their natural Reason, before they can be
brought to conclude, that the Prince of Dark-
ness would assist Men in destroying his own
power.
The best Answer I can afford these Men is
Silence for if they will not argue upon the
Principles of Reason, or be guided by her
dictates, I think them no more fit to be con-
tended with, in a rational and decent man-
ner, than Bedlamites, and such who are bereft
of all Understanding. A Rod is the best Ar-
gument for the Back of a Fool, and Contempt
the be# Usage that ought to be shewn to every
head-strong and ignorant Opponent.;
In a Word, I know of no Branch of Mr.
Campbell's Practice that bears the least Resem-
blance to those Crimes mentioned in the fore-
going Acts. That he can and doth tell Peoples
Names at first Sight, tho' perfect Strangers to
him, is confessed by all who have made the
curious Enquiry at his Hands; but what part
of the Law, I would fain knaw,is that against i
Knowledge, and a clear Sight into Things not
common, is not only an allowable, but a com-
mendable (Qualification j and whether this
Knowledge in him be inherent, accidental, or
the result of a long Study, the Case is still the
fame ; since we are aslured he doth it by no
unlawful Intelligence,or makes use of the same
to any ill Purpose, and therefore is undoubted-
ly as lawful as to draw natural Conclusions,
from right Premises. Hard is the Fate of any
X 3 Man

<page 349>
^io The Life and Adven ture s,
Man to be ignorant, but much harder would
his Lot be, if he were to be punished for being
Wife, and, like Mr. Campbell, excelling others
in this kind of Knowledge.
Much more might be said in Defence of
Mr. Campbell and the Art he profesferh, but as
the Arguments which are brought against
him by his Enemies on the one Hand,, are
trivial and ill-grounded; I therefore think
they deserve no farther Refutation ,. so on the
other, his Innocency is too clear' to require it.
After having thus taken a Survey of Mr.
Campbell's Practices, with regard to their Le-
gality according to the Statutes and the Laws
of the Nation wherein he lives, we will con-
sider next, whether according to the stated
Rules of Casuistry, among the great Divines
eminent for their Authority, it may be lawful
for Mr. Campbell to predict, or for good
Christian. Persons to visit his House, and con-
sult him about his Predictions. I have upon
this Head examined all the learnedest Casuists
I could.meet with In ancient Times, for I
cannot meet (in my readings with any Mo-
derns that treat thoroughly upon this Case,
or I should rather have chosen them, because
perhaps the Second.Sight was less known in
those aritient Days than it has been since, and
ib might escape their Notice.
My Design is first to give the Reader a
distinct Summary of all that has been said of
'this Matter, and to do it as succinctly and

briefly

<page 350>
esMt". DuNCANCARsPBELf. ^hSr

briefly as possible, and then to argue my
self from what they agree upon as to this
Man's particular Case.
That every one may have recourse to the
Authors themselves, if they have a Curiosity*
and find that I don't go about to impose up-
on their Judgments, I will here tell the Rea-
der where he may find the whole Content*
of the following little Abstract of Divinity
and Casuistry ; because it would be a tedious
piece of Work to set down the Words of each
of them distinctly, and quote them every
one round at the end of their several dif-
ferent Sentences, which tend to the fame
Meaning; but I will strictly keep to the Sense*
of them all -y and I here give the Reader tljeirj
Names, and the Places,'that he may consult
them himself, if his Inclination leads him to
be so curious; Thomas Aquinas 4. Distin.
34. quœjlto. 1. Art. 3. Bona 2. Dist.-y. Art.
2. Quest. 1. Johannes Major, 4. Dift. 34.
quœft. 2. Sylvester Verbo Malefico-, qwst. 8.
Rosella, Verb. Impedimentum if. cap. 18,
Tabiena, Verb.Jmped. 11 Vers. Cajetan, Tom.
r. Opusc. ri. de Malefic. Alphonfus a Cast.
Lib. id. de Juftd Hxreticomm pitnitione, cap*
IS- Cofmus Philiarchus, de Offic. Sacerdot.
p. %. 1. }. cap. 11. Toletus in Summa, lib. 4^
cap. 16. Spineus, im TraB. de Stnzjfrus.
Petrus Binsfield, in TraB. de Co)ife£wnibus
MalesicoYUm.
X 4 These

<page 351>
}t2. The Lit* And Adventures

These Divines have generally written up^
on the impious Arts of Magick, which they
call by the Name of Divination ; and this Di-
vination ('as they term it) they divide into
Kinds, the One, in which the Devil is ex~
prejly invoked to teach hidden and occult
Things; the Other, in which he is tacitly
called upon to do the same. An express In-
vocation is by Word or Deed, by which a real
Compact is actually made with the Devil, and
that is a Sin that asfects the Death of the Soul,
according to the Laws of Theology, and ought
to effect the Death of the Body, according to
Civil and Political Laws. The tacit Invoca-
tion of Dæmons is then only, when a Man
busies himself so far with such Persons, that it
is meet, and just, that the Devil Ihould be per-
mitted to have to do with him, though it was
opposite to the Intention of the Man.
But then this express Invocation again is
subdivided into several Species, according to
the divers Manners by which the Devil in-
structs these Men.
The first is Enchantment, which I need not
describe, and of which I will speak ho more,
because it is what every Body knows to be de-
testable,and no Body ought to know the Art
thereof.
The second is Divination by Dreams, when
any Instructions are expected from the Devit
by way of Dream, which is a capital Crime.
The

<page 352>
os Mr. Duncan Campbell^ %i%

The third is called Necromancywhich is,
when by the use of Blood and Writing, or
speaking certain Verses, the Dead seem to rise
again, and speak and teach future Things. For
tho the Devil can't recal a Soul departed, yet
he can (as some have thought) take the Shape
of the dead Corpse, himself actuate it by his
Subtilty, as if it was inform'd with a Soul. And
some affirm, that by the Divine Permission,
the Devil can do this, and spake so in the Case
of Samuel and Saul. But Divines of a more
solid Genius attribute that Power only to the
Deity, and fay, with Reason, that it is beyond
she Devil's Capacity. But it is certain this was
f a Divination done in dead Animals by the Use
of their Blood, and therefore the Word is de-
rived from the Greek vtxepv, which signifies
Dead, and Mclvthcc, which signifies Divination.
The fourth Species is called Divination by
the Pytbians, which was taken from Apollo,
the first Diviner, as Thomas Aquinas says in
his Secundd secundæ qu. 95. Artie. 3.
The fifth is called Geomancy, which is when
the Devil teaches any Thing by certain Signs
appearing in the Earthly Bodies, as in Wood,
Iron, or polished Stones, Beryls, or Glass.
The sixth is named Hydromancy, as when
a Dæmon teaches any Thing by Appearances
in the Water.
The seventh is stiled Æromancy ; which if
when he informs People of such Things by
Figures in the Air.

<page 353>
^14 The Lite and Adventures

* The Eighth B cntituled Pyromancy; that
is, when it instructs People by Forms appear-
ing in the Fire.
The Ninth is termed Antspicy ; which is,
when by Signs appearing in the Bowels of sa-
crificed Animals the Dæmon predicts at Altars.
, Thus tar, as to express Divination, or Invo-
cation of the Devil, which is detestable, and
the very consulting of Persons, that use such
J: - i - .... a.
Means, is according to the Jt
ment of all Casuists, the high Road to <
nal Damnation.
Now as to tacit Divination or Invocation
the Devil, that is divided into two subal-
Kinds. The first Kind is, when for the
of knowing hidden Things, they make
use of a vain .and superstitious Disposition
existing in Things to judge from; which
Disposition is not of a sufficient Virtue to lead
them to any 'real Judgment. The second
Kind of tacit. Divination is, when tha
Knowledge .is sought by the Disposition <
those Things, which Men effect on purpose
and of their own accord, in order to come
by and acquire that Knowledge.
"oth these Kinds of f^r;'rDivination are
subdivided into several Species, as are
rticularly mentioned by St. Tho. Aquin. Se-
*.(-. > i Se, nn u\ Quæst. Artie. 3. Gregory
SeValeht'w, Tomo 3. Disput. 6. quæst. n.
p\lhct#:2: YoHeWs in Sumrrsa. Lib. 4. cap. if.
And Michael Medina Lib. "V. de reft a in
Dewn

<page 354>
os Mr. Duncan Ca m fee i t. Y*5
Deum fide : pqfi sanBum Auguftinum. Lib. z'
de DoB. Christ. cap. 19. & sequem.
The first of these Kinds of tacit Divination,
contains under it the following several Species.
The first Species is called Genethliacal,
which is, when from the Movement or Situa^-
tion of the Stars, Men's Nativities are calcula-
ted and enquired into so far, as that from such
a Search they pretend to deduce the Know-
Events that are to attend them. This Thomas
Aquinas; and Sixtm Quintus condemns; but
I mall with Humility and Submission to great-
er Judgments enquire hereafter into their Rea-
sons, and give my Opinion why I think this
no evil Art; but I submit my Opinion, if,
after it is given, it is thought erroneous.
The second is Augury, when any Thing is
predicted from the chattering of Birds, or the
voice of Animals, and this may be either law-
ful, or unlawful. If it comes from natura Hn-
stinct (for Brutes having only a sensitive Soul^
have their Organs subject to the Disposition of
the greater Bodies in which they are contain-
ed, and principally of all to the Celestial Bo-
dies) his Augury is not amiss. For if when
Crows are remark'd to Kaw fas the Vulgar
Phrase is) more than ordinary, it is judging
according to the Instinct of their Nature,if we
expect Rain, and we may reasonably depend
upon'it, we shall be right if we foretel Rain to
be at Hand . But sometimes the Devils actuate

those

<page 355>
TVLife and Adventures
those Brute Animals to excite vain Ideas in
Men, contrary to what the Instinct of their
Nature compels them to. This is superstiti-
ous and unlawful, and forbid in holy Writ.
The Third is Aruspicy, when from the Flight
of Birds, or any other Motion of any Animals
whatsoever, Persons pretend to have an In-
sight and a penetrative Knowledge into oc-
cult and hidden Matters. >
The fourth consists in Omensy when for
Example a Man from any Words which others
may have spoken on Purpose or by Accident,
pretends to gather a way of looking into and
knowing any Thing of Futurity.
The fifth is Chiromancy, which consists in
making a pretence to the Knowledge of fu-
ture Things by the Figures and the Lines of
the Hands : And if it be by consulting the
Shoulder-bones of any Beast, it goes by the
Name of Spatulamancy.
As the first Kind of Divination, by a tacit
Invocation of the Devil, is divided into the
five Species above-mentioned; so also is the
second kind of tacit Divination or Invocation
of the Devil, divided into two Species by
St. Thomas Aquin. Secunda secund&, qua-
fi'wne nonagefimd quint a articulo tertio, and
too tedious to insert here.
Now all these Ways are by these Divines
accounted wicked, and I set them down that
People may avoid them. For hqw many Gyp-
sies and Pretenders to Cbyromattcy have we in.
London


<page 356>
0/jiff. Dun can Campbell! 817
London and in the Country ? How many that
are for Hydromancy, that pretend in Water
to shew Men mighty Mysteries? And how
many in Geomancy, with their Beryls and
their Glasles, that, if they are not under the
Instigation of the Devil, propogate the Scan-
dal at least by being Cheats, and who ought
to be punished to the utmost Severity, as
our English Laws enact ? Mr. Campbells who
hates, contemns, and abhors these ways, ought,
methinks, to be encouraged by their being
restrain'd ; and People of curious Tempers,
who always receive from him moral and good
Instructions, which make them happy in the
Conduct of Life, mould be animated in a
publick Manner to consult him, in order to
divert the curious Itch of their Humours from
consulting such wicked Impostors, or Diar
bolical Practicers, as too frequently abound
in this Nation, by reason of the inquisitive
Vulgar, who are more numerous in our Cli-
mate, than any I ever read of.
But now to argue the Cafe of Conscience
with regard to his particular Practice by way
of the Second-Sight, whether, in soro Con-
scientia, it is lawful for him to follow it, or
others to consult him ? The Divines above-
mentioned having never had any notice of
that Faculty in all Likelihood, or if they had,
never mentioning it, makes it a Point more
difficult for me to discuss ; but I think they
have stated some Cafes, by the making of
which



<page 357>
318 The hut. and Adyentures
which my Premises, I can deduce from all
the learned Men I have above quoted, a
Conclusion in favour of our Mr. Duncan
Campbell, and of those who consult him ; but
my Opinion mall be always corrected by those
who are wiser than my self, and to whom I
owe entire Submission. I take leave to fix
these Premises from them first, and to form
my Argument from them afterwards, in the
following manner. i.
Fir/?, It is allowed by all these Divines,
that a Knowledge which one may have of
suture Things within the order of Nature, is,
and may be lawful. , w
'. Secondly, They imply, that where Justice
is not violated, it is lawful both to predict,
and to consult.
Thirdly, Many of them, but particularly
Aureolus puts this Question: Is it lawful to
go to one that deals in the Black Art, to per-
soade them to cure any innocent Body, that
another Necromancer or Dealer in the Black
Art may have maliciously afflicted, and tor-
mented with Pains ? And some of these Ca-
suists, particularly Aureolus, say, it is lawful
on foch an Occasion to go to such a Con-
jurer, because the End is not Conjuration, but
freeing a Person from it. .
But I take leave to distent from these great
Men, and think they are in a double Mistake;
first

<page 358>
of Mr. D unc a n Cam p b e i i. 319
•first in stating the, Question,,, and then in mas-
king such an Answer, provided the Question
liad been stated right. „0;.t 3 vjr0 t ,\2
The Question is founded, upon this Suppo-
sition (which is past by as .granted) viz.
that one Necromancer could release a Person
bewitched by, another, which isr absolutely
false ; for it is against the Nature of the De-
vil to be made an Instrument to undo his own
Works of Impiety : But admitting*; and nor.
granting this to be possible,, and the Question
to be rightly stated, why still, these Casuists
are out in their Answer ?' It is lawful, reply
they, because the End of going to the Con-
jurers is not Conjuration, but freeing a good
Person from it: But the End is not the Poinj;
here to be consider'd, it is the Medium which
is bad that is to be constder'd. It is by Con-
juration, (according to their Hypothesis) the
other Conjuration is to be dissolved ; and
does not the common Rule, that a Man must
not do Evil that Good may come of it, for-
bid this Practice? And to speak my Opinion
plainly in that Case, the Friend that mould
consult a Conjurer for that End, would be
only so kind to put his own Soul in danger
of being guilty of Hell-torments, to relieve
his afflicted Friend from some bodily Pains,
which it would be a Virtue in him to suffer
with Patience and Resignation.
Others,almost all Divines,indeed agree, that
it is and may be lawful to go to a Conjurer
that


<page 359>
3i'o The Life and Adventures
that torments another, and give him Money
not to afflict the Patient any longer; because
that is only seeing him to desist from actings
after his conjuring manner.
These Premises thus settled, if we allow
the Second-Sight to be in-born and in-bred,
and natural and common to some Families,
which is proved in the Book; and if all that
Mr. Campbell has predicted in that Second-
sighted Way terminates with moral Advice,
and the Prosit of the Consulter, and without
the Violation of Justice to others, as the
Book mews all throughout; if he can relieve
from Witchcraft, as it seems Oath is to be
had he can, which no one that deals in the
Black Art can do, why then I need not draw
the Conclusion, every Reader will do it na-
turally ; they will avow all the strictest Laws
of Casuistry and Morality to be in favour of
Mr. Campbell and his Consulters.
F I N I S.

<page 360>
s

<page 361>
J

<page 362>

<page 363>
i


<page 364>
UNIVERSIrY OF MICHIGAN
3 9015 01374 7905

A 512488

<page 365>


<page 366>
