
<page 1>

<page 2>
Hubban
Imag. Vo
•At
Go j;

<page 3>

<page 4>


<page 5>

<page 6>


<page 7>

<page 8>

s

<page 9>

<page 10>
THE ..
LIFE
And Strange Surprizing
ADVENTURES
ROBINSON CRUSOE,
Of TORIC, Mariner:
Who lived eight and twenty Years all alone in
an un-inhabited Island on the Coast of America,
near the Mouth of the Great River oiOroortoque;
Having been cast on Shore by Shipwreck, where-
in all the Men perished but himself.
With an ACCOUNT how he was at last as
strangely deliver'd by Pyrates.
Written by Himself.

LONDON: Printed for W. Tatior at the
I Ship in Pater-Noster-Row. Mdccxix.

<page 11>

<page 12>

t^^AUn* THE
PREFACE-
IFever the Story of any private
Man's Adventures in the
World were worth making
Publick, and were acceptabhwhen
Tublijtid, the Editor of this Ac-
count thinks this will be so.
The IVonders of this Man's
Life exceed all that (he thinks^)
is to be found extant \ the Use of
one Man being scarce capable of a
greater Variety.
The Story is told with Modesty,
with Seriousness, and with a reli-
gious: Application of Events to the
Uses to which wife Men always
V" aPPb

<page 13>

<page 14>
THE
L I FE
- •.
AND
A DV ENTUR ES
b f
Robinson Crusoe,
Was born in the Year 1^32, in the
City of York, of a good Family, tho'
not of that Country, my Father be-
ing a Foreigner of Bremdn, who fettled
first at Hull: He got a good Estate
by Merchandize, and leaving oft" his
Trade, lived afterward at York, from whence he had
married my Mother, whose Relations were, named
Robinson, a very good Family in that Country, and
from whom I was call'd Robinson Rreutx:naer; but by
the usual Corruption of Words in England, we are
now call'd, nay we call our selves, and write our
NameCV«/ttf,and so my Companions always eall'd me.
B I had


<page 15>

<page 16>
[J]
that th%se things were all either too far above me,
or too far below me; that mine was the middle
State, or what might be called the upper Station
of Low Life, which he had found by long Experience
was the best State in the World, the most suited to
human Happiness, not exposed to the Miseries and
Hardships, the Labour and Sufferings of the me-
chanick Part of Mankind, and not embarase'd with
the Pride, Luxury, Ambition and Envy of the up-
per Part of Mankind* He told me, I might judge
of the Happiness of this State, by this one thing,
viz,. That this was the State of Life which all
other People envied; that Kings have frequently la-
mented the miserable Consequences of being born
to great Things, and wish, they had been placed
in the Middle of the two E;ftremes, between the
Mean and the Great; that the wife Man gave his
Testimony to this as the just Standard of true Fe-
licity, when he prayed to have neither Poverty or
Riches.
He bid me observe it, and I should always find,
that the Calamities of Life were shared among the
upper and lower Part of Mankind; but that the
middle Station had the fewest Disasters, and was
not expos'd to so many Vicissitudes as the higher ot
lower Part of Mankind; nay, they were not subje*
cted to so many Distempers and Uneasinesses either
of Body or Mind, as those were, who by vicious
Living, Luxury and Extravagancies on one Hand,
or by hard Labour, want of Necessaries, and mean
or insufficient Diet on the other Hand, bring Di-
stempers upon themselves by the natural Consequen-
ces of their Way of Living; That the middle Sta-
tion of Life was calculated for all kind of Virtues
and all kind of Enjoyments; that Peace and Plen-
ty were the Hand-maids of a middle Fortune;
that Temperance, Moderation, Quietness,Health,
£ a Society,
» , .

<page 17>

<page 18>
vail, his young Desires prompting him to run int°
the Army where he was kill'd ; and tho' he fai^
he would not cease to pray for me, yet he woul^
venture to say to me, that if I did take this foolish
Step, God would not bless me, and I would have
Leisure heteafter to reflect upon having neglected
his Counsel when there might be none to assist in
my Recovery.
I observed in this last Part of' his ..Discourse,
which was truly Prophetick, tho'I suppose my Fa-
ther did not know it to be so himself; I say, I ob-
served the Tears run down his Face very plentiful-
ly, and especially when he spoke of my Brother
who was kill'd ;^and that when he spoke of my ha-
ving Leisure to repent, and none to assist me, he
was so mov'd, that he broke oft the Discourse, and
told me, his Heart was so full, he could fay no
more to me.
I was sincerely affected with this Discourse, as
indeed who could be otherwise? and I resolv'd not
to think of going Abroad any more, but to settle
at Home according to my Father's Desire. But
alas! a few Days wore it all off; and in short, to
prevent any of my Father's farther Importunities,
in a few Weeks after, I resolv'd to run quite away
from him. However, I did not act so hastily neither
as my first Heat of Resolution prompted, but I took
my Mother, at a time when I thought her a little
pleafanter than ordinary, and told her, that my
Thoughts were so entirely bent upon seeing the
World, that I should never settle to any thing with
Resolution enough to go through with it, and my
Father had better give me his Consent than force
me to go without it; that I was now Eighteen
Years old, which was too late to go Apprentice to
a Trade, or Clerk to an Attorney; that I was sure,
if I did, I should never serve out my Time, and I
B 3 should

<page 19>

<page 20>
.£73 .
one of my Companions being going by Sea to Lon-
don, in his Father's Ship, and prompting me to go
with them, with the common Allurement of Seafa-
ring Men, viz,, That it should cost me nothing for
my Passage, I consulted neither Father or Mother
any more, rior so much as sent them Word of it; but
leaving them to hear of it as they might, without
asking God's Blessing, or my Father's, without any
Consideration of Circumstances or Consequences*
and in an ill Hour, God knows, on the first of Sep-
tember 1651, I went on board a Ship bound for Lori'
don; never any young Adventurer's Misfortunes, I
believe, began sooner, or continued longer than mine.
The Ship was no sooner gotten out of the Humber>
but the Wind began to blow, and the Winds to rife
in a most frightful manner; and as I had never
been at Sea before, I was most inexpressible sick in
Body, and terrify'd in my Mind: I began now se-
riousiy to reflect upon what I had done, and how
justly I was overtaken by the Judgment of Heaven
for my wicked leaving my Father's House, and a-
bandoning my Duty; all the good Counsel of my
Parents, my Father's Tears and my Mother's En-
treaties came now fresh into my Mind, and my
Conscience, which was not yet come to the Pitch
of Hardness to which it has been since, reproach'd
me with the Contempt of Advice, and the Breach
of my Duty to God and my Father.
All this while the Storm encreas'd, and the Sea,
which I had never been upon before, went very high,
tho' nothing like what I have seen many times
since; no, nor like what I saw a few Days after
But it was enough to affect me then, who was but
a young Sailor, and had never known any thing of
the Matter. I expected every Wave would have
swallowed us up, and that every time the Ship fell
down, as I thought, in the Trough or Hollow
. B 4 of

<page 21>

<page 22>
. c 9 ]
Wind ? A Cap full d'you call it? said I, 'twas a terri-
ble Storm: A Storm, you Fool you, replies he, do you
call that a Storm, -why it was nothing at all; give us but
a good Ship and Sea-room, and we think nothing of fitch
a Squal of Wind ai that; but you re but.afrejh Water
Saillor, Bob; come let us make a Bowl of Punch and
we'll jorget all that; d'ye fee what charming Weather 'tis
now} To make short this fad Part of my Story,
we went the old way of all Sailors, the Punch* was
made, and I was made drunk with it, and in that
one Night's Wickedness I drowned all my Repen-
tance, all my Reflections'upon my past Conduct,
and all my Resolutions for my future. In a word,
as the Sea was returned to its Smoothness of Sur-
sace and settled Calmness by the Abatement of that
Storm, so the Hurry of my Thoughts being over,
my Fears and Apprehensions of being swallow'd up
by the Sea being forgotten, and the Current of my
former Desires return'd, I entirely forgot the Vows
and Promises that I made in my Distress. I found
indeed some Intervals of Reflection, and the serious
Thoughts did, as it were, endeavour to return a-
gain sometimes, but I shook them off, and rouz'd
my self from them as it were from a Diilemper,
and applying my self to Drinking and Company,
soon matter'd the Return of those Fits, for so I
call'd them, and I had in five or six Days got as
compleat a Victory over Conscience as any young
Fellow that resolv'd not to be troubled with it,
could desire: But I was to have another Trial for
it still; and Providence, as in such Cases generally
it does, resolv'd to leave me entirely without Excuse.
For if I would not take this for a Deliverance, the
next was to be such a one as the worst and most
harden'd Wretch among us would Confess both the
Danger and the Mercy.
s" * The
i
'/

<page 23>

<page 24>
'[ n ]
Hurries, I was stupid, lying still in my Cabbin,
which was in the Steerage, and cannot describe my
Temper: I could ill re-aflume the first Penitence
which I had so apparently trampled upon, and har-
den'd my self against: I thought the Bittterness of
Death had been past, and that this would be no-
think too like the first. But when the Master him-
self came by me, as I said just now, and said we
should be all lost, I was dreadfully frighted: I got
up out of my Cabbin, and look a out; but such a
dismal Sight I never saw: The Sea went Mountains
high, and broke upon us every three or four Mi-
nutes: When I could look about, I could fee no-
thing but Dillress round us: Two Ships that rid
near us, we found, had cut their Masts by the
Board, being deep loaden; and our Men cry'dour,
that a Ship which rid about a Mile a-Head of us
was foundered. Two more Ships being driven from
their Anchors, were run out of the Roads to Sea,
at all Adventures, and that with not a Mast stand-
ing. The light Ships fared the best, as not so much
labouring in the Sea; but two or three of them
drove, and came close by us, running away with
only their Sprit-fail out before the Wind.
Towards Evening the Mate and Boatswain
begg'd the Master ot our Ship to let them cut a-
way the Fore-mast, which he was very unwilling
to: But the Boatswain protesting to him, that if he
did not, the Ship would founder, he consented;
and when they had cut away the Fore-mast, the
Main-mast stood so loose, and shook the Ship so
much, they were obliged to cut her away also, and
make a clear Deck.
Any one may judge what a Condition I must be
in at all this, who was but a young Sailor, and
who had been in such a Fright before at but a lit-
t'c. But if I can express at this Distance the
Thoughts

<page 25>

<page 26>
[ i3 3
dreadful thing happen'd. In a word, I was so sur-
prized, that I fell down in a Swoon. As this
was a time when every Body had'his own Life t6
think of, no Body minded me, or what was become
of me; but another Man stept up to the Pump, and
thrusting me aside with his Foot, let me lye, think-
ing I had been Dead; and it was a great while
before I came to my self.
We work'd on, but the Water encreasing in the
Hold, it was apparent that the Ship would founder,
and tho' the Storm began to abate a little, yet as
it was not possible she could swim till we might run
into a Port, so the Master continued firing Guns for
Help; and alight Ship who had rid it our just a
Head of us, ventured a Boat out to help us. It was
with the utmost hazard the Boat came near us, but
it was impossible for us to get on Board, or for the
Boat to Ke near the Ship Side, till at last the Men
rowing very heartily, and venturing their Lives to
save ours, our Men cast them a Rope over the Stern
with a Buoy to it, and then vered it out a great
Length, which they after great Labour and Hazard
rook hold of, and we haul'd them close under our
Stern and got all into their Boat. It was to no
Purpose for them or us after we were in the Boat to
think of reaching to their own Ship, so all agreed
to let her drive, and only to pull her in towards
Shore as much as we could, and our Master pro-
mised them, That if the Boat was stav'd upon
Shore he would make it good to their Master, so
partly rowing and partly driving, our Boat went a-
way to the Norward, floaping towards the Shore
almost as far as Winterton-Ness.
We were not much more than a quarter of an
Hour out of our Ship but we saw her. sink, and
then I understood for the first time what was meant
by a Ship foundering in the Sea; I must acknow-
ledge

<page 27>

<page 28>
C if ]
no Power to do it. I know not what to call this, nor
will I urge, that it is a secret over-ruling Decree
that hurries us on to be the Instruments of our own
Destruction, even tho' it be before us, and that we
push upon it with our Eyes open. Certainly no-
thing but some such decreed unavoidable Misery
attending, and which it was impossible for me to
escape, could have push'd me forward against the
calm Reasonings and Perswasions of my most re-
tired Thoughts, and against two such visible In-
structions as I had met with in my first Attempt.
My Comrade, who had help'd to harden me be-
fore, and who was the Master's Son, was now less
forward than I; the first time he spoke to me after
we were at Yarmouth, which was not till two or
three Days, for we were separated in the Town
to several Quarters; I fay, the first time he saw me,
it appear'd his Tone was alter'd, and looking very
melancholy, and shaking his Head, ask'd me how
I did, and telling his Father who I was, and how
I had come this Voyage only for a Tryal, in order
to go farther abroad; his Father turning to me
with a very grave and concern'd Tone, Young Man,
fays he, you ought never to go to Sea anymore, you ought
to take this for a slain and visible 'Token that you are
not to be a Seafaring Man. Why, Sir, said I, will you
go to Sea no more? That is another Cafe, said he,
it is my Calling, and therefore my Duty; but as you made
this Voyage for a Tryal, you fee what a Taste Heaven has
given you of what you are to expebl if you persist; perhaps
this is all befallen us on your Account, like Jonah in the
Ship of Tarshish. Pray, continues he, what are you?
and on what Account did you go to Sea? Upon that I
told him some of my Story ; at the End of which he
burst out with a strange kind of Passion, What had
I done, says he, that such an unhappy Wretch should
come into my Ship ; • I would not set my Foot in

<page 29>

<page 30>
[ i7]
the Remembrance of the Distress I had been in
wore off; and as that abated, the little Motion I
had in my Desires to a Return wore off with it,
till at last i quite laid aside the Thoughts of it,
and look'd out for a Voyage.
That evil Influence which carried me first away
from my Father's House, that hurried me into the
wild and indigested Notion of raising my Fortune;
and that imprest those Conceits so forcibly upon
me, as to make me deaf to ail good Advice, and
to the Entreaties and even the Command of my Fa-
ther: I fay the same Influence, whatever it wast
presented the most unfortunate of all Enterprizes
to my View; and I went on board a Vessel bound
to the Coast of Africa; or as our Sailors vulgarly
call it, a Voyage to Guiney.
It was my great Misfortune that in all these
Adventures I did not ship my self as a Sailor;
whereby, tho' I might indeed have work'd a little
harder than ordinary, yet at the fame time I had
learn'd the Duty and Office of a Fore-mast Man;
and in time might have qualified my self for a
Mate or Lieutenant, if not for a Master. But as
it was always my Fate to choose for the worse,
so I did here; for having Money in my Pocket,
and good Cloaths upon my Back, I would always
goon board in the Habit of a Gentleman ; and so
I neither had any Business in the Ship, or learn'd to
do any.
It was my Lot first of all to fall into pretty good
Company in London, which does not always hap-
pen to such loose and unguided young Fellows as I
then was; the Devil generally not omitting to lay
some Snare for them very early: But it was not so
with me, I first fell acquainted with the Master of
a Ship who had been on the Coast of Guin:y; and
who having had very good Success there, was re-'
C solved

<page 31>

<page 32>
[19]
Yet even in this Voyage I had my Misfortunes
too; particularly, that I was continually Sick, be-
ing thrown into a violent Calenture by the excessive
Heat of the^Gimate; our principal Trading being
upon the Coast, from the Latitude of 15 Degrees,
North even to the Line it self. ,"
I was now set up fora Guiney Trader; and my
Friend, to my great Misfortune, dying soon after his
Arrival, I resolved to go the same Voyage again,
and I embark'd in the same Vessel with one who was
his Mate in the former Voyage, and had now got
the Commandos the Ship. This was the unhap-
piest Voyage that ever Man made; for tho' I did
not carry quite 100 /. of my new gain'd Wealth,
so that 1 had 200 left, and which I lodg'd with
my Friend's Widow, who was very just to me, yet
I fell into terrible Misfortunes in this Voyage; and
the first was this, viz,. Our Ship making her Course
towards the Canary Islands, or rather between those
Islands and the African Shore, was surprized in the
Grey of the Morning, by iTurki/h Rover of Sallee,
who gave Chase to us with all the Sail she could
make. We crowded also as much Canvass as our
Yards would spread, or our Masts carry, to have
got clear; but finding the Pirate gain'd upon us,
and would certainly come up with us in a few
Hours, we prepar a to fight; our Ship having 1 %
Guns, and the Rogue 18. About three in the Af-
ternoon he came up with us, and bringing too by
Mistake, just athwart our Quarter, instead of a-
thw art our Stern, as he intended, we brought 8 of
our Guns to bear on that Side, and pour'd in a
Broadside upon him, which made him sheer off a-
gain, after returning our Fire, and pouring in also
his small Shot from near 200 Men which hehad on
Board. However, we had not a Man touch'd, all
our Men keeping close. He prepar'd to attack us
C a again

<page 33>

<page 34>
[ II ]
little Garden, and do the common Drudgery of
Slaves about his House; and when he came home
again from his Cruise, he ordcr'd me to lye in the
Cabbin to look after the Ship.
Here I meditated nothing but my Escape; and
what Method I might take to effect it, but found
no Way that had the least Probability in it: No-
thing presented to make the Supposition of it ratio-
nal; for I had no Body to communicate it to, that
would embark with me, no Fellow-Slave, no Eng-
lishman, Irishman, or Scotsman there but my self > so
that for two Years, tho? I often pleased my self with
the Imagination, yet I never had the least encoura-
ging Prospect of putting it in Practice.
After about two Years an odd Circumstance pre-
sented it self, which put the old Thought of ma-
king some Attempt for my Liberty, again in my
Head: My Patron lying at Home longer than usu-
al, without fitting out his Ship, which, as I heard,
was for want of Money; he used constantly, once
or twice a Week, sometimes oftner, if the Weather
was fair, to take the Ship's Pinnace, and go out
into the Road a-fifliing; and as he always took me
and a young Maresco with him to row the Boat, we
made him ve,ry merry, and I prov'd very dexterous
in catching Fish; insomuch that sometimes he
would fend me with a Moor, one of his Kinsmen,
and the Youth the Maresco as they call'd him, to
catch a Dish of Fish for him.
. It happen'd one time, that going a fishing in a
stark calm Morning, a Fog rose so thick, that tho'
we were not half a League from the Shore we lost
Sight of it; and rowing we knew not whither or
which way, we labour d all Day, and all the next
Night, and when the Morning came we found we
had pull'd'off to Sea instead of pulling in for the
Shore; and that we were at least twoLeagues from
C 3 the;

<page 35>

<page 36>
[13 ]
clean, her Antienc and Pendants out, and every
thing to accommodate his Guests; when by and by
my Patron came on board alone,, and told me his
Guests had put off going, upon some Business that
fell out, and order d me with the Man and Boy,
as usual, to go out with the Boat and catch them
some Fish, for that his Friends were to sup at his
House; and commanded that as soon as I got some
Fish I should bring it home to his House; all which
I prepar'd to do.
This Moment my former Notions of Delive-
rance darted into my Thoughts, for now I found I
was like to have a little Ship at my Command; and
my Master being gone, I prepar'd to furnisti my
self, not for fishing Business, but for a Voyage;
tho' I knew not, neither did I so much as consider
whither I should steer; for any where to get out
of that Place was my Way.
My first Contrivance was to make a Pretence to
speak to this Moor3 to get something for our Sub-
sistance on board; for I told him we must not pre-
sume to eat of our Patron's Bread; he said, that
was true; so he brought a large Basket of Rusk
or Bisket of their kind, and three Jarrs with fresh
Water into the Boat; I knew where my Patron's
Cafe of Bottles stood, which it was evident by
the make were taken out of some English Prize; and
I convey'd them into the Boat while the Moor was
on Shore, as if they had been there before, for our
Master: I convey'd also a great Lump of Bees-
Wax into the Boat, which weighed above half a
Hundred Weight, with a Parcel of Twine or
Thread, a Hatchet, a Saw, and a Hammer, all
which were of great Use to us afterwards; espe-
cially the Wax to make Candles. Another Trick
I try'd upon him, which he innocently came into
also; his Name was Jsmael, who they call Muly,
C 4 or

<page 37>

<page 38>
. [ *5 ]
thing behind him, I took him by suprize with my
Arm under his Twist, and toil him clear over board
into the Sea; he rife immediately, for he swam
like a Cork, and call'd to me, begg'd to be taken
in, tpld me he would go all over the World with
me; he swam so strong after the Boat that he would
have reach'd me very quickly, there being but little
Wind; upon which 1 stept into the Cabbin, and
fetching one of the Fowling-piece-, I presented it
at him, and told him, I had done him no Hurt, and
if he would be quiet I would do him none : but
said I, y ou swim well enough to reach to the Shore
and the Sea is calm, make the best of your Way to
Shore, and I will do you no Harrn,but if you come
near the Boat I'll shoot you thro' the Head; for I
am resolved to have my Liberty; so he turn'd him-
self about and swam for the Shore, and I make no
doubt but he reach'd it with Ease, for he was an
Excellent Swimmer.
I could have been content to ha' taken this Moor
with me, and ha' dro wn'd the Boy, but there was no
venturing to trust him: When he was gone I turn'd
to the Boy, who they call'd Xury, and said to
him, Xury, if you will be faithful to me I'll make
you a great Man, but if you will not stroke your
Face to be true to me, that is,swear fy Mahomet and
his Father's Beard, I must throw you into the Sea
too; the Boy smil'd in my Face, and spoke so inno-
cently that 1 could not mistrust him; and swore'to
be faithful to me, and go all over the World with",
me- 'f.
,' While I was in View of the Moor that was
swimming, I stood out directly to Sea with the Boat,
rather stretching to Windward, that they might
think me gone towards the Straits-mouth (as indeed
any one that had been in their Wits must ha'been sup-
pos'd to do)for who wou'd ha'suppos'd we were sail'd

<page 39>

<page 40>
Cvj ]
Fear, and begg'd of me not to go on Shore till
Day; well Xury, said I, then I won't, but it may
be we may see Men by Day, who will be as bad to
us as those Lyons; then we give them the Jhoot Gun,
{ays Xury, laughing, make them run wey; such Englijb
Xury spoke by conversing among us Slaves. Howe-
ver I. was glad to see the Boy so cheerful, and I
gave him a Dram (out of our Patron's Case of Bot-
tles) to chear him up: After all, Xury's Advice
was good, and I took it, we dropp'd our little An-
chor and lay still all Night; I fay still, for we slept
none; for in two or three Hours we saw vast great
Creatures (we knew not what to call them) of
many forts, come down to the Sea-shore and run in-
to the Water, wallowing and washing themselves
for the Pleasure of cooling themselves; and they
made such hideous Howlings and Yellings, that I
never indeed heard the Kke.
Xury was dreadfully frighted, and indeed so was
I too; but we were both more frighted when we
heard one of these mighty Creatures come swim-
ming towards our Boat, we could not see him, but
we might hear him by his blowing to be a mon-
strous, huge and furious Beast; Xury said it was a
Lyon, and it might be so for ought I know; but
poor Xury cried to me to weigh the Anchor and
row away; no, fays I, Xury, we can flip our Cable
with the Buoy to it and go off to Sea, they cannot
follow us far; I had no sooner said so, but I per-
ceiv'dthe Creature (whatever it was) within two
Oars length, which something surprized me; how-
ever I immediately slept to the Cabbin-door, and
taking up my Gun fir'd at him, upon which he im-
mediately tum'd about, and swam towards the
Shore again.
But it is impossible to describe the horrible Noi-
ses, and hideous Cries and Howlings, that were
raised

<page 41>

<page 42>
[ 19 ] _
frighted with some wild Beast, and I run forward
towards him to help him, but when I came nearer
to him, I saw something hanging over his Shoul-
ders which was a Creature that he had shot, like a
Hare, but disferent in Colour, and longer* Legs,
however we were very glad of it, and it was very
good Meat; but the great Joy that poor Xury
came with, was to tell me he had found good Wa-
ter, and seen no wild Mans.
But we found afterwards that we need not take
such Pains for Water, for a little higher up the
Creek where we were, we found the Water fresh
when the Tide was out, which flows but a little
way up ; so we filled our Jarrs and feasted on the
Hare we had killed, and prepared to go on our
Way, having seen no Foot-steps of any human
Creature in that part of the Country.
As I had been one Voyage to this Coast before,
I knew very well that the Islands of the Canaries,
and the Cape de Verd Islands also, lay not far oft"
from the Coast. But as I had no Instruments to
take an Observation to know what Latitude we
were in, and not exactly know, or at least to re-
member what Latitude they were in ; I knew not
where to look for them, or when to stand off to Sea
towards them; otherwise I might now easily have
found some of these Islands. But my Hope was,
that if I stood along this Coast till I came to that
Part where the Englijb traced, I should find some of
their Vessels upon their usual Design of Trade,
that would relieve and take us in.
By the best of my Calculation, that Place where
I know was, must be that Country, which lying be-
tween the Emperor of Morocco's Dominions and the
Negroes, lies wast and uninhabited, except by wild
Beasts; the Negroes having abandon'd it, and gone
farther South for fear of the Moors; and the Moors
not

<page 43>

<page 44>
bad him lye still, and I took our biggest Gun,
which was almost Musket-bore, and loaded it with
. a good Charge of Powder, and with ^wo Slugs,
and laid it down; then I loaded another Gun with
two Bullets, and the third, for we had three Pie-
ces, I loaded with five smaller Bullets. I took the
best Aim I could with the first Piece to have shot
him into the Head, but he lay so with his Leg
rais'd a little above his Nose, that the Slugs hit
his Leg about the Knee, and broke the Bone. He
started up growling at first, but finding his Leg broke
fell down again, and then got up upon three Legs,
and gave the most hideous Roar that ever I heard;
I was a little surpriz'd that I had not hit him on
the Head; however I took up the second Piece im-
mediately, and tho' he began to move off fir'd a-
gain> and shot him into the Head, and had the
Pleasure to see him drop, and make but little Noise,
but lay struggling for Life. Then Xury took Heart,
and would have me let him go on Shore: Well, go
said I; so the Boy jump'd into the Water, and ta-
king a little Gun in one Hand, swam to Shore with
the other Hand, and coming close to the Creature,
put the Muzzel of the Piece to his Ear, and shot
him into the Head again, which dispatch'd him
quite.
This was Game indeed to us, but this was no
Food, and I was very sorry to lose three Charges of
Powder and Shot upon" a Creature that was good
for nothing to us. However Xury said he would
have some of him; so he comes on board, and ask'd
me to give him the Hatchet; for what, Xury, said
I ? Me cut off his Head, said he. However Xury
could not cut off his Head, but he cut off a Foot,
and brought it with him, and it was a monstrous
great one.
I be-

<page 45>

<page 46>
I 33 1
no Weapons in their Hands, except one who had a
long llender Stick, which Xury said was a Lance,
and that they would throw them a great way with
good Aim; sol kept at a distance, but talk'd with
them by Signs as well as I could; and particularly
made Signs for something to eat, they beckon'd to
me to stop my Boat, and they would fetch me
some Meat; upon this I lower'd the top of my
Sail, and lay by, and two of them run up into the
Country, and in less than half an Hour came back,
and brought with them two Pieces of dry Flesh
and some Corn, such as is the Produce of their!
Countrey, but we neither knew what the one or the
other was; however we were willing to accept it,
but how to come at it was our next Dispute, for I
Was not for venturing on Shore to them, and they
were as much afrraid of us; but they took a safe
Way for us all, for they brought it to the Shore and
laid it down, and went and stood a great way off
till we fetch'd it on Board, and then came close to
us again.
We made Signs of Thanks to them, for we had
nothing to make them amends; but an Opportuni*
ty offer'd that very Instant to oblige them won*
derfully, for while we were lying by the Shore,
came two mighty Creatures, one pursuing the other,
(as we took it) with great Fury, from the Mountains
towards the Sea; whether it was the Male pursuing
the Female,or whether they were in Sport or in Rage*
we could not tell, any more than we could tell whe-
ther it was usual or strange, but I believe it was the
latter; because in the first Place, those ravenous
Creatures seldom appear but in the Night; and in
the second Place, We found the People terribly
Frighted, especially the Women. The Man that
had the Lance or Dart did not fly from them,
but the rest did; however as the two Creatures
D tact

<page 47>

<page 48>
[ 35 ]
ling to have them take it as a Favour from me,
which when I made Signs to them that they might
take him, they were very thankful for, immediate-
ly they fell to work with him, and tho' they had no
Knife, yet with a sharpen'd piece of Wood they took
off his Skin as readily, and much more readily than
we cou'd have done with a Knise; they offer'd me
some of the Flesh, which I declined, making as if
I would give it them, but made Signs for the Skin,
which they gave me very freely, and brought me a
great deal more of their Provision, which tho' I did
not understand, yet I accepted; then I made Signs
to them for some Water, and held out one of my
Jarrs to them, turning it bottom upward, to shew
that it was empty, and that I wanted to have it
filled. They call'd immediately to some of their
Friends, and there came two Women and brought
a great Vessel made of" Earth, and burnt as I sup-
pose in the Sun; this they set down lor me, as be-
fore, and I sent Xury on Shore with my Jarrs, and
filled them all three. The Women were as stark
naked as the Men.
I was now furnished with Roots and Corn, such
as it was, and Water,-and leaving my friendly Ne~
groes, I made forward for about eleven Days more,
without offering to go near the Shore, till I saw
the Land run out a great Length into the Sea, at
about the Distance of sour or five Leagues before
me, and the Sea being very calm, I kept a large
offing to make this Point; at length, doubling the
Point at about two Leagues from the Land, I
saw plainly Land on the other Side to Seaward;
then I concluded, as it was most, certain indeed,
that this was the Cafe de Verd, and those the I-
/lands', call'd from thence Cape de Verd Islands.
However they were at a great Distance, and I
could not well tdl what I had best to do, for if I
D 2 should

<page 49>

<page 50>
[37]
them > but at last a Scow Sailor who was on board,
call'd to me, and I answer'd him, and told him I
was an Englishman, that I had made my escape out
of Slavery from the Moors at SaUee; then they bad
me come on board, and very kindly took me in,
and all my Goods.
It was an inexpressible Joy to mef that any one
will believe, that I was thus deliver'd,as Iesteem'd
it, from such a miserable and almost hopeless Con-
dition as I was in, and I immediately offered all I
had to the Captain of the Ship, as a Return for
my Deliverance; but he generously told me, he
would take nothing from me, but that all I had
should be deliver'd safe to me when I came to the
Brajils; for, says he, / havefavd your Life on no o~
ther Terms than I would be glad to be saved my self, and
it may one time or other be my Lot to be taken up in the
same Condition; besides, said he, when I carry you to
the Brasils, so great a way from your own Country, if I
should take from you what you have, you will be starved
there, and then 1 only take away that Life I have given.
No, no, Seignor, Inglese, says he, Mr. Englishman,
I will carry you thither in Charity, and those things will
help you to buy your Subsistence there, and your Passage
home again.
As he was Charitable in his Proposal, so he was:
just in the Performance to a tittle, for he ordered
the Seamen, that none should offer to touch any
thing I had; then he took every thing into his own
Possession, and gave me back an exact Inventory of
them, that I might have them, even so much as
my three Earthen Jarrs.
As to my Boat it was a very good one, and
that he saw, and told me he would buy i£of me
for the Ship's Use, and ask'd me what I wotjld have
fop it? I told him he had been so generous to me
in every thing, that I could not offer to make a-
D 3 ny

<page 51>
[ }* 1
ny Price of the Boat, but left it entirely to him,
upon which he to!d me he would give me a Note
of his Hand to pay me 80 Pieces of Eight for it
at Bra/il, and when it came there, is any one of-
fer'd to give more he would make it up; he offer'd
me also <5o Pieces of Eight more for my Boy Xury,
which I was loath to take, not that I was not wil-
ling to let the Captain have him, but I was very
loath to fell the poor Boy's Liberty, who had assi-
sted me so faithfully in procuring my own. How-
ever when I let him know my Reason, he own'd it
to be just, and offer'd me this Medium, that he
would give the Boy an Obligation to set him free,
in ten Years, if he turn'd Christian; upon this, and
Xury saying he was willing to go to him, I let the
Captain have him.
We had a very good Voyage to the Brasth, and
arriv'd in the Bay de Tvdos los Santo<, or AU-Saints-
Bay, in about Twenty-two Days after. And now
I was once more deliver'd from the most miserable
of all Conditions of Life, and what to do next
with my self I was now to consider.
The generous Treatment the Captain gave me,
I can never enough remember; he would take no-
thing of me for my Passage, gave me twenty Ducats
for the Leopard's Skin, and fcrty for the Lyon's
Skin which I had in my Boat, and caused every
thing I had in the Ship to be punctually deliver'd
me, and what I was willing to fell he bought, such
as the Cafe of Bottles, two of my Guns, and a
Piece of the Lump of Bees-wax, for I had made
Candles of the rest; in a word, I made about 220
Pieces of Eight of all my Cargo, and with this
Stock I went on Shore in the Brafilo.
I had not been long here, but being recommen-
ded to the House of a good honest Man like him-
self, who had an lngeino as they call it; that is, a
Til

<page 52>
s 39 ]
Plantation and a Sugar-House, I lived with him
some time, and acquainted my self by that Means
with the Manner of their planting and making of
Sugar; and seeing how well the Planters liv'd, and
how they grew rich suddenly, I resolv'd, if I could
get Licence to settle there, I would turn Pianter a-
mong them, resolving in the mean time to find out
some Way to get my Money which I had left in Lon-
don remitted to me. To this Purpose getting a kind
of a Letter of Naturalization, I purchased as much
Land that was Uncur'd, as my Money would reach,
and form'da Plan for my Plantation and Settlement,
and such a one as might be suitable to the Stock
which I proposed tomy self tq receive from England.
I had a Neighbour, a Portuguese of Lisbon, but
born of Englijh Parents, whose Name was Wells,
and in much such Circumstances as I was. I call
him Neighbour, because his Plantation lay next
to mine, and we went on very sociable together. My
Stock was but low as well as his; and we rather
planted for Food, than any thing else, for about two
Years. However, we began to increase, and our
Land began to come into Order; so that the third
Year we planted some Tobacco, and made each of
us a large Piece of Ground ready for planting Canes
in the Year to come; but we both wanted Help;
and now I found more than before, I had done
wrong in parting with my Boy Xury.
But alas! for me to do wrong that never did right,
was no great Wonder: I had no Remedy but to
go on; I was gotten into an Employment quite re-
mote to my Genius, and directly contrary to the Lise
I delighted in, and for which I forsook my Father's
House, and broke thro' all his good Advice; nay,
I was coming into the very middle. Station, or up-
per Degree of low Life, which my Father advised
me to before; and which if I resolved to go on
D 4 with

<page 53>
[ 40 3
with, I might as well ha' staid at Home, and never
have fatigu'd my self in the World as 1 had done';
and I used often to say to my self, I could ha'
done this as well in England among my Friends, as
ha* gone 5000 Miles off to do it among Strangers
and Savages in a Wilderness, and at such a Distance,
as never to hear from any Part of the World that
had the least Knowledge of me.
In this manner I used to look upon my Condition
with the utmost Regret. , I had no bpdy to con-
verse with but now and then this Neighbour; no
Work to be done, but by the Labour of my Hands;
and I used to say, I liv'd just like a Man cast away
upon some desolate Island, that had no body there
but himself. But how just has it been, and how should
all Men reflect, that, when they compare their pre-
sent Conditions with others that are worse, Heaven
may oblige them to make the Exchange, and be
convinc'd of their former Fel.'city, by their Experi-
ence: I say, how just has it been, that the truly soli-
tary Life I reflected on in an Island of meer Desola-
tion should be my Lot, who had so often unjustly
compar'd it with the Life which I then led, in which
had I continued, I had in all Probability been ex^
ceeding prosperous and rich.
I was in some Degree settled in my Measures for
carrying on the Plantation, before my kind Friend
the Captain of the Ship, that took me up at Sea,
went back; for the Ship remained there in provi-
ding his Loading, and preparing for his Voyage,
near three Months, when telling him what little
Stock I had left behind me in London, he gave me
this friendly and sincere Advice,Seigntr Ingtesejays he,
for so he always called me, is; ou wilj give meLetters,
and a Procuration here in Form to me, with Orders
to the Person who has your Money in London, to fend
your Effects to Lisbon, to such Persons as I shall di-
rect,

<page 54>
C 41 J.
rect, and in such Goods as are proper for this Coun-
try, I will bring you the Produce of them, God
willing, at my Return; but since human Affairs are
all subject to Changes and Disasters, I would have
you give Orders but for One Hundred Pounds Sterl.
which you fay is Half your Stock, and let the Ha-
zard be run for the first; so that if it come safe,
you may order the rest the same Way; and if it
miscarry, you may have the other Half to have Re
course to for your Supply.
This was so wholesome Advice, and look'd so
friendly, that I could not but be convine'd it was the
best Course I could take; so I accordingly prepared
* Letters to the Gentlewoman with whom I had left
my Money, and a Procuration to the Portuguese
Captain, as he desired.
I wrote the Englijh Captain's Widow a full Account
of all my Adventures, my Slavery, Escape, and how
J had met with the Portugal Captain at Sea, the Hu-
manityof his Behaviour, and in what Condition Lwas
now in, with all other necessary Directions for my
Supply; and when this honest Captain came to Lisbon,
he found means by some of the English Merchants
there, to fend over not the Order only, but a full
Account "of my Story to a Merchant at London,
who represented it effectually to her; whereupon,
she not only delivered the Money, but out of her
own Pocket sent the Portugal Captain a very hand-
som Present for his Humanity and Charity to me.
The Merchant in London vesting this Hundred
Pounds in Engli;h Goods, such as the Captain had
writ for, sent them directly to him at Lisbon, and he
brought them all safe to me to the Brafih, among
which, without my Direction (for I was too young
in my Business to think of them ) he had taken Care
to have all Sorts of Tools, Iron-Work, and Uten-

<page 55>
[ ** ]
siJs necessary for my Plantation, and which were
great Use to me.
When this Cargo arrived, I thought my Fortune
made, for I was surprized with Joy of it; and,my
good Steward ttje Captain had laid out the Five
Pounds which my Friend had sent him for a Pre-
, sent for himself, to purchase, and bring me over a
Servant under Bond for six Years Service, and would
not accept of any Consideration, except a little
Tobacco* which I would have him accept, being
of my own Produce.
Neither was this all; but my Goods being all
Englifi Manufactures, such as Cloath,. Stuffs, Bays,
and things particularly valuable anddesireable in the .
Country, I found means to fell them to a very great
Advantage ; so that I may fay, I had more than
four times the Value of my first Cargo, and was
now infinitely beyond my poor Neighbour, I mean
in the Advancement of my Plantation; for the first
N thing I did, I bought me a Negro Slave, and an Eu-
ropean Servant also; I mean another besides that
which the Captain brought me from Lisbon.
But as abus'd Prosperity is oftentimes made the
very Means of our greatest Adversity, so was it with
me. I went on the next Year with great Success in
my Plantation: I raised fifty great Rolls of Tobac-
co on my own Ground, more than I had disposed of
for Necessaries among my Neighbours; and these
fifty Roiis being each of above a looWt. were
weilcur'd and laid by against the Return of the
Fleet frem Lisbon: And now inc: easing in Business
and in Wealth, my Head began to be full of Pro-
jects and Undertakings beyond my Reach; such as
arc. indeed often the Ruin of the best Heads in
Business.
Had

<page 56>
[«]
Had I continued in the Station I was now in, I
had room for all the happy things to have yet be-
fallen me, for which my Father To earnestly recom-
mended a quiet retired Life, and of which he had
so*scnsibly described the middle Station of Life to
be full of; but other things attended me, and I
was still to be the wilful Agent of all my own
Miseries; and particularly to encrease my Fault
and double the Reflections upon my self, which in
my future Sorrows I mould have Leisure to make;
all these Miscarriages were.procured by my appa-
rent obstinate adhering to my foolish Inclination of
wandrlng abroad, and pursuing that Inclination, in
contradiction to the clearest Views ot doing my
self good in a fair and plain pursuit of those Pros-
pects and those Measures of Life, which Nature
and Providence concurred to present me with, and
to make my Duty.
As I had once done thus in my breaking away
from my Parents, so I could not be content now,
but I must go and leave the happy View L had of
being a rich and thriving Man in my new Plantati-
on, only to pursue a rash and immoderate Desire ot
rising faster than the Nature of the Thing admit-
ted; and thus I cast my self down again into the
deepest Gulph of human Misery that ever Man fell
into, or perhaps could be consistent with Life and
a State'of Health in the World.
* To come then by the just Degrees, to the Parti-
culars of this Part of my Story; you may suppose,
that having now lived almost four Years in the
Brasilo, and beginning to thrive and prosper very
well upon my Plantation; I had not only Iearn'd
the Language, but had contracted Acquaintance
and Friendship among my Fellow-Planters, as well
as among the Merchants at St. Sahadore, which
was our Port; and that in my Discourses among
them,

<page 57>
r 44 ]
them, I had frequently given them an Account of
my' two Voyages to the Coast of Guinea, the
manner of Trading with the Negroes there, and
how easy it was to purchase upon the Coast, for
Trifles, such as Beads, Toys, Knives, Scissars,
Hatchets, bits of Glass, and the like ; not only
Gold Daft, Guinea Grains, Elephants Teeth, &e.
but Negroes for the-Service of the Brafils, in great
Numbers.
They listened always very attentively to my
Discourses on these Heads, but especially to that
Part which related to the buying Negroes, which
was a Trade at that time not only not far entred
into, but as far as it was, had been carried on by
the Affiento's, or Permission of the Kings of Spain
and Portugal, and engross'd in the Publick, so that
few Negroes were brought, and those excessive
dear.
It happen'd, being in Company with some Mer-
chants and Planters of my Acquaintance, and
talking of those things very earnestly, three of
them came to me the next Morning, and told me
they had been musing very much upon what I had
discoursed with them of, the last Night, and they
came to make a secret Proposal to me; and after
enjoining me Secrecy, they told me, that they had
a mind to sic out a Ship to go to Guinea, that
they had all Plantations as well as I, and were
straiten'd for nothing so much as Servants; that as
it was a Trade that could not be carried on, be-:
cause they could not publickly fell the Negroes
when they came home, so they desired to
make but one Voyage, to bring the Negroes, on
Shore privately, and divide them among their
own. Plantations; and in a Word, the Question
was, whether I would go their Super-Cargo in the
Ship to.manage the Trading Part upon the Coast

<page 58>
[ 45 ]
of Guinea? And they offer'd me that I should have
my equal Share of the Negroes, without providing
any Part of the Stock.
This was a fair Proposal, it must be confess'd,
had it been made to any one that" had not had a
Settlement and Plantation of his own to look after,
which was in a fair way of coming to^be very
considerable, and with a good Stock upon it. But
for me that was thus entered and established, and
had nothing to do but go on as I had begun for
three or four Years more, and to have sent for the
other hundred Pound from England, and who in
that time, and with that little Addition, could
scarce ha' fail'd of being worth three or four thou-
sand Pounds Sterling, and that encreasing too; for
me to think of such a Voyage, was the most pre-
posterous Thing that ever Man in such Circumstan-
ces could be guilty of.
But I that was born to be my own Destroyer,
could no more resist the Offer than I fcould re-
strain my first rambling Designs, when my Fa-
ther's good Counsel was lost upon me. In a word,
I told them I would go with all my Heart, if
they would undertake to look after my Plantation,
in my Absence, and would dispose of it to such
as I should direct if I miscarry'd. This they all
engag'd to do, and entred into Writings or Cove-
nants to do so; and I made a formal Will, dispo-
sing of my Plantation and Effects, in Cafe of my
Death, making the Captain of the Ship that had
sav'd my Life as before, my universal Heir, but
obliging him to dispose of my Effects asT had di-
rected in my Will, one half of the Produce being
to himself, and the other to be shipp'd to England.
In short, I took all possible Caution to preserve
my Effects; and keep up my Plantation; had I u-
sed half as much Prudence to have look'd into my
own

<page 59>
U* ]
own Interest, and have made a Judgment of what
1 ought to have done, and not to have done, I had
certainly never gone away from so prosperous an
Undertaking, leaving all the probable Views of a
thriving Circumstance, and gone upon a Voyage to
Sea, anencid with all its common Hazards; to fay
nothing of. the Reasons I had to expect particular
Misforttlties to my self.
But,I was hurry'd, on, and obey'd blindly the
Dictates of my Fancy rather than my Reason: and
accordingly the Ship being fitted out, and the Car-
go furnished, and all things done as by Agreement,
by ray Partners in the Voyage, I went on Board
in an evil Hour, the th of , being
the fame Day eight Year that I went from my
Father and Mother at Hull, in order to act the
Rebel to their Authority, and the Fool to my own
Interest.
Our Ship was about 120 Tun Burthen, carried
6 Guns, and 14 Men, besides the Master/ his Boy,
and my self; we had on Board no large Cargo of
Goods, except of such Toys as were fit for our
Trade with the Negroes, such as Beads, bits of
Glass, Shells, and odd Trifles, especially little
Looking-Glasles, Knives, Scislars, Hatchets, and
the like.
The fame, Day I went on Board we set fail,
standing away to the Northward upQn our own
Coast, with Design to stretch over for the Jffrican
Coafi, when, they came about 10 or 12 Degrees of
Northern Latitude, which it seems was the man-
ner of their Course in those Days. We had very
good Weather, only excessive hor, all the way Up-
on our own Coast, till we came the Height of
Cape St. Auguflino, from whence keeping farther off
at Sea we lost Sight of Land, and sieer'd as if we
was bound for the IQe Fernand de 'ftcronka, holding
our

<page 60>
C 47 ]
our Course N. E. by N, and leaving those Isles on
the East; in this Course we past the Line in abouc
ia Days time, and were by our last Observation in
7 Degrees 2 2Min. Northern Latitude, when a vi-
olent Tournado or Hurricane took us quite out of
our Knowledge; it began from the South-East,
came about to the North-West, and then settled
into the North-East, from whence it blew in such
a terrible manner, that for 12 Days together we
could do nothing but drive, and scudding away
before it, let it carry us whither ever Fate and the
Fury of the Winds directed ; and during these 1 a
Days, I need not fay, that I expected every Day
to be swallowed up, nor indeed did any in the
Ship expect to save their Lives.
In this Distress, we had, besides the Terror of
the Storm, one of our Men died of the Calenture,
and one Man and the Boy wasiYd over-board; a-
bout the 12th Day the Weather abating a little,
the Master made an Observation as well as he
could, and found that he was in about 11 Degrees
North Latitude, but that he was 22 Degrees of
Longitude disference West from Cafe St. Augustino;
so that he found he was gotten upon the Coast
of Guiney., or the North Part of Brafil, beyond
the River Amcz,ones, toward that of the River Oro-
noque, commonly call'd the Great River, and began
to consult with me what Course he should take,
for the Ship was leaky and very much, disabled,
and he was going directly back to trfe Coast of
Brafil.
1 was positively against that, and looking over
the Charts of the Sea-Coast of America with him,
we concluded there was no inhabited Country for
us to have recourse to, till we came within the Cir-
cle of the Carribbe-Iflands, and therefore resolved
to stand away fer Barbadoes, which by keeping off
at

<page 61>
[ 48 ]
at Sea; to avoid the Indraft of the Bay or Gulph
of Mexico, we might easily perform, as we hoped,
in about fifteen Days Sail, whereas we could not
possibly mike our Voyage to the Coast of Africa
without some Assiitance, both to our Ship and to
our selves.
With this Design we ehang'd our Course, and
steer'd away N. IV. by W. in order to reach
some of our Englijh Islands, where I hoped for Re-
lief; but our Voyage was otherwise determined,
for being in the Latitude of 12 Deg. 18 Min. a
second Storm came upon us, which carry'd us a-
way with the fame Impetuosity Westward, and
dtove us so out of the very VVay of all humane
Commerce, that had all our Lives been saved, as
to the Sea, we were rather in Danger of being de-
voured by Savages than ever returning to our own
Country.
In this Distress, the Wind still blowing very
hard, one of our Men early in the Morning,
cry'd out, Land; and we had no sooner run out
of the Cabbin to look out in hopes of seeing
whereabouts in the World we were; but the Ship
struck upon a Sand, and in a Moment her Motion
being so stopp'd, the Sea broke over her in such a
manner, that we expected we should all have pe-
rish'd immediately, and we were immediately dri-
ven into our 'close Quarters to shelter us from the
very Foam and Sprye of the Sea.
It is not easy for any one, who has not been
in the like Condition, to describe or conceive the .
Consternation of Men in such Circumstances; we
knew nothing where we were, or upon what Land
it was we were driven, whether an Island or the
Main, whether inhabited or nor inhabited; and
as the Rage of the Wind was still great, tho' ra-
ther less than at first, we could not so much as
hope

<page 62>
. C 49 3
I
hope to have the Ship hold many Minutes with-
out breaking in Pieces, unless the Winds by a kind
of Miracle should turn immediately about. In a
word, we fat looking one upon another, and ex-
pecting Death every Moment, and every .Man act-
ing accordingly, as preparing for another World,
for there was little or nothing more for us to do in
this; that which was our present Comfort, and all
the Comfort we had, was, that contrary to our
Expectation the Ship did not break yet, and that
jthe Master said the Wind began to abate.
Now tho' we thought that the Wind did a little
abate, yet the Ship having thus struck upon the
Sand, and sticking too fast for us to expect her'get-
ting off", we were in a dreadful Condition indeed,
and had nothing to do but to think of saving our
Lives as well as we could ; we had a Boat at our
Stern, ;ust before the Storm, but she was first stav'd
by dashing against the Ship's Rudder, and in the
next Place she broke away, and either funk or
was driven off to Sea, so there was no hope from
her; we had another Boat on Board, but how to
get her off into the Sea, "was a doubtful thing;
however, there was no room to debate, for we
fancy'd the Ship would breajc in Pieces every Mi-
nute, and some* old us Jhe was actually broken al-
ready.
In this Distress, the Mate of our Vessel lays hold
of the Boat, and with the help of the rest of the
Men, they got her stung over the Ship's-side, and
getting all into her, let go, and committed our
selves being Eleven in Number, to God's Mercy,
and the wild Sea; for tho' the Storm was abated
considerably, yet the Sea went dreadful high upon •
the Shore, and might well be call'd, Dm wild Zee,
as the DutcfcaM the Sea in a Storm.
E And

<page 63>
[ 50]
And now our Case was very dismal indeed ; for
we all saw plainly, that the Sea went so high, that
the Eoat could not live, and that we should be ine-
vitably drowned. As to making Sail, we had none,
nor, if we had, could we have done any thing with
it; so we work'd at the Oar towards the Land,
tho'with heavy Hearts, like Men going to Executi-
on; for we ail knew, that when the Boat came near-
er the Shore, she would be dasiVd in a thousand
Pieces by the Breach of the Sea. However, we
committed our Souls to God in the most earnest
Manner, and the Wind driving us towards the Shore,
we hasten'd our Destruction with our own Hands,
pulling as well as we could towards Land.
What the Shore was, whether Rock or Sand,
whether Steep or Shoal, we knew not; the only
Hope that could rationally give us the least Shadow
of Expectation, was, if we might happen into some
Bay or Gulph, or the Mouth of some River, where
by great Chance we might have run our Boat in, or 1
cot under the Lee of the Land, and perhaps made
smooth Water. But there was nothing of this ap-
peared; but as we made nearer and neater the
Shore, the Land look'd more frightful than the Sea.
After we had row'd, or rather driven about a
League and a Half, as we reckon'd it, a raging
Wave, Mountain-like, came rowiing a-stern of us,
and plainly bad us expect the Coup-de-Grace. In a
word, it took us with such a Fury, that it overset
the. Boat'at once; and separating us as well from
the Boat, as from one another, gave us not time
hardly to fay, O God! for we were all swallowed
up in a Moment.
. Nothing can describe the Confusion of Thought
which I felt when I sunk into the Water; for tho' I
swam very well, yet I could not deliver my sell from
the Waves so as to draw Breath, till that Wave
having

<page 64>
[ ft 3
having driven me, or rather carried me a vast Way
on towards the Shore, and having spent it self, went
back, and left me upon the Land almost dry, but
half dead with the Water I took in, I had so much
Presence of Mind as well as Breath left, that seeing
my self nearer the main Land than I expected, I got
upon my Feet, and endeavoured to make on to-
wards the Land as fast as I could, before another'
Wave should return, and take me up again. But I
soon found it was impossible to avoid it; for I saw
the Sea come after me as high as a great Hill, and
as furious as an Enemy which I had no Means or
Strength to contend with; my Business was to hold
my Breath, and rife myself upon the Water, if I
could: and so by swimming to preserve, my Breath-
ing, and Pilot my self towards the Shore, if possi-
ble; my greatest Concern now being, that the Sea,
as it would carry me a great Way towards the Shore
when it came on, might not carry me back again
with it when it gave back towards the Sea.
The Wave that came upon me again, buried me
at once 20 or 30 Foot deep in its own Body; and I
could feel my self carried with a mighty Force and
Swiftness towards the Shore a very great Way; but
I held my Breath, and assisted my self to swim still
forward with all my Might. I was ready to burst
with holding my Breath, when, as I felt my self
rising up, so to my immediate Relief, I found my
Head and Hands shoot out above the Surface of the
Water; and tho' it was not two Seconds of Time
that I could keep my self so, yet it reliev'd me
greatly, gave me Breath and new Courage. I was
covered again with Water a good while, but not
so long but I held it out; and finding the Water,
had spent it self, and began to return, I strook for-
ward against the Return of the Waves, and &!t
Ground again with my Feet. I stood still a few
E a Mo-
1 *
•* . *

<page 65>
[ 51 ]
Moments to recover Breath, and till the Water
went from me, and then took to my Heels, and run
with what Strength I had farther towards the Shore.
But neither would this deliver me from the Fury of
the Sea, which came pouring in after me a,gain,
and twice more I was lifted i:p by the Waves and
carried forwards as before,the Shore being very flat.
The last Time of these two had well near been
fatal to me; for the Sea having hurried me along as
before, landed me, or rather dash'd me against a
Piece of a Rock, and that with such Force, as it
left me senseless, and indeed helpless, as to my own
Deliverance; for the Blow taking my Side and
Breast, beat the Breath as it were quite out of my
Body; and had it returned again immediately, f
must have been strangled in the Water; but I re-
cover'd a little before the return of the Waves,
and feeing I should be cover'd again with the
Water, I resolv'd to hold fast by a Piece of the
Rock, and so to hold my Breath, if possible, till
the Wave went back; nOw as the Waves were not
so high as at first, being near Land, I held my
Hold till the Wave abated, and then fetch'd ano-
ther Run, which brought me so near the Shore,
that the next Wave, tho' it went over me, yet did
not so swallow me up as to carry me away, and
the next run I took, I got to the main Land,
where, to my great Comfort, I clamber'd up the
Cljfts of the Shore, and fat me down upon the
Grafs, free from Danger, and quite out of the.
Reach of the Water.
I was now landed, and safe on Shore, and began
to look up and thaiik God that my Life was fav'd in
a Cafe wherein there was some Minutes before scarce
any room to hope. I believe it is impossible to ex-
press to the Life what the Extasies and Transports of
the .

<page 66>
c ?n
the Soul are, when it is so fav'd, as I may fay, out
of the very Grave; and I do not wonder now at
that Custom, viz,. That when a Malefactor, who
has the Halter about his Neck, is tyed up, and just
going to be turn'd off, and has a Reprieve brought
to him : I fay, I do not wonder that they bring a
Surgeon with it, to let him Blood that very Mo-
ment they tell him of it, that the Surprize may not
drive the Animal Spirits from the Heart, and over-
whelm him:
For sudden Joys, like Griefs, confound at first.
I walk'd about on the Shore, lifting up my Hands,
and my whole Being, as I may fay, wrapt up in the
Contemplation of my Deliverance, making a thou-*
sand Gestures and Motions which Icannot describe,
reflecting upon all my Comerades rhat were drown'd,
and that there should not be one Soul fav'd but my
self; for, as for them, I never saw them afterwards,
or any Sign of them, except three of their Hatst
one Cap, and two Shoes that were not Fellows.
I cast my Eyes to the stranded Vessel, when the
Breach and Froth of the Sea being so big, I could
hardly fee it, it lay so far off, and considered, Lord i
how was it possible I could get on Shore /
After I had solac'd my Mind with the comforable
Part of my Condition, I began to look round me to
fee what kind of Place I was in, and what was next
to be done, and I soon found my Comforts abate,
and that in a Word I had a dreadful Deliverance:
For I was wet, had no Cloaths to (hist me, nor any
thing either to eat or drink to comfort me, neither
did I fee any Prospect before me, but that of pe-
rishing with Hunger, or being devourd by wild
Brasts; and that which was particularly afflicting
to me, was, that I had no Weapon either to hunt
E 3 and

<page 67>
[54]
and kill any Creature for my Sustenance, or to de-
fend my self against any other Creature that might
desire to kill me for theirs: In a Word, I had no-
thing about me but a Knife, a Tobacco-pipe, and
a little Tobacco in a Box; this was all my Provisi-
on, and this threw me into terrible Agonies of
Mind, that for a while I run about like a Mad-man;
Night coming updn me, I began with a heavy
Heart to consider what would be my Lot if there
were any ravenous Beasts in that Country, seeing at
Night they always come abroad for their Prey.
All the Remedy that ofser'd to my Thoughts at
that Time, was, to get up into a thick bushy Tree
like a Firr, but thorny, which grew near me, and
where I resolv'd to sit all Night, and consider the
••next Day what Death I should dye, for as yet I
saw no Prospect of Life; I walk'd about a Furlong
from the Shore, to see if I could find any fresh Wa-
ter to drink, which I did, to my great Joy; and ha-
ving drank, and put a little Tobacco in my Mouth
to prevent Hunger, I went to the Tree, and get-
ting up into it, endeavour'd to place my self so, as
that if I mould sleep I might not fall; and having
cut me a short Stick, like a Truncheon, for my
Defence, I took up my Lodging, and having been
excessively fatigu'd, I fell fast asleep, and slept as
comfortably as, I believe, sew could have done
in my Condition, and found my self the most re-
fresii'd with it, that I think I ever was on such an
Occasion.
When I wak'd it was broad Day, the Weather
clear, and the Storm abated, so that the Sea did
not rage and swell as before: But that which sur-
priz'd me most, was, that the Ship was lifted off
in the Night from the Sand where she lay, by
the Spelling of the Tyde, and was driven up al-
most as far as the Rock which I first mention'd,
where

<page 68>
C 55 ]
where I had been so bruis'd by the dashing me a-
gainstit; this being within about a Mile from the
Shore where I was, and the Ship seeming to stand
upright still, I wish'd my self on board, that, at
least, I might save some necessary things for my
use.
When I came down from my Appartment in the
Tree, I look'd about me again, and the first thing I
found was the Boat, which lay as the Wind and
the Sea had tofs'd her up upon the Land, about
two Miles on my right Hand, I walk'd as far as I
could upon the Shore to have got to her, but found
a Neck or Inlet of Water between me and the
Boat, which was about half a Mile broad, so I
came back for the present, being more intent upon
getting at the Ship, where I hop'd to find some-
thing for my present Subsistence,
A little after Noon I found the Sea very calm,
and the Tide ebb'd so far out, that I could come
within a Quarter of a Mile of the Ship; and here
I found a fresh renewing of my Grief, for I saw
evidently, that if we had kept on Board, we had
been all safe, that is to fay, we had all got safe
on Shore, and I had not been so miserable as to
be left entirely destitute of all Comfort and Com-
pany, as I now was; this forced Tears from my
Eyes again, but as there was litle Relief in that,
I resolv'd, if possible, to get to the Ship, so I
pull'd off my Cloaths, [for the Weather was hot to
Extremity, and took the Water; but when I came
to the Ship, my Difficulty was still greater to
know how to get on Board, for as she lay a-ground,
and high out of the Water, there was nothing
v/ithin my Reach to lay hold of, I swam round
her twice, and the second Time I spy'd a small
Piece of a Rope, which I wonder'd I did not see
at first, hang down by the Fore-Chains so low,
E 4 as

<page 69>
[ 5<H
as that with great Difficulty i got hold of it, and
by the help of that Rope, got up into the. Fore-
castle of the Ship, here I found that the Ship was
bulg'd, and had a great deal of Water in her Hold,
but that see lay so on the Side of a Bank of hard
Sand, or rather Earth, and her Stern lay listed up
upon the Bank, and her Head low almost to
the Water; by this Means all her Quarter was
free, and all that was in that Part was dry;
for you may be sure my first Work was to search
and to see what was spoil'd and what was
free; and first I found that all the Ship's Pro-
visions were dry and untouch'd by the Water,
and being very well diipos'd to eat, I went to
the Bread-room and fill'd my Pockets with Bif-
ket, and eat it as I went about other things,
for I had no time to lose? I also found some Rum
in the great Cabbin, of which I took a large
Dram, and which I had indeed need enough of
to spirit me for what was before me: Now I
wanted nothing but a Boat to furnise my self with
many things which I foresaw would be very necessa-
ry to me.
It was in vain to sit still and wise for what was
not to be had, and this Extremity rouz'd my
Application; we had several spare Yards, and
two or three large sparrs of Wood, and a spare
Top-mast or two in the Ship; I tefolv'd to falJ to
work with these, and flung as many of them
over board as I could manage of their Weight,
tying every one with a Rope that they might
not drive away; when this was done I went down
the Ship's Side, and pulling-them to me, I ty d
four of them fast together at both Ends as well
as I could, in the Form of a Raft, and laying
two or three seort Pieces of Plank upon them
cross-ways, I found I could walk upon it vcry
> well,

<page 70>
[ 57?
well, but that it was not able to bear any great
Weight, the Pieces being too light; so 1 went to
work, and with the Carpenter's > Saw I cut a spare.
Top-mast into three Lengths, and added them to
my Ratt, with a great deal of Labour and Pains,
but hope of furnilhing my self with Necessaries, en-
courag'd me to go beyond what 1 should have been
able to have done upon another Occasion.
My Raft was now strong enough to bear any
reasonable Weight; my next Care was what to
load it with, and how to preserve what I laid upon
it from the Surf of the Sea; biit I was notdong consi-
dering this, I first laid all the Pianks or Boards upon
it that I could get, and having consider'd well what
I most wanted, I first got three of the Seamens
Chests, which I had broken open and empty'd, and
lower'd them down upon my Raft; the first of*
these I fill'd with Provisions, viz,. Bread, Rice,
three Dutch Cheeses, five Pieces of dry'd Goat's
Flesh, which we liv'd much upon, and a little Re-
mainder of EuropeanCoxn which had been laid by
for some Fowls which we hcought "to Sea with us,
but the Fowls were kill'd; there had been some Ear-
ly and Wheat together, but,£to my great Disap-
pointment, I found afterwards that the Rats had
eaten or spoil'd'it all; as for Liquors, I found feve-
veral Cases of Bottles belonging to our Skipper, in
which were some Cordial Waters, and in all about
five or six Gallons of Rack, these I flow'd by
themselves, there being no need to put them into
the Chest, nor no room for them. While I was
doing this, I found the Tide began to flow, tho'
very calm, and I had the Mortification to fee my
Coat, Shirt, and Wast-coat, ,$rhich I had left on
Shore upon the Sand, swim away; as for my
Breeches which were only Linnen and open-knee'd,
I swam on board in them and my Stockings : How-
ever

<page 71>
s 5.8 ];
ever this put me upon rummaging for Cioaths, of
which I found enough, but took no more than I
wanted for present use,, for 1 had other things
which my Eye was more upon, as first Tools to
work with on Shore, and it was after long search-
ing that I found out the Carpenter's Chest, which
was indeed a very useful Prize to me, and much
more valuable than a Ship Loading of Gold would
have been at that time; I got it down to my Raft,
even whole as it was, without loosing time to look
into it, for I knew in general what it contain'd.
My next Care was for some Ammunition and
Arms; there were two very good Fowling-pieces
in the great Cabbin, and two Pistols, these I sc-
cur'd first, with some Powder-horns, and a small
Bag of Shot, and two old rusty Swords: I knew
there were three Barrels of Powder in the Ship,
but knew not where our Gunner had stow'd them,
but with much search I found them, two of them
dry and good, the third had taken Water, those
two I got to my Raft, with the Arms, and now
I thought my self pretty well freighted, and be-
gan to think how I should get to Shore with them,
having neither Sail, Oar, or Rudder, and the least
Cap full of AVind would have overset all my Na-
vigation.
I had three Encouragements, i. A smooth
calm Sea, z. The Tide rising and setting in to
the Shore, 3. What little Wind there was blew
me towards the Land; and thus, having sound two
or three broken Oars belonging to the Boat, and
besides the Tools which were in the Chest, I found
two Saws, an Axe, and a Hammer, and with this
Cargo I put to Sea: For a Mile, or thereabouts my
Raft went very well, only that I found it drive a
little distant from the Place where I had landed be-
fore, by which I perceiv'd that there was some In-
draft

<page 72>
[ 59 ]
draft of the Water, and consequently. I hop'd to
find some Creek or River there, which I might
make use of as a*Port to get to Land with my
Cargo.
As I imagin'd, so it was, there appear'd before
me a little opening of the Land, and I found a
strong Current of the Tide set into it, so I gui-
ded my Raft as well as I could to keep in the Mid-
dle of the Stream: But here I had like to have
suffer'd a second Shipwreck, which, if I had, I
think verily would have broke my Heart, for know-
ing nothing of the Coast, my Raft run a-ground
at one end of it upon a Shoal, and not being a-
ground at the other End, it wanted but a little
that all my Cargo had slipp'd off towards that End
that was a-float, and so fall'n into the Water: I
did my utmost by setting my Back against the
Chests, to keep them in their Places, but could
not thrust off the Raft with all my Strength, nei-
ther durst I stir from the Posture I was in, but hold-
ing up the Chests with all my Might, stood in that
Manner near half an Hour, in which time the rising
of the Water brought me a little more upon a Le-
vel , and a little after, the Water still rising, my
Raft floated again, and I thrust her off with the
Oar I had, into the Channel, and then driving up
higher, I at length found my self in the Mouth of a
little River, with Land on both Sides, and a
strong Current or Tide running up, I look'd on both
Sides for a proper Place to get to Shore, for I was
not willing to be driven too high up the River,
hoping in time to fee some Ship at Sea, and there-
fore resolv'd to place my self as near the Coast as
I could.
At length I soy'd a little Cove on the right
Shore.of the Creek, to which with great Pain and
Disficulty I guided my Raft, and at last got so near,
as

<page 73>
[(50]
as that, reaching Ground with my Oar, I coul
thrust her directly in, but here I had like to havr
dipt all my Cargo in the Sea again; for that Shoe
lying pretty steep, that is to fay sloping, tlie'sl
was no Place to land, but where one End of re.
Float, if it run on Shore, would lie so high, adu
rhe other sink lower as before, that it would en-
danger my Cargo again: All that I could do, was
to wait 'till the Tide was at the highest, keeping the
Raft with my Oat like an Anchor to hold the Side
of it fast to the -Shore, near fa flat Piece of
Ground, which I expected the Water would flow
over; and so it did: As soon as I found Water
enough, for my Raft drew about a Foot of Water, I
thrust, her on upon that flat Piece of Ground, and
there fasten'd or mor'd her by sticking my two
broken Oars into] the Ground; one on one Side
near one End, and one on the other Side near the
other End; and thus I lay till the Water ebb'd a-
way, and left' my Raft and all my Cargo safe on
Shore.
My next Work was to view the Country, and
seek a proper Place for my Habitation, and where
to stow my Goods to secure them from whatever
might happen; where I was, I yet knew not, whe-
ther on the Continent or on an Iiland,^ whether in-
habited, or not inhabited, whether in Danger of
wi:d B.asts or not: There was a Hill not above
a Mile from me, which rose up very steep and high,
arid which seem'd to over-top some other Hills
which lay as in a Ridge from it Northward; I took
our one of the Fowling Pieces, and one of the Pi-
stols , and an Horn of Powder, and thus arm'd I
travelled for Discovery up to the Top of that Hill,
where after I had witn great Labour and DiiEcul-
tv gor to the Top, I saw my Fate to my great
Affliction, (viz*) that I was in an Island environ'd
every

<page 74>
[61 ]
every Way with the Sea, no Land to be seen, ex-
cept some Rocks which lay a great Way off, and
two small Islands less than this, which lay about
three Leagues to the, West.
I found also that the Island I was. in was barren,
and, as I saw good Reason to believe, un-inhabited,
except by wild Beasts, of whom however I saw
none, yet I saw abundance of Fowls, but knew
not their Kinds, neither when I kilf d them could
I tell What was fit for Food, and what not; at my
coming back, I shot at a great Bird which I saw
sitting upon a Tree on the Side of a great Wood, I
believe it was the first Gun that had been fir'd
there since the Creation of the World ; I had no
sooner fir'd, but from all the Parts of the Wood
there arose an innumerable Number of Fowls of
many Sorts, making a confus'd Screaming, and
crying every one according to his usual Note; but
not one of them of any Kind that I knew: As for
the Creature I khTd, I took it to be a Kind of a
HaWk, its Colour and Beak resembling it, but had
no Talons or Claws more than common, its Flesh
was Carrion, and fit for nothing.
Contented with this Discovery, I came back to
Raft, and fell to Work to bring my Cargo on
Shore, which rook me up'the rest of that Day, and
what to do with my self at Night I knew not, nor
indeed where to rest; for I was afraid to lie down
on the Ground, not knowing but some wild Beast
might devour me, tho', as I afterwards found,there
was really nc^Jeed for those Fears.
However, as well as I could, I barricado'd my
self round with the Chests and Boards that I had
brpught on Shore, and made a kind of a Hut sot
that Night's Lodging; as for Food, I yet saw not
which" Way to supply my self, except that I had
seen

<page 75>
[ <se ]
seen two or three Creatu-es like Hares run out of
the Wood where I {hot the Fowl.
I now began to consider, that I might yet get
a great many Things out of the Ship, which would
be useful to me, and particularly some of the Rig-
ging, and Sails, and such other Things as might
come to Land, and I resolv'd to make anotherVoy-
age on Board the Vessel, if possible; and as I
knew that the first Storm that blew must necessarily
break her all in Pieces, I resolved to set all other
Things apart, 'till I got every Thing out of the
Ship that I could get; then I call'd a Council, that
is to fay, in my Thoughts, whether I should take
back the Raft, but this appear'd impracticable; so
I refolv'd to go as before, when the Tide was
down, and I did so, only that I slripp'd before I
went from my Hutt, having nothing on but ache-
quer'd Shirt, and a Pair of Linnen Drawers, and a
Pair of Pumps on my Feet.
I got on Board the Ship, as before, and prepar'd
a second Raft, and having had Experience of the
first, I neither made this so unweildy, nor loaded
it so hard, but yet I brought away several Things
very useful to me; as first, in the Carpenter's Stores
I found two or three Bags full of Nails and Spiker,
a great Skrewjack, a Dozen or two of Hatchets,
and above all, that most useful Thing call'd a.
Grind-stone; all these I sccur'd together, with se-
veral Things belonging to the Gunner, particular-
ly two or three Iron Crows, and two Barrels of
Musquet-Bullets, seven Musquets, and another
Fowling-Piece, with some small Quattity of Pow-
der more ,* a large Bag full of small Shot, and a
great Roll osSheet Lead: But this last was so heavy,
I could not hoisc it up to get itdver the Ship's Side..
Besides these Things, I took all the Mens Cloaths
that I could rind, and a spar; Fors-top-sail, Ham-
mock,

<page 76>
[ ^ ]
mock and some Bedding; and with this I loaded ray
second Raft, and brought them all safe on Shore to
my very great Comfort.
I was under some Apprehensions during my Ab-
sence from the Land, that at least my Provisions
might be devour'don Shore; but when I came back,
I found no Sign of any Visitor, only there fat a
Creature like a wild Cat upon one ,of the Chests,
which when I came towards it, ran away a little
Distance, and then stood still; she sat very com-
pos'd, and unconcern'd, and look'd full in my Face,
as is she had a Mind to be acquainted with me, I
presented my Gun at her, but as she did not under-
stand it, she was perfectly unconcern'd at it, nor
did (he offer to stir away; upon which I toss'd her
a bit, of Bisket, tho' by the Way I was not very
free of it, for my Store was not great: However,
I spar'd her a bit, I say, and she went to it, smell'd
of it, and ate it, and look'd (as pleas'd) for more,
but I thank'd her, and could spare no more; so shc
march'd off.;
Having got my second Cargo on Shore, tho' I
was fain to open the Barrels of Powder, and bring
them by Parcels, for they were too heavy, being
large Casks, I went to work to make me a little
Tent with the Sail and some Poles which I cut for
that Purpose, and into this Tent I brought every
Thing that I knew would spoil, either with Rain
or Sun, and I piled all the empty Chests and Casks
up in a Circle round the Tent, to fortify it from a-
ny sudden Attempt, either from Man or Beast.
When I had done this I block'd up the Door of
the Tent with some Boards within, and an empty
Chest set up an End without, and spreading one
of the Beds upon the Ground, laying my two Pi-
stols just at my Head, and my Gun at Length by
me, I went to Bed for the first Time, and slept
very

<page 77>
1
very quiet!y all Night, for I was very weary and
hetvy, for the Night before I had slept little, and
had labour'd very hard all Day, as well to fetch all
those Things from the Ship, as to get them on
Shore.
I had the biggest Magazine of all Kinds now
that ever were laid up, I believe, for one Man;
but I was not satisfy'd still ; for while the Ship fat
upright in that Posture, I thought I ought to get
every Thing out of her that I could; so every Day
at low Water I w-nt on Boar J, and brought away
some Thing or other: But ,particu!arly the third
Time I went, I brought away as much of the Rig-
ging as I could, as also all the small Ropes and
Roye-twine I could get, with a Piece of ipare Can-
vass, which was to mend the Sails upon Occasion,
the Barrel of wee Gun-powder: In a Word J brought
away all the Sails first and last, only that I was
fain to cut them in Pieces, and bring as much at a
Time as I could; for they were no more useful ro
be Sails, but as meer Canvass only.
But that which comforted me more still, was,
that at last of all, after I had made five or si* such
Voyages as these, and thought I had nothing more
ro expect from the Ship that was worth my med-
ling with, I fay, after all this, I sound a great Hog-
shead of Bread, and three large'Runlets of Run or
Spirits, and a Box of Sugar, and a Barrel of fine
Flower ; this was surprizing to me, because I had
given over expecting any more Provisions, except
what was syoii'd by the Water: I soon empty'd the
Hogshead of that Bread, and wrapt it up, Parcel
by Parcel, in Pieces of the Sails, which 1 cutout:
and in a Word, I got all this safe on Shore also.
The next Day I made anorher Voyage; and
now having plunder'd the Ship of what was porta-
ble

<page 78>
C*5] .
ble and fit to hand out, I began with the Cables;
and cutting the great Cable into Pieces, such as I
could move, I got two Cables and a Hawser oil
Shore, with all the Iron-work I could get, and
having cut down the Spritsail-yard, and the Mi-
sen-yard, and every Thing I could to make a large
Raft, I loaded it witli all those heavy Goods, and
came away: But my good Luck began now to
leave me; for this Raft was so unweildy, and so
overladen, that after I was enter'd the little Cave,
where I had landed the rest of my Goods, not
being able to guide it so handily as I did the o-
ther, it overset, and threw me and all my Cargo
into the Water; as for my self it was no great Harm,
for I was near the Shore; but as to my Cargo, it
Was great part of it lost, especially the Iron, which
I expected would have been of great Use to me t
However, when the Tide was out, I got most of
the Pieces of Cable ashore, and some of the Iron,
tho' With infinite Labour; for I was fain to dip for
it into the Water, a Work which fatigu'd me very
much; after this, I went every Day on Board,
and brought away what I could get.
I had been now 13 Days on Shore, and had been
II Times on Board the Ship; in which Time I
had brought away all that one Pair of Hands could
Well be suppos'd capable to bring, tho' I believe
verily, had the calm Weather held, I should have
brought away the whole Ship, Piece by Piece:
But pr%>aring the 12thTime to go on Board,Ifound
the Wind begin to rife; however at low Water I
went on Board, and tho' I thought I had ru-
mag'd the Cabbin so effectually, as that nothing;
more could be, founds yet I discover'd a Locker
with Drawers in it, in one of which I found two
or three Razors, and one Pair of large Scissars,
With some ten or a dozen of good Knives and
F Forks}

<page 79>
[ 66 ]
Forks; in another I found about Thirty six Pounds
value;in Money, some European Coin, some Brafil,
some Pieces or" Eight, some Gold, some Silver.
I smil'd to my self at the Sight of this Money.
0 Drug! said I aloud, what art thou good for?
Thou art not worth to me, no not the taking oft
of the Ground, one of those Knives is worth all
this Heap, I have no Manner of use for thee, e'en
remain where thou art, and go to the Bottom as
a Creature whose Life is not worth saving. How-
ever upon second Thoughts, I took it away, and
wrapping all this in a Piece of Canvas, I began
to think of making another Raft, but while I was
preparing this, I found the Sky over-cast, and the
Wind began to rife, and in a Quarter of an Hour
it blew a fresh Gale from the Shore; it presently
occur'd to me, that it was in vain to pretend to
make a Raft with the Wind off Shore, and that
it was my Business to be gone before the Tide of
Flood began, otherwise I might not be able to
reach the Shore at all: Accordingly I let myself
down into the Water, and swam cross the Channel,
which lay between the Ship and the Sands, and
even that with Difficulty enough, partly with the
Weight of the Things I had about me, and partly
the Roughness of the Water, for the Wind rose
very hastily, and before it was quite high Water
it blew a Storm.
But I was gotten home to my little Tent, where
1 lay with all my Wealth about me very fefure- It
blew very hard all that Night, and in the Morning
when I look'd out, behold no moreShip was to be
seen, 1 was a little surpriz'd, but recover'd my
self with this satisfactory Reflection, viz,. That I
had lost no time, nor abated no Diligence to get
every thing out of her that could be useful to me,
and that indeed there was little left in her that I
was

<page 80>
s -57 ]
<S?as able to bring away, if I had had mbre time/
I now gave over any more Thoughts of the
Ship, or of any thing out of her, except what
might drive on Shore from her Wreck, as indeed
divers Pieces of her afterwards did; but those
things were of small use torne.
My Thoughts were now wholly employ'd about
securing my self again/t either Savages, is any
should appear, dr wild Beasts, if any were in the
Island; and I had many Thoughts of the Method
how to do this* and what kind of Dwelling to
make, whether I should make me a Cave in the
Earth, or a Tent upon the Earth: And, in shorts
I resolv'd upon both, the Manner and Descripti-
on of which it may not be improper to give an
Account of.
I soon found the Place I was in was not for my
Settlement, particularly because it was upon a low
moorish Ground near the Sea, and I believ'd would
not be wholsome, and more particularly because
there was no fresh Water near it, so I resolv'd to
find a more healthy and more convenient Spot of
Ground..
I consulted several Things in my Situation which
I found would be proper forme, ist. Health, and
fresh Water, I just now mentioned. 2dly, Shelter
from the Heat of the Sun. 3dly, Security from ra-
venous Creatures, whether Men or Beast. 4thly;
a View to the Sea, that if God sent any Ship
in Sight, I might not lose any Advantage for my
Deliverance, of which I was not willing to banish
all my Expectation yet.'
In search of a Place proper for this, I found a
little Plain on the fide of a rising Hill, whose
Front towards this little Plain Was steep as a
House-side, so that nothing could come down up-
on me from the Top; on the Side of this Rock
F a there

<page 81>
[ 6S ]
there was a hollow Place worn a little way in like
the Entrance or Door of a Cave, but there was
not really any Cave or Way into the Rock at all.
On the Flat of the Green, ;ust before this hollow
Place, I resolved to pitch my Tent: This Plain was
not above an hundred Yards broad, and about
twice as long, and lay like a Green before my
Door, and at the End of it descended irregularly
every way down into the low Gronnds by the Sea-
side. It was on the N.N.JV. Side of the Hill, so
that I was sheltered from the Heat every Day, till
it came to a W- and by S. Sun, or thereabouts,
which in those Countries is near the Setting.
Before I set up my Tent, I drew a half Circle
before the hollow Place, which took in about ten
Yards in its Semi-diameter from the Rock, and
twenty Yards in its Diameter, from its Beginning
and Ending.
In this half Circle I pitch'd two Rows of strong
Srakes, driving them into the Ground till they stood
very firm like piles, the biggest End being out of
the Ground about five Foot and a half, and shar-
pen'd on the Top; the two Rows, did not stand
above six Inches from one another.
Then I took the Pieces of Cable which I had cut
in the Ship, and laid them in Rows one upon*ano-
ther, within the Circle between these two Rows
offtakes, up to the Top, placing other Stakes in
the Inside, leaning against them, about two Foot
and a half high, like a Spur to a Post, and this
Fence was so strong, that neither Man or Beast
could get into it or over it: This cost me a great
deal of Time and Labour, especially to cut the
Piles in the Woods, bring them to the Place, and
drive them into the Earth.
The Entrance into this Place I made to be not
by a Doer, but by a short Ladder, -to go over
the

<page 82>
I 691
the Top, which Ladden, when I was in, I lifted
over after me, and so I was compleatly fenced in,
and fortify'd, as I thought, from all the World,
and consequently slept secure in the Night, which
otherwise I could not have done, tho'as itappear'd
afterward, there was no need of all this Caution
from the Enemies that I apprehended Danger from.
Into this Fence or Fortress, with infinite Labour,'
I carry'd all my Riches, all my Provisions, Am-
munition and Stores, of which you have the Ac-
count above, and I made me a large Tent, which
to preserve me from the Rains, that in one Part of
the Year are very violent there, I made double, viz,.
one smaller Tent within, and one larger Tent a-
bove it, and cover'd the uppermost with a large
Tarpaulin which I had sav'd among the Sails.
And now I lay no more for a while in the Bed
which I had brought on Shore, but in a Hammock,
which was indeed a very good one, and belong'd
to the Mate of the Ship.
Into this Tent I brought all my Provisions, and
every thing that would spoil by the Wet, and ha-
ving thus enclos'd all my Goods, I made up the
Entrance, which till now I had left open, and so
pass'd and repass'd, as I said, by a short Ladder.
Wfien I had done this, 1 began to work my
Way into the Rock, and bringing all the Earth and
Stones that I dug down, out thro' my Tent, I
laid 'em up within my Fence in the Nature of a
Terras, that so it rais'd the Ground within about
a Foot and a half; and thus I made me a Cave just
behind my Tent, which serv'd me like a Cellar to
my House.
It cost me much Labour, and many Days, before
all these Things were brought to Perfection, and
therefore I must go back to some otherThings which
took up some of my Thoughts. At the fame time it
F 3 happen'd

<page 83>
[70]
happen'd after I had laid my Scheme for the set-
ting up my Tent, and making the Cave, that a
Storm of Rain falling from a thick dark Cloud, a
sudden Flash of Lightning happen'd, and after that .
a great Clap of Thunder, as is naturally the Effect
of it; I was not so much furpriz'd with the Light-
ning, as I was with a Thought which darted into
my Mind as swift as the Lightning it self: O my
Powder! my very Lhart funk within me, when I
thought, that at one Blast all my Powder might be
destroy'd; on which, not my Defence only, but the
providing me Food, as I thought, entirely depen-
ded ; I was nothing near so anxious about my own
Danger, tho' had the Powder took fire, I had ne-
ver known who had hurt me.
Such Impression did this make upon me, that af-
ter the Storm was over, I laid aside all my Works,
my Building, and Fortifying, and apply'd my self
to make Bags and Boxes to separate the Powder,
and to keep it a little and a little in a Parcel, in
hope, that whatever might come, it might not
all take Fire at once, and to keep it so aparr, that
it siiould not be possible to make one Part fire a-
nother. I finish'd this Work in about a Fortnight,
and I think my Powder, which in all was about
•240 ]. weight, was divided in not less than a "Hun-
dred Parcels; as to the Barrel that had been wet,
I did not apprehend any Danger from that, so I
i plac'd it in my new Cave, which in my Fancy I ,
: call'd my Kitchin; and the rest I hid up and
down in Holes among the Rocks, so that no wet
might come to ir, marking very carefully where I
laid it.
In the Interval of time while this was doing, I
went out once at least every Day with my Gun,
as well to divert my self, as to fee if I could kill any
thing fit for Food, and as near as I could to ac-
quaint

<page 84>
171.1
uaint my self with what thelsland pr oduc'd. The
rsttimel went out I presently discover'd that
there were Goats in the Island, which was a great
. Satisfaction tome; but then it was attended with
this Misfortune to me, viz. That they were so
shy, so subtle, and so swift of Foot, that it was
the difficultest thing in the World to come at them:
But I was not discourag'd at this, not doubting
but I might now and then shoot one, as it soon hap-
pen'd, for after I had found their Haunts a little,
I laid wait in this Manner for them.. I observ'd if
they saw me in the Valleys, tho' they were upon
the Rocks, they would run away as in a terrible
Fright; but if they were feeding in the Valleys,
and I was upon the Rocks, they took no Notice
of me, from whence I concluded, that by the
Position of their Opticks, their Sight was so di-
rected downward, that they did not readily fee
Objects that were above them; so afterward I
took this Method, I always climbed the Rocks sirst
to get above* them, and then had frequently a fair
Mark. The first (hot I made among these Crea-
tures, I kill'd a She-Goat which had a little Kid
by her which she gave suck to, which griev'd me
heartily; but when the Old one fell, the Kid
stood stock still by her till I come and took her up,
and not only so, but when I carried the Old one
with me upon my Shoulders, the Kid follow'd
me quite to my Enclosure, upon which I laid dowri
the Dam, and took the Kid in my Arms, and
carried it over my Pale, in hopes to have bred it
up tame, but it would not eat, so I was fore'd to
kill it and eat it my self; these two supply'd me
with Flesh a great while, for I eat sparingly; and
sav'd my Provisions (my Bread especially) as much
as possibly I could
F 4 Having

<page 85>
[7*1
Having nowfix'd my Habitation, I sound itab-
solutely necessary to provide a Place to make a
Fire in, and Fewel to burn; and what I did for
that, as also how I enlarg'd my Cave, and what
Conveniencies I made, I shall give a full Account'
of in its Place: But I must first give some little
Account of my self, and of my Thoughts about
Living, which it may well be supposed were not
a few.
I had a dismal Prospect of my Condition; for as
I was not cast away upon that Island without be-
ing driven, as is said, by a violent Storm quite out
of the Course of our intended Voyage, and a great
Way, viz,, some Hundreds of Leagues out of the
ordinary Course of the Trade of Mankind, I had
great Reason to consider it as a Determination of
Heaven, that in this desolate Place, and in this
desolate Manner I should end my Life; the Tears
would run plentifully down my Face when! made
these Reflections, and sometimes I would expostu-s
late with my self, Why Providence*should thus
compleatly rnin its Creatures, and render them fa
absolutely miserable, so without Help ahandon'd,
so entirely depress'd, that it could hardly be ra-
tional to be thankful for such a Life.
But something always return'd swift upon me to
check these Thoughts, and to reprove me; and
particularly one Day walking with my Gun in my
Hand by the Sea-side, I was very pensive upon the
Subject of my present Condition, when Reason as
it were expostulating with me to'ther Way, thus
Well, you are in a desolate Condition, 'tis true, but
pray remember, Where are the rest of you? Did
not you come Eleven of you into the Boat, where
are the Ten? Why were not they sav'd and you
lost? Why were you singled out? Is it better to be
here or there? and then I pointed to the Sea. All
Evils

<page 86>
[73]
Evils are to be consider'd with rhe Good that is in
them, and with what worse attended them.
Then it occurred to me again, how well I was
furninVd for my Sublistance, and what would have
been my Cafe if it had not happen'd, Which -was
(in Hundred 'Thousand to cne, that the Ship floated
from the Place where she first struck and was dri-
ven so near to the Shore that I had time to get
;ill these Things out of her: What would have
been my Cafe, if I had been to have liv'd in the
Condition in which I at first came on Shore, with-
out Neceflaries of Life, or Necessaries to supply
and procure them? Particularly said I aloud, (tho'
to my self) what should I ha' done without a
Gun, without Ammunition, without any Tools
to make any thing, or to work with, without
Cloaths, Bedding, a Tent, or any manner of
Covering ; and that now I had all these to a suffi-
cient Quantity, and was in a fair way to provide
my self in such a manner, as to live without
my Gun when my Ammunition was spent/ so
that I had a tolerable View of subsisting/without
£ny Want as long as I liv'd; for I coafider'd from
the beginning how I would provide for the Acci-
dents that might happen, and for the time that was
to come, even not only after my Ammunition
should be spent, but even after my Health or
Strength mould decay.
I confess I had not enter tain'd any Notion of my
Ammunition being destroy'd at one Blast, I mean
my Powder being blown up by Lightning, and this
made the Thoughts of it lo surprising to me when
it lighten'd and thunder'd, as I obferv'd just now.
And now being to enter into a melancholy
Relation of a Scene of silent Life, such perhaps as
was neve* heard of in the World before, I shall
t^ke it from its Beginning, and continue it in its
Order

<page 87>
[74 1
Order. It was, by my Account, the 30th of Sep.
when, in the Manner as abovesaid, I first set Foot
upon this horrid Island, when the ,Snn being, to
us, in its Autumnal'Equinox, was almost just over
my Head, for I reckon'd'my self, by Observation,
to be in the Latitude of 9 Degrees 22 Minutes
North of the Line.
After I had been there about Ten or Twelve
Days, it came into my Thoughts, that I should
lose my Reckoning of Time for want of Books,
and Pen and Ink, and should even forget the Sab-
bath Days from the Working Days'; but to prevent
this, I cut it with my Knife upon a large Post, in
Capital Letters, and making it into a great Cross, I
set it up on the Shore where I first Landed, vix,. I
came m Shore here on the 50th cj Sept. 1659. Upon
the Sides or this square Post, I cut every Day a
Notch with my Knife, and every seventh Notch
was as long again as the rest, and every first Day of
the Month as long again as that long one; and thus
I kept my Kalendar, or weekly, monthly, and
yearly reckoning of Time.
In the next place we are to observe, that among
the many things which I brought out of the Ship
in the several Voyages, which, as abovemention'd,
I made to it, I got several things of less Value,
but not all less useful to me, which I omitted set-
ting down before ; zs in particular, Pens, Ink, and
Paper, several Parcels in the Captain's, Mate's
Gunner's, and Carpenter's keeping, three or sou
Compasses, some Mathematical Instruments, Dials,
Perspectives, Charts, and Books of Navigation,
all whish I huddled together, whether I might
want them or no; also I found three very good
Bibles which came to me in my Cargo from Eng-
land, and which I had pack'd up among my things;
seme Povtug'u^e Books also, aud among them two

<page 88>
[ 75 ]
or three Popish Prayer-Books, and several other
Books, all which I carehilly lecur'd. And I must
not forget, that we had in the Ship a Dog and two
Cats, of whose eminent History I may have occa-
sion to say something in its Place; for I carry'd
both the Cats with me; a,;d as for the Dog, he
jump'd out of the Ship of himself, and swam on
Shore tome the Day after I went on Shore with my
first Cargo, and was a trusty Servant to me many
Years; I wanted nothing that he could fetch me,
nor any Company that he could make up to me,
I only wanted to have him talk to me, but that
would not do: As I observed before, I found Pen,
Ink and Paper, and I husbanded them to the ut-
most; and I shall shew, that while my Ink lasted,
1 kept things very exact; but after that was gone,
J could not; for I could not make any Ink, by any
Means that I could devise.
And this put me in mind that I wanted many ,
things, notwithstanding all that I had amass'd to-
gether; and of these, this of Ink was one, as also
Spade, Pick-Axe and Shovel, to dig or remove
the Earth; Needles, Pins, and Thread; as for
Linnen, I soon learn'd to want that without much
Difficulty.
• This want of Tools made every Work I did go
on heavily, and it was near a whole Year before I
had entirely finished my little Pale or surrounded
Habitation: The Piles or Stakes, which were as
heavy as I could well lift, were a long time in cut-
ting and preparing in the Woods, and more by far
in bringing home; so that I spent sometimes two
Days in cutting and bringing home one of those
Posts, and a third Day in driving it into the Ground;
for which Purpose I got a heavy Piece of Wood
at first, but at last bethought myself of one of the
Jron Crows, which however, tho' I found it, yet

<page 89>
[7* ]
it made driving those Posts or Piles very labo-
rious and tedious Work.
But what need I ha' been concerned at the Te-
diousnese of any thing I had to do, seeing I had
time- enough to do it in, nor had I any other Em-
ployment if that had been over, at least, that I
could foresee, except the ranging the Island to seek
for Food,, which I did more or less every Day.
I now began to consider seriously my Condition,
and the Circumstance I was reduc a to, and I drew
up the State of my Affairs in Writing, not so much
to leave them to any that were to come after me,
for I was like to have but few Heirs, as to de-
liver my Thoughts from daily poring upon them,
and afflicting my Mind; and as my Reason began
now to master my Despondency, 1 began to com-
fort my self as well as I could, and to set the Good
against the Evil, that I might have something to
distinguish my Case from worse; and I stated it
very impartially, like Debtor and Creditor, the
Comforts I enjoy'd, against the Miseries I suffer'd,
thus:
Evil. Good.
/ dm cast upon a horri- But I am alive, and
tie desolate Island, void os not drown d,as all my Ship's
all hope of Recovery. Company was.
I am singled out ojf d fe- But I am singled out too
pa rated, as it were, from from all the Ship's Crew to
all the World to be misera- be spared from Death; and
He. he that miraculously saved
mesom Death, can deliver
me f rom this Condition.
lam divided from Alan- But I am not flaw V and
iind, a Solitaire, one ba- perishing cn a barren Place,
ni;h dfrom humane Society. ' aff ording no Sustenance.
I have

<page 90>
[77] ,
/ have not Cloaths to to- But I am in a hot Cli'
mate, -where if I had Cloaths
I couldhardly wear them.
•ver- me.
1 am without any De-
fence or Means to resist any
Violence of Man or Beast.
I have no Soul to
to, or relieve me.
But r am cast on an I-
stand, where I fee no wild
Beasts to hurt me, as I saw
on the Coast of Africa: And
what if I had been Ship-
wreck'd there?
But God wonderfully sent
the Ship in near enough to
the Shore, that I have got-
ten out so many necessary
things as will either supply
my Wants, or enable me
to supply my self even as
long as Hive.
Upon the whole, here was an undoubted TestiW
mony, that there'was scarce any Condition in the
World so miserable, but there was something nega-
tive or something pofitive to be thankful for in it;
and let this stand, as a Direction from the Experi-
ence of the most miserable of all Conditions in this
World, that we may always find in it something
to comfort ourselves from, and to set in the De-
scription of Good and Evil, on the Credit Side of
the Account.
Having now brought my Mind a little to relish
my Condition, and given over looking out.to Sea,
to see if I could spy a Ship; I say, giving over
these Things, I began to apply my self to accommo-
date my way of Living, and to make things as ea-
sy to me as I could.
I have

<page 91>
[78]
I have already described my Habitation, which
was a Tent under the Side of a Rock, surrounded
with a strong Pale of Posts and Cables, but I might
now rather call it a Wall, for I rais'd a kind of
Wall up against it of Turfs, about two Foot thick
on the Outside, and after some time, I think it
was a Year and half, I rais'd Rafters from it, lean-
ing to the Rock, and thatch'd or cover'd it with
Boughs of Trees, and such things as I could get to
keep out the Rain, which I found at some times of
the Year very violent.
I have already observ'd how I brought all my
Goods into this Pale, and into the Cave which I
had made behind me: But I must observe too
that at first this was a confus'd Heap of Goods,
which as they lay in no Order, so they took up
all my Place; I had no room to turn my self; So
I set my self to enlarge my Cave and Works far-^
ther into the Earth r"for it was a loose sandy Rock,
which yielded easily to the Labour I bestowed on
it: And so when I sound I was pretty safe as to
Beasts of Prey, I work'd sideways to the Right
Hand into the Rock; and then turning to the Right
again, work'd quite out, and made me a Door to
come out, on the Outside of my Pale or Fortifi-
cation.
This gave me not only Egress and Regress, as
it were a Back-way to my Tent and to my Store-
house, but gave me room to stow my Goods.
And now I began to apply my self to make such
necessary things as I found I most wanted, particu-
larly a Chair and a Table; for without these I was
not able to en;oy the few Comforts I had in the
WorldI could not write or eat, or several things
with so much Pleasure without a Table-
So I went to work; and here I must needs ob-
serve, that as Reason is the Substance and Origi"
nal

<page 92>
[ 79 3
nal of the Mathematicks, so by stating and squar-
ing every thing by Reason, and by making the
most rational Judgment of things, every Man may
bein time Master of every mechanick Art. I had
never handled a Tool in my Life, and yet in time
by Labour, Application and Contrivance, I found
at last that I wanted nothing but I could have made
it, especially if I had had Tools; however, I
I made abundance of things, even without Tools,
and some with no more Tools than an Adze and
a Hatchet, which perhaps were never made that
way before, and that with infinite Labour: For
Example, If I wanted a Board, I had no other Way
but to cut down a Tree, set it on an Edge before
me, and hew it flat on either Side with my Axe,
till I had brought it to be as thin as a Plank, and
then dubb it smooth with my Adze. It is true,
by this Method I could make but one Board out
of a whole Tree, but this I had no Remedy for
but Patience, any more than I had for the prodi-
gious deal of Time and Labour which it took me
up to make a Plank or Board: But my Time or
Labour was little worth, aud so it was as well em-
ploy 'd one way as another.
However, I made me a Table and a Chair, as
I observ'd above, in the first Place, and this I did
out of the fliort Pieces of Boards that I brought
on my Raft from the Ship: But when I had
wrought out some Boards, as above, I made large
Shelves of the Breadth of a Foot and a Half one
over another, all along one Side of my Cave, to
lay all my Tools, Nails, and Iron-work, and in a
Word, to separate every thing at large in their
Places, that I might come easily at them ; I knock'd
Pieces into the Wall of the Rock to hang my Guns
and all things that would hang up."
So

<page 93>
[ to]
So that had my Cave been to be seen, it Jook'd
like a general Magazine os all neceilary things,
and I had every thing so ready at my Hand, that
it was a great Pleasure to me to see all my Goods
in such Order, and especially to find my Stock of
all Necessaries so great.
And now it was when I began to keep a Jour-
nal of every Day's Employment, lor indeed at first
I was in too much a Hurry, and not only Hurry
as to Labour, but in too much Discomposure of
Mind, and my Journal would ha'been full os many
dull things. For Example, I must have said thus:
Sept, the 30th, After I got to Shore, and had escap'd
drowning, instead of being thankful to God for
my Deliverance, having first vomited with the
great Quantity of fait Water which was gotten
into my Stomach, and recovering my self a little, I
ran about the Shore, wringing my Hands, and beat-
ing my Head and Face, exclaiming at my Misery,
and crying out, I was undone, undone, till tir'd
and faint I was fore'd to lye down oathe Ground
to repose, but durst not sleep for fear of being de-
vour'd.
Some Days after this, and after I had been on
board the Ship, and got all that I could out of
her, yet I could not forbear getting up to the Top
of a little Mountain, and looking out to Sea in
hopes of seeing a Ship, then fancy at a vast Di-
stance I spy'd a Sail, please my self with the Hopes
of it, and then after looking steadily till I was al-
most blind, lose it quite, and sit down and weep
like a Child, and thus encrease my Misery by my
Folly.
But having gotten over these things in some Mea-
sure, and having settled my Houshold-Stuff and Ha-
bitation, made me a Table and a Chair, and all
as handsome about me as Icouid, I began to keep
my

<page 94>
s Si]
my Journals of which I shall here give you the
Copy (tho' in it will be told all these Particulars
over again) as long as it lasted, sot having no
more Ink, I was fore'd to leave it off.
the JOURNAL;
SEptember 30. 1659. I poor miserable Robinson.
Crusoe, being shipwreck'd, during a dreadful
Storm, in the Offing, came on Shore on this dis-
mal unfortunate Island, which I eall'd, "the Island of
Despair^ all the rest of the Ship's Company being
drown'd, and my self almost dead.
All the rest of that Day I spent in afflicting my
self at the dismal Circumstances I was brought to*
•viz,. I had neither Food, House, Cloaths, Weapon
or Place to fly to, and in Despair of any Relief*
saw nothing but Death before me, either that I
should be devour'd by wild Beasts, murther'd by
Savages, or starv'd to Death for want of Food. At
the Approach of Night, I slept in a Tree for Fear
of wild Creatures* but slept soundly tho' it rain'd
all Night.
O&ober t. In the Morning I saw to my great
Surprize the Ship had floated with the high Tide,
and was driven on Shore again much nearer the
Island, which as it was some Comfort on one hand*
for seeing her sit upright, and not broken to Pieces*
I hop'd, if the Wind abated, I might get on board,
and get some Food and Necessaries out of her for
my Relief; so on the other hand, it renew'd my
Grief at the Loss of my Comrades, who I ima-
gin'd if we had all staid on Board might have*
sav'd the Ship, or at least that they would not have
been all drown'd as they were; and that had the
Men been sav'd, we might perhaps have built us a
Boat out of the Ruins of the Ship, to have car-
G rie^

<page 95>
[8z ]
ried us to some other Part of the World. I spent
great part of this Day in perplexing my self on
these things; but at length feeing the Ship almolt
dry, I went upon the Sand as near as I could, and
then swam on Board; this Day also it continuU
raining, tho' with no Wind at all ,, :.A ,
From the ist of October to the 24th. All these,
Days entirely spent in many several Voyages to
get all I could out of the Ship, which I brought
on Shore, every Tide of Flood, upon Rafts. Much
Rain also in these Days, tho'with some Intervals
of fair Weather; But, it seems, this was the rainy
Season.
Oci. 20. I overset my Raft, and all the Goods
I had got upon it, but being in shoal Water, and
the things being chiefly heavy, I recover'd many
of them when the Tide was out.
Oci. 25. It rain'd all Night and all Day, with
some Gusts of Wind, during which time the Ship
broke in pieces, the Wind blowing a little harder
than before, and was no more to be seen, except
the Wreck of her, and that only at low Water.
I spent this Day in covering and securing the Goods
which I had sav'd, that Rain might not spoil
them.
Oci. 26. I walk'd about the Shore almost all
Day to find out a Place to fix my Habitation,
greatly concern'd to secure my self from anyAttack
in the Night, either from wild Beasts or Men.
Towards Night I fix'd upon a proper place under
a Rock, and mark'd out a Semi-Circle for my En-
campment, which I resolv'd to strengthen with a
•Work, Wall, or Fortification made of double Piles,
lin'd within with Cable, and without with Turf.
From the 26th to the 30th I work'd very hard
in carrying all my Goods to my new Habitation.
tho'

<page 96>
tho' some part of the time it rain'd exceeding
hard.
The 31st in the Morning I went out into the
Ifland with my Gun to see for some Food, and dis-
cover the Country; when rkill'd a She-Goat, and
her Kid folJow'd me home, which I afterwards
kill'd also, because it would not feed.
November 1. I set up my Tent under a Rock, and
lay there for the first Night, making it as large as
I could with Stakes driving in to swing my Ham-
mock* upon.
Nov. 2.1 set up all irrf Chests and Boards, and
the Pieces of Timber which made my Rafts, and
With them form'd a Fence round me, a little with-
in the Place I had mark'd out for my Fortifi-
cation. *
Nov. 3.1 went out with my Gun, and kill'd two
Fowls like Ducks, which were very good Food.
In the Afternoon went to work to make me a
Table.
Nov. 4. This Morning I began to order my times
of Work, of going out with my Gun, time of
Sleep, and time of Diversion, viz,. Every Morning
I walk'd out with my Gun for two or three Hours
if it did not Rain, then employ'd myself to work
till about Eleven a-clock, then eat what I had to
live on, and from Twelve to Two I lay down to
deep, the Weather being excessive hot, and then
in the Evening to work again; The working Part
of this Day and of the next were wholly employed
in making my Table, for I was yet but a very sorry
Workman, tho' Time and Necessity made me a
compleat natural Mechanick soon after, as I believe
it would do any one else.
Nov. 5., This Day went abroad with my Gun
and my Dog, and kill'd a wild Cat, her Skin
pretty soft, but her Flesh good for nothing: Every
, G a Creature

<page 97>
[ 84]
• Cicature I kill'd, I took off the Skins and prescrv'd
them. Coming back by the Sea-Shore, I saw ma-
ny Sorts of Sea-Fowls, which I did not understand;
but was furpriz'd, and«almost frighted with two ,
or three Seals, which, while I was gazing at, not
well knowing what they were, got into the Sea,
and eicap'd me for that Time.
Nov. 6. After my Morning Walk I went to work
with my Table again, and finish'd it, tho' not to
my Liking; nor was it long before I learn'd to
mend it.
Nov. 7. Now it began to be settled fair Weather.
The 7th, 8ch, oth, xoth, and Part of the 12th,'
(iot the 11 th-was, Sunday) I took wholly up to
make me a Chair, and with much ado brought
it to a tolerable Shape, but never to please me;
and even in the making I pulfd it in Pieces several
Time.. Note, I soon neglected my keeping Sun-
days, for omitting my Mark for them on my Post,
I forgot which was which.
Nov. 13. This Day it rain'd, which refrefli'd me
exceedingly, and cool'd the Earth, but it was ac-
company'd with terrible Thunder and Lightning,
which frighted me dreadfully for fear of my Pow-
der: As soon as it was over, I resolv'd to separate
my Stock of Powder into as many little Parcels as
possible, that it might not be in Danger.
Nov. 14, 15, 16. Those three Days I spent in
making little square Chests or Boxes, which might
hold about a Pound, or two Pound, at most, of
Powder; and so putting the Powder in, I stowed
it in Places as secure and remote from one another
as possible. On one of these three Days I kill'd
a large Bird,that was good to eat, but 1 knew not
what to call'it.
Nlv. 1 j. This Day I began to dig behind my
1 Tent into the Rock, to make Room for my farther
Convc-

<page 98>
[ 85 ]

Conveniency. Note, Three Things I wanted ex-
ceedingly for this Work, viz,, a Pick-axe, a Shovel,
and a Weeel-barrow or Basket, so I desisted from
my Work, and began to consider how to supply
that Want, and make me some Tools: As for a
Pick-axe, I made use of the Iron Crows, which
were proper enough, tho' heavy; but the next
thing was a Shovel or Spade this was so abso-
lutely necessary, that indeed I could do nothing ef-
fectually without it; but what kind of one to make
I kuew not.
Nov. 18. The next Day in searching the Woods
I found a Tree of that Wood, or like it, which
in the Brajils they call the Iron Tree, for its ex-
ceeding Hardness; of this, with great Labour and
almost spoiling my Axe, I cut a piece, and brought
it home too with Difficulty enough, for it was ex-
ceeding heavy.
The excessive Hardness of the Wood, and having
no other way, made me a long while upon this
Machine; for I work'd it effectually by little
and little into the Form of a Shovel or Spade,
the Handle exactly shap'd like ours in England,
only that the broad Part having no Iron shod up-
on it at Bottom, it would not last me so long;
however it scrv'd well enough for the uses which I
had occasion to put it to; but never was a Shovel,
I believe, made^ after that Fashion, or so long a
making.
I was still deficient, for I wanted a Basket or a
Wheel-barrow; a Basket I could not make by any
means, having no such things as Twigs that would
bend to make Wicker Ware, at least none yet found
out; and as to a Wheel-barrow, I fancy d I could
make all but the Wheel, but that I had no Notion
or, neither did I know how to go about it; besides
I had no possible way to make the Iron Gudgeons
G 3 foe

<page 99>
[ %6 ]
for the Spindle or Axis of the Wheel to ran in, so
I gave it over; and so for carrying away the Earth
which I dug out of the Cave, I made me a Thing
likeaHodd which the Labourers carry Mortar in,
when they serve the Bricklayers.
This was not so difficult to me as the making
the Shovel; and yet this, and the Shovel, and the
Attempt wh'ch I made in vain, to make a Wheel-
barrow, took me up no less than four Days, I mean
always, excepting my Morning Walk with my Gun,
which I seldom fail'd; and very seldom fail d also
bringing Home something for to eat,
Nov. 23. My other Work having now stood still,
because of my making these Tools; when they
were finish'd, I went on, and working every Day,
as my Strength and Time allow'd, I spent eigh-
teen Days entirely in widening and deepening my
Cave, that it might hold my Goods commodi-
oufly.
Not?, During all this Time, I work'd to make
thisJR.oom or Cave spacious enough to accommo-
date me as a Warehouse or Magazine, a Kitchen,
a Dining-room, and a Cellar; as for my Lodging,
I kept. to the Tent, except that sometimes in the
wet Season'of the Year, it rain'd so hard that I
could riot keep my self dry, which caus'd me after-
wards to coverall my Place within my Pale with
long Poles in the Form of Rafters, leaning against
the Rock, and load them with Flags and large
Leaves of Trees like a Thatch.
December 10. I began now to think my Cave
Or Vault finished, when on a sudden (it seems I
had made it too large) a great Quantity of Earth
fell down from the Top and one Side, so much
that in short it frighted me, and not without Rea-
son too; for if I had been under it, I had never
wanted a Grave-digger: Upon this Disaster I had
a great

<page 100>

[ 87]
a great deal of Work to do over again; for I had
the loose Earth to carry out, and which was of
more Importance, I had the Cieling to prop up, so
that I might be sure no more would come down.
D.c. n. This Day I went to Work with it accord-
ingly, and got two Shores or Posts pitch'd upright
to the Top, with two Pieces of Boards a-crois over
each Post, this I finish'd the next Day; and setting
more Posts up with Boards, in about a Week more I
had the Roof secur'd; and the Posts standing in
Rows,scrv'd me for Partitions to part ot my House.
Dec. 17. From this Day to the Twentieth I
plac'd Shelves, and knock'd up Nails on the Posts
to hang every Thing up that could be hung up,
and now I began to be in some Order within
Doors.
Dec. 20. Now I carry'd every Thing into the
Cave, and began to furnish my House, and set up
some Pieces of Boards, like a Dresler, to ordermy
Victuals upon, but Boards began to be very scarce
with me; also I made me another Table.
Dec. 24. Much Rain all Night and all Day, no
stirring out.
Dec. 25. Rain all Day.
Dec. 26. No Rain, and the Earth much cooler
than before, and pleasanter.
Dec. 27. Kill'd a young Goat, and lam'd ano-
ther so that I catch'd it, and led it Home in a
String; when I had it Home, I bound and splin-
ter'd, up its Leg which was broke. N. B. I
took such Care of it, that it Jiv'd, and the Leg
grew well and as strong as ever; but by nursing
it so long it grew tame, and fed upon the little
Green at my Door, and' would not go away:
This was the first Time that I entertain'd a,-
Thought of breeding up some tame Creatures,
, G 4 that.

<page 101>
[88}
that I might have Food when my Powder and Shot
was all spent.
Dec. 18,29,30. Great Heats and no Breeze;
so that there was no stirring abroad, except in the
Evening for Food; this Time I spent in putting
all my Things in Order within Doors.
January 1. Very hot still, but I went abroad ear-
ly and late with my Gun, and lay still in the middle
of the Day. This Evening, going farther into the
Valleys, which lay towards the Center of the Ifland,
I found there was plenty of Goats, tho'exceeding
shy and hard to come at; however I resolv'd to try
if I could not bring my Dog to hunt them down.
Jan. 2. Accordingly, the next Day, I went out
with my Dog, and set him upon the Goats; but
I was mistaken, for they all fac'd about upon the
Dog; and he knew his Danger too well, for he
would not come near them.
Jan. 3. I began my Fence or Wall; which, be-
ing still jealous of my being attack'd by some Bo-
dy, I resolv'd to make very thick and strong.
N.' B. This Wall being defcrib'd before, I
. purposely omit what was said tn the Jour-
nal; it is sufficient to observe, That I was
no less Time than from the 3 d of January
to the 14th of April, working, finijhing,and
• perfecting this Wall, tho' it was no more
than about 24 Tards in Length, being a half
Circle from one Place iri the Rock to another
Place about eight Tards from it, the Door
of the Cave being in the Center behind it.
All this Time I work'd very hard, the Rains
hindering me many Days, nay, sometimes Weeks
together; but I thought I should never be perfect-
ly secure 'till this Wall-was finistui; and it is
scarce

<page 102>
C 89]
scarce credible what inexpressible Labour every
Thing was done with, especially the bringing
Piles out of the Woods, and driving them into the
Ground, for I made them much bigger than I need
to have done.
When this Wall was finish'd, and the Out-side
double fene'd with a Turf-Wall rais'd up close to
it, I perfwaded my self that if any People were
to come on Shore there, thep would not perceive
any Thing like a Habitation; and it was very well
I did so, as may be observ'd hereafter upon a very
remarkable Occasion.
During this Time, I made my Rounds in the
Woods for Game every Day when the Rain ad-
mitted me, and made frequent Discoveries in these
* Walks of something or other to my Advantage;
p articularly I found a kind of a wild Pidgeons, who
built not as Wood Pidgeons in a Tree, but rather
as House Pidgeons, in the Holes of the Rocks;
and taking some young ones, I endeavoured to
breed them up £ame, and did so; but "when they
grew older they flew all away, which perhaps was
at first for Want of feeding them, for I had no-
thing to give them; however I frequently found
their Nests, and got their young ones, which were
very good Meat.
And now in the managing my Houshold Affairs,
I found my self wanting in many Things, which
I thought at first it was impossible for me to make,,
as indeed as to some of them it was; for Instance,
I could never make a Cask to be hoop'd, I had a
small Runlet or two, as I observ'd before,but I cou'd
never arrive to the Capacity of making one by them
tho' I spent many Weeks about it; I could neither
put in the Heads, or joint the Staves so true to one
another, as to make them hold Water, so I^ave
chat also over.
- In

<page 103>
C9o ]
In the next Place, I was at a great Loss for Can-
dle ; so that as soon as ever it was dark, which was
generally by Seven-a-Qock, I was oblig'd to go to
Bed : I remembred the Lump of Bees-wax with
which I made Candles in my African Adventure,
but I had none of that now; the only Remedy I
had, was, that when I had kiil'd a Goat, I sav'd
the Tallow, and with a little D;sh made of Clay,
which I bak'd in the S^n, to which I added a Wick
of some Oakum, I made me a Lamp; and this
gave me Light, tho' not a clear steady Light like
a Candle; in the middle of all my Labours it hap-
pen'd, that rumaging my Things, I found a little
Bag, which, as I hinted before, had been fill'd with
Corn for the feeding of Poultry, not for this Vo-
yage, but before, as I suppose, when the Ship •
came from Lisbon; what little Remainder of Corn
had been in the Bag, was all devour'd with the
Rats, and I saw nothing in the Bag but Husks and
Dust; and being willing to have the Bag for some
other Use, I think it was to put Powder in, when I
divided it for fear of the Lightning, or some such
Use, I shook the Husks of Corn out of it on one
Side of my Fortisication under the Rock.
It was a little before the great Rains, just now
mention'd, that I threw this Stuff away, taking no
Notice of any Thing, and not so much as remem-
bring that I had thrown any Thing there; when
about a Month after, or thereabout, I saw some
few Stalks of something Green shooting out of the
Ground, which I fancy'd might be some Plant I
had not seen, but I was surpriz'd and perfectly a-
siouish'd, when after a little longer Time, I saw
about ten or twelve Ears come out, which were
persect green Barley of the fame Kind as our Euro-
pean* nay, as our Englijh Barley.

<page 104>
[ 95 ]

It is impossible to express the Astonishment and
Confusion of my Thoughts on this Occasion; I
had hitherto acted upon no religious Foundation ac
all; indeed I had very few Notions of. Religion in
ray Head, or had entertain'd ar^y Sense of any
Thing that had befallen me, otherwise than as a
Chance, or, as we lightly fay, what pleases God;
without so much as enquiring into the End of Pro-
vidence in these Things, or his Order in gover-
ning Events in the World: But after I saw Barley
grow there, in a Climate which I know was not
proper for Corn, and especially that I knew not
how it came there, it startled me strangely, and I
began to suggest, that God had miraculously caus'd
this Grain to grow without any Help of Seed
sown, and that it was so directed purely for my
Sustenance on that wild miserable Place.
This touch'd my Heart a little, and brought
Tears out of my Eyes, and I began to bless my
self, that such a Prodigy of Nature should happen
upon my Account; and this was the more strange
to me, because I saw near it still all along by the
Side of the Rock, some other straggling Stalks,
which prov'd to be Stalks of Rice, and which I
knew, because I had seen it grow in Africa, when
I was afliore there.
I not only thought thcs<| the pure Productions
of Providence for my Support, but not doubting,
but that there was moie in the Place, I went all
over that Part of the Island, where I had been
before peering, in every Corner, and under every
Rock, to fee for more of it, but I could not find
any; at last it occurr'd to my Thought, that I had
shook a Bag of Chickens Meat out in that Place,
and then the Wonder began to cease; and I must
confess, my religious Thankfulness to God's Pro-
vidence bsgan to abate too upon the Discovc-
• • ring

<page 105>
I 5* ] •
ring that all this was nothing but whatwas com>-
mon; tho' I ought to have been as thankful for so
strange and unforeseen Providence, as if it had been
miraculous; for it was really the Work of Pro-
vidence as to roe, that should order or appoint,
i o or 12 Grains of Corn should remain unspoil'd
(when the Rats had destroy'd all the rest) as is it
had been dropt from Heaven: as also that I
should throw it out in that particular Place,
where it being in the Shade of a high Rock, it
sprang up immediately; whereas if I had thrown it
it any where else at that Time, it had beeis burnt
up and destroy'd.
I carefully sav'd the Ears of Corn, you may be
sure in their Season, which was about the End of
'June, and laying up every Corn, I resolv'd to sow
them all again, hoping in Time to have some
Quantity sufficient to supply me with Bread; but it
was not till the 4th Year that I could allow my •
self the least Grain of this Corn to eat, and even
then but sparingly, as I shall say afterwards in its
Order; for I lost all that I sow'd the first Season, by
nor observing* the proper Time; for I sow'd it just
before the dry Season, so that it never came up at
all, at least, not as it would have have done: Of
which in its Place.
Besides this Barley, there was, as above 10 or
30 Stalks of Rice, which I prescrv'd with the fame
Care, and whose Use was of the fame Kind or
to the fame Purpose, (viz,) to make me Bread, or
rather Food; for I found Ways to cook it up with-
out bating, tho' I did that also after some Time.
But to return to my Journal.
I work'd excessive hard these three or four
Months to get my Wall done; vand the 14th of
April I closed it up, contriving to go into it, not
by a Door, but over the Wall by a Ladder, that
there

<page 106>
• C?JJ
there might be no Sigh in the Out-side of my Ha-
bitation.
Apil 16. I finish'd the Ladder, so I went up with
the Ladder to the Top, and then pull'd it up aster
me, and let it down on the Inside; This was a
compleat Enclosure to me ; for within I had Room
enough, and nothing could come at me from with-
out, unless it could first mount my Wall.
The very next Day after this VVall was finished,
I had almost had all my Labour overthrown at
once, and my self kill'd; the Case was thus: As I
was busy in the Inside of it, behind my Tent, just in
the Entrance into my Cave, I was terribly frighted
with a most dreadful surprizing Thing indeed;
for all on a sudden I found the Earth come crum-
bling down from the Roof of my Cave, and from
the Edge of the Hill over my Head, and two of
the Posts I had set up in the Cave crack'd in a
frigffrful manner: I was heartily scared, but thought
nothing of what was really the Cause, only think-
ing that the top of my Cave was falling in, as some
of it had done before; and for fear I shou'd be bu-
ry'd in it, I ran forward to my Ladder, and not
thinking my self safe there neither, I got over my
Wall for fear of the Pieces of the Hill which I ex-
pected might roll down upon me: I was no sooner
stept down upon the firm Ground, but I plainly
saw it was ajjkrrible Earthquake, for the Grouhd I
stood on shook three times at about eight Mi-
nutes distance, with three such Shocks, as would
have overturned the strongest Building that could
be suppos'd to have stood on the Earth; and a
great Piece of the Top of a Rock, which .stood a-
bout half a Mile from me next the Sea, fell down
with such a terrible Noise, as I never heard in all
my Life v I perceiv'd also, the very Sea was put
into violent Motion by it; and I believe the
Shocks

<page 107>
[ 94 3
Shocks were stronger under the Water than on the
Island.
I was so amaz'd with the Thing it self, having
never feit the like, or discoursed with any one that
had, that I was like one dead or stupify'd; and the
Motion of the Earth made my Stomach lick, like
one that was toss'd at Sea; bur t he Noise of the
falling of the Rock awak'd me, as it were, and rou-
2ing me from the stupitied Condition I was in.fill'd
me with Horror, and I thought of nothing then
but die Hill falling upon myTent> and all my Hous-
hold Goods, and burying all at once; and this
funk my very Soul within me a second time.
After the third Shock was over, and I felt no
more for some time, I began to take Courage, and
yet I had not Heart enough to get over my Wall a-
gain, for fear of being buried alive, but fat still
upon the Ground, greatly cast down and disconso-
late, not knowing what to do: All this while I*had
not the least serious religious Thought, nothing
but the common, Lord ha Mercy upon me; and
when it was over, that went away too.
While I fat thus, I found the Air over-cast, and
grow cloudy, as if it would rain; soon alter that
the Wind rose by little and little, so that in less
than half an Hour it blew a most dreadful Hurri-
cane: The Sea was all on a sudeen cover'd over
with Foam and Froth, theShore wassover'd with
the Breach of the Water, the Trees were torn up
by the Roots, and a terrible Storm it was; and
this held about three Hours, and then began to
abate, and in two Hours more it was stark calm,
and began to rain very hard.
AU this while I fat upon the Ground very much
terrify'd and dejected, when on a sudden it came
into my Thoughts, that these Winds and Rain being
the Consequence of the Earthquake, the Earthquake
itself
<6

<page 108>
[ 95 ]
itself was spent and over, and I might venture into
my Cave again: With this Thought my Spirits
began to revive, and the Rain also helping to per-
swade me, I went in and sat down in my Tent,
but the Rain was so violent, that my Tent wa»
ready to be beaten down with it; and I was fore'd
to go into my Cave, tho' very much afraid and un-
easy for fear it should fall on my Head."
This violent Rain fore'd me to a new Work, viz..
to cut a Hole thro' my new Fortification like a
Sink to let Water go out, which would else have
drown'd my Cave. After I had been in my Cave
some Time, and found still no more Shocks of the
Earthquake follow, I began to be more compos d;
and now to support my Spirits, which indeed wan-
ted it very much, I went to my little Store, and
took a small Sup of Rum, which however I did
then and always very sparingly, knowing I could
have no more when that was gone.
It continu'd raining all that Night, and great
Part of the next Day, so that I could not stir
abroad, but my Mind being more compos'd,I be-
gan to think of what I had best do, concluding*
that if the Island was subject to these Earthquakes,
there would be no living for me in a Cave, but I
must contider of building me some little Hut in an
open Place, which I might surround with a Wallas
1 had done here, and so make my self secure from
v/ild Beasts or Men: But concluded, if I staid
where I was, I mould certainly, one Time or other,
be bury'd alive.
With these Thoughts I resolv'd to remove my
Tent from the Place where it stood, which was
just under the hanging Precipice of the Hill, and
which, ir it should be shaken again, would certain-
ly fall upon my Tent : And I spent the two next
Days




<page 109>
I 9*1
Days, being the tpth and 20th oi Afril, in contri-
ring where and how to remove my Habitation.
The sear of* being swallow'd up alive, made me
that I never slept in quiet, and yet the Apprehen-
sion of lying abroad without any Fence was almost
equal to it; but still when I look'd about and saw
how every thing was put in order, how pleasantly
conccal'd I was, and how safe from Danger, it made
me very loth to remove.
In the mean time it occur'd to me that it would
require a vast deal of time for me to do this, and
that I must be contented to run the Venture where
I was, till I had form'd a Camp for my self, and
had secured it so as to remove to it: So with this
Resolution I compos'd my self for a time, and re-
fol v'd that I would go to work with all speed to build
me a Wall with Piles and Cables, &c. in a Circle
as before; and set my Tent up in it when it was
finish'd, but that I would venture to stay where I
was tiil it was finish'd and fit to remove to. This
was the iift-
A$ril 22. The next Morning I began to consider
of Means to put this Resolve in Execution, but I
was at a great loss about my Tools; I had three
large Axes and abundance of Hatchets, (for we
carried the Hatchets for Traffick with the Indians)
but with much choping and cutting knotty hard
Wood, they were all full of Notches and dull,
and tho'I had a Grindstone, I could not turn it and
grind my Tools too; this cost me as much Thought
as a Statesman would have bestow'd upon a grand
Point of Politicks, or a Judge upon the Life and
Death of a Man! At length I contriv'd a Wheel
with a String, to turn it with my Foot, that I
might have both my Hands at Liberty : Note, I had
oever seen any such thing in England, or at least
not to take Notice how it was done, tho' since I

<page 110>

I 9f 5
have bbserv'd it is very common there; besides
that, my Grind-stone was very large and heavy;
This Machine cost me a full Week's Work to bring
it to Perfection.
April 28, 2p. These two whole Days I took
up in grinding my Tools, my Machine for turning
my Grind-stone performing very well.
April 30, Having perceiv'd my Bread had been
low a great while, now I took a Survey of it*
and reduced myself to one Bisket-cake a Day,
which made my Heart very heavy.
May i, In the Morning looking towards the
Sea-side, the Tide being low, J saw something lie
on the Shore bigger than ordinary; and it look'd
like a Cask; when I came to it, I found a small
Barrel, and two or three Pieces of the Wreck of
the Ship, which were driven on Shore by the late
Hurricane; and looking towards the Wreck itself,
I thought it seem'd to lie higher out of the Water
than it us'd to do: I examin'd the Barrel which
was driven On Shore, and soon found it was a
Barrel of Gun-powder, but it had taken Water,
and the Powder was cak'd as hard as a Stone;
however I roll'd it farther on Shore for the present,
and went on upon the Sands as near as I could to"
the Wreck of the Ship to look for more.
When I came down to the Ship,I found it strange-
ly remov'd; the Fore-castle, Which lay before bu-
ry'd in Sand, was heav'dup at least six Foot; and
the Stern, which was br6ke to pieces, and parted
from the rest by the Force of the Sea, soon after I
had left rummaging her, was toss'd, as it were,upi
and cast ort one side, and the Sand was throwti
so high on that side next her Stern,' that whereas
there was a great Place of Water b efore, so'that I
could not come within a Quarter of a Mile of the
Wreck without swimming, I. could no<.V walk
h

<page 111>
[ 9§ 1

quite up to her when the Tide was out; I was sur-
priz'd with this at sirst, but soon concluded it must
be done by the Earthquake: And as by this Vio-
lence the Ship was more broken open than former-
ly, so many things (#me daily on Shore, which
the Sea had looien'd, and which the Winds and
Water rolled by degrees to the Laud.
This wholly diverted my Thoughts from the
Design of removing my Habitation; and I busied
myself mightily that Day especially, in searching
whether I could make any way into the Ship; but
I sound nothing was to be expected of that Kind,
for that all the Inside of the Ship was choak'd up
with Sand: However, as I had learnt not to de-
spair of any thing, I resolvM to pull every thing
to pieces that I could of the Ship, concluding,
. that every thing I could get from her, would be
of some Use or other to me.
May 3, I began with my Saw, and cut a Piece
of a Beam thro3, which I thought held some of the
upper Part or Quarter-Deck together, and when
IJhad cut it thro', I clear'd away the Sand as well
as I could from the Side which lay highest; but
the Tide coming in, I was obliged to give over
for that time.
May 4, I went a fishing, but caught not ope Fisb
that I durst eat of, till I was weary of my Sport;
when just going to leave off, I caught a young
Dolphin. I had made me a long Line of some
Rope Yarn, but I had no Hooks, yet I frequently
caught Fisii enough, as much as I car'd to eat;
all which I dry'd in the Sun, and eat them dry.
May 5, Work'd on the Wreck, cut another •
Beam asunder, and brought three great Fir Planks
off from the Decks, which I ty'd together, and
made swim on Shore, when the Tide of Flood
came on.'
May

<page 112>
[ 99 3

Mty S. Work'd on the Wreck, got federal Iron
Bolts out of her, and other Pieces of Iron-worky
work'd very hard, and came Home very much
tir'd, and had Thoughts of giving it over.
May 7, Went to the Wreck again, but with an
Intent not to work, but found the Weight of the
Wreck had broke itself down, the Beams being cut>
that several Pieces of the Ship seem'd to lie loosoi
and the Inside of the Hold lay so open, that I could
see into it,, but almost full of Water and Sand.
May 8, Went to the Wreck, and carry'd an Iron
Crow to wrench up the Deck, which lay now
quite clear of the Water or Sand; I wrench'd open
two Planks, and brought them on Shore also with
the Tide : 1 left the Iron Crow in the Wreck for
next Day.
May 9, Went to the Wreck, and with the Crow;
made way into the Body of the Wreck, and felt
several Casks, and loosen'd them with the Crowj
but could not break them up; I felt also the Roll
of English Lead, and could stir it, but it was too
heavy to remove.
May io, li, 12, 13, 14, Went every Day to
the Wreck, and got a great deal cf Pieces of
Timber, and Boards, or Plank, and z or 300
Weight of Iron.
May 15, I carry'd two Hatchets to try if I
could not cut a Piece off of the Roll of Lead, by
placing the Edge of one Hatchet, and driving it
with the other; but as it lay about a Foot and a
haif in the Water, I could not make any Blow to
drive the Hatchet.
May i<5, It had blow'd hard in the Night, and
the Wreck appear'd more broken by the Force of
the Water; but I staid so long in the Woods to
get Pidgeons for Food, that the Tide prevented
me going to the Wreck that Day.
H a - May

<page 113>
[ loo ]
May i% I Taw some Pieces of the Wreck blown"
on Shore, at a great Distance, near two Miles oft'
me, but resolv'd to fee what they were, and found
it was a Piece of the Head, but too heavy for me
to bring away.
May 24, Every Day to this Day I work'd on
the Wreck, and with hard Labour I loofen'd some
things so much with the Crow, that the first
blowing Tide several Casks floated out, and two
of the Seamens Chests; but the Wind blowing
from the Shore, nothing came to Land that Day
but Pieces of Timber, and a Hogshead which had
some Bcaul Pork in it, but the Salt-water and
the Sand had spoil'd it.
I continu'd this Work every Day to the 15th
of June, except the Time necessary to get Food,
which I always appointed, during this part of
my Employment, to be when the Tide was up,
that I might be ready when it was ebb'd out;
and by this time I had gotten Timber, and Plank,
and Iron-woik enough to have built a good Boat,
if I had known how; and also, I got at several
times, and in several Pieces, near 100 weight of
the Sheet-Lead.
June 16, Going down to the Sea-side, I found
a large Tortoise or Turtle; this was the first I
Jiad seen, which it seems was only my Misfortune,
not any Defect of the Place, or Scarcity; for had
I happen'd to be on the other Side of the Island,
I might have had Hundreds of them every Day,
* as I found afterwards; but perhaps had paid
dear enough for them.
. June 17, I spent in cooking the Turtle; I
found in her threescore Eggs; and her Flesh was
to me at that time the most savoury and pleasant
that ever I tasted in my Life, having had no Flesh,

<page 114>
horrid Place.

June 18, Rain'd all Day, and I stay'd within.
I thought at this time the Ram felt cold, and I
was something chilly, which I knew was not
usual in that Latitude.
June 19, Very ill, and shivering, as if the Wea-
ther had been cold.
June 20, No Rest all Night, violent Pains in
my Head, and feverish.
June n, Very ill, frighted almost to Death
with the Apprehensions of my fad Condition, to
be sick, and no Help: Pray'd to Go& sot the
first time since the Storm off of Hull, but scarce
knew what I said, or why; my Thoughts being
all confused. <;>"'
June 22, A little better, but under dreadful
Apprehensions of Sickness.
June 22, Very bad again, cold and shivering,
and then a violent Head-ach.
June 24, Much better.
June 25, An Ague very violent; the Fit held
me seven Hours, cold Fit and hot, with faint
Sweats after it.
June 26, Better; and having no Victuals to
eat, took my Gun, but found myself very weak;
however I kill'd a She-Goat, and with much
Difficulty got it Home, and broil'd some of it,
and eat; I wou'd sain have stew'd it, and made
some Broth, but had no Pot. ^ . -
June 27, The Ague again so violent, that I
lay a-bed all Day, and neither eat or drank. I
was ready to perish for Thirst, but so weak, I had
not Strength to stand up, or to get myself any
Water to drink: Pray'd to G o d again, but was
light-headed, and when I was not, I was so igno-
it, ■ r • .w « 1

lot what to fay; only I lay and
H 3 cry'd,

<page 115>
i ft* J.
€ry*4, Lord fook upon me, Lord pity ff!^jfc%:h#$
Qdercy upon me: 1 suppose I did nothing else for
two or three Hours, till the Fit wearing off, I fd\
asleep, and did not wake till far in the Night; when
t wak'd, I found myself much refreshed, but weak,,
and exceeding thirsty: However, as I. had no,
Water in my whole Habitation, I was sorc'dt<*
lie till Morning, and went to sleep again; In this;
second Sleep, 1 had this terrible Dream.
gil thought, that I was fitting oo the Ground-on
the Out-side of my Wall, where I fat when the;
Storm blew after the Earthquake, and that \ saw
a Man descend from a great black Cloud, in a.
bright Flame of Fire, and light upon the Ground ^
He was all over as bright as a Flame, so that I
could but just bear; to look towards him; his.
Countenance was most inexpressibly dreadfuls
impossible for woids to describe; when he step'd
upon the Ground with his Feet, I thought the;
Earth trembled, just as it had done before in the
Ea.thquake, and all the Air lookd to my Appre-'
her.sion, as if it had been fili'd with Flashes of Fire..
He was no sooner landed upon the Earth, but;
he mov'd forward towards me, with a long Spear
Or Weapon in his Hand, to kill me; and when he ,
came to a rising Ground, at some Distance, he
spoke to me, or I heard a Voice so terrible, that
it is impossible to express the Terror of it; all that
I can fay I understood was this, Seeing aB thefe
Things have not brought thee to Repentance, mw thou,
shalt die: At which Words, I thought he lifted up
the Spear, that was in his Sand to kill me./ • ';'
No one, that shall ever read this Account, "will
expect that I should be able to describe the Horrors,
of my Soul at this terrible Vision, I mean,that even
while it was a Dream, I even 4reamed of those
Horrors; nor is it. any more possible to

<page 116>

r mi s
the Impression that remain'd upon my Mind, when
I awak d, and found it was but a Dream.
I had alas! no divine Knowledge; what I had re-
ceived by the goodlnstruction of my Father was then
worn out by an uninterrupted Series, for 8 Years, of
seafaring Wickedness, and a constant Conversation
with nothing but such as were like myself, wicked
and prophane to the last Degree: I do not remem-
ber that I had in all that time one Thought that so
much as tended either to looking upwards toward
God, or inwards towards a Reflection upon my
own Ways: But a certain Stupidity of Soul, with-
out Desire of Good, or Conscience of Evil, had
entirely overwhelm'd me,and I was all that the most
hardned, unthinking, wicked Creature among our
common Sailors can be suppos'd to be, not having
the least Sense, either of the Fear of God in Dan-
ger, or of Thankfulness to God in Deliverances.
In the relating what is already past of my Story,
this will be the more easily believed, when I shall
add, that thro' all the Variety of Miseries that
had to this Day befallen me, I never had so much
as one Thought of it being the Hand of God, or
that it was a just Punishment for my Sin, my re-
bellious Behaviour against my Father, or my pre-
sent Sins,which were great; or so much as a Punish-
ment for the general Course of my wicked Life.
When T was on the desperate Expedition on the
desart Shores of Africa, I never had so much as one
Thought of what would become of me; or one
Wish to God to direct me whither I should go, or
to keep me from the Danger which apparently sur-
rounded me, as well from voracious Creatures as
cruel Savages: But I was meerly thoughtless of a
God, or a Providence, acted like a meer Brute
from the Principles of Nature, and by the Dictates
of common Sense only, and indeed hardly that.
H 4 When

<page 117>
[ »Q4 1
When I was deliver'd and taken up at Sea by
the Portugal Captain, well us'd and dealt justly and'
honourably with, as well as charitably, IJiadnot
the least Thankfulness on my Thoughts: When
again I was shipwreck'd, ruin'd, and in danger of
drowning on this Island, I was as far frdm Re-
morse, or looking on it as a Judgment; I only said
to myself often, that I was an unfortunate Dog, and
born to be always miserable.
It is true, when I got on Shore first here, and
found all my Ship's Crew drown'd, and myself
soar'd, I was surpriz'd with a kind of Extasy, and
some Transports of Soul, which, had the Grace of
God assisted, might have come up to true Thank-
fulness; but it ended where it begun, in a meet
common Flight of Joy, or, as I may fay, being glad,
1 -œm alive, without the least Reflection upon the
distinguishing Goodness of the Hand which had,
preferv'd me, and had singled me out to be pre-
ierv'd, when all the rest were destroy'd ; or an Enr
quiry why Providence had been thus merciful tp
me; even just the fame common sort of Joy which
Seamen generally have after they are got safe aflior?
from a Shipwreck,which they drown all in the next
Bowl of Punch, and forget almost as soon as it is
over, and all the rest of my Life was like it.
i Even, when I was afterwards, on due Consider
ration, made sensible of my Condition, how I was
cast on this dreadful Place, out of the Reach of
human Kind, out of all Hope of Relief, ot Prospect
of Redemption, as soon as I saw but a Prospect as
living, and that I should not starve and perish for
Hunger, all the Sense of my Affliction wore off,
and 1 begun to be very easy, apply'd my self to the
Works proper for my Preservation and Supply, and
was far enough from being afflicted at my Con-
dition, as a Judgment from Heaven, or as the

<page 118>

[ io5 ]
Hand of God against me; these were Thoughts
which very seldom enter'd into my Head.
The growing up of the Corn, as is hinted in
my Journal, had at first some little Influence upon
me, and began to affect me with Seriousness, as
long as I thought it had something miraculous in
it; but as soon as ever that Part of the Thought
was remov'd, all the Impression which was rais'd
from it, wore off also, as I have noted already-
Even the Earthquake, tho' nothing could be
more terrible in its Nature, or more immediately
directing to the invisible Power, which alone di-
rects such things; yet no sooner was the first Fright
over,but the Impression it had made, went off also.
I had no more Sense of God or his Judgments,
much less of the present Affliction of my Circum-
stances being from his Hand, than if I had been
in the most prosperous Condition of Life.
But now when I began to be sick, and a leisure-
ly View of the Miseries of Death came to place
itself before me; when my Spirits began to sink
under the Burden of a strong Distemper, and Na-
ture was exhausted with the Violence of the Fe-
ver ; Conscience that had slept so long, began to
awake, and I began to reproach myself with my
past Life, in which I had so evidently, by uncom-
mon Wickedness, provok'd the Justice of God to
lay me under uncommon Strokes, and to deal with
me in so vindictive a manner.
These Reflections oppress'd me for the second or
third Day of my Distemper, and in the Violence,
as well of the Fever, as of the dreadful Reproaches
of my Conscience, extorted some Words from me,
like praying to God, tho' I cannot fay they were
either a Prayer attended with Desires or with
Hopes; it was rather the Voice of meer Fright
and Distress; my Thoughts were confus'd, the
Con vie-

<page 119>
[ io6 J
Convictions great upon my Mind, and the Horror
of dying in such a miserable Condition, rais'd Va-
lours into my Head with the meet Apprehen-
sions; and in these Hurries of my Soul, I know
not what my Tongue might express; but it was
rather Exclamation, such as, Lord! ivhdt a mise-
rable Creature am I? Is I should be sick, 1 Jhall certain-
ly die for -want of Help, and what will become os me!
Then the Tears burst out of my Eyes, and I
could fay no more for a good while.
;\ In this Interval, the good Advice of my Father
came to my Mind, and presently his Prediction,
which I mentioned at the Beginning of this Story,
viz. That is I did take this foolish Step, God would not
lless me; and 1 would have leisure hereafter to refleEl
upon having negleBed his Counsel, -when there might be
none to assist in my Recovery. Now, said I aloud,
my dear Father's Words are come to pass; God's
Justice has overtaken me, and I have none to help
or hear me: I rejected the Voice of Providence,
which had mercifully put me in a Posture or Sta-
tion of Life, wherein I might have been happy and
easy; but I would neither see it myself, or learn
"to know the Blessing of it from my Parents: I left
them to mourn ovtr my Folly, and now I am left
'to mourn under the Consequences of it. I refus'd
their Help and Assistance who would have lifted
me into the World, and wou'd have made every
thing easy to me, arid now I have Difficulties to
struggle with, too great for even Nature itself to
support, and no Assistance, no Help, no Comfort,
no Advice: Then I cry'd out, Lord be my Help,
for lam in great Distress. A
This was the first Prayer, if I may call it so,
that I had made for many Years., But I return to
my Journal.
'jane

<page 120>

[ r°7 ]
28, Having been somewhat refresh^ with,
the Sleep I had had, and the Fit being entirely
Oft, I got up; and tho' the Fright and Terror of
my Dream was very great, yet I considers, that
the Fit of the Ague wou'd return again the next
Day, and now was my time to get something to
refresh and support myself when I should be ill;
and the first thing I did, I fill'd a large square
Case Bottle with Water, and set it upon my Ta-
ble, in Reach of my Bed; and to take off the chill
or aguish Disposition of the Water, I put about
a Quarter of a Pint of Rum into it, and rhix'd
them together; then I got me a Piece of the
Goat's Flesh, and broil'd it on the Coals, but
could eat very little; I walk'd about, but was ve-
ry weak, and withal very fad and heavy-hearted
in the Sense of my miserable Condition; dreading
the Return of my Distemper the next Day; at
Night I made my Supper of three of the Turtle's
Eggs, which I roasted in the Ashes, and eat, as we
call it, in the Shell; and this was the first Bit of
Meat I had ever ask'd God's Blessing to, $ven, as,
J cou'd remember in my whole Life.
After I had eaten, I try'd to walk, but found,
myself so weak that I cou'd hardly carry the.
Gun, (for I never went out without that) so 1=
went but a little Way, and sat down upon the
Ground, looking out upon the Sea, which was
just before me, and very calm and smooth: As
I fat here, some such Thoughts as these occur'd
to me.
What is this Earth and Sea of which I have seen
so much? whence is it produced? and what am I,
and all the other Creatures, wild and tame, hu-
mane and brutal, whence are we?

<page 121>
[ io8 ]

Sure we are all made by some secret Power,
who form'd the Earth and Sea, the Air and Sky;
and who is that?
Then it foiiow'd most naturally, It is God that
has made it all: Well, but then it came on strangely,
if God has made ail these Things, He guides and
governs them all, and all Things that concern
fhem; for the Power that could make all Things,
must certainly have Power to guide and direct
them.
If so, nothing can happen in the great Circuit of
his Works, either without his Knowledge or Ap-
pointment.
And is nothing happens without hisKnowledge,
he knows that I am here, and am in this dreadful
Condition; and if nothing happens without his
Appointment, he has appointed all this to befal
me.
Nothing occurr'd to my Thought to contradict
any of these Conclusions; and therefore it rested
upon me with the greater Force, that it must needs
be, that God has appointed all this to befal me;
that I was brought to this miserable Circumstance
by his Direction, he having the sole Power, not of
me only, but of every thing that happen'd in the
World. Immediately it foiiow'd,
Why has God done this to me? What haw I done to
le thm us'd?
My Conscience presently check'd me in that En-
quiry, as if I had blasphem'd, and methought it
spoke to me like a Voice ,• WR ETCH! dust thou
ask what thou bast done! look back upon a dreadful
mis-spent Life, and ask thy self what thou hast not
done? ask, Why is it that thou wen not long ago de-
stroy'd? Why wert thou not drown d in Yarmouth
Roads? KiS'd in the Fight when the Ship was taken by
?he Salle Man of War? Devour d by the wild Beafls

<page 122>
t iop ]
on the Coast of Africa? Or Drown d HER E,
when all the Crew ferijh'd but thyself? Dost thou ask
What have I done?
I was struck.dumb with these Reflections, as one
astonish'd, and had not a Word to fay, no not to
answer to myself, but rose up pensive and sad,
walk'd back to my Retreat, and went up over my
Wall, as if I had been going to Bed, but my
Thoughts were sadly disturb'd, and 1 had no In-
clination to sleep; so I sat down in my Chair,
and lighted my Lamp, for it began to be dark.
Now as the Apprehension of the Return of my Di-
stemper terrify'd me very much, it occurr'd to my
Thought, that the BrafiUans take no Physick but
their Tobacco for almost all Distempers; and I
had a Piece of a Roll of Tobacco in one of the
Chests, which was quite cur'd, and some also that
was green and not quite cur'd.
I went, directed by Heaven no doubt; for in
this Chest I found a Cure both for Soul and Body,
I open'd the Chest, and found what I look'd for,i>/z,.
the Tobacco ; and as the few Books, I had sav'd,
lay there too, I took out one of the Bibles which
Imention'd before, and which to this Time I had
not found Leisure, or so much as Inclination to
look into; I fay, I took it out, and brought both
that and the Tobacco with me to the Table.
What Use to make of the Tobacco, I knew not,
as to my Distemper, or whether it was good for it
or no; but I try'd several Experiments with it, as
if I was resolv d it should hit one way or other:
1 first took a Piece of a Leaf, and chew'd it in my
Mouth, which indeed at first almost stupify'd my
Brain, the Tobacco being green and strong, and
that I had not been much us'd to it; then ) took
some and steep'd it an Hour or two in some Rum,
and resolv'dto take a Dose of it when 11,


<page 123>
[ ^io 3
and lastly, ! burnt some upon a Pan of Coals, and
held my Nose close over the Smoak of it as long
as I could bear it, as well for the Heat as almo%
for Suffocation. . .
In the Interval of this Operation, I tOokupthe
Bible and began to read, but my Head was too
much disturb'd with the Tobacco to bear reading,
at least that time; only having open'd the Book
casually, the first Words that occur'd to me weEe
these, Call on me in the Day of Trouble, and IviiS dt'
liver, and thou fialt glorify me.
The Words were very apt to my Cafe, and made
some Impression upon my Thoughts at the time of
them, tho' not so much as they did after-
"r as for being deliver'd, the Word had no
may fay,to me; the thing was so remote,
>le in my Apprehension' of things, that
to fay as the Children of Israel did, when
re promis'd Flesh to eat, Can God spread a
the Wilderness? so I began to say, Can God
himself deliver me from this Place? And as it was
not for many Years that any Hope appear'd, this
prevail'd very often upon my Thoughts: But
however, the Words made a great Impression upon
me, and I mused upon them very often. It grew
now late, and the Tobacco had, as I said, doz'd
my Head so much, that I inclin'd to sleep; so I
lest my Lamp burning in the Cave, lest I should
want any thing in the Night, and went to Bed;
but before I lay down, I did what I never had done
in all my Life, I kneel'd down and pray'd to God
to fulfil the Promise to me, that if I call'd upon him
in the Day of Trouble, he would deliver me:
After my broken and imperfect Prayer was over, I
drunk the Rum in which I had steep'd the Tobac-
co, which was so strong and rank of the Tobacco,
that indeed I could scarce get it down; immediately
upon, **



<page 124>
[ III ]

up<?n this I went to Bed, I found presently it flew
up in my Head violently, but I fell into a sound
Sleep, and wak'd no more, till by the Sun it must
necessarily be near threes-Clock in the Afternoon
the next Day; nay, to this Hour I'm partly of the
Opinion, that I slept all the next Day and Night,
and till almost three that Day after; for other-
wise I knew not how I mould lose a Day out of
my Reckoning in the Days of the Week, as it ap-
pear'd some Years after I had done; for if I had
lost it by crossing and recrossing the Line, I should
have lost more than one Day : But certainly I lost a
Day in my Account, and never knew which Way.
Be that however one way or t'other, when I
aw^k'd I found myself exceedingly refresh'd, and
my Spirits lively and chearful; when I got up, I
was stronger than I was the Day before, and my
Stomach better, for I was hungry; and in short, I
had no Fit the next Day, but continu'd much al-
ter'd for the better; this was the 29th.
The 30th was my Well-day of Course, and I
went abroad with my Gun, but did not care to
travel too far. I kill'd a Sea-Fowl or two, some-
thing like a Brand-Goose, and brought them home,
but was not very forward to eat them; so I eat
some more of the Turtle's Eggs, which were very
good: This Evening I renew'd theMedicine which
I had suppos'd did me good the day before, viz,, the
Tobacco steep'd in Rum, only I did not take so
much as before, nor did I chew any of the Leaf, ot
hold myHead over the Smoke; however, I was not
so well the next Day, which was the first of July,
as I hop'd I mould have been; for I had a little
Spice of the cold Fit, but it was not much.
July 2, I renew'd the Medicine all the three
JVays, and doz'd my self with it as at first; and
doubled the Quantity which I drank.

<page 125>
t ni f
3. 1 miss'd the Fit for good and all, tho* I did
hot recover ray full Strength for some Weeks aften
While I was thus gathering Strength, myThoughts
run exceedingly upon this Scripture^ / will deliver
thee; and the Impossibility of my Deliverance lay
much upon my Mind in Bar of my ever expecting
it. But as I was discouraging myself with such
Thoughts, it occurr'd to my Mind, that I pored
so much upon my Deliverance from the main Affli-
ction, that I disregarded the Deliverance I had re-
ceiv'd; and I was, as it were, made to ask my
self such Questions as these, viz,. Have I not been
xleliver'd, and wonderfully too, from Sickness; from
the most distressed Condition that could be, and
that was so frightful to me, and what Notidfe I
had taken of it? Had I done my part, God had de-
livered me; but I had not glorified him ; that is to say,
I had not own'd and been thankful for that as a
Deliverance, and how could I expect greater De-
liverance?
This touch'd my Heart very much, and imme-
diately I kneel'd down, and gave God Thanks i-
loud for my Recovery from my Sickness.
July 4, In the Morning 1 took the Bible, and be-
ginning at the New Testament, I began seriously
to read it, and impos'd upon myself to read Zr
while every Morning and every Night, not tying
myself to the Number os Chapters, but as long as
my Thoughts should engage me: It was not long
after I set seriously to this Work, but I found
my Heart more deeply and sincerely affected with
the Wickedness of my.past Life: The Im-
pression of my Dream reviv'd, and the Words, AB
these things have not brought thee to Repentance, ran se-
riously in my Thought: I was earnestly begging
of God to give me Repentance, when it happen'd
providentially the very Day that reading the Scrip-
ture,

<page 126>
t "3 \

ture, I cartie to these Words, He is exalted a Prince
and, a Saviour, to give Repentance, afid to give Remis-
<fion: I threw down the Book, and with my Heart
as well as my Hands lifted up to Heaven, in a
Kind of Extasy of Joy; I cry'd out aloud, Jesds,
thou Son of David, Jesva, t"hou exalted Prince and Sa-
viour, give me Repentance!
This was the first time that I could .fay; in the
true Sense of the Words, that I pray'd ih all my
Life; for now I pray'd with a Sense of my Con-
dition, and with a true Scripture View of Hope
founded on the Encouragement of the Word of
God; and from this Time, I may fay, I began to
have Hope that God would hear me.
Now I began to construe the Words mentibned
above, Call on me, and I -xiB deliver yon, in a disfe-
rent Sense from what I had ever done before; for
then I had no Notion of any thing being call'd De-
liverance, but my being deliver'd from the Capti-
vity I was in; for tho' I was indeed at large in
the Placei yet the Island was certainly a Prison tri
me, and that in the worst Sense in the World j
but now I learn'd to take it in another Sense:
Now I look'd back upon my past Life with such
Horror, and my Sins appear'd so dreadful, that
my Soul sought nothing of God, but Deliverance:
from the Load of Guilt that bore down all my
Comfort: As for my solitary Life it was nothing;
I did not so much as pray to be deliver'd from it,
or think of it; it was all of no Consideration in
comparison to this ; and I add this Part here, to
hint to whoever mall read it, tihat whenever they
come to a true Sense of things, they will find De-
liverance from Sin a much greater Blessing than De-
liverance from Affliction.
But leaving this Part, I return to rriy Journal.
I Ms




<page 127>
C 114 ]
My Condition began now to be, tho' not left
miserable as to my Way of living, yet much easier
to my Mind; and my Thoughts being directed by
a constant reading the Scripture, and praying to
God, to things of a higher Nature; I had a great
deal of Comfort within, which till now I knew
nothing of; also as my Health and Strength re-
turned, I bestir'd myself to furnish myself with eve-
ry thing that I wanted, and make my way of liv-
ing as regular as 1 could.
From the 4th of July to the 14th, I was chiefly
employ'd in walking about with my Gun in my
Hand, a little and a little at a Time, as a Man
that was gathering up his Strength after a Fit of
Sickness: For it is hardly to be imagin'd, how low
I was, and to what Weakness I was reduc'd. The
Application which I made use of was perfectly
new, and perhaps what had never cur'd an Ague
before, neither can I recommend it to any one to
practise, by this Experiment; and tho' it did car-
ry off the Fit, yet it rather contributed to weaken-
. ing me; for I had frequent Convulsions in my
Nerves and Limbs for some time.
I learnt from it also this in particular, that be-
ing abroad in the rainy Season was the most perni-
cious thing to my Health that could be, especially
in those Rains which came attended with Storms
and Hurricanes of Wind; for as the Rain which
came in a dry Season was always most accompa-
ny'd with such Storms, so I found that Rain was
much more dangerous than the Rain which fell in
September and OEiober.
I had been now in this unhappy Island above 10
Months, all Possibility of Deliverance from this
Condition scem'd to be entirely taken from me;
and I firmly believed, that no humane Shape had
ever set Foot upon that Place : Having now secur'd
my

<page 128>
t 115 3
my Habitation, as I thought, fully tb roy Mind, f
had a great Desire to make a more perfect Disco-
very of the Island, and to see what other Produc-
tions I might find, which I yet knew nothing
of.
It was the 15th of July that I began to take a
more particular Survey of the Ifland it self : I went
up the Creek first, where, as I hinted, I brought
my Rafts on Shore; I found after I came about
two Miles up, that the Tide did not flow any
higher, and that it was no more than a little
Brook of running Water, and very fresh and good;
but this being the dry Season, there was hardly any
Water in some Parts of it, at least not enough to
run in any Stream, so as it could be perceiv'd*
On the Bank of this Brook I found many plea-
sant Savanas, or Meadows, plain, smooth, and
cover'd with Grass; and on the rising Parts of
them next to the higher Grounds, where the Wa-
ter, as it might be supposed, never overflow'd,
I found a great deal of Tobacco, green, and growing
to a great and very strong Stalk : There were divers
other Plants which I had no Notion of, or Under-
standing about, and might perhaps have Virtues
of their own, which I could not find out.
T'searched for the Cajjava Root,, which the In-
dians in all that Climate make their Bread of, but I
could find none. I saw large Plants of Aloes, but
did not then understand them. I saw several Sugar!
CaneS, but wild, and for want of Cultivation, im-*
perfect. I contented myself with these Discoveries
for this time,. and came back musing with my
self what Course I might take to know the Virtue
and Goodness of any of the Emits or Plants which,
I shoold discover ; but could bring it to no Con-
clusion ; for in short,.I had made so little Obser-
vation while I was in the Bm/ils, that I knew little:'
I a Of
*

<page 129>
s u€ ]
of the Plants in the Field, at least very little that
might serve me to any Purpose now in my Di-
stress.
The next Day, the itfth, I went up the fame
Way again, and after going something farther than
I had gone the Day before, I found the Brook, and
the Savanas began to cease, and the Country be-
came more woody than before: in this Part I found
disferent Fruits, and particularly I found Melons
upon the Ground in great Abundance, and Grapes
upon the Trees; the Vines had spread indeed over
the Trees, and the Clusters of Grapes were just
now in their Prime, very ripe and rich : This was a
surprising Discovery, and I was exceeding glad of
them; but I was warn'd by my Experience to eat
sparingly of them, remembring, that when I was
adore in Barbary, the eating of Grapes kill'd seve-
ral of our EttgUjb Men who were Slaves there, by
throwing them into Fluxes and Fevers: But I
found an excellent Use for these Grapes, and that
was to cure or dry them in the Sun, and keep them
as dry'd Grapes or Raisins are kept, which I
thought would be, as indeed they were, as whole-
some, as agreeable to eat, when no Grapes might
be to be had.
I spent all that Evening there, and went not
back to my Habitation, which by the way was
the first Night, as I might fay, I had lain from
Home. In the Night I took my first Contrivance,
and got up into a Tree, where I stept well, and the
next Morning proceeded upon my Discovery, tra-
velling near four Miles, as I might judge by the
Length of the Valley, keeping still dae North, with
a Ridge of Hills on the South and North side of
me.
At the End of this March I came to an Open-
ing, where the Country seem'd to descend to the
• West,

<page 130>
s ii7 1
West, and a little Spring of fresh Water, which is-
sued out of the Side of the Hill by me, run the
other way, that is due East ; and the Country ap-
pear'd sofresh, so green, so flourishing, every thing
being in a constant Verdure, or Flourish oiSpring,
that it it look'd like a planted Garden.
I descended a little on the Side of that delicious
Vale, surveying it with a secret Kind of Pleasure,
(tho' mixt with my other afflicting Thoughts) to
think that this was all my own, that I was King
and Lord of all this Country indefeasibly, and had
a Right of Possession; and if I could convey it,
I might have it in Inheritance, as .compleatly as
any Lord of a Manor in England. I saw here
Abundance of Cocoa Trees, Orange, and Le-
mon, and Citron Trees; but all wild, and very
few bearing any Fruit, at least not then: How-
ever, the green Limes that I gathered, were not
only pleasant to eat, but very wholesome; and T
mix'd their Juice afterwards with Water, which
made it very wholesome, and very cool, and re-
freshing. *
I found now I had Business enough to gather and
^arry Home; and I resolv'd to lay up a Store, as
well of Grapes, as Limes and Lemons, to furnish
myself for the wet Season, which I knew was ap-
proaching.
In order to this, I gather'd a great Heap of
Grapes in one Place, and a lesser Heap in another
Place, and a great Parcel of Limes and Lemons in
another Place; and taking a few of each with me,
I travel'd homeward, and resolv'd to come again,
and bring a Bag or Sack, or what I could make, to
carry the rest Home.
Accordingly, having spent three Days in this
Journey, I came Home, so I must now call my
Tent and my Cave: But before I got thither,, the
I 3 Grapes

<page 131>
s u8 ]
Grapes were spoil'd, the Richness of the Fruits,
and the Weight of the Juice having broken them,
and bruis'd tncm, they were good for little or no-
ching ; as to the Limes, they were good, but I
Could bring but a few.
The next Day, being the 19th, I went back,
having maJe me two small Bags to bring Home
my Harvest: But I was llirpriz'd, when coming
to my Heap of Grapes, which were so rich and
fine when 1 gather'd them, I found them all spread
about, trod to pieces, and drag'd about, some
here, some there, and Abundance eaten and de-?
vour'd: By this I concluded, there were some wild
Creatures thereabouts, which had done this; but
what they were I knew not.
However, as I found that there was no laying
them up on Heaps, and no carrying them away in
a Sack, but that one way they would be destroy'd,
and the other way they would be crusiVd with
their own Weight; I took another Course; for I
gather'd a large Quantity of the Grapes, and hung
them up upon the out Branches of the Trees, that
they might cure and dry in the Sun; and as for
the Limes and Lemons, I carry'd as many back as
I could well stand under.
When I came Home from this Journey, I con-
templated with great Pleasure the Fruitfulness of
that Valley, and the Pleasantness of the Situation,
the Security from Storms on that Side the Water,
and the Wood, and concluded, that 1 had pitch'd
upon a Place to fix my Abode, which was by. far
the worst Part of the Country. Upon the whole
I began to consider of removing my Habitation;
and to look out for a Place equally safe, as where
I now was situate, if possible, in that pkasane
frmtful p4rt Qf ?he Island*
This

<page 132>
[ np ]
This Thought run long in my Head, aVid I was
exceeding fond of it for some Tim», the Pleasant-
ness of the Place tempting me; but when I came
to a nearer View of it, and to consider that I was
now by the Sea-side, where it was at least possible
that something might happen to my Advantage,
and by the same ill Fate that brought me hither,
might bring some other unhappy Wretches to the
fame Place; and tho'.it was scarce probable that
any such thing should ever happen, yet to enclose
myself among the Hills and Woods, in the Center
of the Island, was to anticipate my Bondage, and
to render such an Affair not only improbable, but
impossible; and that therefore I owght not by any
Means to remove.
However, I was so enamour'd of this Place,
that I spent much of my Time there for the whole
remaining Part of the Month of July; and tho*
upon second Thoughts I resolv'd as above, not to
remove, yet I built me a little kind of a Bower,
and surrounded it at a Distance with a strong
Fence, being a double Hedge, as high as I could
reach, well stak'd, and fill'd between with Brujh-.
wood; and here I lay very secure, sometimes two
or three Nights together, always going over it
with a Ladder, as before; so that I fancy'd now I
had my Country-House, and my Sea-Coast-House:
And this Work took me up to the Beginning of
August.
I bad but newly finish'd my Fence, and began
to enjoy my Labour, bat the Rains came on, and
made me stick doseto my first Habitation; for tho'
1 had made me'a Tent like the other, with a Piece
of a Sail, and spread it very well; yet I had not
the Shelter of a Hill to keep me from Storms, nor a
Cave behind me to retreat into, when the Rains
were extraordinary.
I 4 About

<page 133>
[ no ]
About the Beginning of August, en I said, \ \}id
finish'd my Eower, and began to enjoy myself.
The third of August, I found the Grapes 1 had
hung up were perfectly dry'd, and indeed, were
excellent good Raisins of the Sun; so I began to
take them down from the Trees, and it was very
happy that I did so ; for the Rains which follow'd
would have, spoil'd them, and f had lost the best
Part of my Winter Food; for I had above two,
hundred large Bunches of them. No sooner had
I taken them all down and carry'd most of them
Home to my Cave, but it began to rain ;and from
hence, which was the fourteenth of August, it rain'd
more or less, every Day, till the middle of Qlhber;
and sometimes so violently, that I could not stir
out of my Cave for several Days.
In this Season I was much surpriz'd with th$
Increase of my Family: I had been concern'd for
the Loss of one of my Cats, who run away from
me, or at I thought had been dead, and I heard no
more Tale or Tidings of her, till to my Astonish-
ment she came home about the End of August,
with three Kittens. This was the more strange to
ms, because tho' I had kill'd' a wild Cat, as I
call'd it, with my Gun; yet I thought it was i
quite disfering Kind from our Epropeap. Cats; yet
the young Cats were the fame kind of House-
breed like the old one; and both my Gats being
Females, I thought it very strange: But frord these,
three Cats, I afterwards came to be so pester d
with Cats, that I was fpre'd to kill them l.ifceVer-,
min, or wild Beasts, and to drive them from rojr.
House as much as possible.
From the fourteenth of August to the twenty,
sixth, incessant Rain, so that I could not stir, and
was now very careful not to be much wet. In this
Confinement I began to be straitned for Food, but
venturing

<page 134>
[ 121 ]
venturing out twice, I one Day kill'd a Goat, and
the last Day, which was the twenty-sixth, found
a very large Tortoise, which was a Treat to me,
and ray Food was regulated thus; I eat a Bunch
of Raisins for my Breakfast, a Piece of the Goat's
Flesh, or of the Turtle for my Dinner broil'd;
for to my great Misfortune, 1 had no Vessel to
boil or stew any thing; and two or three of the
Turtle's Eggs for my Supper.
During this Confinement in my Cover by the
Rain, 1 work'd daily two or three Hours at en*
Jarging my Cave, and by Degrees work'd it on
towards one Side, till I came to the Outside of the
Hill, and made a Door or Way out, which came
beyond my Fence or Wall, and so I came in and
out this Way: but I was not perfectly easy at
lyiqg so open; for as I had manag'd myself be-
fore, 1 was in a perfect Enclosure, whereas now I
thought 1 lay expos'd, and open for any thing to
come in upon me; and yet I could not perceive
that there was any living thing to fear, the big-
gest Creature that 1 had ;et seen upon the Island
being a Goat.
September the thirtieth, I was now come to the
unhappy Anniversary of my Landing. I cast up the
Notches on my Post, and found 1 had been on
Shore three hundred and sixty five Days. I kept
this Day as a solemn Fast, setting it apart to Re-
ligious Exercise, prostrating myself on the Ground
with the most serious Humiliation, confessing my
Sins to God, acknowledging his righteous Judg-
ments upon me, and praying to him to have Mer-
cy on me, thro' Jesus Christ; and having not
tasted the least Refreshment for twelve Hours,
even till the going down of the Sun, I then eat a
Bisket-Cake, and a Bunch of Grapes, and went to
Bed, finishing thtf Day as I began.it.
lhad
• •/

<page 135>
[ 122 1
I had all this time obscrv'd no Sabbath-Day;
for as at first 1 had no Sense of Religion upon my
Mind, 1 had alter some time omitted to distin-
guish the Weeks, by making a longer Notch than
ordinary for the Sabbath-Day, and so did not really
know what any of the Days were; but now hav-
ing cast up the Days, as above, I found I had been
there a Year; so 1 divided it into Weeks, and set
apart every seventh Day for a Sabbath; tho' I
found at the End of my Account I had lost a Day
or two in my Reckoning.
A little after this my Ink began to fail me, «nd
so I contented myself to use it more sparingly, and
to write down only the most remarkable Events of
my Lise, without continuing a daily Memorandum
of other things.
The rainy Season, and the dry Season, began now
to appear regular to me, and 1 learnt to divide
them so, as to provide for them accordingly. But
i bought all my Experience before I had it; and
this 1 am going tb relate, was one of the most dis-
couraging Experiments that I made at all: 1 have
mention'd that I had fav'd the few Ears of Barley
and Rice which I had so furprizingly sound soring
up, as ! thought, of themselves, and believe there
were about thirty Stalks of Rice, and about twen-
ty of Barley; and now I thought it a proper time
to sow it after the Rains, the Sun feing in its
Southern Position going from me. w'
Accordingly I dug up a Piece of Ground, as
well as I could with my wooden Spade, and di-
viding it into two Parts, I sow'd my Grain; but
as I was sowing, it casually occui$£to my Thoughts,
that I would not sow it all at first, because 1 did
not know when was the proper time for it; sol
sow'd about two thirds of the Seed, leaving about
a handful of each.

<page 136>
"[123]
It was a great Comfort to me afterwards, that;
J did so, for not one Grain of that 1 sow'd this
time came to any thing; for the dry Months
following, the Earth having had no Rain after
the Seed was sown, it had no Moisture to assist
its Growth, and never came up at all, till the
wet Season had come again, and then it grew as
if it had been but newly sown.
Finding my first Seed did not grow, which I
easily imagin'd was by the Drought, 1 sought for
a moister Piece of Ground to make another Trial
in, and I dug up a Piece ot Ground near my new
Bower, and sow'd the rest of my Seed in February,
a little before the Vernal Equinox; and this having
the rainy Months of March and April to water it,
sprung up very pleasantly, and yielded a very good
Crop; but having Part of the Seed left only, and
not daring to sow all that I had, 1 had but a small
Quantity at last, my whole Crop not amounting
to above half a Peck of each kind.
But by thjs Experiment I was made Master of
my Bushes, and knew exactly when the proper
Season |Fas to sow; and that 1 might expect two
Seed-ti|*es, and two Harvests every Year. .
While this Corn was growing, I made a little
Discovery which was of Use to me afterwards:
As soon as the Rains were over, and the Weather
began to settle, which was about the Month of
November, I made a Visit up the Country to my
Bower, where tho' I had not been some Months,
yet I found all things just as I left them. The Cir-
cle or double Hedge that I had made, was not on-
ly firm and entire/'but the Stakes which 1 had cut
out of some Trees that grew thereabouts, were all
shot out and grown with long Branches, as much
as a Willow-tree usually shoots the first Year after
lopping its Head. I could nor tell what Tree ro

<page 137>
£ 124 ]
Call it, that these Stakes were cut from. I was
surpriz'd, and yet very well pleas'd, to fee the
young Trees grow; and I prun'd them, and led
them up to grow as much alike as I could; and
it is scarce credible how beautiful a Figure they
grew into in three Years; so that tho' the
Hedge made a Circle of about twenty five Yards
in Diameter, yet the Trees, for such I might
now call them, soon cover'd it; and it was a
compleat Shade, sufficient to lodge under all the
dry Season. . ,
This made me resolve to cut some more Stakes,
and make me a Hedge like this in a Semicircle
round my Wall; I mean that of my first Dwelling,
which I did; and placing the Trees or Stakes in
a double Row, at about eight Yards distance from
my first Fence, they grew presently, and were a^
first a fine Cover to my Habitation, and afterward
serv'd for a Defence also, as I shall observe in its
Order.
I found now, that the Seasons of the Year
might generally be divided, not into Summer and
Winter, as in Europe; but into the rainy Seasons,
and the dry Seasons, which were generally thus:
Half F%7cliR™y>thcSu» bei*gthen on>"
Haifa's nearthe£?»'«0*-
Half Aprils
Dry, the Sun being then to the.
June>r North 0f the Line.
Half August,,
Half

<page 138>
112$ ]
Half Augusts Rai the Sm bdn thencome
Septembers b k
Half OBober,\
Half October,^
November,/ D the ^ bd thfin tQ ^
December,> 0f the Line.
January, \
HaUFe^wct?.)',J
The Rainy Season sometimes held longer or
shorter, as the Winds happen'd to blow; but this
was the general Observation I made: After I had
found, by Experience, the ill Consequence of being
abroad in the Rain, I took care to furnish myself
with Provisions beforehand, that I might not be
oblig'd to go out; and I fat within Doors as much
as possible during the wet Months.
In this Time I found much Employment, (and
very suitable also to the Time) for I found great
Occasion of many things which I had no way to
furnish myself with, but by hard Labour and con-
stant Application ; particularly, I try'd many Ways
to make myself a Basket, but all the Twigs I
could get for the Purpose prov'd so brittle, that
they would do nothing. It prov'd of excellent Ad-
vantage to me now, that when I was a^Boy, I
used to take great Delight in standing at a Basket-
maker's in the Town where my Father liv'd, to
see them make their Wiaker-ware; and. being, as
Boys usually are, very officious to help, and a
great Observer of the Manner how they work'd
those things, and sometimes lending a Hand, I
had by this means full Knowledge of the Methods
of it, that I wanted nothing but the Materials;
when it came into my Mind, that the Twigs of
that Tree from whence I cut my Stakes that grew,
might

<page 139>
t 116 ]
,#ight possibly be as tough as the Safioivs, atid
Pfclkws, and Osiers in England, and I resolv'd
to try.
Accordingly the next Day I went to my Coun-
try-House, as I call'd it, and cutting some of the
smaller Twigs, I found them to my Purpose as
much as I could desire; whereupon I came the next.
time prepar'd with a Hatchet to cut down a
Quantity, which I soon found, for there was great
Plenty of them: these I set up to dry within my
Circle or Hedge, and when they were fit for Use,
I carried them to my Cave; and here during the
next Season, I employ'd myself in making, as -well
as I could, a great many Baskets, both to carry
Earth, or to carry or lay upk any thing as I had oc-
casion; and tho' I did not finish them very hand-
somly, yet I made them sufficiently serviceable for
my Purpose; and thus afterwards I took care ne-
ver to be without them; and as my Wicker .ware
decay'd, I made more, especially I made strong
deep Baskets to place my Corn in, instead of Sacks,
when I should come to have any Quantity of it.
Having master'd this Difficulty, and employJd
a world of Time about it, I beslir'd myself ro see
if possible, how to supply two Wants: I had no
Vessels to hold any thing that was Liquid, ex^
Cept two Runlets which were almost full of Rum,
and some Glass Bottles, some of the common Size,
and others which were Cafe-Bottles square, for
the holding of Waters, Spirits, &c. I had not so
much as a Pot to boil any thing, except a gffeat
Kettle which I sav'd out of the Ship, and which
was too big for such Use as T desir'd it, yizj- to
make Broth, and stew a Bit of Meat by itself".
The second thing I would fain have had, was a
Tobacco-Pipe; but it was impossible to me to
make

<page 140>
[ 127 ]
make one; however I found a Contrivance for
that too at laft^
1 employ'd myself in planting my second Rows
of Stakes or Piles, and in this Wicker Working ail
the Summer, or dry Season, when another Busi-
ness took me up more Time than it could be ima-
,gin'd I could spare.
I mention'd before, that I had a great Mind to
see the whole Island, and that I had traveled up
the Brook, and so on to where I built my Bower,
and where I had an Opening quite to the Sea on
the other Side of the Island.; I now resolv'd to
travel quite cross to the Sea-more on that Side:
so taking my Gon, a Hatofcet, and my Dog, and
a larger Quantity of Powder and Shot than usual,
with two Bisket-Cakes, and a great Bunch of
Raisins in my Pouch for my Store, I began my
Journey; when I had pass'd the Vale where my
Bower stood, as above, I came within View of
the Sea, to the IVefl, and it being a very clear Day,
I sairly descry'd Land, whether an Island or a Con-
tinent, I could not tell- but it lay very high, ex-
tending from the West to the W. S.W. at a very
great Distance; by my Guess it could not be less
than fifteen or twenty Leagues off.
I could not tell what Part of the World this
might be, otherwise than that I know it must be
Part of America; and as 1 concluded by all my
Observations, must be near the Spanish Dominions,
and perhaps was all inhabited by Savages, where
if* i should have landed, I had been in a worse
Condition than I was now; and therefore 1 ac-
quiesced in the Dispositions of Providence, which
I began now to own, and to believe, order'd e*e-
ry thing for the best; I say, I quieted my Mind
with this, and left afflicting myself with fruitless
Wishes of being there.
Eesides

<page 141>
[ 12* 1
Besides, after some Pause upon this Affair, f
consider'd, that if this Land was the Spanish Coast}
I should certainly, one Time dr Other, see some
Vessel pass or re-pass one Way or Other; but if not;
then it was the Savage Coast between the Spanish
Country and Brajils, which were indeed the worst
of Savages; for they are Cannibals, or Men-eaters,
and fail not to murther and devour all the humane
Bodies that fall into their Hands.
With these Considerations I walk'd very leisure-
ly forward. I found that Side of the Island where
I now was, much pleasanter than mine, the open
or Savana Fields sweet, adorn'd with Flowers and
Grafs, and full of very,fine Woods. I saw Abun-
dance of Parrots, and fain I would have caught ofte$
if possible, to have kept it to be tame, and taught
it to speak to me. I did> after some Pains taking;
catch a young Parrot, for I knock'd it down with
a Stick, and having recover'd it, I brought it home;
but it was some Years before I could make him
speak: However, at last I taught him to call me
by my Name very familiarly: But the Accident
that follow'd, tho' it be a Trifle, will be very di-
verting in its Place. ,
I was exceedingly diverted with this Journey: I
found in the low Grounds Hares, as I thought
them to be, and Foxes, but they disfer'd greatly
from ail the other Kinds I had met with; nor could
-I satisfy myself to eat them, tho' I kill'd several r
But I had no need to be venturous; for I had no
Want of Food, and of that which was, very good
too; especially these three Sorts, viz,. Goats, Pid*
geons,and Turtle or Tortoise; which, added to my
Grapes,*Leaden-hall Market could not have fur-
nish'd a Table better than f, in Proportion toth£
Company; and tho' my Cafe was deplorable
enough, yet i had great Cause for Thankfulness.

<page 142>
t »*> J
that I was not driven to any Extremities for Foot!;
but rather Plenty, even to Dainties.
I never travel'd in this Journey above two Miles
outright in a Day, or thereabouts; but I took so
many Turns and Returns to fee what Discoveries
I could make^that I came weary enough to the
Place whereT^esolved to sit down for all Night;
and then 1 either repos'd myself in a Tree, or sur-
rounded myself with a Row of Stakes set upright
in the Ground, either from one Tree to another,
Or so as no wild Creature could come at me, with-
out waking me.
As soon as I came to the Sea-shore, I was fur-
prized to fee that I had taken up my Lot on the
worst side of the Island; for here indeed the Shore
was cover'd with innumerable Turtles*' whereas
on the other side I had found but three in a Year,
and half. Here was also an infinite number of
Fowls, of many Kinds, some which I had seen, and
some which 1 had not seen of before, and many of
them.very good Meat; but such as I knew not
die Names of; except those call'd Penguins.
I could have shot as many as I pleas'd, but was
very sparing of my Powder and Shot; and there-
fore had more Mind to kill a She-Goat, if I could,
which I could better feed on: and tho' there
were many Goats here more than on my Side the
Island, yet it was with much more Difficulty that
I could come near them, the Country being flat
and even, and they saw me much sooner than
when I was on the Hill.
I confess this Side of the Country was much
pleafanter than mine, but yet I had not the le"ast In-
clination to remove; for as I was fix'd in my Ha-
bitation, it became natural to me, and I scem'd all
the while I was here, to be „s it were upon a jour-
hey, and from Home: However, I travel'd along1
K. the


<page 143>
[ 13° 3
the Shore of the Sea, towards the East, I suppose
about twelve Miles; and then setting up a great
Pole upon the Shore for a Mark, I concluded I
would go Home again; and that the next Journey
I took should be on the other Side of the Island,
East trom my Dwelling, and so rqwid till I came
to my Post again: Of which in irWlace.
I took another Way to come back than that I
went, thinking I could easily keep all the Island so
much in my View, that I could not miss finding
my first Dwelling by viewing the Country; but I
found myself mistaken; for being come about two
or three Miles, I found myself descended into a
very large Valley; but so surrounded with Hills,
and tho% Hills covered with Wood, that I could
not fee wliich was my Way by any Direction but
that of the Sun, nor even then, unless I knew very
well the Poiition of the Sun at that time of the
Day.
It happen'd, to my farther Misfortune, that
the Weather prov'd hazey for three or four Days,
while I was in this Valley; and not being able to
fee the Sun, I wander'd about very uncomfortably,
and at last was obliged to find out the Sea-side,
Jook for my Post, and come back the fame Way
] went; and then by easy Journeys I turn'd home-
ward, the Weather being exceeding hot, and my
Gun, Ammunition, Hatchet, and other things
very heavy.
In this Journey my Dog surpriz'd a young Kid,
and seiz'd upon it, and I running in to take hold
of it, caught it, and sav'd it alive from the Dog:
I had a great mind to bring it Home is I could;
for I had often been musing, whether it might not
be possib'e to get a Kid or two, and so raise a
Breed of tame Goats, which might supply me when
my Powder and Shot should be ail spent.

<page 144>
[ *M ]
I made a Collar to this little Creature, and with
a String which I made or some Rope-Yarn which
I always carry "d about me, I led him along; thoi
with some Difficulty, till I came to my Bower,
and there I enclos'd him, and ;est him; sor I was
Very impatient to be at Horn*, from whence I had
been absent above a Month.
I cannot express what a Satisfaction it was to
me, to come into my old Hutch* and lie down in
my Hamock-Bed: This little wandring Journey,
without settled Place of Abode, had been so un-
pleasant to me, that my own House* as I call'd it
to myself, was a perfect Settlement to me, com-
par'd to that; and it render'd every thing about
Die so comfortable, that I resolv'd I would never
go a great Way from it again, while it should be
my Lot to stay on the Island.
I repos'd myself here a Week, to rest and regale
tayself after my long Journey; during which, most
of the Time was taken up in the weighty Affair of
making a Cage for my Po 1, who began now to be
a meer Domestick, and to be mighty well acquain-
ted with me. Then I began to think of the poor
Kid, which I had penn'd in within my little Cirj
cle, and resolv'd to go and fetch it Home, or give
it some Food; accordingly I went,v and found it
where I left it; for indeed it could not get out*
but almost starv'd for want of Food: I Went and
cut Bows of Trees, and Branches of such Shrubs
as I conld find, and threw it over, and having fed
k, I ty'd it as I did before, to lead ic away; but
it was so tame with being hungry, that I had nd
need to have ty'd it; for it follow'd me like a
t)og ; and as I continually fed it, the Creature be*
came so loving, so gentle, and so fond, that it be-
came from that time one of my Ddmesticks also,
and would never leave me afterwards*
K 3 Th«

<page 145>
j 132 1
The rainy Season of the Autumnal Equinox was
now come, and 1 kept the 30th of September in the
fame solemn manner as before, being the Anniver-
sary of my Landing on the Island, having now been
there two Years, and no more Prospect of being de-
livers than the first Day J came there. 1 spent the
whole Day in humble and thankful Acknowledg-
ments of the many wonderful Mercies which my so-
litary Condition was attended with, and without
which it might have been infinitely more miserable.
I gave humble and hearty Thanks that God had
been pleased to discover to me, even that it was
possible I might be more happy in .this solitary
Condition, than I should have been in a Liberty of
Society, and in all the Pleasures of the World. That
He could fully make up to me the Deficiencies of
my solitary State, and the want of Humane So-
ciety, by his Presence, and the Communications of
his Grace to my Soul, supporting, comforting, and
encouraging me to depend upon his Providence
here, and hope for his Eternal Presence hereafter.
It was now that I began sensibly to feel how
much more happy this Life I now led was, with
all its miserable Circumstances, than the wicked,
cursed, abominable Lise I led all the past part of
my Days; and now I changed both my Sorrows
and my Joys; my very Desires alter'd, my Affe-
ctions changed their Gusts, and my Delights were
perfectly new, from what they were at my first
coming, or indeed for the two Years past.
Before, as I walk'd about, either on my Hunt-
ing, or for viewing the Country, the Anguish of
my Soul at my Condition, would break out upon
me on a sudden, and my very Heart would die
within me, to think of the Woods, the Mountains,
the Desarts I was in; and how I was a Prisoner
lock'd up with the Eternal Bars and Bolts of the
Ocean,

<page 146>
t MS.]
Ocean, in an uninhabited Wilderness, without Re-
demption: In the midst of the greatest Composures
of my Mind, this would break out upon me like a
Storm, and make me wring my Hands, and weep
like a Child: Sometimes it would take me in the
middle of my Work, add I would immediately sit
down and sigh, and look upon the Ground sot an
Hour or two together; and this was still worse to
me; for if I could burst out into Xears, or vent
myself by Words, it would go off, and the Grief
having exhausted itself, would abate.
But now I began to exercise myself with new
Thoughts; I daily read the Word of God, and ap-
ply'd all the Comforts of it to my present State.
One Morning being very sad, I open'd the Bible
upon these Words, 1 will never, never leave thee, nor
jorsake tbee; immediately it occur'd, that these
Words were to me, why else should they be di-
rected in such a Manner, just at the Moment when
I was mourning *over my Condition, as one for-
saken of God and Man? Well thety, said I,-if
God does not forsake me, of what ill Consequence
can it be, or what matters it, tho' the World
should all forsake me, seeing on the other hand, if
I had all the World, and should lose the Favour
and Blessing ofOod, there wou'd be no Compa-
rison in the Loss.
From this Moment I began to conclude in my
Mind, that it was possible for me to be more
happy in this forsaken solitary Condition, tlvn it
was probable I should ever have been in any other
particular State in the World; and with -this
Thought I was going to give Thanks to God for
bringing me to this Placed jt&fyn
I know hot what it was, but something shock'd
my Mind at that Thought, and I durfl. not freak
the Words: How canst thou be such a Hypocrite,
, K 3 '(ford

<page 147>
[ i?4 ]

(said I, even audibly) to pretend to be thankful for
a Condition, which however thou may'si endea-
vour to be contented with, thou would'st rather
pray heartily to be deliver'd from; so I stopp'd
there: Hut tho' I could not say, I thank'd God
for being there; yet I sincerely gave Thanks'to
God for opening my Eyes, by whatever afflicting
Providences, to fee the former Condition of my
Life, and to mourn for my Wickedness, and repent.
I never open'd the Bible, or shut it, but my very
Soul within me bless'd God for directing my Friend
in England, without any Order of mine, to pack it
up among my Goods and for assisting "me after-
wards to save it out of the Wreck of the Ship.
Thus, and in this Disposition of Mind, I began
my third Year: and tho' I have not given the Rea-
der the Trouble of so particular Account of my
Works this Year as the first; yet in general it
may be observ'd, that I was very seldom idle;
but having regularly divided my Time, according
to the several daily Employments that were before
me, such as, first, my Duty to God, and the read-:
ing the Scriptures, which I constantly set apart
some time for thrice every Day. Secondly, The going
Abroad with my Gun for Food, which generally
took me up three Hours in every Morning, when
it did not Rain. 'Thirdly, The ordering, curing,
preserving, and cooking what I had kil'd or catch'd
for my Supply; these took up great Part of the
Day: also it is to be considers that the middle of
the day when the Sun was in the Zenith, the Vio-
lence of the Heat was too great to stir out; so that
about four Hours in the Evening was all the time
I could be suppos'd to work in; with this Excep-
tion, that sometimes I chang'd my Hours of
Hunting and Working, and went tq work in the
Morning,

<page 148>
[H5]
Morning, and Abroad with my Gun inthe Aster-
noon. .
To this short time allow'd for Labour, 1 desire
may be added the exceeding Laboriousness of my
"Work, the many Hours which for want of Tools,
want of Help, and want of Skill, every thing I
did, took up out of my Time: For Example, I
was full two and forty days making me a Board
for a long Shelf, which I wanted in my Cave;
•whereas two Sawyers with their Tools, and a Saw-
Pit would have cut six of them out of the fame
Tree in half a day.
My Cafe was this; it was to be a large Tree
which was to be cut down, because my Board was
to be a broad one. This Tree I was three days
a cutting down, and two more cutting off the
Bows, and reducing it to a Log, or Piece of Tim-
ber. With inexpressible hacking and hewing t
reduced both the Sides of it into Chips, till it be-
gun to be light enough to move; then I turn'd it,
and made one side of it smooth, and fiat, as a
Board from End to End; then turning that side
downward, cut the other side, till I brought the
Plank to be about three Inches thick, and smooth
on both sides. Any one may judge the Labour of
my Hands in such a piece of Work; but Labour
apd Patience carry'd me thro' that and many
other things: I only observe this in particular, to
shew the Reason why so much of my time went
away with so little Work, -viz,, that what might
be a little to be done with Help and Tools, was a
vast Labour, and requir'd a prodigious time to do
alone, and by hand. - •
Bnt notwithstanding this, with Patience and La-
bour I went thro' many things, and indeed every
thing that my Circumstances made necessary to me
to do, as will appear by what follows.
K 4 I was

<page 149>
s i3* 1
I was now in the Months ps November and De-
cember, expecting my Crop of Barley and Rice.
The Ground 1 had manur'd or dug up for them,
was not great; for as I observ'd, my Seed of each
was not above the Quantity of half a Peck;
for I had lost one whole Crop by sowing in the
dry Season; but now my Crop promis'd very well,
when on a sudden 1 found I was in Danger of
losing it all again by Enemies of several sorts,
which it was scarce possible to keep from it; as
first, the Goats, and wild Creatures which I call'd
Hares, who tasting the Sweetness of the Blade, ,
lay in it Night and Day, as soon as it came up,
and eat it so close, that it could get no time to
shoot up into Stalk.
This I saw no Remedy for, but by making an
'Enclosure about it with a Hedge, which I did
with a great deal of Toil; and the more, because
it requir'd Speed. However, as my Arable Land
was but small, suited to my Crop, i got it totally,
well fenced in about three Weeks time; asid (hoot-
ing some of the Creatures in the Day time, I set
my Dog to guard it in the Night, tying him up to
a Stake at the Gate, where he would stand and
bark all Night lpng; so in a little time the Enemies
fprsook the Place, and the Corn grew very strong,
and well, and began to ripen apace.
But as the Beasts ruined me befpre, while my
Corn was in the Blade, so the B:rds were as likely,
tp ruine me now, when it was in the Ear; for go-
ing along by the Place to fee how it throve, I saw
my little Crop surrounded with Fowls of I know
not how many sorts, who stood as it were watch-
ing till I should be gone: I 'immediately let fly
among them (for I always had my Gun with me.)
I had no sooner shot but there rose up a little
qoud

<page 150>
[ i?7 1
Cloud of Fowls, which I had not seen at all, from
among the Cora ic sc;i.
Tiiis touavd me tenliMy, for I foresaw, that in
a few IXtys they would devour all my Hopes, that
I should be starv'd, and never be able to raise a
Crop at all, and what to do I could not tell: How-
ever, I resolv'd not to lose my Corn, if possible,
tho' I should watch it Night and Day. In the
first Place, I went among it to see what Darrrage
was already done, and found they had spoil'd a
good deal of it; but that as it was yet too green
for them, the Loss was not so great, but that the
Remainder was like to be a good Crop if it could
be sav'd.
I staid by it to load my Gun, and then coming
away I could easily see the Thieves sitting upon all
the Trees about me, as if they only waited till I
was gone away, and the Event proved it to be so;
for as I walk'd off as if I was gone, I was no soon-
er out of their Sight, but they dropt down one by
one into the Corn again. 1 was so provok'd that I
could not have Patience to stay till more came on,
knowing that every Grain that they eat now, was,
ca it might be said, a Peck-loaf to me in the Conse-
quence; but coming up to the Hedge, I fir'd a-
gain, and kill'd three of them. This was what I
w,ish'd for; so I took them up, and serv'd them as
we serve notorious Thieves in England, (viz,.)
Hang'd them in Chains for a Terror to others. It
is impossible to imagine almost, that this should
have such an Effect as it had; for the Fowls would
not only not'come at the Corn, but in short they for-
sook all that Part of the Island, and I could never
see a Bird near the Place aslongas my Scare-Crows
hung thete.
This

<page 151>
[ M8 ]
This I was very glad of, you may be sure ; and a-
bout the latter end of December, which was our se-
cond Harvest of the Year, 1 reap'd my Crop.
I was sadly put to it for a Scythe or a Sickle to
cut it down, and all I could do was to make one as
well as I could out of one of the broad Swords or
Cutlalfes, which I sav'd among the Arms out of
the Ship. However, as my first Crop was but small,
I had no great Difficulty to'cut it down: in short,
I reap'd it my way, for I cut nothing off but the
Ears, and carry d it away in a great Basket which
I had made, and so rubb'd it out with my Hands;
and at the End of all my Harvesting, I found that
out of my half Peck of Seed, I had near two Bu-
lhels of Rice, and above two Bushels and half of
Barley, that is to fay, by my Guess, for I had no
Measure at that time.
However, this was a great Encouragement to
me; and I foresaw that in time, it would please
God to supply me with Bread: And yet here I
was perplex'd again, for I neither knew how to
grind or make Meal of my Corn, or indeed how
to clean it and part it; nor if made into Meal, how
to make Bread of it; and if how to make it, yet I
knew not how to bake it: these things being added
to my Delire of having a good Quantity for Store,
and to secure a constant Supply, I resolv'd not to
taste any of this Crop, but to preserve it all for Seetl
against the next Season, and in the mean time to
employ all my Study and Hours of working to ac-
complish this great Work of providing myself with
Corn and Bread.
It might be truly said, that now I work'd for
my Bread. 'Tis a little wonderful, and what I be-
lieve few People have thought much upon, (viz,.) the
ftrange Multitude of little things necessary in the
?X2r

<page 152>
C 159 ]
Providing, Producing, Curing, Dressing, Making
and Finishing this one Article of Bread.
I that was reduced to a meer State of Nature,
found this to my daily Discouragement, and was
made more and more sensible of it every Hour, even
after I had got the rirst Handful of Seed-Corn,
which, as I have said, came up unexpectedly, and
indeed to a Surprise.
First, I had no Plow to turn up the Earth, no
Spade or Shovel to dig it. Well, this I conquer'd,
by making a wooden Spade, as I observ'd before;
but this did my Woik in but a wooden manner;
and tho' it cost me a great many Days to make it,
yet for want of Iron it not only wore out the soon-
er, but made my Work the harder, and made it
be perform'd much worse.
However, this I bore wiih, and was content to
work it out with Patience, and bear with the Bad-
ness of the Performance. When the Corn was
sow'd, I had no Harrow, but was forced to go
over it my self, and drag a great heavy Bough of a
Tree over it, to Scratch it, as it may be call'd, ra-
ther than Rake or Harrow it.
When it was growing and grown, I have ob-
serv'd already how many things I wanted* to
fence it, secure it, mow or reap it, cure\ and
t^rry it Home, thrash, part it from the Chars,
and save it. Then I wanted a Mill to grind it,
Sieves to dress it, Yeast and Salt to make it into
Bread, and an Oven to bake it; and yet all these • *
things I did without, as shall be obscrv'd; and
yet the Corn was an inestimable Comfort and Ad-
vantage to me too. All this, as I said, made

:ain Paft pf # was every Day appointed to
these

<page 153>
[ 140 ]
these Works; and as I resolv'd to use none of the
'Corn for Bread till I had a greater Quantity by
me, I had the next six Months to apply myself
wholly by Labour and Invention to furnish myself
with Utensils proper for the performing all theQ-
perations necessary for the making the Corn (when,
I had it) fit for my use.
But sirst, I was to prepare more Land, for I
had now Seed enough to sow above an Acre of
Ground. Before I did this*, I had a Weeks-work
at least to make me a Spade, which when it was
done was but a sorry one indeed, and very heavy,
and requir'd double Labour to work with it;
however I went thro' that, and sow'd my Seed in
two large flat Pieces of Ground, as near my
House as I could find them to my Mind, and
fene'd them in with a good Hedge, the Stakes of
which were all cut of that Wood which I had set
before, and knew it would grow, so that in one
Year's time I knew I should have a Quick or Li-
ving.Hedge, that would want but little Repair.
This Work was not so little as to take me up less
than three Months, because great Part of that time
was of the wet Season, when I could not go a-
broad.
Within Doors, that is, when it rained, and \
could not go out, I found Employment on the fol-
lowing Occasions ; always observing, that all the
while I was at work I diverted myself with talk-
ing to my Parrot, and teaching him to Speak;
and I quickly learned him to know his own Name,
and at last to speak it out pretty loud, POLL,
which was the first Word I ever heard spoken in
the Island by any Mourh but my own. This
therefore was not'my Work, but an Assistant to my
Work; for now, as I said, I had a great Employ-
ment upon my Hands, as follows, (viz,.) I had

<page 154>
[ t4l ]
long study M, by some Means or other, to make
myself some Earthen Vessels, which indeed I want-
ed sorely, but knew not where to come at them:
However, considering the Heat of the Climate, I
did not doubt but if I could find out any such
Clay, I might botch up some such Pot, as mights
being dry'd in'theSun, be hard enough, and strong
enough to bear handling, and to hold any Thing
that was dry, and required to be kept so; and
as this was necessary in the preparing Corn,
Meal, &c. which was the Thing I was upon, I
resolved to make some as large as I could, and fit
only to stand like Jars to hold what should be put
into them.
It would make the Reader pity me, or rather
laugh at me4 to tell how many awkward Ways I
took to raise this Paste, what odd mishapen ugly
things I made, how many of them fell in, and how
many fell out, the Clay not being stiff enough to
bear its own Weight; how many crack'd by the
over violent Heat of the Sun, being set out too
hastily; and how many fell in Pieces with only re-
moving, as well before as after they were dry'd;
and in a word, how after having laboured hard
to find the Clay, to dig it, to temper it, to bring
it home and work it, I could not make above two
large earthen ugly things, 1 cannot call them Jarrs,
in about two Months Labour,,
However, as the Sun^ik'd these two very dry
and hard, I lifted them very gently up, and set
them down again in two great Wicker-Baskets,
which I had made on purpose for them, that they
might not break; and as between the Pot and the
Basket there was a little room to spare, I iluff'd it
full of the Rice and Barley Straw, and these two
Pots being to stand always dry, I thought would
... c :Y r' llold

<page 155>
t 142 ]
hold my dry Corn, and perhaps the Meal, wheti
the Corn was bruised.
Tho' I miscarried so much in my Design for
large Pots, yet I made several smaller things with
better Success; such as little round Pots, flat Dish-
es, Pitchers and Pipkins, and any things my Hand
turn'd to, and the Heat of the Sun bak'd them
strangely hard. . .
But all this would not answer my End, which
was to get an Earthen Pot to hold what was Li-
quid, and bear the Fire, which none of these could
do. It happen'd after some time, making a pretty
large Fire for cooking my Meat, when I went to
put it out after I had done with it, I found a bro-
ken Piece of one of my Earthen-wate Vessels in the
Fire, burnt as hard as a Stone, and red as a Tile,
I was agreeably surpriz3d to fee it, and said to my
self, that certainly they might be made to bum
whole, if they would burn broken.
This set me to studying how to order my Fire,
so as to make it burn me some Pots. % had no
notion of a Kiln, such as the Potters burn in, or
of glazing them with Lead, tho' I had some Lead
to do it -with; but I plac'd three large Pipkins,
and two or three Pots in a Pile one upon another,
and plac'd my Fire-wood all round it with a great
Heap of Embers under them; I ply'd the Fire
with fresh Fuel round the out-side, and upon the
top, till I saw the Pots in the inside red hot quite
thro', and obferv'd that they did not crack at all;
when I saw them clear red, I let them stand in
that Heat about 5 or 6 Hours, till I found one of
them, tho' it did not crack, did melt or run, sot
the Sand which was mixed with the Clay melted
by the Violence of the Heat, and would have run
into Glass if I had gone on; so I slack'd my Fire
gradually, till the Pots began to abate of the red
Co-"

<page 156>
[ 1

Colour, and watching them all Night, that I might
not let the Fire abate too fast, in the Morning I
had three very good, 1 will not say handsome Pip-
kins , and two other Earthen Pots, as hard burnt
as could be dehVd; and one of them perfectly
glaz'd with the Running of the Sand.
After this Experiment, I need not fay that I
wanted no fort of Earthen Ware for my Use; but
I must needs fay, as to the Shapes of them, they
were very indifferent, as any one may fuppose,when
I had no way of making them, but as the Children
make Dirt-Pyes, or as a Woman would makePyes
that never learnt to raise Paste.
No Joy at a thing of so mean a Nature was
ever equal to mine, when I found I had made an
Earthen Pot that would bear the Fire; and I had
hardly Patience to stay till they were cold, before
I set one upon the Fire again, with some Water in
it, to boil me some Meat, which it did admirably
well; and with a Piece of a Kid 1 made some very
good Broth, though I wanted Oatmeal, and seve-
ral other Ingredients requisite to make it so good
as I would have had it been.
My next Concern was, to get me a Stone Mor-
tar to stamp or beat some Corn in ; for as to the
Mill, there was no thought at arriving to that Per-
fection of Art, with one Pair of Hands. To sup-
ply this Want I'was at a great Loss; for of all
Trades in the World I was as perfectly unqualified
for a Stone-Cutter, as for any whatever; neither had
1 any Tools to go about it with. 1 spent many a
Day to find out a great Stone big enough to cut
hollow, and make fit for a Mortar, and could find
none at all ; except what was in the solid Rock,
and which I had no way to dig or cut out; nor in-
deed were the Rocks in the Island of Hardness suf-
ficient, but were all os a sandy crumbling Stone,
which

<page 157>
£ *44 3
which worild neither bear the Weight of a heavy'
Pestle, or would break the Corn without filling ;t
Vith Sand ; so after a great deal of Time lost in
Searching for a Stone, I gave it over, and resolv'd
to look out for a great Block of hard Wood, which
1 found indeed much easier; and getting one as
big as I had Strength to stir, I rounded it, and
form'd it on the Outside with my Axe and Hatchet;
and then with the Help of Fire and infinite Labours
made a hollow Place in it, as the Indians in Brafil
make their Canoes. After this, I made a great hea-
Xy Pestle or Beater, of the Wood call'd the IronT
Wood, and this I prepared and laid by against I
had my next Crop of Corn, when I propos'd to
myself to grind, or rather pound, my Corn into
Meal to make my Bread.
My next Difficulty was to make a Sieve, or
Search, to dress my Meal, and to part it from the
Bran, and the Husk, without which I did not fee
it possible I could have any Bread. This was a
most difficult thing, so much as but to think on;
for to be sure I had nothing like the necessary thing
to make it; I mean fine thin Canvas, or Stuss to
search the Meal through. And here I was at a full
Stop for many Months ; nor did I really know
what to do ; Linnen I had none left, but what was
meer Rags; I had Goats Hair, but neither knew
I how to weave it, or spin it; and had I known
how, here was no Tools to work it with; all the
Remedy that I found for this, was, That at last I
did remember I had among the Seamens Cloaths
which weresav'd out of the Ship, some Neckcloths
of CaHicoe or Muslin; and with some Pieces of
these I made three small Sieves, but proper enough
for the Work; and thus I made {hist for some Years;
how I did afterwards, I shall shew, in its Place.
she

<page 158>
£ 145 1
The baking Part was the next thing to be con-
fider'd, and how I should make Bread when 1 came
to have Corn; for first I had no Yeast; as to that
Part, as there was no supplying the Want, so 1 did
not concern my self much about it : But for an
Oven, I was indeed in great Pain: at length I
found out an Experiment for that also, which was
this; I made some Earthen Vessels very broad, but
riot deep; that is to fay, about two Foot Diame-
ter, and not above nine Inches deep: these I burnt
in the Fire, as I had done the other, and laid them
By; and when I wanted to bake, I made a great
Fire upon my Hearth, which I had pav'd with
some square Tiles of my own making and burning
also; but I should not call them square.
When the Fire-wood was burnt pretty much into
Embers, or live Coals, I drew themforward upon
this Hearth, so as to cover it all over; and there I
let them lie, till the Hearth was very hot; then
sweeping away a!l the Embers, I set down my
Loaf, dr Loaves, and whelming down the Earthen
Pot upon them, drew the Embers all round the
Outside Of the Pot, to keep in, and add to the
Heat; and thus, as well as in the best Oven in the
World, I bak'd my Barley-Loaves, and became in
little tirrie a meer Pastry-Ccok into the Bargain;
for I made myself several Cakes of the Rice and
Puddings ; indeed I made no Pies, neither had s any
Thing to put into them, supposing 1 had, except
the Flesh either of Fowls or Goats.
It need not be wondered at, iP all these things
took me up most Part of the third Year of my A-
bode here; for it is to be observ'd, That in the In-
tervals of these Things, I had my new Harvest and
Husbandry to manage; for I reap'd rny Corn in its
Season, arid'carried it Home as well as I could, and
laid it Up in the Ear, in my large Baskets, till I had
L time

<page 159>
C 14* 1
Time to rub it out; for I had no Floor to thrash
it on, or Instrument to thrash it with.
And now indeed my Stock of Corn increasing, I
really wanted to build my Barns bigger: I wanted a
Place to ay it up in; for the Increase of the Com
now yielded me so much, that I had of the Barley
about twenty Bushels, and of the Rice as much,
or mote, insomuch, that now I resolv'd to begin
to use it freely; for my Bread had been quite gone
a great while ; also 1 resolv'd to see what Quanti-
ty would be sufficient for me a whole Year, and to
sow but once a Year.
Upon the whole, I sound that the forty Bushels
of Barley and Rice was much more than I could
consume in a Year; solresolv'd to sow just thesame
.Quantity every Year that I sowed the last, in hopes
that such a Quantity would fully provide me with
Bread, &c.
All the while these Things were doing, you may
be sure my Thoughts run many times upon the
Prospect of Land which I had seen from the other
Side of the Island, and I was not without secret
Wishes that I were on Shore rhere, fancying the see-
ing the main Land, and in an inhabited Country,
I might find some Way or other to convey my
self farther, and perhaps at last find some Means of
Escape.
But all this while I made no Allowance for the
Bangers of such a Condition, and how I might fall
into the Hands of Savages, and perhaps such as I
might have Reason to think far worse than the Li-
ons and Tigers of Af rica. That if I once came in-
to their Power, I should run a Hazard more than a
Thousand to One of being kill'd, and perhaps of be-
ing eaten; for I had heard that the People of the Car-
riiean Coasts were Cannibals, or Man-eaters ; and
I knew by the Latitude, that I could not be far off

<page 160>
[ 147 )
from that Shore. That suppose they were not Can-
nibals, yet that they might kill me, as many Euro-
seam who had fallen into their Hands had been ser-
ved, even when they had been ten or twenty toge-
ther; much more I that was but one, and could
make little or no Defence. All these things, I fay,
which i ought to have consider'd well of, and did
cast up in my Thoughts afterwards, yet took up
none of my Apprehensions at first; but my Head
run mightily upon the Thought of getting over to
the Shore.
Now I wish'd for my Boy Xury, and the Long-
Boat with the bhoulder of Mutton Sail, with which
I sail'd above a thousand Miles on the Coast of A~
frick; but this was in vain. Then I thought I would
go and look at our Ship's Boat, which, as I have
said, was blown up upon the Shore a great Way in
the Storm, when we were first cast away- She lay
almost where she did at first, but not quite; and
was turn'd by the Force of the Waves and the
Winds, almost Bottom upward, against a high
Ridge of Beachy rough Sand; but no Water abouc
hec as before.
If I had had Hands to have refitted her, and to
have launch'd her into the Water, the Boat would
have done well enough, and I might have gone
back into the Brajtls with her easily enough • but 1
might have foreseen, that I could no more turn her, .
and set her upright upon her Bottom, than I could
remove the Island: However, I went to the
Woods and cut Levers and Rollers, and brought
them to the Boat, resolv'd to try what I could do;
suggesting to myself, that if I cqv\d but turn her
down, I might easily repair the Damage stie had
receiv'd, and she would be a very good Boat, and
I mie;ht so to Sea in her very easily.
I sp.ir'd no Pains indeed, in.this Piece of" fruitless
Toil, and spent, I think, three or four Weeks a-
L a bout

<page 161>
1148 i
bout it; at last finding it impossible to heave it up
with my little Strength, 1 fell to digging away the
Sand to undermine it, and so to make it fall down,
setting Pieces of Wood to thrust and guide it right
in the Fall.
But when I had done this, I was unable to stir it
up again, or to get under it, much less to move it
forward towards the Water; so I was fore'd to give
it over; and yet, though I gave over the Hopes of
the Boat, my desire to venture over for the Main
increased, rather than decreased, as the Means for *
it seem'd impossible.
'This at length put me upon thinking, Whether
it was not possible to make myself a Canoe, or Peria-
gua, such as the Natives of those Climates make,
even without Tools, or, as I might fay, without
Hands, viz.. of the Trunk of a great Tree. This I
not only thought possible, but easy, and pleas'd
myself extreamly with the Thoughts of making it,
and with my having much more Convenience for it
than any of the Negroes or Indians ; but not at all
considering the particular Inconveniences which I
lay under, more than the Indians did, viz.. Want of
Hands to move it, when it was made, into theWa-
ter; a Difficulty much harder for me to surmount,
than all the Consequences of want of Tools could
be to them: For what was it to me, That when I
had chosen a vast Tree in the Woods, I might with
much Trouble cut it down, if after I might be a-
ble with my Tools to hew and dub the Out side
into the proper Shape of a Boat, and burn or cut
out the In fide to make it hollow, so to make a Boat
of it, if after all this, I must leave it just there
where I found it, and was not able to launch it in-
to the Water.
One would have thought, I could not have had
the least Reflection upon my Mind of my Circum-
stance,

<page 162>
s 149 1
stance, while I was making this Boat, but I should
have immediately thought how I should get it into
the Sea ; but my Thoughts were so intent upon
my Voyage over the Sea in it, that I never once
consider'd how I should get it oft" of the Land;
and it was really in its own Nature more easy tor
me to guide it over forty five Miles of Sea, than
about forty five Fathom of Land, where it lay, to
set it a float in the Water.
I went to work upon this Boat the most like a
fool that ever Man did, who had any of his Senses
awake. I pleas'd myself with the Design, with-
out determining whether I was ever able to under-
take it; not but that the Disficulty of launching
my Boat came often into my Head; but I put a
stop to my own Enquiries into it, by this foolish
Answer which I gave myself, Let's first make it, fU
warrant VU find some Way or other toget it along, -when
'tis done.
• This was a most preposterous Method; but the
Eagerness of my Fancy prevail'd, and to work I
went. I fell'd a Cedar Tree: I question much
whether Solomon ever had such a one for the Build-
ing of the Temple at 'Jerusalem. It was five Foot
ten Inches Diameter at the lower Part next the
Stump, and four Foot eleven Inches Diameter .it
the End of twenty two Foot, after which it les-
sen'd for a while, and then parted into Branches:
It was not without infinite Labour that I fell'd
this Tree: I was twenty Days hacking and hew-
ing at it at the Bottom. I was fourteen more get-
ting the Branches and Limbs, and the vast soread-
ing Head of it cut off", which I hack'd and hew'd
through with Axe and Hatchet, and inexpressible
Labour: After this, it cost me a Month to shape'
it, and dub it to a Proportion, and to something
like the Bottom of a Boat, that it might swim up-
L 3 right

<page 163>
[ 15° ]
right as it ought to do. It cost me near three
Months more to clear the Inside, and work it out
so, as to make an exact Boat of it: This I did in-
deed without Fire, by mere Mallet and Chissel, and
by the dint of hard Labour, till 1 had brought it to
be a very handsome Penagua, and big enough to
have carried six and twenty Men, and consequently
big enough to have carried me and all my Cargo.
When I had gone through this Work, I was ex-
tremely delighted with it. The Boat was really
much bigger than I ever saw a Canoe, or Periagua,
that was made of one Tree, in my Lise. Many a
weary Stroke it had cost, you may be sure; and
there remained nothing but to get it into theWater;
and had I gotten it into the Water, I make no que-
stion, but 1 should have began the maddest Voyage
and the most unlikely to be perform'd, that ever
was undertaken.
But .-ill my Devices to get it into the Water
sail'd me, though they cost me infinite Labour too.
It lay about one hundred Yards from the Water,
and not more: But the first Inconvenience was, it
was up Hill towards the Creek : well, to take a-
way this Discouragement, I resolv'd to dig into
the Surface of the Earth, and so make a Declivi-
ty: This I begun, and it cost me a prodigious deal
of Pains; but who grudges Pains, that have their
Deliverance in View? But when this was work'd
through, and this Difficulty manag'd, it was still
much at one; for I could no more stir the Canoe,
than I could the other Boat.
Then I measur'd the Distance os Ground, and
resolv'd to cut a Dock, or Canal, to bring the Wa-
ter up to the Canoe, seeing I could not bring the
Canoe down to the Water: Well, I began this
Work, and when I began to enter into ir, and cal-
culate how deep it was to be dug, how broad,

<page 164>
• C 151 3
how the Stuff to be thrown out, I sound, that by
the number of Hands I had, being none but my
own, it must have been ten or tweive Years before
I should have gone through with it; for the Shore
lay high, so that at the upper End it must have
been at least twenty Foot deep; so at length, tho'
with great Reluctancy, I gave this Attempt over
also.
This griev'd me heartily, and now I saw, tho'
too late, the Folly of beginning a Work before we
count the Cost, and before we judge rightly of
our own Strength to go through with it.
In the middle of this Work, I finish'd my fourth
Year in this Place, and kept my Anniversary with
the same Devotion, and with as much Comfort as
ever before; for by a constant Study, and serious
Application of the Word of God, and by the As-
sistance of his Grace, I gain'd different Know-
ledge from what I had before. 1 entertain'd diffe-
rent Notions of things. 1 look'd now upon the
World as a thing remote, which I had nothing to
do with, no Expectation from, and indeed no De-
sires about -. In a word, I had nothing indeed to
do with it, nor was ever like to have ; so I thought
it look'd as we may perhaps look upon it hereafter,
•viz,, as a Place I had lived in, but was come out of
jt; and well might I fay, as Father Abraham to
Dives, Between me and thee is a great Gulph fixed.
In the first Place, I was removed from all . the
Wickedness of the World here: I had neither the
Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, or. the Pride of
Life. I had nothing to covet; for I had all that I
was now capable of enjoying: I was Lord of the
whole Manors or:if I pleas'd,.I mi^htcall myfcif
King, or Emperor over the whole Country which
I had Possession of. There were no Rivals : I had
no Competitor, none to dispute Sovereignty dr
L 4 Com-

<page 165>
t »52 ]
Command with me.,^1 might have rais'd Ship
Loadings of Corn; but I had no use for it; so I let
as little grow as I thought enough for my Occasion.
I had 1 ortoise or Turtles enough; but now and
then one was as much as I could put to any use. I
had Tim-er enough to have built a Fleet of Ships.
I had Grapes enough to have made Wine, or to
have ci r'd into Raisins, to have loaded that Fleet
when the|i had been built.
But all I could make use of, was, All that was
valuabi|. I had enough to eat, and to supply my
Wants, and, what was all the rest to me? If I
kill'd more Flesh than I could eat, the Dog must eat
it, or the Vermin. If I sow'd more Corn than I
could eat, it must be spoil'd. The Trees that 1
cut down, were lying to rot on the Ground : I
could make no more use of them than for Fewei,
and that I had no Occasion for, but to dress my
Food.
In a Word, the Nature and Experience of
Things dictated to me upon just Reflection, that
all the good Things of this World, are no farther
good to us, than they are for our Use; and that
whatever we may heap up indeed to give others,
we enjoy just as much as we can use, and no more.
The most covetous griping Miser in the World
would have been cured of the Vice os Covetousness,
is he had been in my Cafe; for I possessed infinitely
more than I knew what to do with. I had no room
for Desire, except it was of things which I had
not, and they were but Trifles, tho' indeed of
great use to me. I had, as I hinted before, a Par-
cel of Money, as well Gold as Silver, about thirty
fix Pounds Sterling: Alas! there the nasty sorry
useless Stuff lay; I had no manner of Business
for it; and I often thought with myself, that I
wpuld have given a Handful of it for a Gross of
Tobacco,-

<page 166>
[ J53 1
Tobacco-Pipes, or for a Hand-mill to grind my
Corn; nay, I would have given it all for Sixpenny-
worth of Turnip and Carrot Seed out ot England, or
for a Handful of Pease and Beans, and a Bottle of
Ink: As it -was, I had not the least Advantage by
it, or Benefit from it; but there it lay in a Drawer,
and grew mouldy with the Damp of the Cave, in
the wet Season; and if I had had the Drawer full
of Diamonds, it had been the fame G&e; and
they had been of no manner of Value to me, be-
cause of no Use. ./
I had now brought my State os Life to be much
easier in itself than it was at first, and much easier
to my Mind, as well as to my Body. I frequently
fat down to my Meat with Thankfulness, and ad-=
mired the Hand of God's Providence, which had
thus spread my Table in the Wilderness. I learned
to look more upon the bright Side of my Condi-
tion, and less upon the dark Side; and to consider
what I enjoy'd, rather than what I wanted; and
this gave me sometimes such secret Comforts, that
I cannot express them; and which I take Notice
of here, to put those discontented People in mind
of it, who cannot enjoy comfortably what God
has given them, because they see, and covet somer-
thing that he has not given them. All our Dis-
contents about what we want, appeared to me to
spring from the Want of Thankfulness for what we
have.
Another Reflection was of great Use to me, and
doubtless would be so to any one that should fall
into such Distress as mine was; and this,was to
compare my present Condition with what I at first
expected it should be; nay, with what it would
certainly have been, if the good Providence of
God had riot wonderfully ordered the Ship to be
cast up nearer to the Shpre, where I hot only could
come
/

<page 167>
[ i54 3
come at her, but could bring what I got out of her
to the Shore, for my Relief and Comfort; without
which, I had wanted for Tools to work, Weapons
for Defence, or Gun-powder and Shot for getting
my Food.
I spent whole Hours, I may fay whole Days, in
representing to myself in the most lively Colours,
how I must have acted, if I had got nothing out
of the Ship; how I could not have so much as
got any Food, except Filh and Turtles; and that
as it was long before I found any of them, I must
have perish'd first: That I should have liv'd, if I
had not perish'd, like a meer Savage: that if I
had kill'd a Goat, or a Fowl, by any Contrivance,
I had no way to flea or open them, or part the Flesh
from the Skin and the Bowels, or to cut it up;
but must gnaw it with my Teeth, and pull it with
my Claws like a Beast.
These Reflections made me very sensible os the
Goodness of Providence to me, and very thankful
for my present Condition, with all its Hardships
and Misfortunes: And this Part also 1 cannot but
recommend to the Reflection of those who are apt
in their Misery to say, Is any AffiiElion like mine!
Let them consider, how much worse the Cases of
some People are, and their Case might have been,
if Providence had thought fit.
I had another Reflection which assisted me also
to comfort my Mind with Hopes; and this was
comparing my present Condition with what I had
deserv'd, and had therefore Reason to expect from
the Hand of Providence. I had liv'd a dreadful
Life, perfectly destitute of the Knowledge and Fear
of G od. I had been well instructed by Father and
Mother; neither had they been wanting to me in
their early Endeavours, to infuse a religious Awe
of G o d into roy Mind, a Sense of my Duty, and
of

<page 168>
[ iS5 ]
of what the Nature and End of my Being requir'd
of me. But alas! falling early into the Sea-faring
Lise, which of all the Lives is the most destitute
of the Fear of God, tho' his Terrors are al-
ways before them; I fay, falling early into the
Sea-faring Life, and into Sea-faring Company, all
that little Sense of Religion which I had enter-
tain'd, waslaugh'd out of me by my Mess-mates,
by a harden'd despising of Dangers, and the Views
of Death, which grew habitual to me, by my long
Absence from ail manner of Opportunities to con-
verse with any thing but what was like myself,
or to hear any thing that was good, or tended to-
wards it.
So void was I of every thing that was good, ot'
of the least Sense of what I was, or was to be,
that in the greatest Deliverances 1 enjoy'd, such
as my Escape from Sal/e, my being taken up by
the Portuguese Master of the Ship, my being plant-
ed so well in the Brafils, my receiving the Cargo
from England, and the like, I never had once the
Word Thank God, so much as on my Mind, or in.
my Mouth; nor in the greatest Distress, had I so
much as a Thought to pray to him; or so much as.
to fay, Lord have Mercy upon me; no nor to mention
the Name of God, .unless it was to swear by,
and blaspheme it.
I had terrible Reflections upon my Mind foe
many Months, as I have already observ'd, on the
Account of my wicked andhardned Life past - and
when I look'd about me, and consider'd what parti-
cular Providences had attended me since my com-
ing into this Place, and how God had dealt boun-
tifully with me; had not only punisiVd me less than
my Iniquity had deserv'd, but had so plentifully pro-
v ded for me; this gave me great Hopes that my
4 Repen-

<page 169>
[ 15<5 ]
Repentance was accepted, and that God had yet
Mercy in store for me.
With these Reflections I work'd my Mind up,
pot only to Resignation to the Will-of God in the
present Disposition of my Circumstances, but even
to a sincere Thankfulness for my Condition; and
that I who was yet a living Man, ought not to
complain, seeing I had not the due Punishment of
my Sins; that I enjoy'd so many Mercies which
I had no reason to have expected in that Place;
that I ought never more to repine at my Condition,
but to rejoyce, and to give daily Thanks for that
daily Bread which nothing but acroud of Wonders
Could have brought. That I ought to consider I
had been fed even by Miracle, even as great as
that of feeding Elijah by Ravens; nay, by a long
Series of Miracles, and that I could hardly have;
nam'd a Place in the unhabitable Part of the World
where I could have been cast more to my Advan-
tage .- A Place, where as I had no Society, which
was my Affliction on one hand, so I found no ra^
venous Beasts, no furious Wolves or Tygers to
threaten my Life, no venomous Creatures or poi-
sonous, which I might feed on to my hurt, no Sa-
vages to murder and devour me.
In a Word, as my Life was a Life of Sorrow'
one way, so it was a Life of Mercy another; and
I wanted nothing to make it a Life of Comfort,
but to be able to make my Sense os God's Good-
ness to me, and Care over me in this Condition,
be my daily Consolation; and after I did make a
;ust Improvement of these things, I went away and
was no more fad.
I had now been here so long, that many things .
which I brought on Shore for my Help, were either
quite gone, or very much wasted and near spent.
My

<page 170>
t J57 )
My Ink, as I observed, had been gone for some
time, all but a very little, which I eek'd out with
Water a little and a little, till it was so pale it scarce
left any Appearance of black upon the Paper: As
long as it lasted I made use of it to minute down
the Days of the Month on which any remarkable
thing happen'd to me; and first by casting up
Times past, I remember that there was a strange
Concurrence of Days in the various Providences
which befei me, and which, if I had been super-
stitioufly inclin'd to observe Days as Fatal or For-
tunate, I might have had Reason to have look'd
upon with a great deal of Curiosity.
First, I had observ'd, that the same Day that I
broke away from my Father and my Friends, and
run away to Hull in order to go to Sea, the fame
Day afterwards I was taken by the Sails Man of
War, and made a Slave.
The fame Day of the Year that I escaped out
of the Wreck of that Ship in Yarmouth Roads, that
fame Day-Year afterwards I made my escape from
Salic in the Boat.
The same Day of the Year I was born on, (viz,.)
the 30th of September, the fame Day I had my
Life so miracnlousiy saved 26 Years after, when I
was cast on Shore in this Island; so that my wicked
Life and my solitary Life begun both on a Day.
The next thing to my Ink's being wasted, was
that of my Bread, I mean the Bisket which I
brought out of the Ship: this I had husbanded to
the last degree, allowing myself but one Cake of
Bread a Day for above a Year, and yet 1 was quite
without Bread for near a Year before I got any
Corn of my own; and great Reason I had to be
thankful that I had any ar all, the getting it being,
as has been already observed, next to miraculous.
My

<page 171>
E 158 1
My Cloaths began to decay too mightily; As to
Linnen, i had had none a good while, except some
chcquer'd Shirts which I found in the Chests of the
other Seamen, and which I carefully prescrv'd, be-
cause many times 1 could bear no other Cloaths
On but a Shirt; and it was a very great help to me
that I had among all the Mens Cloaths of the Ship
almost three dozen of Shirts. There were also se-
veral thick Watch-coats of the Seamens, which
were left indeed, but they were too hot to wear;
and tho' it is true, that the Weather was so violent
hot that there was no need of Cloaths, yet I could
not go quite naked; no, tho' I had been inclined
to it, which I was not, nor could not abide the
Thoughts of it, tho' I was all alone.
The Reason why 1 could not go quite naked,
was, I could not bear the Heat of the Sun so
well when quite naked, as with some Cloaths on;
nay, the very Heat frequently blister'd my Skin;
whereas with a Shirt on, the Air itself made some
Motion, and whistling under that Shirt, was twofold
cooler than without it: No more could 1 ever bring
myself to go out in the Heat of the Sun without a
Cap or a Hat; the Heat of the Sun beating with
such Violence as it does in that Place, would give
me the Head-ach presently, by darting so directly
on my Head, without a Cap or a Hat on; so that I
could not bear it; whereas if I put on my Hat, it
would presently go away.
Upon those Views I began to consider about put-
ting the few Rags 1 had, which I called Cloaths,
into some Order: I had worn out all the Waist-
coats I had, and my Business was now to try if I
could not make Jackets out of the great Watch-
coats which I had by me, and with such other
Materials as I had; so I set to work a Tayloring,
or rather indeed a Botching; for I made most
piteous

<page 172>
[ 159 3
piteous Work of it. However, \ made shift to
make two or three new Waistcoats, which I hoped
would serve me a great while; as foriBreeches or ,
Drawers, I made but a very sorry shift indeed, till
afterward.
I have mentioned, that I saved the Skins of all
the Creatures that I kill'd, I mean four-footed ones,
and I had hung them up stretch'd out with Sticks
in the Sun, by which means some of them were so
dry and hard that they were sic for little, but others
it seems were very useful. The first thing I made
of these was a great Cap for my Head, with the
Hair on the Outside to shoor off the Rain; and
this I perform'd so well, that after this I made me
a Suit of Cloaths wholly of these Skins, that is to
fay, a Waistcoat and Breeches open at Knees, and
both loose, for they were rather wanting to keep
me cool than to keep me warm. I must not omit
to acknowledge that they were wretchedly made;
for if I was a bad Carpenter, 1 was a worse Taylor.
However, they were such as I made very good
shift with ; and when I was abroad, if it happen'd
to rain, the Hair of my Waistcoat and Cap being
outermost, I was kept very dry. -
After this 1 spent a great deal of Time and Pains
to make me an Umbrella; I was indeed in great
want of one, and had a great mind to make one;
I had seen them made in the Brasth, where they
are very useful in the great Heats which are there:
And I felt the Heats every jot as great here, and
greater too, being nearer the Equinox; besides, as
1 was obliged to be much abroad, it was a most
useful thing to me, as well for the Rains as the
Heats. 1 took a world of Pains at it, and was a
great while before I could make any thing likely
to hold; nay, after I thought I had hit the way, I
spoifd 2 or 3 before I made one to my mind; but
at
t

<page 173>
s 160 1
at last I made one that answer'd indisferently well i
the main difficulty I found was to make it to let
down: I could make it to spread, but if it did not
let down too, and draw in, it was not portable for
me any way but just over my Head, which would
not do. However, at last, as I said, I made one
to answer, and cover'd it with Skins, the Hair up-
wards, so that it cast off the Rains like a Pent-
house, and kept off the Sun so effectually, that I
could walk out in the hottest of the Weather with
greater Advantage than I could before in the cool-
est, and when I had no need of it, could close it
and carry it under my Arm. • ..'
Thus I lived mighty comfortably, my Mind be-
ing entirely composed by resigning to the Will of
God, and throwing myself wholly upon the Dis-
posal of his Providence. This made my Lise bet-
ter than sociable; for when I began to regret the
want of Conversation, I would ask myself,whether
thus conversing mutually with my own Thoughts,
and, as I hope I may fay, with even God himself
by Ejaculations, was not better than the utmost
Enjoyment of humane Society in the World?
I cannot fay that after this, for five Years, any
extraordinary thing happen'd to me, but I liv'd ori
in the fame courses in the fame Posture and Place,
as just before. The chief things I was employ'd in,
besides my yearly Labour of planting my Barley and
Rice, and curing my Raisins, of both which I al-
ways kent up just enough to have sufficient Stock
of one Year's Provisions beforehand; I fcy, besides
this yearly Labour, and my daily Labour of going
Out With my Gun, I had one Labour to make me a
Canoe, which at last T finished: So that by dig-
ging a Canal to it of six Foot wide, and four Foot
deep, I brought it into the Creek, almost half a
Mile. As for'the first, which was so vastly big'i"'
as

<page 174>
[ 16% ]
as I made it without considering before-hand, as I
ought to do, how I should be able to launch it; so
never being able to bring it to the Water, or bring
the Water to it, I was oblig'd to let it lie where it
was, as a Memorandum to teach me to be wiser next
Time : Indeed, the next Time, tho' I could not
get a Tree proper for it, and in a Place where I
could not get the Water to it, at any less Distance
than as I have said, near half a Mile; yet as I saw
it was practicable at last, I never gave it over; and
though I was near two Years about it, yet I never
grudg'd my Labour, in Hopes of having a Boat to
go oft to Sea at last.
"" However, though my little Permgua was fi-
nisiVd, yet the Size of it was not at all answerable
to the Design which I had in View, when I made
the first; I mean, of venturing over to the 'Terra
Firma, where it was above forty Miles broad; ac-
cordingly, the Smallness of my Boat affisted to put
an End to that Design, and now I thought no more
of it: But as I had a Boat, my next Design was to
make a Tour round the Island; for as I had been on
the other Side, in one Place, crossing, as I have al-
ready deserib'd it, over the Land; so the Discove-
ries I made in that little Journey, made me very ea-
ger to fee other Parts of the Coast; and now I had
a Boat, I thought of nothing but sailing rouncUbe
Island.
For this Purpose, that I might do every Thing
with Discretion and Consideration, I fitted up a lit-
tle Mast to my Boat, and made a Sail to it out of
some of the Pieces of the Ship's Sail, which lay in
store ; and of which I had a great Stock by me.
Having fitted my Mast and Sail, and try'd the
Boat, I found she would fail very well: Then I
made little Lockers, or Boxes, at either End of my
Boat, to put Provisions, Necessaries and Ammuni-
M tior,
,

<page 175>
[ 161 ]
tion, &c. into, to be kept dry, either from Rain,
or the Sprye of the Sea; and a little long hollow
Place I cut in the Iniide of the Boat, where I could
lay my Gun, making a Flap to hang down over it
to keep it dry.
I fix'd my Umbrella also in a Step at the Stern,
like a Mast, to stand over my Head, and keep the
Heat of the Sun off of me like an Auning; and
thus I every now and then took a little Voyage
upon the Sea, but never went far out, not far from
the little Creek; but at last being eager to view
the Circumference of my little Kingdom, I resolv'd
upon my Tour, and accordingly I victualed my
Ship for the Voyage, putting in two Dozen of
my Loaves, (Cakes I should rather call them) of
Barley Bread, an Earthen Pot full of parch'd Rice,
a Food I eat a great deal of, a little Bottle of Rum,
half a Goat, and Powder and Shot for killing more,
and two large Watch-coats, of those which, as I
mention'd before, I had savM out of the Seamen's
Chests; these I took, one to lie upon, and the
other to cover me in the Night.
It was the sixth of November, in the sixth Year
of my Reign, or my Captivity, which you please,
that I set out on this Voyage, and I found it much
longgr than I expected;. for though the Island itself
was not very large, yet when I came to the East
Side of it, I found a great Ledge of Rocks lie out
above two Leagues into the Sea, some above Wa-
ter, some under it; and beyond that, a Shoal of
Sand, lying dry half a League more; so that I was
oblig'd to go a great Way out to Sea to double the
Point.
When sirst I discovers them, I was going to give
over my Enterprize, and come back again, not
a — o D - o , ,
Sea; and above all, doubting how I mould get bacic
knowing haw far it might obligi

again;

<page 176>
E i<*3 ]
again; so I came to an Anchor; for I had made
me a kind of an Anchor with a Piece of a broken
Graplin, which I got out of the Ship.
Having secur'd my Boar, I took my Gun, and
went on Shore, climbing up upon a Hill, which
seem'd to overlook that Point, where I saw the
full Extent of it, and refolv'd to venture.
In my viewing the Ssa from that Hill where I
stood, I perceiv'd a strong, and indeed, a most fu-
rious Current, which run to the East, and even
came close to the Point; and I took the more No-
tice of it, because I saw there might be some Dan-
ger, that when I came into it, I might be carry'd
out to Sea by the Strength of it, and not be able
to make the Island again; arid indeed, had I not
gotten first up upon this Hill, I believe it would
have been so; for there was the fame Current on
the other Side the Island, only that it set off at
a farther Distance; and I saw there was a strong
Eddy under the Shore; so I had nothing to do but
to get in out of the first Current, and I should
presently be in an Eddy.
I lay here, however, two Days; because the
Wind blowing pretty fresh at E. S. E. and that
being just contrary to the said Current, made a
great Breach of the Sea upon the Point; so that it
was not safe for me to keep too close to the Shore
for the Breach, nor to go too far off because of the
. Stream.
The .third Day in the Morning, the Wind ha-
ving abated over Night, the Sea was calm, and I
ventur d; but I am a warning Piece again to*.all
rash and ignorant Pilots; for no sooner was I come
to the. Point, when even I was not my Boat's
Length from the Shore, but I found myself in a
great Depth of Water, and a Current like the Sluice
. of-.a Mill e It carry'd my Boat along with it
• .:- M. 2 with

<page 177>
• [ 1*4 ]
with such Violence, that all I could do, could not
keep her (o much as on the Edge of it; but I found
it hurried me farther and farther out from the Ed-
dy, which was on my Left Hand. There was no
Wind stirring to help me, and all I could do with
my Paddlers signify'd nothing ;-and now I began to
give myself over for lost; for as the Current was
on both Sides the Island, I knew in a few Leagues
Distance they must ;oin again, and then I was ir-
recoverably gone • nor did I fee any Possibility of
avoiding it; so that I had no Prospect before me
but of Perishing; not by the Sea, for that was
calm enough, but of starving for Hunger. I had
indeed found a Tortoise on the Shore, as big al-
most as I could lift, and had toss'd it into the
Boat; and I had a great Jar of fresh Water, that is
to say, one of my Earthen Pots; but what was all
this to being driven into the vast Ocean, where, to
be sure, there was no Shore, no main Land, or Island,
for a thousand Leagues at least?
And now I saw how easy it was for the Provi-
dence of God to make the most miserable Condi-
tion Mankind could be in, -worse. Now I look'd
back upon my desolate solitary Istand, as the most
pleasant Place in the World, and'all the Happiness
my Heart could wish for, was to be but there
again. I stretch'd out my Hands to it with eager
Wishes. O happy Desart, said I, I shall never see
thee more! O miserable Creature, said I, whi-
ther am I going! Then I reproach'd myself with
my unthankful Temper, and how I had repin'd at
my solitary Condition; and now what would I give
to be on Shore there again? Thus we never fee
the true State of our Condition, till it is illustrated
to us by its Contraries; nor know how to value
what we enjoy, but by the want of it. It is scarce
possible to imagine the Consternation I was now in,
being

<page 178>
[ i*J ]
being driven from my beloved Island (for so it ap-
peared to me now to be) into the wide Ocean, al-
most two Leagues, and in the utmost Despair of
ever recovering it again. However, I work'd hard,
till indeed my Strength was almost exhausted, and
kept my Boat as much to the Northward, that is,
towards the . Sjde of the Current which the Eddy
lay on, as possibly I could; when about Noon, as
the Sun pass'd the Meridian, I thought I relt a lit-
tle Breeze of Wind in my Face, springing up from
the S. S. E. This chear'd my Heart a little, and
especially when in about half an Hour more it
blew a pretty small gentle Gale. By this Time I
was gotten at a frightful Distance from the Island,
and had the least Cloud or hazy Weather interven'd,
I had been undone another Way too; for I had no
Corns ass on Board, and should never have known
how to have steered towards the Island, is I had
but once lost Sight of it; but the Weather con-
tinuing clear, I apply'd myself to get up my Mast
again, spread my Sail, standing away to the North
as much as possible, to get out of the Current.
Just as I had set my Mast and Sail, and the Boat
began to stretch away, I saw even by the Clear-
ness of the Water, some Alteration of the Current
was near; for where the Current was so strong, the
Water was foul; but perceiving the Water clear, I
found the Current abate, and presently I found to
the East, at about half a Mile, a Breach of the Sea
upon some Rocks; these Rocks I found caus'd the
Current to part again, and as the main Stress of it
ranUway more Southerly, leaving the Rocks to the
Notfh-Enfi; so the other return'd by the Repulse of
the 'Rocks, and made a strong Eddy, which ran
back:>fagain to the North-West with a very sharp
t ^*"EL;v y >''3w : . *
tl}:\ ™ Tats . M 3 They

<page 179>
[ iM ]
They who know what it is to have a Reprieve
brought to them upon the Ladder, or to be rescu-
ed from Thieves just going to murder them, or
who have been in such like Extremities, may guess
what my present Surprize of Joy was, and how glad-
ly I put my Boat into the Stream of this Eddy, and
the Wind also frestining, how gladly I spread my
Sail to it, running chearfully before the Wind, ancf
with a strong Tide or Eddy under Foot.
This Eddy carry'd me about a League in my
Way back again directly towards the Island, but
about two Leagues more to the Northward than
the Current which carried me away at first; so that
when I came near the Island, I found myself open
to the Northern Shore of it, that is to fay, the other
End of the Island opposite to that which I went put
from.
When I had made something more thaft a League
of Way by the Help of this Current or Eddy, I found
it was spent and serv'd me no farther. However, J
found that being between the two great Currents,
(viz,.) that on the South Side, which had hurried
me away, and that on the North, which lay about
a League on the other Side: I fay, between these
two, in the V/ake of the Island, I found the Water
at least still and running no Wayand having still a
Breeze of Wind fair for me, I kept on steering di-
rectly for the Island, tho? not making such srefli Way
as I did before.
About four a-Clock in.the Evening, being then
within about a League of the Island, I found the
Point of the Rocks which occasion'd this Disaster,
.stretching out, as is described before, to the South-
ward, and pasting off the Current more Southward-
ly, had of course made another Eddy to the North,
and this I found very strong, but not directly setting
she Way ray Course lay, which was due West, but

<page 180>
[ i*7 3
almost full North. However, having fresh Gale,
I stretch'd a-cross this Eddy slanting North-west,
and in about an Hour came within about a Mile
£>f the Shore, where it being smooth Water, I soon
got to Land.
When I was on Shore I fell on my Knees and
gave God Thanks for my Deliverance, resolving'
to lay aside all Thoughts of my Deliverance by my
Boat; and refreshing myself with such Things as'
I had, I brought my Boat close to the Shore in a
little Cove that I had spy'd under some Trees, and
laid me down to steep, being quite spent with the
Labour and Fatigue of the Voyage.
I was now at a great Loss which Way to get
Home with my Boat : I had run so much Hazard,
and knew too much the Case to think of attempt-
ing it by the Way I went out; and what might be
at the other Side, (I mean the West Side) 1 knew
not, nor had I any Mind to run any more Ventures,
so I only resolved in the Morning to make my Way
Westward along theS^hore, and to se,e if there'was
• no Creek where I might lay up my Frigate in Safe-
ty, so as to have her again if I wanted her. In about
three Miles, or thereabout, coasting the Shore, I
came to a very good Inlet, or Bay, about a Mile over,
which narrowed till it came to a very little Rivulet
or Brook, where I found a very convenient Harbour
for my Boat, and where she lay as if she had been
in a little Dock made on purpose for her. Here I
put in, and having stow'd my Boat very safe, I went
on Shore to look about me, and see where 1 was.
. .jksoon found I had but a little pass'd by the Place
where I had been before, when I traveled on Foot
to that Shore ; so taking nothing out of my Boat,
but my Gun and my Umbrella, for it was ex-
ceeding hot, I began my March. The Way was
comfortable enough after such a Voyage as I had
M 4 been

<page 181>
. [ itf8 ]
been upon, and I reach'd my old Bower in the
Evening, where I found every thing standing as I
left it; for I always kept it in good Order, being,
as I said before, my Country-house.
I got over the Fence, and laid me down in the
Shade to rest my Limbs, for I was very weary, and
fell asleep: But judge you, if you can, that read my
•Story, what a Surprize I must be in, when I was
wak d out of my Sleep by a Voice calling me by
my Name several times, Robin, Robin, Robin Crusoe,
poor Robin Crusoe! where are you Robin Crusoe?
Where are you? Where have you been?
I was so dead, asleep at first, being fatigu'd with
Rowing, or Paddling, as it is cali'd, the first
Part of the Day, and with Walking the latter Parr,
that I did not wake thoroughly; but dozing be-
tween steeping and waking, thought I dream'd
that some body spoke to me :' But as the Voice
continu'd to repeat, Robin Crusoe, Robin Crusoe, at
last I began to wake more perfectly, .and was at
first dreadfully frighted, and* started up in the ut-
most Consternation: But no sooner were my Eyes
open, but I saw my Poll sitting on the Top of the
Hedge, and immediately knew that it was he that
spoke to me; for just in such bemoaning Language
I had used to talk to him, and teach him ; and he
had lcarn'd it so perfectly, that he would sit upon
my Finger, and lay his Bill close-to my Face, and
cry, Poor Robin Crusoe, Where are you? Where have
you been 1 How come you here? and such things as I
had taught him.
However, even though I knew it was the Parrot,
and that indeed it could be no body else, it was
a good while before I could compose myself:
First, I was amazed how the Creature got thither,
and then how he should just keep about the Place,
and tv> where else ; But as I was well satisfied it

<page 182>
C i*? 1
could be no body but honest Poll, I got it over;
aud holding out my Hand, and calling him by his
Name Poll, the sociable Creature came to me, and
sat upon my Thumb, as he used to do, and conti-
nued talking to me, Poor Robin Crusoe, and how
did I come here ? and where had I been? just as if he
had been overjoy'd to fee me again; and so I car-
ry'd him Home along with me.
I had now had enough of rambling to Sea for
some time, and had enough to do for many Days
to sit still, and reflect upon the Danger I had been
in. I would have been very glad to have had
my Boat again on my Side of the Island; but I
knew not how it was practicable to get it about
as to the East Side of the Ifland; which I had
gone round : I knew well enough there was no ven-
turing that Way ; my very Heart would shrink, and
my very Blood run chill but to think of it : And as
to the other Side of the Ifland, I did not know
, how it might be there ; but supposing the Current
ran with the same Force against the Shore at the
East, as it pass'd by it on the other, I might run
the fame Risk of being driven down the Stream,
and carry'd by the Ifland, as I had been before, of
being carry'd away from it; so with these Thoughts
I contented my self to be without any Boat, tho*
it had been the Product of so many Months La-
bour to make it, and of so many more to get it
unto the Sea.
*Jn this Government of my Temper I remain'd
near a Year, lived a very sedate retired Life, as
you may well suppose; and nvy Thoughts being
very,fftuch composed as to my Condition, and
fully comforted in resigning myself to the Dis-
positions of Providence, 1 thought I liv'd really ve-
ry happily in all things, except that of Society*;
v.,. lira-

<page 183>
C 170 ]
I improv'd my selr in this time in all the mecha-
nick Exercises which my Necessities put me upon
applying myself to, and I believe could, upon Oc-
casion, have made a very good Carpenter, especially
considering how few Tools I had.
Besides this, I arrived at an unexpected Per-
fection in my Earthen Ware, and contrived well
enough to make them with a Wheel, which I found
infinitely easier and better; "because I made Things
round and fhapable, which before were filthy
Things indeed to look on. But 1 think I was ne-
ver more vain of my own Performance, or more
Joyful for any Thing I found out, than for my be-
ing able to make a Tobacco-Pipe. And tho' it was
a very ugly clumsy Thing, when it was done, and
only burnt red like other Earthen Ware, yet as it
was hard and firm, and would draw the Smoke, I
was exceedingly comforted with it; for I had been
always used to smoke, and there were Pipes in the
Ship, but I forgot them at first, not knowing that
there was Tobacco in the Island ; and afterwards,*
when I scarch'd the Ship again,' I could not come
at any Pipes at all.
In my Wicker Ware also I improved much, and
made abundance of necessary Baskets, as well as
my Invention shew'd me, though not very hand-
some, yet they were such as were very handy and
convenient for my laying Things up in, or fetching
Things home in. For Example, if I kill'd a Goat
abroad, I could hang it up in a Tree, flea it, and
dress it, and cut it in Pieces, and bring it home in
a Basket; and tl^e like by a Turtle, I could cut it
up, take out the Eggs, and a Piece or two of the
Flesh, which was enough for me, and bring them
home in a Basket, and leave the rest behind
me. Also large deep Baskets were my Recei-
vers for my Corn, which I always rub'd out as.

<page 184>
[ i7i 3
soon as it was dry, and cured, and kept it in great
Baskets.
I began now to perceive my Powder abated consi-
derably, and this was a Want which it was im-
possible for me to supply, and I began serioufly to
consider what I must do when I should have no
more Powder; that is to fay, how I should do to
kill any Goats. I had, as is observ'd in the third
Year of my being here, kept a young Kid, and bred
her up tame, and I was in hopes of getting a He-
Goat, but I could not by any means bring it to
pass, till my Kid grew an old Goat; and I could
never find in my Heart to kill her, .till she dy'd at
last of meer Age.
But being now in the eleventh Year of my Resi-
dence, and, as I have said, my Ammunition grow-
ing low, I set myself to study some Art to trap and
snare the Goats, to fee whether I could not catch
some of them alive, and particularly I wanted a She-
*Goat great with Young.
To this Purpose I made Snares to hamper them,
and I do believe they were more than once taken
in them ; but my Tackle was not good, for I had
no Wire, and I always found them broken, and my
Bait devour'd.
At kngth I resolv'd to try a Pit-fall, so I dug
several large Pits in the Earth, in Places where I
had observ'd the Goats used to feed, and over these
Pits I placed Hurdles of my own making too,
with a great Weight upon them; and several times
I put Ears of Barley and dry Rice, without set-
ting the Trap, and I could easily perceive that the
Goats had gone in and eaten up the Corn, for I
could fee the Mark of their Feet. Ac length I set
three Traps in one Night, and going the next
Morning 1 found them all standing, and yet the
Bait eaten and gone. This was very discouraging:
,'*•'.'--*" ''How-

<page 185>
[ «7* ]
However, I alter'd my Trap, and, not to trouble
you with Particulars, going one Morning to fee my
Trap, I found in one of them a large old He-Goat,
and in one of the other three Kids, a Male, and
two Females.
As to the old one, I knew not what to do with
him, he was so fierce I durst not go into the Pit to
him; that is to fay, to go about to bring him away
alive, which was what I wanted. I could have
kill'd him, but thit was not my Business, nor would
it answer my End. So I e'en let him out, and he
ran away as if he had been frighted out of his
Wits: But I had forgot then what I learned af-
terwards, that Hunger will tame a Lion. If I
had let him stay there three or four Days without
Food, and then have carry'd him some Water to
drink, and then a little Corn, he would have been
as tame as one of the Kids, for they are mighty
sagacious tractable Creatures where they are well -
used. ,
However, for the present I let him go, knowing
no better at that Time; then I went to the three
Kids, and taking them one by one, I ty'd them
with Strings together, and with some Difficulty
brought them alLHome.
It was a good while before they would feed, but
throwing them some sweet Corn, it tempted them,
and they began to be tame: and now 1 found that
if I expected to supply myself with Goat-Flesh
when I had no Powder or Shot left, breeding some
up tame was my only Way, when perhaps I
might have them about my House like a Flock of
Sheep.!
=. .u.But then it presently occur'd to me, that I must
keep the Tame from the Wild, or else they would
always run wild when they grew up; and the only
Way for this was to have some enclosed Piece ot
...i? Ground,

<page 186>
[ i7? ]
Ground, well fenc'd either with Hedge or Bale, to.
keep them in so effectually, that those within might
not break out, or those without break in.
This was a great Undertaking for one Pair of
Hands; yet as 1 saw there was an absolute Neces-
sity of doing it, my first Piece of Work was to
find out a proper Piece of Ground, viz.. where there
was likely to be Herbage for them to eat, Water
for them to drink, and Cover to keep them from the
Sun.
Those who understand such Enclosures will think
I had very little Contrivance, when I pitch'd upon
a Place very proper for all these, being a plain
open piece of Meadow-Land or Savanna, (as our
People call it in the Western Colonies,) which had
two or three little Drills of fresh Water in it, and
at one end was very woody: I fay they will smile
at my Forecast, when I shall tell them I began my
enclosing of this Piece of Ground in such a Man-
ner, that my Hedge or Pale must have been at least
two Mile about. Nor was the Madness of it so
great as to the Compass, for if it was ten Mile
about I was like to have time enough to do it in.
But I did not consider that my Goats would be as
wild in so much Compass, as if they had had the
whole Island, and I should have so much Room
to chace them in, that I should never catch
them.
My Hedge was begun and carry'd on, I believe,
about fifty Yards, when this Thought occur'd to
me; sol presently stopt short, and for the first be-
ginning 1 resolv'd to enclose a Piece of about 150
Yards in length, and 100 Yards in breadth, which as
it would maintain as many as I should have in any
reasonable time, so as my Flock encreased, I could
add more Ground to my Enclosure.
This.

<page 187>
[ m ]
This was acting with some Prudence, and I went
to work with Courage. I was about three Months
hedging in the first Piece, and till I had done it I
tether'd the three Kids in the best part of it, and
us'd them to feed as near me as possible to make
them familiar; and very often I would go and car-
ry them some Ears of Barley, or a handful of Rice,
and feed them out of my Hand; so that after my
Enclosure was finished, and I let them loose, they
would follow me up and down, bleating after me
for a handful of Corn.
This answer'd my End, and in about a Year and
half I had a Flock of about twelve Goats, Kids
and all; and in two Years more I had three and
forty, besides several that s took and killed for my
Food. And after that I enclosed five several Pie-
ces of Ground to feed them in, with little Pens to
drive them into, to take them as I wanted, and
Gates out of one Piece of Ground into ano-
ther.
But this was not all,. for now I not only had
Goats-Flesh to feed on when I pleas'd, but Milk
too, a thing which indeed in my beginning I did
not so much as think of, and which, when it came
into my Thoughts, was really an agreeable Sur-
prize. For now I set up my Dairy, and had some-
times a Gallon or two of Milk in a Day. And as
Nature, who gives Supplies of Food to every
Creature, dictates even naturally how to make use
of it; so I that had never milk'd a Cow, much less,
a Goat, or seen Butter or Cheese made, very rea-
dily and.handily, tho' after a great many Essays and
Miscarriages, made me both Butter aud Cheese
at last, and never wanted it afterwards.
How mercifully can our great Creator treat his
Creatures, even in those Conditions in which they
scem'd to be overwhelm'd in Destruction! How
can

<page 188>
[ i7? ]
can he sweeten the bitterest Providences, and give
us cause to praise him for Dungeons and Prisons!
What a Table was here spread for me in a Wilder-
ness, where I saw nothing at first but to perish for
Hunger 1 '...;',J^ .
It would have made a Stoick smile to have seen
me and my little Family sit down to Dinner; there
was my Majesty the Prince and Lord of the whole
Island; I had the Lives-of all my Subjects at my
absolute Command. I could hang, draw, give Li-
berty, and take it away, and no Rebels among all
my Subjects.
Then to fee how like a King I din'd too all
alonej attended by my Servants; Poll, as if he had
been my Favourite, was the only Person permit-
ted to talk to me. My Dog, who was now grown
very old and crazy, and had found no Species to
multiply his Kind upon, fat always at my Right
Hand ; and two Cats, one on one Side the Ta-
ble, and one on the other; expecting now and
then a Bit from my Hand, as a Mark of special
Favoiiiv .fJty ;2* • , *£\ . ,: 5V."
But these were not the two Cats which I brought
on Shore at first, for they were both of them dead,
and had been interr'd near my Habitation by my
own Hand; but one of them having multiply'd by
Iiknow not what Kind of Creature, these were
two which I had preserv'd tame, whereas the rest
run wild in the Woods, and became indeed trou-
blesome to me at last; for they would often come
into my House, and plunder me too, till at last I
was.obli|eiil to shoot them, and did kill a great
many.; at;jjfength they left me with this Atten-
dance, and in this plentiful Manner I liv'd ; nei-
ther could I be said to want any thing but Society,
and of that in some- time after'this I was like to
have too much. ». ,

<page 189>
[ i7<* ]
I was something impatient, as I have observ'd,
to have the Use of my Boat; though very loth to
run any more Hazards; and therefore sometimes I
fat contriving Ways to get her about the Island,
and at other times I fat my self down contented
enough without her. But* I had a strange Uneasiness
in my Mind to go down to the Point of the Island,
where, as I have said, in my last Ramble, I went up
the Hill to see how the Shore lay, and how the Cur-
rent set, that I might see' what I had to do: This
Inclination increas'd upon me every Day, and at
length I resolv'd to travel thither by Land ; follow-
ing the Edge of the Shore, I did so: But had any
one in England been to meet such a Man as I was, it
must either have frighted them, or rais'd a great
deal of Laughter; and as I frequently stood Hill to
look at myself, I could not but smile at the Notion
of my travelling through York/hire with such an E-
quipage, and in such a Dress s Be pleas'd to take a
, Sketch of my Figure as follows.
I had a great high shapeless Cap, made of a
Goat's Skin, with a Flap hanging down behind, as
well to keep the Sun from me, as to moot the Rain
oft' from running into my Neck; nothing being so
hurtful in these Climates, as the Rain upon the
Flesh under the Cloaths.
I had a short Jacket of Goat-Skin, the Skirts co-
ming down to about the Middle of my Thighs;
and a Pair of open-knee'd Breeches of the fame; the
Breeches were made of the Skin of an old He-goat,
whose Hair hung down such a Length on either
Side, that like Pantaloons it reach'd to the Middle ot
, my Legs; Stockings and Shoes I had none, but had
made me a Pair of some-things, I scarce know
what to call them, like Buskins, to flap over my
Legs, and lace on either Side like Spatter-dastes;
but
*
«

<page 190>
[ '77 ] ;,
but of a most barbarous Shape, as indeed were all
the rest of my Cldaths.
I had on a broad Belt of Goat's-Skin dry'd,
which I drew together with two Thongs of the
fame, instead of Buckles, and in a kind of a Frog
on either Side of this. Instead of a Sword and a
Dagger, hung a little Saw and a Hatchet, one on
one Side, one on the other. I had another Belt
not so broad, and fasten'd in the fame Manner,
which hung over my Shoulder; and at the End of
it, under my left Arm hung two Pouches, both
made of Goat's-Skin too; in one of which hung
my Powder, in the other my Shot: At my Back I
carried my Basket, on my Shoulder my Gun, and
over my Head a great clumsy ugly Goat-Skin Um-
brella, but which, after all, was the most necessary
Thing I had about me, next to my Gun; As for
my Face, the Colour of it was really not so . Moktta
like as one might expect from a Man not at all care-
ful of it, and living within nineteen Degrees of the
Equinox. My Beard I had once siifler'd to grow till
it was about a quarter of a Yard long; but as I had
both Scissars and Razors sufficient, I had cut it pret-
ty short, except what grew, on my upper Lip, which
I had trim'd into a large Pair of Mahometan Whis-
kers, such as I had seen worn by some Turks, who I
saw at Salle, for the Moors did not wear such, tho'
the Turks did • of these Muschatoes or Whiskers,. I
will' not fay they were long enough to hang my Hat
upon them; but they were of a Length and Shape
monstrous enough, and such as in England would
hive pafs'd for frightful.
But all this is by the by; for as to my Figure, I
had so few to observe me, that it was of no man-
ner of Consequence; so I say no more to that Part-
In this kind of Figure I went my new Journey, and
was out five or six Days. I travel'd first along the
N Sea-

<page 191>
Sea-Shore, directly to the Place where I first brought
my Boat to an Anchor, to get up upon the Rocks;
and having no Beat now to take care of, I went over
the Land a nearer Way, to the fame Height that
I was upon before; when looking forward to the
Point of the Rocks which lay out, and which I was
oblig'd to double with my Boat, as is said above,
I was Airpriz'd to fee the Sea all smooth and quiet,
no Ripling, no Motion, no Current, any more there
than in other Places.
I was at a strange Loss to understand this, and
refolv'd to spend some Time in the observing it, to
see if nothing from the Sets of the Tide had occa-
sions it; but I was presently convinced how it was,
viz,. That the Tide of Ebb setting from the Weft,
and joyning with the Current of Waters from some
great River on the Shore, must be the Occasion of
this Current; and that according as the Wind blew
more forcibly from the West, or from the North,
this Current came near, or went farther from the
Shore; for waiting thereabouts till Evening, I went
up to the Rock again, and then the Tide of Ebb
being made, I plainly saw the Current again as be-
fore, only, that it run farther off, being near half a
League from the Shore; whereas in my Cafe, it
ser close upon the Shore, and hurried me and my
Canoe along with it, which at another Time it
would not have done.
This Observation convine'd me, That I hai Ino-
:hing to do but to observe the Ebbing and the
Flowing of the Tide, and I might very easily br. Uig
ny Boat about the Island again: But when 11 *-
jan to think of putting it in Practice, I had such a.
Terror upon my Spirits at rhe Remembrance c*
he Danger I had been in, tha't I could not think:
>f it again with any Patience; but on the contrary,
. took up another Resolution, which was more safe,
though

<page 192>
t i79 3
though more laborious; and this was, That i
would build, or rather make me another Pariagud
or Canoe; and so have one for one Side of the Island,
and one for the other.
You arc to understands that now I had, as t
rnay call it; two Plantations in the Island; one my
little Fortification or Tent, with the Wall about
it under the Rock, with the Cave behind me,
which by this Time i had enlarg'd into several
Apartments or Caves, one within another. One
of these, which was the dryest, and largest; and
had a Door out beyond my Wail or Fortification;
that is to fay, beyond where my Wall ;oyn'd to
the Rock, was all fill'd up with the large Earthen
Pots, of which I have given an Account, and with
fourteen or fifteen great Baskets, which would hold
five or six Bushels eaeh; where I laid up my Stores
of Provision, especially my Corn, some in the Ear
cut off fliort from the Strawy and the other rub'd
out with my Handi
As for my Wall made; as before; with long Stakes*
or PileS; those Piles grew all like Trees, and were
by this Time grown so big* and spread so very
much, that there was not the least Appearance to
any one's View of any Habitation behind them.
Near this Dwelling of mine, but a little farther
within the Land, and upon lower Ground, lay my
two Pieces of Corn-Ground, which I kept duly
cultivated and sow'd, and which duly yielded me
their Harvest in its Season; and whenever I had
occasion for more Corn, I had more Land adjoyn-
ing as fit as that.
Besides this, I had my Country Seat, and I had
now a tolerable Plantation there also; for first, I
had my little Bower, as 1 call'd it, Which I kept'
in Repair, that is to fay, I kept the Hedge which
circled k in> constantly fitted up to its
N 2

Height;
the'

<page 193>
[ ito]
the Ladder standing always in the Inside; I kept
the Trees which at first were no more than my
Stakes, but were now grown very firm and tall; I
kept them always so cut, that they might spread and
grow thick and wild, and make the more agreeable
Shade, which they did effectually to my Mind. In
the Middle of this I had my Tent always standing,
being a piece of a Sail spread over Poles set up for
that Purpose, and which never wanted any Repair
or Renewing; and under this I had made me a Squab
or Couch, with the Skins of the Creatures I had
kill'd, and with other soft Things, and a Blanket
laid on them, such as belong'd to our Sea-Bedding,
which I had saved, and a great Watch-Coat to
cover me; and here, whenever I had Occasion to
be absent from my chief Seat, I took up my Coun-
try Habitation.
Adjoyning to this I had my Enclosures for my
Cattle, that is to fay, my Goats: And as I had taken
an inconceivable deal of Pains to fence and enclose
this Ground, so I was so uneasy to see it kept entire,
lest the Goats should break thro', that I never left
off till with infinite Labour I had stuck the Outside
of the Hedge so full of small Stakes, and so near to
one another, that it was rather a Pale than a Hedge,
and there was scarce Room to put a Hand thro'
between them, which afterwards when those Stakes
grew, as they all did in the next rainy Season, made
the Enclosure strong like a Wall, indeed stronger
than any Wall. . .
This will testify for me that I was not idle,
and that I spared no Pains to bring to pass what-
ever appear'd necessary for my comfortable Sup-
port; for I consider'd the keeping up a Breed of
tame Creatures thus at my Hand, would be a li-
ving Magazine of Fled, Milk, Butter and Cheese,

<page 194>
C *ti ]
for me as long as I liv'd in the Place, if it were to be
forty Years, and that keeping them in my Reach,
,depended entirely upon my perfecting my Enclo-
sures to such a Degree, that I might be sure of
keeping them together; which by this Method in-
deed I so effectually secur'd, that when these lit-
tle Stakes began to grow, I had planted them so
very thick, I was forced to pull some of them up
again.
In this Place also I had my Grapes growing,
which I principally depended on for my Winter
Store of Raisins, and which I never fail'd to pre-
serve very carefully, as the best and most agreeable
Dainty of my whole Diet ; and indeed 'they were
not agreeable only, but physical, wholesome, nou-
rishing and refreshing to the last Degree. * * •
As this was also about half Way between my o-
ther Habitation and the Place where I had laid up
my Boat, I generally stay'd, and lay here in my
Way thither; for I used frequently' to visit my
Boat, and I kept' all things about or belonging to
her in very good Order; sometimes I went out in
her to divert my self; but no more hazardous
Voyages would I go, nor scarce ever above a
Stone's Cast or two from the Shore, I was so appre-
hensive of being hurried out of my Knowledge a-
gain by the Currents or Winds, or any other Acci-
dent: But now I come to a new Scene of my Life.
It happen'd one Day about Noon going towards
my Boat, I was exceedingly surpriz'd with the Print
of a Man's naked Foot on the. Shore, which was
very ptein to be seen in the Sand : I stood like one
Thunder-struck, or as if I had seen an Apparition;
I listen'd, I look'd round me, I could hear nothing,
nor see any Thing; I went up to a rising Ground to
look farther; I went up the Shore and down the
Shore, but it was all one, I could fee no other
N 3 Impression
. *

<page 195>
t »«!.]
Impression but that one, I went to it again to see
if there were any more, and to observe if it might
not be my Fancy; but there was no Room for
that, for there was exactly the very Print of a Foot,
Toes, Heel, and every Part of a Foot; how it
came thither, I knew not,' nor could in the least
imagine. But after innumerable fluttering Thoughts,
like a Man perfectly cpnfus'd and out of myself, I
came Home to my Fprtification,' not feeling, as we
say, the Ground I went on, but terrify'd to the last
Degree, looking behind me at every two or three
Seeps, mistaking every Bum and Tree, and fancy-
ing every Stump at a Distance to be a Man; nor is,
it possible to describe how many various Shapes af-
frighted Imagination represented Things to me in;
hew many wild Ideas were found every Moment
in my Fancy, and what strange unaccountable
Whimsies came into my Thoughts by the Way.
"When I came to my Castle, for so I think I call'd
it ever after this, I fled into it like one pursued;
whether I went over by the Ladder as first con-
triv'd, or went in at the Hole in the Rock, which
I callfdaDoor, I cannot remember; no, nor could
I remember the next Morning; for never frighted
Hare fled to Cover, or Fox to Earth, with more
Terror of Mind than I to this Retreat.
I slept none that Night; the farther I was from
the Occasion' of my Fright, the greater my Ap1
prehensions were; which is something contrary tp
the Nature of such Things, and especially to the
usual Practice of all Creatures in Fear: But I was
so embarrass'd with my own frightful Ideas of the
Thing, that I form'd nothing but dismal Imagina-
tions to myself,' even tho' I was how a great way
off* it. Sometimes I fancy'4 it must be the De-
pil; and Reason joyn'd in with me upon this Sup-
position: For how should any other Thir.g in hu-

<page 196>
t i«J]
mane Shape come into the Place? Where was the
Vessel that brought them? What Marks was there
of any other Footsteps ? And how was it possible
a Man should come there? But then to think that
Satan should take humane Shape upon him in such a
Place where there could be no manner of Occasion
for it, but to leave the Print of his Foot behind
him, and that even for no Purpose too, for he could
not be sure I should see it; this was an Amusement
the other Way: I considered that the Devil might
have found out abundance of other Ways to have
terrify'd me than this of the single Print of a Foot.
That as I liv'd quite on the other Side of the Island,
he would never have been so simple to leave a Mark
in a Place where it was ten Thousand to one whe-
ther I should ever see it or not, and in the Sand
too, which the first Surge of the Sea upon a high
Wind would have defac a entirely: AU this seem'd
inconsistent with the Thing itself, and with all the
, Notions we usually entertain of the Subtilty of the
Devil.
Abundance of such Things as these assisted to ar-
gue me out of all Apprehensions of its being the
Devil: And I presently concluded then, that it must
be some more dangerous Creature, viz.. That it
must: be some of the Savages of the main Land
over-against me, who had wandered out to Sea in
their Canoes, and either driven by the Currents, or
by contrary Winds, had made the Island; and had
been on Shore, but were gone away again to Sea,
being as loth, perhaps, to have staid in this deso-
late Island, as I would have been to have had them.
While these Reflections were rolling upon my
Mind, I was very thankful in my Thoughts, that
I was so happy as not to be thereabouts at that
Time, or that they did not fee my Boat, by which
they would have concluded that some Inhabitants
N 4 'had

<page 197>
C 184]
Sad been in the Place, and perhaps have scarch'd
farther for me: Then terrible Thoughts rack'd my
Imagination about their having found my Boat,
and that there were People here; and that if so, I
should certainly have them come again in greater
Numbers and devour me; that if it mould happen
so that they should not find me, yet they would
tind my Enclosure, destroy all my Corn, carry away
all my Flock of tame Goats, and I should perish at
ast for meer Want;
Thus my Fear banish'd all my Religious Hope,
all that former Confidence in God, which was
rounded upon such wonderful Experience as I had
bad of his Goodness, now vanish'd; as if he that
had fed me by Miracle hitherto, could not preserve
by his Power the Provision which he had made for
me by his Goodness: I rcproach'd my self with my
Easiness, that would not sow any more Corn one
Year than would just serve me till the next Season,
is if no Accident could intervene to prevent my
sn;oying the Crop that was upon the Ground;
md this I thought so just a Reproof, that I resolv'd
:or the future to have two or three Years Corn be-
bre-hand, so that whatever might come, I might
lot perish for want of Bread.
How strange a Chequer-Work os Providence is
he Life of Man! and by what secret disfering
springs are the Affections hurried about, as difter-
ng Circumstances present 1 To Day we love what
o Morrow we hate ; to Day we seek what to Mor-
ow we shun; to Day we desire what to Morrow
ve fear; nay, even tremble at the Apprehensions of,
shis was exemplified in me at this time in the
nost lively Manner imaginable; for I, whose only
Affliction was, that I feem'd banish'd from humane
Society, that I was alone circumscrib'd by the
>oundless Ocean, cut off from Mankind, and con-
demns

<page 198>
[ i«j 3
demn'd to what I call silent Life; that I was as
one whom Heaven thought not worthy to be num-
ber'd among the Living, or to appear among the
rest of his Creatures; that to have seen one of my
own Species, would have seem'd to me a Raising
me from Death to Life, and the greatest Blessing
that Heaven itself, next to the supreme Blessing of
Salvation, could bestow; I say, that I should now
tremble at the very Apprehensions of feeing a Man,
and was ready to sink into the Ground at but the
Shadow, or silent Appearance of a Man's having
sec his Foot on the Island.
Such is the uneven State of Humane Life; and it
afforded me a great many curious Speculations af-
terwards, when I had a little recovered my first
Surprize; I considered that this was the Station of
Life,' the infinitely wife and good Providence of
God had determin'd for me, that as I could not
foresee what the Ends of Divine Wisdom might be
in all this, so I was not to dispute his Sovereignty,
who, as I was his Creature, had an undoubted
Right by Creation to govern and dispose os me ab-
solutely as he thought fit; and who, as I was a
Creature who had offended him, had likewise a ju-
dicial Right to condemn me to wha/ Punishment
he thought fit; and that it was my part to submit
to bear his Indignation, because I had sin'd against
him.
I then reflected, that God, who was not only
Righteous but Omnipotent, as he had thought
fit thus to punish and afflict me, so he was able
to deliver me; that if he did not think fit to do it,
'rwas my unquestion'd Duty to resign my self abso-
lutely and entirely to his Will : And on the other
hand, it was my Duty also to hope in him, pray
to him, and quietly to attend the Dictates and Di-
rections pf his daily Providence.
These

<page 199>
[ iS6 ]
These Thoughts took me up many Hours, Days,
nay, I may fay, Weeks and Months; and one par-
ticular Effect of my Cogitations on this Occasion,
I cannot omit, viz.. One Morning early, lying in
my Bed, and fuTd with Thought about my Danger
from the Appearance of Savages, I found it dif-
Compos'd me very much; upon which those Words
of the Scripture came into my Thoughts, Call up-
on nie in the Day of Trouble, and I will deliver, and thou
Jbalt glorify me.
Upon this, rising chearfully out of my Bed, my
Heart was not only comforted, but I was guided
and encouraged to pray earnestly to God for Deli-
verance: When I had done praying, I took up my
Bible, and opening it to read, the first Words that
presented to me, were, Wait on the Lord, and be of
mod Cheeps and be shall strengthen thy Heart; wait, I
Jay, on the Lord. It is impossible to express the Com-
fort this gave me. In Answer, I thankfully laid
down the Book, and was no more fad, at least, not
on that Occasion.
In the middle of these Cogitations, Apprehen-
sions and Reflections, it came into my Thought one
Day, that all this might be a meer Chimera of my
own; and that this Foot might be the Print of my
own Foot, when I came on Shore from my Boat:
This chear'd me up a little too, and I began to per-
fwade myself it was all a^Delufion; that it was no-
thing else but my owrfFoot; and why might not I
come that Way^rbm the Boat, as well as I was go-
ing that Way t(? the Boat? Again, I considers also
that I could byino Means tell for certain where I
had trod, and w^ere I had not; and that is at last
this was only the Print of my own Foot, I had
play'd the Part of those Fools, who strive to make
Stories of Spectres and Apparitions, and then are
frighted at them more than any body.
Now

<page 200>
C i«7 J
Now I began to take Courage, and to peep abroad
again; for I had not stir'd out of my Castle for three
Pays and Nights; so that I began to starve for
Provision; for I had little or nothing within Doors,
but some Barley Cakes and Water. Then I knew
that my Goats wanted to be milk'd too, which
usually was my Evening Diversion; and the poor
Creatures were in great Pain and Inconvenience for
want of it; and indeed, it almost spoil'd some of
them, and almost dry'd up their Milk.
Heartning myself therefore with the Belief that
this ;was nothing but the Print of one of my own
Feet? and so I might be truly said to start at my
own Shadow, I began to go abroad again, and
went to my Country House, to milk my Flock; but
to see with what Fear I went forward, how often I
look'd behind me, how I was ready every now and
then to lay down my Basket, and run for my Life, it
would have made any one have thought I was haunt-
ed with an evil Conscience, or that I had been late-
ly most terribly frighted, and so indeed I had.
However, as I went down thus two or three
Days, and having seen nothing, I began to be a lit-
tle bolder; and to think there was really nothing in
it, but my own Imagination: But I could not per-
swade myself fully of this, till I should go down to
the Shore again, and fee this Print of a Foot, and
measure it by my own, and sec if there was any Si-
militude or Fitness, that I might be aslur'd it was
my own Foot: But when I came to the Place,
First, it appeared evidently to me, that when I laid
up my Boat, I could not poissibly be on Shore any
where thereabout. Secondly, When I came to mea-
sure the Mark with my own Foot, I found my Foot
hot so large by a great deal; both these Things fill'd
my Head with new Imaginations, and gave me the
Vapours again to the highest Degree; so that I
soook

<page 201>
[ 188 ]
fliook with Cold, like one in an Ague; and I went A
Home again, fill'd with the Belief that some Man E
or Men had been on Shore there; or, in short, that bi
the Iiland was inhabited, and I might be surpriz'd pt
before I was aware; and what Course to take for so
my Security, I knew not.
O what ridiculous Resolutions Men take, when all
posless'd with Fear! it deprives them of the Use of h;
those Means which Reason offers for their Relief. w
The first Tiling I propos'd to my self, was, to so
throw down my Enclosures, and turn all my tame IJ
Cattle wild into the Woods, that the Enemy might se<
not find them, and then frequent the Island in pros- se]
pect of the same, or the like Booty ; then to the ex
simple Thing of Digging up my two Corn-Fields, m
that they might not find such a Grain there, and al
still be prompted to frequent the Island; then to de- w
molish my Bower and Tent, that they might not y(
see any Vestiges of Habitation, and be prompted to th
look further, in order to find out the Persons in- ve
habiting. . , • m
These were the Subject of the first Night's Cogi- ,
tation, after I was come home again, while the nc
Apprehensions which had so over-run my Mind p
were fresh upon me, and my Head was full of Va- 4
pours, as above. Thus Fear of Danger is ten thou- a
sand times more terrifying than Danger it self, tl
when apparent to the Eyes ; and we find the Bur- 3
then of Anxiety greater by much, than the Evil
which we are anxious about; and, which was worse >
than all this, I had not that Relief in this Trouble {
from the Resignation I used to practise, that I
hop'd to have. I look'd, I thought, like Saul, who
complain'd not only that the Philistines were upon
. him, but that God had forsaken him; for I did not
now take due Ways to compose my Mind, by crying
to God in my Distress, and resting upon his Provi-
dence,

<page 202>
[ i89]
dence, as I had done before, for my Defence and
Deliverance; which if I had done, I had, at least,
been more cheerfully supported under this new Sur-
prize, and perhaps carry'd through it with more Re-
solution. • * . «
This Confusion of my Thoughts kept me waking
all Night; but in the Morning I fell asleep, and
having, by the Amusement of my Mind, been as it
were tired, and my Spirits exhausted, I slept very
soundly, and wafd much better compos'd than
I had ever been before: and now I began to think
sedately; and upon the utmost Debate with my-
self, I concluded, That this Island, which was so
exceeding pleasant, fruitful, and no farther from the
main Land than as I had seen, was not so entirely
abandon'd as J might imagine: That altho' there
were no stated Inhabitants who liv'd on the Spot;
yet that there might sometimes come Boats off from
the Shore, who either with Design, or perhaps ne-
ver, but when they were driven by cross Winds,
might come to this Place.
That I had liv'd here fifteen Years now, and had
not met with the least Shadow or Figure of any
People yet; and that if at any Time they should be
driven here, it was probable they went away again
as soon as ever they could, seeing they had never
thought fit to fix there upon any Occasion, to this
Time.
That the most I cou'd suggest any Danger from,
was, from any such casual accidental Landing of
straggling People from the Main, who, as it was
likely if they were driven hither, were here against
their Wills; so they made no stay here, but went off
again with all possible Speed, seldom staying one
Night on Shore, lest they should not have the
Help of the Tides, and Day-light back again; and
that therefore I had nothing to do but to consider

<page 203>
[ 190 ]
of some fase Retreat, in ease I should see any SaJ
vages land upon the Spot.
Now I began sorely to repent, that I had dug
my Cave so large* as to bring a Door through
again, which Door, as I said, came out beyond where
my Fortification joyn'd to the Rock: upon mature-
ly considering this therefore! I resolv'd to draw me
a second Fortification, in the fame Manner of a
Semicircle, at a Distance from my Wall, just where
I had planted a double Row of Trees, about twelve
Years before, of which I made mention: These
Trees having been planted so thick before, they
wanted but a sew Tiles to be driven between
them, that they should be thicker, and stronger,
and my Wall would be soon finish'd.
So that I had now a double Wall, and my outer
Wall was thickned with Pieces of Timber, old Ca-
bles, and every Thing I could think of to make it
strong; having in it seven little Holes, about as
big as I might put my Arm out at. In the Inside
of this, I thickned my Wall to above ten Foot
thick, with continual bringing Earth out of my
Cave, and laying it at the Foot of the Wall, and
walking upon it; and through the seven Holes, I
contriv d to plant the Musquets, of which I took
Notice, that I got seven on Shore out of the Ship;
these, I fay, I planted like my Cannon, and fitted
them into Frames that held them like a Carriage,
that so I could fire all the seven Guns in two Mi-
nutes time: This Wall I was many a weary Month
a finishing, and yet never thought myself safe till it
was done.
When this was done, I stuck all the Ground
without my Wall, for a great way every way, as
full with Stakes or Sticks of the O/ser-like Wood,
which I sound so apt to grow, as they could well
stand; insomuch, that I believe I might set in near
| twenty

<page 204>
C191 ]
twenty thousand of them, leaving a pretty large
Space between them and my Wall, that I might
have room to see an Enemy, and they might have
no shelter from the young Trees, if they attempted
to approach my outer Wall.
Thus in two Years time X had a thick Grove,
and in five or six Years time I had a Wood before
my Dwelling, growing so monstrous thick and
strong, that it was indeed perfectly impaflablej
and no Men, of what kind soever, would ever ima-
gine that there was any Thing beyond it, much left
a Habitation. As for the Way which I proposed to
myself to go in and out, for I left no Avenue, it
was by setting two Ladders; one to a Part of the
Rock which was low, and then broke in, and left
room to place another Ladder upon that; so when
the two Ladders were taken down, no Man living
could come down to me without misehiefing him-
self; and if they had come down, they were still
on the Out-side of my outer Wall.
Thus I took all the Measures humane Prudence
could suggest sot my own Preservation; and it will
be seen at length, that they were not altogether
without just Reason; though I foresaw nothing at
that Time, more than my meer Fear suggested to
me.
While this was doing, I was not altogether care-
less of my other Affairs; for I had a great Concern
upon me for my little Herd of Goats; they were
not only a present Supply to me upon every Occa-
sion, and began to be sufficient to me, without the
Expence of Powder and Shot; but also without the
Fatigue of Hunting after the wild ones; and I was
loth to lose the Advantage of them, and to have
them all to nurse up over again.
To this Purpose, after long Consideration, I
could think of but two Ways to preserve them;
one

<page 205>
[ ] .
one was to find another convenient Place to dig a
Cave under Ground, and to drive them into it every
Night; and the other was to enclose two or three
little Bits of Land, remote from, one another, and as
much conceal'd as I could, where I might keep about
half a Dozen young Goats in each Place: So
that if any Disaster happen'd to the Flock in gene-
ral, I might be able to raise them again with little
Trouble and Time: And this, tho' it would re-
quire a great deal of Time and Labour, I thought
was the most rational Design.
Accordingly I spent some Time to find out the
most retir'd Parts of the Island; and I pitch'd up-
on one which was as private indeed as my Heart
could wish for; it was a little damp Piece of Ground
in the middle of the Hollow and thick Woods,
where, as is observ'd, I almost lost myself once be-
fore, endeavouring to come back that Way from the
Eastern Part of the Island: Here I found a clear
Piece of Land near three Acres, so surrounded with
Woods, that it was almost an Enclosure by Nature,
at least it did not want near so much Labour to
make it so, as the other Pieces of Ground I had
work'd so hard at.
I immediately went to work with this Piece of
Ground, and in less than a Month's Time, I had
so fenc'd it round, that my Flock or Herd, call it
which you please, who were not so wild now as at
first they might be supposed to be, were well
enough secur'd in it. So without any farther De-
lay, I removed ten young She-Goats and two He-
Goats to this Piece; and when they were there, I
continu'd to perfect the Fence till I had made it
as secure as the other, which, however, I did at
more Leisure, and it took me up more Time by a
great deal, i . .
I 'All

<page 206>

r i9i i
All this Labour I was at the Expence of, purely
from my Apprehensions orj the Account of the Print
of a Man's Foot which I had seen; for as yet I
never saw any human Creature come near the Illand,
and I had now livJd two Years under these Unea-
sinesses, Which indeed made my Life much less
comfortable than it was before; as may well be
imagin'd by any who know what it is to live in
the constant Snare of the Fear os Alan; and this I
must observe with Grief too, that the Discompo-
sure of nly Mind had too great Impressions also up-
on the religious Part of my Thoughts, for the
Dread and Terror of falling into the Hands of Sa-
vages and Canibals, lay so upon my Spirits, tl
I seldom found my seisin a due Temper for Ap{
cation to my Maker, ac least, not with the fed:
Calmness and Resignation of Soul which I was
wont to do ; I rather pray'd to God as under
great Affliction and Pressure of Mind, surrounded
with Danger, and in Expectation every Night of
being murder'd and devour'd before Morning;
and I must testify from my Experience, that a Tem-
per of PeaCe, Thankfulness, Love and Astection, is
much more the proper Frame sot Prayer, than that
of Terror and Discomposure and that under the
Dread of Mischief impending, a Man is no more
fit for a comforting Performance of the Duty of
praying to God, than he is for Repentance on a
lick-Eed: For these Discomposures assect the Mind
as the others do the Body; and the Discomposure
of the Mind must necessarily be as great a Disabi-
lity as that of the Body, and much greater, pray-
ing to God being properly an Act of the Mind, not
of the Body.
But to go on: After I had thus sean'd one Part
of my little living Stock, I went about the whole
Illand, searching for another private Place, to make
O . such

<page 207>
[mi
such another Deposit; when wandring more to the
West Point of the Island than I had ever done yet,
and looking out to Sea, I thought I saw a Boat up-
on the Sea, at a great Distance; I had found a Pro-
spective-Glass, or two, in one of the Seamen's
Chests, which I sav'd out of our Ships; but I had
it not about me, and this was so remote, that I could
not tell what to make of it ; though I look'd at it
till my Eyes were not able to hold to look any
longer: whether it was a Boat, or not, I do not
know; but as I descended from the Hill, I could
see no more of it, so I gave it over ,• only I resolv'd
to go no more out without a Prospective-Glass in
my Pocket.
When I was come down the Hill, to the End of
the Island, where indeed I had never been before,
I was presently convinc'd, that the seeing the Print
of a Man's Foot, was not such a strange Thing in
the Island as I imagin'd; and but that it was a spe-
cial Providence that I was cast upon the Side of the
Island where the Savages never came, I should ea-
sily have known, that nothing was more frequent
than for the Canoes from the Main, when they hap-
pen'd to be a little too far out at Sea, to shoot over
to that Side of the Island for Harbour; likewise as
they often met, and fought in their Canoes, the Vic-
tors having ta-ken any Prisoners, would bring them
over to this Shore, where, according to their dread-
ful Customs, being all Canibals, they would kill and
eat them; of which hereafter.
When I was come down the Hill to the Shore,
as I said above, being the S. W. Point os the
Island, I was perfectly confounded and amaz'd; nor
is it possible for me to express the Horror of m/
Mind, at seeing the Shore spread with Skulls,
Hands, Feet and other Bones of humane Bodies;
. and particularly I observ'd a Place where there had

<page 208>

f *$>5 ]
•beea.a Fire made, and a Circle dug in trie E^fthi
like a Cockpit, where it is supposed the Savage
Wretches had fat down to their inhumane Feast-
ings upon the Bodies of their Fellow-Creatures,
I was so astonish'd with the Sight of these Things,
that I entertain'd no Notions of any Danger to my
self from it for a long while all my Apprehen-
sions were buried in the Thoughts of such a Pitch of
inhumane, hellish Brutality, and the Horror of the
Degeneracy of Humane Nature; which though I
had heard of often, yet I never had so near a View of
before; in inert, I turn'd away my Face from the
horrid Spectacle;, my Stomach grew sick, and I
was >ust at the point of Fainting, when Nature dis-
charged the Disorder from my Stomach; and ha-
ving vpmited with an uncommon Violence, I was
a little reliev'd, but could not bear to stay in the
Place a Moment; so I got me up the Hill again
with all the Speed I could, and walk'd on towards
;jpy.own Habitation.
When I came a. little out of that Part of the
Island, I stood still awhile as amaz'd; and then re-
covering myself, I.look'd up wirh the utmost Affec-
tion of my Soul,, and with a Flood of Tears in my
EyfcVgave God, Thanks, that ha$ east my first Lot
•inia^Part,of the. World, where I was distinguisli'd
;ftpm/uch dreadful Creaturgs as these; and that
though I had esteemed my present Condition ver/
; miserable, had yet given me so many .Comforts in
it, that I had still more to give thanks for than to
eowplain of; and this above all, thaf I had even
in this miserable Condition been comforted with
the Knowledge of himself, and the Hope of his
. Blessing, which was a, Felicity more than sufficient-
ly equivalent to all the Misery which I had sufser'd;
or could suffer.

<page 209>
[I*]

In this Frame of Thankfulness, I went Home to
my Castle, and began to be much easier now, as
to the Safety of my Circumstances, than ever I was
before; for I observ'd that these Wretches never
came to this Island in search of what they could
get; perhaps not seeking, nor wanting, or not ex-
pecting any thing here; and having often, no doubt,
been up in the cover'd woody Part of it, without
finding any Thing to their Purpose. I knew I had
been here now almost eighteen Years, and never
saw the least Footsteps of Humane Creature there
before; and I might be here eighteen more, as en-
tirely conceal'd, as I was now, if I did not discover
my self to them, which I had no manner of Occa-
sion to do, it being my only Business to keep my
self entirely concealed where I was, unless I found
a better fort of Creatures than Canibals to make my
self known to.
Yet I entertain'd such an Abhorrence of the Sa-
vage Wretches that I have been speaking of, and of
the wretched inhumane Custom of their devouring
and eating one another up, that I continu'd pensive,
and sad, and kept close within my own Circle
for almost two Years after this: When I fay my
own Circle, I mean by it, my three Plantations,
viz.. my Castle, my Country-Seat, which I call'd
my Bower, and my Enclosure in the Woods; nor
did I look after this for any other Use than as an
Enclosure for my Goats; for the Aversion which
Nature gave me to these hellish Wretches, was
such, that I was fearful of seeing them, as of feeing
the Devil himself; nor did I so much as go to look
after my Boat in all this time, but began rather
to think of making me another; for I could not
think of ever making any more Attempts to bring
the other Boat round the Island to me, lest I
tfeould meet with some c-jf these Creatures at Sea,
in

<page 210>
C '97 ]
in which, if I had happen'd to have fallen into their
Hands, I knew what would have been my Lot.
Time however, and the Satisfaction I had, that
I was in no Danger of being discovered by these
People, began to wear off my Uneasiness about
them; and I began to live just in the fame compos'd
Manner as before; only with this Difference, that
I used more Caution, and kept my Eyes more about
me than I did before, lest I should happen to
jbe seen by any of them; and particularly, I was
more cautious of firing my Gun, lest any of them
being on the Island, should happen to hear of it;
and it was therefore a very good Providence to me,
that I had furnilh'd myself with a tame Breed of
that I needed not hunt any more about the
, or moot at them; and if I did catch any
of them, after this it was by Traps, and Snares, as
I had done before; so that for two Years after this,
I believe I never fir'd my Gun once off, though I
never went out without it; and which was more,
as I had fav'd three Pistols out of the Ship, I al-
ways carried them out with me, or at least two of
them, sticking them in my Goat-Skin Belt; also I
furbisti'd up one of the great Cutlashes, that I had
out of the Ship, and made me a Belt to put it on
also; so that I was now a most formidable Fellow
to look at, when I went abroad, if you add to
the former Description of myself, the Particular of
two Pistols, and a great broad Sword hanging at
my Side in a Belt, but without a Scabbard.
Things going on thus, as J have said, for some
Time; I scem'd, excepting these Cautions, to be
redue'd to my former calm, sedate way of Living,
all these Things tended to (hewing me more and
more how far my Condition was frpra being mise-
rable, compared to some others; nay, to many
Other Particulars of Life, which it might have plea-
o 1 sea


<page 211>
f f# ],

mong , ... , ,
pie would rather compare their Condition with
those that are worse, in order to be thankful, than
be always comparing them with those which are'
better, to assist their Murmurings and Complain-
v As in my present Condition there were not really
many Things which I wanted; so indeed I thought
that the Frights I had been in about these Savage
Wretches, and the Concern I had been in for my
own Preservation, had taken oft" the Edge of my ti-
yentionfor my own Conveniences; and I had drops
a.good Design, which I had Once bent my Thoughts
too much upon; and that was, to try if I could not
make some of my Barley into Malt, and then try to.
b^rew myself some Beer: This was really a whim-'
fiscal Thought, and I reprov'd myself often for the/
Simplicity of it; for I presently'saw there would
be the Want of several Things neceflary'to the
making my Beer, that it would be impossible for
me to supply : As first, Casks to preserve it in,
which was a Thing, that as I have observ'd alrea-'
dy, I could never compass; no, though I spent not
many Days, but Weeks, nay Months, in attempt-'
jngjt, but to no purpose. In the next place, I hid
noHops to make it keep, no Yeast to make it work,
po Copper or Kettle to make it boil; and yet al}
these Things, notwithstanding, I verily believe,'
had not these Tilings interv.en'd, J mean the Frights,
and Terrprs I was in about the Savages, I had un-
do rtaken' it, and perhaps brought it to pafstp|$
tor I seldom gave any' thing over without actO'
plifliingit, when I piice had it in'my Head end'
m

<page 212>

[ *99 ]
But my Invention now run quite another Way;
for Night and Day I could think of nothing but
how I might destroy some of these Monsters in their
cruel bloody Entertainment, and, if possible, save
the Victim they should bring hither to destroy. It
would take up a larger Volume than this whole
Work is intended to be, to set down all the Con-
trivances I hatch'd, or rather brooded upon in my
Thought, for the destroying these Creatures, or at
least frighting them, so as to prevent their coming
hither any more; but all was abortive, nothing
could be possible to take effect, unless I was to be
there to do it my self; and what could one Man
do among them, when perhaps there might be
twenty or thirty of them together, with their
Darts, or their Bows and Arrows, with which
they could shoot as true to a Mark, as I could with
my Gun?
Sometimes I contrived to dig a Hole under the
Place where they made their Fire, and put in Five
or Six Pound of Gun-powder, which, when they
kindled their Fire, would consequently take Fire,
and blow up all that was near it; but as in the first
Place I should be very loth to waste ,so much Powder
upon them, my Store being now within the Quan-
tity of one Barrel; so neither could I be sure of its
going off at any certain time, when it might sur-
prize them, and at best, that it would do little more
than just blow the Fire about their Ears and fright
them, but not sufficient to make them forsake the
Place'; so I laid it aside, and then propos'd, that
I would place my self in Ambush, in some con-
venient Place, with my three Guns, all double
loaded; and in the middle of their bloody Cere-
mony, let fly at them, when I should be sure to kill
or wound perhaps two or three at every Shoot; and
then falling in upon them with my three Piflols,
O 4 and

<page 213>
[ io6 y
and my Sword, J made no doubt but that if there,
was twenty, I lhould kill them all. This Fancy
pleas'd my Thoughts for some Weeks, and I was so
full of it, that I often dream'd of it; and sometimes
that I was just going tp let fly at them, in my Sleep.
I' 1 went sp far with it in my Imagination, that f
pmploy'd my self several Days to find out proper
Places to put my self in Ambuscade, as \ said, to
watch for them; and I went frequently to she Place
itself, which was now grown more familiar to
me ; and especially while my Mind was thus fill'd
with Thoughts of Revenge, and of a bloody put-
ting twenty or thirty of them to the Sword, as I
may call it; the Horror I had at the Place, and
at the Signals of the barbarous Wretches devouring
one another, abated my Malice.'
Well, at length I found a Place in the Side of
the Hill, where I was satisfy'd I might securely
wait, till I saw any of their Boats coming, and
might then, even before they would be ready to
pome on Shore, convey my self unseen into Thickets
'of Trees, in ope of which there \vas a hollow
large enpugh tp conceal me entirely,' and where J
might sit and observe jifl their bloody Doings, and
'take my full aim at their jleads, when they were
so close together, as that it would be next to im-
possible that I should miss my Shoot, or that I could
fai| wpundjng three or four of them at the first
Shoot.
In this Place then J resolv'd, tp fix my Design,
and accordingly I prepaid two Muskets and my
prmnary Fpwling-Piece^ The two Muskets I
loaded with a grace* of Slugs each, and four or five
smaller gullets, about the Size of Pistol-Bullets;
and'the Fowling-piece I loaded with near a Hand-
ful Qf Swan-Shpt; of the largest Size"; I also loaded,
ir;y Pistols'wrtH about four Ballets each; and in this,
W~, , ~'Posture,

<page 214>
[ 101 ]
fosture, well provided with Ammunition for a se-
cond and third Charge, I prepar'd ray self for roy
Expedition. V."-.i .'• • ,
After I had thus laid the Scheme of my Design,
and in my Imagination put it in Practice, I conti-
nually made my Tour every Morning up to the
Top ©f the Hill, which was from my Castle, as I
call'd it, about three Miles, or more, to fee if I
could observe any Boats upon the Sea, coming near
the Island, or standing over towards it; but I be-
gan to tire of this hard Duty, after I had for two
or three Months constantly kept my Watch; but
came always back without any Discovery, there
having not in all that Time been the least Appear-
ance, not only on, or near the Shore, but not on
the whole Qcean, so far as my Eyes or Glasses
could reach every Way.
As long as I kept up my daily Tour to the Hill
to look out, so long also I kept up the Vigour of
my Design, and my Spirits seem'd to be all the
while in a suitable Form for so outragiousan Exe-
cution as the killing twenty or thirty naked Savages,
for an Offence which I had not at all entred into a
Discussion of in my Thoughts, any farther than my
Passions were at first fir'd by the Horror I conceiv'd
at the unnatural Custom of that People of the Coun-
try, who, it seems, had been suffer'd by Providence,
in his wise Disposition of the World, tp have no
other Guide than that of their own abominable and
vitiated Passions; and consequently were left, and
perhaps had been so for some Ages, to act such
horrid Things, and receive such dreadful Cus-
toms, as nothing but Nature entirely abandonM
of Heaven, and acted by some Hellish Degeneracy,
could have run them into: But now when, as I
have said, I began to be weary of the fruitless Ex-
* £ursion which I had made so long, and so &r, eve"
"•',/»" •' ry

<page 215>

C ]
ry Morning in vain, so my Opinion of the Action
itself began to alter, and I began with cooler and
calmer Thoughts to consider what it was I was go-
ing to engage in. What Authority or Call I had,
to pretend to be Judge and Executioner upon these
Men as Criminals, whom Heaven had thought fit
for so many Ages to suffer unpunish'd, to go on,
and to be, as it were, the Executioners of his Judg-
ments one upon another. How far these People
were Olsenders against me, and what Right I had
to engage in the Quarrel of that Blood, which they
stied promiscuously one upon another. I debated
this very often with my self thus; How do I know
what God himself judges in this particular Cafe? it
is certain these People either do not commit this as
a Crime; it is not against their own Consciences
reproving, or their Light reproaching them. They
do not know it to be an Offence, and then commit
it in Defiance of Divine Justice, as we do in almost
all the Sins we commit. They think it no more a
Crime to kill a Captive taken in War, than we do
to kill an Ox; nor to eat humane Flesh, than we
do to eat Mutton.
When I had consider'd this a little, it follow'd
necessarily, that I was certainly in the Wrong in
it; that these People were not Murderers in the
Sense that I had before condemned them in my
Thoughts, any more than those Christians were
Murderers, who often put to Death the Prisoners
taken in Battel; or more frequently, upon many
Occasions, put whole Troops of Men to the Swora,
without giving Quarter, though they threw down
their Arms and submitted.
In the next place itoccur'd to me, that albeit the
Usuage they thus gave one another, was thus brutish
and inhumane, yet it was really nothing to me;
"These People had done me no Injury: That if they
- attempted

<page 216>
|F IdsJ. . ...
Attempted me, or I saw it necessary for my imme-
diate Preservation to Tall upon them, something
might be said for it; b^t that as I was yet out of
their Power,: and they had really no Knowledge
of me, and consequently no Design upon me;
therefore it could not be ;ust for me to fall upon
them. That this wou'd justify the Conduct of the
Spaniards in all their Barbarities practis'd in Ame-
rica, and where' they destroyed Millions of these
People, who, however they were Idolaters and Bar-
barians, and had several bloody and barbarous
Rites in their Customs, such as sacrificing humane
Bodies to their Idols, were yet, as to the Spaniards,
Very innocent People; and that the rooting them
out of the Country, is spoken of with the utmost
Abhorrence and Detestation, by even the Spaniards
themselves, at this time, and by all other Christi-
an Nations of Europe, as a meer Butchery, a bloo-
dy and unnatural Piece of Cruelty, unjustifiable ei-
ther to God or Man; and such, as for which the ve-
ry Name of a Spaniard is reckon'd to be frightful
and terrible to allPeople of Humanity, or 'of Chris-
tian Compassion: As if the Kingdom of Spain were
particularly.eminent for the Product of a Race of
Men, who were Without Principles of Tenderness,
pr the common Bowels of Pity to the Miserable,
which'is reckon'd to he a Mark of generous Tem-
per in the Mind.'' , ,,••<',
• These Considerations really put me to a Pause,
arid to a kind of a Full-stop ,* and I began by little
and Ktrfe'to be off of my Design, and to conclude,
I had taken wrong Measures in my Resolutions to
attack the-Savages; that it was not my Business to
meddle with'them, unless they first attacked me,
ahxf this ic wais my Business if possible to prevent;
but that if I.pere discovers, and attack'd, then I
knew my Duty.- - , ,

<page 217>

[ *°4 3
On the other hand, I argu'd with myself, That
this really was the way not to deliver myself, but
entirely to ruin and destroy myself; for unless I was
sure to kill every one that not only mould be on
Shore at that time, but that mould ever come on
Shore afterwards, if but one of them escap'd, to
tell their Country People what had happen'd, they
would come over again by Thousands to re-
venge the Death, of their Fellows, and I should
only bring upon myself a certain Destruction,
which at present I had no manner of occ/ion
for.
Upon the whole I concluded, That neither in
Principles, nor in Policy, I ought one way or other to
concern myself in this Affair. That my Business
was by all possible Means to conceal myself from
them, and not to leave the least Signal to them to
guess by, that there were any living Creatures up-
on the Island; I mean of humane Shape,
Religion joyn'd in with this Prudential, and I was
convine'd now many Ways, that I was perfectly out
of my Duty, when I was laying all my bloody
Schemes for the Destruction of innocent Creatures,
I mean innocent as to me: As to the Crimes they
were guilty of towards one another, I had nothing
to do with them; they were National, and I ought
to leave them to the Justice of God, who is the
Governour of Nations, aria knows how by Na-
tional Punishments to make a just Retribution for
National Offences; and to bring publick Judg-
ments upon those who offend in a publick Manner,
by such Ways as best pleases him.
This appear'd so clear to me now, that nothing
was a greater Satisfaction to me, than that I had
not been sufser'd to do a Thing which I now saw
so much Reason, to believe would have been no less
a. Sin, than that of wilful Murder, if I had cpm^

<page 218>
[ 2.05 1
mitted it; and I gave most humble Thanks on my
Knees to God, that had thus delivered me from
Blood-guiltiness, beseeching him to grant me the
Protection of his Providence, that I might not fall
into the Hands of the Barbarians; or that I might
not lay my Hands upon them, unless I had a more
clear Call from Heaven to do it, in Defence of my
own Life.
In this Disposition I continued for near a Year
after this ; and so far was I from desiring an Oc-
casion for falling upon these Wretches, that in all
that Time I never once went up the Hill to sec
whether there were any of them in sight, or to
know whether any of them had been on Shore
there, or not, that I might not be tempted to re-
new any of my Contrivances against them, or be
provoked by any Advantage which might present it
self, to fall upon them; only this I did, I went and
removed my Boat which I had on the other Side
the Ifland, and carried it down to the Easi-End of
the whole Ifland, where I ran it into a little Cove
which I found under some high Rocks, and where
I knew, by reason of the Currents, the Savages durst
not, at least would not come with their Boats,
upon any Account whatsoever.
With my Boat I carried away every Thing that
I had left there belonging to her, though not ne-
cessary for the bare going thither, viz.. a Mast and
Sail which I had made for her, and a Thing like
an Anchor, but indeed which could not be call'd
either Anchor or Grapling; however, it was the
best I could make of its kind. All these I remo-
ved, that there might not be the least Shadow of
any Discovery, or any Appearance os any Boat,
L'tation upon the Island.

Cell, o-
.+ n thee

<page 219>


thcr than upon my constant Employment, w, To
milk ray She-Goats, and manage; my little Flock in
the Wood; which as it was quite; on the other Part
of the Island, was quite out of Danger;; for certain
it is, that these Savage People, who. sometime?
haunted this Island, never came with any Thought?
of finding any thing Jiere;. and consequently, never
wandred off from the Coast; and I doubt not, bur
they might have been sevetal times, on. shore, after
my Apprehensions of them.had made me cautious^
well as before; and -indeed, 1 look'd back with
some Horror upon the-Thoughts of vtfhat my" Gonr
dition would have been, if I had chop'd upon them,
and been diseover'd before that, .when, naked and
unarm'd, except with one Gun, and;that leaden
often only with small. Shot. I walk'd every where
peeping arid peeping about the Island, to see what
I could get; what aSurprise should. I have been in,
if wheri I diseover'd therPrint of aMaa's Foot, I
had instead of that seen fifteen .ot, twenty Savages,
and found them pursuing me, and by. the Swiftness
of their Running, no. Possibility of my escaping
Stem?. ;'. .: ;::siir/J .... .j T^a: ,d .fvl
The Thoughts of this sometimes funk:my very
Soul within me, and distress'd my Mind so much
that I,could not soon recover it, to think what I
should have done, .and how I not.only should ndt
have been, able to resist them, but exen .should not
have had Presence of Mind enough. r6 :do what X
mights have done .; much less, what now afier so
much Consideration and Preparation:! ,might be a-
ble eoidci: Indeed, after serious thinking ;.of; these
Things, I should be very melancholy, and some-
times it would last a great while; but I resolv'd it
at last all into Thankfulness to that Providence,
which had deliver'd me from so many unseen Dan-
gers, and had kept me ftom those Mischiefs whiah
; .' Icould




<page 220>
„C 107 1


I could no way have been the Agent in delivering
my self from ; because I had not the least notion of
any such thing depending* or the least Supposition
of it being possible.
This renew'd a Contemplation, which ofteruhad
come tO my Thoughts in former Time, when first
I began to fee the merciful Dispositions of Heaven,'
in the Dangers we run through in this Life. How
wonderfully we are delivered, when we know no-
thing of it. How, When we are in (a Quandary, as
we call it) a Doubt or Hesitation, whether to go
this Way, or that Way, a secret Hint shall direct
us this Way, when we intended to go that Way;
nay, when Sense, our own Inclination, and perhaps
Business has call'd to go the other Way, yet a strange
Impression upon the Mind, from we know not What
Springs,. and by we know not what Power, shall o-
ver-rule us to go this Way; arid it (hall afterwards
.appear, that had we gone that Way which we should
have gone, and. even to our Imagination ought to
have gone, we mould have. been ruin'd and lost.
Upon these, and many like Reflections,'! after-
wards made it a certain Rule with me, That When-
ever I found those secret Hints, or Pressings of my
Mind, to doing, or not doing any Thing that pre-
sented; or to going this'Way,or that Way, I never
sail'd to obey the secret Dictate; though Iknewno
other Reason for it, than that such a Pressure, or
such a Hint hung upon my Mind: I could give ma-
ny Examples of the Success of this Conduct in the
Course of my Life; but more especially in the lat-
ter Part of my inhabiting this unhappy Island; be-
sides many Occasions which it is very likely I might
have taken noiice of, if I had seen with the same
Eyes then, that I saw with now: But *tis never too
late to be wife ; and I cannot but advise all confi-
dering Men, whose Lives are attended with such ex-
traordinary


<page 221>
■ [ 10$ ]


traordinary Incidents as mine, or even though not
so extraordinary, not to slight such secret Intima-
tions of Providence,let them come from what invisi-
ble InteUigence they will, that I shall not.discuss,
and perhaps cannot account for; but certainly they
are a Proof of the Converse of Spirits, and the se-
cret Communication between those embody'd, and
those unembody'd ; and such a Proof as can never
be withstood : Of which 1 shall have Occasion to
give some very remarkable Instances, in the Re-
mainder of my solitary Residence in this dismal
Place.
I believe the Reader of this will not think
strange, if I confess that these Anxieties, these con-
stant Dangers I liv'd in, and the Concern that was
now upon me, put an End to all Invention, and to
all the Contrivances that I had laid for my future
Accommodations and Conveniences. I had the
Care of my Safety more now upon my Hands, than
that of my Food. I car'd not to drive a Nail, or
chop a Stick of Wood now, for fear the Noise I
should make, should be heard; much less would t
fire a Gun, for the fame Reason; and above all, I
was intolerably uneasy at making any Fire, lest
the Smoke, which is visible at a great Distance in the
Day, should betray me ; and for this Reason I re-
mov'd that Part of my Business which requir d FirC;
such as burning of Pots and Pipes, &c. into roy
new Apartment in the Woods, where, after I had
been some time, I found, to my unspeakable Conso-
lation, a meer natural Cave in the Earth, which
went in a vast Way, and where, I dare say, no Sa-
vage had been at the Mouth of it, or would be so
hardy as to venture in, nor indeed would any Man
else, but one who, like me, wanted nothing so much
as a safe Retreat.
the

<page 222>
I 2°9 ]
The Mouth of this Hollow was ar the Bottom
of a great Rock, where by meer Accident (I would
say, if I did not fee abundant Reason to ascribe
all such Things now to Providence) I was cutting
down some thick Branches of Trees to make
Charcoal ; and before I go on, I must observe the
Reason" of my making this Charcoal, which was
I was afraid of making a Smoke about my Ha-
bitation, as I said before ; and yet fcould not live
there without baking my Brdad, cooking my Meat,
so'1.contriv'd to burn some Wood here, as I
had seen done in.England, under Turf, till it be-
came Charlc, or dry Coal; and then putting the
Fire out, I preserv'd the Coal to carry Home, and
perform the other Services, which Fire was want-
ing for at Home, without Danger of Smoke.
'-But this by,the byy While I" was cutting down
some Wood herej 1 perceiv'd that behind a very
thick Branch of sow Brushwood, or Underwood,
ttyere was a kind of hollow Place. I was curious
to look into it; and getting with Disficulty into
the>Mouth of it, I found it was pretty large, that
is to fay, sufficient for me to stand upright in itj
and perhaps another with me; but I must confess
toi you I made more haste out than I did in, when
looking farther into" the Place, and which was
perfectly dark, I saw two broad shining Eyes of
some Creature, whether' Devil or Man, I knew
not,."which twinkled like two Stars, the dim Light
from the Cavers Mouth mining directly in, and
making.the Reflection*'.-/'"
.Itoweyier, after .some Pause; I recover'd myself,
arid'began to call my self a thousand Fools, and
tell myself, that he that was.afraid'to~see the De-
vil, was not fit to live twenty Years in an Island all
alone ,' and that I durst to believe there was no-'
* * P thing

<page 223>

<page 224>
„ it *» 3
low, that it requirsd me to creep upon my Hand3
and Knees to go into it, and whither I went I
knew not; so having no Candle, I gave it over
for some Time; but resolv'd to come again the
next Day provided wish Candles, and, a Tinder-
box, which I had made of the Lock of one of the
Muskets, with some Wild-fire in the Pan.
Accordingly, the next Day I came provided
with six large Candles of my own making; for I
made very good Candles now of Goats Tallow;
and going into this low Place, I was oblig'd to
creep upon all Fours, as I have said, almost ten
Yards; which, by the way, I thought was a VenJ
ture bold enough, considering that I knew not
how far it might go, nor what was beyond it,
When I was got through the Strait, I found the
Roof rose higher up, I believe near twenty Foot;
but never was such a glorious Sight seen in the
Island, I dare say, as it was, to look round the
Sides and Roof of this Vault or Cave; the Walls
reflected a hundred thousand Lights to me from
my two Candles; what it'was in the Roek, whether
Diamonds, or any other precious Stones, or Gold,
which I rather suppos'd it to be, I knew not.
•The Place I was in, was a most delightful Ca-
vity, or Grotto, of its Kind, as could be expected,
though perfectly dark; the Floor was dry and
level, and had a fort of small loose Gravel upon
it, so that there was no nauseous or venomous
Creature to be seen, neithet was there any Damp
fcr wet, on the Sides or Roof: The only Difficulty
in it , was the Entrance,, which, however, as it
was a Place of Security, and such a Retreat as I
wanted, I thought that was a Convenience; fe*
that I. was really rejoye'd at the Discovery, and re- v
solv'd, without any Delay, to bring some of those
Things which I was most anxious about to this
P a Place;

<page 225>

<page 226>
f was now in my twenty third Year of Resi-
dence in this Island, and was so naturaliz'd to the
Place, and to the Mannet of Living, that could
1 have butJenjoy'd the Certainty, that no Savages
would come to the Place to disturb me, I qould
have been content to have capitulated for spending
the rest of my Time there, even to the last Mo-
ftient, till I had laid me down and dy'd, like the old
Goat in the Cave. I had also arriv'd to some little
Diversions and Amusements, which made the Time
pass more pleasantly with me a great deal, than
it did before; as first, I had taught my Poll, as J
noted before, to speak; and he did it so familiarly,
and talk'd so articulately and plain, that it was
very pleasant to me; and he Jived with me no less
than six and twenty Years. How long he might,
live afterwards, I know not; tho' I know they
have a Notion in the Brafils, that they UtP a hun-
dred Years; perhaps poor Pott may be alive there
still, calling after Pogr Robin Crusoe to this Day. I
wish no Englishman the ii). Luck to come there and
Hear him; but if he did, he would certainly believe
it was the Devil. My Dog was a very pleasant
and loving Companion to me for no less than six-
teen Years of my Time, and then dy'd of meer
pld Age; as sonny Cats, they muftiply'd, as I have
obscrv'd, to that Degree, that I was oblig'd to (hoot
several of them at first, to keep them from devour-
ing me and all I had; but at length, when the
tWo old ones, I brought with me, were gone, and
after some Time continually driving them from me,
and letting them have no Provision with me, they
atP'^^jffld into the Woods, except two or three
Favourites, which I kept tame; and whose Young,
when they ;haH any, I always drown'd; and these
were Part of my Family. Besides these I always'
kept two or three housliold Kids about me, which I
V:: p 3 taught

<page 227>

<page 228>
r.JIJ ]
vages bad been, as before, but not on the other
jSide; but, to my great Affliction, it was on my
Side of the Island.
I was indeed terribly surpriz'd at the Sight, and
step'd short within my Grove, not daring to go
out, lest I might be surpriz'd ; and yet I had no
more Peace within, from the Apprehensions I had,
that if these Savages, in rambling over the Island,
should find my Corn standing, or cut, or any of my
Works and Improvements, they would immediate-
ly conclude, that there were People in the Place,
and would then never give over till they had found
me out. In this Extremity I went back directly to
my Castle, pull'd up the Ladder after me, and made
all things without look as wild and natural as I
could. ,
Then I prepar'd myself within, putting myself
|n a Posture of Defence; I loaded all my Cannon,
as I call'd them; that is to fay, my Muskets, which
were mounted upon.my new Fortification, and all
my Pistols, and resolv'd to defend' myself to the
last Gasp, not forgetting seriously to commend my
self to the Divine Protection, and earnestly to pray
to God to deliver me out of the Hands of the Bar-
barians; and in this Posture I continu'd about two
Hours, but began to be mighty impatient for In-
telligence abroad, for I had no Spies to send out.
After sitting a while longer, and musing what I
should do in this Cafe, I was not able to bear sit-
ting in Ignorance any longer; so setting up my
Ladder to the Side of the Hill, where there was a
flat Place, as I observ'd before, and then pulling
the Ladder up after me, J set it up again, and
mounted to the Top of the Hill, and pulling out
my Prospective-Glass, which I had taken on pur-
pose, I laid me down flat on my Belly on the
Grounds and began to look fpr the Place. I pre-
P 4 sently

<page 229>

<page 230>
[ 2*7 ]
cover'd the first Appearance of all; and as soon a's
1 gat thither, which was not less than two Hours,
(for I could not go apace, being so loaden with
Arms as I was) I perceived there had been three
Canoes more of Savages in that Place; and look-
ing out farther, I saw they were all at Sea together,
making over for the. Main.
This was a dreadful Sight to me, especially
when going down to the Shore, I could see the
Marks of Horror which the dismal Work they had
been about, had left behind it, viz,, the Blood, the
Bones, and Part of the Flesh of humane Bodies,
eaten and devour'd by those Wretches, with Mer-
riment and Sport: J was so fill'd with Indignation
at the Sights that t began now to premeditate the
.'Destruction pf the next that I saw there, let them
be who or how many soever.'
It seem'd evident to me, that the Visits which
they thus make to this Island, are not very fre-
quent; for it was above fifteen Months before any
more of them came on Shore there again; that is
to fay, I neither saw them, or any Footsteps, or
Signals of them, in all that Time; for as to the
rainy Seasons, then they are sure not to come a-
broad, at least not so far; yet all this while I liv'd
uncomfortably, by reason of the constant Apprehen-
sions I was in of their coming upon me by Surprize;
from whence I observe, that the Expectation of
jEvil is more bitter than the Suffering, especially
if chere is no Room to shake off that: Expectation,
or those Apprehensions.
'During all this Time, I was in the murdering
Humour, and took up most of my Hours, which
should have been better employ d, in contriving
how to circumvent and fall upon them, the very
next time I should see them; especially if they
piould be divided, as they were the last Time, in-

<page 231>

<page 232>
... r H91
Savages, and of the Reasons why I might justify
the doing of itBut to wave al) this sot a while,
it was in the Middle of May, on the sixteenth Day
j think, 'as well as my poor wooden Calendar
would reckon; for I mark'd all upon the Post still;
I fay, it was the sixteenth of May, that it blew a
very great Storm of Wind, all Day, with a great
deal Of Lightning and Thunder, and a very foul
Night it was after it: I know not what was the
particular Occasion of it; but as I was reading in
the Bible, and taken up with very serious Thoughts
about my present Condition, I was furpriz'd with a
Norse of a Gun, as I tfipught, fir'd at Sea.
This was to be sure a Surprize of a quite disfe-
rent Nature from any I had met with before; for
the Notions this put into my Thoughts were quite'
of another Kind. I started up in the greatest Haste
imaginable, and in a trice clapt my Ladder to the
middle Place of the Rock, and pull?d it after me,
and mounting it the second Time, got to the Top
of the Hill the very Moment that a Flash of Fire
bid me listen for a second Gun, which accordingly,
in about half a Minute, I heard, and by the Sound,
knew that it was from that Pan of the Sea where
1 was driven down the Current in my Boat.
I immediately consider'd that this must be some
Ship in Distress, and that they had some Comrade,
or some other Ship in Company, and fir'd these Guns
for Signals of Distress, and to obtain Help: 1 had
this Presence of Mind at that Minute, as tb think
that though I could not help them, it may "be
they might help me; so I brought tpgethet all the
dry Wood. I could get'at hand, and making a good
handsome'Pise', I set it on Fire upon the Hill; the
Wood was dry, and blaz'd freely; and though the
Wind blew very hard, yet it burnt fairly out; that
J was certain, if there was any such Thing as a'

<page 233>

<page 234>

imagin'd, my Fire, fill'd me with many Thoughts.
First I imagin'd, that upon feeing my Light, they
might have put themselves" into their Boat, and
have endeavour'd to make the Shore,; but that the
Sea going very high, they might have been cast
away; other times I imagin'd, that they might
liave lost their Boat before, as might be the Cafe
many Ways; as1 particularly, by the Breaking of
the Sea upon their Ship, which many times obli-
ges Men to stave, or take in Pieces their Boat;
and sometimes to throw it AVer Board with their
own Hands: Other times I imagin'd, they had
some other Ship or Ships in Company, who upon
the Signals of Distress they had made, had taken
them up, and carry'd them off: Other whiles I fan-
cy'd, they were all gone off to Sea in their Boat,
and being hurry'd away by the Current that I
had been formerly in, were carry'd out into the
great Ocean, where there was nothing but Misery
and Perishing; and that -perhaps they might by'
this Time think of Starving, and of being in a
Condition to eat one another.
As all these were but Conjectures at best^ so in
the Condition I was in, I could do no more than
look on upon the Misery of the poor Men, and
pity them, which had still this good Effect on
my Side, that it gave me more and more Cause
to give Thanks to God, who had so happily and
comfortably provided for me in my desolate Con-
dition; and that of two Ships Companies who were
now cast away upon this Part of the World, not
one Life should be spar'd but mine: I learn'd here
again to observe, that it is very rare that the Pro-
vidence of God casts us into any Condition of Life
so low, or any Misery so great, but we may see
something or other to be thankful for; and may see
others in worse Circumstances than our own*
i.

<page 235>
E"11 .;
Such certainly was the Case of these Men, of
whom I could not so much as see Room to sup-
pose any ot them were sav'd; nothing could make
it rational, so much as to wish or expect that they
did not all perish there, except the Possibility only
os their being taken up by another Ship in Com-
pany; and this was but.meer Possibility indeed;
tor I saw not the least Signal or Appearance ot any
such Thing.
I cannot explain, by any possible Energy 6s Words;
what a strange Longing or Hankering of Desires \
felt in my Soul upon this Sight; breaking out some-
times thus; O that there had been but one or two;
nay,,.or but one Soul sav'd out of this Ship, to have
elcap'd to me, that I might but have had one
Companion, one Fellow-Creature to have spoken
to me, and to have convers'd with 1 In all the Time
Dt my solitary Life, I never felt so earnest, so
[Irong a Desire after the Society of my Fellow-
Creatures, or so deep a Regret at the Want of it. ,
There are some secret moving Springs in the Ar
action's, which when they are set a going by some
Object in View, or be it some Object, though not
n View, yet renders present to the Mind by the
Power of Imagination, that Motion carries out the
joul by its Impetuosity to such violent eager Em-
>racings of the Object, that the Absence os it is
nsupportable.
Such were these earnest Wishings, That butonfc
vfau had been sav'd! O that it had ken but One'- I
>elieve I tepeated the Words, 0 that it had been but
lœ, a thousand Times; and the Desires were so
lov'd by it, that when I spoke the Words, my
lands would clinch together, and my Fingers press
he Palms of my Hands, that if I had had any soft
Thing in my Hand, it would have crush'd it invo-
mtarily; and my Teeth in my Head.would strike
together,

<page 236>
I ml
together, and set against one another so strong, that
for some time I could not part them again.
- Let the Naturalists explain these Things, and
the Reason and Manner of them; all I can say to
them, is, to describe the Fact, which was even
surprizing to me when I found it; though I knew
not from what it should proceed, it was doubtless
the Effect of ardent Wishes, and of strong Ideas
form'd in my Mind, realizing the Comfort which
the Conversation of one os my Fellow-Christians
would have been to me. ± .
But it was not to be; either their Fate or mine,
or both, forbad it; for till the last Year of my be-
ing on this Island, I never knew whether any
were sav'd out of that Ship or no; and had only
the Affliction some Days after, to fee the Corps of
a drown'd Boy come on Shore, at the End of the
Island, which was next the Shipwreck: He had on
no Cloaths but a Seaman's Wastcoat, a Pair of
open-knee'd Linnen Drawers, and a blue Linnen
Shirt; but nothing to direct me so much as to
guess what Nation he was of. He had nothing in
his Pocket but two Pieces of Eight and a Tobac-
co-pipe; the last was to me of ten times more Va-
lue than the first-
It was now calm, and I had a great Mind to
venture out in my Boat to this Wreck, not doubt-
ing but I might find something on Board that
might be useful to me; but that did not altogether
press me so much, as the Possibility that there
might be yet some living Creature on Board, whose
Life l.might not only save, but might, by saving
that Life, comfort my own to the last Degree;
and this Thought clung so to my Heart, that I
could not be quiet Night nor Day, but I must
venture out in my Boat on Board this Wreck; and
committing the rest to God's Providence, I thought
MiV.-1' i' the

<page 237>
E *H ]
the Impression was so strong upon my Mind, that
it could not be resisted, that it must come from
some invisible Direction, and that I should be want-
ing to my self, is I did not go.
Under the Power of this Impreflion I hasten'd
back to my Castle, prepar'd every Thing for my
Voyage, took a Quantity of Bread, a great Pot for
fresh Water, a Compass to steer by, a Bottle of
Rum, for I had' still a great deal of that left ; a BaP
ket full of Raisins. And thus loading my self with
every thing necessary, I went down to my Boar,
got the Water out of her, art* got her afloat, load-
ed all my Cargo in her,'and then went Home a.1
gain for more; my second Cargo was a great Bag
full of Rice, the Umbrella to setup over my Head
for Shade, another large Pot full of fresh Water;
and about two Dozen of my small Loaves, or
Barley-Cakes, more. than before, with a Bottle of
Goat's-Milk and a Cheese: All which, with great
Labour and Sweat, I brought to my'Boat; and
praying to God to direct my Voyage, I put out,
and rowing or paddling the Canoe along the Shore,
I came at last to-the utmost Point of the Island
on that Side (viz..) Nv E. And now I was to launch
out into the Ocean, and either to vehture, or not
to venture. I look'd on the rapid Currents which
ran constantly on both Sides of the Island, at a
Distance, and which were very terrible tome,
from the Remembrance of the Hazard I bad been
in before, and my Heart began to fail me; for I
foresaw that if I was driven into either of these
Currents, I should be carry \d a vast Way out to
Sea, and perhaps out of my Reach, or Sight of the
Island again ; and that then, as my Boat was but
mail, if any little Gale of Wind should rise, I
iould be inevitably lost. ,- • ••
These


<page 238>
[ "5 ]
These Thoughts so opprefs'd my Mind, that 1
began to give over my Enterprize, and having ha-
led my Boat into a little Creek on the Shore, I
slept out, and fate me down upon a little rising
bit of Grounds very pensive and anxious, between
Fear and Desire about my Voyage; when as I was
musing, I could perceive that the Tide was turn'd,
and the Flood came on; upon which my going
was for so many Hours impracticable: Upon this,
presently it occur'd to me, that I should go up to
the highest Piece of Ground I could find, and ob-
serve, if I could, how the Sets of the Tide, or Cur-
rents lay, when the Flood eame in, that I might
judge whether if I was driven one way out, I might
not expect to be driven another Way Home,
with the fame Rapidness of the Currents: This
Thought was no sooner in my Head, but I cast my
Eye upon a little Hill, which sufficiently over-
looks the Sea both Ways, and from whence I had
a clear View of the Currents, or Sets of the Tide,
•and which Way I was to guide myself in my Re-
turn; here I found, that as the Current of the Ebb
set out close by the South Point of the Island, so
the Current of the Flood set in close by the Shore
of the North Side, and that I had nothing to do but
to keep to the North of the Island in my Return,
and I should do well enough.
Encourag'd with this Observation, I resolv'd the
next Morning to set out with the first of the Tide;
and reposing myself for the Night in the Canoe, un-
der the great Watch-coat I mentioned, I launch'd
out: i made first a little out to Sea full North, till I
began to seel the Benefit of the Current, which set
Eastward, and which carry'd me at a great Rate,
and yet did not so hurry me as the Southern Side
Current had done before, and so as to take from
me all Government of the Boat; but having a
Q. strong

<page 239>
[ "8 ]
as we had at the Brasih; and in.a Word, not atas
good; but when I came to open the Chests, J
found several Things of great Use to me: For
Example, I found in one a fine Case of Bottles, of
an extraordinary Kind, and fill'd with Cordial Wa-
ters, sine, and very good; the Bottles held about
three Pints each, and were tip'd with Silver: I
found two Pots of very good Succades, or Sweet-
meats, so fasten'd also on Top, that the Salt Water
had not hurt them; and two more of the same,
which the Water had spoil'd: I sound some very
good Shirts, which were very welcome to rue, and
about a Dozen and half of Linnen white Handker-
chiefs, and colour'd Neckloths; the former were
also very welcome, being exceeding refreshing to
wipe my Face in a hot Day; besides this, when I
came to the Till in the Chests, I found there three
great Bags of Pieces of Eight, which held out about
sleven hundred Pieces in all; and in one of them,
wrapt up in a Paper, six Doubloons of Gold, and
some small Bars or Wedges of Gold; I suppose they
night all weigh near a Pound.
The other Chest I found had some Cloaths in it,
;ut of little Value; but by the Circumstances it
mist have belong'd to the Gunner's Mate, though
here was no Powder in it, but about two Pound of
ine glaz'd Powder, in three small Flasks, kept, I
bppose, for charging their Fowling Pieces on Oc-
asion: Upon the Whole, I got very little by this
/oyage, that was of any Use to me; for as to the
Æoney, I had no Manner of Occasion for it; 'twas
) me as the Dirt under my Feet; and I would
ave given it all for three or four Pair of EngHfo
hoes and Stockings, which were
Things I greatly
anted, but had not had on my Feet now for
any YearS: I had, indeed, gotten two Pair °f
loes now, which I took off of the Feet of the
two

<page 240>

C "9 ]
two drown'd Men, who I saw in the Wreck; and
I found two Pair more in one of the Chests, which
were very welcome to me; but they were not like
our English Shoes, either for Ease or Service, being
rather what we call Pumps than Shoes: I found
in this Seaman's Chest about fifty Pieces of Eight
in Royals, but no Gold; I suppose this belong'd
to a poorer Man than the other, which seem'd to
belong to some Officer.
Weli, however, I lug'd this Money home to
my Cave, and laid it up, as I had done that before,
which I brought from our own Ship; but it was
great Pity, as I said, that the other Part of this
Ship had not come to my Share, for I am satisfy'd
I might have loaded my Canoe several Times over
with Money, which, if I had ever escap'd to Eng-
land, would have lain here" safe enough till I might
have come again and fetch'd it.
Having now brought all my Things on Shore,
and sccur'd them, I went back to my Boat, and
row'd or paddled her along the Shore to her old
Harbour, where I laid her up, and made the best
of my way to my old Habitation, where I found
every Thing safe and quiet; so I began to repose
my self, live after my old Fashion, and take
Care of my Family - Affairs ; and for a while, I
lived easy enough, only that I was more vigilant
than I used to be, look'd out oftner, and did not
go abroad so much; and if at any time I did stir
with any Freedom, it was always to the East
Part of the Island, where I was pretty well satis-
fy'd the Savages never came, and where I could
go without so many Precautions, and such a Load
of Arms and Ammunition, as I always carry'd with
me, if I went the other Way.
I liv'd in this Condition near two Years more;
but my unlucky Head, that Was always to let me
Q.3 know

<page 241>
:now it was born to make my Body miserable,
was all the two Years fill'd with Projects anc}
Designs, how, if it were possible, I might get away
rom this Island; for sometimes I was for making
mother Voyage to the Wreck, though my Rea-
bn told me that there was nothing left there worth
:he Hazard of my Voyage: Sometimes for a
Ramble one Way, sometimes another; and I be*
ieve verily, if I had had the Boat that I went from
SaSee in, I should have ventur'd to Sea, bound any
where I knew not whither.
I have been, in all my Circumstances, a Memento
:o those who are touch d with the general Plague
of Mankind, whence, for ought I know, one Half
of their Miseries flow; I mean, that of not being
satisfy'd with the Station wherein God and Na-
ture hath plac'd them; for not to look back upon
my primitive Condition, and the excellent Advice
pf my Father, the Opposition to which, was,
as I may call it, my Original Sin, my subsequent
Mistakes of the fame Kind had been the Means of
my coming into this miserable Condition; for had
that Providence, which so happily had seated me
at the Braftls, as a Planter, bless'd me with con-
fin'd Desires, and I could have been contented to
have gone on gradually, I might have been by this
Time, / mean in the Ttme of my being in this Ist^d,
pne of the most considerable Planters in the Bra-
silt; nay, I am perswaded, that by the Improve-
ments I had made in that little Time I liv'd there,
and the Encrease I should prpbably have made, is I
jhad stay'd, I might have been worth an hundred
thousand Moyadorps; and what Business had I to
|eave a settled Fortune, a well-stock'd Plantation,
jmprpving and encreasing, to turn Supra Cargo to
puinea, tp fetch Negroes, when Patience and
wpuld hay? so encreas'd pur Stock at


<page 242>
Home, that we could have bought them at our own
Door, from those whose Business it was to fetch
them? and tho' it had cost us something more, yet
the Disference of that Price was by no means worth
saving at so great a Hazard.
But as this is ordinarily the Fate of young Heads,
so Reflection upon the Folly of it; is as ordinarily
the Exercise of more Years, or of the dear-bought
Experience of Time; and so it was with me now;
and yet so deep had the Mistake taken root in
my Temper that I could not satisfy myself in my
Station, but was continually poring upon the
Means and Possibility of my Escape from this Place j
and that I may with the greater Pleasure to the
Reader bring on the remaining Part of my Story,
it may not be improper to give some Account of
my first Conceptions on the Subject of this foolish
Scheme for my Escape; and how, and upon what
Foundation I acted.
I am now to be suppos'd retired into my Castle,
after my late Voyage to the Wreck, my Frigate
laid up, and sccur'd under Water, as usual, and my
Condition restored to what it was before: I had
more Wealth indeed, than I had before, but was
not at all the richer; for I had no more Use for it,
than the Indians of Peru had before the Spaniards
came there.'
It was one of the Nights, in the rainy Season in
March, the sour and twentieth Year of my first
setting Foot in this Island of Solitariness, I was
lying in my Bed, or Hammock, awake, very well
in Health, had no Pain, no Distemper, no Unea-
siness of Body, no, nor any Uneasiness of Mind,;
more than ordinary, but could by no Means
close my Eyes; that is, so as to sleep; no, not a
.Wink all Nightlong, otherwise than as follows;'
•i 'fim&h'lxr.., 4".. •: .im^fe'
0.4 «

<page 243>
It is as impossible as needless, to set down the
innumerable Crowd of Thoughts that whirl'd
through that great Thorowfair of the Brain, the
Memory, in this Night's Time: I run over the
whole History of my Life in Miniature, or by
Abridgment, as I may call it, to my coming to this
Island; and also of the Part of my Life since I
came to this Island. In ray Reflections upon the
State of my Cafe, since I came on Shore on this
Island, I was comparing the happy Posture of my
Affairs in the first Years of my Habitation here,
compar'd to the Life of Anxiety, Fear, and Care,
which I had liv'din ever since I had seen the Print of
a Foot in the Sand; not that I did not believe the
Savages had frequented the IJlandeven nil the while,
and might have been several Hundreds of them at
times on Shore there; but I had never known it,
and was incapable of any Apprehensions about it;
my Satisfaction was perfect, tho' my Danger was
the fame; and I was as happy in not knowing my
Danger, as if I had never really been expos'd to it.
This furnish'd my Thoughts with many very pro-
fitable Reflections, and particularly this one, How
infinitely good that Providence is, which has pro-
vided in its Government of Mankind such narrow
Bounds to his Sight and Knowledge of Things;
and tho' he walks in the Midst of so many thou-
sand Dangers, the Sight of which, if discover'd to
him, would distract his Mind, and sink his Spirits,
he is kept serene and calm, by having the Events
of Things hid from his Eyes, and knowing no-
thing of the Dangers which surround him. H.'
After these Thoughts had for some Time enter-
tain'd me, I came to reflect seriously upon the real
Danger I had been in for so many Years in this
very Jfland; and how I had walk'd about in the
greatest Security, and with all possible Tranquili-
V'

<page 244>
08 J
ty; even when perhaps nothing but a Brow of a
Hill, a great Tree, or the casual Approach of,
Night, had been between me and the worst Kind
of Destruction, viz.. That of falling into the Hands
of Canibals and Savages, who would have sciz'd
on me with the fame View as I did of a Goat or
a Turtle, and have thought it no more a Crime to
kill and devour me, than I did of a Pidgeon or a
Curlieu: I should unjustly slander myself, if I
should say I was not sincerely thankful to my
great Preserver, to whose singular Protection I ac-
knowledge with great Humility, that all these
unknown Deliverances were due; and without
•which I must inevitably have fallen into their mer-
ciless Hands.
When these Thoughts were over, my Head was
for some time taken up in considering the Nature
of these wretched Creatures, I mean the Savages;
and how it came to pass in the World, that the
wife Governour of all Things should give up any
of his Creatures to such Inhumanity; nay, to
something so much below even Brutality itself, as
to devour its own Kind; but as this ended in some
(at that time fruitless) Speculations, it occur'd
to me to enquire, what Part of the World these
Wretches liv'd in; how far oft the Coast was from
whence they came; what they ventur'd over so far
from Home for; what Kind of Boats they had;
and why I might not order myself, and my Busi-
ness so, that I might be as able to go over thither,
as they were to come to me.
I never so much as troubled myself to consider
what I should do with myself when I came thi-
ther; what would become of me, if I fell into the
Hands of the Savages; or how I should escape from
them, if they attempted me; no, nor so much as
how it was possible for me to reach the Coast, and
''r, '' . . not

<page 245>
C134 ]
not be attempted by some or other of them, with-
out any Possibility of delivering myself; and if I
should not fall into their Hands, what I should do
for Provision, or whither I mould bend my Course;
none of these Thoughts, I fay, so much as came
in my Way; but ray Mind was wholly bent upon
the Notion of my passing over in my Boat to the
main Land : I look'd back upon my present Con-
dition, as the most miserable that could possibly be,
that I was not able to throw myself into any thing
but Death, that could be call'd worse; that is I
reach'd the Shore of the Main, I might perhaps
meet with Relief, or I might coast along as I did
on the Shore of Africk, till I came to some in-
habited Country, and where I might find some Re-
lief; and after all, perhaps I might fall in with
some Christian Ship that might take me in; and
if the worst came to the worst, I could but die,
which would put an end to all these Miseries at
once. Pray note, all this was the Fruit of a dis-
turbs Mind, an impatient Temper, made as it
were desperate, by the long Continuance of my
Troubles, and the Disappointments I had met in
the Wreck I had been on Board of, and where 1
had been so near the obtaining what I so earnestly
long'd for, viz,, some Body to speak to, and to learn
some Knowledge from of the Place where I was,
and of the probable Means of my Deliverance:
I fay, I was agitated wholly by these Thoughts.
All my Calm of Mind in my Resignation to Pro-
vidence, and waiting the Issue of the Dispositions
of Heaven, feem'd to be suspended; and I had, as
it were, no Power to turn my Thoughts* to any
Thing, but to the Pro;ect of a Voyage to the
Main, which came upon me with such Force, and
such an Impetuosity of Desire, that it was not to
be resisted,
When

<page 246>

When this had agitated my Thoughts for two
Hours or more with such Violence, that it set
my very Blood into a Ferment, and my Pulse beat
as high as if I had been in a Fever, merely with
the extraordinary Fervour of my Mind about it,
Nature, as if I had been fatigued and exhausted
with the very Thought of it, threw me into a
found Sleep: One would have thought I should
have dream'd of it; but I did not, nor of any
Thing relating to it; but I dream'd, that as I was"
going out in the Morning, as usual, from my Castle,
1 saw upon the Shore two Canoes, and eleven Sava-
ges coming to Land, and that they brought with
them another Savage, who they were going to kill,
in order to eat him; when on a sudden, the Sa-
vage that they were going to kill, jump'd away
and ran for his Life; and I thought in my Sleep,
that he came running into my little thick Grove
before my Fortification to hide himself; and that
I seeing him alone, and not perceiving that the o-
ther sought him that way, shew'd myself to him,
and, smiling upon him, encourag'd him; that he
kneel'd down to me, seeming to pray me to assist
him; upon which I shew'd my Ladder, made him
go up, and carry'd him into my Cave, and he be-
came my Servant; and that as soon as I had got-
ten this Man, I said to myself, now I may cer-
tainly venture to the Main Land; for this Fellow
will serve me as a Pilot, and will tell me what to
do, and whither to go for Provisions; and whi-
ther not to go for fear of being devourd, what Pla-
ces to venture into, and what to escape: I wak'd
with this Thought, and was under such inexpres-
sible Impressions of Joy at the Prospect of my Escape
in my Dream, that the Disappointments which I felt
upon coming to myself, and finding it was no
more than a Dream, were equally extravagant the
other






<page 247>
[ 1J<* ]
other Way, and threw me into a very great Dejec-
tion of Spirit. ...
Upon this, however, I made this Conclusion,
That my only Way to go about an Attempt for an
Escape, was, if possible, to get a Savage into my
Possession; and, if possible, it should be one of their
Prisoners, who they had condemn'd to be eaten,
and should bring thither to kill; but these
Thoughts still were attended with this Difficulty,
that it was impossible to effect this, without at-
tacking a whole Caravan of them, and killing them
all; and this, was not only a very desperate At-
tempt, and might miscarry; but, on the other
hand, I had greatly scrupled the Lawfulness of it to
me, and my Heart trembled at the Thoughts of
shedding so much Blood, tho' it was for my Deli-
verance. I need not repeat the Arguments which
occur'd to me against this, they being the fame
mention'd before: But tho' I had other Reasons to
offer now, (viz,.) that those Men were Enemies to
my Life, and would devour me, if they could;
that it was Self-preservation in the highest Degree,
to deliver myself from this Death of a Lise, and
was acting in my own Defence, as much as if they
were actually assaulting me, and the like. I fay,
tho' these Things argued for it, yet the Thoughts
of shedding humane Blood for my Deliverance,
were very terrible to me, and such as I could
by no Means reconcile my self to a great
while.
However, at last, after many secret Disputes
with myself, and after great Perplexities about
it; for all these Arguments, one way and another,
struggled in my Head a long Time; the eager
prevailing Desire of Deliverance at length master'd
all the rest; and I resolv'd, if possible, to get one
of those Savages ,into my Hands, cost what it
would,

<page 248>
t *37 ]
would. My next Thing then was to contrive how-
to do it, and this indeed was very disficult to re-
solve on: But as I could pitch upon no probable
Means for it, so I resolv'd to put myself upon the
Watch, to see them when they came on Shore,
and leave the rest to the Event, taking such Mea-
sures as the Opportunity should present, let be what
would be.
• With these Resolutions in my Thoughts, I set
myself upon the Scout, as often as possible, and
indeed so often, till I was heartily tir'd of it; for
it was above a Year and half that I waited, and
for great part of that Time went out to the West
End, and to the South West Corner of the Island,
almost every Day, to fee for Canoes, but none
appear'd. This was very discouraging, and began
to trouble me much; tho' I cannot say that it did
in this Cafe, as it had done some Time before that,
(viz.) wear off the Edge of my Desire to the Thing.
But the longer it seem'd to be delay'd, the more
eager I was for it; in a Word, I was not at first so
careful to shun the Sight of these Savages, and
avoid being seen by them, as I was now eager to
be upon them.
Besides, I fancy'd myself able to manage one,
nay, two or three Savages, if I had them, so as to
make them entirely Slaves to me, to do what-
ever I should direct them, and to prevent their
being able at any Time to do me any Hurt. It
was a great while, that I pleas'd myself with this
Affair, but nothing still presented; all my Fancies
and Schemes came to nothing, sot no Savages came
near me for a great while.
About a Year and half after I had entertain'd
these Notions, and, by long musing, had as it were
resolv'd them all into nothing, for want of an Oc-
casion to put them in Execution, I was surpriz"d
one


<page 249>
C 1J8 ]
one Morning early, with seeing no less than sivfi
GzHC*s all on Shore together on my side the Island;
and the People who belong'd to them all landed,.
and out of my Sight: The Number of them broke
all my Measures; for seeing so many, and know-
ing that they always came four or six, or sometimes
more, in a Boat, I could not tell what to think of
it, or how to take my Measures, to attack twen-
ty or thirty Men single handed; so I lay still in
my Castle, perplexed and discomforted: However,
lput myself into all the same Postures for an At-
tack, that I had formerly provided, and was ;ust
ready for Action, if any thing had presented. Ha-
ving waited a good while, listening to hear if they
made any Noise; at length, being very impatient,
I set my Guns at the Foot of my Ladder, and
clamber'd up to the Top of the Hill, by my two
Stages as usual; standing so, however, that my
Head did not appear above the Hill, so that
they could not perceive me by any means: Here
1 observed, by the Help of my Perspective Glafe,
that they were no less than thirty in Number, that
:hey had a Fire kindled, that they had had Meat
irefs'd; how they had cook'd it, that I knew not,
)r what it was; but they were all dancing in I
mow not how many barbarous Gestures and Fi-
gures their own Way, round the Fire.
While. I was thus looking on them, I perceiv'd,
>y my Perspective, two miserable Wretches drag'd
rom the Boats, where it seems they were laid by,
nd were now brought out for the Slaughter. I
lerceiv'd one of them immediately fell, being
nock'd down, I suppose with a Club or Wooden
word, for that was their Way, and two or three
ithers were at Work immediately cutting him open
)r their Cookery, while the other Victim was left
;anding by himself, till they ihould be ready foe

<page 250>
C 3
hifik In that very Moment this poor Wretch see-
ing himself a little at Liberty, Nature inspir'd him
with Hopes of Life, and he started away from
them, and ran with incredible Swiftness along the
Sands directly "towards me, I mean, towards that
part of the Coast where my Habitation was.
I was dreadfully frighted, (that I must acknow-
ledge) when I perceiv'd him to run my Way; and
especially, when as I thought I saw him pursued
by the whole Body; and now I expected that Part
of my Dream was coming to pass, and that he
would certainly take Shelter in my Grove; but I
could not depend by any Means upon my Dream
for the rest of it, (viz,.) that the other Savages
would not pursue him thither, and find him there.
However I kept my Station, and my Spirits began
to recover, when I sound that there was not above
three Men that folio w'd him and still more was I
encourag'd, when I found that he outstript them
exceedingly in Running, and gain'd Grdund of
them, so that if he could but hold it for half an
Hour, I saw easily he would fairly get away from
them all.
There was between them and my Castle the
Creek which I mentioned often at the first Part of
my Story, when I landed my Cargoes out of the
Ship; and this, I saw plainly, he must neeeflarily
swim over, or the poor Wretch would be taken
there: But when the Savage escaping came thi-
ther, he made nothing of it, tho' the Tide was
then up, but plunging in, swam thro' in thir-
ty Strokes or thereabouts, landed, and ran on
with exceeding Strength and Swiftness; when thic
three Persons came to the Creek, I found that two
of them could swim, but the third could not,
and that standing on the other Side, he look'd at
the other, but went no farther; and soon after went
softly

<page 251>
[240 ]
softly back again, which, as it happen'd, was ve^
ry well for him in the main.
I observ'd, that the two who swam, were yet
more than twice as long swimming over the Creek,
as the Fellow was that fled from them: It came
now very warmly upon my Thoughts, and indeed
irresistibly, that now was my Time to get me a
Servant, and perhaps a Companion or Assistant;
and that I was call'd plainly by Providence to save
this poor Creature's Life; I immediately run down
the Ladders with all possible Expedition, fetch'd
my two Guns, for they were both but at the Foot
of the Ladders, as I observ'd above; and getting
. up again with the same Haste to the Top of the
Hill, I cross'd toward the Sea; and having a very
short Cut, and all ^down Hill, clap'd myself in
the way between the Pursuers and the Pursued;
hollowing aloud to him that fled, who looking
back, was at first perhaps as much frighted at me
as at them; but I beckon'd with my Hand to him
to come back, and in the mean time I slowly ad-
vanc'd towards the two that follow'd; then rushing
at once upon the foremost, I knock'd him down with
the Stock of my Piece: I was loth to fire, because
I would not have the reft hear; though at that
Distance it would not have been easily heard;
and being out of Sight of the Smoak too, they
would not have easily known what to make of it s
.Having knock'd :his Fellow down, the other, who
pursu'd him stop'd, as if he had been fright-
ed; and I advanc'd apace towards him; but as I
came nearer, I perceiv'd presently he had a Bow
and Arrow, and was fitting it to moot at me; so I
was then necessitated to shoot at him first, which I
,did, and kill'd him at the first Shoot; the poor Savage
who fled, but had stop'd, though he saw both
.his Enemies fallen, aud kill'd, as he thought; yet

<page 252>
[ 24i ]
was so frighted with the Fire, and Noise of my
Piece, that he stood stock.still, and neither came
forward or went backward, tho' _he seem'd rather
inclin'd to fly still, than to come on; I hollow'd
"again to him, and made Signs to come forward,
which he easily understood, and came a little Way,
then stopp'd again and then, a little farther, and
stopp'd again; and I could then perceive that he
stood trembling, as if he had been taken Prisoner,
and had just been to be kilsd, as his two Enemies
were: I beckon'd him again to come to me, and
gave him all the Signs of Encouragement that I
could think of, and he came nearer and nearer,
kneeling down every ten or twelve Steps, in Token
'of Acknowledgment for my saving his Life: I smil'd
at him, and look'd pleasantly, and beckon'd to him
to come still nearer; at length he came close to me,
and then he kneel'd down again, kitVd the Ground,
and laid his Head upon the Ground, and takirig
me by the Foot, set my Foot upon his Head;
this, it seems, was in Token of swearing to be my
Slave for ever. I took him up, and made much of
him, and encourag'd him all I could: But there
was more Work to do yet, for I perceiv'd the Sa-
vage, whom I knock'd down, was not kill'd, but
stunn'd with the Blow, and began to come to him-
self^ so I 'pointed to him, and ihowing him the Sa-
vage, that he was not dead; upon this he spoke
some Words to me, and tho' I could not understand
them, yet I thought they were pleasant to hear, for
they were the first Sound of a Man's Voice that I
had heard, my own excepted, for above twenty five
Years. But there was no Time for such Reflecti-
ons now; the Savage, who was knock'd down,
recover'd himself so far, as to sit up upon the
Ground, and I perceiv'd that my Savage began to
be afraid but When I saw that I presented my o-
R thex

<page 253>
[ *4* ]
ther Piece at the Man, as if I would shoot him;
upon this my Savage, for so I call him now, made
a Motion to me to lend him my Sword, which hung
naked in a Belt by my Side; so I did: He no soon-
er had it, but he runs to his Enemy, and at one
Blow cut off his Head as cleverly, no Executioner
in Germany could have done it sooner or better;
which I thought very strange, for one, who I had
Reason to believe never law a Sword in his Life be-
fore, eicept their own wooden Swords; however,
it seems, as I learn'd afterwards, they make their
wooden* Swords so sharp, so heavy, and the Wcod
is so hard, that they will cut off Heads even with
them, aye and Arms, and that at one Blow too:
When he had done this, he comes laughing to me
in Sign of Triumph, and brought me the Sword
again, and with abundance of Gestures, which I
did not understand, laid it down with the Head of
the Savage that he hadkill'd, just before me.
But that which astonifh'd him most, was to
know how I had kill'd the other Indian so far off;
so, pointing to him, he made Signs to me to let
him go to him; so I bad him go, as well as I could;
when became to him, he stood like one amaz'd,
looking at him, turn'd him first on one Side, then
on t'other, look'd at the Wound the Bullet had
made, which, it seems, was just in his Breast, where
it had made a Hole, and no great Quantity of
Blood had follow'd, but he had bled inwardly, f°r
he was quite dead: He took up his Bow and Ar-
rows, and came back, so I turn'd to go away, and
beckon'd to him to follow me, making Signs to
him, that more might come after them.
Upon this he sign'd to me, that he should bury
them with Sand, that they might not be seen by
the rest if they follow'd; and so I made Signs again
to him to do so; he fell to work, and in an Instant
he

<page 254>
C;*43 ]
he had scrap'd a Hole in the Sand with his Hands,
big enough .to bury the first in, and then dragg'd
him into it, and cover'd him, and did so also by
the other; I believe he had bury d them both in a
Quarter of an Hour; then calling him away, I car-
ry 'd him not to my Castle, but quite away to my
Cave, on the farther Part of the Island; so I did
not let my Dream come to pass in that Part, viz.
That he came into my Grove for Shelter.
Here I gave him Bread, and a Bunch of Raisins
to eat, and a Draught of Water, which I found he
was indeed in great Distress for, by his Running -y
and having refreshed him, I made Signs for him to
go lie down and sleep, pointing to a Place where
I had laid a great Parcel of Rice Straw, and a
Blanket upon it, which I used to sleep upon my
self sometimes; so the poor Creature laid down,
and went to sleep.
He was a comely handsome Fellow, perfectly well
made, with strait strong Limbs, not too large, tall
and well sliap'd, and, as I reckon, about twenty six
Years of Age. He had a very good Countenance,
not a fierce and surly Aspect, but seensd to have
something very Manly in his Face, and yet he had
all the Sweetness and Softness of an European in his
Countenance too, especially when he smisd. His
Hair was long and black, not cursd like Wool; his
Forehead very high, and large, and a great Vivacity
and sparkling Sharpness in his Eyes. The Colour of
his Skin was not quite black, but very tawny, and
yet not of an ugly yellow nauseous Tawny, as the
Brapliam, and Virginians, and other Natives of A-
merica are, but of a bright Kind of a dun Olive Co-
lour, that had in it something very agreeable, tho'
not very easy to describe. His Face was round
and plump, his Nose small, not fiat like the Ne-
groes, a very good Mouth, thin Lips, and his
R 2 sine

<page 255>
[ M4 j
fine Teeth well set, and white as Ivory. After he
had flumbercl, rather than Jlept, abcut half an
Hour, he wak'd again, and comes out of the Cave
to me; for I had been milking my Goats which I
had in the Enclosure just by: When he efpy'd me,
he came running to,me, laying himself down a-
gain upon the Ground, with all the poilible Sigss
of an humble thankful Disposition, making a
many antick Gestures to show it: At last he lays
his Head flat upon the Ground, close to my Foot,
and sets my other Foot upon his Head, as he had
done before and after this, made all the Signs to
me of Subjection, Servitude, and Submission ima-
ginable, to let me know how he wculd serve me as
long as he livei. I understood him in many Things,
and let him know I was very well pleas'd with
him; in a little Time I began to speak to him,
and teach him to speak to me ^ and first, I made
him know his Name lhould be Fiiday, which was
the Day I sav'd his Lise I call'd him so for the
Memory of the Time; I likewise taught him to
say Master, and then let him know that was to
be mv Name; I likewise taught him to say Tes
and No, .and to know the Meaning of them, I
gave him some Milk, in an earthen Pot, and let
him . see me drink it before him, and sop my
Bread, in it; and I gave him a Cake of Bread, to
do the like, which he quickly comply'd with, and
made Signs that it was very good for him.
I kept there with him all that Night, but as
Toon as it was Day, Ibcckoisci to him to come with
me, and let him know I would give him some
Cloaths, at which he seem'd very glad, for he was
'stark-naked: As we went by the Place where he
had bury'd the two Men, he pointed exactly t0
the Place, and shew'd me the Marks that he had
.made to find them again, making Signs to nie

<page 256>
[ -245 }
that we should dig them up again, and eat them;
at this I appear'd ver)' angry, express'd my Ab-
horrence ot it, made as if I would vomit at the
Thoughts of it, and beckon "d with my Hand to
him to come away, which he did immediately,
with great Submission. I then led him up to rhef
Top of the Hill, to fee if his Enemies were gone 5
and pulling out my Glass, I look'd and saw plain-
ly the Place where they had been, but no Appear-
ance of them, or of their Canoes; so that it was
plain that they were gone, and had left their
two Comrades behind them, without any Search
after them.
But I was not content with this Discovery, but
having now more Courage, and consequently more
Curiosity, I takes my Man Friday with me, giving
him the Sword in his Hand, with the Bow and
Arrows at his Back, which I found he could use
very dcxtroufly, making him carry one Gun for me,
and I two for myself, and away we march'd to the
Place, where these Creatures had been ; for I had
a Mind now to get some fuller Intelligence of
them: When 1 came to the Place, my very Blood
ran chill in my 4r<yns, and my Heart funk within
me at the Horror.of the Spectacle: Indeed it was a
dreadful Sight, at least it was so tome, tho' Friday
made nothing of it: The Place was cover'd with
human Bones, the Ground dy'd with their Blood,
great Pieces of Flesh left here and there, half
eaten, mangled and scorch'd ; and, in short, all the
Tokens of the triumphant Feast they had been
making there, after a Victory over their Enemies:
Isaw three Skulls, five Handstand the Bones ofthree
or four Legs and Feet, and abundance of other Parts
of the Bodies; and Friday by his Signs, made me
understand, that they brought over four Prisoners
to feast upon, that three of them were eaten up,
R 3 and

<page 257>
[ 246 ]
and that he, pointing to himself, was the fourth:
That there had been a great Battle between them,
and their next King, whose Subjects, it seems, he had
been one of ^ and that they had taken a great Num-
ber of Prisoners, all which were carry'd to several
Places by those that had taken them in the Fight,
in order to feast upon them, as was done here by
these Wretches upon those they brought hither.
I caus'd Friday to gather all the Skulls, Bones,
Flesh, and whatever remain'd, and lay them toge-
ther on a Heap, and make a great Fire upon it,
and burn them all to Allies: I found Friday had still
a hankering Stomach after some of the Flesh, and
was still a Cannibal in his Nature; but I disco-
vers so much Abhorrence at the very Thoughts of
it, and at the least Appearance of it, that he durst
not discover it * for I had, by some Means, let him
know, that I would kill him if he offer'd it.
When we had done this, we came back to our
Castle, and there I fell to work for my Man Fridays
and first of all I gave him a Pair of Liuen Draw-
ers which I had out of the poor Gunner's Chest I
mention'd, and which I found in the Wreck, and
which, with a little Alteration,fitted him very well;
then I made him a Jerkin of Goat's-skin, as well as
my Skill would allow; and I was now grown a
tolerable good Taylor; and I gave him a Cap,
which I had made of a Hare-lkin, very convenient,
and fashionable enough; and thus he was cloath d
for the present, tolerably well, and was mighty
wellpleas'd to fee himself almost as wellcloath'd
as his Master: It is true, he went awkardly w
these Things at first: Wearing the Drawers was
very awkard to him, and the Sleeves of the Wast-
coat gall'd his Shoulders, and the Infide of his
Arms ; but a little easing them, where he complain'd

<page 258>
[ 247 J.
they hurt him, and using himself to them, at
length he took to them very well.
The next Day, after I came Home to my Hutch
with him, I began to consider where I should lodge
him; and that I might do well for him, and yet be
perfectly easy myself, I made a little Tent for him
in the vacant Place between my two Fortifications,
in the Inside of the last, and in the Outside of the
first: And as there was a Door or Entrance there
into my Cave, I made a formal fram'd Door-case,
and a Door to it of Boards, and set it up in the
Passage, a little within the Entrance ^ and causing
the Door to open on the Inside, I barr'd it up in
the Night, taking in my Ladders too; so that Fri-
day could no Way come at me in the" Inside of my
innermost Wall, without making so much Noise in
getting over, that it must needs waken me; for my
first Wall had now a compleat Roof over it of long
Poles, covering all my Tent, and leaning up to the
Side of the Hill, which was again laid cross with
smaller Sticks instead of Laths, and then thatch'd
over a great Thickness with the Rice Straw, which
was strong like Reeds; and at the Hole or Place
which was left to go in or out by the Ladder, I had
plac'd a kind of Trap-door, which if it had been
attempted on the . Outside, would not haveopen'd
at all, but would have fallen down, and made a
great Noise; and as to Weapons, I took them all
in to my Side every Night.
But I needed none of all this Precaution for ne-
ver Man had a more faithful, loving, sincere Ser-
vant than Friday was to me; without Passions,
Sullenness, or Designs, perfectly oblig'd and en-
gag'd hii very Affections were ty'd to me, like
those of a Child to a Father; and I dare say, he
would have sacrific'd his Life for the saving mine,
upon any Occasion whatsoever ; the many Testimo-
ny .f*ryL%ak>

<page 259>
. t *4* ]
mes he gave me of this, put it out of DouTrt, and
soon convincd me, that I needed to use no Precau-
tions as to my Safety on his Account.
This frequently gave me Occasion to observe,
and that with wonder, that however it had pleas'd
God in his Providence, and in the Government of
the Works of his Hands, to take from so great a
Part of the World of his Creatures, the best Uses to
which their Faculties and the Powers of their
Souls are adapted; yet that he has bestow'd upon
them the fame Powers, the fame Reason, the same
Affections, the fame Sentiments of Kindness and
Obligation, the fame Passions and Resentments
of Wrongs, the fame Sense of Gratitude, Sinceri-
ty, Fidelity, and all the Capacities of doing Good,
and receiving Good, that he has given to us; and
that when he pleases to offer to them Occasions of
exerting these, they are as ready, nay, more ready
to apply them to the right Uses for which they
were bestow'd, than we are. And this made me
very melancholy sometimes, in reflecting, as the
several Occasions presented, how mean a Use we
make of all these, even though we have these Po-
wers enlighten'd by the great Lamp of Instruction,
the Spirit of God, and by the Knowledge of his
Word added to our Understanding; and why it
has pleas'd God to hide the like saving Knowledge
from so many Millions of Souls, who (\i I might
judge by this poor Savage) would make a much
better Use of it than we did.
From hence I sometimes was led too far to
invade the Sovereignty of Providence, and, as it
were,arraignthe Justice of so arbitrary a Disposition
of Things, that should hide that Light from some,
and reveal it to others, and yet expect a like Du-
tv from both: But I shut it up, and check'd my
Thoughts with this Conclusion, ;ft, That we did

<page 260>
t 249 ]
not know by what Light and Law these should be
condemn'd; but that as God was necessarily, and,,
by the Nature of his Being, infinitely holy and
just, so it could not be, but that if these Crea-
tures were all fentencd to Absence from himself,,
it was on Account of sinning against that Light,'
which, as the Scripture fays, was a Law to them-
selves, and by such Rules as their Consciences would
acknowledge to be just, tho'the Foundation was not
discover'd to us. And, 2dly, That still as we aye. all
the Clay in the Hand of the Pot.ter, no Veljel
could fay to him, Why hast thou form'd me thus?' .
But to return to my new Companion : I was
greatly delighted with him, and made it my Busi-
ness to teach him every Thing that was proper to'
make him useful, handy, and helpful; but especi-
ally to make him speak, and understand me when
I spake and he was the aptest Scholar that ever
was, and particularly was so merry, so constantly
diligent, and so pleas'd, when he could .hut un-
derstand me or make me understand him, that it
was very pleasant to me to talk to him; and now
my Life began to be so easy, that I began to say to
myself, that could I but have been safe from more
Savages, I cared not if I was never- to remove from
the Place while I liv'd.
After I had been two or three Days return'dto
my Castle, I thought that, in order to bring Friday
off from his hprria Way of Feeding, and from the
Relish of a Canibal's Stomach, I ought to let him
taste other Flesh; so I took him out with me one
Morning to the Woods; I went, indeed, intending
to kill a Kid out of my own Flock, and bring him
home and dress it: But as I was going, I saw
a She Goat lying down in the Shade, and two.
young Kids sitting by her; I catch'd hold of Fri-
day, hold, fays I, stand still; and made Signs to him

<page 261>
[ Mo ]
not to stir, immediately I presented my Piece, shot
and kill'd one of the Kids. The poor Creature,
who had at a Distance, indeed, seen me kill the
Savage, his Enemy, but did not know, or could
imagine, how it was done, was sensibly surpnz'd,
trembled, and shook, and look'd so amaz d, that
I thought he would have sunk down. He did not
see the Kid I had shot at, or perceive I had kill'd
it, but ripp'd up his Wastecoat to feel if he was
not wounded, and, as I found, presently thought
I was resolv'd to kill him 5 For he came and
kneel'd down to me, and embracing my knees,
said a great many Things I did not understand,
but I could easily fee that the Meaning was to
pray me not to kill him.
I soon found a Way to convince him that I would
do him no Harm, and taking him up by the Hand,
laugh'd at him, and pointing to the Kid which I
had kill'd, beckond to him to run and fetch it,
which he did; and while he was wondering and
looking to fee how the Creature was kill'd, I load-
ed my Gun again, and by-and-by I saw a great
Fowl like a Hawk sit upon a Tree within Shot;
so, to let Friday understand a little what I would do,
I call'd him to me again, pointing at the Fowl,which
was indeed a Parrot, tho I thought it had been a
Hawk; I fay, pointing to the Parrot, and to myGun,
and to the Ground under the Parrot, to let him fee
I would make it fall, I made him understand that
I would shoot and kill that Bird; accordingly I
fir'd, and bad him look, and immediately he saw
the Parrot fall; he stood like one frighted again,
notwithstanding all I had said to him; and I found
he was the more amaz'd, because he did not see
me put anything into the Gun; but thought that
there must be some wonderful Fund of Death and
Destruction in that Thing, able to. kill Man, Beast,
Bird,

<page 262>
[ *!• ]
Bird, or anything, near or far off; and the Asto-
nishment this created in him was such, as could
not wear off for a long Time; and I believe, if I
would have let him, he would have worfhipp'd
me and my Gun: As for the Gun itself, he would,
not so much as touch it for several Days after; but
would speak to it, and talk to it, as if it had an-
fwer'd him, when he was by himself; wnich, as I
afterwards learn'd of him, was to desire it not to
-kill him.
Well: After his Astonishment was a little over
at this, I pointed to him to run and fetch the Bird
I had shot, which he did, but stay'd some Time 5
for the Parrot not being quite dead, was mttter'd
a good Way off from the Place where she fell;
however, he found her, took her up, and brought (
her to me; and, as I had perceiv'd his Ignorance
about the Gun before, I took this Advantage to
charge the Gun again, and not let him fee me do
it, that I might be ready for any other Mark that
might present; but nothing more offer'd at that
Time; so I brought home the Kid, and the same
Evening took the Skin off, and cut it out as well
as I could; and having a Pot for that Purpose, I
boisd or stew'd some of the Flesh, and made
some very good Broth ; and after I had begun to
eat some, I gave some to my Man, who seenui
very glad of it, and lik'd it very well; but that
which was strangest to him was to fee me eat
Salt with it; he made a Sign to me, that the Salt
was not good to eat, and putting a little into his
own Mouth, he seem'd to nauseate it, and would
spit and sputter at it, washing his Mouth with fresh
Water after it; on the other Hand, I took some
Meat in my Mouth without Salt, and I pretended
to spit and sputter for want of Salt, as fast as he
had done at the Salt; but it would not do, he
would

<page 263>
would never care for Salt with his Meat, or in his
Broth; at least, not a great while, and then but a
very little.
Having thus fed him with boil'd Meat and
Broth, I was resolv'd to feast him the next Day
with roasting a Piece of the Kid; this I did by hang-
ing it before the Fire in a String, as I had seen
many People in England, setting two Poles up,
one on each hide the Fire, and one cross on the
Top, and tying the String to the cross Stick, letting
the Meat turn continually: This Friday admir'd
very much; but when he came to taste the Flesh,
he took so many Ways to tell me how well he lik'd
it, that I could not but understand him ; and at
last he told me he would never eat Man's Flesh
any more, which I was very glad to hear.
The next Day I set him to work to beating some
Corn out, and fisting it in the Manner I used to do,
as I observ'd before; and he soon understood how
to do it as well as I, especially, after he had seen
what the Meaning of it was, and that it was to
make Bread of; for after that I let him fee me
make my Bread, and bake it too, and in a little
Time Friday was able to do all the Work for me,
as well as I could do it myself.
I began now to consider, that having two Mouths
to feed instead of one, I must provide more Ground
for my Harvest, and plant a laVger Quantity of
Corn than I used to do; so I mark'd out a larger
Piece of Land, and began the Fence in the same
Manner as before, in which Friday not only work'd
/ery willingly and very hard, but did it very
:hearfully; and I told him what it was for, that it
Aras for Corn to make more Bread, because he was
low with me, and that I might have enough for
;;ui and myself too: He appear'd very sensible of
hat Part, and let me know that he thought I had
'"" much

<page 264>
[ MS ]
much more Labour upon me on his Account, than
I had for my self; and that he would work the
harder for me, if I would tell him what to do.,
This was the pleasantest Year of all the Life lied
in this Place: Jtriday began to talk pretty well, and
understand the Names of almost every Thing I had
Cccafion to call for, and of every Place I had to
fend him to, and talk a great deal to me; so that,
in short, I began now to have some Use for my
Tongue again, which indeed I had very little Oc-
casion for before ; that is to say4 about Speech: Be-
sides the Pleasure of talking to him, I had a singu-
lar Satissaction in the Fellow himself ; his simple
unfeign'd Honesty appear'd to me more and more
every Day. and I began really to love the Creature;
and on his Side, 1 believe he lov'd me more than it
was possible for him ever to love any Thing before.
I had a Mind once to try if he had any hankering
Inclination to his own Country again ; and having
learn'd him EvgliJJ) so well, that he could answer me
almost any Questions, I auYd him whether the Na-
tion that he belong'd to never conquer'd in Battle?
At which he smil'd, and said, Yes, yes, we always
fight the better •, that is, he mean'd always get the
better in Fight and so we began the following
Discourse: You always fight the better, said I, How
came you to be taken Prisoner then, Friday?
Friday, My Nation beat much, for all that.
Master, How beat; if ycur Nation beat them,
how come you to be taken? ,' f,
. Friday, They more many than my Nation in the
. Place where me was; they take one, two, three,
and me: my Nation over beat them in the yon-
der Place, where me no was; there my Natiou
take one, two, great Thousand.
Master, But why did not your Side recover you
from the Hands of your Enemies then?
t:-j Friday,

<page 265>
[ *J4 1
Friday, They run one, two, three, and me, and
make go in the Canoe; my Nation have no Canoe
that Time.
( Master, Well, Friday, and what does your Na-
tion do with the Men they take, do they cany
theni away, and eat them as these did >
Friday, Yes, my Nation eat Mans too, eat all
up.
Master, Where do they carry them?
Friday, Go to other Place, where they think.
Master, Do they come hither >
Friday, Yes, yes, they come hither; come other
else Place.
Master, Have you been here with them?
Friday, Yes, I been here ; [points to the N. W. Side
of the Island, which it seems was their Side.]
By this I understood, that my Man Friday had
formerly been among the Savages, who uied to
come on Shore on the farther Part of the Island,
on the said Man-eating Occasions that he was now
brought for; and some Time after, when I took
the Courage to carry him to that Side, being the
same I formerly mentiond, he presently knew
the Place, and told me, he was there once when
they eat up twenty Men, two Women, and one
Child: He could not tell twenty in English; but
he numbred them by laying so many Stones on a
Row, and pointing to me to tell them over.
I have told this Passage, because it introduces
what follows; that after I had had this Discourse
with him, I ask'd him how far it was from our
Island to the Shore, and whether the Canoes were
not often lost; he told me, there was no Danger,
no Canoes ever lost; but that after a little Way out
to the Sea, there was a Current, and a Wind, al-
ways one Way in the Morning, the other in the
Afternoon.
This

<page 266>
[ >55 ]
This I understood to be no more than the Sets
of the Tide, as going out, or coming in; but I
afterwards understood it was occasion'd by the
great Draft and Reflux of the mighty River Oroo-
nooko; in the Mouth or the Gulf of which River,
as I found afterwards, our Island lay; and this
Land, which I perceiv'd to the W. and N. W. was
the great Island Trinidad, on the N. Point of the
Mouth of the River. I ask'd Friday a thousand
Questions about the Country, the Inhabitants, the
Sea, the Coast, and what Nation were near; he
told me all he knew, with the greatest Openness
imaginable. I aslt'd him the Names of the several
Nations of his Sort of People, but could get no ci-
ther Name than Caribs; from whence I easily un-
derstood, that these were the Caribbees, which out
Maps place on that Part of America which reaches
from the Mouth of the River Oroonooko to Guiana,
and onwards to St. Martha: He told me, that tip a
great Way beyond theMoon, that was, beyond the
Setting of the Moon, which must be West from
their Country, there dwelt white bearded Men,
like me, and pointed to my great Whiskers, which
I mention'd before ; and that they had kill'd much
Mam, that was his Word: By all which I under-
stood, he mean'd the Spaniards, whose Cruelties in
America had been spread over the whole Countries,
and was remember d by all the Nations, from Fa-
ther to Son.
I enquir'd if he could, tell me how I might come
from this Island, and get among those white Men 5
he told me, yes, yes, I might go in two Canoe; I
could not understand what he meant, or make him
describe to me what he meant by two Came, 'till at
last, with great Difficulty, I found he meant it must
be in a large great Boat, as big as two Canoes.
TmV

<page 267>
[ *5« ]
This Part of Fridays Discourse began to relish
With me very well, and from this Time I enter-
tain'd some Hopes, that one Time or other I
might find an Opportunity to make my Escape
from this Place; and that this poor Savage might
be a Means to help me to do it
, .During the long Time that Friday has now bee*
with me, and that he began to speak to me, and
understand me, I was not wanting to lay a Foun-
dation of religious Knowledge in his Mind; par-
ticularly, I alk'd him one Time, Who made him?
The poor Creature did not understand me at all,
but thought I had alk'd who was his Father: But
I took it by another Handle, and alk'd him who
made the Sea, the Ground we walk'd on, and the
Hills and Woods; he told me it was one old Be-
xamuckee, that liv'd beyond all,: He could describe
nothing of this great Person, but that he was very
old; much older, he said, than the Sea or the Land,
than the Moon or the Stars: I afk'd him then, If
this old Person had made all Things, why did not
all Things worship him > He look'd very grare,
and with a perfedt Look of Innocence, said, All
Things said 0 to him: I alk'd him if the People,
who die in his Country; went'away anywhere?
He said, Yes, they all went to Benamuckee: Then
I alk'd him, Whether these they eat up went thi-
ther too? He said, Yes.
From these Things I began to instruct him in
the Knowledge of the true God. I told him, That
the great Maker of all Things liv'd up there,
pointing up towards Heaven: That he governs
the World by the fame Power and Providence by
which he had made it: That he <was Omnipotent,
could do every Thing for us, give every Thing to
us, take every Thing from us and thus, by De-
grees, I open'd his Eyes. He listen'd with great At-
tention

<page 268>
[ >57 ]
tention, and receivd with Pleasure the Notion of
Jesus Christ, being sent to redeem us, and of the
Manner of making our Prayers to God, and his
being able to hear us, even into Heaven. He told
me one Day, that if our God could hear us up be-
yond the Sun, he must needs be a greater God than
their Btnamuckee, who liv'd but a little "Way off,
and yet could not hear,'till they went up to the
great Mountains where he dwelt, to speak to him:
I ask'd him if ever he went thither, to speak to
him? He said, No, they never went that were
young Men; none went thither but the old Men,
who he call'd their Oowolakee, that is, as I made
him explain it to me, their Religious, or Clergy,
and that they went to fay 0, (so he call'd saying
Prayers) and then came back, and told them
what Benamuckee said. By this I observe!, That
there is Priestcraft, even amongst the most blinded
ignorant Pagans in the World; and the Policy of
making a secret Religion, in Order to preserve the
Veneration of the People to the Clergy, is not on-
ly to be found in the Roman, but perhaps among
all Religions in the World, even among the most
brutish and barbarous Savages.
I endeavour'd to clear up this Fraud to my
Man Friday, and told him, That the Pretence of
their old Men going up to the Mountains to fay 0
to their God Benamuckee, was a Cheat, and their
bringing Word from thence what he said, was
much more so; that if they met with any Answer,
or spoke with any one there, it must be with an
evil Spirit: And then I enter'd into a long Dis
course with him about the Devil, the Original of
him, his Rebellion against God, his Enmity to
Man, the Reason of it, his setting himself up in
the dark Parts of the World to be worships in-
stead of God, and as God; and the many Strata-
S gems

<page 269>
[ 3
gems he made Use of to delude Mankind to their
Ruin* how he had a secret Access to our Passions,
and to our Affections, to adapt his Snares so to our
Inclinations, as to cause us even to be our own
Tempters, and to run upon our Destruction by our
own Choice.
I found it was not so easy to imprint right No-
tions in his Mind about the Devil, as it was about
the Being of a God. Nature assisted all my Argu-
ments to evidence to him even the Necessity of a
great first Cause and over.ruling governing Power,
a secret directing Providence, and os the Equity
and Justice of paying Homage to him that made
us, and the like. But there appear'd nothing of all
this in the Notion of an evil Spirit, of his Ori-
ginal, his Being, his Nature, and above all, of his
Inclination to do Evil, and to draw us in to do
so too. And the poor Creature puzzltl me once
in such a Manner, by a Question meerly natural
and innocent, that I scarce knew what to say to
him. I had been talking a great deal to him os
the Power of God, his Omnipotence, his dreadful
Aversion to Sin, his being a consuming Fire to the
Workers of Iniquity; how, as he had made us all,
he could destroy us and all the World in a Mo-
ment; and he listen'd with great Seriousness to me
all the while.
After this, I had been telling him how the De-
vil was God's Enemy in the Hearts of Men, and
used all his Malice and Skill to defeat the good
Designs of Providence, and to ruin the Kingdom
of Christ in the World, and the like. Well, fays
Friday, but you fay, God is so strong, so great,
is he not much strong, much Might as the Devil?
Yes, yes, fays I, Friday, God is stronger than the
Devil, Gcd is above the Devil, and therefore we
pray to God to tread him down under our Feet,

<page 270>
f M9 ]
and enable us to refist his Temptations, and
quench his fiery Darts. But, fays he again, if
God much strong, much Might as the Devil, why God
no kill the Devil, so make him no more do wicked.
I was strangely surpriz'd at his Question, and
after all, tho11 was now an old Man, yet I was
but a young Doctor, and ill enough qualify'd for
a Casuist, or a Solver of Difficulties : J.nd, at first,
I could not tell what to fay, so I pretended not to
hear him, and ask'd him what he said? But he
was too earnest for an Answer to forget his Que-
stion ; so that he repeated it in the very fame broken
Words, as above. By this Time I had recovered
myself a little, and I said, God will at last punifi
him severely; be is refervd for the Judgment, and is
to be cafi into the Bottomless Pit, to dwell with ever-
lasting Fire. This did not satisfy Friday, but he
returns upon me, repeating my Words, Reserve
At last, me no understand, But, Why not kill the
Devil now, not kill great ago > You may as well ask
me, said I, Why God does not kill you and I,
when we do wicked Things here that offend him?
We are preserv'd to repent and be pardon'd; He
muses a while at this; Well, well, fays he, mighty
affectionately, that well; so you, J, Devil, all wick-
ed, all preserve, repent, God pardon all. Here I was
run down again hy him to the last Degree, and it
was a Testimony to me, how the meer Notions of
Nature, though they will guide reasonable Crea-
tures to the Knowledge of a God, and of a Wor-
ship or Homage due to the supreme Being of God,
as the Consequence of our Nature; yet nothing but
divine Revelation can form the Knowledge of Je-
sus Christ, and of a Redemption purchas'd for us, of a
Mediator ofthe new Covenant,and of ah Intercessor,
at the Footstool of God's Throne; I fay, nothing

<page 271>
[ **> ]
the Soul; and that therefore the Gospel of out
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, I mean, the Word
of God, and the Spirit of God, promis'd for the
Guide and Sanctifier of his People, are the abso-
lutely necessary Instructors of the Souls of Men,
in the saving Knowledge of God, and the Means
of Salvation.
I therefore diverted the present Discourse be-
tween me and my Man, rising up hastily, as upon
some sudden Occasion of going out; then sending
him for something a good Way off,I seriously pray <i
, to God, that he would enable me to instruct saving-
ly this poor Savage, assisting by his Spirit the
Heart of the poor ignorant Creature, to receive
the Light of the Knowledge of God in Chrifi, re-
conciling him to himself, and would guide me jp
speak so to him from the Word of God, as his
Conscience might be convincM, his Eyes open'd,
and his Soul sav'd. When he came again to me, I
entred into a long Discourse with him upon the
Subject of the Redemption of Man by the Saviour
of the World, and of the Doctrine of the Gospel
preach'dfrom Heaven, viz. of Repentance towards
God, and Faith in our blessed Lord Jesus. I then
explain'd to him, as well as I could, why our
Blessed Redeemer took not on him the Nature of
Angels, but the Seed ef Abraham, and how for
that Reason the fallen Angels had no Share in the
Redemption^ that he came only to the lost Sheep
of the House of Israel, and the like.
I had, God hwws, more Sincerity than Know-
ledge, in all the Methods I took for this poor
Creature's Instruction, and must acknowledge what
I believe all that act upon the fame Principle will
find, That in laying Things open to him, I really
infbrm'd and instructed myself in manyThings,that
cither I did not know, or had not fully consider d
before;

<page 272>
[ »«« ]'
before, tut which occurr'd naturally to my Mind,
upon my searching into them, for the Information
of this poor Savage- and I had more Affection in
my Enquiry after Things upon this Occasion, than
ever I telt before; so that whether this poor wild
Wretch was the better for me, or no, I had great
Reason to be thankful that ever he came to me:
My Grief sate lighter upon me, my Habitation
grew comfortable to me beyond Measure; and
when I reflected that in this solitary Life, which I
had been V:onfin'd to, I had not only been mov'd
myself to look up to Heaven, and to seek to the
Hand that had brought me there * but was now
to be made an Instrument under Providence to save
the Life, and, for ought I know, the Soul of a poor
Savage, and bring him to the true Knowledge of
Religion, and of the Christian Doctrine, that he
might know Christ Jesus, to know whom is Li fe eter-
nal } I fay, When I reflected upon all these Things,
a secret Joy run through every Part of my Soul,
and I frequently rejoic d that ever I was brought to
this Place, which I had so often thought the most
dreadful of all Afflictions that could possibly have
befallen me.
In this thankful Frame I continu'd all the Re*
mainder of my Time, and the Conversation which
employ'd the Hours between Friday and I, was
such, as made the three Years which we liv'd there
together perfectly and compleatly happy, if any fitch
Thing as compleat Happiness can be form a in a sublu-
nary State- The Savage was now a good Christi-
an, a much better than I; though I have Reason
to hope, and bless God for it, that we were equally
penitent, and comforted restor'd Penitents; we
had here the Word of God to read, and no farther
off from his Spirit to instruct, than if we had been
• in England.
S 3 I always

<page 273>
[ 26 z ]
T always apply'd myself to reading the Scrip-
ture, to let him know, as well as I could, the
Meaning of what I read; and he again, by his se-
rious Enquiries and Questions, made me, ca I
said before, a much better Scholar in the Scripture
Knowledge, than I should ever have been by my
own private meer Reading. Another Thing I can-
not refrain from observing here also from Experi-
ence, in this retir'd Part of my Life, viz.. How in-
finite and inexpressible a Blessing it is, that the
Knowledge of God, and of the Dodlrine of Salva-
tion by CbriJ} Jesus, is so plainly laid down in the
Word of God, so easy to be receiv'd and under-
stood, that as the bare Reading the Scripture
made me capable of understanding enough of
my Duty, to carry me directly on to the great
Work or sincere Repentance for my Sins, and lay-
ing hold of a Saviour for Life and Salvation, to a
stated Reformation in Practice, and Obedience to
all God's Commands, and this without any Teach-
er or Instructer (I mean, humane) • so the same
plain Instruction sufficiently ferv'd to the Enlight-
ning this Savage Creature, and bringing him to
be such a Christian, as I have known few equal to
him in my Life. ,'
As to all the Disputes, Wranglings, Strife, and
Contention, which hashappessd in the World about
Religion, whether ^Niceties in Doctrines, or Schemes
of Church Government, they were a 11 perfectly use-
less tons, as for ought I can yet fee, they have
been to all the rest in the World: We had the f»*
Guide to Heaven, viz The Word of God; and we
had, blrfed be God, comfortable Views of the Sp-
rit ofGod, teaching and instructing us by his "Word,
leadhg us ivto all Trvtb, and making us both wil-
ling and obedient to the Instruction of his Word;
and I cannot fee the least Use that the greatest
• . , . . Knowledge

<page 274>
[ ,165 ]
Knowledge of the disputed Points in Religion,
which have made such Confusions in the World,
Would have been to us, if we could have obtain'd
it: But I must go on with the Historical Part of
Things, and take every Part in its Order.
After Friday and I became more intimately ac-
quainted, and that he could understand almost all
1 said to him, and speak fluently, tho' in broken
Eyglifi, to me; I acquainted him with my own
Story, or at least so much of it as related to my
coming into the Place, how I had liv'd there, and
how long. I let him into the M}Tstery, for such
it was to him, of Gunpowder and Bullet, and
taught him how to shoot : I gave him a Knife,
. which he was wonderfully delighted with, and I
made him a Belt, with a Frog hanging to it, such
as in EygUvd we wear Hangers in ; and in the Frog,
instead of a Hanger, I gave him a Hatchet, which
was not only as good a Weapon in some Cafes, but
much more useful upon other Occasions.
I describ'd to him the Country of Europe, and
particularly Epglattd, which I came from; how we
liv'd, how we worshipp'd God, how we behav'd
to one anpther •, gnd how we traded in Ships to all
Parts of the World: I gave him an Account of the
Wreck'which I had been on board of, aiid fhew'd
him, as near as I could, the Place where she lay;
but she was all beaten in Pieces before, and gone,
'ikl lhew'd'him the Ruins of our Boat, which we
lost when we efcap'd, and which I could not stir
with my whole Strength then, but was now fallen
almost: all to Pieces ,. Upon feeing this Boat, Friday
stood musing a great while, and said nothing ^ I
ask'd him what it was he study'd upon ; at last, fays
he, me see svcbBoat like come to Place at my Nation.
.•' I .'did not understand him a good while; but at
last, when I had examin'd farther into it, I under-
S 4 stood

<page 275>
[ *«4 ]
lood by him, that a Boat, such as that had been,
:ame on Shore upon the Country where he liv'd,
hat is, as he explain'd it, was driven thither by
Stress of Weather: I presently imagin'd, that some
European Ship must have been cast away upon their
Coast, and the Boat might get loose, and drive a-
Lore, but was so dull, that I never once thought
)f Men making Escape from a Wreck thither, much
;ess whence they might come; so I only enquir'd
tfter a Description of the Boat.
Friday describ'd the Boat to me well enough; but
wrought me better to understand him, when he ad-
led with some Warmth, we save the white Mam from
Irown: Then I presently ask'd him, if there was a-
ly white Mans, as he calfd them, in the Boat: Tes,
le said, the Boat full of white Mam: I ask'd him
low many * he told upon his Fingers seventeen:
[ aik'd him then, what became of them; he told
ne, they live, they dwell at my Nation.
This put new Thoughts into my Head; for I
presently imagin'd, that these might be the Men
;elonging to the Ship that was cast away in Sight
)f my Island, as I now call it; and who, after the
ihip was struck on the Rock, and they saw her
nevitably lost, had sav'd themselves in their Boat,
ind were landed upon that wild Shore, among the
lavages. . ^ •
Upon this, I enquir'd of him more critically
vhat was become of them; he affur'd me they
iv'd still there; that they had been there about
our Years that the Savages let them alone, and
;ave them Victuals to live. I ask'd him, how it
ame to pass they did not kill them and eat them;
le said, No, they make Brother with them; that is,
s I understood him, a Truce: And, then he ad-
led, They wo eat Mans but when male the War fyht:
shat is to fay, they never eat any Men, hut

<page 276>
[ *** ]
«
such as come to fight with them, and are taken
in Battle.
It was after this, some considerable Time, that
being on the Ton of the Hill, at the East Side
of the Island, from whence, as I have said, I had
in a clear Day discover'd the Main, or Continent
of America: Friday, the Weather being very serene,
looks very earnestly towards the main Land, and
in a kind'of Surprize, falls a jumping and dancing,
and calls out to me, for I was at some Distance
from him: I ask'd him what was the Matter;
O, Joy! fays he, 0 Glad! There see my Country,
there my Nation!
I observ'd an extraordinary Sense of Pleasure ap-
pear'd in his Face, and his Eyes sparkled, and his
Countenance discovers a strange Eagerness, as if
he had a Mind to be in his own Country again \
and this Observation of mine put a great many
Thoughts into me, which made me at first not so
easy about my new Man Friday as I was before;
and I made no Doubt, but that if Friday could get
back to his own Nation again, he would not only
forget all his Religion, but all his Obligation to
me, and would be forward enough to give his
Countrymen an Account of me, and come back per-
haps, with a hundred or two of them, and make a
Feast upon me, at which he might be as merry as
he used to be with those of his Enemies, when
they were taken in War.
But I wrong'd the poor honest Creature very
much, for which I was very sorry afterwards.
However, as my Jealousy increas'd, and held me
some Weeks, I was a little more circumspect, and
not so familiar and kind to him as before; in
which I was certainly in the Wrong too, the ho-
nest grateful Creature having no Thought about it,
but what consisted with the best Principles, both
as

<page 277>
[ ^6 ]
as a religions Christian, and as a grateful Friend,
as appear'd afterwards to my full Satisfaction.
While my Jealousy of him lasted, you may be
sure I was every Day pumping him, to fee if he
would discover any of the new Thoughts which I
suspected were in him; but I found every Thing
he said was so honest, and so innocent, that I
could find nothing to nourish my Suspicion ; and,
in spite of all my Uneasiness, he made me at last
entirely his own again, nor did he in the least
perceive that I was uneasy, and therefore I could
not suspect him of Deceit.
One Day walking up the same Hill, but the
Weather being haizy at Sea, so that we could not
see the Continent, 1 call'd to him, and said, Fri-
day, do not you wish yourself in your own Coun-
try, your own Nation > Tes, he said, / be much 0
glad to be at my own Nation. What would you do
there, said I, would you tarn wild again, eat Mens
Flesh ag^ain, and be a Savage as you were before?
He looFd full of Concern, and ihaking his Head,
said, No, no, Friday tell them to live good, tell them
to pray God, tell them to eat Corn-Bread, Cattk-Flep,
Milk, no eat Man again : Why then, said I to him,
They will kill you. He look'd grave at that, and
then said, No, they no kill me, they willing love learn:
He meant by this, they would be willing to learn.
He added, they learnd much of the Bearded Mans
that come in the Boat. Then I ask'd hint.if ie
would go back to them? He smil'd at that, and
told me he could not swim so far. I told him I
would make a Canoe for him. He told me, he
would go if I would go with him. I go! says I,
why, they will eat me if I come there? No,
fays he, me make they no eat you, me make they much
love you. He meant, he would tell them how I hart
-feill'd his Enemies, and sav'd his Life, and so he
. • . .......... ....*.. .„nn\A

<page 278>
[ *«7 ]
would make them love me; then he told me, as
well as he could, how kind they were to seventeen
white Men, or bearded Men, as he call'd them,
who came on Shore there in Distress.
From this Time, I confess, I had a Mind to
venture over, and fee if I could possibly join with
these bearded Men, who, I made no Doubt, were
Spaniards or Portuguese; not doubting but, if I could,
we might find some Method to escape from
thence, being upon the Continent, and a good
Company together, better than I could from an
Island 40 Miles off. the Shore, and alone without
Help. So, after some Days, I took Friday to work
again, by way of Discourse, and told him I would
give him a Boat to go back to his own Nation ,
and accordingly I carry'd him to my Frigate,
which lay on the other Side of the Island, and ha-
ving clear'd it of Water, for I always kept it funk
in the "Water, I brought it out, shew'd it him, and
we both went into it.
I sound he was a most dextrous Fellow at ma-
naging it, would make it go almost as swift and
fast again as I could $ so when he was in, I said to
him, Well, now, Friday, {hall we go to your Na-
tion? He look'd very dull at my saying so, which,
it seems, was, because he thought the Boat- too
small to go so far. I told him then I had a bigger
so the next Day I went to the Place where the
first Boat lay which I had made, but which I could
not get into Water; He said that was big enough 5
but then, as I had taken no Care of it, and it had
lain two or three and twenty Years there, the Sun
had split and dry'd it, that it was in a Manner
rotten. Friday told me,. such a Boat would do ve-
il'' well, and would carry much enough Vhtle. Drifik.

his Way of Talking.
Upon.

<page 279>
[ »«8 ]
Upon the whole, I was by this Time so fii'd
upon my Resign of going over with him to the
Continent, that I told him we would go and make
one as big as that, and he should go home in it.
He answer'd not one Word, but look'd very grave
and sad: I alk'd him what was the Matter with
him; he ask'd me again thus, Why you angry'mai
with Friday, what me done? I alk'd him what he
meant$ I told him I was not angry with him at all.
No angry! No angry! lays he, repeating the Words
several Times, Why send Friday home away to tnj
Nation? Why, fays I, Friday, did you not lay you
wish'd you were there ? Tes, yes, lays he, wijh be both
there, no wist) Friday there, no Master time. In a
Word, he would not think of going there without
me: I go there, Friday, fays I, what shall I do
there? He turn'd very quick upon me at this: Tou
do great deal much Qood, fays he, you teach wild Man
he good sober tame Mans; you tell them know God,
pray God, and live new Life. Alas, Friday, fays I,
thou knowest not what thou fay'st, I am but an
ignorant Man myself. Tes, yes, says he, you teacbu
me Good, you teachee them Good. No, no, Friday,
fays I, you shall go without me; leave me here to
live by myself, as I did before. He look'd confus'd
again at that Word, and running to one of the
Hatchets which he used to wear, he takes it up
hastily, and gives it me, What must I do with this?
says I to him s Tou take kill Friday, fays he:
What must I kill you for? said I again. He re-
turns very quick, What you fend Friday awaj
for f1 take kill Friday, no fend Friday away. This
he spoke so earnestly, that I saw Tears stand
in his Eyes. In. a Word, I sq plainly discover d
the utmost Affection in him to me, and a firm Re-
solution in him, that I told him then, and often
after, that I would never send him away from
me, if he was willing to stay with me.

<page 280>
[ 269 ]
Upon the whole, as I found by all his Discourse
a settled Assertion to me, and that nothing should
part him from me, so I found all the Foundation
of his Desire to go to his own Country, was laid
in his ardent Affection to the People, and his Hopes
of my doing them Good ; a Thing which as I had
no Notion of myself, so I had not the least Thought,
or Intention, or Desire of undertaking it. But still
I found a strong Inclination to my attempting an
•Escape, as above, founded on the Supposition ga-
ther'd from the Discourse, (viz.) That there were
seventeen bearded Men there; and therefore, with-
out any more Delay, I went to work with Friday
to find out a great Tree proper to fell, and make a
large Periagua or Canoe to undertake the Voyage.
There were Trees enough in the Island to have
built a little Fleet, not of Periaguas and Canoes,
but even of good large Vessels. But the main Thing
I look'd at, was to get one so near the Water, that
we might launch it when it was made, to avoid
the Mistake I committed at first.
At last, Friday pitch'd upon a Tree, for I found he
knew much better than I what Kind of Wood was
fittest for it; nor can I tell, to this Day,what Wood
to call the Tree we cut down, except that it was
very like the Tree we call Fustic, or between that
and the Nicaragua Wood, for it was much of the
same Colour and Smell. Friday was for burning the
Hollow or Cavity of this Tree out to make it for
a Boat: But I shewM him how rather to cut it out
with Tools; which, after I had shew'd him how
to use, he did very handily, and in about a Month s
hard Labour we finish u it, and made it very
handsome, especially when with our Axes, which I.
shew'd him how to handle, we cut and hew'd the
Out-side into the true Shape of a Boat after this,
however, it cost us near a Fortnight's Time to get
her

<page 281>
[ 17© ]
her along, as it were, Inch by Inch upon great
Rowlersinto the Water. But when she was in, she
would have carry'd twenty Men with great
Ease.
When she was in the Water, and tho' she was so
big, it amaz'd me to fee with what Dexterity and
how swift my Man Friday would manage her, turn
her, and paddle her along; so I alk'd him is he
would, and if we might venture over in her Tes, he
said, he venter over in her very well, tho' great Mm
Wind. However, I had a farther Design that he
knew nothing of, and that was to make a Mast and
Sail, and to fit her with an Anchor and Cable: As
to a Mast, that was easy enough to get ; so I pitch'd
upon a strait yotmg Cedar-Tree, which I found
near the Place, and which there was great Plenty
of in the Island-; and I set Friday to work to cut it
down, and gave him Directions how to shape and
order it. But as to the Sail, that was my particulat
Care; I knew I had old Sails, or rather Pieces of
old Sails enough; but as I had had them now
26 Years by me, and had not been very care-
ful to preserve them, not imagining that I should
ever have this kind of Use for them, I did not doubt
but they were all rotten,- and indeed most of them
were so; however, I found two Pieces which ap-
pear'd pretty good, and with these I went to work,
and with a great deal of Pains, and awkward tedi-
ous stitching (you may be sure) for Want of Needles,
I at length made a Three-cornerd ugly Thing, like
what we call in England, a Shoulder of Mutton
Sail, to go with a Boom at Bottom, and a little
short Sprit at the Top, such as usually our Ships
Long-Boats fail with, and such as I best knew how
to manage; because it was such a one as I had to
the Boat in which I made my Escape from Bar-
bary, as related in the first Part of my Story.


<page 282>
[ *U ]
I was near two Months performing this last
Work, viz. rigging and fitting my Mast and Sails }
for I fmilh'd them very compleat, making a small
Stay, and a Sail, or Foresail to it, to aflist, if we
should turn to Windward; and which was more
than all, I fix'd a Rudder to the Stern of her, to
steer with; and tho'1 was but a bungling Ship-
wright, yet as I knew the Usefulness, and even
Necessity of such a Thing, I apply'd myself with
so much Pains to do it, that at last I brought it to
pass, tho' considering the many dull Contrivances
I had for it that fail a, I think it cost me almost as
much Labour as making the Boat.
After all this was done too, I had my Man Fri-
day to teach as to what belong'd to the Navigation
of my Boat$ for tho' he knew very well how to
paddle a Canoe, he knew nothing what belong'd to
a Sail and a Rudder, and was the most ama'zd
when he saw me work the Boat too and again in
the Sea by the Rudder, and how the Sail gyb'd, and
fill'd this Way or that Way, as the Course we sail'd
chang'd ^ I say, when he saw this, he stood like
one astonilh'd and amaz'd: However, with a little
Use, I made all these Things familiar to him ; and
he became an expert Sailor, except that as to the
Compass, Ijrould make him understand very little
of that. On the other Hand, as there was very little
cloudy Weather, and seldom or never any Fogs in
those Parts, there was the less Occasion for a Com-
pass, seeing the Stars were always to be seen by
Night, and the ShoreT>y Day, except in the rainy
Seasons, and then no Body cared to stir abroad, ei-
ther by Land or Sea.
I was now enter'd on the seven and twentieth
Year of rny Captivity in this Place; tW the
three last Years that I had this Creature with me,
ought rather to be left out of the Account, my Ha-
bitation

<page 283>

[ 272 ]
fcitation being quite of another Kind than in all the
rest of the Time. I kept the Anniversary of my
landing here with the same Thankfulness to God
for his Mercies, as at first ^ and if I had such Cause
of Acknowledgment at first, I had much more so
now, having such additional Testimonies of the
Care of Providence over me, and the great Hopes
I had of being effectually and speedily delivers
for I had an invincible Impression upon my
Thoughts, that my Deliverance was at hand, and
that I should not be another Year in this Place:
However, I went on with my Husbandry, digging,
planting, fencing, as usual; I gather'd and cur'dmy
Grapes, and did every necessary Thing, as before.
The rainy Season was in the mean Time upon
me, when I kept more within Doors than at other
Times } so I had stow'd our new Vessel as secure as
we could, bringing her np into the Creek, where,
as I said in the Beginning, I landed myRafts from
the Ship, and haling her up to the Shore, at High
Water Mark, I made my Man Friday dig a little
Dock, just big enough to hold her, and just deep e-
nough to give her Water enough to float in; and
then, when the Tide was out, we made a strong
Dam cross the End of it, to keep the Water out;
and so she lay dry, as to the Tide, from the Sea;
and to keep the Rain off, we laid a great many
Boughs of Trees, so thick, that she was as well
thatch'd as a House; and thus we waited for the
Month of'November and December, in which I de-
signs to make my Adventure.
When the settled Season began to come in, as
:he Thought of my Design return'd with the fair
Weather, I was preparing daily for the Voyage;
md the first Thing I did, was to lay by a certain
Quantity of Provisions, being the Stores for oar
Voyage i and intended, in a Week or a Fortnights
Time,

<page 284>
[ 273 1
Time, to open the Dock, and launch out our Boat.
I v/as busy one Morning upon Ibme Thing of this
kind, When I call'd to Friday, and bid him go to the
i-'ea Shore, and fee if he could find a Turtle, or
Tortoise, a Thing which we generally got once a
Week, for the Sake of the Lggs, as well as the
Flesh: Friday had not been long gone, when he
came running back, and flew over my outer Wall,
or Fence, like one that felt not,the Ground, or the
Steps he set his Feet on; and before I had Time to
speak to him, he cries out to me, 0 Master! Ma-
ster! 0 Sorrow! 0 bad! What's the Matter, Friday,
fays I ^ 0 yonder, there, fays he, one, two, three Canoe!
one, two,three! By his way of speaking, I conclu-
ded these were six ; biit on Enquiry I found it was
but three: Well, Friday, fays I, do not be frighted
so I hearten'd him up as well as I could: However,
1 saw the poor Fellow was most teiribly scar'd ; for
nothing ran in his Head but that they were come to
look for him, and would cut him in Pieces, and eat
him; and the poor Fellow trembled so, that I
scarce knew what to do with him: I comforted hini
as well as I could, and told him I was in as much
Danger as he, and that they would eat me as well as
him; blit, says I, Friday, we mvst.resolve tofight them\
Can you fight, Friday? Me /boot, fays he, but there-
come many great Number. No matter for that, said
I again, our Guiis will fright them that we db not
killso T aik'd him, Whether if I resolv'd to defend
him, he would defend me, and stand by me, and do
jult as I bid him? He said, Me die, when you bid dieT
Master: so I went and fetch'd a good- Dram of
Rum, and gave him; for I had been so good a Huf-
band of my Rum, that I had a great deal left:
When he had drank it, I made him take the two
Fowling-Pieces, which we always carry'd, and load'
them with large Swan-Shot, as big as small Pistol
BulletS *

<page 285>
C 274 ]
Bullets; then I took four Muskets, and loaded them
with two Slugs, anu five small Bullets each; and
my two Pistols I loaded with a Brace of Bullets
each; I hung my great Sword as usual, naked by
my Side, and gave Fi iday his Hatchet.
When I had thus prepar'd my feif, I took my Per-
spective-Glass, and went up to the Side of the Hill,
to fee what I could discover ; and I found quickly,
by my Glass, that there were one and twenty Sava-
ges, three Prisoners, and three Canoes-, and that
their whole Business feem'd to be the triumphant
Banquet upon these three humane Bodies, (a barba-
rous fieast indeed) but nothing more than as I had
observ'd was usual with them.
I obferv'd also, that they were landed not where
the}'. had done when Friday made his Escape, but
nearer to my Creek, where the Shore was low, and
where a thick Wood came close almost down to the
S£a: This, with the Abhorrence of the inhumane
Errand these Wretches came about, fill'd me with
such Indignation, that I came down again to Fruhj,
and told him, I was resolv'd to go down to them,
and kill them all; andaiVd him if he would stand
by me > He had now gotten over his Fright, and
his Spirits being a little rais'd with the Dram I had
Ejiven him, he was very chearful, and told me, as
before, be would die, when I bid die.
In this Fit of Fury, I took first and divided the
Arms which I had charg'd, as before, between us:
I gave Fi iday one Pistol to stick in his Girdle, and
:hree Guns upon his Shoulder; and I took oue Pi-
stol', and the other three myself; and in this Po-
fture vtfe march'd out: I took a small Bottle of Rum
in my Pocket, and gave Friday a large Bag, with
more Powder and Bullet; and, as to Orders, I
-harg'd him to keep close behind me, and not to
Yir, or (hoot, or do any Thing, till I bid him; ana

<page 286>
[ *7J ]
in the mean Time, not to speak a Word: In this
Posture I fetch'd a Compass to my Right Hand of
near a Mile, as well to get over ihe Creek, as to
get into the Wocd; so that Pmight come within
Shot of them before I should be discover'd, which
I had seen by my Glass it was easy to do.
While I was making this March, my former
Thoughts returning, I began to abate my Resolu-
tion; I do not mean, that I entertain'd any Fear
of their Number; for as they were naked, unarm'd
Wretches, 'tis certain I was superior to them; nay,
though I had been alone; but it occurr d to my
Thoughts, What Call? What Occasion? much
less, What Necessity I was in to go and dip my
Hands in Blood, to attack People, who had neither
done, or intended me any Wrong? Who, as to me,
were innocent, and whose barbarous Customs were
their own Disaster, being in them a Token indeed
of Gods having left them, with the other Nations
of that Part of the World, to such Stupidity and
to such inhumane Courses; but did not call me to
take upon me to be a Judge of their Actions, much
less an Executioner of his Justice; that whenever
he thought fit, he would take the Cause into his
own Hands, and by National.Vengeance punish
them as a People for National Crimes ; but that,
in the meantime, it was none of my Business; that
it was true, Friday might justify it, because he was
a declar'd Enemy, and in a State of War with those
very particular People; and it was lawful for him
to attack them; but I could not fay the fame with
respect to me. These Things were fa warmly
prefs'd upon my Thoughts, all the Way as I went,
that I refolv'd I would only go and place myself
near them, that I might observe their barbarous
Feast, and that I would act then as God should
direct; but that unless something osfer'd that was
T 2 more

<page 287>
[ V6 ]
more a Call to me than yet I knew of, I would nos
•meddle with them.
With this Resolution 1 cnter'd the Wood, and
with all poliible Waryness and Silence, Ftiday fol-
lowing close at my Heels, I marclsd till 1 came
to tha Skirt of the Wood, on the Side which was
next to them; only that one Corner of the Wood
lay between me and them; here I calfd softly to
Friday, and shewing him a great Tree, which was
just at the Corner of the Wood. I bad him goto
the Tree, and bring me Word if he could see there
plainly what they were doing : he did so, and came
immediately bac k to me, and told me they might
he plainly view'd there; that they were all about
their Fire, eating the Flesh of one of their Priso-
ners; and that another lay bound upon the Sand,
a little from them, which he laid they would kill
next, and which hYd all the ver)" Soul within me;
he told me it was not one of their Nation, but one
of the bearded Men, who lie had told me of, that
came to their Country in the Boat: I was filfd
with Horror at the very naming the white.bearded
Man, and going to the Tree, I law plainly, by my
Glass, a White Man who lay upon the Beach of
the Sea, with his Hands and his Feet ty'd with
Flags, or Things like Rushe s; and that he was an
European, and had-Gloaths on.
There was another Tree, and a little Thicket
beyond it about fifty Yards nearer to them than
the Place where I was, which by £oing a little way
about, I saw I might come at undiscover'd, and
that then I should be within half Shot of them; lo
I with held my Pfflinn, though I was indeed en-
rag'd to the highest Degree, and going back about
twenty Paces, ! got behind some Bushes, which held
all the war, till I came to the other Tree; and then
1 came to a little rising Ground, which gave me a

<page 288>
[ lll J
full View of them, at the Distance of about eigh-
ty Yards.
I had now not a Moment to lose ; for nineteen
of the dreadful Wretches sate upon the Ground, all
close huddled together, and had just sent the other
two to butcher the poor Christian, and bring him,
perhaps, Limb by Limb, to their Fire, and they
were stoop'd down to untie the Bands at his Feet:
I turn'd to Friday, now Friday, said I, do as I bid
thee; Friday said he would ; then, Friday, says I,
do exactly as you fee me do, fail in nothing: So I
set down one of the Muskets, and the Fowling-
Piece, upon the .Ground, and Friday did the like
by his and with the other Mulket I took rny
+\iin at the Savages, bidding him do the like; then
asking him if he was ready, he said, yes, then
fire at them, said I; and the same Moment I sir'd
also.
Friday took Jus Aim so muc h better than I, that
on the Side that he shot, he kilTd two of them,
and wounded three more; and on my Side, I kilsd
one and wounded two. They were, you may be
sure, in a dreadful Consternation % and all of them,
who were not hurt, juinp'd up upon their Feet,
but did not immediately know which Way to run,
or which Way to look $ for they knew not from
whence their Destruction came: Friday kept his
Eyes close upon me, that as I had bid him, he
might observe what I did -, so, as soon as the first
Shot was made, I threw down the Piece, and tonk
up the Fowling Piece, and Friday did the like; he
fee me ccck, and present, he did the same again:
Are you ready, Friday? said I; Yes, fays he; \tt
fly then, fays I, in the Name of God, and with
that I fir'd again among the amaz'd Wretches, and
ib did Friday -y and as our Pieces were now loaden
with what I call'd Swan Shot, or small Pistol Bul-
T % lets

<page 289>
t ]
lets, we found only two drop; but so many were
wounded, that they ran about yelling and lkream-
ing like mad Creatures, all bloody, and miserably
wounded most of them; whereof three more fell
quickly after, though not quite dead.
Now, Friday, says I, (laying down the discharg'd
Pieces, and taking up the Mulket, which was yet
loaden) follow me, fays I, which he did, with a
great deal of Courage upon which I rulh'd out of
the Wood, and stiew'd myself, and Friday close at
my Foot pas soon as I perceiv'd they saw me, I
shouted as loud as I could, and bad Friday do se
too; and running as fast as I could, which, by the
iWay, was not very fast, being loaden with Arms as
/I''was, I made directly towards the poor Victim,
who was, as I said, lying upon the Beach, or Shore,
between the Place where they sate and the Sea;
the two Butchers, who were just going to work
with him, had left him, at the Surprize of our first
Fire, and fled in a terrible Fright to the Sea side,
and had jump'd into a Canoe, and three more of the
rest made the fame Way: I turn'd to Friday, and bid
him step forwards, and fire at them; he under-
stood me immediately, and running about forty
Yards to be near them, he shot at them, and I
thought he had kilfd them all, for I fee them all
fall of a Heap into the Boat; though I saw two of
them up again quickly: However, he kill'd two
of them, and wounded the third; so that he lay
down in the Bottom of the Boat, as if he had been
dead.
While my Man Friday fir'd at them, I pull'd out
my Knise, and cut the Flags that bound the poor
Victim, and loosing his Hands and Feet, I listed
him up, and afk'd him, in the Portuguese Tongue,
What he was? He answers in Lat'tH< ( hrisiiam;
but was so weak and faint, that he could scarce

<page 290>
[ 279 ]
stand or speak; I took my Bottle out of my Poc-
ket, and gave it him, making Signs that he should
drink, which he did and I gave him a Piece of
Bread, which he eat; Then I alVd him, What
Countryman he was? And he said, Espagniole ^ and
being a little recover'd, let me know by all the
Signs he could possibly make, how much he was
in my Debt for his Deliverance: Seignior, said li
with as much Spamjh as I could make up, we will
talk afterwards, but we must fight now; if you
have any Strength left, take this Pistol and Sword,
and lay about you. He took them very thankfully,
and no sooner had he the Arms in his Hands, but
as if they had put new Vigour into him, he flew
upon his Murderers like a Fury, and had cut two
of them in Pieces in an Instant :, lor the Truth is,
as the Whole was a Surprize to them, so the poor
Creatures were so much frighted with the Noise of
our Pieces, that they fell down for mere Amaze-
ment and Fear, and had no more Power to at-
tempt their own Fscape, than their Flesh had to*
resist our Shot; and that was the Cafe of those five
that Friday shot at in the Boat; for as three of
them fell with the Hurt they receiv'd, so the other
two fell with the Fright.
I kept my Piece in my Hand still, without firing,
being willing to keep my Charge ready, because I
had given the Spaniard my Pistol and Swords; so I
call'd to Friday, and bad him run up to the Tree
from whence we first fir'd. and fetch the Arms
which lay there, that had been discharg'd, which
he did with great Swiftness ; and then giving him
my Musket, I sat down myself to load all the rest
again, and bad them conte to me when they want-
ed. While I was loading these Pieces, there hap-
pen'd a fierce Engagement between the Spaniard
and one of the Savages,who made at him with one of
T '4 - their

<page 291>
their great wooden Swords, the fame Weapon that
was to have kill'd him before, is I had not prevent-
ed it: The Spaniard,' who was as bold and as brave
as could be imagin'd, though weak, had fought
this Indian a good while, and had cut him two
great Wounds on his Head; but the Savage being
a stout lusty Fellow, closing in with him, had
thrown him down, being faint, and was wringing
my Sword out of his Hand, when the Spaniard, tho'
undermost, wifely quitting the Sword, drew the
Pistol from his Girdle, shot the Savage through
the Body, and kill'd him upon the Spot, before I',
who was running to help him, could come near
him.
Friday being now left to his Liberty, pursu'dthe
flying Wretches with no Weapon in his Hand but
his Hatchet; and with that he dispatched those
three, who, as I said before, were wounded at first,
and fallen, and all the rest he could come up with;
and the Spaniard coming to me for a Gun, I gave
him one of the Fowling-Pieces, with which he
purfu'd two of the Savages, and wounded them
both 5 but as he was not able to run, they both got
from him into the Wood, where Fumy purfud
thjem, and kill'd one of them; but the other was
too nimble for him; and tho' he was wounded, yet
had plung'd himself into the Sea, and swam with
all his Might ost" to those two who were left in the
Canoe, which three in the Canoe,' with one wound-
ed, who we know not whether hedv'd or no, were
all that escap'd our Hands of one and twenty : The
Account of the rest is as follows:
3 Kill'd at our first Shot from the Tree.
2 Kill'd at the next Shot.
2 Kill'd by Friday in the Boat.
2 Kill'd by Ditto, oi thole at first wounded.
• i Kiin

<page 292>
[ *«I ]
I Kill'd by Ditto in the Wood.
3 Kill'd by the Spaniard.
4 Kill'd, being found dropp'd here and there of
tliek Wounds, or kill'd by Friday in his Chafe
of them.
4 Escap'd in the Boat, whereof one wounded, if
not dead.
, 'f ,
2i In all.
Those that were in the Canoe, work"d hard to
get out of Gun-Shot; and though Friday made two
or three Shot at them, I did not find that he hit
any of them. Friday would fain have had me took
one of their Canoes, and purfu'd them; and indeed
I was very anxious about their Escape, least carry-
ing the News Home to their People, they should
come back, perhaps, with two or three hundred of
their Canoes, and devour us by mere Multitude; so
I consented to pursue them by Sea, and running to
one of their Canoes, I jump'd in, and bad Friday
Follow me ; but when I was in the Canoe, I was
surpriz'd to find another poor Creature lie there a-
live, bound Hand and Foot, as the Spaniard was,
for the Slaughter, and almost dead with Fear, nofr
knowing what the Matter was, for he had not been
able to look up over the Side of the Boat, he was
ty'd so hard, Neck and Heels, and had been ty'd so
long, that he had really but little Life in him.
I immediately cut the twisted Flags, or Rushes,
which they had bound him with, and would have
helped him up; but he could not stand, or speak,
but groan'd most piteoufly, believing (it seems) still
that he was only unbound in order to be kill'd.
When Friday came to him, I bad him speak to
him, and tell him of his Deliverance, and pulling
out my Bottle, made him gi ve the poor Wretch a
'.' •"' Dram,

<page 293>
[*«*]
Dram, which, with the News of his being deli-
ver'd, reviv'd him, and he fate up in theBoat; but
when Friday came to hear him speak, and look
^in his Face, it would have mov'd any one to Tears,
to have seen how Friday kifs'd him, embracd him,
hugg'd him, cry'd, laugh'd, hollow'd, jump'd a-
bout, danc'd, fung, then cry'd again, wrung his
Hands, beat his own Face and Head, and then
fung, and jump'd about again, like a distracted
Creature: It was a good while before I could make
him speak to me, or tell me what was the Matter;
but when, he came a little to himself, he told me,
that it was his Father.
It is not easy for me to express how it mov'd
me to fee what Ecstasy and filial Affection had
work'd in this poor Savage, at the Sight of his Fa-
ther, and of his being deliver'd from Death ; nor
indeed can I describe half the Extravagancies of his
Affection after this; for he went into the Boat and
out of the Boat a great many Times: When he
went in to him, he would sit down by him, open
his Breast, and hold his Father's Head close to his
Bosom half an Hour together, to nourish it; then
he took his Arms and Ankles, which were numb'd
and stiff with the Binding, and chafed and rubbed
them with his Hands ; and I perceiving what the
Cafe was, gave him some Rum out of my Bottle
to rub them with, which did them a great deal of
Good.
This Action put an End to our Pursuit of the
Canoe, with the other Savssges, who were now
gotten almost out of Sight ; and it was happy for
us that we did not; for it blew so hard within two
Hours after, and before they could be gotten a
Quarter of their Way, and continued blowing W
hard all Night, and that from the North.West,
which was against them, that I could not suppose
their

<page 294>
[ **i ]
their Boat could live, or that they ever reach'd to
their own Coast.
But to return to Friday, he was so busy about
his Father, that I could not find in my Heart to
take him off for some Time: But after I thought
he could leave him a little, I call'd him to me,
and he came jumping and laughing, and pleas'd to
the highest Extream ,■, then I aik'd him, If he had
given his Father any Bread? He shook his Head,
and said, None: Ugly Dog eat all tip self; so I gave
him a Cake of Bread out of a little Pouch I carry'd
on Purpose; I also gave him a Dram for himself,
but he would not taste it, but carry'd it to his Fa-
ther: I had in my Pocket also two or three Bunch-
es of my Raisins, so I gave him a Handful of them
for his Father. He had no sooner given his Fa-
ther these Raisins, but I saw him come out of the
Boat, and run away as if he had been bewitch'd,
he ran at such a Rate; for he was the swiftest Fel-
low of his Foot that ever I saw; I say, he run at
such a Rate, that he was out of Sight, as it were,
in an Instant; and though I call'd, and hollow'd
too, after him, it was all one, away he went, and
in a Quarter of an Hour, I saw him come back a-
gain, though not so fast as he went; and as he
came nearer, I found his Pace was stacker, because
he had something in his Hand.
When he came up to me, I found he had been
quite Home for an earthen Jugg or Pot to bring
his Father some fresh Water, and that he had got
two more Cakes, or Loaves of Bread -. The Bread
he gave me, but the Water he carry'd to his Father:
However, as I was very thirsty too, I took a little
Sup of it. This Water reviv'd his Father more
than all the Rum or Spirits I had given him; for
he was just fainting with Thirst.
•r+rl

<page 295>
[ 284 ]
When his Father had drank, I ealsd to him tq
know if there was any Water left; he said, yes;
and I bad him give it to the poor Spaniards
who was in as much Want of it as his Father;
and 1 sent one of the Cakes, that -Friday brought,
to the Spaniard too, who was, indeed, very weak,
and was reposing himself upon a green Place, under
the Shade of a Tree, and whose Limbs were also
very stiff, and veiy much swell'd with the rude
Bandage he had been ty'd with. When I saw that,
upon Ftidays coming to him with the Water, he
sate up and drank, and took the Bread, and began
to eat, I went to him, and gave him a Handful of
Raisins; he look'd up in my Face with all the To-
kens of Gratitude and Thankfulness that could ap-
pear in any Countenance ; but was so weak, not-
withstanding he had so exerted himself in the Fight,
that he could not stand upon his Ft^t; he try'd to
do it two or three Times, but was really not able,
his Ankles were so swell'd and so painful to him.,
so I bad him sit still, and caused Friday to rub his
Ankles, apd bathe them with Rum, as he had dene
his Father's.
I observ'd the poor affectionate Creature every
two Minutes, or perhaps less, all the while he
was here, turn'd his Head about, to fee if his Fa-
ther was in the fame Place and Posture as he left
hjm sitting; and at last he found he was not to
be seen; at which he started up, and, without
speaking a Word, flew with that Swiftness to him,
that one could scarce perceive his Feet to touch
the Ground as he went: But when he came, he
only found he had laid himself down to ease his
Limbs ; so Friday came back to me presently, and
I then spoke to the Spaniard to let Friday help
him up if he could, and lead him to the Boat, and
then he should carry him to our Dwelling, where
I would

<page 296>
[ *«J ]
1 woilld take Care of him: But Friday, a lusty-
strong Fellow, took the Spaniard quite up upon
his Back, and carry'd him away to the Boat, and
set him down softly upon the Side or Gunnel of
the Canoe, with his Feet in the Inside of it, and then
lifted him quite in, and set him close to his Fa-
ther, and presently stepping out again, launch'd
the Boat off, and paddled it along the Shore faster
than I could walk, though the Wind blew pretty
hard too; so he brought them both safe into our
Creek, and leaving them in the Boat, runs away
to fetch the other Canoe. As he pass'd me, I
spoke to him, and ask'd him, whether he went,
he told me, Go fetch more Boat; so away he went
like the Wind for sure never Man or Horse run
like him, and he had the ether Canoe in the Creek
almost as soon as I got to it by Land; so he wafted
me over, and tnen went to help our new Guests
out of the Boat, which he did; but they were nei-
ther of them able to walk; so that poor Friday
knew not what to do. , «
To remedy this I went to work in my Thought,
and calling to Friday to bid them sit down on the
Bank ivhile he came to me, I soon made a Kind
of Hand-Barrow to lay them on, and Friday and I
carry'd them up both together upon it between us:
But when we had got them to the Outside of our Wall
or Fortification, we were at a worse Loss than be-
fore forest' was impossible to get them over, and?
I was refolv'a not to break it down: So I set to
Work again , and Friday and I, in about two HoiirS
Time, made a very handsom Tent, cover'd with.
old'rSail^ "and above that with Boughs of Trees,
being in the Space without our outward Fence,
and between that and the Grove of 3'oung Wood
which I had planted: And here we made them two
Beds of such Th;ngs as I had {viz.) of good Rice*
Straw,

<page 297>
[»««]
Straw, with Blanktfs laid upon it, to lie on, and
another to cover them on each Bed. °'
My Ifland was now peopled, and I thought my All
felt very rich in Subjects; and it was a merry Re- nila
flection which I frequently made, How like a King foch
I look'd. First ot" all, the whole Country was my Wani
own mere Property; so that I had an undoubted and I
Right of Dominion. Secondly, My People were tne d
perfectly subjected: I was absolute Lord and Law- the S
giver; they all ow'd their Lives to me, and were also r
ready to lay down their Lives (if there had been their
Occasion of it) for me. It was remarkable tco, we much,
had but three Subjects, and they were of three self;:
different Religions. My Man Friday was a Protest- that \
ant, his Father was a Pagan and a Cannibal, and ( defac
the Spaniard was a Papist: However, I allowd Li- , there
berty of Conscience throughout my Dominions: know
But this is by the Way." °* *h
As soon as I had secur'd my two weak rescued I t\
Prisoners, and given them Shelter, and a Place to with;
•eft them upon, I began to think of making some to en<
'rovision for them: And the first Thing I did, I Eseap,
irder'd Friday to take a yearling Goat, betwixt a might
Cid and a Goat, out of my particular Flock, to great |
>e kill'd, when I cut off the hinder Quarter, and Savag
hopping it into small Pieces, I set Friday to work | whicJ
o boiling and stewing, and made them a very NecCj<
pod Dish, I assure you, of Flesh aud Broth, ha- SW,
ing put some Barley and Rice also into the they
iroth; and as I cook'd it without Doors, (for I »utas
lade no Fire within my inner Wall) so I carry d bVi0tf:
, all into the new Tent 5 and having set a Table on t;
aere for them, I sate down, and eat my own Din- Ma„
er also with them, and, as well as I could, cheard Fne
lem and encouragYl them; Friday being my Inter- they
reter, especially to his Father, and indeed to the by t
. , Sp* appe.

<page 298>
[ 287 ]
Spaniard too ^ for the Spaniard spoke the Language
of the Savages pretty well.
After we had dined, or rather supped, I order'd
Friday to take one of the Canoes,,and go and
fetch our Mulkets and other Fire-Arms, which for
Want of Time we had left upon the Place of Battle;'
and the next Day I order'd him to go and bury
the dead Bodies of the Savages, which lay open to
the Sun, and would presently be offensive; .and I
also order'd him to bury the horrid Remains of
their babarous Feast, which I knew were pretty
much, and which I could not think of doing" my
self; nay, I could not bear to see them, if I went
that Way : All which he punctually perform'd, and
defac d the very Appearance of the Savages being
there ; so that when I went again, I could scarce
know where it was, otherwise than by the Corner
of the Wood pointing to the Place.
I then began to enter into a little Conversation
with my two new Subjects; and first I set Friday
to enquire of his Father, what he thought of the
Escape of the Savages in that Canoe, and whether we
might expect a Return of them with a Power too
great for us to resist. His first Opinion was,that the
Savages in the Boat never could live out the Storm
which blew that Night they went off, but must of
Necessity be drown'd or driven South to those other
Shores, where they were as sure to be devour'd as
they were to be drown'd if they were cast away ^
but as to what they would do if they came safe on
Shore, he said he knew not.; but it was his Opini-
on that they were so dreadfully frighted with the
Manner os their being attacks, the Noise and the
Fire, that he believ'd they would tell their People
they were all kill'd by Thunder and Lightning, not
by the Hand of Man, and that the two which
appear'd, (viz.) Friday and me, were two Heavenly
x Spirits

<page 299>
r >*« ]
Spirits or Furies, come down to destroy them and
not Men with Weapons: This he said he knew,
because he heard them all cry out so in their Lan-
guage to one another; for it was impoilible to them
to conceive that a Man could dart Fire, and speak
Thunder, and kill at ?. Distance without listing up
the Hand, as was done now: And this old Savage
was in the right ^ for, as I understood since by
others Hands, the Savages never attempted to go o-
ver to' the Island afterwards ; they were so terrified
with the Accounts given by those four Men, i for it
seems they did escape the Sea> that they believ'd
whoever went to that enchanted Istand would be
destroys with Fire from the Gods.
This however I knew not, and therefore was un-
der continual Apprehensions for a good while, and
kept always upon my Guard, me and all my Army,
for as we were now four of us, I would have vei>
tur'd upon a hundred of them fairly in the open
Field at any Time.
In a little Time, however, no more Canoes ap-
pearing, the Fear of their Coming wore off, and
I began to take my former Thoughts of a Voyage
to the Main into Consideration, being likewise as-
sur'd by Fridays Father, that I might depend ufpj
good Usage from their Nation on his Account, if
[ would go.
But my Thoughts were a little suspended, when
[ had a serious Discourse with the Spaniard, and
when I understood that there were sixteen
if his Countrymen and Pcrttigiiese, who having
been cast away, and made their Escape to that
side, liv'd there at Peace indeed with the Sava-
ges, but were very fore put to it for Necessaries,
ind indeed for Life: I alVd him all the Par-
:iculars of their Voyage, and found they were
i Spamjb Ship bound from the Jliode ti «J
to

<page 300>
£ »*9 ]
to the Havana, being directed to leave their Load"
ing there, which was chiefly Hides and Silver, and
to bring back what European Goods they could
meet with there; that they had five Portuguese Sea-
men on Board, whom they took out of another
Wreck; that five of their own Men were drowned
when the first Ship was lost, and that these escaped
thro3 infinite Dangers and Hazards, and arrivd al*-
most starv'd on the Cannibal Coast, where they tx-
pected to have been devoufd every Moment.
He told me, they had some Arms with them*
but they were perfectly 'useless for that they had
neither Powder or Ball, the Washing of the Sea
having spoil'd all their Powder, but a little,' which
they used at their first Landing to provide them-
selves some Food.
I ask'd him what he thought would become of
them there, and if they had form'd no Design of
making any Escape? He said, They had many
Consultations about it, but that having neither
Vessel, or Tools to build one, or Provisions of any
Kind, their Counsels always ended in Tears and
Despair'.
I ask'd him how he thought they would receive
a Proposal from me, which might tend towards an
Escape: And whether, if they were all here, it might
not be done? I told him with Freedom, I fear'd
mostly their Treachery and ill Usage of me, if I
put my Life in their Hands; for that Gratitude was
no inherent Virtue in the Nature of Man; nor
did Men always square their Dealings by the Obli-
gations they had receiv'd, so much as they did
by the Advantages they expected. I told him, it
would be very hard, that I should be the Instrument
of their Deliverance, and that they should after-
wards make me their Prisoner in New Spam, where
an Evglijlman was certain to be made a Sacri-
U fice,

<page 301>
[ 290 ]
ficfc, what Necessity, or what Accident soever
brought him thither; And that I had rather be de-
livers up to the Savages, and be devour'd alive,
than fall into the merciless Claws of the Priests, and
be carry'd into the svquijitio;t. I added, That o-
therwife I was perfwaded, is they were all here,
we might, with so many Hands, build a Bark large
■ enough to carry us all away, either to the Brajih
Southward, or to the Islands or Spauijli Coast
-Northward: But that if in Requital they should,
when I had put Weapons into their Hands, carry
me by Force among their own People, I might be
ill used for my Kindness to them, and make my
Cafe worse than it was before.
He answer's) with a great deal of Candor and In-
genuity, That their Condition was so miserable,
and they were so sensible of it, that he believed
they would abhor the Thought of using any Man
unkindly that should contribute to their Delive-
rance; and that, if I pleased, he would gototherri
With the old Man, and discourse with them about
it, and return again, and bring me their Answer:
That he would make Conditions with them upon
their solemn Oath, That they sliould be absolute-
ly under my Leading, as their Commander and
Captain; and that they should swear upon the Holy
Sacraments and the Gospel, to be true to me, and
to go to such Christian Country as that I should
agree to, and no other; and to be directed wholly
and absolutely by my Orders, 'till they were land-
ed safely in such Country as I intended; and that
he would bring a Contract from them under their
Hands for that Purpose,
Then he told me, he would first swear to me
himself, That lie would never stipfrom me as long
as he liv'd, 'till I gave him Orders; and that he
would take my Side to the. last Drop of his Blood*

<page 302>
. [ »9t ] .
if there should happen the least Breach of Faith a-
mong his Countrymen.
He told me, they were all of them very civil
honest Men, and they were under the greatest Di-
stress imaginable, having neither Weapons or
Cloaths, nor any Food, but at the Mercy and Di-
scretion of the Savages; out of all Hopes of ever
returning to their own Country ,,, and that he was
sure, if I would undertake their Relief, they
would live and die by me.
Upon these Assurances, I resolv'd to venture to
relieve them, if possible, and to send the old Savage
and this Spaniard over to them to treat: But when
we had gotten all Things in a Readiness to go, the
Spaniard himself started an Objection, which had
so much Prudence in it on one hand, and so much
Sincerity on the other hand, that I could not but
be very well satisfy'd in it ; and, by his Advice, put
off the Deliverance of his Comrades for at least half
a Year. The Cafe was thus:
He had been with us now about a Month $ du-
ring which Time, I had let him fee in what Man-
ner I had provided, with the Assistance of Provi-
dence, for my Support; and he saw evidently what
Stock of Corn and Rice I had laid up; which, as
it was more than sufficient for my self, so it was
not sufficient, at least without good Husbandry,
For my Family, now it Was encreas'd to Number
four: But much less would it be sufficient, if
his Countrymen, who were, as he said, fourteen
still alive, should come over. And least of all
would it be sufficient to victual our Vessel, if we
should build one, for a-Voyage ro^ny of the Chri-
stian Colonies of America. So he told me, he thought
it would be more advisable, to let him and the
two other dig and cultivate some more Land, as
much as I could spare Seed to sow ■> and that' we
U 2 should

<page 303>
[ ]
should wait another Harvest, that we might have
a Supply of Corn for his Countrymen when they
ihould come; for Want might be a Temptation to
them to disagree, or not to think themselves deli-
vered, otherwise than cut of one Disficulty into
another. You know, says he, the Children of Is-
rael, though they rejoyc'd at first for their being
deliver'd outof/igypt, yet rebell'd even against God
himself that deliver'd them, when they came to
want Bread in the Wilderness.
His Caution was so seasonable, and his Advice
so good, that I could not but be very well pleased
with his Proposal, as well as I was fatisfy'd with
his Fidelity. So we fell to digging all four of us,
as well as the wooden Tools we were furnifh'd
with permitted; and in about a Month's Time, by
the End of which it was Seed-time, we had got-
ten as much Land cur'd and trimm'd up,as we sow-
ed 22 Bushels of Barley on, and 16 Jarrs of Rice,
which was, in short, all the Seed we had to spare;
nor indeed did we leave our selves Barley sufficient
for cur own Food, for the six Months that we had
to expect our Crop, that is to fay, reckoning from
the Time we set our Seed aside for sowing; for it
is not to be supposed it is six Months in the Ground
in the Country.
Having now Society enough, and our Number
be*ing sufficient to put us out of Fear of the Sa-
vages, if they had come, unless their Number had
been very great, we went freely all over the Island,
where-ever we found Occasion ; and as here we had
onr Escape or Deliverance upon our Thoughts, it
was impossible, at least for ?ne, to have the
Means of it out of mine; to this Purpose,
I rriark'd out several Trees which I thought fit for
pur Work, and I set Friday and his Father to cut-
ting them down ; and then I caused the Spaniard
! tO

<page 304>
[ m ]
to whom I imparted my Thought on that Affair,
to oversee and direct their Work. I shew'd them
with what indefatigable Pains I had hewed a large
Tree into single Planks, and I caused them to do
the like, 'till they had made about a Dozen large
Planks of good Oak, near two Foot bread, 3 5 Foot
long, and from 2 Inches to 4 Inches thick: What
prodigious Labour it took up, any one may ima-
gine.
At the fame Time I contriv'd to increase my lit-
tle Flock of tame Goats as much as I could ; and
to this Purpose, I made Friday and the Spaniard go
out one Day, and myself with Friday the next
Day, for we took our Turns ; and by this Means
we got above 20 young Kids to breed up with the
rest; for whenever we shot the Dam, we saved
the Kids, and added them to our Flock: But above
all, the Season for curing the Grapes coming on,
I caused such a prodigious Quantity to be hung up
in the Sun, that I believe, had we been at Alkdnt,
where the Raisins of the Sun are cur'd, we could
have fill'd 60 or 80 Barrels; and these, with our
Bread, was a great Part of our Food, and very good
living too, I assure you; for it is an exceeding nou^
rishing Food.
It was now Harvest, and our Crop in good Or-
der; it was not the most plentiful Increase I had,
seen in the Island, but, however, it wsfc enough t9
answer our End; for from our 2 2 Bushels of Bar-
ley, we brought in and thrashed out above 220
Bushels; and the like in Proportion of the Rice,
which was Store enough for our Food to the next
Harvest, tho' all the 16 Spaniards had been on Shore
with me • or if we had been ready for a Voyage,
it would very plentifully have victualled our Ship,,
to have carry'd us to any Part of the World, that
is to fay, of America,
U 3 Whea

<page 305>
[ 294 ]
When we had thus ho'uYd and secur\l our Ma-
gazine ot Com, we fell to work to make more
Wicker ^'ork, viz. great Baskets in which we kept
it; and the Spaniard was very handy and dexterous
at this Part, and often blam'd me that I did not
make some Things for Defence, of this Kind of
Work i but I saw no Need of it.
And now having a full Supply of Food for all
the Guests I expected, I gave the Spaniard Leave
to go over to the Main, to fee what he could do
with those he had left behind him there. 1 gave
him a strict Charge in Writing, not to bring any
Man with him, who would not first swear in the
Presence of himself and of the old Savage, That
he would no Way injure, fight with, or attack the
Person he should find in the Istand, who was so
kind to send for them in order to their Delive-
rance; but that they would stand by and defend
him against all such Attempts, and where-ever
they went, would be entirely under and subjected
to his Commands; and that this should be put in
Writing, and sign'd with their Hands: How we
were to have this done, when I knew they had
neither Pen or Ink, that, indeed, was a Question
which we never alk'd.
Under these Instructions, the Spaniard, and the
old Savage (the Father of Friday) went away in one
of the Canoes, which they might be said to come
in, or rather were brought in, when they came as
Prisoners to be devour'd by the Savages.
I gave each of them a Musket with a Firelock
on it, and about eight Charges of Powder ana
Ball, charging them to be very good Husbands ot
both, and not to use either of them but upon ur-
gent Occasion.
This was a chearful Work, being the first Mea-
sures used by me in View of my Deliverance for.
now

<page 306>
{ m ]
now 27 Years and some Days. I gave them Provi-
sions of Bread, and of dry Grapes, sufficient for
themselves for many Days, and sufficient for all
their Country-men for about eight Days Time; and
wishing them a good Voyage, I see them go, a-
greeing with them about a Signal they should hang
out at their Return, by which I should know them
again, when they came back, at a Distance, before
they came on Shore.
They went away with a fair Gale on the Day
that-the Moon was at Full; by my Account in the
Month of OSober ; but as for an exact Reckoning
of Days, after I had once lost it, J could never re-
cover it again ; nor had I kept even the Number of
Years so punctually, as to be sure that I was right,
tho', as it prov'd, when I afterwards examin'd my Ac-
count, I found I had kept a true Reckoning of Yejrs.
It was no less than eight Days I had waited for
them, when a Strange and unforeseen Accident in-
terven'd, of which the like has not, perhaps, been
heard of in History. I was fast asleep in my Hutch
one Morning, when my Man Friday came running
in to me, and call'd aloud, Master, Master, they
are come, they are come.
I jump'd up, and, regardless of Danger, I. went
out as soon as I could get my Cloaths on, thro'
my little Grove, which (by the Way) was by this
Time grown to be a very thick Wood: I fay, re-
gardless of Danger, I went without my Arms,
Which was not my Custom to do ; but I was sur-
prise!, when turning my Eyes to the Sea, I pre-
sently saw a Boat at about a League and Half's Di-
stance, standing in for the Shore, with a Shoulder of
Mutton Sail, as they call it, and the Wind blow-
ing pretty fair to bring them in; also I observ'd
presently, that they did not come from that Side
which the Shore lay on, but from the Souther-
is 4 most

<page 307>
[ 296 ]
most End of the Ifland : Upon this, I call'd Frtii}
in, and bid him lie close, for these were not the
People we look'd for, and that we might not know
yet whether they were Friends or Enemies.
In the next Place, I went in to fetch my Per-
spective Glass, to fee what I could make of them;
and having taken the Ladder out, I climb'd up to
the Top of the Hill, as I used to do when I was
apprehensive of anything, and to take my View
the plainer without being discovers.
I had scarce set my Foot on the Hill, when my
Eye plainly discover'd a Ship lying at an Anchor,
at about two Leagues and a Half's Distance from
me South.south-east, but not above a League and
an Half from the Shore. By my Observation it ap-
pear d plainly to be an Englijh Ship, and the Boat
appear'd to be an English Long-Boat.
I cannot express the Confusion I was in, tho' the
Joy of seeing a Ship, and one who I had Reason to
believe was mann'd by my own Country.men, and
consequently Friends, was such as I cannot describe;
but yet I had some secret Doubts hung about me,
I cannot tell from whence they came, bidding me
keen upon my Guard. In the first Place, it oc-
Currd to me to consider what Business anEv0)
Ship could have in jhat Part of the World, since
it was not the Way to or from any Part of the
"World where the English had any Traffick; and
I knew there had been no Storms to drive them
in there, as in Distress; and that if they were
list really, it was most probable that they were
here upon no good Design; and that I had better
continue as I was, than fall into the Hands of
Thieves and Murderers.
Let no Man despise the secret Hints and Notices
of Danger which sometimes are given him,
when he may think there is no Possibility of its
being

<page 308>
[ 297 ]
i
being real. That such Hints and Notices are given
us, I believe few that have made any Observations
of Things can deny; that they are certain Dis-
coveries of an invisible World, and a Converse of
Spirits, we cannot doubt, and if the Tendency
of them seems to be to warn us of Danger, why
should we not suppose they are from some friendly
Agent, whether supreme, or inferior and subordi-
nate, is not the Question; and that they are given
for our Good?
The present Question abundantly confirms me in
the Justice of this Reasoning; for had I not been
made cautious by this secret Admonition, come it
from whence it will, I had been undone inevitably,
and in a far worse Condition than before, as you
will see presently.
I had not kept myself long in this Posture, but
I saw the Boat draw near the Shore, as if they
look'd for a Creek to thrust in at for the Conveni-
ence of Landing: However, as they did not come
quite far enough, they did not see the little Inlet
where I formerly landed my Rafts, but ran their
Boat on Shore upon the Beach, at about half a
Mile from me, which was very happy for me $ for
otherwise, they would have landed just (as I may
fay) at my Door, and would soon have beaten me
ont of my Castle, and perhaps have plunder'd me
of all I had.
When they were on Shore, I was fully satisfy'd
that they were Englifimen, at least, most of them,
one or two I thought were Dutch; but it did not
prove so: There were in all eleven Men, whereof
three of them I found were unarm'd, and, as I
thought, bound * and when the first four or five of
them were jump'd on Shore, they took those three
out of the Boat as Prisoners: One of the three I
could perceive using the most passionate Gestures of
Entreaty,

<page 309>
[ 298 ]
Jntreaty, Affliction and Despair, even to a kind of
Extravagance; the other two, I could perceive,
listed up their Hands sometimes, and appeardcon-
cern'd indeed, but not to" such a Degree as the
first. - • r?
I was perfectly confounded at the Sight, and
knew not what the Meaning of it should be. Fri-
day calsd out to me in Etiglifi, as well as he could,
0 Majier I Tou see Kngliih Mam eat Prisoner as «J
m Savage Mam. Why, fays I, Friday, do vui
think they are a going to eat them then ? Tes,kp
Friday, 1'bey will eat the?n: No, no, fays I, Ftw},
1 am afraid they will murder them, indeed, but
you may be sure they will not eat them.
All this while I had no Thought of what the
Matter really was ^ but'stood trembling with the
Horror of the Sight, expecting every Moment when
the three Prisoners should be kill'd ; nay, once I law
one of the Villains lift up his Ann with a great Cut
lash, (as the Seamen call it) or Sword, to strike one
of the poor Men ; and I expected to fee him fall
every Moment, at which all the Blood in my Body
seem'd to run chill in my Veins.
I wish'd heartily now for my Spaniard, and the
Savage that was gone with him; or that I had a.
ny Way to have come undiscover'd within Shot ot
them, that I might have rescu'd the three Men';
for I saw no Fire-Arms they had among them; but
it fell out to my Mind another Way.
After I had observ'd the outragious Usage of the
three Men by the insolent Seamen, I obsery'd the
Kellows run scattering about the Land, as is they
wanted to fee the Country: I observ'd that the
:hree other Men had Liberty to go also where they
pleas'd but they'fate down all three upon the
Ground very pensive, and look'd like Men »
>spair. ,l •
This

<page 310>
[ *99 ]
This put me in Mind of the first Time when J
came on Shore, and began to look about me; how?
I gave my felt" over for lost, how wildly I look'd
round me, what dreadful Apprensions I had, and
how I lodg'd in the Tree all Night for fear of
being devoufd by-wild Beasts.
As I knew nothing that Night of the Supply I
was to receive by the providential Driviug 'of the
Ship nearer the Land, by the Storms and Tide, by
which I have since been so long nourislid and sup-
ported; so these three poor desolate Men knew no-
thing how certain of Deliverance, and Supply they
were, how near it was to them, and how effectu-
ally and ready they were in a Condition of Safety,
at the fame Time that they thought themselves lost,
and their Cafe desperate.
So little do we see before us in the World, and
so much Reason have we to depend chcarf ully upon
the great Maker of the World, that he does not
leave his Creatures so absolutely destitute, but that
in the worst Circumstances they have always some-
thing to be thankful for, and sometimes are nearer
their Deliverance than they imagine; nay, are even
brought to their Deliverance by the Means by
which they seem to be brought to their Destru-
ction.
It was just at the Top of High-Water when these
People came on Shore, and while partly they stood
par lying with the Prisoners they brought, and part-
ly while they rambled about to fee what kind of a
Place they were in, they had carelefly staid till the
Tide was spent, and the u ater-was ebb'd considera-
bly away, leaving their Boat a ground.
They had left two Men in the Boat, who as I
found afterwards, having drank a little too much
Brandy, fell a-sleep; however, one of them waking
sooner than the other, and finding the Boat too fast
U: h . a ground

<page 311>
[ 3°° ]
a-ground for him to stir it, hollow'd for the rest who
were straggling about, upon which they all soon
came to the Boat; but it was past all their Strength
to launch her, the Boat being very heavy, and the
Shore on that Side being a soft ousy Sand, almost
like a Quick-Sand.
In this Condition, like true Seamen, who are per-
haps the least «f all Mankind given to Fore thought,
they gave it over, and away they stroll'd about the
Country again; and I heard one of them fay aloud
to another, calling them off from the Boat, Wb),k
her alone, Jack, cant ye, fie will float next Tide; by
which I was fully confirm'd in the main Enquiry,
of what Countrymen they were.
All this while I kept my self very close, not once
daring to stir out of my Castle, any farther than to
my Place of Observation near the Top of the Hill; 1
and very glad I was, to think how well it was forti. tim<
fy'd: I knew it was no less than ten Hours before the
the Boat could be on float again, and by that Time
it would be dark, and I might be at more Liberty
to fee their Motions, and to hear their Discourse, if'
they had any. me •
In the mean time, I fitted my self up for a Bat- whe:
tel as before, though with more Caution, knowing reft]
I had to do with another kind of Enemy than I had paVi
at first. I order'd Friday also, who I had made an to m,
excellent Marksman with his Gun, to load him- All
self with Arms: I took myself two Fowling-Pieces, yQu
and I gave him three Muskets; my Figure indeed f0l
was very fierce; I had my formidable Goat.Skin 1 fs
Coat on, with the great Cap I have mention'd, a to
naked Sword by my Side, two Pistols in my Belt, y01
and a Gun upon each Shoulder. )'oi
It was my Design, as I said above, not to have ■;
made any Attempt till it was dark: But about Fs(
Two a Clock, being the Heat of the. Day, I found ret
that
that
Wo,
The
Con
dow
aqi
of J
I
and
ate]
Fiid
for}
a5pi
I
and
to t'
Ans
goin

<page 312>
[ 301 1
that in fliort they were all gone straggling into the
Woods, and, as I thought, were laid down to Sleep.
The three poor distressed Men, too anxious for their
Condition to get any Sleep, were, however, set
down under the Shelter of a great Tree, at about
a quarter of a Mile from me, and, as I thought, out
of Sight of any of the rest.
Upon this I refolv'd to discover my self to them,
and learn something of their Condition : Immedi-
ately I march'd in the Figure as above, my Man
Fi iday at a good Distance behind me, as formidable
for his Arms as I, but not makiA quite so staring
a Speftre-like Figure as I did. IF
I came as near them undiscover'd as I could,
and then before any of them saw me, I calsd aloud
to them in Spanish, What are ye Gentlemen?
They started up at the Noise, but were ten
times more confounded when they saw me, and
the uncouth Figure that I made. They made no
Answer at all; but I thought I perceiv'd them just
going to fly from me, when I spoke to them in
Englijh: Gentlemen, said I, do not be surpriz'd at
me; perhaps you may have a Friend near you
when you did not expect it. He must be sent di-
rectly from Heaven then, said one of them very
gravely to me, and pulling cff his Hat at the fame Time
to me, for our Condition is past the help of Man.
All Help is from Heaven, Sir, said I. But can
you put a Stranger in the Way how to Help you,
for you seem to me to be in some great Distress?
I saw you when you landed, and when you seem'd
to make Application to the Brutes that came with
you, I saw one of them lift up his Sword to kill
you.
The poor Man, with Tears running down his
Face, and trembling, looking like one astonish'd,
return'd, Am 1 talking to God, or Man! Is it a real
Man

<page 313>
[ 3°> ]
Matt, or an Angel! Be in no fear about that, Sis,
said I, if God had sent an Angel to relieve you, he
would have come better cloath'd, and arm'd after
another Manner than you see me in pray layaside
your Fears, I am a Man, an EngliJIman, and dis-
pos'd to assist you, you fee; I have one Servant
only; we have Arms and Ammunition; tell ib
freely, Can we serve you? What is your
Cafe;
Our Cafe, said he, Sir, is too long to tell you,
while our Murderers are so near .> but, in short,
.Sir, I was ComBtonder of that Ship, my Men
have mutiny'd afpwist me 5 they have been hard-
ly prevail'd on not to murder me, and at last
have set me on Shore in this desolate Place, with
these two Men with me, one my Mate, the other
a Passenger, where we expected to perish, believ-
ing the Place to be uninhabited, and know not yet
what to think of it.
Where are those Brutes, your Enemies, said I
do you know where they are gone? There the)
Sir, said he, pointing to a Thicket of Trees, ■)
Heart trembles for fear they have seen us, anil bid
fou speak j is they have, hey will certainly murier »
alL . „.
Have they any Fire-Arms, said I? He answerd,
they had only two Pieces, and one which thev
left in the Boat. Well then, said I,'leave the rest
tome; I fee they are all asleep, it is an easy
thing to kill them all; but shall we rather take
them Prisoners? He told me, there were two de-
sperate Villains among them that it was fiarrt
safe to shew any Mercy to; but if they were se-
curd, he believ'd all the rest would return tc
their Duty. I afk'd him, which they were? He
told me, he could not at that Distance descnW
them; but he would obey my Orders in any thin?
I would

<page 314>
t 3°3 ] ., ,
I would direct Well, says I, let us retreat out of
their View or Hearing, least they awake, and we
will resolve farther; so they willingly went back
with me, till the W.oods cover'd us from them.
Look you, Sir, seid I, if I venture upon your
Deliverance, are you willing to make two Condi-
tions with me •, he anticipated my Proposals, by
telling me, that both he and the Ship, if recover'd,
should be wholly directed and commanded by me
in every thing ; and if the Ship was not recover'd,
he would live and die with me in what Part of the
World soever I would send him; and the two other
Men said the same.
Well, says I, my Conditions are but two. i. That
while you stay on this Island with me, you will not
pretend to any Authority here*, and if I put Arms
into your Hands, you will upon all Occasions give
them up to me, and do no Prejudice to me or mine,
upon this Island, and in the mean time be govern'd
by my Orders.
2. That if the Ship is, or may be *recover'd,
you will carry me and my Man to England Pas-
sage-free.
He gave me all the Assurances that the Invention
and Faith of Man could devise, that he would com-
ply with these most reasonable Demands, and be-
sides would owe his Life to me, and acknowledge
it upon all Occasions as long as he liv'd.
Well then, said I, here are three Muskets for
you, with Powder and Ball tell me next what yoii
think is proper to be done. He shewed all the
Testimony of his Gratitude that he was able;
but offer'd to be wholly guided by me. I told him,
I thought it was hard venturing any Thing; But
the best Method I could think of was to fire upon
them at once, as they lay; and if any was not
kilsd at the first Volley, and offered to submit.

<page 315>
I 3°4 ]
we might save them, and so put it wholly upofl
Gods Providence to direct the Shot.
He said very modestly, That he was loath to
kill them, if he could help it y but that those two
were incorrigible Villains, and had been the Au-
thors of all the Mutiny in the Ship, and if they
escaped, we should be undone still; for they would
go on Board, and bring the whole Ships Com-
pany, and destroy us all. Well then, fays I, Ne-
cejsity legitimates my Advice; for it is the oi)
If Tj to save our Lives. However, seeing him still
cautious of shedding Blood, I told him they mould
gc themselves, and manage as they found con-
venient.
In the Middle of this Discourse, we heard some
of them awake, and soon after we saw two of
them on their Feet. I ask'd him, if either of them
were the Men who he had said were the Heads
of the Mutiny? He said, No: Well then, said I,
you may *let them escape, and Providence seems to
have waken'd them on Purpose to save themselves.
Now, fays I, if the rest escape you, it is yout
Fault.
Animated with this, he took the Musket I
had given him in his Hand, and a Pistol in
his Belt, and his two Comrades with him, with
each Man a Piece in his Hand. The two Men
who were with him going first, made some
Noise, at which one of the Seamen, who was
awake, turn'd about, and seeing them coming,
:ry'd out to the rest; but it was too late then; fa
:he Moment he cry'd out, they fxr'd * / mean the tvo
Men, the Captain wisely reserving his own Piece:
They had so well aim'd their Shot at the Men they
inew, that one of them was kill'don the Spot, and
:he other very much wounded; but not being dead,
le started up upon his Feet, and call'd eagerly «x
help,

<page 316>
0 305 3
help to the other; but the Captain stepping to him^
told him, 'twas too late to cry for help, he should
call upon God to forgive his V illany, and with that
Word knock'd him down With the Stock of his
Musket, so that he never spoke more: There were
three more in the Company, and one of them was
also slightly wounded: By this Time I was come,
and when they saw their Danger, and that it was
in vain to resist, they begg'd for Mercy: The Cap-
tain told them he would spare their Lives, if they
would give him any Assurance of their Abhorrence
of the Treachery they had been guilty of, and would
swear to be faithful to him in recovering the Ship,
and afterwards in carrying her back to Jamaica^
from whence they came: They gave him all the
Protestations of their Sincerity that could be desir'd,
and he1 was willing to believe them, and spare their
Lives, which I was not against; only I oblig'd him
to keep them bound Hand and Foot while they were
upon the Island. A
While this was doing, I, sent Friday with the
Captain's Mate to the Boat, with Orders to secure
her, and bring away the Oars, and Sail, which
they did; and by and by, three straggling Men that
were (happily for them) parted from the rest, came
back upon hearing the Guns fir1!, and seeing their
Captain, who betore was their Prisoner, now their
Conqueror, they submitted to be bound also; and
so our Victory was compleat.
It now remain'd, that the Captain and I should
enquire into one another's Circumstances: I began
first, and told him my whole History, which he
heard with an Attention even to Amazement} and
particularly, at the wonderful Manner of my being
surnistYd with Provisions and Ammunition; and
indeed, as my Story is a whole Collection of Won-
ders, it affected him deeply; but when he reflected
. - X 'from

<page 317>
t its 3
from thence upon himself, and how I seem'd to
have been prtserv'd there, on purpose to save his
Lise, the Tears ran down his Face-, and he could
not speak a Word more.
After this Communication was at an End,Icarry'd
him and his two Men into my Apartment, lead-
ing them in, just where I came out, viz. at the
Top of the House, where I resresh'd them with
such Provisiohs as f had, and shew'd them all the
Contrivances 1 had made, during my long, long,
inhabiting that Place.
All I shew'd them, all I said to them, was per-
fectly amazing} but above all, the Captain admir'd
rrty Fortification, and how perfectly I had conceal'd
my Retreat with a Grove of Trees, which having
been now planted near twenty Year?, and the Trees
growing much falter than in England, was become
a little Wood, and so thick, that it was unpaflable
in any Part of it, but at that one Sid«, where I
had reserv'd my little winding Passage into it: I
told him, this was my Castle, and my Residence;
but that I had a Seat in the Country, as moil Prin-
ces have, whither I could retreat upon Occasion,
and I would shew him that too another Time;
but at present, oxir Business was to consider how
to recover the Ship: He agreed with me as to that;
but told me, he was perfectly at a Loss what Mea-
sures to take; for that there were still six and twenty
Hands on board, who having entred into a curled
Conspiracy, by which they had all forfeited their
Lives to the Law, would be harden'd in it now by
Desperation} and would carry it on, knowing that
if they were redue'd, they should be brought to the
Gallows, as soon as they came to England, or to
any of the English Colonies} and that therefore
there would be no attacking them .with so imall a
Number as we were.
I mus'd

<page 318>
[ 307 ]
I mus'd for some Time upon what he had said,
and found it was a very rational Conclusions and
that therefore something was to be refolv'd on ve-
ry speedily, as well to draw the Men on board in-
to some Snare for their Surprize, as to prevent their
Landing upon us, and destroying us; upon this it
presently occurr'd to me, that in a little while the
Ship's Crew wondring what was become of their
Comrades, and of the Boat, would certainly come
on Shore in their other Boat, to fee for them, and
that then perhaps they might come arm'd, and be
too strong for us; this he allow'd was rational.
Upon this, I told him the first Thing we had to
do, was to stave the Boat, which lay upon the
Beach, so that they might not carry her off} and
taking every Thing out of her, leave her so far useless
as not to be fit to swim; accordingly we went on
board, took the Arms which were left on board,
out of her, and whatever else we sound there,
which was a Bottle of Brandy, and another of
Rum, a few Bisket Cakes, a Horn of Powder, and"
a great Lump of Sugar, in a Piece of Canvas; the
Sugar was five or six Pounds; all which was ve-
ry welcome to me, especially the Brandy and
Sugar , of which 1 had had none lest for many
Years.
When we had carry'd all these Things on Shore
(the Oars, Mast, Sail, and Rudder of the Boat,
were carry'd away before, as above) we knock'd a
great Hole in her Bottom, that if they had come
strong enough to master us, yet they could not car-
ry off" the Boat.
Indeed, it was not much in my Thoughts, that
we could be able to recover the Ship but my View
was that if they went away without the Boat, I did
not much question to make her fit again, to carry us 4
away to the Leeward Islands, and call upon our
X z Friends
i

<page 319>
C 308 ]
Friends, the Spaniards, in my way, for I had them
Hill in my Thoughts.
While we were thus preparing our Designs, and
had first, by main Strength, heav'd the Boat up up-
on the Beach, so high that the Tide would not
fleet her off at High-Water-Mark; and besides,
had broke a hole in her Bottom, too big to be
quickly stopp'd, and were fat down musing what
we should do; we heard the Ship fire a Gun, and
saw her make a Waft with her Antient, as a Signal
for the Boat to come on Board; but no Boat stirr'd;
and they fir"d several times, making other Signals
for the Boat.
'At last, when all their Signals and Firings prov'd
fruitless, and they found the Boat did not stir, we
saw them by the help of my Glasses, hoist another
Boat out, and row towards the Shore; and we
found as they approach'd, that there was no less
than ten Men in her, and that they had Fire-Arms
with them.
As the Ship lay almost two Leagues from the
Shore, we had a full view of them as they came,
and a plain sight of the Men, even of their Faces,
because the Tide having set them a little to the£«/
ot the other Boar, they row'd up under Shore, to
come to the fame Place, where the other had land-
ed, and where the Boat lay.
By this means, I fay, we had a full view of them,
and the Captain knew the Persons and Characters
of all the Men in the Boat, of whom he said, that
there were three very honest Fellows, who he was
sure were led into this Conspiracy by the rest, being
over-power'd and frighted.
But that as for the Boatswain, who it seem was
the chief Officer among them, and all the rest, they
were as outragious as any of the Ship's Crew, and
were, no doubt made desperate in their new Enter-
prize,

<page 320>
[309]
prize, and terribly apprehensive he was, that they
would be too powerful for us.
I smil'd at him, and told him, that Men,in our
Circumstances were past the Operation of Fear:
That seeing almost every Condition that could be
was better than that which we werefuppos'd to be
in, we ought to expect that the Conseque nce, whe-
ther Death or Life, would be sure to be a Deli-
verance: I ask'd him, What he thought of the Cir-
cumstances of my Life? And, whether a Delive-
rance were not worth venturing for? And where,
Sir, said I, is your Belief of my being preserv'd here
on purpose to save your Life, which elevated you
a little while ago? For my Parr, said I, there seems
to be but one Thing amiss in all the Prospect of it;
Whass that? Says he; why, said I, 'Tis, that as you
fay, there are three or four honest Fellows among
them, which should be spar'd ; had they been all of
the wicked Part of the Crew, I should have thought
God's Providence had singled them out to deliver
them into your Hands; for depend upon it, every
Man of them that comes a-shore are our own, and
shall die, or live, as they behave to us.
As 1 spoke this with a rais'd Voice and chearfu}
Countenance, I found it greatly encourag'd him ; so
we set vigorously to our Business: We had upon the
first Appearance of the Boat's corning from the Ship,
consider'd of separating our Prisoners, and had in-
deed secur'd them effectually.
Two of them, of whom the Captain was lessaf-
fur'd than ordinary, I sent with Friday, and one of
the three (desiver'd Men) to my Cave, where they
were remote enough, and out of Danger of being
heard or discover'd, or of finding their way put of
the Woods, if they could have deliver'd themselves:
Here they left them bound, but gave them Provisi-
ons, and promis'd them if they continued there qui-
*. ." x 3. etlvs.

<page 321>
. [ 3io ]
ctly, to give them their Liberty in a Day or two;
but that if they attempted their Escape, they should
'be put to Death without Mercy: They promis'd
saithfully to bear their Confinement with Patience,
and were very thankful that they had such good
Usage, as to have Provisions, and a Light left them;
for Friday gave them Candles (such as we made our
selves) for their Comfort; arid they did not know
but that he stood Sentinel over them at the En-
trance.
The other Prisoners had better Usage; two of
them were kept pinion'd indeed, because the Cap-
tain was not free to trust them; but the other two
were taken into my Service upon their Captain'sRe-
commendation, and upon their solemnly engaging
to live and die with us; so with them and the three
honest Men, we were seven Men, well arm'd; and
I made no doubt we sliou'd be able to deal well e-
notigh with the Ten that were a coming, consi-
dering that the Captain had said, there were three
or sour honest Men among them also.
As soon as they got to the Place where their o-
ther Boat lay, they run their Boat in to the Beach,
and came all on Shore, hailing the Boat up after
them, which I was glad to fee; for I was afraid
they would rather have left the Boat at an Anchor,
some Distance from the Shore, with some Hands
in her, to guard her; and so we should not be able
to seize the Boat.
Being on Shore, the first Thing they did, they
ran ail to their other Boar, and it was easy to fee
that they were under a great Snsprize, to find her
stripp'd as above, of all that was in her, and a great
hole in her Bottom.
After they had mus'd a while upon this, they
set up two or three great Shouts, hollowing with
all their might, to try if they could make their
Companions

<page 322>
[ 3.1 ]
Companions hear; but all was to no purpose: Then
they came all close in a Ring, and fir'da Volley of
their small Arms, which indeed we heard, and the
Echoes made the Woods ring} but it was all one,
those in the Cave we were sure could not hear, and
those in our keeping, though they heard it well
enough, yet durst give no Answer to them. "i
They were so astonish'd at the Surprize of this,
that as they told us afterwards, they resolv'd to go
all on board again to their Ship, and let them know
there, that the Men were all murther'd, and the
Long-Boat stav'd; accordingly they immediately
launch'd their Boat again, and gat all of them on
board.
The Captain was terribly amaz'd, and even con-
founded at this, believing they would go onboard
the Ship again, and set Sail, giving their Comrades
for lost, and so he should still lose the Ship, which
he was in hopes we should have recover'd; but he
was quickly as much frighted the other way.
They had not been long put off with the Boar,
but we perceiv'd them all coming on Shore again;
but with this new Measure in their Conduct, which
•it seems they consulted together upon, viz. To
leave three Men in the Boat, and the rest to go on
Shore, and go up into the Country to look for their
Fellows.
This was a great Dfappointment to us; for now
we were at a Loss what to do; for our seizing
those seven Men on Shore would be no Advantage
to us, if we let the Boat escape; because they
would then row away to the Ship, and then the
rest of them would be sure to weigh and set Sail,
and so our recovering the Ship would be lost.
However, we had no Remedy, but to wait and
see what the Issue of Things might present; the
seven Men came on Shore, and the three who re-
. X 4 maio'd

<page 323>
[ 312 ]
mairsd in the Boat, put her off to a good Distance
from the Shore, and came to an Anchor to wait for
them; so that it was impossible for us to come at
them in the Boat.
Those that came on shore, kept close together,
marching towards the Top of the little Hill, under
which my Habitation lay; and we could fee them
plainly, though they could not perceive us: We
could have been very glad they would have come
nearer to us, so that we might have fir'd at them,
or that they would have gone farther off, that we
might have come abroad.
But when they were come to the Brow of the
Hill, where they could fee a great way into the
Valleys and Woods, which lay towards the North-
East part, and where the Island lay lowest, they
lhouted, and hollow'd till they were weary; and
not caring it seems to venture far from the Shore,
nor far from one another, they fat down together
under a Tree, to consider of it: Had they thought
fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other Parry
of them had done, they had done the Jobb for us;
but they were too full of Apprehensions of Danger,
to venture to go to sleep, tho' they could not tell
what the Danger was they had to fear neither.
The Captain made a very just Proposal to me,
upon this Consultation of theirs, viz. That per-
haps they would all fire a Volley again, to endea-
vour to make their Fellows hear, and that we
should all sally upon them, just at the Junaure
when their Pieces were all difcharg'd, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them
without Blood-'lhed: I lik'd the Proposal, provided
it was done while we were near enough to come
up. to them, before they could load their Pieces
again..
But

<page 324>
. [ 3'3 ]
But this Event did not happen, and we lay still
a long Time, very irresolute what Course to take}
at length I told them, there would be nothing to
be done in ray Opinion till Night, and then if they
did not return to the Boat, perhaps we might find
a way to get between them and the Shore, and so
might use some Stratagem with them in the Boat
to get them on Shore.
We waited a great while, though very impatient
for their removing} and were very uneasy, when,
after long Consultations, we saw them start all up,
and march down toward the Sea: It seems they had
such dreadful Apprehensions upon them .of the
Danger of the Place, that they resolv'd to go op
board the Ship again, give their Companions over
for lost, and so go on with their intended'*Voyage
with the Ship.
As soon as I perceiv'd them go toward.s the Shore,
I imagin'd it to be as it really was, That they had
given over their Search, and were for going back
again} and the Captain, as soon as I rbld him my
Thoughts, was ready to sink at the Apprehensions
of it} but I presently thought of a Stratagem to
fetch them back again, and which answer'd my
End to a Tittle.
1 order'd Friday, and the Captain's Mate, to go
over the little Creek Westward, towards the Place
where the Savages came on Shore, when Friday was
refeu'd} and as soon as they came to a little rising
Ground, at about half a Mile Distance, I bad them
hollow, as loud as they could, and' wait till they
found-the Seamen heard them} that as soon as ever
they heard the Seamen answer them, they should
return it again, and then keeping out of Sight, take
a round, always answering when the other hollow'd,
to draw them as far into the Island, and among the
Woods,

<page 325>
[ ]
Woods, as possible, and then wheel about again te>
me by such ways as I directed them. ,
They were just going into the Boat, when-TW-
day and the Mate hollow'd, and they presently heard
them, and answering, run along the Shore West-
ward, towards the Voice they heard, when they
were presently ltopp'd by the Creek, where the
Water being up, they could not get over, and
call'd for the Boat to come up, and set them over,
as indeed I expected.
When they had set themselves over, I obferv'd,
that the Boat being gone up a good way into the
Creek, and as it were in a Harbour within the
Land, they took one of the three Men out of her
to go along with them, and left only two in the
Boat, having fastned her to the Stump of a little
Tree o.n the Shore.
This was what I wish'd for; and immediately
leaving Friday and the Captain's Mate to their Busi-
ness, 1 took the rest with me, and crossing the
Creek out of their Sight, we furpriz'd the two
Men before they were aware; one of them lying on
Shore, and the other being in the Boat; the Fellow
on Shore, was between sleeping and waking, and go-
ing to start up, the Captain who was foremost, ran in
upon him,and knock'd him down,and then call'd out
to him in the Boat to yield, or he was adead Man.
There needed very few Arguments to persuade
a single Man to yield, when he saw five Men upon
him, and his Comrade knock'd down; besides, this
was it seems one of the three who were notso hearty
in the Mutiny as the rest of the Crew, and there-
rore was easily persuaded, not only to yield, butas-
erwards to join very sincerely with us. k
In the mean time, Friday and the Captain's Mate
b well maivag'd their" Business with the rest, that
hey drew them by hollowing and answering, from
one

<page 326>
[ 315 ]
one Hill to another; and from one Wood to ano-
ther, till they not only heartily tir'd them, but lest
them, where they were very sure they could not
reach back to the Boat, before it was dark; and in-
deed they were heartily tir'd.themselves also, by the
Time they, came back to us.
We had nothing now to do, but to watch for
them in the dark, and to fall upon them, so as to
make sure work with them.
It was several Hours after Friday came back to
me, before they came back to their Boat; and we
could hear the foremost of them long before
they came quite up, caliing to those behind to
come along, and could also hear them answer and
complain how lame and tir'd they were, and not
able to come any faster, which was very welcome
News to us.
At length they came up to the Boat} but 'tis
impossible to express their Confusion, when they
found the Boat sast a ground in the Creek, the
Tide ebb'd out, and their two Men gone: We
could hear them call to one another in a most la-
mentable Manner, telling one another they were
gotten into an inchanted Island; that either there
were Inhabitants in it, and they should all be mur-
ther'd, or else there were Devils and Spirits in it,
, and they should be all carry'd away, and devour'd.
They hollow'd again, andcall'd their two Com-
rades by their Names a great many times, but
no Answer. After some time, we could see
them, by the little Light there was, run about
wringing their Hands like Men in Despair; and
that sometimes they would go and sit down in the
Boat to rest themselves, then come ashore again,
and walk about again, and so the same thing over
again.
My

<page 327>
[3i* ]
My Men would sain have me give them Leave
to fall upon them at once in the Dark; but I was
willing to take them at some Advantage, so to
spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing
any of our own Men, knowing the other were ve-
ry well armed. I resolved to wait to fee if they
did not separate; and therefore to make sure of
them, I drew my Ambuscade nearer, and order'd
Friday and the Captain to creep upon their Hands
and Feet as close to the Ground as they could,
that they might not be discovers, and get as near
them as they could possibly, before they offered to
fire.
They had not been long in that Posture, but that
the Boatswain, who was the principal Ringleader
of the Mutiny, and had now shewn himself the
most dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came
walking towards them with two more of their
Crew; the Captain was so eager, as having this
principal Rogue so much in his. Power, that he
could hardly have Patience to let him come so
near, as to be sure of him; for they only heard
his Tongue before: But when they came nearer,
the Captain and Friday starting up on their Feet,
let fly at them.
The Boatswain was kill'd upon the Spot, the
next Man was shot into the Body, and fell just by
him, tho' he did not die till an Hour or two afteri
ind the third run for it.
At the Noise of the Fire, I immediately ad-
/ane'd with my whole Army, which was now 8
VIen, viz. my self Generalissimo,, Friday my Lieu-
enant-General, the Captain and his two Men, and
he three Prisoners of War, who we had trusted
vith Arms.
We

<page 328>
C 3n ]
We came upon them indeed in the Dark, so, that
they could not see our Number; and I made the
Man we had lest in the Boat, who was now one
of us, call to them by Name, to try if I coyjd
bring them to a Parley, and so might perhaps re-
duce them to Terms, which fell out just as we de-
sir'd: For indeed it was easy to think, as their
Condition then was, they would be very willing
to capitulate; so he calls out as loud as he could,
to one of them, Tom Smiths T"om Smith; Tom Smith
answer'd immediately, Who's that, Robinson? for
it seems he knew his Voice: T'other answer'd, Ay,
ay, for God's Sake, Tom Smith, throw down your
Arms, and yield, or, you are all dead Men this Mo-
ment.
Who mufl we yield to? where are they? (says Smith
again;) Here they are, fays he, here's our Captain,
and fifty Men with him, have been hunting you
this two Hours; the Boatswain is kill'd, WillFrye
is wounded, and I am a Prisoner; and if you do not
yield, you are all lost.
Will they give us Quarter then, (says Tom
Smith) and we will yield? /'// go and ask, if you
promise to yield, fays Robinson; so he ask'd the Cap-
tain, and the Captain then calls himself out, You
Smith, you know my Voice, if you lay down your
Arms immediately, and submit, you shall have your
Lives all but Will. Atkins.
Upon this, Will. Ækins cry'd out, For God's fake,
Captain, give me Quarter, what have 1 done? They
have been all as bad as I, which by the way was not
true neither; for it seems this Will. Atkins was the
first Man that laid hold of the Captain, when they
'first mutiny'd, and used him barbarously, in tying
his Hands, and giving him injurious Language.
However, .the Captain told him he must lay down
his Arms' at Discretion, and trust to the Gover-
nor's

<page 329>
• t 318 ]
noQr's Mercy, by which he meant me; for they
all call'J me Governour.
In a word, they all kid down their Arms, and
begg'd their Lives; and I lent the Man that had
p.uly'd with them, and two more, who bound
them all; and then my great Army of so Men,
which particularly with thole three, were all but
eight, came up and sciz'd upon them all, and upon
their Boat, only that I kept my self and one more
out of Sight, for Reasons of State.
Our next Work was to repair the Boat, and
think of seizing the Ship; and as for the Captain,
now he had Leisure to parly with them: He expo-
stulated with them upon theVillanyof their Pra-
ctices with him, and at length upon the sarther
Wickedness of their Design, and how certainly it
tnust bring them to Misery and Distress in the End,
and perhaps to the Gallows.
They all appear'd very penitent, and begg'd hard
for their Lives : as for that, he told them they
were none of his Prisoners, but the Commander of
the Island; that they thought they had set him on
Shore in a barren uninhabitated Island, but it had
pleased ,God so to direct them, that the Island
was inhabited, and that the Governour was an
Englifi Man; that he might hang them all there, if
he pleased; but as he had given them all Quarter,
he supposed he would send them to England to be
dealc with there, as Justice requir'd, except At-
kins, who he was commanded by the Governour to
advise to prepare for Death; for that he would be
hang'd in the Morning.
Though this was all a Fiction of his own, yet
it had its desired Effect*; Atkins fell upon his Knees
to beg the Captain to intercede with the Gover-
nour for his Lisei and all the rest begg'd of h»nl
for

<page 330>
[ 319 ] %
for God's Sake, that they might not be sent to
England.
It how occurr'd to me, that the time of our De-
liverance was come, and that it would be a most
easy thing to bring these Fellows in, to be hearty
in getting Possession of the Ship; so I retir'd in the
Dark from them, that they might not see what
Kind of a Governour they had, and call'd the Cap-
tain to me. When I call'd, as at a good Distance,
one of the Men was order'd to speak again, and fay
to the Captain, Captain, the Commander calls for
you; and presently the Captain reply'd, 1'ell bis
Excellency I am just a coming: This more perfect-
ly amused them i 'and they all believed that the
Commander was just by with his fifty Men.
Upon the Captain's coming to me, I told him
\c\y Project for seizing the Ship, which he lik'd of
•wonderfully well, and refolv'd to put it in Execu-
tion the next Morning.
But in order to execute it with more Art, and
security of Success, I told him, we must divide the
Prisoners, and that he should go and take Atkins
and two more of the worst of them, and send them
pinion'd to the Cave where the others lay: This
was committed to Friday and the two Men who
came on Shore with the Captain.
They convey'd them to the Cave, as to a Pri-
son i and it was indeed a dismal Place, especially to
Men in their Condition.
The other I order'd to my Bower, as I call'd ill
of which 1 have given a full Description; ana
as it was ftfnc'd in, and they pinion'd, the Place
, was secure enough, considering they were upon
their Behaviour.
To these in the Morning I sent the Captain, who
was to enter into a Parley 'with them, in a Word
to try them, and tell me, whether he thought they
might

<page 331>
» • C 3.2o ]
might be trusted or no, to go on Board and surprize
the Ship. He talk'd to them of the Injury done
him, of the Condition they were brought to, and
that though the Governour had given them Quar-
ter for their Lives, as to the present Action, yet
that if they were sent to England, they would all
be hang'd in Chains, to be sure* but that if they
would join in so just an Attempt, as to recover the
Ship, he would have the Governour's Engagement
for their Pardon.
Any' one may guess how readily such a Proposal
would be accepted by Men in their Condition;
they sell down on their Knees_to the Captain, and
promised with the deepest Imprecations, that they
would be faithful to him to the last Drop, and
that they should owe their Lives to him, and
. would go with him all over the World, thatthjy
would own him for a Father to them as long as
they liv'd.
Well, fays the Captain, I must go and tell the
Governour what you fay, and fee what I can do
to bring him to consent to it: So he brought me
an Account os the Temper he sound them in;
and that he verily believ'd they would be faith-
ful.
However, that we might be very secure, I told
him he should go back again, and chuse out thole
five, and tell them, they might fee that he did not
want Men, that he would take out those five to be
his Assistants, and that the Governour would keep
the other two, and the three that were sent Priso-
ners to the Castle {my Cave) as Hostages, for the
Fidelity of those five; and that is they prov'd un-
faithful in the Execution, the five Hostages should
be hang'd in Chains alive upon the Shore.
This look'd severe, and convine'd them that the
Governour

<page 332>
[ 321 ]
Governour was in Earnest; however they had rid
Way left them, but to accept it; and it was now"
the Business of the Prisoners, as much as of the
Captain, to persuade the other five to do their
Duty.
Our Strength was now thus ordered for the Ex-
pedition: i. The Captain, his Mate, and Passen-
ger, i. Then the two Prisoners of the first Gang,
to whom having their Characters from the Captain',.
I had given their Liberty, and trusted them with
Arms. 3. The other two who I had kept till now$
in my Bower, pinion'd; but upon the Captain's
Motion, had now releas'd. 4. These five releas'd
at last: So that they were twelve in all, besides five
we kept Prisoners in the Cave, for Hostages.
I ask'd the Captain, if he was willing to ven-
ture with these Hands on Board the Ship 5 for
as. for me and my Man Friday, I did not think
it was proper for us to stir, having seven Men
left behind; and it was Employment enough for
us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
Victuals.
As to the five in the Cave, I resolv'd to keep
them fast, but Friday went in twice a Day to them*
to supply them with Necessaries; and I made the
other two carry Provisions to a certain Distance^
where Friday was to take it.
When I shew'd my self to the two Hostages, ic
was withYhe Captain, who told them, I was the
Person the Governour had order'd to look after
them, and that it was the Governour's Pleasure they
should not stir any where, but by my Directi-
on; that if they did, they should be fetch'd int&
the Castle, and be lay'd in Irons* so that as we
never suffered them to see me as Governour, so I
now appeal 'd as another Person, and spoke of the
Y Gover-

<page 333>
[ 322 ]
}overnour, the Gaiison, the Castle, and the like,
pon all Occasions.
The Captain now had no Difficulty before him,
iut to furnish his two Boats, stop the Breach ot'
>nc, and Man them. He made his Passenger
I)aptain of one, with four other Men} and him-
elf, and his Mate, and five more went in the o-
:her: And they contriv'd their Business very well}
ror they came up to the Ship about Midnight: As
"con as they came within Call of the Ship, he made
Robinson hale them, and tell them they had brought
aff the Men and the Boat, but that it was a long
time before they had sound them, and the like;
holding them in a Chat till they came to the Ship's
side; when the Captain and the Mate, entring
first with their Arms, immediately knock'd down
the second Mate and Carpenter with the But-end
of their Muskets. Being very faithfully seconded
by their Men, they secur'd all the rest that were
upon the Main and Quarter Decks, and began to
sasten the Hatches to keep them down who were
below, when the other Boat and their Men entring
at the fore Chains, secur'd the Fore-Castle of the
Ship, and the Scuttle which went down into the
Cook-Room, making three Men they found there
Prisoners.
When this was done, and all safe upon Deck,the
Captain order'd the Mate with three Men to break
into the Round-House, where the new Rebel Cap-
tain lay, and having taken the Alarm, was gotten
up, and with two Men and a Boy had gotten Fire
Arms in their Hands, and when the Mate with a
Crow split open the Door, the new Captain and
his Men fir'd boldly among them, and wounded the
Mate with a Musket Ball, which broke his Ann,
and wounded two more of the Men, but k»ld
no Body. Tbc

<page 334>
[ 323 3
The Mate calling for Help, rush'd however in-
to the Round-House, wounded as he Was, and
with his Pistol shot the new Captain thro' the
Head, the Bullet entring at his Mouth, and came
out again behind one of his Ears; so that he never
spoke a Word; upon which the rest yielded, and
the Ship was taken effectually, without any more
Lives lost.
As soon as the Ship was thus, fecur'd, the Cap-
tain order'd seven Guns to be fir'd, which was the
Signal agreed upon with me, to give me Notice
of his Success, which you may be sure I was very
glad to hear, having fat watching upon the Shore
for it till near two of the Clock in the Morning.
Having thus heard the Signal plainly, I laid me
down; and it having been a Day of great Fatigue
to me, I slept very sound, till 1 was something sur-
priz'd with the Noise of a Gun; and presently
starting up, I heard a Man call me by the Name of
Governour, Governour, and presently I knew the
Captain's Voice, when climbing up to the Top of
the Hill, there he stood, and pointing to the Ship,
he embrac'd me in his Arms, My dear Friend and
Deliverer, fays he, there's your Ship, for she is ally oursy
andso are we and all that belong to her. I cast my Eyes
to the Ship, and there she rode within little more
than half a Mile of the Shore; for they had weigh*-
ed her Anchor as soon as they were Masters of her;
and the Weather being fair, had brought her to an
Anchor just against the Mouth of the little Creek;
and the Tide being up, the Captain had brought
the Pinnace in near the Place where I at first land-
ed my Rafts, and 1b landed just at my Door.
I was at first ready to sink down with the Sur-
prize. For I saw my Deliverance indeed visibly
put into my Hands, all things easy, and a large
Ship just ready to carry me away whither I plea-
Y z fed

<page 335>
[ 324- ]
fed to go. At first, for some time, I was not able
to answer him one Word; but as he had taken me
in his Arms, I held fast by him, or I mould have
fallen to the Ground.
He perceived the Surprize, and immediately
pulls a Bottle out of his Pocket, and gave me a
Dram of Cordial, which he had brought on pur-
pose for me; after I had drank it, I sat down up-
on the Ground; and though it brought me to my
self, yet it was a good while before I could speak
i Word to him.
All this while the poor Man was in as great an
Extafy as I, only not under any Surprize, as I was;
and he said a thousand kind tender things to me, to
compose me and bring me to my self; but such was
the Flood of Joy in my Breast, that it put all my
Spirits into Confusion; at last it broke out into
Tears, and in a little while after, I recovered my
Speech.
Then I took my Turn, and embrac'd him as
ny Deliverer} and we rejoic'd together. I told
iim, I look'd upon him as a Man sent from Heaven
:o deliver me, and that the whole Transaction
"eemed to be a Chain of Wonders; that such things
is these were the Testimonies we had of a secret
rland of Providence governing the World, and an
Evidence, that the Eyes of an infinite Power could
earch into the remotest Corner of the World, and
end Help to the Miserable whenever he pleas'd.
I forgot not to lift up my Heart in Thankful-
less to Heaven, and what Heart could forbear to
>less him, who had not only in a miraculous Man-
rer provided for one in such a Wilderness, and
n such a desolateCondition, but from whom every
deliverance must always be acknowledged to pro-
eed.: • $;
When

<page 336>
[ 325 ]
When we had talk'd a while, the Captain told
me he had brought me some little Refreshment,
snch as the Ship afforded, and such as the Wretches
that had been so long his Masters had not plunder'd
him of: Upon this he call'd aloud to the Boat, and
bid his Men bring the things ashore that were for
the Governour; and indeed it was a Present, as if
I had been one not that was to be carry'd away
along with them, but as if I had been to dwell
upon the Island still, and they were to go without
me.
First he had brought me a Case of Bottles full
of excellent Cordial Waters, six large Bottles of
Madcra Wine; the Bottles held two Quarts a-piece >
two Pound of excellent good Tobacco, twelve good
Pieces of the Ships Beef, and six Pieces of Pork,
with a Bag of Pease, and about a hundredweight
of Bisket.
He brought me also a Box of Sugar, a Box of
Flower, a Bag full of Lemons, and two Bottles
of Lime-juice, and abundance of other things:
But besides these, and what was a thousand times
more useful to me, he brought me six clean new
Shirts, six very good Neckcloaths, two Pair of
Gloves, one Pair of Shoes, a Hat, and one Pair of
Stockings, and a very good Suit of Cloaths of his
own, which had been worn but very little: In a
Word, he cloathed me from Head to Foot.
It was a very kind and agreeable Present, as any
one may imagine, to one in my Circumstances: But
never was any thing in the World of that Kind so
unpleasant, awkard, and uneasy, as it was to me to
wear such Cloaths at their first putting on.
After these Ceremonies past, and after all his
good things were brought into my little Apart-
ment, we began to consult what was to be done
with the Prisoners we had; for it was worth con-
Y J sidcrin^

<page 337>
[ 326 ]
lid'ering, whether we might venture to take them
iway with us or no, especially two of them, who
we knew to be incorrigible and refractory to the
tit Degree; and the Captain said, he knew they
were such Rogues, that there was no obliging
them, and if he did carry them away, it mult be
i a Irons, as Malefactors to be delivered over to Ju-
Iticeat the first Englifli Colony he should come at;
and 1 found that the Captain himself was very an-
xious about it.
Upon this, I told him,, that if he defir'd it, I
durst undertake to bring the two Men he spoke of,
to make it their own Request that he should leave
them upon the Island * I jhould be very glad of that,
lays the Captain, with all my Heart.
Well, fays I, I will fend for them up, and talk
with them for you; so I caused Friday and the two
Hostages, for they were now difcharg'd, their Com-
rades havingperform'd their Promise; I say, I cau-
sed them to go to the Cave, and bring up the five
Men pinion'd, as they were, to the Bower, and
keep them there 'till I came.
After some time, I came thither drefs'd in my
new Habit, and now 1 was call'd Governouragain;
being all met, and the Captain with me, I caused
the Men to be brought before me, and I told them,
I had had a full Account of their villainous Beha-
viour to the Captain, and how they had run away
with the Ship, and were preparing to commit far-
ther Robberies, but that Providence had en-
fnar'd them in their own Ways, and that they
were fallen into the Pit which they had digged tor
others.
I let them know, that by my Direction the Ship
had been feiz'd, that she lay now in the Road; and
they might see by and by, that their new Captain
had
*
\

<page 338>
t 327 ]
had recciv'd the Reward of his Villany; for that
they might fee him hanging at the Yard-Arm.
That as to them, I wanted to know what they
had to fay, why I should not execute them as Pi-
rates taken in the Fact, as by my Commission they
could not doubt I had Authority to do.
One of them anfwer'd in the Name of the rest,
That they had nothing to fay but this, That when
they were taken the Captain promis'd them their
Lives, and they humbly implor'd my Mercy: But
I told them, I knew not what Mercy to shew them }
for as for my self, I had refolv'd to quit the
Island with all my Men, and had taken Passage
with the Captain to go for England: And as for
the Captain, he could not carry them to England
other than as Prisoners in Irons, to be try'd for
Mutiny, and running away'with the Ship; the
Consequence of which, they must needs know,
would be the Gallows; so that I could not tell
which was best for them, unless they had a mind
to take their Fate in the Island} if they desir'd that,
I did not care, as I had Liberty to leave it, I had
some Inclination to give them their Lives, if they
thought they could shift on Shore.
They seem'd very thankful for it, said they would
much rather venture to stay there, than to be car-
ry'd to England to be hang'd , so 1 lest it on that
Issue.
However, the Captain seem'd to make some
Difficulty of it, as if he durst not leave them
there : Upon this I seem'd a little angry with the
Captain, and told him, That they were my Priso-
ners, not his y and that seeing I had offer'd them
so much Favour,'1 would be as good as my Word }
and that if he did not think fit to consent to it, I
would set them at Liberty as I found them; and

<page 339>
[ 328 ]
if he did not like it, he might take them again it
he could catch them.
Upon this they appeared very thankful, and I ac
cordingly set them at Liberty, and bad them retire
into the Woods to the Place whence they came,
and I would leave them some Fire Arms, some
Ammunition, and some Directions how they should
live very well, if they thought fit.
Upon this I prepar'd to go on Board the Ship,
but told the Captain, that I would stay that Night
to prepare my Things, and desir'd him to go on
Board in the mean time, and keep all right in the
Ship, and fend the Boat on Shore the next Day for
me; ordering him in the mean time to cause the
new Captain, who was kill'd, to be hang'd at the
Yard-Arm, that these Men might see him.
When the Captain was gone, I sent for the Men
up to me to my Apartment, and entred seriously
into Discourse with them of their Circumstances.
I told them, I thought they had made a right
Choice; that if the Captain carry'd them away,
they would certainly be hanged. I shewed them
the new Captain, hanging at the Yard-Arm of the
Ship, and told them they had nothing less to expect.
When they had all declar'd their Willingness to
stay, I then told them, I would let them into the
Story of my living there, and put them into the
Way of making it easie to them. Accordingly I
*ave them the whole History of the Place, and of
ny coming to it; shew'd them my Fortifications,
he way I made my Bread, planted my Corn, cu-
ed my Grapes; and in a word, all that was ne-
.eflary to make them easy: I told them the Story
lso of the sixteen Spaniards that were to be expe-
nd i for whom 1 left a Letter, and made them
romise to treat them in common with themselves.
I left

<page 340>
[ 329 ]
I lest them my Fire Arms, viz. Five Muskets,
three Fowling Pieces, and three Swords. I had
above a Barrel and half of Powder left; for after
the first Year or two, I used but little, and wasted
none. I gave them a Description of the Way I
manag'd the Goats, and Directions to milk and
fatten them, and to make both Butter and Cheese.
In a word, I gave them every Part of my own
Story; and I told them, I would prevail with the
Captain to leave them two Barrels of Gun-Powder
more, and some Garden-Seeds, which I told them
I would have been very glad of; also I gave them
the Bag of Pease which the Captain had brought
me to eat, and bade them be sure to sow and en-
crease them.
Having done all this, I left them the next Day,
and went on Board the Ship: We prepared imme-
diately to fail, but did not weigh that Night:
The next Morning early, two of the five Men
came swimming to the Ship's Side, and making a
most lamentable Complaint of the other three, beg-
ged to be taken into the Ship, for God's fake, for
they should be murthered, and begg'd the Captain
to take them on Board, .though he hang'd them
immediately.
Upon this the Captain pretended to have no
Power without me } but after some Disficulty,
and after their solemn Promises of Amendment,
they were taken on Board, and were some time af-
ter soundly whipp'd and pickl'd; after which,
they prov'd very honest and quiet Fellows.
Some time after this, the Boat was order'd on
Shore, the Tide being up, with the Things promi-
sed to the Men, to which the Captain, at my Inter-
cession, caused their Chests and Cloaths to be add-
ed, which they took, and were very thankful for;
I also encourag'd them, by telling them, that if

<page 341>
[ 330 ]
it lay in my way to send any Vessel to take them in,
I would not forget them.
When I took leave of this Island, I carry'd on
Board for Reliques the great Goat's-Skin-Cap I
had made, my Umbrella, and my Parrot; also I
forgot not to take the Money I formerly mentions,
which had lain by me so long useless, that it was
grown rusty, or tarnisti'd, and could hardly pass
for Silver, till it had been a little rubb'd, and han-
dled; as also the Money I found in the Wreck of
the Spanijh Ship.
And thus I left the Island, the Nineteenth os
December, as I found by the Ship's Account, in
the Year 1686, after I had been upon it eight and
twenty Years, two Months, and ip Days; being
deliver'd from this second Captivity, the same Day
of the Month that I first made my Escape in the
Barco-Longo, from among the Moors of Sallee.
In this Vessel, after a long Voyage, I arriv'd in
England the Eleventh of June, in the Year 1687,
having been thirty and five Years absent.
When I came to England, I was as perfect a
Stranger to all the World, as if I had never been
known there. My Benefactor and faithful Stew-
ard, who I had left in Trust with my Money, was
alive, but had had great Misfortunes in the World;
Was become a Widow the second Time, and very low
in the World: I made her easy as to what she ow'd
me, assuring her, I would give her no Trouble; but
on the contrary, in Gratitude to her former Care
and Faithfulness to me, I reliev'd her, as my little
Stock would afford, which at that Time would
indeed allow me to do but little for her; but Iaf-
sur'd her,I would never forget her former Kindness
to me; nor did I forget her, when 1 had sufficient
to help her, as shall be observ'd in its place.
I went

<page 342>
[ 331 ]
I went down afterwards into Yorkshirebut my
Father was dead, and my Mother, and all the Fa-
mily extinct:, except that I found two Sisters, and
two of the Children of one of my Brothers, and as
I had been long ago given over for dead, there had
been no Provision made for me; so that in a Word,
I found nothing to relieve, or. assist me} and that
little Money I had, would not do much for me, as
to fettling in the World.
I met with one Piece of Gratitude indeed, which
I did not expect} and this was, That the Master
of the Ship, who I had so happily deliver'd, and
by the fame Means fav'd the Ship and Cargo, ha-
ving given a very handsome Account to the Own-
ers, of the Manner how I had fav'd the Lives of
the^Men, and the Ship, they invited me to meet
them, and some other Merchants concern'd, and
all together made me a very handsome Compliment
upon the Subject, and a Present of almost two
hundred Pounds .Sterling.
But after making several Reflections upon the
Circumstances of my Life, and how little way this
would go towards settling me in the World, I re-
solv'd to go to Lisbon, and see if I might not come
by some Information of the State of my Plantation
in xhc Brajils, and of what was become of my Part-
ner, who I had reason to suppose had some Years
now given me over for dead.
With this View I took Shipping for Lisbon,
where I arriv'd in dpril following} my Man Fri-
day accompanying me very honestly in all these
Ramblings, and proving a most faithful Servant up-
on all Occasions.
When I came to Lisbon, I found out by Enqui-
ry, and to my particular Satisfaction, my old Friend
the Captain of the Ship, who first took me up at
Sea, off of the Shore of Jfrick: He was now
grown

<page 343>
[ 332 ]
grown old, and had lest off the Sea, having put
his Son, who was far from a young Man, into his
Ship} and who still used the Brasil Trade. The
old Man did not know me, and indeed I hardly
knew him; but I soon brought him to my Remem-
brance, and as soon brought my self to his Remem-
brance, when I told him who I was.
After some passionate Expressions of the old Ac-
quaintance, I enquir'd, you may be sure, aster my
Plantation and my Partner: The old Man told me
he had not been in the Brasih for about nine Years;
but that he could assure me, that when he came
away my Partner was living; but the Trustees,
who I had join'd with him to take Cognizance of
my Part, were both dead; that however, he be-
liev'd that I would have a very good Account of
the Improvement of the Plantation} for that upon
the general Belief of my being cast away, and
drown'd, my Trustees had given in the Account of
the Produce of my Part of the PJantation, to the
Procurator Fiscal, who had appropriated it, in
case I never came to claim it} one Third to the
King, and two Thirds to the Monastery of St. Au-
gustine^ to be expended for the Benefit of the Poor,
and for the Conversion of the Indians to theCatho-
lick Faith} but that if I appear'd, or any one for
me, to claim the Inheritance, it should be restor'd;
only that the Improvement, or annual Production,
being distributed to charitable Uses, could not be
restor'd} but he assur'd me, that the Steward of
the King's Revenue (from Lands) and the Provedi-
dore, or Steward of the Monastery, had taken great
care all along, that the Incumbent, that is to say,
my Partner, gave every Year a faithful Account or
:he Produce, of which they receiv'd duly my
Moiety.
I ask/d

<page 344>
[ 333 ] \,
I ask'd him if he knew to what height of Im-
provement he had brought the Plantation? And,
Whether he thought it might be worth looking af-
ter? Or, Whether on my going thither, I should
meet with no Obstruction to my possessing my just
Right in the Moiety?
He told me, he could not tell exactly to what
Degree the Plantation was improv'd} but this he
knew, that my Partner was grown exceeding rich
upon the enjoying but one half of it; and that to
the best of his Remembrance, he had heard, that
the King's Third of my Parr, which was it seems
granted away to some other Monastery, or Religi-
ous House, amounted to above two hundred Moi-
dores a Year* that as to my being restor'd to a
quiet Possession of it, there was no question to be
made of thac, my Partner being alive to witness my
Title, and my Name being also enrolled in the
Register of the Country; also he told me, That
the Survivors of my two Trustees were very fair
honest People, and very wealthy; and he believ'd
I would not only have their Assistance for putting
me in possession, but would find a very considerable
Sum of Money in.their Hands, for my account;
being the Produce of the Farm while their Fathers
held the Trust, and before it was given up as a-
bove, which, as he remember'd, was for about
twelve Years.
I shew'd my self a little concern'd, and uneasy at
this Account, and enquir'd of the old Captain, How
it came to pass, that the Trustees should thus dis-
pose my Effects, when he knew that I had made my
Will, and had made him, the Portuguese Captain,
my universal Heir, &e,;
He told me, that was true; but that as there
was no Proof of my being dead, he could not act •
as Executor, until some certain Account should
come

<page 345>
[ 334 ]
come of my Death, and that besides, he was not
willing to intermeddle with a thing so remote}
that it was true he had registers my Will,
and put in his Claim; and could he have given
any Account of my being dead or alive, he would
have acted by Procuration, and taken Possession of
the Ingenio, so they call'd the Sugar-House,and had
given his Son, who was now at the Brasils,Qxfcx
to do it.
But, fays the old Man, I have one Piece of
News to tell you, which perhaps may not be so
acceptable to you as the rest, and that is, That
believing you were lost, and all the World believ-
ing so also, your Partner and Trustees did of-
fer to accompt to me in your Name, for six or
eight of the first Years of Profits, which I receiv'd;
but there being at that time, fays he, great Dis-
bursements for encreasing the Works, building an
IngeniO) and buying Slaves, it did not amount to
near so much as afterwards it produced: However,
fays the old Man, I shall give you a true Account
of what I have received in all, and how I have
disposed of it.
After a few Days farther Conference with this
ancient Friend, he brought me an Account of the six
first Years Income of my Plantation, lign'd by roy
Partner and the Merchants Trustees, being al-
ways deliver'd in Goods, viz. Tobacco in Roll,
and Sugar in Chests, besides Rum, Molossus, tfc-
which is the Consequence of a Sugar Work; and
I found by this Account, that every Year the In-
come considerably encreased; but as above, the
Disbursement being large, the Sum at first was
small: However, the old Man let me fee, that he
was Debtor to me 470 'Moidores of Gold, besides
60 Chests of Sugar, and if double Rolls of To-
bacco which were lost in his Ship; he having been
Ship-

<page 346>
E 335 ]
Ship-wreck'd coming Home to Lisbon about 11
Years after my leaving the$y;ue<}j -
The good Man then began to complain of his
Misfortunes, and how he had been oblig'd to make
Use of my Money to recover his Losses, and buy
him a Share in a new Ship: However, my old
Friend, fays he, you'shall not want a Supply in your
Necessity; and as soon as my Son returns, you shall
be fully satisfy'd.
Upon this, he pulls out an old Pouch, and
gives me 160 Portugal Moidores in Gold; and giv-
ing me the Writing of his Title to the Ship, which
his Son was gone to the Brasils in, of which
he was a Quarter Part Owner, and his Son another,
he puts them both into, my Hands for Security of
the rest.
I was too much mov'd with the Honesty and
Kindness of the poor Man, to be able to bear this }
and remembring what he had done for me, how
he had taken me up at Sea, and how generously he
had used me on all Occasions, and particularly,
how sincere a Friend he was now to me, I could
hardly refrain weeping at what he said to me:
Therefore first I asked him, if his Circumstances
admitted him to spare so much Money at that time,
and if it would not straiten him? He told me, he
could not say but it might straiten him a little} but
however it was my Money, and I might want it
more than he.
Every thing the good Man said was full of Af-
fection, and I could hardly refrain from Tears
while bespoke: In short, I took 100 os the Moi-
dores, and call'd for a Pen and Ink to give him a
Receipt for them, then I returned him the rest, and
told him, If ever I had Possession of the Plantation,
I would return the other to him also, as indeed I af-
terwards did 3 and that as to the Bill of Sale of
2. his

<page 347>
C 336 ]
his Part in his Son's Ship, I would not take it by
any Means; but that if I wanted the Money, I
found he was honest enough to pay me; and is I
did not, but came to receive what he gave me rea-
son to expect, I would never have a Penny more
from him.
When this was pass'd, the old Man began to ask
me, If he should put me into a Method to make ray
Claim to my Plantation? I told him, I thought to
go over to it my self: He said, I might do so is I
pleas'd; but that if I did not, there were ways e-
nough to secure my Right, and immediately to ap-
propriate the Profits to my Use; and as there were
Ships in the River of Lisbon, just ready to go away
to Brafil, he made me enter my Name in a publick
Register, with his Affidavit, affirming upon Oath
that I was alive, and that I was the fame Person
who took up the Land for the Planting the said
Plantation at first.
This being regularly attested by a Notary, and
i Procuration affix'd, he directed me to fend it with
i Letter of his Writing, to a Merchant of his Ac-
quaintance at the Place, and then propos'd'my
laying with him till an Account came of the re-
urn.
Never any Thing was more honourable, than
he Proceedings upon this Procuration; for in less
han seven Months I receiv'd a large Packet from
he Survivors of my Trustees the Merchants, for
/hose Account I went to Sea, in which were the
allowing particular Letters and Papers, enclos'd.
First, There was the Account current of t"e
'roduce of my Farm, or Plantation, from the Year
'hen their Fathers had ballanc'd with my old/V-
igai Captain, being for fix Years ; the Ballance ap-
;ar'd to be 1174 Moidores in my Favour.
Secondly

<page 348>
[' 337 ]
Secondly^ There was the Account of four Years
more while they kept the Effects in their Hands,
before the Government claim'd the Administrati-
on, as being the Effects of a Person not to be
found, which they call Civil Death; and the Bal-
lance of this, the Value of the Plantation encrea-
sing, amounted to Cruifadoes, which made
3241 Moidores. >
'Thirdly) There was the Prior of the Augustine's
Account, who had receiv'd the Profits for above
fourteen Years ; but not being to account for whaC
was dispos'd to the Hospital, very honestly de-
clar'd he had 872. Moidores not distributed, which
he acknowledged to my Account} as to the King's
Part, that refunded nothing.
There was a Letter of my Partner's, congratu-
lating me very affectionately upon my being alive,
giving me an Account how the Estate was im-
prov'd, and what it produced a Year, with a Par-
ticular of the Number of Squares or Acres that it
contain'd; how planted, how many Slaves there
were upon it, and making two and twenty Crosses
for Blessings, told.me he had said so many Ave Ma-
ria's to thank the Blessed Virgin that I was alive;
inviting me very passionately to come over and
take Possession of my own; and in the mean time
to give him Orders to whom he should deliver my
Effects, if I did not come my self; concluding
with a hearty Tender of his Friendship, and that
of his Family, and sent me, as a Present, seven
fine Leopard's Skins, which he had it seems recei-
ved from Africa, by some other Ship which he had
sent thither, and who it seems had made a better
Voyage than I: He sent me also five Chests of ex-
cellent Sweet-meats, and an hundred' Pieces of
Gold uncoin'd, not quite so large as Moidores.
Z , By

<page 349>
[ 338 ]
By the same Fleet, my two Merchant Trustees
shipp'd me i zoo Chests of Sugar, 800 Rolls of To-
bacco, and the rest of the whole Accomptin Gold.
^ I might well lay, now indeed, That the latter
End of Job was better than the Beginning. It is
impossible to express the Flutterings of my very
Heart, when I look'd over thele Letters, and es-
pecially when I found all my Wealth about me; for
as the Brafil Ships come all in Fleets, the fame
Ships which brought my Letters, brought my
Goods; and the Effects were safe in the River be-
fore the Letters came to my Hand. In a word, I
turned pale, and grew fick; and I;ad not the old
Man run and fetch'd me a Cordial, I believe the
Hidden Surprize of Joy had overset Nature, and I
had dy'd upon the Spot.
Nay after that, I continu'd very ill, and was so
some Hours, 'till a Physician being sent for, and
something of the real Cause of my Illness being
known, he order'd me to be let Blood; after
which, I had Relief, and grew well : But I verily
believe, if it had not been eas'd by a Vent given
in that manner to the Spirits, I mould have
dy'd. V
I was now Master, all on a sudden, of above
fooo/. Sterling in Money, and had an Estate, as
I might well call it, in the*Brafu's, of above a
thousand Pounds a Year, as sure as an Estate of
Lands in England: And, in a word, I was in a
Condition which I scarce knew how to understand,
or how to compose my self, for the Enjoyment
of it.
The first thing I did, was to recompense my
original Benefactor, my good old Captain, who
had been first charitable to me in my Distress,
kind to me in my Beginning, and honest to nag «
the End: I fhew'd him all that was sent me, 1
told

<page 350>
[ 339 ]
told him, that next to the Providence of Heaven,
which disposes all Things, it was owing to him $
and that it now lay on me to reward him, which
I would do a hundred fold: So I first return'd to
him the hundred Moidores I had receiv'd of him,
then I sent for a Notary, and caused him to draw
up a general Release or Discharge for the 470
Moidores, which he had acknowledg'd he ow'd
me in the fullest and firmest Manner possible; af-
ter which, I caused a Procuration to be drawn,
impowering him to be my Receiver of the annual
Profits of my Plantation, and appointing my Part-
ner to accompt to him, and make the Returns by
the usual Fleets to him in my Name; and a Clause
in the End, being a Grant of 100 Moidores a
Year to him, during his Life, out of the Effects,
and so Moidores a Year to his Son after him, for
h'"s Life: And thus I requited my old Man.
I was now to consider which way to steer my
Course next, and what to do with the Estate that
Providence had thus put into my Hands; and in-
deed I had more Care upon my Head now, than
I had in my silent State of Life in the Island,
where I wanted nothing .but what I had, and
had nothing but what I wanted: Whereas I had
now a great Charge upon me, and my Business
was how to secure it. I had ne'er a Cave now to
hide my Money in, or a Place where it might lye
without Lock or Key, 'till it grew mouldy and
tarnish'd before any Body would meddle with it:
On the contrary, I knew not where to put it, or
who to trust with it. My old Patron, the Cap-
tain, indeed was honest, and that was the only
Refuge I had.
In the next Place, my Interest in the Brasils
seem'd to summon me thither, but now I could
not tell how to think of going thither, 'till I had

settled

<page 351>
[ 340 ]
settled my Affairs, and left my Effects in some safe
Hands behind me. At first I thought of my old
Friend the Widow, who I knew was honest, and
would be just to me; but then she was in Years,
and but Poor, and for ought I knew, might be in
Debt; so chat in a word, I had no way but to
go back to England my self, and take my Effects
With me.
It was some Months however before I resolved
upon this; and therefore, as I had rewarded the
old Captain fully, and to his Satisfaction, who had
been my former Benefactor, so I began to think of
my poor Widow, whose Husband had been my
first Benefactor, and she, while it was in her Pow-
er, my faithful Steward and Instructor. So the first
thing I did, I got a Merchant in Lisbon to write
to his Correspondent in London, not only to pay a
Bill, but to go find her out, and carry her in Mo-
ney an hundred Pounds from me, and to talk with
her, and comfort her in her Poverty, by telling her
slie should, if I liv'd, have a farther Supply: At
the fame time I sent my two Sisters in the Coun-
try, each of them an hundred Pounds, they being,
though not in Want,'yet not in very good Cir-
cumstances} one having been marry'd, and kit a
Widow; and the other having a Husband not so
kind to her as he should be.
But among.all my Relations, or Acquaintances,
I could not yet pitch upon one, to whom I durst
commit the Gross of my Stock, that I might go
away to the Brasds, and leave things safe behind
raer; and this greatly perplex'd me.
I had once a Mind to have gone to the JBra/tlS)
and have settled my self there} for 1 was, as it
were, naturaliz'd to the Place; but I had some lit-
tle Scruple in my Mind about Religion, which
insensibly drew me back, of which I shall fay
more
For

<page 352>
[ 341 ]
more presently. However, it was not Religion
that kept me from going there for the pi dent;
and as I had made no Scruple of being openly of
the Religion of the Country, all the while I was
among them, so neither did I yet; only that now
and then having of late thought more of it, than
formerly) when I began to think of living And dying
among them, I began to regret my having profess'd
my self a Papist, and thought it might not be the
best Religion to die with:
But, as I have said, this was not the main thing that
kept me from going to the Brafih, but that real-
ly I did not know with whom to leave my Effects
behind me; so 1 resolv'd at last to go to England
with it, where, if I arrived, I concluded I should
make some Acquaintance, or find some Relations
that would be faithful to me; and accordingly I
prepar'd to go for England with all my Wealth.
In order to prepare things far mygoingHome, I
fii st, the BraJtlFleet being just going away, resolved
to give Answers suitable to the just and faithful Ac-
count of things I had from thence; and first to the
Prior of St. Juguftine I wrote a Letter full of Thanks
for their just .Dealings, and the Offer of the 871
Moidores, which was indisposed of, which I de-
lir'd might be given foo to the Monastery, and
37Z to the Poor, as the Prior should direct, desi-
ring the good Padres Prayers for me, and the like.
I wrote next a Letter of Thanks to my two
Trustees, with all the Acknowledment that so
much Justice and Honesty cali'd for; as for fend-
ing them any Present, they were far above having
any Occasion of it.
Lastly, I wrote to my .Partner, acknowledging
his Industry in the improving the Plantation, and
his Integrity in encrealing the Stock of the Works,
giving him Instructions for his future Govein-
Z 3 . xnent

<page 353>
[ 34-2 ]
mcnt of my Part, according to the Powers I had
left with my old Patron, to whom I desir'd him to
fend whatever became due to me, 'till he mould
hear from me more particularly; assuring him that
it was my Intention, not only to come to him, but
to settle my self there for the Remainder of my
Life: To this I added a very handfom Present of
some Italian Silks for his Wife, and two Daughters,
for such the Captain's Son inform'd me he had;
with two Pieces of fine English Broad-Cloath, the
best I could get in Lisbon, five Pieces of black Bays,
and some Flanders Lace of a good Value.
Having thus settled my Affairs, sold myCargoe,
and tum'd all my Effects into good Bills of Ex-
change; my next Difficulty was, which Way togo
to England: I had been accustom'd enough to the
Sea, and yet I had a strange Aversion to going to
England by Sea at that time} and though I could
give no Reason for it, yet the Difficulty encrcas'd
upon me so much, that though 1 had onceshipp'd
my Baggage, in order to go, yet I alter'd my Mind,
and that not once, but two or three times.
It is true, I had been very unfortunate by Sea,
and this might be some of the Reasons: But let
no Man flight the strong Impulses of his own
Thoughts in Cafes of such Moment: Two of the
Ships which I had singled out to go in, I mean,
more particularly singled out than any other, that
is to fay, so as in one of them to put my things on
Board, and in the other to have agreed with the
Captain > 1 fay, two of these Ships mifcarry'd, viz-
one was taken by the Ægerines, and the other was
cast away on the Start near Tor bay, and all the Peo-
ple drown'd except three so that in either of rhole
Vessels I had been made miserable} and in which
most, it was hard to fay.
• . V Having

<page 354>
[ 343 ]
Having been thus harass'd in my Thoughts,* my
old Pilot, to whom I communicated every thing,
prefs'd me earnestly not to go by Sea, but either
to go by Land to the Groyne, and cross over the
Bay of Biscay to Rochell, from whence it was but
an easy and safe Journey by Land to Paris, and so
to Calais and Dover; or to go up to Madrid, and
so all the Way by Land thfO' France.
In a word, I was so preposTcss'd against my going
by Sea at al!, except from Calais to Dover, that
I resoiv'd to travel all the Way by Land * which
as I was not in Haste, and did not value the
Charge, was by much the pleafanter Way; and to
make ir more so, my old Captain brought an En-
glish Gentleman, the Son of a Merchant in Lisbon,
who was willing to travel with me: After which,
we pick'd up two move Englijh Merchants also, and
two young Portuguese Gentlemen, the last going to
Paris only, so that we were in all six of us, and
five Servants- the two Merchants and the two
* Portuguese, contenting themselves with one Ser-
vant between two, to save the Charge; and as for
me, 1 got an English Sailor to travel with me as
a Servant, besides my Man Friday, who was too
much a Stranger to be capable of supplying the
Place of a Servant on the Road.
In this Manner I set out from Lisbon; and our
Company being all very well mounted and armed,
we made a little Troop, whereof they did me the
Honour to call me Captain, as well because
1 was the oldest Man, as because I bad two Ser-
vants, and indeed was the Original of the whole
Journey.
'As I have troubled you with none of my Sea-
Journals, so I shall trouble you now with none of
my Land-Journal: But some Adventures that hap-
Z 4 pen'd

<page 355>
[ 344- ]
pen'd to us in this tedious and difficult Journey, I
must not omit.
When we came to Madrid, we being all of us
Strangers to Spain, were willing to stay some time
to fee the Court of Spain, and to fee what was
worth observing $ but it being the latter Part of
the Summer, we. hasten'd away, and set out from
Madrid about the Middle of October: But when we
came to the Edge of Navarre, we were alarm'd at
several Towns on the Way, with an Account, that
so much Suow was fallen on the French Side of the
Mountains, that several Travellers were obliged
to come back to Pampeluna, after having attem-
pted at an extream Hazard to pass on.
When we came to Pampeluna it self, we found it
so indeed; and to me that had been always uied
to a hot Climate, and indeed to Countries where
we could scarce bear any Cloaths on, the Cold was
insufferable; nor indeed was it more painful than
it was surprizing, to come but ten Days before out
of the Old Castile, where the Weather was not only
warm, but very hot; and immediately to feel a
Wind from the Pyrenean Mountains, To very keen,
so severely cold, as to be intolerable, and to en-
danger benumbing and perishing of our Fingers
and Toes.
Poor Friday was really frighted when he saw the
Mountains all cover'd with Snow, and self cold
Weather, which he had never seen or felt before
in his Life.
To mend the Matter, when we came to Pam-
peluna, it continued snowing with so much Vio-
lence, and so long, that the People said, Winter
was come before its time, and the Roads which
were difficult before, were now quite impassable:
For in a Word, the Snow lay in some Places too
thick for us to travel; and being not hard frozen, as

<page 356>
[ 345 ] .
•is the Cafe in Northern Countries: There was no
going without being in Danger of being bury'd
alive every Step. We itaid no less than twenty
Days at Pampeluna; when seeing the Winter com-
ing on, and no likelihood of its being better} for
it was the severest Winter all over Europe that had
been known in the Memory of Man. I propos'd
that we should alj go away to Fontarabia, and there
raking Shipping for Bourdcaux, which was a very
little Voyage.
But while we were considering this, there came
in four French Gentlemen, who having been stopp'd
on the French Side of the Passes, as we were on
the Spanish, had found out a Guide, who traversing
the Country near the Head of Languedoc, had
brought them over the Mountains by such Ways,
that they were not much incommoded with the
Snow; and where they met with Snow in any
Quantity, they said it was frozen hard enough to
bear them and their Horses.
We sent for this Guide, who told us, he would
undertake to carry us the fame Way with no Ha-
zard from the Snow, provided we were armed suf-
ficiently to protect us from wild Beasts; for he
slid, upon these great Snows, it was frequent for
some Wolves to show themselves at the Foot of
the Mountains, being made ravenous for Want
of Food, the Ground being covered with Snow:
We told him, we were well enough prepar'd for
such Creatures as they were, if he would ensure
us from a Kind of two-legged Wolves, which we
were told we were in molt Danger from, especi-
ally on the French Side of the Mountains.
He farisfy'd us there was no Danger of that kind
in the Way that werwere to go; lo we readily a-
greed to follow him, as did also twelve other Gen-
tlemen,

<page 357>
C 34-* ]
tlemen, with their Servants, some French, some Spa-
nijh, who, as I said, had attempted to go, and
were oblig'd to come back again.
Accordingly, we all set out from Pampeluna,\v\\h
our Guide, on the fifteenth of November; and in-
deed, I was furpriz'd, when instead of going for-
ward, he came directly back with us, on the fame
Road that we came from Madrid, above twenty
Miles; when being pals'd two Rivers, and come
into the plain Country, we found our selves in a
warm Climate again, where the Country was plea-
sant, and no Snow to be seen; but on a sudden,
turning to the Lest, he approach'd the Mountains
another Way? and though it is true, the Hills and
Precipices look'd dreadful, yet he made so many
Tours, such.Meanders, and led us by such wind-
ing Ways, that we were insensibly pass'd the
Height of the Mountains, without being much
incumbred with the Snow; and all on a sudden,
he shew'd us the pleasant fruitful Provinces of Lan- .
guedoc and Gascoign, all green and flourishing; tho>
indeed it was at a great Distance, and we had some
rough Way to pass yet.
. We were a little uneasy however, when we found
it snow'd one whole Day, and a Night, so fall,
that we could not travel; but he bid us be easy,
we should soon be past it all: We found indeed,
that we began to descend every Day, and to come
more North than before; and so depending upon
our Guide, we went on.
It was about two Hours before Night, when
our Guide being something before us, and not just
in Sight, out rushed three monstrous Wolves, and
after them a Bear, out of a hollow Way, adjoyn-
ing to a thick Wood; two of the Wolves Hew up-
on the Guide, and had he been half a Mile befoie
us, he had been devour'd indeed, before we could
t have

<page 358>
[ 347 ] *
have help'd him: One of them fastned upon his
Horse, and the other attack'd'the Man with that
Violence, that he had not Time, or not Presence
of Mind enough to draw his Pistol, but hollow'd
and cry'd out to us most lustily; my Man Friday
being next to <me, I bid him<ride up, and fee what
was the Matter; as soon as Friday came in Sight
of the Man, he hollow'd as loud as t'other, O Ma-
ster! O Master! But like a bold Fellow, rode di-
rectly up to the poor Man, and with his Pistol
shot the Wolf that attack'd him into the Head.
It was happy for the poor Man, that it was my
Man Friday; for he having been us'd to that kind
of Creature in his Country, had no Fear upon
him; but went close up to him, and Ihot him as
above; whereas any of us, would have fir'd at a
farther distance, and have perhaps either miss'd the
Wolf, or endanger'd shooting the Man.
Eut it was enough to have terrify'd a bolder
Man than I, and indeed it alarm'd all our Compa-
ny, when with the Noise of Friday's Pistol, we
heard on both Sides the difmallest Howling of
Wolves, and the Noise redoubled by the Echo of
the Mountains, that it was to us as if there had
been a prodigious Multitude of them; and per-
haps indeed there was not such a few, as that we
had no Cause of Apprehensions.
However, as Friday had kill'd this Wolf, the o-
ther that had fastned upon the Horse, left him im-
mediately, and fled; having happily fastned upon
his Head, where the Bofles of the Bridle had stuck
in his Teeth; so that he had not done him much
Hurt: The Man indeed was most Hurt; for the
raging Creature had bit him twice, once on the
Arm, and the other time a little above his Knee;
and he was just as it were tumbling down by the
Disorder

<page 359>
*[ 34.8 ];
Disorder of his Horse, when Friday came up and
shot the Wolf.
It is easy to suppose, that at the Noise of Fri-
day's Pistol, we all mended our Pace, and rid up as
sast as the Way (which was very difficult) would
give us leave, to fee what was the Matter; as soon
as we came clear of the Trees, which blinded us
before, we saw clearly what had been the Case,
and how Friday had disengag'd the poor Guide;
though we did not presently discern what kind of
Creature it was he had Itill'd.
But never was a Fight manag'd so hardly, and
in such a surprizing Manner, as that which follow'd
between Friday and the Bear, which gave us all
(though at first we were surpriz'd and afraid for
him) the greatest Diversion imaginable: As the
Bear is a heavy,, clumsey Creature, and does not
gallop as the Wolf docs, who is swift, and light;
Jo he has two particular Qualities, which generally
are the Rule of his Actions} First, As to Men, who
arc not his proper Trey; I fay, not his proper Prey;
because tho' 1 can't say what excessive Hunger might
do, which was now their Cafe, the Ground being all
cover'd with Snow; but as to Men, he does not u-
fually'attempt them, unless they first attack him:
On the contrary, if you meet him in the Woods, if
you don't meddle with him, he won't meddle pith
you; but then you mull take Care to be very civil
to him, and give him the Road; for he is a very
nice Gentleman, he won't go a Step out of his Way
for a Prince; nay, if you are really afraid, your
best way is to look another Way, and keep going
on; for sometimes if you stop, and stand Hill, and
look steadily at him, he takes it for an Affront; but
ifyou throw or toss any Thing at him, and it hits
him, though it were but a bit of a Stick, as big as
your Finger, he takes it for an .Affront, and sets all

<page 360>
[ 349 1
his other Business aside to pursue his Revenge} for
he will have Satisfaction in Point of Honour} that
is his first Quality: The next is, ThaCif he be
once affronted, he will never leave you, Night or
Day, till he hashis Revenge; but follows ata good
round rare, till he overtakes you.
My Man Friday had deliver'd our Guide, and
when we came up to him, he was helping him off
from his Horse; for the Man was both hurt and
frighted, and indeed the last more than the first}
when on the sudden, we spy'd the Bear come out of
the Wood, and a vast monstrous one it was, the big-
gest by far that ever I saw. We y/ereall a little sur-
priz'd when we saw him; but when Friday saw him,
it was easy to sec Joy and Courage in the Fellow's
Countenance; 0/0/0/ fays Friday, three times,
pointing to him ,0 Master; You give me te Leave, me
Jhakee te Hand with him; me make you good laugh.
I was surpriz'd to see the Fellow so pleas'd} You
Fool you, fays I, he will eat you up: Eatee me up!
Eatee me up! fays Friday, twice over again; Me
eatee him up: Me make you good laugh: You all flay
here, me show you good laughs so down he sits, and
gets his Boots off in a Moment, and put on a Pair
of Pumps, (as we call the flat Shoes they wear)
and which he had in his Pocket, gives my other
Servant his Horse, and vyith his Gun away he flew
swift like the Wind.
The Bear was walking softly on, and offer'd to
meddle with no Body, till Friday coming prettv
near, calls to him, as if the Bear could understand
him; Hark ye, hark ye, fays Friday^ me Jpeakee wit
yau: We follo*w'd at a Distance} for now being
come down on the Gascoign side of the Mountains,
•we were entred a vast great Forest, where the
Country was plain, and pretty open, though many
Trees in it scatter'd here and there.
/ < Friday

<page 361>
X 35o ]
Friday, who had as we fay, the Heels of the Bear,
came up with him quickly, and takes up a great
Stone, and throws at him, and hit him just on the
Head} but did him no more harm, that if he had
thrown it agartist a Wall; but it anfwer'd Friday's
End; for the Rogue was so void of Fear, that he
did it purely to make the Bear follow him, and
shew us some Laugh, as he call'd it.
As soon as the Bear felt the Stone, and saw him,
he turns about, and comes after him, taking Devi-
lish long Strides, and shuffling along at a strange
Rate, so as would have put a Horse to a middling
Gallop; away runs Friday, and takes his Course, as
if he run towards us for Help; so we all refolv'd to
fire at once upon the Bear, and deliver my Man;
though I was angry at him heartily, for bringing
the Bear back upon us, when he was going about
his own Business another .Way; and especially I
was angry that he hadtum'd the Bear upon us, and
then run away; and I call'd out, Ton Dog, said I, is
this your making us laugh? Come away, and take your
Horse, that -we may Jhoot the Creature; he hears me,
and cries out, No Jhoot, no jlooot, stand still, you get
much Laugh. And as the nimble Creature run two
Foot for the Beast's one, he turn'd on a sudden, on
one side of us, and seeing a great Oak-Tree fit for
his Purpose, he beckon'd to us to follow, and
doubling his Pace, he gets nimbly up the Tree,
laying his Gun down upon the Ground, at about
five or six Yards from the Bottom of the Tree.
The Bear soon came to the Tree, and we fol-
low'd at a Distance; the first Thing he did, he
stopp'd at theGun, smelt to it, but let it lye, and
up he scrambles into the Tree, climbing like a Cat,
though so monstrously heavy: I was amaz'd at the
Folly, as I thought it, of my Man, and could not
for my Life fee any Thing to laugh at yet, till fee-
ing

<page 362>
I 35i )
ing the Bear get up the Tree, we all rod nearer
to him.
W hen we came to the Tree, there was Friday
got out to the small End of a large Limb of the
Tree, and the Bear got about half way to him \
as soon as the Bear got out to that part where the
Limb of the Tree was weaker, Ha, fays he to us,
now you see me teachee the Bear dance; so he falls a
jumping and shaking the Bough, at which the Bear
began to totter, but stood still, and began to look
behind him, to see how he should get back* then
indeed we did laugh heartily: But Friday had not
done with him by a great deal; when he sees him
stand still, he calls out to him again, as if he had
suppos'd the Bear couid speak Englijli; What, you
no come farther? Pray you come farther; so he left
jumping and shaking the Trees; and the Bear, just
as if he had understood what he said, did come a
little farther, then he fell a jumping again, and the
Bear stopp'd again.
We thought now was a good time to knock him
on the Head, and I call'd to Friday to stand still,
and we would shoot the Bean but he cry'd out
earnestly, O pray! O pray! No shoot, me shoot by
and then-y he would have said, by and by. However,
to shorten the Story, Friday danc'd so much, and
the Bear stood so ticklish, that we had laughing
enough indeed, but still could not imagine what
the Fellow would do; for first we thought he de-
pended upon shaking the Bear off, and we found
the Bear was too cunning for that too} for'he
would not go out far enough to be thrown down,
but clings fast with his great broad Claws and
Feet, so that we could not imagine what would
be the End of it, and where the Jest would be at
last.
But

<page 363>
I 352 ]
But Friday put us out of doubt quickly; for
feeing the Bear cling fast to the Bough, and that
he would not be peri waded to come any farther}
Well, well, fays Friday, you no come farther, me go,
me go ; you no come to me, me go come to you; and
upon this, he goes out to the smallest End of the
Bough, where it would bend with his Weight, and
gently let himself down by it, shding down the
Bough, till he came near enough to jump down
on his Feet, and away he run to his Gun, takes it
up, and stands still.
Well, said I to him, Friday, What will you do
now? Why don't you shoot him ? No Jhoot, says
Friday, no yet, me Jhoot now, me no kill; me stay,
give you one more laugh ; and indeed so he did, as you
will fee presently; for when the Bear fee his Ene-
my gone, he comes back from the Bough where he
stood , but did it mighty leisurely, looking behind
him every Step, and coming backward till he got
into the Body of the Tree; then with the same
hinder End foremost, he come down the Tree,
grasping it with his Claws, and moving one Foot
at a time, very leisurely; at this Juncture, and just
before he could set his hind Feet upon the Ground,
Friday stept up close to him, clapt the Muzzel of
his Piece into his Ear, and shot him dead as a
Stone.
Then the Rogue turn'd about, to fee if we did
not laugh, and when he saw we were pleas'd by
our Looks, he falls a laughing himself very loud}
so we kill Bear in my Country, says Friday; so you
kill them, fays I, why you have no Guns: No,
fays he, no Gun, but shoot, great much long Jrmv.
This was indeed a good Diversion to us; but
we were still in a wild Place, and our Guide very
much hurt, and what to dp we hardly knew} the
Howling of Wolves run much in my Head} and in-
deed,

<page 364>
[ 353 ]'
deed, except the Noise I once heard on the Shore
of Africa, of which I have said something already,
I never heard any thing that filled me with so much
Horrour.
These things, and the Approach of Night, cal-
led us off, or else, as Friday would have had us,
we should certainly have taken the Skin of this
monstrous Creature off, which was worth saving;
but we had three Leagues to go, and our Guide
hasten'd us, so we left him, and went forward on
our Journey.
The Ground was still cover'd with Snow, tho'
not so deep and dangerous as on.the Mountains,
and the ravenous Creatures, as we heard after-
wards, were come down into the Forest and plain
Country, press'd by Hunger to seek for Food; and
had done a great deal of Mischief in the Villages,
where they surpriz'd the Country People, kill'd a
great many of their Sheep and Horses, and some
People too. .> ' .,
We had one dangerous Place to pass, which
our Guide told us, if there were any more Wolves
in the Country, we should find them there; and
this was in a small Plain, surrounded with Woods
on every Side, and a long narrow Defile or Lane,
which we we're to pass to get through the Wood,
and then we should come to the Village where we
were to lodge.
It was within half an Hour of Sun-set when we
entred the first Wood; and a little after Sun-set,
,when we came into the Plain, we met with no-
thing in the first Wood, except that in a little
Plain within the Wood, which was not above two
Furlongs over, we law five great Wolves cross the
Road, full Speed one after another, as if they had
been in Chafe of some Prey, and had it in View^
A a they

<page 365>
[ 35+ },
they took no Notice of us, and were gone, and
out of our Sight in a few Moment?.
,Upon this our Guide, who by the Way was a
wretched faint-hearted Fellow, bid us keep in a
ready Posture; for he believed there were mo;e
Wolves a coming.
We kept our Arms ready, and our Eyes about us,
but we saw no more Wolves, 'till we came thro'
that Wood, which was near half a League, and en-
tred the Plain; as soon as we came into the Plain,
we had Occasion enough to look about us: The
first Obj'ct we met with, was a dead Horse;
that is to fay, a poor Horse which the Wolves
had kill'd, and at least a Dozen of them at Work;
we could not lay eating of him, but picking of
his Rones rather; for they had eaten up all the
Flesh before. . .
We did not think fit to disturb them at their
Feast, neither did they take much Notice of
us: Friday would have let fly at them, but I
would not suffer him by any Means; for I found
we were like to have more Business upon our
Hands than we were aware of. We were not
gone half over the Plain, but we began to hear the
Wolves houl in the Wood on our Left, in a fright-
ful Manner, and presently after we saw about a
hundred coming on directly towards us, all in a
Body, arid most of them in a Line, as regularly as
an Army drawn up by experiene'd Officers. I
scarce knew in what Manner to receive them;
but found to draw our selves in a close Line was
the only Way: so we form'd in a Moment: But
that we might not have too much Interval, I.OPj
der'd, that only every other Man lbould fire, and
that the others who had not firrd should stand rea-
dy to give them a second Volley immediately* »
they continued to advance upon us, and that then

<page 366>
[ 355 ]
those who had fir'd at first, should not pretend to
load their Fusees again, but stand ready with every
one a Pistol 5 for we were all arm'd with a Fufee,
and a Pair of Pistols each Man; so we were by
this Method able to fire six Volleys, half of us at
a Time; however, at present we had no Necessi-
ty } for upon firing the first Volley, the Enemy
made a suit Stop, being terrify'd as well with the
Noise, as with the Fire; four of them being shot
into the-Hea'd, dropp'd, several others were wound-
ed, and went bleeding off, as we could fee by the
Snow: I found they llopp'd, but did not immedi-
ately retreat; whereupon remembring that I had
been told, that the fiercest Creatures were terri-
fy'd at the Voice of a Man, I caus'd all our Com-
pany to hollow as loud as we could; and I found
the Notion not altogether mistaken; for upon our
Shout, they began to retire, and turn about; then
I order'd a second Volley to be fir'd, in their Rear,
which put them to the Gallop, and away they
went to the Woods.
This gave us leisure to charge our Pieces again,
and that we might lose no Time, we kept going }
but we had but little more than loaded our Fusees,
and put our selves into a Readiness, when we heard
a terrible Noise in the same Wood, on our Left,
only that it was farther onward the fame Way we
were to go.
The Night was coming on, and the Light be-
gan to be dusky, which made it worse on our Side }
but the Noise encreasing, we could easily perceive
that it was the howling and yelling of those hel-
lish Creatures; and on a sudden, we perceiv'd 1 or
3 Troops of Wolves, one on our Left, one behind us,
and one on our Front so that we seem'd to be
surrounded with 'em; however, as they did not
sall upon us, we kept our Way forward, as fast as
i- A a 2 we

<page 367>
ve could make our Horses go, which the Way be-
ng very rough, was only a good large Trot; and
n this Manner we came in View oi the Entrance
;f a Wood, through which we were to pal's, at
the farther fide ot' the Plain; but we were gr at-
ly (urpriz'd, when coming nearer the Lane, or
Pass, we saw a consus'd Number ot We lves itand-
ing jufl at tbe Entrance.
On a sudden, at another opening of the Wood,
we heard the Noise of a Gun; and looking that
Way, out rushA: a Horse, with a Saddle, and a
Bridle on him, flying like the Wind, and sixteen
or seventeen Wolves after him, full Speed; indeed,
the Horse had the Heels 01 them; but as we sup-
pos'd that he could not hold it at that rate, we
doubted not but they would get up with him at
lair, and no question but they did.
But here we had a most horrible Sight; for ri-
ding up to the Entrance where the Horse came.out,
we sound the Carcass of another Horse, and of two
Men, devoui'd by the ravenous Creatures, and one
of the Men was no doubt the fame who we heard
flr'd the Gun; for there lay a Gun just by him fli'd
off; but as to the Man, his Head, and the upper
Part of his Body, was eaten up.
This sill'd us with Horrour, and we knew not
what Course to take, but the Creatures resoh'd us
soon ; for they gather'd about us presently, in hopes
of Prey ; and I verily believe there were three hun-
dred of them: It happen'd very much to our Ad-
vantage, that at the Entrance into the Wood, but
a little Way from it, there lay some large Timber
Trees, which had been cut down the Summer be-
fore, and 1 suppose lay there for Carriage; Idiew
my little Troop in among those Trees, and placing
our selves in a Line, behind one long Tree, I ad-
vis'd them all to light, and keeping that Tree be-
$ fore

<page 368>
t 357 ]
sore us, for a Bread-Work, to stand in a Trian-
gle, or three Fronts, enclosing our Horses in the
Center.
We did so, and it was well we did; for never
was a more furious Charge than the Creatures
made upon us in the Place; they came on us with
a growling kind of a Noise and mounted the Piece
of Timber, (which as I said, was our Breast-Work)
as if they were only rushing upon their Prey i and
this Fury of theirs, it seems, was principally occa-
sions by rheir seeing our Horses behind us, which
Was the Prey they aim'd at: I order'd our Men to
fire as before, every other Man; and they took
their Aim so sure, that indeed they kill'd several of
the Wolves at the first Volley; but there was a
Necessity to keep a continual Firing; for they
came on like Devils, those behind pushing on
those before.
When we had fir'd our second Volley of our Fu-
sees, we thought they stopp'd a little, and I hop'd
they would have gone off; but it was but a Mo-
ment; for others came forward again; so we fir'd
two Volleys of our Pistols, and 1 believe in these
four Firings, we had kill'ci seventeen o-- eighteen of
them, and lum'd twice as many; yet they came on
again.
I was loath to spend our last Shot too hastily; so
I call'd my Servant, not my Man Friday, for he was
better employ'd; for with the greatest. Dexterity
imaginable, he had charg'd my Fusee', and his
own, while we were engag'd; but as I said, I call'd
my other Man, and giving him a Horn of Powder,
I bad him lay a Train, all along the Piece of Tim-
ber, and lec it be a large Train; he did so, and had
but just Time to get away, when the Wolves came
up ro it, and some were got up upon it; when
I snapping an uncharg'd Pistol, cjo;e to the Pow-
A a 5 der,

<page 369>
[ 358 ]
der, set it on fire; those that were upon the Tim-
ber were scorcht with it, and fix or seven of them
fell, or rather jump'd in among us, with the Force
• and Fright of the Fire, we dispatch'd these in
an Instant, and the rest were so frighted with
the Light, which the Night, for it was now very
near Dark, made more terrible, that they drew
back a little.
Upon which I order'd our last Pistol to be fir'd
off in one Volley, and after that we gave a Shout;
upon this, the Wolves tum'd Tail, and we sally'd
immediately upon near twenty lame Ones, .who
We found struggling on the Ground, and fell a cut-
ting them with our Swords, which answer'd our
Expectation; for the Crying and Howling they
made, was better understood by their Fellows, so
that they all fled and left us.
We had, first and last, kill'd about three Score
of themi and had it been Day-Light, we had
kill'd many more: The Field of Battle being thus
clear'd, we made forward again; for we had still
near a League to go. We heard the ravenous Crea-
tures houl and yell in the Woods as we went, se-
veral times} and sometimes we fancy'd we saw
some of them, but the Snow dazling our Eyes,
we were not certain; so in about an Hour more,
we came to the Town, where we were to lodge,
which we found m a terrible Fright, and all in
Arms} for it seems, that the Night before, the
Wolves and some Bears had broke into the ViHage
in the Night, and put them in a terrible Fright,
and they were oblig'd to keep Guard Night and
Day, but especially in the Night, to preserve their
Cattle, and indeed their People.
The next Morning our Guide was so ill, and his
Limbs swell'd with the rankling of his two Wounds,
that he could go no farther; so we were oblig'd to
'- take

<page 370>
I 359 ]'
take a new Guide there, and go to Tholouse^ where
we found a warm Climate, a fruitful pleasant CouSpJ^
try, and no Snow, no Wolves, or any Thing like
them; but when we told our Story atTholousc, they
told us it was nothing but what was ordinary in the
great Forest at the Foot of the Mountains, especi-
ally when the Snow lay on the Ground: But they
enquir'd much what kind of a Guide we had got-
ten, that would venture to bring.us that Way in
such a severe Season; and told us, it was very much
wewerenotall devour'd. When we told rhem how
we plac'd our selves, and the Horses in the Middle,
theyblam'd us exceedingly, and told us it was fifty
to one but we had been all destroy'd; for it was the
Sight of the Horses which made the Wolves so fu-
rious, feeing their Prey; and that at other Times
they are really afraid of a Gun; but the being ex-
cessive hungry, and raging on that Account, the
Eagerness to come at the Horses had made them
senllefs of Danger; and that if we had not by the
continu'd Fire, and at last by the Stratagem of the
Train of Powder, master'd them, it had been great
Odds but that we had been torn to Pieces; where-
as had we been content to have fat still on Horse-
back, and fii'd as Horsemen, they would not have
taken the Horses for so much their own, when Men
were on their Backs, as otherwise; and withal
they told us, that at last, if we had stood all toge-
ther, and left our Horses, they would have been so
eager to have devour'd them, that We might have
come oft' safe, especially having our Fire Arms in
our Hands, and being so many in Number.
For my Part, I was never so sensible of Danger
in my Lise; for seeing above three hundred Devils
come roaring and open-mouth'd to devour us, and
having nothing to shelter us, or retreat to, 1 gave
my self over tor lost j%id-as it was, I believe,-!

<page 371>

)
[ 3*o ]
never care to cross those Mountains again; I
k I would much rather go a thousand Leagues
i"n, though I were sure to meet with a Storm
a Week.
have nothing uncommon to take Notice of, in
Passage through France; nothing but what o-
Traveslers have given an Account of, with
h more Advantage than I can. I travell'd from
,douse to Paris, and without any considerable
, came to Cal/ais, and landed safe at Dover, the
teenth of January, aster having had a severe
Season to travel in.
was now come to the Center of my Travels,
had in a little time all my new discovers E-
• safe about me, the Bills of Exchange which I
i '.hr with mfc having been very currently paid.
1y principal Guide, and Privy Counsellor, was
*ood ancient Widow, who in Gratitude for the
ney I had sent her, thought no Pains too much,
'aie too great, to employ for me; and I trusted
so entirely with every Thing, that I was per-
y easy as to the Security of my Effects; and in-
I, I was very happy from my Beginning, and
, to the End, in the unspotted Integrity of this
d Gentlewoman.
ind now 1 began to think of leaving my Effects
i this Woman, and setting out for Lisbon, and
> the Bra/ds; but now another Scruple came in
Way, and that was Religion; for as 1 had en-
u'n'd some Doubts about the Roman Religion,
i while 1 was abroad, especially in my State of
tude} so I knew there was no going to the Bra-
or me, much less going to fettle there, unless 1
ly'd to embrace the Roman C itholick Religion,
lout any Reserve; unless on the other hand, 1
Iv'd to be a Sacrifice to my Principles, be a
:yr for Religion, and die in the Inquisitional'
so
J

<page 372>
[ 3*1 1
I resolv'd to stay at Home, and if I could find
Means for it, to dispose of my Plantation.
To this Purpose I wrote tb my old Friend at
Lisbon, who in Return gave me Notice, that he
could easily dispose of it there: But that if I
thought fit to give him Leave to offer it in my
Name to the two Merchants, the Survivors of my
Trustees, who liv'd in the Brasils, who must fully
understand the Value of it, who liv'd just upon the
Snot, and who I knew were very rich, so that he
belicv'd they would be son! of buying it} he did
not doubt, but I should make 4 or yooo Pieces of
Eight, the more of it.
Accordingly I agreed, gave him Order to offer
it to them, and he did sols and in about 8 Months
more, the Ship being then leturn'd, he sent me an
Account, that they had accepted the Offer, and
had remitted 33000 Pieces of Eight, to a Cor-
refpondent of theirs at Lisbon, to pay for it.
In Return, I sigu'd the Instrument of Sale in the
Form which they sent from Lisbon, and sent it to
my old Man, who sent me Bills of Exchange for
328000 Pieces ot Eight to me, for the Estate; re-
serving the Payment of 100 Moidores a Year to
him, the old Man, during his Life, and so Moi-
dores afterwards to his Son for his Lise, which I
had promised them, which the Plantation was to
make good as a Rent-Charge. And thus I have
given the first Part of a Life of Fortune and Ad-
venture, a Life of Providence's Checquer-Work,
and of a Variety which the World will seldom be
able to shew the like os: Beginning foolishly, but
closing much more happily than any Part of it, ever
gave me Leave so much as to hope for.
Any one would think, that in this State of com-
plicated good Fortune, I was past running any
more Hazards; and so indeed I had been, if other
Cir-

<page 373>
Circumstances had concurr'd, but I was inur'd to
i Wandring Life, had no Family, not many Rela-
.ions, fior however Rich had I contracted much Ac-
quaintance} and though 1 had fold my Estate in
;he Erasth, yet I could not keep the Country out
afmy Head, and had a great Mind to be upon
the Wing again, especially I could not resist the
strong Inclination I had to see my Island, and to
know if the poor Spaniards were in Being there,
and how the Rogues I left there had used them.
My true Friend, the Widow, earnestly difwa-
ded me from it, and so far prevail'd with me, that
for almost seven Years she prevented my running
abroad; during which!time, I took my two
Nephews, the Children of one of my Brothers,
into my Care: The eldest having something of
his own, I bred up a« a Gentleman, and gave
him a Settlement or some Addition to his Estate,
after my Decease; the other I put out to a Cap-
tain of a Ship; and after five Years, finding
him a sensible bold enterprizing young Fellow, I
put him into a good Ship, and sent him to Sea:
And this young Fellow afterwards drew me in, as
old as I was, to farther Adventures my self.
In the mean time, 1 in part settled my self here:
for first of all I marry'd, and that not either to my
Disadvantage or Dissatisfaction, and had three
Children, two Sons and one Daughter: But my
Wife dying, and my Nephew coming Home with
good Success from a Voyage to Spain, my Inclina-
tion to go abroad, and his Importunity prevailed
and engag'd me to go in his Ship, as a private Trader,
to the East-Indies: This was in the Year itfp4.
In this Voyage I visited my new Collony in the
Island, saw my Successors the Spaniards, had the
whole Story of their Lives, and of the Villains I
left there} how at first the insulted they poor Spa-
niards,

<page 374>
[ 3*3 ]
niards, how they afterwards agreed, disagreed, u-
nited, separated, and how at last the Spaniards
were oblig'd to use Violence with them, how they
were subjected to the Spaniards, how honestly the
Spaniards used them* a History, if it were entred
into, as full of Variety and wonderful Accidents,
as my own Part, particularly also as to their Battles
with the Carribeans, who landed several times
upon the Island, and as to the Improvement they
made upon the Island it self, and how five of
them made an Attempt upon the main Land,
and brought away eleven Men and five Women
Prisoners, by which, at my coming, L found about
twenty young Children on the Island.
Here I stay'd about zo Days, left them Sup-
plies of all necessary things, and particularly of
Arms, Powder, Shot, Cloaths, Tools, and two
Workmen, which I brought from England with
me, viz. a Carpenter and a Smith.
Besides this, I shar'd the Ilknd into Parts with
'em, referv'd to my self the Property of the whole,
but gave them such Parts respectively as they a-
greed on; and having fettled all things with them,
and engaged them not to leave the Place, I left
them there.
From thence I touch'd at the BraJils,from whence
I sent a Bark, which I bought there, with more
People to the Island, and in it, besides other Sup-
plies, I sent seven Women, being such as I found
proper for Service, or for Wives to such as would
take them: As to the English Men, I promis'd them
to fend them some Women from England, with a
good Cargoe of Necessaries, if they would apply
themselves to Planting, which I afterwards per-
form'd. And the Fellows prov'd very honest
and, diligent after they were master'd, and had
f their Properties set apart for them. I sent them
also

<page 375>
[ 3*4 ]
also from the Brasds five Cows, three of them be-
ing big with Calf, some Sheep, and some Hogs,
which, when I came again, were considerably en-
creas'd.
But all these things, with an Account how 300
Caribbecs came and invaded them, and ruin'd their
Plantations, and how they fought with that whole
Number twice, and were at first defeated, and
three of them kill'd } but at last a Storm delhoying
their Enemies Cannoes, theyfamish'd or desiroy'd
almost all the rest, and renew'd and recovci'd the
Posiestion of their Plantation, and still liv'd upon
the Island. -
All these things, with some very surprizing In-
cidents m some new Adventures of my own, tor ten
Years more, I may perhaps give a farther Account
of hererafter.
FINIS.


<page 376>

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by
William Taylor, at the Stgn of
the Ship in Pater-Noster-Row.
i. A Neat, Beautiful, and Correct Edition of Plutarch's
j\. Morals, in 5 Vol. izmo. Translated from the Greek
by levora) Hands,
I. Ovid's Metamorphosis in 2 Vol. in izmo. Adorned
with Clus.
3. Epistle in ixmo. with Cuts.
4. Poems by the Author of the Choice, izmo.
5. Poems by the Lady Winchelfea, 80.
6. Poems by Mr. Dryden, 6 Vol. izmo.
7. Mr. Congreve's Plays and Poems, 3 Vol. 80.
8. The New Atlantis in 2 Vol. izmo.
9. Dr. Garth's Dispensary. With Cuts, and a Comple.at
Key, izmo.
10. Mr. Manivaring's Works in Prose and Verse, 8a.
II. The Adventures of Telemachus in 2 Vol. izmo. with
Cuts.
12. Boetim of the Consolation of Philosophy, izmo.
13. Byse's Art of Engli;h Poetry in 4 Vol. beir.g a Com-
pleat Common Place.Book to the Works of our most Emi-
nent EngUJIi Poets. Continued to the Year 17 18.
14. Memoirs of the Court of England, by Count
De Grammont. The second Edition, with a Compleat
Key, .8a.
rf. Mr. Lawrence F.ehard's Translation of Plantus's Co-
medies, with Critical Remarks, izmo.
16. Lord Clarendons History in 6 Vol. in Large and
Small Paper.
17. The Adventures of Theagines and Charklia a R.ma-
na. Done from the Greek of Heliadorus, in 2 Pocket Vo-
lumes.
18. The

<page 377>
Books Printed for W. Taylor.
»&. Trte- Religious Philosopher in t VoJ. Ttw third aud
last Vol. i&in the Press, and will shortly be pubhlhed.
19. The Annals of King Georgt in 4 VoL 8o.
2Q. Dr. Defagulier's Hydrostaticks, 8».
,hi. Bishop Bevendge's Thoughts in 2 Volumes 80. with
Cuts. • ,
22. The fame in izmo.
23. His Sermons in 11 Vol. 8a.
. 24. His Thesaurus in 4 Vol. 80.
25. -His Necessity of Publick Prayer and Frequent
Communion. ,'/
26 His Exposition of the 39 Articles of thj Church
of England.
27. Mr. spinckes's Sick Man Visited. Th'rrd Editi-
on, 8o.
28. Dr. Woodward's Fair Warnings to a Careless World.
Adorned with Cuts.
29. Dr. Barrow of Contentment, Patience, and Resigna-
tion to the Divine Will, izmo.
30. Advice to a Son, Directing how to demean himself
in the most important Affairs of Life, izmo.
31. Mr. Kettlewell's Works in 2 Vol. in Folio.
32. Bishop Taylor's Holy Living and Dying,
33. His Golden Grove, izmo.
34. His Life of Christ will shortly be put to the
Press with New Cuts, Designed by the best Masters, Folio.
35. Bishop Patrick's Devotions, izmo.
36. — His Christian Sacrifice, izmo.
37. Arch-Bishop'of Cambray, of the Existence of God,
vc. Bo- ,'
38. Mr. Whistoris Theological and Mathematical Works.
39. Dr. S;uincy's Compleat Englijh Dispensatory, 80.
40. Cato, a Tragedy. The ninth Edition. By Mr. Ad-
dison, izmo. . *
41. The Distressed Mother, a Tragedy. By Mr. Phi-
lips, izmo. ," . . .
42. The Careless Husband, a Comedy. By Mr. ab-
ler, izmo. • • - '. ^ ,:
43. The Justice of Peace's Vade Mecum, izmo."'
44. Militia-Law. Being an Abstract of all the Acts of
Parliament relating to the Militia, &c. 12.wo.
4j. The Compleat Sportsman, with all the Laws relating
to the Game.
46. The Country Gentleman's Vade Mecum, izmo.
47. The Turkish Spy continued, Vol. t, izmo.
48. Cam-

<page 378>
at the Ship m Pater-Noster-Row.
48. Compleat History of Witchcraft, Magick and Sor-
cery, \imo.
49. Logick, or the Ait of Thinking, ixmo.
50. Lawrence's Clergy-Men and Gentlemen's Recrea-
tion, 80.
5T. The Lady's Recreation in Gardening. By C. Evelin,
Esq; So.
51. Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. Translated into
Engltfli, with above 100 Cats, of Cathedrals, Abbies, Mo-
nasteries, and other Religious Houses. Folio.
$3. Theatrum Scot'u. Containing Prospects of the most
conliderable Places in Scotland, with above 60 Copper Plates.
folio,
54. Portif onii Melæ, de situ Orbis Libri tres.
* Belgium Britannicum. Auclore Guil. Mufgrave, F. R. S.
55. Medulla Hist. Anglicanæ. Begun by Dr. Htrwcl, and
continu'd to this Time, by an able Hand. Adorn'd with
Cuts of jthc most remarkable Incidents.
56. The genuine Works of St. Cyprian, with his Life.
Translated into Engli;h by Dr. Marfnal. Folio.
57. Memoirs of the Affairs of Ireland from the Restora-
tion.
58. Memoirs of the Affairs of Scotland. , •*«
59. Revolutions of Sweden^ By the Abbot Vtrtot.
60. Kersey's Dictionarium Anglo Britannicum.
61. Wingate's Arithmetick, with a Supplement. By G. Shelley.
61. Love's whole Art of Surveying and Measuring of
Land.
63. Sivists Miscellanies, in Prose and Verse.
64. A Treatise of both Globes. To which is added, A
Geographical Description of our Earth, ximo.
65. Lex Meicatoria: Or, The Laws relating to Com-
merce.
66. Martin's Description of the Western Islands of Scot-
land.
67. Wits Common Wealth, for the Use of Schools.
- 68. AfomoU'% Order of the Garter Abridg'd, with Cuts.
69. The Present State of France, in z Vol. in lime.
70. Epistolae Abelardi & Heloissae, So.
7 1. Georgii Buchanani Epistolœ, So.
71. Gulielmi Nicholsii Historiae Sacrae, ximo.
7 y. Analysis Æquationum. Auctore J. Raphson, M. A.
F. R. S.
74. ——Demonstratio de Deo, ab eodem Auctore.
75. De Christo Iraitando, Auctore Thoma Kempisio,
cum Figuris Æneis.
;, 76. Philips's

<page 379>
Books Printed, &c.
• 76. Philifs's World of Words, or Univeisal English Dicti-
onary.
77. T The fame in Ottavo, Abridged and Improved.
13y J. Kersey.
78. Dr. Salmon's F.nglifli Herbal, or History of Plants,
adorned with Figures of the most considerable Species, re-
presenting to the Lite the true Forms of thole several Plants,
in an Alphabetical Order.
79. Mr. Bayle's large Historical and Critical Dictionary,
in 4 Volumes.
80. Bisliop Hopkins's Works, collected into one Volume.
8r. The Works of the Reverend and Learned Dr. Isaac
Barrow, publistied by Archbisliop Tilloi/on.
Sz. A Report from the Committee of Secrecy, appoint-
ed by Order ot' the House of Commons, to examine seve-
ral Books and Papers hid before the Home, relating to the
late Negotiations ot Peace and Commerce, arc. Reported
on the 9th or June, 1715. By the Right Honourable Robert
Walfole, Esq; Chairman of the (aid Committee. Published
by Order ot the House of Commons. With an Appendix
of Original Papers.
. 83. Sacred Geography, contained in 6 Maps. 1. Shew-
ing the Situation of Paradise, and the Country inhabited
by the Patriarchs. 2. The peopling or the Worid by the
Sons of Noah, and the Israelites journeying in the Wilder-
ness. 3, A Plan of the City of Jerusalem, with a View of
Solomon's Temple, and all the sacred Utenliis therein. 4.
The Holy Land divided into the twelve Tribes of Israel,
in which is exactly traced our Saviour's Travels. 5. Tie
Land of Canaan. 6. The Travels of St Paul, and ihe reft
of the Apostles. The whole very useful for the better un-
derstanding the Holy Bible.
84. Vitruvius Britannicus: Or, The British Architect, con-
taining the Plans, Elevations and Sections of the Regu ,r
Buildings, both publick and private, in Great Britain, with
Variety of new Designs, in two Hundred large Pol o Plates,
engraven by the best Hands. In Two Volumes. All de-
lineated from the Buildings, or from the Or gmal Drawings
of the Architects, who have most generously p,omo edtliis
useful Work, by Mr. Camf'oel.
85. Pittas Londinenfis: Or, The Present Ecclesiastical
State of London. By James Paterson, A M.
86. The Peerage of England: Or, An Historical and Ge-
nealogical Account of the present Nobility.
87. An Enquiry into the Nature and Place of Hell.. By
Tobias Swinden.

<page 380>

<page 381>


<page 382>


<page 383>
II
.
I
»



<page 384>


<page 385>


<page 386>
