

<page 1>


<page 2>


<page 3>


<page 4>


<page 5>

<page 6>

<page 7>

<page 8>

<page 9>

<page 10>
OLLA PODRIDA.
BY
CAPTAIN MARRYAT, R.N., C.B.
AUTHOR OF "PETER SIMPLE," "JACOB FAITHFUL," &0.
LONDON:
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.
1849.

<page 11>
LONDON:
Printed by Schulze and Co., 13, Poland Street.

<page 12>
CONTENTS.
f
ss>iaf
PAGE
IARY ON THE CONTINENT ........ 1
i.W. AND BY W. $ W 201
(S^ILL-WILL 217
vTHt SKY-BLUE DOMINO 233
MODERN TOWN HOUSES 248
^TTHE WAY TO BE HAPPY 261
JhOW TO WRITE A FASHIONABLE NOVEL . . . . . 267
HOW TO WRITE A BOOK OF TRAVELS ...... 286
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE 298
THE LEGEND OF THE BELL ROCK 308
^ MOONSHINE ..." 318
On
X

<page 13>

<page 14>
PREFACE.
I have not yet ventured upon a Preface to any of my
writings, and I did not expect that I should ever have written
one. Except in a work of importance, which may demand
it, a Preface is, generally speaking, a request for indulgence
which never will be accorded, or an explanation to which the
Public is indifferent. It is only when an explanation is due
to the Public, or to the Author's reputation, that he should
venture to offer one. If a work is well written, the Public
are satisfied; if not, they have just cause to feel otherwise;
and if an Author obtains justice, he obtains all that he has a
right to expect.
I write this Preface, because I consider that it may save
me from a hasty remark or two, which it may be just as well
to forestall. During the ten years which I have taken up
the pen, I have contributed to various Periodicals. These
papers, if they were all collected together, would swell into
many volumes. Among these are some which I consider
tolerable; others but indifferent; and I should be very sorry
indeed, if at any future time, when I may not have the power
to prevent it, all these articles should be collected and
printed as mine. If ever it were done, it certainly would
not be by my friends: I wish, therefore, to be understood,

<page 15>
viii
PREFACE.
that in this Work, I have selected all that I wish to acknow-
ledge as my writing; and that the remainder (with the
exception of the papers on nautical subjects, which are of no
interest to the general reader) may be considered as dis-
avowed and rejected. The Diary written when I was on the
Continent, first appeared under the title of the "Diary of a
Blase:" the title was a bad one, as I did not write up to
the character; I have, therefore, for want of a better name,
simply called it a "Diary on the Continent -" and I mention
this, that I may not be accused of having intentionally
deceived.
FREDERICK MARRYAT.
LONDON, 1840.

<page 16>
OLLA PODRIDA.
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
CHAPTER I.
April 3, 1835.
Reader, did you ever feel in that peculiarly distressing
state of mind in which one oppressing idea displaces or colours
every other, absorbing, intermingling with, empoisoning, and,
like the filth of the harpy, turning everything into disgust—
when a certain incubus rides upon the brain, as the Old Man
of the Mountain did upon the shoulders of Sinbad, burdening,
irritating, and rendering existence a misery — when, looking
around, you see but one object perched everywhere and grinning
at you—when even what you put into your mouth tastes of but
that one something, and the fancied taste is so unpleasant as
almost to prevent deglutition—when every sound which vibrates
in your ear appears to strike the same discordant note, and all
and everything will remind you of the one only thing which
you would fain forget; — have you ever felt anything like
this, reader? If you have not, then thank God, by way of
grace, before you out with your knife and fork and begin to
cut up the contents of these pages.
I have been and am now suffering under one of these
varieties of "Phobias," and my disease is a Politicophobia.
I will describe the symptoms.
I am now in the metropolis of England, and when I walk
out every common house appears to me to be the House of
Commons — every lordly mansion the House of Lords — every
man I meet, instead of being a member of society, is transferred 
<page 17>
2
DIAEY ON THE CONTINENT.
by imagination into a member of the senate — every chimney-
sweep into a bishop, and a Bavarian girl, with her "Py a
proom," into an ex-chancellor. If I return home, the ring at
the bell reminds me of a Peel — as I mount the stairs I think
of the " Lobby" — I throw myself on the sofa, and the cushion
is transformed into a woolsack — if a solitary visitor calls in, I
imagine a public meeting, and call out chair! chair! — and
I as often address my wife as Mr. Speaker, as I do with the
usual appellative of " my dear."
This incubus, like the Catholic anathema, pursues me every-
where — at breakfast, the dry toast reminds me of the toasts
at public dinners — tea, of the East India charter — sugar, of
the West India question — the loaf, of agricultural distress —
and, as everyone knows that London eggs are a lottery,
according as they prove bad or good, so am I reminded of a
Whig or Tory measure. When the newspaper is brought in,
I walk round and round it as a dog will do round the spot he
is about to lie down upon. I would fain not touch it; but at
last, like a fascinated bird who falls per force into the reptile's
mouth, so do I plunge into its columns, read it with despera-
tion, and when the poison has circulated, throw it away in
despair. If I am reminded to say grace at dinner, I commence
"My Lords, and gentlemen;" and when I seek my bed, as I
light my taper, I move "that the House do now adjourn."
The tradesmen's bills are swelled by my disease into the
budget, and the checks upon my banker into supplies. Even
my children laugh and wonder at the answers which they
receive. Yesterday one brought me her book of animals, and
pointing to a boa constrictor, asked its name, and I told her it
was an O'Connell. I am told that I mentioned the names of
half the members of the Upper and Lower House, and at the
time really believed that I was calling the beasts by their right
names. Such are the effects of my unfortunate disease.
Abroad I feel it even worse than at home. Society is
unhinged, and everyone is afraid to offer an opinion. If I
dine out, I find that no one will speak first — he knows not
whether he accosts a friend or foe, or whether he may not be
pledging his bitter enemy. Every man looks at his neighbour's
countenance to discover if he is Whig or Tory: they appear
to be examining one another like the dogs who meet in the
street, and it is impossible to conjecture whether the mutual 
<page 18>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
3
scenting will be followed up by a growl or a wag of the tail;
however, one remark will soon discover the political sentiments
of the whole party. Should they all agree, they are so busy
in abuse that they rail at their adversaries with their mouths
full — should they disagree, they dispute so vehemently that
they forget that they were invited to dinner, and the dishes
are removed untasted, and the duties of the Amphytryon
become a sinecure. Go to an evening party or a ball and it is
even worse, for young ladies talk politics, prefer discussion to
flirtation, and will rather win a partner over to their political
opinions than by their personal charms. If you, as a Tory,
happen to stand up in a cotillion with a pretty Whig, she taps
you with her fan that she may tap your politics; if you agree,
it is "En avant deux," if not, a " chassez croise'e." Every
thing goes wrong— she may set to you indeed, but hers is the
set of defiance, and she shakes her wig against your Tory. To
turn your partner is impossible, and the only part of the figure
which is executed con amore is dos a dos. The dance is over,
and the lady's looks at once tell you that you may save your
"oaths," while she "takes her seat."
I have tried change of scene — posted to watering places;
but the deep, deep sea will not drown politics. Even the
ocean in its roaring and commotion reminded me of a political
union.
I have buried myself in the country, but it has been all in
vain. I cannot look at the cattle peacefully grazing without
thinking of O'Connell's tail, Stanley's tail, and a short-docked
pony reminded me of the boasted little tail of Colonel Peel.
The farm-yard, with its noisy occupants, what was it but the
reality so well imitated by the members of the Lower House,
who would drown argument in discord 1 I thought I was in
the lobby at the close of a long debate. Every tenth field,
every tenth furrow, (and I could not help counting,) every
tenth animal, and every tenth step, reminded me of the Irish
tithes; and when I saw a hawk swoop over a chicken, I
thought of the Appropriation Bill — so I left the country.
I have tried every thing — I have been everywhere, but in
vain. In the country there was no relaxation — in society no
pleasure — at home no relief. England was disjointed, never
to be united until it was dismembered — and there was no
repose. I had my choice, either to go abroad, or to go mad; 
<page 19>
4
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
and, upon mature deliberation, I decided upon the former, as
the lesser evil of the two. So I gave — I sold — I discharged
— I paid— I packed up, and I planned. The last was the
only portion of my multifarious duties not satisfactorily ar-
ranged. I looked at the maps, plied my compasses that I
might compass my wishes, measured distances that I might
decide upon my measures — planned, looked over the maps —
and planned again.
CHAPTER II.
Well, as I said in my last chapter, I planned — and
planned —but I might as well conjugate it, as many others
assisted— it was I planned, thou plannedst, he planned, we
planned, ye planned, and they planned — and what annoyed
me was, that I could not help considering that "the whole
house was in a committee," and without being able "to report
progress." At first it was decided upon that we should proceed
up the Rhine, and not leave off paddling until we had arrived
at Manheim, at which town I fancied that I should at least be
out of political distance. We read all about Manheim, found
out that it was a regular-built town, with a certain number of
inhabitants— with promenades, gardens, and a fine view of
the Rhine. "So you're going abroad — where?" Manheim,
was the reply, and all the world knew that we were bound to
Manheim; and everyone had something to say, or something
that they had heard said, about Manheim. "Very nice place — Duchess Dowager Stephanie — very cheap — gay in winter — masters excellent" — were the variety of changes rung,
and all was settled; but at last one unlucky observation raised
a doubt — another increased —a third confirmed it. "A very
dull place — German cookery bad for children — steam-boats
from Rotterdam very bad, and often obliged to pass two nights
on deck." A very influential member of the committee took
alarm about the children being two nights on deck, and it was
at last decided that to go up to Manheim by steam-boat at
41. 9s. a-head, and children at half-price was not to be
thought of.
"I wonder you don't go to Bruges," observed a committee 
<page 20>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
5
man; "nice quiet place — excellent masters — everything so
cheap — I once bought eighty large peaches there for two
francs."
And all the children clapped their little hands, and cried out
for Bruges and cheap peaches.
It was further submitted that it was convenient — you
might go the whole of the way by water — and Bruges was
immediately under consideration.
"If you go to Bruges, you will find it very dull," observed
another; "but you'll meet Mrs. Trollope there—now Brussels
is very little farther, and is a delightful place;" and Brussels
was also referred to the committee.
"You won't like Brussels — there is such a mixture, and
house-rent is dear. Now I should recommend Spa for the
summer—it is a most beautiful spot—and excellent company."
And Spa was added to the list.
Then after a day or two came an Anti-Teutonic, who railed
against Germany — and Germans — German towns, German
travelling, and German French, which was detestable — Ger-
man cookery, which was nothing but grease. "You may
imagine," said he, "and so have many more, that Germany is
more pleasant and less expensive than France; but they have
been disappointed, and so will you be. Now, for a quiet
place, I should recommend St. Omer—only thirty miles from
Calais— so convenient — and very pretty."
St. Omer — humph — very quiet and retired — and no
politics —and St. Omer was occasionally canvassed.
"St. Omer!" said another who called the next day,
"you'll die of ennui. Go to Boulogne — it is delightful —
you may be there as retired or as gay as you please."
Boulogne to be taken into consideration — many inquiries
made and all very satisfactory — good sands and excellent
jackasses for the children.
"My dear friend, Boulogne is something like the King's
Bench — at least most of the people only go there in pre-
ference. Everybody will suppose that you've levanted. Pray
don't go to Boulogne."
"Why don't you go by Southampton to Havre — there
you'll have quiet and amusement — beautiful country about
Honfleur— scenery up the Seine splendid; and then you can
go up to Rouen by water, if you intend to go on to Paris."

<page 21>
6
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
Havre and Honfleur submitted to the committee.
But then came Dieppe, and Brest, and the environs of Paris,
Versailles, St. Germain, Passy, and other recommendations, in
which every one particular place was proved incontestably to
be more particularly suited to us than any other, and the
committee sat for three weeks, at the end of which, upon
examining the matured opinions of the last seven days, I found
them to have fluctuated as follows :—
Monday morning, Manheim. Evening, Spa.
Tuesday morning, Bruges. Evening Brussels.
Wednesday morning, St. Omer. Evening, Boulogne.
Thursday morning, Havre. Evening Honfleur.
Friday morning, Dieppe. Evening, Passy.
Saturday morning, Versailles. Evening, St. Germain.
Sunday morning, Spa. Evening, Brussels.
The fact was, that there was a trifling difference of opinion
in the committee — the great object appeared to be, and the
great difficulty at the same time, to find a place which would
suit all parties, that is to say, a place where there were no
politics, plenty of gaiety, and cheap peaches.
CHAPTER III.
Paddle, paddle — splash, splash — bump, thump, bump.
What a leveller is sea-sickness—almost as great a radical as
death. All grades, all respect, all consideration are lost.
The master may summon John to his assistance, but John
will see his master hanged before he'll go to him; he has
taken possession of his master's great coat, and he intends to
keep it—he don't care for warning.
The nurses no longer look after the infant or the children,
they may tumble overboard—even the fond yearnings of the
mother at last yield to the overwhelming sensation, and if
it were not for the mercenary or kind-hearted assistance of
those who have become habituated to the motion of a vessel,
there is no saying how tragical might be the commence-
ment of many a party of pleasure to the Continent.
"0 lauk, Mary, do just hold this child," says the upper

<page 22>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
7
nurse to her assistant; "I do feel such a sinking in my
stomach."
"Carn't indeed, nurse, I've such a rising."
Away hurried both the women at once to the side of the
vessel, leaning over and groaning heavily. As for the children,
they would soon have been past caring for, had it not been for
my protecting arms.
Decorum and modesty, next to maternal tenderness, the
strongest feelings in woman, fall before the dire prostration of
this malady. A young lady will recline unwittingly in the
arms of a perfect stranger, and the bride of three months,
deserted by her husband, will offer no resistance to the un-
couth seaman, who, in his kindness, would loosen the laces
that confine her heaving bosom.
As for politeness, even the ancien regime of the noblesse
of France put it in their pockets as if there were a general
chaos—self is the only feeling; not but that I have seen
occasional traits of good-will towards others. I once wit-
nessed a young lady smelling to a bottle of Eau de Cologne,
as if her existence depended upon it, who handed it over to
another, whose state was even more pitiable, and I was re-
minded of Sir Philip Sidney and the cup of water, as he lay
wounded on the field of battle, "Thy necessity is greater than
mine." And if I might have judged from her trembling lips
and pallid countenance, it was almost an equal act of heroism.
Paddle, paddle, splash, splash, bump, thump, bump—one would
really imagine that the passengers were so many pumps, all
worked at once with the vessel by the same hundred horse
power, for there were an hundred of them about me, each as
sick as a horse. "Sic omnes," thought I.
I have long passed the ordeal, and even steam, and smoke, and
washing basins, and all the various discordant and revolting
noises from those who suffer, have no effect upon my nervous
system—still was I doomed to torment, and was very sick indeed.
For some time I had been watched by the evil eyes of one, whom
the Yankees would designate, as almighty ugly. He was a
thin, spare man, whose accost I could well have spared, for
he had the look of a demon, and, as I soon found, was
possessed with the demon of politics. Imagine what I must
have suffered when I found out that he was a button-holder to
boot. Observing that I was the only one who was in a state 
<page 23>
8
DIAKY ON THE CONTINENT.
to listen, he seized upon me as his victim. I, who had fled
from politics with as much horror as others have done from
the cholera—I, who had encountered all the miseries of steam
navigation, and all the steam and effluvia of close cabins,
to find myself condemned with others "alike to groan—"
what with King Leopold, and William of Nassau, and the
Belgian share of the debt, and the French and Antwerp, and
his pertinacious holding of my button. "Shall I knock him
down," thought I; "he insists upon laying his hands upon
me, why should I not lay my hands upon him 1" But on second
consideration, that would not have been polite; so I made
other attempts to get rid of him, but in vain; I turned the
subject to far countries—the rascal had been everywhere; at
one moment he would be at Vienna, and discuss the German
confederation—at another in South America, canvassing the
merits of Bolivar and St. Martin. There was no stopping
him; his tongue was like the paddle of a steam-boat, and
almost threw as much spray in my face. At last I threw off
my coat, which he continued to hold in his hand by the
third button, and threw myself into one of the cribs appro-
priated to passengers, wishing him a good night. He put my
coat down in the crib beneath, and as he could no longer hold
the button, he laid hold of the side of the crib, and continued
his incessant clack. At last I turned my back to him, and
made no answer, upon which he made a retreat, and when
I awoke the next morning, I found that he was too ill to
spout politics, although as he progressed, he spouted what was
quite as bad.
Par parenthise, he was a great liar, and as he drew a long
bow when he was able to talk, so did he prove a long shot
when he was sea-sick. Confound the fellow, I think I see him
now—there he stood, a tall, gaunt misery, about the height of
a workhouse pump, and the basin was on the floor of the
cabin, nearly three feet from his two feet; without conde-
scending to stoop, or to sit down, or to lift up the basin, so as
to lessen the distance, he poured forth a parabola, "quod
nunc describere" had just as well be omitted. I shall therefore
dismiss this persecuting demon, by stating, that he called him-
self a baron, the truth of which I doubted much; that he was
employed by crowned heads, which I doubted still more. On
one point, however, I had little doubt, although he did not 
<page 24>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
9
enter upon the subject, (and his tongue to a great degree
confirmed it,) that he was a chevalier d'Industrie.
"I am rid of him, thank God," exclaimed I, as I went on
deck to breathe a little fresh air, having lighted my cigar in
the steward's berth as I ascended. The first objects which
attracted my attention, were a young gentleman and lady, the
former standing by the latter, who was sitting in a pensive
position, with her elbow leaning on the gunnel. She was in
deep mourning, and closely veiled.
"And how does the beautiful Maria find herself this morn-
ing t" said the young gentleman, leaning over her with his
hand on the rail to support himself.
The beautiful Maria! How was it possible not to be at-
tracted by such a distinguishing appellation? The beautiful
Maria! I thought of Sterne's Maria, and the little dog with a
string, and I trimmed my ear like a windsail in the tropics
to catch the soft responding, and most assuredly, to my
expectant imagination, melodious vibration of the air which
would succeed.
At last there was a reply. "Oh! tol, lol!" And that in
anything but a melodious voice. "Oh! tol, lol!" What a
bathos! The beautiful Maria, whom in my imagination I
had clothed with all the attributes of sentiment and delicacy,
whom I had conjured up as a beau ideal of perfection, replies
in a hoarse voice with, "Oh! tol, lol!" Down she went, like
the English funds in a panic—down she went to the zero of a
Doll Tearsheet, and down I went again into the cabin.
Surely this is a world of disappointment.
Perhaps I was wrong—she might have been very beautiful,
with the voice of a peacock; she might also have the plumage
—but no, that is impossible—she must, from her sex, have
been a peahen. At all events, if not very beautiful, she was
very sick. I left the beautiful Maria screeching over the
gunnel. If the young gentleman were to repeat the same
question now, thought I, the beautiful Maria will hardly
answer, "Oh! tol, lol!"
It was very cold on deck, blowing fresh from the East. I
never heard anyone give a satisfactory reason why a west
wind should be warm, and an east wind cold in latitude
50° N. It is not so in the tropics when the east wind follows 
<page 25>
10
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
the rarefaction occasioned by the sun. Yet, does not Byron
say,
"'Tis the land of the east, 'tis the clime of the sun."
Certainly our east winds are not at all poetical.
"Very cold, sir," said I, addressing a round-faced gentle-
man in a white great coat, who rested his chin and his two
hands upon a thick cane. "You are fortunate in not being
sea-sick."
"I beg your pardon, I am not fortunate. I am worse than
sea-sick, for I want to be sea-sick and I can't. I do believe
that everything is changed now-a-days, since that confounded
Reform Bill!"
Politics again, thought I; what the devil has sea-sickness
to do with the Reform Bill? Mercy on me, when shall I be
at peace?" There certainly has been some change," ob-
served I.
"Change, sir! yes, everything changed. England of 1835
is no more like merry England of olden time, than I am like
Louis the Fourteenth—ruined, sir—every class suffering, sir—
badly ruled, sir."
"Things are much cheaper."
"Much cheaper! Yes, sir; but what's the good of things
being cheap when nobody has any money to purchase with?
They might just as well be dear. It's a melancholy discovery,
sir, this steam."
"Melancholy just now to those who are on board, and suf-
fering, I grant."
"Pooh, nonsense! melancholy to those on shore, sir; the
engines work while man looks on and starves. Country
ruined, sir—people miserable—thrown out of employment,
while foreigners reap the benefit; we sell them our manu-
factures at a cheaper rate; we clothe them well, sir, at the
expense of our own suffering population. But is this all, sir?
Oh, no!"
And here the gentleman dropped his chin again upon his
hands, and looked very woeful indeed. After a few seconds,
he resumed.
"We are dismembered, sir—ruined by faction. Society is
disintegrated by political animosities; thousands have retreated 
<page 26>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
11
from the scene of violence and excitement, to find peace and
repose in a foreign land."
I nodded an assent.
"Ay, sir, and thousands will follow, withdrawing from the
country its resources, circulating millions which enrich other
nations, and avoiding their own share of the national burdens,
which fall still heavier upon those who remain. But is that all,
sir? Oh, no!"
This second "oh, no!" was pronounced in a more lugu-
brious note: he shook his head, and after a pause, he recom-
menced. "England is no longer priest-ridden, sir; but she is
worse, she is law-ridden. Litigation and law expenses have,
like locusts, devoured up the produce of industry. No man is
safe without a lawyer at his elbow, making over to him a part
of his annual income to secure the remainder. And then
there's Brougham. But, sir, is that all? Oh, no!"
Another pause, and he continued. "I never grumble—I
hate grumblers; I never talk of politics—I hate politics; but,
sir, is it not the case, that madmen and fools have united to
ruin the country? Is it not true, sir, that unable to rise
by their talents, and urged by a wicked ambition, they have
summoned main force, and the power of numbers to their
assistance, and have raised a spirit which they cannot put
down again? Is it not true, sir, that treason walks barefaced
through the land, pointing to general destruction—to a vio-
lation of all rights, to anarchy, confusion, and the shedding of
blood? is not reason borne down by faction, sir? but, sir, is
that all? Oh, no!"
This last "oh, no!" was more melancholy than the pre-
ceding, but I considered that my companion must have nearly
exhausted his budget of miseries, and was curious to ascertain
what would come next.
"What, is there more, sir?" inquired I, innocently.
"More, sir. Yes, sir, plenty more. I ask you whether
even the seasons have not changed in our unhappy country;
have we not summer with unusual, unexampled heat, and
winters without cold; when shall we ever see the mercury
down below sixty degrees again? never, sir. What is summer
but a season of alarm and dread? Does not the cholera come
in as regularly as green peas—terrifying us to death, whether
we die of it or not? Of what advantage are the fruits of the 
<page 27>
12
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
earth so bountifully bestowed—have they not all been con-
verted into poisons? Who dares to drink a light summer
wine now? Are not all vegetables abjured, peaches thrown to
the pigs, and strawberries ventured upon only by little boys who
sweep the streets, with the broom in one hand and the pottle
in the other? Are not melons rank poison, and cucumbers
sudden death? And in the winter, sir, are we better off?
Instead of the wholesome frosts of olden days, purifying the
air and the soil, and bracing up our nerves, what have we but
the influenza, which lasts us for four months, and the spas-
modic cough which fills up the remainder of the year? I am
no grumbler, sir, I hate and abhor anything like complaining,
but this I will say, that the world has been turned upside
down—that everything has gone wrong—that peace has come
to us unattended by plenty—that everybody is miserable;
and that vaccination and steam, which have been lauded as
blessings, have proved the greatest of all possible curses, and
that there is no chance of a return to our former prosperity,
unless we can set fire to our coal mines, and re-introduce the
small-pox. But, sir, the will of Heaven be done, I shall say
no more; I don't wish to make other people unhappy; but
pray don't think, sir, I've told you all. Oh, no!"
At this last "oh, no!" my companion laid his face down
upon his knuckles, and was silent. I once more sought the
deck, and preferred to encounter the east wind. "Blow,
blow, thou wintry wind, thou art not so unkind," soliloquized I,
as I looked over the bows, and perceived that we were close
to the pile entrance of the harbour of Ostend. Ten minutes
afterwards there was a cessation of paddle, paddle, thump,
thump, the stern-fast was thrown on the quay, there was a rush
on board of commissionnaires, with their reiterated cries,
accompanied with cards thrust into your hands, "Hotel des
Bains, Monsieur." "H&tel Waterloo, Monsieur." "Hotel
Bellevue." "Hotel Bedford, Monsieur." "H6tel d'Angle-
terre," ad infinitum—and then there was the pouring out of
the Noah's Ark, with their countenances wearing a most para-
doxical appearance, for they evidently showed that they had
had quite enough of water, and, at the same time, that
they required a great deal more. I looked at my children, as
they were hoisted up from the ladies' cabin, one after another;
and upon examination I decided that, with their smudged 
<page 28>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT. 13
faces, the Hotel des Bains would be the most appropriate to
their condition; so there we went.
CHAPTER IV.
Ostend, April 18, 1835.
I was confoundedly taken in by a rascal of a commission-
naire, and aware how the feelings of travellers are affected by
the weather or the treatment they receive at any place they
may pass through, I shall display the heroism of saying
nothing about the place, except that I believe Ostend to be
the most rascally hole in the world, and the sooner the
traveller is out of it so much the better will it be for his purse
and for his temper.
April 19.
It has been assumed as an axiom that everyone in this
world is fond of power. During our passage in the track-
schuyt I had an evidence to the contrary, for as we glided
noiselessly and almost imperceptibly along, a lady told me that
she infinitely preferred the three-horse power of the schuyt to
the hundred-horse power of the steam-packet. We arrived at
Bruges, escaping all the horrors and difficulties of steam
navigation.
House rent at Bruges is cheap, because one half of the
houses are empty—at least that was the cause assigned to me,
although I will not vouch for its being the true one. The
reader may remember that this was the site of cheap peaches,
but none met our sight, the trees not being yet in blossom. I
ought to observe, for the satisfaction of the Foreign Bible
Society, that at the hotel at Bruges I saw a book of their
exportation lying on the chimney-piece in excellent preserva-
tion.
April 21.
As to what passed on our canal voyage to Ghent, I can
only say that everything passed us—for the roads were very
heavy, the horses very lazy, and the boys still lazier—they
rode their horses listlessly, sitting on them sideways, as I have 
<page 29>
14
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
seen lads in the country swinging on a gate—whereby the
gait of the track-schuyt could not be styled a swinging pace.
We did arrive at last, and thus ended our water carriage. At
Ghent we went to the Hotel Royal, from out of the windows
of which I had a fine view of the belfry, surmounted by the
Brazen Dragon brought from Constantinople; and as I con-
jured up times past, and I thought how the belfry was built
and how the dragon got there, I found myself at last wander-
ing in the Apocrypha of " Bel and the Dragon."
We went to see the picture by Van Eck, in the cathedral of
St. Bovin. The reader will probably wish to know who was
St. Bovin—so did I—and I asked the question of the
sacristan: the reader shall have the benefit of the answer, "St.
Bovin, monsieur, il e"tait un saint."
That picture of Van Eck's is worth a van full of most of the
pictures we see: it was Van Eck who invented, and was
indeed the father of painting in oil. It is a wonderful pro-
duction.
Mrs. Trollope says that people run through Belgium as if it
were a mere railroad to other countries. That is very true—
we did the same—for who would stop at Ostend to be
swindled, or at Bruges to look at empty houses, or at Ghent,
which is nothing but a Flanders Birmingham, when Brussels
and King Leopold, and the anticipation of something more
agreeable, were only thirty miles off. Not one day was our
departure postponed; with post-horses and postilions we
posted post haste to Brussels.
CHAPTER V.
April 22.
The Queen of Belgium "a fait un enfant." On the
Continent it is always the wife who is considered as the
faiseuse; the husband is supposed, and very often with justice,
to have had nothing to do in the matter—it certainly does
appear to be optional on the part of the ladies, for they limit
their family to their exact wishes or means of support. How
different is it in England, where children will be born whether
it is convenient or not! O Miss Martineau! you may talk 
<page 30>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
15
about the "preventive check," but where is it? In England
it would be as valuable as the philosopher's stone.
I think that the good people of Paris would do well, as they
appear just now to have left religion in abeyance, to take up
the manners and customs of the empire of the Nahirs, a
Mahratta nation, which I once read about. In that country,
as in heaven, there is no marrying, nor giving in marriage.
All are free, and all inheritance is through the children of the
sister; for although it is impossible to know who may be the
father of any of the children, they are very certain that the
sister's children must have the blood on the maternal side.
What a good arrangement this would be for the Parisians—
how many pe'che's mortels would they get rid of — such as
adultery, fornication, &c.—by passing one simple law of the
land. By-the-by, what an admirable idea for reforming a
nation—they say that laws, now-a-days, are made to prevent
crime: but if laws were enacted by which crime should no
longer be considered as crime, what a deal of trouble might be
saved.
The theatre is closed owing to the want of funds; the want
of funds is owing to the want of honesty on the part of the
manager having run away with the strong box, which was
decidedly the very best box in the theatre.
April 26. I went to see a species of Franconi, or Astley's: there is
little variety in these performances, as there are only a certain
quantity of feats, which can be performed either by the horses
or the riders, nevertheless we had some novelty. We had the
very best feminine rider I ever saw; she was a perfect female
Centaur, looking part and parcel of the animal upon which she
stood; and then we had a regularly Dutch-built lady, who
amused us with a tumble off her horse, coming down on the
loose saw-dust, in a sitting posture, and making a hole in it as
large as if a covey of partridges had been busking in it for the
whole day. An American black (there always is a black
fellow in these companies, for, as Cooper says, they learn to
ride well in America by stealing their masters' horses) rode
furiously well and sprained his ankle—the attempt of a man in
extreme pain to smile is very horrible—yet he did grin as he
bowed and limped away. After that we had a performer, who 
<page 31>
16
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
had little chance of spraining her ankle: it was a Miss Betsey,
a female of good proportions, who was, however, not a little
sulky that evening, and very often refused to perform her
task, and as for forcing the combined will of a female and an
elephant to boot, there was no man rash enough to attempt it,
so she did as little as she pleased, and it pleased her to do very
little : one feat, however, was novel, she took a musket in her
mouth, and fired it off with her trunk.
When I was in India I was very partial to these animals;
there was a most splendid elephant, which had been captured
by the expedition sent to Martaban; he stood four or five feet
higher than elephants usually do, and was a great favourite of
his master, the rajah. When this animal was captured there
was great difficulty in getting him on board of the transport.
A raft was made, and he was very unwillingly persuaded to
trust his huge carcass upon it; he was then towed off with
about thirty of the natives on the raft, attending him; the
largest purchases and blocks were procured to hoist him in,
the mainyards doubly secured, and the fall brought to the
capstern. The elephant had been properly slung, the capstern
was manned, and his huge bulk was lifted in the air, but he
had not risen a foot before the ropes gave way, and down he
came again on the raft with a heavy surge, a novelty which he
did not appear to approve of. A new fall was rove, and they
again manned the capstern; this time the tackle held, and up
went the gentleman in the air; but he had not forgotten the
previous accident, and upon what ground it is impossible to
say, he ascribed his treatment to the natives, who were
assisting him on the raft. As he slowly mounted in the air,
he looked about him very wroth, his eyes and his trunk being
the only portions of his frame at liberty. These he turned
about in every direction as he ascended—at last, as he passed
by the main channels, he perceived the half of a maintop-sail
yard, which had been carried away in the slings, lying on the
goose-necks; it was a weapon that suited him admirably; he
seized hold of it, and whirling it once round with his trunk,
directed the piece of wood with such good aim, that he swept
about twenty of the natives off the raft, to take their chance
with a strong tide and plenty of alligators. It was the self-
possession of the animal which I admired so much, swinging
in the air in so unusual a position for an elephant, he was as_

<page 32>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
17
collected as if he had been roaming in his own wild forests.
He arrived and was disembarked at Rangoon, and it was an
amusement to me, whenever I could find time to watch this
animal, and two others much smaller in size who were with
him; but he was my particular pet. Perhaps the reader will
like to have the diary of an elephant when not on active
service. At what time animals get up who never lie down
without being ordered, it is not very easy to say. The
elephants are stalled at the foot of some large tree, which
shelters them during the day from the extreme heat of the
sun; they stand under this tree, to which they are chained by
their hind legs. Early in the morning the keeper makes his
appearance from his hovel, and throws the respective keys
down to the elephants, who immediately unlock the padlocks
of the chains, cast themselves loose, and in the politest manner
return the keys to the keeper; they then march off with him
to the nearest forest, and on their arrival commence breaking
down the branches of the trees, selecting those which are most
agreeable to their palates, and arranging them in two
enormous faggots. When they have collected as much as
they think they require, they make withies and bind up their
two faggots, and then twist another to connect the two, so as
to hang them over their backs down on each side, and having
thus made their provision, they return home; the keeper may or may not be present during this performance. All depends
upon whether the elephants are well trained, and have been
long in servitude. Upon their return, the elephants pass the
chains again round their legs, lock the padlock, and present
the key as before; they then amuse themselves with their
repast, eating all the leaves and tender shoots, and rejecting
the others. Now when an elephant has had enough to eat, he
generally selects a long bough, and pulling off all the lateral
branches, leaves a bush at the end forming a sort of whisk to
keep off the flies and musquitoes; for although the hide of the
elephant is very thick, still it is broken into crannies and
cracks, into which the vermin insert themselves. Sometimes
they have the following ingenious method of defending them-
selves against these tormentors—they put the end of their
trunk down in the dust, draw up as large a quantity as they
can, and turning their trunks over their heads, pour it out over 
<page 33>
18
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
their skin, powdering and filling up the interstices, after which
they take the long branch I have before mentioned, and amuse
themselves by flapping it right and left, and in all directions
about their bodies, wherever the insects may settle.
And now for an instance of self-denial, which I have often
witnessed on the part of my friend the large elephant. I have
observed him very busy, flapping right and flapping left, evi-
dently much annoyed by the persecution of the musquitoes;
by-the-by, no one can have an idea how hard the tiger-mus-
quito can bite. I will, however, give an instance of it, for
the truth of which I cannot positively vouch; but I remem-
ber that once, when it rained torrents, and we were on a boat-
ing expedition, a marine who, to keep his charge dry, had
his fore-finger inserted in the barrel of his musket, pulled
it out in a great hurry, exclaiming to his comrade, "May
I be shot, Bill, if one of them beggars ha'n't bit me right
through the barrel of my musket." This par parenthese,
and now to proceed. As I said before, the elephant showed, by
constant flagellation of his person, that he was much annoyed
by his persecutors, and just at that time, the keeper brought
a little naked black thing, as round as a ball, which in India
I believe they call a child, laid it down before the animal with
two words in Hindostanee—" Watch it!" and then walked
away into the town. The elephant immediately broke off the
larger part of the bough, so as to make a smaller and more
convenient whisk, and directed his whole attention to the
child, gently fanning the little lump of Indian ink, and driving
away every musquito which came near it; this he continued
for upwards of two hours, regardless of himself, until the
keeper returned. It was really a beautiful sight, and causing
much reflection. Here was a monster, whose bulk exceeded
that of the infant by at least two thousand times, acknowledg-
ing that the image of his Maker, even in its lowest degree of
perfection, was divine; silently proving the truth of the sacred
announcement, that God had "given to man dominion over
the beasts of the field." And here, too, was a brute animal
setting an example of devotion and self-denial, which but few
Christians, none indeed but a mother, could have practised.
Would Fowell Buxton, surrounded by a host of musquitoes,
have done as much for a fellow-creature, white or black? not

<page 34>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
19
he ; he would have flapped his own thighs, his own ears, his
own face, and his own every thing, and have left his neighbours
to take care of themselves; nor would I blame him.
As I am on the subject, I may as well inform my readers
how and in which way this elephant and I parted company, for
it was equally characteristic of the animal. The army was
ordered to march, and the elephants were called into requisition
to carry the tents. The quarter-master general, the man with
four eyes, as the natives called him, because he wore spectacles,
superintended the loading of the animals—tent upon tent was
heaped upon my friend, who said nothing, till at last he found
that they were overdoing the thing, and then he roared out his
complaints, which the keeper explained; but there was still one
more tent to be carried, and, therefore, as one more or less
could make no difference, it was ordered to be put upon his
back. The elephant said no more, but he turned sulky—
enough was as good as a feast with him, and he considered
this treatment as no joke. Now it so happened that at the time
the main street, and the only street of the town, which was
at least half a mile long, was crowded to suffocation with
tattoos, or little ponies, and small oxen, every one of them
loaded with a couple of cases of claret, or brandy, or some-
thing else, slung on each side of them, attended by coolies,
who, with their hooting, and pushing, and beating, and
screaming, created a very bustling and lively scene. When
the last tent was put on the elephant he was like a mountain
with canvass on each side of him, bulging out to a width equal
to his own; there was just room for him to pass through the
two rows of houses on each side of the street, and not ten
inches to spare; he was ordered by the keeper to go on—he
obeyed the order certainly, but in what way—he threw his
trunk up in the air, screamed a loud shriek of indignation, and
set off at a trot, which was about equal in speed to a horse's
gallop, right down the street, mowing down before him every
pony, bullock, and cooley that barred his passage; the confu-
sion was indescribable, all the little animals were with their
legs in the air, claret and brandy poured in rivulets down the
streets, coolies screamed as they threw themselves into the
doors and windows; and at one fell swoop the angry gentle-
man demolished the major part of the comforts of the officers,
who were little aware how much they were to sacrifice for the c 2

<page 35>
20
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
sake of an extra tent. With my eyes I followed my friend
in his reckless career, until he was enveloped and hid from my
view in a cloud of dust, and that was my farewell of him. I
turned round, and observed close to me the quarter-master
general, looking with all his four eyes at the effects of his
inhumanity. But I have wandered some twenty thousand miles
from Brussels, and must return.
CHAPTER VI.
Brussels, May 5.
His Belgian Majesty, the Belgian ministers, Belgian ambas-
sadors, Belgian authorities, and all the Belgian nobility and
gentry, all the English who reside in Brussels for economy
and quiet, and all the exiles and propaganda who reside here
to kick up a row, have all left Brussels by the Porte d'An-
vers. And all the Belgians who live at Brussels have shut up
their shops, and gone out by the Porte d'Anvers. And the
whole populace, men, women, and children, have gone out
of the Porte d'Anvers. And all the infants have also gone,
because the mothers could not leave them at home. And the
generals, and their staffs, and the officers, and all the troops,
and all the artillery, have also left Brussels, and gone out at
the Porte d'Anvers, to keep the said populace quiet and in good
order. So that there is no one left at Brussels, and Brussels
must for one day take care of itself.
And now you of course wish to know why they have all left
Brussels, and further, why they have gone through the Porte
d'Anvers.
Because there is this day the commemoration of the inaugu-
ration of the Chemin de Fer, which has just been completed
from Brussels to Malines, and which is on this day to be opened,
that is to say, that three steam tugs, whose namesare theStephen-
son. the Arrow, and the Elephant, are to drag to Malines and back again in the presence of his majesty, all his majesty's ministers,
all the ambassadors who choose to go, all the heads of the
departments, and every body else who can produce a satis-
factory yellow ticket, which will warrant their getting into
one of the thirty-three omnibuses, diligences, or cars, which 
<page 36>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
21
are attached to the said three steam-tugs, the Arrow, the
Stephenson, and the Elephant. I shall go and see it—I will
not remain at Brussels by myself, the "last man."
May 6. ,
It was a brilliant affair, and went off well, because the trains
went on well. We were tugged through twelve miles of the
most fertile pasture in the universe, the whole line of road so
crowded with spectators, as to make evident the extreme popu-
lousness of the country. For the first mile it was one mass
of people—and a Belgian crowd has a very agreeable effect,
from the prevailing colours being blue and white, which are
very refreshing, and contrast pleasantly with the green back-
ground. Every man had his blouse, and every woman her cap
and straw bonnet; but if the Belgians look well en masse, I
cannot say that they do so in detail: the men we do not
expect much from, but the women are certainly the plainest
race in the whole world—I will not except the Africans. In
some of our men-of-war it was formerly the custom to have
an old knife, which was passed from one to the other, as the
men joined the ship, being handed to the ugliest man they
could find; he held the knife until another came, more unfor-
tunate in physiognomy than himself, when it was immediately
made over to the last, who was obliged in his turn to retain
it until he could discover some one even more unprepossess-
ing. Following up this principle with the women of Belgium,
and comparing them with other European states, they are most
unequivocally entitled to hold the knife, and unless they improve
by crossing the breed, I am afraid they will have it in their
possession for centuries. We arrived safe at Malines, and I was infinitely amused at
the variety of astonishment in the five hundred thousand faces
which we passed. In one rich meadow I beheld a crowd of
Roman Catholic priests, who looked at the trains in such a man-
ner as if they thought that they were "heretical and damnable,"
andthat theChemindei^er was nothing but the Chemin d'En/er.
At Malines we all got out, walked to a stone pillar, where a
speech was made to the sound of martial music, and we all got
in again. And then to show the power of his engines, Mr.
Stephenson attached all the cars, omnibuses, and diligences
together, and directed the Elephant to take us back without 
<page 37>
22
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
assistance from the other two engines. So the Elephant took
us all in tow, and away we went at a very fair pace. It must
have been a very beautiful sight to those who were looking on
the whole train in one line, covered with red cloth and garlands
of roses with white canopies overhead, and decorated with
about three hundred Belgian flags, of yellow, red, and
black. However, the huge animal who dragged this weight
of eighty tons became thirsty at Ville Vorde, and cast us
off—it took him half an hour to drink—that is to say, to take
in water, and then he set off again, and we arrived safely at
Brussels, much to the delight of those who were in the cars
and also of his majesty, and all his ministers, and all his autho-
rities, and all the mercantile classes, who consider that the
millennium is come, but very much to the disappointment of
the lower classes, who have formed the idea that the Chemin de
Fer will take away their bread, and who therefore longed for a
blow-up. And Mr. Stephenson having succeeded in bringing
back in safety his decorated cars, has been decore himself, and
is now a Chevalier de l'Ordre Leopold. Would not the Iron
order of the Belgian patriots have been more appropriate as a
Chemin de Fer decoration?
It is impossible to contemplate any steam-engine, without
feeling wonder and admiration at the ingenuity of man; but
this feeling is raised to a degree of awe when you look at a
locomotive engine—there is such enormous power compressed
into so small a space—I never can divest myself of the idea
that it is possessed of vitality—that it is a living as well as a
moving being—and that idea, joined with its immense power,
conjures up in my mind that it is some spitting, fizzing,
terrific demon, who, if he could escape control, would be ready
and happy to drag us by thousands to destruction.
And will this powerful invention prove to mankind a blessing
or a curse ?—like the fire which Prometheus stole from heaven
to vivify his statue, may it not be followed by the evils of
Pandora's fatal casket?
The lower classes of Belgium have formed an idea that the
introduction of steam is to take away their bread. Let us
examine whether there is not in this idea a degree of instinctive
and prophetic truth.
The axiom of our political economists is, that the grand
object to be sought and obtained is to produce the greatest 
<page 38>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
23
possible results by the smallest possible means. The axiom,
as an axiom by itself, is good; but the axiom to be opposed
to it is, that the well-being and happiness of any state depends
upon obtaining full employment for the whole industry of the
people.
The population of Belgium is enormous. In England we
calculate about eighteen hundred souls to the square league.
In Belgium it amounts to three thousand eight hundred souls
to the square league. Now it would be impossible for Belgium
to support this population, were it not, in the first place, for
her extensive manufactories, (for upon the cotton manufactories
alone, in which steam is as yet but partially introduced, two
hundred and fifty thousand souls depend for their existence,)
and in the second place, from the subdivision of the land in
small portions, arising from the laws of inheritance, which
bar the right of primogeniture; the consequence of which is,
that the major part of Belgium is cultivated by spade hus-
bandry, and is in the very highest state of fertility. Never-
theless, the proportion of those who receive relief in Belgium
from public institutions and private charities of all descriptions
amounts even at present to one in eight persons. Now, allow-
ing that the steam-engine should be generally introduced into
this country, the consequence must be, that machinery will
supply the place, and do the work of man. And what may
be the result? that thousands will be thrown out of employ-
ment, and must be supported by the nation. When the
population is so dense that there is not room for the labour of
its present inhabitants, it is clear that the introduction of
machinery can have but one effect—that of increasing pau-
perism. Are not, then, the Belgians right in thinking that
it will deprive them of their bread?
That machinery has already had that effect to a certain
degree in England cannot be denied; and not only our manu-
facturing, but our agricultural population, have been distressed
from an adherence to the same principle, of obtaining the
greatest possible results from the smallest possible means.
The subdivision of land will do more to relieve the agricultural
distress than anything else. At present large farms are pre-
ferred both by landlord and tenant, because a large farm can
be cultivated with a fewer number of men and horses; but
how does this act? It throws a certain quantity of labourers 
<page 39>
24
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
out of employ, who are supported in idleness. Is the sum
gained by farmers by employing fewer men on large farms
more than their proportion of the poor's rates paid for unpro-
ductive industry? That it may be more to the farmers is
possible, as they shift a great part of the onus upon others;
but to the nation it certainly is not—for the man who does not
work must still be fed. May we not then consider the fol-
lowing propositions as correct?
That, producing the greatest possible results from the least
possible means, is an axiom which can only hold good when
it does not interfere with the industry of the people. That,
as long as the whole population are employed, such powers
become a benefit, and a source of extra wealth. But that,
in proportion as it throws the population out of employment,
so much the more does it prove an injury, and must finally
lead to a state of things which must end in riot, anarchy,
and confusion. Quod est demonstrandum—I hope it will not
be in our time.
CHAPTER VII.
Antwerp-
Evesy one has heard of the cathedral at Antwerp and the
fine pictures by Rubens—every one has heard of the siege of
Antwerp and General Chasse\ and how the French marched
an army of non-intervention down to the citadel, and took it
from the Dutch—and every one has heard how Lord Pal-
merston protocol-ed while Marshal Gerard bombard-ed—and
how it was all bombard and bombast. The name of Lord
Palmerston reminds me that conversing after dinner with
some Belgians, the topic introduced was the great dearth of
diplomatic talent in a country like England, where talent was
in every other department so extremely prominent. It was
not the first time that this subject had been canvassed in my
presence by foreigners. Naturally envious of our general
superiority, it is with them a favourite point of attack; and
they are right, as it certainly is our weakest point. They
cannot disparage our army, or our navy, or our constitution;
but they can our climate, which is not our fault, but our
misfortune; and our diplomacy, which is our fault, and has too
often proved our misfortune also.

<page 40>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
25
It certainly is the fact, that our diplomatic corps are very
inferior, and this can arise but from one cause; the emolu-
ments which have been attached to it having rendered
admission into it an advantage eagerly sought by the higher
classes as a provision for the junior branches of their families.
Of course, this provision has been granted to those to whom
government have felt most indebted for support, without the
least regard to the important point as to whether those who
were admitted were qualified or not; so that the mere pro-
viding for a younger son of an adherent to the government
may have proved in the end to have cost the country millions
from the incompetence of the party when placed in a situation
requiring tact and discrimination. This evil is increased by
the system of filling up the vacant appointments according to
seniority—the exploded and absurd custom of "each second
being heir unto the first." Should any man have proved,
upon an emergency, that he was possessed of the highest
talent for diplomacy, it will avail him nothing—he never, under
the present system, will be employed—he cannot be admitted
into the corps without having entered as a private secretary
or attached It would be monstrous, unheard of; and the
very idea would throw Lord Aberdeen on the one side, or Lord
Palmerston on the other, into convulsions. Is it therefore to
be wondered at our being so deficient in our diplomatic
corps? Surely if any point more than another requires revision
and reform, it is this; and the nation has a right to insist
upon it.
It may be asked, what are the most peculiar qualities
necessary in a diplomatist, taking it for granted that he has
talents, education, and a thorough knowledge of the routine of
business? The only term which we can give to this deside-
ratum is presence of mind—not the presence of mind required
in danger, but that presence of mind which enables him, when
a proposition is made, at once to seize all its bearings, the
direction to which it tends, and the ultimate object (for that
will always be concealed at first) which the proposer may have
in view. Diplomatists, when they enter the field, are much in
the situation of two parties, one defending and the other
attacking a stronghold. Admissions are highly dangerous, as
they enable the adversary to throw up his first parallels; and
too often, when you imagine that the enemy is not one jot c 3

<page 41>
26
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
advanced, you find that he has worked through a covered way,
and you are summoned to surrender. It is strange that, at
the very time that they assert that it would be impossible to
employ those as diplomatists who have not been regularly
trained to the service, officers in the army, and captains in the
navy are continually so employed, and often under circum-
stances of vital importance. Now it would be supposed that
the latter of all people they must be the most unfit; as,
generally speaking, they are sent to sea, as unfit for anything else. But it appears that once commanding a frigate, they
are supposed to be fit for everything. A vessel is ordered for
"particular service," why so called I know not, except that
there may be an elision, and it means "particularly disagreeable
service." The captain is directed by the Admiralty to consider
himself under the orders of the Foreign Office, and he receives
a huge pile of documents, numbered, scheduled, and red-taped (as Bulwer says in his pamphlet), the contents of which
he is informed are to serve as a guide for his proceedings.
He reads them over with all their verbiage and technicalities,
sighs for Cobbett's pure Saxon, and when he has finished,
feels not a little puzzled. Document No. 4. contradicting
document No. 12., and document No. 1. opposed to No. 56.;
that is, as he reads and understands English. Determined to
understand them if possible, he takes a dose of protocol every
morning, until he has nearly learnt them by heart, and then
acts to the best of his knowledge and belief. And it is unde-
niable that, with very few exceptions, the navy have invariably
given satisfaction to the Foreign Office when they have been
so employed, and often under circumstances of peculiar
difficulty. I have heard, from the best authority, that military
men have also been equally successful, although they have not
so often been called into "particular service." By the bye,
particular service is all done at the same price as general
service in his Majesty's navy, which is rather unfair, as we
are obliged to find our own red tape, pens, ink, and sta-
tionery.
As I was walking on the glacis with a friend, he pointed
out to me at a window an enormous fat man smoking his pipe,
and told me that he had been in the Dutch service under
William of Orange; but not being a very good hand at a
forced march, he had been reduced with others to half-pay. 
<page 42>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
27
He had not been many months in retirement when he went to
the palace, and requested an audience of his Majesty, and,
when admitted, stated that he had come to request that his
Majesty would be pleased to put him again upon full pay.
His Majesty raised many objections, and stated his inability to
comply with his request; upon which the corpulent officer
exclaimed, embracing with his arms as far as he could, his
enormous paunch, "My God! your Majesty, how can you
imagine that I can fill this big belly of mine with only my
half-pay?" This argumentum ad ventrem so tickled King
William, that he was put on full pay unattached, and has con-
tinued so ever since. The first instance I ever heard of a man
successfully pleading as ladies do at the Old Bailey.
It is hard for a wanderer from childhood like me, to find
out anything new or interesting. I have travelled too much
and have seen too much—I seldom now admire. I draw com-
parisons, and the comparison drawn between the object before
my eyes, and that in my mind's eye, is unfortunately usually
in favour of the latter. He who hath visited so many climes,
mingled with so many nations, attempted so many languages,
and who has hardly anything left but the North Pole or the
crater of Vesuvius to choose between; if he still longs for
something new, may well cavil at the pleasures of memory as
a mere song. In proportion as the memory is retentive, so
is decreased one of the greatest charms of existence—novelty.
To him who hath seen much, there is little left but com-
parison, and are not comparisons universally odious? Not
that I complain, for I have a resource—I can fly to imagina-
tion—quit this every-day world, and in the region of fiction
create new scenes and changes, and people these with new
beings.
Moreover, there is still endless variety, endless amusement,
and food for study and contemplation, in our own species. In
all countries still the same, yet ever varying,
"The proper study of mankind is man."
From which, I presume, we are to infer that it is time thrown
away to study woman.
At the same party in which the conversation was raised
relative to diplomacy, a person with whom I was, until that 
<page 43>
28
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
day, wholly unacquainted, was sitting by me, and as it hap-
pened, the name of one with whom I had long been on terms
of intimacy was mentioned. "Do you know him?" said my
neighbour, with a very peculiar expression. I replied that I
had occasionally met him, for I thought there was something
coming forward.
"Well, all I can say is, that he is rather a strange person."
"Indeed!" replied I; "how do you mean?"
"Why, they say, that he is of a very uncertain temper."
"Indeed!" continued I, with the same look of inquiry, as
if demanding more information.
"Yes, yes, rather a dangerous man."
"Do you know him?" inquired I, in return.
"Yes; that is to say—not very intimately—the fact is,
that I have avoided it. I grant that he is a very clever man—but I hear that he quarrels with everybody."
"Who told you so?" replied I.
Oh! he was not authorised to give the name of the person.
"Then," replied I, "allow me to say that you have been
misinformed. I have been on intimate terms with that person
for nearly twenty years, during which he never quarrelled with
me or any one that I know of; although, I grant, he is not
over civil to those whom he may despise. The only part of
your communication which is correct is, that he is a very
clever man, and our government are of the same opinion."
My neighbour was discomfited, and said no more, and I
joined the general conversation. What may have been his
cause of dislike I know not—but I have frequently remarked,
that if a man has made himself enemies either from neglect of
that sophistry and humbug, so necessary to enable him to roll
down the stream of time with his fellows without attrition, if
they can find no point in his character to assail, their last
resort is, to assert that he is an uncertain tempered man,
and not to be trusted.
This is the last, and although not the most empoisoned, still
the surest shaft in the whole quiver of calumny. It does not
exactly injure the character, but it induces others to avoid the
acquaintance of the party so misrepresented.
It is rather singular, and perhaps I may have been fortunate,
but in more than half-a-dozen instances I have found the very
parties to whom this character has been given, although high-

<page 44>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
29
minded and high-spirited, the very antithesis to the character
which has been assigned them. That some do deserve the
character is undoubted—but there is no species of calumny to
be received with such peculiar caution. It may be right to be
on your guard, but it never should be the ground for a positive
avoidance of the party accused. Indeed, in some degree, it
argues in his favour, for it is clear that the whole charge they
can bring against his character is an infirmity to which we
are all more or less subjected; and he who looks for perfection
in his acquaintance or his friends, will inevitably meet with
disappointment.
CHAPTER VIII.
Brussels.
I have lost all my memoranda! I cannot find them anywhere. Well—children are a great blessing when they are
kept in the nursery—but they certainly do interfere a little
with a papa who has the misfortune to be an author. I little
thought, when my youngest girl brought me up a whole string
of paper dolls, hanging together by the arms, that they had
been cut off my memoranda. But so it was; and when I had
satisfactorily established the fact, and insisted upon an inquisi-
tion to recover my invaluables, I found that they had had an
auto-da-fe, and that the whole string of dolls, which contained
on their petticoats my whole string of bewitching ideas, had
been burnt like so many witches. But as the man said in the
packet—" Is that all?" Oh, no!—they come rushing in like
a torrent, bounding, skipping, laughing, and screaming, till I
fancied myself like another Orpheus, about to be torn to pieces
by Bacchanals (they are all girls), and I laid down my pen,
for they drive all my ideas out of my head. May your
shadows never grow less, mes enfans, but I wish you would
not make such a cursed row.
The author and the author of existence do not amalgamate.
That's a fact.
Their joyous countenances are answered by a look of
despair—their boiling-water heat drives my thermometer
down to zero—their confounded merriment gives me a con-
founded headache—their animal spirits drive me to vegetable 
<page 45>
30
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
spirits—their cup of bliss running over makes me also require
a bumper—brandy restores the equilibrium, and I contrive to
get rid of them and my headache about one and the same
time.
Talking about brandy—one morning at two o'clock, about
the witching time that ghosts do glide about in churchyards,
as I was thinking whether it would not be better to go to bed
instead of writing nonsense, in which opinion most of my
readers may coincide with me, in stalked three young men who
were considerably the worse for potation. There is a great
deal of character in inebriety—at the same time that no esti-
mate of character can be made from its effects; for we often
find the most quiet men when sober to be the most choleric in
their cups—but still there is character, and much that is
curious in witnessing its variety of effects. Now these young
men were each drunk in a very different way—the first, in a
way quite novel; for although he could preserve his equili-
brium, and stare immensely, he had lost the power of speech;
you saw his lips move, but no articulation or sound succeeded
— the second was laughing drunk; everything that was said,
either by himself or by any one else, was magnified into a pun
or a bon mot—the third, with whom I had no previous
acquaintance, was politely drunk. I presume the idea of
intruding himself upon a stranger, at such an unseasonable
hour, had produced that effect—but let me describe the
scene.
"Ha, ha, ha! we come to you—ha, ha! capital. We want
some brandy and water; and, ha, ha! we know you always
keep a stock," said the second, seating himself in an arm-
chair.
The first also took a chair, moved his lips for a few seconds,
and then sat bolt upright, staring at the two candles; how
many he counted I cannot pretend to say.
"Really," said No. Three, "we are—I'm afraid—taking a
great liberty—a very great liberty; but—an apology is cer-
tainly due—if you will allow me to offer an apology for my
two friends—will you allow me to introduce them?"
"Many thanks, but I have the pleasure of knowing them
already."
"I really beg your pardon—it was quite unintentional on
my part. I trust you are not offended? Will you allow me 
<page 46>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
31
to introduce myself? I am Captain C—, of the . Will
you permit me to present my card, and to say how happy I
shall be to make your acquaintance?" So saying, the third
gentleman presented me with his card, and returned the card-case into his pocket.
"Capital!" cried No. Two. "Ha, ha, ha! what an excel-
lent joke, ha, ha, ha! Now for the brandy-and-water."
This was soon produced, and although No. One had lost all
articulation, he had still the power of deglutition; he filled his
glass, sat up more erect, stared at the candles, and drank his
grog; the other did the same, when No. Three again spoke.
"My dear Sir, I hope you will excuse the liberty, but my
name is Captain C—, of the . Will you allow me the
honour of presenting my card, and of saying how proud I
shall be to make your acquaintance?" So saying, he pre-
sented me another card, which I put aside with the first.
"Ha, ha, ha! what a good joke, to find you up. I said
we should get brandy-and-water here; wasn't that capital ?—
ha, ha, ha, ha!"
I could not exactly see the joke of being kept up for perhaps
two more hours, but I begged they would refill their glasses,
as the sitting would be sooner ended one way or the other—
either by the bottle being empty, or their falling under the
table—I did not care which—when I was again addressed by
No. Three.
"I really beg your pardon, but—I'm afraid I have been
very remiss—will you allow me to introduce myself? I am
Captain C—, of the . Here is my card, and I cannot
say how happy I shall be if I may have the honour of your
acquaintance."
I bowed a third time, and received a third card.
"By heavens, I've finished my tumbler! Ain't that capi-
tal? Ha, ha, ha! famous fun;—and so has Alfred."
"Famous fun, indeed," thought I, as the contents of the
bottle disappeared.
"And Alfred is going to help himself again; well, that is
capital, ha, ha, ha! —ha, ha, ha!—ha, ha, ha, ha 1"
Alfred, who was No. One, moved his lips, but like the
frozen horn of Munchausen, sounds would not come out; he
did, however, follow up the joke, by refilling his tumbler for
the third time.

<page 47>
DIAEY ON THE CONTINENT.
"Upon my honour, I've been very rude, I ought to apolo-
gize," said No. Three, again drawing out his card-case; "but
will you allow me to offer my card? I am Captain C—,
of the , and I shall be most happy to make your ac-
quaintance."
I bowed again, and received the fourth card.
Thus were the changes rung by numbers, one, two, and
three, until I was tired out, two bottles more drank out, and I
had received fifteen cards from my very polite friend, whom I
had never seen before.
At four o'clock they all rose to depart.
"Upon my soul, I do believe I'm drunk," said No. Two;
"capital joke—ha, ha, ha!"
No. One continued dumb, brandy had not thawed him; but
he stared very hard at me, as much as to say, I would speak
if I could.
No. Three put into my hand the sixteenth card, and made a
rash attempt at a bow.
Having seen them fairly outside my door, I bolted it, saying
with Shakspeare—
"0! that a man
Should put an enemy in his mouth
To steal away his brains 1"
I have been this morning to visit an establishment founded
by two brothers, of the name of Van der Maelen. It compre-
hends natural history, botany, geography, and statistics, and
they have, moreover, a lithographic press for maps and plates.
It is a very curious, and very spirited undertaking. As yet,
the whole has been effected by their own means, which are
extensive, and without any assistance from government. How
few people in this world employ their money so usefully!
This establishment is but yet in its infancy, and the collec-
tions are not very valuable, although rapidly increasing, from
the interest felt by every one in its welfare.
Of all collections of natural history, the fossil department is,
to me, the most interesting; there is room for speculation and
reflection, till the mind is lost in its own wanderings, which I
consider one of the greatest delights of existence. We are
indebted to the vast, comprehensive mind, and indefatigable
labour of Cuvier, for the gleams of light which have lately

<page 48>
DIA11Y ON THE CONTINENT.
33
burst upon us, and which have rendered what was before mere
speculative supposition now a source of interesting and anxious
investigation, attended with results that are as satisfactory as
they are undeniable.
That there was a period when the surface of the earth was
almost entirely covered with water—a state between chaos
and order, when man was not yet created (for that then the
world had not yet been rendered by the Almighty a fit recep-
tacle for man), appears to be undoubted. Yet the principle of
life had been thrown forth by the Almighty hand, and mon-
sters had been endowed with vitality, and with attributes
necessary for their existence upon an intermediate world.
These were the many varieties of the Ichthyosauri and the
Plesiosauri, of whose remains we have now such abundant
specimens—all animals of the lizard species; some supposed
to have been supplied with wings, like the flying fish of the
present day.
But imagine an animal of the lizard species, one hundred
and twenty feet long—imagine such a monster—the existence
of which is now proved beyond a cavil, by the remains, deeply
imbedded in the hard blue lias rocks, and which remains are
now in our possession. What a terrific monster it must have
been! We look with horror at an alligator of twenty or
thirty feet, but imagine an animal of that species extending his
huge bulk to one hundred and twenty feet. Were they all
destroyed when the waters were separated from the land, or
did they gradually become extinct when the earth was no
longer a suitable habitation for them, and no longer congenial
to those properties with which they had been endowed when
ordered into existence by the Almighty power i The de-
scription of the Behemoth, by Job, has long been a puzzle to
the learned; we have no animal of the present time which will
answer to it, but in many points, this description will answer
to what may be supposed would be the appearance, the mus-
cular power, and the habits of this huge denizen of a former
world.
"His force is in the navel of his belly
He moveth his tail like a cedar.
His bones are as strong pieces of brass.
His bones are like bars of iron. He lieth under the shady trees in the covert of the reeds and fens.
D

<page 49>
34
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
The shady trees cover him with their shadow.
The willows of the brook compass him about."
It may be a matter of deep surmise, whether all animals
were created as we now find them, that is, whether the first
creation was final—or how far the unerring hand has permitted
a change to take place in the forms and properties of animals,
so as to adapt them to their peculiar situations. I would say,
whether the Almighty may not have allowed the principle of
vitality and life to assume, at various epochs, the form and
attributes most congenial to the situation, either by new
formation or by change.
May not the monster of former worlds have dwindled down
to the alligator of this—the leviathan to the whale? Let us
examine whether we have any proofs in existing creation to
support this supposition. We all know that the hair of the
goat and sheep in the torrid zones will be changed into wool
when they are taken to the colder climes, and that the reverse
will also take place—we know that the hare and weazel tribes,
whose security is increased from their colour so nearly ap-
proaching to that of the earth in temperate latitudes, have the
same protection afforded to them when they are found in the
regions of snow, by their changing to white—and we know
that the rete mucosum of the African enables him to bear the
exposure to a tropical sun, which would destroy an European.
But this is not sufficient, we must examine further. Sir
Humphry Davy has given us a very interesting account of a
small animal found in the pools of water in the caves in
Carniola; this animal is called the Proteus Anguinua or Syren;
it is a species of eel with two feet—a variety only to be found
in these caves—it lives in darkness, and exposure to the light
destroys it. Now, here is an animal which we must either
suppose to have been created at the universal creation—and
that is to suppose that these caves and pools of water have
also existed from the time of the creation—or that the principle
of vitality has been permitted, at a later date, to take that
form and those attributes congenial to its situation: it is a
curious problem. Again, it is well known that in the continent
of New Holland there are animals who have a property pecu-
liar to that continent alone—that of a pouch or false stomach,
to contain their young after their birth; it has been surmised
that at one time the major part of that continent was under

<page 50>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
-35
Water, and that this pouch was supplied to them for the safety
of their young; nor is this conjecture without strong grounds;
if only the kangaroo and opossum tribes, which are animals
peculiarly indigenous to that continent, were supplied with
this peculiar formation, the conjecture would fall to the ground,
as it might fairly be said that this property was only another
proof of the endless variety in creation; but the most remark-
able fact is, that not only the kangaroo and opossum, animals
indigenous and peculiar to that portion of the globe, but that
every variety of squirrel, rat, and mouse, which in every other
respect are of the same species as those found in the other
continents, are all of them provided with this peculiar false
pouch to contain their young. Why, therefore, should all
these have been supplied with it, if not for a cause? And the
question now arises, whether at the first creation they had
that pouch, or were permitted so far to change their formation,
when the pouch became necessary for the preservation and
continuation of these species? That these changes are the
changes of centuries, I grant, and therefore are not likely to be
observed by man, whose records or whose knowledge are not
permitted to be handed down beyond a certain extent. Know-
ledge is not happiness; and when the accumulation has arrived
to that height so as to render it dangerous, it is swept away
by the all-wise and benevolent Creator, and we are permitted
to begin again de novo. After all, what we term posterity is
but a drop of water in the ocean of Time.
CHAPTER IX.
Brussels.
There are few people in Brussels, indeed in Belgium, who
do not complain of the revolution; all that goes wrong is at
once ascribed to this cause—indeed I was rather staggered by
one gentleman, at Ghent, telling me very gravely that they
had had no fat oxen since the revolution; but this he explained
by stating that the oxen were fattened from the refuse of
several manufactories, all of which had been broken up, the
proprietors having quitted for Holland. The revolution has
certainly been, up to the present time, injurious to both 
<page 51>
36
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
countries, but it is easy to foretell that eventually Belgium will
flourish, and Holland, in all probability, be the sufferer. The
expenses of the latter even now are greater than her revenue,
and when the railroads of Belgium have been completed, as
proposed, to Vienna, the revenue of Holland will be propor-
tionably decreased from her loss of the carrying trade. It
may be urged that Holland can also have her railroads—but
she cannot: so large a proportion of her population find their
support at present on the canals, that a railroad would be
productive of the most injurious effects. It is true that she can lower her rates of carriage, but the merchant will save ten
days of transport by the railroads, and this rapidity of commu-
nication will always obtain the preference.
But whatever may be the future prospects of Belgium, it is
certain that, from the heavy expenses attending the support of
so large an army, the retirement into Holland of most of the
influential and wealthy commercial men, and the defection of
almost all the nobility, at present she is suffering. Brussels,
her capital, has perhaps been most injured, and is no longer
the gay and lively town which it was under the dynasty of
King William of Nassau. When the two countries were
united, it was the custom of the Dutch court to divide the year
between Brussels and the Hague; and as there was not only
the establishment of the King, but also those of Princes William
and Frederick (in fact three courts), as well as all the nobility
of Holland and Belgium, there was an overflow of wealth, of
company, and of amusement, which rendered Brussels one of
the most delightful winter residences on the Continent: but
this has now all passed away. The court of Leopold, in
consequence of the radical party having the entire sway, is but
a shadow, as nearly all the Belgian nobility have retired from
it. The few who reside in town will not visit at the palace,
and live in seclusion, receiving no company, and spending no
money; the majority, however, have either removed from
Brussels to their country seats, or have left the kingdom to
spend their revenue amongst foreigners.
At present there are but few English here, it being no
longer the scene of gaiety, and there are other reasons which
gradually decrease the number. The fact is, that Brussels is
not a very cheap residence. The duties on everything are
now enormous, and the shop-keepers prey upon the English 
<page 52>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
37
as much as they can, having avowedly two prices, one for
them and the other for the Belgians. There are very few
amusements, and the people, since the revolution, are rude and
bearish, imagining that by incivility they prove their liberty
and independence. The other towns of Belgium are very dull
and very cheap—Brussels is very dull and very dear. In
another point, Brussels presents a contradiction to all the other
capitals of Europe, in which you generally find the most
polished manners, and the greatest beauty in the female sex,
concentrated. At Brussels it is directly the reverse—the men
are uncivil and the women plain: whereas in the Belgian
provinces you will meet with civility and respect, and at
Antwerp, Ostend, and most other provincial towns, fall in with
many fine countenances, reminding you of the Spanish blood
which has been for centuries mingled with that of the Low
Provinces.
Nevertheless there are many advantages in Brussels: the
communication with England is so rapid, and its situation so
central, that it may be considered as the point from which
travellers diverge on their various routes.
About the end of May the arrivals and departures from
Brussels are constant; this stream continues to pour through
the city for three months, after which, as the Belgians do not
mix with the foreign residents, the latter are left entirely to
their own resources for amusement. But the greatest objec-
tion to Brussels is, that the English have brought with them
the English feeling. I hardly know how else to term it, but it
certainly is a feeling peculiarly English, which has taken deep
rootwithin this last half century, and which has already produced
much evil, and may eventually be productive of more serious
results. I refer to the system of spending more money than
you can afford, to enable you to hold a certain position in the
scale of society.
For these last forty years, during which immense fortunes
have been made in England, there has been a continued struggle of wealth against rank. Parvenus, as the aristocracy
have been pleased to call them, have started up in every direc-
tion, vying with, and even eclipsing the nobility in lavish
expenditure—in some instances, driving the aristocracy to
spend more money than they could afford, and thereby impo-
verishing them; in others, forcing admittance into their circles. 
<page 53>
38
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
Wealth and public opinion have latterly gained the ascen-
dency, and the aristocracy are now more looked up to on
account of their large possessions than of their high birth.
Now this has been nothing more than a demand for greater
liberty and more extended rights on the part of the com-
moners of England, in proportion as they found themselves
a more important body in the state. It has not been a case
of Magna Charta, but it is still analogous; for they have
demanded that the barrier raised between them and the aristo-
cracy should be thrown down, as soon as they possessed all
the advantages, with the exception of that nominal rank, the
title too often conferred without discrimination on the one
hand or claims on the other.
As soon as a partial breach had been made in this barrier,
every one rushed for admittance, displaying wealth as their
ticket of admission, and the consequence has been, that wealth
has now become the passport into society; but another con-
sequence has also ensued, which is, that to obtain entrance,
almost everybody has been living and keeping up an appearance
which has not been warranted by their means. Many have
exceeded their incomes, and then sunk down into poverty;
others have, perhaps, only lived up to their incomes; but in
so doing, have disappointed those who, induced by the
appearance of so much wealth, have married into the family
and discovered that they have obtained wives with expensive
ideas, and no money. But there have been other reasons
which have induced some to live beyond their means—they
have done it in the pure spirit of gambling. In England,
credit, next to money, is of most value, and according to
their supposed wealth, so did the parties obtain credit; an
expenditure beyond their means was, therefore, with commercial
men, nothing more than a speculation, which very often suc-
ceeded, and eventually procured to the parties the means of
expenditure. It is well known that the income tax, in many
cases, was paid double; commercial men preferring to give in
their income at twice its real value, and pay the tax to that
amount, that they might be supposed to possess more than
they really had; indeed, as it was imagined that a man would
evade so heavy an impost as much as possible, he was generally
considered to be worth even more than what he himself had
stated. It is from these causes that has arisen what I have 
<page 54>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
called the English feeling, for display beyond the means, and
which has made our countrymen look down upon those who
cannot compete with them in expense. Let a married couple
be ever so well connected—let them have talent, and every
other advantage, it will avail them nothing, if they have not
money, sufficient at least to keep a carriage, and not shock
the mistress of a house by the sound of the rattling steps of
a hackney-coach at her door; besides which, in our commercial
country, the principle of barter, of quid pro quo, is extended
even to dinner and evening parties—and the reason is obvious—
when people live to the full extent, or even beyond their
incomes, a little management is required. A dinner-party is
so arranged, that the dinners received from others are returned
to them, and they cannot afford to ask a couple who cannot give
them a dinner in return, as they would fill up the places of others
to whom a dinner is due, and who, if not asked then, must be at
another time; and an extra dinner is an extra expense to be
avoided. The English therefore, who have only moderateincomes,
have the choice, either to live beyond their means, and leave their
children unprovided for, or of being shut out from that society,
to which every other is but the adventitious claim of wealth,
they are entitled. The consequence has been that since the
peace thousands and thousands have settled on the Continent,
that they may make more display with a small income, and
thousands more, with a much better feeling, to avoid expense,
and lay by a provision for their children. Of course all these
remarks are made with reservation, but with reservation, it
may be said, that in England we have, or soon shall have,
only two classes left, the extreme rich and the extreme poor,
for the intermediate classes are gradually retiring to the con-
tinent, emigrating to Canada and America, or sinking down
into the second class.
This is a most dangerous state of society, and, if carried to
the extreme, has always proved ruinous to the state. Although
the immense extent of the Roman empire may be asserted as
the ultimate cause of its downfall, still that downfall was most
certainly accelerated by the rottenness at the core, the system
of patrons and clients having thrown all the wealth into the
hands of a few. Are we not rapidly advancing to this state
in England? The landholders are almost at the mercy of the
fundholders, who, in fifty years' time, will probably have 
<page 55>
40
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
possession of the land as well as of the money. And should
there be no check put to this disintegration of society, then
must come what the radicals are now so anxious to obtain, the
equitable adjustment—and in that case it is a problem how far
that may not be really equitable, for society may, by degrees,
arrive to a state so anomalous as to warrant that the few
should be sacrificed for the benefit of the community at
large.
CHAPTER X.
Brussels, M ay22.
Among the lions of Brussels, a dog was pointed out to
me, as he lay on the pavement in front of the House of
Assembly. It was a miserable looking cur; but he had a
tale extra attached to him, which had magnified him into a
lion. It was said that he belonged to a Dutch soldier, who
was killed in the revolution, at the spot where the dog then
lay, and that ever since (a period of four years) the animal
had taken up his quarters there, and invariably lain upon that
spot. Whether my informant lied, and the dog did not, I
cannot pretend to say; but if the story be true, it was a most
remarkable specimen of fidelity and ugliness. And he was a
sensible dog, moreover; instead of dying of grief and hunger,
as some foolish dogs have done, he has always dedicated an
hour every evening to cater for his support, and then returns
to pass the night on the spot. I went up to him, and when
within two yards he thought proper to show his teeth, and
snarl most dog-matically; I may therefore, in addition to his
other qualities, state that he is an ill-natured dog. How far
the report was correct, I cannot vouch; but I watched him
three or four days, and always found him at his post; and
after such strict investigation, had I asserted ten years instead
of four, I have a prescriptive right, as a traveller, to be
believed.
It is singular that it is only in England that you can find
dogs, properly so called; abroad they have nothing but curs.
I do not know anything more puzzling than the genealogy of
the animals you meet with under the denomination of dogs in
most of the capitals of Europe. It would appear as if the 
<page 56>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
41
vice of promiscuous and unrestricted intercourse had been
copied from their masters; and I have been almost tempted to
take up the opinion, that you may judge of the morality of a
capital from the degeneracy of the dogs. I have often, at Paris,
attempted to make out a descent; but found it impossible.
Even the late Sir G. Naylor, with all the herald's office,
stimulated by double fees, could not manage to decipher
escutcheons obliterated by so many crosses.
I am very partial to dogs; and one of my amusements,
when travelling, is to watch their meetings with each other;
they appear to me to do everything but speak. Indeed, a
constant observer will distinguish in dogs many of the pas-
sions, virtues, and vices of men; and it is generally the case,
that those of the purest race have the nobler qualifications.
You will find in them devotion, courage, generosity, good
temper, sagacity, and forbearance; but these virtues, with
little alloy, are only to be found in the pure breeds. A cur
is quite a lottery: he is a most heterogeneous compound of
virtue and vice; and sometimes the amalgamation is truly
ludicrous. Notwithstanding which, a little scrutiny of his
countenance and his peculiar movements will soon enable you
to form a very fair estimate of his general character and dis-
position.
One of the most remarkable qualities in dogs is the fidelity
of their attachments; and the more so, as their attachments
are very often without any warrantable cause. For no reason
that can be assigned, they will take a partiality to people or
animals, which becomes a feeling so dominant, that their
existence appears to depend upon its not being interfered with.
I had an instance of this kind, and the parties are all living.
I put up, for an hour or two, at a livery stables in town, a pair
of young ponies. On my taking them out again, the phaeton
was followed by a large coach-dog, about two years old, a
fine grown animal, but not well marked, and in very poor
condition. He followed us into the country; but having my
establishment of dogs (taxes taken into consideration), I
ordered him to be shut out. He would not leave the iron
gates; and when they were opened, in he bolted, and hastening
to the stables, found out the ponies, and was not to be dis-
lodged from under the manger without a determined resist-
ance. This alternate bolting in and bolting out continued 
<page 57>
42
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
for many days; finding that I could not get rid of him, I
sent him away forty miles in the country; but he returned the
next day, expressing the most extravagant joy at the sight of
the ponies, who, strange to say, were equally pleased, allowing
him to put his paws upon them, and bark in their faces. But
although the ponies were partial to the dog, I was not; and
aware that a voyage is a great specific for curing improper
attachments, I sent the dog down the river in a barge, re-
questing the men to land him where they were bound, on the
other side of the Medway; but in three days the dog again
made his appearance, the picture of famine and misery. Even
the coachman's heart was melted, and the rights and privileges of
his favourite snow-white terrier were forgotten. It was therefore
agreed, in a cabinet council held in the harness room, that we
must make the best of it; and, as the dog would not leave the
ponies, the best thing we could do, was to put a little flesh on
his bones, and make him look respectable. We therefore
victualled him that day, and put him on our books with the
purser's name of Pompey. Now this dog proved, that sudden
as was his attachment to the ponies, it was of the strongest
quality. He never would and never has since left these
animals. If turned out in the fields, he remains out with
them, night as well as day, taking up his station as near as
possible half way between the two, and only coming home to
get his dinner. No stranger can enter their stables with im-
punity; for he is very powerful, and on such occasions very
savage. A year or two after his domiciliation, I sold the
ponies, and the parties who purchased were equally anxious at
first to get rid of the dog; but their attempts, like mine, were
unavailing, and, like me, they at last became reconciled to
him. On my return from abroad, I re-purchased them, and
Pompey of course was included in the purchase.
We are none of us perfect—and Pompey had one vice; but
the cause of the vice almost changed it into a virtue. He had
not a correct feeling relative to meum and tuum, but still he
did not altogether steal for himself, but for his friends as well.
Many have witnessed the fact of the dog stealing a loaf, or
part of one, taking it into the stables, and dividing it into
three portions, one for each pony, and the other for himself.
I recollect his once walking off with a round of beef, weighing
seventeen or eighteen pounds, and taking it to the ponies in 
<page 58>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
the field—they smelt at it, but declined joining him in his
repast. By-the-bye, to prove that lost things will turn up
some day or another, there was a silver skewer in the beef,
which was not recovered until two years afterwards, when it
was turned up by the second ploughing. One day, as the
ponies were in the field where I was watching some men at
work, I heard them narrating to a stranger the wonderful feats
of this dog, for I have related but a small portion. The dog
was lying by the ponies as usual, when the servants' dinner-
bell rang, and off went Pompey immediately at a hard gallop
to the house to get his food. "Well, dang it, but he is a
queer dog," observed the man, "for now he's running as fast
as he can, to answer the bell."
CHAPTER XI.
May 23. With all the faults of the Roman church, it certainly
appears to me that its professors extend towards those who
are in the bosom of their own church a greater share than
most other sects, of the true spirit of every religion—charity.
The people of the Low Countries are the most bigoted
Catholics at present existing, and in no one country is there so
much private as well as public charity. It is, however, to
private charity that I refer. In England there is certainly
much to be offered in extenuation, as charity is extorted by
law to the utmost farthing. The baneful effects of the former
poor laws have been to break the links which bound together
the upper and lower classes, produced by protection and good
will in the former, and in the latter, by respect and gratitude.
Charity by act of parliament has dissolved the social compact—the rich man grumbles when he pays down the forced con-
tribution—while the poor man walks into the vestry with an
insolent demeanour, and claims relief, not as a favour, but as
a right. The poor laws have in themselves the essence of
revolution, for if you once establish the right of the poor
man to any portion of the property of the rich, you admit a
precedent so far dangerous, that the poor may eventually
decide for themselves what portion it may be that they may 
<page 59>
44
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
be pleased to take; and this becomes the more dangerous, as
it must be remembered, that the effect of the poor laws is
repulsion between the two classes, from the one giving un-
willingly, and the other receiving unthankfully. How the
new Poor Law Bill will work remains to be proved; but this
is certain, that much individual suffering must take place,
before it works out the great end which it is intended to
obtain. . ,
That the Roman Catholic laity are more charitable is not
a matter of surprise, as they are not subjected to forced con-
tributions: but it appears to me that the Catholic clergy are
much more careful and kind to their flocks than our own.
How, indeed, can it be otherwise, when even now, although
so much reform in the Church has been effected, so many of
our clergymen are pluralists and non-residents, expending the
major part of the church revenue out of the parish, leaving to
the curate, who performs the duty, a stipend which renders it
impossible for him to exercise that part of his Christian duty
to any extent ?—for charity begins at home, and his means will
not allow him to proceed much farther. That serious evils
have arisen from the celibacy of the Roman clergy is true, for
priests are but men, and are liable to temptation; but it is
equally certain that when a Roman Catholic clergyman is a
pure and pious man, he has nothing to distract his attention
from the purposes of his high calling; and not only his
whole attention is devoted to his flock, but his existence, if
necessary, is voluntarily endangered. At the period of the
cholera, there were many remarkable instances of this devotion
to death on the part of the Roman priesthood, and as many,
I am forced to say, of the Protestant clergy flying from the
epidemic, and leaving their flocks without a shepherd. And
why so? because the Protestant clergymen had wives and
families depending upon them for support, and whose means
of existence would terminate with their own lives. It was
very natural that they should prefer the welfare of their own
families to that of their parishioners. But in other cases not
so extreme, the encumbrance of a family to a clergyman in
England is very often in opposition to his duty. To eke out
a scanty remuneration, he sets up a school or takes in pupils.
Now if the duties of a clergyman consisted in merely reading
the services on a Sunday, and christening, burying, and 
<page 60>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT. 45
marrying, he might well do so; but the real duties of a clergy-
man are much more important. His duty is to watch over
the lives and conduct of his parishioners, to exhort, persuade,
and threaten, if necessary; to be ever among his flock, watch-
ing them as a shepherd does his sheep. And how can he
possibly do this, if he takes charge of pupils ?—he must either
neglect his pupils or neglect his parish. He cannot do justice
to both. As St. Paul says to the bishops, "Although it is
better to marry than burn, still it is better to be even as I
am," unencumbered with wife and family, and with no ties
to distract my attention from my sacred and important
calling.
But the public charitable institutions abroad are much better
conducted than those of England, where almost everything of
the kind is made a job, and a source of patronage for pretend-
ing pious people, who work their way into these establishments
for their own advantage. It is incredible the number of poor
people who are effectually relieved on the Continent in the
course of the year, at an expense which would not meet the
weekly disbursements of a large parish in England. But
then, how much more judicious is the system! I know for
a fact, that in the county where I reside, and in which the
hard-working labourer, earning his twelve shillings a week, is
quite satisfied if he can find sufficient bread for his family, (not
tasting meat, perhaps, ten times during the whole year,) that
those who were idlers, supported by charity, were supplied
with meat three or four times a week; nay, even the
felons and prisoners in the county gaol were better fed than
was the industrious working man. And this is what in
England is called charity. It is base injustice to the meri-
torious. But many of the charitable institutions in England,
from mal-administration, and pseudo-philanthropy, have be-
come very little better than establishments holding out pre-
miums for idleness and hypocrisy.
Among the institutions founded by Roman Catholics and
particularly deserving of imitation, that of the Sceurs de la
Charite appears to be the most valuable. It is an institution
which, like mercy, is twice blessed—it blesses those who give,
and those who receive. Those who give, because many hun-
dreds of females, who would otherwise be thrown upon the
world, thus find an asylum, and become useful and valuable 
<page 61>
46
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
members to society. They take no vows—they only conform to
the rules of the sisterhood during the time that they remain in
it, and if they have an opportunity, by marriage or otherwise,
of establishing themselves, they are at free liberty to depart.
How many young women, now forced into a wretched, wicked
life, would gladly incorporate themselves into such a society in
England; how many, if such a society existed, would be pre-
vented from falling into error!
It is well known, that to support a large community, the
expenses are trifling compared to what they are when you
have the same number of isolated individuals to provide for.
A company of two or three hundred of these sisters living
together, performing among themselves the various household
duties, washing, &c., and merely requiring their food, would
not incur the same expense in house rent, firing, and provi-
sions, as thirty or forty isolated individuals. Soldiers in
barracks are even well fed, housed, and clothed, at a much
less expense than it costs the solitary labourer to eat his dry
bread in his own cottage; and the expenses of such commu-
nities, if once established, would very soon be paid by their
receipts.
It would be a double charity, charity to those who would
willingly embrace the life, and charity to those who might
require their assistance. It is well known how difficult it is
to obtain a sick nurse in London. It is an avocation seldom
embraced by people, until they are advanced in years, and all
feeling has been dried up by suffering or disappointment.
Those who undertake the task are only actuated by gain, and
you can expect but eye-service. Not being very numerous,
and constantly in demand, they are overworked, and require
stimulants in their long watchings. In fact, they drink and
dose—dose and drink again.
But how different would it be if the establishments, which
I have referred to, were formed! Those who are wealthy
would send for one of the sisters when required, and if the
illness were tedious, her services could be replaced by another,
so that over-fatigue might not destroy watchfulness and
attention to the patient. You would at once feel that you had
those in your house in whom you could confide. If your
means enabled you, you would send a sum to the funds of
the charity in return for the service performed, and your 
<page 62>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
47
liberality would enable them to succour those who could only
repay by blessings. A very small subscription would set
afloat such a charity, as the funds would so rapidly come in;
and if under the surveillance of the medical men who attended
the hospitals, it would soon become effective and valuable.
I trust if this should meet the eye of any real philanthropist
who has time to give, which is more valuable than money,
that he will turn it over in his mind :—the founder would be a
benefactor to his country.
CHAPTER XII.
May 25.
"A man cannot die more than once," is an old apothegm,
and it would appear bold to dispute it; but still there are lives
within lives, such as political lives, literary lives, &c, and
there is also such a thing as being dead in the eye of the law;
so that it is evident that a man can die twice, that is, once
professionally or legally, and once naturally.
I presume, like all other scribblers, I must meet my literary
death, that is, when I have written myself down, or have
written myself out. I have no objection, for I am very weary
of my literary existence, although authors are not so in
general; on the contrary, they can perceive in themselves no
sign of decay when it is apparent to everybody around them.
Literary decay is analogous to the last stage of a consumption,
in which you believe you are not going to die, and plan for
the future as if you were in perfect health. And yet to this
complexion must all authors come at last. There is not a
more beautiful, or more true portrait of human nature, than
the scene between the Archbishop of Grenada and Gil Bias, in
the admirable novel of Le Sage. Often and often has it been
brought to my recollection since I have taken up the pen, and
often have I said to myself, "Is this homily as good as the
last?" (perhaps homily is not exactly the right term for
my writings.) The great art in this world, not only in
writing, but in everything else, is to know when to leave off.
The mind as well as the body must wear out. At first it is a
virgin soil, but we cannot renew its exhausted vigour after it 
<page 63>
48
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
has borne successive crops. We all know this, and yet we are
all archbishops of Grenada. Even the immortal Walter Scott
might have benefited by the honesty of Gil Bias, and have
burnt his latter homilies; but had he had such an unsophisti-
cated adviser, would he not, in all probability, have put him
out by the shoulders, wishing him, like the venerable hierarch,
"a little more taste and judgment."
Since I have been this time abroad, I have made a discovery
for which all prose writers ought to feel much indebted to me.
Poets can invoke Apollo, the Muses, the seasons, and all
sorts and varieties of gods and goddesses, naked or clothed,
besides virtues and vices, and if none of them suit, they may
make their own graven image, and fall down before it; but we
prose writers have hitherto had no such advantage, no pro-
tecting deity to appeal to in our trouble, as we bite our pens,
or to call upon to deliver us from a congestion of the brain.
Now being aware that there were upwards of three hundred
and fifty thousand canonised saints on the Roman calendar, I
resolved to run through the catalogue, to ascertain if there
was one who took prose authors under his protection, and to
my delight, I stumbled upon our man. By-the-bye, Tom
Moore must have known this, and he has behaved very ill in
keeping him all to himself. But I must introduce him. It is
the most holy, and the most blessed, Saint Brandon. Holy
Saint Brandon inspire me, and guide my pen while I record
thy legend! In the first place, let me observe that our patron
saint was an Irishman, and none the worse for that, as Ireland
has had as good saints as any in the calendar. And it is
now clear that he does protect us prosaic writers, by the
number of reporters and gentlemen of the press which have
been sent over from the sister kingdom. But to proceed.
Saint Brandon, it appears, was a reading man, and amused
himself with voyages and travels; but St. Brandon was an
unbeliever, and thought that travellers told strange things.
He took up the Zoology of Pliny, and pursued his accounts
of "Antres vast, and men whose heads do grow beneath
their shoulders." He read until his patience was exhausted,
and, in a fit of anger, he threw the manuscript into the
flames. Now this was a heavy sin, for a man's book is the
bantling of his brain, and, to say the least, it was a literary
infanticide. That very night an angel appeared to him, and 
<page 64>
DIAttT ON THE CONTINENT.
49
as a penance for his foul crime (in the enormity of which
every author will agree with the angel), he was enjoined to
make the book over again, no easy task in those days, when
manuscripts were rare, and the art of book-making had not
been invented. The sinner, in obedience to the heavenly
mission, goes to work; he charters a vessel, lays in provisions
for a seven years' voyage, and with a crew of seven monks,
he makes sail, and after going round the world seven times,
during which the world went round the sun seven times, he
completed his task in seven volumes folio, which he never
published, but carried his manuscript away with him to prove
that he had performed his penance. For this miraculous
voyage—and certainly with such a ship's company, it was a
miracle—he was canonised, and is now the patron saint of all
prose authors, particularly those whose works are measured by
the foot-rule.
And now that I have made known to my fraternity that we
also have a saint, all they have to do is to call upon him six or
seven times, when their brains are at sixes and sevens. I opine
that holy St. Brandon made a very hazard-o\is voyage, for it is
quite clear that, in the whole arrangement, it was—seven's the
main.
CHAPTER XIII.
En route, May 26.
Passed Waterloo—was informed that two days before the
Marquis of Anglesea had arrived there, and stayed a short
time to visit the cemetery of his leg; a regular family visit of
course, as all the members were present.
May 27. Slept at Namur. The French are certainly superior to us
in the art of rendering things agreeable. Now, even in the
furnishing of a common apartment, there is always something
to relieve the eye, if not to interest you. I recollect when I
was last in London, in furnished apartments, that as I lay
awake in the morning, my eye caught the pattern of the
paper. It was a shepherdess with her dog in repose, badly
executed, and repeated without variation over the whole 
<page 65>
50
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
apartment. Of course I had nothing to do but to calculate
how many shepherdesses and dogs there were in the room,
which, by counting the numbers in length and breadth,
squaring the results, and deducting for door and windows, was
soon accomplished. But how different was the effect produced
by the paper of the room in which I slept last night! It was
the history of Dunois, the celebrated bastard of France, who
prays in his youth that he may prove the bravest of the brave,
and be rewarded with the fairest of the fair. This was not the
true history, perhaps, of Dunois; but I am drawing the com-
parison between the associations and reminiscences conjured
up by this decoration in opposition to the dull and tasteless
recapitulation of the English manufacture. From the latter I
could not extract a bare idea, except that shepherdesses are,
as a race, extinct, and that Lord Althorp had taken the tax off
shepherds' dogs, by way of a bonus, to relieve a distressed
capital of some hundred millions, to which the agricultural
interest had very properly replied, "Thank you for nothing,
my Lord;" but from the sight of the French paper what a
host of recollections started up at the moment! The mind
flew back to history, and was revelling in all the romance of
chivalry, from King Arthur and his Knights, to the Field of
the Cloth of Gold.
"Yet, after all," thought I, at the end of a long reverie,
"divest chivalry, so called, of its imposing effect, examine
well into its nature and the manners of the times, and it must
be acknowledged that the modern warfare has a much
greater claim than the ancient to the title of chivalry. In
former times men were cased in armour of proof, and, before
the discovery of gunpowder, had little to fear in a m£Ue,
except from those who, like themselves, were equally well
armed and equally protected, and even then only from flesh
wounds, which were seldom mortal. The lower classes, who
served as common soldiers, were at the mercy of the mounted
spearsmen, and could seldom make any impression upon their
defences. In those days, as in the present, he who could
command most gold carried the day, for the gold procured the
steel harness, and a plump of spears brought into the field was
more than equal to a thousand common men. He who had
the best tempered armour was the most secure, and that was
to be only procured by gold. He who could mount and case 
<page 66>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
51
in iron the largest number of his followers was the most
powerful, and, generally speaking, the most lawless. Divest
chivalry of its splendour, which threw a halo round it, and it
was brutal, and almost cowardly. Single combats did certainly
prove courage; but even in them, skill, and more than skill,
personal strength, or the best horse, decided the victory. In
fact, although not the origin, it was the upholder of the feudal
system, in which might was right; and we may add, that the
invention of gunpowder, which placed every man upon a level,
if not the cause of, certainly much assisted to break up the
system. How much more of the true spirit of chivalry is
required in the warfare of the present day, in which every man
must stand for hours to be shot at like a target, witnessing
the mowing down of his comrades, and silently filling up the
intervals in the ranks made by their deaths, exposed to the
same leaden messengers; a system of warfare in which every individual is a part of a grand whole, acting upon one concerted
and extended plan, and forced a hundred times to exhibit the
passive and more perfect bravery of constancy, for once that
he may forget his danger in the ardour of the charge! When
shall we learn to call things by their right names?"
Liege, May 28. Our landlord is a most loyal man, but there is a reason for
it. Leopold took up his quarters at this hotel in his way to
Spa. In every room we have upon every article of fayence—
"Leopold, with the Genius of Belgium crowning him with
laurels, while Truth is looking on." Every plate, every dish,
is impressed with this proof print of loyalty. But this is not
all, as the man said in the packet, "Oh, no!" All the wash-
hand basins, jugs, and every other article required in a bedchamber, have the same loyal pattern at the bottom. Now it
appeared to me, when I went to bed, that loyalty might be
carried too far; and what may have been intended as respect,
may be the cause of his Majesty being treated with the
greatest disrespect; and not only his sacred Majesty, but the
glorious Belgian constitution also. As for poor Truth, she is
indeed said to sojourn at the bottom of a well; but in this
instance, it would, perhaps, be as well that she should not be
insulted—I am wrong, she always is, and always will be, e 2

<page 67>
52
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
insulted, when she appears in the purlieus of a court, or in the
presence of a king.
After all, mine is a strange sort of Diary. It is not a diary
of events, but of thoughts and reminiscences, which are thrown
up and caught as they float to the surface in the whirlpool of
my brain. No wonder!—events are but as gleanings com-
pared to the harvest of many years, although so negligently
gathered into store. I have been puzzling myself these last
two hours to find out what a man's brain is like. It is like a
kaleidoscope, thought I; it contains various ideas of peculiar
colours, and as you shift them round and past, you have a
new pattern every moment. But no, it was not like a
kaleidoscope, for the patterns of a kaleidoscope are regular,
and there is very little regularity in my brain, at all events.
It is like a pawnbroker's shop, thought I, full of heteroge-
neous pledges; and if you would take anything out, expe-
rience stands at the counter, and makes you pay her com-
pound interest, while many articles of value are lost for ever,
because memory cannot produce the duplicate.
And then I compared it to almost everything, but none
of my comparisons would hold good. After all, thought I, I
have been only playing at "What are my thoughts like?"
which is a childish game; and how can I possibly find out
what my brain is like, when my brain don't choose to tell?
So I rose, and opening the window, lighted my cigar, and
smoked myself into a reverie, as I watched the smoke ascend-
ing from the chimneys of the good town of Liege.
And this is the city which travellers pass through, describ-
ing it as a mere manufacturing town, thought I. A city
which has, in its time, produced a greater moral influence
upon society than any other in existence—a city that has led
the van in the cause of religion and liberty. Liege presents a
curious anomaly among the states of Europe. It is the only
town and province, with the exception of Rome, which has
been, for centuries, ruled by the clerical power. But be it
recollected, that at the very period that Christianity was offer-
ing up her martyrs at the blood-stained arena of the Coli-
seum, it was from Liege (or rather Tongres, for Liege was not
then built) that she was spreading wide her tenets, unperse-
cuted and unrestrained, for she was too far removed from 
<page 68>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
53
idolatry and imposture to be regarded. The province of
Liege was the cradle of the Christian faith. From the earliest
records there were bishops at Tongres; and it was about five
hundred years after Christ, that St. Monulphe, the reigning
bishop, founded the city of Liege. From that time until the
French Revolution, this town and these fertile provinces had
always remained under clerical authority.
Although these prince-bishops proved that, upon necessity,
they could change the crosier for the coat of mail, still, as by
endowments and benefactions they increased their revenues,
so did they, by the mildness of their sway, induce thousands
to settle in their territory; and to increase their population
(which was to increase their wealth), they first granted to
their citizens those privileges and liberties, which have, upon
their precedent, been obtained by force or prayers by others.
The very boast of the English of the present day, that every
man's house is his castle, was the sacred grant of one of the
bishops to the citizens at Liege, long before the feudal system
had been abolished in our island.
I may also observe, for it is to be gained from the chronicles
of this province, that the time at which it may be said that the
primitive Christian church first fell into error, appears to have
been about one thousand years after the death of our Saviour.
And as I thought of all this, and a great deal more, and
smoked my cigar, I felt a great deal of respect for the good old
city of Liege; and then I wandered back to the country I had
passed through the day before, excelling in all lovely scenery.
I had seen it before, but it was many years ago; and it may
be seen many times without the least degree of satiety. I do
not know any scenery which raises up such pleasurable sensa-
tions as that of the Valley of Meuse, taking it the whole way
from Namur to Liege, and from Liege to Spa. It is not so
magnificent as the Rhine, to which it bears a miniature resem-
blance. It is not of that description creating a strong excite-
ment, almost invariably succeeded by depression; but it is of
that unchanging and ever-pleasing, joyous description, that
you are delighted without being fatigued, and have stimulus
sufficient to keep you constantly in silent admiration without
demanding so much from the senses as to weary them. If I
could have divested myself from the knowledge that I was in
motion, and have fancied that the scene was moving past, I 
<page 69>
54
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
could have imagined myself seated at one of our large
theatres, watching one of Stanfield's splendid panoramas.
But the lighted end of my cigar at last approximated so near
to my nose, that I was burnt out of my reverie; I took the
last save-all whiffs, tried to hit an old woman's cap with the
end of it, as I tossed it into the street, and retreated to the
diurnal labour of shaving—of all human miseries, certainly,
the "unkindest cut of all"—especially when the maids have
borrowed your razor, during your absence, to pare down the
apex of their corns.
CHAPTER XIV.
Liege.
I have been reading the "Salmonia" of Sir Humphry
Davy': what a pity it is that he did not write more! there are
so many curious points started in it. I like that description
of book, which, after reading a while, you drop it on your
knee, and are led into a train of thought which may last an
hour, before you look for the page where you left off. There
are two cases argued in this work, which led me into a medi-
tation. The one is, a comparison between reason and instinct,
and the other, as to the degree of pain inflicted upon fish by
taking them with the hook. Now it appeared to me, in the
first question, what has been advanced is by no means conclu-
sive, and although it is the custom to offer a penny for your
thoughts, I shall give mine for nothing, which is perhaps as
much as they are worth, (I say that, to prevent others from
making the sarcastic remark), and in the second question, I
think I can assist the cause of the lovers of the gentle art of
angling—why gentle, I know not, unless it be that anglers
bait with gentles, and are mostly gentle-men.
But before I attempt to prove that angling is not a cruel
sport, I must first get rid of "reason and instinct." Of
reason most undoubtedly a philanthropist would reply, "Be it
so;" nevertheless, I will argue the point, and if I do not
succeed, I have only to hedge back upon Solomon, and in-
quire, "If man was born to misery as the sparks fly upwards,
why are not the inferior classes of creation to have their share
of it?"

<page 70>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
55
I do not think that any one can trace out the line of demar-
cation between reason and instinct. Instinct in many points in
wonderful, especially among insects, but where it is wonderful, it
is a blind obedience, and inherited from generation to generation.
We observe, as in the case of the bees, that they obey the
truest laws of mathematics, and from these laws they never
have deviated from their creation, and that all animals, as far
as their self-defence or their sustenance is concerned, show a
wonderful blind obedience to an unerring power, and a sa-
gacity almost superior to reason. But wonderful as this is,
it is still but instinct, as the progenitors of the race were
equally guided by it, and it is handed down without any
improvement, or any decay in its power. Now if it could be
asserted that the instinct of animals was only thus inherited from
race to race, and could "go no farther," the line of demarcation
between reason and instinct would at once be manifest, as
instinct would be blindly following certain fixed laws, while
reason would ever be assisted by memory and invention. But
we have not this boasted advantage on the side of reason, for
animals have both memory and invention, and, moreover,
if they have not speech, they have equal means of communi-
cating their ideas. That this memory and invention cannot
be so much exercised as our own, may be true, but it is
exercised to an extent equal to their wants, and they look no
further; that is to say, that if any want not prepared for, or
anything should take place interfering with their habits and
economy, instinct will enable them to meet the difficulty. There is nothing more wonderful than the application of
mechanical power by ants. No engineer could calculate with
greater nicety, and no set of men work together with such
combination of force. After they have made ineffectual at-
tempts to remove a heavy body, you will observe them to meet
together, consult among themselves, and commence an entire
new plan of operations. Bees, also, are always prepared
to meet any new difficulty. If the sphinx atropos, or death's
head moth, forces its way into the hive, the bees are well
known, after having killed it with their stings, to embalm the
dead body with wax—their reason for this is, that the body
was too large for them to remove through the passage by
which it entered, and they would avoid the unpleasant smell of the carcass. It may be argued, that instinct had always 
<page 71>
56
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
imparted to them this knowledge; but if so, they must have
had a fresh accession of instinct after they had been domiciled
with men: for it is well known that the hole in the tree, in
which the wild bees form their cells, is invariably too small to
admit any animal larger than themselves, and the bodies of
such sized animals they could remove with as much ease as
they do the bodies of their own dead.
I could cite a hundred instances, which would prove that
animals have invention independent of the instinct handed
down from generation to generation. I will, however, con-
tent myself with one instance of superior invention in the
elephant, which occurred at Ceylon. Parties were employed
felling timber in the forests of Candia, and this timber, after
having been squared, was dragged to the depot by a large
party of elephants, who, with their keepers, were sent there
for that purpose. This work was so tedious, that a large
truck was made, capable of receiving a very heavy load of
timber, which might be transported at once. This truck was
dragged out by the elephants, and it was to be loaded. I
should here observe, that when elephants work in a body,
there is always one who, as if by common consent, takes the
lead, and directs the others, who never refuse to obey him.
The keepers of the elephants, and the natives, gave their
orders, and the elephants obeyed; but the timber was so
large, and the truck so high on its wheels, that the elephants
could not put the timber in the truck according to the
directions given by the men. After several attempts, the
natives gave up the point, and retiring to the side of the road
as usual, squatted down, and held a consultation. In the
meantime, the elephant who took the lead summoned the
others, made them drag two of the squared pieces to the side
of the truck, laid them at right angles with it, lifting one end
of each on the truck, and leaving the other on the ground,
thus forming the inclined plane. The timber was then brought
by the elephants, without any interference on the part of the
keepers or natives, who remained looking on, was pushed by
the elephants with their foreheads up the inclined plane,
and the truck was loaded. Here then is an instance in which
the inventive instinct of the animal—if that term may be
used—was superior to the humbler reasoning powers of the
men who had charge of them.

<page 72>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
57
That animals have the powers of memory as well as man,
admits of no dispute. In elephants, horses, and dogs, we
have hourly instances of it: but it descends much lower down—the piping bullfinch, who has been taught to whistle two or
three waltzes in perfect concord, must have a good memory,
or he would soon forget his notes. To detail instances of
memory would therefore be superfluous; but, as it does
occur to me while I write, I must give an amusing instance
how the memory of a good thrashing overcame the ruling
passion of a monkey, which is gluttony, the first and only
instance that I ever saw it conquered.
I had on board a ship which I commanded, a very large
Cape baboon, who was a pet of mine, and also a little boy,
who was a son of mine. When the baboon sat down on his
hams, he was about as tall as the boy was when he walked.
The boy having tolerable appetite, received about noon a
considerable slice of bread and butter, to keep him quiet
till dinner-time. I was on one of the carronades, busy with
the sun's lower limb, bringing it in contact with the horizon,
when the boy's lower limbs brought him in contact with the
baboon, who having, as well as the boy, a strong predilection
for bread and butter, and a stronger arm to take it withal,
thought proper to help himself to that to which the boy had
been already helped. In short, he snatched the bread and
butter, and made short work of it, for it was in his pouch
in a moment. Upon which the boy set up a yell, which
attracted my notice to this violation of the articles of war,
to which the baboon was equally amenable as any other
person in the ship; for it is expressly stated in the preamble
of every separate article, "All who are in, or belonging
to." Whereupon I jumped off the carronade, and by
way of assisting his digestion, I served out to the baboon
monkey's allowance, which is, more kicks than halfpence.
The master reported that the heavens intimated that it
was twelve o'clock; and with all the humility of a captain
of a man-of-war, I ordered him to "make it so;" whereupon
it was made, and so passed that day. I do not remember
how many days it was afterwards that I was on the carronade
as usual, about the same time, and all parties were precisely
in the same situations,—the master by my side, the baboon
under the booms, and the boy walking out of the cabin with
his bread and butter. As before, he again passed the baboon, 
<page 73>
58
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
who again snatched the bread and butter from the boy,
who again set up a squall, which again attracted my attention.
I looked round, and the baboon caught my eye, which told
him plainly that he'd soon catch what was not "at all my
eye;" and he proved that he actually thought so, for he
actually put the bread and butter back into the boy's hands.
It was the only instance of which I ever knew or heard of a
monkey being capable of self-denial when his stomach was
concerned, and I record it accordingly. (Par parenthese:) it
is well known that monkeys will take the small-pox, measles,
and I believe the scarlet fever; but this poor fellow, when the
ship's company were dying of the cholera, took that disease,
went through all its gradations, and died apparently in great
agony.
As, then, invention and memory are both common to instinct
as well as to reason, where is the line of demarcation to be
drawn; especially as in the case of the elephants I have men-
tioned, superior instinct will invent when inferior reason is at
fault? It would appear, if the two qualities must be associated,
that, at all events, there are two varieties of instinct: blind
instinct, which is superior to reason, so far that it never errs,
as it is God who guides; and inventive instinct, which enables
the superior animals to provide for unexpected difficulties, or
to meet those which memory has impressed upon them. But
if we examine ourselves, the difficulty becomes even greater—
we have decidedly two separate qualities. We are instinctive
as well as reasonable beings; and what is inventive instinct but
a species of reason, if not reason itself?
But although I say that it is hardly possible to draw the
line of demarcation, I do not mean to say that they are one
and the same thing; for instinct and reason, if we are to judge
by ourselves, are in direct opposition. Self-preservation is
instinctive; all the pleasures of sense, all that people are too
apt to consider as happiness in this world; I may say, all that
we are told is wrong, all that our reason tells us we are not to
indulge in, is instinct.
Such are the advantages of being reasonable beings in this
world; undoubtedly, we have a right to claim for ourselves,
and deny to the rest of the creation, the enjoyments of the
next. Byron says,
"Man being reasonable, must get drunk."

<page 74>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
That is to say, being reasonable, and finding his reason a
reason for being unhappy, he gets rid of his reason whenever
he can. So do the most intellectual animals. The elephant
and the monkey enjoy their bottle as much as we do. I
should have been more inclined to agree with Byron, if he had
said,
Man being reasonable, must go to the devil.
For what are poor reasonable creatures to do, when instinct
leads them to the "old gentleman ;" and reason, let her tug
as hard as she pleases, is not sufficiently powerful to overcome
the adverse force.
After all, I don't think that I have come to a very satisfactory conclusion. Like a puppy running round after his
own tail, I am just where I was when I set out; but, like the
puppy, I have been amused for the time. I only hope the
reader will have been so too.
And now, my brethren, I proceed to the second part of my
discourse, which is, to defend anglers and fly-fishers from the
charge of cruelty.
It is very true that Shakspeare says, "The poor beetle that
we tread on, in mortal sufferance, feels a pang as great as
when a giant dies ;" and it is equally true that it is as false as
it is poetical.
There is a scale throughout nature, and that scale has been
divided by unerring justice. Man is at the summit of this
scale, being more fearfully and wonderfully made, more
perfect than any other of the creation, more perfect in his
form, more perfect in his intellect; he is finer strung in his
nerves, acuter in his sympathies; he has more susceptibility
to pleasure, more susceptibility to pain. He has pleasures
denied to, and he has pains not shared with him by, the rest
of the creation. He enjoys most, and he suffers most. From
man, the scale of creation descends, and in its descent, as
animals are less and less perfect, so is meted out equal but
smaller proportions of pleasure and pain, until we arrive to the
Mollusca and Zoophyte, beings existing certainly, but existing
without pleasure and without pain—existing only to fill up the
endless variety, and add the links to the chain of nature ne-
cessary to render it complete. The question which naturally
will be put is, "How do you know this ? it is assertion but not 
<page 75>
60
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
proof." But arguments are always commenced in this way.
The assertion is the quid, the est demonstrandum always comes
afterwards. I handle my nose, flourish my handkerchief, and
proceed.
Man is the most perfect of creation. What part of his
body, if separated from the rest, can he renew? No part,
except the hair and the nail. Reproduction can go no further.
With the higher classes of animals, also, there is no repro-
duction: but even at this slight descent upon the scale, we
may already point out a great difference. Although there is
no reproduction, still there are decided proofs of inferiority;
for instance, a hare or rabbit caught in a trap, will struggle till
they escape, with the loss of a leg; a fox, which is carnivorous,
will do more; he will gnaw off his own leg to escape. Do
they die in consequence? no, they live and do well; but could
a man live under such circumstances? impossible. If you
don't believe me, gnaw your own leg off and try. And yet
the conformation of the Mammalia is not very dissimilar from
our own; but man is the more perfect creature, and therefore
has not the same resources.
I have hitherto referred only to the limbs of animals; I will
now go further. I had a beautiful little monkey on board my
ship. By accident it was crushed, and received such injury
that the backbone was divided at the loins, and the vertebra of
the upper part protruded an inch outside of its skin. Such an
accident in a man would have produced immediate death; but
the monkey did not die; its lower limbs were of course para-
lysed. The vertebra which protruded gradually rotted off, and
in six weeks the animal was crawling about the decks with its
fore feet. It was, however, such a pitiable object, that I
ordered it to be drowned. Now, if we descend lower down in
the scale until we come to the reptiles and insects, we shall find
not only that the loss of limbs is not attended with death, but
that the members are reproduced. Let anyone take a spider
by its legs, it will leave them in your hands that it may escape.
Confine the animal under a glass, and in a few weeks it will
have all its members perfect as before. Lizards are still more
peculiar in their reproduction. I was at Madeira for many
months, and often caught the lizards which played about the
walls and roofs of the out-houses ; and if ever I caught a lizard
by the tail, he would make a spring, and leave his tail in my 
<page 76>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
61
hand, which seemed to snap off as easily as would a small
carrot. Now the tail of the lizard is longer than its body, and
a continuation of the vertebrae of the back. I soon found out
that lizards did not die from this extensive loss, but, on the
contrary, that their tails grew again. Even the first week
afterwards, a little end began to show itself, and in about two
months the animal had reproduced the whole. What I am
about to say now will probably be considered by some as
incredible; they are, however, at full liberty to dsibelieve it.
One day I was looking out of the window with the late Tom
Sheridan, who lived in the same house, and we observed on
the roof of the out-house a lizard with two tails, but neither of
them full grown; and we argued that, at the time the animal
lost his tail, he must have suffered some division of the stump.
Being at that time a naturalist, i.e. very cruel, I immediately
caught a lizard, pulled off his tail, notched the vertebra, and
turned him loose again. Our conjectures were right; the
animal in two or three weeks had two tails growing out like
the one we had seen. I repeated this experiment several times,
and it always appeared to succeed; and all the two-tailed
lizards were called mine.
Now this power of reproduction increases as you descend
the scale; as an instance, take the polypus, which is as near as
possible at the bottom of it. If you cut a polypus into twenty
pieces, without any regard to division, in a short time you will
have twenty perfect polypi.
Now the deductions I would draw from these remarks are—
That the most perfect animals are least capable of repro-
duction, and most sensible of pain.
That as the scale of nature descends, animals become less
perfect, and more capable of reproduction.
Ergo—they cannot possibly feel the same pain as the more
perfect.
Now, with respect to fish, they are very inferior in the scale
of creation, being, with the exception of the cetaceous tribe,
which class with the Mammalia, all cold-blooded animals, and
much less perfect than reptiles or many insects. The nervous
system is the real seat of all pain; and the more perfect the
animal, the more complicated is that system: with cold-
blooded animals, the nervous organisation is next to nothing.
Most fish, if they disengage themselves from the hook, will 
<page 77>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
take the bait again; and if they do not, it is not on account of
the pain, but because their instinct tells them there is danger.
Moreover, it is very true, as Sir H. Davy observes, that fish
are not killed by the hook, but by the hooks closing their
mouths and producing suffocation. How, indeed, would it
otherwise be possible to land a salmon of thirty pounds weight,
in all its strength and vigour, with a piece of gut not thicker
than three or four hairs?
Upon the same grounds that I argue that fish feel very little
comparative pain, so do I that the worm, which is so low in
the scale of creation, does not suffer as supposed. Its writh-
ings and twistings on the hook are efforts to escape natural to
the form of the animal, and can be considered as little or
nothing more. At the same time I acknowledge and, indeed,
prove, by my own arguments, that it is very cruel to bob for
whale.
To suppose there are no gradations of feeling as well as of
perfection in the animal kingdom, would not only be arguing
against all analogy, but against the justice and mercy of the
Almighty, who does not allow a sparrow to fall to the earth
without his knowledge. He gave all living things for our use
and our sustenance; he gave us intellect to enable us to capture
them: to suppose, therefore, at the same time, that he endowed
them with so fine a nervous organization as to make them
undergo severe tortures previous to death, is supposing what is
contrary to that goodness and mercy which, as shown towards
us, we are ready to acknowledge and adore.
I cannot finish this subject without making a remark upon
creation and its perfectibility. All respectable animals, from
man down to a certain point in the scale, have their lice or
parasites to feed upon them. Some wit, to exemplify this
preying upon one another, wrote the following:—
"Great fleas have little fleas,
And less fleas to bite them,
These fleas have lesser fleas,
And so—ad infinitum."
This, however, is not strictly true. Parasites attach them-
selves only to the great. Upon those they can fatten. Having
your blood sucked, is therefore, a great proof of high heraldry
and perfectibility in the scale of creation. If animals were 
<page 78>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
03
endowed with speech and pride like man, we might imagine
one creature boasting to another, as a proof of his importance.
"And I, too, also have my louse!!"
CHAPTER XV.
Liege, May 30th. What strange meetings take place sometimes! I recollect
once, when I was sitting at a table d'hote, at Zurich, being
accosted by a lady next to me, and being accused of having
forgotten her. I looked with all my eyes, but could not dis-
cover that I had ever seen her before. At last, after allowing
me to puzzle for some time, she said: "Sir, you and I met at
dinner four years ago, at Mr. K 's house in Demerara."
It was very true; but who would have thought of running
his memory over to South America, to a cursed alluvial depo-
site, hatching monthly broods of alligators, and surrounded by
naked slaves, whilst out of the window before him his eye
rested upon the snow-covered mountains of Switzerland, and
he breathed the pure air of William Tell and liberty. This
morning I fell in with an acquaintance whom I had not seen
for years, and him also I did not recollect. I am very unfor-
tunate in that respect, and I am afraid that I have very often
given offence without intending it; but so imperfect is my
memory of faces, that I have danced with a lady in the evening,
and the next day have not known her, because she was in a
bonnet and morning dress. Sometimes the shifts I am put to
are quite ludicrous, asking all manner of questions, and answer-
ing those put to me at random, to find out some clue as to
who my very intimate friend may be. They ought not to be
angry at my forgetting their names, for sometimes, for a few
minutes, I have actually forgotten my own. It does, however,
only require one clue to be given me, and then all of a sudden
I recollect everything connected with the party. I remember
one day as I was passing Whitehall, somebody came up, wrung
my hand with apparent delight, and professed himself delighted
to see me. I could do no other than say the same, but who
he was, and where I had seen him before, was a mystery. "I
am married since we parted," said he, "and have a fine little 
<page 79>
64
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
boy." I congratulated him with all my heart. "You must
come and see me, and I will introduce you to Mary."
"Nothing would give me more pleasure;" but if he had
only called his wife Mrs. So-and-so, I should have a clue.
"Let me see," said I, "where was it we parted?"
"Don't you recollect?" said he, "At the Cape of Good
Hope."
But I was still mystified, and after putting several leading
questions, I found myself quite as much in the dark as ever.
At last I asked him for his card, that I might call upon him.
He had not one in his pocket. I pulled out my tablets, and
he took out the pencil, and wrote down his address; but that
was of no use to me.
"Stop, my good fellow, I have so many addresses down
there, that I shall be making some mistake; put your name
down above it."
He did so, and when I saw the name everything came fast
like a torrent into my recollection; we had been very intimate,
and he was fully justified in showing so much warmth. I
could then talk to him about old scenes, and old acquaintances;
so I took his arm, and went forthwith to be introduced to his
Mary. The knowledge of this unfortunate failing makes me
peculiarly careful not to avoid a person who appears to know
me; and one day a very absurd scene took place. I was
standing on some door steps close to the Admiralty, waiting
for a friend, and there was another gentleman standing close
to me, on the pavement. A third party came up, extending
his hand, and I immediately took it, and shook it warmly,—
although who my friend was, I was, as usual, very much
puzzled to find out. Now it so happened that the hand which
I had taken was extended to the gentleman standing by me,
and not to me; and the party whose hand I was squeez-
ing looked me in the face and laughed. I did the same, and
he then gave his hand to the right party, and walked off. As,
however, we had said, "How d'ye do?" we had the politeness
to say, "Good-by;" both taking off our hats on the broad
grin.
I was observing, that I here met with a person whom I
could not recollect, and, as usual, I continued to talk with
him, trusting to my good fortune for the clue. At last it was
given me. "Do you recollect the little doctor and his wife at 
<page 80>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
65
Bangalore?" I did, and immediately recollected him. As
the story of the doctor and his wife has often made me laugh,
and as I consider it one of the best specimens of tit for tat,
I will narrate it to my readers. I have since been told that it
is not new—I must tell it nevertheless.
A certain little army surgeon, who was stationed at Ban-
galore, had selected a very pretty little girl out of an invoice
of young ladies, who had been freighted out on speculation.
She was very fond of gaiety and amusement, and, after her
marriage, appeared to be much fonder of passing away the
night at a ball than in the arms of her little doctor. Never-
theless, although she kept late hours, in every respect she was
very correct. The doctor, who was a quiet, sober man, and
careful of his health, preferred going to bed early, and rising
before the sun, to inhale the cool breeze of the morning. And
as the lady seldom came home till past midnight, he was not
very well pleased at being disturbed by her late hours. At
last, his patience was wearied out, and he told her plainly,
that if she staid out later than twelve o'clock, he was resolved
not to give her admittance. At this, his young wife, who,
like all pretty women, imagined that he never would presume
to do any such thing, laughed heartily, and from the next ball
to which she was invited, did not return till half-past two in
the morning. As soon as she arrived, the palanquin-bearers
knocked for admittance; but the doctor, true to his word, put
his head out of the window, and very ungallantly told his wife
she might remain all night. The lady coaxed, entreated, ex-
postulated, and threatened; but it was all in vain. At last
she screamed, and appeared to be frantic, declaring that if not
immediately admitted, she would throw herself into the well,
which was in the compound, not fifty yards from the bun-
galow. The doctor begged that she would do so, if that gave
her any pleasure, and then retired from the window. His wife
ordered the bearers to take her on her palanquin to the well;
she got out, and gave her directions, and then slipped away
up to the bungalow, and stationed herself close to the door,
against the wall. The bearers, in obedience to her directions,
commenced crying out, as if expostulating with their mistress,
and then detaching a large and heavy stone, two of them
plunged it into the water; after which, they all set up a howl
of lamentation. Now the little doctor, notwithstanding all F

<page 81>
66
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
his firmness and nonchalance, was not quite at ease when he
heard his wife express her determination. He knew her to
be very ent4tee, and he remained on the watch. He heard the
heavy plunge, followed up by the shrieks of the palanquin-
bearers. "Good God," cried he, "is it possible?" and he
darted out in his shirt to where they were all standing by the
well. As soon as he had passed, his wife hastened in-doors,
locked, and made all fast, and shortly afterwards appeared at
the window from which her husband had addressed her.
The doctor discovered the ruse when it was too late. It was
now his turn to expostulate; but how could he "hope for
mercy, rendering none?" The lady was laconic and decided.
"At least, then, throw me my clothes," said the doctor.
"Not even your slippers, to protect you from the scorpions
and centipedes," replied the lady, shutting the "jalousie." At
day-light, when the officers were riding their Arabians, they
discovered the poor little doctor pacing the verandah up and
down in the chill of the morning, with nothing but his shirt
to protect him. Thus were the tables turned, but whether
this ruse of the well ended well,—whether the lady reformed,
or the doctor conformed,—I have never since heard.
CHAPTER XVI.
Liege, June 2.
The academy or college established at Liege in 1817 is
very creditable to the Liegeois. Much has been done in fifteen
years: the philosophical apparatus, collections of minerals and
natural history, are all excellent for instruction, although the
minerals are not very valuable. The fossils found in the
Ardennes are very interesting, and ought to be a mine of
wealth to the Liegeois, as by exchanging them they might soon
have a valuable collection. It is a pity that the various
museums of Europe do not print catalogues, not of their own
collections only, but also of the duplicates which they can part
with, so that they may be circulated, not only among the
national collections, but also among private cabinets; by so
doing they would all become more perfect. It is currently
reported that more duplicates have been allowed to perish in 
<page 82>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
67
the cellars of the British Museum than would have furnished
all the cabinets in Europe. It may be replied, that other
cabinets had nothing to offer in exchange; but that is only
a surmise: and even if they had not, they should have been
presented to other institutions abroad. Science ought not to
be confined to country or people: it should be considered as
universal.
To the college is annexed a botanical garden. There is
nothing I dislike more than a botanical garden. I acknow-
ledge the advantages, perhaps the necessity, of such institu-
tions; but they always appear to me as if there was disarrange-
ment instead of arrangement. What may be called order and
classification seems to me to be disorder and confusion. It
may be very well to class plants and trees for study, but cer-
tainly their families, although joined by man, were never
intended to be united by God. Such a mixture in one par-
tition, of trees, and shrubs, and creeping plants, all of which
you are gravely told are of one family. I never will believe it:
it is unnatural. I can see order and arrangement when I
look at the majestic forest-trees throwing about their wild
branches, and defying the winds of heaven, while they afford
shelter to the shrubs beneath, which in their turn protect and
shelter the violets that perfume all around. This is beautiful
and natural—it is harmony; but in a botanical garden every
thing is out of its place. The Scripture says, "Those whom
God hath joined let no man put asunder;" may we not add,
Those whom God hath sundered let no man presume to join.
I felt as I looked at the botanical garden as if it were pre-
sumptuous and almost wicked, and as it was on the banks of
the Meuse, I sat down on the wall and recovered myself by
looking at the flowing river, and thinking about utility and
futility, "and all that sort of thing and everything else in the
world," as poor Matthews used to say,—and there I sat for
an hour, until my thoughts revolved on the propriety of going
back and eating my dinner,—as Mrs. Trollope used to do
when she was in Belgium.
As I was walking about in the evening, I perceived a dirty
little alley illuminated with chandeliers and wax candles.
There must be a ball, thought I, or some gaiety going on:
let us inquire. "No, sir," replied a man to whom I put the
question, "it's not a ball,—it is a Monsieur who has prep 2

<page 83>
68
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
sented to an image of the Virgin Mary which is up that court,
a petticoat, which, they say, is worth one thousand five hundred
francs, and this lighting-up is in honour of her putting it on."
The race of fools is not extinct, thought I. I wonder whether,
like King Ferdinand, he worked it himself. Belgium is cer-
tainly at this present the stronghold of superstition.
CHAPTER XVII.
June 3.
Went to Harquet's manufactory of arms, and was much
amused. They export all over the world, and the varieties
they make up for the different markets are astonishing. They
were then very busy completing an order for several thousand
muskets for the Belgian troops, which load at the breech and
fire off without locks or priming. They showed me a fowling-piece on the same principle, which they fired off under water.
But the low prices of the arms astonished me. There were a
large quantity of very long fowling-pieces with the maker's
name at Constantinople, for the Turkish gentlemen, at thirty
francs each: a common musket was fourteen francs. I
perceived in a corner a large number of muskets, of infamous
workmanship, and with locks resembling those awkward
attempts made two hundred years back. I asked what they
were for. They were for the South American market, and
made to order, for the people there would use no others: any
improvement was eschewed by them. I presume they had
borrowed one of the Spanish muskets brought over by Pizarro
as a model, but, at all events, they were very cheap, only
eight francs each. God help us, how cheaply men can be
killed now-a-days!
It is very seldom that you now meet with a name beginning
with an X, but one caught my eye as I was walking through
the streets here. Urban Xhenemont, negotiant. I perceive
there are still some to be found in Greece; the only one I
know of in England is that of Sir Morris Ximenes, who, I
presume, claims descent from the celebrated cardinal. The
mention of that name reminds me of the songs of the impro-
visatore. Theodore Hook, and his address in finding a 
<page 84>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
69
rhyme for such an awkward name as Ximenes. Few possess
the talent of improvising. In Italy it is more common,
because the Italian language admits the rhyme with so much
facility; but a good improvisatore is rare even in that country.
There was a Dutchman who was a very good improvisatore, a
poor fellow who went about to amuse companies with his
singing and this peculiar talent. One day a gentleman
dropped a gold Guillaume into a glass of Burgundy, and told
him if he would make a good impromptu, he should have both
the wine and the gold: without hesitation he took up the
glass, and suiting the action to the word, sang as follows:—
"Twee Goden in een Glas,
Wat zal ik van maken?
K' steek Plutus in myn tas,
K slaak Bacchus in myn Kaken."
Which may be rendered into French as follows:—
"Quoi! deux dieux dans un verre,
Eh bien! que vais-j'en faire?
J'empocherai Plutus,
J'avalerai Bacchus."
The gentleman, who gave me this translation, also furnished
me with a copy of extempore French verses, given by a gentle-
man of Maestricht, who was celebrated as an improvisatore.
They certainly are very superior. He was at a large party,
and agreed to improvise upon any theme given him by five of
those present in the way of Souvenir. The first person
requested the souvenir of early youth.
"Vous souvient-il? Amis de ma jeunesse,
Des beaux momens de nos fougueux exploits?
Quand la raison sous le joug de l'ivresse,
Essaye en vain de soutenir ses droits.
Ce tems n'est plus, cet age de folie,
Oh tout en nous est presse' de jouir:
Ales bons amis, du printemps de la vie
Gardons toujours le joyeux souvenir."
The next party requested a souvenir of the conscription,
many of them, as well as the poet, having been forced into the
army of France.

<page 85>
ÏO
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
"Vous souvient-il? que plus tard, sous les armes
Plusieurs de nous, désignés par le sort,
Loin des parents; versant d'amères larmes,
Allaient trouver ou la gloire ou la mort.
Ces jours de deuil par milliers dans l'histoire
Ne viendront plus, sur nons s'appesantir
Amis, volons au temple de Mémoire
Effaçons-en le sanglant souvenir."
The third party requested a souvenir of his "first love."
"Vous souvient-il? de cet enfant de Guide
Fripon rusé, volage et séducteur;
Qui par les yeux d'une beauté timide,
D'un trait de feu veut nous frapper au cœur.
Du sentiment qne sa flèche fit naître,
Et que la mort peut seul anéantir,
Eternissons le ravissant bien-être,
En conservant un si beau souvenir."
The fourth proposed as a theme, the morning of his mar-
riage.
"Vous souvient il? du jour où l'hyménée
Vint nous dicter ses éternelles loix,
En attachant à notre destinée
L'objet sacré de notre premier choix.
Solennité qui par des vœux nous lie,
De saints devoirs chargeant notre avenir,
Solennité que le vulgaire oublie
Nous te gardons en pieux souvenir."
The last party desired him to wind up with friendship.
"Quel souvenir puis-je chanter encore,
Après celui né dans la volupté?
Il en est un que le tems corrobore,
C'est le premier élan de l'amitié.
Eh! qui de nous n'a pas dans sa jeunesse,
Livré son cœur à ses charmes puissants,
Sainte Amitié, jusqu'à dans la vieillesse,
Console-nous des ravages du tems."
I should imagine that after the gentleman had finished all
this, he must have been pretty well out of breath.
About four miles from Liege is the celebrated manufactory
of Seraing, belonging to Messrs. Cockerell. It is beautifully
situated on the banks of the Meuse, and was formerly the 
<page 86>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
71
summer palace of the Prince Archbishop. But it is not only
here that you observe these symptoms of the times—all over
France you will perceive the same, and the major portion
of the manufactories have the arms of princes or nobles
emblazoned over the facade, while the interiors, which once
were the abode of refinement and luxury, are now tenanted
by artisans and appropriated to utility. The utilitarian system
was, however, more fully exemplified before the Belgian revo-
lution, for William of Nassau was, in fact, a partner of
Mr. Cockerell. Mr. Cockerell, the father, who is now dead,
came over from England before the peace, bringing with him
either the machinery for spinning cotton, or the knowledge
necessary for its construction, so jealously guarded by our
manufacturers. He established himself at Liege, and soon
gained patrons. The firm has now three or four manufactories
at Liege besides the one at Seraing, Large as was the
bishop's palace, it has been increased to about three times its
original size: it reminds me more of Portsmouth yard than
any other place. The number of workmen employed in this
manufactory alone is between fourteen and fifteen hundred.
They make every variety of steam engines, and not only
supply this country, but Prussia, Austria, France, and even
Russia. People talk of Mr. Cockerell having done much
mischief to his country by furnishing foreigners with the
machinery which enabled us to undersell them. I doubt it
very much: I consider that the sooner other countries are
enabled to compete with us to a certain extent, the better
it will be for England. At present we are in an unhealthy
state, and chiefly arising from the unlimited use of machinery.
Let us lose that advantage, and, if not richer, at all events we
shall be much happier. We are now suffering under a ple-
thora of capital at the same time that we are oppressed with
debt. As for Mr. Cockerell, it may be very well to cry out
about patriotism, but the question is, would not every other
man have done the same? Had he not a right to bring his
talents to the best market? and before he is accused of having
had no regard for his country, it may first be fairly asked, what
regard had his country shown for him?

<page 87>
72
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
CHAFrER XVIII.
Spa, June 10.
Hebe we are, and for a time at rest. Rest! no, the wheels
of the carriage may rest, even the body for a time may rest,
but the mind will not. We carry our restlessness with us
wherever we go. Like a steam-engine, the mind works, and
works, and works, sometimes, indeed, with less rapidity of
motion; but still it goes on, goes on in its ever-continued-
labour; waking or sleeping, no repose; until the body, which
is the mechanical part of the engine, is worn out by constant
friction, or the steam of the mind is exhausted. And people
tell you, and believe that there is rest in the grave. How
can that be? The soul is immortal and cannot exist without
consciousness. If not conscious, it does not exist; and if
conscious, it must work on, even beyond the grave, and
for ever. To assert that there is rest in the grave, is
denying the immortality of the soul. And what a con-
temptible, base slave the body is to the soul! I was going
to say that he could not call his soul his own; but that
would be a Catachresis, and I hate and abominate every thing
which begins with cat. It is singular that they are all unplea-
sant, or unlucky, or unsafe; for instance—
Cat-acombs remind you of death, funerals, and mummies.
Cat-alogue „ „ sale of effects, some poor devil done up.
Cat-aplasm „ „ a boil poulticed.
Cat-aract „ „ sore eyes, Sam Patch, and devastation.
Cat-arrh „ „ head stuffed, running of the glands.
Cat-echism „ „ equally unpleasant in youth and marriage.
Cat-egorical „ „ argument, which is detestable.
Cat-erpillars „ „ beasts who foul nature.
Cat-erwaul „ „ horrid variety of love.
Cat-gut „ „ street music, hurdy-gurdy.
Cat's-paw „ » a calm, with a prize in sight.
As for a cat itself, I cannot say too much against it; and it
is singular, that the other meanings of the single word are
equally disagreeable; as to cat the anchor, is a sign of going
to sea, and the cat at the gangway is the worst of all. Five o'clock in the morning,—the sun has not yet appeared
above the hills, but the mist is rising gradually. The bell of 
<page 88>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
73
the church in front of my window is tolling;—it ceases; aad
the pealing of the organ, with the chanting of the priests,
comes distinct and clear upon my ear, as the notes of the
bugle over the still water, from some dashing frigate in the
Sound, beating off at sunset. How solemn and how beautiful
is this early prayer! The sun is rising, the mists of the
night are rolling off, and the voices and music resound at
the same time to heaven. The church is full, and many
remain outside, uncovered, and kneeling in humility. But
who comes here, thought I, as a man in a shabby coat walked
to within a few yards of the church door, and laid down his
burden, consisting of a drum, a fiddle, a roll of canvass, a
chair, and a long pole. This is a curious stock in trade,
methinks; how in the name of all the saints do you gain your
livelihood? This was soon ascertained. A minute before
the mass was over, he fixed his pole upright in the ground,
hung his canvass on it, and unrolled it, displaying a picture
divided in six compartments. He then hung his fiddle to his
button, took his drum, and putting his chair close to his
pole, stood upon it, giving a long, but not loud roll of
his drum, which he repeated at intervals, to attract attention.
He had taken his station with judgment; and as the people
came out of church, he had soon a crowd about him, when
he commenced with crossing himself, and then continued to
explain the legend which was attached to his pictures on the
canvass. I could not hear all, but still I could understand
enough to fill up the rest. It was the wonderful cure per-
formed by a certain saint; and as he told the story, he
pointed to the different compartments with his fiddlestick,
for he had laid aside his drum as soon as he had collected an
audience. Now and then he crossed himself devoutly, and
at last informed the crowd around him that he had the very
prayer, and the very remedy which had been prescribed.
He then played his fiddle, singing the prayer in a solemn
chaunt; and then he pulled out of his pocket a packet of
little books and little boxes. They are only one halfpenny
each; and all that is necessary is, that they should touch
the figure of the saint on the canvass, to be imbued with the
necessary virtue. He sells them rapidly; each time that he
puts them to the canvass crossing himself, and insisting that
the party who purchases shall do the same. He takes his 
<page 89>
74
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
fiddle again, and sings the history of the saint, pointing with
his fiddlestick to the compartments of the picture as he goes
on; and now he pulls out more little books and more boxes;
and how fast they purchase them! The stock in trade in
his own possession is certainly of little value; but he pos-
sesses a fruitful mine in the superstition of others. Ah, well!
Are not those inside the church setting him the example of
mixing up religion with quackery?
Spa is beautifully situated, between abrupt hills covered
with verdure; the walks cut in these hills are very beautiful,
and much pains have been taken to render the place agreeable;
—no wonder, when we recollect how many crowned heads
have visited the place: but the sun of Spa has set, probably
never to rise again; for whatever may be the property of its
waters, to be frequented, a watering-place must be fashionable.
There are many causes for its desertion. One is, the effects
of the Belgian revolution. During the time that Belgium
was attached to the Netherlands, the king, with the prince
and princess of Orange, came here almost every year, bringing
with them, of course, a great number of the nobility; but
now the nobility have deserted the court; and when Leopold
came here, no one followed. He was disgusted, and remained
but a few days. The Prussians used also to resort very much
to Spa; but the king of Prussia finding that so many young
men were ruined at the gaming-tables, and so much distress
occasioned by it, with a most fatherly despotism, has refused
all the officers permission to visit Spa, and has forbidden the
medical men to recommend the waters. The Russians also
flocked in great numbers to Spa; but the emperor, although
very indifferent about their losing their money, is very par-
ticular about his subjects gaining revolutionary opinions;
and Spa being in a revolutionary country, has been con-
demned: they may just as well ask to go to Siberia, for that
would probably be their route; and lastly, there is one more
cause which, these two last seasons, has had a powerful
effect, neither more nor less than a certain book, called the
"Bubbles of the Brunnen." I say for the last two seasons, for
its influence will not extend to a third, as hundreds and hun-
dreds who have gone to the Baths with the intention of
passing this season, have already returned in disgust. A word
upon this.

<page 90>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
75
When Sir George Head published his "Bubbles," he set
people almost as mad as they were during the great "Bubble
Mania;" and like all the mining and other associations, they
have proved but bubbles at last. It is said that one hundred
and thirty-five thousand passports were taken out last year to
go up the Rhine, by people who wished to see the pigs go
through their daily manoeuvres, to an unearthly solo on the
horn, and to witness the decapitation of the Seltzer-water
bottles, which were condemned as traitors. Now, so large an
influx of people to these German watering-places could have
but one effect; that of a glorious harvest to the innkeepers,
and those who had lodgings to let. The prices, at these
places, have now become so enormous, that three florins have
been asked for a single bed, and everything else has risen in
the same proportion. The reaction has now begun to take
place, and every day and every hour we have carriages return-
ing through Liege, and other towns, from these watering-places, the occupants holding up their hands, quite forgetting
the pigs and bottles, and only exclaiming against extortion,
and everything German. They have paid too dear for their
whistle, as Franklin used to say; the bubble has burst, and
they look with regret at their empty purses. And yet, all
that Head said in his amusing book was true. He rambled
through a verdant and unfrequented lane, and described what
he felt as he stopped to pick blackberries. An immense mul-
titude have followed him, the green lane has been beaten down
into a high road, and, as for blackberries, they are only to be
procured at the price of peaches in May.
And now let us reflect whether the bubble will not also
burst with the Germans. Formerly they were contented
with moderate profits, and received their visitors with humility
and thankfulness. Now, that they have suddenly made large
profits, they have become independent and unceremonious;
and, like most people, because they have reaped a golden harvest
for two years, they anticipate that it will continue. The value
of property at these places has risen, speculations have been
entered into on a large scale, provisions and the necessaries of
life have become dear; new houses are building against time,
and the proprietors smoke their pipes with becoming gravity,
calculating upon their future gains. But the company will
fall off more and more each succeeding year, although the 
<page 91>
76
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
speculations will continue; for people always find a good
reason for a bad season, and anticipate a better one the next.
At last, they will find that they are again deserted, and
property will sink in value to nothing; the reaction will have
fully taken place, prices will fall even lower than they were at
first; honesty and civility will be reassumed, although, proba-
bly, the principal will have been lost. Thus will the bubble
burst with them, as it has already with deserted Spa.
But when all idle people shall have visited all the bubbling
fountains of Germany, where are they to go next? There are
some very nice springs in Iceland not yet patronized; but al-
though the springs there are hot, the Springs, vernally speak-
ing, are cold. I can inform travellers where they will find out
something new, and I advise them to proceed to the boiling
springs at St. Michael's, one of the Western isles, and which
are better worth seeing than all the springs that Germany can
produce. I will act as guide de voyage.
When you land at St. Michael's, you will find yourself in
one of the dirtiest towns in the world, and will put up at one
of the worst hotels; however, you will have to pay just as
dear as if lodged at the Clarendon, and fed at the Rocher de
Cancale. The town contains many inhabitants, but more pigs.
German pigs are not to be compared to them. You must
then hire donkeys and ascend to the mountains, and after a
hot ride, you will arrive at a small valley in the centre of the
mountains, which was once the crater of a volcano, but is now
used by nature as a kettle, in which she keeps hot water per-
petually boiling for those who may require it. There you will
behold the waters bubbling and boiling in all directions, throw-
ing up huge white columns of smoke, brought out in strong
relief by the darker sides of the mountains which rear their
heads around you. The ground you tread upon trembles as
you walk; you feel that it is only a thin crust, and that in a
moment you may sink into the vast cauldron below, and have
a hot bath without paying for it. Continue along the valley,
and you will find lakes of still, deadly-cold water, with hot
springs at their verge, throwing the smoke over their surface,
while they pour in their boiling water as if they would fain
raise the temperature; depositing sulphur in cakes and crystals
in their course. And in another spot there is a dark, un-
fathomable hole, called the Devil's Mouth: you approach it, 
<page 92>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
77
and you hear low moanings and rumblings, as if nature had
the stomach-ache; and then you will have a sudden explosion,
and a noise like thunder, and a shower of mud will be thrown
out to a distance of several yards. Wait again; you will
again hear the moans and rumblings, and in about three
minutes the explosion and the discharge will again take place;
and thus has this eternal diarrhoea continued ever since the
memory or tradition of man.
Yet, upon this apparently insecure and dangerous spot have
been erected houses and baths, and it is resorted to by the
fashionables of St. Michael's, who wish, by its properties, to
get rid of certain cutaneous disorders: for the whole air is
loaded with sulphurous vapour, as the eternal pot keeps
boiling.
Observe the advantages of this place:—you may have a
bath as hot as you please, as cold as you please, or you may
have a mud douche, if you have that buffalo propensity; and
then you will have to rough it, which is so delightful; you
will find little or nothing to eat, and plenty of bedfellows in all
their varieties, a burning sun, and a dense atmosphere, and
you will be very delighted to get back again, which, after all,
is the summum bonum to be obtained by travel.
Not very far from this valley of hot water there is another
valley, containing four small lakes, and in those lakes are
found the most beautiful gold and silver fish, perhaps, in the
world. How they came there, Heaven only knows; but I
mention this because there is a curious coincidence. These
lakes are known by the name of the Quadre Cidade, or four
cities. Now, if my readers will recollect, in the "Arabian
Nights," there is a story ofa valley with four lakes, which
were once four cities, and that in these lakes were fish of
various beautiful colours, who were once the inhabitants. If I
recollect right, when the fish were caught and put into the
frying-pan, they jumped up and made a speech; (so would
fish now-a-days, if they were not mute;) and the story is told
by a prince, whose lower extremities are turned into black
marble, very convenient, certainly, if he dined out every day,
as he had only his upper toilet to complete. This coincidence
appeared to me to be very curious, and had I had time and oppor-
tunity I certainly should have fried four of these unfortunate
fish, to ascertain whether they were of the real breed spoken 
<page 93>
78
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
of in the Arabian Tales, of the authenticity of which no one, I
presume, will venture to doubt.
CHAPTER XIX.
Spa, July 15.
What a curious history might be afforded by Spa and its
gaming tables! When Spa was in its glory, when crowned
heads met and dukes were forced to remain in their carriages
for want of accommodation, when it was the focus of all that
was recherche and brilliant, for Spa was so before the French
revolution, the gaming tables were a source of immense profit;
and to whom do you imagine that a great portion of the
profits belonged?—to no less a person than the most sacred
and puissant prince, the Bishop of Liege, who derived a great
revenue from them. But it would appear as if there was a
judgment upon this anomalous secular property, for these
gaming-tables were the cause of the Prince Bishop losing
all, and being driven out of his territories. There were two
gaming establishments at Spa, the Redoubt in the town,
and the Vauxhall about a quarter of a mile outside of it. The
Redoubt is a fine building, with splendid ball-rooms and
a theatre, but you must go through the gaming-rooms to enter
either the bali-room or the theatre. The Vauxhall has no
theatre, but the rooms are even more spacious; but when
Spa was at its zenith, even these two immense edifices were
barely sufficient for the company. Both these establishments
were under the same proprietors, and it so happened that the
English nobility, who were always a very strong party here,
were displeased with the conduct of the lessees, and imme-
diately raised funds for the building of a second Vauxhall. The
bishop ordered the building to be discontinued, but, as by the
privileges granted by former bishops, this was a violation
of the rights of the Liegeois, his order was disregarded, and
the Vauxhall now known by the name of the Vauxhall, was
finished. When finished, the bishop would not permit it to be
opened, but his commands being disregarded, he came down
with two hundred soldiers and two pieces of cannon and took
possession. This created a revolution, and the bishop was 
<page 94>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
79
ultimately obliged to fly his territory and seek assistance.
The Prussians marched an army into the city, and there was
apparent submission, but as soon as they quitted, the insur-
rection again took place, and the bishop was forced again tosolicit aid from the Austrians, for Prussia would no longer
interfere. Metternich, who was so fond of legitimacy that he
considered the gaming-tables a legitimate source of revenue
to the apostle, marched in an Austrian army, and hundreds
were slaughtered that the bishop might obtain his rights.
Such was the state of affairs when the French revolution
broke out and convulsed Europe, and the province of Liege
was among the very first to receive with open arms the bonnet
rouge and to join themselves with France, and thus did the
bishop lose his beautiful province for ever. As far as Liege
was concerned, the French revolution proved a blessing. It
certainly was a disgraceful finale to an ecclesiastical power,
which, as I have before mentioned, had formerly led the van in
the march of Christianity and liberty.
But it appears that the clergy are fated to have an interest
in these gaming-tables, the stipend of the English resident
clergyman being, even now, paid out of their profits; for
when Belgium was made over to the Netherlands, King
William assumed his right to the bishop's former share of the
profits of the tables, and of course brought as many people
down here as he could to lose their money, as he pocketed his
thirds. Since the revolution, Leopold is in King William's
shoes, but there are little or no profits, as Spa is deserted
and the expenses of the establishments are great. Perhaps
there is no spot of ground in Europe—I will not except Paris
—where so much money has been lost by gaming as at Spa.
I was walking with a friend who pointed out to me a small
pavilion in a garden. "There," says he, "the Prince of
Orange, who played very deeply, lost to a Spanish gentleman
those very jewels that were pretended to be stolen. It was
well got up in the papers, but that is the real truth." How
far it may be the truth or not, I cannot pretend to say, and
only know that in Spa you cannot pick your teeth without all
the world knowing it, and that this is fully believed at Spa
to be the real truth of the disappearance of the splendid jewels
of the princess, which have since been redeemed from the
Spanish gentleman, who now resides at the Hague.

<page 95>
80
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
Gaming has always been held up in abhorrence as a vice;
but it is rather a passion strongly implanted by nature, and
abhorrent from the dreadful effects produced by its over-
powering influence, than a vice per se. Life itself is a lottery,
and the best part of our life is passed in gambling. It
is difficult to draw the line between gambling and speculation,
for every speculation is a gambling transaction. Is not the
merchant a gambler? in fact, is not every venture an act
of gambling? As for the Stock Exchange, it is the very
worst species of gambling. All we can say is, that gambling
may be legitimate or otherwise; that is, there are species
of gambling which may enrich the individual if he is fortunate,
but whether it enriches him or not, at all events it is be-
neficial to the community at large. A merchant speculates—he sends out manufactures of every description: he fails, and
is ruined: but the artisans have procured employment for
their industry, and, although the merchant fails, the community
at large has benefited. This is legitimate gambling; but do
people in business stop there? No: they will agree to deliver so
many thousands of casks of tallow or tons of hemp at such and
such a time and at a certain price, whatever the price may
then be. They cannot complete their engagement, and they
are ruined; but in this instance, which is simply termed
speculation, we have quite as much gambling as if the money
were at once laid down on the table, and the chances decided
in an hour instead of so many months. But there is this
difference, that this party does not injure his character by
such a transaction, whereas, if he lost his money at the
gaming-table he would. The English are, with the exception
of the Americans, the most gambling nation under heaven;
naturally so, because they are the greatest mercantile nation.
The spirit of gambling is innate, and when directed into
the proper channel it becomes enterprise. It is doubtless
a great moral error on the part of a government to encourage
vice with the view of increasing the revenue, but, at the same
time, there is no tax so well laid on as that which is imposed
on vice. Again, there are certain propensities in man which
cannot be overcome, and which, if attempted to be wholly
eradicated by legal enactments, would occasion more evil still.
All that a judicious government can or should attempt to
effect is, to restrain them within proper bounds, to regulate 
<page 96>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
81
them, and as much as possible to keep them out of sight, that
the virus may not extend. It is well known, that certain
houses are licensed by the magistrates, because, it being
impossible to eradicate the vice, they can do no more than to
separate it, that it may not be communicated to the healthier
part of the community. Now upon this principle, which is
the true principle of sound legislation, I have often thought
that it was a great error in our legislature when they consented
to put down the public lotteries in England. I am convinced
that they were beneficial, acting as safety-valves to the
gambling spirit of the nation, and that their prohibition has
been productive of much crime and misery. The spirit of
gambling cannot be eradicated; it ought, therefore, to be
kept within due bounds. There was one great advantage in
the English lottery; it was drawn but once a year, and those
who purchased the tickets were content to remain quiet until
their success was made known. The chances, although very
distant, of so high a prize, satisfied the spirit of gambling; if
they lost, they purchased again, and waited patiently for
another year, trusting to be more fortunate. Now, although
they gambled, they did not acquire the habit of gaming.
What has been the consequence since the lotteries have been
abolished? that there are hells of every description esta-
blished throughout the metropolis, from those which admit the
stake of a shilling, to Crockford's splendid Pandemonium; and
those who were formerly content with a lottery ticket, now
pass their evenings away from their families, and ruin them-
selves in a very short time. The lottery never ruined anyone. The sum staked might be large for the circumstances of
the parties, but it was a yearly stake, and did not interfere
with the industry, the profits, or the domestic happiness of the
year. One half the tradesmen who now appear in the
"Gazette," have been ruined by frequenting the low hells
with which the metropolis abounds. From the above con-
siderations, I do not think it was advisable to abolish the lot-
teries.
The next question is one upon which I hesitate to offer an
opinion; but it is worthy of consideration how far it may be
advisable to license and tax gaming-houses. Were it possible
to put them down altogether, the question need not be dis-
cussed; but it is impossible. Has any magistrate ventured
a

<page 97>
82
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
to interfere with Crockford's, where it is well known that the
highest gaming is carried on every night? Are you not per-
mitted to walk through the club at any hour of the day? Do
they not have the tables exposed to the view of everyone?
Yet who has interfered, although you find that the smaller
hells are constantly broken in upon, and the parties had up to
the police-office? Are not the laws made for all? Is that an
offence in the eyes of government in a poor man which is not
one in the rich? Yet this is the case: and why so? Be-
cause the rich will game, and the government cannot prevent
them. Has not a man a right to do as he pleases with his
own money? You legalise the worst of gambling on the
Stock Exchange, for a man can there risk what he cannot
pay: you cannot control the gaming of the race-course, and
yet you would prevent a man from gambling after his own
fashion. You wink at the higher classes ruining themselves,
and you will not permit the middle classes. Now the conse-
quence of not having licensed tables is, that you have no
control over them, and the public, who will play, are the dupes
of rascals who cheat in every way: whereas, if a certain
number were licensed and controlled, those who play would
have a better chance, and the licensed tables taxed by govern-
ment would take care to put down all others who were not.
We must legislate for society as it is, not as it ought to be;
and, as on other points, we have found it necessary to submit
to the lesser evil of the two, it is a question whether in this
also we might not do better by keeping within due bounds
that which it is impossible to prevent.
I was amused with an anecdote told me to-day. An
Englishman and a Frenchman arrived at Spa in the same
diligence. They both took up their quarters at the same hotel,
but from that moment appeared to have no further intimacy.
"Do you see that fellow?" would the Englishman say, point-
ing at the Frenchman, " I know him, and he's a confounded
rogue. I recommend you to be shy of him." "Voyez-vous
cet Anglais?" said the Frenchman as the Englishman passed
by. "Gardez-vous en-bien; c'est un coquin superieur."
Thus did they continue to warn the company of each other,
until the close of the season, when one fine day they both
went off together in the diligence, leaving all their debts
unpaid, and their trunks and portmanteaus for the benefit of 
<page 98>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
83
the landlord of the hotel, who, on opening them, found them
to contain nothing but stones and rubbish. This was a new
species of holy alliance, but the ruse was by no means ill
advised. When you hear a man constantly proclaiming the
roguery of another, you are too apt to give him credit for
honesty in his own person. Thus, with those whom each
party associated and dealt with, they obtained a credit for
honesty, which enabled them to succeed in their roguish en-
deavours.
CHAPTER XX.
Ostend. From Spa to Liege, from Liege to Brussels, from Brussels
to Ostend, how detestable it is to go over the same ground
again and again! only to be imposed upon and cheated
again and again. What a weary world this is, and what a
rascally one! How delightful a little honesty would be, by
way of a change! Of all the rascality spread like butter on
bread over the surface of the globe, certainly the butter lies
thicker on the confines of each territory. There is a concen-
tration of dishonesty at the ports of embarkation and debarka-
tion. Take London when you land from a steam-boat, or
Dover, or Calais, or Ostend. It is nothing but a system of
extortion or overreaching. And why so? because in the
hurry, the confusion, the sickness, and the ignorance of what
is right, everything that is wrong can be practised with im-
punity. These preyers upon mankind at the confines, remind
you of the sharks in India, who always ply in the surf, where
their motions cannot be seen, and the unwary are invariably
their prey. I have knocked three down already, and one
would imagine they would hasten for redress; but they will
not, for that would take hours, and during these hours they
will lose the opportunity of making their harvest, so they get
up again, and pocket the affront, that they may not lose time
in filling their pockets. Talking about roguery, there was a
curious incident occurred some time back, in which a rascal
was completely outwitted. A bachelor gentleman, who was a
very superior draftsman and caricaturist, was laid up in his
apartments with the gout in both feet. He could not move,
but sat in an easv chair, and was wheeled by his servant in o 2

<page 99>
84
MARr ON THE CONTINENT.
and out of his chamber to his sitting-room. Now a certain
well-known vagabond ascertained the fact, and watched until
the servant was sent upon a message. The servant came out
of the front door, but left the area door open, communicating
with the kitchen. Down went the vagabond, entered the
kitchen, and walked upstairs, where, as he anticipated, he
found the gentleman quite alone and helpless. "I am sorry,
sir, to see you in this situation," said the rogue; "you cannot
move, and your servant is out." The gentleman stared.
"It is excessively careless of you to leave yourself so exposed,
for behold the consequences. I take the liberty of re-
moving this watch and these seals off the table, and putting
them into my own pocket; and, as I perceive your keys are
here, I shall now open these drawers, and see what suits my
purpose." "Oh! pray help yourself, I beg," replied the
gentleman, who was aware that he could do nothing to prevent
him. The rogue did so accordingly; he found the plate in
the sideboard drawer, and many other articles which suited
him, and in about ten minutes, having made up his bundle,
he made the gentleman a very low bow, and decamped. But
the gentleman had the use of his hands, and had not been idle;
he had taken an exact likeness of the thief with his pencil,
and on his servant returning soon after, he despatched him
immediately to Bow Street with the drawing, and an account
of what had happened. The likeness was so good, that the
man was immediately identified by the runners, and was cap-
tured before he had time to dispose of a single article purloined.
He was brought to the gentleman in two hours afterwards,
identified, the property found on him sworn to, and, in six
weeks, he was on his passage to Botany Bay.
CHAPTER XXI.
London, November.
We have the signs of the times here. I peep through
the fog and see quite enough to satisfy me that the pros-
perity is but partial. Money in plenty, but lying in heaps—not circulated. Everyone hugs his bag, and is waiting to
see what the event may be. Retrenchment is written up as 
<page 100>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
85
evident as the prophetic words of fire upon the walls of Bel-
shazzar's palace—To let—to let—to let. Leave London in
any direction, and you find the same mystical characters every
one hundred yards of the road. This beautiful villa, this
cottage ornee, this capital house with pleasure-grounds, this
mansion and park—all—all to let. It is said that there are
upwards of seven thousand of these country seats to let within
twelve miles of the metropolis. Again, look at the arms of
the carriages which still roll through the streets, and you will
perceive that if not with a coronet or supporters, nine out of
ten have the widow's lozenge. And why so? because they
belong to the widows of those who died in the times of plenty,
and who left them large jointures upon their estates. They,
of course, can still support and even better support, the
expense; but the estates now yield but sufficient to pay the
jointure, and the incumbent swallows up the whole. And
where are the real owners of the properties? At Paris, at
Naples, at Brussels, if they can afford to be in a Capital—
if not, dispersed over Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy—re-
trenching in other countries, or living more comfortably upon
their incomes. How many millions, for it does amount to
millions, are now spent on the continent, enriching the people
of other countries, and in all probability laying up for those
countries the sinews for another war to be directed against
England! How much of wretchedness and starvation has
been suffered in our own country within these few years, which,
if our people had not been living abroad, might never have
been felt! Where are the elite of our aristocracy? Where
are our country gentlemen who used to keep open house at
their estates, disseminating their wealth and producing happi-
ness? All driven abroad—society disjointed—no leader of
fashion to set the example, by luxurious entertainments, of
disseminating that wealth which ultimately finds its way into
the greasy pocket of the labourer or mechanic. Shops opened
late and closed early. Gin palaces, like hell, ever open to a
customer. The pulse of London hardly beats—it is perceptible,
but no more. Nothing is active but the press, and the pressure
from without. But who would remain ten days in London in
the month of November, when he can go away, without he had
serious thoughts of suicide? Candles at high noon, yellow
fogs, and torches in mid-day, do not suit me, so I'm off again
to a purer atmosphere.

<page 101>
86
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
CHAPTER XXII.
Spa, June 30.
Yesterday I fell in with two old friends, who, from a mere
"truant disposition," joined perhaps with a little good will
towards me, came over to Spa. As soon as their arrival had
been announced, I went to them, and at their request joined
their dinner. After our first greetings, B , who not only
appears, but really is, a man of fashion, in the best sense of
the term, wanted his snuff-box. It was in his bed-room, and
his bed-room was locked by the servant, who had taken the
key and gone out. The consequence was, that B had to
wait some time, and until the man came back. I have always
had a great aversion to a valet when constantly moving about
on the Continent, as a single man; and, although I do not
now, as I used to do when a midshipman, brush my own
clothes and black my own shoes, yet I like independence
in everything, and infinitely prefer doing anything myself,
to being waited upon; for, generally speaking, it is the master
who waits and not the man.
"I wonder you bother yourself with such a travelling
appendage, B ," observed I, giving him a pinch of snuff to
quiet his impatience. "I have never lately travelled with one."
"My dear fellow—the comfort of it—you have no idea. It
would be impossible to get on without one."
"Quite impossible," observed W , my other acquain-
tance.
"I have been brought up in a school in which the word
impossible has been erased from the language."
"Well, but the comfort of it. When you arrive, dirty and
dusty, your portmanteau opened, all your articles of dress laid
out."
"I can do all that myself sooner than he can; and, as I
must wait till it be done, I may as well do it myself."
"Yes, so you may, but then the security; everything
locked up, which, in a strange hotel, is so necessary."
"I lock my own room, and know where to find the key
when I come in."
"Very likely; but still it is impossible to travel comfortably
without a valet."
"Quite impossible," rejoined W .

<page 102>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
87
"Be it so," replied I; "we differ in opinion. All I can
say is, that necessary as a valet is when stationary, he is a
nuisance when you travel en garcon."
The conversation dropped, and we sat down to dinner; the
time passed away, as it always does, when old friends, who
respect and like each other, meet, after an absence of some
months. After dinner we smoked cigars; and, as the evening
advanced, there were none left on the table. B rang the
bell for his servant to procure others; the servant had gone
out and was nowhere to be found, and for security had locked
the bed-room door and taken the key with him. So we drank
our claret, and waited for his return. "Thinks I to myself
but I said nothing. At last, we waited till past twelve
o'clock; but the gentleman's gentleman was nowhere to be
found. B was angry with the man, W had thrown
himself on the sofa. He wished to go to bed after a long day's
travel; but his key was also, for security, in the valet's pocket,
who had been searched for everywhere without success. B
begged me not to remain out of politeness; but I did remain
not out of politeness, but of "malice," as the French term it.
"I had too much pleasure in their company to think of leaving
them;" and we continued to sip brandy-and-water. At last,
three o'clock came, B was out of all patience, W
snoring on the sofa, and I, quite delighted. The sun should
have poured his beams upon us before I would have gone
away. The bell was rung, but in vain, for the waiters would
wait no longer. It was proposed to send for a menuisier to
pick the lock; but how was one to be found at three o'clock
in the morning? At last the valet, drunk and reeling in his
morning jacket, entered the room. "The keys! the keys!" demanded B in wrath.
"The key!" roared W , who had woke up.
"I have them," replied the valet, with a most knowing leer,
facetiously smiling. "I have them—all safe—all right,
gentlemen. Here they are," continued the man, pulling them
out, and presenting them as if he had done a very clever
thing. "Here they are, you see."
The man was too tipsy to be expostulated with, and the
gentlemen took their keys in silence. "And now," said I,
"gentlemen, I wish you a very good night. You have fully
established the extreme comfort of a travelling valet, and the 
<page 103>
88
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
impossibility of doing without one." It was a glorious
victory, although to get out of the house I had to open a
window and leap from it, and to get into my own house at that
hour was even more difficult.
CHAPTER XXIII.
I have been reading Jesse's "Gleanings." Is he quite
correct? I have my doubts. In one point I certainly do not
agree with him, in his favourite opinion of cats. I do, how-
ever, know an instance of misplaced affection in a cat, which,
although it does not add to the moral character of the race, is
extremely curious for more reasons than one, and as it
happened in my own family, I can vouch for its authenticity.
A little black spaniel had five puppies, which were considered
too many for her to bring up. As, however, the breed was
much in request, her mistress was unwilling that any of them
should be destroyed, and she asked the cook whether she
thought it would be possible to bring a portion of them up by
hand before the kitchen fire. In reply, the cook observed that
the cat had that day kittened, and that, perhaps, the puppies
might be substituted for her progeny. The experiment was
made, two of the kittens were removed, and two puppies
substituted. The cat made no objections, took to them kindly,
and gradually all the kittens were taken away, and the cat
nursed the two puppies only. Now, the first curious fact was,
that the two puppies nursed by the cat were, in a fortnight,
as active, forward, and playful, as kittens would have been:
they had the use of their legs, barked, and gambolled about;
while the other three, nursed by the mother, were whining
and rolling about like fat slugs. The cat gave them her tail
to play with, and they were always in motion; they very soon
ate meat, and long before the others they were fit to be
removed. This was done, and the cat became very inconsola-
ble. She prowled about the house, and on the second day of
tribulation fell in with the little spaniel, who was nursing the
other three puppies. "O ho!" says Puss, putting up her
back, "it is you who have stolen my children." "No," 
<page 104>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
89
replied the Spaniel, with a snarl, "they are my own flesh and
blood." "That won't do," said the cat, "I'll take my oath
before any justice of peace that you have my two puppies."
Thereupon issue was joined, that is to say, there was a
desperate combat, which ended in the defeat of the spaniel,
and the cat walking proudly off with one of the puppies,
which she took to her own bed. Having deposited this one,
she returned, fought again, gained another victory, and
redeemed another puppy. Now it is very singular that she
should have only taken two, the exact number she had been
deprived of. Does this not prove to a certain extent the power
of calculating numbers in animals? and does not the precocity
of the two puppies brought up by the cat, infer there is some
grounds for the supposition that with the milk is imbued much
of the nature and disposition of the mother? A few experi-
ments made on these points would be interesting, and we
should have a new science, that of lacteology, to add to
craniology, in our nurture and rearing of the species.
This reminds me of a singular fact, little known. The
Burmahs, who are disciples of Gaudma, equally with the
inhabitants of Pegu and Syriam, whose country they have
conquered, worship the White Elephant, who is considered as
a god. There have been but three white elephants since the
foundation of the Burmah dynasty by Alompraa. The first
one is dead, and I have one of his teeth carved with figures,
which was consecrated to the great Dagon Pagoda. The
second now reigns—he is attended by hundreds, wears a
howdah, or cloth, studded with precious stones, which is said
to be worth a million of money. He also wears his bangles or
armlets on each leg, and fares sumptuously every day. White
elephants are very scarce; the colour is occasioned by a
disease in the animal, a species of leprosy. Any elephant
hunter in these countries, who is fortunate enough to capture
a white elephant, is immediately created a noble, and advanced
to high honour and wealth. The third white elephant, of
which I am about to speak particularly, and who may be
considered as the heir apparent, was taken a few months
previous to our declaring war against the Burmahs. He was
very young; his mother had been killed, and he yet required
partial nourishment. He was brought to Rangoon, established
in one of the best houses in the place, and an edict was sent 
<page 105>
90
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
forth from the capital, ordering that twenty-four of the most
healthy young married women should be dedicated to his
wants, and if they fell off in powers of nourishment, be re-
placed by others. This was considered an honour—for were
they not nursing a God? Major Canning, the political agent,
who went to see this curious spectacle, described it to me as
follows: "The animal was not above three feet and a few
inches high, its colour was a dirty grey, rather than white; it
was very healthy, playful, and in good spirits. When I went
into the room, which was very spacious, and built of teak-
wood, the twenty-four nurses were sitting or lying on mats
about the room, some playing at draughts and other games,
others working. The elephant walking about, looking at
them, and what they were doing, as if he understood all about
it. After a short time, the little deity felt hungry, and, with
his trunk he pushed some of the women, but to annoy him
they would not yield to his solicitations. When he became
angry, and was too rough for them, they submitted, and he
put his trunk round their waists in the most affectionate
manner, while he was supplying himself." I did not see the
animal myself, as immediately that they heard of our arrival at
the mouth of the river, they despatched him under a strong
guard to a place of security. But I should like to ascertain
hereafter^ whether his nurture made him a more reasonable
being than are elephants in general.
How one's thoughts fly away over time and space! What
a rush of incidents crowd into my memory, merely from having
mentioned this circumstance of the white elephant. I did
once intend to have written a narrative of what passed during
our sojourn in that country, for I saw more of the inhabitants
than most people; but others have forestalled me, and it is
now too late. Nevertheless, it will perhaps amuse the reader,
if, without entering into the military details, I mention a few
of the operations and scenes which then occurred. It shall be
so then, and we will discourse a little about the Burmahs.
An Armenian merchant who resided there told me a story
one day which was curious. The King of Pegu was possessed
of the most splendid ruby in the world, both as to size and
colour. This was well known; it was the boast of the nation.
When the Burmahs subdued the kingdom of Pegu, the old
king with all his family were taken prisoners, vast treasure 
<page 106>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
91
was also captured, but the great ruby was not to be found,
notwithstanding the torture and beheading of thousands.
With the usual barbarity of these countries, the old king, a
miserable paralytic little man, was stripped naked and confined
in an iron cage, which I saw when I was at Rangoon. In
this confinement he lived for ten or twelve years, every festival
day being brought out and exposed to the derision of the
populace. At last he died, and his body was thrown out to be
devoured by the dogs and birds of prey. One of the soldiers
who assisted to drag the body out of the cage, turned it over
with his foot, and perceived that his right hand grasped a
lump of damma, (a sort of pitch,) which curiosity induced the
Burmah to force out with the point of his spear. This had
been observed before, but the Burmahs, who are very super-
stitious and carry about them all sorts of charms, imagined it
, to be a charm for his paralysis or palsy with which he was
afflicted, and therefore had allowed him to retain it. But
when the Burmah took it up, the weight of it convinced him
that it was not all damma: he examined it, and found that it
was the great ruby of the Pegu kingdom which had been lost,
and which the old man had for so many years, in a state of
nudity and incarceration, held in his left hand. I asked one
of the Burmah chiefs whether this ruby now in the possession
of the King of Ava was so fine as represented: his answer was
in truly Eastern hyperbole—" Dip it in the Irrawaddy," said
he, (that is, an enormous river seven hundred miles long and
in many parts several miles broad,) "and the whole water will
turn to blood."
I have said that the Burmahs are very superstitious: they
have a great variety of charms which they wear about their
persons, but there is one custom of theirs which is very sin-
gular. They polish rubies; that is, without cutting them in
facettes, but merely the stone, whatever its primitive shape, is
rubbed down on every side until it is perfectly smooth. They
then make an incision in the flesh, generally the arm or leg,
put in the ruby and allow the skin to heal over it, so that the
stone remains there. Soldiers and sailors in search of plunder
will find out anything, and this practice of the Burmahs was
soon discovered; and after the assault and carrying of a
stockade, you would see the men passing their hands over the
bodies, and immediately they felt a rising in the limb, out with 
<page 107>
92 DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
their knives and cut in for the rubies. Indeed, the plunder
was more considerable than might be imagined, for every
Burmah carried all his wealth about his person.
Another singular custom arising from their superstition pre-
vails among this people. The king has a corps denominated
Invulnerables, whose ranks are filled up in this manner:—
when a criminal is condemned to death for certain offences,
such as robbery, he is permitted to challenge as an invulnerable.
This is proved by his standing at a certain distance from several
men who fire at him with ball. Should he not be wounded or
killed, he is pronounced an invulnerable and enrolled in the
corps. In every stockade we attacked, there were always one
or two of these men, and they really appeared to believe in
their own powers. They generally stood above the timbers of
the stockade, dancing and capering as the boats advanced, and
continued their extravagance amidst a shower of bullets,
exposing their persons in a most undaunted manner. There
was one fellow who, dressed in a short red jacket, and nothing
else except the cloth round his loins, who was well known to
our men; they called him Happy Jack, from the capers which
he used to cut, and somehow or another it was his good
fortune never to be hit, at least, not that we know of, for
taking stockade after stockade, at every fresh attack there was
Happy Jack to be seen capering and shouting as usual, and
never ceasing to expose himself until the troops had landed
and were about to scale the fortress. It was quite amusing to
hear the men shout out with laughter, "By heavens, there's
Happy Jack again." I hope he is alive at this moment; at all
events, he deserves to be.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Spa. Yes, now Spa is agreeable: we have no redouble open with
fools losing their money, no English passants looking after
amusement, no valetudinarians drinking the poupon, no Spa
boxes crowding every window: we are now as a Spa should be,
a coterie of houses in a ravine, surrounded by the mountains
of the Ardennes, crowding and shoving up together in mutual 
<page 108>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
93
protection against the deep snow and the forest wolves.
There is something new in this: most of the houses are shut
up; the shop-windows are all bare; the snow is two feet
deep in the streets; the mountains on every side are white;
the icicles hang upon the leafless boughs, and the rivulets are
enchained. All is one drear blank; and except the two-horse
diligence which heaves slowly in sight three or four hours
past its time, and the post, (which is now delivered at nine
o'clock instead of noon); there is no such thing as an arrival:
the boys slide upon their little sledges down the hills; the
cattle are driven home; the church clock strikes; and unless
we are enlivened by the crowd assembled round the country-
man, who appears with the carcass of a wolf which he has
been fortunate enough to kill, we are all quiet, monotony and
peace: in fact, Spa, now that it is a desert, has become to me,
at least, agreeable.
They say, this hard winter promises plenty of wolves; if
so, I recommend those who are fond of excitement to come
here. Indeed, it will be profitable, for if they are active
huntsmen, they can pay their expenses. A dead horse costs
little, and in Spa, as they give very little to the horses to
eat in summer, and nothing at all in the winter, they die fast.
You have only to drag the carcass to an outhouse at a little
distance from the town, and with your rifle watch during the
night. The wolves will come down to prey upon the carrion,
and it is hard if you do not kill your couple during the night,
and then you are rewarded by the commune. I do not know
what the price is now, but when the King of Holland was
in possession of Belgium it was one hundred francs for a
male, and three hundred francs for a female wolf. Now a
brace a night, four hundred francs, or sixteen pounds, is
not a bad night's earning: in Spa it would keep a half-pay
officer for three months. There is a curious story here,
proving the sagacity of a wolf which came down an hour
before dusk into the town, and made off with a child of two
years old in her mouth. The cry was raised, and the pursuit
immediate. After following her track for many miles, she
gained upon them, it became quite dark, and the people
returned homewards, melancholy at the fate of the poor
child. When they were about half way back, they heard
the wail of an infant, and, guided by it, they arrived at a 
<page 109>
4
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
thick bush, where they found the child alive and unhurt.
The wolf, finding that her pursuers gained upon her, had
deposited the child there, intending to return and make a meal
of it upon a more favourable opportunity.
We have had nothing to excite us within these last few
days but the death and burial of an old curate. He died in
all the odour of sanctity three days ago, and was buried
yesterday. He was not loved or even liked, for he wanted
that greatest of all gifts—charity. His situation was worth,
with offerings, six thousand francs a year,—a large sum in
this country: but he did not give to the poor; he exacted
from them, and they religiously obeyed him, no one killing a
pig or anything else without a present of part of it to the
curate. When the old man was told that he could not live,
the ruling passion still governed him. He sent for a person
to dispose of for him the sundry pieces of pork which he had
gathered as presents, then took the extreme unction, and died.
His will is not known, but he is supposed to be very rich, and
whether he leaves his wealth to some nephews, or to support
a hospital here which is at present without funds, is a question
of some interest. He was buried in great parade and pro-
cession, followed by hundreds holding candles. He was
dressed in his best, and everyone said that he never looked
so clean or so well in his life. He was carried on an open
brancard, with his canonical hat on his head, the snow fell
fast and settled on his face and clothes, but he felt it not.
The funeral was as cold as his charity, the thermometer being
exactly 13° below the freezing point. Except the procession
of the dead curate and of a dead wolf, we have had nothing to
interest us for the last ten days.
But I promised to talk about the Burmahs. There have
been two or three accounts of the military movements, but
there has been no inquiry or examination into the character of
the people, which, in my opinion, is of more importance than
is generally supposed; for although the East India Company
may imagine that they have done with the Burmahs, it is my
conviction that the Burmahs have not done with them, and
even I may live to witness the truth of my assertion.
It certainlyis a point of some interest to ascertain from whence
the Burmah nation originally came: that they are not aborigines,
I think most certain. They are surrounded by the Cochin 
<page 110>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
95
Chinese, the Chinese, and the Hindoos, all races of inferior
stature and effeminate in person, with little or no beard. Now
the Burmahs are a very powerful race, very muscular in their
limbs, possessing great strength and energy: generally speaking,
I should say, that they are rather taller than Europeans. They
have the high cheek bones of the Tatar, but not the small
eyes; they have strong hair and beards, and certainly would
remind you of a cross between the Jew and the Tatar. This
is singular; and it gave the idea to some of those who are
fond of indulging in theory, that they might be the remnants
of that portion of the Jews who, when permitted to leave
Babylon, instead of going east with the others, bent their
course to the westward and were never spoken of afterwards.
But the only props they had to this argument were the
appearance of the people, the weight in silver being called the
tekel or shekel, and the great pagoda having the name of the
Dag on pagoda. At least I heard of no more to support the
argument but those three, which can hardly be sufficient,
although the coincidence of the two words is singular.
The Burmahs are semi-barbarous: but this term must be
used in the most favourable light; because, surrounded on
every side by people who are wedded to their own customs,
the Burmahs have a liberality and a desire to improve, which
is very remarkable. I never met with any Burmah, not even
a lad, who could not read and write; they allow any form of
religion to be made use of, and churches of any description to
be built by foreigners, but they do not like missionaries
making converts of their own people; for as the king is the
head of the religion, conversion is a breach of allegiance.
One of the missionaries had an audience with the king, and
demanded permission to make proselytes. The king replied
that the missionary might convert as many as he pleased, but
that he would cut all their heads off afterwards. The mis-
sionary had not much trouble, when this answer was made
known, in counting the heads of his proselytes. In their own
religion, which is Budhism, the Burmahs appear to be very
relax; it is too absurd for the energy of their minds. Those
who enter the priesthood wear a yellow dress; but if a priest
at any time feels disposed to quit his profession, he is at
liberty so to do. All he has to do is to throw off his yellow
garment: but at the same time he can never resume it. The 
<page 111>
96
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
Burmahs are superstitious about charms, but are not super-
stitious on religious points. In fact, there is very little
religion among them, and had we, at the close of the war,
instead of demanding a crore of rupees, insisted that they
should embrace Christianity, the king would have given the
order, and the whole nation would have nominally been
Christians. I once asked a Burmah soldier what was his idea
of a future state. His idea of bliss was singular—" I shall be
turned into a buffalo, and shall lie down in a meadow of grass
higher than my head, and eat all day long, and there won't be
a single mosquito to annoy me." While on the subject of
religion, I may here observe, that at the capture of Rangoon
I entered a Chinese temple, the altar-piece, if I may use the
term, was the Ganesa of the Hindoos, but not seated on the
lotus leaf, but on the Chinese rat. On each side of this were
two little candelabras, formed of the Egyptian ibis, holding the
oil cups in its beak. I also found the Hounyman, or monkey
god of the Hindoos, and Bhudhist figures. I once observed
some sepoys playing and laughing at a bronze image they had
picked up at the pagoda of Syriam, and on examining it, I
was surprised to find that it was a figure of the Egyptian Isis,
with her hand raised, and her person in the position described
as the correct one when blessing the world. The art of
embalming appears to be known to the Burmahs, and is occa-
sionally practised by the priests. At the capture of the old
Portuguese fort at Syriam, I found, not far from it, a sort of
canopied shed, decorated with carving, cut paper, and tinsel,
and supported by four pillars, like a bedstead. Below lay the
body of a priest, embalmed and gilt. I intended to have
brought this home, but before I arrived there, I found one of
my marines, a graceless dog without religion or any other
good quality, very busy hammering the mummy to pieces
with the butt end of his musket. I was very angry, and
ordered him to desist. In excuse, he replied that it was an
abominable molten image, and it was his duty, as a good
Christian, to destroy it—the only evidence of Christianity ever
witnessed on that fellow's part. On examination, I found
that the body had been wrapped in sundry clothes, and,
like the ark of Noah, pitched within and without: over the
clothes was a coat of damma, then of chunam, and lastly it
was gilt; the head of the mummy was fictitious, and formed 
<page 112>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
97
of a cocoa-nut, the real skull being where, in the mummy,
would have appeared to have been the breast of the body. It
did not smell much, but there were a great many small
scarabei inside, and it was so mutilated that I did not remove
it. The Burmahs are cleanly in their houses, which generally
are raised from the ground a few feet, so as to allow the pigs,
which are the scavengers of the town, to walk under. They
have houses of brick, or stone and mortar, such as the custom-
house at Rangoon, and one or two others; but the most sub-
stantial houses are usually built of thick teak plank. The
smaller houses and cottages are built of bamboo, the floors
and walls being woven like wicker-work: the cleanliness and
the beauty of these houses when new are very remarkable, and
what is still more so, the rapidity with which they are built.
I have known an officer order a house to be built of three
rooms, with doors and windows to each, and of a comfortable
size, and three or four Burmahs will complete this house in a
day, and thatch the roof over. In another point, the Burmahs
show a degree of civilization, which might be an example to
the northern Athens—to every house there is a very neat and
clean cloaca.
The government, like all in Asia, is most despotic; and the
people have the faults which are certain to be generated by
despotism—but not to that degree which might be expected.
They have their hereditary nobility, and the orders of it are
very clearly defined. They consist of gold chains, worn round
the neck, with four plates or chased bosses dividing them;
the lowest order wears the bosses linked together by three
chains, the next highest in degree with six, the next nine, and
the last and highest order has twelve; the king only wears
twenty-four chains. The use of gold and silver, as drinking
cups, &c, is only permitted to the nobility. They are very
clever in chasing of metals, and they have a description of
work in glass and enamel, quite their own, with which they
decorate the temples, houses of the priests, and coffers con-
taining the sacred volumes. Their ornamental writings in the
Pali language, a variety of the Sanscrit, known only to the
priests, are also very beautiful—especially that upon long
leaves of ivory. Upon the whole, their manufactures are
superior to all around them, except perhaps the Chinese.
The women are small, and delicately formed, in proportion H

<page 113>
98
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
to the men; they are not shut up, but go where they please;
their dress is becoming; they braid the hair with flowers, and
they are much fairer than would be supposed. Those who
keep much within doors are nearly as white as Europeans.
They have a singular custom of putting a patch of white
chunam on the cheek bone, something in opposition to the
black patches which used formerly to be worn by our belles;
and it is intended to show how near they approach to white.
Indeed, when the men of the lower class, who are exposed all
day to the sun, remove their garments, it is singular to wit-
ness how many shades lighter they are in that part of their
bodies which is covered up. Usually, the men have but one
wife, but occasionally there are supernumeraries.
The laws of the Burmahs appear to be good, but, as in all
despotic countries, they are not acted upon, unless it pleases
the ruler. Slavery of a certain species is allowed. Should
one man be in debt to another, and is summoned before the
chief; if he states his inability to pay, he is asked how many
children he has, and according to the debt, so are his children
given in bond slavery to his debtor, who writes off a certain
sum every year until they are free. If he has no children, his
wife, or himself perhaps, will be bonded in the same manner.
But in this case, where ill-treatment can be proved, the bon-
dage will be removed; and further, any person so bonded, may
at his or her wish remove to the service of another master,
provided they can find one who will pay to the debtor the
amount still due, and thus finish the time of servitude under
one whom they like better. These bonds are all in writing,
and must be produced. Some of our military officers released
several of the young women from their slavery.
Sitting down in your presence, is, among the Burmese, a
mark of respect. Every poor man who is sent for, immediately
drops down on his hams in the corner of the room, or at the
portal. The use of the cocoa, or betel nut, is universal among
the men, but not so common with the women until they grow
old. The consequence is, that the teeth of the men are quite
black and decayed, while those of the young women are very
good.
The most remarkable feature in the character of the Burmahs
is their good temper; I think they are the most even-tempered
race I ever met with. They are always gay, always content 
<page 114>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
99
under any privation. I had, as will be seen hereafter, more
opportunities of seeing into the character of this people than
others had, for we mixed with them in amity for some weeks.
They are very fond of marionettes, and puppet playing, and are
very amusing mimics. They work very hard, and with the
greatest cheerfulness. They have a high respect for the English,
or the white faces, as they call us; and the superiority of our
warlike instruments, and our ships, was a subject of wonder,
and, at the same time, of most careful examination. They
perceive how far they are behind us, and are most anxious to
improve. From this reason, joined to others, it was a pity that we ever made war with the Burmahs; they had made an
easy conquest of those around them, and were satisfied with
their supposed superiority, but now they are not, for they are
active and enterprising, fond of war, and will not be content
until they have improved their system. Twenty years hence
we shall find the Burmahs a much more formidable nation
than they are at present, for they have every quality necessary
to become the first nation in the East: indeed, when we
consider with what weapons they defended themselves, and the
nature of the warfare, it is not a little to their credit that they
held out for nearly three years against the power of Great
Britain.
CHAPTER XXV.
February, 1836.
The Burmahs are decidedly a brave nation: the government
being despotic, their rulers are cruel, but the people are not.
I state this, as cowardice and cruelty usually go hand in hand.
Good temper and generosity are the prominent features in their
character—excellent materials to work upon in judicious hands.
I witnessed acts of courage at the early part of the war, before
the Burmahs found out how impossible it was to cope with
our superior arms, which were most surprising, and which
excited our admiration. They are peculiarly a warlike nation;
indeed, they are fond of war. Every man is a soldier, and
when ordered out to join the ranks, obeys without receiving h 2

<page 115>
100
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
any pay, providing his own arms. This fact, at once, estab-
lishes that they are inclined to war. Their arms generally
consist of a double-handed sword, a weapon of great force, and
very large spears; but everyone will possess a musket if he
can, and if it has not a lock, he will fire it with a match. It
is in this point that the Burmahs are so deficient in arms: we
used to consider it a very courageous act to venture to fire off
a Burmese musket, they were in such a wretched condition:
and to crown all, every man makes his own gunpowder. Now it
may be easily imagined what stuff this must be; as, previous
to an expected combat, each Burmah sits down and composes
the article to the best of his knowledge and belief. The
consequences are, that when these muskets do go off (and it is
ten to one they do not), it is again ten to one that the bullet
falls short, from the inefficacy of the powder. There is another
singular fact, and one which proves that they have been used
to muskets but a short time: it is, that they have no bullet-
moulds or leaden bullets. All their bullets are of iron,
hammered as round as they can hammer them at the forge; of
course the windage produced by this imperfect shape, occasions
it to deviate much from its intended direction.
The guns on their stockades and war-boats are equally
defective from bad powder, and the hammered iron bullets.
It is difficult to know where they could have collected such a
curious assemblage. Sometimes you will fall in with a small
brass piece of exquisite Spanish manufacture, at others you
will find them of the strangest forms that can be conceived. I
rather think they were purchased, or taken as a part of the
duties on vessels trading to Rangoon. I recollect once at the
first taking of a stockade, we knocked off the trunnions of an
old iron gun, and left it there as useless. The Burmahs re-
occupied the stockade, and we had to take it a second time,
when we found that they had most ingeniously supplied the
want of trunnions with iron hoops and rivets, and the gun was
fired at us before we entered. At another time, we entered
a stockade which had kept up a brisk fire for a few minutes,
and to our surprise found that they had made wooden guns,
very well bound and braced with iron hoops. Of course these
guns would not fire more than two or three shots each, as the
touch-holes became inflamed, and were soon so large as to
render the guns unserviceable; but 1 mention these points, to 
<page 116>
DIAKY ON THE CONTINENT.
101
prove the perseverance of these people, and the efforts they made in their own defence. After the first campaign it is true
that they deserted, and the levies were made by force; but the
reason of this, for I inquired into it, was not that they had
any objection to fight, but that, fighting without pay, they
wanted to go home and put the seed into the ground, as
otherwise their wives and families would starve.
The Burmah war-boats are very splendid craft, pulling
from eighty to one hundred oars; the Burmahs manage them
very dexterously, and will pull them from seven to eight miles
an hour. They have a war-boat dedicated to the Deity,
which brought intelligence that saved the nation at the time of
the war with the empire of Pegu, in a space of time so short,
as almost to appear incredible.
As I before observed, the gun mounted on the boat's bow is
of little effect, but their spears are really formidable. At a
night attack upon some of our vessels, anchored off a stockade
which they wanted to regain, I had an evidence of the force
with which they are thrown. The sides of the vessels were
covered with them, sticking out like porcupine's quills, and
they had entered the plank with such force, that it required
a very strong arm to pull them out again. We lost some
men by them; the effect of a hundred spears hurtling through
the air at the same time was singularly appalling to our men,
who were not accustomed to the sound, especially during the
night. I heard several of the sailors observe afterwards that
they "did not like that at all," and I am sure they would
have infinitely preferred to have been met with fire-arms.
Some of these spears were sixteen feet long, with an iron
head, sharp at both sides, weighing from twelve to fourteen
pounds. I have seen bows and arrows in the possession of
the Burmahs, but never have observed that they used them in
their conflicts with us. They appeared to despise them.
The system of warfare and defence pursued by these people, is
undoubtedly excellent for the peculiarities of the country.
Their stockades are usually built of any thick teak timber, or
rather squared trees, which are much too strong to be pene-
trated by any other than battering cannon, and, in conse-
quence, were invariably carried by escalade. Some of them
are built of bamboos, running from a foot to two feet in
diameter. These are equally strong, with the peculiarity that 
<page 117>
102
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
if you fire cannon at them the bamboos yield, admit the shot,
and then close again. If these stockades are not close to the
river side, they usually have a deep ditch round them, and are
further protected by what was more serious to us than the
escalading, which were abbatis of pointed bamboos, stuck in a
slanting direction in the ground. The slight wounds made by
these bamboos brought on lock-jaw, and too often terminated
fatally. In the attacks upon us at Rangoon they made their
approaches with some degree of military skill, throwing up
trenches as they advanced. Their fire-rafts on such a rapid
river were also formidable. They have wells of petroleum up
the country: their rafts were very large, and on them, here
and there, were placed old canoes filled with this inflammable
matter. When on fire, it blazed as high as our maintop,
throwing out flames, heat, and stink quite enough to drive anyone away.
I have mentioned their mode of warfare and their deficien-
cies, to prove that if the Burmahs had been as well provided
with every species of arms equal to our own, the country would
not have been so soon subjugated as it was. Their system of
defence was good, their bravery was undoubted, but they had
no effective weapons. I strongly suspect that they will, now
that they have been taught their inferiority, use every means
to obtain them; and if so, they will really become a formi-
dable nation. As one proof of their courage, I will mention,
that at every stockade there is a look-out man, perched on a
sort of pole, about ten feet or more clear of the upper part of
the stockade, in a situation completely exposed. I have
often observed these men, and it was not till the cannonade had
fairly commenced on both sides, that they came down, and
when they did, it was without hurry; indeed, I may say, in a
most leisurely and indifferent manner. Of their invulnerables
and their antics I have already spoken.
In countries governed despotically, life is not so much
valued as it is in others. The very knowledge that it may be
taken in a moment at the will of the rulers, renders even the
cowardly comparatively indifferent. Having been accustomed
from our earliest years to anticipate an event, when it
actually arrives we meet it with composure and indifference.
The lad in England who is brought up to thieving, and who
is continually reminded by his parents, that he must be hung 
<page 118>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
103
before he is twenty, goes to the gallows when his turn comes
with much sang froid. So it is in a despotic country, where
the people witness the heads of their companions roll on the
ground, and surmise how soon their own turn will come. I
had more than one evidence of this during my stay. In one
instance I wished to obtain information from a prisoner, but
could extract none. He had been sitting between the car-
ronades on deck for twenty-four hours, and some of the men
or officers had given him a bowl of grog and a couple of cigars,
with which he was busy when I interrogated him. As he
professed ignorance, I told him that if he would not give me
the desired information, I should take his head off; and I sent
for the Serjeant of marines, who appeared with two of his
party, and with his drawn sword. We called him out from
between the guns, but he begged through the interpreter to be
allowed to finish his grog, to which I consented: when that
was done, he was again ordered out, but requested leave to
finish about an inch of cigar which remained in his mouth.
To which I also acceded, not being in a particular hurry to do
that which I never intended to do. During all this the man
was perfectly composed, and did not show the least alarm at
his approaching fate. As soon as the cigar was finished, he
bound his long hair up afresh, and made preparation. I again
asked him if he would tell, but he pleaded ignorance, and
stepped forward, went down on his knees and took off the
cloth from about his loins, which he spread on the deck to
receive his head, and then putting his hands on the deck,
held it in the position to be cut off. Not a muscle trembled,
for I watched the man carefully. He was, of course, re-
manded, and the sailors were so pleased with him, that he
went on shore with more grog and more tobacco than he had
probably ever seen in his life.
The Burmahs have, however, a means of extracting infor-
mation from spies, &c, which I never saw practised by them,
although it was borrowed from them by us. It was in our
own quarter-master-general's office that I witnessed this
species of torture, so simple in its operation, and apparently
so dreadful in its effects. It consists in giving one single
blow upon the region of the heart, so as to stop for some
seconds the whole circulation. The way by which this is
effected is as follows:—the man—the Burmahs are generally 
<page 119>
104
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
naked to the waist—is made to sit down on the floor; another
man stands behind him, and leaning over him, takes a very
exact aim with his sharp bent elbow at the precise spot over
his heart, and then strikes a blow which, from its being
propelled so very mechanically, descends with increased
force.
The effect appears dreadful; the dark hue of the sufferer's
face turns to a deadly white; the perspiration bursts out from
his forehead, and he trembles in every limb. I never wit-
nessed such apparent agony. These blows repeated three or four times, will unman the most resolute, and they will call for
death as a favour.
There is one point which must not be overlooked by the
Indian government, and which, connected with what I have
already mentioned, makes the Burmese nation more formid-
able; it is, the great contempt they have for the sepoys.
And what is equally true, the fears which the sepoys have of
them. The Burmahs are only afraid of the white faces, as I
shall very soon establish. They despise the sepoys, although
they are so well armed. Now, that the sepoys are good
troops, there can be no doubt; they have proved it often; but,
at the same time, they are not, as some of the Indian officers
have asserted in my presence, the best troops in the world,
and preferable to Europeans. That they are much easier to
control, and that they excel in discipline, I grant, because
they are never intoxicated; but they have, in the first place,
very little stamina, and are, generally speaking, a small and
very effeminately built race. Still they have fought well—
very well; but they never fought well against the Burmahs;
and for this simple reason,—that superstition is more power-
ful than courage, and subdues it. The sepoys are very
superstitious, and had the idea, which was never eradicated,
that the Burmahs were charmed men, and they never went
out against them willingly, even when they were headed by
the English troops. As for the Burmahs' contempt of them,
it was notorious. I have myself seen one of the Burmah
prisoners at Rangoon lift up a piece of timber that six of
the sepoys could hardly have moved, and throw it down, so
as to make it roll at the feet of the sepoy guard who watched
him, making them all retreat several paces, and then laugh
at them in derision. But we had many more decisive proofs. 
<page 120>
DIAKY ON THE CONTIOEttT.
105
The Burmahs had stockaded themselves about seven miles
from Rangoon, and it was determined to dislodge them.
Colonel S—, who was very partial to the native troops, was
ordered on this service, and he requested particularly that
he might have no troops but the sepoys. Sir A. Campbell
did not much like to consent, but, as the stockades were
not higher than breastworks, and the Burmahs not in very
great force, he eventually yielded to the Colonel's arguments.
Fifteen hundred sepoys were ordered out, and the Colonel
went on his expedition. The Burmahs had good intelligence
that there were no European troops, and when the sepoys
arrived, they did not wait to be attacked, but attacked the
sepoys, and put them completely to the rout. One half of
the sepoys were said to be killed; the others came back to
Rangoon in parties of ten or twelve, and in the utmost
consternation and confusion. Sir A. Campbell was, of course,
much annoyed, and the next day a European force was
despatched against the Burmahs. On their arrival they
witnessed a dreadful and disgusting scene. A long avenue
had been cut in the wood, and on each side of it were hung
by the heels, at equal distances, shockingly mutilated, the
naked bodies of the seven hundred and fifty sepoys killed.
The Burmahs did not, however, attempt to resist the Euro-
pean force, but after a few shots made their retreat. Now,
this is a very important fact: and it is a fact which cannot
be denied, although it has not been made known. In India
there is a nominal force of three hundred thousand men, but
they are scattered over such a vast extent of territory, that,
allowing they could be made disposable, which they could
not, it would require many months before they could be col-
lected, and if the Burmahs despise the sepoys, and the sepoys
dread the Burmahs, the only check against the latter will be
the European troops; and of them how many can be called
out. Not ten thousand, at the very utmost; and the diffi-
culty of collecting them was well known at the commence-
ment of the Burmah war. There certainly is a great difference
between attacking others in their own territories, and defending
ourselves; but if the Burmahs could hold out against us, as
they did, for nearly three years, without arms to cope with us,
what might be the consequence if they were supplied with
arms and officers by any other nation? We have now a 
<page 121>
106
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
footing in the country, and it must be our object to prevent
the ingress of any other, and to keep the Burmahs as quiet
and as peaceable as we can. But our very intercourse
will enlighten them by degrees, and we have more to dread
from that quarter than from all the hordes of Russia or Runjeet
Sing, and the whole disaffection of India.
As I have more to say relative to the Burmahs, I will, in
my next chapter, enter into a short narrative of the expedi-
tion to Bassein. It was a bloodless one, although very
important in its results: and circumstances occurred in it
which will throw much light upon the character of the nation.
CHAPTER XXVI.
It was not until many months after the war had been
carried on, that Sir Archibald Campbell found himself in a
position to penetrate into the heart of the Burmah territory,
and attempt the capital. He wanted almost everything,
and among the rest reinforcements of men; for the rainy
season had swept them off by thousands. At last, when
determined to make the attempt, he did it with a most
inadequate force; so small that, had the Burmahs thought
of even trenching up and barricading the roads at every
half mile, he must have been compelled, without firing a shot,
to have retreated. Fortunately, he had an accession of
men-of-war, and his river detachment was stronger than he
could have hoped for. I do not pretend to state the total
force which was embarked on the river or that which pro-
ceeded by land, communicating with each other when cir-
cumstances permitted, as the major part of the provisions
of the army were, I believe, carried up by water. The united
river force was commanded by Brigadier Cotton, Captain
Alexander, and Captain Chads; the land forces, of course,
by Sir A. Campbell, who had excellent officers with him, but
whose tactics were of no use in this warfare of morass, mud,
and jungle.
It will be proper to explain why it was considered necessary
to detach a part of the forces to Bassein. The Rangoon
river joins the Irrawaddy on the left, about one hundred and 
<page 122>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
seventy miles from its flowing into the ocean. On the right
of the Irrawaddy is the river of Bassein, the mouth of it
about one hundred and fifty miles from that of the Irrawaddy,
and running up the country in an angle towards it until it
joins it about four hundred miles up in the interior. The
two rivers thus enclose a large delta of land, which is the
most fertile and best peopled of the Burmah provinces, and
it was from this delta that Bundoola, the Burmah general,
received all his supplies of men. Bundoola was in the strong
fortress of Donabue, on the Bassein side of the river, about
half way between where the Rangoon river joined it on the
left, and the Bassein river communicated with it a long way
farther up on the right. Sir A. Campbell's land forces were
on the left of the river, so that Bundoola's communication
with the Bassein territory was quite open; and as the river
forces had to attack Donabue on their way up, the force
sent to Bassein, was to take him in the rear and cut off his
supplies. This was a most judicious plan of the General's,
as will be proved in the sequel. Major S—, with four or
five hundred men in three transports, the Lame, and the
Mercury, Hon. Company's brig, were ordered upon this
expedition, which sailed at the same time that the army began
to march and the boats to ascend the river.
On the arrival at the mouth of the river we found the
entrance most formidable in appearance, there being a dozen
or more stockades of great extent; but there were but two
manned, the guns of the others, as well as the men, having
been forwarded to Donabue, the Burmahs not imagining, as
we had so long left that part of their territory unmolested, that
we should have attempted it. Our passage was therefore easy;
after a few broadsides, we landed and spiked the guns, and
then, with a fair wind, ran about seventy miles up one of the
most picturesque and finest rivers I was ever in. Occasionally
the right lines of stockades presented themselves, but we found
nobody in them, and passed by them in peace. But the river
now became more intricate, and the pilots, as usual, knew
nothing about it. It was, however, of little consequence; the
river was deep even at its banks, over which the forest trees
threw their boughs in wild luxuriance. The wind was now
down the river, and we were two or three days before we
arrived at Bassein, during which we tided and warped how we

<page 123>
108
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
could, while Major S— grumbled. If the reader wishes to
know why Major S— grumbled, I will tell him—because
there was no fighting. He grumbled when we passed the
stockades at the entrance of the river because they were not
manned; and he grumbled at every dismantled stockade that
we passed. But there was no pleasing S—; if he was in hard
action and not wounded, he grumbled; if he received a slight
wound, he grumbled because it was not a severe one; if a
severe one, he grumbled because he was not able to fight the
next day. He had been nearly cut to pieces in many actions,
but he was not content. Like the man under punishment,
the drummer might strike high or strike low, there was no
pleasing S—: nothing but the coup de grace, if he be now
alive, will satisfy him. But notwithstanding this mania for
being carved, he was an excellent and judicious officer. I
have been told he is since dead; if so, his Majesty has lost
one of the most devoted and chivalric officers in his service, to
whom might most justly be applied the words of Hotspur,—
"But if it be a sin to covet honour, I am the most offending
soul alive."*
As I before observed, the branches of the trees hung over
the sides of the river, and a circumstance occurred which was
a source of great amusement. We had a little monkey, who
had been some time on board, and was a favourite, as usual,
of the ship's company. The baffling winds very often threw
us against the banks of the river, near which there was plenty
of water; and when this was the case, the boughs of the trees
were interlaced with the rigging of the ship. This unusual
embracing between nature and art gave Jacko the idea of old
times when he frolicked in the woods, and unable to resist the
force of early associations, he stepped from the top-sail yard to
the branch of a large tree, and when the ship had hauled off
clear, we found that Jacko had deserted. We lamented it,
and ten minutes afterwards, thinking no more about him, we
continued our course up the river. About an hour had
elapsed, during which we had gained upwards of a mile, when
again nearing the bank on that side, we heard a loud
chattering and screaming. "That's Jacko, sir," said one of * He is alive and well, and has since gained great distinction and
honour.

<page 124>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
109
the men, and others expressed the same opinion. We manned
the jolly-boat, and sent it on shore towards the place where
the noise was heard. The monkey did not wait till the bow
of the boat touched the shore, but springing into it when some
feet off, he took his seat very deliberately on the stern, and
was pulled on board, where immediately he flew up the side,
caressing every one he met. The fact was, that Jacko had
found several of his own race in the woods, but, like all wild
animals, they immediately attacked one who had worn the
chains of servitude, and Jacko had to fly for his life. We very
often interlaced the rigging with the boughs after that, but
the monkey remained quiet on the booms, and showed not the
slightest wish to renew his rambles.
I think it was on the third day that we arrived below the
town of Naputah, which was defended by a very formidable
stockade, commanding the whole reach of the river. The
stockade was manned, and we expected that it would be
defended, but as we did not fire, neither did they; and we
should have passed it quietly, had not S— grumbled so much
at his bad luck. The next day we arrived at Bassein, one of
the principal towns in the Burman Empire. Here again the
Major was disappointed, for it appeared that, on hearing of
the arrival of the expedition at the entrance of the river, the
people had divided into two parties, one for resistance, the
other for submission. This difference of opinion had ended in
their setting fire to the town and immense magazines of grain,
dismantling the stockades, and the major part of the in-
habitants flying into the country. The consequence was, that
we took possession of the smoking ruins without opposi-
tion.
It was soon observed that the people were tired of the
protracted war, and of the desolation occasioned by it. They
wanted to return to their wives and families, who were
starving. But up to this time the chiefs had remained faithful
to Bundoola, who had amassed stores and provisions at
Bassein, intending to retreat upon it, should he be driven out
of the fortress of Donabue; and as long as he held that
fortress, receiving from Bassein his supplies of men and of
provisions. The Burmahs were so unwilling to fight any
longer, that they were collected by armed bands, and made
prisoners by the chiefs, who sent them up as required; and 
<page 125>
110
DIARY ON THE CONTINNET.
many hundreds were still in this way detained, enclosed in
stockaded ground, and watched by armed men, in several
towns along the river. An expedition was first despatched up
the river, to its junction with the Irrawaddy, as there was a
town there in which was the dockyard of the Burmahs, all
their war boats, and canoes of every description being built at
that place. They ascended without difficulty, and, after a
little skirmishing, took possession of the place, burnt all the
boats built or building, and then returned to Bassein.
Of course, we had then nothing to do: Major S—'s orders
were to join Sir A. Campbell, if he possibly could; which,
with much difficulty, he ultimately effected. We must now
return to the Irrawaddy expedition sent up at the same time
that Sir A. Campbell marched by land, and our expedition
went up the Bassein river.
This force arrived at Donabue before we had gained Bassein.
It found a most formidable fortress, or rather, three fortresses
in one, mounting a great number of guns, and, as I before
observed, held by Bundoola, the commander of the Burmah
forces, in whom the Burmah troops placed the greatest
confidence. I speak from hearsay and memory, but I believe
I am correct when I state that there were not less than ten
thousand men in Donabue, besides war elephants, &c. Now
the river force did not amount in fighting men certainly to one
thousand, and they were not in sufficient strength to attack a
place of this description, upon which every pains had been
taken for a long while to render it impregnable. The attack
was however made, and the smaller stockade of the three
carried; but when they had possession of the smallest stockade,
they discovered that they were at the mercy of the second, and
in a sort of trap. The consequence was, defeat—the only
defeat experienced by the white troops during the whole war.
The troops were re-embarked, and the boats were obliged to
drop down the river clear of the fire of the fort. I believe two
hundred and fifty English troops were left dead in the
stockade, and the next day their bodies, crucified on rafts,
were floated down among the English boats by the triumphant
Bundoola. In the meantime a despatch had been sent to Sir
A. Campbell, who was in advance on the banks of the river;
stating that the force afloat was not able to cope with the
fortress, the real strength of which no one had been aware of. 
<page 126>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
Ill
The consequence was, that Sir A. Campbell retraced his steps,
crossed the river, and attacked it in conjunction with the
flotilla, Sir A. Campbell taking it in the rear. After some
hard fighting, in which the elephants played their parts, the
troops gained possession, and Bundoola having been killed by
a shell, the Burmahs fled. Now it was very fortunate that the
expedition had been sent to Bassein, for otherwise the
Burmahs would have fallen back upon that place, which held
all their stores, and would thus have been able to continue in
the rear of Sir A. Campbell, as he advanced up the river. But
they had heard of the destruction and capture of Bassein, and
consequently directed their flight up the river towards the
capital. We were in possession of all these circumstances
shortly after we had taken possession of Bassein; and although
the death of Bundoola and taking of Donabue had dispirited
the Burmahs, yet there were many chiefs who still held out,
and who, had they crossed with their troops to the Irrawaddy,
would have interrupted the supplies coming up, and the
wounded and sick who were sent down. We had, therefore,
still the duty of breaking up these resources if possible.
Having ascertained who the parties were, we sent a message
to one of the weakest to say, that if he did not tender his
submission, and come in to us, we should attack him, and
burn the town to the ground.
The chief thought it advisable to obey our summons, and
sent word that he would come in on the ensuing day. He
kept his promise: about noon, as we were sitting in the
verandah of a large Sammy house (a sort of monastery), which
we had taken possession of, we were informed that he had
arrived. The token of submission on the part of the Burmahs
is, presenting the other party with wax candles. If a poor man
has a request to make, or favour to ask of a great man, he
never makes it without laying a small wax candle at his feet.
Neither do they approach the Rayhoon and Mayhoon without
this mark of respect.
Some time after this, one of the chiefs who had submitted
took up his quarters at Bassein; and his little daughter, about
eight or nine years old, was very fond of coming to see me, as
I generally made her little presents. She became very much
attached to me, but she never appeared without a little wax
candle, which she dropped at my feet before she threw herself
into my lap.

<page 127>
112
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
In the present instance, the chief first made his appearance,
and having come within a few feet, sat down as a mark of
respect. He was followed by six more, who each carried about
two pounds of wax candles, tastefully arranged in a sort of
filigree work of coloured papers. After these came about fifty
men, carrying large baskets full of vegetables and fruit, which
they poured out on the floor before us, and then walked away
and squatted at a distance. A few words of ceremony were
then exchanged, and the friendship cemented over a bottle of
brandy and some wine; which, notwithstanding the use of
spirituous liquors is against their religion, and forbidden by the
governmenat, they did not object to. Before he left I made
him a present in return, and he went away delighted with the
gift. Several more of the minor chiefs afterwards came in, and
the same formalities were gone through; but there were three
of the most important who would not make their appearance;
one, the chief of Naputah, the town which we had passed,
which did not fire at us from the stockades, and two others
down at another large arm of the river, who had many men
detained for the service of the army if required, and who were
still at open defiance. All these three were gold chatta chiefs,
that is, permitted to have a gold umbrella carried over their
heads when they appeared in public.
After waiting a certain time for these people to send in their
submission, we sent word down to the chief of Naputah, that
we should visit him the next day, threatening him with the
consequences of not complying with our request. Accordingly
we weighed in the Lame, and dropped down the river till we
were abreast of the town and stockade, which was about thirty
miles distant from Bassein. Our broadside was ready; but as
we were about to fire, we perceived that boats were manning,
and in about five minutes the chief of Naputah, in his own
war-boat, accompanied by about twelve others, and a great many
canoes, pulled off from the shore and came alongside. He
made his submission, with the usual accompaniments, and we
were soon very good friends. We gave him a beautiful little
brass gun, which ornamented our poop, and he went away
very well pleased. We here had an opportunity of witnessing
the dexterity with which they handle their boats. They really
appeared to be alive, they darted through the water with such
rapidity. Many of the Burmahs remained on board, exa-
mining every part of the vessel and her equipment; and soon 
<page 128>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
113
they were on the best of terms with the seamen and the few
troops which I had on board to assist us, for we were very
short manned. We had gained intelligence that there were
some guns sunk in a creek, about three miles from Bassein,
and we had despatched a boat to look for them, having the
assurance of a chief who was at Bassein, that the people were
peaceable and well-disposed. By some mistake, the boat went
up the wrong creek, and pulled many miles into the country,
without finding the spot pointed out by marks given. At
night they were at the mercy of the Burmahs, who came to
them to know what they required. The Burmahs told them
that they had mistaken the creek, but were very kind to them,
giving them a good supper, and passing the night among
them, playing their marionettes. The next day they showed
them their way, and when they came to the guns, the Burmahs
dived, and made ropes fast, and brought them up for them,
sending a message that they would come and see the Great
Water-dog (meaning me) the next day.
We remained two days at anchor, off the town of Naputah,
waiting for this boat, as it was our intention to go down the
river, and attack the two other gold chatta chiefs, if they did
not send in their submission. On the second day the Naputah
chief came on board to ask us if we would attend a Nautch
which he gave that evening in compliment to us ; but requested
that we would not bring all our people, as it would frighten
his own. Although it was not pleasant to trust ourselves on
shore in the night, in the midst of so large a force, yet, anxious
to make friends with him, we thought it advisable to accept
the invitation in the manner he desired. I replied, "that I
would only bring on shore a few officers, and my usual
attendants of six marines without arms." At eight o'clock
some of the officers and I went on shore: it was quite dark,
but we found the chief at the landing-place ready to receive
us. The marines had their bayonets, and the officers had
pistols concealed in case of treachery, and the first lieutenant
kept a good look out, with the broadside of the ship all ready
at the first flash of a pistol, but these precautions were unne-
cessary; the chief took me by the hand and led me up to his
house, in front of which had been erected a sort of covered
circus, brilliantly lighted up with oil in cocoa-nut shells, and
round which were squatted several hundred Burmahs. He
took us all to the raised verandah of the house, which was i

<page 129>
114
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
fitted up for the ceremony, where we found his wife, and all
his attendants, but not his daughter, who was said to be very
handsome. As soon as we had taken our seats the Nautch
commenced. About twenty men struck up a very barbarous
kind of music, in which the bells and drums made the most
noise. After a few minutes of discordant sound, the play
began. The actors were in a sort of costume, and appeared
quite at home in their parts. The story consisted in the
attempts of a young prince to obtain the hand of a young
princess; and the dialogue was constantly interrupted by an
actor who appeared to be a looker-on, but who made his
remarks upon what passed, so as to excite bursts of laughter
from the audience. He was the Jack Pudding, or wit of the
piece, and several of his jokes were not very delicate. At all
events, he was the Liston of the company, for he never spoke
nor moved without creating a laugh. The play ended very
curiously; after the prince had gained the princess, they had a
procession, in which they made an imitation of a ship, out of
compliment to us; and then built a little house on the stage
with singular rapidity, to the door of which they conducted
the youthful couple, closed it, and then the play was over. In
the meantime pickled tea (which is a great compliment and
excessively nasty) was handed round to us, and we all partook
of it, taking it out with our fingers; but we could not swallow
it, so it remained like a quid of tobacco in our cheeks until we
had an opportunity of getting rid of it.
The purser had had the foresight to put a couple of bottles
of wine, and one of brandy, in the pockets of the marines,
which were now produced, while the band continued to play,
and wrestling was introduced. We asked the chief to join us,
but he refused; he handed down a sort of picture, in which was
represented the white elephant, pagodas, &c, and told us that
he was not only the war chief, but the head of the religion at
Naputah, and that it would not be right that he should be
seen by his people transgressing the laws. In the meantime
his daughter, who did not come out to us, was very anxious to
know what sort of people we were, and she sent for one to be
brought in to her. My clerk was the favoured party. She
examined him very closely, pulled his dress about, made him
bare his legs, to see how white they were, and then dismissed
him. The clerk reported her as very handsome, and quite as
white as he was; splendidly dressed; and with an air of

<page 130>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
115
command, which showed that she was aware of her impor-
tance.
We staid about two hours longer, and then we rose to go
away. The chief walked with us down to the boats, and we
were not sorry to find ourselves on board again; for the popu-
lation was much more numerous than we had imagined, and
had any treachery been attempted, we must have fallen a
sacrifice.
CHAPTER XXVII.
EXPEDITION TO BASSEIN CONTINUED.
May, 1836.
Although on friendly terms with the chief of Naputah, he
was a person of such weight in that part of the country, that
it was advisable, if possible, to identify him with us, so that
he should never again fall off, and oppose us, in the contin-
gency of a reverse, on the Irrawaddy. The next day we sent
for him, informing him that it was to make him a present in
return for his civility the day before. But before we handed
the present to him, we stated our intention of dropping down
the river to reduce the two gold chatta chiefs who still held
out; and that, as we did not exactly know where their towns
were situated, we wished for some of his people to go with me.
To this first proposition, after some hesitation, he consented.
We then pointed out that our men were not accustomed to
work in the sun, and were often ill; that, as we were now
friends, we wished him to allow me some of his boats to assist
the ship in the river. To this also he consented. In fine, we
brought forward our last proposition, which was, that he
should supply us with six or eight war-boats, well manned,
and that we would pay the men and officers at the same rate
per day as we paid our own men; stating the sum we would
give, and that, if he was really sincere in his friendship and
goodwill, we expected not to be refused. Now, among the
Burmahs who were with him, there were many whose rela-
tions were detained to join the army; a consultation ensued;
the chief was pressed by his own people, and, at last, gave his
consent. We then presented him with the piece of plate,
upon which his eyes had constantly been turned, and he went
i 2

<page 131>
116
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
away, promising us that the men and boats should be alongside
by daylight the next morning.
This chief adhered to his promise, and we weighed anchor
the next day, and made sail down with the war-boats, and
three or four despatch-canoes, pulled by four or five men.
These little canoes, when put to their speed, dashed through
the water at such a rate, that they threw off from each bow
one continued little fan-shaped jet-d'eau, which had a very
beautiful appearance, the sunbeams forming them into rain-
bows. As for our Burmah force, they were at one time pul-
ling against the vessel sailing; at others, hanging on, and the
people climbing about the rigging, and ascending the mast-
head of the vessel; but they soon all congregated to the stand
of muskets, for that was the great object of attraction. In the
afternoon we had ball practice with the small arms; and the
Burmahs were, much to their delight, permitted to fire. It is
surprising how exact they were in their aims, considering the
little practice they must have had. Bad as all the muskets
are which are served out to the ships of war, I really believe
that there was not a Burmah who would not have laid down
every thing he possessed, except his life, to have obtained one.
One of them, when he was permitted to take a musket, looked
proudly round, and said, with a smile of joy, "Now I'm a
man!"
The next day we arrived at the branch of the river where one
of the chiefs held out. At daylight onr own boats were man-
ned, and with the Burmah boats ranged in line, made an
imposing appearance, which was very necessary, for at that
time we were so short-handed, that we could not send away more
than forty men—a force so small, that, had the Burmahs
opposed to us seen it advance, they would probably have tried
their strength with us. As it was, we pulled into the stockaded
town in a line, the despatch-boats flying across us backwards
and forwards like porpoises before the bows of a ship running
down the trades: not that they had any messages to carry, but
merely to show their own dexterity. When we had advanced
to within a quarter of a mile, a boat came out and communica-
ted with one of the despatch-boats, saying that the Burmahs
would not fight if we did not attack them, and that they would
deliver up the men detained, and their chief as a prisoner. We
agreed to these terms, landed, took possession of the chief with
his gold chatta, correspondence withBundoolah, &c, and took

<page 132>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
117
him on board. On this occasion, we would not trust the
Burmahs employed with muskets; it was too soon; they had
only their own swords and spears.
The chief was a fine tall man with a long beard. Like all
Burmahs, he took his loss of liberty very composedly, sitting
down between the guns with his attendants, and only express-
ing his indignation at the treachery of his own people. We
were very anxious to know what had become of the guns of the
dismantled stockade, which were said to be in his possession,
but he positively denied it, saying that they had been despatched
in boats across to the Irrawaddy. Whether this were true or not,
it was impossible to say; but, at all events, it was necessary to
make some further attempts to obtain them, so we told him,
that if he did not inform us where the guns were, by the next
morning his head would be taken off his shoulders. At this
pleasant intelligence he opened his betel-bag and renewed his
quid. The next day he was summoned forth to account for
the said guns, and again protested that they had been sent to
Donabue, which I really believe was false, as they were not
taken out of the stockade until after Donabue was in the
possession of Sir A. Campbell: it was therefore judged proper
to appear to proceed to extremities; and this time it was done
with more form. A file of marines was marched aft with their
muskets, and the sergeant appeared with his drawn sword.
Sand was strewed on the deck in front of the marines; and he
was led there and ordered to kneel down, so that his head, if
cut off, would fall where the sand was strewn. He was again
asked if he would tell where the guns were concealed, and again
stated that they were at Donabue; upon which he was desired
to prepare for death. He called one of his attendants and gave
him his silver betel-box, saying, "Take this to my wife,—
when she sees it she will know all." I watched him very
closely; his countenance was composed, but, as he bent forward
over the sand, the muscles of his arms and shoulders quivered.
However, as it is not the custom to cut off people's heads on
the quarter-deck of his Majesty's ships, we very magnanimously
reprieved him, and he was afterwards sent a prisoner to Cal-
cutta. But that he had the guns, we discovered afterwards,
which adds to his merit.
Having succeeded in this attempt, we made sail for the stoc-
kade of the other chief, and arrived there that evening. As he
was supposed to be greater in force than the other, we decided 
<page 133>
118
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
upon an attack in the dark, when he would not be able to
distinguish of what our force was composed ; and this time we
gave muskets to our Burmah comrades. The attack was
successful, we obtained possession, and the chief fled, but our
Burmahs pursued him nearly two miles, made him prisoner,
and brought him aboard. As he immediately tendered his
submission, which the other would not do, he was released the
next day.
We had done all our work, and having employed the Bur-
mahs for a few days more in destroying the stockades at the
entrance of the river, they were paid and discharged from his
Majesty's service. They would not, however, quit us; but,
so long as we remained in the river they continued to hang on
to the ship, and discovered three guns which had been sunk,
which they weighed and brought on board.
I have entered into this short narrative, as it will give some
idea of the character of these people. The government is
despotic, cruel, and treacherous, but the people are neither
cruel nor treacherous: on the contrary, I think they would
make most excellent and faithful soldiers; and it is singular
to find, surrounded by natives who have not the slightest
energy of mind or body, a people so active, so laborious, and
so enterprising as the Burmahs. The English seamen are
particularly partial to them, and declared they were "the best
set of chaps they had ever fallen in with." They admitted
the Burmahs to their messes, and were sworn friends. I
forgot to say, that when the chiefs sent in their submissions,
at first, among other presents, they sent slaves, usually
females, which was rather awkward. But not wishing to
affront them, I begged that the slaves sent might be children,
and not grown up, as we had no accommodation for them.
The consequence was, that I had quite a young family when
I left the river, which I distributed at Rangoon and the
presidencies on my return. For if they were only bond-
slaves, which I suppose they were, it was a kindness to have
them educated and taken care of. We lost one little fellow,
that was a great favourite with the men; he was about three
years old, and could speak English. He had been christened
by the sailors Billy Bamboo, and was quite as amusing as the
monkey. The poor little fellow died very suddenly, and was
much regretted by all on board.
I certainly do think that we may eventually find the

<page 134>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
119
Burmahs to be the most powerful enemy that we shall have
to contend with in India; and, at the same time, I cannot
help giving my opinion as to the ridiculous fear we entertain
of the Russians ever interfering with us in that quarter. That
the extension of the Russian empire has been a favourite
object through many of her dynasties, is true: but it is so
no longer: they have discovered that already their empire is
too extensive; and hardly a year passes but they have out-
breaks and insurrections to quell in quarters so remote that
they are scarcely heard of here. That Russia might possibly
lead an army through our Indian possessions, I admit; but
that she never could hold them if she did do so, is equally
certain; the conquest would be useless to her, after having
been obtained at an enormous sacrifice. The fact is, the
Russians (with the exception of the Emperor Paul) never
had any intention of the kind, and never will attempt it: but
they have discovered how very alive we are to the possibility,
and how very jealous and anxious we are on the subject,
and it is possible that they have made demonstrations in that
direction to alarm us; but I think myself, that the great
object of Russia in these advances has been to force a channel
for trade, which in her present situation she is to the south
of her extensive empire nearly deprived of. Notwithstanding
the outcry which has so often been raised against the Russian
empire, it has always appeared to me that our natural ally is
Russia; as for an alliance with France it is morally impos-
sible that two rival nations like us can continue very long
at peace; our interests are separate and conflicting, and our
jealousy but sleeps for the moment. We have been at peace
with France many years, and have not yet succeeded in
making a satisfactory commercial treaty with her; neither
will any of the other Continental powers permit our manu-
factures to enter, with the exception of Russia, who not only
takes them, but returns to us what is most valuable for our
marine.
Why, then, this outcry against the ambition of Russia?
nothing but tirades against Russian ambition. Does France
show no ambition? Does America show no ambition? Have
we no ambition ourselves? Why this constant suspicion and
doubt against a power whose interest it is to be closely allied
to us, and who can always prove a valuable aid in case of
emergency ?—simply because Russia wishes to have an opening 
<page 135>
120 DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
to the Black Sea. And this is very natural; her northern
ports are closed nine months in the year, and therefore her
navy and mercantile marine are almost useless. She has no
outlet, no means of raising either. Does she, then, ask too
much? Is a great empire like Russia to be blocked up, her
commerce and navy crippled, for the want of an outlet? She
does require the opening of the Black Sea; it is all that she
requires. She never will remain quiet until she obtains it;
and obtain it sooner or later she certainly will; and in my
opinion she is perfectly justified in her attempts. What would
be the consequence if she succeeded?—that, if we were wise
enough to continue on terms of amity with Russia, who has
invariably extended the hand of friendship to us, and has I
believe never failed in her treaties, we should have a balance of
power to us very important. Whose navies shall we in future
have to contend against ?—those of France and America; for
it is certain that whenever we go to war with France, America
will back her, and their navies will be united. At present, the
navy of America is not very large, but it can soon be made so;
and we should not be sorry to have the navy of Russia on our
side, to balance against the two which will always be opposed
to us. It is, therefore, our interest to assist Russia in the
object she has in view, and to keep up a firm alliance with her.
It is the interest of France to excite jealousies between Russia
and this country; and her emissaries have been but too success-
ful, at the very time that France has, contrary to all treaty, and
exclaiming against Russian ambition, seized upon Algiers, and
is now playing her game, so as if possible to command the
whole of the Mediterranean. The very strides which France
has made in that quarter should point out to us the propriety
of opening the Black Sea for Russia, so as to restore the
balance of power in that future site of contention. I repeat
that we are blind in every way to our own interests, in not
uniting ourselves firmly by an alliance, offensive and defensive,
with Russia; and that by so doing, we should be the greatest
gainers; for with France we must never expect more than a
hollow truce, concealing for the time her jealousy and thirst for
revenge,—a truce during which her secret efforts to undermine
us, will be still carried on as indefatigably as ever, and which
must only be considered as a mere feint to recover her breath,
before she again renews her frenzied efforts to humiliate
England, and obtain universal dominion.

<page 136>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
121
CHAPTER XXVIII.
London, June, 1837.
To one who has visited foreign climes, how very substan-
tial everything appears in England, from the child's play-
thing to the Duke of York's column! To use a joiner's
phrase, everything abroad is comparatively scamp-work.
Talk about the Palais Royale, the Rue Richelieu, and the
splendour of the Parisian shops—why, two hundred yards of
Regent-street, commencing from Howell and James's, would
buy the whole of them, and leave a balance sufficient to buy
the remainder of the French expositions. But still, if more
substantial and massive, we are at the same time also heavy.
We want more space, more air, more room to breathe, in
London; we are too closely packed; we want gardens with
trees to absorb the mephitic air, for what our lungs reject is
suitable to vegetation. But we cannot have all we want in
this world, so we must do without them.
What wealth is now pouring into the country! and, thank
God, it is now somewhat better expended than it was in the
bubble mania, which acted upon the plethora certainly, but
bled us too freely and uselessly. The rail-road speculators
have taken off many millions, and the money is well em-
ployed; for even allowing that, in some instances, the expec-
tations of the parties who speculate may be disappointed,
still it is spent in the country; and not only is it affording
employment and sustenance to thousands, but the staple pro-
duce of England only is consumed. In these speculations—
in the millions required and immediately produced, you can
witness the superiority of England. Undertakings from
which foreign governments would shrink with dismay are
here effected by the meeting of a few individuals.
And now for my commissions. What a list! And the
first item is—two Canary birds, the last having been one fine
morning found dead; nobody knows how; there was plenty
of seed and water (put in after the servant found that they
had been starved by his neglect), which, of course, proved
that they did not die for want of food. I hate what are
called pets; they are a great nuisance, for they will die, and

<page 137>
122
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
then such a lamentation over them! In the "Fire Worship-
pers" Moore makes his Hinda say—
"I never nursed a dear gazelle,
To glad me with its soft black eye,
But when it came to know me well'
And lore me—it was sure to die."
Now Hinda was perfectly correct, except in thinking that
she was peculiarly unfortunate. Every one who keeps pets
might tell the same tale as Hinda. I recollect once a Canary
bird died, and my young people were in a great tribulation; so
to amuse them we made them a paper coffin, put the defunct
therein, and sewed on the lid, dug a grave in the garden, and
dressing them out in any remnants of black we could find for
weepers, made a procession to the grave where it was buried.
This little divertissement quite took their fancy. The next
day one of the youngest came up to me and said, "Oh, papa,
when will you die?"—A strange question, thought I, quite
forgetting the procession of the day before.—" Why do you
ask, my dear?"—"Oh, because it will be such fun burying
you."—"Much obliged to you, my love." There is much more intellect in birds than people suppose.
An instance of that occurred the other day, at a slate quarry
belonging to a friend, from whom I have the narrative. A
thrush, not aware of the expansive properties of gunpowder,
thought proper to build her nest on a ridge of the quarry, in
the very centre of which they were constantly blasting the
rock. At first she was very much discomposed by the frag-
ments flying in all directions, but still she would not quit her
chosen locality; she soon observed that a bell rang whenever
a train was about to be fired, and that, at the notice, the
workmen retired to safe positions. In a few days, when she
heard the bell, she quitted her exposed situation, and flew
down to where the workmen sheltered themselves, dropping
close to their feet. There she would remain until the explo-
sion had taken place, and then return to her nest. The
workmen, observing this, narrated it to their employers, and
it was also told to visitors who came to view the quarry.
The visitors naturally expressed a wish to witness so
curious a specimen of intellect; but, as the rock could not
always be ready to be blasted when visitors came, the bell 
<page 138>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
123
was rung instead, and, for a few times, answered the same
purpose. The thrush flew down close to where they stood;
but she perceived that she was trifled with, and it interfered
with her process of incubation: the consequence was, that
afterwards, when the bell was rung, she would peep over the
ledge to ascertain if the workmen did retreat, and if they did
not, she would remain where she was, probably saying to
herself, "No, no, gentlemen; I'm not to be roused off my
eggs merely for your amusement."
Some birds have a great deal of humour in them, particularly the raven. One that belonged to me was the most mis-
chievous and amusing creature I ever met with. He would
get into the flower-garden, go to the beds where the gardener
had sowed a great variety of seeds, with sticks put in the
ground with labels, and then he would amuse himself with
pulling up every stick, and laying them in heaps of ten or
twelve on the path. This used to irritate the old gardener
very much, who would drive him away. The raven knew
that he ought not to do it, or he would not have done it. He
would soon return to his mischief, and when the gardener
again chased him (the old man could not walk very fast), the
raven would keep just clear of the rake or hoe in his hand,
dancing back before him, and singing as plain as a man could,
"Tol de rol de rol; tol de rol de rol!" with all kinds of mi-
micking gestures. The bird is alive now, and continues the
same meritorious practice whenever he can find an oppor-
tunity.
CHAPTER XXIX.
June, Steam-boat Princess Victoria. It certainly appears that the motion of a steam-vessel pro-
duces more nausea than that of a sailing-vessel; and people
appear to suffer in some degree in proportion to the power of
the engines. This may be accounted for by the vibration of
the vessel increasing in the same ratio.
We are now in a vessel of two hundred and fifty horsepower, and the consequence is that the passengers are as sick
as two hundred and fifty horses. The effect of the vibration
of the after part of the vessel amounts to the ridiculous.

<page 139>
124
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
When dinner was put on the table, we had no occasion for
a bell to announce it, for every glass on the table was dancing
to its own jingling music. And when the covers were taken
off, it was still more absurd—everything in the dishes ap-
peared to be infected with St. Vitus's dance. The boiled leg
of mutton shook its collops of fat at a couple of fowls which
figured in a sarabande round and round their own dish,—roast beef shifted about with a slow and stately movement—a ham glisseed croisee from one side to the other—tongues
wagged that were never meant to wag again—bottles reeled
and fell over like drunken men, and your piece of bread con-
stantly ran away and was to be pulled back into its proper
place. It was a regular jig-a-jig—a country-dance of pou-
sette, down the middle, and right and left.
The communication of motion was strange; the whole
company seated on long forms were jig-a-jigging up and
down together—your knife jigged and your fork jigged—even the morsel which was put into your mouth gave one
more jump before it could be seized. However, we jigged it
to some purpose; for, in eighteen hours and a half, we passed
from London to Antwerp.
The English are naturally great voyageurs: the feeling
is inherent from our insular position. I have been reflecting
whether I can recollect, in my whole life, ever to have been
three months in one place, but I cannot, nor do I believe that
I ever was—not even when sent to school; for I used to run
away every quarter, just to see how my family were—an
amiable weakness, which even flogging could not eradicate.
And then I was off to sea; there I had my wish, as Shak-
speare says, borne away by "the viewless winds, and blown
with restless violence about the pendent world," north, south,
east, and west; one month freezing, the next burning; all
nations, all colours,—white, copper, brown, and black; all
scenery, from the blasted pine towering amidst the frost and
snow, to the cocoa-nut waving its leaves to the sea-breeze.
Well, "homekeeping youths have homely wits," says the
same author; and he has told more truth than any man who
ever wrote. I certainly did hear of one young man who did
not gain much by travelling; he was a banker's clerk, and
obtained three months' vacation to go on the Continent. He
landed at Ostend, and the next day found himself in the 
<page 140>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
125
track-shuyt that is towed by horses, from Bruges to Ghent.
The cabins were magnificent, velvet and gold; the down
cushions luxurious, the dinner and breakfast sumptuous, the
wine excellent, the bed-rooms comfortable, and the expense
moderate. Moreover, the motion was imperceptible. What
could a man wish more? He arrived at Ghent, and could
not make his mind up to quit this barge; so he returned in
her to Bruges, and then back again to Ghent; and thus he
continued between the two towns, backwards and forwards,
until the three months' leave had expired, and he was obliged
to return to the desk. I have never yet made up my mind
whether this personage was a wise man or a fool.
But, until the opening of the Continent, the English were
only voyageurs, not travellers; and that, after having been so
long debarred, they should be desirous of visiting the various
portions of Europe, is not only natural but praiseworthy; but
that they should make the Continent their residence—should
expatriate themselves altogether, is, to me, a source of asto-
nishment as well as of regret.
The excuse offered is the cheapness. It is but an excuse,
for I deny it to be the fact: I have visited most places, with
and without a family; and I will positively assert, not for
the benefit of others who have already expatriated them-
selves, but as a check to those who feel so inclined, that they
will discover too soon that, at less expense, they can com-
mand more good living and substantial comforts in England,
than in any part of the Continent they may fix upon as their
habitation.
Let us enter a little into the subject. First, as to the capi-
tals, Paris, Brussels, &c.
Let it first be remembered that we have no longer war
prices in England, that almost every article has fallen from
thirty-five to fifty per cent. It is true that some trades-
people who are established as fashionable keep up their
prices; but it is not absolutely necessary to employ them, as
there are those equally skilled who are more moderate. But
even the most fashionable have been obliged, to a certain de-
gree, to lower their prices; and their present prices, reduced
as they are, will most assuredly die with them.
Everything will, by degrees, find its level; but this level
is not to be found at once. Should peace continue, ten years 
<page 141>
126
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
from this date will make a great alteration in every article,
not only of necessity, but of luxury; and then, after having
been the dearest, England will become the cheapest residence
in the world. House rent in the capitals abroad is certainly
as dear, if not dearer than it is in England. There are situ-
ations more or less fashionable in every metropolis; and if
you wish to reside in those quarters, you pay accordingly. It
is true that, by taking a portion of a house, you to a certain
degree indemnify yourself,—a first, second, or third story,
with a common staircase loaded with dirt and filth; but is
this equal to the comfort of a clean English house, in which
you have your own servants, and are not overlooked by your
neighbours? If they were to let out houses in floors in Eng-
land as they do in Paris and elsewhere, a less sum would be
demanded. You may procure a handsome house in a fashion-
able quarter, well furnished, in London, for 300?. per annum.
Go to the Place Vendome, or those quarters styled the Eng-
lish quarters, at Paris, and which are by no means the most
fashionable quarters, and you will pay for a handsome front
floor 700 francs per month; so that for one floor of a house in
Paris you will pay 3361. per annum, when in London you
will obtain the whole house for 300?. The proprietor of the
Paris house, therefore, receives much more by letting his
floors separate than the English do. The common articles of
necessity are as dear, if not dearer abroad; the octroi duty
upon all that enters the barriers raising the price excessively.
Meat at Paris or Brussels is as dear as in London, and not so
good; it is as dear, because they charge you the same price
all round, about 5d. per pound, independent of its inferiority
and the villanous manner in which it is cut up. Our butchers
only butcher the animal, but foreign butchers butcher the
meat. Poultry is as dear; game much dearer; and so is fish.
Indeed, fish is not only dear, but scarce and bad. Horses
and carriages are quite as dear abroad, in the capitals, as in
London. Clothes are in some respects cheaper, in others
dearer, especially articles of English manufacture, which are
more sought after than any others.
Amusements are said to be cheaper; but, admitting that,
the places of amusement are oftener resorted to, and in con-
sequence as much money is spent abroad as in England. It
is true that there are an immense number of theatres in Paris, 
<page 142>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
127
and that most of them are very reasonable in their charges
for admission; but be it recollected that there are not above
three of them which are considered fashionable, if even respec-
table; and there the prices are sufficiently high. If people
went to Sadler's Wells, the Coburg, Victoria, Queen's Thea-
tre, Astley's, and other minor theatres in London, as they do
to the Theatres St. Martin, Gymnase, et Varietes at Paris,
they would find no great difference in the prices.
What then is there cheaper? Wine. I grant it; and, it
is also asserted, the education of children. We will pass
over these two last points for the present, and examine whe-
ther living is cheaper on the Continent, provided you do not
live in any of the capitals.
That at Tours and other places in the south of France, at
Genoa, at Bruges, in Belgium, you may live cheaper than in
London, I grant; but if any one means to assert that you
can live cheaper than in the country in England, I deny it
altogether. People go abroad, and select the cheapest parts
of the Continent to live in. If they were to do the same in
England, they would find that they could live much cheaper
and much better; for instance, in Devonshire, Cornwall, and
Wales, and, indeed, in almost every county in England.
The fact is, it is not the cheapness of the living which
induces so many people to reside abroad. There are many
reasons; and as I wish to be charitable, I will put forward
the most favourable ones.
In England, we are money-making people, and we have the
aristocracy of wealth as well as the aristocracy of rank. It
has long been the custom for many people to live beyond their
incomes, and to keep up an appearance which their means
have not warranted. Many, especially the landed proprietors,
finding their rentals reduced from various causes, have been
necessitated to retrench. They were too proud to put down
their carriages and establishments before the eyes of those
who had perhaps looked upon them with envy, and whose
derision or exultation they anticipated. They therefore have
retired to the Continent, where a carriage is not necessary to
prove that you are a gentleman. Should those return who
have emigrated for the above reasons, they would find that
this striving for show is hardly perceptible now in England.
Those who have remained have either had sense enough, or 
<page 143>
128
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
have been forced by circumstances, to reduce their expendi-
ture.
Another cause is the easy introduction into what is called
good society abroad on the Continent, but which is in reality
very bad society. Certainly there are a sufficient number of
Counts, Viscounts, and Marquesses to associate with; but in
France high birth is not proved by titles, which are of little
or no value, and do not even establish gentility. This society
may certainly be entered into at a much less expense than
that of England, especially in the metropolis; but, depend upon
it, there is a species of society dear at any price.
With respect to education of children, that boys may receive
advantage from a Continental education I admit; but woe be
to the mother who intrusts her daughter to the ruin of a
French Pension!
In England there are many excellent schools in the country,
as cheap and cheaper than on the Continent; but the school-
masters near London, generally speaking, are ruining them-
selves by their adherence to the old system, and their extra-
vagant terms. The system of education on the Continent is
certainly superior to that of England, and the attention to the
pupils is greater: of course there are bad schools abroad as
well as in England; but the balance is much in favour of
those on the Continent, with the advantage of being at nearly
one-half the expense. A great alteration has taken place in
modern education; the living languages and mathematics
have been found to be preferable to the classics and other
instruction still adhered to in the English schools.
I have always considered, and have every reason to be
confirmed in my opinion, that the foundation of all education
is mathematics. Everything else may be obtained by rote,
and without thinking; but from the elements of arithmetic
up to Euclid and algebra, no boy can work his task without
thinking. I never yet knew a man who was a good mathe-
matician who was not well-informed upon almost every point;
and the reason is clear—mathematics have prepared his mind
to receive and retain. In all foreign schools this important
branch of education is more attended to than it is in England;
and that alone would be a sufficient reason for me to give
them the preference. In point of morals, I consider the
schools of both countries much upon a par; although, from 
<page 144>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
129
the system abroad of never debasing a child by corporal
punishment, I give the foreign schools the preference even in
that point.
I consider, then, that boys are better educated abroad than
in England, and acquire much more correctly the living
languages, which are of more use to them than the classics.
So much I can say in favour of the Continent; but in every
other respect I consider the advantage in favour of England.
Young women who have been brought up abroad I consider,
generally speaking, as unfitted for English wives; and that
in this opinion I am not singular, I know well from conversa-
tion with young men at the clubs and elsewhere. Mothers
who have returned with their daughters full of French fashions
and ideas, and who imagine that they will inevitably succeed
in making good matches, would be a little mortified and sur-
prised to hear the young men, when canvassing among them-
selves the merits of the other sex, declare that "such a young
lady may be very handsome and very clever, but—she has
received a Continental education, and that won't do for them."
Many mothers imagine, because their daughters, who are bold
and free in their manners, and talk and laugh loud, are sur-
rounded by young men, while the modest girl, who holds
aloof, is apparently neglected, that their daughters are more
admired; but this is a great mistake. Men like that boldness,
that coquetry, that dash, if I may use the term, because it
amuses for the time being; but although they may pay atten-
tion to women on that account, marrying them is quite
another affair. No: the modest retiring girl, who is appa-
rently passed by, becomes the wife; the others are flattered
before their faces, and laughed at behind their backs. It
certainly is unmanly, on the part of our sex, to behave in this
manner, to encourage young women in their follies, and ruin
them for their own amusement; as Shakspeare says—
"Shame to him whose cruel striking
Kills for faults of his own liking."
But so it is, and so it will be so long as the world lasts, and
mankind is no better than it is at present.
If then, as I have asserted, there is so little to be gained by
leaving a comfortable home, what is the inducement which
takes so many people abroad to settle there? I am afraid K

<page 145>
130
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.,
that the true reason has been given by the author whom I
now quote. Speaking of the French metropolis, she says—
"I have been lately trying to investigate the nature of the
charm which renders Paris so favourite a sojourn of the
English.
"In point of gaiety (for gaiety read dissipation) it affords
nothing comparable with that of London. A few ministerial
fetes every winter may perhaps exceed in brilliancy the balls
given in our common routine of things; but for one entertain-
ment in Paris at least thirty take place chez nous. Society is
established with us on a wider and more splendid scale. The
weekly soirees, on the other hand, which properly represent
the society of this place, are dull, meagre, and formal to the
last degree of formality. There is no brilliant point of re-
union as at Almack's,—no theatre uniting, like our Italian
Opera, the charm of the best company, the best music, and
the best dancing. Of the thousand and one theatres boasted of
by the Parisians, only three are of a nature to be frequented by
people of consideration, the remainder being as much out of
the question as the Pavilion or the Garrick. Dinner parties
there are none; water parties none; dejeuners, unless given by a
foreign ambassadress, none. A thousand accessories to Lon-
don amusements are here wanting. In the month of May, I
am told, the public gardens and the Bois de Boulogne become
enchanting. But what is not charming in the month of May?
Paris, perhaps, least of all places; for at the commencement
of the month every French family of note quits the metro-
polis for its country seat, or for sea or mineral bathing.
Foreigners and the mercantile and ministerial classes alone re-
main. What, then, I would fain discover, constitutes the
peculiar merit of inducing persons uninstigated by motives of
economy to fix themselves in the comfortless and filthy city,
and call it Paradise? Alas! my solution of the problem is far
from honourable to the taste of our absentees. In Paris
people are far less amenable than in London to the tribunal of
public opinion; or, as a lady once very candidly said to me,
'One gets rid of one's friends and relations.'"
Indeed, there are so many petty annoyances and vexations
of life attendant upon residents abroad, that it must require
some strong motives to induce them to remain. Wherever
the English settle they raise the price of everything, much to 
<page 146>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
the annoyance of the rentiers and respectable people of the
place, although of advantage to the country generally. The really highbred and aristocratic people will not associate with
the English, and look upon them with any feeling but good,
will. With regard to servants, they are invariably badly
served, although they pay two or three times the wages that
are paid by the inhabitants, who, in most places, have made
it a rule never to take a domestic that has once lived in an
English family; the consequence is that those engaged by the
English are of the worst description, a sort of pariahs among
the community, who extort and cheat their employers with-
out mercy. If not permitted so to do, they leave them at a
minute's warning; and you cannot go to any foreign colony
of English people without listening to very justified tirades
of the villany of the servants. Upon the same principle, there are few places abroad where the tradespeople have not
two prices; one for the English, and the other for the inha-
bitants.
I was in company with an English lady of title, who gave
me a very amusing instance of the insolence of the Belgian
servants. She had a large family to bring up on a limited
income, and had taken up her abode at Brussels. It should
be observed that the Belgians treat their servants like dogs,
and yet it is only with the Belgians that they will behave
well. This lady, finding her expenses very much exceeding
her means, so soon as she had been some time in the country,
attempted a reformation. Inquiring of some Belgian families
with whom she was acquainted what were the just propor-
tions allowed by them to their servants, she attempted by
degrees to introduce the same system. The first article of
wasteful expenditure was bread, and she put them upon an allowance. The morning after she was awoke with a loud
hammering in the saloon below, the reason of which she could
not comprehend; but on going down to breakfast she found
one of the long loaves made in the country nailed up with ten^
penny nails over the mantelpiece. She sent to inquire who had done it, and one of the servants immediately replied that
she had nailed it there that my lady might see that the bread
did not go too fast.
There is another point on which the English abroad have
long complained, and with great justice,—which is, that in k 2

<page 147>
132
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
every litigation or petty dispute which may appear before a
smaller or more important tribunal, from the Juge de Paix to
the Cour de Cassation, the verdict invariably is given against
them. I never heard an instance to the contrary, although
there may have been some. In no case can an Englishman
obtain justice; the detention of his property without just
cause, all that he considers as law and justice in his own
country, is overruled: he is obliged to submit to the greatest
insults, or consent to the greatest imposition. This is pecu-
liarly observable at Paris and Brussels, and it is almost a
jour de fete to a large portion of the inhabitants when they
hear that an Englishman has been thrown into prison. It
must, however, be acknowledged that most of this arises not
only from the wish of the rentiers, or those who live upon
their means (who have these means crippled by the concourse
of English raising the price of every article), that the Eng-
lish should leave and return to their own country; but also
from the number of bad characters who, finding their position
in society no longer tenable in England, hasten abroad, and,
by their conduct, leave a most unfavourable impression of the
English character, which, when Englishmen only travelled,
stood high, but, now they reside to economise, is at its lowest
ebb; for the only charm which the English had in the eyes of
needy foreigners was their lavishing their money as they
passed through the country, enriching a portion of the com-
munity without increasing the prices of consumption to the
whole.
As a proof of the insolence to which the English are sub-
jected, I will give the reader a verbatim copy of a letter sent
to me by a friend not more than a year ago. I have heard
of such a circumstance taking place in France, but then the
innkeeper was a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour; but this
case is even more remarkable. Depend upon it, those who
travel will find many a Monsieur Disch before they are at the
end of their journey. I will vouch for the veracity of every
word in the letter:—
"Wisbaden, July 3, 1836.
"My dear , As you kindly said that you would be
glad to hear of our progress when any opportunity offered of
writing you a letter, I now avail myself of some friends pass-

<page 148>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
ing through Brussels to let you know that thus far we have
proceeded in health and safety; but whether we shall com-
plete our project of wintering in Italy seems more and more
doubtful, as I believe the cholera to be doing its work pretty
actively in some of the states we propose to visit; and a
gentleman told me yesterday, who has lately left the country,
that the Pope is so glad of an excuse to keep heretics out of
his dominions, that he has never taken off the quarantine: so
that, under any circumstances, we must vegetate in some
frontier hole for a fortnight before we can be admitted; a
circumstance in itself sufficiently deterring, in my opinion.
Besides which, what with the perplexity of the coinage, and
the constant attempt at pillage which we have already met
with, and which, I am told, is quadrupled on the other side
of the Alps, such a counterbalance exists to any of the enjoy-
ments of travelling, that I am heartily weary of the continual
skirmishing and warfare I am subjected to;—warfare indeed,
as at Cologne I was called out. The story is too good to be
lost, so I will tell it for your amusement and that of our
friends at Brussels; moreover that you may caution everyone against Mons. Disch, of the Cour Iinperiale:—We had
marchandeed with Madame Disch for rooms, who at last
agreed to our terms; but when the bill came, she charged
her own. We remonstrated, and the bill was altered; but
Mons. Disch made his appearance before I could pay it, in-
sisting on the larger sum, saying his wife had no business to
make a bargain for him. I remonstrated in vain, and Mrs. commenced most eloquently to state the case; he was, however, deaf to reason, argument, eloquence, and
beauty. At last I said, 'Do not waste words on the matter,
I will pay the fellow and have done with him, taking care
that neither I nor my friends will ever come to his house
again,' at the same time snatching the bill from his hand:
when he demanded, in a great fury, what I meant by that;
exclaiming, 'I am Germans gentlemans,—you English gentle-
mans, I challenge you—I challenge you.' Although some-
what wroth before this, I was so amused that I laughed in
the rascal's face, which doubled his rage, and he reiterated his
mortal defiance; adding,—' I was in London last year; they
charge me twelve—fourteen shillings for my dinner at coffee-
house, but I too much gentlemans to ask them take off one 
<page 149>
134
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
farding. I challenge you—I challenge you.' I then said,
'Hold your tongue, sir; take your money and be off.' 'Me
take money!' replied he; 'me take money! No, my
servant take money; I too much gentlemans to take money.'
Upon which the waiter swept the cash off the table, handed
it to his master, who immediately sacked it and walked off."
I certainly have myself come to the conclusion that the
idea of going abroad for economy is most erroneous. As I
have before observed, the only article, except education, which
is cheaper, is wine; and I am afraid, considering the thirsty
propensities of my countrymen, that is a very strong attraction
with the nobler sex. If claret and all other French wines
were admitted into England at a much lower duty, they
would be almost as cheap in England as they are in foreign
capitals; and, as the increased consumption would more than
indemnify the government, it is to be lamented that it is not
so arranged. Formerly we shut out the French wines, and
admitted those of Portugal, as our ancient ally; but our
ancient ally has shown anything but good-will towards us
lately, and we are at all events under no further obligation
to support her interests. Let us admit French wines in
bottles at a very low duty, and then England will be in every
respect as cheap, and infinitely more comfortable as a resi-
dence than any part of the Continent. The absentees who
are worth reclaiming will return; those who prefer to remain
on the Continent are much better there than if they were
contaminating their countrymen with their presence. How
true is the following observation from the author I before
quoted on her return from abroad:—
"Home, home at last. How clean, how cheerful, how
comfortable! I was shown at Marthieu the shabby, dirty-
looking lodgings where the are economizing, in pen-
ance for the pleasure of one little year spent in this charming
house! Poor people! How they must long for England!
how they must miss the thousand trivial but essential con-
veniences devised here for the civilization of human life!
What an air of decency and respectfulness about the servants!
what a feeling of homeishness in a house exclusively our
own! The modes of life may be easier on the Continent,—but it is the ease of a beggar's ragged coat which has served twenty masters, and is twitched off and on till it scarcely 
<page 150>
DIAUY ON THE CONTINENT.
135
holds together, in comparison with the decent, close-fitting suit characteristic of a gentleman."
CHAPTER XXX.
Brussels.
Authors, like doctors, are very apt to disagree.
Reading, the other day, a very amusing publication, called
tire "Diary of a Desennuyee," some passages in it induced
me to fall back upon Henry Bulwer's work on France.
Among his remarks upon literary influence in that country,
he has the following:—
"A literary Frenchman, whom I met not long ago in
Paris, said to me that a good-natured young English noble-
man, whom I will not name, had told him that dancers and
singers were perfectly well received in English society, but
not men of letters.
"'Est il possible qu'on soit si barbare chez vous?'"
He subsequently adds:—
"To be known as a writer is certainly to your prejudice."First, people presume you are not what they call a
gentleman; and the grandfather who, if you were a banker or
a butcher, or of any other calling or profession, would be left
quiet in his tomb, is evoked against you."
Mr Bulwer then proceeds with a variety of argument to
prove that literary men are not Mcecenased by either the
government or aristocracy of Great Britain. He points out
the advantages which the French literati have from their
Institute, the ennoblements, the decorations, and pensions
which they receive; and certainly makes out a strong case.
The author of the "Diary" would attempt to deny the
statements of Mr. Bulwer; but, in the very denial, she admits
all his points but one—to wit, that they are not so well
received by the aristocracy in England as they are in France.
She says—
"What does Henry Bulwer mean by the assertion that
literary men are more eagerly welcomed in society here than
in England?
"They occupy, perhaps, a more independent and honour-
able position, are less exposed to being lionised by patronising 
<page 151>
136
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
dowagers, and more sure of obtaining public preferment; but,
with the exception of Mignet and Merimee—who are courted
for their personal merits and official standing rather than for
their literary distinctions—I have scarcely met one of them.
To the parties of the ministers of the Grand Referendaire, and
other public functionaries, artists and men of letters are
admitted as part of a political system; but they are not to be
found—like Moore, Rogers, Chantrey, Newton, and others—in the boudoirs of the elite, or the select fetes of a Devonshire
House.
"The calling of 'un homme de lettret' is here, however, a
profession bearing its own rewards and profits, and forming
an especial and independent class. In common with the
artists they look to ennoblement in the Academy, and under
the existing order of things have been richly endowed with
places and pensions.'"
It appears then, in France, that to the parties of ministers,
&c., they are admitted as a part of the political system; and
further, that they have been fostered by the government, by
being ennobled and richly endowed with places and pensions.
Therefore, upon his opponent's own showing, Henry Bulwer
has made out his case. In another part of the same work
there is the following amusing passage, in advice given by a
lady of fashion to her protegee upon entering into London
society.
"' Pore over their books as much as you please, but do not
so much as dip into the authors,' said she, when I proposed
an introduction to one of the most popular authors of the
day. 'These people expend their spirit on their works—the part that walks through society is a mere lump of clay,
like the refuse of the wine-press after the wine has been ex-
pressed.' In conversing with a clever author you sometimes
see a new idea brighten his eye or create a smile round his
lip; but for worlds he would not give it utterance. It belongs
to his next work, and is instantly booked in the ledger of his
daily thoughts, value 3s. 6d. The man's mind is his mine;
he can't afford to work it gratis, or give away the produce."
If we are to draw any inference from this extract, it is,
that although some noblemen do extend their patronage to
literary men, at all events the general feeling is against them.
I must say that I never was more amused than when I read 
<page 152>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
137
the above sarcasm. There is much truth in it, and yet it is
not true. In future when I do say good things, as they call
them, in company, I shall know the precise value of my
expenditure during the dinner or evening party by reckoning
up the three-and-sixpeuces. One thing is clear, that if an
author say half a dozen good things, he fully pays for his
dinner.
In the "Student," Edward Bulwer makes some remarks
which range in opposition to the author of the above "Diary."
In arguing that most authors may be known by their works,
he says—
"Authors are the only men we really do know; the rest
of mankind die with only the surface of their character
understood."
It appears, then, that people have no excuse for being dis-
appointed in authors; when they meet them in company
they have but to read their works, and if they like the works
they must like the authors. Before I proceed I must be per-
mitted to make a remark here. An author's opinion given
as his own will allow the public to have an insight into his
character and feelings, and the public are justified in forming
their opinions of an author upon such grounds. But it too
often happens that the public will form their opinion of an
author from opinions put by him into the mouths of the
characters drawn in a work of fiction, forgetting that in these
instances it is not the author who speaks, but the individuals
which his imagination has conjured up; and that the opinions
expressed by these creatures of his brain, although perfectly
in keeping with the character, and necessary to produce that
vraisemblance which is the great merit of fiction, may be
entirely opposed to the real sentiments of the author. The
true merit of fiction, and that which is essential to its success,
is the power of the author at the time that he is writing to
divest himself, as it were, of himself, and be for the time the
essence of the character which he is delineating. It is there-
fore a great injustice to an author to accuse him of being an
Infidel because his infidel character is well pourtrayed, par-
ticularly as, if he is equally fortunate in describing a charac-
ter which is perfect, the public do not ever give him the
credit for similar perfection. That is quite another affair.
Again, Edward Bulwer says, in opposition to the poverty of
the mi'we:—

<page 153>
138
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
"A man is, I suspect, but of a second-rate order whose
genius is not immeasurably above bis works,—who does not feel
within him an inexhaustible affluence of thoughts, feelings,
and invention, which he never will have leisure to embody in
print. He will die and leave only a thousandth part of his
wealth to posterity, which is his heir."
I like to bring all in juxtaposition. There is excitement
in making mischief, and that is the reason why people are so
fond of it. Still, the question at issue ought to be fairly
lecided; and, as in case of arbitration, when the disputants
cannot agree, a third party is called in by mutual consent, .1
shall venture to take upon myself that office, and will fairly
argue the point, as there is more dependent upon it than,
upon the first view, the question may appear to merit.
If we turn back to the last century, in what position shall
we find authors?—looking up to patrons among the aristo-
cracy, and dedicating their works to them in panegyrics,
fulsome from their obsequiousness and flattery. At that
period the aristocracy and the people were much wider apart
than they are at present.
Gradually the people have advanced; and, as they have
advanced, so have the authors thrown off the trammels of
servitude, and have attacked the vices and follies as well as
the privileges of those to whom they once bowed the knee.
The advancement of the people, and the lowering of the
aristocracy, have both been effected through the medium of
the press. The position of authors has been much altered.
Formerly we behold such men as Dryden, Otway, and many
others (giants in their days), humbling themselves for bread.
Now we have seldom a dedication, and of those few we have
the flattery is delicate. The authors look to the public as
their patrons, and the aristocracy are considered but as a part
and portion of it. These remarks equally hold good with
respect to the government. Authors are not to be so easily
purchased as formerly; they prefer writing in conformity
with public opinion to writing for government, because they
are better remunerated. Now, if it will be recalled to mind
that in the rapid march of the people, in their assertion of
their right to a greater share in the government of the coun-
try, in the pointing out and' correcting of abuses, and in the
breaking down of all the defences which have gradually

<page 154>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
139
yielded in so many years, it is the authors and the press who
have led the van, and that in these continual inroads the
aristocracy have been the party attacked,—it is no wonder
that there has arisen, unwittingly perhaps on the part of the
aristocracy, a feeling against the press and against authors in
general.
The press has been, and will probably for a long while
continue to be, the enemy of the aristocracy; and it is hardly
reasonable to expect that the aristocracy should admit the
enemy within its camp. For, be it observed, whether a man
write a political pamphlet or a novel, he has still the same
opportunity of expressing his sentiments, of flattering the
public by espousing their opinions; and as a writer of fiction,
perhaps, his opinions have more effect that as a pamphleteer.
In the first instance, you are prepared to expect a political
partisan; in the latter, you read for amusement, and uncon-
sciously receive the bias. For one who reads a political
pamphlet (by-the-by, they are generally only read by those
who are of the same way of thinking as the author) there
are hundreds who read through a work of fiction, so that the
opinions of the latter are much more widely disseminated.
Now, as most works are written for profit as well as reputa-
tion, they are naturally so worded as to insure the good-will
of the majority, otherwise they would not have so extensive
a sale. The majority being decidedly liberal, every work
that now appears more or less attacks the higher orders.
When, therefore, a gentleman who has been well received in
the best society ventures upon writing a work, it is quite
sufficient to state that he is an author (without his book being
read) to occasion him to "lose caste" to a certain degree.
Authors have been the enemies of the higher classes. You
have become an author—consequently you have ranked your-
self with our enemies. Henry Bulwer, therefore, is right
twhere he asserts that "to be known as an author is to your
prejudice among the higher classes."
Having made these observations to point out that the aris-
tocracy and the press are at variance, let us now examine into
the merits of authors, as mixing in society. And here I think
it will be proved that it is more their misfortune than their
fault that there should be a prejudice against them. They
are overrated before they are seen, and underrated after-
wards.

<page 155>
140
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
You read the works of an author—you are pleased with
them, and you wish to become acquainted with the man.
You anticipate great pleasure—you expect from his lips, in
impromptu, the same racy remarks, the same chain of reason-
ing, the same life and vigour which have cost him so many
hours of labour and reflection, or which have been elicited in
his happiest moods, and this from a person who comes,
perhaps, almost a total stranger into a large company. Ia
this fair or just to him? Did yon find any of your other
friends, at first meeting, play the fiddle to a whole com-
pany of strangers? Are not authors as reserved and shy
as other people—even more so? And yet you ask them, as
if they were mountebanks or jugglers with a certain set of
tricks, to amuse the company. The very circumstance of
being aware that this is expected of him makes the man
silent, and his very anxiety to come up to your expectations
takes away from his power.
The consequence is, that you are disappointed, and so are
the company, to whom you have announced that "Mr.
So-and-So" is to meet them. Had you become intimate with
this person you would perhaps have found the difference, and
that he whom you pronounced as so great a failure, would
have turned out equally amusing. At the same time there is
some truth in the remarks of the " Desennuyee" that "some
authors will not let out their new ideas, because they require
them for their books." But, as Bulwer observes, they must
be but second-raters, as the majority of authors are.
In many instances they are punsters; but punning is not a
standard of authorship; or, perhaps, there may be other
second-rate authors present, and if so, they know that they
are in the company of literary pickpockets.
To prove that this remark of the "Desennuyee" can only
apply to second-rate authors, let us examine into the conver-
sational powers of those who are first-rate. And here I can
only speak of those whom I have known—there may be
many others. Where could you find such conversationists
as Coleridge, Charles Lamb, Sir John Malcolm, and many
others, who are now gone? And among those in existence,
I have but to mention Croker, Theodore Hooke, Professor
Wilson, Bulwer, Lockhart, the Smiths, and, in the other sex,
Lady Blessington, Lady Morgan, Mesdames Somerville,
Austin, and Jameson.

<page 156>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
141
Now these are all first-rate authors in their various styles;
and I can challenge any one to bring forward an equal
number out of the whole mass who are so powerful or de-
lightful in society. And there is still more to be said in favour
of authors. I know many whose conversation is superior to
their writings; I will not name them, as they, perhaps, would
not consider this to be a compliment; but it fully tends to
disprove the remarks of the " Desennuyee," as to authors of
talent reserving their thoughts for their books, for, on the
contrary, when in company, they generally take the lead.
Still, there is a difference arising from the variety of tempera-
ment: some, accustomed to mix constantly in society, will be
indifferent whether they are acquainted with the parties
present or not; others, more retiring, require to feel at their
ease, and it is only in small coteries, and among friends, that
their real value can be appreciated. Theodore Hooke is a
proof of the former, the late Charles Lamb was of the latter.
Some shine most when they have no competitors; others are
only to be brought out when other men of talent are in com-
pany, and, like the flint and steel, their sparks are only to bo
produced by collision.
If I might be permitted to offer an opinion to the authors
themselves, it would be, not to mix in general company, but
confine themselves to their own friends. They would stand
much higher in reputation if they adhered to this plan; above
all, let them avoid what the author of the "Desennuyee"
terms those "Skinnerian lion feeds" given by those who have
no talent to appreciate, and who, to fill their menagerie,
will mix you up with foreign swindlers, and home-bred
ruffians. This is most humiliating, and has certainly injured
the fraternity.
I have but one more remark to make. Authors in England
have little to expect from the Government and the aris-
tocracy. Pensions and honours have been given, but until
Sir Robeit Peel set a more worthy example, they were be-
stowed for the support of political opinions, not as a reward
of talent. That the aristocracy, with but a few exceptions,
have not fostered talent, is most true; and they are now
suffering from their want of judgment. They have shut their
doors to authors, and the authors have been gradually under-
mining their power. To what extent this may be carried, it

<page 157>
142
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
is impossible to say; but one thing is certain, that the press
is more powerful than either king or lords, and that, if
the conflict continue, the latter must yield to the influence of
the former, who will have ample retaliation for the neglect
to which they have been subjected.
What a superiority there is in England over France, and
every other nation, in the periodical and daily press, espe-
cially in the latter! Take up the "Constitutionnel," or
"Journal des Debats" at Paris, and then look at the broad
double sheets of the "Times" and other morning papers, with
the columns of information and original matter which they
contain. Compare the flimsy sheets, bad printing, and
general paucity of information of the continental daily press, with the clear types, rapid steam power called into action,
the outlay, enormous expenditure, and rapid information
obtained by our leading journals from all quarters of the
globe. I have looked with astonishment and admiration at
the working of the "Times" newspaper by its beautiful
steam-engine; it is one of the most interesting sights that
can be beheld.
Nothing but the assistance of steam could, indeed, enable
the great daily newspapers to accomplish their present task.
When the reader calls to mind that the debates in the House
are sometimes kept up till two or three o'clock in the morn-
ing; that the reporters, relieved every twenty minutes, have
to carry all their communications to the office; that all this
matter has to be arranged, put in type, and then worked off;
and that, notwithstanding this, the double sheet of matter is on thousands and thousands of tables by nine o'clock the next
morning, it is really wonderful how it can be accomplished.
Saturday night appears to be the only night on which those
connected with these immense undertakings can be said to
have any repose from year's end to year's end. What a life
of toil! what an unnatural life must theirs be, who thus cater
during the hours of darkness for the information and amuse-
ment of the mass who have slept soundly through the night,
and rise to be instructed by the labour of their vigils! It
can be effected in no other country in the world. It is
another link in the great chain of miracles, which proves the
greatness of England.
The editors of these papers must have a most onerous task. 
<page 158>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
143
It is not the writing of the leading article itself, but the obli-
gation to write that article every day, whether inclined or
not, in sickness or in health, in affliction, distress of mind,
winter and summer, year after year, tied down to one task,
remaining in one spot. It is something like the walking a thousand miles in a thousand hours. I have a fellow-feeling
for them, for I know how a monthly periodical will wear
down one's existence. In itself it appears nothing—the labour
is not manifest: nor is it the labour—it is the continual
attention which it requires. Your life becomes as it were
the magazine. One month is no sooner corrected and printed
than on comes the other. It is the stone of Sisyphus—an
endless repetition of toil—a constant weight upon the mind—a continual wearing upon the intellect and spirits, demanding
all the exertion of your faculties, at the same time that you
are compelled to do the severest drudgery. To write for a
magazine is very well, but to edit one is to condemn yourself
to slavery.
Magazine writing, as it is generally termed, is the most
difficult of all writing, and but few succeed in it; the reason
of which is obvious—it must always be what is termed "up
to the mark."
Anyone who publishes a work in one, two, or three
volumes, may be permitted to introduce a dull chapter or
two; no one remarks it; indeed, these dull chapters allow the
mind of the reader to relax for the time, and, strange to say,
are sometimes favourable to the author. But in magazine-
writing these cannot be permitted; the reader requires ex-
citement, and whether the article be political or fictitious, there
requires a condensation of matter, a pithiness of expression
(to enable you to tell your story in so small a space), which
is very difficult to obtain. Even in continuations the same
rule must be adhered to, for, being read month after month,
each separate portion must be considered as a whole and
independent of the other; it must not therefore flag for one
minute. A proof of this was given in that very remarkable
production in " Blackwood's Magazine," styled "Tom Cringle's
Log." Every separate portion was devoured by the public—they waited impatiently for the first of the month that they
might read the continuation, and everyone was delighted,
even to its close, because the excitement was so powerful. 
<page 159>
144
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
Some time afterwards the work was published in two volumes,
and then, what was the consequence 1—people complained
that it was overcharged—that it was too full of excitement—gave no repose. This was true; when collected together it had that fault—a very good one, by the by, as well as a very uncommon one; but they did not perceive that until it was
all published together. During the time that it came out in
fragments they were delighted. Although, in this instance,
the writing was overcharged, still it proved, from the popu-
larity it obtained when it appeared in the magazine, what
force and condensation of matter is required in writing
for periodicals.
CHAPTER XXXI.
I am grave to-day; it is the birth-day of one of my chil-
dren—a day so joyful in youth, in more advanced life so teeming with thought and serious reflections. How happy
the child is—and it is its happiness which has made me
grave.
How changed are our feelings as we advance in life!—Our
responsibility is increased with each fleeting year. In youth
we live but for ourselves—self predominates in everything.
In mature age, if we have fulfilled the conditions of our
tenure, we feel that we must live for our children. Fortun-
ately, increase of years weans us from those selfish and
frivolous expenses which youth requires, and we feel it little
or no sacrifice to devote to our children the means which,
before, we considered so important to the gratification of our
pride and our ambition. Not that we have lost either our
pride or our ambition, but they have become centred in other
objects dearer to us than ourselves—in the race springing up—to whom we shall leave our names and worldly posses-
sions when our own career is closed.
Worn out with the pursuit of vanity, we pause at a certain
age, and come to the conclusion that in this life we require
but little else than to eat, drink, prepare for a future exist-
ence, and to die.
What a miserable being must an old bachelor be!—he
vegetates, but he cannot be said to exist—he passes his life in 
<page 160>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
145
one long career of selfishness, and dies. Strange, that chil-
dren, and the responsibility attached to their welfare, should
do more to bring a man into the right path than any denunci-
ations from holy writ or holy men! How many who might
have been lost, have been, it is to be hoped, saved, from the
feeling that they must leave their children a good name, and
must provide for their support and advancement in life!
Yes, and how many women, after a life so frivolous as to
amount to wickedness, have, from their attachment to their
offspring, settled down into the redeeming position of careful,
anxious, and serious-minded mothers!
Such reflections will rise upon a birth-day, and many more
of chequered hopes and fears. How long will these flowers,
now blossoming so fairly, be permitted to remain with us?
Will they be mowed down before another birth-day, or will
they be permitted to live to pass through the ordeal of this
life of temptation? How will .they combat? Will they fall
and disgrace their parents, or will they be a pride and bless-
ing? Will it please Heaven to allow them to be not too
much tempted, not overcome by sickness, or that they shall
be severely chastised? Those germs of virtue now appear-
ing, those tares now growing up with the corn—will the
fruit bring forth good seed? will the latter be effectually
rooted up by precept and example? How much to encour-
age! and how much to check! Virtues in excess are turned
to vice—liberality becomes extravagance—prudence, avarice—
courage, rashness—love, weakness—even religion may turn to
fanaticism—and superior intellect may, in its daring, mock the
power which granted it. Alas! what a responsibility is here!
A man may enjoy or suffer when he lives for himself alone;
but he is doubly blest or doubly cursed when, in his second
stage, he is visited through his children. What a blessing is
our ignorance of the future! Fatal, indeed, to all happiness
in this world would be a foreknowledge of that which is to
come.' We have but to do our duty and hope for the best,
acknowledging, however severe maybe the dispensation, that
whatever is, or is to be, is right.
How strange, although we feel in the midst of life we are
in death, that mortals should presume to reduce it to a nice
calculation, and speculate upon it! I can sell my life now to
an annuity-office for twenty years' purchase or more, and they
L

<page 161>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
will share a dividend upon it. Well, if ever I do insure my
life, I hope that by me they will lose money, for, like everybody else in this world, I have a great many things to do
before I die. There was but one man I ever heard of who
could lie down and die, saying, "Now, Lord, let thy servant
depart in peace." I have no warning yet, no screw is loose
in this complex mechanism; and yet, this very day, a chimney-
pot may fall on my head, and put an end to all my calcula-
tions.
It is right that the precarious tenure of our existence should
not be wholly forgotten, but certainly was never intended
that it should be borne on the mind, for, if we had ever in
our memory that we may die this very hour, what a check
there would be to all energy, and enterprise, and industry.
Who would speculate with the anticipation of large returns
upon some future day, if he did not calculate upon living to
receive them 1 We should all stop to say Cui bono? If it
were not that our hopes support us, not only support us in all
reasonable, but even unreasonable calculations, the world
would be at a stand-still. No, no! we have our duty to per-
form towards our God; but we are also enjoined to perform
our duty towards our neighbour. The uncertainty of life is
to be remembered as a check to our worldly passions, but not
as a drag-chain to our worldly career.
CHAPTER XXXII.
En route, August, 1837.
There is a great art in packing property, and in it our
profession are fortunately adepts. A midshipman, for in-
stance, contrives to put everything at the bottom of his
chest. No very easy matter to pack up and arrange a
carriagefull of children, two birds, and a spaniel puppy—in
all, twelve living beings with all their appendages, down to
the birds and dogs' tails. As for packing up a dog, that is
impossible; the best way is to pack it off. Canary birds
travel very well in the carriage lamps, in the summer time,
when they are not lighted; and I mention this as a hint to
those who travel with such indispensable appendages. Inde*

<page 162>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
147
pendent of their being out of the way, their appearance behind
the glass is a source of great amusement to those who are
standing by where you change horses.
Stopped at St. Frond, and asked what was to be seen.
Nothing here but churches and monks. One of the little
girls, three years old, looked with avidity at the Virgin
Mary, three feet high, in gold brocade. The old verger
observing this, led her nearer to it, ascribing her admiration
probably to piety, when, to his horror, she screamed out,
"Quel jolie poupeel" Solomon says, "Out of the mouths of
babes shall ye be taught wisdom." The old man dropped her
hand, and looked as if he would have lighted the faggots had
she been bound to the stake, as she, in his opinion, deserved.
The perseverance of Belgian beggars is most remarkable,
and equally annoying. The best way is to take out your
purse, and pretend to throw something over their heads; they
turn back to look for it; and if you keep pointing farther off,
you distance them. On the whole, I consider that it is much
more advisable not to give to beggars, than to relieve them.
Begging is demoralising, and should be discountenanced in
every country. If children are brought up to whine, cry,
and hnmiliate themselves as in Belgium, that feeling of pride
and independence in early youth, which leads to industry in
after life, is destroyed. Aud yet, the aged and infirm would
appear to be proper objects of charity. In many cases, of
course, they must be; but to prove how you may be deceived,
I will state a circumstance which occurred to me some years
ago.
I was driving up the road with a friend. He was one of
the pleasantest and most honest men that nature ever moulded.
His death was most extraordinary: of a nervous tempera-
ment, ill health ended in aberration of intellect. At that
time Lord Castlereagh had ended his life of over-excitement
by suicide; the details in the newspapers were read by him,
and he fancied that he was Lord Castlereagh. Acting pre-
cisely by the accounts recorded in the newspapers, he went
through the same forms, and actually divided his carotid
artery, using his penknife, as had done the unfortunate peer.
Peace be with him! To proceed. I was driving in a gig, a
distance of about forty miles from town, on the Northern
Road, when, at the bottom of a steep hill, we fell in with a 1 2

<page 163>
148
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
group who were walking up it. It consisted of a venerable
old man, with his grey locks falling down on his shoulders,
dressed as a countryman, with a bundle on a stick over his
shoulders; with him were a young man and woman, both
heavily burdened, and five children of different sizes. The
appearance of the old man was really patriarchal, and there
was a placidity in his countenance which gave a very favour-
able impression. For a short time they continued breasting
the hill on the pathway: when about one-third up, the old
man crossed the road to us, as our horse was walking up, and
taking off his hat, said, "Gentlemen, if not too great a liberty, may I ask how far it is to ?" mentioning a town about twelve miles off. We told him, and he replied,
"That's a long way for old legs like mine, and young legs of
tired children." He then informed us that they had lost
their employment in the country, and that, with his son and
daughter, and their children, he had gone to town to procure
work, but had been unsuccessful, and they were now on their
return. "God's will be done!" continued he, after his nar-
rative, "and thankful shall we be to find ourselves at our
cottages again, although twelve miles is a weary bit of road,
and I have but a few halfpence left; but that will buy a bit
of bread for the poor children, and we must do as we can.
Good morning, and thank'ye kindly, gentlemen,"
Now there was no begging here, certainly, except by im-
plication. The effect, however, of his narrative was to ex-
tract a crown out of our pockets, which was received with a
shower of blessings on our heads. We drove off, observing
how difficult it was to know how to select real objects of
charity, and flattering ourselves that alms in this instance
were worthily bestowed. My readers will agree with me, I
have no doubt.
It so happened that, about ten days afterwards, I was
driving on the Dover Road, in the same gig, and in company
with the same gentleman, when we came to the bottom of
Shooter's Hill. Who should we fall in with but the very
same party, the venerable old man, the young people, and
the children, trudging up the pathway. The same plan, of
proceeding was observed, for, although we recognised them
immediately, it appeared that they did not recognise us. We
allowed the old fellow to tell his tale, as before; it was just 
<page 164>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
149
the same. He first took off his hat, and inquired the distance
to ———; and then entered into the same narrative, only
changing the place of abode, and ending with his few half-
pence to buy bread for the children. I let him finish, and
then I did not, as before, give him a crown, but I gave him
a cut across his face with the whip, which made him drop his
bundle, put his hands up to it; and we left him, stamping
with pain in the middle of the road, till we were out of sight.
A young rogue I can easily pardon, but an old one, on the
verge of the grave, is a proof of hardened villany, which
admits of no extenuation. After giving him this cut direct,
we never met again.
To return to St. Frond.—In the last church we visited
we had a scene. A woman was in the confessional; the
priest, with a white handkerchief up to conceal his face, and
prevent what he said being overheard, attracted the attention
of the children, who demanded an explanation. Children ask
so many questions. "Do you think she has been very
wicked? Will he forgive her?" Before I could offer my
opinion upon this important subject, the woman gave a loud
scream, and fell back from the confessional in a fit. The
priest rose, the handkerchief no longer concealed his face, and
he appeared to be burning with indignation. She was carried
out of the church, and the priest hastened up the aisle to the
vestry. What had she done? At all events, something for
which it appeared there was no absolution.
Aix-la-Chapelle—alas! What did we care for the tomb
of Charles the Great, and his extensive dominions, his splen-
dour and power? We had lost something to us of much
more importance—a carpet bag; not that the carpet bag was
of much value, for it was an old one, nor the articles which
it contained, for they were neither new nor of much worth;
but we lost in that carpet bag an invaluable quantity of com-
fort, for it contained a variety of little absolute necessaries,
the loss of which we could not replace until our arrival at
Cologne, to which town all our trunks had been despatched.
The children could not be brushed, for the brushes were in
the carpet bag; they could not be combed, for the combs
were in the carpet bag; they were put to bed without night-
caps, for the night-caps were in the carpet bag; they were
put to bed in their little chemises, reaching down to the fifth 
<page 165>
150
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
rib or thereabouts, for their night-clothes were in the carpet
bag: not only the children, but everyone else suffered by
this carpet bag being absent without leave. My boots burst,
and my others were in the carpet bag; my snuff-box was
empty, and the canister was in the carpetbag; and the ser-
vants grumbled, for they had smuggled some of their things
into the carpet bag.
It would appear that everything had been crammed into
this unfortunate receptacle. Had we lost a jewel-case, or a
purse full of money, it would have been a trifle compared to
the misery occ si. ned by this jumble up of every day conve-
niences of little value, showing how much more comfort de-
pends upon the necessaries than the luxuries of life. I may
add, now that I read what I have written, that this carpet
bag increased in dimensions to a most extraordinary compass
for several weeks afterwards. Everything that was missing was declared by the servants to have been in the carpet bag,
which, like the scape-goat of the Jews, wandered in the wil-
derness, bearing with it all the sins of all the nurses and every
other domestic of the family.
On our road, the landlord of an inn put the following
printed document into my hands, which I make public for
the benefit of those who are sportsmen without being land-
holders :—
"Comfortable Inn.—The proprietor of the Red House, at
Burgheim, on the road from Aix-la-Chapelle to Cologne,
pleasantly situated in the middle of the town, opposite the
Post-Oflice and Post-House, has the honour of recommending
himself to travellers. The ' Galignani's Messenger' and other
newspapers are taken in. The English, German, and French
languages spoken. Having excellent preserves of game in
the neighbourhood, he is happy to inform travellers that he
can provide them with good sports in wild boar, deer, and
hare hunting, and wild duck and partridge shooting. Horses
and carriages of all descriptions supplied for excursions in
the neighbourhood.
"A. J. Hons."
Prussia.—I fear that our political economists are running
after a shadow, and that their reciprocity system will never
be listened to. It is remarkable, that, after subsidising this 
<page 166>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
151
and other powers to break up the continental system esta-
blished by Napoleon for the expulsion of English manufac-
tures and the consequent ruin of England, now that the world is at peace, these very powers who, by our exertions
and our money, have been liberated from their thraldom, have
themselves established the very system of exclusion which we
were so anxious to prevent. A little reflection will prove
that they are right. The government of a country ought
never, if possible, to allow that country to be dependent upon
any other for such resources as it can obtain by its own in-
dustry. We, ourselves, acted upon this principle when we
established the silk manufactories in Spitalfields; and it is the
duty of every government to do the same.
The indigenous productions of the soil may fairly be ad-
mitted on a system of reciprocity and exchange, but not
articles of manufacture, of which the raw material is to be
obtained by all. For instance, the lead, and iron, and tin of
Great Britain, the wines of other countries, are all articles to
be exchanged or paid for by those who have not mines of
those metals, or do not possess vineyards. Further than this
reciprocity cannot go, without being injurious to one, if not
to both parties.
Three of the carriage-wheels defective! Add this to the
carpet bag, and people will agree in the trite observation that
misfortunes never come single. This is not true; they do
come single very often, and when they do, they are more
annoying than if they come in heaps. You growl at a single
mishap, but if you find that Fortune is down upon you and
attempts to overload you, you rise up against her with indig-
nation, snap your fingers, and laugh at her. The last mishap
brought consolation for all the others; if we had not so for-
tunately found out the defects in the wheels, we might have
broken our necks the next day, especially, as some amateur
took a fancy and helped himself to our sabot. I only wish he
may be shod with it for the remainder of his days.
It is curious how the ignorant and simple always rise or
depreciate others, whatever their rank may be, to their own
levels, when they talk of them. I listened to one little girl
telling a story to another, in which kings, queens, and prin-
cesses were the actors. "And so," said the queen to the
princess, "what a very pretty doll that is of yours!" "Yes, 
<page 167>
152
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
your majesty; papa bought it for me at the bazaar, and gave
5*. 6c?. for it," &c. This reminded me of the sailors telling
stories on board of a man-of-war, who put very different lan-
guage into the mouth of royalty. ''Well/' says the king,
"blow me tight if I'll stand this. You must buckle to as
fast as you please, Mrs. Queen." "I'll see you hanged first,
and your head shaved too," answered her majesty in a rage,
&c. &c. What queens may say in a rage it is impossible to
assert; but to the seamen this language appeared to be per-
fectly regal and quite correct.
Some people form odd notions of gentility. A cabman
took up a well-dressed female, who made use of expressions
which rather startled him, and he observed to a friend of his,
a hackney-coachman, that he had no idea that the higher
classes used such language. "Pooh! pooh!" replied the
coachman, "she warn't a lady." "I beg your pardon," re-
plied the cabman, "a real lady, hat and feathers /"
Cologne.—This is a regular Golgotha—the skulls of the
Magi, par excellence, and then the skulls of St. Ursula and
her 11,000 virgins. I wonder where she collected so many!
St. Ursula brought a great force into the field, at all events,
and, I presume, commands the right wing of the whole army
of martyrs. I went into the golden chamber, where there
are some really pretty things. The old fellow handed us the
articles one after another, but I observed that there were
many things which I had seen when here before, which were
not presented to view, so I looked into the cabinet and found
them. They were crystal vases, mounted with gold and
precious stones. One had the thigh-bone of St. Sebastian;
another, part of the ulna of St. Lawrence; and a third a bit
of the petticoat of the Virgin Mary. I handed them out to
the ladies, and asked him why he did not show as those as
he used to do before. The old man smiled and turned the
corners of his mouth down, as if to say, "Its all humbug!"
Relics are certainly at a discount, even among the Catholics.
I question whether the Bridge of Boats at Cologne don't
pay better than any other in the whole world, although by
no means the handsomest; the stream of passengers on it all
day is as strong and as wide as the Rhine itself. As for
Cologne, the best thing that could happen to it is to be burnt
down. Narrow streets, badly ventilated, badly drained; your 
<page 168>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
nose is visited with a thousand varieties of smell as you pass
along; and the Eau de Cologne in the gutters is very different
in savour from that which you buy in the bottles.
We had a pleasant passage from Cologne to Coblentz, and
from thence to Mayence, because we had pleasant company.
It is singular, but it is a fact, that you go on board a steam-
boat to avoid fatigue, and each night you are more tired than
if you had travelled by land. You go to avoid dust and
heat; the first is exchanged for blacks out of the funnel, and
you are more dirty than if you had travelled twice the dis-
tance; and the heat is about the same; in these points you
certainly gain nothing. The expense of these Rhine steam-
boats is very great. By a calculation I made—to travel by
post, five persons in a carriage, from Cologne to Strasburg—
you will expend 200 and odd francs less than by the steam
conveyance. In time you certainly lose by steam, as you
are four days and a half going to Strasburg, and by land car-
riage it is half the distance, being only forty-five posts.
Neither do you save trouble; for the steam-boats being
changed every evening, you have to take your luggage on
shore, shift it from one to the other, and, at the very time
that you are least inclined to do anything, independent of an
enormous expense which you ought not to pay, but cannot
well resist.
Now, as you really gain nothing in the above points, it is
at least to be supposed that you gain in the picturesque; but
this is not the case: and I have no hesitation in asserting
that those who go up the Rhine are generally disappointed,
although they do not like to say so. They expect too much.
The vivid descriptions, the steel engravings, have raised their
anticipations too high; and they find that the reality is not
equal to the efforts of the pen and pencil. Several of the
passengers acknowledged to me that they were disappointed;
and I must confess that I hardly knew the Rhine again.
When I travelled up the Rhine by land I thought it beautiful;
but in a steam-boat it was tame.
This was observed by others, besides myself, who had
ascended both by steam and by the road running close to the
banks; and the reason was simple. When you travel by
land you have the whole breadth of the Rhine as a fore-
ground to the scenery of the opposite bank, and this you lose 
<page 169>
154
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
by water; and the bank you travel on is much more grand from
its towering above you, and also from the sharp angles and
turns which so suddenly change the scenery. Abruptness greatly assists the picturesque: the Rhine loses half its beauty
viewed from a steam-boat. I have ascended it in both ways, and I should recommend all travellers to go up by land. The
inconveniences in a steam-boat are many. You arrive late and find the hotel crowded, and you are forced to rise very
early (at Mayence at three o'clock in the morning), which,
with a family, is no trifle. The only part of the Rhine-worth,
seeing is from Cologne to Mayence; below Cologne and above
Mayence it is without interest; and although between these
two places the steam-boats are well served, above Mayence
everything is very uncomfortable, and you are liable to every
species of exaction.
If I were to plan a tour up the Rhine for any friends, I should advise them not to go by the Rotterdam steamer; it is a long voyage and without interest, and with many incon-
veniences; but start in the steamer to Antwerp, go up to
Brussels by the rail-road; from thence you will start for
Cologne by the route of Namur and Liege through Waterloo;
and I rather expect that many will prefer the banks of the
Meuse to the Rhine. I know nothing more beautiful than the
road from Namur as far as Chaude Fontaine, although com-
pared to the Rhine it is on a miniature scale. From Liege
to Aix-la-Chapelle, and from thence to Cologne. Go up the Rhine by land as far as Mayence, and then you may do as
you please. When you are coming back, descend by the
steam-boats; for then you go with the stream and with great
rapidity, and arrive in good time at the towns where they
stop. You will then have seen the Rhine by land and by
water.
At present the bubble is at its height; but it will burst by-
and-by. The English are lining the banks of the Rhine with
gold, and receive insult and abuse in exchange. I have been much amused with a young countryman who has come up in
the steamer with me. Not able to speak a word of French or
German, he is pillaged every hour of the day; but if he could
speak, he has no idea of the value of his money. He pulls
out his purse, and the waiters help themselves—very plenti-
fully, I may safely add. What he has come for it is difficult 
<page 170>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
155
to say: not for the picturesque, for he slept the whole time
between Cologne and Mayence—that is, all the time that was
not occupied by eating and drinking. His only object appears
to be to try the Rhenish wines. He has tried all upon the
Wein Presen. He called for a bottle of the best; they gave
him one not on the carte, and charged him exactly one pound
sterling for the bottle. He is a generous fellow; he sits at
the table with his bottle before him, and invites every man
to partake of it. And he found plenty on board who were
willing to oblige him.
"Capital wine, an't it?" said he to a Frenchman who drank
his wine, but did not understand a word of English.
"A votre sante, Monsieur," replied the Frenchman.
"I say, what wine do you call it?"
"C'est exquis, Monsieur," replied the Frenchman.
"Exkey, is it? You waiter, bring us another bottle of
exkey."
CHAPTER XXXIII.
To continue.—Should travellers think it advisable to pro-
ceed upon the Rhine, so far as Mayence, let them be careful
how they venture to proceed farther. I did so, out of curiosity
to know what the features of the Rhine were, after it had lost
its character for magnificence; and I will now detail my pro-
gress. At Mayence you are shifted into a smaller steamer,
with less power, upon the principle that there being but a
few passengers, their comforts do not require so much atten-
tion; for, as the Rhine becomes more rapid as it narrows,
upon any other principle the power of the engine should have
been greater. I must caution the reader not to believe what
is told them by the steam-packet company.
Barbers were once considered liars par excellence, but I am
inclined to give the preference to these new associations.
The features of the Rhine change immediately that you leave
Mayence; the banks are low, and the river is studded with
numerous islands, all of which, as well as the greatest propor-
tion of the banks, are covered with osiers. Still, there is a
great beauty in the Rhine even there; the waving of the
osiers to the strong breeze, the rapidity of the current, the 
<page 171>
156
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
windings of the river, the picturesque spires of the village
churches, or the change of scenery when the river pours
through forests, lining each bank as the vessel slowly claws
against the rapid stream, are by no means uninteresting; of
course we did not arrive at Leopoldshaffen at the hour stated
by the people at the office, but we did arrive late at night,
and took up our quarters at a small auberge in the above
village, which is not marked down in the maps, but which has
post-horses and diligences to convey passengers to Carlsruhe.
Notwithstanding the assertion at the packet-office, that we
were to be in one day to Leopoldshaffen, in one day more to
Strasburg, we found there was no steamer until the day after
the morrow, and that we must wait one day more if we did
not choose to go to Carlsruhe. The females, being fatigued,
preferred remaining where they were. We sauntered about
and amused ourselves quietly. The next day, we found the
steamer had arrived, and that instead of her ascending in one
day to Strasburg, it would take a day and a half, and that
we must pass the night aboard without the least accommoda-
tion—not very pleasant, with a carriagefull of young
children. We embarked on board the steamer, which was a
miserable small vessel, with an engine of bad construction,
and very small power; and with this we were to oppose the
most rapid part of the Rhine. In every other point the vessel
was equally ill found: they had a very small stock of provi-
sions, bad wine, and none of those comforts provided for the
passengers in the other vessels. To crown all, another family
with children (of whom more hereafter) had taken their pas-
sage. The steward told us, that never expecting so many
people on board going up to Strasburg, he was totally unpre-
pared; and so it eventually appeared.
We started, and soon found out that the power of the
engines was quite disproportionate to the object in view.
The Rhine now assumed a more desolate character. For
miles and miles not a village or even a solitary town to be
seen; the Hartz mountains forming a blue opaque mass in the
distance; the stream rapidly passing through narrow and deep
channels, leaving one half of the bed of the river dry. At
times we passed very dangerous straits, where the waters
boiled and eddied over reefs of rocks, and were often obliged
to force our way by keeping within a foot of steep and muddy 
<page 172>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
banks, where trees torn up, and hanging by the roots, proved
how violent must be the current when the river is increased
by the melting of the mountain snow.
Our progress was, as it may be imagined, most tedious; at
no time did we advance above a mile and a half per hour;
sometimes we did not gain a hundred yards in the same time,
and occasionally we were swept back by the current, and had
to lose still more ground, while they increased the power of
the engine at the risk of explosion. The consequence was,
that when the day closed, the conducteur gave his opinion,
that instead of being at Strasburg by eleven or twelve o'clock
the next day, we should not arrive till four or five o'clock:
we anchored within a yard of the bank, and prepared to pass
the night how we could.
Our party consisted of seven, with two nurses. The other
party consisted of four grown-up females, one male, four
boys, an East African negro, and a cowdcin; the latter was a
very important personage, and made a great noise during the
passage. The gentleman was apparently one of those who
denominate themselves eclectic: he paid very little attention
to what was going on; a peaceable sort of man, whose very
physiognomy said "anything for a quiet life:" one of the
ladies was his wife, and two others, virgins of some standing,
apparently his sisters; the other lady, a bilious-looking sort
of personage, and happy in being the mother of four very fine boys, as great pickles as ever lived; these she kept in order
with the assistance of the negro and the cowskin, the use of
the latter occasioning such evident marks of astonishment and
horror to our little ones, as not to be at all satisfactory to the
lady in question, who appeared not averse, had she dared, to
have given them a taste of it. The youngest and the youngest
but one of the boys were the two sufferers; the youngest had
a regular dozen administered every half hour. The two
eldest were more particularly under the care of the negro,
who used his fists, I presume because they wore corduroys,
and, as Hood says, did not care for "cut behind." We had
not been in the vessel two minutes before there was a breeze.
I heard the negro expostulating as follows:—" Yon very
foolish boy, what you mean? who ever heard of putting new
cloth cap into water to catch fish?" This was the first
offence. I must say that the coercion used did not appear to 
<page 173>
15S
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
originate from any feeling of regard for the children, for they
were allowed to climb, and push, and run over the sky-lights,
and over the engine, and I every moment expected that some
of them would be provided for either by the cog-wheels or
the river Rhine.
It was evident at once, not only from the above accessories,
but from the Chinese trunks which contained their luggage,
that they were an Indian importation, and their behaviour
subsequently proved it, beyond all doubt, even if they had
not made it known—not by talking to us, but by talking at
us, for they evidently did not consider that we were suffi-
ciently respectable to be admitted into their society, even in
the short intercourse of fellow-travellers.
I cannot here help making an observation relative to most
of the people who come from India. They are always dis-
satisfied, and would gladly return. The reason is very ob-
vious; they at once lose their rank and consequence, and sink
down to the level which they are entitled to in English
society. In India the rank of the servants of the Company
takes precedence; but whatever their rank or emolument may
be in India, they are still but servants of a company of mer-
chants, and such rank is not, of course, allowed in England.
Accustomed to unlimited sway and control over a host of
fawning slaves, and to that attention as females—which,
where females are not very plentiful, is most sedulously paid
—accustomed to patronise the newcomers, who, of course, feel
grateful for such well-timed civility and hospitality—in short,
accustomed to rank, splendour, wealth, and power—it is not
surprising that, upon their return to England, when they find
themselves shorn of all these, and that their station in society
is far more removed from the apex, they become sullen and
dissatisfied. Of course, there are many who have been resi-
dent in India, where family and connections insure them
every advantage upon their return to their native country;
but it must be recollected that the greater proportion of those
who return consists of those who were of low origin, and who
have obtained their appointments in reward for the exertions
of their parents in behalf of their patrons in parliamentary
returns, &c., and of young females who have (with their face
as their fortune) been shipped off to India upon a matrimonial
speculation. Now, however high in rank they may have, in 
<page 174>
DIAEY ON THE CONTINENT.
159
the course of many years' service, arrived to in India, when
they return they are nobodies; and unless they bring with
them such wealth as to warrant their being designated as
nabobs, their chance of admittance into the best society is
very small indeed.
I have said that they talked at us, and not to us. The
gentleman was civil, and would have conversed, but he was
immediately interrupted and sent off on a message; and, for a
quiet life, he gave it up. The system of talking at people
always reminds me of the play of the "Critic," in which it
is asked why, if "he knows all this, it is necessary to tell
him again V Simply because the audience do not; so, the
party in question were the actors, and we were the audience
to be informed. The conversation between the adults ran as follows :—" You recollect how polite Lord C was to us
at ?" "To be sure I do."—" Lady D told me so
and so." "Yes, I recollect it very well.''—" What a nice man
the Honourable Mr. E is!" "Yes, that he is."—" How
very intimate we were at with Lady G." "That we
were."—And so on, during the whole of the day, much to our
edification. How contemptible, how paltry is such vanity!
But with their indulgence of it for our amusement, the cow-
skin, and a scanty dinner, we got through the first day, during
which two or three occasional patronising questions or remarks
were thrown at our heads, and then they reverted to their
own assumed exclusiveness. The night, as may be supposed,
was anything but comfortable to those in the cabin; but I
shall not dwell upon what, if fairly narrated, would be a very
pretty sketch of human nature.
We were to arrive the next day at five o'clock in the after-
noon, but we toiled on; and the sun at last went down, and
we found ourselves with the steeple of Strasburg a long way
off. We again anchored, and had to pass another night in
this miserable vessel and delightful company. The detention,
of course, made our fellow-passengers more cross; and could
I have obtained possession of the cowskin, I would certainly
have thrown it overboard. The captain sent a man on shore
to procure us something to eat, for the steward declared him-
self bankrupt. The next forenoon we arrived at the bridge
of boats between Kehl and Strasburg; and thus was finished
our tedious and unpleasant voyage, of which I have given a 
<page 175>
160
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
description as a warning to all future travellers. Our fellow-
passengers did once condescend to address and inform us that
they had left England (a party of ten people) only to pay a
visit to some friends in Switzerland — an expensive sort of
trip, and which did not appear at all consistent with the fact
that they were travelling without a carriage or female servants.
Be it as it might, we separated without so much as a saluta-
tion or good-bye being exchanged.
Much of the picturesque on the Rhine is destroyed by the
vineyards, which are, in reality, the most unpoetical things in
landscape scenery, being ranged up the sides of the mountains
in little battalions like infantry. It is remarkable in how
shallow and how very poor a soil the vine will grow. At St.
Michael's, they dig square holes in the volcanic rocks, and the
vines find sustenance. At the Cape of Good Hope the Con-
stantia vineyards are planted upon little more than sand. I
dug down some depth, and could find nothing else. The finest
grapes grown in Burgundy are upon a stratum of soil little
more than a foot deep, over schistus slate quarries, and the
soil itself composed chiefly of the debris of this soft rock.
We know that the vegetable creation has a sort of instinct
as well as the animal; and it appears to me that there are
different degrees of instinct in that portion of nature as well
as in the other. A vine, for instance, I take to be a very
clever plant, and both apple and pear-trees to be great fools.
The vine will always seek its own nourishment, hunting with
its roots through the soil for the aliment it requires; and if it
cannot find it where it is planted, it will seek, in every direc-
tion and to a great distance, to obtain it. It is asserted that
the famous vine at Hampton Court has passed its roots under
the bed of the river, and obtains aliment from the soil on the
other side; but an apple or pear-tree will take no such trouble
—it will not even avoid what is noxious. Plant one of these
trees in the mould three or four feet above the marl or clay;
so long as the roots remain in the mould, the tree will flourish,
but so soon as the tap root pierces down to the marl or clay
below the mould, the tree will canker and die. To prevent
this, it is the custom to dig first down to the marl and put a
layer of tiles upon it, which turn the roots of the trees from
a perpendicular to a horizontal direction, and then they do
well; but leave the tree without assistance, and the fool will 
<page 176>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT. 161
commit suicide, blindly rushing to its own destruction; while
the vine will not only avoid it, but use every exertion to pro-
Cure what is necessary for its continuing in health and vigour.
The vine is therefore certainly the more intellectual plant of
the two.
«t - -CHAPTER XXXIV.
P. - ,Strasbourg.
There certainly is an impulse implanted in our natures to
love something; our affections were never intended to lie in
abeyance, and if they cannot be placed upon the other sex or
our own children, they still seek something as an object.
This accounts for old bachelors being fond of their nephews
and nieces, for blood relationship has nothing to do with it;
and for old ladies, who have not entered into wedlock, be-
coming so attached to dogs, cats, and parrots. Sometimes,
indeed, the affections take much wilder flights in the pursuit
of an object, and exhibit strange idiosyncrasies; but still it
proves by nature we are compelled to love something. I have
been reflecting how far this principle may not be supposed to
pervade through the universe, and whether we cannot trace it
in the inferiors of the animal creation: whether we cannot
trace a small remnant of Paradise in the beasts who enjoyed
it with man, as well as in man himself. It is well known
that animals will take very strong and very strange attach-
ments towards other animals. It is, perhaps, more apparent
in domestic animals, but is not that because they are more
brought together and more under our immediate eye? In
some instances, as in the case when maternal feelings are
roused, the strongest antipathies and habit will be controlled.
A cat losing her kittens has been known to suckle a brood of
young rats, but in this case I consider instinct to have been
the most powerful agent; wild beasts confined in cages show
the same propensity. The lion secluded in his den has often
been known to foster and become strongly attached to a dog,
thrown in to him to be devoured; but there never was an
instance of a lion or any other wild beast, which had a female
in the same den or even a companion of its own species, pre-
serving the life of any other living creature thrown in to him;
M

<page 177>
162
DIAKY ON THE CONTINENT.
This feeling occasions also the production of Hybrids; which
in a wild state could never take place. There is not, probably,
a more ferocious or ill-tempered animal than the bear when it
is grown up; it is subdued by fear, but shows no attachment
to its keeper; yet, the other day I fell in with a remarkable
narration proving the feeling I have referred to, actuating
even this animal. A proof of the bad feeling of a bear is
fully established by the fact that, although Martin, as the old
bear is called in the Jardin des Plantes, at Paris, had been
confined in his fosse nearly twenty years, during which time
not a day passed that he was not well fed by the people who
amused themselves in the gardens, when a man fell into his
pit, he immediately destroyed him. It does, however, appear,
that all bears are not so ill-tempered as Monsieur Martin.
Leopold, Duke of Lorraine, had a bear confined by a long
chain, near the palisades below the glacis. Some poor Sa-
voyard boys, who had emigrated as they still do, with the
hopes of picking up some money to take back with them, had
taken shelter in an out-house during a severe snow storm.
One of them who was numbed with the cold, thought that he
would try if he could not find some warmer berth, and in
seeking this, as the snow fell fast, he at last crawled nearly
exhausted into the kennel of the bear. Instead of tearing the
lad to pieces, the bear took him in his fore paws, and pressed
him to his shaggy warm coat till he was quite recovered. A
bear generally receives you with open arms, whatever may
be his ultimate decision; but in this instance it was favour-
able. The poor little boy finding himself in good quarters,
went fast asleep; the next morning he sallied forth to obtain
some victuals if he could, but without success. Cold and
hunger drove him again to the kennel of the bear, who not
only was delighted to see him, but had actually laid aside a
portion of his supper for the boy's use. The amicable
arrangement continued for some days, and the bear, at last,
would not touch his victuals till the boy's return. This
peculiar friendship was at last discovered, and the story nar-
rated to the Duke, who sent for the boy, and took care of
him, admitting him into his own household. The narrator
observes that the boy died a year or two after this unusual
occurrence had taken place. I have no doubt but that many
more instances might be brought forward by others to establish 
<page 178>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
163
my supposition. To us, all wild animals of the same species
appear to be much alike in disposition, because we have not
an opportunity of examining and watching them carefully,
but I should rather imagine, that as we can perceive such a
manifest difference in temper between individual horses and
dogs and other animals who are domesticated, that the same
difference must exist in the wild species, and that, in fact,
there may be shades of virtue and vice in lions, tigers, bears,
and other animals; and that there does exist in animals as
well as in man, more or less according to their natural dis-
positions, a remnant of those affections which in the garden
of our first parents were so strongly implanted as to induce
the lion to lie down with the lamb. "God is Love," says the
Scriptures; before the devil found his way to this earth all
was love, for God only was there. Now man struggles
between the two principles of good and evil. When his
nature was changed, so was that of animals; but the principle
not being extinct in man, why should not a portion still
remain in the rest of the creation, who with him were per-
mitted to inhabit the garden of Eden, and whose savage
natures were not roused until with man they were driven
from that abode of peace?
The most affectionate animal that I know of is the common
brown Mongoose: it is a creature between the squirrel and
the monkey, with all the liveliness but without any of the
mischief of the latter. Unfortunately they will not live in
our country, or they would supersede the cat altogether; they
are very clean, and their attachment is beyond all conception
to those who have not seen them. They will leap on their
master's shoulder, or get into his bed, and coil their long
bushy tails round his neck like a boa, remaining there for
hours if permitted. I recollect one poor little fellow who was
in his basket dying—much to the grief of his master—who,
just before he expired, crawled out of his straw and went to his
master's cot, where he had just sufficient strength to take his
place upon his bosom, coil his tail round his neck, and then
he died.
Hares and rabbits are also very affectionate. One of my
little girls had one of the latter, which she brought up in the
house. He grew very large, and was domesticated just like
a dog, following you everywhere, in the parlour and .up inlt
M 2

<page 179>
164 DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
the bed-room; in the winter lying on the rug before the fire
on his side, and stretching out his four legs as unconcerned as
possible, even refusing to go away if you pushed him. As
for the cat, she durst not go near him. He thrashed her un-
mercifully, for he was very strong; and the consequence was
that she retired to the kitchen, where he would often go
down, and if she was in his way drive her out. The hare
and rabbit, as well as the deer tribe, defend themselves by
striking with their fore paws, and the blow which they can
give is more forcible than people would suppose. One day
when I was in a cover, leaning against a tree, with my gun
in my hand, I presume for some time I must have been in
deep thought, I heard a rustling and then a squeak on the
other side of the tree; I looked round the trunk, and beheld
a curious combat between two hares and a stoat. The hares
were male and female, and had their leveret between them,
which latter was not above six weeks old. The stoat—a
little devil with all its hair, from the tip of its nose to the end
of its tail, standing at end—was at about two yards distance
from them, working round and round to have an opportunity
to spring upon the leveret, which was the object of its attack.
As it went round so did the hares face him, pivoting on a
centre with the young one between them. At last the stoat
made a spring upon the leveret. He was received by the
hares, who struck him with their fore feet such blows as I
could not have believed possible; they actually resounded,
and he was rolled over and over until he got out of distance,
when he shook himself and renewed his attacks. These con-
tinued about ten minutes, and every time he was beaten off;
but, at every spring his teeth went into the poor little leveret,
at last it gave its last squeak, turned over on its side, and
died, the father and mother still holding their relative situa-
tions, and facing the stoat. The latter showed as much prudence as courage; for so soon as he perceived that the
leveret was dead, he also walked off. The hares turned
round to their young one, smelt at it apparently, pushed it
with their noses, and shortly after, as if aware that it was
past all defence, hopped slowly away; they were hardly out
ofsight in the bushes when back came the stoat, threw the
leveret, twice as big as himself, over his shoulders, and went
off with his prize at a hard gallop, reminding me, in minia-

<page 180>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
165
ture, of the Bengal tiger carrying off a bullock. All the
actors in the drama having gone off, I walked off, and shortly
after both barrels of my gun went off, so the whole party dis-
appeared, and there's an end of my story.
If an elephant were not so very unwieldy, and at the same
time so very uncertain in his temper, he is the animal who
has the most claims from affection and intelligence to be
made a pet of; but an elephant in a drawing-room would be
somewhat incommodious; and, although one may admit a
little irritability of temper in a lap-dog weighing three pounds,
the anger of an elephant, although he expresses himself
very sorry for it afterwards, is attended with serious con-
sequences. There is something very peculiar about an ele-
phant in his anger and irritability. It sometimes happens
that, at a certain season, a wild elephant will leave the herd
and remain in the woods alone. It is supposed, and I think
that the supposition is correct, that these are the weaker
males who have been driven away by the stronger, in fact,
they are elephants crossed in love; and when in that unfor-
tunate dilemma, they are very mischievous, and play as many
fantastic tricks as ever did any of the knights of the round
table on similar occasions in times of yore.
When I was at Trincomalee, an elephant in this situation
had taken possession of the road at some leagues distant, and,
for reasons best known to himself, would not allow a soul to
pass it. He remained perdu in the jungle till he saw some-
body coming, and then he would burst out and attack them.
It is the custom to travel in palanquins from one part of the
island to another, as in all parts of India. If some officer or
gentleman was obliged to proceed to Colombo or elsewhere, so
soon as the palanquin came towards him, out came the ele-
phant; the native bearers, who knew that it was no use
arguing the point, dropped the palanquin and fled, and all
that the occupant could do was to bundle out and do the same
before the elephant came up, otherwise he had little chance of
his life, for the elephant immediately put his knees in the palan-
quin, and smashed it to atoms. Having done this, he would
toss the fragments in the air in every direction, at the same
time carefully unfolding all the articles contained in the
palanquin for the occupant's use—shirts, trowsers, boots,
bottles, books, undergoing a most rigid examination, and after 
<page 181>
166
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
that being rendered to fragments. If the cooley who had the
charge of the bag of letters made his appearance, he was im-
mediately pursued until he gave up the whole correspondence,
official or private. The bag was opened, every letter was
opened one by one, and then torn in fragments and tossed to
the winds. In this way did he keep possession of the road,
stopping all communication for several weeks, until it was his
sovereign will and pleasure that people might receive their
letters and travel across the country as before. Now what
an unaccountable freak was this! It was like the madness of
a reasonable being. If I recollect right, it was when Captain
Owen was on the east coast of Africa, some of his party who
landed were attacked by elephants, who threw them down on
the ground and, instead of killing them, as might have been
expected, and would have given them no trouble, they drew
up a large quantity of mud in their trunks and poured it into
their mouths so as to nealry to suffocate them, and then left
them. On another occasion, they put their fore feet on their
limbs, so as to pinch and bruise them severely in every part of
their bodies, but avoided their bones so as not to fracture one.
Now this was evidently two species of torture invented by the
elephants, and these elephants in a wild state. There cer-
tainly is something very incomprehensible about these animals. The lion has been styled the king of beasts, but I think he
is an usurper allowed to remain on the throne by public
opinion and suffrage, from the majesty of his appearance. In
every other point he has no claim. He is the head of the
feline or cat species, and has all the treachery, cruelty, and
wanton love for blood that all this class of animals have to
excess. The lion, like the tiger and the cat, will not come
boldly on to his prey, but springs from his concealment. It
is true that he will face his assailants bravely when wounded,
but so will the tiger.
In my opinion, the horse is the most noble of all animals,
and, I am sorry to say, the most ill-used, at least in England;
for I do not recollect a single instance of having seen a horse
ill-treated on the Continent. In fact, you hardly ever see a
horse on the Continent that is not in good working condition:
you never meet the miserable, lame, blind, and worn-out
animals that you do in England, which stumble along with
their loads behind them till they stumble into their graves. 
<page 182>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
167
If anyone would take the trouble to make friends with their
horses, they would be astonished at the intelligence and affec-
tion of this noble animal; but we leave him to our grooms,
who prefer to use force to kindness. At the same time, I
have observed, even in colts, very different dispositions; some
are much more fond and good-tempered than others; but let
them be what they will as colts, they are soon spoiled by the
cruelty and want of judgment of those who have charge of
them in the stable. The sympathy between the Arab and his
horse is well known: the horse will lie down in the tent, and
the children have no fear of receiving a kick; on the contrary,
they roll upon, and with him: such is the result of kindness.
And I can now give a proof of the effects of the contrary, as
it was, in this instance, what may be termed malice prepense
in the animal. The horses used in the West Indies are sup-
plied from the Spanish Main; they are from the Andalusian
stock originally, partly Arab and barb. These horses are
taken by the lasso from the prairies, and are broken in as
follows:—They lead them down to the sea beach, saddle and
bridle them for the first time, and mount them with a pair of
spurs, the rowels of which are an inch long. So soon as the
animal plunges and attempts to divest himself of his rider, he
is forced into the sea, and there he is worked in and out of
his depth till he is fairly worn out and exhausted. This is
repeated once or twice till they are submissive, and then they
are sent off as broke-in horses to the West India Islands. A
friend of mine had a very beautiful animal, which he had pur-
chased from one of these ships. He had not bought him
more than a week before he took the bit in his mouth, and
ran away with the black boy who was exercising him. The
boy lost his seat and fell, and the horse, for a hundred yards,
continued his career; and then it stopped, turned round, and
galloped up to the boy, who was still on the ground, and
never ceased kicking him till the poor fellow's brains were
scattered in the road. Now this was evidently determination
for revenge.

<page 183>
168
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
CHAPTER XXXV.
Strasbourg is full of the pomp and circumstance of war.
Being one of the keys of France, it has a garrison of ten
thousand men, and the drums and bands play from morning
to evening, much to the delight of the children, at all events.
It is a well-built town, although the houses are most of them
of very ancient date, with three stories of mansardes, in their
high-peaked roofs. I am rather partial to the Alsatian
character; it is a combination of French, Swiss, and German,
which make a very good cross. Not being in any particular
hurry, I have remained here ten days, and I will say for
Strasbourg, that it has many recommendations. It is lively
and bustling; the walks outside the ramparts are beautiful,
and living is very reasonable. It has, however, the reputa-
tion of being a very unhealthy place, and I am afraid with
truth. It is singular that the beautiful cathedral, although it
has already suffered so much by lightning, has not yet been
fitted with a conductor. There was a meeting of the digni-
taries some years back; some argued in favour and some
against it, and it ended in neither party being persuaded, and
nothing being done. I met another Englishman here, to
whom the question might so properly be put, "What the
deuce are you doing here?" An old worthy, nearly seventy,
who, after having passed his fair allowance of life very
happily in his own country, must, forsooth, come up the
Rhine, without being able to speak a word of French, or any
other language but his own. He very truly told me that he
had just begun to see the world at a time that he should be
thinking of going out of it. He honoured me with the office
of interpreter as long as he stayed, and I was not sorry to
see him booked for the steam-boat, all the way to the London
Custom House stairs.
There is one remarkable point about the town of Stras-
bourg, which is, that the Protestants and Catholics have, I
believe always, and do now, live in a state of amity which
ought to be an example to others. In running over the his-
tory of the town, I do not find that they ever persecuted
each other; but if they have not persecuted each other, I am
shocked to say that they have not spared the Jews. At the 
<page 184>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
169
time of the plague, they accused the Jews of having occa-
sioned it by poisoning the wells, and only burnt alive two
thousand of them at once! I wonder when the lightning
struck the cathedral they did not drown two thousand more
in the Rhine—strange Christianity! when smitten by the
hand of God, to revenge themselves by smiting their fellow-creatures. I had to call upon a Professor here upon some
business; he amused me very much; he fancied that he could
speak English: perhaps he might have been able to do so at
one time, but if so, he had forgotten it, but he did not think
he had. I addressed him in French, and told him my busi-
ness. "Sir, you speak English ?"—"Yes," replied I. "Then, Sir, I tell you that "Then he stopped, pondering and perplexed for some minutes, without saying a syllable.
"Speak French, Sir," said I; "I perceive that you have for-
gotten a word in our language;" and I then put another lead-
ing question to him, to which he replied, "Yes, I recollect
that very well, and I "Then another dead pause for the verb. I waited a minute in perfect silence, but his
memory was as treacherous as he was obstinately bent upon
talking English, and then I again spoke to him, and he re-
plied, "That is true, that you must "Then he broke
down again, and I broke up the conference, as I really could
not wait until he formed English words, and he was evidently
resolved that he would speak in no other language. Fortu-
nately, it was no business of my own, but a commission from
another, which ended in an omission, which, perhaps, did
quite as well.
This morning I strolled into a small de'bit de tabac, to fill my
box, and it being excessively warm, was not sorry to sit
down and enter into a conversation with the young woman
who attended upon the customers. I asked her, among other
questions, if the shop was hers. She replied, "That she had
hired the license." This answer struck me, and I inquired if
she could obtain a license for herself. She replied," No, un-
less," said she, laughing, "I should marry some old estropie
who has been worn out in the service." She then informed
me of what I was not aware, which is, that instead of giving
pensions to the old militaires, they give them, and them only,
the licenses for selling tobacco. They may either carry on
the trade themselves, or may lease out their licenses to others,
for as much as they can obtain for it per year.

<page 185>
170
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
I perceive that the Gallic cock now struts on the head of
the staff, bearing regimental colours, instead of the eagle of
Napoleon. They certainly have made the cock a most im-
posing bird, but still a cock is not an eagle. The couplets
written upon this change, which was made by Louis Philippe,
are somewhat sarcastic:—
"le vaillant coq Gaulois,
Grattant sur le fumier,
A fait sortir le roi
Louis Philippe Premier;
Qui par juste reeonnoissance
Le mit dans les armes de France."
Did not sleep very comfortably this night; there were too
many of us in the bed, and all of us bits of philosophers. I
am a bit of a philosopher myself, and surely fleas cannot be
considered more than very little bits. All French fleas are
philosophers, it having been fairly established by a French
punster that they belong to the secte—(TEpicure (des pi-
queurs).
The English who go up the Rhine to Switzerland generally
proceed on the German side. Few pass through Alsace or
German France, and those who do, take the shortest route,
by which they avoid Colmar. As I took the longest in pre-
ference, I shall in few words point out the features of the
country. You pass through the valley of the Rhine, which
is flat and fertile to excess, the only break in the uniformity
of the country being the chain of Vorges mountains, distant
about eight miles on your right, and the occasional passage
of the dry bed of a winter torrent from the mountains. The
cathedral at Colmar is well worth seeing. In outward archi-
tecture it is not very remarkable, but its painted windows are
quite as fine as those of Strasbourg; and, in one point, it
excels all the cathedrals I have seen, which is the choir, hand-
somely carved in oak, and with good pictures let into the
panels. It is in better taste, more solid, and less meretricious
in its ornaments, than any I know of. It has also a very
fine pulpit, the whole of which, as well as the steps and
balustrade leading up to it, is of fine marble. At Colmar,
the eye will be struck with the peculiarity of architecture in
some of the old buildings; it very often is pure Saracenic.
The roads being excellent, we arrived in good time at Basle.

<page 186>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
171
Once more in Switzerland; I have more pleasure now in
revisiting a country which has left pleasant reminiscences in
my mind, than in passing through one hitherto unexplored.
In the latter case, I am usually disappointed. When we
revisit those spots in which our childhood was passed, how
invariably do we find that the memory is true to what the
place appeared to us when children, and hardly to be recog-
nized when our ideas and powers of mind have been developed
and enlarged in proportion with our frames. Is it possible]
thought I, when I returned, after a lapse of fifteen years, to
the house of my childhood out of mere curiosity, for my
family had long quitted it. Is this the pond which appeared
so immense to my eyes, and this the house in my memory so
vast? Why it is a nutshell! I presume that we estimate the
relative size of objects in proportion to our stature, and, as
when children, we are only half the size of men, of course,
to children, everything appears to be twice the size which it
really is. And not only the objects about us, but every-
thing in the moral world as well. Our joy is twice the joy
of others, and our grief, for the moment, twice as deep: and
these joys and griefs all for trifles. Our code of right and
wrong is equally magnified: trifles appeared to be crimes of
the first magnitude, and the punishments, slight as they were,
enough to dissolve our whole frame into tears until we were
pardoned. Oh dear! all that's gone, as Byron says—
"No more, no more, O never more on me,
The freshness of the heart shall fall like dew."
The cathedral at Basle is nearly one thousand years old,
which is a ripe old age, even for a cathedral. I believe that
it is only in Switzerland, and England, and Holland, that you
find the Protestants in possession of these edifices, raised to
celebrate the Catholic faith.
I met here a very intelligent Frenchman who has resided
many years in the town. One of the first questions I put to
him was the following:
For more than twenty years Switzerland has been overrun
with English and other visitors, who have spent an enor-
mous sum of money in the country: what has become of all
this money ]
He replied that I might well ask the question.

<page 187>
172
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
"They have no banks in Switzerland; and, although land
exchanges owners, still the money does not leave the country.
We have here," he said, "a few millionaries, who do lend
their money in France upon good securities; but except these
few, they do nothing with it. The interest of money is so
low, that I have known it lent by one of the rich people at
two-and-a-half per cent.; and the Swiss in general, in pre-
ference to risking what they can obtain for so small a
premium, allow it to remain in their chests. There is, at
this present moment more bullion in Switzerland than in any
other country in Europe, or, perhaps, than in all the countries
in Europe. A Swiss is fond of his money, and he does not
use it; the millionaries that we have here, make no alteration
in their quiet and plain state of living." He then continued,
"At this moment, those who can afford to spend their money
at Basle are retrenching, not from motives of economy, but
from feelings of ill will. The burghers, who have country
seats, to which they retire during the summer, have aban-
doned them, and if anyone wished to settle in this canton,
they might purchase them for half their value. The reason
is, that there has been a difference between the town burghers
and the country people. The canton wanted a reform bill to
be passed, in which they have not succeeded. They required
a more equitable representation—the country people amount
to about forty thousand, the town of Basle to only ten thou-
sand; and the town of Basle, nevertheless, returns two-thirds
of the council, which governs the canton, to which the people
who live in the country have raised objections. Hence the
variance; and to punish the country people by not spending
their money among them, the burghers have abandoned their country houses."
It may not, perhaps, be generally known, that at the time
of the three days at Paris, there was an emeute in Switzer-
land, in which the aristocracy were altogether put down;
and in Berne, and some other cantons, the burghers' families,
who, on pretence of preventing the aristocracy from enslav-
ing the country, had held the reins of power for so long a
period, were also forced to surrender that power to those
who had been so long refused participation in it. This was
but the natural consequence of the increase of wealth in the
country: those who before had remained quiet, feeling them-

<page 188>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
173
selves of more consequence, insisted upon their rights; and
the usual results were, that the administration of the govern-
ment changed hands; but although this might be considered
as an advantage gained, still it was but a change, or rather
an admission of those who had become wealthy to a partici-
pation of the advantages connected with the exercise of
authority; a change beneficial to a few, but to the masse,
productive of no real advantage. At Berne, to be a member
of the government, is considered as a certain source of wealth,
a convincing proof that the interests of those who hold the
reins are not neglected; and that in a republic it is as diffi-
cult to insure to the people their legitimate rights, as under
any other form of government. And so it will be as long as
the world turns round; man is everywhere the same exact-
ing, selfish, preying creature; and his disposition is not to
be changed.
The Helvetic Republic is, in fact, nothing but an aggre-
gation of petty despotisms—leniently administered, I grant;
but still nothing but despotisms. Those who are in power,
or connected with those in power, are the only portion of
the community who can amass large sums; and thus the
authority is handed down from one to the other within certain
limits, which it but rarely transgresses, something very nearly
approximating to the corporations in England.
In Switzerland, the working man remains the working
man, the labourer the labourer, almost as distinct as the
Indian castes: the nobles are crushed, and the haughty burgh
rules with all the superciliousness of vested right.
I have always held a " respublica" as only to exist in theory
or in name. History has proved the impossibility of its re-
taining its purity for half a century. What the American
Republic may be, it is impossible to say, until one has been
in the country, and discovered what its advocates have been
careful to conceal. The Americans had a great advantage in
establishing this system of government; they had nothing to
overthrow, nothing to contend with. They all started fair,
and their half century is now nearly complete. Time will
prove whether it be possible in this world to govern, for any
length of time, upon such a basis. Mr. Cooper, in his work
on Switzerland, is evidently disappointed with his examina-
tion into the state of the Helvetic Republic; and he admits
this without intending so to do.

<page 189>
174
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
At Soleure I saw nothing very remarkable, except a dog
with a very large goitre on his neck, a sight which I never
had witnessed before, during the long time that I wandered
through Switzerland.
On our way to Berne, to divide the day's travelling more
equally, we stopped at a small village, not usually the rest-
ing-place of travellers, and I there met with a little bit of
romance in real life, which Sterne would have worked up
well, but I am not sentimental. The house, to which the
sign was the appendage, struck me, at first entering, as not
having been built for an hotollerie; the rooms were low, but
large, and the floors parquette; here and there were to be
seen remains of former wealth in pieces of marquetterie for
furniture, and clocks of ormolu. There were some old
prints, also, on the walls, very superior to those hung up
usually in the auberges of the continent, especially in a village
auberge. When the supper was brought up, I observed that
the silver forks and spoons were engraved with double arms
and the coronet of a marquis. I asked the female who brought
up the soup, from whence they had obtained them? She
replied, rather brusquement, that she supposed they had been
bought at the silversmith's, and left the room as if not
wanting to be questioned. The master of the auberge came
up with some wine. He was a tall, fine, aristocratical-looking
man, about sixty years of age, and I put the question to
him. He replied that they belonged to the family who kept
the inn: "But," said I, "if so, it is noble by both descents V
"Yes," replied he, carelessly, "but they don't think anything
of that here." After a few more questions, he acknowledged
that they were the armorial bearings of his father and mother,
but that the family had been unfortunate, and that, as no
titles were allowed in the country, he was now doing his
best to support the family. After this disclosure, we entered
into a long discussion relative to the Helvetic Republic, with
which I shall not trouble my readers. Before I went, I
inquired his name from one of the servants, and it imme-
diately occurred to me that I had seen it in the list of those
twenty-six who are mentioned as the leaders of the Swiss
who defeated the Burgundians, and whose monument is
carved in the solid rock at Morat. Two engravings of the
monument were in the rooms we occupied, and I had amused
myself with reading over the names. I am no aristocrat 
<page 190>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
myself, heaven knows! and if a country could be benefited,
and liberty obtained, by the overthrow of the aristocracy, the
sooner it is done the better; but when we see, as in Switzer-
land, the aristocracy reduced to keeping village inns, and
their inferiors, in every point, exerting that very despotism of
which they complained, and to free the people from which,
was their pretence for a change of government, I cannot help
feeling that if one is to be governed, let it be, at all events, by
those who, from the merits of their ancestors and their long-
held possessions, have the most claim. Those who are born
to power are not so likely to have their heads turned by the
possession of it as those who obtain it unexpectedly; and
those who are above money-making are less likely to be
corrupt than those who seek it. The lower the class that
governs, the worse the government will be, and the greater
the despotism. Switzerland is no longer a patriarchal land.
Wealth has rolled into the country; and the time will come
when there will be a revolution in the republic. Nothing
can prevent it, unless all the cantons are vested into one
central government, instead of so many petty oligarchies, as
at present, and which will eventnally tire out the patience of
the people.
I parted from my noble host, and will do him the justice
to say that his bill was so moderate, compared to the others
paid in Switzerland, that I almost wished that all the inns in
the cantons were held by the nobility—that is, provided they
would follow his example. His wine was excellent, and I
suspect was laid in long before the sign was hung up at the
door.
From Soleure to Berne the whole road was lined with
parties of troops ordered in that direction: every man of
them was drunk, cheering, and hooting, and halloing at us as
we passed. As for the peasant girls they met on the road, I
really pitied them. At last we have arrived at Berne. The
Bernese have chosen a most appropriate symbol in their
heraldic crests of the bear, and, as if they had not a sufficient
quantity inside of their towns, they keep four in the ditch
outside.
What a difference between the tables d'hote in Germany
and in Switzerland! 1 always prefer the table d'hote when it
is respectable, for nothing is more unpleasant than remaining 
<page 191>
l't'l DIA^Y ON THE CONTINENT.
in a hotel shut up in your own room; the latter may be more
dignified and aristocratic, but it is not the way to see the
world; one might as well be in England, and, indeed, had
much better. A table d'hote is a microcosm: you meet there
all nations, people of all professions—some idle, some busy
travelling on important matters, others travelling for amuse-
ment. You are unfortunate if you do not fall in with one
clever man at least, and you are quite sure to meet with a
fool, which is almost as amusing. When I survey a table
d'hote I often think of the calenders who had all come to
spend the Ramadhan at Bagdad, and their histories; and I
have thought that Grattan might make a very good series of
Highways and Byways if he could obtain the history of those
who meet at this general rendezvous. The tables d'hote in
Germany are excellent, properly supplied, and very moderate.
I cannot say so of those in Switzerland. The fondness of the
Swiss for money betrays itself in everything, and instead of
liberality at the table d'hote, we have meanness. The dinner
itself is dearer than in Germany, and not half so good; but
what is the most unexcusable part of our host's conduct is,
that he half serves his guests, as Sancho was served at
Barataria; for instance, as is usually the case, the viands
are put on the table and then removed to be carved; two
ducks will make their appearance at one end, two chickens
at the other; they are removed, and only one of each is cut
up and handed round, the others are sent away whole to be
re-dressed for some great man who dines in his own room.
This has been constantly the case since I have been here.
It may be asked, why we do not remonstrate 1 In the first
place, I prefer watching my host's manoeuvres; and in the
next, although I might get my duck, my host would charge
me the whole value of it when he sent in his bill.
The French Ambassador could not have taken a better
step to bring the Swiss to their senses than threatening them
with a blockade. It would have been ruin to them. All
the golden harvests would have been over, their country
would have been deserted, and their Ranz des Vaches would
have been listened to only by the cows. As the French
minister expected, the councils fumed and vapoured, the
officers drew their swords and flourished them, and then—very quietly pocketed the affront that they might not be out 
<page 192>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
177
of pocket. What a pity it is that a nation so brave and with
so many good sterling qualities, should be, as it would appear,
so innately mercenary! There never was a truer saying than
"Point d'argent, point de Suisse."
CHAPTER XXXVI.
Geneva. Twenty years have made a wonderful alteration in the
good sober puritanical city of Geneva. The improvement
from the new builindgs which have been erected is so great,
that I could hardly recognise the old city of Geneva in her
dress. It was an old friend with a new face, for as you enter
the town, all the new buildings and streets meet your view.
As far as it has proceeded (for there is much left yet to be
finished), the new portion of Geneva is finer than any por-
tion of Paris, upon an equal space of ground. But what sur-
prised me more was to read the affiches of the Comedie. A
theatre in Geneva! When I was last here, a theatre was
considered by the good people as criminal to the highest
degree, I inquired where the theatre was to be found, and it
was all true—there was a theatre. I then made more in-
quiries. It appeared that Mammon had seduced the puritans
of Geneva. People would not winter at Geneva; it was so
dull—no amusements; and as soon as the snow was knee
deep at Chamouny, they all ordered horses and flew away to
Paris or Italy. This affected the prosperity of the good
citizens, and they talked among themselves; but no one of
the Town Council would propose a theatre, until it was dis-
covered, by private communication, that they were unani-
mously agreed,—then the proposition was started and carried.
But there are many concomitants attending a theatre, and
with the theatre many other innovations have crept in; so
that in a few years Geneva will be no better than Paris.
When I was last here, Science was the order of the day.
There were many celebrated men residing in the town, but
they are all gone to their forefathers. Every branch of
Natural History had its savant; but, above all, Mineralogy
was the most in vogue. But Mineralogy has been super-
seded lately, by her eldest sister Geology, who, although not N

<page 193>
178
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
so pretty, has been declared more interesting and profound.
Still Mineralogy is the more scientific, although Geology is
the more speculative. In the education of children, I know
no study which so enlarges the mind or gives a habit of
research and application, as that of Natural History; it is
amusement and instruction so happily blended, that it never
tires. Perhaps, the natural cupidity of our natures assists,
as the knowledge of every new specimen is for the most part
accompanied by the possession of the specimen and an addi-
tion to the collection. Moreover, it is a tangible study; not
a nomenclature of things, but each substance is in your hand to be examined. The arrangement and classification gives a
habit of neatness and order, and children are taught to throw
nothing away until its value is known. Every child should
be made acquainted with Natural History; and where the
specimens can be obtained, and there is room for them, they
should be allowed to have a collection, such as minerals,
corals, shells, and plants; for these sciences, amusing in
themselves, will gradually impel them to the others more
abstruse, as every branch of Natural Philosophy is intimately
connected with them. The mind will ever be active, and if
not interested in rational pursuits, it will fly off to the
sensual.
They have a very excellent plan in Switzerland, in many
of the boys' schools, of all the scholars setting off together on
a pedestrian tour of some weeks. You will meet a whole
school of thirty or forty urchins, with their knapsacks on
their shoulders, attired in blouses, trudging away from town
to town, and from mountain to mountain, to visit all the
remarkable peculiarities of the country.
This is a most excellent method of relaxing from study,
and invigorating the mind at the same time that it is allowed
to repose. Neither is it so expensive as people would imagine.
One room will hold a great many school-boys, where the
mattresses are spread over the floor: and I saw them make a
very hearty breakfast upon bread and cheese and three
bottles of wine, among about forty of them. Why should not
the boys about London set off on a tour to the lakes or else-
where, in the same way—every year changing the route.
They then would see something of their own country, which
few do before they are launched in life, and have no time to 
<page 194>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
179
do afterwards. I have never seen the lakes; in fact, I know
nothing of my country, although I have scoured the world so
long. I recollect that my father, who had never seen the
Tower of London, was determined every year that he would
go and see it; but he never could find time, it appears, for he
died without seeing it at last. I did, however, make the
observation, that if Geneva had backslided so far as to permit
a theatre, there was a feeling that this innovation required
being carefully opposed. When I was at Geneva before,
there was no theatre, but neither were there shops which
dealt exclusively in religious tracts and missionary works. I
observed on this my second arrival, that there were a great
many to serve as a check to the increasing immorality of the
age.
I have referred to the change of twenty years, but what a
change has been effected in about three hundred years, in this
very country. Read what took place in these cantons at
about the date which I have mentioned. I have been reading
the chronicles. Observe the powers assumed by the bishops
of that period; they judged not only men but brutes; and it
must be admitted that there was some show of justice, as the
offending parties, being dumb themselves, were allowed
lawyers to plead for them.
How the lawyers are paid, has not been handed down; and
it appears that the judgments were sometimes easier pro-
mounced than carried into execution.
At Basle, in the year 1474, it appears that a cock was
accused of the enormous crime of having laid an egg: he was
brought to trial and condemned to be burnt alive, as a warn-
ing to all cocks not to lay eggs, from which it is well known
would have been hatched a cockatrice or basilisk.
In 1481, cockchafers committed great ravages in the Grisons.
The Bishop of Coire condemned them all to transportation,
and a barren valley was assigned to them as their future
residence. Whether the cockchafers obeyed his Lordship's
orders, is not handed down to posterity. . : „ ...
Some years afterwards the river Aar was infested with
leeches, who spoilt all the salmon. The Bishop of Lausanne
excommunicated the whole tribe of leeches in a solemn pro-
cession to thei river.;, and it is dreadful to reflect, that this
excommunication remains upon their heads even unto this n 2

<page 195>
180
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
day. Also next door, in France, in 1386, a sow was arraigned
for having eaten a young child, and condemned to be hanged;
to add to the disgrace of her punishment, she was dressed in
man's clothes.
About the same period rats were extremely mischievous,
and in consequence were summoned to appear before my Lord the Bishop. But the rats had a good lawyer, who first
asserted that the rats, being dispered in all the neighbouring
villages, had not had time to collect together, and make their appearance; and that a second and a third summons would
be but an act of justice. They were, therefore, again sum-
moned after the performance of mass on Sunday in each
parish. Notwithstanding the three summonses, the rats did
not appear in court, and then their defender asserted, that in
consequence of the affair having been made so public by the
three summonses, all the cats were on the look-out, and there-
fore his clients dare not make their appearance without all
the cats were destroyed. The consequence of this difficulty
was, that the rats were not punished for contempt of court.
I have often thought that it is a great pity that agricultural
associations in England do not send over a committee to
examine into the principle upon which they build and load
carts and waggons on the Continent.
It is a point on which we are very unenlightened in
England. The waste of wood in the building, and the wear
and tear of horses, is enormous. We have yet many things
to learn in England, and must not be ashamed to profit from
our neighbours. One horse will do more work on the Conti-
nent, especially in France and Switzerland, from the scientific
principles upon which their vehicles are built, and the loads
are put on, than three horses will accomplish in England.
The inquiries of the committee might be extended much if
they went to the Agricultural Association at Berne; they
would discover many things which have not yet entered into their philosophy. I doubt very much whether the four-course
shift of Norfolk, where farming is considered the most perfect, is not more expensive and more exhausting to the land, than
the other systems resorted to on the Continent; that is, that
it is not that which will give the greatest possible returns at
the minimum of expense. I have before observed how very
seldom you see a horse out of condition and unfit for work on.

<page 196>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT. 181
the Continent; one great cause must be from their not being
racked and torn to pieces by overloading; and notwithstanding
which, the loads they draw are much heavier than those iu
England. I have seen a load of many tons so exactly poised
upon two wheels, that the shaft horse neither felt his saddle
por his belly-band.
One great cause of the ill usage of horses in England is the
disgraceful neglect of the public conveyances of all kinds. If
an alteration was to be made in the regulations of hackney
coaches and cabs, we should no longer have our feelings tor-
tured by the spectacles of horse misery which we daily meet
with. There are plenty of commissioners for hackney coaches,
and it is a pity that they had not something to do for the
money they receive, or else that they were abolished and
their duty put into the hands of the police. It may appear
a singular remark to make, but I cannot help thinking that
there would be a good moral effect in the improvement of
hackney coaches. There are a certain class of people in
London, to whom these vehicles are at present of no use. I
refer to those who have a sufficient independence, but who
cannot afford to keep their carriages, and who, by the present
system of social intercourse, are almost shut out of society, or
are inclined to spend more money than prudence would dic-
tate. In all other capitals, the hackney coaches are clean
and respectable, and in some instances as good as a private
carriage; and besides that, they have a superior kind of car-
riage for evening parties, which renders the expense of a
private carriage unnecessary. There certainly may be some
excuse made for those who dislike hackney coaches pulling
up at their doors, when we look at the disgusting turn-outs of
the London stands, at one time filled with drunken men and
women, at others carrying diseased people to the hospital,
or dead bodies to the Surgeons' Hall. An English hackney
coach is a type of misery, as regards the horses' outsides, and
a cloaca within; you know not, when you step into it, whether
you are not to encounter disease and death. It may be said
that there are such vehicles as glass coaches, as they are
termed; but those are only to be hired by the day, and be-
come very expensive. The arrangements of these vehicles
should be under the police; every coach and cab should be
examined, at the commencement of the year, as to its appear-

<page 197>
182
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
ance outside as well as its cleanliness inside. The horses
should be inspected, and if not in fair working condition, and
of a certain height, the license should be refused. And there
should be a superior class allowed at certain stands, who are
entitled to demand a higher fare. This would not only be a
boon to the public, but a much greater one to the poor horse,
who would not drag out his lengthened misery as he does
now. When there was no longer any means of selling a poor
brute, to whom death was a release, he would be put out of his misery. It would also be a great improvement if the
Numbers were put inside instead of out, as they are abroad;
and \ievery description of vehicle, if well fitted, were licensed.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
The Hotel des Bergues is certainly a splendid establish-
ment; many people winter at this hotel in preference to
going to a pension, which is, with the best arrange Jients,
disagreeable, for you are obliged to conform to the usages
and customs, and to take your meals at certain hours, hungry
er not hungry, as if it were a pension of school-boys and
girls, and not grown up people. The price demanded is the
same as at the pensions, viz. 200 francs, or 81., per month,
which includes everything but wine and fuel. The establish-
ment is certainly very well conducted. There is a salon,
next to the table d'hote, large enough to hold 200 people,
well warmed and lighted, handsomely carpeted, with piano,
books, prints, newspapers, card tables, &c. Indeed, there is
everything you wish for, and you are all independent of each
other. I was there for two or three days, and found it very
pleasant; I was amused with a circumstance which occurred.
One of the company, a Russian, sat down to the piano, and
played and sang. Everyone wished to know who he was,
and on inquiring, it was a Russian prince. Now a prince is
a very great person where princes are scarce, as they are in
England, although in Russia, a prince, where princes are
plenty as blackberries, is about on a par with an English
baronet.
He was a very honest off-hand sort of personage, and cer-

<page 198>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT. 183
tainly gave himself no airs on account of his birth and rank.
Nevertheless, the English ladies, who were anxious that he
should sing again, made a sort of deputation to him, and
begged the honour of his highness favouring them with a
song, with every variety of courtesy and genuflexion.
"Oh yes, to be sure," replied his highness, who sat down
and played for an hour; and then there was so much thanking,
complimentary acknowledgment of condescension on his part,
&c, and the ladies appeared so flattered when he spoke to
them. The next day it was discovered that a slight mistake
had occurred, and that, instead of being a prince, he had only
come to Geneva along with a Russian prince, and that the
real prince was in his own room upstairs; upon which not
only he fell himself at least 200 per cent., but, what was
really too bad, his singing fell also; and many who had been
most loud in his praises began to discover that he was not
even a prince of musicians, which he certainly was.
We had a good specimen of the independence and fami-
liarity of Swiss servants on the occasion of this gentleman's
singing; they came into the salon, and mixed almost with
the company that they might listen to him; and had they
been ordered out, would, in all probability, have refused. An
American, with whom I was conversing, observed that in his
country such conduct on the part of servants, notwithstanding
what had been said by English travellers on the subject,
would never have been permitted. I have fallen in with
some odd characters here.
First, what would be considered a curiosity in England—a
clergyman of the Church of England with mustachios!
What would the Bishop of London say t—and yet I do not
see how, if a clergyman choose to wear them, he could be
prevented. He has good authority to quote; Calvin wore
them, and so, I believe, did Luther.
Secondly, with a personage who is very peculiarly disor-
ganized when he drinks too much. His wife, a most amiable
quiet lady, is the party whose character is attacked. As
soon as Mr. is in his cups, he immediately fancies that
his wife is affected with the liquor, and not himself, and he
tells everybody in a loud whisper his important secret.
"There now, look at Mrs. , one of the best women in
the world; an excellent wife and mother, and at most times 
<page 199>
184
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
as lady-like as you would wish to see: but look at her now
—you see she's quite drunk, poor thing; what a pity, isn't it,
that she cannot get over her unfortunate propensity; but I
am afeard it's no use. I've reasoned with her. It's a sad
pity, and a great drawback to my happiness. Well, hang
sorrow—it killed a cat. Don't notice what I've told you,
and pass the bottle."
I believe that the English are better acquainted with geo-
graphy than other nations. I have been astonished at the
ignorance on this point I have found in foreigners who other-
wise were clever and well-informed men and women. When
the Marquis de Claremont Tonnere was appointed to the
office of Minister of the Marine and Colonies, upon the re-
storation of the Bourbons, a friend of mine had an audience
with him, and it was not until a very angry discussion, and
a reference to the map, that he could persuade the minister
that Martinique was an island. However, in this instance
we had nearly as great an error committed in our own Colo-
nial office, which imagined that the Dutch settlement of
Demerara upon the coast of South America, and which had
fallen into our hands, was an island; indeed, in the official
papers it was spoken of as such. A little before the French
Revolution, a princess who lived in Nomandy determined
upon a visit to her relations in Paris; and having a sister
married to a Polish nobleman, she determined to take Poland
in her way. To her astonishment, instead of a day to two,
her voyage was not completed under four months.
I have heard it often asserted, that you should not build
your house so as to look at a fine prospect out of your win-
dows, but so as to walk to view it at a short distance. This
may be true with the finest prospects in other countries, but
not so in Switzerland, where the view never palls upon the
eye, from the constant changing which occurs in the tinting
of the landscape. You may look upon the Lake of Geneva
every day, and at no one day, or even portion of the day, is
the effect the same. The mountains of Savoy are there, and
change not their position: neither does the Lake; but at one
time the mountains will appear ten miles nearer to you than
they will at another. The changing arising from refraction
and reflection is wonderful. Never did I witness anything
finer than the Lake of Geneva at the setting of yesterday's 
<page 200>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
sun. The water was calm and glassy as a mirror, and it
reflected in broad patches, like so many islands dispersed
oVer it, every colour of the rainbow. I cannot attempt to
describe it; the effect was heavenly, and all I could say was,
with the Mussulman, "God is great!"
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
In this world we are so jealous of any discovery being
made, that innovation is immediately stigmatized as quackery.
I say innovation, for improvement is not the term. The at-
tempt to improve is innovation, the success of the experiment
makes it an improvement. And yet how are we to improve
without experiment? Thus we have quackery in everything,
although not quite so severely visited as it formerly was by
the Inquisition, who would have burnt alive him who asserted
that the sun did not go round the earth, but the earth round
the sun. In medicine, quackery is the most frequently stig-
matized. We know but little of the human frame as far as
medicine is to act upon it. We know still less of the virtues
of various plants which will effect a cure. We are acquainted
with a few, but there are hundreds equally powerful, the pro-
perties of which we are ignorant of. Could we add to medical
science the knowledge of the African negroes and Indians,
which they so carefully conceal from us, our pharmacopoeia would be much extended. When metallic medicines were
first introduced into general use by a physician, an ancestor
of mine, and the wonderful effects of them established by the
cures, the whole fraternity was up in arms, and he was
decried as a quack; notwithstanding which, the works he
wrote have gone through twenty-five editions, and the doses
prescribed by him are to this day made use of by the prac-
titioners.
The fact is, that although the surgical knowledge of the
day is very perfect, the medical art is still in its infancy.
Even the quackeries which fail should not be despised, for
they have proved something, although they could not be per-
fected. Animal magnetism, for instance: it failed, but still
it discovered some peculiar properties, some sympathies of the 
<page 201>
1M
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
human body, which may hereafter give a clue to more import-
ant results. The great proof of the imperfection of medical
science is the constant change made by the profession itself.
One medicine is taken into favour, it is well received everywhere, until the faculty are tired of it, and it sinks into disgrace. Even in my time I have seen many changes of this
sort, not only in medicine, but in diet, &c.
What medical men would have thought of prescribing fat
bacon for delicate stomachs twenty years ago 1 Now it is all
the vogue; breakfast bacon sold in every quarter of the
metropolis. Either this is quackery, to use their own term,
or twenty years ago they were very ignorant, for their
patients received positive injunctions to avoid all fat and
greasy substances.
Thus do the regular practitioners chop and change about,
groping in the dark: but the only distinction is, that all
changes made by the faculty are orthodox; but any alteration
proposed out of the pale of M.D., is an innovation and a
quackery.
That we have everywhere ignorant men, who are de facto
quacks, I admit; but still that term has been as liberally ap-
plied to the attempts of scientific and clever persons to improve
the art of medicine. Even homoeopathy must not be totally
rejected until it has had a fair trial. It has one merit in it,
at all events, that you take less physic.
I consider the continual appearance of new quacks on the
horizon a sure proof of the low state of our medical knowledge.
The more so as these quacks, although they kill, do effect very
remarkable cures. Do not regular practitioners kill also 1 or
rather, do not their prescriptions fail? If a quack cures, they
will tell you that it was by mere accident. I suspect that
there is more of accident in the practice than the faculty are
ready to admit; and Heaven knows they so change about
themselves, that it is clear that they feel no confidence in the
little that they do know; and it is because medicine is so im-
perfect that every half century we have a new quack, as he
is termed, rising up, and beating the regular practitioners out
of the field. I could tell a story about Morrison's pills which
would surprise not a little, and all the parties are now alive
to prove it; but instead of that, I will tell another which oc-
curred in France, in which a quack medicine had a most won-

<page 202>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT,
derful and unusual effect, for it was the means of the total
destruction of a Banditti, who had defied the Government of
the country for many years. About twenty years ago,—I am
not sure whether he still lives,—there was an irregular prac-
titioner in France of the name of Le Roi. He was, by all
accounts, the King of all Empirics, and the Emperor of all
Quacks. He was more potent than the sovereign, and the
par Vordre du Roi of Government was insignificant, compared
to the par Vordre du Roi of this more potent personage.
He did not publish his cures in pamphlets, but in large quartos.
I have seen them myself, larger in size than an Ainsworth's
dictionary. It so happened that an Englishman, who was
afflicted with the indescribables, was recommended from every
quarter to buy the medicines of Mons. le Roi. He did so,
and his unknown complaint was removed. The consequence
was, that the Englishman swore by Le Roi; and as he was
proceeding on to Spain, he took with him a large supply of
the doctor's medicines, that he might be prepared in case his
complaint should return. All quack gentlemen take care
that their medicines shall be palatable; no unwise precaution.
I do not know a better dram than Solomon's Balm of Gilead.
Old Solomon, by the bye, lived near Plymouth, and was very
partial to the Navy. He kept an excellent table, and was
very hospitable.
1 recollect one day after the officers had drunk a very suffi-
cient quantity of his claret and champagne, being a little
elevated, they insisted upon Solomon bringing them out some
Balm of Gilead as a finish, and they cleared off about two
dozen one guinea bottles. The old gentleman made no objec-
tion to provide it as often as they called for more, and they
separated; but the next day he sent them all their bills in for
the said Balm of Gilead, observing, that although they were
welcome to his wine and table, that he must be paid for his
medicine. But to proceed.
The Englishman travelled with the king's messenger; most
of his baggage had been sent on, but he would not part with
his medicine, and this was all in the vehicle with himself. As
they passed the Pyrenees they were stopped by the banditti,
who dragged them out of the carriage, after shooting the
postilion, and made them lie with their faces on the ground,
with guards over them, while they rifled the carriage. They 
<page 203>
188
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
soon came to the packages of medicine, and observing that
Le Roi was upon all the bottles, and knowing that they had possession of a king's messenger, they imagined that this was
some liquor sent as a present to the King of Spain; they tasted
it, and found that, like other quack medicines, it was very
strong and very good.
Each man took his bottle, drank the king's health, and
mirth and revelry took place, until they had consumed all
that the Englishman had brought with him. Now there is a
great difference between taking a table-spoonful, and six or
seven bottles per man; and so it proved, for they had hardly
finished the last case before they found that the medicine
acted very powerfully as a cathartic; the whole banditti were
simultaneously attacked with a most violent cholera; they dis-
appeared one by one; at last the guards could contain them-
selves no longer, and they went off too. The two prisoners,
perceiving this, rose from the ground, mounted the horses and
gallopped off as fast as they could. They gave notice to the
authorities of the first town they arrived at, not four miles
distant, and a large body of cavalry were sent out immedi-
ately. The effects of the medicine had been so violent that
the whole of the banditti were found near to the spot where
they had drunk the king's health, in such a state of suffering
and exhaustion that they could make no efforts to escape, andere all secured, and eventually hung.
CHAPTER XXXIX.
Lausanne.
I recollect some one saying, that in walking out you
should never look up in the air, but always on the ground, as,
by the former practice, you were certain never to find anything, although you might by the latter. So if you will not
enter into conversation, you are not likely to obtain much in-
formation; whereas if you do, you will always chance to
obtain some, even from the quarters the least promising. I
was seated on the box of the carriage, with the Swiss voiturier
—and asked him, "If it were not a lucrative profession?"
"It may appear so to you, sir," replied he, "from the price 
<page 204>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
189
paid for the horses, but it is not so. All we gain, is in five
months in the year; the seven months of winter, we have to
feed our horses without employment for them, that is, gene-
rally speaking."
"But have you no employment for them in the winter?""Yes, we put them into the waggons and draw wood and
stone, which about pays their expenses. If you are known
and trusted, you will be employed to transport wine, which
is more profitable; but that voiturier who can find sufficient
employment for his horses during the winter to pay their
keeping, considers himself very fortunate."
"When you do make money, what do you do with it?"
"If we can buy a bit of land we do, but most people, if
they can, buy a house, which pays better. I prefer land."
"There is not much territory in Switzerland, and land is
not often for sale. Everybody cannot buy land. What do
the others do V
"Lock the money up in their chests."
"But do you never put your money in the foreign funds?"
"Yes, the rich do and those who understand it. We have
a few very rich people in Switzerland, but, generally speak-
ing, the people do not like to part with their money, and they
keep it by them."
"I was told by a Frenchman at Basle, thas there was a
great deal of bullion lying idle in Switzerland?"
"He told you very true, sir; there is an enormous quan-
tity of it, if collected together. Those are Jews," continued
he, pointing to a char-a-banc passing.
"Have you many of those in Switzerland? I should think
not."
"No, sir, we do not allow them. One or two families are
perhaps permitted in a large town, but no more. We are a
small country, and if we were to allow the Jews to settle
here, we should soon have too large a population to support.
By their customs, they may marry at any age, and they never
go into the field, and work at the plough."
"But may not you marry at any age, and when you
please?"
"No, sir; we have good laws in that respect, and it pre-
vents the population increasing too fast. I belong to a com-
mune (parish); if I wish to marry, I must first prove that all 
<page 205>
]90
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
my debts are paid, and all my father's debts, and then the
commune will permit the Cure to marry me."
"All your father's debts as well as your own 1"
"That is to say, all the debts he may have incurred to the
commune. Suppose my father had been a poor man and un-
able to work, the commune would have let him want for
nothing; but in supplying him they would have incurred an
expense, that must be repaid by his family before any of the
sons are allowed to marry. In the same way, when my
father died, although he received no assistance from the com-
mune, he left little or nothing, The commune clothed and
educated me till I was able to gain my own livelihood. Since
I have done well, I have repaid the debt; I now may marry
if I choose."
"But cannot you evade this law?"
"No, sir. Suppose I was at Berne, and wished to marry
a woman who belonged to another commune as well as my-
self. The banns must be published three times in my parish,
three times in her parish, and three times at Berne."
"But suppose you married in a foreign country?"
"If a Swiss marries in a foreign country, and has no debts
to prevent his marrying, he must write home to the heads of
the commune, stating his intention, and his banns will then
be published in the commune, and a license sent him to
marry. But if, having debts of your own or your father's,
you marry without giving notice, you are then no longer be-
longing to the commune, and if you come back in distress,
you will be conveyed to the confines of the republic, and
advised to seek the parish of your wife in her country. If
you are out of Switzerland with your wife, every child that
you have born you must give notice of by letter to the com-
mune, that it may be properly registered; and if you omit so
doing, those children have no claim on their return."
Such was the result of our conversation, and I repeat it for
the benefit of those who occupy themselves with our internal
legislation.
I have been searching a long while for liberty, but I can
find her nowhere on this earth: let me be allegorical. If all
the world are still in love with the name of Liberty, how
much more were all the world in love with the nymph
herself when she first made her appearance on earth. Every

<page 206>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
191
one would possess her, and everyone made the attempt, but
Liberty was not to be caught. How was it possible with-
out her destruction? After being harassed all over the
world, and finding that she never was allowed to take
breath, she once more tied from her pursuers, and, as they
seized her garments, with the spring of the chamois she
burst away, and bounding from the world, saved herself in
Ether, where she remains to this day. Her dress was, how-
ever, left behind, and was carried home in triumph. It is,
however, composed of such slippery materials as its former
owner, and it escapes as it pleases from one party to another.
It is this dress of Liberty which we now reverence as the
goddess herself, and whatever is clothed with it for the time
receives the same adoration as would have been offered up to
the true shrine. Even Despotism, when in a very modest
mood, will clothe herself in the garb of Liberty.
Now there is really a sort of petty despotism in these free
cantons, which would be considered very offensive in England.
What would an English farmer say, if he was told that he
could not commence his harvest without the permission of
Government? Yet such is the case in Switzerland, where
there is a heavy fine if anyone commences his vintage before
the time prescribed by the authorities. Your grapes may be
ripe, and be spoiled; you have to choose between that alter-
native, or paying a fine, which reduces your profits to nil.
The reason given for this is that there are so many petty
proprietors holding half and quarter acres of vineyards mixed
together and not separated by a wall or fence, that if one
began first he would rob the vineyard of the other—not
arguing much for the Swiss honesty, which has become so
proverbial.
The case of the vintage laws is peculiarly hard this season
upon the small proprietors. The vintage has been late, and
winter has now set in, all at once. After weather like sum-
mer, we are now deep in snow, and the thermometer below
the freezing point. Few of the small proprietors have wine-
presses; they have to wait until those who have them have
got in their vintage, and then they borrow them. The con-
sequence is, that the small proprietors are always the last to
gather their grapes, and now they have been overtaken by
the weather, and they will lose most of their harvest. Had 
<page 207>
192
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
they been permitted to pick their grapes at their own time,
they might have used the presses, and have finished before the
large vineyards had commenced.
From the inquiries I have made, it appears that the vine-
yards of Switzerland pay very badly. Land is at a very high
price here, in the Canton de Vaud; 300?. or 400Z. per acre is
not thought dear (600?. have been given); and in the best
seasons a vineyard will not yield 10?. per acre. The wine is
very indifferent, and requires to be kept for years to become
tolerable.
But the Swiss are wedded to their vineyards; and although
if they laid down the land in pasture, they would gain twice
as much, they prefer the speculation of the wine-press, which
fails at least three times out of four.
The office of public executioner or Jack Ketch of a canton
in Switzerland, as well as in many parts of Germany, is very
appropriately endowed. He has a right to all animals who
die a natural death, with their skins, hoofs, &c, and this it
is said brings in a fair revenue, if attended to. Executions
are so uncommon in Switzerland, that Jack Ketch would
starve if he was not thus associated with death. When an
execution does takes place he is well paid; they say the sum
he receives is upwards of twenty pounds; but it must be
remembered that he does not hang, he decapitates, and this
requires some address: the malefactor is seated in a chair, not
laid down with his head on the block.
An execution took place at Berne when I was last in
Switzerland; the criminal, after he was seated in the chair,
was offered a cup of coffee, and as he was drinking it, the
executioner, with one blow of his heavy sword, struck his
head clear off; for a second or two the blood flew up like a
fountain: the effect was horrid.
An Englishman at Lausanne had a very favourite New-
foundland dog, which died. He was about to bury it, when
the executioner interfered and claimed the skin; and it was
not until he had submitted to the demands of this official
gentleman, that he was permitted to bury his favourite in a
whole skin. Only imagine, half a dozen old dowagers of
Park Lane, whose puffy lap-dogs were dead in their laps,
bargaining for their darlings with Jack Ketch, because they
wish to have them stuffed; and Jack's extortion raising his 
<page 208>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
193
demands, in proportion to the value apparently placed upon
the defunct favourites. Talking about lap-dogs, one of the
best stories relative to these creatures is to be found in
Madame de Crequey's Memoirs. A Madame de Blot, a
French dandysette, if the term may be used, who considered
her own sex as bound to be ethereal, and would pretend that
the wing of a lark was more than sufficient for her suste-
nance during the twenty-four hours, had one of the smallest
female spaniels that was ever known. She treated her like a
human being, and when she went out to a party, used to
desire her lady's maid to read the animal a comedy in five
acts, to amuse it during her absence. It so happened that a
fat priest, who was anxious for the protection of Madame de
Blot, called to pay his respects. Madame de Blot made a
sign to him, without speaking, to take his seat upon a large
fauteuil. No sooner had the priest lowered down his heavy
carcass into the chair, than he felt something struggling under
him, and a little recollection told him that it must be the
little spaniel. That it was all over with the spaniel was
clear, and that if her mistress had discovered his accident, it
was equally clear that it was all over with him, as far as the
patronage of Madame de Blot was concerned. The priest
showed a remarkable degree of presence of mind upon this
trying occasion. He rose himself up a little from his chair
and plumped down, so as to give the poor little spaniel her
coup de grace, and then entered into conversation with
Madame de Blot. During the conversation he contrived by
degrees to cram the dog, tail and all, into his capacious coat
pockets. As soon as it was fairly out of sight, he rose, bade
adieu to Madame de Blot, and backed out of the room with
as great respect as if he was in the presence of royalty, much
to the satisfaction of Madame de Blot, who was delighted at
such homage, and little thought why the good priest would
not turn his back to her. The story says, that the Madame
de Blot never could find out what had become of her little dog.

<page 209>
194
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
CHAPTER XL.
Lausanne.
What a continual strife there is between literary men! I
can only compare the world of authors to so many rats
drowning in a tub, forcing each other down to raise them-
selves, and keep their own heads above water. And yet
they are very respectable, and a very useful body of men,
also, in a politico-economical sense of the word, independent
of the advantages gained by their labours, by the present and
the future; for their capital is nothing except brains, and yet
they contrive to find support for themselves and thousands of
others. It is strange when we consider how very few, com-
paratively speaking, are the number of authors, how many
people are supported by them.
There are more than a thousand booksellers and publishers
in the three kingdoms, all of whom rent more than a thousand
houses, paying rent and taxes; support more than a thousand
families, and many thousand clerks, as booksellers alone.
Then we have to add the paper manufacturers, the varieties
of bookbinders, printing-ink manufacturers, iron pens, and
goose quills. All of which are subservient to and dependent
upon these comparatively few heads.
What a train an author has! unfortunately for him it is
too long. There are too many dependent upon him, and,
like some potentates, the support of his state eats his whole
revenue, leaving him nothing but bread and cheese and fame.
Some French writer has said, "La litterature est le plus noble
des loisirs, mais le dernier de tous les metiers;" and so it is,
for this one reason, that, according as an author's wants are
cogent, so he is pressed down by the publisher. Authors and
publishers are natural enemies, although they cannot live
without each other. If an author is independent of literature,
and has a reputation, he bullies the publisher: he is right; he is only revenging the insults contumely heaped upon those
whom the publishers know to be in their power, and obliged
to submit to them. Well, every dog has his day, and the
time will come when I and others, having swam too long,
shall find younger and fresher competitors, who will, like the
rats, climb on our backs, and we shall sink to the bottom of 
<page 210>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
195
the tub of oblivion. Now, we must drive on with the stream;
the world moves on so fast, that there is no stopping. In
these times, "Si on n'avance pas, on rectde."
How the style of literature changes! Even now I per-
ceive an alteration creeping on, which will last for a time.
We are descending to the homely truth of Tenier's pictures.
Every work of fiction now is "sketched from nature f the
palaces, the saloon, all the elegancies of high life are eschewed,
and the middle and vulgar classes are the subjects of the
pencil. But this will not last long. It is the satiety of
refinement on the part of the public which for a short time
renders the change palatable.
I was yesterday informed that a celebrated author wished
to be introduced to me. I was ashamed to say that I had
never heard his name. The introduction took place, and
there was a sort of patronising air on the gentleman's part,
which I did not approve of. I therefore told him very
frankly that I was not aware of the nature of his literary
labours, and requested to know what were his works. He
had abridged something, and he had written a commentary
upon another thing f—just the employment fit for some old
gentleman who likes still to puddle a little with ink. One
could write a commentary upon anything. One of my chil-
dren is singing a nursery song, now I'll write a commentary
on it in the shape of notes :,—
Pussy cat, pussy cat, where have you been?
I've been to London to see the new queen.
Pussy cat, pussy cat, what did you there?
Hunted a titty mouse under the chair.
Now for a commentary:—
This simple nursery rhyme is in the familiar style of question
and answer, which is always pleasing; and it is remarkable
that two excellent moral lessons are to be found in so few
words.
The child who sings it may be supposed to repeat the
words without comprehending their full meaning; but although
such may be the case, still it is most important that even the
rhymes put into the infantine lips should afford an oppor-
tunity to those who watch over their welfare to point out to
them on a proper occasion the instruction which they con-

<page 211>
196
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
tain. In the first line, the term pussy cat may be considered
tautological, as pussy and cat both refer to the same animal;
but if so, it is allowable, as pussy may be considered as the
christian and cat as the surname of the animal. It is to be
presumed that the cat addressed is young, for it evidently
was at play, and old cats do not play. Otherwise it would
not have been necessary to repeat her name, to call her
attention to the question. The cat answers in few words, as
if not wishing to be interrupted, that she has been to London
to see the new queen. What queen of England may be
referred to, it is impossible to positively ascertain; but as
she says the new queen, we have a right to suppose that it
must refer to the accession of a queen to the throne of Eng-
land. We have here to choose between three,—Elizabeth,
Mary, and Anne; and for many reasons, particularly as the
two last were married, we are inclined to give the preference
to the first, the word new having, for the sake of the metre,
been substituted for virgin. Certain it is that a married
woman cannot be considered as new, although she may not
be old. We therefore adhere to our supposition that this
rhyme was composed at the accession of the great Elizabeth.
And here we may observe, that the old adage "that a cat
may look at the king" is fully corroborated, for pussy says
expressly that she has been to see the new queen, pointing
out, that as the sun shines upon all alike, so the sun of
royalty, in a well-administered government, will equally
dispense its smiles upon all who approach to bask in them;
and that even a cat is not considered as unworthy to look
upon that gracious majesty who feels that it is called to rule
over so many millions, for the purpose of making them
happy.
It would appear as if the cat continued to play with her
ball, or whatever else might have been its amusements, after
having answered the first question; for, on the second question
being put, her attention is obliged to be again roused by the
repetition of her name. She is asked what she did there, and
the reply is, that she hunted a titty mouse under the chair.
There is a wonderful effect in this last line, which fully gives
us at once the nature and disposition of the cat, and a very
excellent moral lesson. The cat calls the mouse a titty
mouse, a term of endearment applied to the very animal 
<page 212>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
197
that she was putting in bodily fear. It is well known how
cats will play with a mouse in the most graceful way; you
would almost imagine, from the manner in which it is tossed
so lightly and so elegantly, allowed to escape and then
caught again, that it was playing with it in all amity, in-
stead of prolonging its miseries and torturing it, previously
to its ultimate destruction.
It is in reference to this peculiar character of the cat, that
she is made to use the fond diminutive appellation of titty
mouse.
The moral contained in this last line hardly needs to be
pointed out to our intelligent readers. A cat goes to court,
she enters the precincts of a palace, at last she is in the pre-
sence of royalty, not as usual in the kitchen, or the cellar, or
the attics, or on the roofs, where cats do most congregate, but
actually stands in the presence of royalty; and what does she
do? Notwithstanding the awe which it may be naturally
supposed she is inspired with, notwithstanding the probable
presence of noble lords and ladies, forgetful of where she is,
and in whose presence she stands, seeing a mouse under the
chair, she can no longer control the powerful instincts of her
nature; and forgetting that the object of her journey was to
behold royalty, she no longer thinks of anything but hunting
the titty mouse under the chair. What a lesson is here
taught to the juvenile sexes that we should never attempt
to force ourselves above our proper situations in society, and
that in so doing we soon prove how much we are out of our
place, and how our former habits and pursuits will remain
with us, and render us wholly unfit for a position to which
we ought never to have aspired.
CHAPTER XLI.
Lausanne.
After all, there is more sympathy in this world than we
would suppose, and it is something to find that, in the tur-
moil and angry war of opinion and interest, nations as well
as parties can lay down their weapons for a time, and offer
one general and sincere tribute to genius. In these exciting 
<page 213>
198
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
times, we hear of revolutions in Spain and Portugal, deaths of
crowned men, with indifference, but a shock as astounding as
that of an earthquake in the city of Peru was felt throughout
Europe when the numerous periodicals spread the unexpected
intelligence that the gifted Malibran was no more, that in
the fulness of her talent and her beauty, just commencing the
harvest ripe and abundant, produced by years of unremitting
labour, in which art had to perfect nature, she had been called
away to the silent tomb, and that voice which has electrified
so many thousands was mute for ever. Poor Malibran! she
had had but a niggard portion of happiness in this world,
although she procured so much pleasure to others. A brutal
father, from whom she received but blows, who sold her to a
dotard, who would have sold her again would she have con-
sented! until her late marriage, toiling for others, without
one object in the world on whom to throw her warm affec-
tions. I remember one day when we were talking of sea-
sickness, I observed that the best remedy was beating the
sufferer: she shook her head.
"No," said she; "that will not cure it, or surely I should
have been cured when I crossed the Atlantic with my father."
Those who knew Malibran only as a performer did not
know enough of her; they should have known her in society,
and in domestic life. She was the. tieplus ultra of genius in
a woman; one moment all sunshine, the next a cloud would
come over her expressive features; changeable as the wind,
but in every change delightful, for she never disguised a thought. Six weeks—but six short weeks, and I saw her at
Brussels at her country house, whither she had retired after
the fatigues of the season. How impressive must be her
death. Had she sickened and died at Brussels, the shock
would have been great, for it is a shock when youth, beauty,
and talent are so suddenly mowed down; but she died, as it
were, on the stage. Admiring and applauding thousands had
been listening to her magical powers, thousands more waiting
to hear her at the other festivals; all eyes were upon her, all
expectation upon tiptoe, when death, like a matador, comes
in, strikes his victim, bows sarcastically to the audience, and
retires. A thousand sermons, and ten thousand common
deaths could not have produced so effective a moral lesson as
the untimely fate of Malibran. There is but one parallel to 
<page 214>
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
199
it, and the effect of it was tremendous. It was that of Mr.
Huskisson, on the opening of the Manchester Kailroad. This
is the second homily read to the good people of Liverpool and
Manchester. Peace be with her, although her body is not
permitted to be at rest.
The more I see of the Swiss and Switzerland, the more is
my opinion confirmed as to the strongest feature in the
national character being that of avarice. The country is
poetry, but the inhabitants are the prose of human existence.
Not a chalet but looks as the abode of innocence and peace;
but whether you scale the beetling rock, or pause upon the
verdant turf which encircles their picturesque habitations, the
demon appears like Satan in the garden of Eden. The
infant, radiant as love, extends its little hand for money; the
adult, with his keen grey eye, searches into you to ascertain
in what manner he may overreach you. Avarice rules over
the beautiful country of Helvetia.
The prevailing foible of a nation is generally to be found
in the proverbs of the country and of those adjacent. The
Genevese appear to have the credit of excelling the Swiss
generally: they say here, "II faut trois Juifs pour faire un
Baslois, et trois Baslois pour faire un Genevpis."
Again:—
"Si un Genevois se jette par la fenetre, suivez le? II y
aura pour gagner."
It was, however, a very neat answer given by a Swiss to a
Frenchman, who asserted that the French fought for honour,
and the Swiss for money.
"C'est vrai," replied the Swiss, "chacun se bat pour cela
que lui manque."
The Swiss have abolished titles, they have crushed their
nobility; but human nature will prevail; and they seek dis-
tinction by other channels; everyone who has the least pre-
tention to education or birth looks out for employment under
government; and you can hardly meet with a well-dressed
person in the streets who is not a magistrate, inspector, direc-
teur, or employe in some way or the other, although the emo-
luments are little or nothing. The question has been brought
forward as to trial by jury being introduced, and, strange to
say, the majority are opposed to it as not being suitable to
the Swiss. The reason they give is, that as all respectable 
<page 215>
200
DIARY ON THE CONTINENT.
people hold offices under Government, and are thereby
excused from serving, that there will be nobody but the lower
classes to sit as jurors. It is very difficult to obtain evidence
in a Swiss court of justice; and this arises from the dislike of
the Swiss to give evidence; as, by so doing, they may make
enemies, and their own interests may be injured. This is
completely the character of the Swiss. When I visited Swit-
zerland in my younger days, I used my eyes only, and I was
delighted; now that I visit it again, when years have made
me reflect and inquire more, I am disappointed. The charm
is dissolved, the land of liberty appears to me to be a land of
petty tyranny in the Government, and of extreme selfishness
in the individuals; even the much-vaunted fidelity of the
Swiss seems not to have arisen from any other than mer-
cenary motives. Indeed, there is something radically wrong— however faithful they may be to their employers, or however
they may be brave and talented—in the hearts of those who
volunteer for hire and pay to kill their fellow creatures. I
could not put my trust in such men in private life, although I
would in the service for which they have hired themselves.
Do the faults of this people arise from the peculiarity of
their constitutions, or from the nature of their Government?
To ascertain this, one must compare them with those who live
under similar institutions.
I must go to America, that's decided.

<page 216>
V
201
V - IS.W. AND BY W. | W.
Jack Littlebrain was, physically considered, as fine
frown, and moreover as handsome a boy as ever was seen,
but it must be acknowledged that he was not very clever.
Nature is, in most instances, very impartial; she has given
plumage to the peacock, but, as everyone knows, not the
slightest ear for music. Throughout the feathered race it is
almost invariably the same; the homeliest clad are the finest
songsters. Among animals the elephant is certainly the
most intelligent, but, at the same time he cannot be considered
as a beauty. Acting upon this well ascertained principle,
nature imagined, that she had done quite enough for Jack
when she endowed him with such personal perfection; and
did not consider it was at all necessary that he should be very
clever; indeed, it must be admitted, not only that he was not
very clever, but (as the truth must be told) remarkably dull
and stupid. However, the Littlebrains have been for a long
while a well-known, numerous, and influential family, so that,
if it were possible that Jack could have been taught any-
thing, the means were forthcoming: he was sent to every
school in the country; but it was in vain. At every fol-
lowing vacation, he was handed over from the one peda-
gogue to the other, of those whose names were renowned
for the Busbian system of teaching by stimulating both ends:
he was horsed every day and still remained an ass, and at
the end of six months, if he did not run away before that
period was over, he was invariably sent back to his parents
as incorrigible and unteachable. What was to be done with
him? The Littlebrains had always got on in the world,
somehow or another, by their interest and connections; but
here was one who might be said to have no brains at all.
After many pros and cons, and after a variety of consulting
letters had passed between the various members of his family,
it was decided, that as his maternal uncle, Sir Theophilus 
<page 217>
202
S.W. AND BY W. | W.
Blazers, G.C.B., was at that time second in command in the
Mediterranean, he should be sent to sea under his command;
the Admiral, having in reply to a letter on the subject, an-
swered that it was hard indeed if he did not lick him into
some shape or another; and that, at all events, he'd warrant
that Jack should be able to box the compass before he had
been three months nibbling the ship's biscuit; further, that it
was very easy to get over the examination necessary to qualify
him for lieutenant, as a turkey and a dozen of brown stout
sent in the boat with him on the passing day, as a present to
each of the passing captains, would pass him, even if he were
as incompetent as a camel (or, as they say at sea, a cable), to
pass through the eye of a needle; that having once passed,
he would soon have him in command of a fine frigate, with
a good nursing first lieutenant; and that if he did not behave
himself properly, he would make his signal to come on board
of the flag-ship, take him into the cabin, and give him a
sound horsewhipping, as other admirals have been known to
inflict upon their own sons under similar circumstances. The
reader must be aware that, from the tenour of Sir Theo-
philus's letter, the circumstances which we are narrating must
When Jack was informed that he was to be a midshipman,
he looked up in the most innocent way in the world, (and
innocent he was, sure enough,) turned on his heels, and
whistled as he went for want of thought. For the last three
months he had been at home, and his chief employment was
kissing and romping with the maids, who declared him to be the handsomest Littlebrain that the country had ever produced.
Our hero viewed the preparations made for his departure with
perfect indifference, and wished everybody good bye with the
utmost composure. He was a happy, good-tempered fellow,
who never calculated, because he could not; never decided,
for he had not wit enough to choose; never foresaw, although
he could look straight before him; and never remembered,
because he had no memory. The line, "If ignorance is bliss,
'tis folly to be wise," was certainly made especially for Jack;
nevertheless he was not totally deficient: he knew what was
good to eat or drink, for his taste was perfect, his eyes were
very sharp, and he could discover in a moment if a peach
was ripe on the wall; his hearing was quick, for he was the 

<page 218>
S/W. AND BY W. } W.
203
first in the school to detect the footsteps of his pedagogue;
and he could smell anything savoury nearly a mile off, if the
wind lay the right way. Moreover, he knew that if he put
his fingers in the fire that he would burn himself; that
knives cut severely; that birch tickled, and several other little
axioms of this sort which are generally ascertained by children
at an early age, but which Jack's capacity had not received
until at a much later date. Such as he was, our hero went
to sea; his stock in his sea-chest being very abundant, while
his stock of ideas was proportionably small.
We will pass over all the trans-shipments of Jack until he
was eventually shipped on board the Mendacious, then lying
at Malta with the flag of Sir Theophilus Blazers at the fore—
a splendid ship, carrying 120 guns, and nearly 120 midship-
men of different calibres. (I pass over captain, lieutenant,
and ship's company, having made mention of her most valuable
qualifications.) Jack was received with a hearty welcome
by his uncle, for he came in pudding-time, and was invited
to dinner; and the Admiral made the important discovery,
that if his nephew was a fool in other points, he was certainly
no fool at his knife and fork. In a short time his messmates
found out that he was no fool at his fists, and his knock-down
arguments ended much disputation. Indeed, as the French
would say, Jack was perfection in the physique, although so
very deficient in the morale.
But if Pandora's box proved a plague to the whole world,
Jack had his individual portion of it, when he was summoned
to box the compass by his worthy uncle Sir TheophilusBlazers;
who in the course of six months discovered that he could not
make his nephew box it in the three, which he had warranted
in his letter; every day our hero's ears were boxed, but the
compass never. It required all the cardinal virtues to teach him
the cardinal points during the forenoon, and he made a point of
forgetting them before the sun went down. Whenever they
attempted it (and various were the teachers employed to drive
the compass into Jack's head) his head drove round the com-
pass; and try all he could, Jack never could compass it. It
appeared, as some people are said only to have one idea, as if
Jack could only have one point in his head at a time, and to
that point he would stand like a well-broken pointer. With
him the wind never changed till the next day. His uncle 
<page 219>
204
S.W. AND BY 'VK | W.
pronounced him to be a fool, but that did not hurt his
nephew's feelings; he had been told so too often already.
I have said that Jack had a great respect for good eating
and drinking, and, moreover, was blessed with a good appe-
tite: every person has his peculiar fancies, and if there was
anything which more titillated the palate and olfactory nerves
of our hero, it was a roast goose with sage and onions. Now
it so happened, that having been about seven months on
board of the Mendacious, Jack had one day received a sum-
mons to dine with the Admiral, for the steward had ordered
a roast goose for dinner, and knew not only that Jack was
partial to it, but also that Jack was the Admiral's nephew,
which always goes for something on board of a flag ship.
Just before they were sitting down to table, the Admiral
wishing to know how the wind was, and having been not a
little vexed with the slow progress of his nephew's nautical
acquirements, said, "Now, Mr. Littlebrain, go up, and bring
me down word how the wind is; and mark me, as, when you
are sent, nine times out of ten you make a mistake, I shall
now bet you five guineas against your dinner, that you make
a mistake this time: so now be off and we will soon ascertain
whether you lose your dinner or I lose my money. Sit
down, gentlemen, we will not wait for Mr. Littlebrain."
Jack did not much admire this bet on the part of his uncle,
but still less did he like the want of good manners in not
waiting for him. He had just time to see the covers re-
moved, to scent a whiff of the goose, and was off.
"The Admiral wants to know how the wind is, sir," said
Jack to the officer of the watch.
The officer of the watch went to the binnacle, and setting
the wind as nearly as he could, replied, "Tell Sir Theophilus
that it is S. W. and by W. f W."
"That's one of those confounded long points that I never
can remember," cried Jack, in despair.
"Then you'll'get goose,' as the saying is," observed one
of the midshipmen.
"No; I'm afraid that I sha'n't get any," replied Jack,
despondingly. "What did he say, S.W. and by N. f E. 1"
"Not exactly," replied his messmate, who was a good-
natured lad, and laughed heartily at Jack's version. "S.W.
and by W. f W."

<page 220>
S.W. AXD BY W. | W.
205
"I never can remember it," cried Jack. "I'm to have five guineas if I do, and no dinner if I don't; and if I stay
here much longer, I shall get no dinner at all events, for they
are all terribly peckish, and there will be none left."
"Well, if you'll give me one of the guineas, I'll show you
how to manage it," said the midshipman.
"I'll give you two, if you'll only be quick and the goose
a'n't all gone," replied Jack.
The midshipman wrote down the point from which the
wind blew, at full length, upon a bit of paper, and pinned
it to the rim of Jack's hat. "Now," said he, "when you go
into the cabin, you can hold your hat so as to read it, with-
out their perceiving you."
"Well, so I can; I never should have thought of that,"
said Jack.
"You hav'n't wit enough," replied the midshipman.
"Well, I see no wit in the compass," replied Jack.
"Nevertheless, it's full of point," replied the midshipman:
"now be quick."
Our hero's eyes served him well, if his memory was trea-
cherous; and as he entered the cabin door he bowed over his
hat very politely, and said, as he read it off, "S. W. and by
W. f W," and then he added, without reading at all, "if
you please, Sir Theophilus."
"Steward," said the Admiral, "tell the officer of the watch
to step down."
"How's the wind, Mr. Growler?"
"S.W. and by W. f W." replied the officer.
"Then, Mr. Littlebrain, you have won your five guineas,
and may now sit down and enjoy your dinner."
Our hero was not slow in obeying the order, and ventured,
upon the strength of his success, to send his plate twice for
goose. Having eaten their dinner, drunk their wine, and
taken their coffee, the officers, at the same time, took the
hint which invariably accompanies the latter beverage, made
their bows and retreated. As Jack was following his seniors
out of the cabin, the Admiral put the sum which he had
staked into his hands, observing, that "it was an ill wind
that blew nobody good."
So thought Jack, who, having faithfully paid the midship-
man the two guineas for his assistance, was now on the poop 
<page 221>
206
S.W. AND BY 'W. | W.
keeping his watch, as midshipmen usually do; that is, stretched
out on the signal lockers, and composing himself to sleep after
the most approved fashion, answering the winks of the stars
by blinks of his eyes, until at last he shut them to keep them
warm. But, before he had quite composed himself, he thought
of the goose and the five guineas. The wind was from the
same quarter, blowing soft and mild; Jack laid in a sort of
reverie, as it fanned his cheek, for the weather was close and
sultry.
"Well," muttered Jack to himself, "I do love that point
of the compass, at all events, and I think that I never shall
forget S.W. and by W. f W. No I never—never liked one
before, though"
"Is that true?" whispered a gentle voice in his ear; "do
you love 'S.W. and by W. f W ,' and will you, as you say,
never forget her?"
"Why, what's that?" said Jack, opening his eyes, and
turning half round on his side.
"It's me — ' S. W.and by W. f W.,' that you say you
love."
Littlebrain raised himself and looked round;—there was
no one on the poop except himself and two or three of the
after-gnard, who were lying down between the guns.
"Why, who was it that spoke?" said Jack, mnch astonished.
"It was the wind you love, and who has long loved you,"
replied the same voice; "do you wish to see me?"
"See you,—see the wind?—I've been already sent on that
message by the midshipmen," thought Jack.
"Do you love me as you say, and as I love you?" conti-
nued the voice.
"Well, I like you better than any other point of the com-
pass, and I'm sure I never thought I should like one of them,"
replied Jack.
"That will not do for me; will you love only me?"
"I'm not likely to love the others," replied Jack, shutting
his eyes again; "I hate them all." "And love me?"
"Well, I do love you, that's a fact," replied Jack, as he
thought of the goose and the five guineas.
"Then look round, and you shall see me," said the soft
voice.

<page 222>
S.W. AND BY W. | W.
Jack, who hardly knew whether he was asleep or awake,
did at this summons once more take the trouble to open his
eyes, and beheld a fairy female figure, pellucid as water, yet
apparently possessing substance; her features were beautifully
soft and mild, and her outline trembled and shifted as it were,
waving gently to and fro. It smiled sweetly, hung over him,
played with his chestnut curls, softly touched his lips with
her own, passed her trembling fingers over his cheeks, and its
warm breath appeared as if it melted into his. Then it grew
more bold,—embraced his person, searched into his neck and
collar, as if curious to examine him.
Jack felt a pleasure and gratification which he could not
well comprehend: once more the charmer's lips trembled
upon his own, now remaining for a moment, now withdraw-
ing, again returning to kiss and kiss again, and once more
did the soft voice put the question,—
"Do you love me V
"Better than goose," replied Jack.
"I don't know who goose may be," replied the fairy form,
as she tossed about Jack's waving locks; "you must love only
me, promise me that before I am relieved.
"What, have you got the first watch, as well as me V
replied Jack.
"I am on duty just now, but I shall not be so long. We
southerly winds are never kept long in one place; some of my
sisters will probably be sent here soon."
"I don't understand what you talk about," replied Jack.
"Suppose you tell me who you are, and what you are, and
I'll do all I can to keep awake; I don't know how it is, but
I've felt more inclined to go to sleep since you have been
fanning me about, than I did before."
"Then I will remain by your side while you listen to me.
I am, as I told yon, a wind"
"That's puzzling," said Jack, interrupting her.
"My name is 'S. W. and by W. f W.'"
"Yes, and a very long name it is. If you wish me to re-
member you, you should have had a shorter one."
This ruffled the wind a little, and she blew rather sharp
into the corner of Jack's eye,—however, she proceeded,—
"You are a sailor, and of course you know all the winds
on the compass by name."

<page 223>
208
S.W. AND BY W. | W.
"I wish I did; but I don't," replied Littlebrain, "I can
recollect you, and not one other."
Again the wind trembled with delight on his Hps, and she
proceeded:—'- You know that there are thirty-two points on
the compass, and these points are divided into quarters; so
that there are, in fact, 128 different winds."
"There are more than I could ever remember; I know
that," said Jack.
"Well, we are in all 128. All the winds which have
northerly in them, are coarse and ugly; all the southern winds are pretty." .
"You don't say so?" replied our hero.
"We are summoned to blow, as required, but the hardest
duty generally falls to the northerly winds, as it should do,
for they are the strongest; although we southerly winds can
blow hard enough when we choose. Our characters are
somewhat different. The most unhappy in disposition, and I
may say, the most malevolent, are the north and easterly
winds; the N.W. winds are powerful, but not unkind; the
S.E. winds vary, but, at all events, we of the S.W. are con-
sidered the mildest and most beneficent. Do you understand
me?"
"Not altogether. You're going right round the compass,
and I never could make it out, that's a fact. I hear what
you say, but I cannot promise to recollect it; I can only
recollect S.W. and by W. f W."
"I care only for your recollecting me; if you do that, you
may forget all the rest. Now you see we South Wests are
summer winds, and are seldom required but in this season; I
have often blown over your ship these last three months, and
I always have lingered near you, for I loved you."
"Thank you—now go on, for seven bells have struck
sometime, and I shall be going to turn in. Is your watch
out?"
"No, I shall blow for some hours longer. Why will you leave me—why wo'n't you stay on deck with me?"
"What, stay on deck after my watch is out! No, if I do,
blow me! We midshipmen never do that—but I say, why
can't you come down with me, and turn in my hammock; it's
close to the hatchway, and you can easily do it."
"Well, I will, upon one promise. You say that you love 
<page 224>
S.W. AND BY W. £ W.
209
me, now I'm very jealous, for we winds are always supplant-
ing one another. Promise me that you will never mention
any other wind in the compass but me, for if you do, they
may come to you, and if I hear of it I'll blow the masts out
of your ship, that I will."
"You don't say so?" replied Jack, surveying her fragile,
trembling form.
"Yes, I will, and on a lee shore too; so that the ship shall
go to pieces on the rocks, and the Admiral and every soul on board her be drowned."
"No, you wouldn't, would you?" said our hero, astonished."Not if you promise me. Then I'll come to you and pour
in my arms. Promise me, then, on no account ever to recol-
lect or mention any other wind but me."
"Well, I think I may promise that," replied Jack, "I'm
very clever at forgetting; and then you'll come to my ham-
mock, won't you, and sleep with me? you'll be a nice cool
bedfellow these warm nights."
"I can't sleep on my watch as midshipmen do; but I'll
watch you while you sleep, and I'll fan your cheeks, and
keep you cool and comfortable, till I'm relieved.""And when you go, when will you come again?""That I cannot tell—when I'm summoned; and I shall
wait with impatience, that you may be sure of."
"There's eight bells," said Jack, starting up; "I must go
down and call the officer of the middle watch; but I'll soon
turn in, for my relief is not so big as myself, and I can
thrash him."
Littlebrain was as good as his word; he cut down his
relief, and then thrashed him for venturing to expostulate.
The consequence was, that in ten minutes he was in his ham-
mock, and "S.W. and by W. f W." came gently down the
hatchway, and rested in his arms. Jack soon fell fast asleep,
and when he was wakened up the next morning by the quar-
ter-master, his bedfellow was no longer there. A mate in-
quiring how the wind was, was answered by the quarter-
master that they had a fresh breeze from the N.N.W., by
which Jack understood that his sweetheart was no longer
on duty. p


<page 225>
210 S.W. AND BY W- f W.
Our hero had passed such a happy night with his soft and
kind companion, that he could think of nothing else; lie
longed for her to come again, and, to the surprise of every-
body, 'was now perpetually making inquiries as to the wind
which blew. He thought of her continually; and in fact
was as much in love with "S.W. and by W. f W." as he
possibly could be. She came again—once more did he enjoy
ller delightful company; again she slept with him in his
hammock, and then, after a short stay, she was relieved by
another.
We do not intend to accuse the wind of inconstancy, as
that was not her fault; nor of treachery, for she loved dearly;
nor of violence, for she was all softness and mildness; but we
do say, that "S.W. and by W. f W." was the occasion of
Jack being very often in a scrape, for our hero kept his word;
he forgot all other winds, and, with him, theTe was no other
except his dear "S. W. and by W. f W." It must be ad-
mitted of Jack, that, at all events, he showed great perse-
verance, for he stuck to his point.
Our hero would argue with his messmates, for it is not
those who are most capable of arguing who are most fond of
it; and, like all arguers not very brilliant, he would flounder
and diverge away right and left, just as the flaws of ideas
came into his head.
"What nonsense it is your talking that way," would bis
opponent say; "why don't you come to the point?"
"And so I do," cried Jack.-
"Well, then, what is your point V
"S. W. and by W. f W.," replied our hero.
Who could reply to this 1 Rut in every instance, and
through every difficulty, our hero kept his promise, until his
uncle Sir Theophilus was very undecided, whether he should
send him home to be locked up in a Lunatic Asylum, or bring
him on in the service to the rank of post-captain. Upon
mature consideration, however, as a man in Bedlam is a very
useless member of society, and a tee-total non-productive,
whereas a captain in the navy is a responsible agent, the Ad-
miral came to the conolusion, that Littlebrain must follow up
his destiny. .
At last, Jack was set down as the greatest fool in the ship,
and was pointed out as such. The ladies observed, that such

<page 226>
S.W. AND BY W. | \V. 211
might possibly be the case, but at all events he was the
handsomest young man in the Mediterranean fleet. We
believe that both parties were correct in their assertions.
Time flies—even a midshipman's time, which does r>ot fly
quite so fast as his money— and the time came for Mr. Little-
brain's examination. Sir Theophilus. who now commanded
the whole fleet, wag almost in despair. How was it possible
that a man could navigate a ship, with only one quarter point
of the compass in his head 1
Sir Theophilus scratched his wig; and the disposition of
the Mediterranean fleet, so important to the country, was
altered according to the dispositions of the captains who com-
manded the ships. In those days, there were martinets in
the service; officers who never overlooked an offence, or per*
mitted the least deviation from strict duty; who were gene-
rally hated, but at the same time were most valuable to the
service. As for his nephew passing his examination before
any of those of the first or second, or even of the third de-
gree, the Admiral knew that it was impossible. The conse-
quence was, that one was sent away on a mission to Genoa,
about nothing; another to watch for vessels never expected,
off Sardinia; two more to cruize after a French frigate which
had never been built: and thus, by degrees, did the Admiral
arrange, so as obtain a set of officers sufficiently pliant to
allow his nephew to creep under the gate which barred his
promotion, and which he never could have vaulted over. So
the signal was made—our hero went on board—his uncle had
not forgotten the propriety of a little douceur on the occa-
sion; and, as the turkeys were all gone, three couple of geese
were sent in the same boat, as a present to each of the three
passing captains. Littlebrain's heart failed him as he pulled
to the ship; even the geese, hissed at him, as much as to say,
"If you were not such a stupid ass, we might have been left
alive in our coops." There was a great deal of truth in that
remark, if they did say so..
Nothing could have been made more easy for Littlebrain
than his examination. The questions had all been arranged
beforehand; and some kind friend had given him all the
answers written down. The passing captains apparently
suffered from the heat of the weather, and each had his
hand on his brow, looking down on the table at the time
P 2

<page 227>
212
S.W. AND BY W. | W.
that Littlebrain gave his answers, so that of course they did not observe that he was reading them off. As soon as
Littlebrain had given his answer, and had had sufficient time
to drop his paper under the table, the captains felt better
and looked up again. >
There were but eight questions for our hero to answer.
Seven had been satisfactorily got through; then came the eighth, a very simple one:—" What is your course and distance from Ushant to the Start V This question having been
duly put, the captains were again in deep meditation, shroud-
ing their eyes with the palms of their hands.
Littlebrain had his answer—he looked at the paper. What
could be more simple than to reply t—and then the captains
would have all risen up, shaken him by the hand, compli-
mented him upon the talent he had displayed, sent their
compliments to the commander-in-chief, and their thanks
for the geese. Jack was just answering, "North -"
"Recollect your promise!" cried a soft voice, which Jack
well recollected.
Jack stammered — the captains were mute — and waited
patiently.
"I must say it," muttered Jack.
-'You shan't," replied the little Wind.
"Indeed I must," said Jack, "or I shall be turned back."
The captains, surprised at this delay and the muttering of Jack, looked up, and one of them gently inquired if Mr.
Littlebrain had not dropped his handkerchief or something
under the table 1 And then they again fixed their eyes upon
the green cloth.
"If you dare, I '11 never see you again," cried "S.W. and
by W. f W.,"—" never come to your hammock,—but I'll
blow the ship on shore, every soul shall be lost, Admiral
and all; recollect your promise!"
"Then I shall never pass," replied Jack.
"Do you think that any other point in the compass shall
pass you except me 1—never! I am too jealous for that.
Come now, dearest!" and the Wind again deliciously
trembled upon the lips of our hero, who could no longer
resist.
"S.W. and by W. f W.," exclaimed Jack firmly.
"You have made a slight mistake, Mr. Littlebrain," said 
<page 228>
S.W. AND BY VV. £ W. 213
one of the captains. "Look again—I meant to say, think
again."
„ "S.W. and by W. £ W.," again repeated Jack.
"Dearest, how I love you !" whispered the soft Wind.
"Why, Mr. Littlebrain," said one of the captains — for
Jack had actually laid the paper down on the table—" what's
in the wind now?"
v "She's obstinate," replied Jack.
"You appear to be so, at all events," replied the captain.
"Pray try once more."
t, "J, have it!" thought Jack, who tore off the last answer
from his paper. "I gained five guineas by that plan once
before." He then handed the bit of paper to the passing
captain: "I believe that's right, sir," said our hero.
"Yes, that is right; but could you not have said it instead
of writing it, Mr. Littlebrain?"
Jack made no reply; his little sweetheart pouted a little,
but said nothing; it was an evasion which she did not like. A
few seconds of consultation then took place, as a matter of
form. Each captain asked of the other if he was perfectly
satisfied as to Mr. Littlebrain's capabilities, and the reply was
in the affirmative; and they were perfectly satisfied, that he
was either a fool or a madman. However, as we have had
fcoth in the service by way of precedent, Jack was added to
the list, and the next day was appointed lieutenant.
Our hero did his duty as lieutenant of the forecastle; and
as all the duty of that officer is, when hailed from the quarter-
deck, to answer "Ay, ay, sir," he got on without making
many mistakes. And now he was very happy; no one dared
to call him a fool except his uncle; he had his own cabin, and
many was the time that his dear little "S.W. and by W f W."
would come in by the scuttle, and nestle by his side.
"You won't see so much of me soon, dearest," said she,
one morning, gravely.
"Why not, my soft one?" replied Jack.
"Don't you recollect that the winter months are coming
"So they are," replied Jack. "Well, I shall long for you
back."
And Jack did long, and long very much, for he loved his
dear wind, and the fine weather which accompanied her. 
<page 229>
214 S.W. AND BY W. | W.
Winter came on, and heavy gales and rain, and thunder and
lightning; nothing but double-reefed top-sails, and wearing
in succession; and our hero walked the forecastle, and thought
of his favourite wind. The N.E. winds came down furiously,
and the weather was bitter cold. The officers shook the rain
and spray off their garments when their watch was over, and
called for grog.
"Steward, a glass of grog," cried one; "and let it be
strong."
"The same for me," said Jack; "only, I'll mix it myself."
Jack poured out the rum till the tumbler was half full.
"Why, Littlebrain," said his messmate, "that is a dose;
that's what we call a regular Nor-wester."
"Is it?" replied Jack. "Well then, Nor-westers suit me
exactly, and I shall stick to them like cobblers' wax."
And during the whole of the winter months our hero
showed a great predilection for Nor-westers.
It was in the latter end of February that there was a heavy
gale; it had blown furiously from the northward for three
days, and then it paused and panted as if out of breath—no
wonder! And then the wind shifted, and shifted again, with
squalls and heavy rain, until it blew from every quarter of
the compass. ,.
Our hero's watch was over, and he came down and called for a "Nor-wester" as usual.
"How is the wind now 1" asked the first lieutenant to the
master, who came down dripping wet.
'f ^"S.S.W., but drawing now fast to the Westward," said old
Spunyarn.
And so it was; and it veered round until "S.W. and by
W. J W.," with an angry gust, came down the sky-light,
and blowing strongly into our hero's ear, cried,—
"Oh, you false one F*
"False!" exclaimed Jack. "What! you here, and so
angry too? What's the matter V
"What's the matter !—do you think I don't know? What
have you been doing ever since I was away, comforting your-
self during my absence with Nor-westers?"
"Why, you an't jealous of a Nor-wester, are you?" replied
Littlebrain. "I confess, I'm rather partial to them."
"What!—this to my face !"—I'll never come again, with-

<page 230>
S.W. AND BY W. | W.
215
out you promise me that you will have nothing to do with
them, and never call for one again. Be quick—I cannot stay
more than two minutes; for it is hard work now, and we re-
lieve quick—say the word."
"Well, then," replied Littlebrain, "you've no objection to
half-and-half?"
"None in the world; that's quite another thing, and has
nothing to do with the wind."
"It has, though," thought Jack, "for it gets a man in the
wind; but I won't tell her so; and," continued he, "you don't
mind a raw nip, do you?"
"No—I care for nothing except a Nor-wester.'"
"Til never call for one again," replied Jack; "it is but
making my grog a little stronger; in future it shall be half-
and-half."
"-That's a dear! Now I'm off—don't forget me;" and
away went the wind in a great hurry.
It was about three months after this short visit, the fleet
being off Corsica, that our hero was walking the deck, think-
ing that he soon should see the object of his affections, when
a privateer brig was discovered at anchor a few miles from
Bastia. The signal was made for the boats of the fleet to
cut her out; and the Admiral, wishing that his nephew should
distinguish himself somehow, gave him the command of one
of the finest boats. Now Jack was as brave as brave could be; he did not know what danger was; he hadn't wit enough
to perceive it, and there was no doubt but he would distin-
guish himself. The boats went on the service. Jack was the
very first on board, cheering his men as he darted into the
closed ranks of his opponents. Whether it was that he did
not think that his head was worth defending, or that he was
too busy in breaking the heads of others to look after his own,
this is certain, that a tomahawk descended upon it with such
force as to bury itself in his skull (and his was a thick skull
too). The privateer's men were overpowered by numbers, and then our hero was discovered, under a pile of bodies, still
breathing heavily. He was hoisted on board, and taken into
his uncle's cabin: the surgeon shook his head when he had
examined that of our hero.
"It must have been a most tremendous blow," said he to
the Admiral, "to have penetrated"

<page 231>
216
S/W. AND BY W. | W.
"It must have been, indeed," replied the Admiral, as the
tears rolled down his cheeks; for he loved his nephew.
The surgeon having done all that his art would enable him,
left the cabin to attend to the others who were hurt; the
Admiral also went on the quarter-deck, walking to and fro
for an hour in a melancholy mood. He returned to the cabin,
and bent over his nephew; Jack opened his eyes.
"My dear fellow," said the Admiral, "how's your head
now r
"S W. and by W. f W." faintly exclaimed our hero, con-
stant in death, as he turned a little on one side and expired.
It was three days afterwards, as the fleet were on a wind,
making for Malta, that the bell of the ship tolled, and a body,
sewed up in a hammock and covered with the Union Jack,
was carried to the gangway by the Admiral's bargemen. It
had been a dull cloudy day, with little wind; the hands were
turned up, the officers and men stood uncovered; the Admiral
in advance with his arms folded, as the chaplain read the
funeral service over the body of our hero,—and as the service
proceeded, the sails flapped, for the wind had shifted a little;
a motion was made, by the hand of the officer of the watch,
to the man at the helm to let the ship go off the wind, that
the service might not be disturbed, and a mizzling soft rain
descended. The wind had shifted to our hero's much loved
point, his fond mistress had come to mourn over the loss of
her dearest, and the rain that descended were the tears which
she shed at the death of her handsome but not over-gifted
lover.

<page 232>
217
ILL-WILL.
DRAMATIS PERSONS.
Ms. Cadaverous, An old miser, very rich and very ill.
Edward, A young lawyer without a brief.
Mr. Haustus Gumarabic, Apothecary.
Seedy, Solicitor.
Thomas Montagu,}^hewt „ Mr. Cadaverous.
John Montagu, )
W^mamItermng J*'**" ™~*< <° * Serous.
Clementina Montagu, Niece to Mr. Cadaverous.
Mrs. Jellybags, Housekeeper and nurse.
Act I.
Scene.—A sick room.—Mr. Cadaverous in an easy chair
asleep, supported by cushions, wrapped up in his dressing-
gown, a night-cap on his head.—A small table with phials,
gallipots, &c.—Mrs. Jellybags seated on a chair close to
the table.
Mrs. Jellybags (looks at Mr. Cadaverous, and then comes
forward). He sleeps yet—the odious old miser! Mercy on
me, how I do hate him,—almost as much as he loves his
money! Well, there's one comfort, he cannot take his
money-bags with him, and the doctor says that he cannot
last much longer. Ten years have I been his slave—ten
years have I been engaged to be married to Sergeant Major
O'Callaghan of the Blues—ten years has he kept me wait-
ing at the porch of Hymen,—and what thousands of couples
have I seen enter during the time! Oh dear! its enough
to drive a widow mad. I think I have managed it;—he
has now quarrelled with all his relations, and Dr. Gumarabic
intends this day to suggest the propriety of his making his
last will and testament. [Mr. Cadaverous, still asleep,
coughs.] He is waking, (Looks at him.) No, he is not. 
<page 233>
218
ILL-WILL.
Well, then, I shall wake him, and give him a draught, for,
after such a comfortable sleep as he is now in, he might last
a whole week longer. (Goes up to Mr. Cadaverous, and
shakes him.) ,
Mr. Cad. (starting up.) Ugh! ugh! ugh! (coughs violently.)
Oh! Mrs. Jellybags, I'm so ill. Ugh! ugh!
Jel. My dear, dear sir! now don't say so. I was in hopes,
after such a nice long sleep you would have found yourself so
much better.
Cad. Long sleep! oh dear!—I'm sure I've not slept ten
minutes.
Jel. (aside.) I know that. (Aloud). Indeed, my dear sir,
you are mistaken. Time passes very quick when we are fast
asleep. I have been watching you and keeping the flies off.
But you must now take your draught, my dear sir, and your
pill first.
Cad. What! more pills and more draughts! Why, there's
no end to them.
Jel. Yes, there will be, by and by, my dear sir. You
know Doctor Gumarabic has ordered you take one pill and
one draught every half hour. --.'-—'-'..* 8 -
Cad. And so I have—never missed one for the last six
weeks—woke up for them day and night. I feel very weak— very weak, indeed! Don't you think I might eat something,
my dear Mrs. Jellybags?
Jel. Eat, my dear Mr. Cadaverous!—how can you ask me,
when you know that Doctor Gumarabic says that it would be
the death of you 1
Cad. Only the wing of a chicken,—or a bit of the breast
Jel. Impossible!
Cad. A bit of dry toast, then; any thing-, my dear Mrs.
Jellybags. I've such a gnawing. Ugh! ugh! .....
Jel. My dear sir, you would die if you swallowed the least
thing that's nourishing. ,
Cad. I'm sure I shall die if I do not. Well, then, a little
soup—I should like that very much indeed.
Jel. Soup! it would be poison, my dear sir! No, no. You must take your pill and your draught.
Cad. Oh dear! oh dear!—Forty-eight pills and forty-eight
draughts every twenty-four hours!—not a wink of sleep day
or night.

<page 234>
ILL-WILL.
219
Jel. (soothingly.) But it's to make you well, you know,
my dear Mr. Cadaverous. Come, now. (Hands him a pill
and some water in a tumbler.)
Cad. The last one is hardly down yet;—I feel it sticking
half-way. Ugh! ugh!
Jel. Then wash them both down at once. Come, now,'tis
to make you well, you know.
[Cadaverous takes the pill with a wry face, and coughs it up
again.
Cad. Ugh! ugh! There—it's up again. Oh dew! oh
dear!
Jel. You must take it, my dear sir. Come, now, try
again.
Cad. (coughing.) My cough is so bad. (Takes the pill.)
Oh, my poor head! Now I'll lie down again.
Jel. Not yet, my dear Mr. Cadaverous. You must take
your draught;—it's to make you well, you know.
Cad. What! another draught? I'm sure I must have
twenty draughts in my inside, besides two boxes of pills!
Jel. Come, now—it will be down in a minute.
[Cadaverous takes the wine-glass in his hand, and looks at it
with abhorrence.
Jel. Come, now.
[Cadaverous swallows the draught, and feels very sick, puts
Ms handkerchief to his mouth, and, after a time, sinks back in the chair quite exhausted, and shuts his eyes.
Jel. (aside.) I wish the doctor would come. It's high time that he made his will.
Cad. (drawing up his leg.) Oh! oh! oh!
Jel. What's the matter, my dear Mr. Cadaverous.
Cad. Oh! such pain!—oh! rub it, Mrs. Jellybags.
Jel. What, here, my dear sir? (Rubs his knee.)
Cad. No, no!—Not there!—Oh, my hip!
Jel. What, here? (Hubs his hip.)
Cad. No, no!—higher—higher! Oh, my side! --
Jel. What, here? (Bubs his side.)
Cad. No!—slower!
Jel. Here? (Bubbiny.J
,. Cad. No!—higher!—Oh, my chest!—my stomach! Oh
dear!—oh dear! ,
Jel. Are you better now, my dear sir?

<page 235>
220
ILL-WILL.
Cad. Oh dear! oh! I do believe that I shall die! I've been a very wicked man, I'm afraid.
Jel. Don't say so, Mr. Cadaverous. Every one but your
nephews and nieces say that you are the best man in the
world.
Cad. Do they? I was afraid that I had not been quite so
good as they think I am.
JeL. I'd like to hear anyone say to the contrary. I'd tear
their eyes out,—that I would.
Cad. You are a good woman, Mrs. Jellybags; and I shall
not forget you in my will.
Jel. Don't mention wills, my dear sir. You make me so
miserable. (Puts her handkerchief to her eyes.)
Cad. Don't cry, Mrs. Jellybags. I won't talk any more
about it. (Sinks back exhausted.)
Jel. (wiping her eyes). Here comes Dr. Gumarabic.
Enter Gumarabic.
Gum. Good morning, Mistress Jellybags. Well, how's our
patient ?—better?—heh 1
[Mrs. Jellybags shakes her head.
Gum. No: well, that's odd. (Goes up to Mr. Cadaverous.)
Not better, my dear sir?—don't you feel stronger? Cad. (faintly.) Oh, no!
Gum. Not stronger! Let us feel the pulse. [Mrs. Jelly-
bags hands a chair, and Gumarabic sits down, pulls out his
watch, and counts]. Intermittent—135—well, now—that's
very odd! Mrs. Jellybags, have you adhered punctually to
my prescriptions?
Jel. Oh yes, sir, exactly.
Gum. He has eaten nothing?
Cad. Nothing at all.
Gum. And don't feel stronger? Odd—very odd! Pray,
has he had anything in the way of drink? Come, Mrs.
Jellybags, no diguise,—tell the truth;—no soup—warm jelly
—heh?
Jel. No, sir; upon my word, he has had nothing.
Gum. Humph?—and yet feels no stronger? Well, that's
odd!—Has he taken the pill every half-hour?
Jel. Yes, sir, regularly.
Gum. And feels no better! Are you sure that he has had
his draught with his pill? 
<page 236>
ILL-WILL.
Jel. Every time, sir.
Gum. And feels no better! Well, that's odd!—very odd,
indeed! (Hues and comes forward with Mrs. Jellybags.)
We must throw in some more draughts, Mrs. Jellybags;
there is no time to be lost.
Jel. I am afraid he's much worse, sir.
Gum. I am not at all afraid of it, Mrs. Jellybags,—I am
sure of it;—it's very odd,—but the fact is, that all the physic
in the world won't save him; but still he must take it,—because—physic was made to be taken.
Jel. Very true, sir. (Whispers to Gumarabic.)
. Gum. Ah! yes;—very proper. (Going to Mr. Cadaver-
ous.) My dear sir, I have done my best; nevertheless, you
are ill,—very ill,—which is odd,—very odd! It is not plea-
sant,—I may say, very unpleasant,—but if you have any little
worldly affairs to settle,—will to make,—or a codocil to add,
in favour of your good nurse, your doctor, or so on,—it might
be as well to send for your lawyer;—there is no saying, but,
during my practice, I have sometimes found that people die.
After all the physic you have taken, it certainly is odd—very
odd—very odd, indeed;—but you might die to-morrow.
Cad. Oh dear!—I'm very ill.
Jel. (sobbing). Oh dear! oh dear!—he's very ill.
Gum. (comesforward, shrugging up his shoulders). Yes;
he is ill—very ill;—to-morrow, dead as mutton! At all
events he has not died for want of physic. We must throw
in some more draughts immediately;—no time to be lost.
Life is short,—but my bill will be long—very long!
[Exit as scene closes.
Act II.
Scene T.—Enter Clementina, with a letter in her hand.
Clem. I have just received a letter from my dear Edward:
he knows of my uncle's danger, and is anxious to see me. I
expect him immediately. I hope he will not be seen by Mrs.
Jellybags as he comes in, for she would try to make more
mischief than than she lias already. Dear Edward! how he
loves me! (Kisses the letter.)
Enter Edward.
Edw. My lovely, my beautiful, my adored Clementina! 
<page 237>
ILL-WILL.
I have called upon Mr. Gumarabic, who tells me that your uncle cannot live through the twenty-four hours, and I have flown here, my sweetest, dearest, to—to
Clem. To see me, Edward: surely there needs no excuse
for coming?
Edw. To reiterate my ardent, pure, and unchangeable
affection, my dearest Clementina; to assure you, that in sick-
ness or in health, for richer or for poorer, for better or for
worse, as they say in the marriage ceremony, I am yours till
death us do part.
Clem. I accept the vow, dearest Edward. You know too
well my heart for me to say more.
Edw. I do know your heart, Clementina, as it is,—nor do I think it possible that you could change;—still, sometimes—that is for a moment when I call to mind that, by your
uncle's death, as his favourite niece, living with him for so
many years, you may soon find yourself in possession of
thousands,—and that titled men may lay their coronets at
your feet,—then, Clementina
Clem. Ungenerous and unkind!—Edward, I almost hate
you. Is a little money, then, to sway my affections? Shame,
Edward, shame on you! Is such your opinion of my con-
stancy? (Weeps.) You must judge me by your own heart.
Edw. Clementina! dearest Clementina!—I did!—but rather
—that is,—I was not in earnest;—but when we value any
object as I value you,—it may be forgiven, if I feel at times
a little jealous;—yes, dearest, jealous!
Clem. 'Twas jealousy then, Edward, which made you so
unkind? Well, then, I can forgive that.
Edw. Nothing but jealousy, dearest! I carinot help, at
times, representing you surrounded by noble admirers,—all
of them suing to you,—not for yourself, but for your money,
tempting you with their rank;—and it makes me jealous,
horribly jealous! I cannot compete with lords, Clementina,
—a poor barrister without a brief.
Clem. I have loved you for yourself, Edward. I trust
you have done the same toward me.
Edw. Yes; upon my soul, my Clementina!
Clem. Then my uncle's disposition of his property will
make no difference in me. For your sake, my dear Edward,
I hope he will not forget me. What's that? Mrs. Jellybags 
<page 238>
ILL-WILL.
is coming out of the room. Haste, Edward;—you must not be seen here. Away, dearest!—and may God bless you.
Edw. (kisses her hand ) Heaven preserve my adored, my matchless, ever-to-be-loved Clementina. [Exeunt separately.
Scene II.—The sick room—Mr. Cadaverous, lying on a
sofa-bed—Mr. Seedy, the lawyer, sitting by his side, with
papers on the table before him.
Seedy. I believe now, sir, that everything is arranged in
your will according to your instructions. Shall I read it over
again; for although signed and witnessed, you may make
any alteration you please by a codicil.
Cad. No, no. You have read it twice, Mr. Seedy, and
you may leave me now. I am ill, very ill, and wish to be
alone.
Seedy (folds up his papers and rises). I take my leave,
Mr. Cadaverous, trusting to be long employed as your
solicitor.
Cad. Afraid not, Mr. Seedy. Lawyers have no great
interest in heaven. Your being my solicitor will not help
me there.
Seedy (coming forward as he goes out). Not a sixpence to
his legal adviser! Well, well! I know how to make out a
bill for the executors.
[Exit Seedy, and enter Mrs. Jellybags.
Jel. (with her handkerchief to her eyes). Oh dear! oh
dear! oh, Mr. Cadaverous, how can you fatigue and annoy
yourself with such things as wills?
Cad. ( faintly). Don't' cry, Mrs. Jellybags. I've not for-
gotten you.
Jel. (sobbing). I can't—help—crying. And there's Miss
Clementina,—now that you are dying,—who insists upon
coming in to see you.
Cad. Clementina, my niece, let her come in, Mrs. Jelly-
bags; I feel I'm going fast,—I may as well take leave of
everybody.
Jel. (sobbing). Oh dear! oh dear! You may come in,
Miss.
Enter Clementina.
Clem. My dear uncle, why have you, for so many days, 
<page 239>
224
ILL-WILL.
refused me admittance? Every morning have I asked to be allowed to come and nurse you, and for more than three
weeks have received a positive refusal.
Cad. Refusal! Why I never had a message from you. Clem. No message! Every day I have sent, and every
day did Mrs. Jellybags reply that you would not see me.
Cad. (faintly). Mrs. Jellybags,—Mrs. Jellybags
Clem. Yes, uncle; it is true as I stand here;—and my
brother Thomas has called almost every day, and John every
Sunday, the only day he can leave the banking-house; and
cousins William and James have both been here very often.
Cad. Nobody told me! I thought everyone had forgotten
me. Why was I not informed, Mrs. Jellybags?
Jel. (in a rage). Why, you little, story-telling creature,
coming here to impose upon your good uncle! You know
that no one has been here—not a soul;—and as for yourself,
you have been too busy looking after a certain gentleman
ever to think of your poor uncle;—that you have;—taking
advantage of his illness to behave in so indecorous a manner.
I would have told him everything, but I was afraid of
making him worse.
Clem. You are a false, wicked woman!
Jel. Little impudent creature,—trying to make mischief
between me and my kind master, but it won't do. (To
Clementina aside.) The will is signed, and I'll take care
he does not alter it;—so do your worst.
Cad. (faintly). Give me the mixture, Mrs.
Clem. I will, dear uncle. (Pours out the restorative mix-
ture in a glass.)
Jel. (going back). You will, Miss,—indeed! but you
shan't. Clem. Be quiet, Mrs. Jellybags;—allow me at least to do
something for my poor uncle.
Cad. Give me the mix
Jel. (prevents Clementina from giving it, and tries to
take it from her). You shan't, Miss!—You never shall. Cad. Give me the
[Mrs. Jellybags and Clementina scuffle, at last Clemen-
tina throws the contents of the glass into Mrs. Jellybag'b
face.
Clem. There, then!—since you will have it.

<page 240>
ILL-WILL. 225
J el. {in a rage). You little minx!—I'll be revenged for
that. Wait a little till the will is read,—that's all;—See
if I don't bundle you out of doors,—that I will.
Clem. As you please, Mrs. Jellybags; but pray give my
poor uncle his restorative mixture.
Jel. To please you ?—Not I! I'll not give him a drop till I think proper. Little, infamous, good-for-nothing
Cad. Give me oh!
Jel. Saucy—man-seeking
Clem. Oh! as for that, Mrs. Jellybags, the big sergeant was
here last night—I know that. Talk of men indeed!
Jel. Very well, Miss!—very well! Stop till the breath
is out of your uncle's body—and I'll beat you till youi's is also.
Cad. Give oh!
Clem. My poor uncle! He will have no help till I leave
the room—I must go. Infamous woman! Exit.
Cad. Oh!
Jel. I'm in such a rage!—I could tear her to pieces!—the
little!—the gnat! Oh, I'll be revenged! Stop till the will
is read, and then I'll turn her out into the streets to starve.
Yes! yes! the will!—the will! (Pauses and pants for
oreath.) Now, I recollect the old fellow called for his mix-
ture. I must go and get some more. I'll teach her to throw
physic in my face. [Goes out and returns with a phial—pours out a portion, and
goes up to Mr. Cadaverous.
Jel. Here, my dear Mr. Cadaverous. Mercy on me!
—Mr. Cadaverous!—why, he's fainted!—Mr. Cadaverous!
(Screams.) Lord help us!—why, he's dead! Well now,
this sort of thing does give one a shock, even when one has
longed for it. Yes, he's quite dead! (Coming forward.) So,
there's an end of all his troubles—and, thank Heaven! of
mine also. Now for Sergeant-major O'Callaghan, and—love!
Now for Miss Clementina, and—revenge? But first the will!
-—the will!
[Curtain drops.
Act III.
Mrs. Jellybags.
Oh dear!—this is a very long morning. I feel such sus-
pense—such anxiety; and poor Sergeant-major O'Callaghan 
<page 241>
226
ILL-WILL.
is quite in a perspiration! He is drinking and smoking down
in the kitchen to pass away the time, and if the lawyer don't
come soon, the dear man will be quite fuddled. He talks of
buying a farm in the country. Well, we shall see; but if
the Sergeant thinks that he will make ducks and drakes of
my money, he is mistaken. I have not been three times a
widow for nothing—I will have it all settled upon myself;
that must and shall be, or else—no Sergeant O'Callaghan for
me!
Enter Clementina.
So, here you are, Miss. Well, we'll wait till the will is
read, and then we shall see who is mistress here.
Clem. I am as anxious as you, Mrs. Jellybags. You may
have wheedled my poor uncle to make up the will in your
favour; if so, depend upon it, I shall expect nothing from
your hands.
Jel. I should rather think not, Miss. If I recollect right,
you threw the carminative mixture in my face.
Clem. And made you blush for the first time in your life.
Jel. I shall not blush to slam the door in your face.
Clem. Rather than be indebted to you, I would beg my
bread from door to door.
Jel. I expect that you very soon will. Enter Edward.
Edw. My dearest Clementina, I have come to support you
on this trying occasion.
Jel. And ascertain how matters stand, before you decide
upon marrying, I presume, Mr. Edward.
Edw. Madam, I am above all pecuniary considerations.
Jel. So everybody says, when they think themselves sure
of money.
Edw. You judge of others by yourself.
Jel. Perhaps I do—I certainly do expect to be rewarded
for my long and faithful services.
Clem. Do not waste words upon her, my dear. You have my solemn promise; nothing shall change my feeling towards
you.
Jel. That may be; but did it never occur to you, Miss,
that the gentleman's feelings might alter?
Edw. Detestable wretch![Hands Clementina to a chair on the right, and sits by her.

<page 242>
ILL-WILL.
227
Enter Nephews John, Thomas, William, and James, all with
white pocket-handkerchiefs in their hands—they take their
seats two right and two left.
Jel. (aside). Here they all come, like crows that smell
carrion. How odious is the selfishness of this world! But here is Mr. Gumarabic. How do you do, Sir? {Curtsies with
a grave air.)
Gum. Very well, I thank you, Mrs. Jellybags. Can't say
the same of all my patients. Just happened to pass by—
thought I would step in and hear the will read—odd, that I
should pop in at the time—very odd. Pray, may I ask, my
dear Mrs. Jellybags, were you present at the making of the
will?
Jel. No, my dear sir; my nerves would not permit me. Gum. Nerves!—odd, very odd! Then you don't know
how things are settled?
Jel. No more than the man in the moon, my dear sir. Gum. Man in the moon!—odd comparison that from a
woman!—very odd! Hope my chance won't prove all moon-
shine.
Jel. I should think not, my dear sir; but here comes Mr.
Seedy, and we shall know all about it.
Enter Mr. Seedy—Mrs. Jellybags, all courtesy, waves her
hand to a chair in the centre, with a table before it. Mr.
Seedy sits down, pulls the will out of his pocket, lays it on
the table, takes out his snuff-box, takes a pinch, then his hand-
kerchief, blows his nose, snuffs the candles, takes his spectacles
from his waistcoat pocket, puts them on, breaks the seals, and
bows to the company: Mrs. Jellybags has taken her seat
on the left next to him, and Dr. Gumarabic by her side.
Mrs. Jellybags sobs very loud, with her handkerchief to her
face. Seedy. Silence, if you please.
[Mrs. Jellybags stops sobbing immediately. Edw. (putting his arm round Clementina's waist). My
dearest Clementina!
Mr. Seedy hems twice, and then reads,—"The last Will and Testament of Christopher Cadaverous,
Gentleman, of Copse horton, in the County of Cumberland.
"I, Christopher Cadaverous, being at this time in sound
mind, do hereby make my last will and testament.
« 2

<page 243>
228
ILL-WILL.
"First, I pray that I may be forgiven all my manifold sins
and wickedness, and I do beg forgiveness of all those whom I
may have injured unintentionally or otherwise; and at the
same time do pardon all those who may have done me wrong,
even to John Jones, the turnpike man, who unjustly made
me pay the threepenny toll twice over on Easter last, when I
went up to receive my dividends.
"My property, personal and real, I devise to my two
friends, Solomon Lazarus, residing at No. 3, Lower Thames-
street, and Hezekiah Flint, residing at No. 16, Lothbury, to
have and to hold for the following uses and purposes:—
"First, to my dearly beloved niece, Clementina Montagu,
I leave the sum of one hundred and fifty pounds, 3^ per cent,
consols, for her sole use and benefit, to be made over to her,
both principal and interest, on the day of her marriage.
[Edward withdraws his arm from Clementina's waist— turns half round from her, and falls back in his chair with a pish!
"To my nephew, Thomas Montagu, I leave the sum of
nineteen pounds nineteen shilling and sixpence—having
deducted the other sixpence to avoid the legacy duty.
[Thomas turns from the lawyer with his face to the front of the stage, crossing his legs.
"To my nephew, John Montagu, I leave also the sum of
nineteen pounds nineteen shillings and sixpence. [John turns away in the same manner.
"To my nephew, once removed, James Stirling, I leave
the sum of five pounds to purchase a suit of mourning.
[James turns away as the others.
"To my nephew, once removed, William Stirling, I also
leave the sum of five pounds to purchase a suit of mourning.
[William turns away as the others.
"To my kind and affectionate housekeeper, Mrs. Martha
Jellybags"
[Mrs Jellybags sobs loudly, and cries "Oh dear! Oh dearf
Mr. Seedy. Silence, if you please. [Reads. —" In return for all her attention to me during my illness,
and her ten years' service, I leave the whole of my [Mr. Seedy having come to the bottom of the page lays down
the will, takes out his snuff-box, takes a pinch, blows his nose,
snuffs the candles, and proceeds.

<page 244>
ILL-WILL.
229
—-" I leave the whole of my wardrobe, for her entire use and
disposal; and also my silver watch with my key and seal
hanging to it.
"And having thus provided for"
[Mrs. Jellybags, who has been listening attentively, interrupts Mr. Seedy in great agitation.
Jel. Will you be pleased to read that part over again 1
Seedy. Certainly, ma'am. "I leave the whole of my wardrobe, and also my silver watch, with the key and seal hanging to it. [Mrs. Jellybags screams, and falls back in a swoon on her
chair—no one assists her."And having thus provided for all my relations, I do
hereby devise the rest of my property to the said Solomon
Lazarus and Hezekiah Flint, to have and to hold for the
building and endowment of an hospital for diseases of the
heart, lights, liver, and spleen, as set off by the provisions in
the schedule annexed to my will as part and codicil to it."
Seedy. Would the relations like me to read the pro-
visions?
Omnes. No! no! no!
(Mr. Seedy is about to fold up thepapers.)
Gum. I beg your pardon, sir, but is there no other codicil?
Seedy. I beg your pardon, Mr. Gumarabic, I recollect now
there is one relative to you.
Gum. (nods his head.) I thought so. (Speedy reads.)
"And whereas I consider that my apothecary, Mr. Haustus Gumarabic, hath sent in much unnecessary physic,
during my long illness—it is my earnest request that my
executors will not fail to tax his bill."
Gum. (rises and comes forward.) Tax my bill!—well that
is odd, very odd! I may as well go and look after my
patients. [Exit.
(James and William come forward.)
James. I say, Bill, how are you off for a suit of mourning?
Will. Thanky for nothing, Jem. If the old gentleman
don't go to heaven until I put it on, he will be in a very bad
way. Come along, it's no use staying here.
(John and Thomas come forward.)
John. I say, Tom, how are you off for nineteen pounds
nineteen and six? Heh!

<page 245>
230
ILL-WILL.
Thos. Let's toss and see which shall have both legacies.
Here goes—heads or tails?
John. Woman for ever.
Thos. You've won, so there's an end of not only my ex-
pectations but realities. Come along, Mrs. Jellybags must
be anxious to look over her wardrobe.
John. Yes, and also the silver watch and the key and seal
hanging to it. Good bye, Jemmy! Ha! ha![Exeunt, laughing.
Clem. For shame, John. (Turns to Edward.) My dear
Edward, do not appear so downcast. I acknowledge that
I am myself much mortified and disappointed — but we
must submit to circumstances. What did I tell you before
this will was read?—that nothing could alter my feelings
towards you, did I not?
Edw. (with indifference.) Yes.
Clem. Why then annoy yourself, my dear Edward?
Edw. The confounded old junks!
Clem. Nay, Edward, recollect that he is dead—I can for-
give him.
Edw. But I won't. Has he not dashed my cup of bliss to
the ground? Heavens! what delightful anticipations I had
formed of possessing you and competence—all gone!
Clem. All gone, dear Edward?
[Mrs. Jellybags, who has been sitting very still, takes her handkerchieffrom her eyes and listens.
Edw. Yes, gone!—gone for ever! Do you imagine, my
ever dear Clementina, that I would be so base, so cruel, so
regardless of you and your welfare, to entrap you into
marriage with only one hundred and fifty pounds! No, no!
—judge me better. I sacrifice myself—my happiness—all
for you!—banish myself from your dear presence, and retire
to pass the remainder of my existence in misery and regret,
maddened with the feeling that some happier mortal will
obtain that dear hand, and will rejoice in the possession of
those charms which I had too fondly, too credulously, imagined
as certain to be mine. [Takes out his handkerchief, and covers his face; Clementina
also puts her handkerchief to her face and weeps. Mrs.
Jellybags nods her head ironically.
Clem. Edward!
Edw. My dear, dear Clementina! 
<page 246>
ILL-WILL.
Clem. You won't have me?
Edw. My honour forbids it. If you knew my feelings—
how this poor heart is racked!
Clem. Don't leave me, Edward. Did you not say that for
richer or for poorer, for better or for worse, you would be
mine, till death did us part?
Edw. Did I?
Clem. You know you did, Edward.
Edw. It's astonishing how much nonsense we talk when in
love. My dearest Clementina, let us be rational. We are
almost without a sixpence. There is an old adage, that when
poverty comes in at the door, love flies out of the window.
Shall I then make you miserable! No! no! Hear me, Cle-
mentina. I will be generous. I now absolve you from all
your vows. You are free. Should the time ever come that
prosperity shine upon me, and I find that I have sufficient for
both of us of that dross which I despise, then will I return,
and, should my Clementina not have entered into any other
engagement, throw my fortune and my person at her feet.
Till then, dearest Clementina, farewell!
Clem, (sinking into a chair sobbing.) Cruel Edward! Oh,
my heart will break!
Edw. I can bear it myself no longer. Farewell! farewell!
[Exit.
Jel. (comingforward.) Well, this is some comfort. (To
Clementina.) Did I not tell you, Miss, that if you did not
change your mind, others might 1
Clem. Leave me, leave me.
Jel. No, I shan't; I have as good a right here as you, at
all events. I shall stay, Miss.
Clem, (rising.) Stay then—but I shall not. Oh, Edward!
Edward! [Exit, weeping.
Jel. (alone.) Well, I really thought I should have burst
—to be forced not to allow people to suppose that I cared,
when I should like to tear the old wretch out of his coffin to
beat him. His wardrobe! If people knew his wardrobe as
well as I do, who have been patching at it these last ten
years—not a shirt or a stocking that would fetch sixpence! And
as for his other garments, why a Jew would hardly put them
into his bag! (Crying.) Oh dear! oh dear! After all, I'm
just like Miss Clementina; for Sergeant O'Callaghan, when 
<page 247>
232
ILL-WILL.
he knows all this, will as surely walk off without beat of
drum, as did Mr. Edward—and that too with all the money
I have lent him. Oh these men! these men!—whether they
are living or dying there is nothing in them but treachery and
disappointment! When they pretend to be in love, they only
are trying for your money; and e'en when they make their
wills, they leave to those behind them nothing but ill-will!
[Exit, crying, off the stage as the curtain falls. 
<page 248>
233
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
It was a fine autumnal evening; I had been walking with
a friend until dusk on the Piazza Grande, or principal square
in the town of Lucca. We had been conversing of England,
our own country, from which I had then banished myself for
nearly four years, having taken up my residence in Italy to
fortify a weak constitution, and having remained there long
after it was requisite for my health from an attachment to its
pure sky, and the dolcefar niente which so wins upon you in
that luxurious climate. We had communicated to each other
the contents of our respective letters arrived by the last mail;
had talked over politics, great men, acquaintances, friends and
kindred; and, tired of conversation, had both sank into a
pleasing reverie as we watched the stars twinkling above us,
when my friend rose hastily and bid me good night.
"Where are you going, Albert?" inquired I.
"I had nearly forgotten I had an appointment this evening.
I promised to meet somebody at the Marquesa di Cesto's
masquerade."
"Pshaw! are you not tired of these things V replied I;
"that eternal round of black masks and dominos of all
colours; heavy harlequins, fools and clowns by nature wearing
their proper dresses there, and only in masquerade when out
of it; nuns who have no holiness in their ideas, friars without
a spice of religion, ugly Venuses, Dianas without chastity, and
Hebes as old as your grandmother."
"All very true, Herbert, and life itself is masquerade
enough; but the fact is, that I have an appointment: it is of
importance, and I must not fail."
"Well, I wish you more amusement than I have generally
extracted from these burlesque meetings," replied I. "Adieu,
and may you be successful!" And Albert hastened away.
I remained another half hour reclining on the bench, and
then returned to my lodgings. My servant Antonio lighted

<page 249>
234
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
the candle and withdrew. On the table lay a note; it was
an invitation from the Marquesa. I threw it on one side and
took up a book, one that required reflection and deep exami-
nation; but the rattling of the wheels of the carriages as they
whirled along past my window would not permit me to com-
mand my attention. I threw down the book; and taking a
chair at the window, watched the carriages full of masks as
they rolled past, apparently so eager in the pursuit of plea-
sure. I was in a cynical humour. What fools, thought I,
and yet what numbers will be there; there will be an immense
crowd; and what can be the assignation which Albert said
was of such consequence? Such was my reflection for the
next ten minutes, during which at least fifty carriages and
other vehicles had passed in review before me.
And then I thought of the princely fortune of the Marquesa,
the splendid palazzo at which the masquerade was given, and
the brilliant scene which would take place.
"The Grand Duke is to be there, and everybody of dis-
tinction in Lucca. I have a great mind to go myself."
A few minutes more elapsed. I felt that I was lonely,
and I made up my mind that I would go. I turned from the
window and rang the bell.
"Antonio, see if you can procure me a domino, a dark-
coloured one if possible; and tell Carlo to bring the carriage
round as soon as he can."
Antonio departed, and was away so long that the carriage
was at the door previous to his return.
"Signor, I am sorry, very, very sorry; but I have run to
every shop in Lucca, and there is nothing left but a sky-blue
domino, which I have brought with me."
"Sky-blue! why, there will not be two sky-blue dominos
in the whole masquerade: I might as well tell my name at
once, I shall be so conspicuous."
"You are as well hidden under a sky-blue domino as a
black one, Signor, if you choose to keep your own secrets,"
observed Antonio.
"Very true," replied I, "give me my mask."
Enshrouding myself in the sky-blue domino, I went down
the stairs, threw myself into the carriage, and directed Carlo
to drive to the palazzo of the Marquesa.
In half an hour we arrived at the entrance-gates of the 
<page 250>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
235
Marquesa's superb country seat. From these gates to the
palazzo, a sweep of several hundred yards, the avenue through
which the driver passed was loaded with variegated lamps,
hanging in graceful festoons from branch to branch; and the
notes of music from the vast entrance-hall of the palazzo
floated through the still air. When I arrived at the area in
front of the flight of marble steps which formed the entrance
of the palazzo, I was astonished at the magnificence, the good
taste, and the total disregard of expense which were exhi-
bited. The palazzo itself appeared like the fabric built of
diamonds and precious stones by the genii who obeyed the
ring and lamp of Aladdin, so completely was its marble front
hidden with a mass of many-coloured lamps, the reflection
from whose galaxy of light rendered it bright as day for
nearly one hundred yards around; various mottoes and trans-
parencies were arranged in the walks nearest to the palazzo;
and then all was dark, rendered still darker from the contrast
with the flood of light which poured to a certain distance
from the scene of festivity. Groups of characters and dominos
were walking to and fro in every direction; most of them
retracing their steps when they arrived at the sombre walks
and alleys, some few pairs only continuing their route where
no listeners were to be expected.
This is an animating scene, thought I, as the carriage
stopped, and I am not sorry that I have made one of the
party. As soon as I had descended, I walked up the flight
of marble steps which led to the spacious hall in which the
major part of the company were collected. The music had,
for a moment, ceased to play; and finding that the perfume
of the exotics which decorated the hall was too powerful, I
was again descending the steps, when my hand was seized
and warmly pressed by one in a violet-coloured domino.
"I am so glad that you are come; we were afraid that you
would not. I will see you again directly," said the domino;
and it then fell back into the crowd and disappeared.
It immediately occurred to me that it was my friend Albert
who spoke to me. "Very odd," thought I, "that he should
have found me out!" And again I fell into the absurdity of
imagining that because I had put on a conspicuous domino,
I was sure to be recognized. "What can he want with me? He must be in some difficulty, some unexpected one, that is 
<page 251>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
certain." Such were my reflections as I slowly descended
the steps, occasionally pausing for a moment on one, as I was
lost in conjecture, when I was again arrested by a slight slap
on the shoulder. I looked round: it was a female; and
although she wore her half-mask, it was evident that she was
young, and I felt convinced that she was beautiful.
"Not a word," whispered she, putting her finger to her lip;
"follow me." Of course I followed: who could resist such a challenge?
"You are late," said the incognito, when we had walked
so far away from the palazzo as to be out of hearing of the
crowd.
"I did not make up my mind to come until an hour ago,"
replied I.
"I was so afraid that you would not come. Albert was
sure that you would. He was right. He told me just now
that he had spoken to you."
"What! was that Albert in the rose-coloured domino?"
"Yes; but I dare not stay now—my father will be lookin
for me. Albert is keeping him in conversation. In half an
hour he will speak to you again. Has he explained to you what has occurred?"
"Not one word."
"If he has not had time—and I doubt if he will have, as
he must attend to the preparations—I will write a few lines,
if I can, and explain, or at least tell you what to do; but I
am so harassed, so frightened! We do indeed require your
assistance. Adieu!" So saying, the fair unknown tripped
hastily away.
"What the deuce is all this?" muttered I, as I watched
her retreating figure. "Albert said that he had an appoint-
ment, but he did not make me his confidant. It appears that
something which has occurred this night occasions him to
require my assistance. Well, I will not fail him."
For about half an hour I sauntered up and down between
the lines of orange-trees which were dressed up with variegated
lamps, and shed their powerful fragrance in the air: I rumi-
nated upon what might be my friend's intentions, and what
might be the result of an intrigue carried on in a country
where the stiletto follows Love so close through all the mazes
of his labyrinth, when I was again accosted by the violet-
coloured domino.

<page 252>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
237
"Hist!" whispered he, looking carefully round as he thrust
a paper into my hand; "read this after I leave you. In one
hour from this be you on this spot. Are you armed?"
"No," replied I; "but Albert"
"You may not need it; but nevertheless take this,—I
cannot wait." So saying, he put a stiletto into my hand, and
again made a hasty retreat.
It had been my intention to have asked Albert what was
his plan, and further why he did not speak English instead of
Italian, as he would have been less liable to be understood if
overheard by eavesdroppers; but a little reflection told me
that he was right in speaking Italian, as the English language
overheard would have betrayed him, or at least have identified
him as a foreigner.
"A very mysterious afiair this!" thought I; "but, how-
ever, this paper will, I presume, explain the business. That
there is a danger in it is evident, or he would not have given
me this weapon;" and I turned the stiletto once or twice to
the light of the lamp next to me, examining its blade, when,
looking up, I perceived a black domino standing before me.
"It is sharp enough, I warrant," said the domino; "you
have but to strike home. I have been waiting for you in the
next walk, which I thought was to be our rendezvous. Here
is a paper which you will fasten to his dress. I will contrive
that he shall be here in an hour hence by a pretended message.
After his death you will put this packet into his bosom;—
you understand. Fail not: remember the one thousand
sequins; and here is my ring, which I will redeem as soon as
your work is done. The others will soon be here. The
pass-word is 'Milano.' But I must not be seen here. Why
a sky-blue domino? it is too conspicuous for escape;" and as
I received from him the packet and ring, the black domino
retreated through the orange grove which encircled us.
I was lost in amazement: there I stood with my hands full—
two papers, a packet, a stiletto, and a diamond ring! "Well,"
thought I, "this time I am most assuredly taken for some-
body else—for a bravo I am not. There is some foul work
going on, which, perhaps, I may prevent." "But why a
sky-blue domino V said he. I may well ask the same ques-
tion. "Why the deuce did I come here in a sky-blue do-
mino, or any domino at all I" I put the ring on my finger, 
<page 253>
238
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
the stiletto and packet in my bosom, and then hastened
away to the garden on the other side of the palazzo, that I
might read the mysterious communication put into my hands
by my friend Albert; and as I walked on, my love for admi-
ration led me away so as to find myself pleased with the
mystery and danger attending upon the affair; and feeling
secure, now that I had a stiletto in my bosom for my defence,
I resolved that I would go right through it until the whole
affair should be unravelled.
I walked on till I had gained the last lamp on the other
side of the palazzo. I held up to its light the mysterious
paper: it was in Italian, and in a woman's handwriting.
"We have determined upon flight, as we cannot hope for
safety here, surrounded as we are by stilettoes on every side.
We feel sure of pardon as soon as the papers which Albert
received by this day's mail, and which he will entrust to
you when you meet again, are placed in my father's hands.
We must have your assistance in removing our treasure.
Our horses are all ready, and a few hours will put us in
safety; but we must look to you for following us in your
carriage, and conveying for me what would prove so great
an incumbrance to our necessary speed. When Albert sees
you again, he will be able to tell you where it is deposited.
Follow us quick, and you will always have the gratitude of"Viola.
"P.S. I write in great haste, as I cannot leave my father's
side for a moment without his seeking for me."
"What can all this mean? Albert told me of no papers
by this day's mail. Viola! I never heard him mention such
a name. He said to me, 'Read this, and all will be ex-
plained.' I'll be hanged if I am not as much in the dark as
ever! Follow them in my carriage with the treasure—never says where! I presume he is about to run off with
some rich heiress. Confound this sky-blue domino! Here
I am with two papers, a packet, a stiletto, and a ring; I
am to receive another packet, and am to convey treasure.
Well, it must solve itself—I will back to my post; but first
let me see what is in this paper which I am to affix upon the
man's dress after I have killed him." I held it up to the
light, and read, in capital letters, "The reward of a traitor 1" 
<page 254>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
239
"Short and pithy," muttered I, as I replaced it in my pocket:
"now I'll back to the place of assignation, for the hour must
be nearly expired."
As I retraced my steps, I again reverted to the communi-
cation of Viola—" 'Surrounded as we are by stilettoes on
every side!' Why, surely Albert cannot be the person that
I am required by the black domino to despatch; and yet it
may be so—and others are to join me here before the hour
is passed. A thought struck me: whoever the party might
be whose life was to be taken, whether Albert or another, I
could save him.
My reverie was again broken by a tap on the shoulder.
"Am I right? What is the pass-word 1"
"Milano!" replied I, in a whisper.
"All's right, then—Giacomo and Tomaso are close by—
I will fetch them."
The man turned away, and in a minute re-appeared with
two others, bending as they forced their way under the
orange-trees."
"Here we all are, Felippo," whispered the first. "Be is
to be here in a few minutes."
"Hush!" replied I, in a whisper, and holding up to them
the brilliant ring which sparkled on my finger.
"Ah, Signor, I cry your mercy," replied the man, in a low
voice; "I thought it was Felippo."
"Not so loud," replied I, still in a whisper. "All is disco-
vered, and Felippo is arrested. You must away immediately.
You shall hear from me to-morrow."
"Corpo di Bacco! Where, Signor 1 at the old place?"
"Yes away—now, and save yourselves."
In a few seconds the desperate men disappeared among the
trees, and I was left alone.
"Slaves of the Ring, you have done my bidding at all
events, this time," thought I, and I looked at the ring more
attentively. It was a splendid solitaire diamond, worth
many hundred crowns. "Will you ever find your way back
to your lawful owner 1" was the question in my mind when
Albert made his appearance in his violet-coloured domino.
"'Twas imprudent of you to send me the paper by the
black domino," said he, hastily. "Did I not tell you that 
<page 255>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
I would be here in an hour? We have not a moment to
spare. Follow me quickly, and be silent."
I followed—the paper which Albert referred to needed no
explanation; it was, indeed, the only part of thewholea ffair
which I comprehended. He led the way to about three
hundred yards of the path through the wood.
"There," said he, "in that narrow avenue, you will find
my faithful negro with his charge. He will not deliver it
up without you show him this ring." And Albert put a ring
upon my finger.
"But, Albert,"—my mind misgave me—Albert never had
a faithful negro to my knowledge; it must be some other
person who had mistaken me for his friend,—" I am afraid,"
continued I
"Afraid !—let me not hear you say that. You never yet
knew fear," said he, interrupting me. "What have you to
fear between this and Pisa 1 Your own horses will take you
there in three hours. But here's the packet, which you
must deliver yourself. Now that you know where the negro
is, return to the palazzo, deliver it into his own hands, re-
questing his immediate perusal. After that do not wait a
moment, but hasten here to your charge. While the Grand
Duke is reading it I will escape with Viola."
"I really cannot understand all this," said I, taking the
packet.
"All will be explained when we meet at Pisa. Away,
now; to the Grand Duke—I will go to the negro and pre-
pare him for your coming."
"But allow me"
"Not a word more, if you love me," replied the violet-coloured
domino, who, I was now convinced, was not Albert; it was
not his voice—there was a mystery and a mistake; but I
had become so implicated that I felt I could not retreat
without sacrificing the parties, whoever they might be.
"Well," said I, as I turned back to the palazzo, "I must
go on now; for, as a gentleman and man of honour, I cannot
refuse. I will give the packet to the Grand Duke, and I
will also convey his treasure to Pisa. Confound this sky-blue domino!"
As I returned to the palazzo, I was accosted by the black
domino.

<page 256>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
241
"Milano!" replied I.
"Is all right, Felippo?" said he, in a whisper.
"All is right, Signor," was my answer.
"Where is he?"
I pointed with my finger to a clump of orange-trees.
"And the paper and packet?"
I nodded my head.
"Then you had better away—I will see you to-morrow."
"At the old place, Signor?"
"Yes," replied the black domino, cutting into a cross-path,
and disappearing.
I arrived at the palazzo, mounted the steps, forced my way
through the crowd, and perceived the Grand Duke in an inner
saloon, the lady who had accosted me leaning on his arm.
It then occurred to me that the Grand Duke had an only
daughter, whose name was Viola. I entered the saloon,
which was not crowded, and walking boldly up to the Grand
Duke, presented the packet, requesting that his Highness
would give it his immediate attention. I then bowed, and
hastened away, once more passed through the thronged hall,
and gained the marble steps of the palazzo.
"Have you given it?" said a low voice close to me.
"I have," replied I; "but, Signor
"Not a word, Carlo: hasten to the wood, if you love me."
And the violet-coloured domino forced his way into the crowd
which filled the hall.
"Now for my journey to Pisa," said I. "Here I am, im-
plicated in high treason, perhaps, in consequence of my
putting on a sky-blue domino. Well, there's no help for
it."
In a few minutes I had gained the narrow avenue, and
having pursued it about fifty yards, perceived the glaring
eyes of the crouched negro. By the starlight, I could just
distinguish that he had a basket, or something like one, be-
fore him.
"What do you come for, Signor?" said the negro, rising
on his feet.
"For what has been placed under your charge; here is the
ring of your master."
The negro put his fingers to the ring and felt it, that he
might recognize it by its size and shape.
R

<page 257>
242
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
"Here it is, Signor," said he, lifting up the basket gently,
and putting it into my arms. It was not heavy, although
somewhat cumbrous from its size.
"Hark! Signor, there is confusion in the palazzo. You
must be quick, and I must not be seen with you." And away
darted the negro like lightning through the bushes.
I also hastened away with the basket (contents unknown),
for it appeared to me that affairs were coming to a crisis. I
heard people running different ways, and voices approaching
me. When I emerged from the narrow avenue, I perceived
several figures coming down the dark walk at a rapid pace,
and, seized with a sort of panic, I took to my heels. I soon
found that they were in pursuit, and I increased my speed.
In the gloom of the night, I unfortunately tripped over a
stone, and fell with the basket to the ground; and then the
screams from within informed me that the treasure intrusted
to my safe keeping was a child. Fearful that it was hurt,
and forgetting, for the time, the danger of being captured, I
opened the lid, and examined its limbs, while I tried to pacify
it; and while I was sitting down in my sky-blue domino, thus
occupied in hushing a baby, I was seized by both shoulders,
and found myself a prisoner.
"What is the meaning of this rudeness, Signors V said I,
hardly knowing what to say.
"You are arrested by order of the Grand Duke," was the
reply.
"I am arrested !—why 1— I am an Englishman!"
"That makes no difference; the orders are to arrest all
found in the garden in sky-blue dominos."
"Confound the sky-blue domino!" thought I, for the
twentieth time at least. "Well, Signors, I will attend you;
but first let me try to pacify this poor frightened infant"
"Strange that he should be found running away with a
child at the same time that the Lady Viola has disappeared!"
observed one of my captors.
"You are right, Signors," replied I; "it is very strange;
and what is more strange is, that I can no more explain it
than you can. I am now ready to accompany you. Oblige
me by one of you carrying the basket while I take care of
the infant."
In a few minutes we had arrived at the palazzo. I had 
<page 258>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
243
retained my mask, and I was conducted through the crowd
into the saloon into which I had previously entered when I
delivered the packet to the Grand Duke.
"There he is! there he is!" was buzzed through the crowd
in the hall. "Holy Virgin! he has a child in his arms!
Bambino bellissimo!" Such were the exclamations of wonder
and surprise as they made a lane for my passage, and I was
in the presence of the Grand Duke, who appeared to be in a
state of great excitement.
"It is the same person !" exclaimed the Duke. "Confess!
are you not the party who put a packet into my hands about
a quarter of an hour since?"
"I am the person, your Highness," replied I, as I patted
and soothed the frightened child.
"Who gave it you 1"
"May it please your Highness, I do not know."
"What child is that V
"May it please your Highness, I do not know."
"Where did you get it?"
"Out of that basket, your Highness."
"Who gave you the basket?"
"May it please your Highness, I do not know."
"You are trifling with me. Let him be searched."
"May it please your Highness, I will save them that trou-
ble, if one of the ladies will take the infant. I have received
a great many presents this evening, all of which I will have
the honour of displaying before your Highness."
One of the ladies held out her arms to the infant, who im-
mediately bent from mine toward her, naturally clinging to
the other sex as its friend in distress.
"In the first place, your Highness, I have this evening
received this ring," taking off my finger the one given by the
party in a violet-coloured domino, and presenting it to him.
"And from whom 2" said his Highness, instantly recog-
nizing the ring.
"May it please your Highness, I do not know. I have
also received another ring, your Highness," continued I, taking
off the ring given me by the black domino.
"And who gave you this?" interrogated the Duke, again
evidently recognizing it.
"May it please your Highness, I do not know. Also, this b 2

<page 259>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO,
stiletto, but from whom, I must again repeat, I do not know.
Also, this packet, with directions to put it into a dead man's
bosom." !-.iisl
"And you are, I presume, equally ignorant of the party
who gave it to you V ---»«
"Equally so, your Highness; as ignorant as I am of the party who desired me to present you with the other packet
which I delivered. Here is also a paper I was desired to pin
upon a man's clothes after I had assassinated him."
"Indeed !—and to this, also, you plead total ignorance?"'
"I have but one answer to give to all, your Highness,
which is, I do not know."' -- ->it
"Perhaps, Sir, you do not know your own name or profes-
sion," observed his Highness, with a sneer.
"Yes, your Highness," replied I, taking off my mask, "that
I do know. I am an Englishman, and, I trust, a gentleman,
and a man of honour. My name is Herbert; and I have
more than once had the honour to be a guest at your High-
ness's entertainments." .1*
"Signor, I recognize you," replied the Grand Duke. "Let
the room be cleared—I must speak with this gentleman
alone."
When the company had quitted the saloon, I entered into
a minute detail of the events of the evening, to which his
Highness paid the greatest attention; and when I had finished,
the whole mystery was unravelled to me by him, and with which I will now satisfy the curiosity of my readers.
The Grand Duke had one daughter, by name Viola, whom
he had wished to marry to Rodolph, Count of Istria; but
Viola had met with Albert, Marquis of Salerno, and a mutual
attachment had ensued. Although the Grand Duke would
not force his daughter's wishes and oblige her to marry
Count Rodolph, at the same time he would not consent to her
espousals with the Marquis Albert. Count Rodolph had dis-
covered the intimacy between Viola and the Marquis of
Salerno, and had made more than one unsuccessful attempt
to get rid of his rival by assassination. After some time, a
private marriage with the marquis had been consented to by
Viola; and a year afterwards the Lady Viola retired to the
country, and without the knowledge, or even suspicions, of
her father, had given birth to a male child, which had been 
<page 260>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
passed off as the offspring of one of the ladies of the court
who was married, and to whom the secret had been con-
fided.
At this period the secret societies, especially the Carbo-
nari, had become formidable in Italy, and all the crowned
heads and reigning princes were using every exertion to sup-
press them. Count Rodolph was at the head of these socie-
ties, having joined them to increase his power, and to have at
his disposal the means of getting rid of his rival. Of this
the Marquis of Salerno had received intimation, and for some
time had been trying to obtain proof against the count; for
he knew that if once it was proved, Count Rodolph would
never be again permitted to appear in the state of Lucca.
On the other hand, Count Rodolph had been making every
arrangement to get rid of his rival, and had determined that
it should be effected at this masquerade.
The Marquis of Salerno had notice given him of this inten-
tion, and also had on that morning obtained the proof against
Count Rodolph, which he was now determined to forward to
the Grand Duke; but, aware that his assassination by the
Carbonari was to be attempted, and also that the wrath of
the Grand Duke would be excessive when he was informed of
their private marriage, he resolved to fly with his wife to
Pisa, trusting that the proofs of Count Rodolph being con-
nected with the Carbonari, and a little time, would soften
down the Grand Duke's anger. The marquis had arranged
that he should escape from the Duke's dominions on the night
of the masquerade, as it would be much easier for his wife to
accompany him from thence than from the Grand Duke's
palace, which was well guarded; but it was necessary that
they should travel on horseback, and they could not take
their child with them. Viola would not consent that it
should be left behind; and on this emergency he had written
to his friend, the Count d'Ossore, to come to their assistance
at the masquerade, and, that they might recognize him, to
wear a sky-blue domino, a colour but seldom put on. The
Count d'Ossore had that morning left his town mansion on a
hunting excursion, and did not receive the letter, of which
the Marquis and Viola were ignorant. Such was the state of
affairs at the time that I put on the sky-blue domino to go to
the masquerade.

<page 261>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
My first meeting with the marquis in his violet-coloured
domino is easily understood: being in a sky-blue domino I
was mistaken for the Count d'Ossore. I was myself led into
the mistake by the Marquis Albert having the same Christian
name as my English friend. The second meeting with the
Count Rodolph, in the black domino, was accidental. The
next walk had been appointed as the place of meeting with
the Carbonari Felippo and his companions; but Count Ro-
dolph, perceiving me examining my stiletto by the light of
the lamp, presumed that I was Felippo, and that I had mis-
taken the one path for the other which had been agreed upon.
The papers given to me by Count Rodolph were Carbonari
papers, which were to be hid in the marquis's bosom after he
had been assassinated, to make it appear that he had belonged
to that society, and by the paper affixed to his clothes, that
he had been murdered by the agents of the society for having
betrayed them. The papers which the marquis had requested
me to give to the Grand Duke were the proofs of Count Ro-
dolph's belonging to the secret society; and with those papers
was enclosed a letter to the Grand Duke, in which they
acknowledged their secret union. And now, I believe, the
reader will comprehend the whole of this mysterious affair.
After all had been explained, I ventured to ask his High-
ness if he would permit me to fulfil my promise of taking the
child to its mother, as I considered it a point of honour that
I should keep my engagement, the more so, as the delay
would occasion the greatest distress to his daughter; and I
ventured to add, that I trusted his Highness would pardon
what could not now be remedied, and that I should have the
satisfaction of being the bearer of such pleasing intelligence
to his daughter and the marquis.
The Grand Duke paced the room for a minute, and then replied, "Signor Herbert, I feel so disgusted with the trea-
chery and baseness of Count Rodolph, that I hardly need
observe, if my daughter were free he never should espouse
her; indeed, he will have immediate orders to quit the state.
You have been instrumental in preserving the life of the
Marquis of Salerno, who is my son-in-law, and as matters
now stand, I am indebted to you. Your dismissal of the
bravoes, by means of the count's ring, was a masterly stroke.
You shall have the pleasure of taking my forgiveness to my 
<page 262>
THE SKY-BLUE DOMINO.
247
daughter and her husband; but as for the child, it may as
well remain here. Tell Viola I retain it as a hostage for the
quick return of its mother."
I took my leave of his Highness, and hastened to Pisa,
where I soon found out the retreat of the marquis and his
wife. I sent up my name, requesting immediate admittance,
as having a message from the Grand Duke. I found them in
great distress. The Count d'Ossore had returned late on the
night of the masquerade, found the letter, hastened to the
Marquesa de Cesto's, and had arrived just after the elope-
ment had been discovered. He immediately followed them to
Pisa, when an explanation took place, and they discovered
that they had been communicating with some unknown per-
son, by whom they had, in all probability, been betrayed.
It would be difficult to pourtray their astonishment and
joy when I entered into a detail of what had occurred, and
wound up with the message from the Grand Duke; and I
hardly need add, now that I wind up my story, that the
proofs of gratitude I received from the marquis and his wife,
during my subsequent residence in Italy, left me no occasion
to repent that I had gone to the masquerade of the Marquesa
de Cesto, in a Sky-blue Domino.

<page 263>
248
.r.
MODERN TOWN HOUSES. *>
- 'Hi
I have often thought, when you consider the difference of
comfort between houses built from sixty to a hundred years
back, in comparison with the modern edifices, that the cry of
the magician in "Aladdin," had he called out "new houses,"
instead of "new lamps," for old ones, would not have appeared
so very absurd. It was my good fortune, for the major part
of my life, to occupy an ancient house, built, I believe, in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth. My father lived in it before I was
in existence: I was born in it, and it was bequeathed to me.
It has since been my misfortune to have lived three years in
one of the modern-built houses; and although I have had my
share of the ills to which we all are heir, I must date my real
unhappiness from the first month after I took possession.
With your permission, I will enter into my history, as it may
prove a warning to others, who will not remember the old
proverb of "Let well alone."
I am a married man, with six children; my three eldest
are daughters, and have now quitted a school, near Portman-
equare, to which my wife insisted upon my sending them, as
it was renowned for finishing young ladies. Until their
return to domiciliate themselves under my roof, I never heard
a complaint of my house, which was situated at Brompton.
It was large, airy, and comfortable, with excellent shrub-
beries, and a few acres of land; and I possessed every comfort
and even luxury which could be rationally required, my wife
and daughters having their carriage, and in every respect my
establishment being that of a gentleman.
I had not, however, taken my daughters from school more than two months, before I was told that we were "living out
of the world," although not a mile and a half from Hyde
Park Corner; and, to my surprise, my wife joined in the cry;
it was always from morn to night, "We might do this but, we

<page 264>
MODERN TOWN HOUSES. 249
cannot do this because, we are quite out of the world." It
was too far to dine out in town; too far for people to come and
dine with us; too far to go to the play, or the opera; too far
to drive in the park; too far even to walk in Kensington
Gardens. I remonstrated, that we had managed to dine out,
to receive visiters, and to enjoy all other amusements very
well for a considerable number of years, and that it did not
appear to me that Brompton had walked away from London,
on the contrary, that London was making rapid advances to-
wards Brompton; but it would not do,—all day the phrase
rang in my ears, "out of the world," until I almost began to
wish that I was out too. But it is no use having the best of
an argument when opposed to women. I had my choice,
either to give up my house, and take another in London, or
to give up my peace. With an unwilling sigh, I at last con-
sented to leave a place dear to me, from long association and
many reminiscences; and it was arranged that Brompton
Hall was to be let, or sold, and that we were to look out im-
mediately for a house in some of the squares in the metro-
polis. If my wife and daughters found that the distance from
London was too far for other purposes, at all events it was
not too far for house-hunting. They were at it incessantly
week after week; and, at last, they fixed upon one in the
neighbourhood of Belgrave-square, which, as they repeated,
possessed all the cheerfulness and fresh air of the country,
with all the advantages of a town residence. The next day
I was to be dragged to see it, and give my opinion; at the
same time, from the commendations bestowed upon it previous
to my going, I felt assured that I was expected to give their
opinion, and not my own.
The next day, accordingly, we repaired thither, setting off
immediately after breakfast, to meet the surveyor and
builder, who was to be on the spot. The house in question
was one of a row just building, or built, whitened outside, in
imitation of stone. It was No. 2. No. 1 was finished; but
the windows still stained with the drippings of the whitewash
and colouring. No. 2, the one in question, was complete;
and, as the builder asserted, ready for immediate occupation.
No. 3 was not so far advanced. As for the others, they were
at present nothing but carcasses, without even the front steps
built to them; and you entered them by a drawbridge of
planks.

<page 265>
250
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
The builder stood at the front door, and bowed most
respectfully. "Why," observed I, looking at the piles of
mortar, lime, and bricks, standing about in all directions, "we
shall be smothered with dust and lime for the next two
years."
"Don't be alarmed, sir," replied the builder; every house
in the row will be finished before the winter. We really can-
not attend to the applications for them."
We entered the house.
"Is not the entrance handsome?" observed my wife; "so
neat and clean.
To this I had not a reply to make; it certainly did look
neat and clean.
We went into the dining-room. "What a nice room," ex-
claimed my eldest daughter. "How many can we dine in
this room?"
"Um!" replied I; "about twelve, I suppose, comfortably."
"Dear me!" observed the builder; "you have no notion of
the size of the house; rooms are so deceiving, unfurnished.
You may sit down twenty with ease; I'll appeal to the lady.
Don't you think so, ma'am J"
"Yes, I do," replied my wife.
After that we went over the drawing-rooms, bed-rooms,
and attics.
Every bed-room was apportioned by my wife and daughters,
and the others were allotted to the servants; and that in the
presence of the builder, who took good note of all that
passed.
The kitchen was admired; so were the pantry, scullery,
coal-hole, dust-hole, &c.; all so nice and clean; so compact;
and, as the builder observed, not a nail to drive anywhere.
"Well, my dear, what do you think now? isn't it a charm-
ing house?" said my wife, as we re-ascended into the dining-
parlour.
"It's a very nice house, my dear; but still it requires a
little consideration," replied I.
"Consideration, my dear?" replied my wife; "what! now
that you have gone over it?"
"I am afraid that I cannot give you very long, sir," ob-
served the builder; "there are two other parties after the
house, and I am to give them an answer by two o'clock."

<page 266>
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
251
"Mr. Smithers told me the same yesterday," whispered my
wife.
"What did you say the rent was, Mr. Smithers?"
"Only 2001. per annum."
"Any ground-rent 1"
"Only 271. 10s."
"And the taxes V
"Oh, they will be a mere trifle."
"The rent appears to me to be very high."
"High, my dear sir! consider the situation, the advantages.
We can't build them fast enough at that price. But of
course, sir, you best know," replied he, carelessly walking to-
wards the window.
"Take it, my dear," said my wife."You must take it papa.""Pray take it, papa."
"Mr. Whats-your-name, I beg your pardon"
"Smithers, sir," said the builder, turning round.
"Pray, Mr. Smithers, what term of lease do you let at V
"Seven, fourteen, or twenty-one, at the option of either
party, sir."
"I should have no objection to take it for three years."
"Three years, my dear sir !—that would be doing yourself
an injustice. You would loose half the value of your fixtures
provided you left—and then the furniture. Depend upon it,
sir, if you once get into it, you will never wish to leave it."
"That may or not be," replied I; "but I will not take it
for more than three years. The town-air may not agree with
me; and if, as you say, people are so anxious to take the
houses, of course it can make no difference to you."
"I'm afraid, sir, that for so short a time"
"I will not take it for longer," replied I, rising up, glad
of an excuse to be off.
"Oh, papa!"
"My dear Mr. B"
"On that point," replied I, "I will not be overruled. I
will not take a lease for more than three years, with the
right of continuing, if I please."
The builder perceived that I was in earnest.
"Well, sir," replied he, "I hardly know what to say;
but rather than disappoint the ladies, I will accept you as a
tenant for three years certain."

<page 267>
MODEKN TOWN HOUSES.
"Confound the fellow!" thought I; but I was pinned, and there was an end of the matter. Mr. Smithers pulled
out paper and ink; two letters of agreement were written upon a small deal table, covered with blotches of various-
coloured paints; and the affair was thus concluded.
We got into the carriage and drove home, my wife and
daughters in ecstasies, and I obliged to appear very well
satisfied, that I might not damp their spirits; yet I must say that although the house appeared a very nice house, I had my forebodings.
"At all events," thought I, "the lease is only for three
years;" and thus I consoled myself.
The next day the whole house was in commotion. I be-
lieve my wife and daughters were up at daybreak. When
I went into the breakfast room, I discovered that the pictures
had been taken down, although there was no chance of their
being hung up for many weeks at least, and everything
was in preparation for packing up. After breakfast my wife
set off for town to order carpets and curtains, and did not
come home till six o'clock, very tired with the fatigues of the
day. She had also brought the measure of every grate, to
ascertain what fenders would suit; the measure of the bed-
rooms and attics, to remodel the carpets; for it was proposed
that Brompton Hall should be disposed of, the new occupier
taking at a valuation what furniture might be left. To this
I appeared to consent; but was resolved in my own mind that,
if taken, it should only be for the same term of years as my
new lease. I will pass over a month of hurry, bustle, and
confusion; at the end of which I found myself in our new
habitation. It was completely furnished, with the exception
of the drawing-room carpet, which had not been laid down,
but was still in a roll tied up with packthread in the middle
of the room. The cause of this I soon understood from my
wife. It was always the custom, she said, to give a house-
warming upon entering a new house, and she therefore pro-
posed giving a little dance. To this, as it would please her
and my daughters, I raised no objection.
I have always observed, that what is proposed as a little
dance invariably ends in a great one; for from the time of
proposing till the cards are about, it increases like a snow-
ball ; _ but that arises, perhaps, from the extreme difficulty of
knowing when to draw the line between friends and acquaint-

<page 268>
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
253
ances. I have also observed that when your wife and
daughters intend such a thing, they always obtain permission
for the ball first, and then tack on the supper afterwards;
commencing with a mere stand-up affair,—sandwiches, cakes,
and refreshments,—and ending with a regular sit-down affair,
with Gunter presiding over all. The music from two fiddles
and a piano also swells into Collinet's band, verifying the old
adage, "In for a penny, in for a pound." But to all this I
gave my consent; I could afford it well, and I liked to please
my wife and daughters. The ball was given, and this house-
warming ended in house-breaking; for just before the supper-
quadrille, as it was termed, when about twenty-four young
ladies and gentlemen were going the grand ronde, a loud
noise below, with exclamations and shrieks, was heard, and
soon afterwards the whole staircase was smothered with
dust.
"What is the matter?" cried my wife, who had passed to
the landing-place on the stairs before me.
"Ma'am," said one of Mr. Gunter's men, shaking the lap-
pets of his blue coat, which were covered with white dust,
"the whole ceiling of the dining-room has come down!"
"Ceiling come down!" screamed my wife.
"Yes, ma'am," replied our own servant; "and the sup-
per and supper-tables are all smashed flat with the weight
on it."
Here was a catastrophe. My wife hastened down, and I
followed. Sure enough the weight of mortar had crushed all
beneath it—all was chaos and confusion. Jellies, blancmanges,
pates, cold roasts, creams, trifles,—all in one mass of ruin,
mixed up with lime, horse-hair, plaster of Paris, and
stucco. It wore all the appearance of a Swiss avalanche in
miniature.
"Good heavens, how dreadful!" exclaimed my wife.
"How much more so if there had been people in the room,"
replied I.
"What could be the cause of it!" exclaimed my wife.
"These new houses, sir, won't bear dancing in," observed
Mr. Gunter's head man.
"So it appears," replied I.
This unfortunate accident was the occasion of the party
breaking up: they knew that there was no chance of supper, 
<page 269>
254
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
-which they had looked forward to; so they put on their shawls
and departed, leaving us to clear up the wreck at our leisure.
In fact, as my daughters declared, it quite spoiled the ball as
well as the supper.
The next morning I sent for Mr. Smithers, who made
his appearance, and showed him what had taken place.
"Dear me, I'm very sorry; but you had too many people
above stairs—that is very clear."
"Very clear, indeed, Mr. Smithers. We had a ball last
night."
"A ball, sir! Oh, then no wonder." -■
"No wonder! What! do you mean to say that balls are not to be given?"
"Why, really, sir, we do not build private houses for ball-rooms—we could not, sir; the price of timber just now is enormous, and the additional strength required would never pay us."
"What then! do you mean to say that there are no balls
to be given in London J"
"Oh no, sir !—certainly not; but you must be aware that
few people do. Even our aristocracy hire Willis's rooms for
their balls. Some of the old houses, indeed, such as Devon-
shire House, may do for such a thing."
"But, Mr. Smithers, I expect you will make this ceiling
good."
"Much obliged to you, sir, for giving me the preference
—I will do it as reasonable as anybody," replied Mr. Smithers,
bowing. "I will order my workmen directly—they are only
next door."
For a fortnight we were condemned to dine in the back
dining-room; and after that Mr. Smithers sent in a bill which
cost me more than the ball and supper.
So soon as all was right again, I determined that I would
hang up my pictures; for I had been accustomed to look
at them for years, and I missed them. I sent for a car-
penter, and gave him directions.
"I have the middle now, sir, exactly," said the man, stand-
ing on the high steps; "but," continued he, tapping with
his hammer, " I can't find wood."
"Can't find wood!'
"No, sir," replied the man, tapping as far as he could 
<page 270>
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
reach from right to left; "nothing to nail to, sir. But there
never is no wood in these new-built houses."
"Confound your new houses!" exclaimed I.
"Well, it is very provoking, my dear!" exclaimed my
wife.
"I suppose that their new houses are not built for pictures
any more than for balls," replied I; and I sighed. "What
must be done?"
"I think, sir, if you were to order brass rods to be fixed
from one corner to the other, we might find means to fasten
them," observed the carpenter; "but there's no wood, that's
certain."
"What the devil is the house built of then?" exclaimed I.
"All lath and plaster, sir," replied the man, tapping right
and left.
At a heavy expense I procured the rods, and at last the
pictures were hung up.
The next annoyance that we had was a very bad smell,
which we found to proceed from the drains; and the brick-
layers were sent for. All the drains were choked, it ap-
peared, from their being so very narrow; and after having
up the whole basement, at the expense of 40Z., that nuisance
was abated.
We now had two months' repose, and I was in hopes that
things would go on more comfortably; but one day I over-
heard a conversation between my wife and daughters, as I
passed by the door of the room, which I must candidly
acknowledge gave me satisfaction.
"It's really very awkward, mamma—one don't know where
to put anything: there's not a cupboard or stow-hole in the
whole house—not even a store room."
"Well, it is so, my dear; I wonder we did not observe it
when we looked over it. What a nice set of cupboards we
had at Brompton Hall."
"Oh! yes—I wish we had them here, mamma. Couldn't
we have some built?"
*" I don't like to speak to your papa about it, my dear; he
has already been put to such expense, what with the ceiling
and the drains."
"Then don't, mamma; papa is really very good-natured."
The equinoxes now came on, and we had several gales of 
<page 271>
256
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
wind, with heavy rain—the slates blew off and rattled up
and down all night, while the wind howled round the corner
of the square. The next morning complaints from all the
attic residents; one's bed was wetted quite through with the
water dropping through the ceiling—another had been obliged
to put a basin on the floor to catch the leak—all declared
that the roof was like a sieve. Sent again for Mr. Smithers,
and made a complaint.
"This time, Mr. Smithers," said I, with the lease in my
hand, "I believe you will acknowledge these are landlords
repairs."
"Certainly, sir, certainly," exclaimed Mr. Smithers; "I shall desire one of my men to look to it immediately; but the
fact is, with such heavy gales, the slates must be expected to move a little. Duchesses and countesses are very light, and
the wind gets underneath them." u d
"Duchesses and countesses very light!" exclaimed my
wife; "what do you mean?"
"It's the term we give to slates, madam," replied he; "we
cannot put on a heavy roof with a brick-and-a-half wall. It
would not support one."
"Brick-and-a-half wall!" exclaimed I;—"surely, Mr,
Smithers, that's not quite safe with a house so high." .. -{
"Not quite safe, my dear sir, if it were a single house;
but," added he, "in a row, one house supports another." „■
"Thank Heaven," thought I, "I have but a three-years'
lease, and six months are gone already."
But the annoyances up to this period were internal; we
now had to experience the external nuisances attending a
modern-built house.
"No. 1 is taken, papa, and they are getting the furniture
in," said my eldest daughter one day; "I hope we shall
have nice neighbours. And William told Mary that Mr,
Smithers told him, when he met him in the street, that he
was now going to fit up No. 3 as fast as he could." , #
The report was true, as we found from the report of the
carpenters' hammers for the next three or four weeks. We
could not obtain a moment's sleep except in the early part of
the night, or a minute's repose to our ears during the day.
The sound appeared as if it was in our house instead of next
door; and it commenced at six o'clock in the morning, and 
<page 272>
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
257
lasted till seven in the evening. I was hammered to death;
and, unfortunately, there was a constant succession of rain,
which prevented me going out to avoid it. I had nothing to
do but to watch my pictures, as they jumped from the wall
with the thumps of the hammers. At last No. 3 was floored,
wainscotted, and glazed, and we had a week's repose.
By this time No. 1 was furnished, and the parties who
had taken it came in. They were a gouty old gentleman,
and his wife, who, report said, had once been his cook. My
daughters' hopes of pleasant neighbours were disappointed.
Before they had been in a week, we found ourselves at issue:
the old gentleman's bed was close to the partition-wall, and
in the dead of the night we could distinctly hear his groans
and also his execrations and exclamations, when the fit came
on him. My wife and daughters declared that it was quite
horrible, and that they could not sleep for them.
Upon the eighth day there came a note:—
"Mrs. Whortleback's compliments to Mr. and Mrs. ,
and begs that the young people will not play on the piany, as
Mr. Whortleback is very ill with the gout."
Now, my daughters were proficients on the piano, and
practised a great deal. This note was anything but satis-
factory: to play when the old gentleman was ill would be
barbarous,—not to play was to deprive ourselves of our
greatest pleasure.
"Oh dear! how very disagreeable," cried my daughters.
"Yes, my dear; but if we can hear his groans, it's no
wonder that he can hear the piano and harp: recollect the
wall is only a brick and a half thick."
"I wonder music don't soothe him," observed the eldest.
Music is a mockery to a man in agony. A man who has
been broken on the wheel would not have his last hours
soothed by the finest orchestra. After a week, during which
we sent every day to inquire after Mr. Whortleback's health,
we ventured to resume the piano and harp; upon which the
old gentleman became testy, and sent for a man with a
trumpet, placing him in the balcony, and desiring him to
play as much out of tune as possible whenever the harp and
piano sounded a note. Thus were we at open hostility with
our only neighbour; and, as we were certain if my daughters
touched their instruments, to have the trumpet blowing dis- s

<page 273>
258
MODERN TOWN SOUSES.
cord for an hour or two either that day or the next, at last
the piano was unopened, and the harp remained in its case.
Before the year closed, No. 3 became tenanted; and here we
had a new annoyance. It was occupied by a large family;
and there were four young ladies who were learning music.
We now had our annoyance: it was strum, strum, all day
long; one sister up, another down; and everyone knows
what a bore the first lessons in music are to those who are
compelled to hear them. They could just manage to play a tune, and that eternal tune was ringing in our ears from
morning to night. We could not send our compliments, or
blow a trumpet. We were forced to submit to it. The nur-
sery also being against the partition wall, we had the squalls and noise of the children on the one side, added to groans and
execrations of the old gentleman on the other.
However, custom reconciled us to everything, and the first
vexation gradually wore off. Yet I could not help observing
that when I was supposed not to be in hearing, the chief con-
versation of my wife, when her friends called upon her, con-
sisted of a description of all the nuisances and annoyances
that we suffered; and I felt assured that she and my daughters
were as anxious to return to Brompton Hall as I was. In
fact, the advantages which they had anticipated by their town
residence were not realized. In our situation, we were as far off from most of our friends, and still farther from some than
we were before, and we had no longer the same amusements
to offer them. At our former short distance from town,
access was more easy to those who did not keep a carriage,
that is, the young men; and those were the parties who, of
course, my wife and daughters cared for most. It was very
agreeable to come down with their portmanteaus,—enjoy the
fresh air and green lanes of the country for an afternoon,—
dine, sleep, and breakfast, and return the next morning by
conveyances which passed us every quarter of an hour; but to
dine with us in square, when the expense of a hackney-
coach there and back was no trifle, and to return at eleven
o'clock at night, was not at all agreeable. We found that we
had not so much society, nor were we half so much courted,
as at Brompton Hall. This was the bitterest blow of all, and
my wife and daughters would look out of the windows and
sigh; often a whole day passed without one friend or acquaint-
ance dropping in to relieve its monotony.

<page 274>
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
259
We continued to reside there, nevertheless, for I had made
up my mind that the three years would be well spent if they
cured my wife and daughters of their town mania; and al-
though anxious as I am sure they were to return, I never
broached the matter, for I was determined that the cure
should be radical. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, were finished the
next year, and, by the persuasions of Mr. Smithers, were taken by different parties in the spring. And now we had
another nuisance. Nothing but eternal rings at the bell.
The man-servant grumbled, and was behind with his work;
and when scolded, replied that there was no time for anything, that when cleaning his knives and plate the bell was
rung, and he was obliged to wash himself, throw on his
jacket, and go up to answer the front door; that the bell was
not rung for us, but to find out where some new-comer lived,
and to ascertain this they always rang at the house which
appeared the longest inhabited. There was no end to the
ringing for some months, and we had three servants who
absolutely refused to stay in so bad a place. We had also to
contend with letters and notes in the same way, brought to
us at hap-hazard: "Does Mr. So-and-so live here 1"—"No,
he does not."—"Then pray where does he?" This was in-
terminable, and not five minutes in the day passed without
the door-bell being rung. For the sake of not changing my
servants I was at last put to the expense of an extra boy for
no other purpose but to answer the constant applications at
the door. At last we had remained there for two years and
nine months, and then my wife would occasionally put the
question whether I intended to renew the lease; and I natur-
ally replied that I did not like change.
Then she went upon another tack; observed that Clara
did not appear well for some time, and that she thought that
she required country air; but, in this, I did not choose to
agree with her.
One day I came home, and, rubbing my hands as if pleased,
said, "Well, at last I've an offer for Brompton Villa for a
term of seven years,—a very fair offer and good tenants,—so
that will now be off my hands."
My wife looked mortified, and my daughters held down
their heads.
"Have you let it, papa?" said one of my daughters, timidly. s 2

<page 275>
260
MODERN TOWN HOUSES.
"No, not yet; but I am to give an answer to-morrow
morning.
"It requires consideration, my dear," replied my wife.
"Requires consideration!" said I. "Why, my dear, the
parties have seen the house, and I have been trying to let it
these three years. I recollect when I took this house I said
it required consideration, but you would not allow any such
thing."
"I'm sure I wish we had," said Clara.
''"And so do I." U,fi;
"The fact is, my dear," said my wife, coming round to the
back of my chair, and putting her arms round my neck, "we
all wish to go back to Brompton."
"Yes, yes, papa," added my daughters, embracing me on
each side.
"You will allow, then, that I was right in not taking a
lease for more than three years."
"Yes: how lucky you were so positive!" . -
"Well, then, if that is the case, we will unfurnish this
house, and, as soon as you please, go back to Brompton Hall."
I hardly need observe that we took possession of our old
abode with delight, and that I have had no more applications
for a change of residence, or have again heard the phrase that
we were living "out of the world."

<page 276>
261
'it.'
THE WAY TO BE HAPPY.
Cut your coat according to your cloth, is an old maxim
and a wise one; and if people will only square their ideas
according to their circumstances, how much happier might we
all be! If we only would come down a peg or two in our
notions, in accordance with our waning fortunes, happiness
would be always within our reach. It is not what we have,
or what we have not, which adds or subtracts from our feli-
city. It is the longing for more than we have, the envying
of those who possess that more, and the wish to appear in the
world of more consequence than we really are, which destroy
our peace of mind, and eventually lead to ruin.
I never witnessed a man submitting to circumstances with
good humour and good sense, so remarkably as in my friend
Alexander Willemott. When I first met him, since our school
days, it was at the close of the war: he had been a large
contractor with Government for army clothing and accoutre-
ments, and was said to have realised an immense fortune,
although his accounts were not yet settled. Indeed, it was
said that they were so vast, that it would employ the time
of six clerks, for two years, to examine them, previous to the
balance sheet being struck. As I observed, he had been at
school with me, and, on my return from the East Indies, I
called upon him to renew our old acquaintance, and congra-
tulate him upon his success.
"My dear Reynolds, I am delighted to see you. You must
come down to Belem Castle; Mrs. Willemott will receive you
with pleasure, I'm sure. You shall see my two girls."
I consented. The chaise stopped at a splendid mansion,
and I was ushered in by a crowd of liveried servants. Everything was on the most sumptuous and magnificent scale.
Having paid my respects to the lady of the house, I retired
to dress, as dinner was nearly ready, it being then half-past
seven o'clock. It was eight before we sat down. To an 
<page 277>
262
THE WAY TO BE HAPPY.
observation that I made, expressing a hope that I had not
occasioned the dinner being put off, Willemott replied, "On
the contrary, my dear Reynolds, we never sit down until
about this hour. How people can dine at four or five o'clock,
I cannot conceive. I could not touch a mouthful."
The dinner was excellent, and I paid the encomiums which
were its due.
"Do not be afraid, my dear fellow—my cook is an artiste
extraordinaire—a regular Cordon Bleu. You may eat anything without fear of indigestion. How people can live upon
the English cookery of the present day, I cannot conceive.
I seldom dine out, for fear of being poisoned. Depend upon
it, a good cook lengthens your days, and no price is too great
to insure one."
When the ladies retired, being alone, we entered into
friendly conversation. I expressed my admiration of his
daughters, who certainly were very handsome and elegant
girls.
"Very true; they are more than passable," replied he.
"We have had many offers, but not such as come up to my
expectations. Baronets are cheap now-a-days, and Irish lords
are nothings; I hope to settle them comfortably. We shall
see. Try this claret; you will find it excellent, not a head-
ache in a hogshead of it. How people can drink port, I
cannot imagine."
The next morning he proposed that I should rattle round
the park with him. I acceded, and we set off in a handsome
open carriage, with four greys, ridden by postilions at a rapid
pace. As we were whirling along, he observed, "In town
we must of course drive but a pair, but in the country I never
go out without four horses. There is a spring in four horses
which is delightful; it makes your spirits elastic, and you feel
that the poor animals are not at hard labour. Rather than
not drive four, I would prefer to stay at home."
Our ride was very pleasant, and in such amusements passed
away one of the most pleasant weeks that I ever remembered.
Willemott was not the least altered—he was as friendly, as
sincere, as open-hearted, as when a boy at school. I left him,
pleased with his prosperity, and acknowledging that he was
well deserving of it, although his ideas had assumed such a
scale of magnificence.

<page 278>
THE WAY TO BE HAPPY.
263
I went to India when my leave expired, and was absent
about four years. On my return, I inquired after my friend
Willemott, and was told that his circumstances and expect-
ations had been greatly altered. From many causes, such as
a change in the Government, a demand for economy, and the
wording of his contracts having been differently rendered
from what Willemott had supposed their meaning to be, large
items had been struck out of his balance sheet, and, instead of
being a millionaire, he was now a gentleman with a handsome
property. Belem Castle had been sold, and he now lived at
Richmond, as hospitable as ever, and was considered a great
addition to the neighbourhood. I took the earliest oppor-
tunity of going down to see him.
"Oh, my dear Reynolds, this is really kind of you to come
without invitation. Your room is ready, and bed well aired,
for it was slept in three nights ago. Come—Mrs. Willemott
will be delighted to see you."
I found the girls still unmarried, but they were yet young.
The whole family appeared as contented and happy, and as
friendly, as before. We sat down to dinner at six o'clock;
the footman and coachman attended. The dinner was good,
but not by the artiste extraordinaire. I praised everything.
"Yes," replied he, "she is a very good cook; she unites
the solidity of the English with the delicacy of the French
fare; and, altogether, I think it a decided improvement. Jane
is quite a treasure." After dinner, he observed, "Of course
you know I have sold Belem Castle, and reduced my esta-
blishment. Government have not treated me fairly, but I am
at the mercy of Commissioners, and a body of men will do
that which, as individuals, they would be ashamed of. The
fact is, the odium is borne by no one in particular, and it is
only the sense of shame which keeps us honest, I am afraid.
However, here you see me, with a comfortable fortune, and
always happy to see my friends, especially my old school-
fellow. Will you take port or claret; the port is very fine,
and so is the claret. By the by, do you know—I'll let you
into a family secret; Louisa is to be married to a Colonel
Wilier—an excellent match! It has made us all happy."
The next day we drove out, not in an open carriage as
before, but in a chariot and with a pair of horses.
"These are handsome horses," observed L—" Yes," replied

<page 279>
264
THE WAY TO BE HAPPY.
he, "I am fond of good horses; and, as I only keep a pair, I
have the best. There is a certain degree of pretension in four
horses, I do not much like—it appears as if you wished to
overtop your neighbours."
I spent a few very pleasant days, and then quitted his
hospitable roof. A severe cold, caught that winter, induced
me to take the advice of the physicians, and proceed to the
South of France, where I remained two years. On my return,
I was informed that Willemott had speculated, and had been
unlucky on the Stock Exchange; that he had left Richmond,
near the Exchange.
"Reynolds, I am happy to see you. Thompson told me
that you had come back. If not better engaged, come down
to see me; I will drive you down at four o'clock, if that will
It suited me very well, and, at four o'clock, I met him
according to appointment at a livery stables over the Iron
Bridge. His vehicle was ordered out, it was a phaeton
drawn by two long-tailed ponies—altogether a very neat con-
cern. We set off at a rapid pace.
"They step out well, don't they? We shall be down in
plenty of time to put on a pair of shoes by five o'oclock,
which is our dinner-time. Late dinners don't agree with me—they produce indigestion. Of course, you know that Louisa
has a little boy."
I did not; but congratulated him.
"Yes, and has now gone out to India with her husband.
Mary is also engaged to be married—a very good match—a
Mr. Rivers, in the law. He has been called to the bar this
year, and promises well. They will be a little pinched at
first, but we must see what we can do for them."
We stopped at a neat row of houses, I forget the name, and,
as we drove up, the servant, the only man-servant, came
out, and took the ponies round to the stable, while the maid
received my luggage, and one or two paper-bags, containing a
few extras for the occasion. I was met with the same warmth
as usual by Mrs. Willemott. The house was small, but very
neat; the remnants of former grandeur appeared here and
there, in one or two little articles, favourites of the lady.
We sat down at five o'clock to a plain dinner, and were and was now living at Clapham.

suit.'
n

<page 280>
THE WAY TO BE HAPPY.
attended by the footman, who had rubbed down the ponies
and pulled on his livery.
„ "A good plain cook is the best thing, after all," observed
Willemott. "Your fine cooks won't condescend to roast and
boil. Will you take some of this sirloin, the under-cut is
; excellent. My dear, give Mr. Reynolds some Yorkshire
pudding."
When we were left alone after dinner, Willemott told me,
, very unconcernedly, of his losses.
"It was my own fault," said he; "I wished to make up a
little sum for the girls, and risking what they would have
had, I left them almost pennyless. However, we can always
command a bottle of port and a beef-steak, and what more
in this world can you have 1 Will you take port or white?
—I have no claret to offer you."
We finished our port, but I could perceive no difference
, in Willemott. He was just as happy and as cheerful as ever.
, He drove me to town the next day. During our drive, he
observed, "I like ponies, they are so little trouble; and I
prefer them to driving one horse in this vehicle, as I can put
my wife and daughters into it. It's selfish to keep a carriage
for yourself alone, and one horse in a four-wheeled double
chaise appears like an imposition upon the poor animal."
I went to Scotland, and remained about a year. On my
return, I found that my friend Willemott had again shifted
his quarters. He was at Brighton; and having nothing better
to do, I put myself in the "Times," and arrived at the Bed-
ford Hotel. It was not until after some inquiry, that I could
find out his address. At last I obtained it, in a respectable
but not fashionable part of this overgrown town. Willemott
received me just as before.
"I have no spare bed to offer you, but you must breakfast
and dine with us every day. Our house is small, but it's very
comfortable, and Brighton is a very convenient place. You
know Mary is married. A good place in the courts was for
sale, and my wife and I agreed to purchase it for Rivers. It
has reduced us a little, but they are very comfortable. I have
retired from business altogether; in fact, as my daughters are
both married, and we have enough to live upon, what can we
wish for more ] Brighton is very gay, and always healthy;
and, as for carriage and horses, they are no use here — there
are flies at every corner of the streets."

<page 281>
266
THE WAY TO BE HAPPY.
I accepted his invitation to dinner. A parlour-maid waited,
but everything, although very plain, was clean and com-
fortable.
"I have still a bottle of wine for a friend, Reynolds," said
Willemott, after dinner; "but, for my part, I prefer whisky-
toddy—it agrees with me better. Here's to the health of my
two girls, God bless them, and success to them in life!"
"My dear Willemott," said I, "I take the liberty of an old
friend, but I am so astonished at your philosophy, that I can-
not help it. When I call to mind Belem Castle, your large
establishment, your luxuries, your French cook, and your
stud of cattle, I wonder at your contented state of mind
under such a change of circumstances."
"I almost wonder myself, my dear fellow," replied he. "I
never could have believed, at that time, that I could live
happily under such a change of circumstances; but the fact
is, that, although I have been a contractor, I have a good con-
science; then, my wife is an excellent woman, and provided
she sees me and her daughters happy, thinks nothing about
herself; and, further, I have made it a rule, as I have been
going down hill, to find reasons why I should be thankful,
and not discontented. Depend upon it, Reynolds, it is not a
loss of fortune which will affect your happiness, as long as
you have peace and love at home."
I took my leave of Willemott and his wife, with respect
as well as regard; convinced that there was no pretended in-
difference to worldly advantages; that it was not, that the
grapes were sour, but that he had learned the whole art of
happiness, by being contented with what he had, and by
"cutting his coat according to his cloth."

<page 282>
267
HOW TO WRITE A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
[Scene.—Chamber in Lincoln's Inn. Arthur Ansard at a
briefless table, tete-a-tete with his wig on a block. A. casts a
disconsolate look upon his companion, and soliloquises.]
Yes, there you stand, "partner of my toils, my feelings, and
my fame." We do not suit, for we never gained a suit toge-
ther. Well, what with reporting for the bar, writing for the
Annuals and the Pocket-books, I shall be able to meet all
demands, except those of my tailor; and, as his bill is most
characteristically long, I think I shall be able to make it
stretch over till next term, by which time I hope to fulfil my
engagements with Mr. C, who has given me an order for a
fashionable novel, written by a "nobleman." But how I,
who was never inside of an aristocratical mansion in my life,
whose whole idea of Court is comprised in the Court of King's
Bench, am to complete my engagement, I know no more than
my companion opposite, who looks so placidly stupid under
my venerable wig. As far as the street door, the footman
and carriage, and the porter, are concerned, I can manage
well enough; but as to what occurs within doors I am quite
abroad. I shall never get through the first chapter; yet that
tailor's bill must be paid. (Knocking outside.) Come in, I
pray.
Enter Barnstaple.
B. Merry Christmas to you, Arthur.
A. Sit down, my dear fellow; but don't mock me with
merry Christmas. He emigrated long ago. Answer me
seriously: do you think it possible for a man to describe what
he never saw?
B. (putting his stick up to his chin.) Why, 'tis possible;
but I would not answer for the description being quite correct.

<page 283>
268
HOW TO WRITE
A. But suppose the parties who read it have never seen the
thing described?
B. Why then it won't signify whether the description be
correct or not.
A. You have taken a load off my mind; but still I am not
quite at ease. I have engaged to furnish C. with a fashion-
able novel. -
B. What do you mean to imply by a fashionable novel 1
A. I really can hardly tell. His stipulations were, that it
was to be a "fashionable novel in three volumes, each volume
not less than three hundred pages."
B. That is to say, that you are to assist him in imposing
on the public.
A. Something very like it, I'm afraid; as it is further
agreed that it is to be puffed as coming from a highly talented
nobleman. 4
B. You should not do it, Ansard.
A. So conscience tells me, but my tailors bill says Yes;
and that is a thing out of all conscience. Only look here.
[Displays a long bill.
B. Why, I must acknowledge, Ansard, that there is some
excuse. One needs must, when the devil drives; but you are
capable of better things.
A. I certainly don't feel great capability in this instance.
But what can I do? The man will have nothing else—he
says the public will read nothing else.
B. That is to say, that because one talented author asto-
nished the public by style and merits peculiarly bis own, and
established, as it were, a school for neophites, his popularity
is to be injured by contemptible imitators. It is sufficient to
drive a man mad, to find that the tinsel of others, if to be
purchased more cheaply, is to be pawned upon the public
instead of his gold; and more annoying still, that the majo-
rity of the public cannot appreciate the difference between
the metal and the alloy. Do you know, Ansard, that by
getting up this work, you really injure the popularity of a
man of great talent?
A. Will he pay my tailor's bill!
B. No; I dare say he has enough to do to pay his own.
What does your tailor say?
A. He is a staunch reformer, and on March the 1st he de-

<page 284>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
clares that he will have the bill, the whole bill, and nothing
but the bill—carried to my credit. Mr. C, on the 10th of
February, also expects the novel, the whole novel, and nothing
but the novel, and that must be a fashionable novel. Look
here, Barnstaple. (Shows his tailor's biU.')
B. I see how it is. He "pays your poverty, and not your
will."
A. And, by your leave, I thus must pay my bill {bowing).
»: B. Well, well, I can help you: nothing more difficult than
to write a good novel, and nothing more easy than to write a
bad one. If I were not above the temptation, I could pen
you a dozen of the latter every ordinary year, and thirteen,
perhaps, in the bissextile. So banish that Christmas cloud
from your brow; leave off nibbling your pen at the wrong
end, and clap a fresh nib to the right one. I have an hour
to spare.
A. I thank you: that spare hour of yours may save me
many a spare day. I'm all attention—proceed.
B. The first point to be considered is the tempus, or time;
the next the locus, or place; and lastly the dramatis persona;
and thus, chapter upon chapter, will you build a novel.
A. Build!
B. Yes, build; you have had your dimensions given, the
interior is left to your own decoration. First, as to the open-
ing. Suppose we introduce the hero in his dressing-room.
We have something of the kind in Pelham; and if we can't
copy his merits, we must his peculiarities. Besides, it always
is effective: a dressing-room or boudoir of supposed great
people, is admitting the vulgar into the arcana, which they
delight in.
A. Nothing can be better.
B. Then, as to time; as the hero is still in bed, suppose we
say four o'clock in the afternoon 1
A. In the morning, you mean.
B. No; the afternoon. I grant you that fashionable young
men in real life get up much about the same time as other
people; but in a fashionable novel your real exclusive never
rises early. The very idea makes the tradesman's wife lift
up her eyes. So begin. "It was about thirty-three minutes
after four, post meridian"
A. Minute—to a minute!

<page 285>
270
HOW TO WRITE
B. "That the Honourable Augustus Bouverie's finely
chiselled"
A. Chiselled!
B. Yes; great people are always chiselled; common people
are only cast.—" Finely chiselled head was still recumbent
upon his silk-encased pillow. His luxuriant and Antinous-
like curls were now confined in papillotes of the finest satin
paper, and the tout ensemble of his head"
A. Tout ensemble!
B. Yes; go on.—"Was gently compressed by a caul of the
finest net-work, composed of the threads spun from the
beauteous production of the Italian worm."
A. Ah! now I perceive—a silk nightcap. But why can't
I say at once a silk nightcap?
B. Because you are writing a fashionable novel.—" With
the forefinger of his gloved left hand"
A. But he's not coming in from a walk—he's not yet out of bed.
B. You don't understand it.—" Gloved left hand he applied
a gentle friction to the portal of his right eye, which unclosing
at the silent summons, enabled him to perceive a repeater
studded with brilliants, and ascertain the exact minute of
time, which we have already made known to the reader, and
at which our history opens."
A. A very grand opening indeed!
B. Not more than it ought to be for a fashionable novel.
—" At the sound of a silver clochette, his faithful Swiss valet
Coridon, who had for some time been unperceived at the door,
waiting for some notice of his master, having thrown off the
empire of Somnus, in his light pumps, covered with beaver,
moved with noiseless step up to the bedside, like the advance
of eve stealing over the face of nature."
A. Rather an incongruous simile.
B. Not for a fashionable novel.—"There he stood, like
Taciturnity bowing at the feet of proud Authority."
A. Indeed, Barnstaple, that is too outre.
B. Not a whit: I am in the true "Cambysis' vein."—
"Coridon having softly withdrawn the rose-coloured gros de
Naples bed-curtains, which by some might have been thought
to have been rather too extravagantly fringed with the finest
Mechlin lace, exclaimed with a tone of tremulous deference
and affection, 'Monsieur a bien dormi V 'Coridon,' said the

<page 286>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
271
Honourable Augustus Bouverie, raising himself on his elbow
in that eminently graceful attitude for which he was so remark-
able when reclining on the ottomans at Almacks"
A. Are you sure they have ottomans there?
B. No; but your readers can't disprove it.—"' Coridon,'
said he, surveying his attendant from head to foot, and ulti-
mately assuming a severity of countenance, 'Coridon, you are
becoming gross, if not positively what the people call fat.'
The Swiss attendant fell back in graceful astonishment three
steps, and arching his eyebrows, extending his inverted palms
forward, and raising his shoulders above the apex of his head,
exclaimed, *' Pardon, milor, fen aurais un horreur parfait.'
'I tell you,' replied our gracefully recumbent hero, 'that it is
bo, Coridon; and I ascribe it to your partiality for that
detestable wine called Port. Confine yourself to Hock and
Moselle, sirrah: I fear me, you have a base hankering after
mutton and beef. Restrict yourself to salads, and do not sin
even with an omelette more than once a week. Coridon
must be visionary and diaphanous, or he is no Coridon for
me. Remove my night-gloves, and assist me to rise: it is
past four o'clock, and the sun must have, by this time, suffi-
ciently aired this terrestrial globe.'"
A. I have it now; I feel I could go on for an hour.
B. Longer than that, before you get him out of his dressing-
room. You must make at least five chapters before he is
apparelled, or how can you write a fashionable novel, in
which you cannot afford more than two incidents in the three
volumes? Two are absolutely necessary for the editor of the
- Gazette to extract as specimens, before he winds up
an eulogy. Do you think that you can proceed now for a
week, without my assistance 1
A. I think so, if you will first give me some general ideas.
In the first place, am I always to continue in this style 1
B. No; I thought you knew better. You must throw in
patches of philosophy every now and then.
A. Philosophy in a fashionable novel t
B. Most assuredly, or it would be complained of as trifling;
but a piece, now and then, of philosophy, as unintelligble as
possible, stamps it with deep thought. In the dressing-room,
or boudoir, it must be occasionally Epicurean; elsewhere,
especially in the open air, more Stoical.

<page 287>
272 HOW TO WRITE
A. I'm afraid that I shall not manage that without a spe-
cimen to copy from. Now I think of it, Eugene Aram says
something very beautiful on a starry night.
B. He does: it is one of the most splendid pieces of writing
in our language. But I will have no profanation, Arthur;—
to your pen again, and write. We'll suppose our hero to have retired from the crowded festivities of a ball-room at some
lordly mansion in the country, and to have wandered into a
churchyard, damp and dreary with a thick London fog. In the light dress of fashion, he throws himself on a tombstone.
"Ye dead!" exclaims the hero, "where are ye? Do your
disembodied spirits now float around me, and, shrouded in this horrible veil of nature, glare unseen upon vitality? Float
ye upon this intolerable mist, in yourselves still more misty
and intolerable? Hold ye high jubilee to-night? or do ye
crouch behind these monitorial stones, gibbering and chatter-
ing at one who dares thus to invade your precincts? Here
may I hold communion with my soul, and, in the invisible
presence of those who could, but dare not to reveal. Away!
it must not be."
A. What mustn't be?
B. That is the mystery which gives the point to his soli-
loquy. Leave it to the reader's imagination.
A. I understand. But still the Honourable Augustus can-
not lie in bed much longer, and I really shall not be able to
get him out without your assistance. I do not comprehend
how a man can get out of bed gracefully; he must show his bare
legs, and the alteration of position is in itself awkward.
B. Not half so awkward as you are. Do you not feel that
he must not be got out of bed at all—that is, by description.
A. How then?
B. By saying nothing about it. Recommence as follows:
—" 'I should like the bath at seventy-six and a half, Cori-
don,' observed the Honourable Augustus Bouverie, as he
wrapped his embroidered dressing gown round his elegant
form, and sank into a chaise longue, wheeled by his faithful
attendant to the fire." There, you observe, he is out of bed,
and nothing said about it.
A. Go on, I pray thee.
B. "'How is the bath perfumed V 'Eau de mille fteurs.'
<Eau de mille fleurs I Did not I tell you last week that I 
<page 288>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
was tired of that villanous compound 1 It has been adulte-
rated till nothing remains but its name. Get me another
bath immediately d la violette; and,Coridon, you may use that
other scent, if there is any left, for the poodle; but observe,
only when you take him an airing, not when he goes with
me':"
A. Excellent! I now feel the real merits of an exclusive;
but you said something about dressing-room, or in-door
philosophy.
B. I did; and now is a good opportunity to introduce it.
Coridon goes into the ante-chamber to renew the bath, and of
course your hero has met with a disappointment in not hav-
ing the bath to his immediate pleasure. He must press his
hands to his forehead. By-the-by, recollect that his forehead,
when you describe it, must be high and white as snow: all
aristocratical foreheads are—at least, are in a fasionable
novel.
A. What! the women's and all 1
B. The heroine's must be; the others you may lower as a
contrast. But to resume with the philosophy. He strikes
his forehead, lifts his eyes slowly up to the ceiling, and drops
his right arm as slowly down by the side of the chaise longue;
and then in a voice so low that it might have been considered
a whisper, were it not for its clear and brilliant intonation,
he exclaims
A. Exclaims in a whisper!
B. To be sure; you exclaim mentally, why should you not
in a whisper 1
A. I perceive—your argument is unanswerable.
B. Stop a moment; it will run better thus:—" The Ho-
nourable Augustus Bouverie no sooner perceived himself
alone, than he felt the dark shades of melancholy ascending
and brooding over his mind, and enveloping his throbbing
heart in their—their adamantine chains. Yielding to the
overwhelming force, he thus exclamed, 'SuGh is life—we re-
quire but one flower, and we are offered noisome thousands—refused that we wish, we live in loathing of that not worthy
to be received—mourners from our cradle to our grave, we
utter the shrill cry at our birth, and we sink in oblivion with
the faint wail of terror. Why should we, then, ever commit
the folly to be happy V"
T

<page 289>
274
HOW TO WRITE
A. Hang me, but that's a poser!
B. Nonsense! hold your tongue; it is only preparatory to
the end. "Conviction astonishes and torments—destiny pre-
scribes and falsifies—attraction drives us away—humiliation
supports our energies. Thus do we recede into the present,
and shudder at the Elysium of posterity."
A. I have written all that down, Barnstaple; but I cannot
understand it, upon my soul!
B. If you had understood one particle, that particle I
would have erased. This is your true philosophy of a
fashionable novel, the extreme interest of which consists in
its being unintelligible. People have such an opinion of their
own abilities, that if they understood you, they would despise
you; but a dose like this strikes them with veneration for
your talents.
A. Your argument is unanswerable; but you said that I
must describe the dressing-room.
B. Nothing more easy; as a simile, compare it to the
shrine of some favoured saint in a richly-endowed Catholic
church. Three tables at least, full of materials in methodized
confusion—all tending to the beautification of the human
form divine. Tinted perfumes in every variety of cut crystal
receivers, gold and silver. If at a loss, call at Bayley and
Blew's, or Smith's in Bond Street. Take an accurate survey
of all you see, and introduce your whole catalogue. You
cannot be too minute. But, Arthur, you must not expect me
to write the whole book for you.
A. Indeed I am not so exorbitant in my demands upon
your good-nature; but observe, I may get up four or five
chapters already with the hints you have given me, but I do
not know how to move such a creation of the brain—so
ethereal, that I fear he will melt away; and so fragile, that I
am in terror lest he fall to pieces. Now only get him into
the breakfast-room for me, and then I ask no more for the
present. Only dress him, and bring him downstairs.
B. There again you prove your incapability. Bring him
downstairs! Your hero of a fashionable novel never
ascends to the first floor. Bed-room, dressing-room, break-
fast-room, library, and boudoir, all are upon a level. As for
his dressing, you must only describe it as perfect when fin-
ished; but not enter into a regular detail, except that, in 
<page 290>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
conversation with his valet, he occasionally asks for some-
thing unheard-of, or fastidious to a degree. You must not
walk him from one chamber to another, but manage it as
follows :—" It was not until the beautiful airs of the French
clock that decorated the mantel-piece had been thrice played,
with all their variations, that the Honourable Augustus Bou-
verie entered his library, where he found his assiduous Cori-
don burning an aromatic pastille to disperse the compound of
villanous exhalations arising from the condensed metropolitan
atmosphere. Once more in a state of repose, to the repeated
and almost affecting solicitations of his faithful attendant,
who alternately presented to him the hyson of Pekoe, the
bohea of Twankay, the fragrant berry from the Asiatic shore,
and the frothing and perfumed decoction of the Indian nut,
c-ur hero shook his head in denial, until he at last was pre-
vailed upon to sip a small liqueur glass of eau sucree." The
fact is, Arthur, he is in love—don't you perceive 1 Now
introduce a friend, who rallies him—then a resolution to
think no more of the heroine—a billet on a golden salver—a counter resolution—a debate which equipage to order—a
decision at last—hat, gloves, and furred great coat—and by
that time you will have arrived to the middle of the first
volume.
A. I perceive; but I shall certainly stick there without
your assistance.
B. You shall have it, my dear fellow. In a week I will
call again, and see how you get on. Then we'll introduce
the heroine; that, I can tell you, requires some tact—au
revoir.
A. Thanks, many thanks, my dear Barnstaple. Fare you
well. Exit Barnstaple.
A. (Looking over his memoranda.)—It will do! (Hopping
and dancing about the room.) Hurrah! my tailor's bill will
be paid after all!
T 2

<page 291>
276
HOW TO WRITE
- i.uA
t i
u
HOW TO WRITE - .-.isa
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL. PART II.
Mr. Arthur Ansard's Chambers as before. Mr. Ansard,
wiifA Ais eyes jfcreci wj»o« £/te wiy block, gnawing the feather
end of his pen. The table, covered with sundry sheets of
foolscap, show strong symptoms of the Novel progressing. "-i
Ansard (solus).
Where is Barnstaple? If he do not come soon, I shall
have finished my novel without a heroine. Well, I'm not
the first person who has been foiled by a woman. (Continues
to gnaw his pen in a brown study.)
Barnstaple enters unperceived, and slaps Ansard on the
shoulder. The latter starts up.
B. So, friend Ansard, making your dinner off your pen: it
is not every novel-writer who can contrive to do that even
in anticipation. Have you profited by my instructions?
A. I wish I had. I assure you that this light diet has not
contributed, as might be expected, to assist a heavy head;
and one feather is not sufficient to enable my genius to take
wing. If the public knew what dull work it is to write a novel, they would not be surprised at finding them dull read-
ing. Ex nihilo niliilfX. Barnstaple, I am at the very bathos
of stupidity. . ...jS
B. You certainly were absorbed when I entered, forjj
introduced myself. vios
A. I wish you had introduced another personage with you —you would have been doubly welcome.
B. Who is that?
A. My heroine. I have followed your instructions to the letter. My hero is as listless as I fear my readers will be,.

<page 292>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
277
and he is not yet in love. In fact, he is only captivated with
himself. I have made him dismiss Coridon.
B. Hah! how did you manage that?
A. He was sent to ascertain the arms on the panel of a
carriage. In his eagerness to execute his master's wishes, he
came home with a considerable degree of perspiration on his
brow, for which offence he was immediately put out of doors.
B. Bravo—it was unpardonable—but still .
A. 0! I know what you mean—that is all arranged; he
has an annuity of one hundred pounds per annum.
B. My dear Ansard, you have exceeded my expectations;
but now for the heroine.
, -A. Yes, indeed; help me—for I have exhausted all my
powers.
B. It certainly requires much tact to present your heroine
to your readers. We are unfortunately denied what the
ancients were so happy to possess,—a whole cortege of divini-
ties that might be summoned to help any great personage in,
or the author out of, a difficulty; but since we cannot com-
mand their assistance, like the man in the play who forgot
his part, we will do without it. Now, have you thought of
nothing new, for we must not plagiarise even from fashionable
novels?
A. I have thought—and thought—and can find nothing
new, unless we bring her in in a whirlwind: that has not yet
been attempted.
B. A whirlwind! I don't know—that's hazardous. Never-
theless, if she were placed on a beetling cliff, overhanging the
tempestuous ocean, lashing the rocks with its wild surge; of
a sudden, after she has been permitted to finish her soliloquy,
a white cloud rising rapidly and unnoticed—the sudden
vacuum—the rush of mighty winds through the majestic and
alpine scenery—the vortex gathering round her—first admir-
ing the vast efforts of nature; then astonished; and, lastly,
alarmed, as she finds herself compelled to perform involun-
tary gyrations, till at length she spins round like a well-
whipped top, nearing the dangerous edge of the preci-
pice. It is bold, and certainly quite novel—I think it will
3q, 'Portray her delicate little feet, peeping out, pointing
downwards, the force of the elements raising her on her tip
toes, now touching, now disdaining the earth. Her dress 
<page 293>
278
HOW TO WRITE
expanded wide like that of Herbele in her last and best
pirouette—round, round she goes—her white arms are tossed
frantically in the air. Corinne never threw herself into more
graceful attitudes. Now is seen her diminishing ankle—now
the rounded symmetry—mustn't go too high up though—the
wind increases—her distance from the edge of the precipice
decreases—she has no breath left to shriek—no power to fall
—threatened to be ravished by the wild and powerful god of
the elements—she is discovered by the Honourable Augustus
Bouverie, who has just finished his soliloquy upon another
adjacent hill. He delights in her danger—before he rushes
to her rescue, makes one pause for the purpose of admiration,
and another for the purpose of adjusting his shirt collar.
A. The devil he does!
B. To be sure. The hero of a fashionable novel never
loses caste. Whether in a storm, a whirlwind, up to his neck
in the foaming ocean, or tumbling down a precipice, he is
still the elegant and correct Honourable Augustus Bouverie.
To punish you for your interruption, I have a great mind to
make him take a pinch of snuff before he starts. Well—he
flies to her assistance—is himself caught in the rushing vor-
tex, which prevents him from getting nearer to the lady,
and, despite of himself, takes to whirling in the opposite
direction. They approach—they recede—she shrieks without
being heard—holds out her arms for help—she would drop
them in despair, but cannot, for they are twisted over her
head by the tremendous force of the element. One moment
they are near to each other, and the next they are separated;
at one instant they are close to the abyss, and the waters
below roar in delight of their anticipated victims, and in the
next a favouring change of the vortex increases their distance
from the danger—there they spin—and there you may leave
them, and commence a new chapter.
A. But is not all this naturally and physically impossible?
B. By no means; there is nothing supernatural in a whirlwind, and the effect of a whirlwind is to twist everything round. Why should the heroine and the Honourable Au-
gustus Bouverie not be submitted to the laws of nature?
besides, we are writing a fashionable novel. Wild and im-
probable as this whirlwind may appear, it is within the range
of probability: whereas, that is not at all adhered to in many 
<page 294>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
2/9
novels—witness the drinking scene in , and others
equally outrees, in which the author, having turned probability out of doors, ends by throwing possibility out of the
window—leaving folly and madness to usurp their place—
and play a thousand antics for the admiration of the public,
who, pleased with novelty, cry out " How fine!"
A. Buy the book, and laud the author.
B. Exactly. Now, having left your hero and heroine in a
situation peculiarly interesting, with the greatest nonchalance,
pass over to the continent, rave on the summit of Mont Blanc,
and descant upon the strata which compose the mountains of
the Moon in Central Africa. You have been philosophical,
now you must be geological. No one can then say that your
book is light reading.
A. That can be said of few novels. In most of them even
smoke assumes the ponderosity of lead.
B. There is a metal still heavier, which they have the
power of creating—gold—to pay a dunning tailor's bill.
A. But after being philosophical and geological, ought one
not to be a little moral.
B. Pshaw! I thought you had more sense. The great art
of novel-writing is to make the vices glorious, by placing
them in close alliance with redeeming qualities. Depend upon
it, Ansard, there is a deeper, more heartfelt satisfaction than
mere amusement in novel-reading; a satisfaction no less real, because we will not own it to ourselves; the satisfaction of
seeing all our favourite and selfish ideas dressed up in a garb
so becoming, that we persuade ourselves that our false pride
is proper dignity, our ferocity courage, our cowardice pru-
dence, our irreligion liberality, and our baser appetites, mere
gallantry.
A. Very true, Barnstaple; but really I do not like this
whirlwind.
B. Well, well I give it up then: it was your own idea.
We'll try again. Cannot you create some difficulty or
dilemma, in which to throw her, so that the hero may come
to her rescue with Sclat?
A. Her grey palfrey takes fright.
B. So will your readers; stale—quite stale!
A. A wild bull has his horns close to her, and is about to
toss her.

<page 295>
280
HOW TO WRITE
B. As your book would be—away with contempt. Vapid
—quite vapid! -
A. A shipwreck—the waves are about to close over her.
B. Your book would be closed at the same moment—worn
out—quite worn out. v■'J
A. In the dead of the night, a fire breaks out—she is
already in the midst of the flames
B. Where your book would also be by the disgusted
reader—worse and worse. r )
A. Confound it—you will not allow me to expose her to
earth, air, fire, or water. I have a great mind to hang her in her garters, and make the hero come and cut her down.
B. You might do worse—and better.
A. What—hang myself?
B. That certainly would put an end to all your difficulties.
But, Ansard, I think I can put your heroine in a situation
really critical and eminently distressing, and the hero shall
come to her relief, like the descent of a god to the rescue of a
Greek or Trojan warrior. .3
A. Or of Bacchus to Ariadne in her distress.
B. Perhaps a better simile. The consequence will be, that
eternal gratitude in the bosom of the maiden will prove the
parent of eternal love, which eternity of passion will of course
last until they are married.
A. I'm all attention.
B. Get up a splendid dinner party for their first casual
meeting. Place the company at table.
A. Surely you are not going to choke her with the bone of
a chicken.
B. You surely are about to murder me, as Sampson did the
Philistines
A. With the jaw-bone of a fashionable novel-writer, yon
mean.
B. Exactly. But to proceed:—they are seated at table;
can you describe a grand dinner?
A. Certainly, I have partaken of more than one. t;
B. Where? -t o£j
A. I once sat down three hundred strong at the Free-
masons' Tavern.
B. Pshaw! a mere hog feed. r .-iA. Well, then, I dined with the late lord mayor.

<page 296>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
281
B. Still worse. My dear Ansard, it is however of no con-
sequence. Nothing is more difficult to attain, yet nothing is
more easy to describe, than a good dinner. I was once reading
& 'very fashionable novel by a very fashionable bookseller, for
the author is a mere nonentity, and was very much surprised
at the accuracy with which a good dinner was described.
The mystery was explained a short time afterwards, when
casually taking up Eustache Eude's book in Sams's library, I
found that the author had copied it out exactly from the
injunctions of that celebrated gastronome. You can borrow
the book.
A. Well, we will suppose that done; but I am all anxiety
to know what is the danger from which the heroine is to be
rescued.
B. I will explain. There are two species of existence—
that of mere mortal existence, which is of little consequence,
provided, like Caesar, the hero and heroine die decently: the
other is of much greater consequence, which is fashionable
existence. Let them once lose caste in that respect, and they
are virtually dead, and one mistake, one oversight, is a death-
blow for which there is no remedy, and from which there is
no recovery. For instance, we will suppose our heroine to
be quite confounded with the appearance of our hero—to
have become distraite, reveuse—and, in short, to have lost her
recollection and presence of mind. She has been assisted to
filet de soles. Say that the only sauce ever taken with them
is au macedoine—this is offered to her, and, at the same time,
another, which to eat with the above dish would be unheard
of. In her distraction she is about to take the wrong sauce
—actually at the point of ruining herself for ever and com-
mitting suicide upon her fashionable existence, while the keen
grey eyes of Sir Antinous Antibes, the arbiter of fashion, are
fixed upon her. At this awful moment, which is for ever
to terminate her fashionable existence, the Honourable Au-
gustus Bouverie, who sits next to her, gently touches her
seduisante sleeve—blandly smiling, he whispers to her that
the other is the sauce macedoine. She perceives her mistake,
trembles at her danger, rewards him with a smile, which
penetrates into the deepest recesses of his heart, helps herself
to the right sauce, darts a look of contemptuous triumph
upon Sir Antinous Antibes, and, while she is dipping her 
<page 297>
282
HOW TO WRITE
sole into the sauce, her soul expands with gratitude and
love.
A. I see, I see. Many thanks; my heroine is now a fair
counterpart of my hero.
B. And now I'll give you another hint, since you appear
grateful. It is a species of clap-trap in a novel, which always
takes—to wit, a rich old uncle or misanthrope, who, at the
very time that he is bitterly offended and disgusted with the
hero, who is in awkward circumstances, pulls out a pocket-
book and counts down, say fifteen or twenty thousand pounds
in bank notes, to relieve him from his difficulties. An old
coat and monosyllables will increase the interest.
A. True, (sighing.) Alas! there are no such uncles in real
life; I wish there were.
B. I beg your pardon; I know no time in which my uncle
forks out more bank notes than at present.
A. Yes, but it is for value, or more than value, received.
B. That I grant; but I am afraid it is the only "uncle"
left now; except in a fashionable novel. But you compre-
hend the value of this new auxiliary.
A. Nothing can be better. Barnstaple, you are really , but I say no more. If a truly great man cannot be
lence then becomes the best tribute. Your advice proves
you to be truly great. I am silent, therefore you understand
the full force of the oratory of my thanks. ..
B. (bowing.) Well, Ansard, you have found out the cheapest
way of paying off your bills of gratitude I ever heard of.
"Poor, even in thanks," was well said by Shakspere; but
you, it appears, are rich, in having nothing at all wherewith
to pay. If you could transfer the same doctrine to your
tradesmen, you need not write novels.
A. Alas! my dear fellow, mine is not yet written. There
is one important feature, nay, the most important feature of
all—the style of language, the diction—on that, Barnstaple,
you have not yet doctrinated.
B. (pompously.) When Demosthenes was asked what were
the principal attributes of eloquence, he answered, that the
Ah, sure a pair were never seen,
So justly form'd to meet by nature.1
flattered with delicacy, it must

attempted at all; si-

<page 298>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
283
first was action; on being asked which was the second, he
replied, action; and the third, action; and such is the idea of
the Irish mimbers in the House of Commons. Now there
are three important requisites in the diction of a fashionable
novel. The first, my dear fellow, is—flippancy; the second,
flippancy; and flippancy is also the third. With the dull it
will pass for wit, with some it will pass for scorn, and even
the witty will not be enabled to point out the difference, with-
out running the risk of being considered invidious. It will
cover every defect with a defect still greater; for who can
call small beer tasteless when it is sour, or dull when it is
bottled and has a froth upon it?
A. The advice is excellent; but I fear that this flippancy
is as difficult to acquire as the tone of true eloquence.
B. Difficult! I defy the writers of the silver-fork school
to write out of the style flippant. Read but one volume of
, and you will be saturated with it; but if you wish to
go to the fountain-head, do as have done most of the late
fashionable novel-writers, Tepair to their instructors—the
lady's-maid, for flippancy in the vein spirituelle! to a London
footman for the vein critical; but, if you wish a flippancy of
a still higher order, at once more solemn and more empty,
which I would call the vein political, read the speeches of
some of our members of Parliament. Only read them, I
wish no man so ill as to inflict upon him the torture of hear-
ing them—read them, I say, and you will have taken the
very highest degree in the order of inane flippancy.
A. I see it at once. Your observations are as true as they
are severe. When we would harangue geese, we must con-
descend to hiss; but still, my dear Barnstaple, though you
have fully proved to me that in a fashionable novel all plot
is unnecessary, don't you think there ought to be a catas-
trophe, or sort of a kind of an end to the work, or the reader
may be brought up short, or as the sailors say, " all standing,"
when he comes to the word "Finis," and exclaim with an air
of stupefaction—" And then"
B. And then, if he did, it would be no more than the fool
deserved. I don't know whether it would not be advisable
to leave off in the middle of a sentence, of a word, nay of
a syllable, if it be possible: I am sure the winding-up would
be better than the lackadaisical running-down of most of the 
<page 299>
284
HOW TO WRITE
fashionable novels. Snap the mainspring of your watch, and none but an ass can expect you to tell by it what it
is o'clock; snap the thread of your narrative in the same way, and he must be an unreasonable being who would expect
a reasonable conclusion. Finish thus, in a case of delicate
distress; say, "The Honourable Mr. Augustus Bouverie was
struck in a heap with horror. He rushed with a frantic
grace, a deliberate haste, and a graceful awkwardness, and whispered in her ear these dread and awful words, "It is too late !'" Follow up with a and Finis.
A. I see; the fair and agitated reader will pass a sleepless
night in endeavouring to decipher the mutilated sentence.
She will fail, and consequently call the book delightful. But
should there not have been a marriage previously to this
happy awful climax.
B. Yes; everything is arranged for the nuptials—car-
riages are sent home, jewellery received but not paid for,
dresses all tried on, the party invited—nay, assembled in
the blue-and-white drawing-room. The right reverend my
lord bishop is standing behind the temporary altar—he has
wiped his spectacles and thumbed his prayer-book—all eyes
are turned towards the door, which opens not—the bride faints,
for the bridegroom cometh not—he's not" 'i the vein"—a some-
thing, as like nothing as possible, has given him a disgust
that is surmountable—he flings his happiness to the winds,
though he never loved with more outrageous intensity than
at the moment he discards his mistress; so he fights three
duels with the two brothers and father. He wounds one of
the young men dangerously, the other slightly; fires his pistol
in the air when he meets her father—for how could he take
the life of him who gave life to his adored one 1 Your
hero can always hit a man just where he pleases—vide every
novel in Mr. C.'s collection. The hero becomes misanthro-
pical, the heroine maniacal. The former marries an anti-
quated and toothless dowager, as an escape from the ima-
ginary disgust he took at a sight of a matchless woman; and
the latter marries an old brute, who threatens her life every
night, and puts her in bodily fear every morning, as an indem-
nity in full for the loss of the man of her affections. They
are both romantically miserable; and then comes on your
tantalizing scenes of delicate distress, and so the end of your 
<page 300>
A FASHIONABLE NOVEL.
285
third volume, and then finish without any end at all. Verb,
sap. sat. Or, if you like it better, kill the old dowager of a
surfeit, and make the old brute who marries the heroine
commit suicide; and, after all these unheard-of trials, marry
them as fresh and beautiful as ever.
^ .4.. A thousand thanks. Your verba are not thrown to a
sap. Can I possibly do you any favour for all this kindness 1
£. Oh, my dear fellow! the very greatest. As I see yours
will be, at all points, a most fashionable novel, do me the
inestimable favour not to ask me to read it.

<page 301>
286
HOW TO WRITE A BOOK OF TRAVELS.
Mr. Anasrd's Chambers.
A. (alone.) Well, I thought it hard enough to write a
novel at the dictate of the bibliopolist; but to be condemned
to sit down and write my travels—travels that have never
extended farther than the Lincoln's Inn Coffee House for my
daily food, and a walk to Hampstead on a Sunday. These
travels to be swelled into Travels up the Rhine in the year
18—. Why, it's impossible. 0 that Barnstaple were here,
for he has proved my guardian angel! Lazy, clever dog!
Enter Barnstaple.
B. Pray, my dear Ansard, to whom did you apply that
last epithet?
A. My dear Barnstaple, I never was more happy to see
you. Sit down, I have much to tell you, all about myself
and my difficulties.
B. The conversation promises to be interesting to me, at
all events.
A. Everything is interesting to true friendship.
B. Now I perceive that you do want something. Well,
before you state your case, tell me, how did the novel go off?
A. Wonderfully well. It was ascribed to Lord G:
the bait took, and 750 went off in a first edition, and the
remainder of the copies printed went off in a second.
B. Without being reprinted?
A. Exactly. I was surprised at my success, and told my
publisher so; but he answered that he could sell an edition of
any trash he pleased.
B. That was not flattering.
A. Not very; but his bill was honoured, and that consoled
me. However, to proceed to business—he has given me
another order—A Journey up the Rhine, in two vols, large
octavo, in the year 18—. Now, Barnstaple, what's to be
done?

<page 302>
A BOOK OF TRAVELS.
287
B. Write it, to be sure.
A. But you well know I have never been out of England
in my life.
B. Never mind, write it.
A. Yes, it's very well to say write it; but how the devil
am I to write it ¥ Write what I have never seen—detail
events which never occurred—describe views of that which I
have not even an idea—travel post in my old arm-chair. It's
all very well to say write it, but tell me, how.
B. I say again, write it, and pocket the money. Ansard,
allow me to state that you are a greenhorn. I will make
this mountain of difficulties vanish and melt away like snow
before the powerful rays of the sun. You are told to write
what you have never seen; but if you have not, others have,
which will serve your purpose just as well. To detail events
which have never occurred—invent them, they will be more
amusing. Describe views, &c., of which you are ignorant—so are most of your readers; but have we not the art of
engraving to assist you? To travel post in your arm-chair—a very pleasant and a very profitable way of travelling, as
you have not to pay for the horses and postilions, and are
not knocked to pieces by continental roads. Depend upon it,
the best travels are those written at home, by those who
have never put their foot into the Calais packet-boat.
A. To me this is all a mystery. I certainly must be a
greenhorn, as you observe.
B. Why, Ansard, my dear fellow, with a book of roads
and a gazetteer, I would write a more amusing book of travels
than one half which are now foisted on the public. All you
have to do is to fill up the chinks.
A. All I want to do is to fill up the chinks in my stomach,
Barnstaple; for, between you and me, times are rather queer.
B. You shall do it, if you will follow my advice. I taught
you how to write a fashionable novel; it will be hard, indeed,
if I cannot send you up the Rhine. One little expense must
be incurred—you must subscribe a quarter to a circulating
library, for I wish that what you do should be well done.
A. Barnstaple, I will subscribe to—anything.
B. Well, then, since you are so reasonable, I will proceed.
You must wade through all the various "Journies on the
Rhine," "Two Months on the Rhine," "Autumns on the 
<page 303>
28S
HOW TO WRITE
Rhine," &c., which you can collect. This you will find the
most tiresome part of your task. Select one as your guide,
one who has a reputation; follow his course, not exactly—that I will explain afterwards—and agree with him in everything, generally speaking. Praise his exactitude and fidelity,
and occasionally quote him; this is but fair; after you rob a
man (and I intend you shall rifle him most completely), it is
but decent to give him kind words. All others you must
abuse, contradict, and depreciate. Now, there is a great
advantage in so doing: in the first place, you make the best
writer your friend—he forgets your larcenies in your com-
mendation of him, and in your abuse of others. If his work
be correct, so must yours be; he praises it everywhere—perhaps finds you out, and asks you to dine with him.
A. How should I ever look at his injured face?
B. On the contrary, he is the obliged party—your travels
are a puff to his own.
A. But, Barnstaple, allowing that I follow this part of
your advice, which I grant to be very excellent, how can I
contradict others, when they may be, and probably are, per-
fectly correct in their assertions?
B. If they are so, virtue must be its own reward. It is
necessary that you write a book of travels, and all travellers
contradict each other—ergo, you must contradict, or nobody
will believe that you have travelled. Not only contradict,
but sneer at them.
A. Well, now do explain how that is to be done.
B. Nothing more simple: for instance, a man measures a
certain remarkable piece of antiquity—its length is 747 feet.
You must measure it over again, and declare that he is in
error, that it is only 727. To be sure of your being correct,
measure it twice over, and then convict him.
A. But surely, Barnstaple, one who has measured it is
more likely to be correct than one who has not.
B. I'll grant you that he is correct to half an inch—that's
no matter. The public will, in all probability, believe you,
because you are the last writer, and because you have decreased
the dimensions. Travellers are notorious for amplification,
and if the public do not believe you, let them go and measure
it themselves.
A. A third traveller may hereafter measure it, and find
that I am in the wrong.

<page 304>
A BOOK OF TRAVELS.
289
, B. Ten to one if you are not both in the wrong; but what
matter will that be? your book will have been sold.
Most true, 0 king! I perceive now the general outline,
and I feel confident that, with your kind assistance, I may
accomplish it. But, Barnstaple, the beginning is everything. If I only had the first chapter as a start, I think I could get
gg.; It is the modus that I want—the style. A first chapter
would be a key-note for the remainder of the tune, with all
the variations.
Well, then, take up your pen. But before I commence,
it may be as well to observe, that there is a certain method
required, even in writing travels. In every chapter you
should have certain landmarks to guide you. For instance,
enumerate the following, and select the works from which
they may be obtained, so as to mix up the instructive with
the amusing. Travelling—remarks on country passed through
»—anecdote—arrival at a town—churches—population—his-
torical remarks—another anecdote—eating and drinking—natural curiosities—egotism—remarks on the women (never
mind the men)—another anecdote—reflections—an adventure—and go to bed. You understand, Ansard, that in these
memoranda you have all that is required; the rule is not to
be followed absolutely, but generally. As you observed,
such is to be the tune, but your variations may be infinite.
When at a loss, or you think you are dull, always call in a
grisette, and a little mystery; and, above all, never be afraid
of talking too much about yourself.
A. Many, many thanks; but now, my dear Barnstaple, for
the first chapter.
B. Let your style be flowery—I should say florid—never
mind a false epithet or two in a page, they will never be observed. A great deal depends upon the first two pages
jou must not limp at starting; we will, therefore, be parti-
cular. Take your pen.
[Barnstaple muses for awhile, and then continues. "A severe cough, which refused to yield even to the balmy
influence of the genial spring of 18—, and threatened a pul-
monary complaint, induced me to yield to the reiterated
persuasions of my physicians to try a change of air, as most
likely to ward off the threatened danger. Where to direct
my steps was the difficult point to ascertain. Brighton, tr

<page 305>
290
HOW TO WRITE
Torquay, Cromer, Ufracombe, had all been visited and revi-
sited. At either of these fashionable resorts I was certain to
fall in with a numerous acquaintance, whose persuasions
would have induced me to depart from that regularity of diet
and of rest, so imperiously insisted upon by my medical
advisers, After much cogitation, I resolved upon a journey
up the Rhine, and to escape the ruthless winter of our northern
clime in the more genial land of history."
A. Land of history—I presume you mean Italy; but am I
to go there?
B. No, you may recover, and come back again to skate
upon the Serpentine, if you please. You observe, Ansard,
I have not made you a fellow with 50?. in his pocket, setting out to turn it into 300?. by a book of travels. I have avoided
mention of Margate, Ramsgate, Broadstairs, and all common
watering-places; I have talked of physicians in the plural;
in short, no one who reads that paragraph, but will suppose
that you are a young man of rank and fortune, to whom
money is no object, and who spends hundreds to cure that
which might be effected by a little regularity, and a few
doses of ipecacuanha.
A. I wish it were so. Nevertheless, I'll travel en grand
seigneur—that's more agreeable even in imagination, than
being rumbled in a " diligence.'"
B. And will produce more respect for your work, I can
assure you. But to proceed. Always, when you leave
England, talk about hospitality. The English like it. Have
you no relations or friends in whose opinion you wish to stand
well 1 Public mention in print does wonders, especially with
a copy handsomely bound "from the author."
A. Really, Barnstaple, I do not know anyone. My poor
mother is in Cumberland, and that is not en route. I have a
maternal uncle of the name of Forster, who lives on the road
—a rich, old, miserly bachelor; but I can't say much for his
hospitality. I have called upon him twice, and he has never
even asked me to dinner. ,
B. Never mind. People like being praised for a virtue
which they do not possess—it may prove a legacy. Say,
then, that you quitted the hospitable roof of your worthy and'
excellent-hearted relation, Mr. Forster, and felt
A. Felt how?

<page 306>
A BOOK OF TRAVELS.
291
B. How—why yon felt, as he wrung your hand, that there
was a sudden dissolution of the ties of kindred and affection.
A. There always has been in that quarter, so my conscience
is so far clear.
B. You arrive at Dovor (mind you spell it Dovor)—go to
bed tired and reflective—embark early the next morning—a rough passage
A. And sea-sick, of course?
B. No, Ansard; there I'll give you a proof of my tact—
you shan't be sea-sick.
A. But I'm sure I should be.
B. All travellers are, and all fill up a page or two with
complaints, ad nauseam—for that reason sick you shall not
be. Observe—to your astonishment you are not sea-sick:
the other passengers suffer dreadfully; one young dandy puffs
furiously at a cigar in bravado, until he sends it over the
side, like an arrow from the blow-pipe of a South American
Indian. Introduce a husband with a pretty wife—he jealous
as a dog, until he is sick as a cat—your attentions—she pil-
lowed on your arms, while he hangs over the lee gunwale—her gratitude—safe arrival at Calais—sweet smiles of the
lady—sullen deportment of the gentleman—a few hints—and
draw the veil. Do you understand?
A. Perfectly. I can manage all that.
B. Then when you put your foot on shore, you must, for
the first time, feel seasick.
A. On shore?
B. Yes; reel about, not able to stand—every symptom as
if on board. Express your surprise at the strange effect,
pretend not to explain it, leave that to medical men, it being
sufficient for you to state the fact.
A. The fact! 0 Barnstaple!
B. That will be a great hit for a first chapter. You
reverse the order of things.
A. That I do most certainly. Shall I finish the first
chapter with that fact?
B. No. Travellers always go to bed at the end of each
chapter. It is a wise plan, and to a certain degree it must
be followed. You must have a baggage adventure—be sepa-
rated from it—some sharp little urchin has seized upon your
valise—it is nowhere to be found—quite in despair—walk to u 2

<page 307>
292
HOW TO WRITE
the Hotel d'Angleterre, and find that you are met by the
landlord and garcons, who inform you that your carriage is
in the remise, and your rooms ready—ascend to your bed-
room—find that your baggage is not only there, but neatly
laid out—your portmanteau unstrapped—your trunk uncorded—and the little rascal of a commissaire standing by with his
hat in his hand, and a smile de malice, having installed him-
self as your domestique de place—take him for his impudence—praise the "Cotelettes and the vin de Beaune"—wish the
reader good night, and go to bed. Thus ends the first chapter.
[Ansard gets up and takes Barnstaple's hand, which he
shakes warmly without speaking. Barnstaple smiles and
walks out. Ansard is left hard at work at his desk.
Arthur Ansard in his Chambers, solus, with his pen in hishand.
Ans. Capital! that last was a hit. It has all the appear-
ance of reality. To be sure, I borrowed the hint, but that
nobody will be able to prove. (Yawns.) Heigho! I have
only got half way on my journey yet, and my ideas are quite
exhausted. I am as much worn out and distressed as one of
the German post-horses which I described in my last chapter.
(Nods, and then falls fast asleep.)
Barnstaple taps at the door; receiving no answer, he enters.
B. So—quite fast. What can have put him to sleep?
(Reads the manuscript on the table.) No wonder, enough to
put anybody to sleep apparently. Why, Ansard!
A. (starting up, still half asleep.) Already? Why, I've
hardly shut my eyes. Well, I'll be dressed directly; let
them get some cafe ready below. Henri, did you order the
hind-spring to be repaired! (Nods again with his eyes shut.)
B. Hallo! What now, Ansard, do you really think that
you are travelling?
A. (waking up). Upon my word, Barnstaple, I was so
dreaming. I thought I was in my bed at the Hotel de
Londres, after the fatiguing day's journey I described yester-
day. I certainly have written myself into the conviction
that I was travelling post.
B. All the better—you have embodied yourself in your
own work, which every writer of fiction ought to do; but they 
<page 308>
A BOOK OF TRAVELS.
293
can seldom attain to such a desideratum. Now, tell me, how
do you get on?
A. Thank you—pretty well. I have been going it with
four post-horses these last three weeks.
B. And how far have you got?
A. Half way—that is, into the middle of my second volume.
But I'm very glad that you're come to my assistance, Barn-
staple; for to tell you the truth, I was breaking down.
B. Yes, you said something about the hind-spring of your
carriage.
A. That I can repair without your assistance; but my
spirits are breaking down. I want society. This travelling
post is dull work. Now, if I could introduce a companion
B. So you shall. At the next town that you stop at, buy
a Poodle.
A. A Poodle! Barnstaple? How the devil shall I be as-
sisted by a poodle?
B. He will prove a more faithful friend to you in your
exigence, and a better companion than one of your own
species. A male companion, after all, is soon expended, and
a female, which would be more agreeable, is not admissible.
If you admit a young traveller into your carriage—what
then? He is handsome, pleasant, romantic, and so forth; but
you must not give his opinions in contradiction to your own,
and if they coincide, it is superfluous. Now, a poodle is a
dog of parts, and it is more likely that you fall in with a
sagacious dog than with a sagacious man. The poodle is the
thing; you must recount your meeting, his purchase, size,
colour, and qualifications, and anecdotes of his sagacity,
vouched for by the landlord, and all the garqons of the
hotel. As you proceed on your travels, his attachment to
you increases, and wind up every third chapter with "your
faithful Mouton."
A. Will not all that be considered frivolous?
B. Frivolous! by no means. The frivolous will like it,
and those who may have more sense, although they may
think that Mouton does not at all assist your travelling re-
searches, are too well acquainted with the virtues of the
canine race, and the attachment insensibly imbibed for so
faithful an attendant, not to forgive your affectionate mention
of him. Besides it will go far to assist the verisimilitude of 
<page 309>
294
HOW TO WRITE
your travels As for your female readers, they will prefer
Mouton even to you.
A. All-powerful and mighty magician, whose wand of
humbug, like that of Aaron's, swallows up all others, not ex-
cepting that of divine Truth, I obey you! Mouton shall be
summoned to my aid: he shall flourish, and my pen shall
flourish in praise of his endless perfections. But, Barnstaple,
what shall I give for him 1
B. (thinks awhile.) Not less than forty louis.
A. Forty louis for a poodle!
B. Most certainly; not a sou less. The value of anything in the eyes of the world is exactly what it costs.
Mouton, at a five-franc piece, would excite no interest; and
his value to the reader will increase in proportion to his price,
which will be considered an undeniable proof of all his won-
derful sagacity, with which you are to amuse the reader.
A. But in what is to consist his sagacity?
B. He must do everything but speak. Indeed, he must
so far speak as to howl the first part of "Lieber Augustin."
A. His instinct shall put our boasted reason to the blush.
But I think I had better not bring him home with me.
B. Of course not. In the first place, it's absolutely neces-
sary to kill him, lest his reputation should induce people to
seek him out, which they would do, although, in all proba-
bility, they never will his master. Lady Cork would certainly invite him to a literary soiree. You must therefore
kill him in the most effective way possible, and you will
derive the advantage of filling up at least ten pages with his
last moments—licking your hand, your own lamentations,
violent and inconsolable grief on the part of Henri, and
tanning his skin as a memorial.
A. A beautiful episode, for which receive my best thanks.
But, Barnstaple, I have very few effective passages as yet. I
have remodelled several descriptions of mountains, precipices,
Waterfalls, and such wonders of the creation—expressed my
contempt and surprise at the fear acknowledged by other
travellers, in several instances. I have lost my way twice—
met three wolves—been four times benighted—and indebted
to lights at a distance for a bed at midnight, after the horses
have refused to proceed. All is incident, and I am quite hard
up for description. Now, I have marked down a fine pas-

<page 310>
A BOOK OF TRAVELS.
295
aage in 's work—a beautiful description of a cathedral,
- with a grand procession. (Reads.) "What with the effect
of the sun's brightest beams upon the ancient glass windows—various hues reflected upon the gothic pillars—gorgeousness
of the procession—sacerdotal ornaments—tossing of censers—crowds of people—elevation of the host, and sinking down of
the populace en masse." It really is a magnificent line of
writing, and which my work requires. One or two like that
in my book would do well to be quoted by impartial critics,
before the public are permitted to read it. But here, you
observe, is a difficulty. I dare not borrow the passage.
B. But you shall borrow it—you shall be even finer than
he is, and yet he shall not dare to accuse you of plagiarism.
A. How is that possible, my dear Barnstaple! I'am all
impatience.
B. His description is at a certain hour of the day. All you
have to do is to portray the scene in nearly the same words.
You have as much right to visit a cathedral as he has, and
as for the rest—here is the secret. You must visit it at
night. Instead of "glorious beams," you will talk of "pale
melancholy light;" instead of "the stained windows throwing
their various hues upon the gotbic pile," you must "darken
the massive pile, and light up the windows with the silver
rays of the moon." The glorious orb of day must give place
to thousands of wax tapers—the splendid fret-work of the
roof you must regret was not to be clearly distinguished—but you must be in ecstacies with the broad light and shade—the blaze at the altar—solemn hour of night—feelings of
awe—half a Catholic—religious reflections, &c. Don't you
perceive?
A. I do. Like the rest of my work, it shall be all moon-
shine. It shall be done, Barnstaple; but have you not
another idea or two to help me with?
B. Have you talked about cooks? A. As yet, not a word.
B. By this time you ought to have some knowledge of
gastronomy. Talk seriously about eating.
A. (writes.) I have made a mem.
B. Have you had no affront?
A. Not one.
B. Then be seriously affronted—complain to the burgo-

<page 311>
296
HOW TO WRITE
master, or mayor, or commandant, whoever it may be—they
attempt to bully—you are resolute and firm as an Englishman
—insist upon being righted—they must make you a thousand
apologies. This will tickle the national vanity, and be read
with interest.
A. (writes ) I have been affronted. Anything else which
may proceed from your prolific brain, Barnstaple 1
B. Have you had a serious illness 1
A. Never complained even of a headache.
B. Then do everything but die—Henri weeping and in-
solable—Mouton howling at the foot of your bed—kick the
surgeons out of the room—and cure yourself with three dozen
of champagne.
A. (writes.) Very sick—cured with three dozen of cham-
pagne—I wish the illness would in reality come on, if I were
certain of the cure gratis. Go on, my dear Barnstaple.
B. You may work in an episode here—delirium—lucid in-
tervals—gentle female voice—delicate attentions—mysterious
discovery from loquacious landlady—eternal gratitude—but
no marriage—an apostrophe—and all the rest left to con-
jecture.
A. (writes down.) Silent attentions—conjecture—I can
manage that, I think.
B. By the bye, have you brought in Madame de Stael?
A. No—how the devil am I to bring her in?
B. As most other travellers do, by the head and shoulders.
Never mind that, so long as you bring her in.
A. (writes). Madame de Stael by the shoulders—that's not
very polite towards a lady. These hints are invaluable; pray
go on.
B. Why, yon have already more hints this morning than
are sufficient for three volumes. But, however, let me see. (B. thinks a little). Find yourself short of cash.
A. A sad reality, Barnstaple. I shall write this part well,
for truth will guide my pen.
B. All the better. But to continue—no remittances—
awkward position—explain your situation—receive credit to
any amount—and compliment your countrymen.
A. (writes.) Credit to any amount—pleasing idea. But I
don't exactly perceive the value of this last hint, Barnstaple.
B. All judicious travellers make it a point, throughout the 
<page 312>
A BOOK OF TRAVELS.
297
whole of their works, to flatter the nation upon its wealth,
name, and reputation in foreign countries; by doing so you
will be read greedily, and praised in due proportion. If ever
I were to write my travels into the interior of Africa, or to
the North Pole, I would make it a point to discount a bill at
Timbuctoo, or get a cheque cashed by the Esquimaux, without
the least hesitation in either case. I think now, that what
with your invention, your plagiarism, and my hints, you
ought to produce a very effective Book of Travels; and with
that feeling I shall leave you to pursue your journey, and
receive, at its finale, your just reward. When we meet again,
I hope to see you advertised.
A. Yes, but not exposed, I trust. I am incog, you know.
B. To be sure, that will impart an additional interest to
your narrative. All the world will be guessing who you may
be. Adieu, voyageur. [Exit Barnstaple.
A. And Heaven forfendthat they should find me out! But
what can be done? In brief, I cannot get a brief, and thus
I exercise my professional acquirements how I can, proving
myself as long-winded, as prosy perhaps, and certainly as
lying, as the more fortunate of my fraternity.

<page 313>
298
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
Mr. Arthur Ansard, standing at his table, selecting a steel
pen from a card on which a dozen are ranged up, like
soldiers on parade.
I must find a regular graver to write this chapter of horrors.
No goose quill could afford me any assistance. Now then.
Let me see (Heads, and during his reading Barnstaple
comes in at the door behind him, unperceived.) "At this most
monstrously appalling sight, the hair of Piftlianteriscki raised
slowly the velvet cap from off his head, as if it had been
perched upon the rustling quills of some exasperated porcu-
pine—(I think that's new)—his nostrils dilated to that ex-
tent that you might, with ease, have thrust a musket bullet
into each—his mouth was opened so wide, so unnaturally
wide, that the corners were rent asunder, and the blood slowly
trickled down each side of his bristly chin—while each tooth
loosened from its socket with individual fear.—Not a word
could he utter, for his tongue, in its fright, clung with terror
to his upper jaw, as tight as do the bellies of the fresh and
elimy soles, paired together by some fisherwoman; but if his
tongue was paralysed, his heart was not—it throbbed against
his ribs with a violence which threatened their dislocation
from the sternum, and with a sound which reverberated
through the dark, damp subterrene "I think that will
do. There's force there.
B. There is, with a vengeance. Why, what is all this 1
A. My dear Barnstaple, you here! I'm writing a romance
for B . It is to be supposed to be a translation.
B. The Germans will be infinitely obliged to you; but, my
dear fellow, you appear to have fallen into the old school—
that's no longer in vogue.
A. My orders are for the old school. B was most
particular on that point. He says that there is a re-action
—a great re-action.

<page 314>
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
299
B. What, on literature 1 Well, he knows as well as any
man. I only wish to God there was in everything else, and
we could see the good old times again.
A. To confess the truth, I did intend to have finished this
without saying a word to you. I wished to have surprised you.
B. So you have, my dear fellow, with the few lines I have
heard. How the devil are you to get your fellow out of that
state of asphyxia?
A. By degrees—slowly—very slowly—as they pretend
that we lawyers go to heaven. But I'll tell you what I have
done, just to give you an idea of my work. In the first place,
I have a castle perched so high up in the air, that the eagles,
even in their highest soar, appear hut as wrens below.
B. That's all right.
A. And then it has subterraneous passages, to which the
sewers of London are a mere song; and they all lead to a small
cave at high-water mark on the sea-beach, covered with bram-
bles and bushes, and just large enough at its entrance to admit
of a man squeezing himself in.
B. That's all right. You cannot be too much underground;
in fact, the two first, and the best part of the third volume,
should be wholly in the bowels of the earth, and your hero
and heroine should never come to light until the last chapter.
A. Then they would never have been born till then, and
how could I marry them 1 But still I have adhered pretty
much to your idea; and, Barnstaple, I have such a heroine—
such a love—she has never seen her sweetheart, yet she is
most devotedly attached, and has suffered more for his sake
than any mortal could endure.
B. Most heroines generally do.
A. I have had her into various dungeons for three or four
years, on black bread and a broken pitcher of water—she has
been starved to death—lain for months and months upon wet
straw—had two brain fevers—five times has she risked vio-
lation, and always has picked up, or found in the belt of her
infamous ravishers, a stiletto, which she has plunged into
their hearts, and they have expired with or without a groan.
B. Excellent: and of course comes out of her dungeons
each time as fresh, as sweet, as lovely, as pure, as charming,
and as constant as ever.

<page 315>
300
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
A. Exactly; nothing can equal her infinite variety of ad-
venture, and her imperishable beauty and unadhesive clean-
liness of person; and, as for lives, she has more than a thou-
sand cats'. After nine months' confinement in a dungeon,
four feet square, when it is opened for her release, the air is perfumed with the ambrosia which exhales from her sweet
person. ". p>
B. Of course it does. The only question is, what ambrosia
smells like. But let me know something about your hero.
A. He is a prince and a robber.
B. The two professions are not at all incompatible. Go on.
A. He is the chief of a band of robbers, and is here, there,
and everywhere. He fills all Europe with terror, admiration,
and love.
B. Very good.
A. His reasons for joining the robbers are, of course, a
secret (and upon my word they are equally a secret to my-
self); but it is wonderful the implicit obedience of his men,
and the many acts of generosity of which he is guilty. I
make him give away a great deal more money than his whole
band ever take, which is so far awkward, that the query may
arise in what way he keeps them together, and supplies them
with food and necessaries. '-
B. Of course with / 0 U's upon his princely domains.
A. I have some very grand scenes, amazingly effective;
for instance, what do you think, at the moment after the holy
mass has been performed in St. Peter's at Rome, just as the
pope is about to put the sacred wafer into his mouth and
bless the whole world, I make him snatch the wafer out of
the pope's hand, and get clear off with it.
B. What for, may I ask?
A, That is a secret which I do not reveal. The whole
arrangement of that part of the plot is admirable. The band
of robbers are disguised as priests, and officiate, without being
found out.
B. But isn't that rather sacrilegious?]
A. No; it appears so to be, but he gives his reasons for
his behaviour to the pope, and the pope is satisfied, and not only gives him his blessing, but shows him the greatest
respect.
B. They must have been very weighty reasons.

<page 316>
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
301
A. And therefore they are not divulged.
B. That is to say, not until the end of the work.
A. They are never divulged at all; I leave a great deal to
the reader's imagination—people are fond of conjecture. All
they know is, that he boldly appears, and demands an
audience. He is conducted in, the interview is private, after
a sign made by our hero, and at which the pope almost leaps
off the chair. After an hour he comes out again, and the
pope bows him to the very door. Everyone is astonished,
and, of course, almost canonize him.
B. That's going it rather strong in a Catholic country. But
tell me, Ansard, what is your plot?
A. Plot; I have none.
B. No plot!
A. No plot, and all plot. I puzzle the reader with certain
materials. I have castles and dungeons, corridors and creak-
ing doors, good villains and bad villains. Chain armour and
clank of armour, daggers for gentlemen, and stilettoes for
ladies. Dark forests and brushwood, drinking scenes, eating
scenes, and sleeping scenes—robbers and friars, purses of gold
and instruments of torture, an incarnate devil of a Jesuit, a
handsome hero, and a lovely heroine. I jumble them all
together, sometimes above, and sometimes underground, and
I explain nothing at all.
B. Have you nothing supernatural 1
A. 0 yes! I've a dog whose instinct is really supernatural,
and I have two or three visions, which may be considered so,
as they tell what never else could have been known. I
decorate my caverns and dungeons with sweltering toads and
slimy vipers, a constant dropping of water, with chains too
ponderous to lift, but which the parties upon whom they are
riveted, clang together as they walk up and down in their
cells, and soliloquize. So much for my underground scenery.
Above, I people the halls with pages and ostrich feathers,
and knights in bright armour, a constant supply of generous
wine, and goblets too heavy to lift, which the knights toss off
at a draught, as they sit and listen to the minstrel's music.
B. Bravo, Ansard, bravo. It appears to me that you do
not want assistance in this romance.
A. No, when I do I have always a holy and compassionate
friar, who pulls a wonderful restorative or healing balm, out 
<page 317>
302
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
of his bosom. The puffs of Solomon's Balm of Gilead are a
fool to the real merits of my pharmacopoeia contained in a
small vial.
B. And pray what may be the title of this book of yours,
for I have known it take more time to fix upon a title than
to write the three volumes.
A. I call it The Undiscovered Secret, and very properly so
too, for it never is explained. But if you please, I will read
you some passages from it. I think you will approve of
them. For instance, now let us take this, in the second
volume. You must know, that Angelicanarinella (for that is
the name of my heroine) is thrown into a dungeon not more
than four feet square, but more than six hundred feet below
the surface of the earth. The ways are so intricate, and the
subterranean so vast, and the dungeons so numerous, that the
base Ethiop, who has obeyed his master's orders in confin-
ing her, has himself been lost in the labyrinth, and has not
been able to discover what dungeon he put her in. For three
days he has been looking for it, during which our heroine has
been without food, and he is still searching and scratching his
woolly head in despair, as he is to die by slow torture, if he
does not reproduce her—for you observe, the chief who has
thrown her into his dungeon is most desperately in love with
her.
B. That of course; and that is the way to prove romantic
love—you ill treat—but still she is certainly in a dilemma,
as well as the Ethiop.
A. Granted; but she talks like the heroine of a romance.
Listen. (Ansard reads.) "The beauteous and divinely-
moulded form of the angelic Angelicanarinella pressed the
dank and rotten straw which had been thrown down by the
scowling, thick-lipped Ethiop for her repose—she, for whom
attendant maidens had smoothed the Sybaritic sheet of finest
texture, under the elaborately carved and sumptuously gilt canopy, the silken curtains, and the tassels of the purest dust
of gold."
B. Tassels of dust of gold! only figuratively, I suppose.
A. Nothing more. "Each particular straw of this dank,
damp bed was elastic with delight, at bearing such angelic
pressure; and, as our heroine cast her ineffably beaming
eyes about the dark void, lighting up with their effulgent 
<page 318>
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
303
rays each little portion of the dungeon, as she glanced them
from one part to another, she perceived that the many rep-
tiles enclosed with her in this narrow tomb, were nestling to
her side, their eyes fixed upon her in mute expressions of
love and admiration. Her eclipsed orbs were each, for a
moment, suffused with a bright and heavenly tear, and from
the suffusion threw out a more brilliant light upon the feeling
reptiles who paid this tribute to her undeserved sufferings.
She put forth her beauteous hand, whose 'faint tracery'—(I
stole that from Cooper)—whose faint tracery had so often
given to others the idea that it was ethereal, and not cor-
poreal, and lifting with all the soft and tender handling of
first love a venerable toad, which smiled upon her, she placed
the interesting animal so that it could crawl up and nestle in
her bosom, 'Poor child of dank, of darkness, and of drip-
ping,' exclaimed she, in her flute-like notes, 'who sheltereth
thyself under the wet and mouldering wall, so neglected in
thy form by thy mother Nature, repose awhile in peace
where princes and nobles would envy thee, if they knew thy
present lot. But that shall never be; these lips shall never
breathe a tale which might endanger thy existence; fear not,
therefore, their enmity, and as thou slowly creepest away
thy little round of circumscribed existence, forget me not,
but shed an occasional pearly tear to the memory of the per-
secuted, the innocent Angelicanarinella!'" What d'ye think
of that?
B. Umph! a very warm picture certainly; however, it is
natural. You know, a person of her consequence could
never exist without a little toadyism.
A. I have a good many subterraneous soliloquies, which
would have been lost for ever, if I did not bring them up.
B. That one you have just read is enough to make every-
body else bring up.
A. I rather plume myself upon it.
B. Yes, it is a feather in your cap, and will act as a feather
in the throat of your readers.
A. Now I'll turn over the second volume, and read you
another morceau, in which I assume the more playful vein.
I have imitated one of our modern writers, who must be cor-
rect in her language, as she knows all about heroes and
heroines. I must confess that I've cribbed a little. 
<page 319>
304
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
B. Let's hear.
A. "The lovely Angelicanarinella pottered for some time
about this fairy chamber, then 'wrote journal.' At last, she
threw herself down on the floor, pulled out the miniature,
gulped when she looked at it, and then cried herself to sleep.
B. Pottered and gulped I What language do you call
that?
A. It's all right, my dear fellow. I understand that it is
the refined slang of the modern boudoir, and only known to
the initiated.
B. They had better keep it entirely to their boudoirs. I
should advise you to leave it all out.
A. Well, I thought that one who was so very particular,
must have been the standard of perfection herself.
B. That does not at all follow.
A. But what I wish to read to you is the way in which I
have managed that my secret shall never be divulged. It is
known only to four.
B. A secret known to four people! You must be quick
then.
A. So I am, as you shall hear; they all meet in a dark
gallery, but do not expect to meet anyone but the hero,
whom they intend to murder, each one having, unknown to
the others, made an appointment with him for that purpose,
on the pretence of telling him the great secret. Altogether
the scene is well described, but it is long, so I'll come at once
to the denouement.
B. Pray do.
A. "Absenpresentini felt his way by the slimy wall, when
the breath of another human being caught his ear: he paused,
and held his own breath. 'No, no,' muttered the other, 'the
secret of blood and gold shall remain with me alone. Let
him come, and he shall find death.' In a second, the dagger
of Absenpresentini was in the mutterer's bosom:—he fell
without a groan. 'To me alone the secret of blood and gold,
and with me it remains,' exclaimed Absenpresentini. 'It
does remain with you,' cried Phosphorini, driving his dagger
into his back:—Absenpresentini fell without a groan, and
Phosphorini, withdrawing his dagger, exclaimed, 'Who is
now to tell the secret but me?' 'Not you,' cried Vortiskini,
raising up his sword and striking at where the voice pro-

<page 320>
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
305
ceeded. The trusty steel cleft the head of the abandoned
Phosphorini, who fell without a groan. 'Now will I retain
the secret of blood and gold,' said Vortiskini, as he sheathed
his sword. 'Thou shalt,' exclaimed the wily Jesuit, as he
struck his stiletto to the heart of the robber, who fell without
a groan. 'With me only does the secret now rest, by which
our order might be disgraced; with me it dies,'and the Jesuit
raised his hand. 'Thus to the glory and the honour of his
society does Manfredini sacrifice his life.' He struck the
keen-pointed instrument into his heart, and died without a
groan. 'Stop,' cried our hero."
B. And I agree with your hero: stop, Ansard, or you'll
kill me too—but not without a groan.
A. Don't you think it would act well 1
B. Quite as well as it reads; pray is it all like this 1
A. You shall judge for yourself. I have half killed myself
with writing it, for I chew opium every night to obtain ideas.
Now again—
B. Spare me, Ansard, spare me; my nerves are rather
delicate; for the remainder I will take your word.
A. I wish my duns would do the same, even if it were
only my washerwoman; but there's no more tick for me here,
except this old watch of my father's, which serves to remind
me of what I cannot obtain from others—time; but, however,
there is a time for all things, and when the time comes that
my romance is ready, my creditors will obtain the ready.
B. Your only excuse, Ansard.
A. I beg you pardon. The public require strong writing
now-a-days. We have thousands who write well, and the
public are nauseated with what is called good writing.
B. And so they want something bad, eh? Well, Ansard,
you certainly can supply them.
A. My dear Barnstaple, you must not disparge this style of writing—it is not bad—there is a great art in it. It may
be termed writing intellectual and ethereal. You observe,
that it never allows probabilities or even possibilities to stand
in its way. The dross of humanity is rejected: all the com-
mon wants and grosser feelings of our natures are disallowed.
It is a novel which is all mind and passion. Corporeal attri-
butes and necessities are thrown on one side, as they would
destroy the charm of perfectability. Nothing can soil, or x

<page 321>
306
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
defile, or destroy my heroine; suffering adds lustre to her
beauty, as pure gold is tried by fire: nothing can kill her,
because she is all mind. As for my men, you will observe
when you read my work—
B. When I do!
A. Which, of course, you will—that they also have their
appetites in abeyance; they never want to eat, or drink, or
sleep—are always at hand when required, without regard to
time or space. Now there is a great beauty in this descrip-
tion of writing. The women adore it because they find their
sex divested of those human necessities, without which they
would indeed be angels! the mirror is held up to them, and
they find themselves perfect—no wonder they are pleased.
The other sex are also very glad to dwell upon female per-
fectability, which they can only find in a romance, although
they have often dreamt of it in their younger days.
B. There is some truth in these remarks. Every milliner's
girl, who devours your pages in bed by the half-hour's light
of tallow stolen for the purpose, imagines a strong similarity
between herself and your Angelicanarinella, and every shop-
boy measuring tape or weighing yellow soap will find out
attributes common to himself and to your hero.
A. Exactly. As long as you draw perfection in both
sexes, you are certain to be read, because by so doing you
flatter human nature and self-love, and transfer it to the indi-
vidual who reads. Now a picture of real life
B. Is like some of Wouvermans' best pictures, which will
not be purchased by many, because his dogs in the fore-
ground are doing exactly what all dogs will naturally do
when they first are let out of their kennels.
A. Wouvermans should have known better, and made his
dogs better mannered if he expected his pictures to be hung
up in the parlour of refinement.
B. Very true.
A. Perhaps you would like to have another passage or
two.
B. Excuse me: I will imagine it all. I only hope,
Ansard, this employment will not interfere with your legal
practice.
A. My dear Barnstaple, it certainly will not, because my
legal practice cannot be interfered with. I have been called 
<page 322>
HOW TO WRITE A ROMANCE.
307
to the bar, but find no employment in my calling. I have
been sitting in my gown and wig for one year, and may
probably sit a dozen more before I have to rise to address
their lordships. I have not yet had a guinea brief. My
only chance is to be sent out as judge to Sierra Leone, or
perhaps to be made a commissioner of the Court of Requests. B. You are indeed humble in your aspirations. I recollect
the time, Ansard, when you dreamt of golden fame, and
aspired to the woolsack—when your ambition prompted you
to midnight labour, and you showed an energy—
A. (putting his hands up to his forehead, with his elbows
on the table.) What can I do, Barnstaple \ If I trust to
briefs, my existence will be but brief—we all must live.
B. I will not reply as Richelieu did to a brother author,
"Je ne vois pas la necessite;" but this I do say, that if you
are in future to live by supplying the public with such non-
sense, the shorter your existence the better.

<page 323>
308
- > - -.
THE LEGEND OF THE BELL ROOK.
( B i.
There was a grand procession through the streets of the
two towns of Perth and Dundee. The holy abbots, in their
robes, walked under gilded canopies, the monks chanted, the
censers were thrown, flags and banners were carried by sea-
men, lighted tapers by penitents; St. Antonio, the patron of
those who trust to the stormy ocean, was carried in all pomp
through the streets; and, as the procession passed, coins of
various value were thrown down by those who watched it
from the windows, and, as fast as thrown, were collected
by little boys dressed as angels, and holding silver vessels
to receive the largesses. During the whole day did the pro-
cession continue, and large was the treasure collected in the
two towns. Everyone gave freely, for there were few, indeed none, who, if not in their own circle, at least among
their acquaintances, had to deplore the loss of some one dear
to them, or to those they visited, from the dangerous rock
which lay in the very track of all the vessels entering the
Frith of Tay.
These processions had been arranged, that a sufficient sum
of money might be collected to enable them to put in execu-
tion a plan proposed by an adventurous and bold young seaman,
in a council held for the purpose, of fixing a bell on the rock, which could be so arranged that the slightest breath of wind
would cause the hammer of it to sound, and thus, by its toll-
ing, warn the mariner of his danger; and the sums given were
more than sufficient. A meeting was then held, and it was
unanimously agreed that Andrew M'Clise should be charged
with the commission to go over to Amsterdam, and purchase
the bell of a merchant residing there, whom Andrew stated
to have one in his possession, which, from its fine tone and 
<page 324>
THE BELL ROCK.
309
size, was exactly calculated for the purport to which it was
to be appropriated.
Andrew M'Clise embarked with the money, and made a
prosperous voyage. He had often been at Amsterdam, and
had lived with the merchant, whose name was Vandermaclin;
and the attention to his affairs, the dexterity and the rapidity
of the movements of Andrew M'Clise, had often elicited the
warmest encomiums of Mynheer Vandermaclin; and many
evenings had Andrew M'Clise passed with him, drinking in
moderation their favourite scheedam, and indulging in the
meditative merschaum. Vandermaclin had often wished that
he had a son like Andrew M'Clise, to whom he could leave
his property, with the full assurance that the heap would not
be scattered, but greatly added to.
Vandermaclin was a widower. He had but one daughter,
who was now just arrived at an age to return from the pen-
sion to her father's house, and take upon herself the domestic
duties. M'Clise had never yet seen the beautiful Katerina.
"And so, Mynheer M'Clise," said Vandermaclin, who was
sitting in the warehouse on the ground-floor of his tenement,
"you come to purchase the famous bell of Utrecht; with the
intention of fixing it upon that rock, the danger of which
we have so often talked over after the work of the day has
been done? I, too, have suffered from that same rock, as
you well know; but still I have been fortunate. The price
will be heavy; and so it ought to be, for the bell itself is of
no small weight."
"We are prepared to pay it, Mynheer Vandermaclin."
"Nevertheless, in so good a cause, and for so good a
purport, you shall not be overcharged. I will say nothing of
the beauty of the workmanship, or even of the mere manu-
facture. You shall pay but its value in metal; the same
price which the Jew Isaacs offered me for it but four months
ago. I will not ask what a Jew would ask, but what a Jew
would give, which makes no small difference. Have you
ten thousand guilders?"
"I have, and more."
"That is my price, Mynheer M'Clise, and I wish for no
more; for I, too, will contribute my share to the good work.
Are you content, and is it a bargain V
"It is; and the holy abbots will thank you on vellum,
Mynheer Vandermaclin, for your generosity."

<page 325>
THE LEGEND OF
"I prefer the thanks of the bold seamen to those of the
idle churchmen; but, never mind, it is a bargain. Now, we
will go in; it is time to close the doors. We will take our
pipes, and you shall make the acquaintance of my fair daugh-
ter, Katerina:"
At the time we are speaking of, M'Clise was about six-
and twenty years of age; he was above the middle size,
elegant in person, and with a frankness and almost nobility
in his countenance, which won all who saw him.
His manners were like those of most seamen, bold, but
not offensively so. His eye was piercing as an eagle's; and
it seemed as if his very soul spoke from it. At the very first
meeting between him and the daughter of Vandermaclin,
it appeared to both as if their destinies were to unite them.
They loved not as others love, but with an intensity which
it would be impossible to portray; but they hardly exchanged
a word. Again and again they met; their eyes spoke, but
nothing more. The bell was put on board the vessel, the
money had been paid down, and M'Clise could no longer
delay. He felt as if his heartstrings were severed as he tore
himself away from the land where all remained that he
coveted upon earth. And Katerina, she too felt as if her exist-
ence was a blank; and as the vessel sailed from the port, she
breathed short; and when not even her white and lofty top-
gallant sail could be discovered as a speck, she threw herself
on her couch and wept. And M'Clise as he sailed away,
remained for hours leaning his cheek on his hand, thinking
of, over and over again, every lineament and feature of the
peerless Katerina.
Two months passed away, during which M'Clise was busied
every ebb of the tide in superintending the work on the rock.
At last, all was ready; and once more was to be beheld a gay
procession; but this time it was on the water. It was on a
calm and lovely summer's morn, that the abbots and the
monks, attended by a large company of the authorities, and
others, who were so much interested in the work in hand,
started from the shore of Aberbrothwick in a long line of
boats, decorated with sacred and with other various banners
and devices. The music floated along the water, and the
solemn chants of the monks were for once heard where never
yet they had been heard before, or ever will again. M'Clise 
<page 326>
THE BELL ROCK.
311
was at the rock, in a small vessel purposely constructed to
carry the bell, and with sheers to hang it on the supports im-
bedded in the solid rock. The bell was in its place, and the
abbot blessed the bell; and holy water was sprinkled on the
metal, which was for the future to be lashed by the waves of
the salt sea. And the music and the chants were renewed;
and as they continued, the wind gradually rose, and with the
rising of the wind the bell tolled loud and deep. The tolling
of the bell was the signal for return, for it was a warning
that the weather was about to change, and the procession
pulled back to Aberbrothwick, and landed in good time; for
in one hour more, and the rocky coast was again lashed by
the waves, and the bell tolled loud and quick, although there
were none there but the sea-gull, who screamed with fright
as he wheeled in the air at this unusual noise upon the rock,
which, at the ebb, he had so often made his resting-place.
M'Clise had done his work; the bell was fixed; and once
more he hastened with his vessel to Amsterdam. Once more
was he an inmate of Vandermaclin's house; once more in the
presence of the idol of his soul. This time they spoke; this
time their vows were exchanged for life and death. But
Vandermaclin saw not the state of their hearts. He looked
upon the young seamen as too low, too poor, to be a match
for his daughter; and as such an idea never entered his head,
so did he never imagine that he would have dared to love.
But he was soon undeceived; for M'Clise frankly stated his
attachment, and demanded the hand of Katerina; and, at the
demand, Vandermaclin's face was flushed with anger.
"Mynheer M'Clise," said he, after a pause, as if to control
his feelings; "when a man marries, he is bound to show
that he has wherewithal to support his wife; to support her
in that rank, and to afford her those luxuries to which she
has been accustomed in her father's house. Show me that
you can do so, and I will not refuse you the hand of Katerina."
"As yet, I have not," replied M'Clise; "but I am young
and can work; I have money, and will gain more. Tell me
what sum do you think that I should possess to warrant my
demanding the hand of your daughter?"
"Produce twelve thousand guilders, and she is yours," re-
plied the merchant.
"I have but three thousand," replied M'Clise.

<page 327>
312
THE LEGEND OF
"Then, think no more of Katerina. It is a foolish pas-
sion, and you must forget it. And, Mynheer M'Clise, T must
not have my daughter's affections tampered with. She must
forget you; and that can only be effected by your not meeting
again. I wish you well, Mynheer M'Clise, but I must request
your absence."
M'Clise departed from the presence of the merchant, bowed
down with grief and disappointment. He contrived that a
letter, containing the result of his application, should be put
in the hands of Katerina. But Vandermaclin was informed
of this breach of observance, and Katerina was sent to a
convent, there to remain until the departure of her lover; and
Vandermaclin wrote to his correspondent at Dundee, re-
questing that the goods forwarded to him might not be sent
by the vessel commanded by M'Clise.
Of this our young captain received information. All hope
was nearly gone; still he lingered, and delayed his departure.
He was no longer the active, energetic seaman; he neglected
all, even his attire.
M'Clise knew in which convent his fair Katerina had been
immured; and often would he walk round its precincts, with
the hope of seeing her, if it were but for a moment, but in
vain. His vessel was now laden, and he could delay no
longer. He was to sail the next morning; and once more
did the unhappy young man take his usual walk to look at
those walls which contained all that was dear to him on earth.
His reverie was broken by a stone falling down to his feet;
he took it up; there was a small piece of paper attached to it
with a silken thread. He opened it; it was the handwriting
of Katerina, and contained but two words—"The Bell"
The bell! M'Clise started; for he immediately compre-
hended what was meant. The whole plan came like elec-
tricity through his brain. Yes; then there was a promise of
happiness. The bell was worth ten thousand guilders; that
sum had been offered, and would now be given by Isaacs the
Jew. He would be happy with his Katerina; and he blessed
her ingenuity for devising the means. For a minute or two
he was transported; but the re-action soon took place. What
was he about to attempt? sacrilege—cruelty. The bell had
been blessed by the holy church; it had been purchased by
holy and devout alms. It had been placed on the rock to 
<page 328>
THE BELL ROCK.
313
save the lives of his brother seamen; and were he to remove
it, would he not be responsible for all the lives lost? Would
not the wail of the widow, and the tears of the orphan, be
crying out to Heaven against him? No, no! never! The
crime was too horrible; and M'Clise stamped upon the paper,
thinking he was tempted by Satan in the shape of woman;
but when woman tempts, man is lost. He recalled the charms
of Katerina; all his repugnance was overcome; and he resolved
that the deed should be accomplished, and that Katerina should
be gained, even if he lost his soul.
Andrew M'Clise sailed away from Amsterdam, and Katerina
recovered her liberty. Vandermaclin was anxious that she
should marry: and many were the suitors for her hand, but
in vain. She reminded her father, that he had pledged him-
self, if M'Clise counted down twelve thousand guilders, that
she should be his wife; and to that pledge she insisted that
he was bound fast. And Vandermaclin after reasoning with
her, and pointing out to her that twelve thousand guilders
was a sum so large, that M'Clise might not procure until his
old age, even if he were fortunate, acknowledged that such
was his promise, and that he would, like an honest man, abide
by it, provided that M'Clise should fulfil his part of the agree-
ment in the space of two years; after which he should delay
her settlement no longer. And Katerina raised her eyes to
heaven, and whispered, as she clasped her hands, "The Bell."
Alas! that we should invoke Heaven when we would wish to
do wrong: but mortals are blind, and none so blind as those
who are impelled by passion.
It was in the summer of that year that M'Clise had made
his arrangements: having procured the assistance of some
lawless hands, he had taken the advantage of a smooth and
glassy sea and a high tide to remove the bell on board his
own vessel; a work of little difficulty to him, as he had placed
it there, and knew well the fastenings. He sailed away for
Amsterdam, and was permitted by Heaven to arrive safe with
his sacrilegious freight. He did not, as before, enter the
canal opposite to the house of Vandermaclin, but one that
ran behind the habitation of the Jew Isaacs. At night, he
-went into the house, and reported to the Jew what he had
for sale; and the keen grey eyes of the bent-double little
Israelite sparkled with delight, for he knew that his profit 
<page 329>
314 THE LEGEND OF
would be great. At midnight the bell was made fast to the
crane, and safely deposited in the warehouse of the Jew, who
counted out the ten thousand guilders to the enraptured
M'Clise, whose thoughts were wholly upon the possession of
his Katerina, and not upon the crime he had committed.
But, alas! to conceal one crime, we are too often obliged
to be guilty of even deeper; and thus it was with Andrew
M'Clise. The people who had assisted, upon the promise of
a thousand guilders being divided among them, now murmured
at their share, and insisted upon an equal division of the
spoils, or threatened with an immediate confession of the
black deed.
M'Clise raved, and cursed, and tore his hair; promised to
give them the money as soon as he had wedded Katerina;
but they would not consent. Again the devil came to his
assistance, and whispered how he was to act: he consented.
The next night the division was to be made. They met in
his cabin; he gave them wine, and they drank plentifully;
but the wine was poisoned, and they all died before the
morning. M'Clise tied weights to their bodies, and sunk
them in the deep canal; broke open his hatches, to make it
appear that his vessel had been plundered; and then went to
the authorities denouncing his crew as having plundered
him, and escaped. Immediate search was made, but they
were not to be found; and it was supposed that they had
escaped in a boat.
Once more M'Clise, whose conscience was seared, went to
the house of Vandermaclin, counted down his twelve thousand
guilders, and claimed his bride; and Vandermaclin, who felt
that his daughter's happiness was at stake, now gave his
consent. As M'Clise stated that he was anxious to return to
England, and arrange with the merchants whose goods had
been plundered, in a few days the marriage took place; and
Katerina clasped the murderer in her arms. All was appa-
rent joy and revelry; but there was anguish in the heart of
M'Clise, who, now that he had gained his object, felt that it
had cost him much too dear, for his peace of mind was gone
for ever. But Katerina cared not; every spark of feeling was absorbed in her passion, and the very guilt of M'Clise
but rendered him more dear; for was it not for her that he
had done all this? M'Clise received her portion, and hasted 
<page 330>
THE BELL ROCK.
315
to sail away; for the bodies were still in the canal, and he
trembled every hour lest his crime should be discovered.
And Vandermaclin bade farewell to his daughter: and, he
knew not why, but there was a feeling he could not suppress,
that they never should meet again.
"Down—down below, Katerina! this is no place for you,"
cried M'Clise, as he stood at the helm of the vessel. "Down,
dearest, down, or you will be washed overboard. Every sea
threatens to pour into our decks; already have we lost two
men. Down, Katerina! down, I tell you." "I fear not; let me remain with you.""I tell you, down!" cried M'Clise, in wrath; and Katerina
cast upon him a reproachful look, and obeyed.
The storm was at its height; the sun had set, black and
monstrous billows chased each other, and the dismasted vessel
was hurried on towards the land. The wind howled, and
whistled sharply at each chink in the bulwarks of the vessel.
For three days had they fought the gale, but in vain. Now,
if it continued, all chance was over; for the shore was on their
lee, distant not many miles. Nothing could save them, but
gaining the mouth of the Frith of Tay, and then they could
bear up for Dundee. And there was a boiling surge, and a
dark night, and roaring seas, and their masts were floating
far away; and M'Clise stood at the helm, keeping her broad-
side to the sea: his heart was full of bitterness, and his
guilty conscience bore him down, and he looked for death,
and he dreaded it; for was he not a sacrilegious murderer,
and was there not an avenging God above?
Once more Katerina appeared on deck, clinging for support
to Andrew.
"I cannot stay below. Tell me, will it soon be over?"
"Yes," replied M'Clise, gloomily; "it will soon be over
with all of us."
"How mean you? you told me there was no danger."
"I told you falsely; there is death soon, and damnation
afterwards; for you I have lost my soul!"
"Oh! say not so."
"I say it. Leave me, leave me, woman, or I curse thee."
"Curse me, Andrew? Oh, no! Kiss me, Andrew; and
if we are to perish, let us expire in each other's arms."
"'Tis as well; you have dragged me to perdition. Leave
me, I say, for you have my bitter curse."

<page 331>
316
THE LEGEND OP
Thus was his guilty love turned to hate, now that death
was staring him in the face.
Katerina made no reply. She threw herself on the deck,
and abandoned herself to her feeling of bitter anguish. And
as she lay there, and M'Clise stood at the helm, the wind
abated; the vessel was no longer borne down as before, al-
though the waves were still mountains high. The seamen on
board rallied; some fragments of sail were set on the rem-
nants of the masts, and there was a chance of safety. M'Clise
spoke not, but watched the helm. The wind shifted in their
favour; and hope rose in every heart. The Frith of Tay
was now open, and they were saved! Light was the heart
of M'Clise when he kept away the vessel, and gave the helm
up to the mate. He hastened to Katerina, who still remained
on the deck, raised her up, whispered comfort and returning
love; but she heard not—she could not forget—and she wept
bitterly.
"We are saved, dear Katerina!"
"Better that we had been lost!" replied she, mournfully.
"No, no! say not so, with your own Andrew pressing you
to his bosom."
"Your bitter curse I''
"'Twas madness—nothing—I knew not what I said."
But the iron had entered into her soul. Her heart was
broken.
"You had better give orders for them to look out for the
Bell Rock," observed the man at the helm to M'Clise.
The Bell Rock! M'Clise shuddered, and made no reply.
Onward went the vessel, impelled by the sea and wind: one
moment raised aloft, and towering over the surge; at another,
deep in the hollow trough, and walled in by the convulsed
element. M'Clise still held his Katerina in his arms, who
responded not to his endearments, when a sudden shock threw
them on the deck. The crashing of the timbers, the pouring
of the waves over the stern, the heeling and settling of the
vessel, were but the work of a few seconds. One more furi-
ous_ shock,—she separates, falls on her beam ends, and the
raging seas sweep over her.
M'Clise threw from him her whom he had so madly loved,
and plunged into the wave. Katerina shrieked, as she dashed
after him, and all was over.
When the storm rises, and the screaming sea-gull seeks the 
<page 332>
THE BELL EOCK.
317
land, and the fisherman hasten his bark towards the beech,
there is to be seen, descending from the dark clouds with the
rapidity of lightning, the form of Andrew M'Clise, the heavy
bell to which he is attached by the neck, bearing him down
to his doom.
And when all is smooth and calm, when at the ebbing tide,
the wave but gently kisses the rock, then by the light of the
silver moon, the occupants of the vessels which sail from the
Frith of Tay, have often beheld the form of the beautiful
Katerina, waving her white scarf as a signal that they should
approach, and take her off from the rock on which she is
seated. At times, she offers a letter for her father, Vander-
maclin; and she mourns and weeps as the wary mariners,
with their eyes fixed on her, and with folded arms, pursue
their course in silence and in dread.

<page 333>
318
MOONSHINE.
Those who have visited our West India possessions must
have often been amused with the humour and cunning which
occasionally appear in a negro more endowed than the gene-
rality of his race, particularly when the master also happens
to be a humourist. The swarthy servitor seems to reflect his
patron's absurdities; and having thoroughly studied his cha-
racter, ascertains how far he can venture to take liberties
without fear of punishment.
One of these strange specimens I once met with in a negro
called Moonshine, belonging to a person equally strange in
his own way, who had, for many years, held the situation of
harbour-master at Port Royal, but had then retired on a pen-
sion, and occupied a small house atRyde, in the Isle of Wight.
His name was Cockle, but he had long been addressed as
Captain Cockle; and this brevet rank he retained until the
day of his death. In person he was very large and fat—not
unlike a cockle in shape: so round were his proportions, and
so unwieldy, that it appeared much easier to roll him along
from one place to another, than that he should walk. Indeed,
locomotion was not to his taste: he seldom went much farther
than round the small patch of garden which was in front of
his house, and in which he had some pinks and carnations and
chrysanthemums, of which he was not a little proud. His
head was quite bald, smooth, and shining white; his face par-
took of a more roseate tint, increasing in depth till it settled
into an intense red at the tip of his nose. Cockle had for-
merly been a master of a merchant-vessel, and from his resi-
dence in a warm climate had contracted a habit of potation,
which became confirmed during the long period of his holding
his situation at Port Royal. He had purchased Moonshine
for three hundred dollars, when he was about seven years
old, and, upon his return to England, had taken him with
him.

<page 334>
MOONSHINE.
319
Moonshine was very much attached to his master, very much attached to having his own way, and was, farther, very
much attached to his master's grog bottle.
The first attachment was a virtue; the second human nature;
and the third, in the opinion of old Cockle, a crime of serious
magnitude. I very often called upon Captain Cockle, for he
had a quaint humour about him which amused; and, as he
seldom went out, he was always glad to see any of his friends.
Another reason was, that I seldom went to the house without
finding some entertainment in the continual sparring between
the master and the man. I was at that time employed in the
Preventive Service, and my station was about four miles from
the residence of Cockle. One morning I stalked in, and found
him, as usual, in his little parlour on the ground-floor."Well, Cockle, my boy, how are you V
"Why, to tell you the truth, Bob, I'm all wrong. I'm on
the stool of repentance; to wit, on this easy chair, doing pen-
ance, as you perceive, in a pair of duck trousers. Last
night I was half-seas over, and tolerably happy; this morning
I am high and dry, and intolerably miserable. Carried more
sail than ballast last night, and lost my head; this morning
I've found it again, with a pig of ballast in it I believe. All
owing to my good nature."
"How is that, Cockle V
"Why, that Jack Piper was here last night; and rather
than he should drink all the grog and not find his way home,
I drank some myself—he'd been in a bad way if I had not,
poor fellow !—and now, you see, I'm suffering all from good
nature. Easiness of disposition has been my ruin, and has
rounded me into this ball, by wearing away all my sharp
edges, Bob."
"It certainly was very considerate and very kind of you,
Cockle, especially when we know how much you must have
acted at variance with your inclinations."
"Yes, Bob, yes, I am the milk punch of human kindness;
I often cry—when the chimney smokes; and sometimes—
when I laugh too much. You see, I not only give my money,
as others will do, but, as last night, I even give my head to
assist a fellow-creature. I could, however, dispense with it
for an hour or two this morning."
"Nay, don't say that; for although you might dispense

<page 335>
320
MOONSHINE.
with the upper part, you could not well get on without your
mouth, Cockle."
"Very true, Bob; a chap without a mouth would be like
a ship without a companion hatch;—talking about that, the
combings of my mouth are rather dry—what do you say, Bob,
shall we call Moonshine?"
"Why it's rather broad daylight for Moonshine."
"He's but an eclipse—a total eclipse, I may say. The
fact is, my head is so heavy, that it rolls about on my shoul-
ders; and I must have a stiffener down my throat to prop it
it up. So Moonshine, shine out, you black-faced rascal!"
The negro was outside, cleaning his knives:—he answered,
but continued at his work.
"How me shine, Massa Cockle, when you neber gib me
shiner?
"No: but I'll give you a shinner on your lower limb, that
shall make you feel planet-struck, if you don't show your ugly
face," replied Cockle.
"Massa Cockle, you full of dictionary dis marning."
"Come here, sir!"
"Why you so parsonal dis marning, sar," replied Moon-
shine, rubbing away at the knifeboard—" my face no shine
more dan your white skull widout hair."
"I pulled one out, you scoundrel, every time you stole my
grog, and now they are all gone.—Hairs; what should I do
with heirs when I've nothing to leave," continued Cockle,
addressing me—"hairs are like rats, that quit a ship as soon
as she gets old. Now, Bob, I wonder how long that rascal
will make us wait. I brought him home and gave him his
freedom—but give an inch and he takes an ell. Moonshine,
I begin to feel angry—the tip of my nose is red already."
"Come directly, Massa Cockle."
Moonshine gave two more rubs on the board, and then
made his appearance.
"You call me, sar?"
"What's the use of calling you, you black rascal?"
"Now sar, dat not fair—you say to me, Moonshine, always
do one thing first—so I 'bey order and finish knives—dat
ting done, I come and 'bey nest order."
"Well, bring some cold water and some tumblers."
Moonshine soon appeared with the articles, and then walked
out of the room, grinning at me.

<page 336>
MOONSHINE. 321
"Moonshine, where are you going, you thief?—when did
you ever see me drink cold water, or offer it to my friends?"
"Neber see you drink it but once, and den you tipsy, and
tink it gin; but you very often gib notin but water to your
friends, Massa Cockle."
"When, you scoundrel?"
"Why, very often you say dat water quite strong enough
for me.'
"That's because I love you, Moonshine. Grog is a sad
enemy to us.
"Massa Cockle real fine Christian—he lub him enemy," in-
terrupted Moonshine, looking at me.
"At all events, I'm not ashamed to look mine enemy in the
face—so hand us out the bottle."
Moonshine put the bottle on the table.
"Now, Bob," said Cockle, "what d'ye say to a seven bell-er?
Why, hallo! what's become of all the grog?"
"All drank last night, Massa Cockle," replied Moonshine.
"Now, you ebony thief, I'll swear that there was half a
bottle left when I took my last glass; for I held the bottle up
to the candle to ascertain the ullage."
"When you go up tairs, Massa Cockle, so help me Gad!
not one drop left in de bottle."
"Will you take your oath, Moonshine, that you did not
drink any last night?"
"No, Massa Cockle, because I gentleman, and neber tell
lie—me drink, because you gib it to me."
"Then I must have been drunk indeed. Now, tell me,
how did I give it to you?—tell me every word which
passed."
"Yes, Massa Cockle, me make you recollect all about it.
When Massa Piper go away, you look at bottel and den you
say, 'Fore I go up to bed, I take one more glass for coming
up'—den I say, ''Pose you do, you nebber be able to go up.'
Den you say, 'Moonshine, you good fellow (you always call
me good fellow when you want me), you must help me.' You
drink you grog—you fall back in de chair, and you shut first
one eye, and den you shut de oder. I see more grog on the
table: so I take up de bottel and I say, 'Massa Cockle, you
go up stairs?' and you say, 'Yes, yes—directly.' Den I hold
de bottel up and say to you, 'Massa, shall I help you?' and 
<page 337>
322
MOONSHINE.
you say, 'Yes, you must help me.' So den I take one glass
of grog, 'cause you tell me to help you."
"I didn't tell you to help yourself though, you scoundrel!"
"Yes, Massa, when you tell me to help you with de bottel,
I 'bey order, and help myself. Den, sar, I waits little more,
and I say, 'Massa now you go up 'tairs,' and you start up aud
you wake, and you say, 'Yes, yes;' and den I hold up and
show you bottel again, and I say, 'Shall I help you massa?' and
den you say 'Yes.' So I 'bey order again, and take one more
glass. Den you open mouth and you snore—so I look again
and I see one little glass more in bottel, and I call you, 'Massa Cockle, Massa Cockle,' and you say, 'high—high !'—and den
you head fall on you chest, and you go sleep again—so den I
call again and I say, 'Massa Cockle, here one lilly more
drop, shall I drink it?' and you nod you head on you bosom,
and say noting—so I not quite sure, and I say again, 'Massa,
Cockle, shall I finish this lilly drop?' and you nod you head
once more. Den I say, "all right,' and I say, 'you very good
helt, Massa Cockle;' and I finish de bottel. Now, Massa,
you ab de whole tory, and it all really for true."
I perceived that Cockle was quite as much amused at this
account of Moonshine's as I was myself, but he put on a bluff
look.
"So, sir, it appears that you took advantage of my helpless
situation, to help yourself."
"Massa Cockle, just now you tell Massa Farren dat you
drink so much, all for good nature to Massa Piper—I do same
all for good nature."
"Well, Mr. Moonshine, I must have some grog," replied
Cockle, "and as you helped yourself last night, now you
must help me;—get it how you can, I give you just ten
minutes -
"'Pose you give gib me ten shillings, sar," interrupted
Moonshine, "dat better."
"Cash is all gone. I havn't a skillick till quarter-day,
not a shot in the locker till Wednesday. Either get me some
more grog, or you'll get more kicks than halfpence."
"You no ab money—you no ab tick—how I get grog,
Massa Cockle? Missy O'Bottom, she tells me, last quarter-
day, no pay whole bill, she not half like it; she say you great
deceiver, and no trust more."

<page 338>
MOONSHINE.
323
"Confound the old hag! Would you believe it, Bob, that
Mrs. Rowbottom has wanted to grapple with me these last
two years—wants to make me landlord of the Goose and
Pepper-box, taking her as a fixture with the premises. I
suspect I should be the goose and she the pepper-box;—but
we never could shape that course. In the first place, there's
too much of her; and, in the next, there's too much of me.
I explained this to the old lady as well as I could; and she
swelled up as big as a balloon, saying, that, when people
were really attached, they never attached any weight to such
trifling obstacles."
"But you must have been sweet upon her, Cockle 1"
"Nothing more than a little sugar to take the nauseous
taste of my long bill out of her mouth. As for the love part
of the story, that was all her own. I never contradict a lady,
because it's not polite; but since I explained, the old woman
has huffed, and wo'n't trust me with half a quartern—will
she, Moonshine?"
"No, sar: when I try talk her over, and make promise,
she say dat all moonshine. But, sar, I try 'gain—I tink I
know how." And Moonshine disappeared, leaving us in the
dark as to what his plans might be.
"I wonder you never did marry, Cockle," I observed.
"You would not wonder if you knew all. I must say,
that once, and once only, I was very near it. And to whom
do you think it was—a woman of colour."
"A black woman f
"No: not half black, only a quarter—what they call a
quadroon in the West Indies. But, thank Heaven! she
refused me."
"Refused you? hang it, Cockle, I never thought that you
had been refused by a woman of colour."
"I was, though. You shall hear how it happened. She
had been the quadroon wife (you know what that means) of
a planter of the name of Guiness; he died, and not only
bequeathed her her liberty, but also four good houses in Port
Royal, and two dozen slaves. He had been dead about two
years, and she was about thirty, when I first knew her. She
was very rich, for she had a good income and spent nothing,
except in jewels and dress to deck out her own person, which
certainly was very handsome, even at that time, for she never Y 2

<page 339>
324
MOONSHINE.
had had any family. Well, if I was not quite in love with
her, I was with her houses and her money; and I used to sit
in her verandah and talk sentimental. One day I made my
proposal. 'Massa Cockle,' said she, 'dere two ting I not
like; one is, I not like your name 'Pose I 'cept your offer,
you must change you name,'
"'Suppose you accept my offer, Mistress Guiness, you'll
change your name. I don't know how I am to change mine,'
I replied.
"'I make 'quiry, Massa Cockle, and I find that by act and
parliament you get another name.'
"'An act of parliament!' I cried.
"' Yes, sar; and I pay five hundred gold Joe 'fore I hear
people call me Missy Cockle—dat shell fish,' said she, and she
turned up her nose.
"' Humph!' said I, 'and pray what is the next thing
which you wish?'
"'De oder ting, sar, is, you no ab coat am arms, no ab seal
to your watch, with bird and beast 'pon 'em; now 'pose you
promise me dat you take oder name, and buy um coat am
arms; den, sar, I take de matter into 'sideration.'
"' Save yourself the trouble, ma'am,' said I, jumping up;
'my answer is short I'll see you and your whole gener-
ation hanged first!'"
"Well, that was a very odd sort of a wind-up to a pro-
posal; but here comes Moonshine."
The black entered the room, and put a full bottle down on
the table.
"Dare it is, sar," said he, grinning.
"Well, done, Moonshine, now I forgive you; but how did
you manage it?"
"Me tell you all de tory, sar—first I see Missy O'Bottom,
and I say, 'How you do, how you find himsel dis marning?
Massa come, I tink, by an bye, but he almost fraid,' I said.
She say, 'What he fraid for?' He tink you angry—not like
see him—no lub him any more: he very sorry, very sick at
'art—he very much in lub wid you."
"The devil you did!" roared Cockle; "now I shall be
bothered again with that old woman; I wish she was moored
as a buoy to the Royal George."
"Massa no hear all yet. I say, 'Miss O'Bottom, 'pose you 
<page 340>
MOONSHINE.
325
no tell?' 'I tell.'—'Massa call for clean shirt dis morning,
and I say, it no clean shirt day, sar;' he say, 'Bring me clean
shirt;' and den he put him on clean shirt and he put him on
clean duck trowsers, he make me brush him best blue coat.
I say, 'What all dis for, massa?' He put him hand up to
him head, and he fetch him breath and say—' I fraid Missy
O'Bottom, no hear me now—I no hab courage;" and den he
sit all dress ready, and no go. Den he say, 'Moonshine, gib
me one glass grog, den I hab courage.' I go fetch bottle, and
all grog gone—not one lilly drop left; den massa fall down
plump in him big chair, and say, 'I neber can go.' 'But,' say Missy O'Bottom, 'why he no send for some?' ''Cause,'
I say, 'quarter-day no come—money all gone.'—Den say she,
'If you poor massa so very bad, den I trust you one bottel—
you gib my compliments and say, I very appy to see him,
and stay at home—Den I say, 'Missy O'Bottom pose massa
not come soon as he take one two glass grog cut my head off.'
Dat all, sar."
"That's all, is it? A pretty scrape you have got me into
you scroundel! What's to be done now?"
"Why, let's have a glass of grog first, Cockle," replied I,
"we've been waiting a long while for it, and we'll then talk
the matter over."
"Bob, you're sensible, and the old woman was no fool in
sending the liquor—it requires Dutch courage to attack such
a Dutch-built old schuyt; let's get the cobwebs out of our
throats, and then we must see how we can get out of this
scrape. I expect that I shall pay 'dearly for my whistle'
this time I wet mine. Now, what's to be done, Bob?"
"I think that you had better leave it to Moonshine,"
said I.
"So I will.—Now, sir, as you have got me into this scrape,
you must get me out of it.—D'ye hear?"
"Yes, Massa Cockle, I tink—but no ab courage."
"I understand you, you sooty fellow—here, drink this, and
see if it will brighten up your wits. He's a regular turnpike,
that fellow, everything must pay toll"
"Massa Cockle, I tell Missy O'Bottom dat you come soon
as you hab two glass grog; 'pose you only drink one."
"That wo'n't do, Moonshine, for I'm just mixing my
second; you must find out something better."

<page 341>
326
MOONSHINE.
. "One glass grog, massa, gib no more dan one tought—dat
you ab —"
"Well, then, here's another.'—Now recollect, before you
drink it, you are to get me out of this scrape; if not, you get
into a scrape, for I'll beat you as—as white as snow."
"'Pose you no wash nigger white, you no mangle him
white, Massa Cockle," added Moonshine.
"The fellow's ironing me, Bob, ar'n't he?" said Cockle,
laughing. "Now, before you drink, recollect the condi-
tions."
"Drink first, sar, make sure of dat," replied Moonshine,
swallowing off the brandy; "tink about it afterwards.—Eh!
I ab it," cried Moonshine, who disappeared, and Cockle and
I continued in conversation over our grog, which to sailors is
acceptable in any one hour in the twenty-four. About ten
minutes afterwards Cockle perceived Moonshine in the little
front garden. "There's that fellow, Bob; what is he
about?"
"Only picking a nosegay, I believe," replied I, looking
out of the window.
"The rascal, he must be picking all my chrysanthemums.
Stop him, Bob."
But Moonshine vaulted over the low pales, and there was
no stopping him. It was nearly an hour before he returned;
and when he came in, we found that he was dressed out in
his best, looking quite a dandy, and with some of his mas-
ter's finest flowers, in a large nosegay, sticking in his
waistcoat.
"All right, sar, all right; dat last glass grog gib me fine
idee; you neber ab more trouble bout Missy O'Bottom."
"Well, let's hear," said Cockle.
"I dress mysel bery 'pruce, as you see, massa. I take
nosegay"
"Yes, I see that, and be hanged to you."
"Neber mind, Massa Cockle. I say to Missy O'Bottom,
'Massa no able come, he very sorry, so he send me;' 'well,'
she say, 'what you ab to say, sit down, Moonshine, you very
nice man.' Den I say, 'Massa Cockle lub you very much,
he tink all day how he make you appy; den he say, Missy
O'Bottom very fine 'oman, make very fine wife.' Den Missy
O'Bottom say, ''Top a moment,' and she bring a bottel from 
<page 342>
MOONSHINE.
327
cupboard, and me drink something did make 'tomach feel
really warm; and den she say, 'Moonshine, what you rnassa
say?' den I say, massa say, 'You fine 'oman, make good
wife;' but he shake um head, and say, 'I very old man, no
good for noting; I tink all day how I make her appy, and I
find out—Moonshine, you young man, you 'andsome feller,
you good servant, I not like you go away, but I tink you
make Missy o'Bottom very fine 'usband; so I not care for
myself, you go to Missy O'Bottom, and tell I send you, dat I
part wid you, and give you to her for 'usband.'"
Cockle and I burst out laughing. "Well, and what did
Mrs. Rowbottom say to that?"
"She jump up, and try to catch me hair, but I bob my
head, and she miss; den she say, 'You filthy black rascal,
you tell you massa, 'pose he ever come here, I break his white
bald pate; and 'pose you ever come here, I smash you woolly
black skull.'—Dat all, Massa Cockle; you see all right now,
and I quite dry wid talking."
"All right! do you call it. I never meant to quarrel with
the old woman; what d'ye think, Bob—is it all right?"
"Why, you must either have quarrelled with her, or mar-
ried her, that's clear."
"Well, then, I'm clear of her, and so it's all right. It
a'n't every man who can get out of matrimony by sacrificing
a nosegay and two glasses of grog."
"Tree glasses, Massa Cockle," said Moonshine.
"Well, three glasses; here it is, you dog, and its dog cheap,
too. Thank God, next Wednesday's quarter day. Bob, you
must dine with me—cut the service for to-day."
"With all my heart," replied I, "and I'll salve my con-
science by walking the beach all night; but, Cockle, look
here, there is but a drop in the bottle, and you have no more.
I am like you, with a clean swept hold. You acknowledge
the difficulty?"
"It stares me in the face, Bob; what must be done?"
"I'll tell you—in the first place, what have you for dinner?"
"Moonshine, what have we got for dinner?"
"Dinner, sar?—me not yet tink about dinner. What you
like to ab, sar?"
"What have we got in the house, Moonshine?"
"Let me see, sar? first place, we ab very fine piece pick-

<page 343>
328
MOONSHINE.
lum pork; den we have picklum pork; and den—let me tink
—den we ab, we ab picklum pork, sar."
"The long and the short of it is, Bob, that we have nothing
but a piece of pickled pork; can you dine off that?"
"Can a duck swim, Cockle!" -»
"Please, sar, weabplentypeafor<fo<7&a«ft%," said Moonshine.
"Well, then, Cockle, as all that is required is to put the
pot on the fire, you can probably spare Moonshine, after he
has done that, and we will look to the cookery; start him off
with a note to Mr. Johns, and he can bring back a couple of
bottles from my quarters."
"Really dat very fine tought, Massa Farren; I put in pork,
and den I go and come back in one hour."
"That you never will, Mr. Moonshine; what's o'clock now?
mercy on us, how time flies in your company, Cockle, it is
nearly four o'clock; it will be dark at six."
"Neber mind, sar, me always ab moonshine whereber I
go," said the black, showing his teeth.
"It will take two hours to boil the pork, Bob; that fellow
has been so busy this morning that he has quite forgot the
dinner.'
"All you business, Massa Cockle."
"Very true; but now start as soon as you can, and come
back as soon as you can; here's the note."
Moonshine took the note, looked at the direction, as if he
could read it, and in a few minutes was seen to depart.
"And now, Cockle," said I, "as Moonshine will be gone
some time, suppose you spin us a yarn to pass away the
time."
"I'll tell you what, Bob, I am not quite so good at that as
I used to be. I've an idea that when my pate became bald,
my memory oozed away by insensible perspiration."
"Never mind, you must have something left, you can't be
quite empty."
"No, but my tumbler is; so I'll just fill that up, and then
I'll tell you how it was that I came to go to sea."
"The very thing that I should like to hear, above all
others."
"Well, then, you must know that, like cockles in general,
I was born on the sea-shore, just a quarter of a mile out of
Dover, towards Shakspeare's Cliff. My father was a fisher-

<page 344>
MOONSHINE.
329
man by profession, and a smuggler by practice, all was fish
that came to his net; but his cottage was small, he was sup-
posed to be very poor, and a very bad fisherman, for he sel-
dom brought home many; but there was a reason for that,
he very seldom put his nets overboard. His chief busi-
ness lay in taking out of vessels coming down Channel,
goods which were shipped and bonded for exportation, and
running them on shore again. You know, Bob, that there
are many articles which are not permitted to enter even upon
paying duty, and when these goods, such as silks, &c, are
seized or taken in prizes, they are sold for exportation. Now,
it was then the custom for vessels to take them on board in
the river, and run them on shore as they went down Channel,
and the fishing-boats were usually employed for this service;
my father was a well-known hand for this kind of work, for
not being suspected, he was always fortunate; of course, had
he once been caught, they would have had their eyes upon
him after he had suffered his punishment. Now the way my
father used to manage was this: there was a long tunnel-drain from some houses used as manufactories, about a hundred
yards above his cottage, which extended out into the sea at
low-water mark, and which passed on one side of our cottage.
My father had cut from a cellar in the cottage into the drain,
and as it was large enough for a man to kneel down in, he
used to come in at low-water with his coble, and make fast
the goods, properly secured from the wet and dirt in tarpaulin
bags, to a rope, which led from the cellar to the sea through
the drain. When the water had flowed sufficiently to cover
the mouth of the drain, he then threw the bags overboard,
and, securing the boat, went to the cottage, hauled up the
articles, and secured them too; d'ye understand? My father
had no one to assist him but my brother, who was a stout
fellow, seven years older than myself, and my mother, who
used to give a helping hand when required; and thus did he
keep his own counsel, and grow rich; when all was right, he
got his boat over into the harbour, and having secured her,
he came home as innocent as a lamb. I was then about eight
or nine years old, and went with my father and brother in
the coble, for she required three hands, at least, to manage
her properly, and like a tin-pot, although not very big, I was
very useful. Now it so happened that my father had notice 
<page 345>
330
MOONSHINE.
that a brig, laying in Dover harbour, would sail the next day,
and that she had on board of her a quantity of lace and silks,
purchased at the Dover custom-house for exportation, which
he was to put on shore again to be sent up to London. The
sending up to London we had nothing to do with; the agent
at Dover managed all that; we only left the articles at his
house, and then received the money on the nail. We went
to the harbour, where we found the brig hauling out, so we
made all haste to get away before her. It blew fresh from
the northward and eastward, and there was a good deal of
sea running. As we were shoving out, the London agent, a
jolly little round-faced fellow, in black clothes, and a bald
white head, called to us, and said that he wanted to board a
vessel in the offing, and asked whether we would take him.
This was all a ruse, as he intended to go on board of the brig
with us to settle matters, and then return in the pilot boat.
Well, we hoisted our jib, drew aft our foresheet, and were
soon clear of the harbour; but we found that there was a
devil of a sea running, and more wind than we bargained for;
the brig came out of the harbour with a flowing sheet, and
we lowered down the foresail to reef it—father and brother
busy about that, while I stood at the helm, when the agent
said to me, 'When do you mean to make a voyage?' 'Sooner
than father thinks for,' said I, 'for I want to see the world.'
It was sooner than I thought for too, as you shall hear. As
soon as the brig was well out, we ran down to her, and with
some difficulty my father and the agent got on board, for the
sea was high and cross, the tide setting against the wind; my
brother and I were left in the boat to follow in the wake of
the brig; but as my brother was casting off the rope forward,
his leg caught in the bight, and into the sea he went; how-
ever, they hauled him on board, leaving me alone in the coble.
It was not of much consequence, as I could manage to follow
before the wind under easy sail, without assistance: so I kept
her in the wake of the brig, both of us running nearly before
it at the rate of five miles an hour, waiting till my father
should have made up his packages, of a proper size to walk
through the tunnel drain.
"The Channel was full of ships, for the westerly winds had
detained them for a long time. I had followed the brig about
an hour, when the agent went on shore in a pilot boat, and I 
<page 346>
MOONSHINE.
331
expected my father would soon be ready; then the wind veered
more towards the southward, with dirt; at last it came on
foggy, and I could hardly see the brig, and as it rained hard,
and blew harder, I wished that my father was ready, for my
arms ached with steering the coble for so long a while. I
could not leave the helm, so I steered on at a black lump, as
the brig looked through the fog: at last the fog was so thick
that I could not see a yard beyond the boat, and I hardly
knew how to steer. I began to be frightened, tired, and cold,
and hungry I certainly was. Well, I steered on for more
than an hour, when the fog cleared up a little, and then I saw
the stern of the brig just before me. My little heart jumped
with delight; and I expected that she would round-to imme-
diately, and that my father would praise me for my conduct;
and, what was still more to the purpose, that I should get
something to eat and drink. But no: she steered on right
down Channel, and I followed for more than an hour more,
when it came on to blow very hard, and I could scarcely
manage the boat—she pulled my little arms off, and I was
quite exhausted. The weather now cleared up, and I could
make out the vessel plainly; and I immediately discovered
that it was not the brig, but a bark which I had got hold of
in the fog, so that I did not know what to do; but I did as
most boys of nine years old would have done who were fright-
ened,—I sat down and cried, still, however, keeping the tiller
in my hand, and steering as well as I could. At last, I could
hold it no longer; I ran forward, let go the fore and jib haul-
yards, and hauled down the sails; drag them into the boat I
could not, and there I was, like a young bear adrift in a
washing-tub. I looked all round me, and there were no
vessels near; the bark had left me two miles astern, it was
blowing a gale from the S.E., with a heavy sea; the gulls and
sea-birds wheeled and screamed in the storm; and as 1 thought,
when they came close to me, looked at me with their keen
eyes, as much as to say, ' What the devil are you doing there}'
The boat was as light as a cork, and although she was tossed
and rolled about so that I was obliged to hold on, she shipped
no water of any consequence, for the jib in the water forward
had brought her head to-wind, and acted as a sort of floating
anchor. At last there was nothing in sight, so I laid down at
the bottom of the boat and fell asleep. It was daylight befor

<page 347>
332
MOONSHINE.
I awoke, and then I got up and looked round me—it blew
harder than ever; and although there were some vessels at a
distance, scudding before the gale, they did not mind, or per-
haps see me. I sat very melancholy the whole day, the tears
ran down my cheeks, my eyes were full of salt from the spray;
I saw at last nothing but the roaring and trembling waves., I
prayed every prayer Iknew, that is, I said the Lord's Prayer, the
JBelief,andasmuch of the Catechism asl couldrecollect. Itrained
in torrents—I was wet, starving, and miserably cold. At night
I again fell asleep from exhaustion. The morning broke again,
and the sun shone, the gale was breaking off, and I felt more
cheered; but I was now ravenous from hunger, as well as
choking from thirst, and I was so weak that I could scarcely
stand. I looked round me every now and then, and lay down
again. In the afternoon I saw a large vessel standing right
for me; this gave me courage and strength. I stood up and
waved my hat, and they saw me—the sea was still running
very high, but the wind had gone down. She rounded-to so
as to bring me under her lee. Send a boat she could not, but
the sea bore her down upon me, and I was soon close to her.
Men in the chains were ready with ropes, and I knew that
this was my only chance. At last, a very heavy sea bore her
right down upon the boat, lurching over on her beam ends,
her main chains struck the boat and sent her down, while I
was seized by the scuff of the neck by two of the seamen, and
borne aloft by them as the vessel returned to the weather-roll.
They hauled me in, and I was safe. It was neck or nothing
with me then; wasn't it, Bob 1"
"It was, indeed, a miraculous escape, Cockle."
"Well, as soon as they had given me something to eat, I
told my story:—and it appeared that she was an East India-
man running down Channel, and not likely to meet with anything to send me back again. The passengers, especially the
ladies, were very kind to me: and as there was no help for it,
why, I took my first voyage to the East Indies."
"And your father and your brother t" .
"Why, when I met them, which I did about six years
afterwards, I found that they had been in much the same
predicament, having lost the coble, and the weather being so
bad that they could not get on shore again. As there was no
help for it, they took their first voyage to the West Indies; so 
<page 348>
MOONSHINE.
333
there was a dispersion of an united family—two went west,
one went east, coble went down, and mother, after waiting a
month or two, and supposing father dead, went off with a
soldier. All dispersed by one confounded gale of wind from
the northward and eastward, so that's the way that I went to
sea, Bob. And now it's time that Moonshine was back."
But Moonshine kept us waiting for some time: when he
returned it was then quite dark, and we had lighted candles,
anxiously waiting for him; for not only was the bottle empty,
but we were very hungry. At last we heard a conversation
at the gate, and Moonshine made his appearance with the two
bottles of spirits, and appeared himself to be also in high
spirits. The pork and peas pudding soon were on the table.
We dined heartily, and were sitting over the latter part of the
first bottle in conversation, it being near upon the eleventh
hour, when we heard a noise at the gate—observed some
figures of men, who stayed a short time and then disappeared.
The door opened, and Moonshine went out. In a few seconds
he returned, bringing in his arms an anker of spirits, which
he laid on the floor, grinning so wide that his head appeared
half off. Without saying a word, he left the room and
returned with another.
"Why, what the devil's this 1" cried Cockle. Moonshine made no answer, but went out and in until he
had brought six ankers in, one after another, which he placed
in a row on the floor. He then shut the outside door, bolted
it, came in, and seating himself on one of the tubs, laughed to
an excess which compelled him to hold his sides; during
which Cockle and I were in a state of astonishment and
suspense.
"Where the devil did all this come from V cried Cockle,
actually getting out of his easy chair. "Tell me, sir, or
by"
"I tell you all, Massa Cockle:—you find me better friend
dan Missy O'Bottom. Now you ab plenty, and neber need
scold Moonshine 'pose he take lilly drap. I get all dis pre-
sent to you, Massa Cockle."
I felt a great degree of anxiety, and pressed Moonshine to
tell his story."I tell you all, sar. When I come back wid de two bottel
I meet plenty men wid de tubs: dey say, 'Hollo there, who 
<page 349>
334
MOONSHINE.
be you?' I say, 'I come from station; bring massa two bottel,
and I show urn.' Den dey say, 'Where you massa?' and I
say, 'At um house at Ryde'—(den dey tink dat you my
massa, Massa Farren)—so dey say, 'Yes, we know dat, we
watch him dere, but now you tell, so we beat you dead.' Den I say, ' What for dat; massa like drink, why you no gib
massa some tub, and den he never say noting, only make fus8
some time, 'cause of Admirality.' Den dey say, 'You sure of
dat?' and I say, 'Quite sure massa neber say one word.' Den dey talk long while; last, dey come and say, 'You come
wid us and show massa house.' So two men come wid me,
and when dey come to gate I say, 'Dis massa house when he
live at Ryde, and dere you see massa;'—and I point to Massa
Cockle, but dey see Massa Farren—so dey say, 'All very
good; tree, four hour more, you find six tub here; tell you
massa dat every time run tub, he alway hab six;' den dey go
way, den dey come back, leave tub; dat all, massa."
"You rascal!" exclaimed I, rising up, "so you have com-
promised me; why I shall lose my commission if found out."
"No, sar; nobody wrong but de smuggler; dey make a
lilly mistake; case you brought to court-martial, I gib evi-
dence, and den I clear you."
"But what must we do with these tubs, Cockle?" said I,
appealing to him.
"Do, Bob?—why they are a present—a very welcome one,
and a very handsome one into the bargain. I shall not keep
them, I pledge you my word; let that satisfy you—they shall
all be fairly entered."
"Upon that condition, Cockle," I replied, "I shall of course
not give information against you." (I knew full well what
he meant by sayiug he would not keep them.)
"How I do, Massa Cockle," said Moonshine, with a grave
face; "I take um to the Custom-house to-night or to-morrow
morning."
"To-morrow, Moonshine," replied Cockle; "at present just
put them out of sight."
I did not think it prudent to make any further inquiries;
but I afterwards discovered that the smugglers, true to their
word, and still in error, continued to leave six tubs in old
Cockle's garden whenever they succeeded in running a cargo,
which, notwithstanding all our endeavours, they constantly 
<page 350>
MOONSHINE.
335
did. One piece of information I gained from this affair,
which was, the numbers of cargoes which were run compared
to those which were seized during the remainder of the time I
was on that station, and found it to be in the proportion of
ten to one. The cargoes run were calculated by the observa-
tions of old Cockle, who, when I called upon him, used to say
very quietly, "I shouldn't wonder if they did not run a cargo
last night, Bob, in spite of all your vigilance—was it very
dark?"
"On the contrary," replied I, looking at the demure face of
the negro; "I suspect it was Moonshine."
THE END.
-
LONDON:
Printed by Schulze and Co., 13, Poland Street.

<page 351>

<page 352>

<page 353>
I

<page 354>

<page 355>

<page 356>

<page 357>


<page 358>


<page 359>


<page 360>
