

<page 1>



<page 2>


<page 3>


<page 4>
THE
MEMOIRS
Of the Honorable
Sir JOHN RERESBT, Baronet,
And last Governor os TORK.
CONTAINING
Several Private and Remarkable Transactions,
FROM
The RESTORATION to the REVOLUTION*
Inclusively.

LONDON:
Printed in the Year M DCC XXXIV.

<page 5>
\
0
• /
I
/

<page 6>
MEMOIRS
O F
Sir J O H N R E R E S B T,
From the Year 1658 to the Year 1689.
Sir John having very minutely acquainted us with his Birth, E-
ducation and Travels, which could neither affect the Reader,
nor be admitted as part of what we promise to print of him, we
shall set out from the Tear 1658.

His Year, says he, died the Protector O-
liver Cromwell, one of the greatest and
bravest Men, had his Cause been good,
the World ever saw. His Actions I leave
to the Historian j and having been very
near his Person but once, at an Au-
dience of an Ambaflador at Whitehall,
I can only iay that his Figure did not
come up to his Character • he was in-
deed a likely Person, but not handsom,
nor had he a very bold look with him. He was plain in his Ap-
parel, and rather negligent than not. Tears he had at will, and
was, doubtless, the deepest Dissembler on Earth.
^ B - The
1658.

<page 7>
V MEMOIRS
l65P- The Duke of Buckingham, who had attended*the King in his
,Aug. l%. £x^ey ka(j (Ji^bligg^y an(J left his Majesty some time besore, and
was now endeavouring to Marry the Daughter and Heiress of
Thomas Lord Fairfax, formerly the Parliament's General, and unto
whom had been granted the greatest part of the said Duke's
Estate. This Duke was the finest Gentleman, both for Person
* and Wit, I think I ever saw; but he knew not how to be long
serious, or mindful of Business \ and had behaved with some in-
solence to the King, which was the Cause of their Separation. It
was now that I first became acquainted with him, and he from
the very first Moment expressed a Kindness for me.
It was now easy to perceive that a way was paving to facili-
tate the King's return; but still the Rump kept up some face
of State j and I remember to have been present at a Dinner, gi-
ven by the City of London, to Lambert and other Officers of the
Army, by far more costly and splendid, than any I ever saw
given afterwards to his Majesty \. so much is Awe more prevalent
than Love.
Off. 20. Continuing but in an indisferent State of Health, I, partly for
that Reason, and partly for others, return6d to Paris, where I
had no sooner put my self into some Equipage, but t endeavoured
to be known at our Queen Mother's Court, which she then kept
at the Palais Royal. Her Majesty had none of her Children with
her, but the Princess Henrietta Maria; and few of the English
making their Court there, I was the better received. As I spoke
the Language of the Country, and danced pretty well, the young
Princess, then about fifteen Years of Age, behaved towards me
with all the civil Freedom that might be; she made me dance
with her, played on the Harpsicordto me in her Highnefs's Cham-
ber ; suffered me to wait on her as she walked in the Garden, and
sometimes to toss her in a Swing between two Trees, and, in
fine, to be present at all her innocent Diversions.
The Queen commanded me to attend as often as I convenient-
ly could; she had a great Affection for England, notwithstanding
the severity os Usage she and hers had met with there. With
the

<page 8>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B y. 3

the great Men and Ladies of France, she discoursed much in l659.
praise of the People and Country, of their Courage, their Gene- .
rosity, their good Nature, and would excuse all the late Misfor-
tunes, as brought about by some desperate Enthusiasts, rather
than proceeding from the Genius and Temper of the Nation. To
give a litte Instance of her Inclination for the English, I hapned
to carry an English Gentleman with me one Day to Court, and
he, to be very fine, had got him a Garniture of rich Ribbon to
his Suit, in which was a Mixture of Red and Yellow ; which the
Queen observing, called to me, and bad me advise my Friend to
mend his Fancy a little, as to his Ribbons, the two Colours he had
joined, being ridiculous in France, and might give the French oc-
casion to laugh at him.
I had three Cousins then in an English Convent at Paris, one
of them an ancient Lady, and since Abbess of the House: Hither
the Queen was wont often to retire for some Days j and the La-
dy would tell me that Lord 'Jertnyn, since St. Albans, had the
Queen greatly in awe of him, and indeed it was obvious that he
had great Interest with her Concerns • but that he was married to
her, or had Children by her, as some have reported, 1 did not
then believe, tho' the thing was certainly so.
The Court of France was very splendid this Winter ; a Grand 1660,
Mask was danced at the Louvre, where the King and Princess
Henriette of England danced to Admiration: But there was now
a greater Resort to the Palais than the French Court; the good
Humour and Wit of our Queen Mother, and the beauty of the
Princess her Daughter being more inviting than any thing that
appeared in the French Queen, who was a Spaniard.
The Queen Mother received the News of nis Majesty's happy
Restoration, with all imaginable Demonstrations ot Joy, and, a-
mong other things, gave a noble Ball at her Court, to which every
Body of the greatest Quality was invited, and to which all the
English Gentlemen, then at Paris, had admittance. Having been
ill some time before, I would have been excused from dancing,
but the Queen commanding me to take out the Cardinal's Niece,
I obeyed. B 2 I

<page 9>
4 MEMOIRS.
1660. "I stayed at Paris till August, and received more Honours from
the Queen and the Princess her Daughter than I deserved, or could
acknowledge, but by the most constant Duty and Attendance in
my Power.
Aug. 2. On the id Instant I fat out for England; but before my De-
parture, I waited on the Queen for her Commands j she told me
stie would write by me, and ordered me to attend next Morning
for her Letter. Having received it and taken my Leave, I de-
fired to know if it required haste? Her Majesty said, No, for
that it contained but little besides a particular Recommendation
of me to her Son the King.
At London I met my Mother and most of my Relations, who
were come up, as from all Parts of England they did, to see the
King, and was presented by the. Duke of Ormondf then but Mar-
quiss, to his Majesty in the Privy Chamber at Whitehall, and
delivering him the Queen's Letter, he alked me several Questions,
both concerning her and my Voyage.
, The. Court • at Whitehall loon became very magnificent, the
Duke of Tork having his Court apart, and the Duke of Gloucester
his: The Kingdom was now very rich, and Men were generally
satisfied with the King's Return, tho' some Malecontents of seve-
ral sorts there were; and how should it be otherwise? But the
King did not much adhere to Business: All was calm and easy,
he had a Parliament ready to yield to any thing that was rea-
sonable, as the Acts they made sufficiently declare, and the Earl
of Clarendon, then Chancellor, was at the Helm..; The King, who
was of an Age and Vigor for it, pursued his Pleasures ; and if
Love prevailed with him mo^£ than any other Passion, he had
this for Excuse, besides that his Complexion was of an amorous
sort, the Women seemed to be the Aggressors j and I have since
heard the King say That they would sometimes offer themselves
to his Embraces: Nor were the two Dukes, his Brothers, more
averse to the Sex than his Majesty.
About this time the King's Aunt (the Queen of Bohemia) came
over from the Hague, as did also his Sister, the Princess of Orange;
but

<page 10>
Os Sir J o h N Rer esby. 5
but they both dyed soon after their Arrival, as did also the Duke
of Gloucester,
The Queen Mother often alked me if the King had done any
thing for me, and what it was I had fixed my Mind on, that she
might speak a Word for me; but in truth I did not at that time
pursue my own Advantage as I might have done; and went to
Court,rather to converse and look about me, than to sollicit any
Favour: I chiefly relyed on the Queen's kindness to me, and the
Influence ihe had over the King; but all the pleasing Superstru-
cture fell to the Ground ;'the- Queen left England soon after the
Death of her Children, taking the Princess Henrietta'away with
her to Paris, and I was' disappointed. \ *
At tmVtime a small Rebellion was raised in London by one Ven-Januarys.
»£/ywhich in its very rise was defeated by a Party of the Guards;
but running out of Town they rallied again in Cane^wood' near
Highgate. Having a mind therefore to see a little Action, I
mounted one of my Coach-horses, and mounted my Man upon the
other, and joined Sir Thomas Sands, who commanded the Party
of the Guards that went in pursuit of the Ihcendaries. Having
fearch'd the Wood till Midnight,we came: to & little House, where
the People told us they had been desiring some Victuals but a
little while before, and that they could not be far off. Accord-
ingly, about an Hour after this, we found some of them in the
thickest part of the Wood. They discharged their Pieces at us,
but the Moon setting they got from us, and hurried back again
to London, where they met with the Fate every Body knows.
Their Captain and about twenty more were hanged, drawn and
quartered: About twenty of them^were killed in their several
Skirmishes, and about as many of the King's Men, one of which
was shot not far from me in Cane-wood.
It was this Summer that the Duke of Tork first took any par- 166u
ticular Notice of me. I hapned to be in Discourse with the
French Ambaflador, and some other Gentlemen of his Nation, in
the Presence at Whitehall, and the Duke joined us, he being a
great Lover of the French Tongue, and kind to those who spoke
it.

<page 11>
6 MEMOIRS
It. The next Night he talked with me a long while, as he was
at Supper with the King.
1662. Now it was that the King went to receive the Infante of Por-
*^ *9' tugal at Portsmouth, attended by the greatest Court I ever saw in
any Progress. But though, upon this Occasion, every thing was
gay and splendid,and profusely joyful, it was ealy to discern that
the King was not excessively charmed with his new Bride, who
was a very little Woman with a pretty tolerable Face; she, nei-
ther in Person nor Manners, had any one Article to stand in Com-
petition with the Charms of the Countess of Caftlemainy (since
Duchess of Cleveland) the finest Woman of her Age. It is well
known that the Lord Chancellor had the blame of this unfruit-
ful Match, and that the Queen was laid to have had a constant
Fluor upon her, which, rendered her incapable of Conception.
1^54. This Year the War broke out between us and the Dutch • and
I resolved to serve as Volunteer in our Fleet, hoping to be on
Board the Duke's own Ship. I accordingly equipped my self
with Neceflaries for the Sea, and went to procure the King's
leave to go on board, and to receive his Commands to the Duke,
intending to be gone the next Day. The King told me he was
willing I should go, but had Letters to write to the Duke,
which he would send by me, and ordered me to stay for them
day after day (expecting, it seems, first to hear from the Duke)
till at last his Majesty told me he should not write, and that I
needed not now to go, for that the Duke would be speedily on
Shore, he not having been able to bring the Dutch to Action.
A dreadful Plague raged this Summer in London, and swept
away 97309 Persons. It wl|s usual for People to drop down in
the Streets as they went about their busineis j and a story is re-
ported for a certain Truth, That a Bagpiper being excessively
overcome with liquor, fell down in the Street and there lay asleep.
In this condition he was taken up and thrown into a Cart,
betimes the next Morning, and carried away with some dead
Bodies. Mean while he awoke from his sleep, it being now
about Day-break, and rising up began to play a Tune, which so
surpriz'd

<page 12>
0/ J O H N R E R E S B T. *s
{urpriz'd the fellows that drove the Cart, who could lee nothing
distinctly, that in a Fright they betook them to their Heels, and
would have it that they had taken up the Devil in the disguise
of a dead Man.
But to resume other things, I married, and was thereby pre-'
vented from being an Eye-witnels of the Dutch War; and lo I
shall only say that his Highness obtained a glorious Victory over
that Republick.
His Royal Highness the Duke and his Duchess came down to Aug. 5-
Tork, where it was observed that Mr. Sydney, the handsomest
Youth of his time, and of the Duke's Bedchamber, was greatly
in love with the Duchess, and indeed he might well be excused;
for the Duchess, Daughter to Chancellor Hide, was a very hand-
iom Personage, and a Woman of fine Wit. The Duchess on
her part seemed kind to him, but very innocently: But he had
the Misfortune to be banilhed the* Court afterwards for another
Reason, as was reported.
I went to Oxford to put the King in mind of a former Pro- Off. 5.
mise, to make me High Sherisf of the County of Tork, the Year
next ensuing; but hearing that Sir Francis Cob (who had been
at some extraordinary Charge in receiving and attending the Court
at Tork ) .obtained a Grant to continue in that Office for ano-
ther Year, at his Hignesi's Intercession I waited on the Duke,
acquainted him with my Claim, and begged his Assistance. He
told me he wished he had known my Claim in time, that he
should have been ready to serve me, and that I had nevertheless ,
his Leave to sollicit his Majesty's Promise. I thank'd him, but
said I could not appear in any degree of Opposition to hisHigh-
ness's Interest and Pleasure, and would therefore defer my Pre-
tensions to a better Opportunity. This he took very kindly,
went with me to the King, and presented me to him for the
next Year; his Majesty gave me his Hand to kiss, and his Word
once more that I should be Sheriff as I had desired.
A great and happy Victory was obtained over the Dutch by l666.
Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle, and a sad and dismal
Fire

<page 13>
$ MEMOIRS
1666. Fife laid the vast and noble City of London in Aslies, but these
being Events that have been of late largely described already, I
shall only observe of the latter, that the dreadful Destruction was
not more extraordinary than the speed, regularity, and cost
wherewith it was retrieved, and a new Londoner exceeding the
old, erected.
086b. 3. I went to London to put the King and Duke in mind of their
Promise, that I should be High Sheriff for the County of Tork
for the Year next ensuing; and no sooner did I appear before
the Duke than he said to me, J remembered you tho you moas not
here, and your Business is done for you. And, to say the truth,
there was no Prince at that time observed to be more punctual
to his Word. I found what the Duke told me to be perfectly
true, the King did graciously confirm what he had said, and
named me Sheriff for the County of Tork, tho' I was not of the
three in the List presented to him by the Judges.
+66-J. The Duke of Buckingham had been some time in disgrace at
Court j and being suspected of some evil Practices against the
King, a Proclamation was issued out to apprehend him. I con-
fess I was at a loss to know how to act in this Matter, between
the Obligation of my Office as Sheriff, and the respect I had for
the Duke: But the Judges coming down to the Assizes, advised
me by all means to proclaim it, which I did, and it for ever as-
ter lessened me in the Esteem os that Lord.
My Lord Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England, be-
ing lately dead, the administration or that great Office was trans-
acted by Four Commissioners, the Duke of Albemarle, Lord Ash-
ley, afterwards Earl of Shaftsbury, Sir Ifattiam Coventry, Se-
cretary to the Duke of Tork, and Sir John Duncomb. It was
now that the Parliament fell upon the great Earl of Clarendon,
who having surrendered the Seals, a few Months afterwards, as.
much as possible to avoid the Heat of his Enemies, retired pri-
vately into France. His greatest Enemy in the House of Lords
was the Duke of Buckingham j in the House of Commons, Sir
Thomas Ojborne, since Earl of Danby \ by this Step, and by the

<page 14>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 9
help of his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, who was now abso- l66l-
lute Favorite, it was that Sir Thomas more especially rose to his
height of Dignity.
The Duke 01 Buckingham now acted as piime Minister: The
King consulted him chiefly in all concerns of Moment; the Fo-
reign Ministers were to apply to him, before they could be ad-
mitted to an Audience. But he was such a Foe to Business, such
a Friend to Pleasure, and so apt to turn the Day into Night, and
the Night into Day, that he could neither attend regularly on
the King, nor dispatch Business, as it ought to be, with those
who had any thing to negociate with him j so his Ministry proved
of no long Duration.
This Spring I carried my Family up to Town, where the Court i<5<s8.
and City were all gay and jovial; for Peace was now concluded
with France, with Spain, with Denmark, and the States General.
Embafladors extraordinary were now lent and received with the
greatest pomp and splendor.
And now the Prince of Tujlany came to London, with a Reti- jfprii.
nue and Equipage suitable to his high Quality, and was at first 1669.
magnificently entertained by the King; but after some time, he
kept House at his own Expence, and had plenty of all the por-
table Rarities for Food and Drink, Italy had to afford. I dined
with him twice; he was very kind to me, as he was to all those
who had travelled into Italy, and spoke the Language. And
this Spring the Prince of Denmark was in London, the same who
some Years afterwards married the Princess j4nne of England.
But all this jollity was turned into Mourning for the Death
of the Queen Mother, who about this time departed this Life at
Paris: She was a great Princess, and my very good Mistress.
This Summer the Duchess of Orleans, the King's Sister, came 1670.
over to Dover, where she was met by the King, the Duke of
Tork, and the whole Court. Here it was that she confined his
Highness the Duke in the Popish Superstition, of which he had
as yet been but barely suspected; and it is laid to have been
his grand Argument for such his Adherence to those Tenets, That
C his

<page 15>
io MEMOIRS
,57°. his Mother had, upon her last Blessing, commanded him to be firm
and steadfast thereto. Before this, it was thought he was rather
a Friend to the Presbyterians; for not long before, a Noncon-
formist Minister being prosecuted at Pomfret, for preaching in a
Conventicle, it was reported That his Highness, and the Duke
of Buckingham, then Principal Minister of State, had written in
his Favour to the justices: But the Duke, as I was one Day
attending on him in St. James's Park, called me to him, and
discoursing over the thing to me, declared what was reported to
be a Mistake, that he had not concerned himlelf at all with it,
tho' he was so much a Friend to that sort of People, that he
could wish the Law had not been put in Execution against him,
or to that Effect, and that absolutely he did not write. At the same
time he told me to represent him, upon Occasion, as no Enemy to
such. Hereupon I acquainted his Highness, that there was a
Kinsman of mine, one Mr. Vincent, in Town, who was a leading
Man of that Party j and his Highness ordered me to bring him to
Court, which I did, and the Duke took him aside, and talked
with him a great while. It was generally believed that the Duke,
in this, acted the Politician suitable to the time ; for it was now
rumoured about The King would be divorced from his Queen,
which, by thus courting all Parties, he proposed to prevent.
But however this was, our Royal Family lost another of its
Number; for the Duke of Orleans had for some time before
been jealous of his Wife, and, if all that is said be true, not
without good Ground : The Count de Quiche it seems, had been
a Favorite with her, and now she is said to have fallen in Love
with the Duke of Monmouth, while she was at Dover • in short,
things were so represented to the Duke her Husband, that she
died very suddenly after her return to Paris, by Poison as the
Report went.
Oftohr. This Month the Prince ot Orange came to London to pay a
Visit to the King. The Parliament being now met, pursuant to
Prorogation, it happened that Sir John Coventry, in a Speech he
made, reflected on the King's wenching; which being reported
to

<page 16>
0/ 5/> J O H N R E R E S B Y. II
to the Duke of Monmouth, he ordered Sir Thomas Sands (an Of- I<J7a-
Jicer of the Guards) and three or four more, to way-lay him as
he went late home to his Lodging; which they accordingly did,
and, taking him out of his Coach, flit his Nose. But complaint
thereof being made to the House, it caused such a Heat, that
thence proceeded the Act against Malicious Maiming and
Wounding.
The Prince of Orange remaining in England, and making his i6-ji.
Addresses to the Lady Marjy, eldest Daughter to the Duke, the
King entertained him with great splendor, as well on that Ac-
count, as because of his Relation to him, and great personal Me-
rit. One Night, at a Supper, given by the Duke of Buckingham,
the King made him drink very hard: the Prince was naturally
averse to it, but being once entered, was more frolic and gay
than the rest of the Company; and now the Mind took him to
break the Windows of the Chambers belonging to the Maids of
Honour, and he had got into their Apartments, had they not
been timely rescued. His Mistress, I suppose did not like him
the worse for such a notable Indication of his Vigor.
This Day dyed Anne, Duchess of Tork, with her last Breath Apl\l
declaring her self a Papist.
War was declared against the States General; and now the March \
City of London had in a great Measure recovered herself from
out of her Ashes, and was lo far rebuilt this Year, that the King
was on the Lord Mayor's Day invited to a Dinner, which he ac-
cepted. •
The King about this time issued out a Proclamation for the
Indulgence of tender Consciences, which caused great Uneasiness,
not only in the Houses of Parliament, where it was afterwards re-
versed, but throughout the whole Kingdom; and was the most
violent Blow that had been given to the Church of England from
the Day of the Restauration. All Sectaries now publickly re-
paired to their Meetings and Conventicles j nor could all the
Laws afterwards, and the most rigorous Execution of them, ever
suppress these Seperatists, or bring them to due Conformity.
C a , This

<page 17>
12 MEMOIRS
1672. This Summer the French joined us at Sea against the Dutch,
but in the end betrayed us. In the Engagement, upon the 18th
of May, the French stood off, and left us and the Dutch to make
the best we could of it j whereas if they had assisted his High-
ness of Tork, who then commanded in Chief as High Admiral,
we had doubtless obtained a signal Victory; but as the case was,
we had so much the better, that, after a Fight of Eight Hours,
the Dutch made fail from us.- In this Engagement perished Ed-
ward Montague, Earl of Sandwich, Vice Admiral.
It was this Year that my Lord Hallifax first came into Busi-
ness, and was sworn of the Privy Council. He was soon after
joined in Commission with the Duke of Buckingham, and Lord
Arlington as Ambasiadors to the States; but to no purpose j the
War continued.
1673. I had heard the King intended to erect a Fort at Burlington,
for the security of the Colliers and others, trading to the North-
ward j and I immediately applied to the Duke, entreating him
to speak to the King that I might have the Command of the in-
1 tended Place; who accordingly did; but whilst the thing was in
agitation, his Highness refused to take the Oaths tendered to him
as Lord High Admiral, thereby declaring himself a Roman Ca-
tholic, and resigning all his Imployments, so that nothing more
was done in my Business for that time.
And now the King having borrowed most of the ready Money
in the Nation, of the Goldsmiths, (at that time called Bankers,)
locked up the Exchequer, to the Bankruptcy of the most consi-
derable of them, and the ruin of an infinite People, whose Mo-
ney they had borrowed at Interest: And with this Calamity we
conclude this Year.
Dec. 12. Now it was that my Neighbour Sir Thomas Ojbourn rose to
the great Office of High Treasurer of England, my Lord Clifford
resigning his Staff, and confessing himself a Papist. The Duke
of Buckingham was chiefly instrumental in bringing this about
for Sir Thomas, by a Bargain he made between Lord Clifford and
him, namely, that Sir Thomas should officiate and give him half

<page 18>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y.
the Salary, and afterwards prevailing on the King to confer the ^73.
Staff on Sir Thomas then created Lord Viscount Dunblain, tho'
afterwards Earl of Danbj?, and had a Patent pafling for Mar-
quils just as he fell into Disgrace.
The War with the Dutch still continued, Prince Rupert being
Admiral for us, and the Count csEfirees for the French. Two
Victories we now obtained over them, but they were lessened by
the loss of that great Seaman Sir Edward Sfjraig.
The Parliament of these Days had from the beginning, which
was soon after the Restauration, been perfectly well inclined to
the King: They had given him a very great Revenue upon Ton-
nage and Poundage, as also by an Excise upon several lorts of
Liquors, Hearth-Money, not to mention Temporary Taxes, the
whole amounting to above three times more than had been en-
joyed by any King of England before. The Country groaned
under this Pressure, and began to be diflatisfied; which having
an Influence on some Gentlemen of both Houses, gave Birth to
two Parties, the one for the Country, the other for the Court.
The former pretended in an impartial Manner to espouse the
Cause of the People, in their Liberties and Properties, and what-
ever is dear to Englishmen; to assert the Religion and Govern-
ment by Law established: The latter pretended to the same, but
thought the King was to have a competent Income,and be invested
with a due Power for the exercise of his regal Office, without
having too great a Dependance on the People, a Cause which had
been of such pernicious Effects to his Royal Father. Hence it
was that Gentlemen bestirred themselves more than usual to
be elected into a Seat in Parliament; so that great was the
Competition between the Candidates, and at great Expences
they were, even from One or Two Hundred, to Two Thousand
Pounds. But the concerns of the Public were not what alone
actuated all Men ; some wanted to be in the House to be screened
from their Debts, this Parliament having sat a long while j and
some had obtained great Emoluments from the Court to stand
up for that Interest j so that it is no wonder I had no less
than

<page 19>
14 MEMOIRS
1*7|- than five Competitions when I offered my self for Audborough,
And not to drop this matter here, I must observe that Mr. Ben-
son was the most formidable of the Five j a Man of no Birth,
but who from a Clerk to a Country Attorney, had raised himself
to be Clerk of the Peace at the Old Baily, Clerk of Assize of
the Northern Circuit, as also to an Estate of 2500 /. tho' not
without some Reflection on his way of getting it. The Election
was irregularly carried on in Favour of this Gentleman, and in the
January following I moved the House to determine the Merit
of the Return j but before a Hearing came on, a Prorogation in-
tervened, so that I had the Charge of bringing up Witnesses, to
do manner of purpose j and so we close up this Year.
i<*74- The Duke now declared his Marriage with Maryy Daugh-
ter to the Duke of Modena, not long before arrived with
the Duchess her Mother. The Nation was much grieved at this
Match, the Lady being a Papist of the strictest class, and the
whole Affair managed by the French Interest.
Novemhr. The Duke of Buckingham was now again in Disgrace, for
which he was indebted to the Duchess of Portsmouth) a French
Lady, and now the most absolute of all the King's Mistresses; a
very fine Woman she was, but most think she was sent on pur-
pose to ensnare the King, who most readily ran into Toils of
that sort. 'His Grace in vain made use of the Mediation of the
Lord Treasurer: And to say the Truth, his Lordship was not
altogether so zealous for his Grace as he ought to have been,
especially if we consider that it was to him he owed the White
Staff he bore. In short, the Duke was not the only Person that
accused him of Ingratitude.
The King was at this time particularly displeased with his
Grace, for that being summoned by the House of Commons to
give an Account of some Malversations when he was Minister;
he did not only appear, being a Peer, and that without the King's
Leave, but to excuse himself reflected on others, and upon
the whole, behaved in that Assembly in too mean and submissive
a Manner j which however was of no avail to him against the
Commons,

<page 20>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. I j
Commons, who addressed the King to lay hifn aside with regard 1674.
to all Offices of Trust or Profit. His Grace was also called to
the Bar of the House of Peers, for scandalousty living with the
Lady Shrevojbury as Man and Wife, he being a married Man,
and for having killed my Lord Shrewsbury after he had debauched
his Wife.
The King prorogued the Parljjment to the 13 th oL^pr/Vnext 1^7
The time of the Meeting of Parliament now drawing on, I
repaired to London, and petitioned the Committee of Privileges
and Elections j and after all endeavours to the contrary, I was
voted the Sitting Member, and conducted into the House by
Lord Ruffel, and Lord Cavendish.
Being thus received into the House, I found the two Parties in
great Extremes against each other. The Court-side was very pres-
sing and urgent for Money for the King's present Occasions; the
Country Party thought of nothing less, except some Laws were
enacted for the better Security of the Protestant Religion, and
the grand Point of Property. But the two were so equal that
nothing more than Words pafled between them; meer Words
without any Effect, for neither dared stand the Chance of a
Question put. In the midst of this, Doctor Shirley prefers a Pe- June-
tition to the House of Lords against Sir John Fag, a Member
of the Lower House, to appear and answer in a Cause he had
brought before the Lords, and a Summons was sent to Sir Johnr
accordingly; which the Commons considering as a Breach of
Privilege, great Heats arose among them, and high Expressions
being, upon this Occasion, mutually vented against each other by
both Houses, the King thought fit to adjourn their time of Sit-
ting for the present.
They no sooner fat again than my Competitor Benjonrandano- Septtmi.
ther, Mr. Long, petitioned against me. They would have had
a lhort Day, but it was my Business to get as long a one as I
could, and I accordingly did so. In short, the Business of the
House was of such consequence, that a Prorogation came on be-
fore

<page 21>
MEMOIRS
sore our Cause could be heard. I took a particular Account of
what was transacted this Session, the most extraordinary Parti-
culars of which were summarily these.
The King had in his Speech acquainted us, That he was Four
Millions in Debt, exclusive of what he owed to the Goldsmiths
or Bankers, a vast Sum more, for which he paid neither Princi-
pal nor Interest, to the Ruin many Families. It being upon
this put to the Vote whether Money should be given or not,
It was carried in the Negative by Four Voices, and that, when
near Four Hundred Members were in the House. But it ap-
pearing that both the Dutch and French exceeded us in the Pro-
portion and Number of their Shipping, a Sum of Three Hundred
Thousand Pounds was voted to the King for the building of
Twenty Ships, namely, One of the First Rate, Five of the Se-
cond, and Fourteen of the Third.
Several Ways were debated for the Raising of this Sum, as
upon Land, upon the Jews, by way of Poll, or upon French
Commodities, and lastly upon our own Consumption, and upon
Merchandise. At length it was to be levyed upon Land, and
paid in Eighteen Months . to be lodged apart in the Exchequer,
and appropriated to that particular Use, with very severe Penal-
ties upon the Officers that should apply it to any other: but the
Sum itself, the time it was to be raised in, and other Circum-
stances, were by no means grateful to the Court. It was farther
voted That the Customs having been formerly given to the King
for the Maintenance of the Fleet, a Clause to that esfect and
purpose should be inserted in this Bill, or a new one prepared
to confirm it.
The State of the Fleet was now given in, whereby it appeared
that we had no more than Eight First Rates, Nine Second Rates,
and Forty Three Third Rates j while the French exceeded us in
the Number of these Rates by Six and Twenty, and the Dutch
by Fourteen.
It was moreover Voted that the Atheism, Debauchery and Im-
piety of the Present Age be inserted, as Grievances to be re-
dressed;

<page 22>
Qr John Reresby. r7
dressed : And it being violently suspected that some Members l57J-
of the House did receive Gratuities from the Court to Vote on
that side; it was put that a Committee should be appointed to
form a kind of Oath or Test, to discover what Sums of Money
and Offices had been given to Parliament Men to gain their In-
terest.
The French Trade also was complained of, as being Thirteen
Hundred Thousand Pounds an overbalance for ours • and upon
the matter it appeared, that every Thousand Pounds a Year had
since the Restoration paid a Hundred Pounds in Taxes to the
Crown.
It was also Voted a Grievance, that Justices of the Peace
should be summoned to appear before the Council, to account for
what they did in their judicial Capacity.
The Business also of Luzance took up some time in the House. j^ovmb.
This Luzance was a French Jesuit, but becoming a Convert to
the Church of England, inveighed against the Fallacies of the /
Church of Rome, in a Sermon he preached in the French Church
in the Savoy. This alarmed the Papists, and particularly one Do-
ctor Burnet, a Jesuit, and Confessor to the Duchess of Tork, who
finding him alone in his Chamber, and posting Three Men at the
Door, threatned to murder him if he did not make Satisfaction
for the Injury, eat his Words, and speedily return to France.
The .Man in this desperate Dilemma promised faithfully what-
ever was required of him, till he got his Liberty, when present-
ly going to Doctor Breval, a converted Jesuit as well as him-
self, he told him the whole Story; Breval the next Day ac-
quainted me with it, and I communicated it to the House. The
Commons took Fire at this, and strait appointed a Committee
to examine into the matter, and ordered me to produce Luzance
the next Day. He appeared accordingly, and averred the Thing
for a Truth. This was the first time I presumed to speak in that
great Assembly, or in any Committee ; but the next Day I was
obliged to do it several times iri what concerned this violent Bust*
ness.
D Upon
1

<page 23>
18 MEMOIRS
1675. Upon the Report made from the Committee to the House, my
Lord Cavendifl called me up to give an Account of some other
things I had had from Luz,ance. One was that Two French
Protestants, being Merchants of good Substance and Credit, had ~
been threatned by certain Papists, that if they were not less
severe upon the Romanists, they Ihould ere long see the Pro*
testant Blood flow in London Streets. A Committe was ap-
pointed to enquire into the truth of this matter; and Luzance
being summoned, gave Evidence to the very self same Effect, and
gave it under his own Hand. The Parties he had his Informa-
tion from being sent for, appeared also, and declared such
Threats to have been used towards them by some French Papists j
but, to what Cause it was owing is uncertain, they gave in only
such Names as were of Persons either absent, or or no Estima-
tion; so that little came of this Business. But these and other
such Informations, concerning the Height and Insolence of the Pa-
pists, did so exasperate the House, that many Motions were made
to humble them. Some were for a speedy Confinement of them
to the Country, others for Banishment, and some again for dis-
arming them, and the like.
In a stiort time after, the Matter of Doctor Shirley s Petition
to the Lords against Sir John Fag, was again renewed, tho' it
had broke up the Parliament the last time. There were those
who thought the King had consented to it, disliking the warm
Proceedings of both Houses: While others were of Opinion that
the Lords of the Country Interest had persuaded the Doctor
thereto, with a View thereby to kindle such a Flame between the
two Houses, that the King should be obliged either to prorogue,,
adjourn, or dissolve them: The said Lords apprehending that if
this Parliament should sit much longer, the Majority might be
gained over by Money and Places, so as to become quite obse-
quious to the Court; and this My Lord Hallifax (then in the
Interest of Lord Shaftsbury his Uncle, who was upon ill Terms
with the Court, being no longer Lord Chancellor) told me was
his Opinion.

<page 24>
Of Sir John R £ r E s b y,
But whatever the Cause was, the Effect was such That the **7f.
Commons refusing to let their Member plead at the Bar of the
Lords during a time of Privilege, it was resolved That the Lords
by receiving an Appeal from any Court, either of Law or Equi-
ty, against a Member of the Lower House, during a Session of
Parliament, were thereby Infringers of the Privileges of the Com-
mons of England j and that such Lawyers as should attend as
Counsel to plead in any such Cause at the Lords Bar, should be
deemed as Betrayers of the Rights of the Commons of England j
and that the said Vote be affixed to the Door of the House of
Commons, IFeftminfter Hall, and the Inns of Court ; which was
accordingly done: And the fame Day it was Voted by the Lords,
that the fame was Illegal and Unparliamentary, and tended to
the Dissolution of the Government: And upon the whole, that
they would not recede from their Right of Judicature by Ap-
peals from the Courts of Equity.
It was then put to the Question, If the King should not be
petitioned to dissolve this Parliament, and it was carried in the
Negative by no more than Two Votes.
This Misunderstanding between the Houses was very diflati£»
factory to the King. The I<ords who had Voted for the Disso-
lution of this Parliament, entered their Protest in the Journal
of their House, together with their Reasons for so doing; so
that Things being at this Pass, the only Expedient left, was to
dismiss the Parliament, which the King did, by Prorogation to
the i oth of February next.
Before I left London, I, at the Interposition of my Lord Ogle,
went with his Lordship to see the Duke of Buckingham, being
well assured that I should be kindly received.
I had a fine Black of about Sixteen Years of Age, presented i6j6.
to me bv a Gentleman who brought him over from Barbadoes:
This Black lived with me some Years, and dyed about this time
of an Imposthume in his Head. Six Weeks after he was buried, Oftob. ao.
I received an Account That at London it was credibly report-
ed I had caused him to be Gelt, and that the Operation had
D a killed

<page 25>
20 MEMOIRS
i<*76 killed him. I laughed at it at first, conscious it was a False-
hood, and a ridiculous Story, 'till being further informed that it
came from the Duke of Norfolk and his Family, with whom I
had had some Differences at Law, and that he had waited upon
the King to beg my Estate, if it became a Forfeiture by this Fe-
lony 'y I thought it convenient to send for the Coroner to view
the Body with a Jury, before it was too far decayed, that a rot-
tenness of the Part might not be imputed to Incision. The Co-
roner accordingly summons a Jury, and does his Office j but
when they came to uncover the Breast, it was so putrified they
would go no farther j so that upon the Examination of Eleven
Witnefles, some that laid him out, and some that saw him naked,
several, because of his Colour, having a Curiosity to fee him af-
ter he was dead, they gave their Verdict, that he dyed Ex
Vijitatione Dei, by the Hand of God.
This, however, was not thought sufficient; for within a few
Days after, there came one Bright, a Lawyer, one Chappel, an
Attorney, (both concerned in the Duke's Affairs,) and one Buck,
a Surgeon of Sheffield, whom I had caused to be prosecuted not
long before for having Two Wives, together with some others,
with my Lord Chief Justice's Warrant, directed to the Coroner
to take up the Body; which the Coroner refused to obey, say-
ing He had done his Office already. These Ambasiadors, how-
ever, took up the Body, and Buck, under pretence of viewing
the Part the better, would have taken it up with a Penknife,
but it was not suffered, lest by that Instrument he should give
the Wound he sought for: But what was not only a Mercy, but
a Miracle also, the Part proved to be perfectly sound and entire,
tho' the Body had been so long under Ground, and the rest of -
it was much putrified and decayed; so that Shame of Face and
Confusion came pretty plentifully upon the Actors in this extra-
ordinary Scene.
A black and most ridiculous piece of Malice this; for had
their Suggestion been proved a Fact, all their Art could never
have so fixed it, as to have indangered either my Person or
Estate.

<page 26>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 21
Estate. My Lord Chief Justice Rains ford acted irregularly and 1<*7<*-
illegally in this Business, his Information not being given in to
him upon Oath. And indeed he afterwards confefled he was mit.
led into it, and that the Duke's Sollicitor wras most pressing and
urgent with him, to grant the Warrant. The Duke of Tork told
my Brother, He wondered such a stir was made about a Report
which must certainly be a flat Fallhood: And Lord Ogle ac-
quainted me, as did also my Lord Treasurer himself afterwards,
That he, meaning the Treasurer, had taken great Pains to pre-
vent the begging of my Estate ; and I believed it to be true, but
shrewdly doubt it was with Design, had it proved a Forfeiture,
to have secured it for himself; I was told as much afterwards. I
endeavoured however to reach the Bottom of this Plot, and to
procure my self some Reparation, as may be observed hereafter.
Having kept my Chriftmafs in the Country, I no sooner re- Fdr.
turned to London than my Lord Treasurer sent to speak with me.
I waited on him therefore, and found him very open in his Dis-
course upon several Subjects, but for the most part lamenting
That his Countrymen would not allow him an Opportunity to
be of Service to them with the King, and making many Prote-
stations That the Jealousies of those who called themselves of the
Country Party, were entirely groundless and without Founda-
tion: That to his certain knowledge, the King meant no other
than to preserve the Religion and Government by Law esta-
blished; and, upon the whole, wished that neither himself or
his Posterity might prosper, if he did not speak what he really
believed: That if the Government was in any Danger, it was
most from those who pretended such a mighty Zeal for it; but
who under that Pretence were endeavoring to create such Dis-
contents between the King and the Nation, as might produce
Confusion in the End: And intreated me to be careful how I im-
barkedmyself with that sort of People. My reply was, That I
hoped I was not one to be wilfully misled; that I should have
no Rule to go by in that House but my Reason and Conscience,
and that so I could be of no particular Faction or Party; That
as

<page 27>
22 MEMOIRS
}6l6- much as I yet understood of the Duty of a Member of the House
of Commons at this time, suggested to me a Moderation between
the two Extremes, and to have an equal Regard for the Prero-
gative of the King, and the Liberty of the Subject.
True it is, till now that the Treasurer used such solemn Asse-
verations, with regard to the King's good Intention, and pretty
clearly convinced me that some of the Chiefs ©f the Country
Party had most at Heart their own private Interest, whatever
they afler ted in savour and Defence of the Public, I had great
Notions of the Truth and Sincerity of the Country Party.
Ftb. 15, The Parliament meeting, the King particularly desired a con-
siderable Sum for the building and rigging of Ships. The Coun-
try did every thing possible to stint the Sum to Four Hundred
Thousand Pounds ; while the Courtiers were for a Million, or Eight
Hundred Thousand Pounds at the least; but the Moderate Men
stept in between with an Offer of Six Hundred Thousand Pounds,
which Sum was granted, and for this I gave my Vote, a Sum
intended for the building of thirty Men of War of several Rates.
My Lord Treaurer took it so kindly that I sided not with those,
who did all they could to weaken and distress the Crown, that
he would needs carry me to kils his Majesty's Hand, which I
had not yet done since I came to Town ;and presented me in the
Lobby of the House of Lords, next to the Prince's Lodgings, no
Body being present but his Majesty, his Lordship, and my self.
He laid much more of me to the King than I deserved, but last-
ly, That as my Family had been always Loyal, he knew I was
perfectly inclined to tread in their Footsteps ; and that the best
way to confirm me in such my Disposition, would be to let me
understand how little of Truth there was in the Pretences set on
Foot to deceive Gentlemen, and withdraw them from their Du-
ty. "The King said he had known me long, and hoped I knew
u him so well as to give no Ear to such Reports of him. I know,
"says he, it is laid I aim at the Subversion of the Government and
u Religion: That I intend to lay aside Parliaments, and to raise
Money another way; but every Man, nay those who insist the
« most

<page 28>
0/ 6"/> J 0 H N Reresby.
"most thereon, knows the thing in all its Circumstances to be »*7*»
"false. There is not a Subject that lives under me, whose sasety
"and welfare I desire less than my own: And I should be as sorry
"to invade his Liberty and Property, as that another should in-
"vade mine. Those Members, continued the King, who boast this
"mighty Friendship for the Public, are of two Sorts; either those
"who would actually and irretrievably subvert the Government.
"and reduce it to a Commonwealth once more ; or else those who
"seem only to join with the former, and talk, loud against the
"Court, purely in hopes to have their Mouths stopped with Places
or Preferments." And to say the truth, the Treasurer had named
some of the Chiefs to me, who had desired so and so of the
King, and upon such conditions promised to come over.
I made answer to the King, That indeed the Pretences were
many, and, to some I believed, plausible, that were raised in Op-
position to what others understood to be for his Majesty's Inte-
rest : But that they had gained but little on me, who had had the
Honour of being so long known to his Majesty, and had been so
lately confirmed in my Belief by Aflurances from my Lord Trea-
surer: That to the best of my Knowledge I should never do
• any thing that became not a true and faithful Subject, or should
be inconsistent with the Prosperity of his Majesty's Royal Per-
son and Government. The King said he was very well pleased
that he had seen me, commanded me to wait on him sometimes,
and told me I should have Access to him when and wherever
I desired it.
The Condescension of the King, in giving this Satisfaction to
lo mean a Person, convinced me very much of the Truth of what
he laid j as did also his natural Temper and Constitution ; for
he was not an active, busy, or ambitious Prince, but perfectly a
Friend to Ease, and fond of Pleasure; he seemed to be chiefly
desirous of Peace and Quiet for his own time.
At this time a great Dispute arising between the Lord Mar-
shal of Englandy Lord Henry Howard, (tho' commonly called
Duke of Norfolk) and his younger Brothers, they not only
peti-

<page 29>
2,4 MEMOIRS
t*j6. petitioned the House of Commons in behalf of themselves, but
also os their eldest Brother the Duke, whom the said Lord Mar-
stial kept up at Padua as a Lunatic, tho' perfectly in possession
of his Senses, praying that the House would be pleased to move
the King to oblige the Marshal to send for him into England. Up-
on this a Debate arose in the House, every one delivering his Mind
according to his Belief, or Prejudices j till at length the Gentle-
men of the House who had been at Padua, were desired to
give their Opinions as to the State and Condition of the Duke.
Upon this occasion I declared that at the time I saw him, he
laboured under all the Symptoms of Lunacy and Distrad^ion.
This being carried to the Lord Marshal, who was very conscious
I was indebted to him for no Obligation, he sent a Gentleman
to me the next Day, to thank me for my Generosity to a Per-
son who had not seemed to have been so much my Friend as he
ought to have been, and touching obliquely on the Affair of the
Blackamoor, he laid he intended to wait on me to give me seme
farther Satisfaction as to that.
My Answer to this Meflage was, That I was surprized at the
Compliment from a Gentleman to whom I intended none, what
1 had said having been with a due regard only to Truth : That
however I was not sorry I had happened to oblige his Lordship
• by it j and that since he had denied all concern in the iniquitous
Affair of my dead Servant, I would prevent his Lordship, and
wait on him my self j as I did two or three Days afterwards. He
received me with all the civility and kindness imaginable, and
wished that neither himself nor Posterity might prosper, if he
was in any wise aiding or assisting in the Plot laid against me.
I told his Lordship, that I could not but add Faith to his Words;
but that if he was not, I was well assured his Servants were ; and
therefore desired he would give me leave to use my best Endea-
vours to find it out: With all his Heart, he said, he did not
only consent to it, but would moreover assist me in the Inqui-
ry; and so, with all possible Demonstrations of Friendship, we
parted.

<page 30>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. "2.5
I very often visited and dined with my Lord Treasurer, and l6l6'
often waited on the King, who, when he saw me, would ask
me how things went forward j and particularly I this Day enter-
tained him a long while, in the Duchess of Tork's Bedchamher, March 18.
with what had then been transacting in the House of Commons.
This Session had gone on smoothly and sedately enough, in both
Houses, My Lord Treasurer having ib ordered it, that the King's
Party encreased rather than the other j but it was much feared »
that seme Votes were obtained more by Purchase than Affection j
and with this we close up the Year.
The Commons Voted a Second Address to the King, That he i6-jj.
would be pleased to contract Alliances for the Preservation o(^arcb z9-
Flanders in the Hands of the King of Spain \ but with this Re-
striction, That his Majesty mould not be obliged to return any
Answer to the House, upon the Subject of the said Address 5
tho' a Number who would have drawn him into Inconveniences,
would have had him urged to declare his Intentions therein; by
which he must have either disobliged the Nation on the one
hand, or on the other have declared War with Francey before
he was prepared to prosecute it. ^
The King and the Duke had both of them much interested ^Pril I2.
themselves in the Affair of my Election, which being to be tryed
very seon, His Majesty gave orders to his Servants that were of
the House, to attend the Committee, and assist me with their
best Services when it came on. The fame Day the Duke of Al-
bemarle came down to engage his Friends to be for me, nor did
the Duke of Tork forget to concern himself very earnestly in my
behalf.
The fame Day being alone with the Lord Treasurer, in his
Coach as he was going to fVefim'infler, I told him that some of
the Discontented had resolved to hasten the Money-Bill as fast
as might be, that fb the House might rise before Eajter, and the
Public Bills, that were preparing, be left unpafled j hoping
thereby to incense the Nation, and bring about Cause of Com-
plaint against the King, as if he called the Parliament together
E for

<page 31>
16 MEMOIRS
»*77. for nothing bat to get Money from them. His Lordship answered,
That the King, well aware of the Design, would prevent it by
a Me flage, that Day to be delivered to the House by Mr. Secre-
tary Coventry, to this Effect, That if ought remained undone,
which the House judged neceflary to be done for the good of
the Nation, the King would allow them a sufficient time after
Easier, and that when they were ready, His Majesty would pass
their Bills; a Meflage that was accordingly delivered.
My Lord Treasurer sent for me among others, desiring us to
assist what we could, towards the Reconciliation of a Difference
likely to take place between the two Houses, about framing
the Bill for the Six Hundred Thousand Pounds, to be given to
the King, which might indanger the Loss of the fame: For the
Commons had made a Clause therein, injoining the Officers of
the Exchequer to give them an Account of the Disbursement and
Distribution of the said Sum; while the Lords had inserted that
they should be accountable to both Houses. This the Commons
would not suffer, alledging The Lords could neither add to nor
take away from a Money-Bill; for that as it was peculiar to them
only to give Money, it was to them only that Account was to be
given how it was applied. The Lords to this replied, That to de-
ny them the Power of calling the Officers of the Exchequer to a
Reckoning, was to abridge them of the Privilege of Judicature
they undoubtedly had as the Supreme Court j and by way of
Precedent observed, That when the Convention gave Money for
the disbanding of the Army, an Account of the same was ordered
to be laid before their House as well as the other. They both
adhered tenaciously to their Point, till the King at length pre-
vailed with the Lords to erase their Clause; and so the Com-
mons got the better of the Day.
It was not long before this, That the King of France, having
obtained a Victory over the Prince of Orange, did in his return
by Calais send over the Duke of Crequy, and the Archbishop of
Rheims, to pay a Compliment to our King, who returned it by
My Lord Sanderland. This gave just Cause to think there would

<page 32>
Os Sir J o h n R E r E s b V, 27
be no War between the two Kings, contrary to what the Par- i<^77.
liament had so earnestly advised. I law a Copy of the Letter
these Ambafladors brought with them; beginning with this Stile
or Title, Tres haut, tres Excellent & tres Puijjant Prince, tres
cher tres aime bon Frere Cousin Allie: And in Truth our
King's Neutrality deserved all this from France, and much more.
Not long after, having the Opportunity of a private Con ver- May 11.
sation with the Treasurer; I complained to him of the Injustice
done me in the foolish Story of my Black's Castration, as also
of the King's readiness to grant away my Estate. He laid he did
not believe the King had given it, for that he had begged of
him not to be too hasty in that particular, believing the Report
to be a malicious Lye: But that he was of Opinion with me,
that now was a fit time to ask his Majesty for something by way
of Reparation, and that he would assist me therein. His Lord-
ship was upon this Occasion so open with me as to tell me, That
tho' the King denied scarce any thing to the Duke, his Brother,
he certainly did not love him at his Heart.
He told me also That the King had no mind to fall out with
France j and that if the Parliament would effectually engage him
in that War, their way would be to furnilh him with Sums of
Money to prepare for it, and that no less than Six Hundred
Thousand Pounds would be absolutely Neceflary for that Purpose.
That if the King accepted of this, he would be obliged to carry
on the War; but that if the Parliament would not trust him, he
was in the right not to embark himself, and might justly argue,
How can I depend on my Parliament to furnish me with regular
and equal Supplies to carry on a War, (which they will not Jo
much as enable me to prepare for? But I easily saw through this;
I plainly perceived it was all Artifice to get the fingering of
Money.
He moreover said, Thai the King could not in Honour join
the Confederates against France: That in all the Treaties the
King of England had been mentioned as Principal in the War: .
That in the beginning he did actually join with France, and
E 2 that

<page 33>
28 MEMOIRS
j*77. that for him now to turn his Arms against that Crown, would
look neither just nor honourable in the Eye of the World. This
his Lordship told me was the King's own way of Arguing, when-
ever War hapned to be the Subject of their Discourse together j
but that his Answer to his Majesty was, That he needed not be
ib regardful of that Transaction, the French King having plaid
him the very fame Trick, when Chancellor Hyde was chief Mi-
nister. To this he replied, That the French King had a Pique
against the Lord Chancellor: To which the Treasurer subjoined,
That whatever was the Cause, the thing was as he had said.
He was so free also as to tell me still further, That the Duke
was the Grand Promoter of the French Interest, and that he now
made his Court to the Sectaries and Fanaticks, only to give
Strength and Vigour to the Popish Interest: That his Highness
was so very a Bigot, that tho' the Archbishop of Rheims made
no Scruple to go into our Churches, and even kneel down during
the time of Divine Service, the Duke at the fame time could not
be prevailed on so much as to step within the Doors. He observed
that the Duke was particularly unhappy in'his Servants, a sense-
less Pack; but that indeed his Confessor was a notable Man, and
one that had a great Influence over him; being as well as his
Master averse to a War with France. His Lordship, however,
declared himself for it.
The next Day I went to visit the Duke and Dutchess of Lau-
therdale, at their fine House at Ham. Dinner over, Her Grace
entertained me in her Chamber with much Discourse upon Af-
fairs of State. A beautiful Woman she had been, the supposed
Mistress of Oliver Cromwell, and at that time a Lady of great
Parts. Both Her Grace and the Duke her Husband, were
entirely in the Treasurer's Interest. Her chief Complaint was,
That the Duke so adhered to Papists and Fanaticks, and so put
the King upon changing the Deputies of Ireland, and all purely
for the Subservience of the Romtfh Interest; and in short, let me
into the Secret of many things I had never so much as heard of
before j and particularly acquainted me with the State and Bent
of

<page 34>
Os Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 2$
of Scotlandy which, as her H^band was Lord Commissioner, lhe *677-
was well able to do.
The Day after I went to alk Mr. Secretary fFilliamson, if any
Entry had been made in his Office concerning my Estate? He
answered He durst only own it to me in private, but that upon
some Rumour of a Forfeiture, by some Act of mine, it was true
that Mr. Felton, of the Bedchamber, had begged it of the Kingy
and entered a Caveat thereof at his Office.
Upon this I prevailed with my Lord Treasurer to go with me
to the King, of whom I begged two Things, namely, That he
would be pleased to order Mr. Secretary Williamson to raze a
Caveat that had been entered with him, upon his Majesty's
granting away my Estate to Mr. Feltort, reputed to be forfeited
by my pretended felonious Practices with the Blackamoor that
dyed in my Service: And that also he would be pleased to lay
his Commands upon my Lord Chief Justice Rainsfbrd, to disco-
ver to me at whole Sollicitation, or upon what Suggestion it was
his Lordship issued out his Warrant to the Coroner to take up
the Body, after it had been so long interred.
To the Firft the King answered, He did not remember any grant
he had made of my Estate to any Person whatsoever, but that if
any iiich Caveat was entered, he would see that it was expunged.
As for the Second, He directed my Lord Treasurer to sond -one
with me to my Lord Chief Justice, as from him, to do as I had
desired; which his Lordship did the next Day by his Secretary.
When we came to him, he told us the whole Matter, and begged
I would excuse him for having been so very forward in that Af-
fair . and indeed he had good Reason so to do, having done more
than he could juJHfy; for he had granted his Warrant upon a
bare Suggejiion, that the Moor had dyed by such an Act, with-
out taKing any Information either in Writing or upon Oath.
The Parliament met at fpyiminfter pursuant to Adjournment; May «.
and the King, in his Speech, told the House, He could not make
such Alliances as they, desired, except they gave him Money, to
make Preparations for War. The Commons did not approve of
this,

<page 35>
MEMOIRS
**77. this, and Voted that no Money should be raised, till the King
had first entered into a League Offensive and Defensive with
Holland, and the rest of the United Provinces, for the safety of
these Kingdoms, the recovery of Flanders, and to abate the Power
of the French King.
May »8. In answer to this, the King said, They had exceeded the
Bounds and Methods of Parliament, That they entrenched on his
Prerogative, by not only directing him to make Alliances, but
by pointing out to him what those Alliances should be, and with
whom to be made. That the Power of making Peace or War
resided wholly in himself, and that if they took that from him,
he should have nothing left but the empty name of King, and no
more, and that in such case, no Prince or State would enter into
Engagements with him. Upon the whole, He rejected the Ad-
dress, but would use such Means as became him for the Preser-
vation of his Kingdoms j adjourning them to the x6th Day of
July following.
In the mean time, having heard that my Lord Tarmouth was
one that had begged my Estate, upon Occasion of the Death of
my Black, and understanding that his Lordship was come to
Town; I presently waited on him at his House, and being with
feme Difficulty admitted (for I had never seen him ) I asked
him if the thing was true ? Whereupon he bitterly swore he had
never asked it os the King, and that he never knew any thing
of it, farther than that one ffrijrht, Sollicitor to the Lord Hen-
ry Howard, did come and acquaint him That there was likely
to be such a Forfeiture, and advised him to use his Interest with
the King for it; but that he absolutely gave no Ear to the Pro-
posal, saying, He would never be the richer for the Misfortunes of
ethers: That he believed it was pure Malice against me, and
that he would serve me all he could to find out the Authors of
it. In short, I got it from under his Hand, That he was neither
directly or indirectly concerned in begging my Estate.
The very lame Day, I found out Mr. ff^rtght, and threatned to
fcring my Action of Scandal against him, upon the Information I
had

<page 36>
Os Sir J O H N R E R E S B v. 31
had received from my Lord Yarmouth, if he did not let me in- ^77-
to the whole Intrigue. He then ingenuously contefled, That both
Bright and Chappel beforementioned, had given htm an Account
of the Moor's Death, with all the Circumstances of his pretended
Castration, and with all Aflurance of the Truth of what they
said; and that he telling the Story to Lord Henry Howard,
his Lordship sent him to Lord Tarmouth, advising him to beg
my Estate of the King, and that he begged it accordingly. I
was now much surprized that two Noblemen should make their
Honour so cheap, and deny a real Fact with such Oaths and
Asseverations; but considering with my self that to make more
stir in the thing, would be only to make a great deal of Noise
about a very foolish Story, I contented my self with this satis-
faction, that as a Sign of their Shame and Repentance, they had
both given themselves the^Lye.
At this time was the Marriage agreed on, between the Prince l9'
of Orange, and the Lady Maryr first Daughter to his Royal
Highnels, to the great Joy of the Nation; for his Highness be-
ing a Protestant Prince, this Match in a great measure dispelled
the Fears that the Majority had conceived concerning Popery.
Lord Danby, the Treasurer, was believed to have promoted this
Alliance, and got good Reputation by it.
The Parliament which was to have met upon the 3 d of De- 26r
cember, was by Proclamation prorogued to the 4th of April; but
nevertheless, the Public Business requiring it, the Day was short-
ned, and they were to meet on the 1 oth of 'January, but when
the time came, they were adjourned for 15 Days.
I Dined with my Lord Treasurer, who received me very n^.x.
kindly; and the next Day I kissed the King's Hand, and the
Duke's. His Highness, among other things, told me the Rea-
son of this short Adjournment was because the King could not
so fully acquaint both Houses, why they vvere called together at
this time, till he had a more perfect Account of a Treaty now
upon the Carpet with Spain; and after some other Discourse of
Public Concern, I gave him some Assurances of Duty and Re-
spect,

<page 37>
3Z MEMOIRS
1<577. fpect, which by a former, tho' false Report he had some Rea-
son to doubt of.
The Parliament met, and the King, in his Speech, informed
them That he was entered in a strict Alliance with the Prince of
Orange, and the United Provinces, to oppose the Growth of the
French King, and the Progress of his Arms in Flanders; and de-
sired he might have Money to enable him to fulfil his Engage-
ments.
Ken}. a8. The Commons immediately Voted an Address of Thanks to
the King, for the Care he had taken of the Protestant Religion,
in marrying his Niece to the Prince of Orange; but observed
they could grant no Supplies for the War, if His Majesty and His
Allies would not ingage not to lay down their Arms, till the
Treaty of the Pyrenees was performed, and till the French King
was reduced to the Condition he theirs was in; for that without
this, neither this Kingdom, nor the rest of Christendom was sase.
30- • They now Voted the Sum of Seventy Thousand Pounds, to be
raised for the Royal Interrment of King Charles the Martyr, and
for erecting a Monument to his Memory.
* Supping this Night with my Lord Treasurer, he told me He
fully had intended to sollicit the King to do something for me 5
but, if he had really meant it, I knew he might have done it
long before then.
Feb. 4. The King sent us an Answer to our Address, and therein
pressed us to raise Money to carry on the War, and to prevail
on us the more effectually, he acquainted us with the Alliances
he had made j which so wrought upon the House, That the
Question being put, it was carried by Two and Forty Voices,
to aslist his Majesty in the War, and to consider of the way to
do it -y but it being late, the Debate was put of till the next
Morning.
$• The next Morning I waited on the Duke of Tork, and had a
great deal of Discourse with him concerning this matter; and
being the Night before with my Lord Treasurer, the Scheme
was laid hpw to proceed the next Day,
Great

<page 38>
Qf£/>JoHN Reresby.
33
Great Debates had arisen upon this Affair, and the reason of i*77.
the violent Opposition it met with, was a Desire in some to op-
pose the Crown, tho' in the very thing they themselves wished
For, the Nation being ever desirous of a War with France \ and
a jealousy in others, That the King indeed intended to raise an
Army, but never designed to go on with the War, and, to say
the Truth, some of the King's own Party were not-very sure of
the Contrary. However, the Commons soon after Voted Money
for the raising of Six and Twenty Regiments of Foot, Four of
Horse, and Two of Dragoons, together with a Navy of Ninety
Men of War, for a War with France.
A few Days afterwards, I acquainted the King and the Duke
with some of the Transactions of the House, and of the Doubts
some had there expressed concerning the Ratification of the Peace
betwixt us and Holland. To which the King replyed, "That
"the League offensive and defensive was actually signed by the
* States, lo that they could not now recede, but that the Ra-
"tification was not yet sealed, the several Provinces not having
"yet confirmed the Act of their Deputies, and of the Council
"of Eight who had received it.
The great Business of granting an Aid to the King came on De- Fth 18.
bate in the House, where it was thoroughly controverted, and
many Difficulties were started, and many Mistrusts of the King.
Among others, I lpoke and attempted to shew the necessity there
was for a Trust at this time, and how impossible it was (tho'
some ground might appear for it) to recede at this Hour 01 the
Day.
The next Day the Commons Voted a Million, to enable the a7.
King to make War with France, for the Preservation of Flanders.
We had at this time News that the French had taken Ghent
and Bruges^ and that Oftend was besieged -y whereupon the King
caused Sixteen Hundred Men to be immediately drawn out of
his Guards and other Forces here, and sent them to Ojtend, un-
der the Command of the Duke of Monmouth ;in short, this News
quite alarmed Flanders, Holland and England. The Commons
'- F parti-

<page 39>
34 M E M O IRS
«*77. particularly concerned themselves therein, and now grown warm,
they begin to reflect on the King's ill Councils, that had not ad-
vised him to a War before. No Man was named, but they plain-
ly pointed at the Duke of Tork, and the Lord Treasurer.
Feb. 28. Attending the King's Levee, His Majesty told me, and some
other Members then present, " That except the Money Voted
"was speedily railed, it would come after the French King had
"done his Work." His Highness also told me the fame Morn-
ing, that his Friends would have a hard Task of it that Day, he
being informed That some of the House had resolved to renew the
Debate concerning ill Councellors j but I assured him it was not
likely, having but the Day before heard a Leader of the anti-
court Party fay, It was no time to raise Disputes at Home, now
that we were in liich a way of being embroiled abroad ^ and it
proved even as I had said.
March a. But after all, News came that Ghent and Bruges had not been
taken, as had been reported; and moreover, that Mons Rou-
vigny was coming over, on the Part of France, with Tenders of
Peace. The Parliament started at this, and grew Jealous the
Offers would be accepted ; but still our Forces marched onwards,
in their way to Ofiend; and two Days afterwards the Bill for
raising Money, by way of Poll, was perfected, when the King
and the Duke talked much of a War, tho' still it was suspected
their Hearts were more inclined for Peace,
jo. His Highness told me, He was informed of a Design in the
House of Commons, to fall upon him and my Lord Treasurer,
and desired me to oppose it. My Lord Treasurer assured me of
the same thing, and that it was to be done that very Day. That,
among other Articles, they laid to his Charge a Treaty between
the King and the Prince of Orange j but that in reality there
was no such Treaty; and had it been, he did not think it had
been disadvantageous to England. Another of his Crimes, he
said, would be for advising the King to make a Peace, which
he never did j tho' it was not impossible but such Design there
might be j but that is so it were, it proceeded from nothing but
the

<page 40>
Of Sir John Reresby. 35
t
the King's own Judgment, who was that way very much bent, 1*78-
if lawful it were lo to say.
Now several Speeches were made in the House, full fraught Mard* 14-
of Jealousies and Fears, and particularly with regard to the Ar-
my at this time levying j as if it rather intended to erect abso-
lutely Monarchy at home, than infest: the Enemy abroad. Com-
plaints were made of evil Councils, and of the Councellors, but
still no Body was named. A long Debate it proved, and in the
end produced an Address to the King, That before they pro-
ceeded to give any more Money, His Majesty would be pleased
to declare War with France, and withdraw his Ambasiador from
that Court. It was also stiflly contended, That a part of this
Address lhould be to entreat the King to put away those evil
Councellors from about him, who had advised him to adjourn the
Parliament in May last, and prevented a War with France all
this time j but this being put to the Question, it was carried in
the Negative; it was carried but by Five Votes only.
The Commons then resolved, That a Day should be appointed !$.
to consider of the State of the Kingdom with regard to Pope-
ry: And Three Days afterwards my Lord Tieafurer sent for se-
veral Members of the House, and me among others, to the Trea-
sury Chamber. His Lordship there told us, It became all good
Subjects to withstand all such Motions and Proceedings, which
tended only to perplex the Minds of Men, and disturb the Pub-
lic Tranquility; in short, to raise jealousies against the Govern-
ment. The Duke also, among othqr things, told me, It would
be to disarm all Popish Reculants, which he seemed to think a
ridiculous Thing' and here we put a Period to this Year.
At this time, many well meaning Men began to fear the Ar- *<*78-
my now raised, was rather intended to awe our own Kingdom,
than to% War against France, as had at first been suggested ; and
now it being put to the Question, whether an Address should be May 8.
made to the King, for laying aside Duke Lautherdale, of the
Kingdom of Scotland, it was carried in the Negative by one Vote
, only.
F 2 . The

<page 41>
36 MEMOIRS
1678. The Question was put again, and carried, That such Counci-
lors as had advised the King to make such Answers to the late
Addresies from his Parliament, being Betrayers of the King and
Kingdom, or to that Effect, an Address should be humbly pre-
sented to his Majesty, to lay them aside from his Councils, and
May 10. remove them from their other Employments. This Address was ac-
cordingly presented, and his Majesty's Answer was this, That they
were so extravagant in the Contents of it, that he was not wil-
ling to make such Reply to it as it deserved. Lautherdale was
particularly named. And the fame Day it was carried, tho' but
by one Voice in a full House, That the King's Meflage lately
sent them to consider of some Means for a Supply to his Maje-
sty, for paying off his Fleet, should not be observed,
ij. The King understanding the Tide of their Proceedings to run
so very high, prorogued them to the 23d of the fame Month,
which put a stop to their farther Proceedings.
It was, at this time generally believed That Peace was con-
cluded between us, the Confederates, and the King of France.
We blamed the States for their ready Complyance; the States
blamed the Spaniard who was full of his Offers, while he had
neither Men, Arms, or Money in Flanders to defend it j and
they both fell upon the Parliament of England, who when they
should have given Money, and made other Preparations for the
War, were wasting their time in quarrelling at home with the
Government, and with each other.
2j. The Parliament met, pursuant to Adjournment, when the King
spoke to them a little more brilkly than usual. He told them, a
Peace was near upon Conclusion between France and the Confe-
derates, at which they were extremely concerned. This Peace
with France, when there was like to be fb strong an Union com-
bined to reduce that proud and potent King to a better Sense of
himself, was very ungrateful News to England; and therefore
the King, to throw the Blame of it upon the Commons, told us,
in his Speech, It was owing to their refusal of Money, till some-
thing was done for the Security of their Religion j thek Ne-
gligence

<page 42>
Qf&rJoHN Rbres by. 37
gligence to direct or advise him concerning the intended War, or l^78.
to assist him till he had changed Councellors, and consequently the
little Hopes the Confederates could have of Help from him j that
this, together with the low Condition of Spain, had prompted
them to lend an Ear to offers of Peace; not to speak of the
sluggish Motion of the Germans, the Difficulty of getting them,
together, their Princes being influenced by such discordant Views
and Interests, and the present Poverty of the States General, all
which had contributed towards the Ceilation of the War.
But still our King was chiefly condemned in this great Af-
fair, as he so long deferred to engage in this Alliance j which,
had he sooner done, the French King had never. dared to persist
in the War; at least he could not have made so great a Pro-
gress in Flanders, or have been able to make so good a. Market
for himself, as he did by this Peace. :*
To this our King made Answer, He could not have believed
the French King would have been able to weather out a War
so well as he did, tho' in a manner against all Europe, Himself
and the King of Sweden only excepted, who sat Neuters: And
that in case this Number of Enemies had humbled that King-
dom, England might well have been satisfied with the having
been an unconcerned Looker-on, while she engrossed all the Com-
merce of Europe, and might in the end have reaped an equal
Share of Advantage with even the Labourers themselves, who
had been at all the Pains and Expence.
The Commons Voted Two Hundred Thousand Pounds, to be June 4.
given for disbanding the Army; but under great Restrictions,
fearing the King might take the Money, and convert it to other
Uses. Wherefore great Penalties were levelled against the Of-
ficers of the Exchequer, and others, through whose Hands it was
to pass, to prevent their diverting it from its right Channel, and
this done, the Money was chearfully given, the Nation, and its
Representatives, dreading nothing so much, at that time, as a
standing Army.
About

<page 43>
38 MEMOIRS
1578. About this time there was fresh Discourse about a War with
June 24. prafJcey tjje French King and ours not agreeing concerning the
Interest of the King of Sweden, which the French would have to
be adjusted, before they would deliver up the Towns they had
taken in Flanders: But, by what I heard, I thought the thing
-\ I had but an unlikely Aspect, and particularly as I had seen the
^\ King, Duke, and French Ambassador so verry often merry, and
intimate together at the Duchess of Portsmouth's Lodgings, laughr
ing at thole who believed it in earnest.
Oftob. to. Now came the first News of the Popish Plot, or a Design of
the Papists to kill the King. No Body can conceive, that was
not a Witness thereof, what a Ferment this raised among all
Ranks and Degrees. Being at this time in the Country, I hur-
ried to Town with my Family.
3f. The Parliament met, and the King in his Speech told us,
He had kept the Army on foot longer than by the Act for did
banding it was allowed; but that he had done it to preserve the
rest of Flanders, which had proved an Expensive Precaution to
him j That he was deeply in Debt j That his Revenue would
jiot defray the Charge of the Government j That he Would satis,
fy them as to this, by laying the whole Scheme of his Income
before them, and that he then doubted not but they would make
him a proper Augmentation. That there had been a Design a-
gainst his Life by the Jesuits and their Friends \ but that he
would not descend to the Particulars of the thing, lest some
should think he laid too little, and others, that he said too
much: In a word, he left the whole to their Discovery.
The Two Houses, (but the Commons especially) took fire at
this, and immediately Voted an Address to the King, That all
Papists should be sent Ten Miles from London. And now came
on the Tragedy of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey \ and now also ap-
peared Doct. Gates, who, as he pretended, having some Jealousy
of what was in Agitation, dissembled himself a Papist, and got
Admittance of the Jesuits College at St. Omers, where seeing in-
to the whole Matter, he told it to one Doct. Tongue, an English
Divine,

<page 44>
r0f Sir Jo h n Reres by. o>9
Divine, who told it to my Lord Treasurer, who privately told it *67&
to the King, in such manner that the thing was stifled and latent ofieb. 23.
for a whole Month. But being with the King at the Duchess of
Portsmouth's Lodgings, my Lord Treasurer also being present,
the King told me, " He took it to be some Artifice, and that he
"did not believe one word of the whole Story."
Cokmans Affair made also a Noise j and seemed in some sort 2^ <
to confirm the other. He made very free with his Highness's
Name upon several important Articles, tho' the Duke was an
utter Stranger to his Correspondence, as he desired his Friends
of both Houses to declare for him. The Commons, however,
were very angry with my Lord Treasurer, for keeping the Plot
so long in the Dark, seeing the King might have been made a-
Way with in the mean time. This News I first of any Body com^
municated to his Lordship, in the Presence of the King, who
said, "My Lord was in no Fault as to that; he having com-
"manded him to keep it Secret, the better to make Discovery
"of what Truth there might be therein.''
Now to enter into the Particulars of this Plot, real or pre-
tended, is not the Design of this Work j the several Narratives
of the Witnesses before the Two Houses of Parliament, and the
Courts of justice, upon the Tryals of the Parties accused, will
give sufficient Insight and Satisfaction, as to all that can be said
of it. Thus much we may, however, observe, that tho' a great
deal of what was advanced and confidently related, bore the
Face of Improbability, yet such was the Torrent of the Times>
that no doubt was to be made of all that was heard.
All the beginning of this Month was taken up by the Com- Novmbtr-
mons, in examining of Witnesses concerning the Plot, who came
in very plentifully, the King having, at the Request of the
Commons, granted Indemnity to all who should make any Dik
covery, tho ever so deeply and blackly engaged themselves, and
riot only Indemnity, but Subsistance in to the Bargain. At length
the Commons came to this Resolution, That upon the Evidence
which appeared from Colemans Letters, and the Informations of
Oatejy

<page 45>
MEMOIRS
Gates and others, it was plain there was a hellish and damnable
Design to aflassinate and murder the King, and to subvert the
Religion and Government as by Law established.
The House of Lords now requested his Royal Hignels, to
-withdraw himself from the King s Councils, and he complied
with the Request; but the Commons went a Step higher, and
were for removing him from about the King's Person. There
were those in the House who argued the Danger of this, observ-
ing that his Highness might be thereby tempted to put himself
at the Head of the Popish Faction. Some there were also, who
moved That the Duke should be sent out of England. The King
and Duke both, spoke to all their Friends to oppose this, and it
was effectually done ; for no Resolution being taken that Day,
the Debate was adjourned to the 8 th Instant. But tho' it
came not to the Vote, the House was generally of Opinion,
That the Duke's being of that Religion was what principally
encouraged the Papists to such wicked Attempts: In short, they
were, by Proclamation, banished to the Distance of ten Miles
from London.
While Colemans Letters were under the Consideration of the
House, I waited several times on my Lord Treasurer, who had
called several of us together, to consult us about an Act to les-
sen the Popish Interest in this Kingdom ; when his Lordship told
us, The King was willing something should be enacted, To pare
(as his Expression was) the Nails of a Popish Successor; but that
he would never suffer his Brother to be taken away from him,
or the right Line of the Succession to the Crown to be inter-
rupted; and to the same Effect the King spoke to the two
Houses the next Day.
To pass over other things more generally known, a Jealousy
now seemed to arise between the Duke and my Lord Treasurer.
The Duke thought his Lordship was within himself for his leav-
ing the Court, that so he might have the King the more absolutely
in his own Power: And my Lord (tho I believe he endeavoured
to serve the Duke all he could, tho' no Friend to his Religion)
resented

<page 46>
Os Sir J o h n R e r e s b y; 41
refented the Duke's Suspicion. Much was, at this time, done and l67%-
transacted, in disfavour of the Popish Party; and particularly it New. 13.
was now that the Lords pafled that great Bill to incapacitate such
oith&w Roman Catholic Members as should refuse to take the Oath
of Allegiance and Supremacy ; tho' my Lord High Treasurer said
in my Hearing, but the Night before, He was sure it would ne-
ver pass in that House.
The Duke of Holfteins Resident had, it seems, reported the
Lord Treasurer to be in the Pay and Pension of France. Thus,
at least, had his Lordship been informed, and sending for him,
he sent for me also to be present at the Examination j but the
Resident absolutely denied what was laid to his Charge. To
make amends for this, I, a few Days after, acquainted his
Lordship, That the same Gentleman had assured me, the Com-
mons would most certainly fall upon him, and that it was in his
power to turn the Edge of one that was most violent against him.
I told him also, that I had,from other Hands, been informed, that
my Cousin Ralph Montague^ since Lord Montaguey lately recalled
from being Ambaflador in France', and now Member of our House,
would accuse him there. But my Lord gave no Ear to either
of these j saying, The latter durst not impeach him, for that he
had Letters to shew from him, whilst Ambaflador, that would
prove how officious he was to persuade him, to accept of the
French King's Money, tho' he absolutely refused it. The fame
Day the Duke told me, He expected to be attacked by the
Commons, and hoped his Friends would stand firm to him; and
Sir Joseph H^'tWiamfony Secretary of State, was, by the House,
committed to the Tower, for pafling the Musters of some Popish
Officers, without tendering them the Oaths, tho' he had his Ma-
jesty's Orders for so doing.
Bedloe, the Evidence, went on apace, but being this Day u.
. with the King, his Majesty told me, " Bedloe was a Rogue, and
"that he was satisfied he had given some false Evidence, con-
• "cerning the Peath of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey"
G In
1

<page 47>
42 MEMOIRS
T<S78- In preparing the Bill for purging the House of Lords of such
JVw. 21. as refused the new Test, it was put to the Question, Whether
or no His Royal Highness fliould be excused from taking it, and
it was carried in the Affirmative, but by no more than Two
Votes: Had it been carried in the Negative, he would, in the
next place, have been Voted away from the King's Presence.
And now all the Popish Lords, three excepted, were expelled
the House of Peers.
Decmh i. Having proceeded thus far, the Commons Voted an Address
to the King, from that House, to represent the ill State of the
Nation, and the Danger it was in, by his Majesty's adhering to
private Councils rather than to his Two Houses of Parliament:
This aimed at my Lord Treasurer, and some others of the Cabi-
net Council. This was carried by Two and Twenty Votes, and
even some of the Courtiers were for it; whence it was by some
surmised, That the Duke, being no longer in Councils, was grown
jealous of the Treasurer, and had a mind he should be removed.
It was now laid the Duke had been persuaded ( but unjustly)
that his Lordship endeavoured to insinuate into the King, that
there was something of Probability in the Accusation against the
Queen, purely that he might hearken to a Divorce, and marry
another more likely to bring Children to the Crown.
The Commons were now intent upon disbanding the Army,
raising of Money for that purpose, and the Conviction of Popish
Recusants ; during which the Right of the Lords to interfere in a
Money-Bill was warmly contested ; but not to dwell on so nice
16, a Subject, the King caused Mr. Montagues Papers to be seized,
and acquainted the House of Commons, That having been his
Ambaflador at the French Court, he had taken on him to treat
with the Pope's Nuncio, without any Commiflion from him for
so doing ; and that he had seized his Papers to come at the Pur-
port of the laid Treaty. But Montague allured the House, that
this was a meer Artifice, a contrivance of the Treasorer's to save
himself; but that his Lordship had therein failed, for that altho'
most of his Letters were seized, he had by good luck laved the
most

<page 48>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 43
most material. One of them, dated the 25th of March 1678, ,l67*-
instructed him to acquaint that Court with the great Difficulties
he met withal here in the Affair of Peace between us and them,
and the fear there was the Parliament should discover it: That
however he had orders from the King to bid him treat with them
for a Peace, as well between them and the Confederates, as our
selves j upon Condition, the French King would give ours Six
Hundred Thousand Livers per Annum, for Three Years together,
after the Conclusion of the Peace j for that as our King would
thereby disgust the Parliament, he could expect no Money from
them of so long a time: And finally, That when he wrote back
to the Secretary, concerning this Transaction, he should be silent
as to the Money, and so on. Signed, Danby.
This put the House into a Flame, and a motion was instantly
made, That the Treasurer should be impeached of High Trea-
son; for that he had endeavoured to estrange the King from
his Parliament, and make it of no use to him; and one Mr.
Powel observed, That this was usurping a Power to the Exclusion
of other Councellors, who had a Right to advise the King as well
as himself; the very Treason that was laid to the charge of the
Spencers, and the Duke of Ireland, in the Days of Richard the
Second.
But it was answered, That it was no such great Offence to
write this by the King's own Order, as was expressed in the Let-
ter itself, and would be owned, as supposed, by the King at
this Time. That the King had certainly a Power to advise
with which of his Councellors he pleased ; and that if his Majesty
foresaw the Confederates would strike up a Peace, which we must
comply with, where was the Harm of making what Advantage
we could of it to our selves, and at the same time of sparing the
Purses of the Subject?
A second Letter was produced, which gave Assurance of In-
clinations for a very fair Understanding between us and his
Most Christian Majesty; together with Advice to hasten the
Peace j because the Duke seemed every Day more and more
G 2 averse

<page 49>
44 MEMOIRS
j *7 8. averse to it; and mentioned some Towns to be given up, by the
Frenchy as cautionary, to the Confederates, upon the Conclusion of
this Peace. Mr. Montague then declared in the House, That
the French King was willing to deliver up Two Towns more
than he did by the former Treaty; but that my Lord Treasurer
was so earnest and pressing for Money, that he thereby made the
Terms much worse for the Confederates; but at the same time
acknowledged he could not say he knew of any Money paid ei-
ther to him or to his Majesty. Other things were now laid to
the Treasurer's Charge, as the Male-administration of his Os-
lice, and the Lownesi of the Exchequer: But to this it was an-
swered, by his Lordship's Friends, That a Debt of Six Hundred
Thousand Pounds had been paid off since he had been in Office,
tho' no Money had in all that time been given to the King, but
what had been appropriated to the Uses designed.
He was farther accused, (this Letter bearing Date the 25 th of
of March 1678, and the Act which gave Money to the King to
enter into a War with France being pafled but the 20th) of de-
luding the Nation, in advising the King to take Money for rais-
ing an Army for Service abroad, and at the same time treating
for Money from France to make a Peace, which looked as if a
standing Army was designed to humble England) and not France.
In short, the Question being put, it was resolved, That an Im-
peachment be drawn up against the Lord Treasurer, and a Com-
mittee was accordingly appointed for that purpose.
Mr. Montague was, in this case, justly censored, for disclosing
what had pafled through his Hands, when a public Minister,
without the King's Leave. Mean while, the Trealiirer endea-
JaHuaryj. voured to destroy the Credit of his Accuser, and produced some
Letters from him, when in France, which were read in the
House, and made it appear that Montague had been very guilty
of the Offences he threw upon his Lordship: But his Enemies
were so many and so powerful, that the whole Edge was bent
against him j in a Word, the Tide was not to be stemmed, and
Six Articles of Impeachment were drawn up against him.
But
G

<page 50>
Of Sir J 0 H N R E R E S B Y. 45
But a Debate arose, whether, supposing any of these Articles x«78-
to be true, they amounted to High Treason, none of-them being
within the Statute of Edward III. At length the Question
being put, whether or no an Impeachment of - High Treason,
founded upon the said Articles against his Lordship, should be
carried up to træ*House of Lords, the] Ayes were 179, and the Jan. 23.
Noes 130. The Impeachment then was carried up to the Bar
of the House of Lords, where it being presently debated, whe-
ther or no his Lordship should withdraw, it was carried in the
Negative by 20 Voices; and then both Houses adjourned for
Chriftmass Eve, and Chriftmass Day only.
The Houses met, and the Commons heard some Evidence con- ad-
eeming the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and quarrelled
with the Lords on account of the Amendment they had made in
the Money-Bil 1 for disbanding the Army. The same Day I
spoke both with the King and the Duke, who both declared
they would adhere to my Lord Treasurer.
The next Day the Lords Voted, That he should not be com- *7*
mitted: And the same Day the Dispute between the Two
Houses, concerning the Money-Bil 1, was decided by a Conference,
and the Bill passed both Houses. And here I cannot but take
Notice, that the King observing the Lord Strafford to be very
violent in the House against the Lord Dauby, (which, it seems,
took birth from a Personal Pique to him, for obstructing a Pen-
sion he had from the Crown) told me," He wondered at it much,
"seeing his Father came to the unfortunate End he did, by the
"very self same Method of Procedure."
And now, when it was least expected, the King prorogued ^
the Parliament to the 4th of February; some said in favour of
the Papists, others of the Lord Treasurer, and others again in
Defence of his Prerogative, which was more than one way in-
vaded by the Commons: But his Majesty at the same time de-
clared he intended to disband the Army, and prosecute the Busi-
ness of the Plot. Montague was now discovered in a Disguise
at Dovert in his way to France.
My

<page 51>
4<S MEMOIRS
1*78. My Lord Treasurer sent for me, and told me, The King had
Jan' 2* declared he would diflblve the Parliament, and advised me to
make Interest as soon as I could against the approaching Elec-
tion, for that another Parliament would speedily be called. This
Parliament was, for the most part, very Loyal both to the King
and the Church j which made those of adverse Sentiments very
desirous of its Dissolution ; and the way they contrived to bring
it about, as was credibly reported, was by persuading the Trea-
surer to obtain it of the King, promising if he should succeed
therein, That there should be no farther Prosecution against him
in the next Parliament j but they deceived him, as he afterwards
experienced.
, 31. Both the King and the Duke advised me to stand for the next
Parliament, and both of them assured me, not only of my Go-
vernment of Burlington, but of their Assistance also, if it came
to a controverted Election.
Feb. 14. Accordingly a Proclamation coming out for the Election of a
new Parliament, my Lord Treasurer conducted me to His Ma-
jesty, and thanked him for his Promise of continuing me in my
Government j to which the King replied, That I had served him
faithfully, and that he intended to be kind to me. My Lord
Treasurer wrote also to the High Sheriff of Torkshire, to be fa-
vourable to me in the Return j to conclude, having taken leave
of the Duke of Monmouth, I lest the Town to go into the
Country.
March 6. The Parliament met, but a Difference arose about the Choice
of a Speaker, the House being for one, and the King recom-
mending another; wherefore they refused to enter upon Business,
^ but adjourned to the 7th Instant, then to the 8th, and so to the
10th. The next Day I met the King in his Royal Robes, and
with his Crown upon his Head, as he came out of the House of
Lords: He stopped to ask me If I was elected? To which re-
plying Yes, he kid, He was glad of it. Upon my Return to
Town, I, to the surprise os all Men, found that the King had
commanded the Duke to go into Flanders: Some feid the Trea-
surer
-

<page 52>
Of Sir J o h n Reresby.
47
sucer had brought this to pass, that he might engross the King to »*78.
himself} others said it was to divert the Violence of both Houses
against his Highness, from the Suspicion of lome that he
was of the Plot. But I presume it was chiefly intended to ex-
tirpate all Jealousies in the Parliament, That he was influenced
by Popish Councils, tho' even from his own Brother.
The Commons began to be angry with the Treasurer, for that
the Speaker they had proposed had been rejected by the King j
saying he was the cause of it, because, truly, the Gentleman was
not his Lordship's Friend. This Dispute subsisting between the ,
King and the Commons, they at length Address him, Beseech-
ing him not to invade their undoubted Privilege of chusing
their Speaker; but His Majesty still insists on it, That without
his Approbation, their Choice is of none Effect. Now all the
Moderate Men in the House were concerned That such Puncti-
lio's should stand in the Way of Business, especially when Busi-
ness of such High Importance lay before them; but the Angry
Party was deaf to all Remonstrance; and the King, by way of
Expedient, prorogued the Parliament to the nth Instant, and
from thence to the 15th, when Serjeant Gregory being elected,
both sides were satisfied.
The Storm now begins to fall heavy upon the Lord Treasu-
rer, insomuch that he has Thoughts of delivering up his Staff,
and with it his Office, in hopes by such Resignation to allay
the Heats against him. I was averse to this step, I confess, and
would have had him stood his ground, as long as the King
would stand by him, saying, his Resignation would but expose him
the more to the Power of his Enemies; in short, that the Lords
would fear him the less, and the Commons not love him a bit
the better. Several Persons had got posiesied of good Employ-
ments, not so much by my Lord's Favour and Kindness, as by
giving Money to his Lady, who had for some time driven on a
private Trade of this sort, tho' not without his Lordships partici-:
pation and concurrence. This I knew, but had neither the Face
nor the Inclination to come in at that Door 5 so that I was post-

<page 53>
48 MEMOIRS
-*<*7*- poned to many, who, as I thought, deserved as little as my self";
but they had but a bad Bargain, they were now all swept away
with the fame Torrent that began to overwhelm his Lordship ; a-
Marcb 17. gainst whom fresh Matter now appeared, upon the Evidence of
Bedloe, before the Committee appointed to examine into the
Plot, he accusing the Treasurer 01 having tampered with him to
fly during this Interval of Parliament. And now every thing
went harder and harder with his Lordship's Friends; fb that my
Election being controverted, the Committee of Privileges and E-
lections, in a few Days afterward, gave my Cause against me by
a small Majority of two only j which considering the Stream of the
Times, I reckoned to be as good as half a Victory at least.
In the mean time a Meflage was sent to the Lords, desiring
the Treasurer might be committed j but their Lordships had
but just before Voted him Eight Days t& prepare his Defence
12. in. The Commons repeated their former Meflage to the Lords j
23. and the next Day the King coming to the House of Lords, in the
usual State and Formality, informed both Houses, That it was
by his particular Order the Lord Treasurer had written the
Two Letters, produced by Montague: That it was not the
Lord Treasurer who had concealed the Plot, but that it was
himself who told it his Lordship from time to time, as he thought
fit. His Majesty then declared he had granted the said Noble-
man a full Pardon, and that, if Occasion required, he would
give it him again Ten times over: That, however, he intended
to lay him aside from his Employments, and to forbid him the
Court.
Some would have persuaded his Lordship to take Refuge a-
broad, as what would appease both Houses: And indeed the
Lords had a Conference with the Commons about preparing a
Bill to banisti him, and the Commons desired seme Days to con-
sider of it, in hopes he would have withdrawn in that time. In
1+ the midst of this Perplexity I saw his Lordship at Midnight,
as he came out of his Closet, from advising with his Friends
what to do. He gave me a great many Thanks and good Words;
told

<page 54>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B y. 49
told me he had recommended me to the King as a fit Person to 1<578-
be sent his Envoy into France ; as also where I was to make Ap-
plication in his Absence, if I wanted any thing with the King.
The next Day the Commons, in a great Heat, refused to com- l6l9-
ply with the Lords, in their Bill of Banishment; they said 'ltMarch z*'
was too slight a Punishment, and sent to demand Justice of their
Lordships against the Treasurer, declaring, He ought not only
to be punished in his own Person, but in his Posterity likewise,
as an Example of Terror to those, who for the future mould suc-
ceed him in his Office: But before this Meflage came, the Lords
had changed their Minds, and sent the Black Rod for the Trea-
surer; too late tho'; he was gone, and now it was surmised the
King was grown cool towards him.
A most unhappy thing it is to serve a fickle 'Prince, which,
it must be owned, was Part of our Master's Character. Had the
Treasurer considered no Body but himself, he might certainly
have fared better; but he resolved rather to suffer, than to do
any thing that might derive any Dishonour on the Kin^, or o-
thers about him, as he has since said himself. This great
Change, I must own, made me seriously ponder the incertitude
of human Grandeur: It was but a few Months before that few
things were transacted at Court, but with the Privity or Consent
of this great Man; the King's Brother, and favourite Mistress,
were glad to be fair with him, and the general Address of all
Men of Business was to him, who was not only Treasurer, but
Prime Minister also j who not only kept the Purse, but was the
first and greatest Confident in all Affairs of State. But now he
is neglected of all, forced to hide his Head as a Criminal, and in
danger of losing all he has got, and his Life therewith: His Fa-
mily raised from Privacy to the Degree of Marquifs, ( a Patent
was then actually pafling, to invest him with that Dignity) is now
on the Brink of falling below the humble stand of a Yeoman ; nor
would almost the meanest Subject change Conditions with him
now, whom so very lately the greatest beheld with Envy. This
confirmed me in a Belief, that a Middle State is always the best j
H not

<page 55>
So MEMOIRS
1679. not so lowly as to be trodden on, nor so lofty as to fear the Blasts
of Envy. A Man should not be so wanting in point of Industry,
as not to endeavour to distinguish himself in some sort from the
Bulk of those of his Rank j nor yet so ambitious as to sacrifice
the Ease of this Life, and of that to come, by mounting, over the
Heads of others, to a Greatness of uncertain Duration. But to
March 25. digress no farther,
I wrote to his Royal Highness, to acquaint him with the Po-
sture of Affairs here at present. The Two Houses of Parliament
continued in Division, as to what should be inflicted on the fallen
Treasurer j the Lords adhering to their Bill to banish him, and
the Commons to their Bill of Attainder, till at last it came to a
free Conference between them. This Business, and the Plot, en-
grossed the Attention of the Houses for a long time; during
which it was thought the Lord Danby lay concealed at Whitehall.
The King seemed not at all concerned at thus parting with
his Brother, and his Treasurer; nor in any Degree sollicitous
about the Use the Parliament would make thereof j tho' it was
suspected they would get their own Friends into Power, and ob-
tain a soip of the Prerogative, in Consideration of the Money
they gave to his Majesty.
April l-]. My Lord Danby at length surrendering himself, was com-
mitted Prisoner to the Tower, where going to pay him a Visit,
he seemed to be very little concerned.
i9. The Privy Council of Fifty Lords, was now dismissed, and a
new one called, consisting of Thirty of those Lords and Com-
moners, who had, in both Houses, been most active against the
late Court Measures; of these were Lord RujJ'el, Lord Hallifaxy
Lord Cavendish and others. The Admiralty was put into Com-
mission, and so was the Treasury. The Duke of Moffmouth was
supposed to be at the Bottom of all this; it is certain it was
now that he began to set up for himself.
My Lord Danby returned Answer to his Impeachment, to the
Upper House, pleading the King's Pardon. This was sent down
to the Commons, who referred it to a Committee; and the Re-
sult
V

<page 56>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 51
suit was, That His Majesty had no Power to grant Pardon in l619-
this Case: The same Day both Houses began to cast Reflections
on the Dutchess of Portjmouth.
The Commons, pursuant to their Resolution the Day before, ^P**127-
sat this Day, being Sunday, to consider of the means for the
Preservation of his Majesty's Person; and Voted, That the best
way would be to prevent the Succession from falling into the
Hands of a Papist, and that the Duke of Tork being such, was
the Reason of the late Conspiracy against the King's Person and
Government, and the Religion as by Law established.
My Lord Viscount Hallifax being now of the Council, and
entering into Business, he, tho' a great Enemy to the Earl of
Danbj, profesied a Kindness for me j but here I must observe,
that most of the other Lords and Gentlemen of the Privy Coun-
cil, tho' great Patriots before, in the Esteem of both Houses, be-
gan, in some Measure, to lose their Credit with both, so true
is it, That there is no wearing the Court and Country Livery to-
gether.
The Lords in the Tower moved, that Council might be as- May 11.
signed them, in vain; and a Day was appointed to consider of
that part of his Majesty's Speech, where he said he was willing
to concur with his Parliament, in passing a Bill to limit a Popish
Successor, so that he should not be able to alter the Government
and Religion as now by Law established, tho' he would not suf-
fer the Succession itself to be touched : Against this Day, a Com-
mittee was appointed to examine into Colemans Letters, and to
make Report to the House of whatever therein related to the
Duke of York. They reported that by the said Letters they had
discovered, That his Highness had written thrice to the Pope;
that his first Letter miscarried ; that the second gave his Holiness
such an excess of foy, that the old Gentleman could not refrain
from Tears ; and that the third was to excuse the consent he gave
to have his Daughter married to the Prince of Orange, and to
acquaint him, that the run of the Times had obliged him to such
involuntary Compliance. Upon this and some further intimation
H 2 of

<page 57>
52 MEMOIRS
I<571. os the feme Nature, a Debate arose, whether a Bill should be
drawn up in the way his Majesty had suggested, or whether they
should immediately proceed to a total Exclusion. The Friends
for the Limitation argued, that we might be as safely secured
the one way as the other; that a small Revenue might be
fettled upon a Popish Successor while he continued in that Per-
suasion; that the Militia might be taken out of his Hands; and
that a Parliament might be impowered to assemble, whenever
the present King should die, and to sit for fix Weeks, in order
to settle the Affairs of the Kingdom, to appoint Protestant Offi-
cers, Military and Civil, and to make Choice of Bishops, which
the Successor, if a Papist, should have no Power to nominate.
To this it was objected, that such a Project of Procedure
were altering the very Frame and Constitution of our Govern-
ment and Monarchy, and directly to reduce it to a Republic j
that it would be quite ineffectual; that the King, by the fun-
damental Laws of the Land, was Head and Supreme of the three
Estates j that a Parliament so convened as above, could enact
nothing valid without him; that while he enjoyed the Title of
King, he would exercise a Power adequate to his Office; and
that therefore the means proposed were delusory and unsafe, in
comparison of an utter Exclusion. It was replied, that this Expe-
dient was by far more to be avoided than the former; that it
was depriving the Duke of his Birthright; that if his Highness
survived, he had as clear a Claim to succeed the King, is he died
Childless, as any Man whatever had to succeed to his Father's Pos-
sessions • that probably a Prince of his Spirit would not easily
submit to be so disinherited; that such a Disturbance of the
Succession had never, in this Kingdom, been of any lasting Ef-
fect; that Right had always prevailed at last j that Civil Warsr
upon the like Occasions- had been disastrous to England; that
Success would reverse all Attainder; and that should his High-
ness force his way to the Crown, the overthrow of Religion and
the Government were more,, much more, to be feared, than by
his peaceful Accession.
The

<page 58>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 53
The next Day I acquainted the King with my Fate in the
Committee, he said, " He was very sorry for it, but that they aj> 1 *'
"should not stay long behind me, if they did not use himself and
"his Brother better than they did "; and promised to continue
me in my Command of Burlington, with a Salary of Two Hun*
dred Pounds, till a Company should become vacant, which I
should have in lieu of mine now to be disbanded with the rest of
the Army.
The King sent a Meflage to the Commons, advising them to 14.
think of raising Money for the Equipment of a Fleet, and for a
frefli Provision of Naval Stores,very much wanted in all the Yards
in England. This Meflage being taken into Consideration, the
House insisted on a Change of the Succession, and a proper Secu-
rity for Religion, and a Removal of all Officers they distiked
the Kingdom over. Such was the Tenor of the Debate, but no
Vote pafled, except to adjourn the farther Consideration of this
Matter for Eight Days.
Now the Lords who were in the Tower for the Plot, and my
Lord Danbjy, being shortly to take their Tryals, an arduous Que-
stion arose in the House of Lords concerning the Bilhops, Whe-
ther or no they ought to be present in Cases of Blood. Where- .
upon the Commons, thinking these Spiritual Lords would be of
too favourable an Inclination, took the Consideration of the fame
into their House, and came to an Opinion, They ought not to
be present. This was resented by the Lords y as if the Commons
interfered with a Branch of their Judicature j in short, the Di-
spute grew to be of great Warmth-
Mean while the Kingdom in geneial had a very melancholy
Aspect; the King was poor; the Officers of the Crown and of
the Houfhold were clamorous for their Salaries and Dues, which
had not of a long time been paid, and no wonder, when Sir
Robert Howard, one of the chief Officers of the Exchequer, de-
clared in the House of Commons, that there was not Money suf-
ficient for Bread for the King's Family; there were no Stores a.
ny where, either for the Sea Service or the Land ; the Garrisons
were
t
«

<page 59>
54 M E M O r R S
l679- were all out of Repair, the Platforms decayed, and the Cannon
dismounted; the Army divided, for the Duke of Tork and against
him, the Officers of State the same ; the Parliament for the most
part in a ferment, and glad of these public Misunderstandings, as.
favoring their Desire of clipping the Wings of the Prerogative,
reducing the height of Monarchy, and furthering their private
Designs; the King also and his Brother at variance, and so kept
by those who promised to make his Majesty quite easy, if he
would but comply with them so far as to disinherit the Duke j
so that he was quite in Suspence as to what Resolution he should
or should not take.
The Duke of Monmonth who was certainly very much in the
King's Affections, was evidently in Councils against his Uncle of
Tork j for all his Creatures in the House voted against his High-
ness, nor were any Men higher in his estimation, than the Earls
of Shastfbury and Ejjex, and other Chiefs of the Cabal. The
truth is, tho' the Duke of Monmouth was quite finished as to his
exterior, his inside was by no means of a Piece therewith; so
that he was easily beguiled by Shaftjbury into the flattering
Notion of being, the Duke disinherited, the next Heir to the
Crown, either by the King's declaring Marriage with his Mo-
ther, or by being made Legitimate by Act of Parliament. And
indeed tho', at the Instances of the Duke of Tork, the King had
openly in Council declared, that the Duke of Monmouth was but
his Natural Son, and that he never was married to his Mother •
"here were numbers ready to assert his Right, and who pretended
chat sufficient Witness was to be produced of such as were actually
at the Wedding, and that a Record of the fame was kept in a
black Box, in custody of some of the Duke of Monmouths
Friends; but to dismiss this,
May a. The Lords voted, That the Bishops might be present at the
Tryal os the Lords; and the Commons committed the Bill of
Exclusion, upon a previous Question put, the Ay's being 240,
the Nos 128.
Two

<page 60>
Of &> J O H N R E R E S B Y. 55
Two Days afterwards, I was at the King's Couche'e, and won- 1fi79-
dered to fee him quite chearful, amidst such an intricacy of Trou- ^
bles; but it was not his Nature to think or perplex himself much
about any thing. I had the good Fortune to say something that
pleased his Majesty, and the Duke of Newcastle, one of the Bed-
chamber, being in waiting, his Grace took the Opportunity of
laying some kind things of me, whereupon his Majesty came to
me, and reassured me of a continuance in my Command, and told
me, he would stick by his old Friends.
But the Lords persisting in their Opinion, That their Spiri- »?•
tual Members might be present at the Trial of the Prisoners, and
particularly of the Earl of Danbys, as to the Validity of his Par-
don, which was his Plea; and on the other Hand, the Commons
voting that the said Lords should not be present, and resolving
only to proceed against that Earl, and not the rest of the Priso-
ners, tho' the time appointed for the Trial of them all was come;
extraordinary Heats arose between the Two Houses, insomuch
that his Majesty came and told them, That not perceiving which
way they were to be reconciled, he prorogued them till the 14th
of August. The City of London, where the Anticourt Party was
very strong, took so great Offence at this, and were so angry,
that it was thought they would have risen j but all, with much
ado, was hustled and kept quiet.
And now came News of an Insurrection in Scotland, to the J'"7' «*,
Number of 7000 Men, that they had burnt several Acts of Par-
liament, as the Act of Uniformity and Episcopacy, as also the
Act which abolished and condemned the Covenant. That they
had set forth a Declaration for 'Jesus Chrlji, the Kirk, and the
Covenant; in short, some Troops that were ordered out against
them having been defeated, the Duke of Monmouth was sent Post
haste into Scotland to stop the Progress of this Infant Rebellion.
The King told me he had an Account that the Two Armies »*•
were but Ten Miles distant from each other, that his consisted
not of above 12 00, and that the Rebels were above 6000 strong j
but notwithstanding this great Odds, news came the next Day
that

<page 61>
56 MEMOIRS
■>
i*7S>- that the latter after, a very poor Resistance, had been utterly
routed and dispersed.
jufy 9. Being soon after in the Country, and understanding the Duke
of Monmouth was to be at Doncajver, post out of Scotland; I went
to meet him, and sent half a Buck, and some extraordinary sorts
of Wine to entertain him there. He came not till Midnight, and
raised me out of the Bed design'd for him, his delay tempting me
to think he would hardly be in that Night. Sir Thomas Arm-
strong was with him, and told me the King had heard some false-
hoods concerning the Duke, and had, in all haste, sent for him
out of Scotland, And indeed it hapned to be understood, That
after his Victory he was about laying a Foundation whereon to
, succeed in that Kingdom, and by the Industry of his Agents ma-
king himself popular.
The Duke of Tork, who had been sometime abroad, suddenly
appeared again in England, to see the King, who, as was pre-
tended, had not been well. The Duke of Monmouth, who
thought he had the King to himself, knew nothing of it, till his
Highness actually arrived at Windsor j nor were there above four
Persons who knew any thing at all of the matter, so close and
reserved could the King be, when he conceived it to be neceflary.
This Revocation of the Duke was principally owing to the inter-
vention of Lord Feverfham, who afterwards told me the whole
Story. And now it was thought that the Parliament, being chiefly
made up of Exclusionists, would be but very short-lived. The
Duke however went back again, but it was only to fetch his
Otkber. Dutchess, whom he had left behind him, returning presently,
with his whole Court from Flanders, and desiring of the King,
That if he must needs be absent, he might rather remain in
ao. some part of his Majesty's Dominions, and so he was sent into
Scotland. His Highness then proceeded Northward; but Lord
Shaftjbury being soon after removed, the Exclusionists began to
November, dispair 01 Success; nor was that all j for the Duke of Monmouth
having been sent into Flanders, and returning without the
King's Leave, drew such Displeasure on him, that he was di-
vested

<page 62>
Os Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 57
*^
vested of all his Employments. Soon after, I heard the Duke had l6l9-
been sent for, from Scotland, by the King; that the two Brothers
met very affectionately, and that the King particularly should
say, No Body Jhould ever part them for the future; and with this
we conclude this Year.
I went to London to sollicit some Business at Court, but the i68o.
Application of all Men being to the Duke, who quite engrossed
the King to himself, his Highness had but little leisure to give
Ear to, or assist" his Friends, for as luch he seemed to look on
me when I attended him at Tork, the last Year, as he went down
to Scotland; and, indeed, there was small hopes of succeeding in
Money Requests, as mine was, the King every Day retrenching
rather than increasing his Expences, that so he might stand the
left in need of his Parliament, which he despaired of finding in
any good Humour.
There were, at this time, great Meetings of Persons disfatik
fied with the Court, where Consultations were held to distress the
King upon all Occasions, whether in Parliament, or out of it, and
these resorts were called Cabals. The Duke of Monmouth, the
Earl of Shaftfbury, and the Lords Ruffe I, Cavendish and others,
where the chiess of these Assemblies, which, for the greater Pri-
vacy, shifted every Night from House to House ; the public Out-
cry pretending fears of Popery, and the safety of the King.
The King and the Duke being at Windsor,camc to Town but- ax.
once a Week, to be present at Council; and finding the Friends I
had with the King were but of little service to me, I went my self
to Windsor, and acquainted the Duke with a Design, in agitation May &
with some People, to prove the King's Marriage with the Duke
of Monmouth's Mother, and informed him how he might obviate
it y for which he thanked me, and told me, without my alking
it, that he had been mindful of my Business. The King shewed me
a great deal of what he had done to the House, which was indeed
very fine, and acquainted me with what he intended to do more;
for then it was he was upon finishing that most Majestic Struc-
ture. He lived quite privately at this time j there was little or
I no

<page 63>
S8 M E M O I R S
i6io. no resort to him, and his Days he pasted in fishing, or walking in
the Park; and certain it is, he was much better pleased with
Retirement, than the Hurry of the gay and busy World.
Mayi-j. I returned to Windsor* few Days afterwards, and had all
Assurances, from the Duke, of constant Services with the King, in
what I sollicited, which was to go abroad in quality of Envoy Ex-
traordinary ; and at the iame time taking my Leave of his Maje-
sty, he laid his Hand upon my Shoulder, and said, et He was very
u sensible of my Services, and that they should be rewarded." I
took this Opportunity to put him in mind of his Promise to send
me abroad, and mentioned a Nobleman who was present when
he made it j and he said, " He remembered it particularly well,
"and that, upon the very first Occasion, he would be as good as
« his Word."
Oft.itnxG. It was now again rumoured about, That the Duke oiYork
was to depart before the Meeting of the Parliament j some said in
Obedience to the King's Orders ; others, to avoid the Violence of
both Houses: For plain and most evident it was, that the Papists
lifted up their Crest with great arrogance, presuming on support
from the Duke, who now reigned absolute in all the King's Af-
ai. fairs. In short, the Duke and Duchess sat out once more for
a 2. Scotland j and the next Day the Parliament meeting, the King
in his Speech declared, u They were free to do whatever they
"would for the Security of the Protestant Religion, provided,
"they did not offer to divert the direct Line of the Succession.**
But still the Commons went on, this Month and the next, to
frame a Bill to exclude the Duke of Tork from the Succession,
and the Gentlemen and others of Torkshire, who had counterpe-
titioned, and declared their Abhorrence of the tumultuous Peti-
tion for a meeting of Parliament, were voted Betrayers of the Li-
berties of the People, and Abettors of Arbitrary Power. A Com-
mittee was also appointed to inquire into the Matter, and af-
ter the Persons concerned therein; and two Members of the
House, both of Yorkshire, who had set their Hands to the Ab-
horrence, were convened before them 5 but I, who was the Pen-
man

<page 64>
0/&>John Reresby, 59
man os that Instrument, had done it so cautiously, that no hold »*8o.
could be fastened, no exceptions taken, and so they got off.
The Parliament pursued the Duke with such Violence, and Nvomler.
the King was so thoroughly distressed for Money, that some now
began to be of Opinion, his Majesty would abandon his Brother.
Attending, about this time, at the King's Supper, I told him that
I was threatned, by some of the House of Commons, to be called
to an Account for Penning the Abhorrence, and signing it with
the rest of the Torkfhire Gentlemen: To which his Maje-
sty made Answer, "Do not trouble yourself; I will stick by
u you and my old Friends j for if I do not, I mail have no Bo-
*4 dy to stick by me." But yet, it was, by a great many, feared
he was not quite resolved as to this Profession • for Money was
so exceedingly wanting, and the offers of the Parliament so very
fair, if he would but give up his Brother, that no Body was
safe. What added to the Suspicion was, that many who were
well in the King's Esteem, appeared for the Bill of Exclusion:
Nor was it unknown that the Dutchefs of Portsmouth was well
inclined to it; whether artfully to insinuate herself into the good
Graces of the Party, who had been at greatest Enmity with her,
or in Complyance with the French^ whose Tool she was, who
were ready to catch at any thing to embroil us at Home, is un-
certain.
. WA few Days afterwards, I hapned to be at the Dutchess of
Portsmouths, where the King was quite unreserved, and very open
as to the Witnesses who were making out the Popish Plot, and
proved to a Demonstration, that many Articles they had given in
Evidence,' were not only improbable, but quite impossible. 17.
This was one of the greatest Days ever known in the
House of Lords, with regard to the Importance of the Business
they had in Hand, which concerned no less than the Lineal Suc-
cession to the Crown, the Bill having passed the Commons, who
sent it up to the Lords. Great was the Debate, and great were
the Speakers; the chief of those for the Bill the Earl of Shafts'
buryy the chief of those against it, Lord Hailifax, It was mat-
• I 2 ter

<page 65>
MEMOIRS
ter of surprise, that the latter mould appear at the Head of an
Opposition to the former, when they were wont always to draw
together; but the Business in agitation was against: the Lord
Hall'tfaxs Judgment, and therefore he opposed it with Vigor;
and being a Man of the clearest Head, finest: Wit, and fairest
Eloquence, he made so powerful a Defence, that he alone, so all
confessed, influenced the Houses and persuaded them to throw
out the Bill.
The King was so highly pleased with the Transactions of this
Day, that he, soon after, took this great Lord into Business ; but,
on the other Hand, the Commons were so angry with him, that
though they could regularly take no Notice of what any Man
said in the other House, they voted an Address to the King to
lay him aside, and remove him from his Councils and Presence.
To this he answered, "That if Lord Halifax had done any
"thing contrary to Law, he was willing he mould be prosecuted
u and punished accordingly; but that not being satisfied he had
u done any thing amiss, he could not part with him," or Words
to that Effect. One would have thought that so signal a Piece of
Service, Lord Hallifax did to his Highness, had been of a Degree
and Nature never to be forgot: But when the Duke afterwards
came to be King, he, from the Privy Seal, where he found him,
removed him to the Presidency of the Council, purely to make
Room for another, and in the end quite laid him aside.
I was, soon after, a long while in Discourse with his Majesty,
and, among other things, told him, I doubted whether I should
be inserted in the List, the Lords had voted to be given in to
them, of the Military Officers, there being neither Company nor
Gunner at Burlington, where I was Governor, to make it appear
a Garrison; and that if I was, I presumed I mould be of the
Number of those they intended to petition his Majesty to lay a-
side : To this the King answered, u Let them do what they will,
u I will never part with any Officer at the Request of either
"House; my Father lost his Head by such Complyance ; but as
"for me, I intend to dye another way."
Lord

<page 66>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 6l
Lord Halifax j as we have observed above, having defeated I68°-
the Bill of Exclusion, in the House of Lords, was beheld as the Nn'
rising Man, and premier Favourite. I waited on him, and the
next Day he took me in his Coach with him to fVh 'tte-hatty and
invited me to dine with him in private; in our Conversation to-
gether, he told me it was to be feard seme unhappy Differences
might distract the Nation from these Uneasinesses about the Suc-
cession: And that in case things should unhappily ripen to a War,
it might be proper to form something of a Party in ones own
Thoughts. He said he knew there was but another and my self
that had any considerable Influence in my Neighbourhood j in
consequence of which and some further Conversation this way, I,
the next Day, carried him the Names and Character of all the
considerable Men in those Parts. And upon the whole, we agreed
that the Loyalists were not only the most tmmerous, but also
the most active and wealthy; and that those who, in Parliament,
were against the Court, were Men of little Account or Estima-
tion in their own Country.
But to turn our Eyes upon what justly claimed the Attention
of all Men, now came on the Trial or Lord Stafford by his Peers.
Weflminfter-hall was the Place, and I think it was the deepest
Solemnity I ever saw. Great were the Expectations of the Issue
of this Event, it being doubtful whether there were more who
believed there was any Plot by the Papists in reality against the
King's Life, than not. He was impeached by the Commons, and
being deemed to be weaker than the other Lords in the Tower,
for the same Crime," and less able to labour his Defence, was
purposely marked out to be the first brought on; but he de-
ceived them so far as to plead his Cause to a Miracle. The
three chief Evidences against him, were Dr. Oates, Dugdak, and
Turberville: The first lwore he had brought him a Commission
signed by the Pope, to be Paymaster of the Army to be raised
against the King; the second, That his Lordship offered him
Five Hundred Pounds to kill the King; and the third, That he
had offered him a Reward for the fame dreadful deed, but at a
n different

<page 67>
6a MEMOIRS
i*8o. different time. And so positive seemingly were they in this
and other dangerous Evidence, that I, who fat and heard
most of the Tryal, had not known what to think, had the Wit-
nesses been but Men of any the least Credit; but indeed such
were the Incoherences, and indeed Contradictions which seemed
to me to arise towards the latter End, that considering them,
and the very evil Name of the People that swore against this
Lord, I was fully latisfied that all was untruth they laid to his
Charge: But the poor Gentleman was condemned by a Majority
of 22. He heard his Accusers, and defended himself with great
Steadiness and Resolution, and received his Sentence with great
Courage and Composure; nor did he stoop beneath the Weight
of his Doom, till he submitted his Head to the Block, with his
last Breath protesting his Innocence, and the cruel Wrong he
suffered. My Lord Hattisax was one that gave his Voice for
him; and the King who heard all his Tryal, was extremely con-
cerned at the rigour and abruptness of his Fate.
Nw. 14. Being at my Lord HaUisax's, I discovered, what was then ge-
nerally unknown, that his Lordship sat up for first Minister j
for I saw the French Ambaflador come privately to him upon Busi-
ness. This fame Day the Commons were alked, What they
would do for the King after so long a sitting to no effect, as to
the Matters his Majesty required of them ? They voted this An-
swer, That they would put him into a Condition to defend Tan-
gier* j pay off all his Debts; put the Fleet into a good Condi-
tion, and enable him to assist his Allies; provided he would re-
linquish the Duke his Brother j pass an Act for the more frequent
Meeting of Parliament, and change such Officers about him as
thfr House should point out. There were many who believed
the King would be tempted to comply ; but, the very next Day,
seeing my Lord Halfifax, he assured me there was not the least
probability that he would j for That'it'was like offering a Man
Money to cut off his Nofi.
The fame Day, the unfortunate Lord Stafford came to the
House of Lords, and was admitted, under a Notion That h«
had


<page 68>
(y&rJOHM Reresby. 63
had some Discovery, or Confession to make, concerning the Po-
pish Plot; but instead of that, he only protested his own Inno-
cence, and accused Lord Shastjbmy 01 a Correspondence with
the Papists, and of sending him to the Duke of Torky to desire
him to use his Interest with the King to diflblve the Long Paths''
liament, as the best thing that could be done to favour the' Po-
pish Interest; and so he was remanded back agaJte^^4"
I was at the King's Couchee, when there were but Four pre- Nov. 24.
sent: His Majesty was in a very good Humour, and took up
some time in displaying to us the Fallacy and Emptiness of those
who pretended to a fuller Measure of Sanctity than their Neigh-
bours, and pronounced them to be, for the most part, abominable
Hypocrites, and the most arrant Knaves; as Instances of which
he mentioned several eminent Men of our own Times, nor {pared
to introduce some Mitred Heads among the rest, whom he pre-
tended to be none of the best, tho' their devout exterior gave
them the Character of Saints with the Croud. However, there
were of the Men, so pointed out, some whom the King had no
reason to love upon a political Account, which may be pleaded
in Abatement or the Acrimony of his Censure. He was that
Night Two full Hours in putting off his Cloaths, and it was half
an Hour past One before he went to Bed. He seemed to be
quite free from Care and Trouble, tho' one would have thought,
at this time, he should have been overwhelmed therewith; for e-
very Body now imagined he must either dismiss the Parliament
in a few Days, or deliver himself up to their most pressing De-
sires ;but the straits he was in seemed no ways to embarrais him,
as I just now observed.
I dined with that excellent Man Dr. Gunning, Bishop of Ely: 25.
The famous Dr. Oates was of the Company at Table, and flushed
with the Thoughts of running down the Duke of Tork, expressed
himself of his Highnese and his Family, in Terms that bespoke
him a Fool and something worse; nor contented with this, but
he must rail at the Queen, his Mother, and her present Maje-
sty. In this strain did he hurry on, while no Soul dared to op-

<page 69>
<S4 MEMOIRS
iczo. pose him, for fear of being made a Party of the Plot; till, no
longer able to bear with the Insolence of the Man, I took him
to talk to such purpose, that he flung out of the Room with some
Heat. The Bishop told me that such was the general Drift of
his Discourse, and that he had sometimes checked him for the
indecency of his' Talk, but that finding he had done it to no
manner of purpose, he had desisted from any further Effort to set
Bounds to his Virulence.
Nov. i?. In the mean time, Lord Stafford was led to the Scaffold on
Tower ^Hill, w here he persisted in the firmest Denial of what
was laid to his Charge, and that in so cogent, convincing, and
persuasive a Manner, that all the Beholders believed his Words,
and grieved his Destiny. The fame Day, I dined with my Lord
Hallifax, who said to me, fVell, if it comes to a JVar^ you and
J must go together. I told his Lorcjship, I should be ready to
follow him, happen what would; but that if the King expected
his Friends to be hearty in his Cause, and steady to his Person,
he should consider with himself, and encourage them a little ;and
thereupon acquainted him with some of my Disappointments at
Court, notwithstanding the most solemnly reiterated Promises;
and added, that I should be glad his Majesty would send me
his Envoy to some Part of the World or other. But to return to
things of more public and general Concern;
Jan. 4. The King sent down an Answer to the House of Commons, sig-
nifying, That he still persisted in his Resolution, not to disturb
the immediate Succession to the Crown; which had so unhappy
an Effect, as to cause the pafling of some very violent Votes against
such as were understood to be the King's chief Advisers in this
Matter, namely, the Earls of Hallifax, Clarendon, Feverfham,
the Marquiss of IVorcefler, and Mr. Hyde, since Lord Rocbefler.
Upon this the Parliament was prorogued from the 10th to the
jlo. 2 oth of January ; some thought in order for a Dissolution, while
others persisted, That the King would suffer them to sit at that
Time, and pass the Bill. Waiting this Day on Lord HaUifaxy
he complained much of the Severity of the Commons in their
Vote,

<page 70>
Os Sir J O H N R E R E S B y. 65'
Vote, TJiat he was a Promoter of Popery, and a Betrayer of the I6^°-
People, which, said he, were a Man ever so Innocent, yet com-
ing from the Representative Body of the People, is too heavy for
the Shoulders of any one single Person; that he had therefore
some thoughts of retiring from Court; but that, however, he
would go his own pace, and not be kicked out at their Pleasure.
That if for the future the King should have occasion for him, in
any thing that was just, he should be ready to serve him: That
is Y would repose a Confidence in him, he would let me know
when it was time to appear for the King's Service, and that I
should share Fortunes with him, and so on. But, at the same time,
he complained of the Fickleness and Incertitude of the King's
Temper; and obierved, that while he seemed perfectly to ap-
prove of the Council you gave him, he hearkned to others from a
back Door, which made him wavering of Mind, and slow to re-
solve. The next Day I waited on Lord Danby in the Tower,
and he ipoke, of the King's unsteadiness, in the very self same
strain; and particularly observed, That tho' the Duke of Tork
had but little Influence with him, as to what purely regarded
himself, the Minister would find him an overmatch with his Ma-
jesty, as to any other Person or Concern. The fame Day the
Duke of Newcajtl e told me he was to wait on the King the next,
and that he fancied he would offer him some Employment, but
that as his Majesty had not done it in better times, he would
excuse himself now that they were so dangerous; which recalled
to my Mind what Lord Halifax had observed a few Days be-
fore, That the King's Uncertainty and Silence, as to what he pro-
posed to himself, made Men afraid to serve him.
In the midst of this, the City of London petitions the King, J**. li'
by their Common Council, for the sitting of the Parliament, at
the time appointed: To which the King made answer, It was
none of their Bus ness: And it was the Discourse, that the Par-
liament would be dissolved, and a new one called to sit at Ox-
ford. My Lord Halifax seemed averse to this Dissolution, but
he only seemed so; he could, certainly, have no very cordial
K' Wiihes
*

<page 71>
66 MEMOIRS
idSo. Wishes towards those, who had dealt so severely, as he thought,
with him. My Lord was now jealous, That the Earl of Dauby
would be taken out of the Tower, and received again into Coun-
cils; which if it hapned, his Resolution was to retire, and his
advice to me was, not to pets for Employment, till things were
established upon a more (olid Foundation.
Jan. 21. jn a few £)ays afterwards, his Lordship told me his Thoughts
were absolutely to retire, not that he was at all dissatisied with
the King, but that he was afraid the Duke's superior Prevalen-
cy with him, might peradventure carry things too far. In stiort,
every thing now, and for some time to come, was in the most
unsettled, dark, and most perplexing Suspence, so that a Man
searce knew what to think, or how to behave.
March 22. ^ lengtn a new Parliament was called to sit at Oxford, whi-
ther, being elected a Member, I repaired, and waited on the
King, who received me very kindly. I told him, I had it in
charge from several Gentlemen of our County, to acquaint him,
They had no part in the Petition offered to the Knights of their
Shire, to prosecute the Bill of Exclusion against his Highness;
and that the thing had been managed but by six or seven factious
Persons, tho' it had been industriously reported to be a more ge-
neral Concern. His Majesty laid, He had already received some
short Account to the fame purpose, and ordered me to return
his Thanks to those who did not busy themselves therein.
53. The Parliament now met. The Court was at Chriftchurch;
and the Commons fat in the Schools, but were very much
straitned for Room, there being a very great Concourse of Mem-
bers. His Majesty's Speech to both Houses was very gracious,
and calculated to reconcile all Differences, and to disperse all
jealousies as to Religion, &c. but was still averse to, what for-
mer Parliaments had so pushed at, the Exclusion of his Brother
from the Name and Power of King. And yet the first Point de-
bated was, Whether or no, notwithstanding the King's Speech,
a Bill of Exclusion should not be framed and brought in? But
for the present it was only voted, That the Security of his Ma-
jesty's

<page 72>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y.
jesty's Person, and of the Protestant Religion should be taken in-
to consideration the 26th Instant.
Not to insist on the Impeachment of Fitz-harrh, which was
done not to destroy, but to serve him in Opposition to the Court;
the grand Argument for the Bill of Exclusion was, That nothing
could preserve us from Popery but that alone. Now the whole
House was of Opinion, that Popery was to be kept out, the
Dispute was only as to the means of effecting it. The King had,
in his Speech, offered to agree to any thing that might serve to
quiet the Minds of the People as to that particular, the utter Ex-
clusion of his Brother only excepted. It was therefore- moved by
Sir Thomas Littleton, That a Bill, to secure the Protestant Reli-
gion, should be brought in, and consist of the following Heads:
That the Duke of Tork should enjoy the Title, and the Princess
of Orange exercise the Power: That if a Parliament should be in
being, when it should please God to take away the present King,
they should have Power to sit: That the Judges, and all other
Officers of the Crown, should be continued, till Liberty and Pro-
perty were secured: That if there was no Parliament subsisting,
one should assemble of course: And that to prevent the Duke's
interfering to prevent this, he should, by the same Act, be ba-
nished to the Distance of 500 Miles from England) not to re-
turn as long as the King lived. To this it was objected, That
the Name and Power of King were inseparable by the Laws of
England; that the Father would soon find a way to divest the
Daughter os her Power; that a Regency was never known but
in Cases of Lunacy and Minority; and that the Duke was not
of a turn of Disposition to be easily governed. But to this it was
replyed, That Regencies had been frequently allowed in other
Cases besides Incapacity and Lunacy, as formerly in France, and
now in Portugal; that Princes were seldom se complaisant as to
resign Kingdoms or Powers tho' to a Father; and that as for
the Authority of Parliament in this Case, No question but the
same Power that could alter tbe Government, could also modify
it. But Exclusion was the Word: Some Seven or Eight dis-
K z gusted

<page 73>
68 MEMOIRS
i£8o. gufted Lawyers, and able Speakers, joined by some others, who
had been so ad^ive in this Matter, that they thought, should the
Duke ever come to the Crown, he could never forgive them,
wrought so prevalently upon the Members in general, that it was
voted a Bill mould be brought in, To incapacitate James Duke
of Tork, from succeeding to the Imperial Crown or this Realm;
nor during this Debate did some forbear to reflect on his High-
ness's Courage and Honour.
Meanwhile, the Lords refusod to receive Fitz-harruslm-
peachment; observing that he being already indicted at Common
Law, and in a way of Trial by his Peers, as Magna Charta di-
rected, they could not perceive how their House could take No-
tice of his Offence. The Commons hereupon grew angry with
the Lords, and voted That such their Lordship's Proceeding was
a Delay of Justice, a Breach of the Privilege of Parliament, and
a Bar to the further Discovery of the Popisti Plot: And that for
any inferior Court to proceed therein, while an Impeachment was
depending, was an High Breach of the Privilege of Parliament.
The Heats grew, in short, to an Excess in both Houses, both as
to this, and the Bill of Exclusion. The Commons, however, were
of Opinion, That the King would give way to them, he having
already made such Advances towards their Measures, and being
in such thorough distress for Money, besides that many who
were near the King, urged them to persist still in their Endea-
i<581. vors. But on the very Day the King had appointed the Theatre
March 28. to fa made ready for the Commons to sit in, they having com-
plained of the straitness of the Schools ; the Black Rod came, and
commanded them to attend at the Bar of the House of Lords,
where being come, the King, in his Robes, told them, That ob-
serving a great Difference to have taken place between the two
Houses, which, if they fat any longer, might increase to a per-
nicious Degree, it was his Pleasure to dissolve that Parliament:
A Blow so little foreseen, that there were those who thought
there would have been some Stirs or Risings about it, in London.

It

<page 74>
Of Sir J o h n Reresby.
It was now observed, that many of the discontented Members,
of both Houses, came Armed, and more than usually attended j
and it was affirmed There was a Design to have seized the King,
and to have restrained him till he had granted their Petitions. But
if any such Design there was, it hapned that the Parties either
wanted the Courage, or the Opportunity to put it in Execu-
tion , the King immediately departing with all lpeed for Lon-
don.
His Majesty was so kind as to afford me several Opportuni-
ties of speaking to him, while I was at Oxford j and Lord Hall't-
jax taking leave of him, and, in a particular manner, recom-
mending me to his Thoughts, his Majesty laid both his Hands
upon me, and thanked me for my Constancy to his Interest, and
bad me be assured of his Affection.
Bj| this abrupt Dissolution, and what I had heard from Lord
Halifax and others, I concluded the King was determined ne-
ver to relinquish his Brother • as also to call no other Parliament
for a long time yet to come. The Truth is, the Question now
was not so much, Whether the Duke should succeed or not, as
whether the Government should be Monarchical, or Republican?
Some of the adverse side, had, in the House, blabbed out, That
the Bill of Exclusion was not the only material Bill they intended
to get pasted this Session, in order to secure the People of Eng*
land from falling a Prey to Popery, and arbitrary Power: That
it was neceflary the Military and Civil Power too should be
lodged in other Hands, and that the present Officers of both
should be called to an Account and changed: Whence the King
being told, That if he quitted his Brother, it would b6 but an
immediate Step taken to ruin all his Friends and Servants, and
to become himself exposed to the Will and Wishes of those,
whom he had no reason to think were over and above affected to
him, dreaded the Consequences, and resolved accordingly ; which
shall conclude this troublesome Year.
I was at the King's Couchee, as I was three times in one April
Week -j his Diseourse ran generally upon the Impossibility of any l6i
thing

<page 75>
7o MEMOIRS
i<8x. thing like the Popish Plot, and the Contradictions of which it
was made up: That he intended Fitz-harris should come upon
his Trial immediately: That in all Affairs, relating to himself,
the Laws should have their regular Course; and that, whatever
his own private Opinion might be, he would govern by them,
and by them only: A Happiness indeed it was for his People, to
live under so just and so gracious a Prince! And now we begin
to have a Prospect of Halcyon Days again; for his Majesty ha-
ving, since the last Parliament was dissolved, issued out a Decla-
ration fraught with the fairest promises to his People, and assu-
ring them of his firm Intentions to govern inviolably according
to Law, and the like; it had so happy an Effect, that he re-
ceived the Thanks of the City of London, by the Lord Mayor,
and of several Counties and Corporations in England,
May 4. jn tne interim Fitz-harrh is arraigned at the King's Bench
Bar, where by his Council he refused to plead j because he stood,
in Parliament, impeached of the Crimes he there was to be in-
dicted for; tho' the Impeachment specified no particular Trea-
sons, which the Indictment did. The Council for the King said,
his Plea was Evasive, it not appearing whether the same Crimes
were intended by the one, as by the other.
9. This Point was argued at the Bar, but the Case being quite
extraordinary, both in its own Nature, as well as because of the
severe Vote of the Commons at Oxford, the Judges took time to
ix. consider of it, but two Days afterwards pronounced Judgment
for the King; and in the End, Fit&-harris received Sentence of
Death, for his Treason, and was executed accordingly.
My Lord Shaftjbury, and Lord Howard, were now sent Priso-
ners to the Tower ; and my Lord HaUifax told me, There would
July-j. be enough produced against them to hang them both. A fliort
time afterwards, I was, by ray Lord HaUifax, presented to the
King, in his Closet, to take my leave of him, being speedily to
set out for Torkshire: His Lordship, who was now become abso-
lute Favorite, presented me to his Majesty, and spoke to him ve-
ry kindly of me, and particularly defired him to confirm to me

<page 76>
Of S/r J o Reresby.
the Promise he had sometime ago made to his Lordship, That I
should succeed in the Government os Tork; his Majesty did it
very adroitly, without the least Hesitation, and gave me his
Hand to kiss upon the fame; saying, He was convinced how
well I deserved of him.
I returned again to London, and the next Day my Lord HaU
Its ax told me, That Lord Shaftjhury had written to the King,
that if he would be pleased to free him from his Confinement,
he would engage to go to Carolina, never more to return in-
to England; but that the King had rejected his Request, and
determined to leave him to the Law. He also told me, That
were it not for the Interest the King of France had here, he did
not doubt but he should be able to put England into a very hap-
py State and Condition in a very short time. That there was no
hopes of doing any thing by way of Parliament, except his Ma-
jesty should make some new Attempt upon Flanders, and that
such an Incident might be made use os as a Handle whereby to
reconcile all Differences.
Such an Opportunity offered itself soon after, that News came,
the French King had taken Strajburgh; whereby becoming Ma-
ster of the Rhine, he might intercept all Communication and
Commefce between the Lo<w Countries and Germany; so that the
Netherlands would be absolutely obliged to bend the Knee to
France, if we did not enter into a League with them against
the common Adversary, which they did most earnestly sollicit*
But our King could lend them no helping Hand, without a Par-
liament to sopply him with Money j and what Distress his Ma-
jesty laboured under as to that was sufficiently understood, par-
ticularly by France, who determined not to slip the Advantage;
so that what my Lord Hallifax expected, from such an Occur-
rence, proved to be all Delusion.
This Evening his Majesty talked to me a great while, in St. 20.
James's Park, and at the Dutchefs of Portsmouth's; his Dis-
course ran chiefly upon the late unequal Verdicts and Proceed-
ings of the Juries of London and Middlesex j concerning which he
broke

<page 77>
7z MEMOIRS
sdt. broke out into this Expression, "It is a hard cafe that I am the
"last Man to have Law and Justice in the whole Nation.
Oct. 20. His Majesty went to fee a new Ship launched at Debt ford:
He went in his Barge, and I waiting on him to the Waterside,
he saw me, and called me in. The Gentleman who was appoint-
ed to the Command of her, gave a great Dinner to the King,
where his Majesty commanded all the Gentlemen to sit down at
the lame Table. He was more than usually serious that Day,
and seemingly under a greater weight of Thought, than had been
observed of him on account of the most important Business.
,Nov. 4. I went to pay a Visit to Lord Danby, still a Prisoner in the
Tower; who, by the Drift of his Diseourse, was not in Charity
with the then Ministers, seemingly reflecting on them as too fa-
6. vorably inclined towards Lord Shaftjburyy and se on. Two Days
afterwards I acquainted my Lord Halltfax with this j to which
his Answer was, That People were mighty ready with their Judg-
ments and Decisions; but that if the Fact were even as suggested,
what could the King do better than set him at Liberty ? That he
had as good be enlarged upon Terms, as by a Jury which would
most assuredly acquit him were he brought to a Tryal, tho7 ever
so deep in Guilt; and that were he out, he could not do the
King so much harm, as such an Act of Mercy and Popularity
would do him good. The seme Day, one of the Under Secreta-
ries told me, The King was resolved to prosecute him to the ut-
most, and that there was no want of very sufficient Matter a-
gainst him.
But before we come to the Issue of such his Majesty's Resolu-
tion, it may not be amiss to observe by the way, that my Lord
Hallifax, being by no means a Friend to Frame, was upon no
good sooting with the Duchess of Portsmouth; which gave the
King some trouble, as it proved a Hindrance to the currency of
his Affairs; wherefore he sought to reconcile them, which he
ao- did outwardly this Day; as for a thorough and hearty Reconci-
liation, it was impossible, their Views being in such direct Op-
position to each other as they were.
And

<page 78>
Of Sir J o h n R E R e s B V. ., 73
And now pursuant to the King's Resolution that Lord Shafts-
bury should take his Trial, a Commission of Oyer and Terminer 2 3-
was issued out for tjiat Purpose, and the most: capital Articles of his
Accusation having been committed in London, the Jury was there
returned for the finding of the Bill; but tho' there were Eight
Witnesses who peremptorily swore to the Bill, and tho' a Paper
was produced, containing no less than matter of High Treason,
which was sworn to have been found among the Papers in his
Closet, by a Secretary of State, yet such were the Times, That
the Grand Jury brought in their Verdict Ignoramus.
In consequence of this he was enlarged ; but because the Rab- 28.
ble in the City had lighted Bonfires on the Day the Jury acquit-
ted him, the Justices of London and Middlesex had now strict
Orders to prevent the like tumultuous doings. Now there were
those who, considering how nearly Lord Hallifax was related to
Shaftfbury, imagined his Lordship was not grieved that the lat-
ter was no longer a Prisoner j and indeed what made me, among
others, bend a little this way, was That waiting on his Lord-
ship a little early, I found one of my * Lord Shaftfburys Gentle-
men with him. But his Lordship denied it all very seriously to
me, and said he would ere long convince the World of their
Mistake.
It being customary with the King, when he returned from his
Walk before Dinner, to discourse the foreign Ministers, who
usually attended to meet him in the Antichamber, he did it this
Day on the Subject of the hard Measure dealt to him by Lord
Shaftjburys Jury j and it fell to my Lot to explain several things
in French relating to the matter in hand. A few Days after-
wards his Majesty declared his Displeasure against the Duke of Dec.^.
Monmouth, upon several Accounts, but especially for having of-
fered to be Bail for Shaft (bury. The next Day he made the
Duke of Richmond his Master of the Horse, and gave one of the
Regiments of Foot Guards to the Duke of Graf ton. And now
the King to comply with the nature of the Times, for it was 7.
shrewdly suspected he was not in earnest, sent for the Justices of
L 'Middle-

<page 79>
, M E M O I R S
Middlesex to appear before him in Council, where he gave them
a severe Reprimand, for that they were so remiss in their Inquiry
after the Number of Papists, and so backward to prosecute them.
He spoke not himself, but did it by the Lord Chancellor, and
ordered them to be more vigilant, mindful, and active for the
time to come.
The same Day, having been to visit the Duchess of Portsmouth
my Lord Hallifax took me home with him from H^hitehaU. On
the way, I acquainted him that the general Report was, That
his Lordship opposed the Duke of Tork's Interest with the King,
and his Return from Scotland, which his Highness most urgently
prefled. His Reply was, That it was well if the Duke's over-
hastiness did not turn to his Disadvantage ; that his Highness had
a sort of hungry Servants about him, who were eternally pressing
for his Return, nor would ever let him be at rest, till, with a
view to their own Interest, they put their Master upon what
might prove much to his Prejudice. And true it is that whilst
his Highness was near the King's Person, every Body believed
his Majesty to be principally swayed and actuated by his Advice;
and consequently That Popiili Councils were then uppermost;
whereas he did a great deal of good in Scotland, by keeping a
watchful Eye over that mutinous Kingdom. But the Papists, and
others, his Highnesses Creatures, pretended he was kept in Scot-
land That his Enemies might the more easily work him out of
his Brother's good Opinion; and that the Ministers might have
the King all to themselves, and guide him according to their own
Will and Pleasure. Upon this Lord Hallifax observed There
was great Partiality in the Judgment of Men; for that in com-
mon Justice they ought to take as much Notice of Things that
were managed for the Duke's Advantage, as of what seemed to
be otherwise; That, for Instance, no Body had commended the
Ministers for getting the Duke of Richmond to be Master of the
Horse in prejudice to the Duke of Monntouth ; tho' it must prove
a great Obstacle to his Return to the King's Person, and tho'
most evident it was That no greater Service could be done to
to

<page 80>
Of Sir J o HN Reresby.
75
to his Highness, than to keep the Duke of Monmouth from l68t-
Court.
About this time I had a View of going Envoy to Denmark,
but to wave that, I this Day carried a Gentleman, one Mr.
Grant, a Leader of the Fanatic Party, to wait on my Lord Hal- Jan. 4.
lifax. He acquainted his Lordship with the double Dealings
of some great Men at Court against him, who had been parti-
cularly instrumental in exasperating the Commons against him in
the late Parliaments; which my Lord took as a piece of Service
done, as it would put him upon his Guard against the lame Men
for the future. At the same time I conducted a Gentleman to my
Lord, to alk his Pardon for lome things he had been reported to
have said against his Lordship. In good Policy, we ought to suf-
fer no Man to be our Enemy, if we can possibly avoid it; but
such was his Lordship's natural Disposition, that, in the whole
course of my Life, I never knew a Man more ready, at all times,
to forgive, and shall never forget his Expression upon this Occa-
sion, Sir, ifyou did not say the Words I am very glad of it, and
even if you did, I am glad you find cause to be of another Mind.
In a private Conversation I, at the same time, had with his Lord-
ship, he told me, That the People about the Duke of Tork made
him mad; that there was scarce one of them that had a Grain
of Sense; and intimated that a Parliament could not be far off.
The next Day I went to see Lord Danbv in the Tower j he told
me Lord Sunderland was ever railing at Lord Haliifax, tho' his
Brother in Law; and observing him to express some satisfaction
thereat, I presumed to remonstrate to him, That being a Friend
to both, I could wish, now that he was a Prisoner, he would
forget all occasion of animosity against a Gentleman in such high
Power, as my Lord Haliifax; for that when a Parliament should
be called, his Lordship might stand in need of his Assistance, and
the good Offices of his Friends.
A few Days afterwards, the King gave Audience to an Ambas* 11.
sador from Morocco, who was admitted with more than ordinary
Form, the King being of Opinion that a Commerce established
La be-
<

<page 81>
76 MEMOIRS
i<58r. between that Empire and this Kingdom, might prove of consi-
derable Profit to us, especially as we had so opportune a Place
on that Continent as Tangiers. The Ambasiador's Present to the
King consisted of two Lyons, and thirty Ostriches, at which his
Majesty laughed, and iaid, He knew nothing more proper to fend
by way of Return than a Flock of Geese.
Jan. 22. 1 hapned, this Day, to dine with Lord Lumley, at Lord Fe-
verfhams, when the former declared he had speedy Intentions of
resigning his Post of Master of the Horse to the Queen, which he
had hitherto enjoyed independantly of the Master of the Horse
to the King. But it seems the Duchess of Portsmouth had pre-
vailed with the King to alter his Patent, and to make him an
Officer under the Duke of Richmond, contrary to his Promise.
The Duchels was certainly sometimes to blame, in things of this
Nature; for to display her Power with the King, which indeed
was great, and to express her friendship to some, she would often
persuade the King to break his Engagements with others, which
was not for his Honour. And yet his Majesty was not, at this
time, thought to be charmed with her Bed, it being generally be-
lieved he had not Iain with her, since he was at Newmarket, at
least four Months before. I also heard, this Day, that one of the
three Ministers was endeavoring at a Reconciliation with a great
Man who was no Friend to my Lord Hallifax j and immediate-
ly warning his Lordship thereof, he thanked me, and told me
the Information would be of good use to him.
»8. We had now Advice that infinite Damage had been done to
Ofiend, Antwerp, and the Circumadjacencies, by the most dread-
ful Inundation that had ever been known. That Holland had
suffered most prodigiously by the Flood, that the greatest part
of Zealand was under Water, and that several Towns and Villages
had been swept away with all their Inhabitants, and that, accor-
ding to Computation, it would require an Expence of Ten Mil-
lions Sterling to make good the Lois. The Levels also in Tork-
shire and Lincolnshire were laid under Water by the same Fate j
the inceflant Rams of this Season having been the Cause thereof.
And

<page 82>
Os John Reresby- 77
And now the great Point in expectation was, Whether there
would be a Parliament called or not, the Ministers of State be- Wrtwgfc
ing divided as to the Thing. My Lord Hallifax argued, That •
all Christendom was desirous of it, France only excepted, and that
nothing could be offered to discountenance it at Home, but the
fear they might touch upon high Points, which if they did, his
Majesty might dismiss or dissolve them, just as he pleased, and con-
vince the World that it was their Fault and not his, and evince
that he endeavoured to give his People satisfaction by the means
of frequent Parliaments. That if the King and the Parliament
agreed, his Majesty would thereby gain the grand Points of being
united at Home, and formidable abroad. But some, as Seymour
and Hyde, were against the Motion, more for their own sakes,
than any Body's else.
At this time was perpetrated the most barbarous and auda- «,
cious Murder that had almost ever been heard of in England.
Mr. Tkynn, a Gentleman of 9000 I. per dnnum, and lately mar-
ried to Lady Ogle, who repenting herself of the Match, fled from
him into Holland before they were bedded, was set upon by three
Ruffians, who shot him as he was going along the Street in his
Coach. This unhappy Gentleman being much engaged in the
Duke of Monmouth's Cause, it was feared That Party might
put some violent Construction on this Accident, the Actors there-
in making their Escape just for the time, and being unknown.
I hapned to be at Court that Evening, when the King hearing
the News, seemed greatly concerned at it, not only for the Hor~
ror of the Action itself, which was shocking to his natural Dis-
position, but also for fear of the Turn the Anticourt Party might
give thereto. I left the Court, and was just stepping into Bed,
when Mr. Tlwnns Gentleman came to me to grant him an Hue
and Cry, and immediately at his Heels comes the Duke of Mon-
tnouttis Page, to desire me to come to him at Mr. Thynns Lodg-
ing, sending his Coach for me, which I made use 01 accordingly.
Lthere found his Grace surrounded with several Lords and
Gentlemen, Mr. Thynris Friends and Mr. Thynn himself mortally
wounded
1

<page 83>
7S MEMOIRS
wounded with five Shot from a Blunderbuss. I on the Spot
granted several Warrants against Persons suspected to have had a
Hand therein, and that Night got some Intelligence concerning
the Actors themselves. At length, by the Information of a
Chairman, who had carried one of the Ruffians from his Lodg-
ing at Wreflminfter to the Black Bull, there to take Horse, and
by means of a loose Woman, who used to visit the fame Person,
the Constables found out the Place of his Abode, and there took
his Man, by Nation a Swede, who being brought before me,
confessed himlelf Servant to a German Captain, who had told him
he had a Quarrel with Mr. Thytm, and had often ordered him to
watch his Coach ; and that particularly that Day the Captain no
sooner understood the Coach to be gone by, than he booted him-
self, and with two others, a Swedish Lieutenant and a Pole, went
on Horseback, as he supposed in quest of Mr. Thvnn. By the
li. lame Servant I also understood where possibly the Captain and
his two Companions were to be found; and having with the Duke
of Monmouth, Lord Mordaunt and others, searched several Houses,
as he directed us, till six in the Morning, and having been in close
Pursuit all Night, I personally took the Captain in the House of
a Swedish Doctor in Leicester-fields. I went first into his Room,
followed by Lord Mordaunt, where I found him in Bed, with
his Sword at some distance from him on the Table; his Weapon
I in the first place secured, and then his Person, committing him
to two Constables. I wondered he mould make so tame a Sub-
mission, for he was certainly a Man of great Courage, and ap-
peared quite unconcerned from the very beginning, tho' he was
very certain he mould be found the chief Actor in the Trage-
dy. This Gentleman had, not long before, commanded the for-
lorn Hope, at the Siege of Mons, when but two, besides him-
self, of fifty under his Command, eseaped with Life \ and, in con-
sideration of this Service, the Prince of Orange made him a Lieu-
tenant of his Guards, and, in reward for the same, the King of
Sweden gave him a Troop of Horse: But to insist no farther on
this, his two Accomplices also were taken, and brought to my
House,

<page 84>
Os Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 79
House, where before I could finish the several Examinations I
had to go through, the King sent for me to attend him in Coun-
cil, for that purpose, with the Prisoners and Papers. His Maje-
sty ordered me to give him an Account of the Proceedings hither-
to, as well with regard to the apprehending of the Prisoners, as
their Examination, and then examined them himself; and when
the Council rose, ordered me to put every thing into writing, and
in form, against the Trial j which took me up a great part of
the Day, tho' I had got one of the Clerks of the Council, and
another justice of the Peace to assist me, both for the sake of
Dispatch and my own Security, the nicety of the Affair requir-
ing it, as will, in the Sequel, appear.
The Council met again, among other things, to examine the Feb. ij.
Governour of young Count Coning smark, a young Gentleman
then in Mr. Fauberis Academy in London, and supposed to be
privy to the Murther. Upon this Occasion, the King sent for
me, to attend the Council, where the said Governor confessing,
That the eldest Count Coningfwark, who had been in England
some Months before, and made his Addresses to the Lady who
so unfortunately married Mr. Thynn, arrived incognito ten Days
before the laid Murther, and lay disguised till it was committed,
gave great Cause to suspect That the Count was at the Bottom
of this bloody Affair; and his Majesty ordered me thereupon to
go and search his Lodgings, which I did with two Constables;
but the Bird was flown; he went away betimes in the Morning
of the Day after the Deed was perpetrated j of which I imme-
diately gave the King an Account.
I several times afterwards attended on the King, both in pri-
vate and in Council, from time to time to give him Informa-
tion, as fresh matter occurred, or appeared; and upon the whole
it was diseovered, partly by the Confession of the Parties con-
cerned, and partly by the Information of others, That the Ger-
man Captain had been for eight Years an Intimate with Count
Coningjntark, one of the greatest Men in the Kingdom of Swe-
den, his Uncle being at that time Governor of Pomerania, and
near

<page 85>
MEMOIRS
near upon marrying the King's Aunt; and moreover that du-
ring the time he was in England before, he, had made his Ad-
dresies to the Lady Ogle, the only Daughter and Heiress of
the Earl of Northumberland, who had been married to the de-
ceased Mr. Thynn, and that the said Count had resented some-
thing as an Affront from Mr. Thynn: That the Captain, moved
thereto out of pure Friendship to the Count, tho' not at all with
his Privity, as pretended, had determined within himself to re-
venge his Cause, and that in consequence of such his Resolution
the Murder hapned: It appeared also that such his cruel Design
was furthered by the Assistance of the Swedish Lieutenant, and
the Pole who had been by him obliged to discharge the Blunder-
buss into the Coach. I was extremely glad that in this whole
Business there was no English Person directly or indirectly con-
cerned; for the Fanatics had buzzed it about That the Design was
chiefly against the Duke of Monmouth; so that I had the King's
Thanks more than once, the Thanks of my Lord Hallifax and
several others, for my Diligence in tracing out the true Springs
and Motives of this horrid Action, as well as the Actors them-
selves. The Duke of Monmouth had been out of the Coach a-
bove an Hour, and, by the Confession of the Criminals, I found they
were not to have made the Attempt if his Grace had been with
Mr. Thynn.
Mean while, it was suspected that Count Coningsmark was
still in the Kingdom; and search being made after him, he
was met with alone in Disguise at Gravejend, by a Servant of
the Duke of Monmouth s, just as he was stepping out of a Scul-
ler, intending the very next Day to embark on Board of a Swe-
dish Ship. Being brought up to Town, the King immediately
called an extraordinary Council to examine him. I was present
upon this Occasion, and observed that he appeared before the
King with all the Assurance imaginable. He was a fine Person
of a Man, and I think his Hair was the longest I ever saw. He
was very quick of Parts, but his Examination was very superfi-
cial, for which Reason he was by the King and Council orclered
to

<page 86>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. Si
to be, the same Day, examined by the Lord Chief Justice, the '*6Zu
Attorney General, and my self, but he confessed nothing of the
Murder, pretending the Reason why he lay at this time conceal-
ed to be that he was then under Cure for a small Venereal Dis-
aster, and did not care to appear in public, till the Course of
his Prescription was over j and that his going away in Disguise
after the Fact was committed, was by the Advice of Friends,
who told him it would reflect on him should it be known he was
in England, when an Intimate of his laboured under so violent a
Suspicion of having committed so black a Deed; and that he
endeavoured to make his Escape, not knowing how far the Laws
of this Land might for that very reason involve him in the Guilt.
But being at the King's Couchee the Night after, I perceived by Feb. ti
his Majesty's Discourse, That he was willing the Count should
get off.
A few Days afterwards, Monf. Faubert who kept the French *&,
Academy in London, came and desired me to put him in a way
how to save Count Coningjmar/is Life, insinuating to me, That
as he was a Man of vast Fortune, he could not make a better
use of it than to support his own Innocence, and shield himself
from the Edge of the Law, in a strange Country. I told him,
That if the Count was really Innocent, the Law would naturally
acquit him, as much tho' a Foreigner as if he was a Native j but
that he ought to be cautious how he made any Offers to pervert
Justice; for that it were to make all Men of Honour his Ene-
mies, instead of gaining them to be his Friends. This was one
of the first Bribes of Value ever offered to me, which I might
have accepted without any Danger of Discovery, and without
doing much for it: But my Opinion has always been that what
is so acquired is no Addition to our Store, but rather the Cause
of its Waste, according to the saying, Male parta male delabun-
tur j I therefore rejected this now as I had done others before,
and as 1 hope I shall always do for the time to come.
Bills being found at Hicks's Hall against the three Murderers ay
of Mr. Thynn, as Principal, and against the Count as Accessary;
M they

<page 87>
8a MEMOIRS
x$8r. they the next Day made their Appearance at the Old Baily,
where, after a Trial which lasted from Nine in the Morning to
Five in the Afternoon, and a very vigorous Prosecution on the
Part of Mr. Tbynns Relations, the three were brought in Guilty
as Principals, and the Count by the same Jury acquitted as not
Acceflary j it being per medietatem Linguœ, according to the Pri-
vilege of Strangers. I was the first that carried the News of this'
to the King, who seemed to be not at all displeased at it; but the
Duke of Monmouttis Party, who all appeared to add Weight to
the Prosecution, were extremely diflatisfied that the Count had
lo escaped.
Manh 10. The Captain, and the other two his Accomplices in the^Mur-
der of Mr. Thynn, were, pursuant to their Sentence, hanged in
the Street where they had perpetrated the Crime. The Captain
died without any the least Symptom of Fear, or offering at the
least glance os Reflection on Count Coningsmark j and seeing me
in my Coach as he passed by in the Cart, he made a Bow to me
with the most steady Countenance, as he did to several of the
Spectators he knew, before he was turned off \ in short, his
whole Carriage, from the first Moment he was apprehended, to
the last that he resigned his Breath, favoured much of Gallantry,
but not at all of Religion.
Having thus concluded the History of this remarkable Tran£-
action, I shall only, by the way, observe that I was soon after
appointed Governor of Tork, in opposition to a strong and potent
May 9< Interest against me. About this time I had a very long Conversa-
1681. tion with my good Friend, the Earl of Halifax, who continued
steady for a Parliament j and expressed himielf of Opinion, That
the Duke had gained no great Ascendant over the King, by his
late Journey into England, from whence he was now upon his
return to Scotland; a journey quite disagreeable even to the
King's own Friends j and indeed he was chiefly persuaded to it
by his Servants, who gained by his being here.
The next Day came News, That his Highness had been in
great Danger of being cast away in his Voyage back to the
North,


<page 88>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 83
North, the Ship he was in having struck upon Tarmouth Sands,
and that a great 'Number of the Passengers had been lost, a piece
of News that was at first contradicted, but in a Day or two con-
firmed by a particular Account, That the Glocesier, a third Rate, May «.
in which the Duke had embarked for Scotland, had actually suf-
fered Shipwreck upon Tarmouth Sands, and that not a Soul had
escaped but the Duke and about a Hundred and Sixty Persons
more, and that among the lost were the Lords O Brian, and Rox-
borough, and Mr. Hyde, Lord Clarendon s Brother.
Waiting this Day on my Lord Halifax, he told me that the **,
Day before, being Sunday, the Duke of Monmouth came to him
after Prayers, and asked him if it was true That his Lordship,
as was reported, had advised the King, in Council, to issue out a
Proclamation to forbid every Body from keeping him Company:
and that he had answered That he was not obliged to satisfy
him, whether he had so advised his Majesty or not j and that the
Duke replyed there would be no need of a Proclamation to pre-
vent him from keeping his Lordship's Company, and that in an-
other place he would have said more to him, and so went
away.
It must be by all confessed that his Grace in this acted a very
imprudent Part, for he must needs have known that his thus
questioning a Privy Councellor concerning advice given by him
at the Board, would sound very harsh to the King: And on the
other Hand, if his Intentions were really for a Quarrel, he might
have chosen a more proper Place, and have said more, or nothing
at all. I offered to serve his Lordship with my Life upon this
Occasion; but he was so very good as to say, That if it came
to a Necessity of that sort, he would make use of somebody he
did not esteem so much as he did me; but that, however, he
did not think himself obliged to fight upon that Account \ tho'
he should ever be ready to defend himself while he wore a Sword
by his Side.
The next Day a Council was held at Hampton Court, where,
as soon as it was up, his Lordship told me an order had
M 2 been

<page 89>
$4 MEMOIRS
* >
.1683. been pasted to this Effect," that Whereas the Duke of Monmouth
"had been guilty of some threatning Speeches to a Member of
11 that Board, in relation to something offered to his Majesty in
"Council j his Majesty considered the fame as an unmannerly
"Insolence towards himself; and did therefore charge all hi" Ser-
"vants, and all fiich as had dependance on him, not to keep
"Company with, or frequent the said Duke of Monmouth for
"the time to come."
Junt 3. I had soon after a long Conference with Lord Halifax, where-
in I observed to him, That he was too frank and open with some
in Business with him, and with others, who were well in the
King's Favor, and that they generally betrayed him; and de-
sired him to keep himself more to himself if possible. He told
me he was very sensible of the Truth and Importance of what I
laid, but continued, That he could not avoid the Freedom I
condemned in the course of Business, and hoped his Integrity
would support him. At this time he gave me directions how
to behave in the North, but they were such as in common poli-
tical Prudence must be here suppressed.
And now I retired to my Government of Tork, where, tho'
many Transactions were pretty remarkable, they are of too pri-
vate and particular a Nature to be here enumerated; I shall
therefore only observe, That the City of Tork had been more
noted than most places in England, for the height and virulence
of Faction, but that after I had been there some time, finding
some of the Leaders willing to abate of their warmth, I engaged
myself in some private Discourse with Mr. Alderman Ramjden,
one of the most extraordinary of the whole Fraternity, and so
. well explained to him the Danger they were in, if they did not
shew some speedy Signs of Remorse and Repentance for their
former Behaviour, That he confessed himself sensible of Errors
committed upon several Occasions, {viz.) in that they had so of-
ten persisted in their Choice of such Members as they knew to
be quite ungrateful to the King; in that they had so unhand-
somely received the Duke of Tork when he passed through thek
City,

<page 90>
Of S/r J O H N R E R fi S B Y. 85
City, in his way to Scotland; and in that they had petitioned l6%2'
for a Parliament, but never addressed or abhorred: But that af-
ter all he was afraid their Offences were too enormous to be par-
doned, upon a Consideration less than the surrender of their Char-
ter, which they did not know how to think of. I then alked
him what he thought the City might be persuaded to do by way
of some Atonement: To which he answered, they might be
brought to do three things if they might be accepted. Firft, To
lay aside Alderman Thompson, a peevish Antimonarchical Fellow,,
to whom it sell of Course to be Lord Mayor the next Year, pro-
vided his Majesty would, by Letter, command them so to do.
Secondly, To chuse a new High Steward, and to offer the Ho-
nour to his Royal Highness, in lieu of the Duke of Buckingham,
whom they would put out, or in case his Highness should re-
fuse it, to his Lordship of Halifax; and Thirdly, to elect bet-
ter Members for that City, when occasion should offer. These
three things, he said, were feasible, might they be thought suffi -
cient. Jim 10.
I immediately gave Notice of this our Conversation to my
Lord, now Marquiss, of Halifax, who in a few Days sent me
for Answer, That tho' he approved of the setting aside of Tloomp-
son from being Lord Mayor, he could by no means think it safe
to venture the King's Letter upon it, to the Corporation 5 ex-
cept the Success of the Attempt were actually certain jand espe-
cially as Things were in so very fair a way above, particularly
with regard to the Quo tforranto against the City Charter, which
if it succeeded every other Corporation would be obliged to
truckle; and that should the King's Letter not meet with the
proposed Effect, it would rebound back again upon the Court,
and be an Encouragement to the other Party. That as for their
chusing his Highness to be their High Steward, he judged it
improper and unfit upon many Accounts; and as for himself, he
was willing to put himself upon the Ifliie of what they proposed,
provided it did not seem to be his own Request, and that it,
stiould appear he had a considerable Number of Friends and Well-
wishers


<page 91>
S6 MEMOIRS
1681. wishers therein, tho' the Event itself should not answer: such
was the Substance of what he returned.
Jm. 10. His Lordship loon after advised me to Come to London, where
18. he had some things to tell me, which it would be more proper
to communicate near at hand, than at such a Distance. In con-
sequence os which I repaired to our Capital the Month following,
February, where being arrived, his Lordship was pleased to acquaint me
with the whole of a late Dispute he had had with my Lord Hyde,
now Earl of Rochester, and first Lord Commissioner of the Trea-
sury. His Lordship had informed the King of 40000 /. of his
Hearth-Money, which had been misapplied to some private Uso
or Uses Lord Rochefter could not but know of, and was much
suspected to share in ; together with some Miscarriages and Mis-
management of the Revenue, which it seems, no Body but his
Lordship had the Courage to expose to the King. He told me
also he had lately brought in Lord Sunderland to be Secretary of
State, by engaging the Duke of Tork in his behalf; and that
now his Highness seemed to be kinder to that Lord, who had
laboured all he could against him in the late Parliaments, than to
himself, who had done all he could to serve him, and who had
particularly made the most considerable Head against the Bill of
Exclusion j and touched upon some hard Returns and Disappoint-
ments of the fame kind, from the same Quarter. But still his
Lordship was Well with the King, it was in no degree in their
Power to remove him, tho' they combined their whole Strength
to effect it: And indeed I had reason to know how large an In-
fluence he had over his Majesty j for to him it was wholly owing
that I sat still in my Government of Tork. m
A few Days afterwards, his Lordship told me of some hard
Usage he had met with from Lord Rochefter, contrary to their
mutual Engagements, in favor of each other, upon his first en-
tring into Business; and that having obtained a Promise to be
Lord President, or Lord Privy Seal, as a Vacancy of either should
first fall out, which hapned to be os the Seal, Lord Rochefter had
behind the Curtain done all in his Power for Mr. Seymour; that
upon

<page 92>
Os Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 8 J
upon this Occasion he had been raised to the Dignity of Mar- 1<j8z.
quite, which he had never desired, with a View to make him a-
mend for the Seal j but that not declining the one or the other
he had obtained both j and that thereupon Seymour had left the
Court. That however, the King commanding it, he was willing
to be upon good Terms with his Lordship, but that he must
give him iome sufficient Assurance that he was more a Friend to
him than to Sunderland, ere he could repose any Degree of Con-
fidence in him- That in the mean time he would keep in his
Corner, and be attentive to whatever might be for the King's
Service, and not be afraid to acquaint his Majesty with what
might be for his Majesty's Disadvantage, whoever were the Actors
or Transactors; and in fine, that when he had Power, he should
be careful to distinguish those who were his Friends, from those
who were not so.
Now the Affair of the Forty Thousand Pound, said to have
been lost to the King, upon his Hearth Money, and charged up-
pon Lord Rochester, and the other Lords Commissioners of the
Treasurer, came to be argued by Counsel on both sides, before
the King; and it plainly appeared that the King was actually
so much a Loser j but such was the Interest that Lord Rochejter,
supported as he was by the Duke of Tork, Duchess of Portsmouth^
and Lord Sunderland, had with his Majesty, that little or no
Notice of the Fraud was taken at that time: Except that some
of that Lord's Friends having taken the Liberty to censure Lord
Halifax, as too busy in making the Diseovery, the King justi-r
fied him so far as to say openly that Day, in Court, upon the
Trial, That his Lordship had done nothing in the whole Affair,
but by his Order and Approbation. My Lord Halifax told me
this was not the only Matter that would appear, as to the ijlji
Management of the Royal Revenue, and observed That the an-
ticourt Party courted him at such a Rate, that he feared it might
create a Jealousy elsewhere.
A sew Days afterwards his Lordstiip told me the Duke made
it his Business to clear himself from having had any concern:
on

<page 93>
M £ W O t . lC *S
on either side, for the Fraud on the one hand, and the Discove-
ry on the other, were the general Talk of the Town, but that
his Highness should apply to him, before he would apply to his
Highness. He told me also that he had, the Day before, been
with the King, and that he was two Hours in private with him j
and that he had observed to his Majesty, That a Report was
spread as if Lord Rochester was to have the Lord High Treasurer's
Staff delivered to him; but that he was in hopes there was no
such Intention, for that it would be a great Reflection upon him-
self, and look as if his Majesty thought he had done wrong to
the Man whom he immediately so savoured; and that his Ma-
jesty should say, The Man Jhould not be Lord Treasurer the sooner
for what he had lately done as Lord Rochester ; and that his Ma-
jesty was angry with him for giving Ear to so groundless a Ru-
mour.
Two Days afterwards, Lord Halifax told me The Duke had
afliired him, He was not in the least concerned in the Difference
between him and Lord Rochester; and that he had replyed, He
was sore his Highness could wish him no 111, and that if he did,
he should never do any thing to oppose him, but that in such a
case he should not be able to serve him with the Zeal he could
wisti, and that his Highness might possibly repent he had lost
his Service to the degree he desired to use it for him: That he
had done no more than he had been by the King commanded to
do, and that there was no Man in the Kingdom so great that
he could be decently displeased with what was done at the King's
Command: That he perceived they, meaning Rochester, had a
,mind to rid their Hands of him, and that it was likely they
might endeavour to make him uneasy in his Station, but that he
would take care they should not remove him, Firjt, because he
would stay with the King, to be ready to serve him, and, Second-
ty, Because he had a mind to disappoint those who so earnestly
longed for his Absence: That his whole View had been to save
the King Money, and that he knew no greater Service that could
be done to his Highness, if he would but be pleased to look a
little

<page 94>
Os Sir J O H N R g R E S B Y.
little before him into Futurity: That the King indeed had made
him a greater Man than he deserved to be, but that he had this
to say for himself, He was a Gentleman, and that his Highness
ought in justice to have seme Consideration for those that had
Escutcheons, as well as for those that had none; some of the
Duke's Creatures were scarce Gentlemen j and that for his Part
he should never say any thing to his Highness but Truth, which
tho', at first Sight, it might look a little Plain and Homely, no-
thing at Bottom carryed with it a greater Fund of Respect, and
much more to the'fame Effect. That to this his Highness made
Answer, That what his Lordship had said seemed to be very ra-
tional, that he was sensible of great Obligations he had to him,
and that he never would forget them, but serve him in all he
was able, and that so his Lordship should find.
His Lordship also told me, the same Day, That he had been
with My Lady Duchess of Portsmouth, and that, among o-
ther Discourse, he told her, He sound that in case he should
stand in need of his Majesty's Favor, he was not to expect many
Friends on that side of Whitehall \ and that she made Answer,
That some who had been very much his Friends, meaning Ro-
chester, came thither sometimes, and that she hoped they would
be as much his Friends again: That to this he replyed, He was
in much doubt as to her Intercession, and good Offices, in such a
strait, but hoped he should avoid the Danger of making Use there-
of y and took notice that she thereupon blushed, and ieemed to be
in some Confusion. His Lordship further said, That were he quite
as young as he had been, he might be as well with her as others 5
but upon this I observed, That his Lordship ought to have been
furnished with a good Purse as well as something else that be-
gan with the fame Letter j for so, report said, Lord Danby kept
Intelligence so long and so fair with her.
The Court and the whole Town were infinitely divided'as to
the Dispute between the two Lords. Those who had any De-
pendance on Payments out of the Exchequer, durst not but be on
the Side of Lord Rochejier: But all sober and serious Persons,
N who

<page 95>
MEMOIRS
1682. who were independant, and wished well to the Government, ap-
plauded the Integrity, the Zeal, and the Courage of the Lord
Privy Seal, who would not see so great a Sum of the King's Mo-
ney missapplyed, and was so honestly bold as to complain, tho'
he was sure he should thereby raise a Number of violent Enemies
against him; and particularly the Whigs, as they now called
the anticourt Party, were lavish of their Commendations, not on-
ly on account of the Discovery, but in hopes this great Man,
might, by this Quarrel, be brought to a cooler degree of Modera-
tion.
March 20. In the midst of this, all Christendom seemed to be in Danger
of being involved in a bloody War, the Rebels of Hungary ha-
ving called in the Turk to assist them against the Emperor, and,
one or two excepted, all the Princes of the Empire, and the Kings
of Spain and Sweden, preparing to defend the Empire against the
Turk on the one Hand, and the French King, likely to fall upon
Flanders or some of the Princes of Germany, on the other : While
we sat at ease amidst the Bleflings and Plenty of a Peace, which it
was thought would be lasting, because of the Death of the busy
and factious Shaftfbury, not long before retired into Holland.
Going with my Lord Privy Seal, to take the Air, in Hyde-
Parkf he told me he hoped 1 was not sorry he had pressed me to
come up to London, seeing I could not so well have been made
acquainted with the State of Affairs at such a Distance as Tork:
That it was uncertain how long he should be able to keep his
Station, driven at so fiercely as he was by some, but that he ima-
gined he had the King to Friend, and could not conceive he
would part with him for no other Fault than the having obeyed
his Commands j but fays he if we fall again under the Influence
of French Councils, I shall fairly quit, there being greater En-
deavours against me on the other side of the Water, than on
this; and desired me when I got into the Country again, to turn
the Report of his Disgrace into Raillery, till he should give me
notice of hi*s Retreat, which he would early do, if he found it
unavoidable.
Two

<page 96>
Of Sir J o h N Reresby.
Two Days afterwards, I went to fee Lord Dariby in the
Tower, and found him to express himself much more obligingly
towards the Lord Privy Seal, than he had been used to do here-
tofore 5 among other things, he said his Lordship had taken a
prudent and becoming Course in declaring himself for a Parlia-
ment, and that he was very glad of it upon a private Account j
for that he despaired of being enlarged till there was a Sitting.
He said, Lord Rochester and his Party might support themselves
for a while, but that the Interest they built upon was no better
than a sandy Foundation.
The next Day I communicated this to Lord Halifax, who on
his Part seemed alse to be more favorably inclined towards Lord
Danby, than he had for some time been: He said he had already
Enemies enough, and that what he had had to say against that
Lord was now out of his Mind; but that however he would not
now make himself Enemies by being his Friend, as he had for-
merly done by being otherwise ; so that I found Lord Privy Seal
was making up his Interest on the one hand, as Lord Rochester
was on the other, for the latter had sent for Seymour to Court,
and promised to be his Friend. Lord Privy Seal told me that
Seymour had made some Advances to close with him, and that a
general Reconciliation was endeavouring on the part of Lord Ro-
chester s Friends. I told his Lordship, That, in my poor Opi-
nion, he had much better stand by himself, now that he had pok
sefled himself of the Interest of the Nation, by the means of what
he had done in opposition to Lord Rochester; that if he closed in
with that side again, he might run the Hazard of losing the good
Opinion of his Country, which he now so deservedly enjoyed,
whereas if he kept himself separate, he might be Master or both
the one and the other; and that set the Case he should fall, the
King would soon be sensible of such a want of him, that he could
not long be spared from Court. To this his Lordlhip replyed,
It would be matter of great Difficulty for him to stay there
with Men, whose Interest so much it was to remove him. That
they would be apt to play him Tricks, knowing that while he
• N a was

<page 97>
MEMOIRS
in any play, their Carriage and Conduct would be no Secrets to
his Majesty ; but that if they did ingrofs the King all to themselves
they would not long keep their Hold j for that the King had one
Quality which would always preserve him from being long in ill
Hands, meaning his facility to hear all Persons, and to admit of
all Informations from a Back-door, while the Favourites did not
in the least dream of such his Attention. His Lordship then la-
mented the prodigious Influence the Duchess of Portsmouth had
over the King, complaining that (he betrayed him not in his
Councils only, but in his Bed also, and that stie certainly lay
with the Grand Prior of France, who often came over, under the
Mask of Love, the better and more effectually to transmit In-
telligence and Information to His Master the French King. He
urged it That the King was too passive with regard to these
Things, and observed it as his greatest Fault, That no Argument
could prevail on him to resent what he clearly saw he ought
to resent, and that he descended too low from the sublime Ele-
vation of his Dignity. His Lordship then took notice, that I
also, in my Station was the subject of much Envy, and advised
me, when I returned again into the Country, to demean my self
so as to gain as great a Measure of Favor and Benevolence as I
decently could.
Upon the whole, I perceived that the Lord Privy Seal had
the better and more approved Cause, and that Lord Rochejter
had the more potent and overuling Interest; that the Lord Pri-
vy Seal deservedly weighed with the Body of the Nation, and
that the Lord Rochester weighed, tho' undeservedly enough, only
with the Duke of Tork, the Duchese of Port/month, my Lord of
Ormond, and others at Court, who depended upon his Majesty's
Purse, which laboured under the Distribution of the Lord Roche-
ster. In short the Fear was, That the Diligence of those so near
the King might prevail on him to abandon the Privy Seal, who
depended upon himself only, upon no Interest but his own, and
upon the Merit, which was certainly great, of the important Ser-
vices he had already done, and was best able for the future
a to

<page 98>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Yc 93
to do for the Crown; and here we put a Period to this Year. I<582.
I now returned to Tork, and heard that, City had chosen the
Duke of Richmond to be their High Steward, which I was not Id8?-
iorry to understand as their Affairs then stood, my Lord Pri- *
vy Seal having declined that Honour for the sake of the Duke of
Buckingham, who was to be put out before another could be ad - °
mitted. The Dutchess took this very kindly, and upon receiving
the Patent for that Office, which the City presented to the young
Duke in a Gold Box, her Grace sent my Lord Mayor a Letter
of Thanks, wherein she said the King was very well pleased that
the second City in England had had that regard for her Son, and
assured him and the Corporation of her utmost Services. But the
Duke of Buckingham took it extremely ill of them on the other
hand, and wrote them such a Letter, as might easily convince them
of it. The Duke of Buckingham being well with the Lord Privy
Seal, I was at some Loss to know how to steer between the
divided Interests, but I hope I did it in such a manner as to »
give offence to neither. J""*
In June following, we were alarmed with a Report of a dan-
gerous Conspiracy against the King, of such as had been disap-
pointed of Preferments at Court, and of protestant Diflenters.
The same Conspiracy was also against the Duke of Tork, and the
Design was to have shot both his Majesty and his Highness as
they came from Newmarket, the Day of their Return being fixed.
This was to have been executed by forty Men, who, the Blow
given, were to have scoured to London, and to have reported it
to have been done by the Papists. In London it was said there
was a Body of Men ready to rise, and to take immediate Pofles-
sion of the City and the Tower, and consequently of the whole
Nation, and that the Duke of Monmouth was ready to head the
Insurrection.
This was miraculously defeated by a sire which burned down
a great part of the Town of Newmarket, and caused the King's .
Departure from thence ten Days sooner than was at first intended.
The Design thus frustrated, it was afterward renewed to kill the
two

<page 99>
94 "MEMOIRS
1683. two Royal Brothers as they came from Hampton-Court, but the
King being alone they postponed it, their View being to destroy
both or neither. These and the like Dilappoitments put it in-
to the Head of one of the Melancholy Conspirators, That God,
to use his own Phrase, was against them, which wrought on him
to disclose the whole Affair, and he accordingly did. Upon
this, many of the Conspirators, and Abettors withdrew j the Duke
of Monmouth fled, Lord Grey made his Escape after he had been
taken, but Sir Thomas Armstrong was apprehended and commit-
ted to the Tower, together with the Earl of Essex, the Lord
Howard of Efkrick, Lord Rujsel, and many others; and orders
were sent down, to us in the North, to keep a watchful Eye, and
a ready Hand over all suspicious Persons, and particularly to look
out for one Mr. Goodemttgh', and one Mr. Nelthorp, who were
supposed to have made their way towards us. By some Scotch-
men we intercepted and examined, we understood this Conspira-
cy to have been general with the Fanatics and Discontented in
both Kingdoms, and that the Correspondence was carried on, be-
tween them, by the Scocth Pedlars, and other Emiflaries in dis.
guise, which caused great Scrutiny and Search to be made and
observed with regard to all such People from the North: But
to dwell on the Particulars of this Plot, and the Proofs made
out against those who suffered for it, were needless, after what
has been said and recorded by many both privately and publick-
ly concerning it • so I shall only fay, that in the Conclusion it
proved fatal to Lord Ruffel, the eldest Son and Heir to the Earl
Aug-12. of Bedford, and others of more inferior note.
While we were labouring under the Terrors of the late Con-
spiracy, uncertain to vvhat degree it might extend, and what
might be the suture Purpose and Resolution of the Desperate
People concerned, the rest of Christendom was in some seeming
Danger of being overspread by the Turk, and now, more than
•ever, under the Apprehensions of sach a Catastrophe, the com-
mon Enemy having for some time laid close Siege to Vienna,
and reduced that Capital to great Extremities. But at length it
was

<page 100>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E s b r.
was relieved by the fortunate Valour of the King of Poland, as-
sisted principally by the Duke of Lor rain, the Emperor's Gene-
ral, and partly by the Electors of Saxony and Bavaria: But the
bare mention of this being as much as can be required at my
Hands, I mall return to the Posture and Current of our own Af-
fairs.
In OBober, I had a Letter from my Lord Halifax, to acquaint
me that I had the King's Leave to come to Town, which I had
desired, as thinking it to be neceflary I should be near the King's
Person, at a time when I thought he would be taking of new
Measures and making of new Regulations, with regard to Affairs
in general, and Officers in particular, for his own and the Na-
tion's greater Security after the late horrid Machinations j accor-
dingly I sat out the latter end of this Month for London, where
I arrived in November.
I went to visit my Lord Privy Seal, and found him still rooted
in the King's good Esteem; but that the Duke was not altoge-
ther so grateful to him as he ought to have been. I found also
that the Differences between his Lordstiip and Lord Rochefter
not only subsisted still, but with more Acrimony and Warmth
than before • and understood that the Lord Mayor of Tork was
fent for up, by an Order of Council, on account of some Words
he had spoken. The King received me very graciously, and the
Duke seemed kind to me, nor did my Lord Rochefter, whom I
visited, scruple to favour me with a decent Reception.
But I found the Hopes of a Parliament to be still at a very
great Distance, tho' Flanders was in danger of falling next Spring
under the Yoke of France, and tho' the Nation was much difla-
tisfied at the tedious Delay, that part of the Nation, I mean,
that was in Opposition to the French Interest. And just now it
hapned that the Grand Prior of France being in England, and
observed to be very fond of the Duchess of Portsmouth, and she
of him, the King conceived so great a jealodsy thereat that he
sent him away; and it was shrewdly suspected the Duchess would
not be long behind him, which few People seemed to be very
sorry for. I

<page 101>
MEMOIRS
I had heard, from a great Man, that something would shortly
happen very much to the Mortification of the Duke of Tork and
his Party, a Mystery which seemed in a few Days afterwards to
be explained. The Duke of Monmouth being suspected to have
taken Refuge somewhere abroad, on Account of the Conspiracy,
surrenders himself to Mr. Secretary Jenkins, at Whitehall, where,
the Thing being before concerted, the King and Duke went to
him, and, after an Hour's Discourse, suffered him to go to his
Lodgings at the Cockpit, attended by his own Servants, and un-
der no other Restraint than that of a Sergeant at Arms; but
what was said or done at this Interview, may be conjectured
sooner than known.
This was matter of surprize to all People, and waiting ost
Lord Privy Seal, he told me, He doubted not but the Duke of
MoTimouttis Affair, his Grace having that Day kissed the King's
Hand, the Duke's, and the Queen's, would be the Subject of
great Speculation, and that various Guesses would be made as to
the Intercession that brought it to pass. I told him the World
(aid The Duchess of Portsmouth, and Lord Sunderland had done
it, and that it was publickly known That the King had the Day
before in Council said, It was at the Request of the Duke of
Tork, to whom his Grace had made Submission, and disclaimed
all Competition with for the Crown. His Lordship answered,
that the thing was far from so, for that the Duke of Tork and
those in his Interest, had opposed it to the very last j and there-
upon owned himself to have been chiefly instrumental therein;
and gave me several Reasons both public and private, tho' not
proper to be here enumerated, why he laboured to that end. By
this it plainly appeared to me, That notwithstanding the extra-*
ordinary strength of the Interest combined against him, this no-
ble Lord had great Power with his Majesty. His Lordship more-
over gave me to understand, that his Grace had made Confession
of the late Plot, but would not give any public Evidence against
the Conspirators. But to dismiss this, certain it is that whoever
wrought so industriously, with the King, in favor of the Duke of

<page 102>
Of Sir John Reresb 97
'Monmouth, his Majesty himself may be said to have had a large 168*•
Share therein. He had a paternal Affedtton for him, nor could
refrain from the most open and public Expressions of it wherever
he law him ;and the Duke on his part paid all the respect and
duty imaginable in attending upon, and following the King.
Mean while, the whole Court began to discover, that tho' his Aug. 28.
Highness of Tork seemed outwardly to agree to the Duke of
Monmouttis Readmission, it was by no means an Act of Choice,
but of Necessity, the King having declared He would have it so;
and that he was not made privy to it above two Days before it
was effected.
The King had now conceived a Displeasure against the City
of Tork, and coming from the Duchesi of Portjmouth's, he alked
me, leaning upon my Arm, If I knew sufficient Matter for bring-
ing a ^uo IParranto against their Charter. I told his Majesty,
I did not, but would endeavor to inform myself, but feared I
could not so well do it at such a Distance as if I was upon the
Spot: To which his Majesty replyed, / only recommend it to you.
The Lord Mayor it seems had refused to let a Mountebank erect
his Stage in that City, tho' he was furnished with the King's
Recommendation, which the Man complaining of, his Majesty
thought himself thereby slighted, or injured.
The Lord Mayor of Tork being arrived, came to desire leave Dccemb. 4
to make use of my Name before the Council, so far as to say,
„The Governor knew how ready he was with his Assistance upon
Occasion of the late Plot, to which I gave my Consent. I well
knew That the Duke of Tork, who thought him Acceflary to his,
once ill Reception in that City, wished in his Heart the Man
might be punistied \ but I imagined I could not but in justice
stand by him in what was right, and that I could not do amiss in
carrying him to my Lord Privy Seal, who gave him his Promise to
assist him at the Board. I knew there was pique and malice in
the Complaint against him, and was in hopes it might be a means
of making him a thorough Convert, if he was but mercifully
handled in this troublelom Matter.
O Being,

<page 103>
98 MEMOIRS
1683. Being, the next Day, at Lady Portsmouth^, the King told
me there was frelh Complaint against the Lord Mayor or Tork,
and that he was afraid he was but a bad Man. I said I was o-
bliged to acquaint his Majesty with this Truth, That he was ve-
ry ready to give me his Assistance in Tork, upon the late Dread-
ful Occasion; but that I could say nothing in Defence of what
he might have committed since I left the Place; to have done
with this j
Dccemh. 6. The Duke of Monmouth having obtained his Pardon, refused
to sign a public Declaration of his Knowledge of the late Conspi-
racy against the King, for which he was ordered to keep from
Whitehall. My Lord Privy Seal told me, The manner of doing
this, as required, was something hard, but that his Grace ought
intirely to have submitted himself to the King's Pleasure. His
Lordship I found was much concerned that the Duke had been
lo obstinate, and he had reason to be so, being now deemed, as
he was, the chief Instrument that brought him again into Favor.
The fame Day Mr. Sydney was executed upon Tower Hill, as
one of the Conspirators, but said nothing before he suffered. He
only left a Paper with the Sheriff, which I heard the King say
was very treasonable and evasive, tho' not wholly negative of the
Fact laid to his charge j but, however, it was not thought pro-
per to be printed. And now I found that the Duke of Tork was
not at all pleased with the Lord Privy Seal, tho' he made open
shew of the contrary, for that he was not consulted on the Re-
storation of the Duke of Monmouth; and it was his Lordship's
# own Expression, That she Duke would never forgive it him. But
the King having been the chief Promoter of it, it did not appear
that his Lordship had lost any Ground with him. .The Duke of
Monmouth would not perform what was expected of him, and
how could his Lordship help it?
The Confederates, Spain, Holland, Sweden, and the rest, who
were now preparing to resist the French, and to preserve Flanders,
were very angry with us, for that we still supinely persisted in
our Neutrality, and particularly the Spaniard, who said it was a
Breach

<page 104>
0/ J O H N R E R E S B f. $
Breach of our League with him; but all Remonstrances of this l6i
fort were to none effect j our King pretended his own Affairs
were in so ill a Posture at Home, that he could not so much as
think of involving; himself in a War; which confirmed the Jea-
lousy of our adhering to the French Interest, and of a private Com-
merce kept up with them, by the intervention of the Duchess
of Portsmouth and others.
The Talk of the Town now was, That the Lord Privy Seal Dec'
was not well with the King, and that at Court he met with DiC
couragements of such a Nature, as to make him retire from Busi-
ness. I communicated this to his Lordship, who told me, He
had, indeed, met with Discouragements from some, but none at
all from the King, for that he was as well there as ever; and
that there would be a farther Production of Affairs in a little
time than was expected, and so pointed at the Thing that I
easily guefled what he meant. A few Days afterwards I was
with the Duke of Albemarle, who told me he was sorry to find
That Lord Privy Seal, purely to outdo his Antagonist Rochester,
should have had so great a Hand in bringing in Monmouth, and
thereby have incurred the Duke of Tork's Displeasure, as well as
the Dislike of a great Number of the Loyalists, who were before
his Friends. That, not many Hours besore, the Duke had told
him, That if the Lord Privy Seal had had no Friendship for him
in any other Capacity, yet as being the King's Brother, he might
have let him into the Secret, and not have brought in Monmouth
quite without his Privity: That indeed he never could forget
what the Lord Privy Seal had formerly done to serve him; but
that he took a Way, if possible, to make him forget it; and
that to his Knowledge his Lordship was still exerting his La-
bors to reunite the King and Monmouth. The Duke of Albe-
marle then observed, That his Highness knew his Relation to the
Lord Privy Seal, but that the Loyalty and Respect he bore to
his Highness was more considered by him than all that, and that
he hoped his Lordship designed him no Diflervice in this Affair,
with much more to the fame Purpose j in short, his Grace seemed
O 2 . much

<page 105>
ioo MEMOIRS
,tf83» much to lament what his Lordship had done in Favour of Mon-
mouth. His Grace added, That if the Privy Seal would but trust
him, he would tell him how to be too hard for Rochester, with-
out recurring to such unpopular Methods.
Jan. 2. I communicated the particulars of this Conversation to his Lord-
ship, who answered, That he thereby perceived the Duke had a
Mind to be upon better Measures with him; but that, absolutely,
he had not seen the Duke of Monmouth since he last left the
Court; that as to what he had done for his Grace, it was purely
in Obedience to the King's Commands; and that as the King
would not allow him, it was impossible for him to have disclosed
the Matter to his Highness; and concluded, that he was to dine
with the Duke of Æbemarle, the fVednesday following, and
should the better know what to say to his Grace, if he touched
upon this Affair, since I had taken Care to apprize him of his
Thoughts.
I learnt from a great Man, that we were in no Way of having
a Parliament, there being some near the King, who advised
him to another Way of Ruling the Kingdom. The fame Gen-
tleman, at the fame time lamented, That now the Fanatics had
nothing else to say against the Government, they must have suf-
ficient Cause of Complaint upon this Account, as well as on Ac-
count of several other Points now in Agitation. Some Days after-
wards, my Lord Privy Seal told me, He had been very earnest
with the King to call a Parliament, and had represented to him,
That tho' he had slipped the Opportunity of calling one immedi-
ately after the late Plot, when he could not possibly have failed
of one according to his Mind, and might fear he should meet
with no good one now, he would do 'Well to consider, That the
longer he deferred the Thing, the worse it would be, and indeed
fb very bad. That it might be used as an Argument never to call
one more: That nothing ought to have that Weight with him,
as his Word given to the People; that the Law required a
Parliament to be .called every three Year; and that, upon
the last Dissolution, his Majesty had promised a religious Obser-
vance

<page 106>
Of Sir John Reresby, ior
vance of the Laws, by a Proclamation setting forth his Reasons
for dismissing that Parliament: That the general Construction put
upon this was, that he intended to call another within the three
Years, and that he feared an ill use might be made of his not do-
ing what it was Ib generally supposed he certainly would: That
tho' the Antimonarchists were now at a very low Ebb, and under
great Discouragements, such his Majesty's procedure might raise
a Spirit of Discontent where it was least expected, meaning
among those, who tho' they were Friends to the Crown, were,
at the same time, desirous he should govern according to Law,
and not only desired, but expected it, since he had given his
Royal Word, that he would do ib: That if, however, his Ma-
jesty thought not well of this, he would be nevertheless se far
from relinquishing his Service, that he would make it his study
to find out Excuses to make him easy with the People. So then
there was no possibility of seeing a Parliament assembled, but by
some Compulsion from a foreign Cause, and no-body could tell,
but that if the War went on, the Confederates might be pro-
voked to declare against us.
In short, Affairs were now chiefly under the Management of
the Duke of Torky who carried every thing with a very lofty
Hand; but, what is very Strange, the Earl of Danby was on the
Point of stepping out of the Tower, tho' against his Highneis's Con-
sent. My Lord Privy Seal assured me his Enlargement was at
hand; that he himself had been his Lordssiip's chief Friend, and
that the King had made both the Duke and Lord Rochester seem-
ingly set their Hands to it. The Duke, indeed, appeared to be
hearty in it, and that the King was se, there could be no doubt;
but Rochesier and Sunderland did underhand oppose it with might
and main, and se contrived that the Judges delayed to bail out his
Lordship 'till the very last Day of the Term; those two Lords
dreading, That Danby might join with Halifax to "weaken their
Interest.
And now it was resolved to bring a ^uo JFarranto, is with any Febr. to.
Colour of Justice it could be done, against the Charter of Tork;
and

<page 107>
lo* M E M O I "R S
51583. and two Days afterwards, Lord Danby was bailed out of his long
Confinement of five Years, as were afl the Popish Lords that had
been under Durance ever since the Time of the first Plot. Lord
Danby came the same Day to kiss his Majesty's Hand in the Bed-
chamber, where I happened to be present. The King received
him very kindly, and when the Earl complained of his long Im-
prisonment, his Majesty told him, he knew it was against his Con-
sent, which his Lordship thankfully acknowledged; but they had
no Manner of private Discourse together. My Lord Privy Seal
came into the Presence presently after, and the two Lords saluted
each other; but it was very slightly done on both Sides. The
next Day, however, I went from the Lord Privy Seal, to wait
upon the Earl, when his Lordship desired me to present his Ser-
vice to him, and to tell him, That he should have taken a more
particular Sort of Notice of him, but that he thought it would
not prove so much for his Service: And the Earl said, It was for the
very self same Reason he had behaved so indifferently towards his
Lordship; for there was at that Time great jealousy of a Friendship
between them. Lord Danby told me, he would retire to his
House out of Town, nor concern himself with Business, tho' he
doubted not but he might if he would, but not upon the national
Foundation he desired, and therefore would have nothing to do
with it, declaring his Aversion to a French or a Popish Interest. He
told me also, the Substance of what had pasted between the Duke
and him, at the visit he made to his Highness, after he had been
with the King, and I thereby understood his Lordship was upon no
very affectionate Terms with that Prince. He said his Highness
told him, he had heard he had spoken slightingly of him, and that
he answered, It was true he had often been so unfortunate as
to differ with him in Opinion, and could not help saying, That
he had never yet found any Cause to repent him of it j but that
for expressing himself any how against his Person, if he heard so,
they were Whispers and Lies; and desired to know who were his
Informers; but the Duke evaded that. In short, I found by my
Lord Privy Seal, That he and the Earl of Danby had a good un-
derstanding together. The'

<page 108>
Of Sir J o h N Reresby- 103
The King went to Newmarket, and I followed him a sew Days
afterwards; when the Weather being very unseasonable and dirty, March *,
and walking about the Town with his Majesty, he observed, that
my Shoes were but thin, and advised me to get a stronger Pair to
prevent my catching cold, which, tho' a trivial Remark in itself,
may serve as an Example of that Prince's great Goodness and Care
for those Persons that were near him, tho' ever so inconsiderable.
The Manner of the King's dividing his Time at this Place was
thus: He walked in the Morning 'till Ten of the Clock ; then he
went to the Cockpit 'till Dinner-time; about Three he went to
the Horse-races j at Six he returned to the Cockpit, for an Hour
only; then he went to the Play, tho' the Actors were but of a
terrible Sort j from thence to Supper j then to the Duchess of
Portsmouth's 'till Bed-time; and so to his own Appartment to
take his rest.
But to have done with these Domestic Diversions, it may be 1684.
proper just to take Notice, That the War abroad seemed to be in Marcb25'
the Way of a very violent Continuance, tho' the French King had
offered either a Truce or a Peace for a certain Term of Years: But
then it was upon very hard Conditions, he refusing to give up any
Thing he had taken, either from Spain or the Empire, so that
there was no likelihood that the Confederates would agree thereto.
Our King however, seconded the French King's Oners, recom-
mended them to the Allies as reasonable, and proffered to be
Guarrantee between them in Case they came to a Point.
Mean while, Lord Rochefter continued powerful enough to ad- -4Pftf *,
vance his Friends, and Mr. Godolphin, one of the Commissioners
of the Treasury, was made Secretary of State instead of Sir Lyo-
nel Jenkins, who had leave, by Reason of his great Age, to retire •
a Promotion that was not made without the Participation of the
Lady Portsmouth. The Lord Privy Seal, the fame Day, told me,
That tho' all these combined Interests were still as averse to him
as ever, the King was nevertheless as kind to him as he had usu-
ally been; but it was very obvious, That his Lowiship was less
in Business than before: His Lordship, however, had certainly a
ft very

<page 109>
o4
MEMOIR
684. very large Portion of the King's Esteem, and what he said had
'ay 11. generally great Weight with his Majesty. And now the Duke
of Tork is declared Lord High Admiral of England, that is, he
was invested with the Power of that Office, without either the
Title or the Patent, because his Highness could not dispense with
the Oaths or the Sacrament, a Circumstance which gave great Of-
fence to Numbers of People. Nor must we forget another thing,
tho' of a private Nature, which hapned this Day j for the Ducheis
of Portsmouth, contrary to custom, waiting on the Queen, at
Dinner, as Lady of the Bedchamber, her Majesty was thereby
thrown into such Disorder, that the Tears stood in her Eyes, while
the other laughed at it, and turned it into a jest.
y »y. News now came, that the French had possessed themselves of
Luxemburgh, which our Court seemed to be not at all displeased
with j but there were those, and some of them the Kings best
Friends, who were extremely sorry to hear it, that Place being reck-
oned to be the Key of Germany, Holland, and Flanders, and pro-
bably too opportune to advance the Grandeur of the common
Enemy. A few Days afterwards, I went to Windsor, to con-
gratulate the King upon his Birth-Day j the Crowd, upon this Oc-
casion, was great, but as for gaiety and gallantry, there was but
little of either; especially as to Apparel. And now the Duke of
Tork is declared of the great Council, commonly called the Privy
Council, whence he had been excluded ever since the Statute
which required the taking of Oaths, which his Highness refusing
upon this ReadmilTion, it became the Subject of much Talk, and
was deemed to be a Breach of one of the most solemn and most
explicit Acts os Parliament.
u 15. Intending for the North, I went to take leave of the King,
who told me, That those who had served him so carefully and so
well as I had done, should always be in his Thoughts, and that I
should find it so by Experience. I waited also on the Duke, and
desired his Commands for Tork: He told me, He doubted not but
I should do what became me for his Majesty's Service, and that
for his^own Part, he depended upon me. I assured his Highness,
I

<page 110>
. . Os Sir J o H n R e r e s B Y. 105
I should never fail in any Part of my Trust; but begged of him
to hearken to no Stories that might be told him to my prejudice.
I told him, that every County had its Competitors, and that it
was impossible for me to hope to live without Enemies, and espe-
cially as I had the Honour of serving the King preferably to
many of Equal and some of superior Rank, who could not but
look upon me, for that Reason, with an Eye of Envy. A few
Days afterwards, 1 visited the Lord Danby, who informed me, 
that Lord Rochester was closing in with the Moderate Men, not
I suppose out of any Affection for them, but to make himself
the stronger Rival against Lord Privy Seal, who was suspected
to stand upon a firmer Bottom than he, and consequently to be
better able to stand the Shock of a Parliament, in Case the
King should be prevailed on to call one: But, alas! Parliaments
seemed to be no longer thought of, and to be quite out of Doors 5
for, it was Lord Danbys Opinion, There was a very strict Con-
junction between us and France, tho' they had so lately taken
Luxemburg, and were likely to succeed according to their own
Willies.
I returned to the North, and the Augufi following, we had the
grateful News that Buda had been taken for the Emperor, by
the Duke of Lorrain j as also, that a Truce was made between
the Emperor and the King of France, which looked as if a gene-
ral Peace was at Hand, that the Christian Powers might the better
exert themselves against the presumptuous Arms of the Infidel.
And what still added to the good Aspect of the Thing, we had
Advice, There had been great Alterations made with regard to
the Grandees at Court, and that particularly Lord Rockejter had
been removed from the Head of the Treasury Board, to that of
the Council; in which, tho7 he was advanced in Honour, he was
put backward in Profit and Power: It was therefore most evi-
dently what he never sought for, and as plain, that Lord Hal*
lifax had brought it to pals: Thus it was that Lord Danby, now
in the Country, conjectured; and it was soon confirmed to me,
by a Letter from my Lord Marquiss himself, wherein he made
P Use
■

<page 111>
io6 MEMOIRS
KS84. Use of these Words; Tou may believe I am not at all displeased to
see such an Adversary removed from the only Place that could give
him Power and Advantage; and he bears it with Jo little Philo-
sophy', that, is I had ill Nature enough, he gives me sufficient Oc~'
,caston to Triumph. Tou see I cannot hinder myjelsfrom imparting
my Satisfaction, to Jo good a Friend. But the wonder was,
How the Finger of my Lord Privy Seal was able to effect this
against the Shoulder of the Duke of Tork, who still continued a
Friend to Rochester as much as ever.
Sept. 4. I went to visit the Duke of Newcastle at his Castle of Notting-
ham, where the Duke of Buckingham had been not long before,
and given a long Account of Affairs above, which seemed to inti-
mate as if, notwithstanding what had lately hapned, the French
Interest was still uppermost at Court. His Grace told me also, that
Buckingham was very angry with the Marquifs of Halifax, for re-
fusing to admit of a private Communication with the French Am-
baflador, when he offered to bring him to his Lordship; and that his
Grace should say, His Power would never be considerable while
he continued averse to that Interest. But in Contradiction to
this, I towards the latter end of this fame Month, received a very
kind Letter from my Lord Marquiss, and others from very great
Persons, which gave me to understand, There would probably be
some farther change at Court, that his Lordship stood very firm
with the King, and that it was believed the Power of the French
Interest was somewhat abated.
Jan. ao. And now a £$uo Warranto, which had so long threatned them,
was served upon the City of Tork, and the Resolution thereupon,
was to send up the Charter, and to offer at no Defence against the
King: I endeavoured, as much as I conveniently could, to appear
quite indifferent on either Side; but almost upon the Back of this,
I had the fad News, from the Earl of Burlington, that his Majesty
had been taken, upon the ad of this Month, with a Fit of an Apo-
plexy, tho' they called it an Epilepsy; and that he had continued
as it were dead almost three hours, till he was brought to himself
again, by bleeding, cupping, vomiting, and several other Means
that

<page 112>
Of Sir J o h n R E r E s b Y. 107
that had been used. His Lordship farthermore, in his Letter, or- i<584.
dered me, so to dispose of Things as might best prevent Distur-
bances and Troubles, in Case his Majesty mould unfortunately
suffer a Relapse; and all the neceflary Precautions were taken ac-
cordingly ; tho' upon the News that the King was recovered, and
in seme Way of continuance, there was nothing but Bonfires and
Rejoycings in our Parts j a short lived Mirth; for three Days
afterwards, we had News that his Majesty was fallen into a Re-
lapse, and that his Physicians were in great Fear he could not re-
cover. At this we doubled our Diligence to secure Peace and
Quietness, and to prevent any Obstacle that might start up in
prejudice to the Duke of Tork. Two Days afterwards came
News, That my great and good Master was departed this Life.
The Mail came not in till Four in the Morning, when I was set-
ting up to receive it, resolving to suffer no Letter to go out till I
had been with the Lord Mayor, and the High Sheriff, to whom
I immediately delivered their own Letters, by which they had
orders, together with myself, from the Privy Council and the Se-
cretary of State, to proceed immediately and proclaim James the
Second. As soon as we had got every thing ready for this Cere-
mony, which we had before Day, I gave leave for the Delivery
of the rest of the Letters j and by Seven in the Morning, the
High Sheriff, met by the Archbishop and most of the Gentle-
men in the Town, moved towards the Caftle-yard to proclaim
the King there, while I caused all the Garrison, the neces-
sary Guards excepted, to be drawn together in the Thursday
Market.
By Nine in the Morning, the King was proclaimed by my Lord Feb.
Mayor, the High Sheriff, and myself; the Firji did it in the
usual Places of the City; the Second did it in the Caftle-yard, for
the County ;and I did it in the Thursday Market, to the Garrison
there drawn out together j I then ordered a double Discharge of
the Artillery, and several Vollies, according to the Orders I had
for that end received from my Lord Sunderland. All this was
transacted with all imaginable Tokens of Peace and Joy \ not only
P 2 in
1

<page 113>
108 M E M ,0 I R S
1684. in Tork itself, but afterwards throughout the whole County, and,
indeed, the whole Kingdom.
A strange Effect of Power it was from Heaven itself, That so
strong a Party as had reared its Head in Parliament, and so per-
tinaciously called out for the Exclusion of the Duke of Tork, should
now upon his Accession acquiesce to him, with such Deference
and quiet Submission. But it may be presumed, they were aware
of the Difference there was between the Spirit of the late and
the present King : The former they thought might, for peace sake,
be sooner brought to abandon his Brother, than the latter tamely
to renounce his Right and Title to three Kingdoms, for fear of a
War. But what served in very great Measure to quiet the Minds
and allay the Passions of Men, was King James's Declaration to
the Privy Council immediately after the Breath was out of his
Brother's Body, Whereby he promised to defend the Government
oi Englandy both in Church and State, and carefully to tread in
the Footsteps of his late Majesty, with regard to his Kindness
and Lenity towards his People; and that as on the one Hand,
he would defend the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown,
so on the other, he would invade no Man's Property.
I stayed at Tork a few Days to keep the Peace, and, in the
mean time, had Notice from the proper Hands, that-1 was con-
tinued in my Command, and that I had leave to set out for Lon-
don, as I, indeed, had desired. But now there began to be great
Changes at Court; Lord Rochester was made Lord High Trea^
surer os England; Lord Privy Seal was made Lord President of the
Council; which tho' it was a Step higher as to Place, it was
much doubted that it was not at his Lordship's Desire; the Trust
and Profit of the Privy Seal being judged to be an overbalance for
the Honour of the other. And now we had the agreeable Prospect
of a Parliament, which it was said his Majesty intended should
meet in May next.
It was now beyond all Doubt that the King was a Papist;
for he went publickly to Mass, tho' he ordered the Chappel ot"
Whitehall to be kept in Statu quo j whither the Princess or Den-
» mark

<page 114>
0/ J O H N R E R E S B Y. I09
mark repaired daily, while the King did the same to the Queen's
Private Chappel. In the interim, I was chosen a Member to lit in
the ensuing Parliament for the City of Tork ; and with xthis new
Charge, I this Day fat forward for London; where being arrived, April 13.
my Lord Marquiss of Halifax told me he and Lord Rochester,
the Treasurer, were now very well together • that he had used
his constant Endeavours to serve the King, and that he would
continue to do the fame; but that he hoped his Majesty would
not think of imposing his Religion on him j which he seemed
sorrowfully to apprehend, the most considerable Posts in the Army
in Ireland, being now put into the Hands of Papists. His Lord-
ship then recalled to me several Instances of the late King's Kind-
ness to him, and certainly no Man was deeper in his Favour,
when his Majesty was unfortunately snatched away, than my Lord
Marquiss. A few Days afterwards, I waited on his Majesty, ^^~
kissed his Hand, and at the fame time presented him with an
Address from the young Men of the City of Tork, who had peti-
tioned me for leave to exercise themselves at Arms on certain
Days of the Year, which the King received very kindly.
The next Day my Lord Halifax told me he had had two pri-
vate Audiences of the King, and that he had in such plain Terms
told him his Mind, upon the grand Point of Government, that
he much wondered the King, considering his natural Temper,
took it with that Calmness and Composure he did. His Lord-
ship then observed, It possibly might be insisted on, that fbme
Acts should, in the ensuing Parliament, be repealed, which would
require a weighty and mature Deliberation ; and touched on some
Things not altogether se fit to be inserted in this Place-
The King was crowned and the Queen in fVeflminfler-Æbey, 23.
with all imaginable Pomp and Magnificence, except that there was
no Cavalcade thorough the City, as the Custom had formerly been.
Their Majesties went privately to the Palace atWestminster ,vj\\exe
they, the Nobility, and all the Officers of the Crown put on their
Robes, Formalities, and Ensigns, and thence proceeded thorough *
Palace-yard, railed in and prepared for that Purpose, in Pro-
cession)

<page 115>
110
MEMOIRS
i^8y. cession to Weft m'wfier-Abbey, whence,the Ceremony being com-
pleated, they all returned to the Hall, to a most sumptuous Din-
ner. And now the Gentlemen of the House of Commons began
to consider what the Court might demand of them, as well as
what might be granted at the approaching Session, the Parlia-
ment consisting of a great Number of Loyal Gentlemen, who
were, nevertheless, good Patriots, and true Protestants. The
Report went, that there would be more required in Behalf of Po-
pery, than the Laws now in Force would allow of; and that the
King expected the Settlement of a constant Revenue upon him,
suitable to that of the late King, besides a Sum of ready Money
to subvene his present Occasions. That in favour of Popery it
would be proposed to repeal the Habeas Corpus Act, which I
found was much opposed by some great ones, in their private Dif-
courie, as well as by some of us j and to enact a general Toleration
or Liberty of Conscience, which some seemed willing enough to
subscribe to; tho' at the same time, the Resolution was to admit
of no Alteration to capacitate Papists to enjoy any Place or Im-
ployment in or under the Government. As for the Affair of
Money, Men in general seemed willing to settle an handsom
Revenue upon the King, and to give him Money, but whether
their Grant should be permanent or only temporary, and to be
renewed from time to time by Parliament, that the Nation might
be the oftner consulted, was the Question: In all this, I resolved
punctually to do my Duty to the Crown, but not to be unmind-
ful of a due Regard for my Country, and my Religion.
May 4. I had some Discourse with Mr. Hilliard, Sir Roger Martin,
and others, Gentlemen of great Consideration with the Popish
Party: They told me, The King would expect a Repeal of the
Sanguinary Laws; that the Papists should be allowed the pri-
vate Exercise of their Religion, and that they, at least such as had
served the Royal Family in the Wars or otherwise, mould be
capable of Employment under him: That the King would, in Par-
liament, give full Satisfaction to the Nation, with regard to their
Religion and Properties j but that if Reason would not serve his
purpose,

<page 116>
Os Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. III
purpose, he knew what he had to do. That the King would never ^85.
divide the regal Power by admitting of that of the Pope • that
his Majesty was too fond of Power to be guilty of that over-
sight; and that his adhering to the Defence of the Church of
England, would, on the other hand, deter the Pope from pressing
him to admit of his Supremacy \ in short, That it was but rea-
sonable the King mould insist on the Repeal of the severer penal
Laws against the Papists; for that if he should die, he would
leave them in as ill a plight as he found them; But what Wis-
dom or Sense there was in those who, at this time, could offer
at such Arguments, need not be iaid.
I waited on the King in his Barge, from Whitehall to Somerset-
houje, where he went to visit the Queen Dowager: It was upon
this Day, that the noted Doctor Oates was convicted of Perjury,
it being proved, that he was at St. Omers the 24th of April, 1678,
when he swore he was at the 0hite-horse Tavern in the Strand,
where Pickering, Groves, Ireland, and other Jesuits signed to the
Death of King Charles the Second : This was a grateful hearing
to the King, who thereupon observed, That, indeed, there had
been a Meeting of the Jesuits that Day, and that all the Scholars
of St. Omers knew of it, but that it was well Doctor Oates knew
no better where it was to be; for, says his Majesty, they met in
St. Jameses where I then lived, which if Oates had but known,
he would have cut out a fine Spot of Work for me. The King
then subjoined, That Oates being thus convicted, the Popilh Plot
was now dead; to which I answering, That it had been long
since dead, and that novv, it would be buried; his Majesty so well
approved of the Turn, that going with him afterwards to the
Princess of Denmarks, I heard him repeat it to her.
- Three or four Days afterwards, we had advice, That a Store
of Arms had been bought up in Holland, and conveyed into
Scotland; and that Lord Argyle, Lord Grey, and some said the
Duke of Monmouth, were actually gone with them, or aster them.
Mean while, the Parliament assembled in the usual Apart- ip.
ments at Weft minster, but did nothing this Day but take the
Oaths,

<page 117>
ii2 MEMOIRS
•
t<58j. Oaths, and chuse their Speaker, Sir John Trevor, who was con-
firmed by the King: The two next Days were also taken up in
swearing the Members, and taking the Test. On the Twenty-
second, the King made a Speech to both Houses, and therein as-
sured them, He would support and defends the Church of England,
whose Members had ever been most Loyal in the Worst of Times,
in the Cause of his Father, and the Support of his Brother j as
allo to adhere to the Government both in Church and State, as
by Law Established; and that as he never would depart from
the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, so neither would
he attempt to invade any Man's Property. He desired of us suit-
able Returns in settling the Revenue on him for Life, as in the
Days of the late King; and concluded with an Account he had
received from Scotland, that the Earl of Argyle was landed with
Men and Arms, on the Western Islands ofthat Kingdom • and
that the {aid Lord had published two Declarations, in both of
which he charged him with Tyranny and Usurpation.
The Commons returning to their House, immediately voted,
That the King's Speech should be taken into speedy Consideration,
and were so well pleased with The solemn Security the King had
given them as to their Religion and Property, That they voted
him the very same Revenue for his Life, as had been enjoyed by
thelate King for his. They then voted, That the King ihould,
by the whole House in a Body, be thanked for his Speech, in
which the Lords concurred, and it was accordingly done the next
Day; when they farthermore voted an Address to his Majesty,
assuring him, They would stand by him with their Lives and
Fortunes, against Argyle, his Abettors, and all other Traitors
whatsoever; which being presented accordingly to the King, he
was pleased to answer, That he expected no less from a Parlia-
ment so happily made up of Monarchical and Church-of-England-
men, and that he should sear no Enemy he either had or might
have, while he had them on his Side. And now all things seemed
to smile with a very auspicious Countenance, the King forbear-
ing the least Advances towards a Change of Religion, and seeming
to be bent quite the contrary Way. In

<page 118>
Of Sir J o h n Reresby. 113
In the midst os this, a Motion was made in the House, That I(58?-
something should, now be done to please the People, after so much ^ay 2S
had been done to gratify the King j pointing at a proper security
for the Protestant Religion j upon which a Debate arising, it was
referred to the Committee of Religion. This Committee, the
next Day, pasled a Vote, That the House mould be moved by
them, To resolve to stand by the King, with their Lives and
Fortunes, for the Defence of the Religion of the Church of Eng-
land, as by Law Established: As also to present an Address to
the King, to iflue out his Royal Proclamation, for putting the
Laws in Execution against all Dilsenters of what Denomination
soever; and these Votes, tho' in a very full Committee, pafled
Nemine Contradkente.
But the next Day, when the same came to be reported to the 27.
House, a Debate took birth, Whether the House should concur
with the Committee or not? Against the Question it was argued,
That it was reminding the King of a Neglect of his Duty; that
the Justices of Peace were in Fault that the Laws were not more
duly executed; that Votes of this Sort would alarm the Kingdom,
and might create a Jealousy os the King, who had so solemnly
declared his Intentions to defend our Religion; that the King
had told us, The Way to keep a good understanding between
him and his Parliament, would be to use him well, and that he
could not but take this amiss; and finally, That it might be an
Encouragement to the Rebels already in Arms in the Kingdom of
Scotland, and so on. To this it was answered, that it would
have but an indifferent Look with the Nation, If we being Mem-
bers of the Church of England, should let such commendable
Votes in Favour of our Religion drop unheeded: At length
the previous Question being put, Whether to agree or not
agree with the Committee, it was carried in the Negative.
The whole Matter then was summed up in this Vote, That an
Address mould be made to the King, purporting That the House
did entirely rely on his Royal Declaration, that he would defend
and secure the Reformed Religion of the Church of England, as
1

<page 119>
ii4 M E M O I R S .
id8j. by Law Established, by far dearer and nearer to them than their
• Lives.
May 30. We had now Information, That Argyle had penetrated into
his own Territories in the North of Scotland, with a Body of
3000 Men, and that he was fortifying himself there. The next
Pay, the King came to the House of Lords, and pafled the Bill
for the Continuance of the Revenue of Excise and Customs for his
own Life. Having done this, he spoke to both Houses, and
thanked them for the chearfulness and alacrity wherewith they
had pafled the same; he said, their Dispatch was as pleasing to
tim as the Bill itself; but at the same Time, desired lome extra-
ordinary Supply for the Navy and Ordnance Stores, for paying off
the late King's Debts to his Servants and Family, and for defray-
ing the Charge he was like to be at in quelling the Rebellion in
,Scotland j he then recommended the Navy to us, as the Strength
and Glory of the Nation j aslured us he had a true English Heart,
jealous of the Honour of the Nation j and that he pleased himself
with the Thoughts, by God's Blessing, and their Assistance, to raise
the Reputation of it in the World, higher than it had ever yet
been in the Days of any of his Ancestors.
June xi. This Speech being taken into Consideration, it was, by a Com-
mittee of the whole House, voted that a Supply should be granted
to his Majesty for the Uses therein specified. While Things were
going on in this easy and harmonious Manner, we had News from
Lyme in Dorsetshire, That the Duke of Monmouth was landed in
that Neighbourhood, with Arms for a 0,000 Men, together with
Officers and Soldiers, to the Number of about 200 j that many
of the People flocked in to him, from that factious Country, and
that he had declared himself the Protector of the Protestant Re-
ligion, against Popery. With all speed then the King sent down
the Duke of Albemarle, the Lord Lieutenant of that Part,
to raise the Militia; and after him, seme Companies of the stand-
ing Foot, and six Troops of Horse and Dragoons. Lyme is natu-
rally a safe and advantageous Post, and was in Monmouttis Powers
so that in two, or three Days more, we heard he was 300 strong |

<page 120>
Os Sir J o H N R E r E s b Vk 115
but, at the same time, that the Duke of Albemarl e had raised the 168$-
Militia, and was marching towards him with some 8000 Men.
The King no sooner heard that Monmouth was landed, as we
have said, than he communicated the same to the Commons ; up-
on which they immediately voted him their Thanks, anct resolved,
in a Body of the whole House, to wait on his Majesty with their
own Address, wherein they promised to stand by him with their
Lives and Fortunes, against that ungrateful Rebel James Duke
of Monmouthy and all others whosoever they might be; siicri were
the promising Beginnings of this Short and memorable Reign. Soon
after comes Monmoutlfs Declaration, which the King the next
Day sent to both Houses, who attended him that very Day, and
voted a Reward of 5000/. to any Body that mould take him,
and bring him to the King, dead or alive. This Declaration
charged James Duke of Tork, for so it stiled the King, with the
Burning of the City, the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, the
Murder of Sidney, and Lord RujJ'ell, with the poisoning of the
late King, and tearing his Crown from his Head: It charged
him also with being a Have to Popish Councils, and with packing
the present Parliament 5 and that therefore he was come to re-
venge all these things on the pretended King; that he would
never hearken to any Terms, or Accommodation 'till his work was
compleated, and that as he was resolved to give no Quarter to
thole that opposed him, he exhorted all good People to come in
and assist him. To this he subjoined, that he had a just Title to
the Crown, but that he would lay no claim to it 'till he had called
a free Parliament, to whom he was ready to give full Satisfaction
as to that Matter; that Parliaments should sit every Year, nor be
dismissed 'till all Grievances were redressed, and that he would
grant Liberty of Conscience to all Manner of People, not ex-
cluding even the Papists, and much more in the same Strain.
Mean while, came News that Monmouth having marched out
of the Town of Lyme with 200 Foot, and 100 Horse, had met
with some of the Dorset/hire Militia, fallen on them, killed seve-
ral Persons of Note, and taken some Prisoners. And now an ad.- J'
 , Q^z ditional

<page 121>
u6 MEMOIRS
i68j. ditional Supply is voted, for defraying the Expence of the War,
against the Duke of Monmouth, The House upon this Occasion
resolving itself into a Committee of the whole, to consider of the
Ways and Means for raising this new Supply, voted That it should
be levied upon such new Foundations, as had been built upon
within the Compass of the Bills of Mortality, since the Year
1660, excepting the late general Fires in the City of London and
Borough of Southiuark. Secondly, That it should be levyed only
upon the Rents of the same Houses for the Term of one Year. Thirdly,
upon such Foundations as were now laid. Fourthly, That there
should be a Clause to prevent any more Buildings within the said
Limits. Fifthly, That the House should be moved that a Bill
might be brought in for that Intent j in all which the House
concurred with the Committee.
June 18. The next Day the King sent to us, to desire we would give
him Credit upon some Fund, for such a Sum as we should think
fit to grant him, towards the Suppression of the Rebellion in the
West; and that we would prepare our Business se as to be in a
Condition to adjourn for some time, within a few Days. Upon
this we resolved again into a Committee of the whole House, and
voted him the Sum of 400,000 /. the Sum agreed on the Day
before j and at the same time appointed a Committee to inquire
into, and bring in an Estimate of the yearly Value of the Rents
of the new Buildings upon new Foundations.
But notwithstanding all this, the Court seemed to be much
concerned at the Increase of the Duke of Monmouth*s Forces,
which were now reported to consist of 4000 Foot, and four
Troops of Horse, with which having marched towards Taunton,
a populous and factious Town, he made himself Master thereof,
two Regiments of the Militia running away, when they heard he
was near the Place; but the Duke of Albemarle had still orders
not to fight 'till the standing Troops had joined him, which it
was supposed they would do upon the 2 oth Instant; on which
Day also some 2500 of the Guards, Horse and Foot, marched to
reinforce the Troops that had before been sent to the Duke of Al-
• bemarl
e
, 1

<page 122>
0/ 6/> J O H N R E R E S B T. 11 7
bemarley commanded by Lord Feverfham. The fame Day, the I<58J.
Commons understanding it would be a tedious Talk to levy the
neceflary Sums upon the new Foundations, proceeded to shist the
Tax upon French Linen, Brandies, Callicoes, &c.
But I cannot help observing, that my Lord Halifax took it ill
of me, That I had been so earnest for the taxing of the new Build-
ings, he having a deep concern therein • but I told him it was my
• Judgment, and that if my Father's Interest had been ever so much
therein, I should have done the fame Thing; that however, I
was very sorry He, above all Men in the World, should disap-
prove of any Thing I did; but we presently understood each
other, and he said he was very sorry he had laid any Thing to
disturb me: This, tho' a Transaction of quite a private Nature,
I could not forbear the mention of, as it was the only Time we
,ever so much as seemed to differ; but to return to Matters of
more general Importance, June n»
This Day, his Majesty had Advice from Scotland, that the
Earl of Dunbarton, commander in chief of his Forces in that King-
dom, having Notice, that the Rebels had pafled the River above
Dumbarton, had marched from Glas,ow to Sterlings and overtook
them near the close of the Day, but that in the Night the Rebels
stole away from him into Renfrew \ that the said Earl then pur-
sued them with his Horse and Dragoons, and understood that they
were making away from him in very great Confusion. that the
fame Day three Servants belonging to a Gentleman of Renfrew,
fell upon the Earl of Argyle, as he was getting away in the Dis-
guise of a Countryman, with a blue Bonnet on his Head • and
that they had wounded him in several Places of the Head, 'till at
last, fearing they would kill him, he confessed himself to be the
Earl of Argyle; and that thereupon they had taken him Prisoner,
and conducted him to Glas,ow, where he was committed. The
King sent an Account of all this to the Commons, who returned
their Thanks for the same, by such of their Members as were of
the Privy Council, who came back with this Answer, That his
Majesty was every Day more and more satisfied with them for
their

<page 123>
n8 MEMOIRS
i<58j. their Zeal and Loyalty to his Person and Government, and that
he gave them his Thanks.
June 23. ' The next Day the King had Notice, that Monmouth had sent
a Letter to the Duke of Albemarle, under the Stile and Title of
his most trusty and well-beloved Cousin and Councellor, Christo-
pher Duke of Albemarle, charging him upon his Allegiance to
come in to his Aid and Assistance; in a Word, That he now took
upon him to be King; that he was marched from Taunton to-
wards Bristol with about 5000 Men and Boys, and that Albe-
marle was at his Heels.
24. The next Day I hapned to dine with Sir James Smith, the
Lord Mayor of London, whom I had formerly known intimately
well, and who was of a very Loyal Club in the City, where I
used to go, while the Fanatic Plot was in Agitation. This Gen-
tleman complained to me, That he,enjoyed no more than the bare
Title of Lord Mayor, the Lord chief justice Jefferies usurping the
Power j that the City had no Sort of intercourse with the King,
but by the Intervention of that Lord; that whatever was well
done in the City, was attributed to his Influence and Manage-
ment j and that himself and the Aldermen were, by the Court,
looked on as no better than his Tools: That upon all Occasions
his Lordship was so forgetful of the high Dignity of the City as
- to use him and his Brethren with Contempt ; in fine, that the
Lord Chief justice was to be pitied • that his haughtiness would
be the Ruin of him; and that he actually intended to let the King
into the Mystery of these Things j but that he thought the pre-
sent Time was not altogether so proper, seeing a Remonstrance
of this Tendency might be construed into Mutiny and Disaffection.
I answered, That the King was too well acquainted with the
Lord Mayor's Services and Integrity to suspect him of that, and
that, in my Opinion, now was the fittest Time for exposing a Man
in that Credit at Court j for that now the greatest Notice would
be taken of all such Grievances. Indeed I was sorry at my Heart
to see such good Men diflatisfied in any Degree; but 1 was as
glad to find this proud Man seen through; for he had to my
knowledge

<page 124>
Of Sir J O H N RERESBV.
knowledge used the City of Tork as seurvily as it was possible for J^85.
him to use the City of London. For at Tork he put out five Al-
dermen tho' he had solemnly engaged to keep them in, and that,
without so much as allowing them to be heard as to the Crimes
they stood accused of. The Lord Mayor said the very same had
been frequently practised in London, and that many had been
turned out of their Employments without so much as being suf-
fered to make their Defence. I short, I was at the very same
Time told by one of the Lieutenancy of the City, That mould
the Duke of Monmouth give a Blow to the King's Forces, it was
much to be seared there would be an Insurrection in London.
This Day, both Houses attended the King in the House of July.
Lords, and his Majesty having parsed five Bills, ordered the
House to be adjourned to the 4th of August, which was done ac-
cordingly. And now the Fears of those who were Friends to the
Government, added to the Hopes of those who were averse to it.
The Duke of Monmouttis Army was swelled to a Body of 1200a
Foot, and 1500 Horse, which moved from Place to Place, in the
hilly and inclosed Country of the West, where tho' the King's
Army kept pretty close in with them, they could not offer to
give Battle. The King's Army, that was nearest to Monmouth, was
commanded by Lord Fever/ham, and did not consist of above 3000
Foot, and 500 Horse, but then they were mostly of the Guards.
In a Day or two the King had Advice, that Monmouth had got
into Br'tdgeuoater, that he intended to fortisie himself there whilst
he refreshed his Army, and that Lord Feverjham was close after
him.
The Duke of Monmouth being then informed, That Lord Fe- 6'
ver/ham lay incamped at not above three Miles from Bridg<waterf
. that his Army was as yet but small, but that he was in Expecta-
tion of being reinforced by three English, and three Scotch Regi-
ments from Holland, and that a Body of Horse was on its March
from London to the fame Purpose j he steals out about One in the
Morning, with his whole Army, and moves towards the Royal
Camp, and that with such silence and good order, That the King's


<page 125>
120 MEMOIRS
- i62$. People knew nothing of the Approach 'till alarmed by the Fire os
one of their out Sentries. The Duke of Monmouth marched at the
Head of the Foot, and Lord Grey led up the Horse, and they
brought their Cannon to play within Pistol shot. On the other
Hand, our People got into order as fast, and received them as well
as could be expected, but were so overpowered by Numbers,
that 'till Lord Grey went off" with the Horle, which were frightned
at the Cannon, we were in very imminent Danger of losing the
Day: But for the Duke of Monmouth, he stood 'till a great Part
of his Foot was cut to Pieces, and then made off - but so narrowly
that his Coat, his Papers, and his Secretary were taken. Fergu-
sonthat Arch-presbyterian Priest and Rebel, was killed, and
Lord Grey was taken in disguise, three Days afterwards.
The Duke of Monmouth had, from the very Beginning of this
desperate Attempt, behaved with the Conduct of a great Captain,
as was allowed even by the King, who, in my hearing, said he
had not made one false Step. And thus was this great Storm
which gathered from a small Cloud, the Number that landed
with the Duke not exceeding 150, thus T say, was this great
Storm fortunately not to say surprizingly allayed. Had Monmouth
obtained a Victory, it was much to be feared, That the diflaf-
fected would have risen in such Numbers, in the several Parts of
July 9. Englandy as to have made the Crown precarious. But to complete
the King's good Fortune, came News, That the Duke himself
had been taken in Disguise in a Wood, by a Parcel of Country
Fellows who were in quest of him, together with one Count Horn,
who being first discovered in a BuCh, told them the Duke himself
was not far off; and the same Day the Duchess of Monmouth and
her two Sons were lent to the Tower. The Duke, when he was
taken, was almost spent, not having been in a Bed for three
Weeks ; he was quite unprovided with Arms, nor made any De-
fence, being destitute of every thing but a Watch he had in his
Pocket, and about three hundred Pounds in Gold, which was
all the Money he had left. His Majesty, and no wonder, was ex-
tremely well pleased at this News; but he was of a Temper lo
very

<page 126>
Os Sir J o h N Reresb y. iai
very equal, that he never appeared transported upon any Occa- I<S8J-
lion; and sorely he never could have a greater Reason for it than
now, that he saw the Rebellion plucked up by the very Roots,
and himself firmer seated on the Throne, by the Endeavours that
had been used to shake him out of it.
When his Grace came to Town, the King, at his own Request-,
law him at fVhitehall, where he expressed some Detestation of
his Attempt; threw the Blame on the Earl of Argyle, and Fer-
guson, who had stirred him up to it; disclaimed all Title to the
Crown,and laid he was put upon assuming the Stile of King,with
a view that the Quality would the sooner come in to him; all
this I heard the King say, but what he farther confessed, was not
then known. He concluded with a Desire of Pardon, and, on
his Knees, begged his Life of the King; and for the same, he,
by Letters, solicited the two Queens, 'till his Head was at five
Blows severed from his Body, on Tower-hill. When he came to
suffer, he submitted with great Unconcern, renounced all Pretence
to the Crown, and unkindly, to say no worse, disowned his
Duchess, who to him, who had nothing of his own, had brought
a Fortune of ten thousand Pounds a Year; saying she was given
to him as his Wife in the Days of his Minority, but that the
Wife of his own Choice, was the Lady Henrietta WenPwortb,
the only Daughter and Heiress of the Earl of Cleveland, whom
he had debauched; with whom he confessed he had lived ac-
cording to the Rules of his own Convenience, tho' not accord-
ing to the Laws of the Land, for two Years past. He then laid
he was sorry for the Effusion of Blood he had caused, but,
throughout his whole Discourse, made no mention of a Rebellion;
and out of his Pocket were taken Books, in his own hand Wri-
ting, containing Charms or Spells to open the Doors of a Pri-
son, to obviate the Danger of being wounded in Battle, toge-
ther with Songs, and Prayers j such was the latter End of the
. Duke of Monmouth.
Towards the Close of this Month, July, 1 returned to my
Government, where nothing occurring of a Nature general enough
R^ to

<page 127>
122 MEMOIRS
1685. to be worthy of public Notice, I shall hurry on to the End of
October, when we had the bad News, That my Lord Marquise
of Halifax, Lord President of the Privy Council, was fallen
into Disgrace with the King, and quite dismissed from the
Board j he had ever been a true and kind Patron to me j but
what was more, he was a Man of great Integrity and most happy
Talents, which made it seared the Public might seel the want
os him as sensibly as his Friends; but it being the King's Plea-
lure, it became all good Subjects to submit to it: But two or
three Days afterwards, being with the Archbishop of Tork and
Sir Henry Gooderhk, they told me, It was true the King had
laid aside riæLord President, but that he had assigned no Cause
for it j and expressed some jealousy, That the King would offer
at something this Session, in savour of Popery.
Nov. 9. And now the Term of the last Adjournment being elapsed, I
repaired to London j where I found the House of Commons had
deferred the Consideration of the King's Speech, on the Day of
their Meeting, which was the 9th, to the ijth Instant. The
The House of Lords had voted their Thanks j but the Commons
being moved to the same, made head against it, as we have hinted.
The King in this Speech told the Houses He was glad to meet
them in better times than when he parted with them j that the
Rebellion was now perfectly quashed; but that, however, the
Government might be in like Manner attempted for the future,
it being experienced, that the Militia of the Kingdon was of no
Use; that therefore as the Standing Force was but small, he had
raised it to a more considerable Number, which would be an ad-
ditional Charge upon him, for the time to come; that, in considera-
tion thereof, he desired a proportionable Aid: That it was true
There were seme popish Officers in this Army, but that he hoped
it would make no Difference between him and his Parliament 'y
for that tho' they were not -qualified by Law, they were such as
had shewn their Principles by their Loyalty; and that having
had Experience of this, he would not expose them to Shame by
parting with them, or to that Effect; and that, in fine, he would
venture his Life for the true Interest of the Nation. The

<page 128>
O/ S'/> J O H N R E R E S B Y. 12$
The 13th Instant being come, the Commons voted a Supply ****.
to his Majesty, for his present Occasions; but would neither ipe- Nov' r3.
cify the Quantum, nor the particular Use it was designed for.
Upon this a long Debate arose, and the Question being put, they
divided, the No's being 250, and the Ay's 125. They after-
wards, the fame Day, came to a Division upon the Question,
Whether that House should first proceed upon the Supply to the
King, or upon the second Paragraph of his Majesty's Speech,
concerning the popish Officers in the Army j and it was carryed
for postponing the Supply, by one Voice only; in which Divi-
sion, the King was told That several of his Servants, and Officers
of the Army, that were of the House, were against him. The
next Day, I waited on the King to kiis his Hand, and immedi- \/L
ately he asked me, When I came to Town? I told him, the
Night before: He said, He was sorry I had not been here sooner^
for that if I had, he should not have lost the Day before, for one
single Vote, which he (aid was hard,, and the more ib because it
was owing to his own Officers; which I took to be an oblique Piece of
Admonition to me. This same Day, the second Part of the)
King's Speech was taken into Consideration, and the Result was,
That an Address should be drawn up and presented to his Maje-
sty, to represent to him, that the Reception of Popish Recusants
into the Army was quite contrary to Law, and to desire that they
might be removed from their Posts. A Committee was appointed
for this Purpose, and likewise to frame a Bill for the indemnify-
ing the said Officers, in Consideration that they had entered into
the Service at a Time of such imminent Danger. Waiting this
Day on Lord Halifax, he told me the Particulars of his Dismission:
he laid he might have continued with greater Advantages than ever,
if he could but in Conscience have concurred in some Things
which he saw in Embryo; that the King parted with him with,
seeming: Kindnels, but would assign no Cause for it, and that he
would name No-body into his Place. This Lord being generally
esteemed a wise Man, and an excellent Subject, the Removal of
him, especially in almost the infancy of a Parliament, was Matter
R 2 of

<page 129>
124 MEMOIRS
^8y. os Astonishment to great Numbers, and injected a Fear, That a
Change of Councils was in Consequence to ensue a Change of
Councellors.
Nov. ip. Now the Debate, concerning the Aid to be granted to his Ma-
jesty came on. The Motion was at first for two hundred thou-
sand Pounds, and then four hundred thousand Pounds, on the
Part of the Country; while those of the Court insisted on
Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds, for the Payment of the
new raised Forces, for a Term of five Years to come. But the
House would give no Ear to such an Application of the Money
they might give, lest it should prove a Foundation for the Support
os a Standing Army j they rather chose it should be given to the
King to do with it as he would j and at length seven hundred
thouland Pounds was proposed, and granted. In the Course ofthis
Debate, the Usefulness of a Standing Army, especially 'till the Fer-
ment of the Rebellion was quite settled, was much insisted on by
the one Side; while the other exposed the Danger of it, the In-
solence of the Soldiery, the ill Example they were os to the
Country, and the heavy Burthen of Free Quarters: But there
was a Compromiilion or all this, by the Houles declaring its In-
tention to make the Militia of more Use for the Time to come,
and 'till then it was agreed on, as a Thing necesiary, that the
Army should be kept on Foot.
The Address against Popish Officers being prepared, was this
Day read, and agreed to; but a Debate arose, Whether the Con-
currence of the Lords should be desired or not: The Courtiers
were against it, that the King might have the better Excuse not
to comply with it, and the Country Gentlemen were, for that
Reason, for enforcing it the more ; and upon this Occasion I di-
vided with the Country, but we lost it by some forty Voices. The
next Day we considered of the Ways and Means for raising the
seven hundred thousand Pounds we had granted, and the same
Day we went in a Body, with our Address to the King, who had
appointed that to be the Time for his receiving of it: But his
Answer was, That he did not expect such an Address from such
a House

<page 130>
Of Sir J o h n Reresby.
a House of Commons, especially as he had so lately offered to If85.
our Consideration the great Advantages of an Union between him
and us, the good Effects of which had been already experienced:
"I had said he, Reason to hope the Reputation God has blessed
"me with in the World, might have created and confirmed in you,
"a greater Confidence of me, and of all I say to you: But how-
"ever you, on your Part, proceed, I, on mine, shall be steady
"to all the Promises I have made, and be very just to my Word
given in every one of my Speeches;" this he uttered with great
Warmth.
The House, the next Day, consulted on the Means to make Nvo. i&
the Militia of more effectual Service for the suture, but the De-
bate was adjourned to the 21st Instant. At the fame time it was
moved by Mr. IVharton, eldest Son to the Lord IVharton, That
a Day might be appointed for the Consideration of the King's
Answer to our Address; which was seconded by Mr. Cook, of
Derbyshire, a Gentleman of three thousand Pounds per Annum,
who was so warm as, upon this Occasion, to say, fVe were all
Englishmen, and that he hoped we Jhould not be frighted from our
Duty, by a few high Words: But the House resented this as art
Expression of great Indecency, and, in great Anger, sending their
Member to the Tower, deferred the Business fne Die.
The next Day, the Lords began to consider that Part of his
Majesty's Speech, relating to Popish Officers, and grew very warm
in their Debate, which was adjourned to the 2,3 d Instant. The
King hapned to be present, as he was generally constant in the
House of Lords, and was much concerned at the Freedom which
they said was used upon this Subject. And, in truth, it gave
great Dislatissaction, that the Law in this Point particularly,
should be thus invaded and set at nought; and the very best of the
King's Friends, as well as his Officers whether Civil or Militaryr
except such as were popishly inclined, were strangely alarmed
thereat, and expressed themselves with great Freedom whenever
it hapned to be the Topic of their Discourse.
In

<page 131>
126 MEMOIRS
1685. In the midst of this, the King, in the, usual State, comes and,
Nov. 20. 1 ^ Lor(j Chancellor, acquaints both Houses, That for certain
weighty Reasons, his Majesty thought fit to prorogue this Parlia-
ment until the 10th of February next, and that it was prorogued
accordingly. This gave Birth to many Conjectures: Some said
the King had so good a Revenue, and was so good a Manager,
that he had it in his Power to subsist both his Fleet, and his
Army without more Money; and that therefore he would
scarce have Occasion for any more Parliaments; that this seemed
the more likely as he had, by this Prorogation, refused the Sum of
seven hundred thousand Pounds, which the Commons were pre-
paring to give him: While others believed the King would cer-
tainly meet us again, at the Term prefixed, and that, in the. mean
Time, he would find out some Expedient to latisfy the Houses as to
the only Article they complained of, meaning the Affair of the
Popish Officers; which though it was said, might be shrewdly
doubted, seeing that some of the Gentlemen, who had signalized
themselves for the Address, were forbidden the King's Presence,
which was "the Case of Mr. Fox, Paymaster to the Army, Lieu-
tenant Colonel T>arcyy Major JVebby and others we need not
mention.
To pass over Lord Brandon s Trial and Condemnation, for the
concern he had had with the Duke of Monmouth, we must now
observe, That the Popish Party behaved with great Insolence \
which was the more remarked, as the King of France was now in
the Height of Persecuting his Protestant Subjects, who many of
them fled as' they could, poor and naked 5 being stripped of all
they had. This so great and cruel an Instance of the Spirit that,
for the most Part, possesses those of this delusive Persuasion, was
now the Talk of all thinking People, who began to be of Opi-
nion, that every thing just and lawful, ought to-be done to
obviate the Growth, and abate the present Pride of the Papists
Dec. z. in our Dominions. But the King, as if he had a Mind to Ihew
us his Disposition for Clemency, this Day declared he had re-
prieved the Lord Brandon, who was to have been executed three
Days

<page 132>
Os Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 127
Days afterwards; which, it must be owned, was a great Act 1685-
of Mercy in his Majesty, this Lord having been pardoned in the
late Reign, for breaking a Boy's Neck, when he was in his Cups,
of which being convicted, he was condemned as guilty of
Murther.
At this time the Favourites at Court, began to be at Strife
with each other • the Lord Sunderland was made President of the
Council, and continued Secretary of State; his Lordstiip having
artfully insinuated to the Queen ( he had then a Misunderstanding
with the Treasurer) That the Friends and Relations of the King's
first Wife, as Rochester, Clarendon, Dartmouth, and others, were
in greatest Favour, and in possession of the best Places, while her
Friends, tho' she was Queen Consort, were but slenderly provided
for • and her Friends being reckoned to be, Lord Sunderland, the
Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Churchill, they began to play
their private Batteries against each other,
I, for my Part, had seen Ib many Changes backwards and for-
wards, so many of both great and small removed and shifted
about, that I must confess the Thoughts thereof began to damp
the Flight of my Ambition; and made me conclude, There was
a Time when every sober Man would chuse to retire, and be
content with what he had, rather than venture his Substance and
Conscience upon the uncertain Hazard of augmenting his Wealth -y
not that I found the King any way altered with regard to my-
self, or that I despaired of keeping my ground, tho' my great
and good Friend was out j on the contrary, could I but have
strained to the pitch some did, I am persuaded I had a fairer
Opportunity of raising myself than ever I had; but I preferred a
certain Safety to an uncertain Grandeur.
But Things now, with regard to thole who enjoyed any Posts
under the Government, soemed to be carried to a very extraor-
dinary Length; for Fox, the Paymaster of the Army, whose em-
ploy was valued at ten thousand Pounds per Ænum, and Colonel
John Darcjy, Grandchild and Heir to the Earl of Holdernessy
having offended the King by their Votes in the lower House, and
having

<page 133>
128 MEMOIRS
168j. having been thereupon forbidden the King's Presence, were now
wholly laid aside; and it was now iaid that in Council it had
been agreed, That all Persons, who for the future, offended in
- the fame Way, should be served in the fame Manner, which
startled a Number of People. And now it was observed, that
the Lord Treasurer was more lowly and obliging than usual,
whence it was conjectured that the Odds were against him, and
as much was confessed by some even of his Friends; his Lord-
ihip now setting up for the Protestant Interest, and the Queen
and her Friends for the Popisti.
Besides the Gentlemen I have already named, there were seve-
ral other Members dismissed from their Imployments, for not
voting as the King expected they should, and particularly such as
were Officers in the Army, who being not only so, but also great
and very eminent for their Families and Services to the Crown,
it was Matter of great wonder to every Body. But what surprised
me as much as any Thing was to hear, from the Archbishop of
Tork, That Lord Marquils of Halifax was coming again into
play; an agreeable Surprise this, especially as the Times seemed
to turn; but the very next Day, I had the Mortification to under-
stand, from the Marquis's own Mouth, that there was no Man-
ner of Foundation for the Report. The Duke of Albemarle now
told me several Things concerning the State of Affairs, which
astonished me very much. Gentlemen were now in a most un-
precedented Manner aflaulted in the very Streets \ one had a Powder
thrown into his Eyes, which deprived him of Sight; another had
his Throat cut by two Men, tho' neither of these Gentlemen had
given the least visible Provocation or Offence to the Aggressors;
and the Duke of Albemarle was met by a Gentleman who
threatned him as his Grace was going along in a Chair. And now
it was whispered, That the King would still farther prorogue the
Parliament 'till May • which certainly was the wisest Course he
had, at this Time, to take, if he could not resolve to give some
proper Satisfaction to the Houses, with regard to the Popisti Offi -
cers • but that this was far from his Thoughts, and quite contrary to
his

<page 134>
CyS/irJOHNRERESBY. 10,9
his Intention, appeared by a late Admission of several others of i$8f
that Superstition into Military Posts. In short, the King unhap-
pily persisting in his own way, discharged his Anger against the
Bishop of London, a most worthy Prelate, Brother to the late Earl
of Northampton, putting him away from the Council Board, on
Account of a Speech he had, the last Sessions, made in the House
of Lords, concerning the Popish Officers; tho' as I was told, by
the Archbissiop of Tork, it was spoken with all the Deference and
Respect imaginable. This decent Speech was by some said to be
the cause of his Lordship's Dismission ; but others attributed it to
his Industry in keeping the Princess of Denmark within the Pale
of the Protestant Church, in Opposition to some extraordinary
Endeavours to get her over to that of the Church of Rome.
My Lord Delamere was, this Day, tryed by a particular Com- Jan. 1
mission, directed to the Lord High Steward, and thirty other
Peers. The Crime laid to his Charge was conspiring to raise a
Rebellion, and to subvert the Government, in Conjunction with
the Duke of Monmouth, and other false Traitors, and so on. I
hapned to sit near the King during the whole Tryal; but the
only positive Evidence against his Lordssiip was one Saxton, an
obscure Fellow, who swore that about the Time of the Duke os
MonmoutFs landing, he was recommended by the Lord Brandon,
to the Lord Delamere, and discoursed with him at his House in
Chejhire, upon the 4th of June, Sir Robert Cotton, and another
Gentleman being present j that their Conversation was about
Assistance to be given to the said Duke, and that his Lordship
ihould say, He was engaged to raise 10000 Men in his Cause, but
that he could not effect it so soon as he had promised, because of
a present want he was under of Money. What the other Wit -
nesses had to alledge, was all Circumstance and Hearsay: Some
said the Duke os Monmouth had told them, He depended upon
help from Lord Macclesjleld, Lord Brandon, and Lord Delamere,
and that they would be ready to rise in Chejhire, as soon as he
landed: Others swore that the Duke had written and sent Mefc
sages to his Friends in London, to give Notice to the Lords to
S , be

<page 135>
i3o MEMOIRS
be ready, and that he was preparing for England. In the Course
of this Tryal, a Point of Law never before heard of, was started,
by the Lord High Steward, and the Solicitor General, namely,
That tho' there were but one positive Evidence, in a Case of High
Treason, if the rest, tho' but circumstantial, concurred therewith,
it was sufficient to find a Prisoner guilty; for Example, supposing
one Man should hear another say he intended to kill the King,
upon such a Day, and that another swears he saw the Party lie
in wait to prosecute his Intention, the Evidence is sufficient.
But whatever there might be in this Law, it was by no Means
applicable to the Prisoner j for he most convincingly disproved the
main Evidence, Saxton, and, by the clearest Testimony, made it
appear, That neither the two Gentlemen nor himself were upon
the Spot upon the 4th of June; that two of them were then
actually in London, and the other sixteen Miles off.: He urged
also, That if the Man had sworn nothing but truth against him,
he could be no legal Witness, being himself a Prisoner, and taken
in Rebellion, when Monmouth was routed, and consequently un-
der a Temptation to swear against him, to save his own Life;
upon the whole he was acquitted, every one of the Peers declar-
ing him not guilty. There were those who condemned the Lawyers
who had advised the King to bring a Peer to Tryal upon so
slender a Foundation; while others observed, That as the King
had committed him to Prison, it was but fit he should be brought
to a public Tryal, lest it should be said he had been detained
when nothing appeared against him. But when all was over, I
plainly saw the King was in great Rage with Saxton, and the
next Day he declared, He should be first convicted for Perjury,
and then hanged for High Treason.
Jarr. 18. A sew Days afterwards, I dined with the Lord Chancellor,
where the Lord Mayor of London was a Guest, and some other
Gentlemen. His Lordship having, according to custom, drank
deep at Dinner, called for one Mount forty a Gentleman of his, who
had been a Comedian, an excellent Mimic; and to divert the
Company, as he was pleased to term it, he made him plead before
him.

<page 136>
Qf&VJoHN Reresby.
him in a feigned Cause, during which he aped all the great
Lawyers of the Age, in their tone of Voice, and in their Action
and Gesture of Body, to the very great Ridicule not only of the
Lawyers, but of the Law itself, which, to me, did not seem al-
together so prudent in a Man of his lofty Station in the Law;
diverting it certainly was, but prudent in the Lord High Chan-
cellor, I shall never think it; but let us step to the King.
It was now known, That Mrs. Sidkjy, who had been the King's
Mistress, and had several Children by him, when Duke of Torky
but whom he had deserted for a while when he came to theX
Crown, was as much in his favour as ever; for he created her
Countess of Donhefter, and visited her frequently, which gave
the Queen a great deal of Uneasiness j but there was no help for
it j 'till at length her Majesty's Party and Priests did so impor-
tune the King, and se pressingly remonstrate to him the Sin of
this Amour, and what was worse the Disparagement it would
throw on their Religion, that it was reported he would abandon i
his Mistress, and that he had sent her Word, either to retire
into France, or to expect to have her Pension of four thousand
Pounds a Year withdrawn.
To resume the Lord Chancellor once again, he had now like Feb. p.
to have died of a Fit of the Stone, which he virtuously brought
upon himself by a furious Debauch of Wine, at Mr. Alderman
DuncomVs; where he, the Lord Treasurer, and others drank
themselves into that Height of Frenzy, that, among Friends, it
was whispered They had stripped into their Shirts, and that, had
not an Accident prevented them, They had got up on a Sign-
post, to drink the King's Health; which was the Subject of .
much Derision, to say no worse.
The Term, the Parliament was prorogued to, being expired, I0.
the Members of the House of Commons, and the Lords, met in
their respective Places. The Commons that appeared were to.
the Number of about 150; and being summoned, by the Black
Rod, to appear in the House of Lords, a Commission directed to
the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and others, impowering
S 2 them,
1

<page 137>
i32 MEMOIRS
1685. them, or any of them, to prorogue the Parliament 'till the 10th
of May next, was read, and the Parliament was prorogued ac-
cordingly.
Though it could not be as yet said, That the King had made
any notable Invasion on the Rights of the Church of England, he
recurred to all the Methods he could contrive and practice for the
Increase of his own; by putting more Papists into Office in this
Kingdom, but especially in Ireland; by causing or at least al-
lowing of Popish Books to be printed, and fold, and cried about
# publickly; by publishing some Popish Papers found in the late
^/King's Closet; by a Declaration that his late Majesty died a
Papist, and in what Manner; by an Account of the Conversion
of the late Duchess of Tork, together with her Reasons for the
fame, as written by herself; by a Letter or Order to the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, to direct: the Clergy of his Province to
preach a good Life, but never to meddle with Controversies in
, their Sermons; by sending the Lord Caftlemain upon a solemn
Embassy to the Pope, and by much more of the fame Nature and
Tendency, which made it expected that more would infallibly
follow.
i<58<J. Accordingly this Day, being the first of the Term, a great
Jpril 92. change was made among the Judges in JVeftminfter-hall: There
was a new Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and another
new Judge of the same Bench ; there was a new Chief Baron j in
fine, four new Judges of the several Courts. This made a consi-
derable Noise, as the Gentlemen now displaced, were of great
Learning and Loyalty, and whose only Crime had been, They
would not give their Opinions, as several of their Brethren had
done, That the King by his Prerogative might dispense with the
Test required of Roman Catholics. The next Day I was in-
formed by Mr. Jones, Son to the Chief Justice of that Name,
lately turned out, that his Father, upon his Disiniffion, observed
to the King, That he was by no Means sorry he was laid aside,
old and worn out as he was in his Service, but concerned, That
his Majesty should expect such a Construction of the Law from
him,

<page 138>
Of Sir J o h n R e r e s b y. 133
him, as he could not honestly give; and that none but indigent,
ignorant, or ambitious Men would give their Judgment as he ex-
pected \ and that to this his Majesty made Answer, It was neces-
sary his Judges mould be all of one Mind. He told me farther,
that Sir Robert Sawyer, the Attorney General, had been directed
by the King, to draw up a Warrant, by virtue of his Preroga-
tive, to invest a Priest of the Church of Rome with a Benefice,
and to confirm one Walker, head of a House in Oxford, and some
Fellows of the same, who had erred over to the papal Commu-
nion, by a Non obfiante: That the Attorney said This would
not be against one Statute only, but against all the Laws since I
the Days of Elizabeth; that he therefore durst not do it, and ^
desired the King to weigh the Matter a little with himself; for
that it struck at the very Root of the Protestant Church, quite
contrary to his Majesty's late gracious Promises j in short, that the
Attorney farther said, He doubted not but as soon as another could
be found to do the Work, he should lose his Place j such a Slave
was the King to the Priesthood of Rome. »
But whatever the Attorney at present expected, the Solicitor M*t 5*
Finch, was now turned out, and another, one P&wis, appointed
in his stead, who was ready and willing to do what the other re-
fused, which was, to draw up a Warrant for confirming of Walker,
in his Office of Head of Univerjity College in Oxford, and three
Fellows of the seme \ and another in Behalf of the Parson of Put-
ney, which afterwards passed the Great Seal, tho' the Parties
were Papists as strong as could be. And to complete, as it were,
all, most of the Protestant Officers in the Army in Ireland, were
removed and Papists substituted in their stead.
The Term of Prorogation being elapsed, it was by Commission
continued to the 2 2d of November following. The King said this
Morning, in his Bedchamber, That many of the Politicians of
the House of Commorfs were come up, in fear he mould surprize
them with doing of Business, but that he would not do by them, as
they had been wont to do with the Crown; a very extraordinary
Speech. But three Days afterwards, taking my Leave of Lord
Dover,

<page 139>
i34 MEMOIRS
i6Z6. Dover, late Henry Jertnln Esq; a Papist: and great Favourite, he
told me the Parliament would certainly meet at the time last
limited, and that is they would not comply with the King, they
were to look to the Issue. In short, the King having lately got him
a Jesuit for his Confessor, drove on at a great Rate, and seemed
by far more intent than before upon promoting and spreading his
June ii. own Religion. In a Word, he was now resolved to protect: those
of his own implicit Faith at all adventures, a notable Instance of
which was now exhibited in the Case of Sir Edward Hales, a
profest Papist, to whom the King having given a Regiment of
Foot, he was, this Term, sued upon the Statute, for five hundred
Pounds, he keeping his Employment without the Qualification
required. Upon which Occasion it was agreed by all the Judges,
Baron Street excepted, That the King had a Power to dispense
with all penal Statutes, and that his Majesty enjoying alone the
Power, was the only Judge in the Case; and so Sir Edward plead-
ing the King's Pardon, obtained the better of the Prosecution;
an Event which gave great Surprise, and occasioned much Dis.
course the whole Kingdom over.
Offo. 15. Notwithstanding what had been so confidently assured me con-
cerning the Sitting of Parliament, a Proclamation was at this
time issued out for the still farther Prorogation of it from the zzd
of November to the 14th of the February following. After this,
the King continued his Course of displacing Protestants in favour
of their Enemies the Papists, and I expected when it was to be
my turn; for I had frequent alarms of that Sort; every Post
brought us Account of Officers both Civil and Military deprived
of Employment; of some who resigned their Commissions and
Places; but the most general Accounts were of Persons actually
discarded, and that Papists, were, for the most Part, put in to
succeed them. Lord Clarendon, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, was
recalled, and Mr. Talbot, a rigid Irish Papist, a little before
created Earl of Tyrconnel, sent over in his Room; which made
so dreadful an Impression upon many Protestants of that King-
dom, that they either left or sold their Estates, as they could,
and

<page 140>
Os Sir J o H n Reresbt. 135
and came over into England. Mr. Savitte, Vice-chamberlain to i<58<5.
the King, and who had been of his Bedchamber when Duke of
Torky and since then Embassador in France, was put out of all
Employment.
Leaving the public Affairs, for a while, at this untoward pass, March
I would venture to take Notice of a private Occurrence which
made some Noise at Tork. The Assizes being there held,n an
old Woman was condemned for a Witch. Those who were
more credulous in Points of this Nature than myself, conceived
the Evidence to be very strong against her. The Boy she was
said to have bewitched, fell down on a sudden, before all the
Court, when he law her, and would then as suddenly return to
himself again, and very distinctly relate the several Injuries me
had done him; But in all this it was observed, the Boy was free
from any Distortion j that he did not foam at the Mouth, and
that his Fits did not leave him gradually but all at once ; so that,,
upon the whole, the Judge thought it proper to reprieve her;
in which he seemed to act the Part of a Wise-Man. But tho*
such is my own private Opinion, I cannot help continuing my
Story: One of my Soldiers being upon Guard about Eleven in
the Night, at the Gate of Clifford Tower, the very Night after
the Witch was arraigned, he heard a great Noise at the Castle,
and going to the Porch, he there saw a Scroll of Paper creep from
under the Door, which as he imagined, by Moonshine, turned
first into the Shape of a Monkey, and thence assumed the Form
of a Turkey Cock, which passed to and fro by him. Surprised at
this, he went to the Prison, and called the Under-keeper, who-
came and saw the Scroll dance up and down and creep under the
Door, where there was scarce an Opening of the Thickness of an
half Crown. This extraordinary Story I had from the Mouth of
both the one and the other: And now leave it to be believed or
disbelieved as the Reader may be inclined this way or that.
It is fit we observe, That the Way of dealing with Men,,
who proposed any Business to themselves in the Government, and
especially the Members of both Houses of Parliament, that were
in?

<page 141>
136 MEMOIRS
1686. in Possession of Places, and near the King, was thus: His Ma-
jesty took them aside, and told them The Test Act was made
in the Height of Faction, not so much in prejudice to the Roman
Catholics in general, as to himself in particular, and to obviate his
rightful Accession ; that while that, and the Penal Laws remained
in Force, no Soul of that Persuasion could be safe; that it was
against all municipal Law, for Free-born Subjects to be ex-
cluded the Service of their Prince, or for a Prince to be restrained
from employing such Subjects as he thought for his Service; and
that therefore he hoped they would be so loyal as not to refuse
him their Voices for annulling such unreasonable Laws. Every
Man that persisted in a Refusal to comply with this Suggestion
was sure to be outed.
The Time for the Meeting of the Parliament now drawing near,
and several of the Members neglecting to repair to London; the
King ordered the Judges, in their several Circuits, to feel the
Pulses of the Men; in consequence of which I was, to my great
surprise, accosted at Tork by the Judge, who told me, he had
orders to talk with me upon the Subject. I asked him If his Ma-
jesty had made particular Mention of my Name j to which re-
, plying, That he had only received a general Order from the King,
to sound the Inclinations of the several Gentlemen who fat in
Parliament, and that he had had a particular Instruction from the
Chancellor only, as to myself by Name; I desired time to consi-
der of it, and the next Morning returned for Answer, That I per-
ceived a Denial would be construed into Disloyalty; That I had
so lately waited on the King, and given such assurance of my In-
tegrity, that I could not apprehend his Majesty could harbour
any Doubt as to me, and the rather as he had not been pleased
to make Use of my Name; That I could not conceive myself
obliged to declare myself to any body else: But that if his Ma-
jesty lhould think fit to lay any thing to me farther than he had
already, when I had the Honour of waiting on him next, which I
intended mould be speedily, I would so consult my Loyalty and
my Conscience, as to give him all the Satisfaction in my power:

<page 142>
Of Sir J o h n R e r e s b t.'' 137
The Judge told me he would make Report of what I had said, and
did not seem to be very forward in pressing a Complyance '9 he
had his Orders, and he obeyed them. I deemed this to be the
most prudent Reply I could at this time make; for had I an-
swered in the Affirmative, I might have incurred the Displeasure and
Censure of the greatest Part of the Nation; if in the Negative,
I mould have utterly disobliged the King; a Caution the more
Necessity to be taken, as there was no likelihood there would
be any Meeting of Parliament, to control him in his Con-
duct. However I believe that in all Cases of this Nature it is
safest to unbosom ones self to the Prince in Person, and as much as
possible avoid the Danger that may arise from the Treachery, the
Prejudice, or the Ignorance of a Reporter.
In Consequence of this Examination of the Members, a Num-
ber of Vacancies ensued, and among others that were deprived,
was Herbert, the Vice-Admiral of England, and Master of the
Robes, he, in those Days, enjoying Places to the Value of three
thousand Pounds a Year. The King having threatned, and put
his threats in Execution, and also made Use of the most plausible
Persuasions, to draw the Majority of Parliament into his own
Way of Thinking, as to the Test and Penal Laws, and all to no
sort of Purpose, cared not to see them assembled at the Time
seemingly appointed j and therefore, this Day, declared in Mar. 18.
Council, That for divers weighty Considerations the Parliament
stood prorogued to the a ad of the November following. His
Majesty,upon the same Occasion declared,That it having been found
impracticable to effect an Uniformity in Religion, tho' it had been
the great Endeavour of four of his Predecessors successively,
assisted as much as possible by their Parliament; and that such
Attempts having been experienced to be highly prejudicial to the
Kingdom, witness the Fatality of the Rebellion in his Father's
time; He was now determined to issue out a Declaration, in
Favour of all Sorts of Diflenters, that they might enjoy the free
Practice of their own Religion: Hoping \t might contribute to
the general Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, the Increase of the
T , People,

<page 143>
138 *M E M O I R S
i68d. People, and the Advancement of Trade. But whatever the Rea-
sons alledged were, It appeared to most Men, that a deep De-
sign was laid to sap the Foundations of the Church of Englandy
nor could her Sons but dread some extraordinary Shocks • tho'
some there were who apprehending no very extraordinary Conse-
quence of these Machinations, believed such a Toleration might
be of public Emolument, if considered in a political View j which
was, by much the most specious Side of the Building, which shall
close up this Year.
1787. At length the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience made its
J^nl 7. Appearance with us in the North; gilded over with the taking
Pretence of Tenderneis, on the Part of his Majesty, towards all
his Subjects whatsoever; containing an Invitation to all Strangers
of every Sect to come among us; pretending a farther Improve-
ment of our Trade, and promising Protection to the Bishops and
Ministers of the Church of Y^nghndy in their Rights, Privileges,
and Immunities, as also the free and undisturbed Exercise of their
Religion in all their Churches. But all this was too well under-
stood to be intended to divide the Protestant Churches, Divide £sp
Impera, that so the Papists might with the more Ease possess them-
, selves of the highest Place ; which the Presbyterians or Calvinists,
who had, most of them, began to conform, seemed to be well
aware of j and therefore continued to resort to our Churches,
tho' the Anabaptists, Quakers, and Independants thought it
worth their while to return their Addresses of Thanks and Ac-
knowledgment. Elated, seemingly, with this, the King goes on in
his old Course of displacing Gentlemen that had Posts, but par-
ticularly such as were of the Parliament, and obstinate enough to
withstand his Wishes; and now the Parliament being prorogued
it was not thought worth the Trouble to inquire which way any
Body stood inclined, so that the late Question concerning the
Test and Penal Laws was dropped, or at least suspended. All
this Inequality of Usage wrought but upon few Protestants*either
of Estate or Quality to change their Faith, little or not at all al-
lured by the Baits thrown in their Way, or terrified by the King's
Frowns

<page 144>
Qf£/>JoHN Reresby. 139
Frowns and implacable Displeasure: Honour therefore now was I<?87.
the grand Bulwark of our Religion, Gentlemen disdaining to
have thought they could sacrifice the Sweets of Conscience to the
mercenary Views of a Reward: In the midst of this, dies the
Duke of Buckingham, a Man once of vast Estate, and oftentimes
in high Favour with the late King, tho' never with the Present;
a Man of the most exquisite Wit of his time, the handsomest, and
best bred; but unfortunately given up to Pleasures, unsteady in
his Ways, and, in all Respects, an Enemy to himself.
While Addresses of Thanks were every Day presented to the Junt
King, on the Part of the various Denominations of Dissenters, and
from some even of the Church of England \ I had frequent alarms
that the Papists were in a Way of persuading the King, to grant
them the Mannor of Tork, as a Seminary for the Instructing of
Youth in the Principles of their Faith • and I this Day heard it 24.
was granted accordingly to one Lanofon, a Priest, for a Term of
thirty Years. Surprised at this, I wrote to the Lord Bellaflrs,
the Principal Commissioner os the Treasury, remonstrating, That
I had had it by my Commission of Governor, granted to myself
by the late King, and confirmed by this; that it was worth sixty
Pounds a Years to me, and that it had cost me above two hundred
Pounds in Repairs, since I had enjoyed it; and that as I had
been allowed nothing for this Expence, I desired it might be
either continued to me, or that his Majesty would be graciously
pleased to grant me such a Compensation in lieu thereof, and con-
sider me in my Disbursement, in such manner and proportion as
in his great Justice and Wisdom he should think fit. A sew
Days afterwards, a Proclamation came to hand, bearing Date the
2d of July, whereby the King dissolved the Parliament, and at
once stunned the main Body of the Nation. The next Day, the
Pope's Nuncio being to make his public Entry at Windsor, the
Duke of Somerset, one of the Lords of the Bedchamber in wait-
ing, refused attendance at that Solemnity; for which he was for-
bid the Court, and deprived of all his Places; the same fate befel
five of the six Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, for the very
T 2 self

<page 145>
MEMOIRS
self same Cause j so that every Hour things looked worse and
worse. A while after, I had a Letter from Lord Feverfham to
acquaintme that, according to my desire, he had spoken to the
King concerning the Mannor of Tork; but that he had found he
had promised it to Father Lawfon, for the Uses above specified;
that his Majesty told him, He did not know I lived in it, and
that if I had been at any Charge in Repairs I should be consi-
dered for the same; but added, for my present Comfort, That
was I not so good a Man as he took me to be, he would not have
kept a Governor at Tork so long as he had done: But I shortly
after had another Letter from the same Lord, to tell me that the
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury had so represented the Busi-
ness to the King, at Windsor, that no possitive Resolution was
as yet taken.
In the midst of the impending Dangers which seemed to
threaten us, there was a Nobleman, the Marquifs of Winchester,
who had by his Conduct persuaded some People to think him
mad, tho' he certainly acted upon Principles of great human Pru-
dence. This Gentleman passing through Torkshire, in his way
to London, I went to pay him a Visit. He had four Coaches and
an hundred Horses in his Retinue, and staid ten Days at a House
he borrowed in our Parts. His Custom was to dine at Six or
seven in the Evening, and his Meal always lasted 'till Six or
seven the next Morning; during which he sometimes drank;
sometimes he listened to Music; sometimes he fell into Dis-
course; sometimes he took Tobacco, and sometimes he ate his
Victuals; while the Company had free Choice to sit or rise, to
go or come, to sleep or not. The Dishes and Bottles were all the
Time before them on the Table; and when it was Morning he
would Hunt or Hawk, jf the Weather was fair ; if not, he would
Dance, go to Bed at Eleven, and repose himself 'till the Even-
ing. Notwithstanding this Irregularity he was a Man of good
Sense, and tho', as I just now said, some took him to be mad, it
is certain his Meaning was to keep himself out of the Way of
more serious Censure in these ticklish Days, and preserve his Estate,
which he took great Care of. The

<page 146>
Of Sir John Reresby. 141
The President of Magdalen College, in Oxford, being dead, ^87.
the King sent them his Mandamus, requiring them to chuse the SePt- 15
Bishop of that City in his stead; but they answered Locus plenus
est. The King taking Oxford in his Progress, and the Master
and Fellows of that College waiting on him, He told them the
People of the Church of England, had used him ill, that they
had behaved neither as Gentlemen or good Subjects, and ordered
them to go presently back to their Election and chuse the Bishop,
or he would let them feel how heavy a Hand a King had. They
went, but returned this Answer, That they were sorry they should
be so unfortunate as to fall under his Majesty's Displeasure j but
that they could not proceed to a new Choice without actual
Commission of wilful Perjury, and thereupon hoped he would ex-
cuse them. Now, in this Progress, it was an Observation gene-
rally made, That the King courted the Dissenters, and discoun-
tenanced the Church of England: For the Papists being by no
Means a Body of themselves numerous enough to cope with the
national Church, he thought to strengthen them by a Junction
with the Dissenters, whom he blinded with his Liberty of Con-
science, and with telling them that he desired a Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws, for their Ease and Security, as much as
in Behalf of the Papists.
A strange Look it had, That the very People, who had been
lately so indefatigably.busy to divest him ofhis Right, and even to
deprive him of Life, it having been, in one Parliament, attempted
to impeach him of High Treason, upon the Statute against a Re-
conciliation with the Church of Rome, I say it looked strange, that
these very Men should be preferred to those who had so often preser-
ved him out os their Hands, not in Parliament only, but in the Field
also y but it seems all Considerations are of no worth or validity
with a hearty Zeal for the Priesthood of Rome, *and that Oblivion
is so far from being Ingratitude, that it is highly to be com-
mended, a most salutary Expedient, when for the Advantage of
Mother Church.
In

<page 147>
i42 MEMOIRS
1^87. In pursuance of this very ill Doctrine, the King puts out seve-
Sepu 28. raj Aldermen, who had ever signalized themselves by their Fide-
lity and Loyalty, who had adhered to him with the greatest Con-
stancy in the very worst of Times, and what is worse, they were
Aldermen of the City of London; they were Members of the
Church of England, and Nonconformists filled their Places.
Doctor Hough, President of Magdalen College, is now put out, by
certain Visitors appointed by the King for that Purpose, for that
he was elected by the Statutes, in Contradiction to the King's
Mandamus \ but the Doctor stoutly refused to quit, 'till com-
pelled by Force, and then appealed from the Visitors to the King
in MPeflminfter-Hall,
N&v. j. At this time it was my turn to feel a Part of the Storm which
had hitherto blown over me, or at some distance on each Side
from me. I received a Letter from Father Law/on, the Priest I
formerly mentioned, to give me Notice, That the King having
made him a Grant of his House, the Mannor of St. Marys in
Tork, for the Honour of God and the good of his People, he ex-
pected from my usual Civility, that I would give him free and
easy Possession. To which I answered, that I held it by Virtue
of a Commission that constituted me Governor of Tork • that he
could not think I would divest myself of it by my own Act and
Deed j that I had too great a Veneration for the King's Bounty,
and was to Proud of his Service to do that; but that if his Ma-
jesty positively commanded it, I should have nothing to do but
to obey • with this reserve however, That if his Majesty gave it
away, I hoped, and in Justice it was a Duty incumbent on him
to endeavour it, I was to have some Equivalent for the Lois.
Several Letters passed between us, 'till at length the Earl of Fe-
•verjham sent me word, that it was actually granted • while Law-
son flattered me with Expectations that the King would consider
me one way or other, and informed me of several kind Things
his Majesty should say of me.
Dec. 7. At length Father Lavofbn comes in Person, and claims Pot-
session, it being in vain to contest with him, I ordered my
House-

<page 148>
Of Sir J o h N Reresby.
House-keeper to give him Admittance; but he left it again for 1687.
the present, 'till I could move my Goods. The clear Profits of
this Place to me, besides the Use of the House for myself and
Friends, and Grais and Hay for my Horses while I staid in Town,
amounted to about forty Pounds a Year. After this, I expected
the rest would soon follow; for the King had caused or ordered
the Lord Lieutenants of most, if not all, of the Counties in England, ,
to call together their Deputies and the Justices of the Peace, and
ask them these three Questions (1). If in Case the King mould call
a Parliament, and they should be chosen Members of it, Whe-
ther or no they would Vote to take way the Test and Penal
Laws. (2). Whether or no they would give their Vote for such
Members as they believed would be for the Repeal of the same.
(3). Whether or no they would live peaceably, and as Christians
ought to live, with such as differed from them in Religion. Some
Lord Lieutenants who refused to comply with this Order, were
turned out to give place to Papists, and the Deputy-Lieutenants
and Justices of the Peace who did not return a satisfactory An-
swer, were for the most Part divested of Office.
This certainly was pushing the Point by much too far, nor
could Men forbear wondring to what Purpose it could be meant j
for what Answer could any Gentleman pretend to give 'till
he had heard the Reasons and Debates of the House? And who
could pretend to answer for the Man he voted to be a Member .
or pretend to be sure of what Sort of a Mind he would be when
he got to his Seat in the House? If the general Inclination had
been to deceive the King, how easy was it for Men to express
themselves one way and resolve another? Besides it was striking
at the very Foundation of Parliaments, thus to pre-engage the
Members, who according as things, upon their Meeting, appear to
them, are by the Laws of the Land allowed Freedom of Speech,
and Freedom of Judgment. But the most general Answer, that
was returned by the Protestants of the Church of England was,
That they, if of the House, would so Vote as the Reasons of
the Debate should prevail with them j that they would Vote for
such

<page 149>
i44 MEMOIRS
1687. such as they thought would do the same; and that they would
live quietly with all Men as good Christians and Loyal Subjects.
About this time there were great Removes of Officers, Civil and
Military, and most Corporations were purged of their Church of
England Aldermen, and Papists or Diflenters appointed to suc-
ceed them. The King, however, soon after seemingly abated of
the rigor of this Scrutiny, tho' the Lord Lieutenants continued
the Inquiry in most Counties, but with very little Success.
While this was transacting in England, the French King was
engaged in a high Dispute with his Holiness of Rome, concern-
ing the Immunities and Franchises of Ambassadors in that City,
which tho' all the Princes of the Catholic Religion submitted to
the Regulation of, the King of France would not. His Ambaf.
iador, who would have demanded the antient Rights, was denyed
audience, and persisting in the Thing was declared excommunica-
ted; the Cardinals were forbidden to visit him as an Ambasiador j
and the Church of St. Lewis, reputed the parochial Church of the
French Nation, whither the Ambassador and his Retinue repaired
to the midnight Mass of Chriftmas, was interdicted, for admit-
ting him to partake of the Devotions of the Season. Upon No-
tice of this, the Parliament of Paris was assembled, and the At-
torney General drew up an Appeal from Rome to the next Gene-
ral Council, setting forth that the Pope had no just Claim to In-
fallibility; that he had no Power to excommunicate Princes j
that his priestly Authority was of no weight in Temporals j and that
the Power of the Keys was abused when subservient to evil
Ends. That his Holiness had not only in this acted Contradic-
torily to his Character as Vicar, but also in refusing Bulls to such
as his Majesty had nominated and recommended to the vacant
Bilhorprics in his own Kingdom, for no Reason but because they
would not acknowledge him to be Infallible, or as the Italian
Doctors call him Univerjal Monarch \ that by this Means there
were no fewer than thirty Vacancies unfupplied at this Day;
and That the Pope's obstinacy ought to be controled, as the
Custom had formerly been with the Church, by OEcumenic, or
National

<page 150>
Of Sir J O H N R E R« S B Y.
National Councils. After this, and much more, the Attorney 1687.
withdrew, and was by the Parliament admitted as an Appellant
in the Cafe; the Pope's Bull was at the same Time declared
void; it was forbidden to disperse it within any Part of the
Kingdom, and ordered that the King should be humbly entreated
to exert his Authority as to the Immunities and Franchises of his
Ambaflador at Rome; and to call such Councils, or Assemblies
of great Men, as might apply a Remedy to the Disorders that
had arisen from the long Vacancies of Archbishoprics and
Bishoprics, and lastly, that he would prohibit all Commerce
with the Court of Rome, nor suffer any Money to be sent
thither.
This was a strange fort of a Scene to us in England. It was
thought we were most inseparably linked together with our neigh-
bour Kingdom j but while the one is abjectly endeavouring to
crouch to the Lash, the other is seemingly resolved to slip her Neck
out of the Collar. But now a Proclamation is heard requiring Jœ/t. 29.
public Thanksgiving to be made for that our Queen found her-
self quick with Child. The Joy on Account of this News, if
it created any to speak of, was continually interrupted by some
violent or unequal Act or other, on the Part of the King j among
the reft the Earl of Oxford, the first of his Dignity in the Realm
tho' low in Fortune, being commanded to use his Interest in his
Lieutenancy for the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Test j and
making Answer, in plain Terms, that he could not persuade
others to that, which in his own Conscience he was averse to, the
King took his Regiment of Horse from him, and gave it to the
Duke of Berwick. Some time afterwards, the Earl of Burlington
resigned his Commission for the Lord Lieutenancy of the West.
Riding of Tork, into the Hands of the King, who immediately
gave it to Lord Thomas Howard, only Brother to the Duke of
Norfolk, a warm and zealous Papist, pursuant to the Method
his Majesty had hitherto tenacioufly observed with regard to most
of the Lieutenancies that became vacant in England.
U
The

<page 151>
146 MEMOIRS
1688. The West-Riding of Torkjhire had not been examined as to
Jpril 24. the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws ; and now at the General
Quarter Sessions at Pomjret, the Popish justices, in Number six,
and Sir John Bow ton, the King's Serjeant, who, as I presume,
aspired to be a Judge, moved that an Address of Thanks might
be signed and presented to his Majesty for his late Indulgence as
to Matters of Conscience, and that not only by all the justices,
but by the two grand Juries : But none of the Justices except the
six above and one Mr. Bull, nor either of the Grand Juries would
set their Hands to this Address j so that the Roman Catholics
sent it up, signed by themselves, as the Act of the whole Set-
sions. By such Tricks and Artifices as these was the King de-
ceived in the Opinion his Subjects had of his late Indulgence j
three or four Men, in several Places as well as this, pretending
to speak and answer for the whole Corporation, or County.
May 7. A sew Days afterwards, a Roman Catholic Justice told me the
King was now convinced, that he had been ill advised in pushing
the Question concerning the Repeal of the Test j that he intended
to put out some Justices and admit others, tho' not by that
Method, but by informing himself, from such as he knew to be
true to his Service, how they stood affected as to Liberty of Con-
science y and that he had particular Orders from the Lord Thomas
Howard, who had the same from the King, to advise first with
me upon that Subject. I told him that the Method lately taken
had most assuredly been of no advantage to his Majesty, most of
the principal and powerful Gentlemen, in every County, having
been thereby thrust out of Employment: But that this new Me-
thod would be attended with as great Difficulties, and be sub-
ject to the same Fallacy, it being impossible for one Man to pry
into the Recesses of another Man's Heart; nay, that it was even
a hard Matter for a Man to promise for himself. For according
to the Supposition, he was to be either in Parliament, or out of
it; If he himself should be elected, he could not honestly pro-
mise which way he should vote 'till he came to his Seat, and
heard the Debates j and that if he was not elected, it would be

<page 152>
Of Sir J o h N Reresbv. 147
quite impossible in any Degree to answer for the Man he should 1688.
chuse for his Representative; that I believed most: Men thought
a Liberty of Conscience might be of Use and Advantage to the
Nation, if settled upon a proper Foundation, and with true re-
gard to the Rights and Privileges of the Church of England. To
this he replied, that the King had openly declared the Church of
England should have any reasonable Equivalent (he could desire
for her Security, provided an Act might pass for the Liberty of
Conscience j and told me we should meet and talk farther upon
this Head, which for the present I evaded as much as possible;
I cared not to explain myself quite, having no Inclination to ex-
pose myself any farther than was barely needful, or to give Cha-
racters of other Men.
Having at two several Times obtained leave to repair to Lon- May.
don, I there found Affairs to stand much in the Posture I ex-
pected. The popish Party was very urgent with the King to
press the Repeal of the Laws against them, and the other as
obstinate and headstrong against it; and what brought the Di-
spute to a still greater Degree of Warmth, was owing to what
follows: His Majesty had lately renewed his Proclamation for
Liberty of Conseience, and given order to the Bishops, to cause
it be read in the Churches of their respective Dioceses. The
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the Order, remonstrated
against this; setting forth, in a Petition they presented to the
King, That they could not pay his Majesty Obedience in what
he was pleased to require of them; that no Bishop, or Minister
of the Church of England could assent to the Proclamation, which
must of course be implyed by their reading it or causing it to be
read; that a Declaration of the fame Nature, on the Part of the
King, had been in Parliament condemned twice in the late Reign;
that therefore they might be liable to be called to an Account
hereafter, for doing what had been adjudged contrary to Law j
that tho' the King of himself could do no wrong, his Ministers
or Agents were responsible for whatever was done infractory of
the Law; that tho' his Majesty had been pleased to declare a
U 2 Liberty

<page 153>
148 MEMOIRS
i<?88. Liberty of Conscience, it was nevertheless the Duty of the Clergy,
as much as in them lay, to persuade Men into an adherence to
their Communion; that for them to publish the King's Pleasure,
in the Manner required, would be the iame as if they told the
People They needed not come to Church except they pleased;
and that by the fame Rule he might command them to read Mass
in their Churches, and be bound to obey: These and many other
Arguments, were, upon this Occasion, offered by the Bishops j
at which the King conceived se violent a Displeasure, that they
were commanded to appear in Council before him, on the eighth
of June.
June i. In the mean time I kissed the King's Hand, and met with a gra-
cious Reception: I was honoured with a Visit from the Marquiss
of Halifax, who expressed himself pretty well inclined for Li-
berty of Conseience, but averse to the Repeal of the Test and
Penal Laws all at once, tho' h& was seemingly not unwilling it
should be done gradually, and upon wise and weighty Consi-
derations.
•8- And now seven of the Bishops made their Appearance before
the King in Council, where they were commanded to enter into
Recognizances of five hundred Pounds a Man, to answer to an
Information to be brought against them the next Term^ for Di£-
obedience to the King's Orders. This they refused to do, say-
ing they were not to engage themselves under any Security of the
Kind, 'till the Information or Indictment was found, and that by so
doing they should not only run Counter to the Law, but betray
the Liberty of the Peerage ; upon which the Archbishop os Can-
terburyand his six Brethren, were commited Prisoners to the Tower,
a Severity most deeply resented by the whole Church. Being
then at Whitehall, I saw the Bishops going to take Water for the
Tower: They all looked very chearfully, and the Bishop of Chi-
chester, in particular, called to me, and alked me how I did.
The next Day the Lord Huntington, one of the Privy Council,
told me, That had the King known how far the Thing would
have gone, he had never laid the Injunction he did, to have the
Declaration read in Churches. In
<

<page 154>
Of Sir J o h N R E R e s b y. 149
In the midst of this Ferment, this Day, being Trinity Sunday, I688-
about four Minutes before Ten in the Morning, the Queen was Juat-IO.
delivered of a Prince, to the great Joy of the Court. But as im-
portant as this Event might seem to be, little Notice may be said
to have been taken of it. The Imprisonment of the Bishops was
now uppermost in the Minds of most of the People, who flocked to
them in such Numbers, for their Blessing, and to condole their hard
Usage, that great and very extraordinary Remarks were made
both of Persons and Behaviour. Among the rest, ten Noncon-
formist Ministers went to pay them a Visit, which the King took
so heinously, that he ient for four of them to reprimand them;
but their Answer was, That they could not but adhere to the
Prisoners, as Men constant and firm to the Protestant Faith, or to
that Purpose. Nay, what is more extraordinary, the very Soldiers
that kept Guard in the Tower, would frequently drink good
Health to the Bishops j which being understood by Sir Edward
Hales, Constable of the Tower, He sent Orders to the Captain of
the Guard, to see it was done no more; but the Answer he re-
ceived was, That they were doing it at the very Instant, and
would drink that, and no other Health, while the Bistiops were
there.
At length the first Day of the Term came about, when the Arch- J***iy
bishop and the rest moving for their Habeas Corpus, twenty-one
of the very Prime of the Nobility appeared at the King's Bench
to bail them, and they were bailed accordingly. Upon this Oc-*
casion, the Hall and Palace-yards were crouded with thousands
of People, who begging their Blessing as they passed, the Arch-
bishop freely gave it, and as freely, at the same time, exhorted
them to be constant to their Religion. A fortnight afterwards, 2?.
an Information was exhibited against their Lordships, in the King's
Bench, for that they had framed and published a seditious Libel;
of which the Jury would not find them guilty. The Council for
the Bishops, the ablest of their Profeflion in all England, pro-
duced such Arguments in their Behalf, that the Judges were di-
vided, two of them declaring that the Proofs did not extend to
the
•
1

<page 155>
MEMOIRS
the making their Petition or Address a Libel, and two of them
that they did, which cost the two former their Seats on the Bench,
as soon as the Term was over. In the Course of this Tryal, the
Power of the King to dispense with the Laws, that grand Point,
was most exquisitly discussed by the Bishops Council, who were
so much an overmatch for the King's, that at Court it was most
heartily wished this Business had never been pushed to such a
Crisis. JVefiminfier-hall, the Falace-yards, and all the Streets
about, were thronged with an infinite People, whose loud Shouts
and joyful Acclamations upon hearing the Bishops were acquit-
ted, were a very Rebellion in Noise, tho7 very far from ib either
in Fact or Intention. Bonfires were made, not only in the City
of London, but in most Towns in England, as soon as the News
leached them ; tho' there were strict and general Orders given out
to prevent all such doings j and the Clergy preached more loudly,
and more freely than ever against the Errors of the Latin Church.
The next Day I waited on the King to the Camp on Hounjlonu-
heath, where every Body observed him to labour under a very
great Disturbance of Mind; but he spoke very kindly to me as
I rode by him, upon several Occasions.
I was present, as a Justice, at the General Sessions held for
the Liberty of IVeftminfler, and some Days afterwards, at the
•fame held for the County of Middlesex, at Hicks's Hall, where
I found such a strange Revolution among the Justices of the Peace,
ib many Papists and Fanatics put into the Commission, that I
neither sought Business, nor chose to mix with them. At this
last Place there were several indicted as Rioters, for that they had
been concerned in making of Bonfires, or contributed thereto;
but the Grand Jury would find no Bill, tho' they were sent out
no less than three Times; so generally did the Love of the
Bishops and the Protestant Cause prevail. And now my Lord
Halifax, advised me to consider with myself, Whether as Affairs
stood, it were prudent to continue in my Imployments: I an-
swered, I had great Obligations to the King, and would serve
him as well as I could, whilst he would allow me that Honour,
without concerning himself with my Religion. Lord

<page 156>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y.
Lord Sunderland who had been long suipected for a Papist 1688.
now openly declared himself of that Communion, with the usual ^"^
Ceremonies, in the King's Chappel; and ten or eleven Days
afterwards, the King went down to the Thames's Mouth, as pre-
tended, only to take a View of the Fleet; but the real Cause
was to appease the Seamen, who were ready to mutiny, on Ac-
count of some of their Captains, who had publickly celebrated
Mass in their Ships. The King flattered them all he could 'y
went from Ship to Ship j called them his Children; said he had
nothing to do with their Religion, and that he granted Liberty
of Conscience to all j but that he expected they would behave
like Men of Honour and Courage when there should be Occasion
for their Service j tho' they were so far gratified that all the
Priests were ordered on Shore. Admiral Herbert, an able Sea-
man, whom the King had disearded from several great Posts, be-
cause he would not promise to vote for the Repeal, went pri*
vately away to Holland, where he was made Rear-Admiral 5
which raised Anger in the King, and the rather, as a great many
Seamen went after him. -
Sometime afterwards, the Duke of Norfolk came to visit me <A*SPft.
in London j with whom discoursing upon the present Situation
of the Kingdom, I found him a very firm and steady Protestant,
to which he had been converted in the late Rergn, and by no
Means satisfied with the Court. Some Days afterwards, carry-
ing my Wife and Daughter to Windjor, to wait on the Queen;
I perceived the Court to be under iome Consternation, and the
King in an ill Humour, tho7 he was of an Equanimity which
made it difficult to discover, at the News that the Dutch had
fitted out a large Fleet as designed against us j and that the
- French and Dutch were on the Brink of a Rupture, and would
each of them press us soon to know which Side we would take.
This, considering the Jealousies we were under on Account of
Religion, the violent Discontents about the Army, and the ill
Time of the Day it was to call a Parliament for fresh Supplies of
Money, did very justly and reasonably disquiet the Court. And
now

<page 157>
152 M E M O I R S
1688. now the first thing the King did, was to declare He would call a
Parliament, to meet the 2,7th of November following, protesting
in Council, that he was moved thereto more for the Good and
Satisfaction of the Nation, than for any Apprehension he was un-
der of the Dutch Armament. However, he commanded all Of-
ficers in general to their Posts, and drew the Forces out of other
Garrisons and Places to man the Sea Ports.
Aug, 28. Designing for Tork, I took Leave of his Majesty, but with
terrible Apprehensions that he would put the &me Question to
me he had to others, concerning the Repeal j but he said nothing
at all of it, only injoyned me to stand a Candidate, for the next
Parliament, at Tork, which I would -gladly have been excused,
but it could not be; and so he wished me a good journey. Just
at this time I had News, that the Question had been put, the
Week before, to all our Justices of the West-Riding, and that
they had all answered in the Negative; so that I could not but
think I had a lucky escape.
I sent Notice to the Mayor and others of Tork, that I intended
to stand for one of their Representatives, at the ensoing Election,
and found the Magistracy would be for the most Part against me,
tho' I had good Encouragement from the other Citizens. The
Truth is, I was at some loss to know how to act in this Matter;
I was not desirous to be of this Parliament, not only because I
was grown infirm and almost unfit to attend the Duty of the
House, but also because I was afraid the King would expect more
from me than my Conscience would extend to j for as I was de-
termined not to violate this on the one Side, so I could hardly
resolve to offend so good a Master on the other. In these
straits, I went to the King at Windsor, and (hewed him the Let-
ters I had sent to Tork, and the Answers I had received thereto j
desiring his Majesty to indulge me with Replies to three Queries
I had to make, (1.) Whether, seeing the Contest was like to be
both chargeable and difficult, and the Success extremely doubtful,
it was his Pleasure I should stand? He replied positively, I
fliould. (2.) Whether, as the Opposition was very strong against
me,

<page 158>
-S/> J O H N R E R E S B Y.
me he would impute it to my Remissness if I miscarried? He
promised he would not. (3.) Whether he would assist me all
he could to prevent my being baffled, and particularly by such
Means as I should propose to him? His Answer was, Yes j and
he gave immediate Orders to the Lords for purging of Corpora-
tions, to make whatever Change or Alteration I desired in the
City of Tork, and to put in or out, which the King it seems had
reserved to himself by the last Charter , just as I pleased. But
. I was careful of what I did in this Regard: I considered that if I
put out none, it would look as if I had no Power, and debase
me into .Contempt • and that if I displaced too many, it might
exasperate the City against me, make them believe I was too
deep in the Court Interest, and prevent my Succeis on the other
Hand; I therefore only desired that the Lord Mayor might be
dismissed his Office, and Sir ——— Thompson appointed in his
stead, which would prevent his being a Member of Parliament;
and that two, Mr. Edward Tomjon and Mr. Ramsden, who were
my principal Friends in the former Election of me for Tork,
and were afterwards turned out partly on my Account, might
be restored as Aldermen. Then taking leave of the King, and
presenting him with some Roman Medals, which he took very
kindly, he again charged me to do what I could to be chosen.
I afterward desired Mr. Brent, the Agent for Corporation Mat-
ters, that if he had the Power, I might with some others I
mould name, be added to the Bench of justices in that City, by
a Writ of Assistance, which he promised me should be done.
To leave this Affair for the present, there had at this Time been
fifty Irishmen and Papists sent for from Ireland, by the Duke of
Berwick, in order to be incorporated into his Regiment. Eve-
ry Captain was to have lbme j but Lieutenant Colonel Beaumont,
and five Captains more, who were all that were then on the Spot,
in Quarters at Port/mouth, refused to take a Man of them, fay-
ing their Companies were complete, and that they were not to
part with good Soldiers and Englishmen, to make Room for such
as were inferior to them and Foreigners j desiring they might
X' chuse

<page 159>
*S4
MEMOIRS
9f ■
i<588. chuse their own Men, or throw up their Commissions. The
Duke of Berwick took great Offence at this, and sending an
Account of it to the King, he dispatched twenty Horse to bring
them up in Custody to iVtndJor Castle, where they were to be
• tryed by a Council of War ; and they were brought up according-
ly. I spoke to them just as they arrived, and found they were all
resolved to stand it out; but they told me the Duke had not
offered a Man of the Irish to my Company, then in his Graces
Regiment, which was very kind of him on his Part, and a mira-
culous Escape on mine.
Mean while, the Prince of Orange and the Dutch Ambaflador
had lately given the King Assurances that their Preparations were
not against us; but his Majesty, as if he made a Doubt of it,
ordered great Things towards a Fleet for the Spring; and I was
positively told, by one, that he had actually Twenty five hundred
thousand Pounds in his Coffers.
Aug. io. ^n*s -^ay a Council of War fat upon Colonel Beaumont, and
the five Captains, and they were all cashiered, tho' with Reluctance
on the Part of the King, who seemed to dread the Consequences of
it: They were offered Forgiveness if they would but accept of the
Men,but they all refused it; which caused a great and general Dis-
content throughout the Army, and particularly in that Regiment,
most of which soon after quitted. The fame Day Sir Walter Vavasor,
and Mr. Middleton, came up to make Report to the King of the
Answers they had received from the JVeftriding and the Corpora-
tions, to the Queries they had put to them; in which I round
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Tork were so faulty, that they
would out of Course, and that 1 needed not give my self the Trou-
ble of getting them removed, and more remarkably my greatest
Opposers; so I left them to their Stars, and only insisted on
the Commission of Assistance for my self and Friends I should
name; but every Post brought me new Fears I should not be
chosen at Tork, tho' several Alterations and Restrictions from po-
pular Elections to a Mayor and twelve Aldermen, whom the
King appointed as he pleased, were now made by new Charters,
for

<page 160>
0/ J O H N R E R E S B Y. I55
for the more certain Election of such Members as might be to »*88.
the King's good Liking. And now Lord Halifax, when I took
Leave of him, which was this Day, advised me not to be too
much in earnest with my Election; at least not to make too free As.
a Use of the Court Assistance, for many Reasons he then offered
to my Consideration.
A few Days afterwards, I fat out for Torkjhire, and being at
my Seat in the Country, I received Advice that my Interest at
Tork was much lessened by my Absence; and what was still worse,
that Lord Montgomery's Company, being ordered to march from
that City, his Lordship would, if I did not come speedily, be
obliged to deliver up the Keys into the Hands of the Lord May-
or; I therefore immediately posted away and received the Keys,
and the Company marched. I represented it to the King as a great
Inconvenience that there should not be so much as one Company
in Garrison at Tork, and desired to know what I was to do with
the Keys; to the first of which his Majesty answered, That upon
more mature Deliberation he had recalled the Company, and that
as to the Second, I might dispose of the Keys as I saw proper. Off. 1.
I desired the Lord Mayor to call a Hall, for that I had some-
thing to fay to them. A Hall was called; but his Lordship,
the greatest Enemy to my Election, not having Patience to stay
till I came, disini&'d it almost as soon as assembled, searing I
stiould make some Proselytes to my Interest. Just on the Back
of this comes down a Proclamation, setting forth a certain Inten-
tion the Prince of Orange had to invade this Kingdom, by the
Assistance and with the Concurrence of the States General, both
with a strong Fleet and a numerous Army; commanding all Lord
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and all other his Majesty's
Officers, to hold themselves in Readiness to defend the King and
Kingdom. At this Time Lord Thomas Howard was Lieutenant
of the tVeft Rifting, a rigid Papist, and now gone Ambaflador
to Rome. He had left but three Deputies behind him, two of
which also were Papists, and but two of the three were now in
the Country j while most of the Gentry of Torkjhire were come
X 2 to

<page 161>
iS6 MEMOIRS.
1688. to the City, expecting to meet with Writs lor the Choice of
Members. I therefore pressed the High Sheriff to give Notice
to some Gentlemen, while I convened others, for the next Day;
when Sir Henry Gooderic£ began a Discourse, which I seconded,
to shew how little we were able to serve the King with the Mi-
litia, without another Lord Lieutenant, under whom we might
lawfully serve, meaning a Protestant; and at the same Time
we subscribed a Representation of our Case to his Majesty. I was
well aware how very ungrateful this would be to him j but to
obviate his Displeasure, I gave him private Intelligence of the
Intention to prepare it, and begged of him to excuse the Concern
I had therein, assuring him it was now abselutely for his Ser-
vice.
0#. 4. *n tne midst of this comes down a special Messenger to purge
the Corporation, to put out the former Lord Mayor and Alder-
men, and to appoint others, almost all Papists j but the Com*
miflion was so defective, and there were such Mistakes in the
Execution of it, as frustrated the Design. The next Day I pre-
vailed with the Lord Mayor to call a Hall; upon which Occa-
sion I spoke to them a full half Hour, and so convinced them
of the evil Arts which had been #put in Practice against me, and
the great Injustice done me, that they all seemed to be Converts
in my Favour j aud to add to what I had said, I gave them up
the Keys, but made them own it as a Courtesy, and promise to
restore them to me again, whenever I desired it, for his Maje-
sty's Service. And now Lord Fairfax, a Roman Catholic and
Lord Lieutenant of the North Riding, being at Tork, observed
to me it could be for no good End that the Lords Devon-
Jhire and Danby were come down to the Country; tho' the' for-
mer pretended he was only come to view his Estate, and the lat-
ter to drink the Waters at Knaijborough. They were both of
them frequently engaged in Conversation at Sir Henry Goode-
ricJ&s, and the first os them came to fork, where I paid all imagi-
nable Civilities to him, and received the same from him; the other
I waited on at Sir Henry s? not once suspecting that Men os
their

<page 162>
Of Sir John Rbresbt. 157
their high Quality and great Estate could intend any thing pre- i<*88.
judicial to the Government or dangerous to themselves j and in-
deed their outward Behaviour was very decent and innocent.
Two Days afterwards I had an Express from Lord Preston,
the new Secretary of State; Sunderland, who was turned Papist,
and had been the Author of great Mischief since he had been
near the King, being laid aside; to acquaint me that his Maje-
sty had given a very kind Reception to our Representation on
the Part of the County, and that in Compliance therewith he had
named the Duke of Newcastle to be Lord Lieutenant of all Tork~
Jhlre; and his Grace coming to town soon after, appointed his
Deputies and Militia Officers, both Horse and Foot. The King
began now, tho fatally too late, to be sensible of his Error in
carrying Matters to so enormous a Length at the Instigation of
Popish Councils \ and now restored several justices of the Peace
in most Counties, as also the old Charters all England over; he
now quits his Hold of the Bishop of London, does Justice to
Magdalen College, and begins again to court the Church of Eng-
land.
Amidst this hopeful Reform comes News that the Prince of OS. 10.
Orange increased daily, and that his. Fleet was ready to spread
Canvass for the Sea. Three Days afterwards I had Orders from
the King to receive seven hundred Scotch Horse and Dragoons, 13.
on their March from the nothern Kingdom; and in two Days
they arrived. I was in great Hopes they would have taken up their
Quarters in Tork, for the Security of both the City and Country;
but the Danger hourly approaching, the Appehensions of the
Prince of Orange's Descent growing stronger and stronger, and
the King being willing to have his Army in as numerous a Plight
as might be, they were ordered to continue their March south-
ward, after they had been with us but three Days. The Duke
of Newcastle, who kept nothing a Secret from me, told me he
had heard Lord Danby had a great Sum of Money in the Bank
of Holland, and that he had been invited up to London by my
Lord Bellafjis and the King's Order: that he had made some
'Offers

<page 163>
158 MEMOIRS
1688. Offers of his Service, but that he had no manner of Intention to
■ go up; which last I very well knew from other Hands.
Oft. 15. Upon some Discourse with the Earl of Danby, at the Dean's
House, his Lordship broke out into these Expressions j We are
now every way in an ill Condition in this Kingdom If the
King beats the Prince of Orange, Popery will return upon us
with more Violence than ever. If the Prince beats the King,
the Crown and the Nation may be in no small Danger. The
late Lord Mayor being now superseded, tho' it was impossible
to swear the new one in, because of some Mistakes with regard
to the new Charter, it may be said that Tork was now a very re-
markable Place; for it was an Archbishopric without a Bishop,
a City without a Mayor, and a Garrison without a Soldier.
But these Defects were soon supplyed; the old Charter was re-
stored and the old Lord Mayor therewith; the Bishop of Exe-
ter, who fled from that City upon the Prince of Orange's Land-
ing, was made Archbishop of Tork; and I had one Company of
Foot sent to continue with me.
Strange it was, and a certain Presage of the Mischiefs which
attended this Invasion, that neither the Gentry nor the Com-
monalty were under any Concern about it: Said they, the Prince
comes only to maintain the Protestant Religion. He will do
no Harm to England: While on the other hand it was from
Court suggested that his Aim was at the Crown, and that the
Dutch, who assisted him, grasped at the Trade of England. In
truth, his Highnesses Declaration, when it made its Appearance,
which was a little while before he landed, seemed to be dark
and ambiguous enough, setting forth all the Grievances of the
Nation with great Aggravation, and asserting that the King's In-
tention was to subvert the Government both in Church and
State j that he designed to make himself absolute, and to extir-
pate the Protestant Religion; that to this Purpose he had insisted
on a dispensing Power; that he had moulded and fashioned all the
Charters to his Mind, to the End he might have such Members
•of Parliament as he desired j that he had examined and pre-engag-

<page 164>
(y&irJOHN RERESBY. 159
ed such as he intended should be of the House of Commons; 1688.
and that what was worse, he had imposed a suppositions Prince
of Wales upon the Nation, merely to promote Popery, and to
defeat the Prince and Princess of Orange of their Right of Suc-
cession.
The King understanding there was a great Noise raised about
this Prince of Wales, had, a little before the Invasion, called an
extraordinary Council, whither all the Nobility, Bishops, and
Foreign Ministers were summoned, before whom the Queen
Dowager, several Lords and Ladies, and the King's and Queen's
Servants, to the Number of forty, as well Protestants as Papists,
gave pregnant Evidence concerning the Birth of this Prince, all
which was re-examined in Chancery upon Oath, and there re-
corded.
A Report now arrives that the Dutch Fleet had been misera- OR. 29.
bly shattered by Tempest; that Lord Sunderland was cer-
tainly out, and Lord Presion Secretary of State in his Stead.
The King mean while made great Preparations for War, and had
swelled up his Army, as was computed, to six thousand Horse
and Dragoons, and thirty eight thousand Foot: The Fleet also
was out, under the Command of Lord Dartmouth, but much
inferior to the Dutch, and did nothing to the Purpose. Three
Days afterwards the Prince of Orange's Declaration, conveyed
by an unknown Hand to a Citizen of ours, was brought to me,
and I immediately transmitted it to the Secretary of State. Or-
ders were at the same Time sent down to us to secure the Lord
Lumley, then in the North Riding; but the Gentleman, Colonel
John Darcy, who was charged with this Commission, pretended
he could not find him, tho' it afterwards appeared his Lordfliip
was not far off", and might have been seized at Pleasure. The
next Day I had an Express from the Secretary at War, signify-
ing that the Dutch Fleet had been seen off Dover, steering their
Course to the Westward, which gave us some Hopes there was
no Danger of their landing in the North. In three Days more I
received by another Express that the Prince was actually land-

<page 165>
i6o MEMOIR S
1688. ed ztTorbay, in the Weft, (on the 5th of this Month, Novem-
ber,) and that he had marched strait to Exeter, attended by Mar-
shal Schomberg, an old and experienced Officer, together with a
Number of our own Nobility and Gentry of considerable Name,
and a great Land Army.
I immediately sent the Duke of Newcastle Word of this Inva-
sion, tho' he had Notice of it from above; but he wrote back
, that the Prince being landed at such a Distance, his Presence
would be no way neceflary at Tork. I thought this a very weak
Answer, and sent him Word that the Danger was not only from
the Invaders, but also from their Confederates at home, and that
it was impossible the Prince should dare to attack England with
an Army of under 2,0000 Men, if he was not very sure of As-
sistance from our selves. The Deputy Lieutenants, being ten in
Number, were now all at Tork, and being very sollicitous to pre-
serve Peace, Quiet, and good Order, proposed a Meeting
of the Gentry and Freeholders of the County, to be held
on Thursday the 19th Instant, in Order to draw up some
Declaration of unshaken Loyalty to the King in this Time of
Danger j as also to consult on such Matters as might be for the
Honour of God, and our own Welfare and Safety. This being a
Motion made by Sir Henry Gooderick, I seconded it, and observ-
ed that an Address of such a Tenor might give some Satisfaction
to the Government, and be a Discouragement to its Enemies.
Accordingly a Summons was drawn up, to be dispersed all
the Country over; and in the mean time I wrote up to Lord
Prefton, the Secretary of State, to acquaint him with this
seemingly intended loyal Address from the Gentlemen in our
Parts, and sent a Letter to the Duke of Ne<wcaft/ef desiring
him to make one of the Company.
Nov. 15. Being this Day at Dinner with Lord Fairfax, Sir Henry Good-
erick, and others, at a Gentleman's who had invited us, the
Clerk of the Peace of the Weft Riding comes in, to give us Notice
of a new Commission, in which some thirty of the principal Gen-
tlemen of the Neighbourhood were left out; and among the
rest
■

<page 166>
O/^ John Reresby. 161
rest Sir Henry himself. This threw him into such a Rage, that r<588,
he vowed he was sorry he had promoted the Meeting he had
for the Service of the King j but I heard that at this intended
Assembly there were to have been some Points discussed which
would not have been of so grateful a Nature to the Court: For
it was at the fame Time the Design to have petitioned
for a speedy and a free Parliament, and for other Concessions
which were to have been demanded and insisted upon. But all
this was all along denyed to me, and particularly by Sir Henry
Gooderick, who being an open Man, I consols I added Faith to
his Words; but Friendship is too often a Blind to the Eyes.
Four Days after this, the Duke of Ncwcaftte himself came to
Tork, and said he heard there was a Design to petition for a ^ 19
free Parliament, and that he thought it not fit there should be
so much of the Militia together. I sat that Night with his
Grace till it was twelve of the Clock; and we came to a Reso- '.
lution, That if the Petition or intended Address was not con-
ceived in Terms of the strictest Loyalty, we would not set our
Hands to it. The next Day his Grace called together his De-
puty Lieutenants, and asked them, If there was any Thing
meant by their Assembly on Thursday, more than to make a
Declaration of Loyalty to his Majesty? Whereupon Sir Henry
Gooderick, who was one of them, declared plainly, That he in-
tended to petition for a free Parliament, and hoped that the.
rest, who should meet, would concur therein, after the Exam-
ple of a late Petition from some Bishops, and some Temporal
Lords. The Duke took this so much amiss, that he declared
he would not stay to be affronted or overused by his Deputies,
and that he would be gone the next Day. I made Opposition
to this; observing that no absolute Resolution could be taken,
till the Gentlemen appeared; and that if ought else besides a ,
mere Declaration of Loyalty were thought neceflary, it might
be so penned, and with that Modesty as both to satisfy here, and
not displease above; in short, that his Grace ought, at all Events,
to be on the Spot in a Time of such great Trouble and Difricul-
Y ty.
%

<page 167>
162 M E M O I R S
1688. ty. But he went away according to his Word, saying no bo-
dy had been on his Side but my self.
Nov. 22. And now came the Day of Meeting j a fatal one I think. I
would not go to them at the Common Hall, wTiich was the
Place appointed • nor indeed was I very well able, by reason of some
Bruises I had received by my Horse's falling upon me: But X
heard that in the midst of about a hundred Gentlemen who met,
Sir Henry Gooderkk delivered himself to this Effect j That there
having been great Endeavours made by the Government of late
Years to bring Popery into the Kingdom, and by many Devices
to sot at nought the Laws of the Land, there could be no pro-
per Redress of the many Grievances we laboured under, but by
a free Parliament; that now was the only Time to prefer a Peti-
tion of the Sort; and that they could not imitate a better Pat-
tern than had been set before them by several Lords, Spiritual
and Temporal. There were those who differed with him in O-
pinion, and would have had iome Expressions in the Paper mode-
rated and amended . and observed that at the same time they pe-
titioned as they designed, it would be but their Duty to assure
his Majesty, They would stand firm by fiim in the midst of the
Dangers which threatned both him and his Kingdoms, at the Ha-
zard of their Lives and Fortunes; but this was overuled.
When therefore the Draught was completed according to the
Mind of Sir Henry Gooderick and his Friends, tho' several dis-
liked it and went away, they proceeded to sign j but before a
third Man could subscribe it, in comes one Mr. Tankard
with a rueful Story That the Papists were risen; and that they
had actually fired upon the Militia Troops. Alarmed at this,
the Gentlemen ran out j and those that were privy to the De-
sign betook them to their Horses, which were conveniently at
hand for their Purpose. Lord Danby, mean while in his Lodg-
ing, waited for the false Alarm, and mounted, with his Son, Lord
Lumky, Lord Horton, Lord JVilloughby and others, who, toge-
ther with their Servants, formed a Body of Horse, consisting of a
Hundred in Number, well mounted, and well accoutred. These
rode

<page 168>
0/ 5/> J O H N R E R E S B Y4 163
rode up to the four Militia Troops, drawn out on another Ac- i6%&
count, and cryed out A free Parliament, the Protesiant IttfigU
on, and no Popery. The Captains of these Troops were Lord
Fairfax, Sir Thomas Go<wer, Mr. Robinson, and Captain Tan±
kard, who being admitted of the Secret the Night before, thd'
prompt and ready enough in their Nature for any Action of the
Kind, immediately cryed out the same, and led their Troops o-
ver to them. In the first Place they went to the Main Guard of
the Standing Company, which, the Number not exceeding
twenty, they furpriled before I had the least Notice or even Jea-
lousy of what was in Agitation; not thinking it possible that
Men of such Quality^ iuch Estates, could give Way to their .
Discontent, however great and just it might be, to the Degree
of engaging themselves in an Attempt Ib desperate, and so con-
trary to the Laws they boasted, and the Religion they professed.
But I had no sooner Notice of what had been transacted, than I
sent for the Officers and the Guard, and understood they were
Prisoners. I then sent to each Captain of the four Troops, in-
joining him to bring his Troop to me as the King's Governor, as
also to the Main Guard of the Militia Foot; but they would
not stir a step; they would hearken to no Orders. I then sent
for my own Horses, and was just ready to go to the Troops, in
hopes, by my Presence, to regain them to the King's Service,
when Sir Henry Bellaffis, who had commanded a Regiment. in
Holland, untfer the Prince, and had lurked about a long while
in Yorkshire for his Highness's Service, drew up a Party of thir-
ty Horse before my Door, and prevented my stirring abroad till
Lord Danby, and his principal Companions, came up to me.
His Lordstiip told me that to relist were to no manner of End
or Purpose; that himself, and the Gentlemen with him, were
in Asms for. a free Parliament, and the Preservation of the Pro-
testant Religion and Government, as by Law established, which
the King had almost brought to nothing, and which the Prince
of Orange was come to restore 5 and' that he hoped I would join
them in so laudable an Effort. I made Answer that I was for
Y 2 a free"

<page 169>
MEMOIRS
a free Parliament, and the Protestant Religion as well as they,
but that I was also for the King: His Lordship replyed, that
he was so too, and that he hoped as we agreed in Principles, we
should concur in Action: I told him tho' we exactly agreed in
the Matter, we disfered widely as to the Manner; and I
could not conceive it lawful to extort any Thing from the Crown
by any manner of Force; and that as I had the Honour of being
his Majesty's Governor for Tork, it was impossible, whatever the
Consequences might be, for me to join in Concert with those
who openly and avowedly acted in repugnance to and contempt
of his Authority and Commission. His Lordssiip then said, he
must imprison me; to which I made Answer, that I was naked
and destitute of Friends and Assistance, and that I acknowledg-
ed my self in his Lordship's Power to do with me as he would:
But after some short Consultation, his Lordship told me, He
knew me to be a Man of Honour, and that he mould think my
Engagement not to stir, to be as sure and as close a Restraint
upon me, as a Guard or a Prison; so that upon the Pledge of
my Honour I was to confine my self to my Room; his Lord-
ship, however, recommending what he had offered to my farther
Consideration. They then seized on all the Gates, posted strong
Guards every where, and suffered none to go in or out; they se-
cured such Persons as betrayed a Dislike to their Proceedings,
and especially the Officers of the Company; but the Company it
self revolted to them the next Day.
Gathered to this Head, the next Day they visited the Maga-
zine and Stores, which, God knows, were next to nothing,
notwithstanding all my most pressing Remonstrances to the King,
both formerly and of late. The Militia Troops then, and some
of the Gentlemen who came in to serve as Voluntiers, and who
were not above sixty, ransacked the Houses of several Papists,
for Priests, Arms, and Horses, which they took wherever they
found them. They seized also on a Company of Foot new rais-
ed, but not yet armed, in their Quarters at Tadcajter, and a
Company of Grenadiers as they were on their March for Londoiiy

<page 170>
(y&rJOHN RERESBY. 165
by the Way of Tork; but as yet they touched the Property of I<588.
no Man but the Kings, the Papists and my self excepted, for
they made very free with my Coals, and other Provision I had
laid in for the Use of the Garrison.
The Earl now caused the Lord Mayor to call a Hall, where Nov. 24.
his Lordship made a Speech, setting forth the Reason for their
Rising, and of their Declaration, desiring the City would join
with them in the latter, and they signed it accordingly, as did
also a Number of Gentlemen. This Declaration being the next
Day printed, there appeared of Hands of Lords to it, six, of
Lords Sons, three j of Baronets, five; of Knights, six j of
Esquires and Gentlemen, sixty six • and of Citizens of Tork, fif-
ty six. We had now News from Nottingham, that the Earl of
Devonshire, Lord Delamere, and many more Noblemen and Gen-
tlemen were risen also in those Parts, and that great Numbers
flocked in to them.
Mean while, the King was on his March to Salisbury, which #
he had appointed to be the general Rendezvous of his whole
Army, having sent the young Prince, his Son, to Portsmouth, as
the Report was by some, but to France according to others. In
a Day or two, I made it my Request to the Earl of Danby, that
he would give me Leave to be a Prisoner at my own House in the
Country, where I promised to act nothing to his Prejudice, but
to aquiesce, and abide by my Word as a true Prisoner. Here-
upon he sent for me to come and dine with him; and at my
coming into the Room told me, That to give me the better Sto-
mach to my Meal, I might, upon the Terms I had proposed,
depart whenever I pleased. At Dinner his Lordship told me
the Duke of Newcastle's Absence had been what had principally
favoured their Design; and that he doubted not but I had some
Fear or Suspicion of what was going forward: I answered, that
I did indeed believe they would go very high in their Petition,
but never imagined so many Gentlemen of their Rank and Qua-
lity would have ventured upon so perilous an Expedient; and
that if I had been aware of it, I should certainly have made a
Resistance,

<page 171>
MEMOIRS
Resistance, tho' to ever so little Purpose, or at least have made
my Escape out of the Town. I had Discourse with several of
these Gentlemen, and perceived that they bega,n to reflect: on
what they had done, as of more Danger than they at first thought
of, and found they were troubled, that Men come in so {lowly to
them. Lord IVtlhughby said it was the first Time any Bertie
had been concerned against the Crown; that it was a Grief to
him, but that the Necessity of the Times was fataljy such* that
there had been no avoiding it. To this I observed, that the fla-
grant Invasions on our Rights might have been iestrame4 with*.
out a repelling Force, and that a thorough and plain Representa-
tion of our Injuries, properly urged, on the Part of the whole
Kingdom, could not have faijsed to reduce the King to a better
and juster Sense of what he was about; that the great Want of
Money, the violent Distraction of the Nation, and a plain Dis>
covery that Popery could never again be imposed upon us, would
. have obliged his Majesty, for his own Sajc$, for his own Safety
*and Interest, to have altered the Tenor of his Conduct. Sir
Henry Gooderick would then have persuaded me to sign#their De-
claration, but I told them I could not possibly do it j for that
tho' I should be of a Mind with them, as to the Matter it con-
tained, yet being now in Arms I cpuld not^ in my Judgment,
conceive but a Concurrence with them, as to the Contents of their
?aper? might be justly construed into a Joining with them in
the Force. Mr. Tankard also most earnestly pressed me to be;
with them, but I held out. In the midst of this comes the Clerk
of the. Peace to give me Notice of a new Commission that was
brought down, which restored all the Gentlemen of the Weft.
Riding I have formerly observed to have been turned out j but
that myself and two more were omitted. Lord Danby immedi-
ately took up this, and told me it was plain There was a Re-
sentment against me, and that it was very evident I should meet
with worse Quarter on the other Side, than from them; but all
this had no manner of Effect upon me. The next Day the Duke
of Newcaftk sent Orders to his Captains of Horse to dismiss the
Militia

<page 172>
0/ J O H N R E R E S B Y. I67
MilitiaTroops; but they instead of obeying his Orders, laughed 1<5g8.
at him for his Ill-timed Meflage.
This Day I obtained a Pass of their Generalships to go to my a8-
own home, upon my Parole that I would confine my self there,
nor exceed the Bounds of five Miles about, and live peaceably
and quietly, and abstain from all manner of hostile Action. We
had now News as if the Army had voted for a free Parliament,
tho' at the same Time they declared they would defend his Ma-
jesty's Person from all Men without Exception; the very Matter
I desired to be the Contents of our Torkjhire Petition. But on
the Heels of this laudable Resolution, it hapned, as we were
told, that a Number of great Men, Officers of the Army, and
particular Confidents of the King, had revolted and gone over to •
the Prince of Orange \ particularly, that on the 1 gth of Novem-
ber, the King having then reached Salisbury, where his Army was
rendezvoused, the JLord Churchill, one of his Major Generals, un-
der Pretence of shewing bim his out Guards, misted his Majesty
into a Train which must have betrayed him to the Hands of a
Party of the Prince of Orange's Army, had not an immoderate
Bleeding at the Noso prevented the King from proceeding j and
that the said Lord perceiving his Design to be thus frustrated,
immediately went over to the Prince, accompanied by the Duke
of Grafton, Colonel Berkley, and others; tho', it must be ob-
served, that this Lord Churchill was raised from a Page to the
King, to the Degree of a Vilcount of England, and in Poflestion
of a great Estate therewith, which was entirely owing to his
Majesty's Bounty. The King astonished, and not knowing who
to trust, returned to Ædover, on the 14th, where he sat at Sup-
'per with Prince George of Denmark, his Son-in-law, and the
Duke of Ormond, but to the Surprize of all Men, they both de-
serted him that very Night, and withdrew to the Prince, toge-
ther with others of good Note and Account. The very next
Day, the Princess of Denmark departed privately from Whitehall,
in Company with Lady Churchill, and took Refuge at Notting-
ham. Now the Number of all that thus forsook the King did
not

<page 173>
168 MEMOIRS
11
1688. not as yet amount to one thousand, but such a mutual Jealousy
now took Birth, that these was no relying on any one, no know-
ing who would be true and honest: to the Cause j wherefore the
Army and Artillery were ordered to retire back towards London,
where his Majesty arrived on the 2 6th, his Out-quarters being
at Wind/or, Reading, and Places round about.
2 The next Day he called together all the Lords Spiritual and
'24' Temporal then in Town, being about fifty in Number, and
pursuant to their Advice, Writs were immediately issued out for
calling a free Parliament, and for removing all Roman Catho-
lics from Councils and Imployments; for issuing out a general
Pardon to all who were with the Prince, and for sending Com-
missioners to treat with him. The Proclamation accordingly
came out, the Parliament was to meet upon the 15th of Janu-
ary next ensuing, and the Lords Halifax, Nottingham, and Go-
dolphin, were appointed Commissioners to the Prince. But to
iy 28. return back a little to our northern Parts, Kingjton upon Hull,
or Hull, that considerable Garrison was at this Time surprised by
Mr. Copley, the Lieutenant Governor, who gathering a Party to
him, seised the Governor himself, Lord Langdale, in the Night,
as also a Number of Roman Catholics who fled for Refuge to that
Place j and the Soldiers joining in the Treachery, they declared
for the King, and the Protestant Religion, and sent immedi-
ate Notice to Tork of what they had done. About the same Time
a Party was dispatched from Tork to seise the Duke of Newca-
file\ Horses and Arms, which they did, but no manner of At-
tempt or Injury was offered to his Grace's Person. In short,
there were but few Gentlemen in our Parts of the County that
adhered to the King; nor indeed in any Part of the North of
England.
And now Plymouth, Bristol, and other Places, submitted them-
JI' selves to the Prince, and the Defection began to be general. In
the midst, as it were, of this the Prince of JVales is brought from
Portsmouth to London? when every Soul concluded he was in
France: But he made no Continuance , the Queen the very next
Night,

<page 174>
(y 5"/> J O H N R E R E S B Y. I 69
Night, being Sunday, carrying him, about twelve of the Clock, I<588.
down to a Vessel privately prepared, which by a favorable Gale
was wafted over to Dunkirk. The next Day a Regiment of
Scotch Horse deserted to the Priilce, nor was there an Hour scarce
but his Majesty received, like Job, ill News of one Sort or o-
ther . se that, prompted thereto, by most fatal Advice, he the next
Day, being the 11th, withdrew himself privately, attended only j)ec.ll.
by two or three Persons, to follow the Queen, as was then most
commonly believed. This was very extraordinary and quite won-
derful; for his Commissioners having just before sent him Word,
That Affairs might be managed with the Prince to his Majesty's
Satisfaction, he had summoned his Cabinet Council to meet
the next Day, at Nine in the Morning j tho' it seems he intend-
ed nothing less than to be with them j for he went away that
very Night, without so much as leaving any Order or Direction
behind him. The Lord Chancellor withdrew at the same Time,
and took the Broad Seal along with him j so that all was now in
the utmost Confusion, nor is the Consternation to be expressed.
Upon this the Lords, as well Spiritual as Temporal, wrote to
his Highness of Orange, to let him know the King was gone
from them and to acquaint him, They would endeavour to keep .
Things in Order, till they could receive his Directions, and to
invite him to Town.
The Rabble had been before safficiently incensed against the
Papists, but now apprehending, and reasonably enough, That
the King had withdrawn himself by their Advice, or rather at
their Instigation, they grew to that Height of Outrage, that ri-
sing in prodigious Multitudes, and dividing themselves into great
Parties, they pulled down the Chapels of that Worship, as well as
the Houses of many of its Professors, taking and spoiling their
Goods, and imprisoning such as they suspected to be Priests:
Nor did they spare even the Chapels and Houses of Ambassadors,
and other Foreign Ministers; and particularly the Spanish Am-
bassador, who, as was generally computed, of his own and others,
who sought his Protection, had Goods and Plate to the Value of
Z one
1

<page 175>
i7o MEMOIRS
itf88. one hundred thousand Pounds taken from him; what was of less
Worth, and belonging to that Superstition, was burnt publickly
in the Street. The lame Day, the Lord Chancellor, who had
waited too long for the Tide, tho' in the Disguise of a Seaman
and destitute of his Eye-brows, which he had purposely cut off,
was stopt at Wapping, taken, and committed to the Tower by
Order of the Lords. He was at first brought to the Lord May-
or upon Suspicion only \ but being soon known, they were
obliged to give him a strong Guard, or he' had certainly been
torn to Pieces. Pen, the great Quaker, a Man of reputed Wit,
and much consulted by the King, with regard to the dispensing
Power he would unfortunately have usurped, and the Scheme of
Liberty of Conscience, was taken also j as was Father Peters,
that Incendiary, that Scandal to the Privy Council, where he
was the first of his pernicious Order that had fat for many a Year
before.
The King, however, upon his Departure wrote to the General
Officers of his Army, signifying, That Things being brought to
. - Extremities, and being obliged to send away the Queen and the
Prince, he was forced to follow himself; but hoped it might,
at some Time or other, please God to touch the Hearts of this
Nation with true Loyalty and Honour. That could he but have
trusted to his Troops, he would at least have had one Blow for
it , but that tho' there were some Loyal and brave Men among
them, both Officers and Soldiers, it was their Advice to him not
to venture himself at their Head, or to fight the Prince of Orange
with them. He thanked those for their Fidelity who had been
true to him; and added, That tho' he did not expect they
should expose themselves, by resisting a foreign Army, and a
poisoned Nation, he hoped they would preserve themselves dis-
engaged from Associations and all such evil Doings. In the Post-
script he told them, That as he had ever found them Loyal,
so they ever had and ever should find in him a kind Master.
Lord Feverjham, then commanding as General, dispatched
this Letter to the Prince of Orange j and sent him Word,
That

<page 176>
Of Sir J o h n R e r e s b y. 171
r
That having thereby Directions to make no Opposition, he had, to
prevent the Effusion of Christian Blood, given Notice of the same
to his Army, which had thereupon in great Measure disbanded.
His Majesty, in the mean Time, endeavoring to forsake the
Kingdom, in a Hoy with few of his Attendance, among whom
was Sir Edward Hales, and stretching over from an Island in
Kent, was boarded by a Boat, with thirty six armed Men,
who were bound, as they called it, a Priest-codding, or catch-
ing. They used the King, but especially those that were with
him, with great Rudeness and Incivility, and took from his Ma-
jesty three hundred Guinea's, all he was at that Time worth,
and his Sword: But when they came to understand who he was,
they offered to restore him both, but he would take back nothing
but his Sword. Being brought to Shore, he went to Lord Win-
Chelsea's, where he was taken with another Fit of Bleeding at
s the Nose, which made him very weak and very sick. Information
of this being sent up to the Lords at Whitebait, they ordered
four Noblemen, Ayljbury, Middle ton, Tarmouth and another,
with seme of his Servants to attend him, and carry him Necefla-
ries; some of the Guards also, and Lore! Feverjham, waited up-
on him j but their Orders were to leave it to his Majesty's own
Choice, either to go or to return, it being deemed unfit to put any
Restraint upon him. Much about the fame Time, the Lords Pe-
terborough and Salisbury, who had been lately converted by Fa-
ther talker, Master of University College in Oxford, were also
taken: But the Prince of Orange being invited to London, had .
reached Windsor before he knew the King had been intercepted.
Before his Highness came to Town, he sent his own People to
possess themselves of the Tower: He quartered them in and near
the Town, and posted them at Whitehall \ and at two in the Morn-
ing sent his Majesty Notice That he must remove from thence .
that Day to some Place ten or twelve Miles distant, and be
attended by his Highness's Guards. His Majesty therefore went
to Rochester, attended by Lord Dunbarton, Lord Ayljbury, and
Lord Arran 'y and then the Prince came to St. James's, where
Z 2 he

<page 177>
i7% MEMOIRS
i^88. he was complimented by many of the Nobility; the Bells rang,
Bonfires were lighted up, nor was any public Profession of joy
wanting among the Rabble; while serious Men in the City seem-
ed to think it hard The King should be so forced to withdraw
himself a second Time.
The Prince, upon his Arrival, seemed more inclined to the
Presbyterians than to the Members of the Church, which start-
led the Clergy; he ordered as many of the King's Forces to be
gathered together as possible, and confined Lord Fever/ham to
W'tndjor Castle for having disbanded them, and for other Matters
laid to his Charge; nor must we forget, That his Highness as-
fumed so much to himself, as to make the Duke of Beaufort wait
full four Hours before he would give him Admittance. The
King, alarmed at this Proceeding, began to think himself in Dan-
ger, and sent to the Lords, signifying, It was his Desire to go
out of the Kingdom. Their Lordships took some Time to con-
sider on the Answer they were to make j but while they were in
the midst os their Deliberation, he gratisyed himself in his own
Desire, and went privately away. And now the English Guards
and other Troops were, by the Prince, sent to the Distance of
twenty Miles from London, to make Room for the foreign Sol-
diery he had brought with him.
Dec. 20. ^e Lords having for some Time fat in their House, and find-
ing that his Majesty would not appoint another Chancellor or
Keeper, or produce the great Seal, the Lords I say, being about
sixty in Number, as well Spiritual as Temporal, Lord Halifax
being in the Chair, made an Order to banish all Papists that had
not kept House for four Years last past, to the Distance of ten
Miles from the City, Their Lordships ceased not to sit, tho' it
was Chrijimas-Day j and among other Things, framed an Ad-
dress to the Prince, That he would take the Government upon
himself, till Affairs could be settled; and the next Day a certain
Number of Lords were appointed to wait on him therewith • but
his Highness said, He could give no Answer to it, till he had the
Opinion of the Commons; for it was but two Days before that
he

<page 178>
Of Sir J O H N R E R E S B Y. 173
lie had ordered the Lord Mayor and fifty of the Aldermen and ^88.
Common Council, together with all such Gentlemen as had been
Members of Parliament in the late Reign, and were in Town,
to.meet together in the House of Commons, to sit there as a Com-
mittee, in Imitation of the Lords. They met accordingly, to
the Number of about 300, and voted a Concurrence with the
Lords in most Things, and particularly in their Address to the
Prince to take the Government upon him till the 11 d of Janua-
ryy when a Convention was to be mmmoned ; the Writs, it stiould
seem, that had been issued out for the calling of a Parliament,
and the Elections that had thereupon been made, becoming void
and of none Effect. All this was transacted in the midst of al-
most a dead Calm, - no Mischief was attempted, no Disorders
raised or fomented, but all was Peace, Aquiescence, and Sub-
mission.
The Prince having received this Address, replyed, That he Dec. 28.
would, according to their Advice, endeavor to secure the Peace
of the Nation, till the Meeting of the Convention; and that in
order to the said Meeting, he would issue out his Letters to the
several Counties and Towns; that he would take Care the Reve-
nue stiould be applied to the most proper Uses the Exigencies of
Affairs required • that he would do his best to put Ireland into
such a Condition as might best maintain the Protestant Religion
and English Interest in that Kingdom; and that he would at all
Times hazard himself for the Laws and Liberties of these King-
doms, and the Preservation of the Protestant Faith, It being the
very End for which he came.
News now came that the King was safe arrived in France, and
that he was gone to the Queen, who was at Paris. The French
King at first prepared the Castle of Vtncennes for their Reception
and Entertainment; but their Majesties afterwards removed to
St. Germains. The King thus absent in a strange Land, the
Lord Tyrconnel, Lieutenant of Ireland, nevertheless remained
firm and stedfast to his Majesty, with a numerous Army of Pa-
pists j while Lord Inchequin headed another of Protestants, and
had

<page 179>
i74 MEMOIRS
1688. had taken Londonderry, and some other strong Towns in that
Jan. 22. Kingdom. And now being at Liberty to go where I pleased, I
repaired to London, where being arrived, I was presently sensible
of a great Alteration 5 the Guards, and other Parts of the Ar-
my, which both for their Persons and Gallantry were an Orna-
ment to the Place, were sent to quarter at a Distance, while the
Streets swarmed with ill-savoured and ill-accoutred Dutchmen,
and other Strangers of the Prince's Army ; and yet the City seem-
ed to be mightily pleased with their Deliverers, nor perceived
their Deformity, or the Oppression they laboured under, by far more
unsupportable than ever they had suffered from the English.
Tho the Convention met on the nd, there was nothing con-
siderable done till the 2 %th, when the Settlement of the Nation
being taken into Consideration, by the Commons, they voted
That King James II. having endeavored to subvert the Govern-
ment of this Kingdom, by breaking the original Contract be-
tween the King and the People j and by the Advice of Jesuits,
and other wicked Persons, having subverted the fundamental
Laws, and having lastly withdrawn himself from the Kingdom,
had abdicated the Government, and that the Throne was there-
by vacant. The next Day the Lords entered upon the Consi-
deration of the same; and several Motions were made, as there
had been the Day before in the House of Commons. Some would
. have had the King recalled upon Terms, but these were few 5
others would have had the Government continued in the King's
Name, while the Prince was invested with the executive Power
by the Stile or Title of Regent, or Protestor j some again were
for having it that the King should forfeit the Crown, and the
Prince be elected thereto; and others again were for having the
Prince and Princess crowned, as in the Case of Philip and Mary,
and that the Prince ihould be King by Descent in Right of his
Wife, while no Notice was to be taken of the Prince of PVales,
who should be rendered incapable to succeed, as a Roman Catho-
Dcc. 30. He, he having been baptized into that Church: At length,
their Lordships voted a Concurrence with the Commons as to the
main

<page 180>
Qs^JoHN Reresby. i75
main Point, the Vacancy of the Throne, but could not agree
"with them as to certain Words, and so adjourned the Debate till
the next Day, tho' it was carryed by no more than so small a
Majority as Three. The fame Day the Commons resolved, First,
That it had been found inconsistent for a Protestant Kingdom to
be governed by a Popish Prince j Secondly, That a Committee
fhould'foe appointed to bring in general Heads of what was abso-
lutely neceflary for the better Security of our Religion, Laws and
Liberty. This last Vote or Resolution was of most high Impor-
tance, and wisely intended to give Birth to the Conditions on
which the Person that next filled the Throne should be intitled
thereto, and to bind him down to a more strict Observance of
what ought to. be, than had heretofore been the Case. Mean
while, the Prince seemed not at all to concern himself with what
was going forward; and only desired that, the Circumstances of
Holland and Ireland requiring it, they would make all possible
Dispatch, and come to as early a Conclusion as they could.
The next Day was appointed a Festival of Thanksgiving for Dec, 31.
his Highnefs's Arrival, as it was worded, To deliver us from
Popery and Slavery; but it was observed that the public Ex-
pressions of Joy flowed not to the Height expected; which,
whence it came to pass, might be in Part accounted for here, but
may be better deferred to a little Distance of Time. The same
Day the Lords sat, and resumed their Debate; but differed with
the Commons as to their Term, Abdicated, and would have
had, Deserted, substituted in lieu thereof; nor could they quite
agree with them, That the Throne was absolutely vacant; so
that there was still Room for the Constitution of a Regent or Pro-
tector, or even for a Revocation of the King himself upon
Terms.
In the Midst of this I saw Lord Halifax, in Company with Feb. x.
Mr. Seymour, the quondam Speaker of the Commons, a Man of
great Parts, and much for continuing the Power in the Kings
Name, and even in his Person, could we but be secured from the
Danger of Popery. Dr. Bitrket also was present, who with great
Violence

<page 181>
i76 MEMOIRS
1688. Violence argued That the Prince was to be crowned; and urg-
ed, That England could never be happily fettled till his Highness
was at the Helm, and this Kingdom in strict Conjunction with
Holland. Seymour laid his Proposals were impra6ticable; for
that if the Prince was King, he must maintain himself as such,
by the Means of an Army, which was not to be relyed on against
their natural Sovereign. He observed, That as the late Englijb Ar-
my would not fight for Popery, they would be as backward in
fighting against their King; and that it was impossible for Eng-
land and Holland to join heartily in one and the same Interest,
being Suitors, as they were, to one and the same Mistress, namely,
Trade. That fame Night my Lord Hall'tfax told me, He was not
at first in the Secret of the Prince's Expedition j but that as his
Highness was now with us, and upon so good an Occasion, he
, thought we were obliged to stand by and defend him. I told
him, I had heard Lord Danby expected to be beforehand with
him in the Prince's good Grace's j but he gave me some Reasons
to make me believe otherwise, and took Notice that his Lord-
lhip began to lag in his Zeal; and concluded that the said Lord
could have no Hopes of being Treasurer, his Highness having
declared he would have Commissioners for the Execution of that
Office. His Lordship then proceeded to tell me he himself
should be imployed, and offered to me some Arguments to prove
the Legality of serving under the future Government; particu-
larly that tho' the King had relinquished his Function, the Con-
stitution was not for that Reason to be suffered to fall; that
fall it must, if Men would not act under those to whom it was
delegated; in fine, that in our present Circumstances the Salus
Populi was to be the Lex Suprcma. His Lordship then conti-
nued, That there were so many who declined to serve, and so
few who were fit for it, that if I had a Mind to engage myself,
there would be, doubtless, Room sufficient for me j and that af-
ter Things were upon some stable Foundation, I might enter-
tain Thoughts of being sent Ambassador to some Prince or State,
whereby I might be out of the way, till the Clouds which hung
over

<page 182>
Qs&irJOHN Reresby. 177
over us, were dispersed and blown away. His Lordship then. I<588.
offered to carry me the next Morning to the Prince, whom I had
not yet seen, advised me to be cautious of the Company I kept,
and to be very circumspect in all my Actions and Behavior.
The next Day I went to meet the Marquise, who was with the
Prince in his Bedchamber j but coming out to me, he told me his
Highness could not be publickly seen of two Hours yet to come 5
and advised me to defer the waiting on him till the next Day.
At the same Time the Lords, who were for conferring the Crown
immediately on the Prince, began to apprehend the adverse Par-
ties might prevail against: them j wherefore they found Means
to stir up the People, who in a tumultuous Manner offered a Pe-
tition to the two Houses of Parliament, That they would crown
> both the Prince and Princess of Orange, and take speedy Care of
Liberty and Property, as well as for the Defence of Ireland: But
the Lords rejected it, because it was not signed; and the Com-
mons did the same, saying, They would not be awed in their
Votes, nor be directed; for that they ought to be free. The
very same Day the King sent two Letters, the one to the Lords,
the other to the Commons; but the Messenger not being present
to testify they were brought from the King, they were laid by,
and the Person who brought them was ordered to attend on the
Lords the Monday Morning next. At this very Juncture I was
told, by a Court Lady, That it was much wondered my Friend,
the Marquise of Halifax, had been so eager for the King's having
abdicated the Government, when he absolutely knew his Maje-
sty had never gone, if he had not been frightned into it. She
assured me his Lordship had treated with the King to come again
into Business, a few Weeks before the Prince's Intention was cer-
tainly known: That she was the very Person his Lordship sent
to the King; tjiat the King actually gave him a Meeting at her
House: That they had agreed upon Terms j nay, what is more,
that his Lordship had treated with some Priests for his Return to
Court. That upon this Account his Majesty particularly depend-
ed upon him, when he named him orte of the Commissioners to
A a go

<page 183>
MEMOIRS
go to the Prince; that after having conferred with his Highness,
he sent the King a private Letter, intimating an ill Design a-
gainst his Person, and that this was the real Cause of his Maje-
sty's Flight, and the Departure of the Queen. That after the
King was brought back, Lord Halifax was one of the Peers
that came and admonished him, on behalf of the Prince, to*
leave JPJj'ttehatt, for Rochester or Hamy within the short Space
of two Hours • and that his Lordship's Reason for conveying this
ungrateful Meflage to his Majesty, was, That he was assured the
Prince's Party had in Council resolved to seize on his Person, and
imprison him: That upon the whole it must be notoriously known
to his Lordship that the King had no manner of Inclination to
withdraw either the first or the second Time; and that he was
compelled thereto out of a Principle of mere Self-preservation.
She farther imparted to me That the King was so terribly possessed
of his Danger, and so deeply afflicted when the Princess Jl?ine
went away, that it disordered him in his Understanding, but that
he recovered pretty well upon his Return. She continued, That
the Second Time he went away he so little designed any such
Thing, that he knew not which Way to set forward- one while
he resolved to go northward, and throw himself into the Hands
of the Lord Danby j another, he had Thoughts of going to the
Archbishop os Canterbury, or the Bishop of Istnchefler; that
she herself was sent to these last, to know if they would receive
and secure him, and that they neither accepted the Motion, nor
rejected it. She told me moreover, that the Lords intended to
make Use of the Marquiss for the Prince's Service, but were far
from intending him any Advantage thereby: That his Lordship
having been the first that advised the taking away of the Charters,
he would be in some Danger of being called to an Account for
it, as soon as the Government was well settled \ as well as for
other Articles, he having great Enemies among the Party to
which he adhered • at last she desired me if possible so to contrive
that she might speak to this Lordship, and endeavor to moderate
him so far as to make him think well of a Regency, and not hurry
on

<page 184>
0/ J O H N R E R E S B Y. I
on so fast for a Forfeiture or Abdication. I told her I would do 1
what I could in it; but was sensible his Lordship was too far en- -
gaged to recede. The fame Lady again told me a great Lord of
Scotland had, but a few Days before, assured her That in Case the
two Houses agreed to make the Government vacant, that King-
dom would chuse for herself, be no more a Province to England,
nor dance longer Attendance at the Door of an English Court.
The Lords this Day did nothing more than order the %th of
February, which used to be kept as the Anniversary of his Maje-
sty's Accession, to be no longer observed as a Festival; and sent
down their Resolution to the Commons concerning the Abdicati-
on and other Matters thereto relating: Which the Commons, the
Day after, taking into Consideration, they resolved to adhere,
totidem verbis, to their first Vote. Feb
I saw the Duke of Sommerjet, the Earl of Burlington, and the
Earl of Scarf dale, and some other Lords, who had all been active
in the Prince's Cause, which they now seemed in some Measure to
repent. Some of them said The Thing had run a Length they little
expected; others, That they could never have believed the Prince
would have contended for the Crown; but all agreed in Opinion
It was to be set on the Head of the Princess, and so descend in
its right Course: And the Earl of Scarfdale particularly told me
The Princess of Denmark was very sensible of the Error she had
committed in leaving her Father, to make herself of a Party with
the Prince, who now in Return was endeavouring to put her by
her Right, and obtain priority of Succession before her.
The Lords having sent down to the Commons their Reasons
for abiding by their Word Deserted, and why they thought there
was no Vacancy • the House thereupon divided, the Ays being
183, and the No's 251. The next Day the Houses had a free
Conference, the Issue of which was, That the Day after, being
the 6th, the Lords concurred with the Commons. A Vacancy
being thus on all Hands pronounced, the Lords proceeded to con-
sider in what Manner the Throne was to be filled, and in the
End passed a Vote That the Prince and Princess of Orange should
A a 2 be

<page 185>
i8o MEMOIRS
1688. be proclaimed by the Style and Title of . King fVtlliam and Queen
Mary. But the Commons proceeded/a Step farther, and voted
That all Sanction of the Laws and the negative Voice should be
vested in the King singly, declaring it improper there should be
two Negatives: That the Succession of the Crown should be to
the new King and Queen, and to the Survivor of the two j then
to their Issue, and in default thereof to the Princess Æne and her
I^lue; and in default of such Issue, to the Issue of the King in
case he should have any by another Venter, and se to the right
Line, Papists always excluded.
The Commons having completed a Scheme of Grievances and
Usurpations on the Rights of the Subject, sent up the same to
the Lords for their Concurrence, intending to lay them before
the Prince for Redress, at the lame Time they made him a Ten-
der of the Crown of England with all its Dependancies.
Mean while the Marquiss of Halifax desired me to get the
Lady, I just now mentioned, to my House, where he gave her a
9* Meeting, and was two Hours in Conversation with her. During
which, she afterwards told me (he was se free with him as to say,
She wondered he, of all Men living, should contend that the
King had abdicated, when he knew himself to have been se di-
rectly instrumental in forcing him away, by sending him Word,
That if he staid his Life would be in Danger; that for this No-
tice and Advice the King owned himself indebted to him for his
Life now, as before that he was not excluded: That to this his
Lordship replyed The King had done ill by him, in sending him
a Messenger to the Prince, and going away before he could re-
turn: That to this she returned, His Lordship was not to say that
to her, who actually knew he first sent him away, and was then
angry because he went: That then my Lord complained to her
of the King's never sending for him till the Prince was landed:
That this alse she contradicted by observing that his Lordship
knew her to have been privy to frequent Invitations he had from
the King, and that he might have had his own Terms long be-
fore, if he had not stood se aloof: That she then remonstrated to
him

<page 186>
Of Sir J o h n Reresby.
him that though he was so deeply at present imbarked in another J68&
Interest, he could not be well too cautious j for that the Earl of
Dan by would most certainly get the Start of him, and play him
the lame Game in this Court, Lord Sunder land had in the other .
that all they were now doing tottered upon an uncertain Founda-
tion j that Scotland would most assuredly chuse her own King j
that Ireland was probably lost and gone, the Lord Deputy Tyr-
connel being there at the Head of an Army of 40000 Men; and
that England herself was much divided, and in great Distraction^-
with much more to the fame Effect; That his Lordship himself
confessed there were but small Hopes of a lasting Peace from this
Settlement, tho' by far the best that could be formed at this time
of the Day; and that as he was well aware of the great Interest
she had with the King, He hoped me would upon Occasion be his
Friend, as he would be hers whenever she might stand in Need of
him. The Truthis,fhe dealt more roundly with him than any Body
else could have ventured to do with so great a Man; but his Lord-
ship knew her well, and was prepared for all she had to say; tell-
ing me himself it was but Prudence to lend an Ear to every Body.
There were most certainly great and violent Discontents at this
Time, and the Causes thereof were these j The Prince had de-
clared he had no Design upon the Crown, and now sought it all
he could; he came to settle the Protestant Religion, and yet
brought over 4000 Papists with him in his Army, a Number not
far short of what the late King had in his, but then the former
were Foreigners, the latter, for the most Part, English j public
Declaration had been made that the Birth of the Prince of Wales
was false or supposititious j that there was a private Treaty made
with France to inslave England, that the Murder of the late King
and of the Earl of Essex would be amply made out; and yet
nothing of all this appeared, excepting some small Circum-
stances relating to the Earl of EJjsex: Then the Prince kept his
Dutch Forces in Town, while the English were marched off to
remote Quarters • his Highness declared he intended ,to keep his
own Men here, and to send ours to Hol/andand Ireland; the
Princess

<page 187>
18a MEM O I R S
1/588. Princess Anne of Denmark was post-poned in the Succession; se-
veral Noblemen were disappointed ot Posts and Preferments they
deservedly expected for joining with his Highness, because they
would not vote se readily for him as he imagined. in short, the
Letters his Majesty sent to the two Houses, were not so much as
opened j and Trade, the Dutch being a frugal People, seemed to
be much abated in London, to what it had been in the King's
time: These were the Causes of the Discontents that now broke
out and appeared.
The two Houses having agreed upon a List of Grievances and
Feb. h. usurpations, and the Princess of Orange being now safe arrived,
they both in a Body attended their Highness's, who sat in two
Chairs of State, in the banquetting House, Whitehall, where the
Speaker of the House of Lords having read their Grievances and
desired Redress, at the same Time made them an Offer of the
Crowns of England, France, and Ireland, with all the Depen-
dancies and Dominions thereunto belonging. The Prince in a
short Speech told them He did accept os the same, and would do
all he could for the Preservation of their Liberties; and then
went away with the Princess j while the Heralds and several of
the Nobility proceeded to proclaim them King and Queen, in
the usual Form. The Remainder of the Day was spent in Joy and
Acclamation • tho\ some there were who had but a sorrowful
Countenance in the midst thereof.
The chief of the Articles the Convention demanded Redress of,
were suspension of the Laws,or their Execution by the King, with-
out the Consent of Parliament j the pretended Power to dispense
with Laws ;theCourt of Ecclesiastical Commissioners j the raising of
Money by Prerogative j the keeping up a standing Force in Times of
Peace, without the Consent of Parliament; the Obstructions made
to the free Choice of Members to represent the People \ the Bars to
freedom of Speech in Parliament j and the Imposition of excessive
Bail, or Fines. The Houses then desired the Oaths of Allegi-
ance and Supremacy might be suppressed, and the two following
taken in their stead \ J A. B. do Jimerely promise and Jwear that I
<witt

<page 188>
.Of Sir John Reresby.
will be faithful and bear trueAllegiance to their Majesiies KingW'il-
liam and §{ueen Mary, so help me God. — / A. B. do swear that I
do from my Heart abhor, deteft, and abjure as impious and heretical
that damnable Doctrine and Position That Princes excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope or any Authority of the See of Rome may
be deposed or murdered by their Subjects or any other whatsoever j
and I do declare That no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate or
State hath or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclefajiical or Civil within this
Realm, so help me God.
The Days following, the Houses being adjourned for lome
Time, were taken up in Congratulations to the new King, on
the Part of his Subjects, whose Numbers, upon this Occasion,,
were unspeakable; in naming and swearing a new privy Coun-
cil j by whose Advice his Majesty began first with appoint-
ing the great Officers of the Court and the Kingdom; while
the grand Expectation was, who would have the Preference
Halifax or Danby. The latter certainly hoped to be Lord
Treasurer; but the former assured me he was disappointed, and
obliged to take up with the Presidency of "the Council, a Place of
great Honour and Credit, but very small Profit j while Halifax
himself was made Lord Privy Seal, of his own Choice, an Office of
great Trust, and worth full three thousand Pounds a Year. Before
this was publickly known, his Lordship told me Danby was down
in the Mouth, and would now suffer his Neighbours to be a lit-
tle quiet about him, and that for his own Part, as they yet stood
seemingly fair together, he would give him no just Occasion of
Offence.
The King being thus seated in the Throne, the great Business
was to procure such a Parliament as would confirm what the Con-
vention had done j and because a new Election might carry some
Hazard with it, or, as was pretended, might be the Lois of
Time, when the Exigencies or the State required such immediate
Dispatch, it was, after great Disputes between the Lawyers as
to the Legality of the Thing, and warm Debates in both Houses,
agreed

<page 189>
184 MEMOIRS
1688. agreed That the Convention should be converted into a Parlia-
23. ment; which was accordingly done by a Bill framed for that Pur-
pose, which having first passed the House of Lords, was transmit-
ted down to the Commons, who having passed the same, it was
at length offered to the Royal Assent, which was granted of Course.
And thus was a Parliament obtained, after an extraordinary
Manner it must be confessed, but being thus constituted they
proceeded to prepare several Bills, and particularly one for a Com-
a8. prehension, and another for the Toleration of Protestant Dissen-
ters, which being moved by Lord Nottingham, in the House of
Peers, was seconded by some Bishops, tho' more out of Fear than
Inclination; and a third for the raising of 400,000 Pounds by a
Tax upon Land.
And now Lord slrran, who had been a little before aflaulted
in Lekefter-Fields by eight Ruffians, and had, at a Meeting of
the Scotch Nobility in London, proposed to recal King James, was
committed Pisoner to the Tower, and many of the same Nobility
being on the Point of setting forward for the Convention in their
Kingdom, were stopped. The same Day, I dined with the Earl of
Danby, who treated me with more Intimacy and Freedom than I
expected j his Lordstiip said He had made a fair Report of me to
the King, when he gave him an Account of the Surprifal of Tork j
but I found him extremely cooled with Regard to Affairs, as now
managed. He laid that being embarked with his All, he was
sorry to see Things no better conducted; that Ireland was in a
manner become invincible by our Neglect of sending Forces thi-
ther before now; that with regard to this, and other material
Points, equally unheeded, he had been pressing with the King to
a Degree even of Incivility j that he had told his Majesty, He
plainly saw he did all he could to encourage the Presbyterians
and to dishearten the Church, which could not but be absolutely
prejudicial both to himself and the Government; tho' he at the
same Time observed that his Majesty interfered but little in Coun-
cils, being prevented therefrom partly by Inclination, and partly
by want of Health. Indeed the King looked but ill, and the
Difficulty

<page 190>
Of Sir John R e r e s b y; 185
Difficulty he laboured under in swallowing, seemed to soretel him i<588.
a Man 01 short Continuance in this World. His Lordship farther
told me He had been appointed President of the Council quite
against his Will, after the King had declared he could not give
him the Staff of Treasurer, determined, as he was, that the Trea-
sury should be in the Hands of Commissioners; that he had been
offered to be Secretary of State and President both at the same
Time, and that he had declined the first; that all he had asked of
the King for himself, was a Patent to which he had a Right by
a former Grant, and that he would also be pleased to gratify some
Gentlemen who had, upon this Revolution, joined him in the
North j in fine, that the King had told him It would be by no
Means for his Interest to be out of all Business; and that he had,
in a Manner, forced the Presidentship upon him. His Lordship
expressed himself doubtful of the Continuance of Affairs, as they
now stood, and informed me That King James had sent down to
him in the North, offering to throw himself into his Hands be ^
fore he went away. To this, he said, his Answer was, by Charles
Bertie who brought the Meflage, That his own Force, which he
depended upon in the North, was not sufficient to trust to j but
that if his Majesty would bring a considerable Party with him,
and come without his Papists, he would sooner lose his Life than
he should suffer the least Injury; but that the King having no
mind to part with his Romans, would not come. His Lordship
then said That if the King would but quit his Papists, it might
possibly not be too late yet for him. He then observed That the
Duke of Gordon, a Papist, and Governor of Edinburgh Castle, the
only Magazine in Scotland, who was lately ready and willing to
surrender it to any Body, now held it out obstinately for King
James j and that the Discontents in England grew greater daily and
greater. He then reflected on Lord Halifax, the King, and all
about him, as most strangely infatuated with Notions of their own
Security • and particularly animadverted on the last mentioned Lord
for insisting with such violence, in a Speech of his, That the Prince,
ihould be intitied Legal and Rightful King of this Realm, (which
B b * I sup-

<page 191>
i86, MEMOIRS
1688. I suppose the Lord Hallifax did with a View os continuing the
old Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and to obviate all Scru-
ple about taking the New) saying it was mere Nonsense j for that
had the Prince of Wales been made King, he could never have
been deemed our lawful Sovereign, while his Father lived. But
his Lordship nevertheless appeared very serious and urgent about
the Legality of taking the new Oaths, and condemned the Bi-
shops for their Squeamistiness in that Respect, tho' they themselves
had had so large a Hand in bringing about this great and extraordi-
nary Change \ and thereupon quoted Lord Nottingham's Speech,
who, in the House of Lords, had observed That tho' he had ne-
ver in the least consented to this Revolution, but had with all his
Might opposed the Prince's Accession, as contrary to Law; yet
since his Highness was here, and we must owe our Protection to
him as King dejaflo, he thought it but just and legal to swear
Allegiance to him. I have been the more exact in the particu*
lars of this Conversation, to give the better Insight into the
Thoughts of the greatest Men upon this Occasion; tho' I won-
dered his Lordfliip would venture to be so very undisguised with
me: but he was sure I would not betray him, tho' even to Lord
Halifax.
The very fame Day, after several Attempts of the Sort, the
Marquifs of Halifax, now again Lord Privy Seal, presented me
to the King, having before requested him that a young Son of
mine might have my Company, and that he might be excused
from Duty a Year or two, on Account of his Education; but his
Majesty thought it an ill Precedent, and would give no Ear to it.
Having kisied his Hand, I told him I had had the Honour of a
Trust upon me from the late King to the very last, having been
a Stranger to his Designs till I law them in Execution, and that
I could not then, in Honour or justice, comply with them; but
that I was a firm Protestant, and had upon that Account been a
Sufferer in my Estate, concluding That I should be strictly
faithful to my Duty wheresoever I served. My Lord Halifax
then desired I might keep my Company without paying any At-
tendance,


<page 192>
Of Sir J o h n R e r e s b r. 187
tendance, to which I subjoined, Sir, Jsyou have resolved to take x688.
away my two Governments o^sYork and Burlington, J hope you
will not expeB I Jbould wait on a Jingle Company: His Majesty
laid No, He did not expeSi any Attendance from me j which was
all that pafled.
I was told by a Lady whom King James had trusted with March i.
some Seals and Jewels, that his Majesty had written her Word
to put them into the Hands of a certain Person he lent for them.
She Ihewed me the Letter, which was dated the iyth of Februa-
ry New-Stile j whereby I understood that he was to set out for
, Ireland as the very next Day, and that he depended upon his old
Friends to assist him in his Cause. This Lady told me the French
King had supplyed him with a great Treasure of Money, and
6000 Swiss Protestants: That he intended to go through Ireland
for Scotland, there to call a Parliament, instead of the propos'd
Convention; and that from thence he would march into England,
and put himself entirely into the Hands of the Protestant Inte-
rest: She added, That as she had a Friendship for the Lord Pri-
vy Seal, Ihe had a mind to disclose herself to him, if with any
Safety Ihe so might do. I told her I would speak to his Lordship
that very Night, and let her know farther.
Having an Opportunity of speaking to him accordingly, I
sailed not to be as good as my Word; tho' I must own, the To-
pic being of so nice and tender a Sort, I did it with great Cau-
tion. However, I gave him plainly to understand That the chief
Motive which induced the Lady to desire a Meeting with him,
was to impart to him what might be for his own Good, and the
Service ofthe Public. Hereupon he began to be more free and open
with me than he had hitherto been, on this Chapter j and I told
him, in general, that great Designs were on Foot; he said He
believed it, and that tho' Men seemed to be for the present Interest,
as most prevalent, it was not altogether discreet to venture too far j
that if Matters really were as I had said, it was but safe to car-
ry it fair with those in the Opposition, and to let some People
know He spoke always with great Respect of King James j that
B b 2 ^ if

<page 193>
188 MEMOIRS
i$88. if we came to Blows, it was uncertain who would strike
hardest; and that he should be glad to meet the Lady at my
House, whenever she pleased. But his Lordstiip, however, said
all imaginable Care would be taken to ward off any Danger that
might threaten us; that an Army of aoooo Men would be pre-
sently raised; that all suspicious Persons would be secured, the
Parliament intending to invest the King with a Power to impri-
son whom he pleased, and to keep them in safe Custody till they
came to a Tryal; and in fine, that the Parliament would most
plentifully furnisti the King for the Prosecution of the War. At
this Time several Lords and Gentlemen of both Houses withdrew to
their several Countries j and I was told That some who were out-
wardly great Friends to the present Government, were treating for
Terms on the other Side; which I communicated to his Lordlhip,
and particularly made mention of some he little suspected. Where-
upon his Lordship said That if King James was actually driving on
at the Rate reported, the Papists would certainly contrive some
how or other to aflassinate or kill King William, well knowing
what a Task it would be to defend the Crown on the Head of a
Woman, with much more to the fame Effect.
I waited on Lord BellaJJis, first Commissioner of the Treasury
under the late King, who told me that tho' he was himself a Pa-
pist, he had been quite averse-to the Measures which had been
taken to promote the Catholic Religion; but that his Council
never had Weight, the Warm-ones having insinuated to the King
That it came from a Man old and timerous, who having a great
Estate did not care to run any Hazard of it. He then observed
That as there was such a Number of great Men combined in this
Revolt, it was almost impossible to think the King, being a Pa-
pist as he was, should ever again be restored j but that if he
would but be a Protestant it would certainly happen in a very
short Time. This Lord was very deservedly esteemed one of the
wisest Men of his Party.
Mean while, the two Houses were at some Stand about the
taking of the new Oaths. The Commons made Icarce any Scru-
ple
March 3.

<page 194>
Of Sir ] o hn Reresby. 189
if
pie to swear; but some of the Lords refused so to do, and a n*88.
greater Number of Bishops, conceiving they could not lawfully
comply, seeing they had before engaged themselves under Oaths
to King James j and even those who did comply, did it as a lo-
cal and temporary Duty naturally resulting from the Protection
they owed to King William and Queen Mary. This Day Lord
Halifax met the Lady I just now mentioned to have received a
Letter from King James: She dealt very frankly with him, but
durst not tell him all she knew. However he desired her to be
his Friend if any Alteration of Affairs should by any Means be
brought to pals.
Now the two Houses had, some Days before, voted to stand by
King William and Queen Mary with their Lives and Fortunes,
the Commons had completed the Bill for laying a Tax upon Land,
and deliberated on other Ways for levying of Money for the
Crown, as well to raise Men, as to supply the Los; of that Branch,
of the Revenue called Hearth-Money, which they were, by an
Act for that Purpose, taking quite away, as troublesome to collect
and oppressive in its Nature j while the Fears greatly and great-
ly increased That King James was actually in Ireland, and that
Scotland would not fail to take his Part; wherefore Commissions
were given out for the raising of ioooo Foot, and twenty Shil-
lings Advance allowed to every Man; but notwithstanding this
Encouragement, and tho' the Colonels were most of them Men
of Quality and great Interest, it was much apprehended the in-
tended Troops would not be easily collected together. The French
King had, for his Irish Expedition, furnished King James with
a Squadron of 14 Men of War, 6 lesser Frigates, and 3 Fire-
ships, all well manned and fitted; as also with a Sum of 200,000 /.
in ready Money, and 50,000 Pistoles as a Present for his Pocket,
together with Plate, Tents, and a most royal and splendid Equi-
page: He assisted him also with eight experienced Field Officers,
one hundred of inferior Note, a Guard of one hundred Suoifs, a
Band of Skilful Pioneers, 15000 of his own natural Subjects,
Arms for 40000 Men more, Cannon and Ammunition in great a-
bundance,
t

<page 195>
190 MEMOIRS
* *
i<?88. bundance, and over and above made him an Offer of 15000-os
his French Troops; but King James excused himself upon this
Head, saying, He would jucceed by the Help of his oivn Subjects,
or peri/h in the Attempt. In the Midst of this threatning Dan-
ger, Lord Halifax told me the Commons were still bent upon
pursuing him and Lord Danby; and that some of them had de-
clared They would give no more Money till the King had dis-
missed them, and some other of his Officers; but says his Lord-
ship, The King is not to be wrought upon as they may imagine;
he is very well able to defend himself. They were angry with
this Nobleman for advising King Charles II. to take away the
Charter of the City of London, and for opposing the Bill of Ex-
clusion: But I told him it was quite foolish for Men who had
raised a new Fabric, immediately to pull down the main Support
of it. His Lordship said he was very little sellicitous whether
they succeeded in their Attempt or not, and that it would be no
great Mortification to him if he did surrender his Place. His
Lordship then begged of me to endeavor a Reconciliation be-
tween him and a Lady I had formerly brought to him about some
Business wherein she thought herself ill used, for that she had a
good Interest with King James.
March i> There seemed now to be great Discontents among all Sorts of
Men j Affairs looked somewhat embroiled j and 1 heard Lord
Privy Seal say, That in the Posture the Nation now stood, the
King [James"] if but a Protestant, could not be kept out four
Months; nay, Lord Danby went farther, and averred That if he
would but give us Satisfaction as to our Religion, as he easily might,
it would be very hard to make Head against him; Sayings which
I thought very extraordinary to fall from such great Men, and
»7. of the Times too j a few Days afterwards, Lord Dunbartons Re-
giment, which he had long since brought out of France, and was
now quartered at Ipjkuich, being all Scotch, and consisting of
1300 Men, chose rather to march off in a Body with their Arms
and four Pieces of Cannon, towards Scotland, than obey Orders;
which were to embark and fail for Holland. Lord Privy Seal do-
ing

<page 196>
Of Sir J o H N R E r e s b V. 191
ing me the Honour of a Visit this Day, told me The King had J*88.
sent two Regiments of Dutch Horse, and one of Dragoons, after
them; that if the Scotch Regiment had done this without
Confederacy they were all lost: • but that if any other of our Forces
were in the Secret, and under Engagement to join and support
them, there might be Danger in the Thing. I now perceived
his Lordship to be very uneasy That Danbjy, under Pretence of
Illness, so much absented himself from Business j and very much
displeased that some, very little qualifyed, had so wonderfully,
by his Means, got into Posts of Consequence, and particularly
That Lord ff^tlloughbyy a very young Man, and quite a Stranger
to Business, should be the Chancellor of the Exchequer. I told
his Lordship, I wondere^ much more That Lord Mordaunt, who
never saw a hundred Pounds together of his own, mould pretend
to be the first Commissioner of the Treasury j I then dealt very
freely with him as to the apparent Uncertainty of the Times j de-
fired him to be cautious and Circumspect, and assured him I wish-
ed his Safety and his Family's, as much as my own. His Lord-
ship then observed, among other Things, That the King used
no Arts j to which I replied, That, in my Opinion, some Arts
were neceflary in our Government; I think so too, said he, we
act a little too plainly. I acquainted his Lordship with some
Particulars which caused a Murmuring in the Town, and of some
which caused the same in the Country; whereupon he said, come
Sir John, we have Wives and Children, we must consider them,
and not venture too far. He then proceeded to intimate That
if a Change should happen, there would be a general Pardon j
tho' said he, I hear there is one which creeps up and down, where-
in I am excepted; but said he, as you know I gave you some
oblique Hints of what was likely to be brought about, (tho' so
obscure that I must own I did not take them) so you must let me
know what you hear on the other Side: Andindeedlloved himso
well that I was always ready enough to communicate to him what-
ever I heard, relating either to the Public or his own private Ser-
vice, provided I did thereby no Prejudice to any particular Person,
or

<page 197>
t9z MEMOIRS
x688. or incurred the Guilt of betraying what was told me in pure Con-
fidence.
March u. fhis Day the Lord Privy Seal told me The Rebels, meaning
the Scotch Regiment, had submitted themselves to the King's
Mercy; that their Officers would have persuaded them to fight,
tho' the Dutch were sour times their Number; and that they
were in Confederacy with others, who, as it hapned, did not
dare to lift up their Heads. His Lordship continued That there
was now great Hopes of Scotland; and indeed the Kirk Party,
which declared for King fVilliam, was by much the strongest
there. King James appeared too late in Ireland; but he had
this to plead, the Winds would not permit him to stir out of
Bresi sooner than he did. The Church of England was now fu-
riously driven at by some in both Hoftfes, King Tf^tlliam being
*3' seemingly a greater Friend to Calvinism. In the House of Lords
it was strongly debated, and particularly by the Lord Privy Seal,
which lost him some Credit, That the Reception of the Sacra-
ment should be no longer a Part of the Test, as required by the
Statute of Charles II. j and in the House of Commons it was
stifly contended That the King in his Coronation Oath should
not particularly bind himself to the Church of England as by Law
estabbshed; but both these Points being carried in Favor of the
Church, evinced her Interest to be stronger than any other in
Parliament, and would, as it was thought, induce the King to
court her a little more than he had done.
The Affairs of all Europe were now seemingly at a Stand, tho'
Preparations were every wnere making for War; the Empire was
mustering up all her Quota's against France on the one Hand,
and the Turk on the other j Spain betrayed a Willingness to side
with the Emperor; Sweden, Holland, and England were ready to
do the same; while Denmark seemed to be fixed to a Neutrality.
The Pope was still in anger with France tho' (he did all she could
to mollify him, pretending to blow up the Flames of a religious
War j but this was not to serve the Purpose at present, his Ho-
liness thinking the King of France was grown too bis? for his
Neighbours,

<page 198>
0/ J O H N R E R E S B Y. 193
Neighbours, and that therefore Regard was to be had chiefly now i<%.
for his Temporals j the Church was out of the Question, the
World was now uppermost, and Conscience was Pusilanimity and
Indolence, according to the known and avowed Maxims of the
Roman Creed.
It hapned this Day that I met with the Bishop of St. David's, l6g9,
who asked me if I thought he might safely take the Oaths of Al- March 28.
legiance and Supremacy, he being one of the Prelates that had
hitherto stood out, and were now cited to appear before the House
of Lords. I told him it were fittest for me to be advised by him
in fiich a Case, and that certainly his own Conseience could not
but dictate to him right: But I found he was already resolved,
and accordingly he went the next Day and complyed. Mean while
the Archbistiop was obstihate in his Refusal, and would not lb
much as repair to the House of Lords, disowning the Authority
either of the King or the Parliament. The Lords sent his Grace
a Letter admonishing him to come to the House j but he wrote to
excuse himself, by an Answer directed, not to the Lord Privy Seal,
or the Speaker of the House of Lords, but to the Lord Marquise
of Halifax. The House voted this Answer to be not satisfacto-
ry, but thought it unadvisable to pursue the Point too far, sen-
sible of the ill Blood that had been set on Float, by the late Se-
verity of Usage toward the Episcopal Order. A Day or two af-
terwards, the Church of England carryed a second Vote in the
House of Commons, and indeed it was high time for her Sons to
exert themselves, the Dissenters having not only prevailed that
the Oaths meant, for her Security, some Prayers in the Liturgy
and certain Ceremonies should be altered or dispensed with, but
a Motion had likewise been made that there might be some Al-
teration in the very Creed. In a sew Days afterwards a very ex-
traordinary Debate arose in both Houses, between the Dissenters
and the Members of the Church. the former pushing their Act
of Comprehension and Toleration farther than the latter were
willing it should go. They were almost equally matched, and -
sometimes one carryed a Vote in both Houses, and sometimes the
other. C c A

<page 199>
i94 M E M O I R S
1*89. A Number of Regiments, tho' many of them were unarmed,
J^rt '' uncloathed, and in want of Pay to clear off their Quarters, were
now ordered to march Northward j it being past all Doubt that
King James was now in Ireland, and intended for Scotland, tho'
the Kirk Party in the Convention' of that Kingdom were for op-
posing him. Money was at this Time very scarce at Court, and
yet great Preparations were daily making for the Coronation of
King jVtll'tam and Queen Mary. But tho' Neceflaries were cer-
tainly wanting for the Army, the Court, and the due Support of
the Government, it was not that the Parliament was backward
in giving, but the Money could not be raised soon enough, the
City refusing to advance any Money upon {he Acts that were
pasted; for great Discontents were visible to every Eye, which
seemed rather to increase daily than to diminish.
A few Days afterwards, I saw Lord Privy Seal who told me That
is the Church of England was a Sufferer, she might thank herself
for it, her Pretences being too large; that the Commons were so
slow in their Proceedings that it looked as if they thought the
whole World was confined to IVeftminJter j that the King also
was very dilatory, to the great Hindrance of Business, tho Dis-
patch could at no Time be ever more required • His Lordship
continued, That there was a Necessity for acting with so many
Fools, that they alone were wise who had nothing to do; and
moreover, That he had heard there werelome Irish landed in Scot-
land; that Scotland, however, would give them but a cool Re-
ception; that King James had nothing to depend on here but
the Army, which would be so disposed of as to be unable to do
any Thing for him; and that if he came not very soon, he would
be disappointed of this his only Hope: He concurred with me
That the Earl of Danby had procured the Government of Hull
as a Place of Retreat where he might make his own Terms in
Case of a Change of the Times j and assured me He was more
afraid of the Consequences of King iVilliams Cough, which in-
creased upon him with great Violence, than of any Thing else.
I must confess I, upon this Occasion, temporized a little, it being
neither

<page 200>
Os Sir J o h n Reresby. 195
neither safe nor prudent to be too open with a Privy Councellor,
and lo great a Minister, especially as I had been guilty of Free-
doms with his Lordship to little or no Purpose ; tho'whenever he
askedme my Opinion, I never sailed to deal uprightly with him.
But now let us take a View of the Coronation of our new King April i
and Queen, a splendid Sight, as usual. The Procession to the
Abbey was quite regular, tho' not so complete in the Number of
Nobility, as at the two last Solemnities of the fame Kind. Par-
ticular Care was had of the House of Commons, who had a Part
prepared for them to sit in, both in the Church and in the Hall.
They had Tables spread for them at the Banquet, to which I, a-
mong other Friends, had the,Honour of being admitted, as well as
to be with them throughout the whole of the Shew; so that I had
a very fair Opportunity of seeing all that past. The Bishop of
London crowned them both, assisted by 'the Bishop of Salisbury,
the late Doctor Burnett who preached the Sermon, and two o-
thers. A few Days afterwards, being with Lord Privy Seal, the
Bishop of Salisbury came in,and complained heavily of the slow Pro-,
ceedings of the House of Commons, saying the Dutch would clap
up a Peace with France is they did not mend their Pace ; observed
that the Church of England was in the Fault, and expressed himself
as if he thought they meant a Kindness to K'mgjantes by their Me-
thod of Procedure. Lord Privy Seal agreed with him in his Senti-
ments, and added that the Church People hated the Dutch, and had
rather turn Papists than receive the Presbyterians among them ; but
that on the other Hand these were to the full as rank and inve-
terate against those, and would marr all their Business, by their
Inadvertance with Regard to their Bill of Comprehension, and
their Ill-timeing of other Bills j in short that they would disgust
those from whom they looked for Indulgence. They were both
angry with the Commons Address to the King the Day before,
desiring him to support and defend the Church of England ac-
cording to his former Declaration, and to call a Convocation of
the Clergy, which the Bilhop said would be the utter Ruin of
the Comprehension Scheme. In fine, the Marquils took Notice,
C c z that,

<page 201>
i96 MEMOIRS
i62?. that, at the Rate we proceeded, the Government could not but be
very short lived.
King James was all this While in Ireland, the Convention of
Scotland opposing him with Might and Main, and declaring the
Throne of their Kingdom to be vacant: Presently after we had
Advice that they had voted William and Mary to be King and
Queen of Scotland, converted their Convention into a Parliament,
and invited the Englijh Forces on the Borders to come into their
Kingdom, to be ready to assist them against King James and his
Friends, but at the same Time that they had prepared certain
Conditions, and drawn up a List of certain Grievances, for the
King to redress and assent to; and particularly that Episcopacy
should no longer have Being in Scotland, and that the King should,
with regard to them, embrace the Presbyterian Persuasion. The
Duke of Gordon, however, still kept the Castle of Edinburgh.
At home the Parliament was taken up with raising of Money}
and the Commons address the King to declare War with France y
and promise him all the needful Supplies. But great Heats broke
but between the two Houses about the Oath Bill, the Lords be-
ing willing to excuse the Bishops, convinced that several of them
would forfeit their Sees rather than comply; while the Commons
urged that no Soul should be excused. But as widely as they for
the present differed about this, they concurred in the Bill for the
'April ao. Toleration of all Protestant Dissenters. The next Day the King
gave a favorable Answer to the Address which reminded him of
his Promises to the Church of England, and moved him for a
Convocation. A Day or two after, he returned Answer to the
Commons Address That he would declare War with France, tell-
ing them he complyed with their Request, and the rather as the
French King had in a Manner begun, and assuring them that
whatever Money they gave should be faithfully applied to the
desired End.
About this'Time a very fad Accident hapned, which for a
while was the Discourse of the whole Town; Mr. Temple, Son
to Sir fVilliam Temple, who had marryed a French Lady with
10,000

<page 202>
Q^5»JohnReresby. , 197
20,000 Pistoles, a sedate and accomplished young Gentleman, ^88.
who had lately, by King JVtlliam, been made Secretary of War,
took a Pair of Oars, and drawing near the Bridge, leapt into the
Thames and drowned himself, leaving a Note behind him in the
Boat, to this Effect, My Folly in undertaking what I could not
perform, whereby some Misfortunes have befallen the King's Ser-
vice, is the Cause of my putting my self to this sudden End • I
wish him Success in all his Undertakings, and a better Servant.
A dangerous Thing it is for some Constitutions to give Way to
Discontent, and imaginary Notions, but not to digress on this
melancholy Subject j
The Parliament proceeded to raise Money, but upon Terms
and Persons, that gave great Diflatisfaction. The Poll was quite
strict, searce a Soul being exempted therefrom, but such as re-
ceived Alms, the House consenting to the Grant of no less than
four Millions for one Year only. And now Lord Halifax told
me That the Marquiss of Caermarthens Retirement into the
Country, his Pretences to be sick, and his so seldom appearing
at Court instilled fresh Jealousies of him j That he had heard he
should say Things could not long continue thus; That his Rela-
tions and Friends were very dangerous in their Discourse, and
that he himself was very open j That he found this new Marquiss
had no mind to be inward or intimate with him; That he sup-
posed his Lordship might imagine he had kept him at a Distance
From the Treasurer's Staff; but that imagine what he would, he
did not altogether deserve it; that, of all Men, in the World,
the King never would have invested him with that Office, nor,
indeed, with any other that was very considerable, as he would
find, if Affairs but held out till September, Hereupon I acquaint-
ed his Lordship with some Grounds that made it suspected the
President was discontented. His Lordship then continued That
for his own Part he found the King very well affected towards
himself, that his Majesty did not only carry it fair to him, per-
sonally, but that from third Hands he had it That the King used
very kind Expressions of him behind his back; for that he gave
him but very little trouble either on account of himself, or of other
People,

<page 203>
198 ME M O I R S
i62?. People, while the Lord President knew no End of his Importu-
nities. This urged me to fay, 1'hat I did not know what his
Lordship might thereby be a Loser with the King, but that he
gained much with others I was certain; for that it was a com-
mon Saying No Lord used his good Offices for his Country-
men but the Lord President; and this I observed, because the
Lord Privy Seal, tho' otherwise very kind and free with me, did
not espouse my Interest as I expected he would. But his Lord-
fliip farther told me That the King being so very inaccessible as
he was, and confining himself so to Hampton, when there was such
absolute Need of the most stirring ^£kion, was the Destruction
of all Business. That he had desired his Majesty but to lye some-
times in Town, and that his Answer was, It was not to be done
except his Lordship desired to see him dead, which, said my
Lord, was a yery snort Answer. To conclude, he proceeded to
say That if the King survived this Summer, which he thought he
fairly might, notwithstanding his consumptive Disorder, or
cscaped the murderous Hands of the Papists, he doubted not but
the Government would stand firm tho' it devolved to the Queen
singly • but that however the Concern he had for his Family
would naturally tempt him to act with all the Moderation that
might be; that upon this Consideration it was he had taken no
great or additional Places, no new Honours, no blue Ribbon, as
others had done.
The next Day I was to go to Hampton Court, where his
Lordship was to meet me and present me to the King before I
went into the Country. His Lordship repeated his Promises
to do for me what he could, but said It would be but Discreti-
on to let two or three Months pass over-head, before I prefled
Matters too much, to the End we might the better see what was
Jikely to become of Things.
Here Sir John Ends.


<page 204>

THE
I N D E X.
ABdicated, the Lords and Com-
mons agree about it. Page 179.
Admiralty, put into Commis-
sion, 50.
Albemarle [the Duke of] and Prince
Rupert beat the Dutch, 7. censures
Lord Hallifax, 99. sent against Mon-
mouth, 114. threatned by an un-
known Person, 128.
Ambassador [ the Sfanijh ] his House
rifled, 169.
Antwerp [City of] damaged by an
Inundation, 76.
Argyle [the Earl of] in Arms against
K. "James, 114. taken Prisoner, 117.
Arlington [Lord] with Buckingham and
Hallifax.Ambassador to Holland, 12.
Armstrong [Sir Thomas] committed to
the Tower, 94.
Army. See King, Commons, &c.
Arran [Lord] committed to the Tower,
184.
Aflauks, several publickly in theStreets,
iz8.
B
BAg piper, a Story of one, 6.
Bavaria [the Elector of J at the
Siege of Vienna, 95.
Beaufort [the Duke of] ill "used by
the Prince of Orange, 172.
Beaumont [Colonel] and five Captains
sent Prisoners to Windsor, 154. ca-
shiered, ibid.
Bed/oe, King Charles sofp?cts him, 41.
accuses the Treasurer, 48.
Bellasi [ Lord ] blames K. J ames'%
Conduct, 188.
Berwick [ the Duke of ] receives Irijh
Papists into his Regiment, 153..
Bill of Rights, presented to the Prince
and Princess of Orange, 182. for
tollerating Dissenters, 196.
Bisfiops, their Remonstrances to King
James about Liberty of Conscience,
147.
Bishops in the Tower. See Canterbury.
Scruple the Oaths to William and
Mary, 189.
Bohemia [Queen of] her death, r.
Box [black] with Monmoutiit Friends,
5+-
Blackamoor, the Death ofone shame-
fully perverted, 19.
Brandon [Lord] tryedand condemned,
126. pardoned, ibid.
Breval [the converted Jesuit] betrays
the Business of Luzance, 18.
Bn)?o/,submits to the Prince of Orange,
168.
Buda, taken by the Duke of Lorrain,
105.
Buckingham [the Duke of] leaves the
Kingj, — wants Fairfax's Daughter,
— his Character, 2. in Disgrace, 8.
Proclamation against him, ibid, a
professed Enemy to Clarendon, ibid.
in favor and Prime Minister, 9. Am-
bassador to Holland, 12. a great
Friend to Danby, ibid, in Disgrace
again, 14. ungratefully served by the
Treasurer, ibid, under the King's
great Displeasure, ibid, angry with
the City of Ybrk,g$. Death and Cha-
racter, 139.
Burlington [the Earl of] resigns his
Lieutenancy, 145. dissatisfied with
the Prince of Orange, 179.
Burnet [Doctor] his Warmth in be-
half of the Prince of Orange, 175.
remarkable Conversation between
him and Hallifax, 195.
CAbais, what meant by them, 57.
their Pretences, ibid.
Canterbury [ the Archbishop of ] and
the Five, petition King James, 147.
ordered before the Council, 148.
committed to the Tcswer,ibid. bailed,
149. Information against them, ibid.
acquitted, ibid.
Canterbury [ idem ] refuses the Oaths
to William and Mary, 193. his Be-
haviour in that respect, ibid.
Caftlemain [Lord] Ambassador to the
Pope, 132.
Catharine [Queen] troubled with a
constant Fluor, 6.
Cavcndijh [Lord] a Chief of the Ca-
bals, 57.
Charles [the Second] fond of Pleasure,
4. a Favorite with the Ladies, ibid.
Marries, 6. borrows most of the rea-
dy Money, 12. (huts the Exchequer,
ibid, angry with Buckingham, 14. .
complains of his Debts, 16. a so-
lemn Asseveration of his, 22. is not
hearty towards his Brother, 27. pre-
tends to distrust the Parliament, ibid.
that he cannot break with France,
ibid, will enter into no Alliances
without Money, 29. complains of
the Parliament, 30. informs them of
an Alliance with the Prince of O-
range, 32. prevails for Supplies, ibid.
his Answer to some Doubts, 3 3. taxes
the Commons with tediousness, 34.
blames the Commons for the Peace
with Frances, excuses himself from
any concern in the same, 37. informs
the Parliament of the Popiih Plot,
38. suspects it, 39. excuses Danby
for concealing it, ibid, is re^ly to li-
mit a Popish Successor,,* o. calls Bed-
loe a Rogue, 41. reflects on Lord
Strajford, 4;. dissatisfies the Nation,
ibid promises to disband the Army,
and prosecute the Plot, ibid, sends
his Brother to Flanders, 46. disputes
the Choice of a Speaker^, declares
he has pardoned the Treasurer, 48.
demands Money for the Sea,Service,
53. knows not what Course to take,
54. declares against Monmoutl/s Le-
gitimacy, ibid, fends for the Duke
from Scotland,:,?, will never be part-
ed from him again, ibid, repaires
and beautifies Windsor, ibid, his man-
ner of living there, 58. declares he
cannot disinherit the Duke, ibid, a
remarkable saying of his, 59, in di-
stress and condemns the Plot, ibid.
his Apology for Hallifax,6o. a very
remarkable saying of his, ibid, in an
extraordinary fit of Raillery, 63 . will
not disturb dieSucceflion.o^.his short
Answer to the City, 65. particular
Reason why he would not forsake
. his Brother, 69. a private and re-
markable Declaration of his, 70. is
thanked by the City, ibid, a re-
markable complaint of his, 72. re-
flects on Shaftsburfi Jury, 73. re-
primands the Middlesex Justices, 74.
a humourous conceit of his, 76.
thought to be weary of the Lady
D d Forts'

<page 205>
The
I N D E
Tcrfsmottth, 76. forbids his Servants
to be with Monmoutb, 84. justifies
H alii fax against Rochester, 88. a
conspiracy against his Life twice de-
feated, 93, 94. his Affection for
Monmoutb, 97,. an Instance of his
good Nature, 103. how he lived at
New-market, ibid. Teconds the French
King's unreasonable ossers to the
Confederates,;^'/ fails sick and dies,
106, 107.
Christendom, in danger of a destructive
"War, 90.94.
Church'[of England] driven at, 192.
prevails over her Enemies, 193.
'Churchill [Lord] a Favorite with King
James'i Queen, Y27. his Ingratitude
to King James, 167.
Clarendon [ the Chancellor ] blamed,
6. his Fall, 8.
Clergy, exert themselves against Pope-
ry, 150.
Cleveland [Duchels of J the finest Wo-
man 9s her Age, 6.
Clifford [Lord] declares himself a Pa-
pist, and resigns his Staff, 1 2.
Commissioners, sent to treat with the
Prince of Orange, 168.
Committee [to inspect Colemans Let-
ters] their Report concerning the
Duke, 5 1.
Commons [the Mouse of] summon the
Duke of Buckingham, 14, divided,
1 5. at variance with the Lords, ibid.
grant Money for twenty Ships, 16.
in wrath with the Papists, 18. di-
spute with the Lords, 19. grant Mo-
ney for thirty Ships, 22. press the
King to make Alliances, 25. will
not suftl,r the Lords to meddle with
a Money,Bill, 26. 42.49. will grant
no Money without a League with
Holland, 30. thank the King for the
Marriage of his Niece, 32. holdout
against supplies, Hid. grant a Sum
for the Interment of Charles I. ibid.
Vole to assist towards a War,
ibid, have an ill Opinion of the
King, notwithstanding their Votes
in his Favour, 3;. Vote a Million
against France, ibid, reflect on ill
Councils, 34. jealous of the new
raised Army, 35. ibid. 37. bestir
themselves against Evil Councilors,
35, 36. resolve to consider the State
1 of Popery, 3 5. Vote Money for dis-
banding the Army, 37. their Reso-
lution about the Plot, 39. would re-
move the Duke from about the King,
40. debates thereupon, ibid, ad-
dress the King to adhere to his Par-
liament, 42. their Character, and
,why some would have dissolved them,
46. a new one elected, ibid, differ
with the King, ibid, angry With
the Treasurer, 47. desire £ha Lords
to commit him, 48. press them for
Justice on him, 49. dispute the King's
Power to pardon, 51. reflect on
Portsmouth, ibid, consider of Means
to preserve the King's Person, ibid.
debates about the Exclusion, 52. in-
sist on a change of the Succession,
.53. Vote against the Bishops, ibid.
commit the Bill of Exclusion, 54.
continue to pursue the Duke, 59.
desire Hallifax may be dismissed,
60. promise the King fair upon
certain Conditions,62. violent against
the chief Councellors, 64. quarrel
with the Lords about Fitz harris,68.
flatter themselves the Bill of Exclu-
sion will pass, ibid, unexpectedly dis-
solved, ibid. Vote K. James a Reve-
nue for Life, 112. thank him for
his Speech, and Loyally Address
him, ibid, appoint a Committee of
Religion, 113. Debates about Reli-
gion, ibid. Vote a Supply to King
James, 114. promise to stand by
him against Monmoutb, 11 5. begin
to be at variance with King James,
122. bent upon pursuing of Hallifax
and Danby, 190. address King If 11-
Ham to declare War with France,
196. have a Contest with the Lords
about the Bishops, ibid.
Conference [a free one] between the
Lords and Commons, 179.
Coningsmark [Count] accused as ac-
cessary to the Death of Mr. Tbynn,
79. apprehended, 80. his Behaviour
before the King, ibid, his Person,
£sfo ibid, tryed and acquitted, 82.
Consciences [tender] a Proclamation
in favor of them, 11.
Conspiracy, against the King and
Duke, 93. discovered, 94.
Convention, their Votes against King
James, 174. debates thereupon, ibid.
Resolutions thereupon, 175. tumul-
tuously petitioned to Crown the P.
of Orange, 177. attend the Prince
and Princess with the Bill of Rights,
182. the Grievances they require
Redress of, ibid, convert themselves
into a Parliament, 184.
Convention [in Scotland] oppose King
James, 196. Vote for ffl/liam and
Mary, ibid, against Episeopacy, ibid.
Cook [Mr. of Derby/hire] sent to the
Tower, 125.
Corporations, purged of their Church
of England Aldermen, 144.
Corruption [Public] doubts aboutit, 25.
Coventry [Sir John] assaulted in the
Street, 11.
Council [Privy] a new one called, 50.
Counter-petitioners, declared against in
Parliament, 58.
Court [the] dissatisfied with the Pro-
ceedings in Parliament, 16. Favo-
rites there, at variance, 127. violent
Resolutions said to have been taken
there, 128.
Crequy [the Duke] cornea, with the
Archbishop oCRbeims, Ambassador
from France, 26.
Cromixiell [Oliver] his Character and
Person, 1.
D
DAnby [the Earl of] his Rise, 8.
becomes High Treasurer, 12.
introduces the Author to the King,
22. reported to have forwarded the
Match with the Prince of Orange,
31. blamed, 39. jealousy between
him and the Duke, 40. accused by
Montague, 42. impeached, 44. ready
to deliver up his Staff, 47. connives
at the mean Practices of his Wife,
ibid, accused by Bedloe, 48. absconds,
49. Reflections on his Fall, ibid.
committed to the Tower, 50. pleads
the King's Pardon, ibid, while a
Prisoner, averse to the Ministry, 72.
said to have been great with the Da-
chess of Portsmouth, 89. begins to
speak kindly of Hallifax, 91. en-
larged in spite of his Enemies, 101.
appears at Court, 102. well with
Hallifax, ibid, prepares for a Re-
volution, 158. seizes on York, 163.
takes the Autbor Prisoner, ibid, dis-
appointed, 183. much dissatisfied
with King William, 184. his private
Inclination for King James, 185.
190. Marquifs of Caermarthen, and
quite averse to the Court, 197.
Darcy [Col. John] laid aside, 127.
Dartmouth [Lord] at the Head of the
Fleet, 1 59.
Debates. See Commons, Peers, Houses,
Lords, Convention.
Delamere [Lord] hisTryal, 129.
Denmark [the Prince of] comes to Lon-
don,!), deserts K. James, 167.
Denmark [the Princess Anne of] de-
serts her Father, 167.
Dissenters, thank King James for his
Toleration, 138. almost an equal
Match for the Church in Parliament,
'93-
Dugdale,aa Evidence against Lord Staf
ford, 61.
Duke [the] S^York.
Dunbarton [the Earl of] disperses the.
Rebels in Scotland, 117. his Regi-
ment refuses Orders and revolts, 190.
they submit, 192.
Dunblain, [ Lord Viscount] See Dan-,
by.
Dutch, the first War with them, 6.
unwil-

<page 206>
The
X.
I N D E
unwilling to come to Action, ibid.
beaten.7. the second Warwith them,
11. exceed us in Men of War, 16.
alarm King James, i c i.
E
ELections [into Parliament] be-
come expensive, 13. for what rea-
sons^ ibid.
English, obtain two Victories over the
Dutch, 13.
EJsex [the Earl of] one of the chiefs
of the Cabals, 57. committed to the
Tower, 94.
EJirees [Count </'] Admiral of the
French, 13.
Europe, in a state of uncertainty, 192.
Exclusion. See Commons.
Exclusionists despair of Success, 56.
F
FEbruary [the 8th] ordered to be
observed as a Festival, 179.
Fe-verstjam [Lord] has the chief hand
in calling the Duke from Flanders,
56.commandsagainllMo«/Btfa/Z',i 19.
disbands the Army, 171.confined to
Windsor Castle, 172.
Finch [the Sollicitor General] turned
out, 133.
Fitz-harris, his Impeachment, 67, re-
jected by the Lords, 68. arraigned,
sentenced and executed, 70.
Fleet. See Seamen. State of it given
in, 16. exceeded by that both of
France and Holland, ib.
Foubert [Monsr.] consults out Author
about Coningsmark, 81 •
Fox [Paymaster oftheAimy] laid aside,
,27,
France [the King of] beats the Prince
of Orange, 26. fends a solemn Am-
bassy to our King, ibid, takes ad-
vantage of the unsettled State of
England, 71. unaccountab y in our
good Esteem, 105. Truce between
him and the Emperor, ibid, perse-
cutes the Protestants, 126. his Di-
sputes with the Pope, 144. his ex-
traordinary Assistance to K. James,
189.
French, join us, 12. betray us, ibid.
at the Bottom of the Duke's second
Marriage, 14. exceed us in Ships of
War, 16. threaten Flanders and Ger-
many, 90.
G
Gloucester [ the Duke of] his
Death, 5.
Gloucester [a third RateJ lost on Tar-
moutb Sands, 83.
Godfrey [Sir Edmundbury] murdered,
38.
Godolphin [Mr.] made Secretary of
State, 103.
Gooderick [Sir Henry} active against
King James in Yori/hire, 161, 162.
Gordon [the Duke of] holds out Edin-
borough Castle, 196.
Government, the Question whether it
should be Monarchialor Republican,
69.
Graston [the Duke of] Colonel of one
of the Regiments of Guards, 73. de-
serts K. James, 167.
Grant [Mr.] an Anticourtier in pri-
vate Conference with Lord Hallisax,
75-
Gregory [Serjeant] Speaker of the House
of Commons, 47.
Grey [Lord] escapes, 94. commands
the Horse in Monmoutb's Army, 120.
Guards [the English} sent twenty Miles
from London, 171.
H
HAles [Sir Edward] his remark-
able Tryal, 134.
Hallisax [the Lord] his first Appear-
ance, 12. goes with Buckingham and
Arlington, Ambassador to Holland,
ibid, an Enemy to Danby, 51. signa-
lizes himself for the Duke of York,
60. under the Displeasure of the
Commons, ibid, in fear about the
Succession, ibid, first Minister, 61.
a Saying of his, 62. complains of
the Commons, 6c. complains of the
King, ibid, his seeming hypocrisy,
ibid, the Cause of it,66.has thoughts
of retiring, ibid, most averse to the
French Interest, 71. a shrewd Re-
mark of his, 72. upon bad Terms
with Portsmouth, ibid, thought in-
clin'd towardsShastsbury, 73. an Ob-
servation of his upon the Duke's
Affairs, 74. a very just Remark of
bis, ibid, has a Conference with
Grant the Favorite, 75. a wife
Answer of his, ibid, complains of
the People about the Duke, ibid.
argues in behalf of a Parliament, 77.
in Danger of being challenged by
Monmouth, 83. a Marquiss,85- his
Answer to our Author about the City
of York, ibid, accuses Rochester, 86.
Privy Seal, ibid, expostulates with
theDuke,88. has Words with Ports-
mouth, 89. his honesty applauded,
90. averse to French Councils, ibid.
inclines towards Danby,91 attempted
to be reconciled with Rochester, ibid.
laments Portsmoutb^ Influence over
the King, 92. blamesthe King, ibid.
differences between him and Roche-
ster widen, 95. a Friend to Man-
mouth, 96. keeps his Ground, ibid.
thinks the Duke of York will never
forgive him, 98. excuses himself
with regard to Monmouth, 100. ear-
nest with the King for a Parliament,
ibid. President of the Council, 108.
declares his Mind to James \\. 109.
in Disgrace, 122. his Discourse with
the Author about a Reconciliation,
176. accused of double Dealing,
177. severely taxed by a Lady, 180.
his Doubts about the Revolution,
181. made Privy Seal by K. William,
183. his Apprehensions about the
Revolution, 187, 188. has a second
Discourse with a Lady, 189. thinks
King James maybe restored, 190.
jealous of and angry at Danby % Con-
duct and Interest, igr. dreads King,
James's Invasion, ibid, angry with
the Church of England, 194. his
thoughts about the Times, ibid, Use.
remarkable Conversation between,
him and Bishop Burnet, 195. difc
courses remarkably with our Author
about the Marquiss of Caermarthen,
197. Hearth-money, abolished, 189.
Henrietta [the Princess] goes with
her Mother to Paris, 5.
Herbert [ ViceAdmiral] laid aside, 131.
137. retires to Holland, ict.
Hicks1* Hall, strange Alterations there,
150.
Hide. See Hyde.
Holland [the Province of] damaged
by an extraordinary Inundation, 76.
Holland [the States of] uneasy at our
Inaction, 98.
Holstein [the Resident os] asperses the
Treasurer, 41. denies it, and offers
to be his belt Friend, ibid.
Horn [Count ] Discovers Monmouth,
120.
Hough [President of Magdalen Col-
ledge] turned out, 142.
Houses [ the Two ] great Heats be-
tween them, 55. prorogued, ibid.
Howard [Lord Henry] a severe Re-
flection on him, 31.
Howard [ Lord] sent to the Tower,
70.
Howard [Lord of Esirici} sent to the
Tower, 94.
Hoavard [Lord Thomai] Ambassador at
Rome, 155.
Hungary [the Kingdom os] calls in the
lurk, 90.
Hyde and Seymour, against a Parlia-
ment, 77.
Hyde [ Mr. ] lost on Yarmoutb Sands,
83.
Hull [the Town of] surprised by Mr.
Cos ley, 168.
D d * Jwnts


<page 207>
The
X.
I N D E

JAmes [the Second] proclaimed at
York, 107. the good Effects of
his Declaration, 108. goespublickly
to Mass, ibid, fills the Army in Ire-
land with Papists, log. crowned
with his Queen, ibid, an Observation
of his upon Oates's Conviction, 111.
his Speech to the Two Houses, 11 2.
Compliments the House of Com-
mons, ibiU. desires an extraordinary
Supply,! i4.hasa trueEnglishHeart,
ibid, desires Credit upon some Fund,
116. sticks by the Popilh Officers,
122. upbraids the Commons, 124.
prorogues the Parliament, 126. Con-
jectures thereupon, ibid, his Deal-
ings with the Commons who Voted
not to his liking, 128. continues his
Amour with Mrs. Sidley, I31. his
Methods to increase Popery, 132.
cashiers the Protestant Officers in
Ireland, 13 3. a remarkable Expres-
sion of his, ibid, betrays himself a
most bigotted Papist, 134. displaces
more Protestants to make room for
Papists, 134. his Endeavours to re-
peal the Test Act, 136. sets at
nought the Parliament,! 37. his Pre-
tences forLiberty of Conscience, 13 8.
upbraids the Church, and courts the
Dissenters, 141. puts out several Al-
dermen of the City, 141. Questions
he ordered to be put to all justices
of the Peace,£3V. 143. how deceived
in the Inclinations of the People,
146. Orders the Bilhops to read
his Proclamation, 147. repents it,
148. his Power to dispense with
Laws discussed, 150. much disturbed
•thereat, ibid', goes down to pacify
the Fleet, 151. declares he will call
a Parliament, 152. injoins our Au-
thor to stand for York, ibid, makes
great Preparations against the Dutch,
1 54. appoints Mayors and Aldermen
as he pleases, ibid, his Proclamation
about the Prince of Orange,
begins to repent of his Errors, 157.
endeavours to satisfy the Nation
about the Birth of the pretended
Prince of Wales, 159. the Number
of his Army, ibid, marches to Salts
bury, 165. returns to London, 168.
withdraws himself, 169. his Letter
to the Army, 170. taken in a Hoy,
171. goes to Rochester, ibid leaves
the Kingdom, 172. hospitably re-
ceived by the King of France, 173.
sends a Letter to each House, 177.
;Secret History concerning his Abdi-
cation, ibid. Fears about his Inva-
sion, 189. a generous Saying re-
ported of him, 190. continues in
Jrelandj ibid.
w
Jejseries [when chief Justice] his Inso-
lence towards the Cities of London t
and York, 118, 119.
Jejseries [when Chancellor] an extra-
ordinary Story of him, 130. ano-
ther, 131. withdraws with the Seal,
and taken, 169, 170.
Inchequin [Lord] at the Head of the
Protestants in Ireland, 173.
Jones [the Lord Chief Justice] turned
out, 232. his Remonstrance there-
upon, ibid.
Judges.ordered to consult the Disposi-
tions of Men about the Test Act,
.36.
Justices, [of the Peace] examined as to
three Important Points, 143. what
hapned thereupon, ibid.
K
King [the] See Charles, James, Wil-
liam.
Kingdom [the] in a Melancholy State,
53-
L
LAdy [an anonymous one] her re-
markable Conversation with
Lord Hallifax, 180. much trusted
by the King, 187. desires to talk a
second time with LordHallifax, ibid.
has a second interview with Lord
Hallifax, 189.
Land, taxed, ibid.
Lautherdale [ the Dutches of] a beau-
tiful Woman, 28. supposed to have
been the Mistresi of Oliver Crom-
well, ibid, she complains of the
Duke's Management, ibid.
Lincolnshire [the Levels of it] over-
flowed, 76.
London [the City of] reduced to Asties,
8. the Anticourt Party strong there,
5j. angry the Parliament is pro-
rogued, ibid, petitions the King for
the sitting or the Parliament, 65.
Risings apprehended there, 69. re-
turns thanks to the King, 70. Dan-
ger of its rising for Monmoutb, 119.
how altered at the Revolution, 173.
London [the Bishop of] put away from
the Council-board, 129.
Lord Mayor. See Mayor.
Lords. See Peers.
Lords [Spiritual and Temporal] in-
vite the Prince of Orange to Town,
169, send four Noblemen to attend
King James to London, 171. deiire
the Prince of Orange to take the
Government upon him, 172. differ
with the Commons about the Word
abdicated, 175. insist on the Word
.deserted, 179. fcruple to take the
new Oaths, 189. have a Contest
with the Commons about the Bi-
shops, 196.
Lorrain [the Duke of] die Emperor**
General at the Siege of Vienna, 95.
Lumley, [LordJ Orders to apprehend
him, 1 59.
'Luzance [the French Jesuit] his Story,
MAry [Princess of Orange ] pro-
claimed Queen, 182. crowned
195.
Mayor [the Lord of York] sent for to
Court, 95. indiscreetly exposes the
City to the King's Displeasure, 97.
Members [many of both Hou les] come
armed to the Parliament at Oxford,
69. suspected to have had a Design
of constraining the King, ibid.
Monarchial, the Question whether th*
Government should be so or not, 69.
Money [granted by Parliament] See
Commons.
Monmoutb [the Duke of] orders Sands
to way-lay Sir John Coventry, 11.
sent to the Relief of Of/end, 34. in
Councils against his Uncle of York,
54. his Character occasionally given,
ibid, many ready to assert his Right
to the Crown, ibid, sent against the
Rebels in Scotland, 55. affects to be
popular there, 56. returns from
Flanders without leave, ibid, loses
all his Employments, ibid, becomes
a Chief of the Cabals, 57. under the
King's severe Displeasure, 73. his
ridiculous Behaviour towards Halli-
fax, 83. flees, 94. surrenders him-
self, 96. the Consequences thereof,
ibid, banished Whitehall, 98. lands
at Lyme, 114.his Declaration against
King James, 115.8 Reward for ta-
king him dead or alive, ibid, beats
the Dorset/hire Militia, ibid, be-
comes Master of Taunton, 116. as-
sumes the Title of King, and ad-
vances towards Bristol, 118. at the
Head of a numerous Army, 119. de-
feated, 120. taken Prisoner, ibid.has
an Interview with the King, 12 s.
circumstances of his Execution, ibid.
Morocco, an Ambassador from thence
to the King, 75.
Mountague [Ralph] intends to accuse
the Trealurer. 41. his Papers seized,
42. accuses the Trealurer, 43. cen-
sured for disclosing the Secrets of
his Ambassy, 44. discovered in Dis-
guise at Dover, 45.
N
NEvjcastlt sthe Duke ofj disgust-
ed, 6c. Lord Lieutenant of all
York-


<page 208>
The
X.,
I N D E
Yorkshire, icy. his Behaviour as
such upon News of the Prince of
Orange's Invasion, 160, 161. his
Neglect of K. J ames % Interest, ibid.
165. his Orders contemptuously dis-
obeyed, 166. is rifled of his Arms
and Horses, 168.
Newmarket [the Town of] a provi-
dential Fire there, 93.
Nonconformists, visit the Bishops in
the Tower, 149. reprimanded by
the King, ibid, their Answer, ibid.
Non obstante,u(ed in favor of Papists, 133
Norfolk, a Dispute among the Brothers
of that noble Family, 23.
Norfolk [the Duke of] stedfast to the
Protestant Cause. 151.
Nuncio [ the Pope's] makes his Entry
into Windsor, 139.
O
OAtcs [Doctor] his first Appear-
ance, 38. how he got acquainted
with the Plot, Aid. an Evidence a-
gainst Lord Stafford, 61. his Inso-
lence, 63. convicted of Perjury, 111.
Oath. See Test.
O Brian [the Lord] lost on Yarmouth
Sands, 83.
Ogle [Lady] her Marriage with Mr.
Thynn, 77.
Oliver. See Cromwell.
Orange [the Princess of] dies in Lon-
don, 5.
Orange [the Prince of] pays a Visit
to K. Char let, 10. makes his Ad-
dresses to Lady Mary, 11. a remark-
able Story of him, Aid. beaten by
the French, 26. his Marriage with
the Lady Mary, 31. his Assurances
to K. James, 154. his Declaration,
158. lands at Torbay, 160. Commis-
sioners come to treat with him, 168.
takes Possession of the Tower and
Whitehall, 171. orders K. James
from Whitehall, ibid, comes to St.
James's, ibid, partial to Dissenters,
172. his Answer to the Lords and
Commons, 173. his seeming Indif-
ference, 175. proclaimed King, 182.
Orleans [the Duchess of] comes to
Dover, 9. confirms the Duke in Po-
pery, Aid. her Misconduct, 10. in
Love with Monmoutb, ibid, poisoned
as supposed, ibid.
Ormond [the Duke of] deserts K.
James, 167.
Osborne [Sir Thomas'] See Danby.
OJiend [the Town of] damaged by
an Inundation, 76.
Oxford [the City of] a Parliament
called there, 66.
.Oxford [the Earl of] deprived of his
Regiment, 145.
PArliament, well disposed for the
King, 4. falls upon Clarendon, 8.
provides against maiming, 11. against
tender Consciences, Aid. their ma-
ny Grants to K. Charles, 13. fearful
of a Peace with France, 34. a New
one called, 46. sit at Oxford, 66.
obstinate there against the Duke,
Aid. 67. grown into discredit, 77.
none to be hoped for, 101. meets,
ill. odly prorogued by K. James,
126. farther prorogued, 132, 133,
134. grown quite uneasy to the
King, 137. dissolved, 139. one to
meet, 168. changed from a Con-
vention, 184. raises Money by un-
popular means, 197.
Parliament [of Paris] exerts itself a-
gainst the Pope, 144.
Papists.the Commons exasperated a-
gainst them, 18 banished ten Miles
from London, 38. presume on the
Duke, 58. would not have the Duke
in Scotland, 74. expect a Repeal of
Laws, 11 o. insolent at an ill time,
126. assaulted by the Rabble, 169.
banished a second time, 172.
Parties, the Nation divided into two,
13. whence they took birth, Aid.
Peace, concluded between the Con-
federates and France, 36.
Peers [theHouse of] censure the Duke
of Buckingham, I 5. at variance with
the Commons, ibid, contend with
the Commons about Privileges, 19.
claim a right to Money Bills, 26.
wave it, ibid, revive it again, 42.
45. their Request to the Duke, 40.
incapacitate their Catholic Members,
41. refuse to commit the Treasurer,
45. allow him eight Days, 48. send
the Black Rod for him, 49. standby
the Bishops against the Commons,
Aid. and 54. warm about Popish
Officers, 125.
Peterborough [Lord] converted by Fa-
ther Walker, 171.
Plague of London, 6.
Plot [the Popish] 38. concealed, Aid.
39,
Plymouth [the Town of] submits to the
Prince of Orange, 168.
Poland [the King of] relieves Vienna,
„ 95- , , , ,
Pope [the] sends a Nuncio to Eng-
land, 139, his contest with France,
144.inflexible against the fame, 192.
Portsmouth [the Duchess of] her Cha-
racter, 41. her Business in England,
Aid. inclined for the Exclusion, 59.
her Reasons why, ibid, out with
Hal/ifax, 72. her Bed no longer
liked by the King, 76. great with
Danby, 89. with the Prior of France,
92. writes to the City of York, 93,
did not reconcile the King with
Monmouth, 96. her insolence, 104.
Porwel [Mr.] his Argument against
Danby, 43.
Prtfio* [Lord] Secretary of.State, 157.
159.
Prielb[Popi(h]dismissed from theFleet,
irr.
Prior[of France]his Intrigue vi'xhPorts-
moutb, 92. ordered out of the King-
dom, 95,
Proceedings. SeeParliament,Peers,Com-
moits, Houses, Sec.
Proclamation for tender Consciences,
11.
Protestants, persecuted in France, 126.
leave Ireland, 134. proof against all
Attacks in England, 138. 144.
Public spiritedneis, not in every Body
that made loud Pretences to it, 22.
«
Q
OUeen-mother, speaks well of the
English, 3. married to Lord J er-
min, Aid. leaves England, 5.
dies, 9. her last Request, 10.
Queen [King7aw/s]quick withChild,
145. delivered, 149. sent away, 165..
goes to France, 169. ,
R
RAbble [the] asiault the Papists,
169.
Ramsden [a factious Alderman ofYork\
his acknowledgment and Proposal,
84,85.
Republican, the Question whether the
Government should be so or not, 69-
Reresby [Sir^e**] presented at White-
Hall, 4. Candidate for Audborough,
14. voted sitting Member, 15. called
upon to give an Account of the Busi-
ness of Luzance, 17. a wicked Plot
against him, 19. his Audienceof the
King. 22. he receives a remarkable
Answer from the King, 53. inform*
the Duke of a Design against him*
57. reproves Oates, 64. reproves
Danby, 75. his whole Account or:
Thynns Murder, 77, 78, 79, 80.
made Governor of York, 82. his Ad-
vice to Halifax, 91. chosen for
Jo/vf,io9.hisOpinion as toK.Jamei\
Method to abolish the Test, 146.
his Reception by K. William, 186^
Revolution, Thoughts of the Nation
upon the Approach of it, 158.
Causes of discontent about it, 181.
the bad Aspect of things thereupon,
188.
Rhcims [the Archbishop of ] Ambal'
sador

<page 209>

Ue I N D E X:
sador in England, with Crequy*
.Remind [the Duke of] made Ma-
iler of the Horse, 73. High Steward
* , of' Yort, 93.
Rights [th»&ill ofj presented to the
Prince and Princess of Orange, 182.
Rtthesttr [Lord] accused by Hallifax,
fe6,8 7. tsV.the Consequences thereof,
89,90,91,95. made President of the
Council, 105. made Treasurer, 108.
Roxborough [Lord] lost on Yarmouth
Sands, 83.
Rupert [Prince] beats the Dutch, with
Albemarle, 7. Admiral for the En-
glish, 13.
A'aiff/[Lord] a Chief of the Cabals,
57. committed to the Tower, 94.
his Fate, ibid.
S
SAlisbury [Lord] converted by Fa-
ther Walker, 171.
Sandwich [Lord] his Death at Sea.i 2.
Saxony [the Elector of] helps to raise
the Siege of Vienna, g$.
Saxtou, an Evidence against Dela'
mere, 129.
Scar/dale [Lord] dissatisfied with the
Prince of Orange, 179.
Schomberg [ the Duke J attends the
Princess of Orange to England, 16.
Scotch [the] declare for Christ, the
Kirk, and the Covenant, 5 5.
Scotland [the Kingdom of] an Insur-
rection there, 55. quelled, 56.
Seamen, ready to mutiny, 151.
Seymour, and Hyde, against a Parlia-
ment, 77.
Seymour [Mr.] inclined towards King
James, 176.
Shaftsbury [Lord] a chief of the Ca-
bals, 54. 57. removed, 56. remark-
ably for the Exclusion, 59. sent to
the Tower, 70. offers to transport
himself, 71. accused and acquitted,
72. retires to Holland, 90.
Shirley [Dr.] Petitions against Tag,
15. revives the fame, 18. conse-
quences thereof, ibid, and 19.
Shrewsbury [Lord] the Report about
his Death, 15.
Shrewsbury [Lady] cohabits with.£!«£•-
kingham, ibid.
Sidlcy [Mrs.] created Countess of Dor-
cheller, 131.
Smith [ Lord Mayor ] complains of
Jefferies, 118.
Somerset [the Duke of] discarded, 139.
disiatissied with the Prince of O-
range, 179.
Spain [the Kingdom of] a Treaty on
the Carpet therewith, 31. prepares
to assist against the Turks, 90. angry
with us, 98.
Spraig [Sir Edward] killed at Sea, 13.
Stafford [Lord] his Tryal, 61. is sen-
tenced, 62. accuses Shaftsbury, 63.
is beheaded, 64.
Strafford [Lord] violent against Dan-
h> 45- »• .
Sunder/and [Lord] ill with Hallifax,
75. falsely said to have reconciled
the King with Monmouth, 96. made
President and Secretary, 127. de-
clares himself a Papist, 151. laid
aside, 157.
Sweden [the' Kingdom of] prepares
to assist against the Turk, 90. is an-
gry with us, 98.
Sydney [Algernoon] executed, 98.
Sydney [Mr.] in love with the Du-
chess, 7. is banished the Court, ibid.
T
TEmple [Mr.] drowns himself,
197.
Test, against Corruption, 17.
Test Act, endeavours to repeal it, 136.
Thynn [Mr.] how his Murder affected
the Court, 77. his Murderers exe-
cuted, 82.
Trade [the French] complained of, 17.
T.itasury, put into Commission, 50.
Turbrrville, an Evidence against Lord
Stafford, 61.
Turk [the] assists Hungary, 90. besieges
Vienna, 95.
Tuscany [the Prince ofj comes to Lon-
don, 9.
Tyrconnel [Lord] made Lieutenant of
Ireland, 134. at the Head ot the
Papists, 173.
V
VEnner, his Rebellion, 5.
Vienna, besieged by the Turk,t)t;.
Vincent, [ Mr. ] a leading Noncon-
formist, 10.
Votes. See Peers, Commons, Parlia-
ment) Convention.
W
W'JUs [the pretended Prince of]
brought back to London, 168.
Walker [Father] Head of a College
in Oxon, 133.
Wentworth [ Lady Henrietta ] de-
bauched by Monmouth, 121.
William [the III ] proclaimed, 182.
blamed by Hallifax, 194., crowned,
195. his Answer to the Commons
Address for War with France, 196.
Williamson [ Sir Joseph] sent to the
Tower, 41.
Willoughbfjuoxd] his Repentance, 166.
Winchester [the Marquiss of j his poli-
tic Manner of Life, 140.
Windsor [the Castle of J repaired and
beautified by K. Charles, 57. the
Pope's Nuncio makes his entry
there, 139.
Witch [a supposed one] at York, i£ j.
Y
YAr mouth [Lord] a severe Refle-
ction on him, 30.
York [ the Duke of] thought a Friend
to Presbytery, io, refuses the
Oaths, 12. his second Marriage, 14.
a Friend to France, 28. an arrant
Biggot, ibid, in danger of the Com-
mons, 34. endeavours to clear him-
self, 39. jealous of the Treasurer,
40. 42. goes to Flandtrs, 46. re-
turns to England, 56. commanded
from Scotland, 57. engrosses the
King, ibid, goes again for Scotland,
58. his Ingratitude to Hallifax, 60.
unfortunate in his Servants, 74. dis-
pleases the King's Friends, 82. in
danger of Shipwrack, 83. attempts
a Reconciliation with Hallifax, 88.
89. dissembles with Monmouth, gy.
angry with Hallifax, 99. at the
Head of Affairs, 101. declared Ad-
miral, 104. and of the Privy Coun-
cil, ibid.
York [the Duchess of] her Character,
7. innocently inclined to Sydney,ibid.
dies a Papist, 11.
York, a factious City, 48. chuses the
Duke of Richmond High Steward,
93. under the King's displeasure, 97.
a £>uo Warranto served upon their
Charter, 106. Story of a suppolea
Witch there,i 35. purged, 156. remark-
able for three Circumstances, 1 58.
seized on, 163. in Arms against K.
James, 165.
Yorkshire [the Levels of it] overflown,
Z
ZEahnd [ the Province of] the-
greatest part under Water by aot
extraordinary Inundation, 76.

<page 210>


<page 211>


<page 212>




<page 213>


<page 214>
