

<page 1>
V


<page 2>

<page 3>

<page 4>

<page 5>

<page 6>
THE MONK:
ROMANCE.
By M. G. LEWIS, Esq. As. P.
IN THREE VOLUMES.—VOL. II.
Somn'fa, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque.
Ho RAT.
Dreams, magic terrors, spells of mighty power,
Witches, and ghosts who rove at midnight hour.
THE SECOND EDITION.
h O N D O N:
PRINTED FOR J. BELL, OXFORD-STREET.
M.DCCXCVI.
,?

<page 7>
THE KBw Y#BK

<page 8>
•. ' *'. • '..!..-.in >; I'.'-!. . 'Mil .;.'?!./ -.'
; -T H E M' O-N-Klt1 .
>^ ( J ib ;n;s ; t> '.. I Url . ; ;[ ,-.jk tv.. '—.irl
Nr..i.;»l>r.:;€HA.p;-,.Iyj>-:s
^ ar! t3'..;.j t!'..:.j .. : o, ot .:>.. ; .n '.{s,j
^Ta\iiit f aM;qirft my sight! Let-the etfAh hide lute t
-J«*y bones are manowltss ; .thy blood is cold.; i -.' .',
^houhait no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with! Hence,honiblc shadow!
'Unreal mockery, hence!
V%"- o:f;^:nol'j. : i .-.. r'..'r/jaxcBkrit.:
3 .'.'>"'.« ::r:i nr. <i -. t .>. - .:
.3! ., .r.i-.-T ' ,... ;_;-.,
-tONTINUAXIOS.OF THJ2 HISTORY OF DON K.AYMONOV
- . i r- > • .' .. .
lyl.Y journey was uncommonly agree-
able. I found the baron a man of some
fense, but little knowledge of the world.
He had passed a great part of his life with-
out stirring beyond the precincts of his own
Vol, II. B' domains,

<page 9>
THE KBW T«M
PUBLIC UMUHY
* . W« i'.

<page 10>
.'...'si ; 1 y .t;'| llo;; '.. .'.'.-. ;::..'. . ^i ;.;
-.'.-:. . . ' .1/. .u>>: i* .'-L . .'Mix..:;! '^^
''.'...f HE MOi;N:-m^
.vk ,-f. t:
. .-'
n^rrr-:
;« t
i -i
^ ( J ib ;n;r : t\ v i i-trl . . r.Viiw ,rj. . :ir!
* ii:.i ; tbr-;; ;'C H A P. '1V.^'
M 3sl t3'.:; 'j •_!' .!.i ;; : oi ot -:r. . ^ '.!;>j
^Ataiint's'aWqirft-m'y'si^ln-! Let-the eaikh liide thee !T
^&t>y bones are manwltss ; .thy blood is-cold; i -•' -I
^hoiihast no.speculation in those eyes
Which thou doll glare with! Hence, horrible shadow!
I Unreal mockery, hence! \.
VSk-'- »/''' ••'Kwl 0. 'i 1 . . s'. .'sCJisxCBKTII.
a ".' >;. !j! .::.' i m . >i i i .- 't '. ..:
v51'... .t .!- T^" -j...:. .- -,;.
'-CONTINUATI0H.OF THE HISTORY OF DON RAYMOND.,
'' '"f.'-'sii(irfr"fi'-;
.Y journey was 'uncommonly agree-
able. I found the baron a man of some
fense, but little knowledge of the world.
He had passed a great part of his life with-
o.ut sirring beyond the precincts of his own
Vol. II. B' domains,

<page 11>
( a )
domains, and consequently his manners
were far from being the most polished; but
he was hearty, good-humoured, and friend-
ly. His attefltionto me was all that I could
wish, and 1 had every reason to be satissied
with his behaviour. His ruling passion was
hunting, which he had brought himself to
consider as a serious'occupation; and, when
talking over some remarkable chace, he
treated the subject; with as much gravity as if*
it had been a battle on which the fate of two
kingdoms was depending. I happened to
be a tolerable sportsman: soon after my ar-
rival at Lindenberg, I gave some proofs of
my dexterity. The baron immediately
marked me down for a man of genius, and
vowed to me an eternal friendship.
That friendship was becpmejo me by no
means indifferent. At the castle of L,iri^
denberg, I beheld for the 'first time your
sister, the lovely Agnes. for me, who'se'
heart was unoccupied, and "who grieved* 'at
the void, to'sce her and to love her werc'the'
fame. 1 found in Agn'eVali that wa'frequt--
> ..>.."<>*:' " »i' — site

<page 12>
< * )
site^o.secure my affection. She was then
se.arcejy sixteen.; .her person light and ele-
gant ,vyas already formed; she possessed se.-,
yer^taleitfs jn. perfection, particularly those
of fmufic and drawing: her character was
gajr^open, and good-humoured; andrthef
graceful IJrnplicky of her drels and man-
ners formed an advantageous contrast to
the art and studied coquetry of the Parisian
dames, whom I had just quitted. Erom
the i|xoment.that 1 beheld her, I felt jhe
most lively interest in her fate; I-made
many enquiries respecting her of the ba-
roness.
to'TGOi .?.-' i'1' -I' ' .•-.;.].. jIm:
. ** She is my niece," replied that lady;
*,* vou arc; still ignorant, Don Alphonso,
that I am your country-woman. I am sister
.1\\.'.l.''..">'. ;'. "':.'',' 'jv i
to the duke of Medina Celi. Agnes is the
ori .-o ern :£ o^'.; '. ." i .
daughter of my second brother, Don Gas-
ton: slie has been destined to the convent
scomber cradle, and will soon make her
profession at Madrid."
[Here Lorenzo interrupted the marquis
bv an exclamation of surprise.
B 2 "Intended

<page 13>
( 4 )

"Intended for the convent from her cra-
dle!" laid he : " By heaven, this is the first
word that I ever heard of such a design."
"I believe it, my dear Lorenzo," answer-
ed Don Raymond; "but you must listen
to me with patience. You will not be less
surprised, when I relate some particular of
your family still unknown to you,and which
I have learnt from the mouth of Agneslrer-
felf."
He then resumed his narrative as fol-
lows :]'
You cannot but be aware, that your parents
were unfortunately slaves to the grossest-
superstition: when this foible was called
into.'play, their every other sentiment, their
every other passion, yielded to its irresistible
strength. While she was big with Agnes,J
your mother was seized by a dangerous ill-
ness, and given over by her physicians. In'
this situation Donna Inesilla vowed, that if
she recovered from her malady, the child
then living in her bosom, isa girl, Qiould
be dedicated to St. Clare; isa boy, to St.
Benedict.

<page 14>
( 5 )
Benedict. t-ler prayers were heard; flic
got rid of her complaint; Agnes entered the^
world alive, and was immediately destined
to the iervice of St. Clare. ,
Don.Gaston readily chimed in with h*$
'i5:i rr>n>,' ". . . '.''
ladv's withes :,but knowing ihe sentiments,
of the. d.uke, his- brother, respecting a'mo-.
naftic life, it. was determined that your. sif-
ter's destination ihould be carefully con-i
coaled. frornjiim. The better to guard the
secret, it, was refolyed.,that Agnes should
accompany her aunt, DonnaRodolpha, into
''Gerfnany^whitjher that.lady.was on the point
qf following.he^ new-married husband, ba-t
ron.' iLindenberg. ..On her arrival at that,
estate? theycjung.Agnes was put intoacon-;
yenr,. situates-but a few miles from the cas-.
tjef" The:puns, to \vjhom-her education ,wa,s'
confided, performed their charge with ex-.
actitude: they .made her a perfect mistress of
macty.accomplHhmen-t-s-, and strove to infuse
into-her cnind a. taste for the retirementand
trriniiruil pJeasrire.s pi' a convent. But a secret
instincts made. .}ibe young recluse sensible
B 2 that

<page 15>
( 6 )
that she was not born for solitude: in all the.
freedom of youth and gaiety, she scrupled
not to treat as ridiculous many ceremonies
which the nuns regarded with awe; and
(lie was never more happy than when her
lively imagination inspired her with some
scheme to plague the stiff' lady abbess, or
the ugly ill-tempered old porteress. Shtf
looked with disgust upon the prospect before
her; however, no alternative was offered to
her, and she submitted to the decree of her
parents,though not without secret repining.;
That repugnance she had not art enough
to conceal long: Don Gaston was informecf
of it. Alarmed, Lorenzo, lest your affec-
tion for her should oppose itself to his pro-
jects, and lest you should positively object*
to your sister's misery, he''resolved to keep*
the whole affair from your knowledge a)T
well as the duke's, till the' sacrifice should";
be consummated. The season of her t*k-'
ing the veil was fixed for the time when you
should be upon your travels: in the mean
while no hint was dropped of Donna Ine-
silla's

<page 16>
( 7 )
silla's fatal vow. Your sister was never per-
mitted to know your direction. AH your
letters were read before she received them,
and those parts effaced which were likely
to nourish her inclination for the world:
her answers were dictated either by her
aunt, or by dame Cunegonda, her gover-
ness. j These particulars I learnt partly
from Agnes, partly from the baroness her-
I.'immediately determined upon rescuing
this lovely girl from a fate fo contrary lo her
inclinations, and ill suited to her merit; 'I-
endeavoured to ingratiate myself into her
favour :. I boasted of my friend ship and in-
timacy with you. She listened to me with
avidity; she seemed to devour my words'
while I spoke in your praise, and her eyes'
thanked me for my affection to her brother.
My constant and unremitted attention at
length gained me her heart, and with dif-
ficulty I obliged her to confess that she
loved me. When, however, I proposed her
B 4 quitting S
. ---i i....:, i .- ca . u .

<page 17>
t 8 )
quitting the castle of Lindenberg, stie-re-
jected'fire idea in 'positive terms. !..:. -.if
,' <** lie generous, A'lph&nfo,''' (he skid;
''*' you' possess my hearts but usenot the gift
ignobly. :Employ not your'asfcettdsncy
overrnein persuading me to take a step at
which I 'mould hereafter-have tb blush.- I
am young and deseYredY my brother,- my
-Only friend, is' separated fronji ..me,. and my
oiher relations act with me as my enemies.
Tdke pity on my unprotected 'situation.
Instead of seducing me to anactiofi which
would cover me with (liame, strive ratchetM>
.gairKthe affections of those whogovtern me.
•The baron esteems you. My aunt, to
others ever harsh, proud, and contemptuv
ous, 'remembers that you rescued her from
thehands of murderers, and wear$'v/ith'yd.vi
alone the appearance of kindness atidbenig*
nity. Try then your influence over-my
guardians. If they consent to oirr union;
my hand is yours. From your account of
my brother, I cannot doubt your obtaining
>:W::*:rp :H his

<page 18>
his approbation : and when the}' find the
impossibility of executing their design, I
trust that my parents will excuse my dis-
obedience, and expiate by some other sacri-
fice my mother's fatal vow.";
From the first moment that I beheld
Agnes, I had endeavoured to conciliate the
favour of her relations. Authorised by the
confession of her regard, I redoubled my
exertions. My principal battery was di-
rected against the baroness:. it was easy to
discover, that her word was law in the cas-
tle:„ber husband paid her the most absolute
submission, and considered her as a superior
.being. She was about forty : in her youth
(he had been a beauty; but her charms had
been upon that large scale which can but
ill sustain the shock of years: however, she
stilj posselled some remains of them. Her
understanding was strong and excellent
when not obscured by prejudice, which un-
luckily was.but seldom the case. Her pas-
sions were violent: she spared no pains td
gratify them, and pursued with unremitting
.:..-'--' B 5 vengeance

<page 19>
( to )
vengeance those who opposed themselves to
her wishes. The warmest of friend?, the.
triost inveterate of enemies, such was the
baroness Lindenberg.
I laboured incessantly to please hef:
.unluckily I succeeded but too well. She
seemed gratified by myattention, and treated
me with a distinction accorded by her to no
:one else. One of my daily occupations was
reading to her for several hours: thofe
hours I should: much rather have passed
with Agnes; but as I was conscious that
.complaisance for her aunt would advance
our union, I submitted with a good .grate
to the penance imposed upon me. Ddnna
Rodolpha's library was principally com-
posed of old Spanish romances: these wefc
her favourite studies, and Once a day one
of these unmerciful volumes was put regu-
larly into my hands. 1 read the wearisome
adventures of >> Terceforeft" ".ETimnte the
Wbife" i" Palmerin of England,'-' anil k(*lbe
MP-gte-iPf-tbeSuti' till the bopk was on the
point of failing from .my hands through
.;'f - . .. ,. * 1 ennui.

<page 20>
;( u >
ennui. However, the increasing pleasure
which the baroness seemed to take in'
society, encouraged me to persevere; and
latterly she shewed for me a partiality so
marked, that -Agnes advised me to seize
the first opportunity of declaring our mu-
tual passion to our aunt. ._, ...5
One evening I was alone with Donna
Rodolpha, in her own apartment. As our
readings generally treated of love, Agnes
was never permitted to assist at them. 1
was just congratulating myselfon having
finished ?' the Loves of Tristan and the £>uem
Ijeuh," -, v....; l,«.
.; H Ah! the unfortunates !" cried the ba-
K>aess:" How fay you, Segnor? Do you
thtnk.it possible for man to seel an attach-
ment so. disinterested and sincere?"..;
j: ** 1 cannot doubt it," replied I; "my
own heart. furnishes me with the certainty.
Ah! Donna Rodolpha, might I but hope
for your approbation of roy love! might I
but confess the name of my mistress, with-
out incurring your resentment \" • .
B6 She

<page 21>
• She iiiterrupted trie* - -; v.V .vans
** Suppose I were to spare you thivmrl-i'
session? Suppose I were to acknowledge
that the objfct of your desires is not un-
known to me? Suppose I were to fay, ttfttfi
Are returns your affection, and laments' riot-'
less sincerely than yourself the unhappy vows'
which separate her from you?''
"Ah! Donna Rodolpha!" I exclaimed,
tltfowing myself upon my knees before her,.
nsnd-pressing: her hand to my lips, ^.you
have discovered my secret! What JknyoHP
decision? Must I despair, or may I reckon!
upon your favour?" '*—>—.•*.';.. A
'She withdrew not the harid which 'IheFd;
Mit she- turned from me', an^tov'ci'ed^lW*
.'a%eawitfc'the-,oth'eft£..> '<..j '-..ui--.r[ '- nitd*
€t How.cah'-fVeftyfi? if"yotj^sherep&e#P
•*Ah! Don Alphonse, I have long-perceived
r-owhom your attdht-ions were directed, hire
till now I perceived not tile impreflkA
which ctiey'-n'ad triade upon myiheart'P*. &i
length's ta'rr no . »^eT'-htSeshh f w&tfrfefl
either from myself or from ybifc'" lI yield to
i b -> the

<page 22>
( %3 D
the violence of my paffion, and own that J
adore you! .For three long months T stisled
my.desires; but growing slronger by resist-
ance^ I submit to their impetuosity. Prides
fiear, and honour, respect for myself, and
my engagements to the baron, all are van-,
quifhed. I sacrifice them to my love for
you, and it still seems to me that I pay too
mean a price for your posleslion."
i She paused for an answer.—Judge,'.my
Lorenzo, what must baveiibeeb.my con*
fusion at this discovery. J atorace saw 'all
the magnitude of this obstacle, which I had
myself raised to my happiness. Tliia.ba-
roness .had placed. those attentions to hor
own account, which 1 had merely paid her;
for the fake.of Agnes : and: the strength. o£
her expressions, die looks which accumpa-.
nied them, and my knowledge of her re-
vengeful disposition, made.meitreroble fob
myself. and my beloved. .1 wasi silent for.
fiame minute si. Iknfcwndt.hftW tpj ift-j^fc
to hex declaration: I; could.only. resolve 19-
clean tip the mistake without. delay*.and,
for

<page 23>
( 14 )
for the present to conceal scorn her know*
ledge the name of my miitresi. No sooner
had she avowed her passion, than the trans-
ports which before were evident in my
features gave place to consternation and
constraint. I dropped her hand, and rose
from my knee?. The change in my coun-
tenance did not escape her observation. .-,
"What means this silence?" said she in
a trembling voice: " Where is that joy
which you led me to expect?"
, .** Forgive me, Segnora," I answered,
5» if what necessity forces from me should
seem harsh and ungrateful. To encourage
you in an error, which, however .it may
flatter myself, must prove to you the source
of disappointment, would make me appear
criminal in every eye. Honour obliges me
to inform you, that you have mistaken for
the solicitude of love what was only the
attention of friendship. The latter senti-
ment w that which I wished to excite in
your bosom: to entertain a warmer, respect
for you forbids me, and gratitude for the
>oil >.. baron's

<page 24>
( *5 )
baron's generous treatment. Perhaps these
reasons would not be sufficient to shield me
from your attractions, were it not that my
asfections are already bestowed upon ano-
ther. You have charms, Segnora, which
might captivate the most insensible; n:>
heart unoccupied could resist them. Hap-
py is it for me, that mine is no longer in
my possession, or I should have to reproach
myself for ever with having violated the
laws of hospitality. Recollect yourself
noble lady! recollect what is owed by you
to honour, by me to the baron, and replace
by esteem and friendship those sentiments
which I never can return."
The baroness turned pale at this unex-
pected and positive declaration: she doubt*
ed; whether she slept or woke. At length
fecovering from her surprise, consternation
gave place to rage, and the blood ruibed
back into her cheeks with violence. >.
"Villain !" she cried j *f Monster of de-
ceit! Thus is the avowal of my love re-
ceived ? Is it thus that... i. bur, no, no! it
cannot,

<page 25>
< :*6 0
cannot, it (hall not be! Alphonso, behold
me at your feet! Be witness of my despair!
I_ook with pity on a woman who loves you
with sincere affection! She who possesses
your heart, how has she merited such a
treasure? What sacrifice has she made to
you? What raises her above Rodolpha?"
. I endeavoured to lift her from her knees.
,;-« For God's fake, Segnora, restrain these
transports; tliey disgrace yourself and me.
Your exclamations may beheaid, and your
secret divulged to your attendants. I fee
that my presence only irritates you: permit
me to retire."
I prepared to quit the apartment: the
baroness caught ane suddenly bythearm.
-.cf*And;Who is this happy rival?" said
she in a menacing tone ., "I will know her
name, and. when 1: know it...;...!.. She is
feme one in my power; you entreated my
favour, .my protection! Let me but find
hfir, Jet:me but know who dares to rob me
of your heart, and she shall suffer everytor-
mdnt which- jealousy.and disappointment
t* >:Tift3 can

<page 26>
(( &I7 ))
:c#infil(EK--^*o ifrtte^liAnswerme this
moment, HopWt to'conceal heriJVom
my vengeahc^l v^j#i-iA*tt:bc set ovef
you ; every step, ever? ftoWtell be*at*h- .
c« rf6^eyWwiftHli(f§ov«r*»y uvalyi (hall
know her /and when she is fointf, tremble,
AlphomV, .fof''hef;afldifer{5iaurfds>'! .\
.'-As she cttteved these'laftiwdrd«, hierfofy
.mounted to'such * pitches >to stop ber
.powers of respiration. She jpinted, groan-
^d,'afld: at length tinted away. As the
Was falling 1 caught' her in mf arms, and
placed her upona sophav Then hastening
to' the door-, I suifccftoned her women to her
assistance; I committed her to their:cars,
and feized^heopportunity of escaping.'
.AgWaKd-atidl rcanfofed> b'eybnd expreC
fion>'Jl>fb*rst my'stpps towards'the garden.
Thej'bemgtoty wkhtwhiUvxha-torQn.ese had
listened to me at first, raised my hopes to
the highest pitch::' 1 imagined:her to Have
-perched my a Aacbment for1 her niece, and
to approve oftitii JBxtrehie w*s:>asy>dakp>
.S&Wtment 'it Understanding: theUrue pur-
t Port
l.-n* r

<page 27>
( * )
port of her discourse. I .knew not what
course to take: the superstition of the pa-
•rents of Agnes, aided by her aunt's unfor-
tunate passion, seemed to oppose such
obstacles to.our union as were almost in-
surmountable.
As I passed by a low parlour, whose win-
dows looked into the garden, through the
door which stood half open I observed
Agnes seated at a table. She was occupied
in drawing, and several unfinished sketches
were scattered round her. I entered,
still undetermined whether I should ac-
quaint her with the declaration of the ba-
roness, j ;1
"Oh! is it only you? said she, raising
her head: " You are no stranger, and I
shall continue my occupation without ceT
remony. Take a chair, and seat yoursejf by
me."
.1 obeyed, and placed myself near the
table. Unconscious what I was doing, and
totally occupied by. the scene which;had
just passed, I took up some of the drawings,
and

<page 28>
( *'$ j
and cast my eyes over them." One of the
subjects struck me from Its-singularity. It
represented the great hall of the castle of
Lindenberg. A door conducting to a nar-
row stair-case stood half open. In the sore-
ground appeared a group of figures, placed
in the most grotesque attitudes ; terror was
expressed upon every countenance*. Here
was one upon his knees, wfth his eyes cast
up to heaven, and praying most devoutly;
there, another was creeping away upon all
fours. Some hid their faces in their cloaks,
or the laps of their companions j some had
concealed themselves beneath a table,' on
which the remnants of a feast were visible;
while others, with gaping mouths and eyes
wide-stretched, pointed to a figure supposed
to have created this disturbance. It repre-
sented a female of more than human sta-
ture, clothed in the habit of some religious
order. Her face was veiled ; on her arm
hung a chaplet of beads; liter dress was in
several places stained with the blood which -
"i'"r trickled

<page 29>
trickled from a wound upon her bosom.
In one hand Che held a.lamp, in the other
a large knife, and (he seemed advancing
towards the iron gates of the hall.
"What does this mean, Agnes?" said I;
w Is this some invention of your own ?."
-. She cast her eyes upon the. drawing. .
"Oh I no," she replied,:. " 'tis the in-
vention of much wiser heads than mine.
But can you possibly have lived at Linden-
berg for three whole months without hear-
iBg.of dig bleeding nun?"s' .:. ..(.> ,>>{»$
'M You:are the first who ever mentioned
t.he narne.t© me. Pray, whp may^^ed^d-j;-
be?^'>7 -Try :... : .»*'. . i.: - r.-r. '.>.;; :.';-i>lw
'^.Thafe is .more than I can pretend - ;to
tell you. AU my knowledge of her history
comes from.an old tradition in this family,'
whiclnhas been Handed down from-fafher Co.
son, and is firmly credited throughout the
baron's domains. Nay, the baron believes
it himself; and as; for my. aunt, who has a
natural turn for. rhcmarveJlous, she Would
i-.V-;:.-. . .; . 'sooner

<page 30>
( « )
sooner doubt the veracity of tfhe Bible t&arr
of the bleeding huhV Shall 1 tell you this;
history?" .' 'Is:
I answered, that she would 'oblige nW
much' by relating Jt':'' slie resumed"her
drawing, arid then proceeded as' follows irt
a tone of burlesqued 'gravity:'
"It is surprising that in all the chronicles'
of past times this remarkable personage is
never once mentioned. Fain would I.re-
count to you her life; but unluckily"till
after her death she was neyer known tq
have existed. Then first did slie think it'
necessary to make some noise in the world,'
and with that intention slie made bold to
seize upon the castle of Lindenberg. Hav-
ing a good taste, she took up her abode in
the best room of the house ; and once esta-
blished there, she begun to amuse herself by
knocking about the tables and'chairs in the'
middle of the night.' Perhaps she was a
bad steeper, but this I have never been
able to a'icertain. 'According to the tradi-
tion, this entertainment commenced about
a century

<page 31>
\ n ).
a century ago. It was acccjU^anjed^wfeh
shrieking, howling, groaning, swearing,
and many other agreeable noises.of the*
fame kind. But though one particular
room was more especially honoured witljj
her visits, she did not entirely confine hex*..
self to it. She occasionally ventured .imx)'
the old galleries, paced up and down the;
spacious halls; or, sometimes stopping at
the doors of the chambers, she wept and
wailed there to the universal terror of the
.: j:*. .' J i iT '''.'. 'A
inhabitants. In these nocturnal excursions
she was seen by disferent people, who all
describe her appearance as you behold it
here traced by the hand of her unworthy
historian.
The singularity of this account insensibly
engaged my attention.
•* Did slie never speak to those who met?'
her?" said I."'
"Not .siie. The specimens ipde'ed which
she gave nightly of her talents' for conver-
sation, were by no means inviting. Some-
times the castle run"; with oaths and execra-
tions:

<page 32>
(( 4s )
ttens!ht•bf6merrr>afirersli€ repeated Irer pa*,
ternoster'i ^rt$W she howled out the! most.
horrible'blasphcmiesy and then chaunted
De profiindis as orderly as if still in she
choir. In short, she seemed a mighty ca-
pricious being: but whether she prayed or
cursed, whether file was impious'or devout,
she always contrived to terrify her auditors
oiit of their fenses. The castle became
scarcely habitable; and its lord was so
frightened by these midnight revels, that
one fine morning he was found dead in his
beck This success seemed to please the'nun
mightily, fort now she ' made more noise
than ever.' 'But. the next bardn proved too
cunning for her.' He made his appearance
With a celebrated exerciser in his hand,
who feared not to shut himself up for a
nVght" in Jth£? haunted chamber. There iv
seerns tliat he tia'd 'a'haVd' battle with the
ghost before'she woiild'promise to be quiet.
She tfasobstinate, but he was more so; arid
at length she' consented to let the inhabi-
tants' of the'castle 'take agood night's rest.
For

<page 33>
For fame tin^catttersi tKUiaaww^•hgard of .
hfct-.n Brio ait;riic end of five y.eafls the.pxpr«;
cl&s/i&adj mdnhm tjj^ gMtfqt«wu(;<•d v>i
peep -abifciitlijgsjnv.'j Ho\v«vefi i^6;Isw§fi
now grown; 01 4eh more tractable asid well-j
bfibfyed. ; S&e. walked^bputjo..; si|fiu.c.e*j
anjd^y,er made; her; a^p,ear&n^eiabpyeipÆqe,
ie-:#Mfe ),?*i;si . T.^ki; (f^on?„j^9Li vyil^be^j
lie;y<Hhg bafQO), fhetstiii ppntinyesj; irJe^Jo
fuUy^rstiadjedvthtft on ihfl^fth of JVtey#g}
e^ry fifth year, as'ipqnas th&cjocl^strikesa
qne,. the^door. of the haufljted^harfiber.
opens.;j{Obsavja, [that tjbif • Foprn ,ha^.been-;
shut u p. - for. gea^ ,a .eeptury.] .. Then. ouf
Walks the ghostly bi^i with her lamp.. and?.
dagger:, shje desponds die stair-case of the.,
eastern tower j and cro^esj t-hp great hall..
Qn^that night.tbejpprt«r,always [leaves the.T
gate,?, of the .castle o^en, ^utj of .respect; to,
the apparitiop..:. nos tha.ttbU >S thought by-,
any means necessary, since.. she,could easily..
Vfhip 'thrpugh^the.keyhqleif. she chose it:
but .merely, oi^tjof politeness> and to pre-
vent her fronimaJking,her.exir in a yvay.soj
dero-

<page 34>
(' 25 )
derogatory to the dignity of her ghost-
ship."
,' And whither does slie go on quitting
the castle?"
"To heaven, I hope; but if she does,
the place certainly is not to her taste, for
she always returns after an hour's absence.
The lady then retires to her chamber, and
is quiet for another five years."
;** And you believe this, Agnes?"
"How can you ask such a question ? No,
no, Alphonso! I have too much reason to
lament superstition's influence to be its vic-
tim myself. However, I must not avow
my incredulity to the baroness: she enter-
tains not a doubt of the truth of this history.
As to dame Cunegonda, my governess, she
protests that fifteen years ago she saw the
spectre with her own eyes. She related to
me one evening, how she and several other
domestics had been terrified while at sup-
per by the appearance of the bleeding nun,
as the ghost is called in the castle: 'tis from
her account that I' drew this sketch, and
Vol. II. C you

<page 35>
( 26 )
you may be certain that Cunegonda was not
omitted. There she is! I shall never for-
get what a passion she was in, and how ugly
Hie looked while she scolded me for having
made her picture so like herself!"
Here she pointed to a burlesque figure
.of an old woman in an attitude of terror.
In spite of the melancholy which oppress-
ed me, I could not help smiling at the
playful imagination of Agnes: she had per-
fectly preserved dame Cunegonda's resem-
blance, but had so much exaggerated every
fault, and rendered every feature so irresisti-
bly laughable, that I could easily conceive
.the duenna's anger.
"The figure is admirable, my dear
Agnes! I knew not that you possessed such
talents for the ridiculous."
"Stay a moment," ihe replied ; " I will
(hew you a figure still more ridiculous than
dame Cunegonda's. If it pleases you,
you may dispose of it as seems best to your-
self."
She rose, and went to a cabinet at some
little

<page 36>
( *7 )
little distance: unlocking adrawer, slie took;
out a small case, which Ihe opened, and
presented to me. .. . .
"Do you know the resemblance?" said
she, smiling.
..
It was her own. ........
Transported at the gift, I pressed the
portrait to my lips with passion: I threw
myself at her feet, and declared my gratis
tude in: the-warmest and most affectionate
terms. ' She listened to me withxomplai-
sance, and assured me that she -shared my
sentiments; when suddenly die uttered a
loud shriek,. -disengaged the hand which I
held,' and; slew* scom the room-by a door
which- opened to the garden. Amazed at
this abrupt departure, I rofe-hastily from
my knees. I beheld with confusion the
baroness standing near me, glowing with
jealousy, and almost choaked with rage>
On recovering from her swoon, she' had
tortured her imagination to discover her
concealed rival. No one appeared to de-
serve her suspicions more than Agnes. She
C 2 imme-
/.

<page 37>
( 28 )
immediately hastened to find her niece, tax
her with encouraging my addresses, and
assure herself whether her conjectures were
well-grounded. Unfortunately she had al-
ready seen enough to need no other confir-
mation. She arrived at the door of the
room, at the precise moment when Agnes
gave me her portrait. She heard me pro-
fess an everlasting attachment to her rival,
and saw me kneeling at her feet. She ad-
vanced to separate us; we were too much
occupied by each other to perceive her ap-
proach, and were not aware of it till Agnes
beheld her standing by my fide.
Rage on the part of Donna RodoLpha,
embarrassment on mine, for some time kept
us both silent. The lady recovered herself
first.
"My suspicions then were just," said she;
** the coquetry of my niece has triumphed,
and 'tis to her that I am sacrificed. In one
respect, however, I am fortunate; I.-shall
not be the only one who laments a disap-
pointed passion. You, too, shall know
--' i :. v :what

<page 38>
( 29 )'
what it is to love without hope! I daily ex-
pect orders for restoring Agnes to her pa-
rents. Immediately upon her arrival in
Spain, slie will take the veil, and place an
insuperable barrier to your union. You
may spare your supplications." She con-
tinued, perceiving meon the point of speak-
ing: "My resolution is fixed and immove-
ab!e. Your mistress shall remain a close
prisoner in her chamber, till the exchanges
this castle for the cloister. Solitude will
perhaps recall her to a fense of her duty:
but to prevent your opposing that wished
event, I must inform you, Don Alphonso,
that your presence here is no longer agree-
able either to the baron or myself. It was
not to talk nonsense to my niece, that your
relations sent you to Germany : your busi-
ness was to travel, and I sliould be sorry to
impede any longer so excellent a design.
Farewell, Segnor ; remember, that to-mor-
row morning we meet for the last time."
Having said this, Ihe darted upon me a
look of pride, contempt, and malice, and
C 3 quitted

<page 39>
( 3° )
quitted the apartment. I also retired to
mine, and consumed the night in planning
the means of rescuing Agnes from the power
of her tyrannical aunt.
After the positive declaration of its mis-
tress, it was impossible for me to make a
longer stay at the castle of Lindenberg. Ac-
cordingly, I the next day announced my
immediate departure. The baron declared
that it gave him sincere pain; and he ex-
pressed himself in my favour so warmly, that
I endeavoured to win him over to my in-
terest. Scarcely had I mentioned the name of
Agnes when he stopped me short, and said,
that it was totally out of his power to inter-
fere in the business. 1 saw that it was in
vain to argue ; the baroness governed her
husband with despotic sway, and I easily
perceived that she had prejudiced him against
the match. Agnes did not appear. I en-
treated permission to take leave of her,-but
my prayer was rejected. 1 was obliged to
depart without seeing her. ....
At quitting him, the baron shook my hand
affection-

<page 40>
( 3* )
affectionately, and assured me that, as soon
as his niece was gone, I might consider hip
house as my own. .;.
"Farewell, Don Alphonsol" said the
baroness, and stretched out her hand to
me.
I took it, and offered to carry it to my
lips. She prevented me. Her husband
was at the other end of the room, and out
of hearing.
** Take care of yourself," she conti*
nued; "my love is become hatred, and
my wounded pride shall not be unatoned.
Go where you will, my vengeance shall
follow you!" j
She accompanied these words with a
look sufficient to make me tremble. I an,*
swered not, but hastened to quit the castle.
Asmy chaise drove out of the court, I
looked up to the windows of your sister's
chamber: nobody was to be seen there. I
threw myself back despondent in my car-.
riage.'.'. 1 was attended by no other servant*
than a Frenchman,. whom I had hired
C 4 at

<page 41>
( 3* )
at Strasbourg in Stephano's room, and my
little page, whom I before mentioned to
you. The fidelity, intelligence, and good
temper of Theodore ruuTalready made him
dear to me; but he now prepared to lay an
obligation on me, which made me look
upon him as a guardian genius. Scarcely
had we proceeded half a mile from the
castle, when he rode up to the chaise door.
"Take courage, Segnor!" said he ia
Spanish, which he had already learnt to
speakwith fluency and correctness: "While
you were with the baron, I watched the
moment when dame Cunegonda was below
stairs, and mounted into the chamber over
that of donna Agnes. I fang, as loud as I
could, a little German air, well known to
her, hoping that she would recollect my
voice. 1 was not disappointed, for 1 soon
heard her window open. I hastened to let
dow-n a string with which I had provided
myself. Upon hearing the casement closed
again, I drew up the string, and, fastened
to it, I found this scrap of paper."
He

<page 42>
( 33 )
He then presented me with a small note,
addressed to me. I opened it with impa-
tience. It contained the following words,
written in pencil:
** Conceal yourself for the next fortnight
'* in some neighbouring village. My aunt
** will believe you to have quitted Linden-
"berg, and I shall be restored to liberty. I
** will be in the west pavilion at twelve on
*< the night of the thirtieth. Fail not to be
"there, and we shall have an opportunity
w of concerting our future plans. Adieu.
« AGNES."
At perusing these lines my transports ex-
ceeded all bounds; neither did I set any to
the expressions of gratitude which I heaped
upon Theodore. In fact, his address and
attention merited my warmest praise. You
will readily believe that I had not entrusted:
him with my passion for Agnes; but the
arch youth had too much discernment not
to discover my secret, and too much discre..
C5 tion

<page 43>
( 34 )
tion not to conceal his knowledge of it. He
observed in silence what was going on, nor
strove to nuke himself an agent in the bu-
siness till my interests required his interfe-
rence. I equally admired his judgment, his
penetration, his address, and his fidelity.
This was not the first occasion in which I
had found him of infinite use, and I was
every day more convinced of his quickness
and capacity. During my short stay at
Strasbourg, he had applied himself diligent-
ly to learning the rudiments of Spanish. He
continued to study it, and with so much
success, that he spoke it with the same faci-
lity as his native language. He passed the
greatest part of his time in reading. He had
acquired much information for his age; and
united the advantages of a lively counte-
nance and prepossessing figure r.o an excel-
lent understanding and the very best of
hearts. He is now fifteen. He is still in my
service; and, when you seehim, I am sure that
he will please you. But excuse this digres-
sion; I return to the subject which I quitted.
I obeyed

<page 44>
( 35 )
I obeyed the instructions of Agnes. I
proceeded to Munich: there I left my
chaise under the care of Lucas, my French
servant, and then returned on horseback to
a small village about four miles distant
from the castle of Lindenberg. Upon ar-
riving there, a story was related to the host,
at whose inn I alighted, which prevented
his wondering at my making so long a stay
in his house. The old man, fortunately*'
was credulous and incurious: he believed
all I said, and sought to know no more
than what I thought proper to tell him.
Nobody was with me but Theodore : both
were disguised; and as we kept ourselves
close/ v/e-Were not suspected to be other
than what we seemed. In this manner the
fortnight passed away. During that time
Thad the pleasing conviction thaf Agnes
was once more at liberty. She passed
tbrotlgh the village with dame Cunegonda-i
slie seemed in good health and spirits, and
talked to-her companion without any ap-
pearance of constraint. .: '•'''.•.
C 6 . "Who

<page 45>
( 36 )
'" Who are those ladies?" said 1 to my
host as the carriage passed.
"Biron Lindenberg's niece, with her go-
verness," he replied: "she goes regularly
every Friday to the convent of St. Catharine,
in which slie was brought up, and which is
situated about a mile from hence."
You may be certain that I waited with
impatience for the ensuing Friday. I again
beheld my lovely mistress. She cast her
eyes upon me as slie passed the inn door.
A blush which overspread her cheek told
me, that in spite of my disguise I had been
recognised. I bowed profoundly. She re-
turned the compliment by a slight inclina-
tion of the head, as if made to one inferior,
and looked another way till the carriage
was out of sight.
The long-expected, long-wished-for night
arrived. It was calm, and the moon was at
the full. As soon as the clock struck eleven
I hastened to my appointment, determined
not to be too late. Theodore had provided
'a ladder; I ascended the garden wall whh-
. o out

<page 46>
( 37 )
out difficulty. The page followed me, and
drew the ladder after us. I posted myself
in the west pavilion, and waited impatiently
'for the approach of Agnes. Every breeze
that whispered, every leaf that fell, I be-
lieved to be her foot step, and hastened to
meet her. Thus was I obliged to pass a
full hour, every minute of which appeared
to me an age. The castle bell at length
tolled twelve, and scarcely could I believe
the night to be no farther advanced. An-
other quarter of an hour elapsed, and I
heard the light foot os my mistress ap-
proaching the pavilion with precaution. I
flew to receive her, and conducted her to a
feat. I threw myself at her feet, and was
expressing my joy at seeing her, when she
thus interrupted me:
"We have no time to lose, Alphonfo:
: the moments are precious; for, though no
.more a prisoner, Cunegonda watches my
.., every step. An express is arrived from my
father;. 1 must depart immediately for Ma-
drid, and 'tis with difficulty that I.liaye.ob-
. i > tained

<page 47>
f 33 )
tained a week's delay. The superstition of
my parents, supported by the representa-
tions of my cruel aunr, leaves me no hope
of softening them to compassion. In this
dilemma, I have resolved to commit my-
self to your honour. God grant that you
may never give me cause to repent my re-
solution I Flight is my only resource from
the horrors of a convent j and my impru-
dence must be excused by the urgency of
the danger. Now listen to the plan by
which I hope to effect my escape.
"We are now at the thirtieth of April.
On the fifth day from this the visionary
nun is expected to appear. In my last
visit to the convent I provided myself with
a dress proper for the character. A friend
whom I have left there, and to whom I
made no scruple to confide my secret, rea-
dily consented to supply me with a religious
habit. Provide a carriage, and be with it
at a little distance from the great gate of
the castle. As soon as the clock strikes
"one," I (hall quit my chamber, dressed in
the

<page 48>
( '39 )
the same apparel as the ghost is supposed
to wear. Whoever meets me will be too
much terrified to oppose my escape: 1 shall
easily reach the door, and throw myself
under your protection. Thus far success is
certain: but, oh! Alphonso, should you
deceive me; should you despise my im-
prudence, and reward it with ingratitude,
the world will not hold a being more
wretched than myself! I feel all the dangers
to which I shall be exposed. I feel that I am
giving you a right to treat me with levity:
but I rely upon your love, upon your ho-
nour! The step which I am on the point of
taking will incense my relations against me.
Should you desert me; should you betray
the trust reposed in you, I shall have no
friend to punish your insult, or support my
cause. On yourself alone rests all my hope;
and if your own heart does not plead in my
behalf, I am undone for ever!"
The tone in which she pronounced these
words was so touching that, in spite of my
joy at receiving her promise to follow me", I
could

<page 49>
( 40 )
could not help being asfected. I also re-
pined in secret at not having taken the pre-
caution to provide a carriage at the village;
in which case, I might have carried off
Agnes that very night. Such an attempt
was now impracticable; neither carriage
nor horses were to be procured nearer than
Munich, which was distant from Linden-
berg two good days journey. I was there-
fore obliged to chime in with her plan,
which, in truth, seemed well arranged. Her
disguise would secure her from being stop-
ped in quitting the castle, and would enable
her to step into the carriage at the very
gate, without difficulty or losing time. -'' ',J
Agnes reclined her head mournfully upon
my shoulder, and, by the light of the moon,
I saw tears flowing down her cheek. I
strove to dissipate her melancholy, and,en-.
epuraged her to look forward to the pro-
spect of happiness. I protested in the most
solemn terms that her virtue and innocence
would be safe in my keeping j and that, till
the church had made her my lawful wife*
her

<page 50>
( 4i )
her honour should be held by me as sacred
as a sister's. I told her, that my first. care
should be to find you out, Lorenzo, and re-
concile you to our union; and I was con-
tinuing to speak in the same strain, when a
noise without alarmed me. Suddenly the
door of the pavilion was thrown open, and
Cunegonda stood before us. She had heard
Agnes steal out of her chamber, followed
her into the garden, and perceived her en-
tering the pavilion. "Favoured by the trees
which shaded it, and unperceived by Theo-
dore, who waited at a little distance, she
had approached in silence, and overheard
our whole conversation.
".'Admirable!" cried Cunegonda, in a
voice shrill with passion, while Agnes ut-
tered a loud shriek. "fey St. Barbara,
young lady, you have an excellent inven-
tion! You must personate the bleeding
nun,. truly? What impiety! What in-;
credulity! Marry, I have a good mind to
let you pursue your plan. When the real
ghost met you, I warrant you would be in•4-
pretty

<page 51>
C 42 )

pretty condition! Don Alphonso, you
ought to be ashamed of yourself for se-
ducing a-young, ignorant creature to leave
her family and friends. However, for this
time, at least, 1 shall mar your wicked de-
signs. The noble lady shall be informed
of the whole affair, and Agnes must defer
playing the spectre till a better opportunity.
Farewell, Segnor.—Donna Agnes, let me
have the honour of conducting your ghost-
ship back to your apartment."'
She approached the sopha on which her
trembling pupil was seated, took her by
the hand^and prepared to lead her from
the pavilion.
I detained her, and strove by entreaties,
soothing, promises, and flattery, to win her
to my party ; but, sinding all that I could
fay of no avail, I abandoned the vain at-
tempt.
"Your obstinacy must be its own pu-
nishment," said I; "but one resource re-
mains to save Agnes and myself, and I shall
pot hesitate to employ it."
Terrified

<page 52>
( 43 )
Terrified at this menace, she again en*
deavoured to quit the pavilion; but I
seized her by the wrifl, and detained her
forcibly. At the same moment Theodore,
who had followed her into the room, closed
the door, and prevented her escape. I took
the veil of Agnes; I threw it round the
duenna's head, who uttered such piercing
shrieks that, in spite of our distance from the
castle, I dreaded their being heard. At
length I succeeded in gagging her so com-
pletely, that she could not produce a single
sound. Theodore and myself, with some
difficulty, next contrived to bind her hands
and feet with our handkerchiefs; and I ad-
vised Agnes to regain her chamber with all
diligence. I promised that no harm should
happen to Cunegonda; bade her remember
that, on the fifth of May, I should be in
waiting at the great gate of the castle, and
took of her an asfectionate farewell. Trem-
bling and uneasy, she had scarce power
enough to signify her consent to my plans,
and

<page 53>
( 44 )
and fkd back to her apartment in disorder
and confusion.
In the mean while Theodore assisted rra
in carrying off my antiquated prize. She
was hoisted over the wall, placed before me
upon my horse, like a portmanteau, and I
galloped away with her from <he castle of
Lindenberg. The unlucky duenna never had
made a more disagreeable journey in her
life. She was jolted and shaken till she was
become little more than an animated mum-
my; not to mention her fright, when we
waded through a small river, through which
it was necessary to pass in order to regain
the village. Before we reached the inn, I
had already determined how to dispose of
the troublesome Cunegonda. We entered
the street in which the inn stood; and
while the page knocked, I waited.at a little
distance. The landlord opened the door
with a lamp in his hand.
"Give me the light," said Theodore,
** my master is coming."
He

<page 54>
( 45 )
'He snatched the lamp hastily, and pur-
posely let it fall upon the ground. The
landlord returned to the kitchen to relight
the lamp, leaving the door open. I prosited
by the obscurity, sprang from my.horse
with Cunegonda in my arms, darted up
stairs, reached my chamber unperceived,
and,unlocking the door of a spacious closet,
stowed her within it, and then turned the
key. The landlord and Theodore soon
after appeared with lights: the former ex-
pressed himself surprised at my returning
so late, but asked no impertinent questions.
He soon quitted the room, and left me to
exult in the success of my undertaking.
I immediately paid a visit to my prisoner,
:i strove to persuade her submitting with pa-
tience to her temporary confinement. My
'attempt was unsuccessful. Unable to speak
oc move, she expressed her fury by her
looks; and, except at meals, I never dared
to unbind her, or release her from the gag.
At such times I stood over her with a drawn
sword, and protested that, if slie uttered a
i f: single

<page 55>
C 46 )
single cry, I would plunge it in her bosom.
As soon as she had done eating, the gag
was replaced. I was conscious that this
proceeding was cruel, and could only be
justified by the urgency of circumstances.
As to Theodore, he had no scruples upon
the subject. Cunegonda's captivity enter-
tained him beyond measure. During his
abode in the castle, a continual warfare had
been carried on between him and the du-
enna; and, now that he found his enemy
so absolutely in his power, he triumphed
without mercy: he seemed to think of no-
thing but how to find out new means of
plaguing her. Sometimes he affected to pity
her misfortune,then laughed at, abused, and
mimicked her: he played her a thousand
tricks, each more provoking than the other;
and amused himself by telling her, that her
elopement must have occasioned much sur-
prise at the baron's. This was in fact the
cafe. No one, except Agnes, could imagine
what was become of dame Cunegonda
Every hole and corner was searched for her.
7 the

<page 56>
( 47 )
the ponds were dragged, and the woods
underwent a thorough examination. Still
no dame Cunegonda made her appearance.
Agnes kept the secret, and I kept the du-
enna : the baroness, therefore, remained in
total ignorance respecting the old woman's
fate, but suspected her to have perished by
suicide.. Thus passed away five days, during
which I had prepared every thing necessary
for my enterprise. On quitting Agnes, I
had made it my-first business to dispatch a
peasant with a letter to Lucas, at Munich,
ordering him to take care that a coach and
four should arrive about ten o'clock on the
fifth of May at the village of Rosen waid.
He obeyed my instructions punctually ; the
equipage arrived at the time appointed. As
the period of her lady's elop'ement drew
nearer, Cunegonda's rage increased. I ve-
rily believe, that spite and passion would
haye killed her, had I not luckily discovered
her prepossession in favour of cherry-brandy.
With this favourite liquor she was plenti-
fully supplied, and; Theodore always re-
maining

<page 57>
C 43 )
maining to guard her, the gag was occa-
sionally removed. The liquor seemed to
have a wonderful effect in softening the
acrimony of her nature'; and her confine-
ment not admitting of any other amuse-
ment, she got drunk regularly once a-day,
just by way of passing the time.
The fifth of May arrived, a period by me
nevertobeforgotten! Beforetheclockstruck
twelve, I betook myself to the scene of ac-
tion. Theodore followed me on horseback.
I concealed the carriage in a spacious cavern
of the hill on whose brow the castle was situ-
ated. Thiscavern was of considerable depth,
and, among the peasants, was known by the
name of Lindenberg Hole. The night was
calm and beautiful: the moon-beams fell
upon the antient towers of the castle, and
shed upon their summits a silver light. All
was still around me: nothing was to be
heard except the night-breezesighing among
the leaves, the distant barking of village
doo-s, or the owl who had established herself
in a nook os the descried eastern turret. I
\ heard
\

<page 58>
( 49 )
heard her melancholy shritk, and looked
upwards: she fat upon the ridge of a win-
dow, which I recognized to be that of the
. haunted room.. This brought to my re-
membrance the story of the bleeding nun,
and I fighed while I reflected on the inslu-
ence of superstition, and weakness of human
reason. Suddenly I heard a faint chorus
steal upon the silence of the night.
"What can occasion that noise, Theo-
dore v»
"A stranger of distinction," replied he,
"passed through the village to-day in his
way to the castle: he is reported to be the
father of Donna Agnes. Doubtless the
baron has given an entertainment to cele-
brate his arrival."
The castle bell announced the hour of
midnight. This was the usual signal for
. the family to retire to bed. Soon aster 1
perceived lights in the castle, moving back-
wards and forwards in different directions.
I conjectured the company to be separating.
.ui .could hear-the heavy doors grate as they
.... Vol. It.' D" opened

<page 59>
( 50 )
opened with difficulty; and as they closed
again, the rotten casements rattled in their
frames. The chamber of Agnes was on the
other side of the castle. I trembled lest she
should havefailed in obtaining the key of the
haunted room. Through this it was neces-
sary for her to pass, in order to reach the nar-
row stair-cafe by which the ghost was sup-
posed to descend into the great hall. Agi-
tated by this apprehension, I kept my eyes
constantly fixed upon the window, where I
hoped to perceive the friendly glare of a lamp
borne by Agnes. I now heard the mafly
gates unbarred. By the candle in his hand,
I distinguished old Conrad, the porter.' He
set the portal doors wide open, and retired.
The lights in the castle gradually disap-
peared, and at length the whole building
was wrapt in darkness.
While I fat upon a broken ridge of the
hill, the stillness of the scene inspired me
with melancholy ideas not altogether un-
pleasing. The castle, which stood full in
my sight, - formed ah object: equally awful
and

<page 60>
( 5* .)
and picture&me. Its ponderous walls, tinged
hy the moon with solemn brightness j its
old and partly ruined towers, listing them-
selves into the clouds, and seeming to
frown on the plains around them; its
lofty battlements, overgrown with ivy, and
folding gates, expanding in honour of the
visionary inhabitant, made me sensible of a
sad and reverential horror. Yet did not
these sensations occupy me so sully as to
prevent me from witnessing with impatience
the flow progress of time. I approached
the castle, and ventured to walk round it.
A few rays of light still glimmered in the
chamber of Agnes. I observed them with
joy. I was still gazing upon them, when I
.perceived a figure draw near the window,
and the curtain was carefully closed to con-
ceal the lamp which burned there. Con-
vinced by this observation that Agnes had
not abandoned our plan, I returned with a
.Hght heart to my former station.
The half-hour struck! The three-quar-
ters struck! My bosom beat high with
D 2 hope

<page 61>
( 52 )
hope and expectation. At length, the
wished-sor sound was heard. The bell tolled
"one," and the mansion echoed with the
noise loud and solemn. I looked up to the
casement of the haunted chamber. Scarcely
had five minutes elapsed when the expected
light appeared. I was now close to the
tower. The window was not so far from
the ground, but that I fancied I perceived-a
female figure with a lamp in her hand
moving slowly along t!.e apartment. The
light soon fided away, and all was again
dark and gloomy.
Occasional gleams of brightness darted
from the staircase windows as the lovely
ghost palled by them. 1 traced the light
through the Hall : it reached the portal, and
at length 1 beheld Agnes pass through the
folding gates. She was habited exactly as
she had described the spectre. A chaplet
of beads hung upon her arm; her head was
enveloped in a long white veil; her nun's
dress was stained with blood ; and she had
taken care to provide herself with a lamp
'. :-.. and

<page 62>
C 5* )'
and dagger. She advanced towards the
spot where I stood. I flew to meet her, and
clasped her in my arms.
"Agnes !" said I, while I pressed her to
my bosom,
"Agnes! Agnes ! thou art mine!
"Agnes! Agnes! I am thine!
"In my veins while blood shall roll,..
"Thou art mine!
"I am thine!
* Thine my body! thine my foul!"
II -
Terrified and breathless, she was unable
to speak. She dropped her lamp and dag-
ger,. and sunk upon my bosom in silence. I
raised her in my arms, and conveyed her to
the carriage. Theodore remained behind in
order to release dame Cuneconda. I also
is' to
charged him with a letter to the barontss,
explaining the whole asfair, and entreating
her good osfices in reconciling Don Gallon
to my union with his daughter. I discovered
to her my real name. I proved to her that
my birth and expectations justified my pre-
tending to her niece; and assured her,
D 3 though

<page 63>
e 54 )
though it was out of my power to return her
love, that I would strive unceasingly to ob-
tain her esteem and friendship.
I stepped into the carriage, where Agnes
was already seated. Theodore closed the
door, and the postillions drove away. At
first 1 was delighted with the rapidity
of our progress; but as soon as we werte -
in no danger of pursuit, I called to the
drivers, and bade them moderate their pace.
They strove in vain to obey me; the horses
refused to answer the rein, and continuedto .'
rush on with astonishing swiftness. The
postillions redoubled their efforts to stop
them j but, by kicking and plunging, the
beasts soon released themselves from tfiis-'
restraint. Uttering a loud shriek, the dri-
vers were hurled upon the ground. Imme-
diately thick clouds obscured the sky: the
winds howled around us, the lightning
flashed, and the thunder roared tremeri*""
dously. Never did I behold so frightful a!
tempest ! Terrified by the jar of contending .'.
elements, the horses seemed every moment'
to

<page 64>
(5* )
to increase their speed. Nothing could in-
terrupt their career; they dragged the car-
riage through hedges and ditches, dashed
down the moll dangerous precipices, and
seemed to vie in swiftness with the rapidity
of the winds.
AU this while my companion lay mo-
tionless in my arms. Truly alarmed by the
magnitude of the danger, I- was in vain at-
tempting to recall her to her fenses, when a .
load crash announced that a stop was put to,
o^r progress in the most disagreeable man-
ner. The carriage was shattered to pieces,
In falling, I struck my temple against a
flint. The pain of the wound, the violence'
of the shock, and apprehension for the safety
of Agnes, combined to overpower me so
completely, that my senses forsook me, and
I lay without animation on the ground.
I probably remained for some time in
this situation, since, when I opened my eyes,
it was broad day-light. Several peasants
were standing round me, and seemed dis-
puting whether my recovery was possible. I
D 4 spoke


<page 65>
( 56 )
spoke German tolerably well. As soon
as I could utter an articulate sound, I en-
quired aster Agnes. What was my sorprise
and distress, when assured by the peasants
that nobody had been seen answering the
description which I gave of her! They
told me, that in going to their daisy labour
they had been alarmed by observing the
fragments of my carriage, and by hearing
the groans of an horse, the only one of the
four which remained alive : the other three
lay dead by my side. Nobody was near me
when they came up, and much time bad
been lost before they succeeded in reco-
vering me. Uneasy beyond expression re-
specting the sate of my companion, I be-
sought the peasants to disperse themselves
in search of her. I described her dress, and
promised immense. rewards to whoever
brought me any intelligences As for my-
self, k was impossible for me to join in the
pursuit: I had broken two of my ribs in the
fall; my arm being dislocared hung useless
by my side; and my' left leg was shat-
tered

<page 66>
( 57 )
tcred so terribly, that 1 never expected to
recover its use.
The peasants complied with my request;
all left me except four, who made a litter of
boughs, and prepared to convey me to the
neighbouring town. I enquired its name;
it proved to be Ratifbon, and I could
scarcely persuade myself that I had travelled
to such a distance jn a single night. I told
the countrymen, that at one o'clock that
morning I had passed through the village
of Rosenwald. They shook their heads
willfully, and made signs to each other that
I must certainly be delirious. I was con,
veyed to a decent inn,. and immediately
put to bed. A physician was sent for, who
set my arm with success: he then examines
my other hurts, and told me that I need be
under no apprehension of the consequences ..•y
of any of them, but ordered me to keep
myself quiet, and be prepared for a ted'.ous
and painful cure. I answered him, that if
he hoped to keep me quiet, he, must first
endeavour to procure me some news of a
D 5 lady
^

<page 67>
( 58 J
lady who had quitted Rosenwald in my
company the night before, and had been
with me at the moment when the coach
broke down. He smiled, and only replied
by advising me to make myself easy, for that
all proper care mould be taken of me. As
lie quitted me, the hostess met him at the
door of the room.
"The gentleman is not quite in his right
fenses," I heard him fay to her in a low
voice; " "tis the natural consequence of his
fall, but that will soon be over."
One after another the peasants returned
to the inn, and informed me that no traces
had been discovered of my unfortunate
mistress. Uneasiness now became despair.
I entreated them to renew their search Jri
the most urgent terms, doubling the pre-
mises which I had already made them'.
My wild and frantic manner confirmed
the by-standers in the idea of my being
delirious. No signs of the lady having ap-
peared, they believed her to be a creature
fabricated by my over-heated brain, and
9 paid

<page 68>
( 5? )
paid no attention to my entreaties. How-
ever, the hostess assured me, that a fresh eh-".
quiry should be made; but I found after-
wards that her promise was only given to
quiet me. No further steps were taken in
the business.
Though my baggage was left at Munich
under the care of my French servant, hav-
ing prepared myself for a long journey, my'
purse was amply furnished: besides, my
equipage proved me to be of distinction,
and in consequence all possible attention
was paid me at the inn. The day passed
away : still no news arrived of Agnes. The
anxiety of fear now gave place to .defpon-
dency. I ceased to rave about her, and was
plunged in the depth of melancholy reflec-
tions. Perceiving me to be silent and tran-
quil, my attendants believed my delirium
to have abated, and that my malady had
taken a favourable turn. According to
the physician's order, I swallowed a com-
posing medicine; and as soon as the night
D 6 shut

<page 69>
( 6o; y
shut-in, my attendants withdrew, and left
me to repose.
That repose I wooed in vain. The agi-
tation of my bosom chased away sleep.
Restless in my mind, in spite of the fatigue
of my body, I continued to toss about from
side to side, till the clock in a neighbouring
steeple struck " one." ' As I listened to the
mournful hollow found, and heard it die
away in the wind, I felt a sudden dullness
spread itself over my body. I shuddered
without knowing wherefore 3 cold dews
poured down my forehead, and my hair
stood bristling with alarm. Suddenly I
h.eard'slow and heavy steps ascending the
stair-case. By an involuntary movement I
started up in my bed, and drew back the
curtain. A single rush-light,. which glim-
n.iered upon the hearth, shed a faint gleam
.through the apartment, which was hung
with tapestry. The door was. thrown open
with violence. A figure entered, and drew
.near my bed with solemn measured steps.
With

<page 70>
With trembling apprehension I examined'
this midnight visitor. God Almighty! if
was the bleeding nun!' It was my lost: com-
panion! Her face was still veiled, but (he
no longer held her lamp and dagger. She
lifted up her veil slowly. What a sight
presented itself to my startled eyes! I be-
Reid before me an animated corse. Her
countenance was long and haggard; he?
cheeks and lips were bloodless; the pale-
ness of death was spread over her features;
and her eye-balls, fixed stedfastly upon me;
were lustreless and hollow.
I gazed upon the spectre with horror too
great to be described. My blood was
frozen in my veins. I would ha-ve called
for aid, but the found expired ere it could
pass my lips. My nerves were bound up in
impotence, and I remained in the fame at-
titude inanimate as a statue.
The visionary nun looked upon me for
some minutes in silence: there was some-
thing petrifying in her regard. At length,
in

<page 71>
( 6% )
in a sow sepulchral voice, she pronounced
the following words:
"Raymond!' Raymond I Thou art mine !'.
* ** Raymond! Raymond! I am thine t
*' In thy veins while blood shall roll,
*' I am thine!
"Thou art mine J
"Mine thy body! Mine thy soul I".
Breathless with fear, I listened while she
repeated my own expressions. The appa-
rition seated herself opposite to me at the
foot of the bed, and was silent. Her eyes
were fixed earnestly upon mine: they seem-
ed endowed with the property of the rattle-
snake's, for I strove in vain to look off her.
My eyes were fascinated, and I had not the
power of withdrawing them from the
spectre's. .. >
In this attitude she remained for a whole
long hour without speaking or moving;
nor was I able to do either. At length the
clock struck two. The apparition rose
from her seat, and approached the side of
the bed. She grasped with her icy fingers
.'..'.-.. .;.>..; my.

<page 72>
( «5 )
my hand, which hung lifeless upon the co-.
verture, and, pressing her eold lips to mine,.
again repeated,
"Raymond J Raymond! Thou art mine!
"Raymond i Raymond! I am thine I" &c.—
She then dropped my hand* quitted the
chamber with stow steps, and the door
closed after her. Till that moment the
faculties of my body had been all suspend-
ed; those of my mind had alone been wak-
ing. The charm now ceased to operate;
the blood which had been frozen in my
veins rushed back to my heart with vio-
lence j I uttered a deep groan, and sunk
lifeless upon my pillow.
The adjoining room was only separated
from mine by a thin partition; it was occu-
pied by the host and his wife: the former
was roused by my groan, and immediately
hastened to my chamber; the hostess soon
followed him. With some difficulty they
succeeded in restoring me to my senses,
and. immediately sent for the physician,
who arrived in all diligence. He declared
my

<page 73>
( H )
.my fever to be very much increased, and.
that, if I continued to susfer such violent agi-
tation, he would not take upon him.to en-
sure my life. Some medicines which-he
gave me, in some degree tranquillized my
spirits. I fell into a fort of slumber towards
day-break, but fearful dreams prevented me
from deriving any benefit from my repose.
Agnes and the bleeding nun presented
themselves by turns to my fancy, and com-
bined to harass aRd torment me. I awoke
fatigued and unrefreshed. My fever seem-
ed rather augmented than diminished; the
agitation of my mind impeded my fractured
bones from knitting: I had frequent faint-
ing fits, and during the whole day the phy-
sician judged it expedient not to quit me
for two hours together.
The singularity of my adventure made
me determine to conceal it from every one,
since I could not expect that a circumstance
so strange should gain credit. I was very
uneasy about Agnes.. I knew not what she
would think at not finding me at the ren-
4 dezvous,

<page 74>
( 65 )
dezvous, and dreaded her entertaining
suspicions cf my fidelity. However, I de-
pended upon Theodore's discretion, and
trusted that my letter to the baroness
would convince her of the rectitude of my
intentions. These considerations somewhat
lightened my inquietude upon her account;
but the impression left upon my mind by
my nocturnal visitor grew stronger with
evtry succeeding moment. The night drew
near j I dreaded its arrival j yet I strove to-
persuade myself that the ghost would ap-
pear no more, and at all events I desired .
that a servant might sit up in my chamber.
The fatigue of my body, from not hav-
ing; slept on the former night, co-operating
with the strong opiates administered to me
in profusion, at length procured me that
repose of which I was so much in need. I
funk into a profound and tranquil slumber,
and had already slept for some hours, when
the neighbouring clock roused me by
striking' " one." Its sound brought with
it to my memory all the horrors of the night
before*

<page 75>
(6* X
before. The lame cold shivering seized'
me. I started up in my bed, and perceived.
the servant fast asleep in an arm-chair
near me. I called him by his name: he
made no answer. I shook him forcibly
by the arm, and strove in vain to wake
him: he was perfectly insensible to my
efforts. I now heard the heavy steps^
ascending the stair-case; the doer wasv
thrown open, and again the bleeding nun-
stood before me. Once more my limbs
were chained in second infancy: once more.
I heard those fatal words repeated^
** Raymond I Raymond! Thou art mine* j
w Raymond! Raymond I I am thine 1" &c.—
The scene which had shocked me so*
sensibly on the former night,. was again pre-
sented. The spectre again pressed her lips
to mine, again touched me with her rota-
ting fingers, and, as on her first appearance,
quitted the chamber as soon as the clock
told « two."
Every night was this repeated. Far
from growing accustomed to the ghost,
every

<page 76>
c * >
every succeeding visit inspired me wit&
greater horror. Her idea pursued me con*
tinuatly, and I became the prey of habitual
melancholy. The constant agitation of my
mind naturally retarded the re-establish-
ment of my health. Several months
elapsed before I was able to quit my bed;
and when, at length, I- was moved to a so-
pha,-I was so faint, spiritless, and emaciated*
that I could not cross the room without
assistance. The looks of my attendants suf-
ficiently denoted the little hope which they
entertained of my recovery. The profound
sadness which oppressed me without remis-
sion, made the physician consider me to be
an: hypochondriac. The cause of, my dis-
tress I carefully concealed in my qwji bo-
som, for I knew that no one could give me
relief- The ghost was not even visible to
any eye but mine. I had frequently caused
attendants.to sit up in my rooms but the
moment that the clock struck " one," ir-
resistible slumber seized them, nor left
them till the departure of the ghost.
You

<page 77>
( m y
You may be surprised that during this-
time I made no enquiries after your sifter.
Theodore, who with difficulty had disco-
vered my abode, had quieted my appre- •
hensions for her safety; at the same time
he convinced me, that all attempts to re-
lease her from captivity must: be fruitless,
tI4L I should be in a condition to return to
Spain. The particulars of her adventure,
which I shall now relate to you, were partly
communicated to me by Theodore, and
partly by Agnes herself. - . -;- . ... .
. On the fatal night when her elopement
was to have taken place, accident had not
permitted her to quit her chamber at the
appointed time. At length she ventured
into the haunted room, descended the stair-
case leading into the hall, found the gates
open as she expected, and left the castle
unobserved. What was her surprise at not
finding me ready to receive her! She ex-
amined the cavern, ranged through every
alley of theneighbouring wood, and passed
two full hours in this fruitless enquiry.. She
could

<page 78>
( % )
.could discover no traces either of me or of
the carriage. Alarmed and disappointed,
her only resource was to return to the'castle
before the baroness missed her; but here
.she found herself in a fresh embarrassment.
Tne bell had already tolled "two," the
ghostly hour was past, and the careful por-
ter had locked the folding gates. After
much irresolution, she' ventured to knock
softly. Luckily for her, Conrad was still
awake: he beard the noise, and rose, mur-
muring at being called up a second time.
No sooner had he opened one of the door?,
and'beheld the supposed apparition wait-
ing there for admittance, than he uttered a
loud ciy, and sunk upon his knees. Agni's
profited by his terror: she glided by him,
stew to her own apartment, and, having
thrown off her spectre's trappings, retired
to bed., endeavouring in vain to account
for my disappearing.
In the mean while, Theodore, having
seen my carriage drive off with the false
Agnes, returned joyfully to the village.
'--. The

<page 79>
( 7° ^)
The next morning he released Cunegonda
from her confinement, and accompanied
her to the castle. There he found the
baron, his lady, and Don Gaston, disput-
ing together upon the porter's relation.
All of them agreed in believing the exist-
ence of spectres; but the latter contended,
that for a ghost to knock for admittance
was a proceeding till then unwitnessed, and
totally incompatible with the immaterial
nature of a spirit. They were still discus-
sing the subject, when the page appeared
with Cunegonda, and cleared up the mys-
tery. On hearing his deposition, it was
agreed unanimously, that the Agnes whom
Theodore had seen step into my carriage
must have been the bleeding nun, and that
the ghost who had terrified Conrad was no
other than Don Gaston's daughter.
The first surprise which this discovery
occasioned being over, the baroness re-
solved to make it of use in persuading her
niece to take the veil. Fearing lest so ad-
vantageous an establishment for his daugh-
ter

<page 80>
( «7» )
<er should induce Don Gallon to renounce
liis resolution, she suppressed my letter,
and continued to represent me as a needy-
unknown adventurer. A childish vanity had
led me to conceal my real name even from
my mistress; I wished to be loved for my-
tfelf, not for being the son and heir of the
marquis de las Cisternas. The conse-
quence was, that my rank was known to no
.one in the castle except the baroness, and
she took good care to confine the know-
ledge to her own breast. Don Gaston
having approved his sister's design, Agnes
was summoned to appear before them. She
was taxed with having meditated an elope-
. ment, obliged to make a full confession,
and was amazed at the gentleness with
which it was received: but what was her
affliction, when informed that the failure
of her project must be attributed to me!
Cunegonda, tutored by the baroness, told
'her, that when I released her I had desired
her to inform her lady that our connexion
was at an end, that the whole affair was oc-
..'.-. casioned

<page 81>
( 7* )
casion'ed by a false report, and that if by no
means suited my circumstances to marry a
woman without fortune or expectations.
To this account my sudden disappearing
gave but too great an air of probability.
Theodore, who could have contradicted
the story, by Donna Rodolpha's order was
kept out of her sight. What proved a still
greater confirmation of my being an impos-
tor, was the arrival of a letter from yourself,
declaring that you had no sort of acquaint-
ance with Alphonso d'Alvarada. These
seeming proofs of my perfidy, aided bythe
artful insinuations of her aunt, by Cune-
gonda's flattery, and her father's threats and
anger, entirely conquered your sister's re-
pugnance to a convent. Incensed at my
behaviour, and disgusted with the worldin
general, me consented :to receive the veil.
She passed another month at the castle of
Lindenberg, during which my non-appear-
ance confirmed her in her resolution, and
then accompanied Don Gaston into Spain.
Theodore was now- set at liberty. He
hastened


<page 82>
( 73 )
hastened to Munich, where I had promised
to let him hear from me; but finding from
Lucas thai 1 never arrived there, he pur-
sued his search with indefatigable perse-
verance, and at length succeeded in rejoin-
ing me at Racisbon.
So much was 1 altered, that scarcely
could he recollect my features: the distress
visible upon his, sufficiently testified how
lively was the interest which he felt for me.
The society of this amiable boy, whom I
had always considered rather as a compa-
nion than a servant, was now my only com-
fort. His conversation was gay, yet sen-
sible, and his observations shrewd and en-
tertaining. He had picked up much more
knowledge than is usual at his age; but what
rendered him most agreeable to me, was his
having a delightful voice, and no mean
.ft.ill in music. He had also acquired some
taste in poetry, and even ventured occa-
sionally to write verses himself. He fre-
quently composed little ballads in Spanish.
His compositions were but indifferent, I
must confess, yet they were pleasing to me
Vol. 11. E from


<page 83>
( 74 )
from. their novelty;. and hearing him sing
them to his guitar was the only amusement
which I was capable of receiving. Theo-
dore perceived well enough that something
preyed upon my mind; butas I concealed
the cause of my grief even from him, re-
spect would not permit him to pry into my
secrets. ,. .,
. One evening I was lying upon mysopha,
plunged in reslections Very far from agree-
able: Theodore amused himself by ob-r
serving from the window -a. bat tie between
two postillionSj who were quarrelling in the
inn-yard. .... ,,i
"Ha! ha!" cried he suddenly, "yon-
der is the Great Mogul."
"Who?" said I,,,.,,., -;j. js ,' .,.....;-
"Only a man who made me a strange
speech at Munich." .. .;,: 'r'.^r;
"What was the purport of it?"
"Now you put me in mind of if, Seg-
no^ jr. was a.kind.of message to you,,^,
truly it was not worth delivering. .iLb,er,.
lleve the fellow to be mad, for. my part.
When I came to Munich in search of you,
.1 found

<page 84>
( IS )
IFo'undtirm Irving at' the King of the Ro-
mans,* and the host gave me an odd ac-
count of him. By his accent he is supposed
to be a foreigner, but of what country no-
body can tell. He seemed to have no ac-
quaintance in the town, spoke very sel-
dom, and never was seen to smile. He
had neither servants nor baggage; but his
purse seemed well furnished, and he did
much good in the town. Some supposed
him to be an Arabian astrologer, others to
be a travelling mountebank, and many de-'
dared that he was Doctor Faustus, whom
the devil had sent back to Germany. The
landlord, however, told me, that he had
the best reasons to believe him to be the
Great Mogul incognito."
.s'^eiBut the-strange speech, Theodbre—"
"True, I had almost forgotten the
speech: indeed, for that matter, it would
notirave been a great loss if I bad forgotten
it''a1t6gether. You are to know, Segnor,
that while I was enquiring about you of the
landlord, this stranger passed by. He stop-
E 2 ped.

<page 85>
( 7& )
ped,and spoked at meeafnestly—"Youth*"
said he, in a solemn voice, " he whom yovi
seek, has found that which he would fain
lose. My hand alone can dry up the blood.
Bid your master wish for me when the clock
strikes " one."
*> How?" cried I, starting from my so-
pha, [The words which Theodore had
repeated, seemed to imply the stranger's
knowledge of my secret] "Fly to him,
my boy! fc-ntreat him to grant me one mo*
ment's conversation."
Theodore was surprised at the vivacity
of my manner: however, he alked:.tfb
questions, but hastened to obey mei"0^
waited his return impatiently. But a shost
space of time had elapsed, when lie again
appeared, and ushered the expected guest
into my chamber. He was a man of majes-
tic presence; his countenance was stroDgJy
marked, and his\eyes were large, black-,
and sparkling!' yet there was a somethteg
in- his look, which, the moment that'W saw
him, inspired me with a secret awe, not to
i > say
u x

<page 86>
( 77 )
&y horror* He was dressed plainly, his hair
hung wildly upon his brow, and a band of
black velvet, which encircled his forehead,
spread over his features an additional gloom.
His countenance wore the marks of pro-
found melancholy, his step was slow, and
his manner grave, stately, and solemn.
f..:; He (aluted me with politeness; and
having replied to the usual compliments of
introduction, he motioned to Theodore to
•qw-j the chamber. The page instantly
withdrew.
yujl I know your business," said he, with-
out giving me time to speak. "I have the
[power of releasing you from your nightly
ivifitor; but this cannot be done before
HSiostday. On the hour when the sabbath
morning breaks, spirits of darkness have
-leastinfluence over mortals. After Satur-
day the nun shall visit you no more."
f-A-J.f May 1 not enquire," said I, " by what
means you are in possession of a secret,
«whith;I have carefully concealed from the
knowledge of every one?" ,.../*
. . E 3 y "How

<page 87>
( 78 )
.•* How can I be ignorant of your dis-
tresses, when their cause at this moment
.stands beside you?"
I started. The stranger continued.
"Though to you only visible for one
hour in the twenty-four, neither day or
night does she ever quit you; nor will she
ever quit you till you have granted her re-
quest."
"And what is that request f"
.-,f,* That she must herself explain: it lies
not in my knowledge. Wait with patience
for the night of Saturday : all shall be then
cleared up." ....... „..
I dared not press him further. He soon
aster changed the conversation, and talked
cf various matters. He named people who
had ceased to exist for many ccnturifi>,Ljaj>d
y-et with whom he appeared to have heen
perfonally acquainted. I coujd not men-
tion a country, however distant, which he
had not visited, nor could I sufficiently
admire the extent and variety of.,his.infor-
mation. I remarked to him, that having
. 1'. travelled,

<page 88>
(. ft >
snivelled, seen and known so much, must
have given him infinite pleasure. He shook
bis head mournfully.
"No one," he replied, " is adequate
to comprehending the misery os my lot!
Fate obliges me to be constantly in move-
ment; I am not permitted to pass- more
than a fortnight in the fame place. I have no
friend in the world, and, from the restless-
ness of my destiny, I never can acquire one.
Fain would I lay down my miserable; Hsev
for I envy those who enjoy the quiet of the
grave: but death eludes me, and flies from
my embrace. In vain do I throw myself
in the way of danger. I plunge into the
ocean; the waves throw me back with ab-
horrence upon the sbore: I rush into fire?
thesttmes recoil at my approach: I oppose
myself to the fury of banditti; their swords
become blunted, and break against my
breast. The hungry tiger shudders at my
approach, and the alligator flies from a
monster more horrible than itself. God
E 4 has


<page 89>
( »p )
has set his seal upon me, and all his crea-
tures respect this fatal mark."
He put his hand to the velvet, which was
bound round his forehead. There was in
his eyes an expreffion of fury, despair, and
malevolence, that struck horror to my very
soul. An involuntary convulsion made me
shudder. The stranger perceived it. > ,
"Such is the curse imposed on me," he
continued : " I am doomed to inspire all
who look on me with terror and detestation.
You" already feel the insluence of .the
charm, and with every succeeding moment
will feel it more. I will not add to your
sufferings by my presence. Farewell till.Sa-
turday. As soon as the clock strikes twelve,.
expect me at your chamber-door.'\ , - ,
Having said this he departed, leaving me
in astonishment at the mysterious turn of
his manner and conversation. His assur-
ances that I should soon be relieved from
the apparition's visits, produced a good
effect upon my constitution., Thep,dpre».:
ii..-V:•)?.'i .«.

<page 90>
C fe )

whom I rather treated as an adopted chiJd
than a domestic, was surprised at his re-
turn to observe the amendment in my looks.
He congratulated me on this symptom of
resuming health, and declared himself de-
lighted at my having received so much Jbe:
nefit from my conference with the Great
Mogul. Upon enquiry I found that the
stranger had already pasted eight days in
Ratisbon. According to his own accounts
therefore, he was only to remain there six
days longer. Saturday was still at the
distance of three. Oh! with what impa-
tience did I expect its arrival! la the in-
terim, the bleeding nun continued her
nocturnal visits; but hoping soon to be re-
leased from them altogether, the effects
which they produced on me became less
violent than before.
The wished-for night arrived. To avoid
creating suspicion I retired to bed at my
usual hour. But as soon as my attendants
had left me, I dressed myself again, and
prepared for the stranger's reception. H$
E 5 entered
/'

<page 91>
( 82 )
Entered my room upon the turn of mid-
night. A small chest was in his hand, which
he placed near the stove. He saluted me
without speaking; I returned the compli-
ntent, observing an equal silence. He then
opened his chest. The first thing which he
produced was a small wooden crucifix?- he
funk upon his knees, gazed upon it mourn-
fully, and cast his eyes towards heaven.
He seemed to be praying devoutly. At
length he bowed his head respectfully,
kissed the crucifix thrice, and quitted his
kneeling posture. He next drew from
the tftfest a covered goblet: with the li-
iruor^whitb' k contained, and which ap-
peared "rb bfr blood, he sprinkled the sloor;
afid'lrlen dipping in it one end of the cru-
cifix, he described a circle in the midde
of the room. Round about this he placed
vifftsus reliquesy sculls> thigh-bones, &c.
J Observed, that he disposed them alt in the
Brtris of crosses. Lastly, he took out- a
Urge bible, and beckoned me to follow him
ihtt) the1 circle. I obeyed*
-.'Jiiiaa 4 i . "Be

<page 92>
C 83 )
-.'** Be cWftious not to utter a syllable P*
whispered the stranger: "step not out dF
tHe circle, and, as you love yourself, dare
not to look upon my fade!"
"Molding the crucifix in one hand, die
bible in the other, he seemed to read with
profound attention. The clock struck one!
As usual Iheard the spectre's steps upon
the stair-cafe: but I was not seized with
the accustomed shivering. I waited her
approach with confidence. She entered the
room,'-drew near the circle, and stopped.
The stranger muttered some words, to me
.Unintelligible. . Then raising his head from
flfce boo'ki and extending the crucifix to*
«&&}$ the ghost, he pronounced, in a voice
distinct and solemn y. '..'
>'-'**'. Beatrice! Beatrice! Beatrice!" '.'. ". >i
'oX^W.hat wouldst thou ?" replied the ap-
p^'ttieyftitt\a'hollow faltering tone. '.'.> '*:':
.«V*»^Wjbft't-disturbs thy sleep? Why dost
thou afflict and torture this youth i HoW
can rest be restored to thy unquiet'fpirir?''
*' I dare not tell! I must not tell t' F'aih
E 6 '• would

<page 93>
( n•v
would I repose in thy grave, but ftern com-
mands force me to prolong my punish-
ment!" - '.'.-'.'.."'.", ",''; .lc;'
"Knowest thou this blood? Knowest
thou in whose veins it slowed? Beatrice!
Beatrice! In his name, I charge thee to
answer me/' .l;. vwa/I
'" *( I dare not disobey my taslcers."
- "Darest thou disobey me?" ■^ <
He spoke in a commanding tone, and
drew the fable band from his forehead. In
^rite -of- his injunctions to the contrary,
curiosity would not suffer me to keep my
eyes off his face: I raised them, and be-
held a burning cross impressed upon his
brow. For the horror with which this object
'inspired me I cannot account, but I never
felt its equal. My fenses left me for some
moments: a mysterious dread overcame
my courage; and had not the exerciser
caught my hand, I should have failen out
'©f the circle. ;• r -\ . . ,* :.'::nj i'i
. When I recovered myself, I perceived
* tftatahe burning cross had produced an
_..ii^ effect

<page 94>
( »5 )
effect bo less violent upon the spectre. Her
countenance expressed reverence and hor*
ror, and her visionary limbs were shaken
by fear^ . s>*-.>J-r* ;' > .
.** Yes I'* she said at length, " I tremble
at- that mark! I respect it! 1 obey you f
Know then, that my bones lie still unbu -
ried: they rot in the obscurity of Linden-
berg Hole. None but this youth has the
right.of consigning them to the grave.
His own lips have made over to me his
body and his foul; never will I give back
his promise, never shall he know a. night
devoid of terror, unless he engages to col-
lect my mouldering bones, and deposit
thertoin the family vault of his Andalusian
«astle4 iiThen let thirty masses be said for
the repose !©f; nay spirit, and I trouble thjs
jworldno more. Now let me depart,. Those
flames are scorching!" ....nn ... . j;
. .He let the hand-drop slowly which held
the crucifix, and which till then he had
pointed towards her. The apparition bow-
td her head, and her sprm incited. into
air.


<page 95>
( 86 )
jit.: The exoreiser led-me 'out-©fr the
circle. He replaced the bible, &e. in the
chest, and then addressed himself to me,
who stood near him speechless from asto-
aishment. .jiKu :'. c' .'
'n" Don Raymond, you.have heard the
conditions on which repose is promised
you. Be it your business to fulfil them to
the letter. For me, nothing more remains
than to clear up the darkness still spread
over the spectre's history, and inform you,
that when living Beatrice bore the name of
las Cisternas. She was the great aunt of
your .grandfather. In quality of your re-^
lation, her ashes demand respect: from you J
though the enormity of her crimes must
excite ;your. abhorrence. The nature of
those crimes no one is more capable of ex,
plaining to you than myself... I«wasper*
sonally acquainted with the holy man w-htt
jprpfcribed her nocturnal riots in the castle
of Lindenberg, and 1 hold this narrative
from his own lips. . . . t .->+• v...»>
.."Beatrice deJas Cisternas took theyei^

<page 96>
( «7 )
at an early age, not by her own choice, but
at the express command of her parents;
She was then too young to regret the plea-
fures of which her profession deprived her:
but no sooner did her warm andvoluptuous
character begin to be developed, than she
abandoned herself freely to the impulse of
her passions, and seized the first opportu*
nity to procure their gratification. This
opportunity was at length presented, aftef
many obstacles which only added new
force to her desires. She contrived to elope
from the convent, and sled to Germany
with the baron Lindenberg. She lived ac
hit castle several months as his avowed
concubine. All Bavaria was scandalized
by her impudent and abandoned conduct*
Her feasts vied in luxury with Cleopatra's,
and Lindenberg became the theatre of tbd
most unbridled debauchery. Not satisfied
with displaying the incontinence-os.a .pro-
stitute, she professed herself an atheist: slid
took every opportunity to scoff at her mo-
.r ...J ... .: • . . . .' "-;. jiastic

<page 97>
( 88 )
nastic vows, and loaded with ridicule the
most sacred ceremonies of religion.
** Possessed of a character so depraved,
she did not long confine her affections to
one object. Soon after her arrival at the
castle, the baron's younger brother attract-
ed her notice by his strong-marked features,
gigantic stature, and herculean limbs. She
was not of an humour to keep her inclina-
tion long unknown: but she found in Otto
von Lindenberg her equal in depravity.
He returned her passion just sufficiently to'
increase it; and when he had worked it up>
to the desired pitch, he fixed the price of his'
love at his brother's murder. The wreticb?
consented to this horrible asreemeiiti ^'A^
night was pitched upon for perpetratingHfae'
deed. Otto, who resided on a small estate av'
few miles distant from the castle, promised
that, at one in the morning, he would be
waiting for her at Linden berg-hole j that
he? would bring with him a party of chosen
friends, by whose aid he doubted not being!
''v-ablc

<page 98>
( % >
|bjp $9 make himself master pf the castle,;
and that his next step mould be the uniting
her hand to his. It was this last promise
which over-ruled every scruple of Beatrice*
since, in spite of his affection for her, the
baron had declared positively, that he never
would make her his wife. ;, ,. ,
nrfS The fatal night arrived. The barer*
slept in the arms of his perfidious mistress,
when the castle bell struck " one." Imme-
diately Beatrice. drew a dagger from un-
derneathhej pillow, and plunged it in her
paramour's heart. The baron uttered a
fipgle dreadful groan, and expired. The.
n^pcderess quitted her bed hastily, took a
lamp in one hand, in the other the bloody
da$ger£,1a^4 bent her course towards the
cavern*/ The porter dared not to refuse
opening.the gates to one more dreaded ia.
the,qastle dian its master. Beatrice reached..
Ljndenberg-hole unopposed, where, ac-
cording to promise, shefound Octo waiting..
far^ec.. JJe received, and likened ta;he|»,
narrative with transport: but ere she had■
time

<page 99>
( 90 )
time to ask why he came unaccompanied,
he convinced her that he wished for no wit-
nesses to their interview. Anxious to con-
ceal his share in the murder, and to free
himself from a woman whose violent and
atrocious character made him tremble with
reason for his own safety, he had resolved
on the destruction of his wretched agent.
Rushing upon her suddenly, he wrested the
dagger from her hand. He plunged it,
still reeking with his brother's blood, in her
bosom, and put an end to her existence by-
repeated blows.
"Otto now succeeded to the barony of
Lindenberg. The murder was attributed-
folely to the fugitive nun, and no one suspect-
ed him to have persuaded her to the action:.'
But though his crime was unpunished by
man, God's justice permitted him not to'
enjoy in peace his blood-stained honours.
Her bones lying still unburied in the cave,
the restless soul of Beatrice continued to in-
habit the castle. Dressed in her reKgidus:
liabit, in memory of her vows br&ken to-
heaven,

<page 100>
( 9* )
heaven, iuraUhed «ith the dagger whrcb
had drank. the blood of her paramour, and
holding the lamp which had guided her
slying steps, every night did she stand be-
fore the bed of Otto. The most dreadful
confusion reigned through the castle. The
vaulted chambers resounded with shrieks
and groans; and the spectre, as she ranged
along the antique galleries, uttered an inco-
herent mixture of prayers and blasphemies.
Otco; was unable to withstand the mock
which. he felt at this fearful vision: its hor-
rors increased with every succeeding ap*
pearance. His alarm at length became so
insupportable, that his heart burst, and one
mogning he was found in his bed totally
deprived -of wartnth and animation. H5»
death-did not put an end to the nocturnal
riots. The bones of Beatrice continued to
lie unburied, and her ghost continued to
haunt the castle. . .\l......
"The domains of ^tndenberg now fell
to a distant relation. But terrified;by the aiC~*
counts given him of the bleeding nun L(sQ>
. . j was

<page 101>
( $* >
was the spectre called by the multitude)
the new baron called to his assistance a ce-
lebrated exorcifer. This holy man suc-
ceeded in obliging her to temporary re*
pose: but though she discovered to him
her history, he was not permitted to reveal
it to others, or cause her skeleton to be re-
moved to hallowed ground. That office
was refervedfor you ; and tilt your coming
her ghest was doomed to wander about the
castle, and lament the crime which (he had
there committed. However, the exerciser
obliged h«r to silence during his:life-time.
So long as he existed, the haunted chamber
was shut up, and the spectre was invisible.
At his death, which happened in five years
after, she again appeared, but only once on
every fifth year, on the same day and at the
same hour when she plunged her knife in
the heart of her sleeping lover: she then
visited the cavern which held her moulder-
ing skeleton, returned to the. castle as soon
aSitbe clock struck two, and was ieen n©
more till the next five years had elapsed.
:wi,n "She

<page 102>
C 93 )
** She was doomed to susfer during the
space of a century. That period is past.
Nothing now remains but to consign to the
grave the ashes of Beatrice. I have been
the mean? of releasing.you from your vi-
sionary tormentor; and amidst all the sor-
rows which oppress me, to think that £
have been of use to you, is some consola-
tion. Youth, farewell! May the ghost of
your relation enjoy that rest in the tomb,
.which the Almighty's vengeance has de-
nied to me for ever !".
^siHereithe stranger prepared to quit the
apartment. ...>...
-?Wi<Stay yet one moment 1" said I; "you
have satisfied my curiosity with regard to
the spectre, but you leave me a prey to
yet greater respecting yourself. Deign to
inform me to whom I am under such real
obligations. You mention circumstances
song past, and people long dead : you were
personally acquainted with the exerciser*
whor by your own account, has been de-
ceased-' n*^-* century. How am I to ac*
;.!< ''. count

<page 103>
( 9+ )
count for this? What means that burning
cross upon your forehead, and why did the
sight of it strike such horror to my soul ?""
On these points he for some time refused
to satisfy me. At length, overcome by my
entreaties, he consented to dear up the
\Vhole, on condition that I would defer his
explanation till the next day. With this
request Iwas obliged to comply, and he
left me. In the morning my fust care was
to enquire after the mysterious stranger.
Conceive my disappointment, when in-
formed that he had quitted Ratisbon. I
dispatched messengers in pursuit of him,
but' in vain. No traces of the fugitive
were discovered. Since that moment I
never have heard any more of him, and 'tis
most probable that I never shall."
[Lorenzo here interrupted his friend's
narrative:
"How!" said he, *f you have never dis-
covered who he was, or even formed a
guess?"
"Pardon me," replied the marquis:
** when

<page 104>
( 95 )
<' when I related this adventure to my
uncle, the cardinal-duke, he told me, that
he had no doubt of this singular man's be-
ing the celebrated character known univer-
sally by the name of the wandering Jew.
His not: being permitted to pass more
than fourteen days on the fame spot, the
burning cross impressed upon his forehead,
the effect which it produced upon the be-
holders, and many other circumstances,
gave this supposition the colour of truth.
The cardinal is fully persuaded of it; and
for my own part I am inclined to adopt the
only solution which offers itself to this
riddle." I return to the narrative from
v^hich I have digressed.] . .-..'.: » '>
From this .period I recovered my health
so rapidly as to astonifli my physicians. The
bleeding nun appeared no more, and I was
soon able to set out for Lindenberg. The
baron received me with open arms. I con-
fided. tQ'bim. the sequel cf my adventure;
and he was not a little pleased to find that
his mansion would be no longer troubled
with

<page 105>
( 96 )
with the phantom's quinquennial visits. I
was sorry to perceive, that absence had not
weakened Donna Rodolpha's imprudent
passion. In a private conversation which
I had with her during my short stay at
the castle, she renewed her attempts to per-
suade me to return her affection. Regard-
ing her as the primary cause of all my
sufferings, I entertained for her no other
sentiment than disgust. The skeleton of
Beatrice was found in the place which she
had mentioned. Thrs being all that I sought
at Lindenberg, I hastened toquit the baron's
domains, equally anxious to perform the
obsequies of the murdered nun, and escape
the importunity of a woman whom I de-
tested. I departed, followed by Donna Ro-
>dolpha's menaces, that my contempt should
.not be long unpunished.
1 now bent my course towards Spain
with all diligence. Lucas with my bag-
gage had joined me during my abode at-
Lindenberg. I arrived in my native coun-
try without any accident, and immediately
proceeded

<page 106>
( w \
proceeded. to my father's castle in Anda-
lusia. The remains of Beatrice were de-
posited in the family vault, all due cere-
monies performed, and the number of masses
said .which she had required. Nothing
now hindered me from employing all my
endeavours to discover the retreat of Ag-
ues. The baroness had assured me, that her
niece had already taken the veil: this intel-
ligence I suspected to have been forged by
jealousy, aod hope to find my mislrese
still at liberty to accept my hand.. I en-*
quired after her family; I sonnd that before
her daughter could reach Madrid, Donna
Inesilla was no more: you4 my dear Lo-,
renzo, were said to be abroad, but where
I eDpld. not. discover: your father was ia
a distant province, on a visit to the duke
de Medina; and as to Agnes, no ope could
or would inform me what was become of
she^ Theodore, according to promise, had
returned to Strasbourg, where he found
.his; grandfather dead, and Marguerite in.
possession of his fortune. All her persua-
Vox-. II. F sions

<page 107>
( 98 )
sions to remain with her were fruitless.: he
quitted her a second time, and followed
me to Madrid. He exerted himself to the
utmost in forwarding my search: but out
united endeavours were unattended by suc-
cess. The retreat which concealed Agnes
remained an impenetrable mystery, and I
began to abandon all hopes of recovering
her.
About eight months ago I was returning
to my hotel in a melancholy humour, having
passed the evening at the play-house. The
night was dark, and I was uniccompanied.
Plunged in reslections which were far from
being agreeable,! perceived not that three
men had followed me from the theatre, till,
on turning into an unfrequented street,
they all attacked meat the fame time with
the utmost fury. 1 sprang back a few paces,
drew my sword, and threw my cloak over
my left arm. The obscurity of the night
was in my favour. For the most part the
blows of the assassins, being aimed at ran-
dom, failed to touch me. I at length was
fortunate

<page 108>
( 99 )
fortunate enough to lay one of my adver- .
saries at my feet: but before this I had
already received so many wounds, and was
so warmly pressed, that my destruction
would have been inevitable, had not the
clashing of swords called a cavalier to my
assistance. He ran towards me with his
sword drawn: several domestics followed
him with torches. His arrival made the
combat equal: yet would not the bravoes
abandon their design, till their servants
were on the point of joining us. They
then fled away, and we lost them in the
obscurity.
The stranger now addressed himself to
me with politeness, and enquired whether
I was wounded. Faint with the lose of
blood, 1 could scarcely thank him for his
seasonable aid, and entreat him to let some
of his servants convey me to the hotel de
las Cisternas. I no sooner mentioned the
name than he professed himself an acquaint-
ance of my father's, and declared that he
would not permit my being transported.to
F i such
28130IB

<page 109>
C ioo )
such a distance before my wounds had been
examined. He added, that his house was
hard by, and begged me to accompany him.
thither. His manner was so earnest, that I
could not reject his offer; and, leaning upon
his arm, a few minutes brought me to the
porch of a magnificent hotel.
On entering the house,an old grey-headed
domestic came to welcome my conductor:
he enquired when theduke,hismaster, meant
to quit the country, and was answered, that
he would remain there yet some months.
My deliverer then desired the family surgeon
to be summoned without delay : his orders
were obeyed. I was seated upon a sopha in
a noble apartment; and my wounds being
examined, they were declared to be very
slight. The surgeon, however, advised me
not to expose myself to the night air j and
the stranger pressed me so earnestly to take
a bed in his house, that I consented to re-
main where I was for the present.
Being now leit alone with my deliverer,
I took the opportunity of thanking him in
more

<page 110>
( »oi )
more express terms than 1 had done hither-
to; but he begged me to be silent upon the
subject.
"I esteem myself happy," said he, " in
having had it in my power to render you
this little service; and I shall think myself
eternally obliged to my daughter for de-
taining me so late at the convent of St.
Clare. The high esteem in which I have
ever held the marquis de las Cisternas,
though accident has not permitted our being
so intimate as I could wish, makes me re-
joice in the opportunity of making his son's
acquaintance. I am certain that my brother,
in whose house you now are, will lament
his not being at Madrid to receive you him-
self: but, in the duke's absence, I am master
of the family, and may assure you, in his
name, that every thing in the hotel de Me-
dina- is perfectly at your disposal."
Conceive my surprise, Lorenzo, at dis-
covering, in the person of . my preserver,
Don Gaston de Medina. It was only to be
equalled by my secret satisfaction at theas-
F 3 surancei

<page 111>
( I©! )
surance, that Agnes inhabited the convent
of St. Clare. This latter sensation was not
a little weakened, when, in answer to my
seemingly indifferent questions, he told me
that his daughter had really taken the veil.
I suffered not my grief at this circumstance
to take root in my mind : I slattered myself
with. the idea, that my uncle's credit at the
court of Rome would remove this obstacle,
and thaf, without difficulty, I should obtain
for my mistress a dispensation from her
vows. Buoyed up with this hope, I calmed
the uneasiness of my bosom; and I re-
doubled my endeavours to appear grateful
for the attention, and pleased with the so-
ciety, of Don Gaston.
A domestic now entered the room, and
informed me that the bravo whom I had
wounded,discovered some signs of life. I de-
sired that he might be carried to my father's
hotel, and said that, as soon as he recovered
his voice, I would examine hinrrespecting
.-Iris reasons for attempting my life. I was
answered, that he was already able to speak,
though
"V

<page 112>
( i°3 )
though with difficulty. Don Gallons. cu-
riosity made him press me to interrogate the
assassin in his presence ; but this curiosity I
was by no means inclined to gratify. One
reason was, tharrdoubting from whence the
blow came, I was unwilling to place before
Don Gaston's eyes the guilt of a sister.
Another was, that I seared to be recognized
for Alphonsod'Alvarada,. and precautions
taken in consequence to keep me from the
fight of Agnes. To avow my passion for
his daughter, and endeavour to make him
enter into my schemes, what I knew of Don
Gaston's character convinced me would be
an imprudent step; and considering it to
be essential that he should know me for no
other than the conde de las Cisternas, I was
determined not to let him hear the bravo's
confession. I insinuated to him, that as I
suspected a lady to be concerned in the
business, whose name might accidentally.
escape from the assassin, it was necessary for
-me to examine the man in private. Don
Gaston's delicacy would not permit ..bis
F 4 urging

<page 113>
( r©4 )
urging the point any longer, and, in con-
sequence, the biavo was conveyed to my
hotel.
The next morning I took leave of my
host,, who was to return to the duke on the
fame day. My wounds had been so trisling,
that, except being obliged to wear my arm
in a sting for a short time, I felt no incon-
venience from the night's adventure. The
surgeon who examined the bravo's "wound
declared it to be mortal: he had just time
12 confess. that he had been instigated to
murder me by the revengeful Donna Ro-
dolpha, and expired in a few minutes
asteF.
All my thoughts were now bent upon
getting to the speech of my lovely nun.
Theodore set himself to woik,and, for.this
time, with better success. He attacked the.
gardener of St. Clare so forcibly with bribes
and promises, that the old man was entirely
gained over to my interests; and it was.
settled that 1 should be introduced into the
convent in the character of his assistant.
The

<page 114>
C i°5 )
The plan was put into execution without
delay. Disguised in a common habit, and
a black patch covering one of my eyes, I
was presented to the lady prioress, who con-
descended to' approve of the gardener's
choice. I immediately entered upon my
employment. Botany having been a fa-
vourite study with me, I was by no means
at a loss in my new station. For some days
1 continued to work in the convent-garden
without meeting the object of my disguise.
On the fourth morning I was more success-
ful. I heard the voice of Agnes, and was
speeding towards the found,.when the sight
of the domina stopped me. 1 drew back
with caution, and concealed myself behind
a chick chimp of trees..
The prioress advanced, and seated herself
with Agnes on a bench at no great distance.
I heard her, in an angry tone, blame her
companion's continual melancholy. She
told her, that to weep the loss of any lover,
in her situation, was a crime; but tnat to
weep the loss of a faithless one was folly
F i and
s

<page 115>
( io6 ).
and absurdity in the extreme. Agnes re-
plied in so low a voice that 1 could not dis-
tinguish her words, but I perceived that she
used terms of gentleness and submission.
The conversation was interrupted by the ar-
rival of a young pensioner, who informed
the domina that she was waited for in the
parlour. The old lady rose, kissed the
cheek of Agnes, and retired. The new-
comer remained. Agnes spoke much to her
ip praise of somebody whom I could not
rnak.e out; but her auditor seemed highly
delighted, and interested by the conversa-
tion. The nun shewed her several letters.:
the other perused them with evident plear
.sure, obtained permission to copy them, and
.withdrew for that purpose to my great satis-
faction. .''.-. ..>;?: .:
No sooner was she out of sight, than J
quitted my concealment. Fearing to alarm
.my lovely mistress, I drew near her gently,
intending to discover myself by degrees.
Bur who for a.moment can deceive the eyes
of love J.She miied her head.at my approach,
and

<page 116>
( r°7 )
and recognised me, in spite of my disguise,
at a single glance. She rose hastily from
her seat with an exclamation of surprise, and
attempted to retire: but I followed her,
detained her, and entreated to be heard:
Persuaded of my falsehood, she refused.to
listen to me, and ordered me positively to
quit the garden. It was now my turn to
refuse. I protested that, however dangerous
might be the consequences, I would not
leave her till she had heard my justification.
I assured her, that she had been deceived by
the artifices of her relations: that I could
convince. her,beyond the power of doiibr,
that rhy passion had been pure and disin-
terested; and I asked her what should in-
duce me to seek. her in the convent, were.I
influenced by the selfish motives which my.
enemies had ascribed to me.
My prayers, my arguments, and vows
not to quit her till she had promised to listen
tome, united to her sears lest the nuns should
see me wiih her, to her natural curiosity,
and to the affection which she still felt.for
F 6 me,

<page 117>
( io8 )
me, in spite of my supposed desertion, at
length prevailed. She told me, that to
grant my request at that moment was im-
possible-; but slie engaged to be in the fame
spot at eleven that night, and to converse
with me for the last time. Having ob-
tained this promise, I released her hand,
and she fled back with rapidity towards the
convent.
I communicated my success to my ally,
the old gardener: he pointed out an hiding-
place, where I might shelter myself till night
without fear of a discovery. Thither I be-
took myself at the hour when I ought to
have retired with my supposed master, and
waited impatiently for the appointed time.
The chillness of the night was in my favour, .
since it kept the other nuns confined to their
cells. Agnes alone was insensible of the .in-
clemency of the air, and, before eleven,
joined me at the spot which had witnessed
otir former interview. Secure from inter-
ruption, I related to her the true cause of
my disappearing on the fatal fifth of May.
9 She

<page 118>
( iog )
She was evidently much asfected by my
narrative. When.it was concluded, she
confessed the injustice of her suspicions, and
blamed herself for having taken the veil
through despair at my ingratitude.
"But now it is too late to repine!" she
added; "the die is thrown: 1 have pro-
nounced my vows, and dedicated myself
to the service of heaven. I am sensible
how ill 1 am calculated for a convent. My
disgust at a monastic life increases daily:
: ennui and discontent are my constant com-
panions; and I will not conceal from you,
that the passion which I formerly felt for
one so near being my husband, is not yet
extinguished in my bosom: but we. must
part! Insuperable barriers divide us frorh
each other, and on this side the grave we
must never meet again!"
I now exerted myself to prove, that;Oiir
. union was not so impossible as slie seemed
. to think it. I vaunted to her the cardinal-
diike of Lerma's influence at the court. of
Rome. I assured her, that I should easily
obtain

<page 119>
C no )
obtain a dispensation from her vows; and
I doubted not but Don Gaston would coin-
cide with my views,. when informed of my
real name and long attachment. Agnes re-
plied, that since I encouraged such an hope,
I could know but little of her father. Li-
beral and kind in every other respect, su-
perstition formed theonly stain upon his cha-
racter. Upon this head he was inflexible:
he sacrificed his dearest interests to his
scruples, and would consider it an insult
to suppose him capable of authorising his
daughter to break her vows to heaven.
"But suppose," said J, interrupting her-—
"suppose that he should disapprove of our
union: let him remain ignorant of my pro-
ceedings till I have rescued you from th'e
prison in which you are now confined. Once
my wife, you are free from his authority. I
need from him no pecuniary assistance ; and
when he fees his resentment to be unavail-
ing, he will doubtless restore you to his
favour. But, let the worst happen ; should
Don Gaston be irreconcilable, my relations
will

<page 120>
( "1 )
will vie with each other in making you for-
get his loss; and you will find in my father
a substitute for the parent of whom I shall
deprive you."
"Don Raymond," replied Agnes, in.a
firm and resolute voice, "1 love my fa-
ther: he has treated me harshly in this one
instance; but I have received from him, in
every other, so many proofs of love, that
his affection is become necessary to my ex-
istence. Were I to quit the convent, he
Bever would forgive me; nor can I think
that, on his death-bed, he would leave me
his curse, without shuddering at the very
idea. Besides, I. am conscious myself, that
my vows are binding. Wilfully did I con-
tract my engagement with heaven: I can-
not break it without a crime. Then banish
from your mind the idea of our being ever
united. I am devoted to religion; and
however I may grieve at our separation, I
would oppose obstacles myself, to what I
feel would render .me guilty." , ,
I strove to.over-rule these ill-grounded
scruples.

<page 121>
( »* )
scruples. We were still disputing upon the
subject, when the convent bell summoned
the nuns to matins, Agnes was obliged to
attend them; but she left me not till I had
compelled her to promise, that on the sol-
lowing night she would be at the same place
at the same hour. These meetings con-
tinued for several weeks uninterrupted:
and 'tis now, Lorenzo, that I must implore
your indulgence. Reflect upon our situation,
our youth, ourlong attachment. Weigh all
the circumstances which attended our as-
signations, and you will confess the temp-
tation to have been irresistible: you vvill
even pardon me when I acknowledge that,
in an unguarded moment, the honour df
Agnes was sacrificed to my passion."
[Lorenzo's eyes sparkled with fury; a
deep crimson spread itself over his face: he
started from his feat, and attempted to dravtr-
his sword. The marquis was aware of
his movement, and caught his hand: he
pressed it affectionately:
*' My friend! my brother! hear me to
the

<page 122>
( i'3 )
the conclusion! Till then restrain your"
passion; and be at least convinced, that if
what I have related is criminal, the blame
must fail upon me, and not upon your
sister."
Lorenzo suffered himself to be prevailed
upon by Don Raymond's entreaties: he re-
sumed his place, and listened to the rest of
the narrative with a gloomy and impa-
tient countenance. The marquis thus con-
tinued :]
Scarcely was the first burst of passion past,
when Agnes, recovering herself, started
from my arms with horror. She called me
infamous seducer, loaded me with the bit-
terest reproaches, and beat her bosom in all
the wildness of delirium. Ashamed of my
imprudence, I with difficulty found words
to excuse myself. I endeavoured to console
her: I threw myself at her feet, and en-
treated her forgiveness. She forced her
hand from me, which I had taken and
would have pressed to my lips.
"Touch me not!" she cried, with a
violence

<page 123>
( "4. )
violence which terrified me. "Monster of.
perfidy and ingratitude, how have I' been
deceived in you! I looked upon you as
my friend, my protector: I trusted myself
in your hands with confidence, and, relying.
upon your honour, thought that mine ran
no risk: and 'tis by you, whom I adored,
that I am covered with infamy! 'Tis by you
that I have been seduced into breaking.
my vows to God, that I am reduced to a.
level with the basest of my sex 1 Shame
upon yon, villain, you shall never fee me-
mo re r
She started from the bank on which she
was seated. I endeavoured to detain her j
but she disengaged herself from me with
violence, and took refuge in the convent.
I retired, filled with confusion and inquie-
tude. The next morning I failed not, as
usual, to appear in the garden; but Agnes
was no where to be seen. At night I waited
for her at the place where we generally met..
1 found no better success. Several days and
nights passed away in the same manner. At
length.

<page 124>
( »5 )
length I saw my offended mistress cross the
walk, on whose borders I was working.
she was accompanied by the fame young
pensioner, on whose arm she seemed, from
weakness, obliged to support herself. Shs
looked upon me for a moment, but in-
stantly turned her head away. I waited her
return $ but she pasted on to the convent
without paying any attention to me, or the
penitent looks with which I implored her
forgiveness.
As soon as the nuns were retired, the
old gardener joined me with a sorrowful
air.
** Segnor," said he,. " it grieves me to
fay, that I can be no longer of use to you;
the lady whom you used to meet has just
assured me, that if 1. admitted you again
.into the garden, she would discover the
whole business to the lady prioress. She
bade me tell you also, that your presence
was an insult, and that, if you still possess
the least respect: for her, you will never at-
tempt to see her more. Excuse me then
for

<page 125>
( «« )
for informing you, that I: can favour your
disguise no longer. Should the prioress be
acquainted with my conduct, she might
not be contented with dismissing me her
service: out of revenge, she might accuse
me of having profaned the convent, and'
cause me to be thrown into the prisons of
the Inquisition."
Fruitless were my attempts to conquer his
resolution. He denied me all future entrance
into the garden; and Agnes persevered in
neither letting me see or hear from her.
In about a fortnight after, a violent illness
which had seized my father obliged me to
set out for Andalusia. I hastened thither,
and, as I imagined, found the marquis
at the point of death. Though, on its
first appearance, his complaint was declared
mortal, he lingered out several months;
, during which, my attendance upon him
in his malady, and the occupation of set-
tling his affairs after his decease, permitted
not my quitting Andalusia. Within these
four days I returned to Madrid, and, on ar-
riving

<page 126>
( H7 )
riving ac my hotel, J there found this letter
waiting for me.
[Here the marquis unlocked a drawer of
a cabinet.; he took out a folded paper,
which he presented to his auditor. Lorenzo
opened it, and recognised his sister's hand.
The contents were as follows:
"Into what an abyss of misery have you
"plunged me! Raymond, you force me
"to become as criminal as yourself. I had
"resolved never to see you more; if pos-
"sible, to forget you; if not, only to re-
.** member you with hate. A being, for
"whom I already feel a mother's tenderness,
** solicits me to pardon my seducer, and ap-
"ply to his love for the means of preserva*
.** tion. Raymond, your child lives in my
"bosom. I tremble at the vengeance of the
"prioress. I tremble much for myself, yet
"more for the innocent creature whose ex-
"istence depends upon mine. Both of us are
"lost, should my situation be discovered.
"Advise me3 then, what steps to take, but
"seek

<page 127>
( "8 )
«* seek not to see me. The gardener, who un-
"dertakes to deliver this, is dismissed, and
"we have nothing to hope from that quarter.
f' The man engaged in his place is ofincor-
« ruptible fidelity. The best means of con-
"veying to me your answer, is by conceal-
"ing it under the great statue of St. Francis,
"which stands in the Capuchin cathedral;
** thither I go every Thursday to confession,
** and shall easily have an opportunity of se-
"curing your letter. I hear that you are now
** absent from Madrid. Need I entreat you
»* write the very moment of your ree'urn? I
"will not think it. Ah! Raymond! mine
"is a cruel situation! Deceived by my near-
** est relations, compelled to embrace a pro-
"session, the duties of which I am ill cal-
"culated to perform, conscious of the
*' sanctity of those duties, and seduced into
** violating them by one whom I least sus-
"pected of perfidy, I am now obliged, by
"circumstances, to choose between death
"and perjury. Woman's timidity, and ma-
"ternal affection, permit me not to balance
** in the choice. I feel all the guilt into which
"I plunge

<page 128>
( "9 )
."'I plunge myself when I yield tothe plan
"which you before proposed to me. My
"poor father's death, which has taken place
"'since we met, has removed one obstacle.
"He sleeps'in his grave, and 1 no longer
"dread'his anger. But from the anger of
"God, oh! Raymond! who shall shield
"me'? Who can protect me against my
"conscience, against myself? I dare not
"dwell upon these thoughts; they will
"drive me mad. I have taken my refolu-
"tion. Procure a dispensation from my
*' vows. I am ready to fly with you. Write
"to me, my husband! Tell me that ab-
*e fence has not abated your love! Tell
** roe that you will rescue from death your
"unborn child, and its unhappy mother.
"I live in all the agonies of terror. Every
"eye which is fixed upon me, seems to read
"my secret and my shame. And you are
"the cause of those agonies! Oh! when
ct my heart sirst loved you, how little did it
*' suspect you of making it feel such pangs!
** AGNES."

<page 129>
( 120 )
i Having perused the letter, Lorenzo re-
stored it in silence. The marquis replaced
it in the cabinet, and then proceeded:]
Excessive was my joy at reading this in-
telligence, so earnestly desired, so little ex-
pected. My plan was soon arranged. When
Don Gaston discovered to me his daughter's
retreat, I entertained no doubt of her readi-
ness to quit the consent : I had, therefore,
entrusted the cardinal-duke of Lerma with
the whole affair, who immediately busied
himself in obtaining the necessary bull. For-
tunately, I had asterwards neglected to stop
his proceedings. Not long since I received
a letter from him, stating that he expected
daily to receive the order from the court of
Rome. Upon this I would willingly have
relied; but the cardinal wrote me word, that
I must find some means of conveying Agnes
out of the convent, unknown to the prioress.
He doubted not but this latter would be
much incensed by losing a person of suck
high rank from her society, and consider
the renunciation of Agnes as an insult to her
house.

<page 130>
( 121 )
house. He represented her as a woman of
a violent and revengeful character, capable
'of proceeding to the greatest extremities.
It was therefore to be feared lest, by con-
fining Agnes in the convent, sne should
frustrate my hopes, and render the pope's
mandate unavailing. Insluenced by this con-
sideration, I resolved to carry off my mis-
tress, and conceal her till the arrival of the
expected bull in the cardinal-duke's estate.
He approved of my design, and professed
himself ready to give a sheher to the fugi-
tive. I next caused the new gardener of St.
Clare to be seized privately, and confined
in my hotel. By this means I became master
*pf the key to the garden-door, and I had
now nothing more to do than prepare Agnes
for the elopement. This was done by the
letter which you saw me deliver this evening.
I told her in it, that I should be ready to re-
ceive her at twelve to-morrow night; that
1 had secured the key of the garden, and
that she might depend upon a speedy re-
lease.
Vol. II. G You

<page 131>
( 122 )
You have now, Lorenzo, heard rhe whole
of my long narrative. I have nothing to
say in my excuse, save that my intentions
towards your sister have been ever the most
honourable: that it has always been, and
still is, my design to make her my wife.;
and that I trust, when you consider these
.circumstances, our youth, and our attach-
ment, you will not only forgive our mo-
mentary lapse from virtue, but will aid me
in repairing my faults to Agnes, and -se-
curing a lawful title to her person and hor
heart.
CHAP.

<page 132>
( 123 )
CHAP. V.
.
O you! whom Vanity's light bark conveys
On Fame's mad voyage by the wind of Praise,
With what a shifting gale your course you ply,
For ever sunk too low, or borne too high!
Who pants for glory finds but short repose:
A breath revives him, and a breath o'erthrows.
ropE.
Jll ERE the marquis concluded his ad-
ventures. Lorenzo, before he could deter-
mine on his reply, passed some moments in
reslection. At length he broke silence.
** Raymond," said he, taking his hand,
"strict honour would oblige me to wash off
in your blood the stain thrown upon my fa-
mily; but the circumstances of your cafe
forbid me to consider you as an enemy. The
temptation was too great to be resisted. 'Tis
the superstition of my relations which has
G 2 occasioned


<page 133>
( 124 )
occasioned these misfortunes, and they arc
more the offenders than yourself and Agnes,
What has passed between you cannot be re-
called, but may yet be repaired by uniting
you to my sister. You have ever been, you
still continue to be, my dearest, and indeed
my only friend, I feel for Agnes the truest
affection, and there is no one on whom I
would bestow her more willingly than on
yourself. Pursue, then, your design. I
will accompany you to-morrow night, and
conduct her myself to the house of the car-
dinal. My presence will be a sanction for
her conduct, and prevent her incurring
.blame by her slight from the convent."
The marquis thanked him in terms by no
means deficient in gratitude. Lorenzo then
informed him., that he had nothing more to
apprehend from Donna Rodolpha's enmity.
'Five months had already elapsed since, in
.an accessof passion,see broke a blood-vessel,
and expired in the course of a few hours.
He dien proceeded to mention the interests
of Antonia. The marquis was much sur-
prised

<page 134>
C i25 >
prised at hearing of this new relation. Hi*
father had carried his hatred of Elvira to the
grave, and had never given the least hint
that he knew what was become of his eldest
son's widow. Don Raymond assured his
friend) that he was not mistaken in supposing
him ready to acknowledge his si(ter-in-lawr
and her amiable daughter. The prepara-
tions for the elopement wouldnot permit his
visiting them the next day; but, in the
mean while, lie desired Lorenzo to assure
them of his friendship, and to supply Elvira,
upon his account, with any sums which she
$iight w-ant. Tjiis the youth promised to
do, as soon as her abode should be known
^o him* He then took leave of his future
brother, and returned to the palace de
Medina.
The day was already on the point of break-
ing when the marquis retired to his chamber.
Conscious that his narrative would take up
some hours, and wishing to secure himself
from interruption, on returning. to the hotel
he ordered his attendants not to fit up for
G 3 him j

<page 135>
C iW )
him; consequently, he was somewhat sur-
prised, on entering his anti-room, to find
Theodore established there. The page sat
near a table with a pen in his hand, and was
so totally occupied by his employment, that
he perceived not his lord's approach. The
marquis stopped to observe him. Theodore
wrote a few lines, then paused,and scratched
out a part of the writing ; then wrote again,
smiled, and seemed highly pleased with what
he had been about. At last he threw down
his pen, sprang from his chair, and clapped
his hands together joyfully.
"There it is 1" cried he aloud: "now
they are charming!"
His transports were interrupted 'by a
laugh from the marquis, who suspected the
nature of his employment.
** What is so charming, Theodore?''
The youth started, and looked round : he-
blushed, ran to the table, seized the paper
on which he had been writing, and con-
cealed it in confusion.
"Oh ! my lord, I knew not that you were
so

<page 136>
( 127 )
so near me. Can I be of use to you? Lu-
cas is already gone to bed."
"I shall follow his example when I have
given my opinion of your verses."
"My verses, my lord?"
"Nay, 1 am sure that you have been*
writing some, for nothing else could have
kept you awake till this time of the morning.
Where are they, Theodore? I shall like to
see your composition."
Theodore's cheeks glowed with still
deeper crimson: he longed to fliew his
poetry, but first chose to be pressed for it.
"Indeed, my lord, they are not worthy
your attention." . .
"Not these verses, which you just now
declared to be so charming? Come, come,
let me see'whether our opinions are the fame.
I promise that you shall find in me an in-
dulgent critic."
The boy produced his paper with seem-
ing reluctance j but the satisfaction which
sparkled in his dark expressive eyes be-
trayed the vanity of his little bosom. The .
G 4 marquis,

<page 137>
( If? )
marquis smiled while he observed the emo-
tions of an heart as yet but little skilled in
veiling its sentiments. ;He- seared himself
upon a sopha. Theodore, while hope and
fear contended on his anxiouscountenance,
waited with inquietude for his master's de-
cision, while the marquis read the following
lines:
LOVE and AGE.
THE night was dark ; the wind blew cold i
Anacreon, grown morose and old,
Sat by his fire, and fed the cheerful flame:
Sudden the cottage-door expands,
And, lo! before him Cupid stands,
Casts round a friendly glance, and greets him by his name,
"What! is it thou i" the startled fire
In sullen tone exclaimed, while ire
With crimson flushed his pale and wrinkled cheek;
"Wouldst thou again with amorous rage
Inflame my bosom? Steeled by age,
Vain boy, to pierce my breast thine arrows are too weakf
"What seek you in this desert drear?
No smiles or sports inhabit here;
Ne'er did these valleys witness dalliance sweet:
Eternal winter binds the plains,;
Age in my house despotic reigns;
My garden boasts no flower, my bosom boasts no heat.
"Begone,

<page 138>
( 139 )

"Begone, and seek the blooming bower,
Wheie fome ripe virgin courts thy power,
Gr bid provoking dreams slit round her bed 3
On Damon's amorous breast repose j
Wanton on Chloe's lip of rose,
Or make her blushing cheek a pillow for thy head.
"Be such thy haunts! These regions cold
Avoid! Nor think grown wife and old
This hoary head again thy yoke fhall bear:
Remembering that my fairest years
By thee were marked with sighs and tears,
I think thy friendship false, and shun the guileful snare..
"I have not yet forgot the pains
I felt, while bound in Julia's chains:
The ardent slames with which my bofom burned ;.
The nights I passed deprived of rest;
The jealous pangs which racked my breast;
My disappointed hopes, and passion unreturned..
"Then sly, and curse mine eyes no more 1
Fly from my peaceful cottage-door!
No day, no hour, no moment shalt thou stay..
I know thy falsehood, scorn thy arts,
Distrust thy smiles, and fear thy darts:
Traitor, begone, and seek fome other to betray !"—•
-
"Does age, old man, your wits confound?''
Replied the offended god, and frowned:
(His frown was sweet as is the virgin's siniie !)
G 5 "Ed.

<page 139>
( ijo )
"Do you to me these words address I
To me, who do not love you less,
Though you my friendship scorn, and pleasures past; revile!
"If one proud fair you chanced to find,
An hundred other nymphs were kind,
Whose smiles might well for Julia's frowns atone:
But such is man! his partial hand
Unnumbered favours writes on sand,
But stamps one little fault on solid lasting stone.
"Ingrate! Who led you to the wave,
At noon where Lesbia loved to lave?
Who named the bower alone where Daphne lay?
And who, when Celia shrieked for aid,
Bade you with kisses hush the maid?
What other was't than Love, oh! false Anacreon, say t
"Then you could call me—* Gentle boy! . . . .
* My only bliss! my source of joy!'
Then you could prize me dearer than your soul t
Could kiss, and dance me on your knees;
And swear, not wine itself would please,
Had not the lip of Love first touched the flowing bowl!
** Must those sweet days return no more?
Must I for aye your loss deplore,
Banished your heart, and from your savour driven?
Ah! no ; my fears that smile denies;
That heaving breast, those sparkling eyes
Declare me ever dear, and all my faults forgiven. m "Agaii



<page 140>
C w )
"Again beloved, esteemed, caressed,
Cupid shall in thine arms be pressed,
Sport on thy knees, or on thy bosom sleep:
My torch thine age-struck heart shall warm;
My hand pale winter's rage disarm,
And Youth and Spring shall here once more the'tt revel*
keep."—
A feather now of golden hue
He smiling from his pinion drew;
This to the poet's hand the boy commits;;:
. And straight before Anacreon's eyes
The fairest dreams of fancy rife,
I And round his favoured head wild inspiration flit*..
His bosom glows with amorous fire;
Eager he grasps the magic lyre;
Swift o'er the tuneful chords his fingers move:
The feather plucked from Cupid's wing
Sweeps the too-long neglected string','-.'
While soft Anacreon sings the power and praise of love. -
Soon as that name was heard, the woods' -.
Shook off their snows j the melting floods -.
Broke their cold chains, and winter. sted away. .
Once more the earth was decked with flowers;
Mild zephyrs breathed through blooming bowers;
High towered the glorious fun, and poured the blaze of .
day.
. . ..>.. >"
G. 6 Attracted .

<page 141>
( «3* )
Attracted by the harmonious souad, . .
Sylvans and fauns the cot surround, ''. .
And curious crowd the minstrel to behold:
The woo^nymphs haste the spell to prove;
Eager they run; they list, they lore,
A.nd> while they hear-the-strain, forget the maa is old.
-i i
Cupid, to nothing constant long,
Perched on the harp attends the song, . • .
Or stifles with a kiss the dulcet notes:
Now on the poet's breast reposes,
Now twines his hoary locks with roses,
Or borne on wings of gold in wanton circle stoats.
Then thus Anacreon—" I no more
At other shrines my tows will.pour,.
Since Cupid deigns my numbers to inspire:
From Phœbus or the blue-eyed maid
Now shall my verse request no aid,
For Love alone fiiall be the patron of my lyre.
*>In lofty strain, of earlier days,
I spread the king's or hero's praise,
And struck the martial chords with epic fire:
But farewell, hero! farewell, king!
Your deeds my lips no more shall fing,
For Love alone shall be the subject of my lyre."
The marquis returned the paper with a
smile of encouragement.
* "Your

<page 142>
I *23 )
(t Your little poem pleases me much,"
said foe: " however, you must not count
my opinion for any thing. J am do judge
of verses, and for my own part never com-
posed more than fix lines in my life: those
fix produced so unlucky an effect, that J
am fully resolved never to compose another.
But I wander from my subject. i was go-
ing to fay that you cannot employ your
time worse than in making verses. An au-
thor, whether good or bad, or between
both, is an animal whom every body is
privileged to attack: for though all are not
able to write books, all conceive themselves
able to judge them. A bad composition.
.carries with it its own punishment—con-
tempt and ridicule. A good one excites
.envy, and entails upon its author a thou-
sand mortifications: he finds himfelf .as-
sailed by partial and ill-humoured criticism:.
one man finds fault with the plan, another
with the style, a third with the precept which
it strives-to inculcate; and they who can-
not succeed in finding fault with the. book,
. * . employ

<page 143>
( 134 )
employ themselves in stigmatizing its au-
thor. They maliciously rake out from ob-
scurity every little circumstance which may
throw ridicule upon his private character
or conduct, and aim at wounding the man
since they cannot hurt the writer. In short,
to enter the lists of literature is wilfully to
expose yourself to the arrows of neglect,
ridicule, envy, and disappointment. Whe-
ther you write well or ill, be assured that
you will not escape from blame. Indeed
this circumstance contains a young author's
chief consolation: he remembers that Lope
de Vega and Calderona had unjust and en-
vious critics, and he modestly conceives
himself to be exactly in their.predicament.
But I am conscious that all these sage ob-
servations are thrown away upon you.
AuthorsiYip is a mania, to conquer which no
reasons are sufficiently strong; and you
might as easily persuade me not to love, as
I persuade you not to write. However,. if
you cannot help being occasionally seized
with a poetical paroxysm, take at least the
._ '■. precagtioa,

<page 144>
( *35 )
precaution of .communicating your verses
to none but those whose partiality for you
secures their approbation."
"Then, my lord, you do not think these
lines tolerable:" said Theodore, with an
humble'and dejected air.
"'You mistake my meaning. As I said
before, they have pleased me much: but
my regard for you makes me partial, and
others might judge them less favourably.
I must still remark, that even my prejudice
in your favour does not blind me so much
as to prevent my observing several faults.
For instance, you make a terrible confusion
of metaphors; you are too apt to make the
strength of your lines consist more in the
words than fense; some of the verses seem
introduced only in order to rhyme with
others; and most of the best ideas are bor-
rowed from other poets, though possibly
you are unconscious of the theft yourself.
These faults may occasionally be excused
in a work of length; but a short poem must
be correct and perfect." .
:. "Ail

<page 145>
( *3$ )
"AH this is true, segnor; but' you;
should consider that I only write for plea-
sure."
"Your defects are the less excusable.
Their incorrectness may be forgiven^ who
work for money, who are obliged to com-
plete a given task in a given time, and are
paid according to the bulk, not value, of
their productions. But in those whom no
necessity forces to turn author, who merely
write for fame, and have full leisure to po-
lish their compositions,.faults are unpardon-
able, and merit the sharpest. arrows of criti-
cism." .''.
The marquis rose from the fopha; the
page looked discouraged and melancholy j:
and this did not escape his master's' obser-
vation.
"However," added he, smiling, "I think.
that these lines- do you no discredit. Your
versisication is tolerably easy, and your eaf
seems to be just. The perusal of your little
poem upon the whole gave me much plea-
sure; and if it is not asking too great a fa-
« '» '* i vour,.

<page 146>
( i37 )
vpur, I shall be highly obliged to you for a
copy."
The youth's countenance immediately
cleared up. He perceived not the smile,
half approving, half ironical, which accom-
panied the request, and he promised the
copy with great readiness. The marquis
withdrew to his chamber, much amused by
the instantaneous effect: produced upon
Theodore's vanity by the conclusion of his
criticism. He threw himself upon his couch,
fleep soon stole over him, and his dreams
presented him with the most slattering pic-
tures of happiness with Agnes.
On reaching the hotel de Medina, Lo-
renzo's first care was to enquire for letters.
He found several waiting for him ,, but that
which he sought was not amongst them.
Leoneila had found it impossible to write
that evening. However, her impatience to
secure Don Christoval's heart, on which (he
nattered herself with having made no slight
impression, permitted her not to pass an-
other day without informing him where
she

<page 147>
( »3.S )
she was to be found. On her return from
the Capuchin-church, she had related to her
sister, with exultation, how attentive an
handsome cavalier had been to her; as alfa
how his companion had undertaken to plead
Antonia's cause with the marquis de las
Cisternas. Elvira. received this intelligence
with sensations very disferent from those with
which it was communicated. She blamed
her sister's imprudence in confiding her.
history to an absolute stranger, and ex-
pressed her fears lest this inconsiderate step
ihould prejudice the marquis against- her.
The greatest of her apprehensions she con-
cealed in her own breast. She had observed,
with inquietude, that at the mention of Lo-
renzo a deep blush spread itself over her
daughter's cheek. The timid Antonia dared
not to pronounce his name. Without know-
ing wherefore, she felt embarrassed when he
was made the subject of discourse, and en-
deavoured to change the conversation to
Ambrosio. Elvira perceived the emotions
of this young bosom; in consequence, she
insisted

<page 148>
( *39 )
insisted upon Leonella's' breaking her pro-
mise to the cavaliers. A sigh, which on
hearing this order escaped from Antonia/
confirmed the wary mother in her resolution.
Through this refolution Leonella was
determined to break: she conceived it to
be inspired by envy, and that her sister
dreaded her being elevated above her.
Without imparting her design to any one,
she took an opportunity of dispatching the
following note to Lorenzo: it was delivered
to him as soon as he woke:
"Doubtless, Segnor Don Lorenzo, you
have frequently accused me of ingratitude
and forgetfulness: but on the word of a vir-
gin it was out of my power to perform my
promise yesterday. I know not in what
words to inform you, how strange a recep-
tion my sister gave your kind wish to visit
her. She is an odd woman, with many good
points about her; but her jealousy of me
frequently makes henconceive notions quite
unaccountable. On hearing that your friend
had

<page 149>
( Ho- )
had paid some little attention to me, she
immediately took the alarm: she blamed
my conduct, and has absolutely forbidden
me to let you know our abode. My strong
fense of gratitude for your kind offers of
service, and- shall I confess it? -my
desire to behold once more the too amiable
Don Christoval, will not permit my obey-
ing her injunctions. I have therefore stolen;
a moment to inform you, that we lodge in
the strada di San Jago, four doors from the
palace d'Albornos, and: nearly. opposite to?
the barber's Miguel Coello. Enquire for
Donna Elvira Daisa, since, in eo'mpliance
with her father-in-law's order, my fistec
continues to be called by her maiden name.
At eight this evening you will; be flireof
finding us: but let not a word'drop,'which
may raise a suspicion of my having written
this letter. Should you fee the Conde- d'Of-
forio, tell him- 1 blush while I declare
it tell him that his presence will be
but too acceptable to the sympathetic
*' EEONELLA.."
The

<page 150>
(. IV )
. The latter sentences were written in red
ink, to express the blushes of her cheek
while she committed an outrage upon her
virgin modesty.
Lorenzo had no sooner perused this
note, than he set out in search of Don Chris-
toval. Not being able to find him in the
course of the day, he proceeded to Donna
Elvira's alone, to Leonella's infinite disap-
pointment The domestic by whom he
Cent up his name having already declared
^his lady to be at home, she had no excuse
for refusing his visit; yet she consented to
receive it with much reluctance. That re-
luctance was increased by the changes
which his approach produced in Antonia's
countenance $ nor was it by any means
abated, when the youth himself appeared.
The symmetry of his person, animation of
his Features, and natural Elegance of his
manners and address, convinced Elvira
that such a guest must be dangerous for
her daughter. She resolved to treat him
with distant politeness, to decline his ser-
vices

<page 151>
( *4* )
vices with gratitude for the tender of them,
and to make him feel, without osfence, that
his future visits would be far from accepta-
ble.
On his entrance he found Elvira, who
was indisposed, reclining upon.a sopha;
Antonia sat by her embroidery frame; and
Leonella, in a pastoral dress, held "Monte-
mayor's Diana" In spite of her being the
mother of Antonia, Lorenzo could not help
expecting to find in Elvira Leonella's true
sister, and the daughter of " as honest a
pains-takingshoemaker as any in Cordova."
.A single glance was sufficient to undeceive
him. He beheld a woman whose features,
though impaired by time and sorrow, still
bore the marks of distinguished beauty; a
serious dignity reigned upon her counte-
nance, but was tempered by a grace and
sweetness which rendered her truly enchant-
ing. Lorenzo fancied that she must have
resembled her daughter in her youth, and
readily excused the imprudence of the late
Conde de las Cisternas. She desired him
to

<page 152>
.( >43 )
to be seated, and immediately resumed
her place upon the fopha.
Antonia received him with a simple re*
verence, and continued her work: her
cheeks were fuffused with crimson, and
she strove ro conceal her emotion by lean-
ing over her embroidery frame. Her aunt
alfo chose to play off her airs of modesty:
sheaffectedto blush and tremble, and waited
with her eyes cast down to receive, as she
expected, the compliments of Don Chriflo-
val. .Finding, after sometime, that no sign
of his approa-ch was given, Ihe ventured to
look round the room, and perceived with
vexation that Medina was unaccompanied,
impatience would not permit her waiting
for an explanation: interrupting Lorenzo,
who was delivering Raymond's message,
she desired to know what was become of
his friend.
He, who thought it necessary to main-
tain himself in her good graces, strove to
console her under her disappointment by
committing a little violence upon truth.

<page 153>
( *44 )
'u Ah! segnora," he replied in a melan-
choly voice, "how grieved will he be ac
losing this opportunity of paying you his
respects ! A relation's illness has obliged him
to quit Madrid in haste: but on his re-
turn he will doubtless seize the first mo-
ment with transport to throw himself at
your feet!"
As he said this, his eyes met those of
Elvira: she punished his falsehood suffi-
ciently by darting at him a look expressive
of displeasure and reproach. Neither did
the deceit answer his intention. Vexed and
disappointed, Leonella rose from her seat,
and retired in dudgeon to her own apart-
ment.
Lorenzo hastened to repair the fault
which had injured him in Elvira's opinion.
He related his conversation with the mar-
quis respecting her: he assured her that
Raymond was prepared to acknowledge
her for his brother's widow; and that, till
it was in his power to pay his compliments
to her in person, Lorenzo was commissioned
. . • .' .to

<page 154>
( us 3
to supply his place. This intelligence re-
lieved Elvira from an heavy weight of un-
easiness: she had now found a protector
for the fatherless Antonia, for whose future
fortunes slie had suffered the greatest appre-
hensions. She was not sparing of her thanks
to him, who had interfered so generously in
her behalf j but still she gave him no invi-
tation to repeat his visit. However, when
upon rising to depart he requested permis-
sion to enquire after her health occasionally,
the polite earnestness of his manner, grati-
tude for his services, and respect for his
friend the marquis, would not admit of a
refusal. She consented reluctantly to re-
ceive him: he promised not to abuse her
goodness, and quitted the house.
Antonia was now left alone with her mo-
ther: a temporary silence ensued. Both
wished to speak upon the same subject, but
neither knew how to introduce it. The one
felt abashfulness which sealed up her-lips,
and for which she could not accounts, the
other feared to find her apprehensions true,
Vol. II. H or

<page 155>
( H6 )
or to inspire her daughter with notions to
which she might be still a stranger. At
length Elvira began the conversation.
"That is a charming young man, An-
tonia; I am much pleased with him. Was
he long near you yesterday in the cathe-
dral ?" .
"He quitted me not for a moment while
I staid in the church: he gave me his seat,
and was very obliging and attentive."
"Indeed? Why then have you never
mentioned his name to me? Your aunt
lanched out in praise of his friend, and you
vaunted Ambrosio's eloquence: but nei-
ther said a word of Don Lorenzo's person
and accomplishments. Had not Leonella
spoken of his readiness to undertake our
cause, I should not have known him to be
in existence."
She paused. Antonia coloured, but was
silent. ;.,
,** Perhaps you judge him less favourably
than I do. In my opinion his figure is
pleasing, his conversation sensible,and man-
ners

<page 156>
e 147 )
ners engaging. :Still he may have*struekr
you differently: you may think him dis-
agreeable,- and- -"
.'* Disagreeable? Oh! dear mother, how
should I possibly think him so? I should
be very ungrateful were I not sensible of his
kindness yesterday, and very blind if his
merits had escaped me. His figure is so
graceful, so noble! His manners so gentle,
yet so manly ! I never yet saw so many ac-
complishments united in one person, and I
doubt whether Madrid can produce his
equal."
« Why then were you so silent in praise
of this phœnix of Madrid? Why was it
concealed from me, that his society had af-
forded you pleasure >"
:*? In truth, I know not: you aik me a
question which I cannot resolve myself. I
was on the point of mentioning him a thou-
sand times; his name was constantly on my
lips;j but when I would have pronounced
it,.I wanted courage to execute my design.
.1 1 >.'.......; H2 However*
.r

<page 157>
( 148 >
However, is I did not speak of him, it was
nor. that I thought of him the less.**-''
"That I believe. But shall I tell you
why you wanted courage? It was because,
accustomed to confide to me your most'se-
cret thoughts, you knew not .how to con-
ceal, yrt feared to acknowledge, that your
heart nourished a sentiment which you
were conscious I should disapprove. Come
hither tome, my child."
Antonia quitted her embroidery frame,
threw herself upon herkneesby the foph'a,
and hid her face in her mother's lap."
"Fear not, my sweet girl.' Consider me
equally as-your friend and parent, and ap-
prehend no reproof from me. I have-read
the emotions of your bofom; you are yet
ill skilled in concealing them, and they
could not escape my attentive eye. This
Lorenzo is dangerous to your repose; he
has already made an impression upon your
heart. ^Tis true that I perceive-easily that
your affection is returned : but what can be
9 the

<page 158>
( *49 )
t]}e consequences of this attachment ?. You
are poor and friendless, my Antonia; Lo-
renzo is the heir of the duke of Medina.
Ce|i.. Even should himself mean honour-
ably, his uncle never will consent to your
unign; nor, without that uncle's- consent,
will I, By sad. experience I know what
sorrow she must endure, who marries into
a family unwilling to receive her. Then
struggle with your affection: whatever
pain* it may cost yon, strive to conquer it.
Your heart is tender and susceptible: it
has already received a strong impression;
but when once convinced that you should
not encourage such sentiments, 1 trust that
you have sufficient fortitude to drive them
from your bosom."
Antonia kissed her hand, and promised
implicit obedience. Elvira then conti-
nued^
"To prevent your passion from growing
stronger, it will be needful to prohibit Lo-
renzo's visits. The service which. he has
rendered me permits not my forbidding
H 3 them

<page 159>
( I*o )
(hem positively; but unless I judge too Fa-
vourably of his character, he will discon-
tinue them without taking offence, if I
confess to him my reafons, and throw my-
self entirely on his generosity. The next
time that I see him, I will honestly avow
to him the embarrassment which his pre-
sence occasions. How fay you, my child?
Is not this measure necessary?"
Antonia subscribed to every thing with-
out hesitation, though not without regret.
Her mother kissed her affectionately, artd
retired to bed. Antonia followed her ex-
ample, and vowed so frequently never
more to think of Lorenzo, that till sleep
-closed her eyes (he thought of nothing
else. . .: .. ....'. j''«*
While this was passing at Elvira's,' -Lo-
renzo hastened to rejoin the marquis.
Every thing was ready for the second
elopement of Agnes; and at twelve the
two friends with a coach and four were at
the garden-wall of the convent. Don Ray-
mond drew out his key, and unlocked the
. i:.v... V. door.
"-.

<page 160>
( *«» )
door. They entered, and waited for fome
time in expectation of being joined by Agnes.
At length the marquis grew impatient: be-
ginning to fear that his second attempt
would succeed no better than the firstt' he
proposed to reconnoitre the convent. The
friends advanced towards it. Every thing
was still and dark. The prioress was an-
xious to keep the story a secret, fearing lest
the crime of oneof its members should bring
disgrace upon the whole community, or that
the interposition of powerful relationsshouJd
deprive her Vengeance of its intended vic-
tim. She took care therefore to give the
lover of Agnes no cause to suppose that his
design was discovered, and his mistress on
the point of suffering the punishment of
her fault. The same reason made her reject
the idea of arresting the unknown seducer
in the garden: such a proceeding would
have created much disturbance, and the
disgrace of her convent would have been
noised about Madrid. She contented her-
self with confining Agnes closely : asto the.
H 4 lover,

<page 161>
( *5* )
lover, she left him at Jiberty to pursue h-is
desigQS. .What Che had expected was the
result. The marquis and Lorenzo waited
in vain till the break of day; they then re-
tired without noise, alarmed at the saikire
of their plan,. and ignorant of the cause of its
ill success. . ., .
.. The next morning Lorenzo went to the
convent, and requested to fee his sister.
The pdoress appeared at the grate with a
melancholy countenance. She informed hirst.
tba,t for several days Agnes had appeared^
much agitated; that she had been pressed-.
by the nuns in.vain to reveal the cause,
and apply to their tenderness for. advice,
and consolation; that she had obstinately-
persisted in concealing the cause of her d^-^
tress} but that on Thursday evening it had.
produced so violent an effect upon her cor?-^
ftitution, that she had fallen ill, and-..waat.
actually confined to her bed.. Lorenzo!
did not credit a syllable o.f this account ii.he.r
insisted. «pqn feeing his sister; if. siiCj *tfas#
unable to comp. to the grate,- he desired .tp.
'... be

<page 162>
( *53 )
be admitted to her cell. The prioress
crossed herself! she was shocked at the very
idea of a foa-i's profane eye pervading the
interior of her holy mansion, and professed
herself astonished that Lorenzo could think.
of such a thing. She told him that his re--'
quest could not be granted; but that, if
he returned the next day, she hoped that
her beloved daughter would then be suffi-
ciently recovered to join him at the parlour
grate. With this answer Lorenzo was
obliged to retire, unsatisfied, and trembling
for his sister's-safety.!
* He returned the next morning at an.
early hour. ** Agnes was worse; the physi-
cian had pronounced her to be in imminent
danger; she was ordered to remain quier,
and it was utterly impossible for her to re-
ceive herbrother's visit," Lorenzo stormed*
at- this answer, but there was no resource..'
He raved, he entreated, he threatened; no
means were left untried to obtain a sight of
AgncsV His endeavours. were as fruitless as;:
t^ose. of the day before, and he returned in r
H 5 despair

<page 163>
( 154 )
despair to the marquis. On his side,. the
latter had spared no pains to discover what
had occasioned his plot to fail. Don Chris-
toval, to whom the affair was now entrust-
ed, endeavoured to worm out the secret
from the old porteress of St. Clare, .with
whom he had formed an acquaintance;
but slie was too much upon her guard, and
he gained from her no intelligence. , The.
marquis was almost distracted, and Lo-
renzo felt scarcely less inquietude. Both
were convinced that the purposed elope-
ment must have been discovered: they
doubted not bvit the malady of Agnes was
a pretence, but they knew not by what
means to rescue her from the hands of the
prioress. .'
Regularly every day did Lorenzo visit
the convent: as regularly was he informed'
that his sister rather grew worse than bet-
ter. Certain that her indisposition was
feigned, these accounts did not alarm him:
but his ignorance of her fate, and of the
motives which induced the priotcfs'tb keep'"
r-cJiU'' r1'. her

<page 164>
( W )
her from him, excited the most serious un-
easiness. He was still uncertain what steps'
he ought to take, when the marquis receiv-
ed a letter from the cardinal-duke of Ler-
ma. It inclosed the pope's expected bull,
ordering that Agnes should be released
from her vows, and restored to her rela-
tions. This essential paper decided at}
once the proceedings of her friends; they
resolved that Lorenzo should carry it to the
domina without delay, and demand that his
sister should be instantly given up to him.
Against this mandate illness could not be
pleaded: it gave her brother the power of
removing her instantly to the palace de
Medina, and he determined to use that
power on the following day.
'His mind relieved from inquietude re-
specting his sifter, and his spirits raised by
the hb'pS of soon restoring her to freedom,
He now had time to give a few moments tq
love and to Antonia. At the fame hour as
on his former visit, he repaired to Donna
Elvira's. 'She had given orders for hisad-
H 6 mission.

<page 165>
( ij6 )
mission. As soon as he was announced, her
daughter retired with Leonella ; and when
he entered the chamber, he found the lady
of the house alone. She received him with
less distance than before, and desired him to
place himself near her upon the sopha. She
then, without losing time, opened her.bu-
siness, as had been rereed between herself
and Antonia. .
"You must not think. me ungrateful,,
Don Lorenzo, or forgetful how essential are
the services which you have rendered.me
with the marquis. I feel rhe weight of. my
obligations: nothing under the fun/mould
induce my taking the step to which I am
now compelled, but the interest of ray
child, of my beloved Antonia. My health
is declining; God only knows how soon I
. may be summoned before his throne. My
daughter will be left without parents, and,
should she lose the protection of the Cis-
ternas family, without friends. She is young
and artless, uninstructed in the world's per-
;fidy, and with charms sufficient to render
her
"%

<page 166>
( m >
her an object of seduction. Judge then
how I must tremble at the prospect before
her! Judge, how anxious I must be to keep
her from their society who may excite the
yet dormant passions of her bosom. You
are amiable, Don Lorenzo;. Antonia has a
susceptible, a loving heart, and is grateful
for the favours conferred upon us by your
interference with the marquis. Your pre-
sence makes me tremble: I fear lest ie
should inspire her with sentiments which
may embitter the remainder of her life, or
encourage her to cherish hopes in her situ-
ation "unjustifiable and futile. Pardon me,
when I avow my terrors, and let my frank-
ness plead in my excuse. I cannot forbid
you my house, for gratitude restrains me;
1 can only throw myself upon your genero-
sity, and entreat you to spare the feelingsof
an anxious, of a doting mother. Believe
me when'1 assure you, that I lament the
necessity of rejecting your acquaintance;
but there is no remedy, and Antonia's in-
terest obliges me to beg you toforbear your
..i f _. visits.

<page 167>
( i5« )
visits. By complying with my request your
will increase the esteem which 1 already
feel for you, and of which every thing
convinces me that you are truly deserv-
ing."
; " Your frankness charms me," replied
Lorenzo: " You shall find, that in your
favourable opinion of me you were not de-
ceived ; yet I hope that the reasons now in
my power to allege, will persuade you to
withdraw a request which I cannot obey*
without infinite reluctance. I love your
daughter, love her most sincerely j I wish
for no greater happiness than to inspire her
with the same sentiments, and receive her
hand at the altar as her husband. 'Tis true
I am not rich myself, my father's death has
left me but little in my own possession;
but my expectations justify my pretending
to the Conde de las Cisternas'daughter."
He was proceeding, but Elvira interrupt^
ed him. ". .".'"
"Ah 1 Don Lorenzo, you forget in that
pompous title the meanness of my origin.
..:uu o You

<page 168>
( «59 )

You forget that I have now passed fourteen
years in Spain, disavowed by my husband's
family, and existing upon a stipend barely
sufficient for the support and educationof my
daughter. Nay, I have even been neglected
by most of my own relations, who out of
envy affect to doubt the reality of my mar-
riage. My allowance being discontinued at
my father-in-law's death, I was reduced to
the very brink of want. In this situation I
was found by my sister, who, amongst all
her foibles, possesses a warm, generous, and
affectionate heart. She aided me with the
little fortune which my father left her,
persuaded me to visit Madrid, and has sup-
ported my child and myself since our quit-
ting Murcia. Then, consider not Antonia
as descended from the Conde de las Cister-
nas; consider her as a poor and unprotected
orphan, as the grand-child of the tradesman
Torribio Dalsa, as the needy pensioner of
that tradesman's daughter. Reslect upon
the difference between such a situation and
that of the nephew and heir of the potent
2lU • duke

<page 169>
( *6q )
duke of Medina. 1 believe yonr intentions
ro be honourable; but as there are no hopes
that your uncle will approve of the union,!'
foresee that the consequences of your at-
tachment must be fatal to my child's re-
pose."
"Pardon me, Segnora; you are misin-
formed if you suppose the duke of Medina
to resemble the generality of men. His
sentiments are liberal and disinterested ; he
loves me well, and I have no reason to
dread his forbidding the marriage, when be
perceives that my happiness depends upon?
Antonia. But supposing him to refuse his-
sanction, what have I still to fear? My pa-
rents are no-more; my little fortune is in;
my own possession; it will be. sufficient tol
support Antonia, and I shall exchange for
her hand Medina's dukedom without one
sigh of regret."
. "You are young and eager; it is natural
for you to entertain such ideas. But expe-
rience has taught me to my cost, that curses'
accompany an unequal alliance.} . I isiijarried-
us> the

<page 170>
( >6% )
the Conde de las Cisternas in opposition to
the will of his relations; many.an heart-
pang has punished me for the imprudent
step. Wherever we- bent our course, a fa-
ther's execratipn'purfued Gonzalvo. Po-r
verty overtook us, and no friend was near
to relieve our wants. Still our mutual af-
fection existed, but, alas! not without inter-
ruption. Accustomed to wealth and ease,
ill could my husband support the transition
to distress and indigence. He looked back
with jepining to the comforts which he
once enjoyed. He regretted the situation
which for my fake he had quitted ;. and, ia
moments when despair possessed his mi id,
has reproached me with having made him
the companion of want and wretchedness..
He has called me his bane I the source of his
sorrows, the cause of his destruction! Ah!
God! he little knew how much keener
were my own heart's reproaches! He was ig-
norant that I suffered trebly, for myself, for.
my. children, -and for him! 'Tis true. that ,

<page 171>
( '62 )
his anger seldom lasted long: his sincere af-
fection for me soon revived in his heart,
and then his repentance for the tears which
he had made me shed, tortured me even
more than his reproaches. He would
throw himself on the ground, implore my
forgiveness in the most frantic terms, and
load himself with curses for being the mur-
derer of my repose. Taught by experience,
that an union contracted against the incli-
nations of families on either fide must be
unfortunate, I will save my daughter from
those miseries which I have suffered. With-
out your uncle's consent, while 1 live, she
never shall be yours. Undoubtedly he will
disapprove of the union; his power is im-
mense, and Antonia shall not be exposed to
his anger and persecutiori."
4< His persecution? How easily may that
be avoided! Let the worst happen, it is
but quitting Spain. My wealth may easily
be realised. The Indian islands will offer
us a secure retreat. I have an estate, though
i .. not

<page 172>
( *63 )
not of value, in Hispaniola:. thither will we
sly, and lihall consider it to be my native
country, jf it gives me Antonia's undisturbed
possession." .... ; .-,.;..- .. ..:"
"Ah! youth, this is a fond, romantic
vision. Gonzalvo thought the fame. He
fancied that he could leave Spain without
regret j but the moment of parting unde-
ceived him. You know not yet what it is
to quit your native land: to quit it, never
to-behold-it more! You know hot what it
is to exchange the seenes where you have
pasted your infancy, for unknown realms
and barbarous dimates !—to be forgotten,
"Utterly, eternally forgotten by the compa-
nions of-your youth!—to fee your dearest
friends, the fondest objects of your affection,
perishing with diseases incidental to Indian
atmospheres, and find yourself unable to
procure for them necessary assistance! I
have felt all thisl My husband and two
sweet babes found their graves in Cuba:
nothing would have saved my young An-
tonia, but my sudden return to Spain. Ah!
Don

<page 173>
( 104 )
©on Lorenzo, could you conceive what!
fuffered during my absence! Could yoa
know how forely I regretted all that 1 left
behind, and how dear to me was the very
name of Spain! I envied the winds which
blew towards it:'and when the Spanish
sailor chaunted- some well-known air.as he
passed my window, tears filled my eyes*
while.1 thought upon my native.land. Gonr
zalvo too my husband"
Elvira paused. Her voice faltered, and
she concealed her face with her handker-
chief. After a short silence she rose from
the sopha, and proceeded
"Excuse my quitting you for a few mp-
ments; the remembrance of what 1 bav*
suffered has much agitated me, and I need
to be alone. Till I return, peruse. these
lines. After my husband's-.death I found
them among his papers. Had I known
sooner that he entertained such sentiments,
grief would have killed me. Haw rote these
verses on his voyage toCuba, when his mind
was. clouded by sorrow, and he forgot that
be

<page 174>
I *<*5 )

he had a wife and children. What we are
losing ever seems to us the most precious.
Gonzalvo was quitting Spain for ever, and
therefore was Spain dearer to his eyes than
all else which the world contained. Read
them Don Lorenzo j they will give you fome
idea of the feelings of a banished man."
Elvira put a paper into Lorenzo's hand,
and retired from the chamber. The youth
examined the contents, and found them to
be as follows:
.
THE EXILE.
FAREWELL, oh native Spam! farewell for ever!
These banished eyes shall view thy coasts no more;
A mournful presage tells my heart, that never
Goniialvo's steps again shall press thy sliope.
Hustled are the winds; while foft the vessel sailing
With gentle motion plows the unruffled main,
I fed my bosom's boasted courage sailing,
And curse the waves which tear me -far from Spain.
I fee it yet 1 Beneath yon blue clear heaven
Still do the spires, fo well-beloved, appear.
From yonder craggy point the gale of even
Still wafts my native accents to mine ear.
topped.

<page 175>
( 16<> )
Propped on fome moss-crowned rock, and gaily singing,
There in tliesun his nets the fisher dries ).
Oft have I heard the plaintive ballad, bringing
Scenes of past joys before my forrowing eyes.
Ah! happy fivain! he waits the accustomed hour,
When twilight-gloom obscures the closing sky j. . .
Then gladly seeks his loved paternal bower,
Aud shares the feast his native fields supply.
Friendship and Love, his cottage guests, receive him
With honest welcome and with smile sincere:
No threatening woes of present joys bereave him;
No sigh his bofom owns, his cheek no tear.
Ah! happy swain! such bliss to me denying,
Fortune thy lot with envy bids me view;
Me, who, from home and Spain an exile flying,
Bid all I value, all I love,.adieu.
No more mine ear shall list the well-known ditty
Sung by fome mountain-girl, who tends her goats,
Some village-swain imploring amorous pity,
Or shepherd chanting wild his rustic notes.
No more my arms a parent's fond embraces,
No more my heart domestic calm must know; . .
Far from these joys, with sighs which memory traces,
To sultry skies and distant climes I go.
'. ''..'.
Where Indian funs engender new diseases, .
Where snakes and tigi-ra breed, I bend roy way,
To

<page 176>
( 167 )
To brave the severifli thirst no art appeases,
The yellow plague, and madding blaze of day.
But not to feel slow pangs consume my liver,
To die by piece-meal in the bloom of age,
My boiling blood drank by insatiate fever,
And brain delirious with the day-star's rage,
Can make me know such grief, as thus to fever,
With many a bitter sigh, dear land! from thee j
To feel this heart must dote on thee for ever,
And feel that all thy joys are torn from me!
Ah me! how oft will fancy's spells, in slumber,
Recall my native country to my mind!
How oft regret will bid me sadly number
Each lost delight, and dear friend left behind!
.
Wild Murcia's vales and loved romantic bowers,
The river on whose banks a child I played,
My castle's antient halls, its frowning towers,
Eaeh much-regretted wood, and well-known glade j
Dreams of the land where all my wishes centre,
Thy scenes, which I am doomed no more to know,
Full oft mail memory trace, my soul's tormentor,
And turn each pleasure past to present woe.
But, lo! the sun beneath the waves retires;
Night speeds apace her empire to restore!
Clouds


<page 177>
( 168 )
Clouds from my fight obscure the village -spires/ i'
Now seen but faintly, and now seen no more.
Oh! breathe not, winds ? Still be the water's motion!
Sleep, sleep, my bark, in silence on the main 1
So, when to-morrow's light shall gild the ocean.
Once more mine eyes (hall fee the coast of Spain.
Vain is the wish! My last petition scorning, .
Fresh blows the gale, and high the billows swell:
Far (hall we be before the break of morning:
Oh! then,.for ever, native Spain, farewell!
* - «
Lorenzo had scarcely time to read these
lines, when Elvira returned to him: the
giving a free course to her tears had re-
lieved her, and her spirits had regained
their usual composure.
"I have nothing more to say, my lord"
said (he; "you have heard my apprehen-
sions, and my reasons sor begging you- not
to repeat your visits. I have thrown myself
in full confidence upon your honour. I am
certain that you will not prove my opinion
of you to have been too favourable."
"But one question more, Segnora, and
I leave you. Should the duke of Medina
approve

<page 178>
( 1% )
approve my love, would my addresses be
unacceptable to yourself and the fair An-
tonia?" ,?.I.. .-;'.<.:;k \ !. :.: .'~." "'. .*
** I'will be open with you, Don Lorenzo:
there being little probability of such an
union taking place, I fear that it is desired
but too ardently by my daughter. You
have made an impression upon her young
heart which gives me the most seriousalarm:
to prevent that impression from growing
stronger, I am obliged to decline your ac-
quaintance. For me, you may be sure that
1.should rejoice at establishing my child so
advantageously. Conscious that my consti-
tution, impaired by grief and illness, forbids
me to. expect a long continuance in this
world, I tremble at the thought of leaving
her under the protection of a perfect stranger.
The marquis de las Cisternas is totally un-
known to me. He will marry: his lady
may look upon Antonia with an eye of dis-
pleasure, and deprive her of her only friend.
Should the duke, your uncle, give his con-
Vot. II. I sent,

<page 179>
t *7° )
sent, you need not doubt obtaining mine
and my daughter's; butr without his, hope
not for ours. At all events, whatever steps
you may take, whatever may be the dike's
decision, till you know it, let me beg your
forbearing to strengthen, by your presence,
Antonia's prepossession. If the sanction of
your relations authorises' your addressing her
as your wife, my doors fly open to you. If
that sanction is refused, be satisfied to possess
my esteem and gratitude, but -remember
that we must meet no more." -
Lorenzo promised reluctantly to conform
to this decree: but he added, that he hoped
soon to obtain that consent, which would
give him a claim to the renewal of their ac-
quaintance. He then explained to her why
the marquis had not called in person; and
made no scruple of confiding to. her his
lister's history. He concluded by faying',
"that he hoped to set Agnes at liberty th*
next day; and that, as soon as Don Ray-
mond's fears were quieted upon this subject,
he

<page 180>
A .".7/ )
he would lose no time in assuring Donna
Elvira of his friendship and protection."
The lady shook her head.
"I tremble for your sister," said she; ". t
have heard many traits of the domina of St.
Clare's character from a friend who was edu-
cated in .the fame convent with her: she
reported her to be haughty, inflexible, su-
perstitious, and revengeful. I have since
heard, that she is infatuated with the idea of
rendering her convent the most regular in
Madrid, and never forgave those whose im-
prudence threw upon it the slightest stain.
•Though naturally violent and severe, when
her interests require it, she well knows' how
to assume an appearance of benignity. She
leaves no means untried to persuade young
women of rank to become members or her
community: she is implacable when once
incensed, and has too much intrepidity to
shrink at taking the most rigorous measures
for punishing the offender. Doubtless, she
will consider your sister's quitting the con-
I 2 vent
y

<page 181>
( *7* )
vent as a disgrace thrown upon it: she
will use every artifice to avoid obeying the
mandate of his holiness; and I shudder to
think that Donna Agnes is in the hands of
this dangerous woman." .. . ,
Lorenzo now rose to take leave. Elvira
gavehim her hand at parting,which he killed
respectfully; and, telling her that he soon
hoped for the permission to sakue that of
Antonia, he returned to his hotel. The
lady was perfectly satisfied with the conver-
sation which had passed between them:
she looked forward with satisfaction to the
prospect of his becoming her son-in-law;
but prudence bade her conceal from her
daughter's knowledge the flattering hoges
which herself now ventured to entertain.
nnrScaitcely was it day, and already Lorenzo
was at the convent of St. Clare, furnished
with. the necessary mandate. The nuns were
at matins. He waited impatiently for the
conclusion of the service; and at length the
prioress appeared at the parlour-grate, -Ag-
nes

<page 182>
( m )
nes was demanded. The old lady replied-
with a melancholy air, that the dear child's
situation grew hourly more dangerous : that
the physicians despaired of her life; but
that they had declared the only chance for
her recovery to consist in keeping her quiet,
and not to permit those to approach her
whose presence was likely to agitate her.
Not a word of all this was believed by Lo-
renzo, any more than he credited the ex-
pressions of grief and affection for Agnes
with which this account was interlarded.
To end the business, he put the pope's bull
into the hands of the domina, and insisted
that, ill or in health, his sister mould be
delivered to him without delay.
The prioress received the paper with an
air of humility; but no sooner had her eye
glanced over the contents than her resent-
ment baffled all the efforts of hypocrisy- A
deep crimson spread itself over her face,
and me darted upon Lorenzo looks of rage
and menace. 1' . - ..
"This order is positive," said she, in. a
I 3 voice

<page 183>
i s . . }
( J74 )
voice of anger, which she in vain strove to:
disguise: "willingly would I obey it, bur,
cnfortunately, it is out of my power."
Lorenzo interrupted her by an exclama-
tion of surprise.
** I repeat it, Segnor, to obey this order
is totally out of my power. From tender-
ness to a brother's feelings, I would have
communicated the fad event to you by de-
grees, and have prepared you to hear it
with fortitude. My measures are broken
through: this order commands me tc> deli-
ver up to you the sister Agnes without de-
lay; I am, therefore, obliged to inform
'"ty&a, without circumlocution, that on Fri*
day last she expired." . -- i'
Lorenzo started back with horror,. apd
turned pale. A moment's recollection con*
vinced him that this assertion must be false,
and it restored him to himself.
. '.* You deceive me!" said he, passionately;
"hut five minutes past you assured^ me
that, though ill, she was still alive. Pro-
duce her this instant! See her I must and
. will;

<page 184>
( i-75 )
will; and every atterhpt to keep her from
me Will be unavailing." '. .-''
3 '**f.You forget yourself, Segnor: you owe
respect to my age as well as my profession.
Your sifter is no more. If I at first con-
cealed her death, it was from dreading lest
stn event so unexpected should produce or*
you too violent an effect. In truth, I am;
but ill repaid for my attention. And whac
interest, I pray you, should I have in de*
taining her? To know her wish of quitting
our society is a sufficient reason for me to
wish her absence, and think her a disgrace
to the sisterhood of St. Clare r but. G*e har
forfeited my affection in a manner yet more
culpable. Her crimes were great; and
when you know the cause of her death, you
Will doubtless rejoice, Don Lorenzo, thaq
such a wretch is no longer in existence. She
was taken ill on Thursday last on returning
flrom confession in the Capuchin chapel;
her'malady seemed attended with strange
circumstances; but she persified in. con-
cealing its cause. . -Tlianks to <be 'Virgin;.
-~ \'\i- I 4 .. en.. in owls

<page 185>
( 176 )
we were too ignorant to suspect it! Judge
then what must have been our consternation^
our horror, when she was delivered the next
day of a still-born child, whom she imme-
diately followed to the grave. How, Seg-
nor? Is it possible that your countenance
expresses no surprise, no indignation > .Is jt
possible that your sister's infamy was known-
to you, and that still she possessed your as-.
section? In that case, you have no need of
my compassion. I can say nothing more*,
except repeat my inability of obeying the
orders of his holiness. Agnes is no more;
and, to convince you that what I fay'istrue,.
I swear by our blessed Saviour, that three,
days have passed since she was bqried.'f vrjj
Here slie kissed a small crucifix which [
hung at her girdle: she then rose from her- ^
chair, and quitted the parlour. Asshe with--;
drew she cast upon Lorenzo a scornful smile. -
"Farewell, Segnor," said she; C<I..
know no;remedy for this accident* I fear
that even. a second bull from the pope will .
not .procure your sistet's reiurrectjan?" .'•**;-•'
j.v . *.'*,. Lorenzo

<page 186>
( m >
. Lorenzo also retired, penetrated with af-
fliction: but Don Raymond's, at the news
of this event, amounted to madness: He
would not be convinced that Agnes was
really dead; and continued to insist that
the walls of St. Clare still confined her.
No arguments could make him abandon
his hopes of regaining her. Every day some
fresh scheme was invented for procuring in-
telligence of her, and all of them were at-
tended with the fame success.
On his part, Medina gave up the idea of
ever feeing his sister more; yet he- believed
that she had been taken osf by unfair rrieans.'
Under this persuasion, he encouraged Don
Raymond's researches. determined, should
he discover the least warrant tor his suspi-
cions, to take a severe vengeance upon the
unfeeling prioress. The loss ot his sister af-
fected him sincerely: nor was it the least
cause of his distess, that propriety obliged
him for some time to deter mentioning An-
tonia to the duke. In the mean while, his
emissaries constantly surrounded Elvira's'7
1 5 door.

<page 187>
( i7« )
door. He had intelligence os all the move-
ments of his mistress. As (he never failed
every Thursday to attend the sermon in the
Capuchin cathedral, he was secure of seeing
her once a week; thoi:gh, in compliance
with his promise, he carefully shunned her
observation. Thus two long months passed
away. Still no information was procured
of Agnes. All but the marquis credited
her death: and now Lorenzo determined
to disclose his sentiments to his uncle: he
I^ad already dropped some hints of his in-
tention to marry; they had been as fa-'
vourably received as he could expect; and
he harboured no doubt of the success of
his. application.
. '. . r.sl.'Uti . V. . ;..: ;.. .j.'.j -..;. .,,- .
. '. i•: . -ij . . :. . '.,• .•.•.«
r ;.'. '' '.'' i i t-b 'i-l-'-'r. K ~l'..{
.;id ;.ji. u ...• . ; . d .. .. > -' !«...>. ;.jlv j -j .
"^ .;. CHAP.

<page 188>
;j'0 .:i ihsKi bi ]i;i:? 'j.'.',•"./ j:."...*."
.--^-i--V. . ... . _ -
;•;. , CH AP.- VI. '., „.•'
.•
,v:>'V.• «j.":! '::: rr-
-,.Ts'J 5.' .:''•:' .,"•..;. rr-.fr--.-si ,,.,'(). ..;; s''
While in each other's arms entranced they lay, .;
They blessed the night, and cursed the coming day..
rLEft.'
.;..'. .'i.-'-; »a^;jI ;-:,i: .j\- .:i) T • ...: ""/. ..."
^^ .s:oiT'c:, r.03 .- .. ;:->i::-l u."
. 1 BE.b.urst of transport was passed 11 Am-
brose's lust was satisfied.. Pleasure fled, and
Shame usurped hen seal in his bosom. Cojv
fused and terrified at his weakness, he drew|
himself from Matilda's arms: bis perju■fjr
presented itself before him :: he reslectedon
the seene which had just been acted, an'd.
trembled at the consequences of adifcovery *
he looked forward with horror: his heart
was despondent,. a-nd became the abode of
satiety and disgust : he avoided the eyes of
his partner in frailty. A melancholy silence
prevailed, during. which both seemed bu*.
fted with disagreeable reflections* . .
jv; , y\ I 6■ Matilda.

<page 189>
I l*<5 }
Matilda was the fij-st to break it. She
took his hand gently, and pressed it to her .
burning lips.
"Ambrosio!" she murmured, in a soft
and trembling voice.
The abbot started at the found : he turn-
ed his eyes upon Matilda's; they were filled
with tears; her cheeks were covered with
blushes, and her supplicating looks seemed
to solicit his compassion. .,-«..'
-:;«.Dangerous woman I" said he ; ." into
what an abyss of misery have you plunged
me J* Should' your sex be discovered, my
honour, nay, my life, must pay for the
pleasure of a few moments. Fool ihat-L-
was, to trust myself to your seductions.'i;
What can now be done? How can my i
offence be expiated? What atonement.can.
purchase the pardon of my crime ?. .Wretch-
ed Matilda, you have destroyed my quiet
for ever 1" u ... ".! : j.■ _Mi ... v.^;:,.;
"Tome these reproaches^ Ambrosio? .
to me, who have sacrificed'for you the
world's pleasures, the luxury of wealth, the
. la->/-ii :: delKacy

<page 190>
delicacy of sex, my friends, my fortune,
and my fame-? Whtt have you lost which
I preserved? Have / not shared in your
gcrijk-?. i^&weyounot shared in try pleasure?
Guilf,.did I say? In what consists ours, un-
less in the opinion of an ill-judging world?
Let that world be ignorant of them, and
our joys become divine and blameless! Un-
natural were your vows of celibacy; man
was not created for such a state: and were
love a crime, God never would have made
it-so sweet, so irresistible! Then banist) those
clouds from your brow, my Ambrosio.:
Indulge in those pleasures freely,- without
which life is a worthless gift. Cease to re-(!
proaeh me with having taught you what is-'
bljfs, and fed equal transports with the'
woman who adores you!" :.'.>
As she spoke, her eyes were filled with a:
delicjpus languor: her bosom panted : she
twined her arms voluptuously round him,'
drew him towards her, and- glued: her lips
to his. Ambrosio again raged with desire:'
the die was thrown : his vows were already
broken:
. j

<page 191>
.broken: he had already committed thecrime,
and why should he refrain from enjoying.
its reward? He clasped her to his breast
with redoubled ardour. No longer repressed
.by the sense of shame,' he gave a loose to his
intemperate appetites; while the fair wanton
put every invention of lust rn practice, every
refinement m the art of pleasure, which
might heighten the bli& of her possession,
and render her lover's transports still more
exquisite. Ambrosio rioted in delights till
then unknown to him. Swift fled the night,.
and the morning blushed to behold him still
clasped in the embraces of Matilda.
Intoxicated with pleasure, the monk rose-
from the syren's luxurious 'couch : he no
longer reslected with shame upon his incon-
tinence^ dreaded the vengeance of offend-
ed heaven: his only fear was lest death
should rob him of enjoyments, for which his
long fast had only given a keener edge 'so*
his appetite. Matilda was still'under the irl-
fiuence of poison; and the voluptuousraonk
trembled less for his preserver's life than his
:"'' eoncubine's*

<page 192>
( *h )
concubine's. 'Deprived of hef, he would
not easily find another mistress with whom
he could indulge his passions so fully, and
so safely; he therefore pressed her with
earnestness to use the means of preservation
which she had declared to be in her pos-
session.
"Yes!"replied Matilda; "since you have
made me feel that life is valuable, I will
rescue mine at any rate. No dangers shall
appal me: J will look upon the consequences!
of my action boldly, nor shudder at the hor-
rors which they present: I will think my
sacrifice scarcely worthy to purchase your
possession j and remember, that a moment
passed in your arms in this world, o'erpays
an age of punishment in the next. But be-
fore I take this step, Ambrosio, give meyour
solemn oath never to enquire by what means
I shall preserve myself."
He did so, in a manner the most bind-
ing. - » j-
"I thank you, my beloved. This pre-
caution is necessary; for, though you know
ic

<page 193>
( 184 V
it not, you are under the command of vul-
gar prejudices. The business on which I.
mult be employed this night might startle
you, from its singularity, and lower me in
your opinion. Tell me, are you possessed
of the key of the low door on the western
side of the garden?"
*.* The door which opens into the bury-
ing-ground common to us and the sister-
hood of St. Clare? I have not the key,
but can easily procure it." 'u'l
"You have only this to do. Admits
me into the burying-ground at midnight.'
Watch while I descend into the vaults of
St. Clare, kst some prying eye should ob-'
serve my actions. Leave me there alorie^5
f)i an honi, and that life is safe which I de^ 1
dtcate to your pleafun.s. To prevent cr«-;£
ating suspicion, do not visit me during the
day. Remember the key, and rhit-I expect >
you before twelve. Hark! I hear steps'^
approaching! Leave me; I will pretend to!
sleep." - l.' -t
1.The friar obeyed, and left the .cell. 'As
he

<page 194>
( i«3- V
he opened tlie door, father Pablos made his
appearance. . •.; my.
. "A come," said the latter, "to enquire.
after the health of my young patient."
"Hush !" replied Ambrosio, laying his
singer upon his lip; "speak softly; I am
jxist come from him.: he has fallen into a
profound slumber, which doubtless will be
of service to him. Do not disturb him at
present, for he wislies to repose."
- Father Pablos bbeyed, and, hearing the:
bell ring, accompanied the abbot to matins.
Ambrosio felt embarrassed as he entered the.
chapel. Guilt was new to him, and he
fancied that every eye could read the trans-
actions of the night upon his countenance.-.
He strove to pray: his bosom no longer;
glowed with devotion: his thoughts inseo- .
sibly wandered to Matilda's. secret charms.
Bqt what he.wanted in purity of heart, he
supplied by exterior. sanctity. The better-
to cloak. his. transgression, he redoubled;..
his pretensions to the semb ance of virtues,
and never appeased more deypted\9.^e#yea,
than

<page 195>
C i«* )

than since he hadbroken through his engage-
ments. Thus did he unconsciously add
hypocrisy to perjury and incontinence: he
had fallen into the latter errors from yield-
ing to seduction almost irresistible: but he
was now guilty of a voluntary fault, by en-
deavouring to conceal those into which ano-
ther had betrayed him.
The matins concluded, Ambrosio retired
to his cell. The pleasures which he had
just tasted for the first time were still im-
pressed upon his mind: his brain was be-
wildered, and presented a confused chaos of
remorte, voluptuousness, inquietude, and
fear: he looked back with regret to that-
peace of foul, that security of virtue, which-
till then had been his portion: he had in-
dulged in excesses whose very idea, but four-
and-twenty hours befo e, he had recoiled at
with horror: he shuddered at reflecting that
a trifling indiscretion on his part, or on Ma-
tilda's, would overturn that sabric of repu-
tation which it had cost him thirty years to
erect, and render him the abhorrence of that
people

<page 196>
( i«7 )
people of whom he was then the Idol. Con-
science painted to him in glaring colours His
perjury and weakness; apprehension magni-
fied to him the horrors of punishment, and
he already fancied himself in the prifons of
she Inquisition. To these tormenting idea*
succeeded Matilda's beauty, and those de-
licious lessons, which once learnt can never
be forgotten* A single glance thrown upon-
these reconciled him with himself: he con-
sidered the pleasures of the former night to
have been purchased at an easy price by the
sacrifice of innocence and honour. Theit
very remembrance filled' his soul with cc-
ffacy: he cursed his foolish vanity, which
hia induced him to waste in obscurity the
bloom of life, ignorant of the blessings of
love and woman: he determined, at alt
events, to continue his commerce with Ma-
tilda, and called every argument to his aid
which might confirm his resolution: he
asked himself, provided his irregularity was
unknown, in what would his fault consists
and what consequences hehad to apprehend?
; By

<page 197>
( iSS )
By adhering strictly to every rule of his or-
der save chastity, he doubted not to retain
the esteem of men, and even the protection
of heaven: he trusted easily to be forgiven
so slight and natural a deviation from his
vows; but he forgot that, having pronoun-
ced those vows, incontinence, in laymen
the most venial of errors, became in his per-
son the most heinous of crimes.
Once decided upon his future conduct,
his mind became more easy: he threw him-
self upon his bed, and strove by sleeping to
recruit his strength, exhausted by his noc-
turnal excesses. He awoke refreshed, and
eager for a repetition of his pleasures. Obe-
dient to Matilda's order, he visited not her
cell during the day. Father Pablos. men-
tioned in the refectory, that Rosario had at
length been prevailed upon to follow his pre-
scription; but that the medicine had not
produced the slightest effect, and that he be-
lieved no mortal {kill could rescue him from
she grave. With this opinion the abbot
agreed, and affected to lament the untimely
fate

<page 198>
( i»9 )
sate of a youth whose talents had appeared
so promising.
The night arrived. Ambrofio had taken
care to procure from the porter the key of
the low door opening into the cemetery.
Furnished with this, when all was silent in
the monastery, he quitted his cell, and has-
tened to Matilda's. She had left her bed,
and was dressed before his arrival.
"1 have been expecting you with impa-
tience," said she; " my life depends upost
these moments. Have you the key V
"I have."
"** Away then to the garden. We have
no time to lose. Follow me!"
She took a small covered basket from the
table. Bearing this in one hand, and the
Tamp, which was slaming upon the hearth,
in the other, she hastened from the cell.
Ambrofio followed her. Both maintained
a profound silence. She moved on with
quick but cautious steps, passed through
the cloisters, and reached the western side of
the garden : her eyes slashed with a sire and
wudness
. .

<page 199>
( *9° )
Ivildness which impressed the monk at once
with awe and horror. A determined des-
perate courage reigned upon her brow: (he
gave the tamp to Ambrosio; then taking
from him the key, she unlocked the low
door, and entered the cemetery. It was a
vast and spacious square, planted with yew-
trees; half of it belonged to the abbey, the
other half was the property of the sisterhood
of St. Clare, and was protected by a roof
of stone: the division was marked by ari
iron railing, the wicket of which was gene-
rally left unlocked.
. Thither Matilda bent her course: flie
opened the Vvjcket, and sought for the door
leading to the subterraneous vaults where re.
posed the mouldering bodies of the votaries
of St. Clare. The night was perfectly dark;
neither moon nor stars werevisible. Luckily
there was not a breath of wind, and the friar
bore his lamp in full security: by the assist-
ance of its beams, the door of the sepulchre
was soon discovered. It was funk within the
hollow of a wall, and almost concealed by
J thick

<page 200>
( *9* )
thick festoons of ivy hanging over it. Three
fteps of rough-hewn stone conducted to it,
and Matilda was on the point of descend^
ing them, when she suddenly started back.
"There are people in the vaults!" she
Whispered to the monkj " conceal yourself
Mil they are passed."
• She-took refuge behind a lofty and mag-
nificent toirrbv erected in honour of.the con*
vent's foundress. Ambrosio. followed her
example, carefully hiding his lamp, lest its
beams should betray them. But a few mo-
ments had elapsed when the door was pushed
6peb leading to the subterraneous caverns.
Rays Of light proceeded up the starr-case:
they enabled the concealed spectators to obi
serve two females dressed in religious habits,
whoseemed engaged in earnestconversation.
The abbot had no difficulty to recognize
the prioress of St. Ciare in the first, and
one of the elder nuns in her companion.
"Every thing is prepared," said the prio-
ress: " her fate shall be decided to-morrow •
all her tears and sighs will be unavailing'.
No!

<page 201>
( 19* )
No! In five-and-twenty years that I have
been superior of this convent, never did I
witness a transaction more infamous!"
"You must: expect much opposition to
your will," the other replied in a milder
voice: " Agnes has many friends in the
convent, and in particular the mother Sr.
Ursula will espouse her cause most warmly.
In truth, she merits to have friends; and I
wish I could prevail upon you to consider
her youth, and her peculiar situation. She
seems sensible of her fault; the excess of
her grief proves her penitence, and I am
convinced that her tears slow more from
contrition than fear. of punishment- Reve*
rend mother, would you be pei luaded to
mitigate the severity of your sentence $
would you but deign to overlook this first
transgression; I offer myself as the pledge
of her future conduct." . *.. .•....',.
"Overlook it, fay you ?• Mother Camil-
la, you amaze me! What ? after disgracing
me in the presence of Madrid's idol, of the
very man on whom I nipit wished to irrW
press

<page 202>
( »93 )
press an idea of the strictness of my disci-
pline? How despicable mustl haye appeared
to the reverend abbot! No, mother, no! I
never can forgive the insult. I cannot bet-
ter . convince Ambrosio that I abhor such
crimes, than by punishing that of Agnes
with all the rigour of which our severe laws
admit. Cease then your supplications,
they will all be unavailing. My resolution
is taken. To-morrow Agnes shall be made
a terrible example of my justice and resent-
ment." .
... The mother Camilla seemed not to give
up the point, but by this time the nuns
were put of hearing. The prioress unlock-
ed She door which communicated with St.
Clare's chapel, and, having entered with
her. companion, closed it again aster them.'
Matilda now asked, who was this Agnes
with whom the prioress was thus incensed,
and what connexion she could have with
Ambrosio. He related her adventure; and
he added, that since that time his ideas
having undergone a thorough revolution,
Vol, II. K he

<page 203>
( ;*94 )
be now felt much compassion for the unfor-
tunate nun.
"I design," said he, "to request an au-
dience of the domina to-morrow, and use
every means of obtaining a mitigation of
her sentence."
"Beware of what you do," interrupted
Matilda; "your sudden change of senti-
ment may naturally create surprise, and
may give birth to suspicions which it is most
our interest to avoid. Rather redouble
your outward austerity, and thunder out
menaces against the errors of others, the
better to conceal your own. Abandon the
nun to her fate. Your interfering might
be dangerous, and her imprudence merits
to be punished: she is unworthy to enjoy
love's pleasures, who has not wit enough to
conceal them. But in discussing this tri-
sling fubject I waste moments which are
precious. The night slies apace, and much
must be done before morning. The nuns
are retired, all is sase. Give me the lamp,
Ambrosio, I must descend alone into these
. caverns:

<page 204>
( *95 >
caverns: wait here, and if any- one ap^
proacbes warn me by your voice j but as
you value your existence, presume not to
follow me: your life would fall a victim to
your imprudent curiosity.''
Thus faying, she advanced towards the
sepulchre, still holding her lamp in one
hand, and her little basket in the other.
She touched the door: it turned slowly
upon its grating hinges, and a narrow wind-
ing stair-cafe of black marble presented it-
self to her eyes. She descended it; Ambro-
sio remained above, watching the faint
beams of the lamp, as they still receded
down the stairs. They disappeared, and
he found himself in total darkness.
Left to himself, he could not reflect
without surprise on the sudden change in
Matilda's character and sentiments. But a
few days had pasted, since she appeared the
mildest and softest of her sex, devoted to
his will, and looking up to him as to a supe-
rior being. Now she assumed a sort of cou-
rage and manliness in her manners and dis-
K 2 course,

<page 205>
( *9* )
course, but ill calculated to please him;
She spoke no longer to insinuate, but com-
mand: he found himself unable to cope
with her in argument, and was unwillingly
obliged to confess the superiority of her
judgment. Every moment convinced him
of the astonishing powers of her mind; but
what (he gained in the opinion of the man,
ihe lost with interest in the affection of the
lover. He regretted Rosario, the fond, the
gentle, and submissive; he grieved that Ma-
tilda preferred the virtues of his sex to
those of her own; and when he thought of
her expressions respecting the devoted nun,
he could not help blaming them as cruel
and unfetninine. Pixy is a sentiment so na-
tural, so appropriate to the female charac-
ter, that it is scarcely a merit for a woman
to possess it, but to be without it is a griev-
ous crime. Ambrosio could not easily for-
give his mistress for being deficient in this
amiable quality. However, though he
blamed her insensibility, he felt the truth of
her observations j and though he pitied sin-
cerely

<page 206>
C i07 )
eerely the unfortunate Agnes, he resolved
to drop the idea of interposing in her be-
half.'
Near an hour had elapsed since Matilda
descended into the caverns; still she returns
ed not. Ambrosio's curiosity was excited'.1
He drew nearthestair-case—-he listened—alt
was silent, except that at intervals he caught
the found of Matilda's voice, as it wound'
along the subterraneous passages, and was'
re-echoed by the sepulchre's vaulted roofs.
She was at too great a distance for him-to
distinguish her words-, and ere they reached
him, they were deadened in a low mur-
mur. He longed to penetrate into this-
mystery. He resolved to disobey her in-
junctions, and follow her into the cavern.
He advanced to the stair-case; he had al-
ready descended some steps, when his cou-
rage failed him. He remembered Matilda's
menaces if he infringed her orders, and his
bosom was filled with a secret unaccountable
awe. He returned up the stairs, resumed
K 3 his

<page 207>
( *$3 )
bis former station, and waited impatiently
for the conclusion of this adventure.
Suddenly he was sensible of a violent
Shock. An earthquake rocked the ground,
the columns which supported the roof un-
der which he stood, were so strongly shaken,
that every moment menaced him with its
fall, and at the fame moment he heard a
loud and tremendous burst of thunder j it
ceased, and his eyes being fixed upon the
stair-cafe, he saw a bright column of light
flash along the caverns beneath. It was
seen but for an instant. No sooner did it
disappear, than all was once more quiet and
obscure. Profound darkness again sur-
rounded him, and the silence of night was
only broken by the whirring bat as she flit-
ted slowly by him.
With every instant Ambrosio's amaze-
ment increased. Another hour elapsed,
after which the same light again appeared,
and was lost again as suddenly. It was ac-
companied by a strain of sweet but solemn
.i..- .. music,

<page 208>
( *99 )
music, which, as it stole through the .vault*
below, inspired the monk with rhingledde*
light and terror. It had not long been
hustled, when he heard Matilda's steps upon
the stair-cafe. She ascended from the ca-
vern; the most lively joy animated her
beautiful features. . :'fc
"Did you see any thing?" she asked* .
"Twice I saw a column of light flalh up
the stair-case." /-;-..■
** Nothing else?"
."-•* Nothing.
** The morning is on the point of break-
ing: let us retire to the abbey, lest day-light
should betray us."
With a light step sbe hastened from the
burying-ground. She regained her cell, and
the curious abbot still accompanied her.
She closed the door, and disembarrassed
herself of her lamp and basket.
"I have succeeded I" she cried, throw-
ing herself upon his bosom; "succeeded
beyond my fondest hopes! I shall live, Am-
brofio, shall live for you! The step, which
K 4 1 shud-

<page 209>
( 2CO )
I shuddered at taking, proves to me a
source of joys inexpressible I Oh I that I
dared communicate those joys to you! Oh!
that I were permitted to share with you my
power, and raise you as high above the
level of your sex, as one bold deed has ex-
alted me above mine!"
"And what prevents you, Matilda?"
interrupted the friar. "Why is your bu-
siness in the cavern made a secret? Do you
think me undeserving of your confidence?
Matilda, I must doubt the truth of youraf-
fection, while you have joys in which I am
forbidden to share."
"You reproach me with injustice; I
grieve sincerely that I am obliged to con-
ceal from you my happiness: but I am not
to blame; the fault lies not in me, but in
yourself, my Ambrosio. Yon are still too
much the monk, your mind is enslaved by
the prejudices of education; and supersti-
tion might make you Ihudder at the idea of
that'.which experience has taught :me to)
pfrize and value. At present you are unfic
i .ni . .'. to

<page 210>
( aoi )
to be trusted with a secret of such import-
ance; but the strength of your judgment,
and the curiosity which I rejoice to see spark-
ling in your eyes, make me hope that you
will one day deserve my confidence. Till
that period arrives, restrain your impatience.
Remember that you have given me your
solemn oath, never to enquire into this
night's adventures. I insist upon your
keeping this oath; for, though," (he added
smiling, while she sealed his lips with a
wanton kiss, "though I forgive your break-
ing your vows to heaven^ I expect you to
keep your vows to me.'* i si'
The friar returned the embrace, which
had set his blood on fire. The luxurious
and unbounded excesses of the former
night were renewed, and they separated
not till the bell rang for matins. .• i
The fame pleasures were frequently re-'
peated. The monks rejoiced in the feign>-
ed Rosario's unexpected recovery, and
none of them suspected his real sex. The
K.5 abbot

<page 211>
( 202 )
abbot possessed his mistress in tranquillity,
and, perceiving his frailty unsuspected,
abandoned himself to his passions in full
security. Shame and remorse no longer
tormented him. Frequent repetitions made
him familiar with sin, and his bosom became
proof against the stings of conscience. In
these sentiments he was encouraged by
Matilda; but slie soon was aware that she
had satiated her lover by the unbounded
freedom of her caresses. Her charms be-
coming accustomed to him, they ceased to
excite the same desires which at first they
had inspired. The delirium of passion
being past, he had leisure to observe every
trisling defect; where none were to be
found, satiety made him fancy them. The
monk was glutted with the fullness of plea-
sure. A week. had scarcely elapsed, before
he was weariedof his paramour: his warm
•constitution still made him seek in her arms
the gratification of his lust. But when the
-moment of passion was over, he quitted her
:....., '- ;. with

<page 212>
( % r
with disgust, and his humour, naturally in.
constant, made him sigh impatiently for
Variety.'-
Possession, which cloys man, only in-
creases the affection of women. Matilda
with every succeeding day grew more at-
tached to the friar. Since he had obtained
her favours, he was become dearer to her
than ever, and she felt grateful to him for
the pleasures in which they had equally
been sharers. Unfortunately, as her passion
grew ardent, Ambrosio's grew cold; the
very marks of her fondness excited his dis-
gust, and its excess served to extinguish the
slame which already burned but feebly in
his bosom. Matilda could not but remark?
that heir society seemed to him daily less
agreeable; he was inattentive while me
spoke; her musical talents, which she pos-
sessed in perfection, had lost the power of
amusing him; or, if he deigned to praise
them',' his compliments were evidently
forced and cold. He no longer gazed upon
her with affection, or applauded her semi-
K 6 mem$

<page 213>
( 204 >,
ments with a lover's partiality. This Ma-
tilda well perceived, and redoubled her ef-
forts to revive those sentiments which he
once had felt. She could not but fail, since-
he considered as importunities, the pains
which me took to please him, and was dis-
gusted by the very means which she used to
recall the wanderer. Still, however, their
illicit commerce continued; but it was clear
that he was led to her arms, not by love, but
the cravings of brutal appetite. His con-
stitution made a woman necessary to him,
and Matilda was the only one with whom
he could indulge his passions safely. In
spite of her beauty, he gazed upon every.
other female with more desire; but fearing
that his hypocrisy should be made public, he
confined his inclinations to his own breast.
It was by no means his nature to be ti-
mid: but his education had impressed his
mind with fear so strongly, that apprehen-
sion was bow become part of his character.
Had his youth been passed in the world,
he would have shown himself possessed of
.: '.. many

<page 214>
C 2°5 )
many brilliant and manly qualities. Her
was naturally enterprising, firm, and fear-
less: he had a warrior's heart, and he might
have sbone with splendour at the head of
an army. There was no want of genero-
sity in his nature: the wretched never failed
to find in him a compassionate auditor: his
abilities were quick and shining, and his?
judgment vast, solid, and decisive. With
such qualifications he would have been aa
ornament to his country: that he possessed
them he had given proofs in his earliest in*
fancy, and his parents had beheld his dawn*
ing virtues with the fondest delight and ad-
miration. Unfortunately, while yet a child,
he was deprived of those parents. He fell
into the power of a relation, whose only
wish about him was never to hear of him
more: for that purpose he gave him in
charge to his friend, the former superior of
the Capuchins. The abbot, a very monies
used all his endeavours to persuade the boy
that happiness existed not without the walls
of a convent. He succeeded fulbyv To de.
£ serve

<page 215>
( 206 )
serve admittance into the order of St. Fran-
cis was Ambrose's highest ambition. His
instructors carefully repressed those yirtnes,
whose grandeur and disinterestedness were
ill suited to the cloister. Instead of univer-
sal benevolence, he adopted a selfish parti-
ality for his own particular establishment r
he was taught to consider compassion for
the errors of ot hers as a crime of the blackest
dye: the noble frankness of his temper was
exchanged for servile humility; and in or-
der to break his natural spirit, the monks
terrified his young mind, by placing before
him all the horrors with which superstition
could furnish them: they painted to him
the tormepts of the damned in colours the
most dark, terrible and fantastic, and thread .
ened him at the slightest fault with eternal
perdition. No wonder that his imagina-
tion constantly dwelling upon thele fearful
objects should have rendered his character:
timid and apprehensive. Add to this, that'
his. long absence from the great world, and'
total unacq*iaintance with the common dan-
gers

<page 216>
( *>7 ")
gers of life, made him form of them an
idea far more dismal than the reality. While
the monks were busied in rooting out his
virtues, and narrowing his sentiments, they
allowed every vice which had fallen to his
share to arrive at full perfection. He was
suffered to be proud, vain, ambitious, and
disdainful: he was jealous of his equals,
and despised all merit but his own: he was
implacable when offended, and cruel in his
revenge. Still, in spite of the pains taken
to pervert them, his natural good qualities
would occasionally break through the gloom
cast over them so carefully. At such times
the contest for superiority between his real
and acquired character was striking and un-
accountable to those unacquainted with his
original disposition. He pronounced the
most severe sentences upon offenders, which
the moment after compassion induced him
to mitigate: he undertook the most daring
enterprises, which the fear of their conse-
quences soon obliged him to abandon: his
inborn, genius darted, a brilliant. ljght upon
subjects

<page 217>
( 208 )
subjects the most: obscure; and almost in*-
stantaneously his superstition replunged?
them in darkness more profound than that
from which they had just been rescued.
His brother monks, regarding him as a su-
perior b;ing, remarked not this contradic-
tion in their idol's conduct. They were
persuaded that what he did must be right,
and supposed him to have good reasons for
changing his resolutions. The fact was,
that the different sentiments with which
education and nature had inspired him,
were combating in his bosom: it remained
for his passions, which as yet no opportu-
nity had called into play, to decide the vic-
tory. Unfortunately his passions were the
very worst: judges to whom he could possi-
bly have applied. His monastic seclusion
bad till now been in his favour, since it gave
him no room for discovering his bad qua-
lities. The superiority of his talents raised
him too far above his companions to per-
mit his being jealous of them: his exem-
plary piety, persuasive eloquence, and
. pleasing

<page 218>
( a°9 )
pleasing manners had secured him univer-
sal esteem,.and consequently he had no in-
juries to revenge: his ambition was justi-
fied by his acknowledged merits and his-
pride considered as no more than proper
confidence. He never saw, much less con-
versed with the other sex: he was ignorant
of the pleasures in woman's power to be-
stow j and if he read in the course of hi»
studies
"That men were fond, he smiled, and wondered how.'*
For a time spare diet, frequent watching,.
and severe penance cooled and reprefled th&
natural warmth of his constitution: bur. no>
sooner did opportunity present itself, no
sooner did he catch a glimpse of joys to
which he was still a stranger, than religion's,
barriers were too feeble to resist the over*
whelming torrent of his desires. All im-1
pediments yielded before the force of bis
temperament, warm, sanguine, and volup-
tuous in the excess. As yet his other pas-
sions lay dormant; but they only needed to

<page 219>
( 210 )
be once awakened, to display themselves
with violence as great and irresistible.
He continued to be the admiration of
Madrid. The enthusiasm created by his
eloquence seemed rather to increase than
diminish. Every Thursday, which was
the only day when he appeared in public,
the Capuchin cathedral was crowded with
auditors, and his discourse was always re-
ceived with the fame approbation. He was
named confessor to all the chief families in
Madrid; and no one was counted fashion-
able who was injoined penance by any other
than Ambrosio. In his resolution of never
stirring out of his convent he still persisted.
This circumstance created a still greater
opinion of his sanctity and self-denial. -A^
bove all, the women sang forth his praises
loudly, less influenced by devotion than by
his noble countenance, majestic air, and
well-turned graceful figure. The abbey-
door was thronged with carriages from
morning to night; and the noblest an*
fairest

<page 220>
( *» )
fairest dames of Madrid confessed to the
abbot their secret peccadilloes. The eyes
of the luxurious friar devoured their charms.
Had his penitents consulted these interpre-
ters, he would have needed no other means
of expressing his desires. For his misfor-
tune, they were so strongly persuaded of
his continence, that the possibility of his
harbouring indecent thoughts never once
entered their imaginations. The climate's
heat, 'tis well known, operates with no small
influence upon the constitutions of the Spa-
nish ladies: but the most abandoned would
have thought it an easier task to inspire with
passion the marble statue of St. Francis than
the cold and rigid heart of the immaculate
Ambrosio.
On his part, the friar was little acquainted
with the depravity of the world: he suspected
not that but few of his penitents would have
rejected his addresses. Yet had he been
better instructed on this head, the danger
attending such an attempt would have sealed
up his lips in silence. He knew that it
would

<page 221>
( 212 )
would be difficult for a woman" to keep se
secret so strange and so important as his-
frailty; and he even trembled, lest Matilda
should betray him. Anxious to preserve
a reputation which was infinitely dear to-
him, he saw all the risque of committing if
to the power of some vain giddy female;
and as the beauties of Madrid affected only
his fenses without touching his heart, he-
forgot them as soon as they were out of his
Cghr. The danger of discovery, the fear of
being repulsed, the loss of reputation; all
these considerations counselled him to stisle
his desires; and thoug-h he now felt for it
the most perfect indifference, he was ne-
cessitated to confine himself to Matilda*^
person.
One morning, the consluence of peni-
tents was greater than usual. He was de-
tained in the confessional chair till a late
hour. At length the crowd was dispatched,.
and he prepared to quit the chapel, when-
two females entered, and drew near hirrr
with humility. They threw up their veils,
and.

<page 222>
( «»3 )
-and the youngest entreated him to listen to
her for a few moments. The melody of
her voice, of that voice to which no man
ever listened without interest, immediately
caught Ambrosio's attention. He stopped.
The petitioner seemed bowed down with
affliction: her cheeks were pale, her eyes
dimmed with tears, and her hair fell in dis-
order over her face and bosom. Still her
countenance was so sweet, so innocent, so
heavenly, as might have charmed an heart
less fusceptible than that which panted in
the abbot's breast. With more than usual
softness of manner he desired her to pro-
ceed, and heard her speak as follows, with
an emotion which increased every moment:
"Reverend father, you see an unfortu-
nate threatened with the loss of her dearest,
of almost her only friend! My mother, my
excellent mother lies upon the bed of sick-
ness. A sudden and dreadful malady seized
her last night, and so rapid has been its pro-
gress that the physicians despair of her
life. Human aid fails me; nothing re-
mains

<page 223>
mains for me but to implore the mercy of
heaven. Father, all Madrid rings with the
report of your piety and virtue. Deign to
remember my mother in your prayers: per-
haps they may prevail on the Almighty to
spare her; and should that be the case, I
engage myself every Thursday in the next
three months to illuminate the shrine of
St. Francis in his honour."
** So!" thought the monk; »* here we
have a second Vincentio della Ronda. Ro-
sario's adventure began thus;" and he
wished secretly that this might have the
fame conclusion.
He acceded to the request. The peti-
tioner returned him thanks with every mark
of gratitude, and then continued:
** I have yet another favour to ask. We
are strangers in Madrid: my mother needs
a confessor, and knows not to whom she
should apply. We understand that you
never quit the abbey, and, alas! my poor
mother is unable to come hither! If you
would have the goodness, reverend father,
''' ^ to

<page 224>
( **s )
to name a proper person, whose wise and
pious consolations may soften the agonies
of my parent's death-bed, you will confer
an everlasting favour upon hearts not un-
grateful."
With this petition also the monk com-
plied. Indeed, what petition would he
have refused, if urged in such enchanting
accents? The suppliant was so interesting!
Her voice was so sweet, so harmonious!
Her very tears became her, and her afflic-
tion seemed to add new lustre to her charms.
He promised to send to her a confessor that
same evening, and begged her to leave her
address. The companion presented him
with a card on which it was written, and
then withdrew with the fair petitioner, who
pronounced before her departure a thousand
benedictions on the abbot's goodness. His
eyes followed her out of the chapel. It was
not till she was out of sight that he exami-
ned the card, on which he read the follow-
ing words:
** Donna Elvira Dalfa, strada di San
Iago,

<page 225>
lago, four doors from the palace d'Albor-
nos."
The suppliant was no other than Anto-
nia, and Leonella was her companion. The
latter had not consented without difficulty
to accompany her niece to the abbey: Am-
brosio had inspired her with such awe, that
she trembled at the very sight of him. Her
fears had conquered even her natural loqua-
city, and while in his presence she uttered
riot a single syllable.
. The monk retired to his celt, whither rife
was pursued by Antonia's image. He felt
a thousand new emotions springing in his
bosom', and he trembled to examine into
the cause which gave them birth. They
were totally different from those inspired by
Matilda, when she first declared her sex and
her affection. He felt not' the provocation
of lust; no voluptuous desires rioted in his
bosom; nor did a burning imagination pic-
ture to him the charms which modesty had
veiled from his eyes. On the contrary,
what he now felt was a mingled sentiment
.. - of

<page 226>
( 21? )
of tenderness, admiration, and respect. A
soft and' delicious melancholy infused itself
into his foul, and he would not have ex-
changed it for the molt lively transports of,
joy. Society now disgusted him: he de-
lighted in solitude, which permitted his
indulging the visions of fancy: his thoughts
were all gentle, fad, and soothing; and the
whole wide world presented him with no
other object than Antonia.
"Happy man!" he. exclaimed in his ro-
mantic enthusiasm, "happy man, who is
destined to possess the heart of that lovely
'girl! what delicacy in her features ! what
elegance in her form ! how enchanting was
the timid innocence of her eyes! and how
different from the wanton expression, the.
wild luxurious fire, which sparkles in Ma-
tilda's! Oh! sweeter must one kiss be,
snatched from the rosy lips of the first, than
all the full and,lustful favours bestowed so
freely by the second. Matilda gluts me
with enjoyment even to loathing, forces me
to her arms, apes the harlot, and glories. in.
Vol. II. L her

<page 227>
( »8 ).
her prostitution. Disgusting! Did she know
the inexpressible charm of modesty, how
irresistiby it enthrals the heart of man,
how firmly it chains him to the throne of
beauty, she never would have thrown' it
osf.' What would be too dear a price for
this lovely girl's affections? What would I
refuse to sacrifice, could I be released from
my vowf, and permitted to declare my love
in the sight of earth and heaven? While I
strove to inspire her with tenderness, with
friendmip and esteem, how tranquil and
undisturbed would the hours roll away!
Gracious God! to fee her blue downcast
eyes beam upon mine with timid fondness!
to sit for days, for years, listening to that
gentle voice! to acquire the right of ob-
liging her, and hear the artless expressions
of her gratitude! to watch the emotions
of her spotless heart! to encourage each
dawning virtue! to share in her joy when
happy, to kiss away her tears when dis-
tressed, and to fee her fly to my arms for
comfort and support! Yes; if there is per-
fect

<page 228>
( 2i9 )
sect bliss on earth, 'tis his lot alone who be*
comes that angel's husband."
While his fancy coined these ideas, he
paced his cell with a disordered air. His
eyes were fixed upon vacancy: his head
reclined upon his moulder: a tear rolled
down his cheek, while-lie reslected that the
vision of happiness for him could never be
realized.
"She is lost, to me ;" he continued, " by
marriage she capnot be mine:. and to se-
duce such innocence, to use the confidence
reposed in me to work her ruin' Oh!
it w,oqld be.a crime, blacker than yet the
worlds ever, .witnessed! Fear not, lovely
girl! ypur, virtue runs no risque from me*
Not for Indies would I make that gentle
bosom. know the tortures of remorse."
..,.A,gajin he paced his chamber hastily.
Tben flopping, his eye fell upon the picture
qfjhis once-admired Madona. He tore it
with indignation from the wall: he threw
it on the ground, and spurned it from him
with his foot. ,.. .. -. .,.
L 2 The

<page 229>
( 120 )
"The prostitute!"
Unfortunate Matilda! her paramour for-
got, that for his fake alone slie had forfeited
her claim to virtue; and his only reason for
despising her was, that she had loved him
much too well.
He threw himself into a chair, which
stood near the table. He saw the card with
Elvira's address. He took it up, and it
brought to his recollection his promise re-
specting a confessor. He passed a few mi-
nutes in doubt: but Antonia's empire over
him was already too much decided to per- j
mit his making a long resistance to the idea
which struck him. He resolved to be the
confessor himself. He could leave the ab-
bey unobserved without difficulty: by wrap-
ping up his head in his cowl he hoped to
pass through the streets without being re-
cognised: by taking these precautions; and
by recommending secrecy to Elvira's fa-
mily, he doubted not to keep Madrid in
ignorance that he had broken his vow ne-
ver to fee the outside of the abbey-walls.
Matilda

<page 230>
( 221 )
Matilda was the only person whose vigilance
he dreaded: but by informing her at the
refectory, that during the whole of that day
business would confine him to his cell, he
thought himself secure from her wakeful
jealousy. Accordingly, at the hours when
the Spaniards are generally taking their
fiesta, he ventured to quit the abbey by a;
private door, the key of which was in his
possession. The cowl of his habit was
thrown over his face: from the heat of the
weather the streets were almost totally de-
serted: the monk met with few people,
found the strada di San Iago, and arrived
without accident at Donna Elvira's door.
He rang, was admitted, and immediately
ushered into an upper apartment. . ..
It was here that he ran the greatest risque
of ;a discovery. Had Leonella been ac
home, she would . have recognized him
directly. Her communicative disposition
would never have permitted her to rest, till
aU Madrid was informed that Ambrosio
had ventured out of the abbey, and visited
L 3 her

<page 231>
( 222 )
fier sister. Fortune here stood the monE.rs
friend. On Leonella^s return home, she
found a letter instructing her, that a cousin
was j wst dead, who had left what little he
possessed between herself and Elvira. To
secure this bequest she was obliged to set
out for Cordova without losing a moment.
Amidst all her foibles, her heart was truly-
warm and affectionate, and she was unwil-
ling to quit her sister in so dangerous a state.
But Elvira insisted upon her taking the
journey, conscious that, in her daughters
forlorn situation, no increase of fortune,
however trisling, ought to be neglected.
Accordingly Leonella left Madrid, sincere-
ly grieved at her sister's illness, and giving
some few sighs to the memory of the amia;-
ble but inconstant Don Christoval. She
was fully persuaded, that at first she had
made a terrible breach in his hear*; but
hearing nothing more of him, she supposed
that he had quitted the pursuit, disgusted
by the lowness of her origin, and knowing
upon other terms than marriage he had no-
thing

<page 232>
( 223 )
thing to hope from such a dragon of virtue
as she professed herself; or else, that being
naturally capricious and changeable, die re-
membrance of her charms bad been effaced
from the conde's heart by those of some
newer beauty. Whatever was the cause of
her losing him, she lamented it sorely.
She strove in Tain, as she assured every
body who was kind enough to listen to her,
to tear his image from her too susceptible
heart. She affected the airs of a love-sick
virgin, and carried them all to the most ri-
diculous excess. She heaved lamentable
sighs, walked with her arms folded, uttered
long soliloquies, and her discourse generally
turned upon some forsaken maid, who ex-
pired of a broken heart! Her fiery locks
were always ornamented with a garland of
willow. Every evening she was seen stray-
ing upon the hanks of a rivulet by moon-
light; and she declared herself a violent
admirer of murmuring streams and night-
ingales-
Of

<page 233>
( 224 )
". Of lonely haunts, and twilight groves,.
. "Places which pafe paflfon loves!'"
Such was the state of Ijeonella's mints
when obliged to quit Madrid. Elvira was
out of patience at all these follies, and en-
deavoured at persuading her to act like a
reasonable woman. Her advice was thrown
away : Leonella assured her at parting, that
nothing could make her forget the perfi-
dious Don Christoval. In this point she
was fortunately mistaken. An honest
youth of Cordova, journeyman to an apo-
thecary, found that her fortune would be
sufficient to set him up in a genteel shop of
his own. In consequence of this reslection
he avowed himself her admirer. Leonella
was not inflexible; the ardour of his sighs
melted her heart, and she soon consented to
make him the happiest of mankind. She
wrote to inform her sister of her marriage j
but, for reasons which will be explained
hereafter, Elvira never answered her, lew'
ter.
Ambrosio

<page 234>
( 2^5 )
Ambrosio was conducted into the anti-
chamber to that where Elvira was reposing.
The female domestic who had admitted
him, left him alone, while she announced
his arrival to her mistress. Antonia, 'who
had been by her mother's bed-side, im-
mediately came to him.
"Pardon me, father," said sire, advan-
cing towards him; when recognizing his
features, she stopped suddenly, and ut-
tered a cry of joy. "Is it possible ?" she
continued, "do not my eyes deceive me?
Has the worthy Ambrosio broken through
his resolution, that he may soften the ago-
nies of the,best of women > What pleasure
will this visit give my mother f Let me not
delay for a moment the comfort which your
piety and wisdom will afford her."
Thus saying, she opened the chamber-
door, presented to her mother her distin-
guished visitor, and, having placed an arm-
chair by the side of the bed, withdrew- into»
another apartment.
Elvira was highly gratified by this visit t
L 5 ha?

<page 235>
( 225 )
her expectations had been raised high by
general report, but she found them far ex-
ceeded. Ambrosio, endowed by nature
with powers of pleasing, exerted them to
the utmost, while conversing with Antonias
mother. With persuasive eloquence he
calmed every fear, anddisfipatedevery scru-
ple. He bade her reflect on the infinite rrier-
cy of her judge, despoiled death of his darts
and terrors, and taught her to view with-
out shrinking the abyss of eternity, on whose
brink she then stood. Elvira was absorbed
in attention and delight; while she listened
to his exhortations, confidence and comfort
stole insensibly into hermind. She unbo-
somed to him without hesitation her 'cares
Jand apprehensions. The latter respecting
a future life he had already quieted, and he
now removed the former, which she felt
for the concerns of this. She trembled for
Antonia; she had none to whose care she
could recommend her, save to the marquis
de las Cisternas, and her sister Leonella.
The protection of the one was very uncer- .
I 'l. tairti

<page 236>
( **7 )
Sain; and as. to the other, though fond of
her niece, Leonella was so thoughtless and
vain, as to make her an improper person to
have the sole direction of a gid so young
and ignorant of the world. The friar no \
sooner learned" the cause of her alarms, than
he begged her to make herself easy upon
that head. He doubted not being able to
secure for Antonia a safe refuge in the house
of one of his penitents,. the marchioness of
Villa-Franca: this was a lady of acknow-
ledged virtue, remarkable for strict princi-
ples and extensive charity- Should acci-
dent deprive her of this resource, he en-
gaged to procure Antonia a reception in
some respectable convent, that is to fay,. in
quality of boarder; for Elvira had de-
clared herself no friend to a monastic life,
and the monk was either candid or com-
plaisant enough to allow that her disappro-
bation was not unfounded. .
These proofs of the interest which he felt
for her,. completely won Elvira's heart. In*
L 6 thanking?,
"6j
'

<page 237>
( 228 )
thanking him, she exhausted every ex-
pression which gratitude could furnish,
and protested, that now she should resign
herself with tranquillity to the grave. Am-
brosio rose to take leave; he promised to
return the next day at the-same hour, but
requested that his visits might be kept se-
cret.
"I am unwilling,'* said he, " that my
breaking through a rule imposed by neces-
sity, should be generally known. Had I not
resolved never to quit my convent, except
upon circumstances as urgent as that which
has conducted me to your door, I should
be frequently summoned upon insignificant
occasions j that time would be engrossed
by the curious, the unoccupied, and the
fanciful, which I now pass at the bed-side
of the sick, in comforting the expiring pe-
nitent, and clearing the passage to eternity
from thorns.'*
Elvira commended equally his prudence
and compassion* promising to conceal care-
fully

<page 238>
( 229 )
fully the honour of his visits. The monk
then gave her his benediction and retired
from the chamber.
In the anti-room he found Antonia; he
eould not refuse himself the pleasure of
passing a few moments in her society. He
bade her take comfort, for that her mother
seemed composed and tranquil, and he
.hoped that she might yet do well. He en-
quired who attended her, and engaged to
send the physician of his convent to fee her,
one of the most skilful in Madrid. He
then launched out in Elvira's commenda-
tion, praised her purity and fortitude o£
mind, and declared that she had inspired
him with the highest esteem and reverence.
Antonia's innocent heart swelled with gra-
titude, joy danced in her eyes, where a tear
still sparkled. The hopes which he gave her
of her mother's recovery, the lively in*
terest which he seemed to feel for her, and
the flattering way in which she was men-
tioned by him, added to the report of his
judgment

<page 239>
( *JO )
judgment and virtue,- and to the impressions
made upon her by bis eloquence,. confirm-
ed the favourable opinion with which his
first appearance had inspired Antonia. She
replied with diffidence,- but without re-
straint : slie feared not to relate to him all
her little sorrows, all her little fears and
anxieties; and she thanked him for his
goodness with all the genuine warmth
.which favours kindle in a young and inno-
cent heart. Such alone knows how to esti-
mate benefits at their full value. They
who are conscious of mankind's perfidy and
selfishness, ever receive an obligation with
apprehension and disgust; they suspect chat
some secret motive must lurk behind if;
they express their thanks with restraint and
caution, and fear to praise a kind action
to its full extent, aware that on some fu-
ture day a return may be required. Not so
Antonia—she thought the world was com-
posed only of those who resembled her; and
that vice existed, was to her still a secrets.
The monk had been of service to her; he
said

<page 240>
f hl 5
skid that he wished her well; slie was t
grateful for his kindness, and thought that
no terms were strong enough to be the ve-
hicle of her thanks. With what delight did
Ambrosio listen to the declaration of her
artless gratitude! The natural grace of her
manners, the unequalled sweetness of her
voice, her modest vivacity, her unstudied
elegance, her expressive countenance and
intelligent eyes united to inspire him with -
pleasure and admiration; while the solidity
and correctness of her remarks received ad*-
ditional beauty from the unaffected simpli-
city of the language in which they were
conveyed.
Ambrosio was at length obliged to tear
himself from this conversation, which pos-
sessed for him but too many charms. He
repeated to Antonia his wishes, that his visits
should not be made known; which desire
she promised'to observe. He then quitted
the house, while his enchantress hastened to
her mother, ignorant of the mischief which
her beauty had caused. She was eager to
know

<page 241>
( m )
know Elvira's opinion of the man whom
she had j. raised in such enthusiastic terms,
and was delighted to find it equally favour-
able, if not even more so than her own.
"Even before he spoke," said Elvira,
.** I was prejudiced in his favour; the fer-
vour of his exhortations, dignity of his
manner, and closeness of his reasoning,
.were very far from inducing me to alter my
opinion. His fine and full-toned voice
.struck. me particularly; but surely, An-
tonia, I have heard it before. It seemed
perfectly familiar to my ear; either I must
have known the abbot in former times, or
his voice bears a wonderful resemblance to
that of some other, to whom I have often
listened. There were certain tones which
touched my very heart, and made me feel
sensations so singular, that I strive in vain
to account for them."
"My dearest mother, it produced the
fame effect upon me; yet certainly neither
of us ever heard his voice till we came to
Madrid, I suspect that what we attribute
to

<page 242>
( 253 >
to his voice, really proceeds from his plea-
sant manners, which forbid our considering
him as a stranger. I know not why, but I
feel more at my ease while conversing with
him, than I usually do with people who are
unknown to me. I feared not totrepeat to
him all my childish thoughts; and some-
how I felt confident that he would hear my
folly with indulgence. Oh! I was not de-
ceived in him; he listened to me with
such an air of kindness and attention; he
'answered me with such gentleness, such
condescension; he did not call me an in-
fant, and treat me with contempt, as our
cross old confessor at the Castle used to do.
I verily believe, that if I had lived in Mur-
cia a thousand years, I .never should have
liked that fat old father Dominic V . ..:
"I confess, that father Dominic had not
the most pleasing manners in the world;
but he was honest, friendly, and well-
meaning." . «
"Ah! my dear mother, those qualities
are so common'"
> " God

<page 243>
( 234 )
"God grant, my child, that experience
may not teach you to think them rare and
precious! I have found them but too
much so. But tell me, Antonia, why is ic
impossible for me to have seen the abbot
before?" ...
"Because, since the moment when he en-
tered the abbey he has never been on the
outside of its walls. He told me just now,
that from his ignorance of the streets be
had some difficulty to find the strada di-Saa.
lago, though so near the abbey." . .
*.* All this is possible, and still I may
have seen him beforehe entered the abbey:
in order to come out, it was rather necessary
that he should first go in." .;.,.;,!
"Holy virgin! as you fay, that is.very
true.—Oh! But might he not have been.
born in the abbey?" . .,
Elvira smiled.
"Why, not very easily.'*
"Stay, stay ! Now I recollect how it was.
He was put into the abbey quite a child;
the common people fay, that he fell from
heaven,,

<page 244>
( ns )
heaven, and was sent as a present to the
Capuchins by the Virgin."
"That was very kind of her. And so he
fell from heaven, Antonia? He must have
had a terrible tumble."
"Many do not credit this ; and I fancy,
my dear mother, that I must number you
among the unbelievers. • Indeed, as our
landlady told my aunt, the general idea is,
that his parents, being poor, and unable to
maintain him, left him just born at the
abbey door ; the late superior, from pure
charity, had him educated in the convent;
and he proved to be a model of virtue, and
piety, and learning, and 1 know not what
else besides. In consequence, he was first
received as a brother of the order, and not
lottg ago was chosen abbot. However,
whether this account or the other is the
true one—at least all agree, that when
the monks took him under their care, he
could not speak ; . therefore you could not
have heard'his voice before he entered the
monastery »

<page 245>
( 236 )
monastery, because at that time he had
no voice at all."
"Upon my word, Antonia, you argue
very closely ; your conclusions are infallible.
I did not suspect; you of being so able a lo-
gician." ii
"Ah! you are mocking me j but so
much the betcer. It delights me to fee you
in spirits; besides, you seem tranquil and
easy, and I hope that you will have no more
convulsions. Oh! I was sure the abbcn's
.visit would .do you good." , .
"It has indeed done me good, my child.
He has quieted my mind upon some points
which agitated me, andl already feel the ef-
fects. of his attention. My eyes grow hea-
vy, and I think I can sleep a little. Draw
the curtains, my Antonia: but if I should
not wake before midnight, do. not lit up-.
with me, I charge you." - ,, .
. Antonia promised to obey.her; and, hav-
ing received her blessing, .drew the curtains
of the bed, She then seated herself in
silence

<page 246>
( 237 )
silence :at her embroidery frame, and be-
guiled the hours with building castles in the
air. Her spirits were enlivened by the evi-
dent change for (be better in Elvira, and her
fancy presented her with visions bright and
pleasing. In these dreams Ambrosio made
no despicable figure. She thought of him
with joy and gratitude: but for every idea
which fell to the friar's share, at least two
were unconsciously bellowed upon Loren-
zo. Thus passed the time, till the bell in
the neighbouring steeple of the Capuchin
cathedral announced the hour of midnight.
Antonia remembered her mother's injunc-
tions, and obeyed them, though with reluc-
tance. She undrew the curtains with cau-
tion. Elvira was enjoying a profound
and quiet slumber; her cheek glowed with
health's return trig CoJbure: a smile declared
that her dreams were pleasant, and as Anto-
nia bent over her she fancied thaVshe heard
her name pronodncedJ 'She kifiecThcr' mo-
ther's forehead softly, and retired to her
chamber; there/bf knejk bpfoift^stafue of
i 6 St.

<page 247>
( 238 )
Su Rosolia, her patroness; she recom-
mended herself to the protection of heaven,
and, as had been her custom from infancy,
concluded her devotions by chaunting the
following stanzas:
MIDNIGHT HYMN.
Now all is luish'd; the sokmn chime
No longer swells the nightly gale:
Thy awtul presence, hour sublime,.
With spotless heart once more I hail.
'Tis now the moment still and dread,
When sorcerers use their baleful power;
When graves give up their buried dead'
To prosit by the sanctioned hour.
. From guilt and guilty thoughts secure.
To duty and devotion true,
With bosom light and conscience pure, •'*'&'..''
Repose, thy gentk aid I woo.
.Good angels! take my thanks, that still
'slid snares of vice I view with scorn; % 'n
Thanke, that to-nizlit as free from ill > . -
I sleep, as when I woke at morn.
.-.
Yet may not my unconscious breast:
. Harbour some.guilt to me unknown I
Some wish impure, which unreprest
You blush to see, and I to own i


<page 248>
( 239 )
Is such there be, in gentle dream
Instruct my feet to shim the' snare;
Bid truth upon my errors beam,
And deign to make me still your care.
Chafe from my peaceful bed away,
The witching spell, a foe to rest,
The nightly goblin, wanton fay,
The ghost in pain, and fiend unblest.
Let not the tempter in mine ear
Pour lessons of unhallowed joy;
Let not the night-mare, wandering near .>
My couch, the calm of sleep destroy.
. n"
Let not some horrid dream affright
With strange fantastic forms mine eyei;
But rather bid some vision bright
Display the bliss of yonder skies.
Shew me the crystal domes of heaven,
The worlds of light where angels lie;
Shew me the lot to mortals given,
Who guiltless live, who guiltless die
..
Then shew me how a feat to gain
Amidst those blissful realms of air;
Teach me to shun each guilty stain,
And guide me to the good and fair.
So

<page 249>
( 240 )
.*
.<':-
So every morn and night my voice
To heaven the grateful strain sliall raise;
In you as guardian powers rejoice,
Good angels J and exalt your praise.
So will I strive, with zealous sire,
Each vice to shun, each fault correct:
Will love the lessons you inspire,
And prize the virtues you protect.
Then when at length, by high command,
My body seeks the grave's repose,
When death draws nigh with friendly hand,
My failing pilgrim-eyes to close:
-* .'..'>'
Pleas'd that my foul escapes the wreck,
Sighless will I my life resign,
And yield to God my spirit back,
As pure as when it first: was mine.
Having finished her usual devotions, An-
tonia retired to bed. Sleep soon stole over'
her fenses; and for several hours the err--
joyed that calm repose which innocence;
alone can know, and for which many a mo-'
narch with pleasure would exchange hh
crown. .
'*''
- CHA*.

<page 250>
( 24i )
CHAP. VII.
. Ah! how dark
These long-extended realms and rueful wastes;
Where nought but silence reigns, and night, dark night,
Dark as was chaos ere the infant fun
Was rolled together, or had tried its beams
Athwart the gloom profound! The sickly taper,
By glimmering through thy low-browed misty vaults
Furred round with mouldy damps and ropy slime,
Lets fall a supernumerary horror,
And only serves to make thy night more irksome!.
Blair.
RETURNED undiscovered to the ar>
bey, Ambrosio's mind was silled with the
most pleasing images. He was wilfully
blind to the danger of exposing himself to
Antonia's charms: he only remembered
the pleasure which her society had afforded
him, and rejoiced in the prospect of that
pleasure being repeated. He failed not to
prosit by Elvira's indisposition to obtain a
Vol. II. M sight

<page 251>
( '242 )
light of her daughter every day. At first
lie bounded his wishes to inspire Antonia
with friendship: but no sooner was he con-
vinced that she felt that sentiment in its
fullest extent, than his aim became more
decided, and his attentions assumed a
warmer colour. The innocent familiarity
wkh which slic treated him, encouraged his
desires. Grown used to her modesty, it no
longer commanded the same respect and
awe: he still admired it, but it only made
him more anxious to deprive her of that
quality which formed her principal charm.
.Warmth of passion, and natural penetra-
tion, of which latter, unfortunately both for
himself and Antonia, he possessed an ample
lhare, supplied a knowledge of the r.rts' of
seduction. He easily distinguished the
emotions'which were favourable to his de-
signs, and seized every means with avidity
of infusing.corruption into Antonia's bo-
som. This he found no easy matter. Ex-
treme simplicity prevented her from per-
ceiving the aim to which the monk's insi-
nuations tended; but the excellent morals
I which

<page 252>
( 243 )
which she owed to Elvira's care, the soli-
dity and correctness of her understanding,
and a strong sense of what was right, im-
planted in her heart by nature, made her
feel that his precepts must be faulty. By
a. few simple words slie frequently over-
threw the whole bulk of his sophistical ar-
guments, and made him conscious ho.v
weak they were when opposed to virtue and
truth. On fuch occasions he took refuse in
his eloquence; he overpowered her with a
torrentof philosophical paradoxes, to which,
.not understanding them, it was impossible
-for her to reply; and thus, though he did
-not convince her that his reasoning was just,
.heat least prevented her from discovering it
to be false. He perceived that her respect
for his judgment augmented daily, and
doubted not wich time lo bring her to the
point desired.
He was not unconscious that his attempts
were highly criminal. He saw clearly the
baseness of seducing the innocent girl; but
bis passion was too violent. to permit his
abandoning bis design. He resolved to
M 2 pursue

<page 253>
( 244 )
pursue it, let the consequences be what they
might. He depended upon finding Anto-
nia in some unguarded moment J and see-
ing no other man admitted into her society,
nor hearing any mentioned either by her
or by Elvira, he imagined that her young
heart was still unoccupied. While he wait-
ed for the opportunity of satisfying his un-
warrantable lust, every day increased his
coldness for Matilda. Not a little was this
occasioned by the consciousness of his faults
to hen To hide them from her, he was not
sufficiently master of himself; yet he dread-
ed lest, in a transport of jealous rage, she
mould betray the secret on which his cha-
racter and even his life depended. Matil-
da could not but remark his indifference:
he was conscious that she remarked it; and,
fearing her reproaches, shunned her!'studi-
ously. Yet, when he could not aVoid'ht'r,
her mildness might have ''convinced 'him
that he had nothing to dread frbrft hi*'re-
sentment. She had resurhjjcl the character
of the gentle interesting Rosario: she taxed
him not with ingratitude; but her eyes fill-
ed

<page 254>
( H5 )
ed with involuntary. tears, and the soft me-
lancholy of her countenance and voice ut-
tered complaints far more touching than
words could have conveyed. Ambrosio
was not unmoved by her sorrow; but, un-
able to remove its cause, he forbore to show
that it affected him. As her conduct con-
vinced him that he needed not fear her ven-
geance,- he continued to neglect her, and
avoided her company with care. Matilda
saw that she in vain attempted to regain
his affections; yet she stisled the impulse of
resentment, and continued to treat her in-
constant lover with her former fondness and
affection.
By degrees Elvira's constitution recovered
itself. She was no longer troubled with
convulsions, and Antonia ceased to tremble
for her mother. Ambrosio beheld this re-
establilhment with displeasure. He saw
that Elvira's knowledge of the world would
not be the dupe of his sanctified demeanour,
and that she would easily perceive his views
upon her daughter. He resolved therefore,
M 3 before


<page 255>
( 246 )
before she quitted her chamber, to try'the
extent of his influence over the innocent .
Antonia.
One evening, when he had found Elvira
almost perfectly leftored to health, he quit-
ted her earlier than was his usual custom.
Not finding Antonia in the antichamber,..:
he ventured to follow her to her own. It
was only separated from her mother's by a
closer, in which Flora, the waiting-woman,
generally slept. Antonia sat upon a sopha
with her back towards the door, and read
attentively. Site heard not his approach,
till he had seated himself by her. She
llarted, and welcomed him with a look of
pleasure: then rising, she would have con-
ducted him to the sitting-room; but Ambro-
si©, taking her hand, obliged her by gentle.
violence to resume her place. She com-
plied without disficulty: she knew not that
there was more impropriety in conversing
with him in one room than another.. She .
thought herself equally secure of his pria-
ciples and her own; and having replaced
herself

<page 256>
( 247 )
herself upon the sopha, Ihe began to prat-
tle to him' with her usual ease and viva-
city. , , .
He examined the book which slie had
been reading, and had now placed upon the
table. It was ihe Bible.
"How!" said the friar to himself, "An-
tonia reads the Bible* and is still so igno-
rant?" ." ".' - ,
But, upon a further inspection, hefound
that Elvira had made exactly the same re-
mark. That prudent mother, while (he ad-
mired the beauties of the sacred writings,
was convinced that, ujdrestricted, no read-
ing more improper could be permitted a
young woman. Many of the narratives
can only tend to excite ideas the worst cal-
culated for a female breast: every thing is
called plainly and roundly by its name;
and the annals of a brothel would scarcely
furnish a greater choice of indecent expres-
sions, Yet this is the book which young
women are recommended to study, which
is put into the hands of children, able to
M 4 com-

<page 257>
( 248 )'
comprehend little more than those passages'
of which they had better remain ignorant,
and which but too frequently inculcates the
first rudiments of vice, and gives the first:
alarm to the still sleeping passions. Of this
was Elvira so fully convinced, that she
would have preferred putting into her
daughter's hands "Amadis de Gaul," or* '.
"The Valiant Champion, Tiranie the White;
and would sooner have authorised her stu-
dying the lewd exploits of Don Calaor, or i
the lascivious jokes of the Damsel Plazer >
dt mivlda. She had in consequence made'
two resolutions respecting the Bible. The:'
first was, that Antonia should not read it
till. she was of an age to feel its beauties,'•
and profit by its morality. The secondi"
that it mould be copied out with her 6v/ti {
hand, and all improper passages either al-
tered or omitted. She had adhered to this'
determination, and such was' the Bible.:'
which Antonia was reading: it httd: been
lately. delivered to' her,; and (he-perusodvit''
wkh-an avidity, with a delight that was in- .
expressible.

<page 258>
( 249 )
expreslible. Ambrosio perceived his mis-
take, and replaced the book upon the
table.
Antonia spoke of her mother's health
with all the enthusiastic joy of a youthful
heart.
"I admire your filial affection," said the
abbot; " it proves the excellence and sensi-
bility of your character; it promises a trea-
sure to him whom Heaven has destined to
possess yuur affections. The breast so ca-
pable of fondness for a parent, what will it
feel for a lover? Nay, perhaps, what feels
it for one even now? Tell me, my lovely
daughter, have you known what it is to
love? Answer me with sincerity: forges
my habit, and consider me only as a
friend." . ~*
** What it is to lbve ?" said she, repeating
his question. "Oh! yes, undoubtedly; I
have loved many, many people."
"That is not what I mean. The love
©f which I speak can be felt only for one.
M5 Have

<page 259>
( 250 )
Have you never seen the man vyhom you
wished to be your husband?"
"Oh! no, indeed!"
; This Was an untruth, but she was uncon-
scious of its falsehood: she knew not the
nature of her sentiments for Lorenzo ;. and
sever having seen him since his first visit to
Elvira, with every day his image grew less
feebly impressed upon her bosom: besides,
ihe thought of an husband with all a virgin's
terror, and negatived the friar's demand
without a moment's hesitation.
*. "And do you not long to fee that man,
Antonia? Do you feel no void in your
heart, which you fain would have filled up?
J)o you: heave no sighs for the absence of
some one dear to you, but who that some
one is you know not? Perceive you not
that what formerly could please, has charms
for; you no longer?- that a' thousand new
withes, new ideas, new sensations, have
sprung in your bosom, only to be felr, never
to be described? Or, while you fill etfety
1 1-i other

<page 260>
( *5' 3
other heart with passion, is it possible that
your own remains insensible and cold? Ic .
cannot be! That melting eye, that blush-
ing cheek, that enchanting voluptuous me-
lancholy which at times overspreads your
features—all these marks belie your words;
you lovgj Antonia, and in vain would hide
it from me." ,
"Father, you amaze me! What is this
love of which you speak? I neither know
its nature, nor, if I felt ir, why I should con-
ceal the sentiment."
"Have you seen no man, Antonia,
whom, though never seen before, you seemed
long to. have sought? whose form, though
a stranger's, was familiar to your eyes? the
found of whose voice soothed you, pleased
you, penetrated to your very soul? in,
whose presence you rejoiced, for whose ab-
sence you lamented? with whom your
heart seemed to expand, and in whose bo-
som, with confidence unbounded, you re-
posed the cares of your own? Have you
not felt all this, Antonia?"
M6 "Certainly
.

<page 261>
( 252 )
''.'*' Certainly I have: the sirst: time thatT
saw you, I felt it."
Ambrosio started. Scarcely dared he
credit his hearing.
*' Me, Antonia?'' he cried, his eyes
sparkling with delight and impatience, while
he seized her hand, and pressed it raptu-
rously to his lips. ** Me, Antonia? You
felt these sentiments for me V*
"Even with more strength than you
have describee!. The very moment that I
beheld you, I felt so pleased, so interested!'
I waited so eagerly to catch the sound of
your voice; and, whep I heard it, it seemed
so sweet! it spoke to me a language till'
then so unknown! Methought it Sold me
a thousand 'things which I wished to hear!
It seemed as if I had long known you; ^s-
if I had a right to your friendship, your
advice, and your protection. I wept when
you departed, and longed for the time
; which should restore you to my sighr."
br.ht* Antonia! my charming Antonia J"'
exclaimed^ the monk, and caught her to

<page 262>
( 253 )
Tiis bofom: " Can I believe my fenses ?•
Repeat it to me, my sweet girl 1 Tell me
again that you love me, that you-love me
truly and tenderly!"
"Indeed, I do: let my mother be ex-
cepted, and the world holds no one more
dear to me."
"'At this frank avowal Ambrosio no lon-
ger possessed himself: wild with desire, he
clasped the blushing trembler in his arms.
He fastened his lips greediry upon hers,
fucked in her pure delicious breath, vio-
lated with his bold hand the treasures of
her bosom, and wound around him her soft
and yielding limbs. Startled, alarmed, and
confused at his action, surprise at first de-
prived her of the power of resistance. At
length recovering herself, she strove to
escape from his embrace.
"Father I—Ambrosio !" stie cried, "re-
lease me, for God's fake!"
But the licentious monk heeded not her
prayers: he persisted in his design, and
proceeded to take still greater liberties.
. .' . Antonia

<page 263>
(' *54 )
Antonia prayed, wepr, and struggled : ter-.
rjfled to the extreme, though at what she
knew not, she exerted all her strength to
repulse the friar, and was on the point of
shrieking for assistance, when the chamber-
door was suddenly thrown open. Ambrosia
had just sufficient presence of mind to be
sensible of his danger. Reluctantly he
quitted his prey, and started hastily from
the couch. Antonia uttered an exclama-
tion of joy, slew towards the door, and
found herself clasped in the arms of her
mother.
. Alarmed at fome of the abbot's speeches,
which Antonia had innocently repeated,
l'Jvira resolved to ascertain the truth of
her suspicions. She had known enough of
mankind, not to be imposed upon by the"
monk's reputed virtue. She reflected on se-
veral circumstances, which, though.trifling,
on being put together seemed to autho-
rize her fears. • His frequent visits, which,
as far as slie could seet were confined to her
family.; his evident emotion, whenever she
•*V**>l'' -\ spoke

<page 264>
C 255 )
spoke of Antonia; his being in the full
prime and heat of manhood ; and above all,
his pernicious philosophy communicated
to her by Antonia, and which accorded
but ill with his conversation in her pre-.
fence; all these circumstances inspired her
with doubts respecting the purity of Am-
brosio's friendship. In consequence she
resolved, when he should next be alone
with Antonia, to endeavour at surprising
him. Her plan had succeeded. Tis true,
that when she entered the room, he had
already abandoned his prey; but the dis-
order of her daughter's dress, and the
shame and confusion stamped upon the fri-
ar's countenance, sufficed to prove that,
her suspicions were but too well founded*
However, she was. too prudent to makq
those suspicions known. She judged, that
to unmask the impostor would be no easy
matter, the public being so much preju*
diced in his favour: and having but few
friends* she thought it dangerous to make
lierself so powerful an enemy* She asfected
> .; therefore

<page 265>
( *5« )
therefore not to remark his agitation, seated
herself tranquilly upon the sopha, assigned -
some trifling reason for having quitted her
room unexpectedly, and conversed on va-
rious subjects wiih seeming confidence and
ease.
Re-assured by her behaviour, the monk
began to recover himself. He strove to
answer Elvira without appearing embar-
rassed: but he was still too great a novice
in dissimulation, and he felt that he must
look confused and awkward. He soon
broke off the conversation, and rose to de-
part. What was his vexation when, on tak-
ing leave, Elvira told him, in polite terms,
that being now perfectly re-established, she;
thought it an injustice to deprive others of .-
his company who might be more in need of 'j
it! She assured him of her eternal gratitude;;;
for. the benesit which during her illness she
had derived from his society and exhorta-'
tions: and me lamented that her domestic- .
asfairs, as well as the multitude of buslntfft .'
which his situation must of necessity impose
J>"£<lMf upon

<page 266>
( 257 )
upon him, would in future deprive her of
the pleasure of his visits. Though delivered
in the mildest language, this hint was too
plain to be mistaken. Still he was prepar-
ing to put in a remonstrance, when an ex-
pressive look from Elvira stopped him
short. He dared not press her to receive
him, for her manner convinced him that
he was discovered: he submitted without
reply, took an hasty leave, and retired to
the abbey, his heart filled with rage and
shame, with bitterness and disappointment.
Antonia's mind felt relieved by his de-;
parture; yet she could not help lamenting
that she was never to fee him more. Elvira
also felt a secret sorrow: she had received
too much pleasure from thinking him her
fridndj notno regret the necessity of chang-
ing her opinion; but her mind was too
much accustomed to the fallacy of worldly
friendships to permit her present disappoint-
ment to. weigh upon it long. She now ea-..;
deayoured to make her daughter aware of":
the'risk which;she had ryn.:. but.she wets...
oblige-d
r

<page 267>
( 258 )
obliged to treat the subject with caution, ..
left, in removing the bandage of ignorance,
the veil of innocence should be rent away.
She therefore contented herself with warn-
ing Antonia to be upon her guard, and or-
dering her, should the abbot persist in his
visits, never to receive them but in com-
pany. With this injunction Antonia pro-
mised to comply.
Ambrosio hastened to his cell. He closed
the door after him, and threw himself upon ,
the bed in despair. The impulse oif.desire, ;.
the stings of disappointment, theshanie of
detection, and the fear of being publicly ;J
unmasked, rendered his bosom a scene of
the most horrible confusion. He knew
not what course to pursue. Debarred the
presence of Antonia, he had no hopes os
satisfying that passion which was now be-
come a part of his existence. He reflected
that his secret was in a woman's power: he
trembled with apprehension when he be-
held the precipice before him, and with
rage when he thought that, had it not been
for

<page 268>
( 259 )
. for Elvira, he should now have possessed
the object of his desires. With she'direst:
imprecations he vowed vengeance- against
her: he swore that, cost what it would, he'
still would poflese Antonia. Starting from
the bed, he paced the chamber with disor-
dered steps, howled with impotent fury,'
dashed himself violently against the walls,
and indulged all the transports of rage and
madness. -
He was still under the influence of this
storm of passions, when he heard a gentle
knock at the door of his cell. Conscious
that his voice must have been heard, he
dared not refuse admittance to the impor-
tuner. He strove to compose himself, and
to hide his agitation. Having in some de-
gree succeeded, he drew back the bolt: the
door opened, and Matilda appeared.
. At this precise moment there was no one
with whose presence he could better have
dispensed. He had not sufficient command
over himself to conceal his vexation. Ha
started back, and frowned.
"lam

<page 269>
( 26o >
** I am busy," said he in a stern and
hasty tone; " leave me."
Matilda heeded him not: she again fas-
tened the door, and then advanced towards
him with an air genile and supplicating.
"Forgive me, Ambrosio," laid she j
<c for your own sake I must not obey you.
Fear no complaints from me; I come not
to reproach you with your ingratitude. I
pardon you from my heart; and since your
love can no longer be mine, I request the
next best gift, your confidence and friend-
ship. yVc cannot force our inclinations:
the little beauty which you once saw in me
has perished with its novelty ; and if it cart
no longer excite desire, mine is the fault,
not yours. But why persist in shunning
me ? why such anxiety to sly my presence?
You have sorrows, but will not permit me
to Awe them; you have disappointments,
but will not accept my comfort; you have
wishes, but forbid my aiding your pursuits.
.'Tjis of, this which I complain, not of your
indifference to ray person. I have given

<page 270>
; '' •< 261 )
tip the claims of the mistress, but nothing
tliall prevail on me to give up those of the
friend."
"Generous Matilda!" he replied, taking
her hand, "how far do you rife superior
to the foibles of your sex! Yes, I accept
your offer. I have need of an adviser, and
a confident: in you I find every needful
quality united. But to aid my pursuits
-Ah! Matilda, it lies not in your
power!"
"It lies in no one's power but mine.
Ambrosio, your secret is none to me: your
every step, your every action has been ob-
served by my attentive eye. You love."
""Matilda!" "<"'
"Why conceal it from me? Fear not
the little jealousy which taints the gene-
rality of women: my foul disdains so de-
spicable a passion. You love, Ambrosio;
Antonia Dalsa is the object of your slame.
1 know every circumstance respecting' voter
passion. "Every conversation has been re-
'peated to me. I have been informed of
your

<page 271>
( 262 )
your attempt to enjoy Antonia's person,
'your disappointment, and dismission from
Elvira's house. You now despair of pos-
sessing your mistress; but.I come to revive
your hopes, and point out the load to suc-
cess."
"To fuccess? Oh! impossible."
"To those who dare, nothing is impossi-
"ble. Rely upon me, and you may yet be
'happy. The time is come, Ambrosio,
when regard for your comfort and tran-
quillity compels me to reveal a part of my
history, with which you are slill unacquaint-
ed. Listen, and do not interrupt ,me.
Should my confession disgust you, remem-
ber that iu making it my sole aim re to sa-
tisfy your wissies, and restore that peace to
your heart which at present has abandoned
it. I formerly mentioned, that my guar-
dian was a man of uncommon knowledge.
He took pains to instil that knowledge into
my infant mind. Among the various sci-
ences which curiosity had induced him to
explore, he neglected not that which by
most;

<page 272>
( 263 )
most is esteemed impious, and by many
chimerical: I speak of those arts which re-
late to the world of spirits. His deep re-
searches into causes and effects, his unwea-
ried application to the study of natural phi-
losophy, his profound and unlimited know-
ledge of the properties and virtues cf every
gem which enriches the deep, ot evtry
herb which the earth produces, at length
procured him the distinction which he had
sought so long, so earnestly. His curiosity
was fully flaked, his ambition amply gra-
tified.' He gave laws to the elements: he
could reverse the order of nature: his eye
read the mandates of futurity, and the inv-
fernal spirits were submissive to his com-
mands. Why shrink you from me? I
understand that enquiring look. Your
suspicions are right, though your terrors
are Unfounded. My guardian concealed
not from me his most precious acquisition.
Yet, had I never seen you, I should.never
have exerted my power. Like you, I shud-
dered at the thoughts of magic. Like..you,
I had

<page 273>
( 264 )
I had formed a terrible idea of the conse-
quences of raising a dæmon. To preserve
that life which your love had taught me to
prize, I had recourse to means which I
trembled at employing. You remember
that night which I pasted in St. Clare's
sepulchre? Then was it that, surrounded
by mouldering bodies, I dared to perform
those mystic rites, which summoned to my
aid a fallen angel. Judge what must hav>"
been my joy at discovering that my terror:
were imaginary. I saw the dæmon obedient
to my orders: I saw him trembling at my
frown; and found that, instead of selling
my soul to a master, my courage had pur-
chased for myself a slave."
"Rash Matilda! What have you done?
You have doomed yourself to endless per-
dition; you have bartered for momentary
power eternal happiness! If on witchcraft
depends the fruition of my desires, I re-
nounce your aid most absolutely. The
consequences are too horrible.. I dote
upon Antonia, but am not so blinded by
lust,

<page 274>
( *65 )
lust, as to sacrifice for her enjoyment my
existence both in this world and in the
next/''
"Ridiculous prejudices! Oh I blush,
Ambrosio, blush at being subjected to their
dominion. Where is the risque of accept-
ing my offers? What should induce my
persuading you to this step, except the
wish of restoring you to happiness and
quiet? If there is danger, it must fall upon
me. It is I who invoke the ministry of the
spirits: mine therefore will be the crime,
and yours the profit; but danger there is
none. Theenemy of mankind is my slave,
not my sovereign. Is there no difference
between giving and receiving laws, between
serving .and commanding 3 Awake from
your idle dreams, Ambrosio! throw from
you these terrors so ill suited to a soul like
yours; leave them for common men, and
dare to be happy! Accompany me this
night to St. Clare's sepulchre; there wit-
ness my incantations, and Antonia is your
own."
Vol. II. N •* To


<page 275>
( 266 )
"To obtain her by such means, I neither
can nor will. Cease then to persuade me,
for I dare not employ hell's agency."
V You dare not? How have you deceived
me! That mind which I esteemed so great
and valiant, proves to be feeble, puerile,
and grovelling, a slave to vulgar errors, and
weaker than a woman's."
"What? Though conscious of the dan-
ger, wilfully shall I expose myself to the
seducer's arts? Shall I renounce for ever
my title to salvation? Shall my eyes seek a
fight which I know will blast them? No,
no, Matilda, I will not ally myself with
God's enemy."
"Are you then God's friend at present?
Have you not broken your engagements
with him, renounced his service, and aban-
doned yourself to the impulse of your pas-
sions? Are you not planning the destruc-
tion of innocence, the ruin of a creature
whom he formed in the mould of angels?
If not of dæmons, whose aid would you in-
voke to forward this laudable design? Will
o the

<page 276>
( *67 )
the seraphims protect it, conduct Antonia
to your arms, and sanction with their mi-
nistry your illicit pleasures? Absurd! But I
am not deceived, Ambrosio! It is not virtue
which makes you reject my osfer; vouivou'd
accept it, but you dare not. 'Tis not the
crime which holds your hand, but the pu-
nishment; 'tis not respect for God which
restrains you, but the terror of his ven-
geance 1 Fain would you osfend him in se-
cret, but you tremble to profess yourself his
foe< Now shame on the coward foul,
which wants the courage either to be a firm
friend, or an open enemy!"
**-.To look upon guilt with horror, Ma-
tilda, is in itself a merit: in this respect I
glory to confess myself a coward. Though
my paifions have made me deviate from Jiex
laws, I still feel in my heart an innate love
of virtue. But it ill becomes you to tax
me with my perjury; you who first sedu-
ced me to violate my vows; you who Gr/t
roused my sleeping vices, made Lme fed
the weight of religion's chains. and bade me
N 2 be

<page 277>
( c68 )
be convinced that guilt had pleasures. Yet
though my principles have yielded to the
force of temperament, I still have sufficient
grace to shudder at sorcery, and avoid a
.crime so monstrous, so unpardonable!"
"Unpardonable, fay you? Where then
;-is your constant boast of the Almighty's infi-
nite mercy? Has he of late set bounds to
it? Receives he no longer a sinner with
joy? You injure him, Ambrosio; you will
always have time to repent, and he have
goodnefeto forgive. Afford him a glori-
ous opportunity to exert that goodness:
the greater your crime, the greater bis
merit in pardoning. Away then with these
.childish scruples; be persuaded to your
good, and follow me to the sepulchre." ..<
"Oh! cease, Matilda! That scoffing
tone, that bold and impious language is
horrible in every mouth, but most so in a
woman's. L.et us drop a conversation
iwhich excites no other sentiments than hor-
ror and disgust. I will not follow you to
the sepulchre, or accept the services of
your

<page 278>
( 269 )
your infernal agents. Antonia shall be'
mine, but mine by human means."
"Then yours she will neves be! You
are banished her presence; her mother has'
opened her eyes to your designs, and she is
now upon her guard against them. Nay,
more, (lie loves another; a youth of distin-
guished merit possesses her heart j and unless
you interfere, a few days will make her his
bride. This intelligence was brought me
by my invisible servants, to whom 1 had re-
course on first perceiving your indifference.
They watched your every action, related
to me all that passed at Elvira's, and in-
spired me with the idea of favouring your
designs. Their reports have been my
only comfort. Though you shunned my
presence, all your proceedings were known
to me; nay, I was constantly with you
in some degree, thanks to this most pre-
cious gift!"
With these words she drew from beneath
he*.-habit a mirror of polished steel, the
N 3 borders

<page 279>
( *7°. )
borders of which were markedvwiffi. y^qoj^
strange and unknown characters. ;,lw ?3yr^
, **. Amidst all my sorrows, .amidst aU my.
regrets for your coldness, I was sustained
from despair by the virtues <?f this talisman.
On pronouncing certain words, the person.
appears in it on whom the observer's.
thoughts are bent > thus, though /was ed-
ited from your sight, you, Ambrosio, were.
ever.present to mine."
. The friar's curiosity was strongly excited..
"What you relate is incredible! Matil-
da.,. are you not amusing yourself with my
credulity J" .t-
"Be your own eyes the judge."
She.put the mirror into bis hand. Curi-
osity induced him to take it, and love, to.
wish that Antonia might appear. Matilda.,
pronounced the magic words. Immediately
a thick smoke rose from the characters.
traced upon the borders, and spread usjblf.
oyerthe surface.., It dispersed again gradu-
ally.; a confused mixture of coloursr.affid;.

<page 280>
( **1 )
images presented themselves to Are friluV
eyes, which at length arranging themselves
in their proper places, he beheld in mini-
ature Antonia's lovely form.
The scene was a small closet belonging to
her apartment. She was undressing to
bathe herself. The long tresses of her hair
were already bound up. The amorous
monk had full opportunity to observe the
voluptuous contours and admirable sym-
metry of her person. She threw off her last
garment, and, advancing to the bath pre-
pared for her, put her fjot into the wa«
ter. It struck cold, and she drew it back
again. Though unconscious of being ob-
served, an in-bred sense of modesty in-
duced her to veil her charms; and she
stood hesitating upon the brink, in the at-
titude of the Venus de Medicis. At this
momenta tame linnet flew towards her,
nestled its head between her breasts, and
nibbled them in wanton play. The smiling
Antonia strove in vain to shakeoff the bird^
and at lemgth raised her hands to drive it
N 4 from

<page 281>
( 272 >
from its delightful harbour. Ambrofio
could bear no more. His desires were
worked up to phrensy. \ ...; Qo
"I yield!" he cried, dalhing the mirror
upon the ground: "Matilda, I follow you f
Do with me what you will!" '- v
She waited not to hear his consent repeated.
It was already midnight. She fkwto her cell,
and soon returned with her little basket and
the key of the cemetery, which had remain*
edin her possession since her first visit to the
vaults. She gave the monk no time for
reflection. . . ;.' {'>> .-*«.'
"Come!" she said, and took his hand j
f< follow me, and witness the effects of your
resolve." ?-»i'J
This said, she drew him hastily along.:
They passed into the burying-ground .uaw
observed, opened the door of the sepulchre,
and sound themselves at the head of the
subterraneous stair-cafe. As yet the beams
of the full moon had guided their steps,
but that resource now failed them. Matil-'
da had neglected to provide herself with a
lamp.

<page 282>
( 273 )
lamp. Still holding Ambrosio's hand she de-
scended the marble steps; but the profound
obscurity with which they were overspread,
obliged them to walk slow and cautiously.
"You tremble!" said Matilda to her
companion; "fear not, the destined spot i»
near."
They reached the foot of the stair-case,
and continued to proceed, feeling their way
along the walls. On turning a corner, sud-
denly they descried faint gleams of light,
which seemed burning at a distance. Thi-
ther they bent their steps. The rays pro-
ceeded from a small sepulchral lamp which
flamed unceasingly before the stat-ue of St.
Clare. It tinged with dim and cheerless
beams the massy columns which supported
the roof, but was too feeble to dissipate the
thick gloom in which the vaults above were
buried. v
Matilda took the lamp. 'f;
,*.* Wait. for me!" said she to the friar j ..
* itua few moments I am here again."
With these. words she hastened* into one
... .-. N5 of

<page 283>
of the passages which branched in variotlS»
directions from this spot, and formed a sort
of labyrinth. Ambrosiowas now left alone.
Darkness the most profound surrounded'
him, and encouraged the doubts which
began to revive in his bosom. He had been
lmrried away by the delirium of the mo-
ment; The shame of betraying his terrors,
while in Matilda's presence, had induced
him to repress them; but, now that he was
abandoned to himself, they resumed their
former ascendancy. He trembled as the
scene which he was soon to witness. He
knew not how far the delusions of magic
might operate upon his mind: they possibly
might force him-to some deed, whose com*
mission would make the breach betweeri
himself and Heaven irreparable; . lathis
fearful dilemma, he would have imploted
God's assistance, but was conscious that he
had forfeited all claim to'such protection-.
Gladly would he have returned to the^b*
bey j but as he had passed through ihnu-
imerabte taverns and- winding passages; the
wo1 * ,: attempt

<page 284>
d nb )
attempt of regaining the stairs was hopeless;
His fate was determined; no possibility of
escape presented itself. He therefore com-
bated his apprehensions, and called every
argument to his succour,. which might en*
able him to support the trying scene with?
fortitude. He reslected, that Antonia would
be the reward of his daring. He inslamed
his imagination by enumerating her charms.
He persuaded himself, that (as Matilda had;
observed) he always should have time suf-
ficient for repentance; and that, as he em-
ployed her assistance, not that of dæmons,
the crime of sorcery could not be laid tor
his charge. He had read much respecting
witchcraft j he understood that, unless a,
formal act was signed renouncing his claim
to salvation, Satan would. have no -poweE
over him. He was fully determined; not
to execute any such act,. whatever threat*
might be used, or advantages held put ta
him, .. v ,.....- .. . ; | v; }-,: , .V• ..': _..v
Such were his meditations while .waiting
for Matilda. They were interrupted by j.
,., . „..' N 6 low

<page 285>
( *?6 7
low murmur, which seemed at no great dis-
tance fiom him. He was startled—he lis-
tened. Some minutes pasted in silence,
after which the murmur was repeated. It
appeared to the groaning of one in pain.
In any other situation, this circumstance
would only have excited his attention-and
curiosity. In the present, his predominant
sensation was that of terror. Hisimagination
totally engrossed by the ideas of sorcery and
spirits, he fancied that some unquiet ghost
was wandering near him; or else that Ma-
tilda bad fallen a victim to her presump-
tion, and was perishing under the cruel
fangs of the dæmons. The noise seemed
not to approach, but continued to be
heard at intervals. Sometimes it became
more audible—doubtless, as the sufferings
of the person who uttered the groans became
more acute and insupportable. Ambfofio
now and then thought that he could distin-
guish accents, and once in particular he
was almost convinced that he heard a faint
voice exclaim^; '.' Y'-f/K ..:.*.
«• c .1 "God!

<page 286>
( 277 )
"God! Oh! God! No hope! No suc-
cour.!"- ;...>.:
Yet deeper groans followed these words:
they died away gradually, and universal
iilence again prevailed.
** What can this mean?" thought the
bewildered monk.
At that moment an idea which flashed
into his mind, almost petrified him with
horror. He started, and shuddered at
himself.
"Should it be possible!" He groaned
involuntarily; "should it but be possible;
Oh! what a monster am I!"
He wished to resolve his doubts, and to
repair his fault, if it were not too late al-
ready. But these generous and compas-
sionate sentiments were soon put to flight
by the return of Matilda. He forgot the
groaning susferer, and remembered no-
thing but the danger and embarrassment of
his own situation. The light of the return-
ing lamp gilded the walls, and in a few
moments after Matilda stood beside him*
She

<page 287>
( *78 )
She had quitted her religious habit: stie .
was now clothed in a long fable robe, oa
which was traced in gold embroidery a va-
riety of unknown characters: it was fas-
tened by a girdle of precious stones,, in,
which was fixed a poniard. Her neck
and arms were uncovered; in her hand
she bore a golden wand; her hair was
loose, and flowed wildly upon her shoul-
ders; her eyes sparkled with terrific expres-
sion; and her whole demeanour was calcur
lated to inspire the beholder with awe and;
admiration. ,-..... ..„.:.
** Follow me!" she said to the monk in
a low and solemn voice; "all is ready I"
His limbs trembled while he obeyed her.
She led him through various narrow pas-
sages; and on every side, as they passed
ajong, the beams of the lamp displayed
none but the most revolting objects; sculls,
bones, graves, and images whose eyes
seemed to-glare on them. with horror and
surprise. At length they reached a spacious
cavern, whose lofty roof the eye.fought
.j.,..' in

<page 288>
( 279 )
invain to discover. A profound ©bseuritf
hovered through the void; damp vapour*
struck cold to the friar's heart, and he lis-
tened sadly to the blast while it howled
along the lonely vaults. Here Matilda stop-
ped. She turned to Ambrosio. His cheeks
and lips were pale with apprehension. By
a glance of mingled scorn and anger she
reproved his pusillanimity, but she spoke
not. She placed the lamp upon the ground
near the basket. She motioned that Ambro-
sio should be silent, and began the myste-
rious rites. She drew a circle round hirny
another round herself; and then, taking a
small phial from the basket, poured a few*
drops upon the ground before her. She
bent over the place, muttered some indis-
tinct sentences, and immediately a pale sul-
phurous flame arose from the ground.-'' it
increased by degrees, and at length spread'
its waves over the whole surface, the circles
alone excepted in which stood Matilda
and the monk. It then ascended the huge
columns of unhewn stone, glided along the
roof,

<page 289>
( 28o )
roof, and formed the cavern into an im-
mense chamber totally covered with blue
trembling fire. It emitted no heat: on the
contrary, the extreme chillness of the place
seemed to augment with every moment.
Matilda continued her incantations; at in-
tervals. she took various articles from the
basket, the nature and name of most of
which were unknown to the friar 3 bur.:
among the few which he distinguished, he
particularly observed three human fingers,
and an agnus dei which she broke in pieces.
She threw them all into the flames which
burned before her, and they were instantly
consumed. ,• ,.'•
The monk beheld her with anxious cuT
riosity> Suddenly she uttered a loud and):
piercing shriek. She appeared to be seiz-
ed with an access of delirium; the tore her
hair, beat her bosom, used the most frantic.
gestures, and, drawing the poniard from
her girdle, plunged it into her left arm..
The blood gushed out plentifully; and, as
(he stood on the brink of the circle, she
- . ;.. 1 took

<page 290>
( aBi )
rook care that it should fall on the outside.
The fLmes retired from the spot on which
the blood was pouring. A volume of dark
clouds rose slowly from the ensanguined
earth, and ascended gradually till it reached
the vault of the cavern. At the same time
a clap of thunder was heard, the echo pealed
fearfully along the subterraneous passages,
and the ground shook beneath the feet of
the enchantress.
It was now that Ambrosio repented of
his rashness. The solemn singularity of the
charm had prepared him for something
strange and horrible. He waited with fear
for the spirit's appearance, whose coming
was announced by thunder and earthquakes.
He rooked wildly around him, expecting
that some dreadful apparition would meet
his eyes, the sight of which would drive
him mad. A cold shivering seized his bo-
dy, and he funk upon one knee, unable to
fupport'himself.
"He comes!" exclaimed Matilda ina
joyful accent. '. ;K> i>' '''. 1<
Ambrosio

<page 291>
( ^S^ )
'A'mbrosio started, and expected the dæ-
mon with terror. What was his surprise
when, the thunder ceasing to rOlk/ a full
strain of melodious music founded in the
atr! At the fame time the cloud disappear-
ed, and he beheld a figure more beautiful
than fancy's pencil ever drew. It was a
youth seemingly scarce eighteen, the per-
fection of whose form and face was unri-
valled. He was perfectly naked: a bright
star sparkled upon his forehead, two crim-
son wings extended themselves from hi?
shoulders, and his silken locks were con-
sined by a band of many-coloured fires,
*hich played round his head, formed them-
selves into a variety of figures, and shone
with a brilliance far surpassing that of pre-'
cious stones. Circlets of diamonds were fas-
tened round his arms and ankles, and in
his right hand he bore a silver branch imi-
tating myrtle. His form shone with daZ- -
zling glory: he was surrounded by clouds
of rose-coloured light, and,. at the moment
that he appeared, a refreshing air breathed
'"* vf(; perfumes

<page 292>
( **3 )
perfumes through the cavern. Enchanted
ajE a vision so contrary to his expectation?,,
Ambrosio. gazed upon the spirit with de-
light and wonder: yet, however beautiful
the figure, he could not but remark a wild-
ness in the dæmon's eyes, and a mysterious.
melancholy impressed upon his features,.-
betraying the fallen angel, and inspiring the
spectators with secret awe.
The music ceased. Matilda addressed
herself to the spirit: she spoke in a language
unintelligible to the monk, and was answer-
ed in the fame. She seemed to insist upon.
something which the dæmon was unwilling
to grant. He frequently darted upon Am-
brosia angry glances, and at such times
the friar's. heart sank within him. Matilda,
appeared to grow incensed j she spoke in a..
loud and commanding tone, and her ges-
tures declared that the was threatening
hina with her vengeance. Her menaces
had the desired effect. The spirit. sank
upon, his knee, and with a submissive ,ai|^
presented to her the branch of myrtle. No.
,,.. . soonor.

<page 293>
( *84 )
sooner had she received ir, than the tnusic
was again heard j a thick cloud spread itself
over the apparition ; the blue flames disap-
peared, and total obscurity reigned through
the cave. The abbot moved not from ht3
place: his faculties were all bound up in
pleasure, anxiety, and surprise. At length
the darkness dispersing, he perceived Ma-
tilda standing near him in her religious
habit, with the myrtle in her hand. No
traces remained of the incantation, and the
vaults were only illuminated by the faint
rays of the sepulchral lamp.
** I have succeeded," said Matilda,
** though with more difficulty than I ex-
"pected." Lucifer, whom I summoned to
my assistance, was at first unwilling to obey
my commands: to enforce his compliance,
I was constrained to have recourse to my
strongest charms. They have produced
the desired esfect, but I have engnged never
more to invoke his agency in your favour.
Beware then how you employ an opportu-
nity which never will return. My magic
T-'' ' . arts

<page 294>
( **5 )
arts will now be of no use to you: in future
you can only hope for supernatural aid, by
invoking the dæmons yourself, and accept-
ing the conditions of their service. This
you will never do. You want strength of
mind to force them to obedience; and un-
less you pay their established price, they
will not be your voluntary servants. In this
one instance they consent to obey you; I
offer you the means of enjoying your mis-
tress, and be careful not to lose the oppor-
tunity. Receive this constellated myrtle:
while you bear this in your hand, every
door will fly open to you. It will procure
yoii access to-morrow night to Antonia's
chamber : .then breathe upon it thrice, pro-
nounce her name, and place it upon her
pillow. A death like slumber will imme-
diately seize upon her, and deprive her of
the power of resisting your attempts. Sleep
will hold her till break of morning. In this
state you may satisfy your desires without
danger of beingdiscovered; since, when day-
light shall dispel the effects of the enchant-
ment,

<page 295>
( 286 )
menr, Antonia will perceive her dishonour,
but be ignorant of the ravisher. Be happy
then, my Ambrosio, and let this service
convince you that my Friendship is disin-
terested and pure. The night must2 be
near expiring: let us return to the ab-
bey, lest our absence should create'sur-
-
The abbot received the talisman with
silent gratitude. His ideas were too much
bewildered by the adventures of the nighty
to permit his expressing his thanks audi-*'
bly, or indeed as yet to feel the whole value
of her present. Matilda took up her lamp
and basket, and guided her companion
from the mysterious cavern. She restored
the lamp to its former place, and continued
her route in darkness till she reached the
foot of the stair-case. The first beams of
the rising fun darting down it facilitated
the ascent. Matilda and the abbot hasten-
ed out of the sepulchre, closed the door af-
ter them, and soon regained the abbey's
western cloister. No one met them, and
they

<page 296>
( *87 )
they retired unobserved to their respective
cells.
The consusion of Ambrosio's mind now
began to appease. He rejoiced in the for-
tunate islue of his adventure, and, reflecting
upon the virtues of the myrtle, looked upon
Antonia as already in his power. Imagi-
nation retraced to him those secret charms
betrayed to him by the enchanted mirror,
and he waited with impatience for the ap-
proach of midnight.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
.. 1 .;:> '. i
.-.'..'I;, . .
.;

<page 297>
/ . r
,

<page 298>

<page 299>

<page 300>

<page 301>

<page 302>
i



<page 303>


<page 304>
