

<page 1>


<page 2>


<page 3>

<page 4>
NYPL RESEARCH LIBRARIES
|||||
33 O749.4855


<page 5>
– ！！！ ---- - ----|-
auenºſ Time



<page 6>
·（~）
2*）.
_ ***
•
· • ×
sº r.）
~,~~~~
• •
• ， *
|-|-* • • •
|-X.-
*，----
º.
-----*
*！
·+ + + + · · · · · ·:



<page 7>
\
s

<page 8>

<page 9>


<page 10>
THE
Female QJUIXOTEj
OR, THE
ADVENTURES
O F
ARABELLA.
'- i - a S r - k:j
VOL. II. Ch|, >
'» r-t
The Second Edition,
Revised and Corrected.

LONDON:
Printed for A. Millar, over-against
Catharine-street in the Strand.
\
M.DCCLIl.

<page 11>



<page 12>
THE
Female Qui xote,'
BOOK V.
Chap. I.
A Dispute very learnedly handled by tioo
Ladies, in which the Reader may take
what Part' he pleases.
sion, to magnify the most inconsiderable
Trifles into Things of the greatest Import-
ance, when they concern the beloved Ob-
ject; did not sail to torment himself with
a thousand different Fears, which the mysteri-

R. Glanvillc, who was too much
in Love to pass the Night with
any great Degree of Tranquillity,
under the Apprehensions he felt;
it being the Nature os that Paf-
VOL. II.
B
OUS

<page 13>
2 The FEMALE Book!
ous Behaviour of his Father, and the more
mysterious Words of his Mistress, gave rife to.
Among many various Conjectures, all equally)
unreasonable, he fixed upon one, no way ad-,
vantageous to Sir Charles; sor, supposing that;
the Folly of Arabella had really disgusted him,l
and made him desirous of breaking off the de-
signed Match between them; he was, as he 'f
thought, taking Measures to bring this about,
knowing, that if Lady Bella resused to sulfils
her Father's Desire in this Particular, a very
considerable Estate would descend to him.
Upon any other Occasion, Mr. Glanville
would not have suspected his Father of so un-
generous an Action; but Lovers think every
thing possible, which they fear; and being pre-
possessed with this Opinion, he resolved the
next Morning to sound his Father's Inclina-
tions, by intreating him to endeavour to pre-
vail upon Lady Bella to marry him besore her
Year of Mourning sor the Marquis was ex-
pired.
Attending him, theresore, at Breaksast, in
his own Chamber, he made his designed Re- I
quest, not without heedsully observing his {
Countenance at the same time; and trembling,;
lest he should make him an Answer, that
might consirm his uneasy Suspicion.
Sir Charles-, however, agreeably surpi.X
him, by promising to comply with his Desire
that Day; sor, added he, tho' my Niece has
some odd Ways, yet upon the whole, she is a'i
very accomplished Woman; and when you,
are her Husband, you may probably sind thejj
Means of curing her of those little Follies,
which

<page 14>
C ap. i. QJJ IXOTE. 3
which at present are conspicuous enough; but
being.occasioned by a Country Education, and
a perfect Ignorance of the World, the In-
struction, which then you will not scruple to
give her, and which, from a Husband, with-
out any Osfence to her Delicacy, she may
receive, may resorm her Conduct; and make
her Behaviour as complete, as, it must be
confessed, both her Person and Mind now
are.
Mr. Glanvllle having acquiesced in the Jus-
tice of this Remark, as soon as Breaksast was
over, went to visit the two Ladies, who ge-
nerally drank their Chocolate together.
Miss Glanville being then in Lady Bella's
Apartment, he was immediately admitted,
where he sound them engaged in a high Dis-
pute; and, much against his Will, was obliged
to be Arbitrator in the Affair, they having, up-'
on his Entrance, both appealed to him.
But, in order to place this momentous Af-
sair in a true Light, 'tis necessary to go back a
little, and acquaint the Reader with what had
passed in the Apartment; and also, sollowing
the Custom of the Romance and Novel-Wri-
ters, in the Heart of our Heroine.
No sooner were her sair Eyes open in the
Morning, than the unsortunate Sir George pre-
senting himselftoher Imagination,herThoughts,
to use Scudeiy's Phrase, were at a cruel War with
each other: She wished to prevent the Death
of this obsequious Lover; but she could notre-
solve to preserve his Life, by giving him that
Hope he required; and without which, she
B 2 feared.

<page 15>
4 The F E M A L E Book V. I
feared, it would be impossible sor him to |
live.
After pondering a few Hours upon the Ne- I
cessity of his Cafe, and w hat a just Regard to'E
her own Honour required of her, Decoiunfji
prevailed so much (.ver Compassion, that sh{ fc
resolved to abandon the miserable Sir Georg\ \
to all the Rigour of his Destiny; when, hap( -
pily sor the disconsolate Lover, the History o) f
the sair Amalazontka coming into her Mind',
she remembered, that this haughty PrincesM,
having resused to marry the Person, her Far-
ther recommended to her, because lie had no't
a Crown upon his Head ; nevertheless, when he
was dying sor Love of her, condescended to
visit him, and even to give him a little Hope,
in order to preserve his Lise: She conceived it
could be no Blemish to her Character, if she
sollowed the Example of this most glorious
Princess; and susfered herself to relax a little in
her Severity, to prevent the Esfects of her Lo-
ver's Despair.
Fear not, Arabella, said slie to herself; fear
not to obey the Dictates of thy Compassion^
since the glorious Amalazovthu justifies, by hes
Example, the Means thou wilt use to preserve
a noble Life, which depends upon a few Words
thou shalt utter.
When she had taken this Resolution, she
rung her Beil sor her Women; and as soon as
she was dressed, she dismissed them all but Lucy,
whom she ordered to bring her Paper and Pens,
telling her, she would write an Answer to Sir
George's Letter.
Lucy obeyed with great Joy; but by that
Time

<page 16>
thap. i. QJU 1 X O T E. 5
Time she h;id brought her Lndy all the Mate-
rials sor Writing, her Mind was changed; (he
having reflected, that /fmalazoxtha, whose Ex-
ample, in order to avoid the Censure os suture
Ages, the was iesolved exactly to sollow, did
not write to rfmbhmer, but paid him a Visit,
she resoived to do the like; and theresore bid
Lucy take them away again, tcllingher: She had
though: better of.it.and would not write to him.
Lucy, extremely concerned atthisResolution,
•beyed her very slowly, and with great seem-
ing Regret.
( perceive, said Arabellas you are afraid, I
shall abandon the unsortunate Man you so-
licit sor, to the Violence of his Despair; but
tho' I do not intend to write to him, yet I'll
make use of a Method, perhaps as esfectual;
sor, to speak truly, I mean to make him a Visit;
his Fever 1 suppose being violent enough by
this Time to make him keep his Bed.
And will you be so good, Madam, said
Lucy, to go and see the poor Gentleman? I
warrant you, he will be ready to die sor Joy,
when he sees you.
'Tis probable what you say may happen, re-
plied Arabella, but there must be proper Pre-
cautions used to prevent those Consequence?,,
which the sudden and unexpected Sight os me
may produce. Those about him, I suppose, will
have Discretion enough sor that: Theresore
give Orders sor the Coach to be made ready,and
tell my Women, they must attend me ; and be
sure you give them Directions, when 1 enter
Sir George's Chamber, to Hay at a convenient
Distance, in order to leave me an Opportunity
B 3 o/

<page 17>
6 The FEMALE Book V.j
of speaking to him, without being heard: As
sor you, you may approach the Bed-side with
me; since, being my Consident, you may hear
all we have to say.
Arabella, having thus settled the Ceremonial
of her Visit, according to the Rules prescribed
by Romances, sat down to her lhe)a-table,
having sent to know, if Miss Glanville wjis up,
and received sor Answer, that she would attend
her at Breaksast. .?fx&jL~:
Arabella, who had at first detes^^lto-
say nothing of this Asfair to her Cousiflyic'tHild
not resist the Desire she had of talking upon a
Subject so interesting; and, telling her with a
Smile, that she was about to make a v«ry
charitable Visit that Morning, asked her, if
she was disposed to bear her Company it* it*'
I know you Country Ladies, said
Glanville, are very sond of visiting your fick
Neighbours: For my Part, I do not love such
a grave kind of Amusement; yet, sor the sike
of the Airing, 1 shall be very willing to attend
you.
I think, said Arabella, with a more serious
Air than besore, it behoves every generous Pier-
son to compassionate the Missortunes of thfeil-
Acquaintance and Friends, and to relieve theri
ts sar as lies in their Power; but those Miselbic's-
we ourselves occasion to others, demand, »1a a
more particular Manner, our Pity; and, if c'feh^
sistent with Honour, our Relief. . J'l" i:
And pray, returned Miss Glanville, who is
it you have done any Mischiel to, which'-iy&u
are to repair by this charitable Visit, as you
call it?
The

<page 18>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. 7
The Mischief I have done, replied Arabella,
blushing, and casting down her Eyes, was not
voluntary, I assure you: Yet I will not scruple
to repair it, if I can; tho', since my Power is
consined by certain unavoidable Laws, my En-
deavours may not haply have all the Success I
could wish.
Well, but, dear Cousin, interrupted Miss
Glanville, tell me in plain Englijh, what this
Mischief is, which you have done; and to what
Purpose you are going out this Morning?
I am going to pay a Visit to Sir George Bell-
mour, replied Arabella; and I intreat you, sair
Cousin, to pardon me sor robbing you of so
accomplished a Lover. I really always thought
he was in Love with you, till I was undeceiv-
ed by some Words he spoke Yesterday; and
a Letter I received from him last Night, in
which he has been bold enough to declare his
Passion to me, and, through the Apprehension
of my Anger, is this Moment dying with
Grief; and 'tis to reconcile him to Life, that
I have prevailed upon myself to make him a
Visit; in which charitable Design, as I said
besore, I should be glad of your Company.
Miss Glanville, who believed not a Word
Lady Bella had said, burst out a laughing, at a
Speech, that appeared to her so extremely salse
and ridiculous.
I fee, said 'Arabella, you are of a Humour
to divert yourself with the Miseries of a de-
spairing Lover; and in this Particular, you
greatly resemble the sair and witty Doralisa,
who always jelted at such Maladies as are oc-
casioned by Love: However, this Insensibility
B 4 does

<page 19>
8 The F E M A L E B-ok V.
does net become you so well as her, since all
her Conduct was consormable to it, no Man
in the World being bold enough to talk to her
of Love; but you, Cousin, are ready, even by
your own Confession, to listen to such Dis-
courses from any body; and theresore this Be-
haviour, in you, may be with more Justice
termed Levity, than Indifference.'
I perceive, Cousin, said Miss Glanvillc, I
have always the worst of those Comparisons
you are pleased to make between me and other
People; but, I assure you, as free and indis-
creet as you think me, I should very much
scruple to visit a Man, upon any Occasion
whatever.
I am quite astonished, Miss Glanville, re-
sumed Arabella, to hear you assume a Cha-
racter of so much Severity; you, who have
granted Favours of a Kind in a very great De-
gr< e criminal.
Favours! interrupted Miss Glanville, crimi-
nal Favours! Pnty explain yoursels, Midam.
Yes, Cousin, did Arabella, I repeat it again;
criminal Favours, such as allowing Persons to.
tali; to you of Love; not sorbidding them to
write to )ou; giving them Opportunities of
being alone with you sor several Moments to-
ge:her; and several other Civilities of the like
Nature, which no Man can possibly merit, un-
der many Years Services, Fidelity, and Pains:
.All these are criminal Favours,and highly blame-
ahle in a Ladjj who has any Regard sor her
Reputation.
All these, replied Miss Glanville, are no-
shing in Comparison of making them Visits; and
no
\

<page 20>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. #
no Woman, who has any Reputation at all,
will be guilty of taking such Liberties.
What! Miss, replied Aiabella, will you
dare, by this Insinuation, to cast any Censures
upon the Virtue of the divine Mandana, the
haughty Amalazontha, the sair Statira, the cold
and rigid Parifatis, and many other illustrious
Ladies, who did not scruple to visit their Lo-
vers, when consined to their Beds, either by
the Wounds they received in Battle, or the
more cruel and dangerous ones they suffered
from their Eyes? These chaste Ladies, who ne-
ver gr-nted" a Kiss of their Hand to a Lover,,
till he was upon the Point of being their Hus-
band, would nevertheless most charitably con-
descend to approach their Bed-side, and speak
\ some compassionate Words to them, in order
to promote their Cure, and make them submit
to live; nay, these divine Beauties would not
resuse to grant the same Favour to Persons
whp.n they did not love, to prevent the satal
Consequences of their Despair.
Lord, Madam! interrupted Miss Glanvillev
I wonder you'ean talk so blasphemously, to call
a Parcel of confident Creatures divine, and
such terrible Words.
Do you know, Miss, said Arabella, with a
stern Look, that 'tis of the greatest PiincefRs
that ever were, whom you speak in this irre-
verent Manner! Is it possible, that you can be
ignorant of the sublime Quality os Mandana^
who was the Heiress of two powersul King-
doms? Are you not sensible, that Amaiazontha
was Queen of Turringia? And will you pre-
. B s tend

<page 21>
1o she FEMALE Book V.
tend to deny the glorious Extraction of Statira
and Parisatis, Princesses of Persia?
I shall not trouble myself to deny any thing
about them, Madam, said Miss Glanvillti sor
I never heard of them besore; and really I do
not choose to be always talking of Queens and
Princesses, as if I thought none but such great
People were wor hy my Notice: It looks so
affected, I should imagine every one laughed
at me, that heard me.
Since you are so very scrupulous, returned
Arabella, that you dare not imitate the sublimest
among Mortals, I can surnish you with .many
Examples, from the Conduct of Persons,whose
Quality was not much superior to yours, which
may reconcile you to an Action, you at present,
with so little Reason, condemn: And, to name
but One among some Thousands, the sair Cleo-
nice, the most rigid and austere Beauty in all Sar-
</m, paid several Visits to the passionate Ligda-
mis, when his Melancholy, at the ill Success of
his Passion, threw him into a Fever, that con-
fined him to his Bed.
And pray, Madam, who was that Cleonice?
(aid M,ss Glanv'ille; and where did she live?
In Sardis, I tell you, said Arabella, in the
Kingdom of Lydia.
Oh! then it is not in our Kingdom, said
Miss Glanvillt: What signifies what Foreigners
do? 1 sh.ill never sorm my Conduct, upon the
Example of Outlandish People; what is com-
mon enough in their Countries, would be very
particular here; and you can never persuade me,
that it is seemly sor Ladies to pay Visits to
Men in their Beds.
A Lady,

<page 22>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. n
A Lady, said Arabella., extremely angry at
her Cousin's Obstinacy, who will suffer Men
to press her Hand, write to her, and talk to
her of Love, ought to be ashamed of such an
affected Niceness, as that you pretend to.
I insist upon it, Madam, said Miss Glan-
ville, that all th fe innocent Liberties you rail
at, may be taken by any Woman, without
giving the World room to censure her: But,
without being very bold and impudent, she
cannot go to see Men in their Beds; a Free-
dom that only becomes a Sister, or near Re-
lation.
So then, replied Arabella, reddening with
Vexation, you will persist in assirming the di-
vine Mandana *a- impudent r
If she made such indiscreet Visits as those,
she was, said Miss Glanville.
Oh Heavens! cried Arabella, have I lived
to hear the most illustrious Princess that ever
was in the World, so shamesully reflected
on?
Bless me, Madam ! said Miss GlanvilU,whzt
Reason have you to defend the Character of
this Princess so much? She will hardly thank
yc/u sor your Pains, I sancy.
Were you acquainted with the Character of
- that most generous Princess, said Arabella, you
would be convinced, that she was sensible of
the smallest Benefits; but it is not with a View
of acquiring her Favour, that I defend her
against your inhuman Aspersions, since it is
more than Two thousand Years since she died;
yet common Justice obliges me to vindicate a
Person so illustrious sor her Birth and Virtue i
B 6 and

<page 23>
12
the FEMALE Bock V.
and were you not my Cousin, I should express
my Resentment in another Manner, sor the-
Injury you do her.
Truly, said Miss Glanville, I am not much
obliged to you, Madam, sor not downright
quarrelling with me sor one that has been in
her Grave Two thousand Years: However,
nothing shall make me change my Opinion,
and I am sure most People will be of my Side
of the Argument.
That Moment Mr. Glanville sending sor
Permission to wait upon Arabella, she ordered
him to be admitted, telling Miss Glanville, she
would acquaint her Brother with the Dispute:
To which she consented.
Chap. II.
Which inculcates, by a very good Example,
that a Person ought not to be too hasty in
deciding a Question he does not -perfetlly
understand.
YOU are come very opportunely, Sir, said
Arabella, when he entered the Room, to
be Judge of a great Controversy between Miss
Glanville and mysekf. I beseech you theresore,
let us have your Opinion upon the Matter.
Miss Glanville maintains, that it is less cri-
minal in a Lady to hear Persons talk to her of
Love, allow them to kiss her Hand, and permit
them to write to her, than to make a charitable
Visit to a Man who is consined to his Bed
through

<page 24>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 13
through the Violence of his Passion and De-
spair ; the Intent of this Visit being only to pre-
vent the Death of an unsortunate Lover, and,
if necessary, to lay her Commands upon him
to live.
And this latter is your Opinion, is it not
Madam? said Mr. Glanville.
Certainly, Sir, replied Arabella, and «a-.|bis I
am justified by all the Heroines of Antiquity.
Then you must be in the Right, MadanV, rc»
turned Mt. Glanville, both because your own
Judgment tells you so, and also the Example
of these Heroines you mention.
Well, Madam, interrupted Miss Glanville
hastily, since my Brother has given Sentence on
your Side, I hope you will not delay your Visit
to Sir George any longer.
How! said Mr. Glanville, surprised, is Lady
Bella going to visit Six George? Pray, Madam,
may I presume to enquire the Reason sor your
doing him this extraordinary Favour? .
You are not very wife, said Arabella, looking
gravely upon Miss Glanville, to discover a
Thing, which may haply create a Quarrel be-
tween your Bi other, and the unsortunate Per-
son you speak of: Yet since this Indiscretion
cannot be recalled, we must endeavour to pre-
vent the Consequences of it.
I assure you, Madam, interrupted Mr. Glan-
ville, extremely impatient to know the Mean-
ing of these Hints, you have nothing to fear
from me: Theresore you need not think your-
self under any Necessity of concealing this As-
sair from me.
. - 2 You

<page 25>
14 The FEMALE Book V.
You are not, haply, so moderate as you pre-
tend, said Arabella, (who would not have been
displeased to have seen him in all the jealous
Transports of an enraged Orontes); but what-
ever ensues, I can no longer keep from your
Knowledge, a Truth your Sister has begun to
discover; but in telling you what you desire to
know, I expect you will suppress all Inclina-
tions to Revenge, and trust the Care of your In-
terest to my Generosity.
You are to know then, that in the Person of
your Friend Sir George, you have a Rival,
haply the more to be feared, as his Passion is
no less respectsul than violent: I possibly tell
you more than I ought, pursued she, blushing,
and casting down her Eyes, when 1 confess,
that sor certain Considerations, wherein perhaps
you are concerned, 1 have received the sirst In-
sinuation of this Passion with Disdain enough;
and I assure mysels, that \ouare too generous
to desire any Revenge upon a m:scrab!e Rival,
of whom DcaH is g'.ing to frtt; you.
Then, taking \k George's Letter out of her
Cabinet, she presented it to Mr. Glanvitle.
Read this, .iddtdshe; but read it without
suffering youtself to be transported with any
violent Motions of Aiigcr: An i as in Fight, I
am persua :ed you would not oppress a sallen
and vanquished Foe, so in Love, I may hope,
an unsor'unate Rivjl will merit your Com-
passion.
Never doubt it,'Madam, replied Mr. Glan-
vilL; receiving the Letter,which Miss Glanville,
with a beating Heart, earnestly desired to hear
read. Her Brother, *fter asking Permission of
Arabella,

<page 26>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 15
Arabella, prepared to gratify her Curiosity; but
-be no sooner read the first Sentence, than,
jotwithstanding all his Endeavours, a Smile ap-
peared in his Face ; and Miss Glanville,\e(s able,
and indeed less concerned to restrain her Mirth
at the uncommon Stile, burst out a laughiog,
with so much Violence, as obliged her Brother
to stop, and counterfeit a terrible Fit of Cough-
ing, in order to avoid giving Arabella the like
Offence.
The Astonishment of this Lady, at the sur-
prising and unexpected Effect her Lover's Let-
ter produced on Miss Glanville, kept her in a
prosound Silence, her Eyes wandering from the
Sister to the Brother; who, continuing his
Cough, was not able, sor some Moments, to
go on with his Reading.
Arabella, during this Interval, having reco-
vered herself a little, asked Miss Glanville, if
she sound any thing in a Lover's Despair,
capable of diverting her so much, as she seemed
to be with that of the unsortunate Sir George?
My Sister, Madam, said Mr. Glanville,
preventing her Reply, knows so many of Sir
George's Insidelities, that she cannot persuade
herself he is really in such a dangerous Way
as he insinuates: Theresore you ought not to
be surprised, is she is rather disposed to laugh at
this Epistle, than to ke moved with any Con-
cern sor the Writer, who, though he is my Ri-
val, I must say, appears to be in a deplorable
Condition.'
Pray, Sir, resumed Arabella, a little compo-
sed by those Words, sinish the Letter: Your
4 Sister

<page 27>
i6 %be FEMALE Book V.
Sister may possibly sind more Cause sor Pity
than Contempt, in the latt.-r P.irt of it.
Mr. Glanville, giving a Look to his Sister,
sussicient to make her comprehend, that he
would have her restrain her Mirth sor the suture,
proceeded in his reading; but every Line in-
creasing his strong Inclination to laugh, when
he came to the pathetic Wish, that her sair
Eyes might flied some Tears upon his Tomb,
no longer able to keep his aiTumed Gravity,
he threw down the Letter in a counterfeited
Rage.
Curse the stupid Fellow ! cried he, is he mad,
to call the finest black Eyes in the Universe,
fair. Ah! Cousin, said he to Arabella, he must
be little acquainted with the Influence of your
Eyes, since he can so egregiously mistake their
Colour.
And it is very plain, replied Arab.'lla, that
you are little acquainted with the sublime Lan-
guage in which he writes, since you find Fault
with an Epithet, which marks the Beautv, not
the Colour, os those Eyes he praises; sor, in
sine, Fair is indifferently applied, as well to
black' and brown Eyes, as to light and blue
ones, when they are either really lovely in
themselves, or by the Lover's Imagination
created so: And theresore, since Sir George %
Prepossession has made him fee Charms in my
Eyes, which questionless are not there; by
calling them sair, he has very happily expressed
himself, since therein he has the Sanction of
those great Historians, who wrote the Histories
of Lovers he seems to imitate, as well in his
Actions as Stile.
I find

<page 28>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 17
I find my Rival is very happy in your Opi-
nion, Madam, said Mr. Glanvi/le; and I am
apt to believe, I shall have more Reason to
envy than pity his Situation.
Is you keep within the Bounds I prescribe
you, replied Arabella, you shall have no Rea-;
son to envy his Situation; but, considering; the
Condition to which his Despair has by this Tims
certainlv reduced him, Humanity requires that
we should take some Care of him; and, to
shew you how great my Opinion of your Ge-
nerosity is, I will even entreat you to accom-
pany me in the Visit I am going to make him.
Mr. Glanville, being determined, if possible,
to prevent her exposing herself, asfected to be
extremely moved at this Request 5 and, rising
from his Chair in great seeming Agitation, tra-
versed the Room sor some Moments, without
speaking a Word: Then suddenly stopping;
And can you, Madam, said he, looking
upon Arabella, suppose, that I will consent to
your vifiting my Rival; and that I will be mean
enough to attend you myself to his House? Dc*
you think, that Oronles you have often re-
proached me with, would act in such a
Manner?
I don't know how Orontes would have acted
in this Cafe, said Arabella, because it never
happened that such a Proof of his Submission
was ever desired of him; but, con'ldering that
he was of a very fiery and jealous Disposition,
it is probable he might act as you do.
I always understood, Madam, said Mr. Gint-
vllle, that Orontes was a Favourite of yours,
but it seems I was mistaken.
You

<page 29>
i8 The FEMALE Book V.
You will be very unjust, said Arabella, to
draw any unsavourable Conclusion from what
I have said, to the Prejudice of that valiant
Prince, sor whom I confess I have a great Es-
teem; and truly whoever reflects upon the
great Actions he did in the Wars between the
Amazons and the fierce Naobarzanes King of
the Cilicians, must needs conceive a very high
Idea of his Virtue; but if I cannot bring the
Example of Orontes to influence you in the pre-
sent Case, I can mention those of other Per-
sons, no less illustrious sor their Birth and Cou-
rage, than him. Did not the brave Memnon^
when his Rival Oxyatres was sick, intreat the
beautisul Barjina to savour him with a Visit?
And the complaisant Husband of the divine Pa-
rifatis was not contented with barely desiring
her to visit Lysimachus, who was dying with
Despair at their Marriage, but would many
times bring her himself to the Bed-side of this
unsortunate Lover, and, leaving her there, give
him an Opportunity of telling her what he
suffered sor her Sake.
I ana afraid, Madam, said Mr. Glanv'dle, I
shall never be capable of imitating either the
brave Memnon, nor the complaisant Lysimachus^
in this Cafe, and the Humour of Ortntes seems
to me the most commendable.
Nevertheless, said Arabella, the Humour of
Orontes cost him an insinite Number of Pains;
and it may happen, you will as near resemble
him in his Fortune as you do in his Disposition:
But pray let us end this Dispute at present.
If you are not generous enough to visit an un-
sortunate Rival, you shall not put a Stop to

<page 30>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 19
the Charity of my Intentions; and since Miss
Glanville is all of a sudden become so severe,
that she will not accompany me in this Visit,
I shall be contented with the Attendance of
my Women.
Saying this, she rose from her Seat, calling
Lucy^ and ordered her to bid her Companions
attend.
Mr. Glanville, seeing her thus determined,
was almost mad with Vexation.
Upon my Soul, Madam, said he, seizing
her Hand, you must not go.
How, Sir! said Arabella, sternly.
Not without seeing me die first, resumed he,
in a languishing Tone.
You must not die, replied Arabella, grave-
ly, nor must you pretend to hinder me from
going.
Nay, Madam, said Glanville, one of these
two Things will certainly happen: Either you
must resolve not to visit Sir George, or else be
contented to see me die at your Feet.
Was ever any Lady in so cruel a Dilemma?
said Arabella, throwing herself into the Chair
in a languishing Posture: What can I do to
prevent the Fate of two Persons, one of whom
I insinitely pity, and the other, obstinate as he
is, I cannot hate? Shall I resolve to let the
miserable Bellmour die, rather than grant him a
Favour the most rigid Virtue would not re-
suse him ? or shall I, by opposing the impetuous
Humour os a Lover, to whom I am some-
what obliged, make myself the Author of his
Death? Fatal Necessity! which obliges me
either to be cruel or unjust; and, with a Dispo-
sition

<page 31>
20
The FEM ALE B ok V.
sition to neither, makes me, in some Degree,
guilty of both.
Chap. III.
In which our Heroine is in some little
Confusion.
WHILE Arabella was uttering this pa-
thet;cComplaint, Mr. Glanville, with
great Dissiculty kept himself from smiling;
and, by some supplicating Looks to his Sister,
prevented her laughing out j yet she gigg'ed in
secret behind her Fan: But Arabella whs so lost
in her melancholy Reflections, that she kept
her Eyes immoveably fixed on the Ground sor
some Moments: At last, casting an upbraiding
Glance at Glanville;
Is it possible, cruel Person that you are!
said she to him, that you can, without Pity,
see me suffer so much Uneasiness; and, knowing-
the Sensibility of my Temper, can expose me
to the Grief of being accessary to the Death of
an unsortunate Man, guilty indeed of a too
violent Passion, which merits a gentler Punish-
ment, than that you doom him to?
Don't be uneasy, dear Cousin, interrupted
Miss Glanville; 1 dare assure you Sir George
won't die.
It is impossible to think that, said Arabella,
since he has not so much as received a Com-
mand from me to live; but tell me truly, pur-
sued she, dp you believe it probable, that he will
obey me, and live?
Indeed,

<page 32>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 21
Indeed, Madam, said Ml\k Glanville, I could
sw^ar sor him that he will.
Weil, replied Arabella, I will content myself
with sending him mv Commands in Writing;
but it is to be feared they will not have so much
Essicacy upon his Spirit.
Mr. Glanville, extremely pleased that she
had laid aside her Design os viliting Sir George,
did not oppose her writing to him, though he
was plotting how to prevent the Letter reaching
his Hands; and while she went into her Closet
to write, he conferred with his Sister upon the
Means he should use, expressing, .it the same
Time, greJt Resentment against Sir George,
sor endeavouring to supplant him in his Cousin's
Affection.
What then, said Miss Glanville, do you
really imagine Sir George is in Love with Lady
Bella?
He is either in Love with her Person or
Estate, replied Mr. Ghnvilie, or perhaps with
both; sor she is handsome enough to gain a
Lover of his Merit, though she had no For-
tune; and she has Foitune enough to do it,
though she had no Beauty.
My Cousin is well enough, to be sure, said
Miss Glanville; but I never could think her a
Beauty.
If, replied Mr. Glanville, a most lovely
Complection, regular Features,' a sine Stature,
an elegant Shape, and an inexpressible Grace
in all her Motions, can sorm a Beauty, Lady
Bella may pretend to that Characters-without
any Dispute.
Though

<page 33>
22 The FEMALE Book V.
Though she was all that you say, returned
Miss Glanville, 1 am certain Sir George is not
in Love with her. •
I wish I was certain of that, replied Mr.
Glanville; sor 'tis very probable you are mis-
taken.
You may see by his Letter, interrupted Miss
Glanville, what a Jest he makes of her; and
if you had heard how he talked to her the other
Day in the Garden, you would have died with
Laughing; yet my poor Cousin thought he was
very serious, and was so soolishly pleased!'
gravely, I shall take it very ill, if you make so
free with your Cousin's little Foibles; and if
-Sir George presumes to make a Jest of her, as
you say, I shall teach him better Manners.
You are the strangest Creature in the World!
said Miss Glanville: A Minute or two age, you
was wishing to be sure he was not in Love with
her; and now you are angry, when I assure
Arabella, that Moment coming out of her
Closet, broke off their Discourse. I have
written to Sir George, said she, addressing herself
to Mr. Glanville; and you are at Liberty, if
you please, to read my Letter, which 1 pro-
pose to send away immediately.
Mr. Glanville^ taking the Letter out of her
Hand, with a low Bow, began to read it to
Jiimself; but Arabella, willing his Sister should
also be acquainted with the-Contents, obliged
him, much against his Will, to read it aloud.
It was as sollows 4

you he is only in Jest.
Arabella,

<page 34>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 23
Arabella, TiBellmour.
vy H A T E V E R Offence your presump-
* * tuous Declaration may have given me,
yet my Resentment will be appeased with a
less Punishment than Death: And that
Grief and Submission you have testified in your
Letter, may haply have already procured you
Pardon sor your Fault, provided you do not
forfeit it by Disobedience.
I theresore command you to live, and com-
mand you by all that Power you have given me
over you.
Remember I require no more of you, than
Parisatis did of Lystmachus, in a more cruel
and insupportable Missortune: Imitate then
the Obedience and Submission of that illustrious
Prince; and tho' you should be as unsortunate
as he, let your Courage also be equal to his;
and, like him, be contented with the Esteem
that is offered you, since it is all that can be
bestowed, by
Arabella.
Mr. Glanville, sinding by this Epistle, that
Arabella did not design to encourage the Ad-
dresies of Sir George, would not have been
against his receiving it, had he not feared the
Consequence of his having such a convincing
Proof of the Peculiarity of her Temper in his
Possession; and while he kept the Letter in his
Hand, as if he wanted to consider it a little
better, he meditated on the Means to prevent
its .ever being delivered; and had possibly fixed
upon some successful Contrivance, when a
Servant

<page 35>
24 the FEMALE Book V.
Servant coming in, to insorm the Ladies, that
Sir George was come to wait on them, put an
End to his Schemes; and he immediately ran
down to receive him, not being willing to in-
crease, by his Stay, the Astonishment and Con-
susion which appeared in the Countenarce of
Arabella, at hearing a Man, whom she had
believed and represented to be dying, was
come to pay her a Visit.
Chap. IV.
Where the Lady extricates herself out of
her former Confusion, to the great Aflo-
nifoment, we will suppose, of the Rea-
der.
MISS Glanville, not having so much De-
licacy as her Brother, could not help
exulting a little upon this Occasion.
After the terrible Fright you have been in,
Madam, said she, upon Sir George's Account,
I wonder you do not rather think it is his
Ghost than himself that is come to fee us.
There is no Question, but it is himself that
is come, said Arabella, (who had already recon-
ciled this Visit to her first Thoughts of him ;)
and it is, haply, to execute his satal Design in
my Presence, that has brought him here; and,
like the unsortunate Agilmond, he means to
convince me of his Fidelity and Love, by fall-
ing upon his Sword besore my Eyes.
ELse

<page 36>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 25
Bless me, Madam, said Miss Glanville, what
horrid Things come into your Head! I vow
you terrify me out of my Wits, to hear you.
There is no Occasion sor your Fears, in-
terrupted Arabella: Since we already suspect his
Designs, it will be very easy to prevent them:
Had the Princess of the Sanitations known the
satal Intentions of her despaii ing Lover, doubt-
less, she would have used some Precautions to
hinder him from executing them; sor want of
which, she saw the miserable Agilmond wel-
tering in his Blood at her Feet; and with Rea-
son accused herself of being the Cause of so
deplorable a Spectacle.
The Astonishment Miss Glanville viz% in, to
hear her Cousin talk in this Manner, kept her
from giving her any Interruption, while she re-
lated several other terrible Instances of Despair.
In the mean time, Sir George, who was im-
patient to go up to Lady Bella's Apartment,
having slattered himself into a Belief, that his
Letter was savourably received; and that he
should be permitted to hose at least; made a
short Visit to Sir Charles in his own Room; and,
accompanied by Mr. Glanville, who was resolv-
ed to see in what Manner Arabella received
him, went to her Apartment.
As he had taken Care, at his Entrance, to
accommodate his Looks to the Character he
had assumed of an humble despairing Lover,
Arabella no sooner saw him, but her Counte-
nance changed; and, making a Sign to Mr.
Glanville, who could not comprehend what
she meant, to seize upon the Guard of his
Sword, she hastily stept sorward to meet him.
Vol. II. C I am

<page 37>
26
The FEMALE Book V.
I am too well convinced, said she to Sir
George, that the Intent of your coming hither
To-day, is to commit some Violence against
yourself besore my Eyes; But listen not, I be-
seech you, to the Dictates of your Despair:
Live; 1 command you, live; and since you say,
I have the absolute Disposal of your Life, do
not deprive yourself of it, without the Consent
of her, on whom you profess to have bestowed
it.
Sir George, who did not imagine Arabella
would communicate his Letter to her Cousins,
and only expected some distant Hints from her
concerning it, was so consounded at this Re-
ception besore them, that he was not able to
reply: he'blushed, and turned pale alternately;
and, not daring to look, either upon Miss Glan-
t't'Ue, or her Brother, or to meet the Eyes of the
fair Visionary, who with great Impatience, ex-
pected his Answer, he hung down his Head
in a very silly Posture; and, by his Silence, con-
fiimed Arabella in her Opinion.
As he did not want sor Wit and Assurance,
during that Interval of Silence, and Expecta-
tion from all Parties; his Imagination suggested
to him the Means of extricating himself out of
the ridiculous Perplexity he was in; and as it
concerned him greatly to avoid any Quarrel
with the Brother and Sister, he determined to
turn the whole Matter into a Jest: but, if pos-
sible, to manage it so, that Arabella should not
enter into his Meaning.
Raising theresore his Eyes, and looking upon
Arabella with a melancholy Air;
You

<page 38>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 27
You are not deceived, Madam, said he: This
Criminal, with whom you are so justly offend -
ed, comes with an Intention to die at your
Feet, and breath out his miserable Lise, to ex-
piate those Crimes of which you accuse him:
But since your severe Compassion will oblige
me to live, I obey, oh! most divine, but cruel
Arabella! I obey your harsh Commands; and,
by endeavouring to live, give you a more con-
vincing Proof of that Respect and Submission
I lhall always have sor your Will.
I expected no less from your Courage and
Generosity, said Arabella, with a Look of great
Complacency; and since you so well know
how to imitate the great Lyfimachus in your
Obedience, I shall be no less acknowleging
than the sair Parisatis; but will have sor you
an Esteem equal to that Virtue I have ob-
served in you.
Sir George, having received this gracious Pro-
mise, with a-most prosound Bow, turned to
Mr. Glanville, with a kind of chastened Smile
upon his Countenance.
And, you, sortunate and deserving Knight,
said he, happy in the Affections os the sairest
Person in the World 1 grudge me not this small
Alleviation of my Missortunes; and envy me
not that Esteem, which alone is able to make
me suffer Life, while you possess, in the Heart
of the divine Arabella, a Felicity that might
be envied by the .greatest Monarchs in the
World.
As diverting as this Scene was, Mr. Glim-
wile was extremely uneasy: For though Sir
George's Stratagem took, and he believed he
C e was

<page 39>
;Æ8 The FEMALE Book V.
was only indulging the Gaiety of his Humour,
by carrying on this Farce; yet he could not
endure, he should divert himself at Arabella's
lixpence. The solemn Speech he had made him,
did indeed sorce him to smile; but he soon as-
sumed a graver Look, and told Sir George, in
a low Voice, that when he had finished his
Visit he should be glad to take a Turn with
him in the Garden.
Sir George promised to sollow him, and Mr.
Glanville left the Room, and went into the
Gardens; where the Baronet, having taken a
respectsul Leave of Arabella, and, by a fly
Glance, convinced Miss Glanville, he had sa-
crificed her Cousin to her Mirth, went to join
her Brother.
Mr. Glanville, as soon as he saw him, walk-
ed to meet him with a very reserved Air: Which
Sir George observing, and being resolved to keep
up his Humour;
What, inhuman, but too happy Lover, said
he, what, am I to understand by that Cloud
upon your Brow? Is it possible, that thou
canst envy me the small Comsort I have re-
ceived; and, not satisfied with the glorious
Advantages thou possesses*, wilt thou still deny
me that Esteem, which the divine Arabella
has been pleased to bestow upon me?
Pray, Sir George, said Mr. Glanville, lay
aside this pompous Style: I am not disposed to
be merry at present, and have not all the Re-
lish sor this kind of Wit, that you seem to ex-
pect. \I desired to see you here, that I might
tell you withont Witnesses, I take it extreme-
ly ill, you should presume to make my Cousin
4 the

<page 40>
Ghap. 4. QUIXOTE. zg
the Object of your Mirth. Lady 5*7/(7, Sir,
is not a Person, with whom such Liberties'
ought to be taken; nor will I, in the double
Character of her Lover and Relation, suffer it
from any one whatever.
Cruel fortune! said Sir George, stepping back
a little, and lifting up his Eyes, shall 1 al-
ways be exposed to thy Persecutions? And
must I, without any apparent Cause, behold
an Enemy in the Person of my Friend; who,
though, without murmuring, 1 resign to him-
the adorable Arabella, is yet resolved to dis-
pute with me, a Satissaction, which does not'
deprive him of any Part of that glorious For-
tune to which he is destined? Since it is so,
unjust and cruel Friend, pursued he, strike
this Bread which carries the Image of the
divine Arabella 5 but think not, that I will offer
to defend myself, or lift my Sword, against a
M-in beloved by her.
This is all very sine, returned Mr. Glan-
ville, hardly able to sorbear laughing; but 'tis
impossible, with all your Gaiety, to hinder me
srom being serious upon this Business.
Then be as serious as thou wilt, dear Charles,
interrupted Sir George, provided you will allow
me to be gay; and not pretend to infect me-
with thy unbecoming Gravity.
I have but a few Words to say to you, then,
Sir, replied Mr. Glanville: Either behave with
more Respect to my Cousin ., or prepare to
give me Satissaction, sor the Insults you offer .
her.
Oh ! I understand you, Sir, said Sir George;
and because you have taken it into your Head
C 3 to

<page 41>
30 <Tbe FEMALE Book V.
to be offended at a Trifle of no Consequence in
the World, I must give you a sair Chance to
run me through the Body ! There is something
very sooli'b, saith, in such an' extravagant Ex-
pectation: But since Custom has made it ne-
ceslary, that a Man must venture his Soul ami
Body upon these important Occasions, because
I will not be out os the Fashion,, you shall com-
mand me whenever you think fit; though I
shall sight with my Schoolfellow with a very
ill Will, I assure you.
There is no Necessity sor fighting, said Mr.
Glanville, blushing at the ludicrous Light, in
which the gay Baronet had placed his Challenge:
The Concession I have required, is very small,
and not worth the contesting sor, on your Side.
Lady Bella's Peculiarity, to which you contri-
bute so much, can afford you, at best, but an
iK-natured Diversion, while it gives me a real
Pain; and sure, you must acknowlege, you-
are doing me a very great Injury, when you
endeavour to cfinsirm a Lady, who is to be my
Wife, in a Behaviour that excites your Mirth,
and makes her a fit Object sor your Ridicule,
and Contempt.
You do Lady Bella a much, greater Injury
than I do, replied Sir George, by supposing,
she can ever be an Object of Ridicule and Con-
tempt: I think very highly of her Understand-
ing; and though the Bent of her Studies has
given her Mind a romantic Turn, yet the
Singularity of her Manners is sar less disagree-
able, than the lighter Follies of most ot her
Sex.
But

<page 42>
Chap, 4. QU I X O T E. 31
But to be absolutely perfect, interrupted Mr.
Glanville, I must cure her of that Singularity;
and theresore I beg you will- not persist in as-
suming a Behaviour consormable to her ro-
mantic Ideas; but rather help me to banish/thest*
from her Imagination.
Well, replied Sir Georger(ince you no longer
threateu, I'll do what I can to content you; but
I must quit my Heroics by Degrees, and sink
with Decency into my own Character; other-
wife she will never endure me in her Presence.
Arabella and M ss Glanville, appearing iu
the Walk, broke oft" the Conversation. The
Baronet and Mr. Glanville walked sorward to
meet them; but Arabella, who did ix>t desire
Company, struck into another Walk, whi-
ther Mr. Glanville sollowing, proposed to join
fier; when he saw his Father, who had beep
taking a Turn there alone, make up to Ara-
bella; and, supposing he would take that Opr
portunity to talk to her concerning him, he
went b*ck to his Sister and Sir Geerge, whose
Conversation he interrupted, to the greatRegret
of Miss Glanville.

<page 43>
32 The FEMALE Book V.
Chap. V.
In 'which will be found one of the former
Mistakes pursued, and another cleared
up, to the great Satisfaction of Two
Persons; among whom, the Reader, we
expect, will make a Third.
ARABELLA no sooner saw Sir Charles
advancing towards her, when, sensible of
the Consequence of being alone with a Per-
son whom she did not doubt, would make use
of that Advantage, to talk to her of Love, she
endeavoured to avoid him, but in vain; sor Sir
Charles, guessing her Intentions, walked hastily
up to her; and, taking hold of her Hand,
You must not go away, Lady Bella, said he:
I have something to say to you.
Arabella, extremely discomposed at this Be-
haviour, struggled to free her Hand from her
Uncle ; and giving him a Look, on which Dis-
dain and Fear were visibly painted,
Unhand me, Sir, said she," and sorce me not
to sorget the Respect I owe you, as my Uncle,
by treating you with a Severity such uncom-
mon Insolence demands.
Sir Charles, letting go her Hand in a great
Surprize, at the Word Insolent, which she had
used, asked her if she knew to whom she was
speaking?
(^ueflionless, I am speaking to my Uncle,
replied she; and 'tis with great Regret I fee
mysels obliged to make use of Expressions no
way

<page 44>
Chip. 5. QUIXOTE. 33
way consormable to the Respect I bear that
sacred Character.
And, pray, Madam, said Sir Charles, some-
what softened by this Speech, who is it that;
obliges you to lay aside that Respect you seem .
to acknowledge is due to your Uncle?
You do, Sir, replied she; and 'tis with in-
finite Sorrow, that I beheld you assuming a:
Character unbecoming the Brother of my Fa-..
then
This is pretty plain, indeed, interrupted Sir-
Charles: But pray, Madam, insorm me, what .
it is you complain of.
You, questionless, know much better than I.-
can tell you, replied Arabella, blushing, the
Offence I accuse you of; nor is it proper sor;
me to mention, what it would not become.me/
to suffer.
Zounds! cried Sir Cha,les, no longer able:
to suppress his growing Anger, this.is. enoughs .
tomake aMan mad.
Ah! I beseech you, Sir, resumed Arabella,
suffer not an unsortunate and ill-judged Pas-
sion to be the Bane of all your Happiness and
Virtue: Recall vour wandering Thoughts ; re--
fkct upon the Dishonour you will bring upon;
yourself, by persisting in such unji^stifiable Sen-
timents.
I do not know how it is possible to avoid it,.
said Sir Charles; and, notwithstanding all this i
sine Reasoning, there are few People but would s
sty into greater Extremities; but my Affection
sor you makes me .. - «
Hold, hold, I conjure you, Sir, interrupted
Arabella j force me not.to listen to such injurious-
C 5 Languagei

<page 45>
34 The FEMALE Book V.
Language; carry that odious Affection some-
where else; and do not persecute an unsortu-
nate Maid, who has contributed nothing to thy
Fault, and is only guilty of too much Com-
passion sor thy Weakness.
Good God, cried .Sir Charles, starting back,
and looking upon Arabella with Astonishment;
how I pity my Son! What would I not give, if
he did not love this Girl?
Think not, replied Arabella, that the Passion
your Son has sor me, makes your Condition a
bit the worse; sor I would be such as I am,
with respect to .you, were there no Mr. Glan-
•ville in the World.
I never thought, Niece, said Sir Charles, af-
ter a little Pause, that any Patt of my Beha-
viour could give you the Offence you com-
plain of, or authorize that Hatred and Con-
tempt you take the Liberty to express sor me:
But since it is so, I promise you, I will quit
vour House, and leave you to yourself; I have
always been solicitous sor your Welsare; and,
ungratesul as you are
Call me not ungratesul, interrupted Ara-
bella again: Heaven is my Witness, that had
you not sorgot I was your Niece, I would have
always remembered you was my Uncle; and
not only have regarded you as such, but have
looked upon you as another Father, under
whose Direction Providence had placed me,
since it had deprived me os my real Fathers and
whose Tenderness and Care, might have in
some measure supplied the Loss I had of him;
But Heaven has decreed it otherwise; and since
it is its Will, that I should be deprived os the
I - Comsort

<page 46>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 35
Comsort and Assistance my Orphan State re-
quires, I must submit, without murmuring, to>
my Destiny. Go then, unsortunate and la-
mented Uncle, pursued she, wiping some
Tears from her fine Eyes; go, and endeavour
by Reason and Absence to recover thy Re-
pose; and be assured, whenever you can con-
vince me you have triumphed over these Sen-
timents which now cause both our Unhappi-
ness, you shall have no Cause to complain of
my Conduct towards you.
Finishing these Words, she left him with so'
much Speed, that would have been impossible
sor him to have stopped her, though he
had intended it: But indeed, he was so lost in
Wonder and Consusion at a Behaviour sor
which he was not able to assign any other
Cause than Madness, that he remained sixed
in the same Posture of Surprize, in which she
had left him; and from which he was first in-
terrupted by the Voice of his Son, who, fet-
ing Arabella flying towards the House in great-
seeming Emotion, came to know the Result os
their Conversation.
Sir, said Mr. Glanville, who had spoken to
Us Father besore, but had no Answer, will
you not insorm me, what Success you have had
with my Cousin? How did she receive your
Proposal?
Speak of her no more, said Sir Charles, she
h a proud ungratesul Girl, and unworthy the
Affection you have sor her.
Mr. Glanville, who trembled to hear so un-
savourable an Answer to his Inquiries, w*s
struck dumb with his Surprize and Grief; when
C 6 Sir

<page 47>
36 The FEMALE Book V.
Sir Charles taking Notice of the Alteration in
his Countenance;
I am sorry, said he, to find you have set
your Heart'upon this santastic Girl: If ever
she be vour Wife, which i verv much doubt,
she-will make you very unhappy: Hut, Charles,
pursued ' he, I would advi'.e you to think no
more of her; content yourself with the Estate
you gain by her Rcufalof you: With that Ad-
dition to your ostii Fortune, you may pretend
to any Lady whatever ; and you will sind many
that aie sull as agreeable as \our Cousin, who
will be proud of your Addresses.
Indeed, Sir, Lid Mr. Glanville, with a Sigh,
there i> no Woman upon Earth whom I would
choose to marry, but Lady Delia: I flattered
myself, I had been happy enough to have made
some Progress in her Affection; but ir setms, I
was mistaken; however, I should be glad to
know, if she gave you any Reasons sor refusing
me.
Reasons! said Sir Charles: There is no mak-
ing her hear Reason, or expec/iing Reason from
her; I never knew so strange a VVoman in my
Life: She would not allow me to speak what
I intended concerning you ; but interrupted me,
every Moment, with some high flown SiusF or
other.
Then I have not lost all Hopes of her, cried
Mr. Glanville eagerly; sor since she did not
hear what you had to say, she could not pos-
sibly deny you.
tut (he behaved in a very impertinent Man-
ner to me, interrupted Sir Charles; complained
of my harsh Treatment of her; and said seve-
ral

<page 48>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 37
ral other things, which, because of her uncom-
mon Style, I could not perfectly understand;
yet they seemed shocking; and, upon the
Whole, treated me so rudely, that l am deter-
mined to leave her to herself, and trouble my
Head no more about her. .
For Gtfd'a Sake, dear Sir, said Mr, Glan-
ville,, alarmed at this Resolution, suspend youe
Anger, till I have seen my Cousin: There is
some Mistake, I am persuaded, in all this. I
know slie has some very odd Humours, which
you are not so well acquainted with, as I am.
I'll go to. her, and prevail upon her to explain
herself.
You may do so, if you please, replied Sir .
Charles; but I fear it will be to very little Pur-
pose; sor I really suspect her Head is a little
turned: I do not know what to do with her:
It is not fit she should have the Management of
herself; and yet 'tis impossible to live upon easy
Terms with her.
Mr. Glanville, who did not doubt but Ara-
bella had been guilty of some very ridiculous
Folly, offered nothing more in her Justifica-
tion; but, having attended his Father to his
own Chamber went to Arabella's Apartment.
He sound the pensive Fair-one, in a melan-
cholly Posture, her Head reclined upon one
of her sair Hands; and though her Eyes were
fixed upon a Book she held in the other, yet
she d;d not seem to re^d, but rather to be whol-
ly buried in Contemplation.
Mr. Glanville having so happily sound her
alone (sor her Women were not then in her
Chamber) seated himself near her; having first
asked

<page 49>
38 she FEMALE Book V.
aflced Pardon sor the Interruption he had given
to her Studies; and Arabella, throwing aside
her Book, prepared to listen to his Discourse;
which by the Agitation, which appeared in his
Looks, she imagined, would be upon some ex-
traordinary Subject.
I left my Father just now, said he, in a
great deal of Uneasiness, on account of some-
thing you said to him, Lady Bella: He ap-
prehends you are disobliged, and he would will-
ingly know how.
Has your Father then acquainted you with
the Subject of our Conversation? interrupted
Arabella.
I know what would have been the Subject of
your Conversation, replied Mr. GlanviIle, if
you had been pleased to listen to what Sir
Charles intended to say to you on my Be-
half.
On your Behalf? interrupted Arabella: Ah
poor deceived Glanvilte! how I pity thy blind
Sincerity? But it is not sor me to undeceive
thee: only thus much I may say to you, Be-
ware of committing your Inteiests to a Person,,
who will be a much better Advocate sor another
- than sor you.
Mr. Glanville, rejoiced to sind by these
Words, that her Resentment against his Fa-
ther was occasioned by a Suspicion so savour-
able sor him, assured her, that Sir Charles
wished sor nothing more earnestly, than that he
might be able to merit her Esteem 5 and that
it was to dispose her to listen to his Addiesses,
that he wanted to discourse with her that Morn-
ing.

<page 50>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 39
Mr. Glanville, being obliged, through his
Knowledge of his Cousin's Temper, to speak
to her in this distant Manner, went on with
his Assurances of his Father's Candour in this-
Respect; and Arabella, who would not de-
clare her Reasons sor doubting it, only replied,
that she wished Sir Charles meant all that he
had said to him; but that she could not per-
suade herself to believe him sincere, till his fu-
ture Actions had convinced her he was so.
Mr. Glanville, impatient to let his Father
know, how greatly he had been mistaken in
the Cause of Arabella's Behaviour, made his
Visit shorter than he would otherwisehave done,
in order to undeceive him.
Is it possible, said Sir Charles, when his Sore
had repeated the Conversation he had just had
with Arabella, that she could be so soolish, as
to imagine, I had a Design to propose any one
else to her but you? What Reason have I ever
given her, to think I would not be glad to
have her sor my Daughter-in-law? Indeed,
she has some odd Ways that are very disagree-
able; but she is one of the best Matches in
England sor all that: Poor Girl! pursued he,
she had Reason to be angry, if that was the
Cafe; and now I remember, she cried, when
I told her I would leave the House; yet her
Spirit was so great, thae she told me, I might
go. Well, I'll go and make it up with her;
but who could have imagined, she would have
been so soolish? Sir Charles, at the Repetition
of these Words, hurried away to Arabella's
Apartment.
Niece,

<page 51>
4o The FEMALE Book V.
Niece, said he at his Entrance, I am come'
to ask your Pardon, sor having led you into a
Belief, that I meant
. 'Tis enough, Sir, interrupted Arabella-!grant
you my Pardon sor what is past; and as it does not
become me to receive Submifiions Irom my
Uncle, while he remembers he is so, I will dis- -
pense with your Acknowledgments at present:
Only to convince me, that this sudden Altera-
tion is sincere, avoid, I beseech you, sor the su-
ture, all Occasions of displeasing me.
I protest, cried Sir Charles, that I never in-.
tended——
I will not hear you say a Word more of your
past Intentions, interrupted Arabella again; I.
have sorgot them all; and, while you con-
tinue to regard me as your Niece, I will never;
remember them to your Disadvantage.
Then I may hope, said Sir Charles .
Oh ! Heavens! cried Arabella, not suffering
him to proceed; do you come to insult me
thus, with a mock Repentance? And has my
Easiness in being so ready to sorget the In-
jury you would have done me, made you pre-
sumptuous enough to cherish an insolent Hope
that I will ever change my Resolution?
How vexatious is this! replied Sir Charles,
fretting to fee her continually mistaking him.
I swear to you, by all that is sacred, that 'tis'
my Son, sor who.n I would sollicit your Con-
sent.
How! said Arabella, astonished, Will you
then be just at last? And can you resolve to
plead sor that Son, whose Interelr, but a Mo-
ment ago, you would have destroyed?
I see,

<page 52>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 41
I see, said Sir Charles, it is impossible to
convince you.
No, no, interrupted Arabella, hastily; it is
not impossible but my own ardent Wishes that
it may be so, will help to convince me of the
Truth of what you say: For, in sine, do you
think, I shall not be as glad as yoursels, to sind
you capable of acting honourably by your Son;
and to see myself no longer the Cause of the
most unjustifiable Conduct imaginable?
Sir Charles was opening his Mouth, to press
her in Favour of Mr. Glanville; whom, not-
withstanding her strange Behaviour, he was
glad to sind, she loved; when Arabella pre-
venting him,
Seek not, I beseech you, said she, to de-
stroy that Bdief I am willing to give your
Words, by any more Attempts at this Time
to persuade me; sor truly, I shall interpret
your Sollicitude no way in your Favour ; there-
sore, if you desire I should be convinced you
are sincere, let the Silence I require of you, be
one Proof of it.
Sir Charles, who looked excessively out of
Countenance at such a peremptory'Command
from his Niece, was going out of her Cham-
ber in a very ill Humour, when the Dinner-
bell ringing, she gave him her Hand, with a
very gracious Air; and permitted him to lead
her into the Dining-room, where they sound
Mr. Glanville, his Sister, and Sir George, who
had been detained to Dinner by Miss Glan~
.ville, expecting their coming.
Chap.

<page 53>
42 FEMALE Book V.
C H A p. VI.
Containing some Account of Thalestris,
Queen of the Amazons, with other
curious Anecdotes.
IADY Bella having recovered her usu-ai
_j Chearsulnefe, thro' the Satissaction she
felt at her Uncle's returning to Reason, ai>d
the Abatement she perceived in Sir George %
extreme Melancholy, mixed in the Conversa-
tion with that Wit and Vivacity which was
natural to her, and which so absolutely charmed
the whole Company, that not one of them re-
membered any of her sormer Extravagancies.
Mr. Glanville gazed on her with a passionate
Tenderness, Sir George with Admiration, and
the old Baronet with Wonder and Delight.
But Miss Glanville, who was inwardly vexed
at the Superiority her Cousin's Wit gave her
over herself, wished sor nothing more than an
Opportunity of interrupting a Conversation in
which she could have no Share; and, willing
to put them in mind os some of Arabellas
strange Notions, when she observed them
disputing concerning some of the Actions of
the antient Romans, she very innocently asked
Sir George, whether in sormer Times Women
went to the Wars, and sought like Men? For
my Cousin, added she, talks of one Tbaliris, a
Woman, that was as couragious as any Soldier
whatever.
Mr.

<page 54>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. 43
Mr. Glanville, horridly vexed at a Question
that was likely to engage Arabella in a Discourse
very different from that she had been so capa-
ble of pleasing in, frowned very intelligibly at
his Sister; and, to prevent any Answer being
given to her absurd Demand, directed some
other Conversation to Arabella: But she, who
saw a savourite Subject started, took no Notice
of what Mr. Glanville was saying to her; but,
directing her Looks to Sir George,
Though Miss Glanville, said she, be a little
mistaken in the Name of that sair Queen she
has mentioned; yet I am persuaded you know
whom she means; and that it is the renowned
Tbalejlris, whose Valour staggers her Belief,
and of whom she wants to be insormed.
Ay, ay, Tbalejlris, said Miss GlanvilU: It
is such a strange Name I could not remember
it; but, pray, was there ever such a Person?
Certainly, Madam, there was, replied Sir
George : She was Queen of the Amazons, a war-
like Nation of Women, who possessed great
Part of Cappadocia, and extended their Con-
quests so sar, that they became sormidable to all
their Neighbours.
You find, Miss, said Arabella, I did not at-
tempt to impose upon you," when I told you
of the admirable Valour" of that beautisul
Queen; which indeed was so great, that the
united Princes, in whose Cause she sought,
looked upon her Assistance to be equal to that
of a whole Army; and they honoured her
accordingly, with the most distinguishing Marks
of their Esteem and Acknowlegement, and
offered her the chief Command of their Forces.
O shame-

<page 55>
44 Tie FEMALE Hook V.
0 ftamesul! cried Sir Charles, offer a
Woman the Command of an Army! Brave
Fellows indeed, that would be commanded by
a- Woman! Sure you mistake, Niece; there
never was such a thing heard of in the World.
What, Sir, said Arabella, will you contradict
a Fact attested by the greatest Historians that
ever were? You may as well pretend to say,
there were never such Persons as Oroondates or
Juba, as dispute the Existence of the samous
Thalejlris.
Why, pray, Madam, said Sir Charles, who
were those?
One of them, replied Arabella, was the
great King of Srythia; and the other, Prince
of the Two Mauritania!.
Ods-heart! intertupted Sir Charles, I believe
their Kingdoms are in the Moon : I never heard?
of Scythia, or the Two Mauritanias, besore.
And yet, Sir, replied Arabella, those King-
doms are doubtless as well known, «s France
or England; and there is no Question, but the
Descendants of the great Oroondates, and the
valiant Juba, sway the Sceptres of them to this-
Day.
1 must confess, said Sir George, I have a
very great Admiratiojj sor those Two renowned
Princes, and have read their beautisul Exploits
with insinite Pleasure; notwithstanding which,
I am more inclined to esteem the great Arta-
ban, than either of them.
Though Artaban, replied Arabella, is without
Question, a Warrior equal to either of them*
and- haply no Person in the World poflelsed' so
sublime a Courage as his was; yet, it may be,
your
A

<page 56>
Cnap. 6. Q.UIXOTE. 45
your Partiality proceeds from another Cause;
and you having the Honour to resemble him in
some little Infidelities he was accused of, with
less Justice than yourself perhaps, induces you
to savour him more than any other.
Arabella blushed when she ended these
Words: And Sir George replied, with a Sigh;
I have, indeed, the Honour, Madam, to re-
semble the great Artaban, in having dared to
raise my Thoughts towards a Divine Person,
who, with Reason, condemns my Adorations.
Hey-day ! cried Sir Charles, are you going
to speak of Divine Things, after all the Fables
you have been talking of? Troth, I love to
hear young Men enter upon such Subjects: But
pray, Niece, who told you Sir George was an
Insidel >
Mr. Glanvil'e, replied Arabella: And I am
inclined to think he spoke Truth; sor Sir
George has never pretended to deny it.
How! interrupted Sir Charles; I am sorry
to hear that. I hope you have never, added
he, looking at the young Baronet, endea-
voured to corrupt my Son with any of your
Free-thinking Principles: I am sor every
body having Liberty of Conscience; but I
cannot endure to hear People of your Stamp
endeavouring to propagate your mischievous
Notions; and because you have no Regard sor
your own suture Happiness, disturbing other
People in the laudible Pursuit of theirs.
We will not absolutely condemn Sir George,
said Arabella, till we have heard his History
from his own Mouth, which he promised, some
Time ago, to relate when I desired it.
I do

<page 57>
46 tbt FEMALE Book V.
I do not imagine his History is fit to be beard
by Ladies, said Sir Charles; sor your Insidels
live a strange kind of Lise.
However that may be, replied Arabella, we
must not dispense with Sir George from per-
forming his Promise: I dare say there are no
Ladies here, who will think the worse of him
sor freely confessing his Fauks.
You may answer sor yourself, if you please,
M'idam, said Sir Charles; but I hope my Girl
there, will not say as much,
I dare say my Cousin is not so rigid, said
Arabella: She has too much the Spirit of Ju-
lia in her, to sind Fault with a little Insidelity.
parisons, Cousin, said Miss Glanvillt: I sup-
pose this is greatly to my Advantage too.
I assure you, Madam, said Sir George, Lady
Bella has done you no Injury by the Compari-
son she has just now made; sor Julia was one
of the sinest Princesses in the Worid.
Yet she was not free from the Suspicion of
Insidelity, replied Arabella; but though I do
not pretend to tax my Cousin with that Fault,
yet it is with a great deal of Reason that I say
she resembles her in her volatile Humour.
I was never thought to be ill-humoured in
my Lise, Madam, said Miss Glanville, co-
louring; and I cannot imagine what Reason I
have given you sor saying I am.
Nay, -Cousin, said Arabella, I am not con-
demning your Humou?; sor, to say the Truth,
there are a great many Charms in a volatile
Disposition; and, notwithstanding the admirable
Beauty of Julia, it is possible she made as
I am always obliged

Corn-
many

<page 58>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. 47
many Slaves by her light and airy Carriage, as
she did by her Eyes, though they were the
sairest in the World, except the divine Cleo-
patra's.
Cleopatra! cried Sir Charles: Why she was
a Gypsey, was she not?
I never heard her called so, said Arabella,
gravely; and I am apt to believe you are not at
all acquainted with her: But pray, pursued she,
let us wave this Discourse at present, and pre-
pare to listen to Sir George's Relation of his
Life: which, I dare say, is sull of very extra-
ordinary Events: However, Sir, added she, di-
recting her Speech to the young Baronet, I am
afraid your Modesty will induce you to speak
with less Candour than you ought, of those
great Actions, which questionless you have per-
sormed: Theresore we shall hear your History,
with greater Satissaction, from the Mouth of
your saithsul Squire, who will not have the
same Reasons that you have, sor suppressing
what is most admirable in the Adventures of
your Life.
Since it is your Pleasure, Madam, replied
Sir George, to hear my Adventures, I will re-
count them as well as I am able myself, to
the End that I may have an Opportunity of
obliging you by doing some Violence to my na-
tural Modesty, which will not suffer me to re-
late Things the World have been pleased to
speak of to my Advantage, without some little
Consusion.
Then, casting down hisEyes^ he seemed to
be recollecting the most material Passages in his
Life. Mr. Glanville, though he could have
wished

<page 59>
48 the FEM ALE Book V.
wished he had not indulged Arabella in her ridi-
culous Request, was not able to deny himself
the Diversion of hearing what kind of History
he would invent; and theresore resolved to stay
and listen to him.
Miss Glanville was also highly delighted with
the Proposal; but Sir Charles, who could not
conceive there could be any. thing wortn
listening to, in a young Rake's Account of
himseF, got up with an Intention to walk in
the Garden; when, perceiving it rained, he
changed his Resolution, and resuming his Seat,
prepared to listen, as every one else did, to the
expected Story.
When Sir George, aster having paused a
Quarter of an Hour longer, during which all
the Company observed a prosound Silence, be-
gan his Relation in this Manner, addressing
himself to Arabella.
End as tht Fifth BOOK.

<page 60>
[ 49 ]

THE
Female Qjji x o t e.
BOOK VI.
Chap. I.
Containing the Beginning of Sir George'j
History; in which the ingenious Relator
has exactly copied the Stile of Romance.
HOUGHat present, Madam,
you behold me in the Quality of a
private Gentleman, in the Posses-
sion only of a tolerable Estate;
yet my Birth is illustrious enough:
My Ancestors having sormerly
worn a Crown; which, as they won by their
Valour, so they lost by their Missortune only.
How, interrupted Sir Charles, are you de-
scended from Kings? Why, I never heard you
say so besore: Pray, Sir, how sar a-e you re-
Vol. II. D moyeJ


<page 61>
50 The FEMALE Book VI.
moved from Royal Blood? and which of your
Foresathers was it that wore a Crown?
Sir, replied Sir George, it is not much more
than eight Hundred Years since my Ancestors,
who were Saxons, swayed the Sceptre of Kent;
and from the first Monarch of that mighty
Kingdom, am I lineally descended.
Pray where may that Kingdom of Kent lie?
said Sir Charles.
Sir, replied Sir George, it is bounded by Sus-
sex on the South-West; Surry on the West; the
English Channel on the South ; Dover Streights
on the South Ealt; and the Dowhs on the East;
and it is divided from Middlesex and Essex on
the North by the Thames.
A mighty Kingdom, indeed ! said Sir Charles:
Why, it makes but a very small Part of the King-
dom of Britain now: Well, if your Ancestors
were Kings os that County, as it is now called, it
mast be confessed their Dominions were very
small.
However that may be, said Arabella, it raises
Sir George greatly in my Esteem, to hear he is
descended from Kings; sor, truly, a Royal Ex-
traction does insinitely set off noble and valiant
Actions, and inspires only lofty and gelierous
Sentiments: Theresore, illustrious Prince (sor
in that Light I shall always consider you), be
assured, though Fortune has despoiled you of
your Dominions, yet since she cannot deprive
you of your Courage and Virtue, Providence
will one Day assist your noble Endeavours to
recover your Rights, and place you upon the
Throne of your Ancestors, from whence you
have been so inhumanly driven: Or, haply, to
repair

<page 62>
Chap. f. QUIXOTE. 51
repair that Loss, your Valour may procure you
other Kingdoms, no leTs considerable than that
to which you was born.
For Heaven's sake, Niece, said Sir Charles,
How come such improbable Things into your
Head? Is it such an easy Matter, think you, to
conquer Kingdoms, that you can flatter ayoung
Man, who has neither Fleets nor Armies, with
such strange Hopes?
The great Artaban, Sir, resumed Arabella,
had neither Fleets nor Armies, and was Master
only of a single Sword; yet he soon saw him-
self greater than any King, disposing the De-
stinies of Monarchs by his Will, and deciding
the Fates of Empires by a single Word: But
pray let this Dispute rest where it is, and per-
mit Sir George to continue his Relation.
It is not necessary, Madam, resumed Sir
George, to acquaint you with the Missortunes
os my Family, or relate the several Progres-
sions it made towards the private Condition in
which it now is: For, behiies that reciting the
Events of so many Hundred Years may haply,
in some Measure, try your Patience, I should
be glad if you would dispense with me from
entering into a Detail of Accidents that would
sensibly afflict me: It shall sussice, theresore, to
insorm you, that my Father, being a peaceable
Man, sond of Retirement and Tranquillity,
made no Attempts to recover the Sovereignty
from which his Ancestors had been unjustly
expelled; but quietly beheld the Kingdom of
Kent in the Possession of other Masters, while
he contented himself with the Improvement of
that small Pittance of Ground, which was all
D 2 that

<page 63>
52 The FEMALE Book VI.
that the unhappy Prince Veridomer, my Grand-
sather, was able to bequeath to him.
Hey-day! cried Sir Charles, will you new-
christen your Grandsather, when he has been
in his Grave these Forty Years? I knew ho-
nest Sir Edward Bellmour very well, though I
was but a Youth when he died; but I be-
lieve no Person in Kent ever gave him the
Title of Prince Verldomer: Fie ! fie ! these are
idle Brags.
Sir George, without taking Notice os the old
Baronet's Heat, went on with his Narration in
this Manner:
Things were in this State, Madam, when I
was born. I will not trouble you with the
Relation of what I did in my Infancy.
No, pray (kip over all that, interrupted Sir
Charles; I suppose your Insancy was like other
People's; what can there be worth hearing in
that?
You are deceived, Sir, said Arabella : The
Insancy of illustrious Personages has always
something very extraordinary in it; and from
their childish Words and Actions there have
been often Presages drawn of their suture
Greatness and Glory.
Not to disoblige Sir Charles, however, said
the young Prince of Kent, I will not repeat
many things, which I said and did in the first
Years of my Life, that those about me thought
very surprising; and from them prognosti-
cated, that very strange Accidents would besal
me.
I have been a Witness of some very unsa-
vourable Prognostics of you, said Sir Charles,
smiling;

<page 64>
Chap. r. QUIXOTE. 53
smiling; sor you was the most unlucky bold -
Spark, that ever I'knew in my Life.
Tis very certain^ pursued Sir George, that the
Forwardness of my Spirit gave great Uneasiness
to my Father; who, being, as I said besore, in-
clinable to a peaceable and sedentary Life, en-
deavoured as much as possible to repress that
Vivacity in my Disposition, which he feared
might involve me in dangerous Enterprizes.
The Pains he took in my Education, I re-
compensed by a more than ordinary Docility ;'
and, besore I was Thirteen, persormed all my
Exercises with a marvellous Grace; and, if'I'
may dare say so, was, at those early Years, the
Admiration and Wonder of all that saw me.
Lady Bella had some Reason to fear your
Modesty, Ifind, said Sir Charles, smiling; sor,
methinks you really speak too slightly of your
Excel le ncies.-
Howeverthat may be, resumed Sir George;
my Father saw these early Instances of a tower-
ing Genius in me, with a Pleasure, chastened
by his Fears, that the Grandeur of my Courage
would lead me to attempt something sor the
Recovery of that Kingdom, which was my
Due ; and which might haply occasion his losing
me.
Possessed with these Thoughts, he caresully
avoided saying any thing to me concerning the
glorious Pretences, to which my Birth gave me
a Right; and often wished it had been possible
sor him to conceal from me, that I was the
true and lawsul Heir of the Kingdom of Kent;
a Circumstance he never chose to mention to
D 3 any

<page 65>
54 The FEMALE Bock Vs.
any Person, and would have been glad, if it
had always remained a Secret.
And so it Was a Secret, interrupted Sir
Charles; sor, till this Day, I never heard of it;
and it might still have been a Secret, if you had
pleared; sor nobody, I dare say, would suspect
such a Thing; and very few, I believe, will
be inclined to think there is any thing in such
ai improbable Tale.
Notwithstanding all my Fathet'sEndeavouri
to the contrary, Madam, pursued Sir George^
I cherished those towering Sentiments, the
Knowlege of my Birth inspired me with; and
it was not without the utmost Impatience, that
I brooked the private Condition, to which I
sound myself reduced.
Cruel Fate! would I sometimes cry; was it
not enough to deprive me of that Kingdom,
w hich is my Due, and subject me to a mean,
and inglorious State; but, to make that Condi-
tion insinitely more grievous, must: thou |»iv,e
me a Soul towering above my abject for-
tune? A Soul, that cannot but disdain the base
Submission, I must pay to those, who triumph
in the Spoils of my ruined House? A Soul,
which sees nothing above its Hopes and Ex-
pectations ? And, in sine, a Soul, that excites
me daily <o attempt Things worthy of my
Birth, and those noble Sentiments 1 inherit
srom my great Foresathers? Ah! pursued I,
unhappy Bellmour; what hinders thee from
making thyself known and acknowledged sor
what thou art? What hinders thee from bold-
ly asserting thy j_ust and natural Rights; ^nd
from

<page 66>
Chap. i. QJJ I X O T E. 55
from defying the Usurper, who detains them
from thee? What hinders thee, I say?
What? Interrupted Sir Charles, why the
Fear of a Halter, I suppose: There is nothing
more easy than to answer that Question.
Such, Madam, said Sir George, weie the
Thoughts, which continually disturbed my,
Imagination; and, doubtless, they had not sail-,
ed to push me on to some hazardous Enter-
prize, had not a fatal Passion interposed; and
by irs sweet, but dangerous Allurements,
stifled sor a while that Flame, which Ambi-
tion, and the Love of Glory, kindled in my
Soul.
Sir George here pausing, and fixing his Eye»
with a melancholy Air on the Ground, as if
prest with a tender Remembrance j, . .
Mr. Glanvllle alked him, smiling, If the
Thoughts of poor Dolly disturbed him? Pray,
added he, give us the History of your first
Love, without any Mixture of Fable; or shall
I take the Trouble off you? For you know, I
am very well acquainted with your Affair with
the pretty Milk-maid, andean tell it very suc-
cinctly.
'Tis true, Sir, said Sir George, sighing, I
cannot reca'.l the Idea of Dorothea, into my
Remembrance, without some Pain: That sair,
but unsaithsul Sheperdess, who first taught me
to sigh, and repaid my Tenderness with the
blackest Insidelity: Yet I will endeavour to
compose myself, and go on with my Narra-
tion.
Be pleased to know then, Madam, pursued
Sir George, that having my Thoughts, in this
D 4 manner,

<page 67>
56 Tfo FEMALE Book VI.
manner, wholly employed with the Disasters
of my Family, I had arrived to my seventeenth
Year, without being sensible of the Power of
Love; but the Moment now arrived, which
was to prove satal to my Liberty. Following
the Chace one Day with my Father, and some
other Gentlemen, I happened to lag a little be-
hind them; and, being taken up with my ordi-
nary Reflections, I lost my Way, and wander-
ed a long time, without knowing or consider-
ing whither I was going. Chance at last con-
ducted me to a pleasant Valley, surrounded
with Trees: and, being tired with riding, I
lighted, and tying my Horse to a Tree, walked
sorward, with an Intention to repose myself a
few Moments under the Shade of one of those
. Trees, that had attracted my Observation: But
while I was looking sor the most convenient
Place, I spied, at the Distance of some few
Yards from me, a Woman lying asleep upon
the Grass: Curiosity tempted me to go nearer
this Person; and, advancing softly, that I
might not disturb her, I got near enough to
have a View of her Person: But, ah! Hea-
vens! what Wonders did my Eyes encounter
in this View! The Age of this sair Sleeper
seemed not to exceed Sixteen; her Shape was
sormed with the exactest Symmetry; one of her
Hands supported her Head; the other, as it
lay careldly stretched at her Side, gave me an
Opportunity of admiring its admirable Colour
and Proportion: The thin Covering upon her
Neck discovered Part of its inimitable Beauty
to my Eyes; but her Face, her lovely Face,
sixed all my Attention.
Certain

<page 68>
Chap. r. QUIXOTE. 57
Certain it is, Madam, that, out of this Com-
pany, it would be hard to sind any thing so
perfect, as what I now viewed. Her Com-
plexion was the purest White imaginable,
heightened by the inchanting Glow, which
dyed her sair Cheeks with a Colour like that
of a new-blown Rose: Her Lips, sormed with
the greatest Perfection, and of a deeper Red,
seemed to receive new Beauties from the Fra-
grance of that Breath that parted from them.
Her auburn Hair fell in loose Ringlets over he-
Neck; and some straggling Curls, that played
upon her fair Forehead, set off by a charming
Contrast the Whiteness of that Skin it partly
hid: Her Eyes indeed were closed; and though
I knew not whether their Colour and Beauty
were equal to those other Miracles in her Face,
yet thtir Proportion seemed to be large; and
the snowy Lids, which covered them, were
admirably set off by those long and sable Lashes
that adorned them.
For some Moments I gazed upon this love- -
ly Sleeper, whelly lost in Wonder and Admira-
tion.
Where, whispered I, where has this Miracle'
been concealed, that my Eyes were never bles-
sed with the Sight of her besore? These Words,
though I uttered them softly, and with the -
utmost Caution; yet by the murmuring Noise -
they made, caused an Emotion in the beauteous-
Sleeper, that she started, and presently after -
opened her Eyes: But what Words shall I sind
to express the Wonder, the Astonishment, and
Rapture, which the sight of those bright Stars
inspired me with? The Flames which darted
D 5 from

<page 69>
58 The F E M A L E Book VI.
from those glorious Orbs, cast such a dazling
Splendor upon a Sight too weak to bear a
Radiance so unusual, that, stepping back a few
Paces, I contemplated at a Distance, that
Brightness, which began already to kindle a
consuming Fire in my Soul.
Bless me! interrupted Sir Charles, con-
founded at so pompous a Description; who
could this be?
The pretty Milk-maid, Dolly Acorn, replied
"^ArfGlanville gravely: Did you never fee her,
Sir, when you was at your Seat, at?
She used often to bring Cream to my Lady.
Aye, aye, replied Sir Charles, I remember
her: She was a very pretty Girl: And so it was
from her Eyes, that all those Splendprs and
Flames came, that had like to have burnt you
up, Sir George: Well, well, I gues$ how the
Story will end: Pray let us hear it out*
I have already told yog, Madam, resumed
Sir George, the marvelous Effects the Sight of
those bright Eyes produced upon my Spirit: I
remained fixed in a Posture of Astonishment
and Delight; and all the Faculties of my Soul
were so absorbed in the Contemplation of the
Miracles besore me, that I believe, had she
still continued besore my Eyes, I should never
have moved from the Place where I then stood:
But the sair Virgin, who had spied me at the
small Distance to which I was retired, turned
hastily about, and flew away with extraordi-
nary Swiftness;
When Love, now lending me Wings, whom
Admiration had besore made motionless, I per-
sued her so eagerly, that at last I overtook her;
and, .

<page 70>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. 59
and, throwing myself upon my Knees besore
her,
Stay, I conjure you, cried I; and if you be
a Divinity, as your celestial Beauty makes me
believe, do not resuse the Adoration 1 offer
you: But if, as I most ardently wish, you are
a Mortal, though sure the sairest that ever
graced the Earth; flop a Moment, to look up-
on a Man, whose Relpects sor you as a Mor-
tal sall little short of those Adorations he offers
you as a Goddess.
I can't but think, cried Sir Charles, laughing,
how poor Dolly must be surprised at such arho-
domontade Speech!
Oh, Sir! replied Mr. Glanville, you will
sind she will make as good a one.
Will she, by my Troth, said Sir Charles: I
don't know how to believe it.
Tl^is Action, pursued Sir George, and the
Words I uttered, a little surprised that sair
Maid, and brought a Blush into her lovely
Cheeks; but recovering herself, she replied
with an admirable Grace,
lam no Divinity, said she; and theresore
your Adorations are misplaced: But if, as you
say, my Countenance moves you to any Re-
spect sor me, give me a Proof of it, by not
endeavouring to hold any surther Discourse
with me, which is not permitted me from one
of your Sex and Appearance.
A very wife Answer, indeed! interrupted
Sir Charles again: Very few Town Ladies
would have disclaimed the Title of Goddess, if
their Lovers had thought proper to bestow it
D 6 upon

<page 71>
6o stfFEMALE Book VI.
upon them. I am mightily pleased with the
Girl sor her Ingenuity.
The Discretion of so young a Damsel, re-
sumed Sir George, charmed me no less than
her Beauty; and I besought her, with theut-
jriost Earnestness, to permit me a longer Con-
versation with her.
Fear not, lovely Virgin, said I, to listen to
the Vows of a Man, who, till he saw you,
never learnt to sigh: My Heart, which de-
fended its Liberty against the Charms of many
admirable Ladies, yields, without Reluctance,
to the pleasing Violence your Beauties lay
upon me. Yes, too charming and dangerous
Stranger, I am no longer my own Master: It
is in your Power to dispose of my Destiny:
Consider theresore, I beseech you, whether
you can consent to see me die? For I swear to
you, by the most sacred Oaths, unless you pro-
mise to have some Compassion on me, I will
no longer behold the Light of Day.
You may easily conceive, Madam, that, con-
sidering this lovely Maid in the Character of
a Shepherdess, in which she appeared, 1 made
her a Declaration of my Passion, without think-
ing myself obliged to observe those Respects,
which, to a Person of equal Rank with myself,
Decorum would not have permitted me to sor-
get.
However, she repelled my Boldness with
so charming a Modesty, that I began to be-
lieve, she might be a Person of illustrious Birth,
disguised under the mean Habit she wore : But,
having requests d her to insorm me whostie was,
Qie told me her N;:me was Dorstbea; and that
she

<page 72>
Chip. i. QUIXOTE. 61
she was Daughter to a Farmer, that lived in
the neighbouring Valley. This Knowledge in-
creasing my Considence, I talked to her os my
Passion, without being the least afraid of of-
fending her.
And therein you was greatly to blame, said
Arabella: For, truly, though the sair Dorothea
told you, she was Daughter to a Farmer; yet,
in all Probability, she was of a much higher
Extraction, if the Picture you have drawn of
her be true.
The sair Arstnoe, Princess of Armenia, was
constrained sor a while to conceal her true
Name and Quality, and pass sor a simple
Country-woman, under the Name of Delia:
Yet the" generous Philadelph, Prince ofCiiicia,
who saw and loved her under that Disguise,
treated her with all the Respect he would have
done, had he known she was the Daughter os a
King. In like manner, Prince Philoxipes, who
fell in Love with the beautisul Poiicrete, besore
he knew she was the Daughter of the great
Solon; and while he looked upon her as a poor
Stranger, born of mean Parents; nevertheless,
his Love supplying the Want of those Advan-
tages of Birth and Fortune, he wooed her with
a Passion as sull of Awe and Delicacy, as if her
Extraction had been equal to his own. And
theresore those admirable Qualities the sair
Dorothea possessed, might also have convinced:
you, she was not what she seemed, but haply,
some great Princess in Disguise.
To tell you the Truth, Madam, replied Sir
George, notwithstanding the sair Dorothea in-
sormed me, she was of a mean Descent, I could
4 not

<page 73>
62 The FEMALE Book VI.
not easily sorego the Opinion, that she was of
an illustrious Birth: And the Histories of those
sair Princesses you have mentioned, coming in-
to my Mind, I also thought it very possible,
that this divine Person might either be the
Daughter of a great King, or Lawgiver, like
them; but, being wholly engrossed by the Vio-
lence of my new-born Affection, I listened to
nothing, but what molt flattered my Hopes;
and, addressing my lovely Shepherdess with all
the Freedom of a Person who thinks his Birth
much superior to hers; she listened to my Pro-
testations, without any seeming Reluctance,.
and condescended to assure me besore we part-
ed, that she did not hate me. So sair a Begin-
ning, seemed to promise me the most savour-
able Fortune I could with Reason expect. I
parted from my sair Shepherdess with a thousand
Vows of Fidelity; exacting a Promise from
her, that she would meet me as often as she
conveniently could, and have the Goodness to
listen to those Assurances of inviolable Tender-
ness my Passion prompted me to offer her.
When she left me, it seemed as if my Soul had
sorsaken my Body to go after her: My Eyes
pursued her Steps as long as she was in Sight; i
envied the Ground she prest as she went along,
and the Breezes that kissed that celestial
Countenance in their Flight.
For some Hours I stood in the same Posture
in which she had left me; con'emplating the
sudden Change I had experienced in my Heart,
and the Beauty of that divine Image, which
was now engraven in it. Night drawing on, I
began to think os going home; and, untying my
Horse,

<page 74>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 63
Horse, I returned the Way I had come; and
at last struck into a Road, which brought me
to the Place where I parted from the Company;
from whence I easily sound my Way home,
so changed both in my Looks and Carriage,
that my Father, and all my Friends, observed
the Alteration with some Surprize.
Chap. II.
In which Sir George, continuing his sur-
prising History, relates a most stupen-
dous Instance os a Valour only to be pa- .
rallelled by that os the great Oroondates,
Cæsareo, &c. &c. &c.
FOR some Months, continued Sir Gemge,
I prosecuted my Addresses to the admir-
able Dorothea i and I slattered myself with a
Hope, that I had made some Progress in her
Heart: But, alas! this deceitsul Fair-one, who
only laughed at the Torments she made me en-
dure, at the Time she vowed eternal Constan-
cy to me, gave her Hand to a Lover of her Fa- *
ther's providing, and abandoned me, without
Remorse, to the most cruel Despair.
I will not trouble you, Madam, with the
Repetition of those Complaints, which this
perfidious Action drewfrom me sor a longTime.
At length, my Courage enabling me to over-
come the Violence of my Grief, I resolved to
think of the ungratesul Dorothea no more; and
2 the

<page 75>
64 The FEMALE Book VI.
the Sight of another Beauty compleating my
Cure, I no longer remembred the unsaithsul
Shepherdess, but with Indifference.
Thus, Madam, have I saithsully related one
of those Infidelities, wherewith my Enemies
slander me; who can support their Assertion,
with no better Proof, than that I did not die,
when Dorothea abandoned me: But I submit
it to your Candour, whether an unsaithsul
Mistress deserved such an Instance of Affection,
from a Lover she had betrayed?
Why, really, replied Arabella, after a little
Pause, you had some Excuse to plead sor your
Failure in this Point: And though you cannot
be called, the most perfect amongst Lovers,
seeing you neither died, nor was in Danger of
dying; yet neither ought you to be ranked
among those who are most culpable: But pray
proceed in your Story; I shall be better able to
sorm a right Judgment of your Merit as a Lo-
ver, when I have heard all your Adventures..
My Passion sor Dorothea, resumed Sir George,
being cured by her Treachery towards trie,
the Love of Glory began again to revive in my
Soul. I panted after some Occasion to signa-
lize my Valour, which yet I had met with no
Opportunity of doing; but, hearing, that a
mighty Army was preparing to march upon a
secret Expedition, I privately quitted my Fa-
ther's Seat; and attended only by my saithsul
'Squire, I took the same Route the Army had
taken, and arrived the Day besore the terrible
Battle of was sought, where, without
making myself known, I persormed such Pro-
digies of Valour, as astonished all who beheld
me.

<page 76>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 65
me. Without doubt, I should have been highly
caressed by the Commander, who certainly
would have given me the Honour of a Victory
my Sword alone had procured sor him; but,
having unwittingly engaged myself too sar in
Pursuit of the flying Enemy, I sound myself
alone, encompassed with a Party of about Five
hundred Men; who seeing they were pursued,
only by a single Man, saced about, and pre-
pared to kill or take me Prisoner.
Pray, Sir, interrupted Sir Charles, when did
all this happen? and how came it to pass, that
your Friends have been ignorant to this Mo-
ment of those Prodigies of Valour you per-
formed at that Battle? I never heard you was
ever in a Battle: Fame has done you great In-
justice, by concealing the Part you had in that
samous Victory.
The great Care I took to conceal myself,
replied Sir George, was one Reason why my
Friends did not attribute to me the Exploits,
which the Knight in black Armour, who was
no other than myself, persormed; and the Ac-
cident I am going to relate, prevented my be-
ing discovered, while the Memory of those
great Exploits were yet fresh in the Minds of
those 1 had so greatly obliged.
Be pleased to know, theresore, Madam, that
seeing myself about to be encompassed by this.
Party of the Enemy, I disdained to fly; and,
though I was alone, resolved to sustain their
Attack, and sell my Life as dear as possible.
Why, if you did so, you was a Madman,
cried Sir Charles in a Heat: The bravest Man
that ever lived, would not have plesumed to
fight

<page 77>
66 The FEMALE Book Vs.
6ghtwith so great a Number ot Enemies. What
could you expect, but to be cut in Pieces?
Pooh ! pooh! don't think any body will credit
su,ch a ridiculous Tale: I never knew you was
so addicted to—
Lying, perhaps, the good Knight would have
said; but Sir George, who was concerned he
was present at his Legend, and could not
blame him sor doubting his Veracity, prevent-
ed his Utterance of a Word he would be oblig-
ed to take ill, by. abruptly going on with his
Story.
Placing my Back theresore against a Tree,
pursued he, to prevent my being assaulted be-
hind, I presented my Shield to the boldest of
these Assailants; who, having struck an impo-
tent Blow upon it, as he was listing up his Arm
to renew his Attack, I cut it off with one
Stroke of my Sword; and the same Instant
plunged it to the Hik in the Breast of another,
and clove the Scull of a third, who was mak-
ing at me, in two Parts.
Sir Charlei^ at this Relation, burst into a
loud Fit of Laughter; and, being more inclined
to divert himself, than be offended at the Folly
and Vanity of the young Baronet, he permitted
him to go on with his surprising Story, with-
out giving him any other Interruption.
These three Executions, Madam, pursued
Sir George, were the Effects only of so many
Blows; which raised such Indignation in my
Enemies, that they prest sorward in great Num-
bers to destroy me; but, having, as I besore
said, posted myself so advantageously, that I
could only be assaulted besore, not more than
Three

<page 78>
Ctep. 2. QUIXOTE. 67
Three or Four could aftack me at one time. Th«
Desire of lengthening out my Life, till happily
some Succour might come to my Relief, so in-
vigorated my Arm, and added to my ordinary
Strength an almost irresistible Force, that I dealt
Death at every Blow; and in less than a quar-
ter of an Hour, saw more than Fifty of my
Enemies at my Feet, whose Bodies served sor a
Bulwark against their Fellows Swords.
The Commander of this little Body, not
having Generosity enough to be moved with
those prodigious Effects of Valour in my Fa-
vpur,, was transported with Rage at my Re-
sistance; and the Sight of so many of his Men
slain besore his Face, served only to en encase
his Fury j and that Moment, seeing, that, with
Two more Blows, I had sent two of his most
valiant Soldiers to the Shades, and that the rest
fearing to come within the Length of my
Sword, had given me a few Moments Re-
spite,
Ah! Cowards! cried he, are you afraid of
a single Man? And will you suffer him to
escape from your Vengeance, who has slain so
irjany of your brave Comrades besore your
Eyes?
These Words inspiring them with a Fierce-
ness, such as he desired, they advanced towards
me with more Fury than besore: By this Time,
1 had received several large Wounds, and my
Blood ran down from many Parts os my Body:
yet was I not sensible of any Decay of Strength,
nor did the settled Designs of my Enemies to
destroy me daunt me in the least: I still relied
u^ftn the Assistance I expected Providence
would
4' . »

<page 79>
68 The FEMALE Book VI.
would send to my Relief, and determined, if
possible, to preserve my Life, till it arrived.
I sought, theresore, with a Resolution, which
astonished my Enemies, but did not move them
to any Regard sor my Safety: And, observing
their brutal Commander, a few Paces from me,
encouraging his Men, both with his Cries and
Gestures, Indignation against this inhuman
Wretch so transported me out of my Discre-
tion, that I quitted my Post, in order to sacri-
sice him to my Revenge.
Seeing me advance suriously towards him,hc
turned pale with Fear, and endeavoured to shel-
ter himself in the midst of his Men ; who, more
valiant than himself, opposed themselves to my
Rage, to savour his Retreat: But quickly clear-
ing myself a Way with my Sword, I pressed to-
wards the barbarous Coward ; and, ere he could
avoid the Blow I aimed at him, it struck him
senseless at my Feet.
My particular Revenge thus satisfied, I was
sensible of the Fault I had committed in quit-
ting my Post, by which I exposed myself to be
surrounded by the Enemy. I endeavoured to
regain it, but in vain: I was beset on all Sides,
and now despaired of any Safety; and there-
sore only sought to die couragiously, and make
as many of my Enemies as I could, attend
my Fall.
Exasperated by the Missortune of their Com-
mander, they pressed upon me with re'doubled
Fury. Faint as I was, with the Loss of Blood,
and so satigued with the past Action, and the
obstinate Fight I had maintained so long with
such a considerable Number, I could hardly any-
longer

<page 80>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 69
longer lift up my Arm; and, to complete, my
Missortune, having thurst my Sword into the
Body of one of the sorwarded of my Enemies,
in my endeavouring to regain it, it broke in
Pieces, and the Hilt only remained in my Hand.
This Accident completed my Defeat: De-
prived of my Sword, I was no longer capable
of making any Defence: several of them pressed
upon me at once; and, throwing me down,
tied my Hands together behind me, Shame and
Rage at this Indignity ^worked so sorcibly up-
on my Spirits, weakened as I then was, that I
fell into a Swoon. What happened till my Re-
covery, I am not able to tell; but, at the Re-
turn of my Senses, I sound myself laid on a
Bed in a tolerable Chamber, and some Persons
with me, who kept a prosound Silence. . .
Chap. III.
A "Love-Adventure, after the Romantic
'Taste.
RECOLLECTING in a few Moments
all that happened to me, I could not
choose but be surprised at sinding myself
treated with so little Severity, considering I
was Prisoner to Persons who had been Wit-
nesses of the great Quantity of Blood I had
slied in my own Defence. My Wounds had
been dressed while I continued in my Swoon;
and the Faces of those Persons who were about
me, expressed nothing of Unkindness.
After

<page 81>
7o The FEMALE Book VI.
After reflecting some Time longer on my
Situation, I called to a young Man, who sat
near my Bed-side, and intreated him to insorm
mei where I was, and to whom I was a Pri-
soner? But could get no other Answer to those
Questions, than a most civil Intreaty to com-
pose myself, and not protract the Cure of my
Wounds by talking, which the Surgeons had
declared, would be of a bad Consequence j
and had theresore ordered me to be as little dis-
turbed as possible.'
Notwithstanding this Remonstrance, I re-
peated my Request, promising to be entirely
governed by them sor the suture in what re-
garded my Health, provided they would satisfy
me in those Particulars: But my Attendant did
not so much as reply to those Importunities 5
but to prevent the Continuance of them, rose
from his Seat, and retired to the other End of
the Chamber.
I passed that Day, and several others, with-
out being able to learn the Truth of my Condi-
tion: All this Time, I was diligently waited art
by the two Persons I had first seen, neither
of whom I could prevail upon to insorm me
of what I desired to know; and, judging, by
this obstinate Reserve, and the Manner of my
Treatment, that there was some Mystery in
the Cafe, I sorbore to ask them any more
Questions, conceiving they had particular Or-
ders not to answer them.
The Care that was taken to sorward my
Cure, in three Weeks entirely restored me
to Health: I longed impatiently to know,
what was to be my Destiny; and busied myself
in

<page 82>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 71
in conjecturingit, in vain; when one Morning,
an elderly Lady entered my Chamber, at whose
Appearance my two Attendants retired. , ,n
After she had saluted me very civilly, andf
inquired after my Health, she seated herself in
a Chair near my Bedside, and spoke to me in
this Manner:
I make no Question, Sir, but you are sur-
prised at the Manner in which you have been
treated, and the Care there has been taken to
prevent discovering to you the Place where
you now are; but you will doubtless be more
surprized, to hear you are in the Fortress of—,
and in the House of Prince Marcomire, whose
Party you sought against alone; and whom
you so dangeroufly wounded, besore you was
taken Prisoner by his Men.
Is it possible, Madam, said I, who, from
the first Moment of her Appearance, had been
in a strange Perplexity, is it possible, I^am ini
the House of a Man, whose Life I endeavoured
so eagerly to destroy? And is it to him, who,
oppressed me so basely with Numbers, that I
am obliged sor the Succour I have received?
It is not to him, replied the Lady, that you
are obliged sor the savourable Treatment you
have had; but listen to me patiently, and I
will disclose the Truth of vour Adventure.
Prince Marcomire, who*was the Person that
headed that Party against which you so valian
ly defended yourself, after the Loss of the
Battle, was hastening to throw himself into
this Place, where his Sister, and many Ladies
of Quality, had come sor Security: Your in-
discreet

<page 83>
72 ^FEMALE Book VI.
discreet Pursuit engaged you in the most un-
equal Combat that ever was sought; and
T- Nay, Sir, interrupted Arabella, though I do
not resuse to give you all the Praises your gal-
lant Defence of yourself against Five Hundred
Men deserves; yet I cannot agree with that
Lady, in saying, it was the most unequal Com-
bat that ever was sought: For, do but reflect, I
beseech you, upon that which the brave Prince
olMauritania sustained against twice that Num-
ber of Men, with no other Arms than hit
Sword; and, you having been in Battle that
Day, was, as I conceive, completely armed.
The young Prince of Egypt, accompanied only
by the valiant, but indiscreet, Cepio his Friend,
engaged all the King of Armenia's Guards,
and put them all to Flight. The courageous
Ariobafanes scorned to turn his Back upon a
whole Army; not to mention the invincible
Artaban, whom a Thousand Armies together
could not have made to turn.
Be pleased toobserve,Madam, said SirGeorge,
that to the End I may saithsully recount my
History, I am under a Necessity of repeating
Things, which, haply, may seem too advan-
tageous sor a Man to say of himself: Theresore
I indeed greatly approve of the Custom, which,
no doubt, this Inconveniency introduced, of a
'Squire, who is thoroughly instructed with the
Secrets of his Master's Heart, relating his Ad-
ventures, and giving a proper Eulogium of his
rare Valour, without being in Danger of of-
fending the Modesty of the renowned Knight;
who, as you know, Madam, upon those Oc-
casions, commodioufly flips away.
It

<page 84>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 73
It being, however, this Lady's Opinion, that
no Man ever undertook a more hazardous Com-
bat, or with greater Odds, against him, she did
not sail to express her Admiration of it, in very
h'gh Terms. i
The Noise of this Accident, pursued she,
was soon spread over the whole Town; and
the beautisul Sydimiris, Marcamire's Sister, hear-
ing that her Brother was wounded, as it was
thought to Death, and that the Person who
killed him, was taken Prisoner; she flew out
to meet her wounded Brother, distracted with
Grief, and vowing to have the severest Tor-
tures executed on him, who had thus barba-
rously murdered her Brother. Th.^se who bore
that unhappy Prince, having brought him into
the House, his Wounds were searched; and
the Surgeons declared, they were very dan-
gerous.
Sydimiris, hearing this, redoubled her Com-
plaints and Vows of Vengeance against you:
Her Brother having then the chief Authority in
the Place, she commanded, in his Name, to
have you brought hither, and to be most strictly
guarded; determined, if her Brother died, to
sacrifice you to his Ghost.
Full of these sanguinary Resolutions, she
left his Chamber, having seen him laid in Bed;
and his Wounds dressed; but pasting along a
Gallery to her own Apartment, she met the
Persons who were bringing you to the Room
that wps to be your Prison: You: was not, pur-
sued the Lady, yet recovered from your Swoon,
so that they carried you like one that was dead:
They had taken off your Helmet to give you
Voi.. II. E Air;

<page 85>
74 72* F EM A L E Book VI.
'Air; by which means your Face being quite
uncovered, pale, languishing, and your Eyes
closed, as if in Death, presented the most
moving, and, at the same Time, most pleasing
Object in the World.
Sydimirh, who ftopt, and sor a Moment
eagerly gazed upon you, lost all of a sudden
the Fierceness which besore had animated her
against you: And lifting up her Eyes to view
those Men that carried you;
Are you sure, said she to them, that this is
the Person who wounded my Brother?
Yes, Madam, replied one of them ; this must
be he, since there was no other in his Com-
pany; and he alone sustained the Attack of Five
hundred Men; and would probably not have
left one of them alive, had not his Sword, by
breaking, put it into our Power to take him
Prisoner.
Carry him away, said Sydimiris; but let his
Wounds be dressed, and let him be caresully
looked to, that, if my Brother dies, he may
be punished as he deserves.
Pronouncing these Words in a low and sal-
tering Voice, she turned her Eyes a second time
upon you; then, hastily averting her Looks,
she hurried to her own Chamber, and threw
herself into a Chair, with all the Marks of a
-very great Disturbance.
The Affection I have sor her, being the Per-
son who had brought her up, and most savoured
with her Considence made me behold her in
this Condition with great Concern; and sup-
posing it was her Brother that disquieted her,
I besought her not to give way to the Violence

<page 86>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 75
of her Grief, hut to hope that Heaven would
restore him to her Prayers.
Alas! my dear Urinoe, said she, I am more
culpable than you can imagine; and I grieve less
sor the Condition to which I fee Marcomire re-
duced, than sor that Moderation wherewith I
am constrained, spite of myself, to behold his
Enemy.
Yes, dear Urinoe, pursued she, blushing,
and casting down her Eyes, the Actions of
this Unknown appear to me in quite another
Light, since I have seen him; and, instead of
looking upon him as the Murderer of my Bro-
ther, 1 cannot help admiring that rare Valour,
with which he defended himself against so great
a Number of Enemies; and am even ready to
condemn the surious Marcomire, for oppressing
so brave a Man.
As I had never approved of those violent
Transports of Grief and Rage, which she had
expressed upon the first News of her Brother's
Missortune; and as I looked upon your glo-
rious Defence with the utmost Admiration; so,
far from condemning the Change of her
Thoughts, I confirmed her in the savourable
Opinion she began to entertain of you; and,
continuing to make Remarks upon all the Par-
ticulars of the Combat, which had come to
our Knowlege, we sound nothing in your Be-
haviour, but what increased our Admiration.
Sydimiris theresore, sollowing the Dictates
of her own Generosity, as well as my Advice,
placed Two Persons about you, whose Fide-
lity we could rely on; and gave them Orders
to treat you with all imaginable Care and Re-
E * fpect,

<page 87>
76 The FEMALE Book VI.
fyect, but not to insorm you of the Place in
which you was, or to whom you was Pri-
soner.
In the mean Time, Marcomire, whose
'Wounds had been again examined, was de-
clared out of Danger by the Surgeons; and he
having underltood the Excess of his Sister's
Grief, and the Revenge lhe had vowed against
-you, gave her Thanks sor those Expressions of
vher Tenderness; and also uttered some Threats,
.which intimated a violent Hatred against you;
and a Design of prosecuting his Revenge upon
you, as-soon as he was in a Condition to leave
his Chamber.
Sydimiris, who heard him, could with Dif-
ficulty dissemble her Concern.
Ah ! Urinoe, said she to me, when we were
alone; 'tis now, that I more than ever repent
of that Excess of Rage, which transported me
against the brave Unknown. I have thereby
put him intirely into my Brother's Power, and
ihall be haply accessary to that Death he is
meditating sor him, or else a perpetual Impri-
sonment.
This Reflection gave herso much Pain, that
I could not choose but pity her; and consider-
ing, that the only Way to preserve you, was
for her to dissemble a Rage equal to Mar-
comire's against you, in order to prevent being
suspected of any Design in your Favour, I per-
suaded her to join with him in every Thing he
-said; while, in the mean time, we would en-
deavour to get you cured of your Wounds, that
you might at least be in a Condition once more
to

<page 88>
Chap. 4. Q^U I X O T E. 77
to defend yourself with that miraculous Valour
Heaven has bestowed on you,
Sydimiris perceiving her Brother would soon
beina Condition to execute his Threats, resolv-
ed to hazard every thing, rather than to expose
you to his Rage: She theresore communicated
to me her Design of giving you Liberty, and,
by presenting a sussicient Reward to your
Guard, inducing them to savour your Escape.
I undertook to manage this Business in her
Name, and have done it so effectually, that
you will this Night be at Liberty, and may
depart the Town immediately, in which it will -
be dangerous to stay any Time, sor Fear of
being discovered.
Sydimiris sorbad me to let you know the
Person to whom you would be obliged sor your
Freedom; but I could not endure, that you
should unjustly involve the Sister of Marcomire,
in that Resentment you will questionless always
preserve against him; and to keep you from being
innocently guilty of Ingratitude, I resolved to
acquaint you with the Nature of those Obliga-
tions you owe to her.
Chap. IV.
The Adventure continued'.
AH ! Madam, said T, perceiving she had
sinished her Discourse, doubt not but I
shall most gratesully preserve the Remembrance
of what the generous Sydimiris has done sor me;
E 3 and

<page 89>
28 Tie FEMALE Book VI.
and (ball always be ready to lose that Life in
her Defence, which she has had the superlative
Goodness to take so much Care of. But, Ma-
dam, pursued I, with an earnest Look, do not,
I beseech you, resuse me one Favour, without
which I shall depart with inconceivable Sorrow.
Depend upon it, valiant Sir, replied she,
that it what you will require of me, be in my
Power, and fit sor me to grant, I shall very
willingly oblige you.
It is then, resumed I, trembling at the Bold-
ness of my Request, that you would conde-
scend to intreat the most generous Sydimiris to
savour me with an Interview, and give me an
Opportunity of throwing myself at her Feet,
to thank her sor all those Favours 1 have re-
ceived from her Compassion.
I cannot promise you, replied the Lady,
rising, to prevail upon Sydimiris to grant you an
Audience; but I assure you, that I will endea-
vour to dispose her to do you this Favour 5 and
it shall not be my Fault, if you are not sa-
tisfied.
Saying this, she went out os my Chamber,
I Having sollowed her to the Door, with Pro-
testations that I would never sorget her Kindness
upon this Occasion.
I past the rest of that Day in an anxious Im-
patience sor Night, divided between Fear and
Hope, and more taken up with the Thoughts
of seeing Sydimiris, than with my expected
Liberty.
Night came at last, and the Door of my
Apartment opening, I saw the Lady who had
been with me in the Morning, enter.
I have

<page 90>
Chap. 4. QJJIXOTE. 79
I have prevailed upon Sydimiris to see you,,
said she; and she is willing, at my Intreatv, to,
grant that Favour to a Person, who, she with'.
Reason thinks, has been inhumanly treated by
her Brother.
Then, giving me her Hand, she conducted?
me along a large Gallery, to a stately Apart-
ment; and after traversing several Rooms, she-
led me into one, where Sydimiris herself was:
Who, as soon as she perceived me, rose from'
her Seat, and received me with great Civility.
In the Transport I then was, 1 know not
how I returned the gracesul Salute the incom-
parable Sydimiris gave me; sor most certain
it is, that I was so lost in Wonder, at the Sight'
of the many Charms I beheld in her Person,,
that I could not unlock my Tongue, or re-
move my Eyes from her inchanting Face; but
remained fixed in a Posture, which at once ex-
pressed my Admiration and Delight.
To give you a Description of that Beauty
which I then contemplated, I must insorm'
you, Madam, that Sydimiris is tall, of a hand-
some Stature, and admirably proportioned; her
Hair was os the sinest Black in the World ; her
Complexion marveloufly sair; all the Linea-
ments of her Visage were perfectly beautisul;
and her Eyes, which were large and black,,
sparkled with so quick and piercing a Fire, that
no Heart was able to resist their powersul-
Glances: Moreover, Sydimiris is admirably
shaped ; her Port is high and noble; and her
Air so free, yet so commanding, that there are
few Persons in the World, with whom she may
not dispute the Priority of Beauty: In fine,.
E 4 Madam,-

<page 91>
80 The FEMALE Book VJ.
Madam, Sydimiris appeared with so many Ad-
vantages to a Spirit prepossessed already with
the most gratesul Sense of her Favours, that
I could not resist the sweet Violence wherewith
her Charms took Possession of my Heart: I
vielded theresore, without Reluctance, to my
Destiny, and ieligned myself, in an Instant, to
those Fetters, which the Sight of the Divine
Sydimirts prepared sor me : Recovering there-
sore a little from that Admiration, which
had so totally engrossed all my Faculties, I
threw myself at her Feet, with an Action whoi-
ly composed of Transport.
Divine Sydimirts, said I, beholding her with
Eyes, in which the Letters of my new-born
Passion might very plainly be read, fee at
your Feet a Man devoted to your Service, by
all the Ties of Gratitude and Respect. I come,
Madam, to declare to you, that from the first
Moment you gave me Liberty, I had devoted
that and my Life to you; and at your Feet I
consirm the Gift; protesting by all that is most
dear and sacred to me, that since I hold my
Life from the Divine Sydimiris, she alone shall
have the absolute Disposal of it sor the suture;
and should she please again to demand it, either
to appease her Brother's Fury, or to sacrifice
it to her own Security, I will most saithsully
persorm her Will, and shed the last Drop of
that Blood at her Command, which I would
with Transport lose in her Defence.
A sine high flown Speech indeed ! said Sir
Charles, laughing: but I hope you did not in-
tend to keep your Word.
Sure,

<page 92>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 81
Sure, Sir, replied Arabella, you do not ima-
gine, that Sir George would have sailed in
executing all he had promised to the beautisul
and generous Sydimiris: What could he possi-
bly have said less? And indeed what less could
she have expected from a Man, whom at the
Hazard of her own Life and Happiness, she had
given Freedom to?
I accompanied these Words, Madam, pur-
sued Sir George, with so passionate a Look and
Accent, that the sair Sydimiris blushed, and,
sor a Moment, cast down her Eyes with a
visible Consusion. At last,
Sir, replied she, I am too well satisfied with
what I have done, with respect to your Safety,
to require any Prooss of your Gratitude, that
might be dangerous to it; and shall remain ex-
tremely well satisfied, if the Obligations you
think you owe me, may induce you to mode-
rate your Resentment against my Brother, sor
the cruel Treatment you received from him.
Doubt not, Madam, interrupted I, eagerly,
but I shall, in the Person of Marcomire, regard
the Brother of the divine Sydimiris; and that
Consideration will be sussicient, not only to
make me sorget all the Violences he committed
against me, but even to defend his Life, if need
be, with the Hazard of my own.
Excessively generous indeed ! said Sir Charles:
I never heard any thing like it.
Oh! dear Sir, replied Arabella, there are
numberless Instances of equal, and even supe-
rior Generosity, to be met with in the Lives of
the Heroes of Antiquity: You will there /ee
a Lover, whose M stress has been taken from
5 J lim,

<page 93>
9,2 The FEMALE Book VI.
him, either by Treachery or Force, venture
his Life in Defence of the injurious Husband
who possesses her; and though all his Felicity
depends upon his Death, yet he will rescue him
from it, at the Expence of the greater Part os
his Blood.
Another, who after along and bloody War,
has, by taking his Enemy Prisoner, an Oppor-
tunity of terminating it honourably; yet, thro'
an heroic Principle of Generosity, he gives his
Captive Liberty, without making any Condi-
tions, and has all his Work to do over again.
A Third having contracted a violent Friend-
ship with the Enemies of his Country, through
the same generous Sentiments, draws his Sword
in their Defence, and makes no Scruple to fight
against an Aimy, where the King his Father
is in Person.
I must confess, said Sir Charles, that Gene-
rosity seems to me very peculiar, that will make
a Man fight sor his Enemies against his own
Father.
It is in that Peculiarity, Sir, said Arabella^
that his Generosity consists; sor certainly there
is nothing extraordinary in fighting sor one's
Father, and one's Country; but u hen a Man
has arrived to such a Pitch of Greatness of
Soul, as to neglect those mean and selfish Con-
siderations, and, loving Virtue in the Persons
of his Enemies, can prefer their Glory besore
his own particular Interest, he is then a perfect
Hero indeed : Such an one was Oroondates, Ar-
taxerxes, and many others I could name, who
all gave eminent Prooss of their Disinterested-
ness and Greatness of Soul, upon the like Oc-
casions:

<page 94>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 83
casions: Theresore, not to detract from Sir
George's Merit, I must still insist, that in tha,
Resolutions he had taken to defend his Ene-
my's Life at the Expence of his own, he did
no more than what any Man of ordinary Ge-
nerosity ought to do, and what he was particu-
larly obliged to, by what the amiable Sydimiris
had done sor him.
I was so happy, however, Madam, continued
Sir George, to rind that those Expressions of my
Gratitude wrought somewhat upon the Heart
of the lovely Sydimiris in my Favour: Her
Words discovered as much, and her Eyes spoke
yet more intelligibly: but our Conversation was
interrupted by the discreet Urinoe, who, searing
the Consequence os so long a Stay in her Cham-
ber, represented to me, that it was Time to
take my Leave.
I turned pale at this cruel Sound; and, be-
holding Sydimiris with a languishing Look,
Would to Heaven, Madam, siid I, that-
instead of giving me Liberty, you would keep
me eternally your Prisoner; sor though aL>un-
geon was to be the Place of my Consinemen-,,
yet if it was near you, it would seem a Palace
to me; sor indeed I am no longer in a Condi-
tion to relish that Freedom you bellow upon
me, since it mult remove me farther from you:
But I beseech you, Madam, to believe, that in -
delivering me from your Brother's Fetters, you
have cast me into your own, and that I am more
a Prisoner than ever, but a Prisoner to solovely
a Conqueror, that 1 do not wish to break my
Chains, and prefer the sweet and glorious Cap-
E 6 tivity

<page 95>
84 ^FEMALE Book VI.
tivity I am in, to all the Crowns in the
World.
You are very bold, said Sydimirii, blushing,
to entertain me with such Discourse; yet I
pardon this Osfence, in Consideration of what
you have suffered from my Brother, and on
Condition that you will depart immediately,
without speaking another Word.
Sydimiris spoke this so earnestly, that I durst
not disobey her; and, kissing the Hem of her
Robe, with a passionate Air, I left her Cham-
ber, conducted by Urinoe; who having brought
me to a private Door, which carried us into
the Street, I there sound a Man waiting sor
me, whom I knew to be the same that had
attended me during my Stay in that House.
Urinoe having recommended to him to see
me safe out of the Town, I took Leave of
her, with the most gratesul Acknowlegements
sor her Kindness; and sollowed my Conductor,
so oppressed with Grief at the Thoughts of
leaving the Place where Sydimiris was, that I
bad hardly Strength to walk.
Chap. V.
An extraordinary Instance of Generosity in
a Lover, somewhat resembling that of the
great Artaxerxes in Cassandra.
TT^HE sarther I went, continued Sir George,
jf_ the more my Regret increased; ant),
finding it would be imposlible to live, and quit
the /

<page 96>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 2$
the divine Sydimiris, I all at once took a Re-
solution to remain-in the Town concealed;
and, communicating my Design to my Guide,
I engaged him to assist me in it, by a Present of
a considerable Sum, which he could not resist:
Accordingly he left me in a remote Part of the
Town, and went to find out a convenient
Lodging sor me; which he soon procured, and
also a Suit of Cloaths to disguise me, my own
being very rich and magnificent.
Having recommended me as a Relation of
his, who wag newly arrived, I was received
very civilly by the People with whom he placed
me; and, sinding this voung Man to be very
witty and discreet,and also very capable of serv-
ing me, I communicated to him my Intentions
by staying, which were only to be near the
divine Sydimiris, and to have the Happiness
of sometimes seeing her, when she went
abroad.
This Man entering into my Meaning, assured
me, he would saithsully keep my Secret; and
that he would not sail to bring me Intelligence
of all that passed in the Palace of Marcomire.
I could with Dissiculty keep myself from
falling at his Feet, to express my Sense of his
kind and generous Offers; but I contented
mvself with presenting him another Sum of
Money, larger than the first, and assured him
of mv suture Gratitude.
He then took Leave, and lest me to my Re-
flediion', which were wholly upon the Image
of the Divine Sydimiris, and the Happiness of
being so near the Object I adored.
My

<page 97>
86 The FEMALE Book VI.
My Considant came to me the next Day;
but brought me no other News, than that my
Escape was not yet known to Marcomire. I
inquired if he had seen Sydimris; but he re-
plied he had not, and that Urinoe had only
asked him, if he had conducted me safe out of
Town: To which he had answered as we had
agreed, that I had got out safe and undisco-
vered.
A Day or two after, he brought me News
more pleasing; sor he told me, that Sydimitis
had sent sor him into her Chamber, and asked
him several Questions concerning me: That
she appeared very melancholy, and even blush-
ed, whenever she mentioned my Name.
This Account gave sussicient Matter sor my
Thoughts to work upon sor several Days. I
interpreted Sydimiris's Blush a Thousand differ-
ent Ways; I reflected upon all the different
Causes to which it might be owing, and busied
myself with all those innumerable Conjectures,
which, as you know, Madam, such an Incident
always gives rife to in a Lover's Imagination.
At length I explained it to my own Advantage,
and felt thereby a considerable Increase of my
Affection.
A whole Week having elapsed, without
another Sight of my Considant, I began to be
greatly alarmed; when, on the Eighth Day of
this cruel Suspense, I saw him appear; but with
so many Marks of Disturbance in his Face,
that I trembled to hear what he had to acquaint
me with.
Oh! Sir, said he, as soon as his Concern
suffered him to speak, Marcomire has discovered
your

<page 98>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 87
your Escape, and the Means by which it was
procured: One of those in whom Urinoe consid-
ed, has betrayed it to him; and the beauteous
Sydimiris is likely to feel the most terrible Ef-
fects of his Displeasure : He has consined her to
her Chamber, and vows to sacrifice her Life to
the Honour of his Family; which, he says, she
has stained; and he loads that admirable Lady
with so many Reproaches, that it is thought,
her Grief sor such undeserved Calumnies will
occasion her Death.
Scarce had he sinished these cruel Words,
when I, who all the time he had been speaking,
beheld him with a dying Eye, sunk down at
his Feet in a Swoon; which continued so long,
that he began to think me quite dead: How-
ever I at last opened my Eyes; but it was only
to pour sorth a River of Tears, and to utter
Complaints, which might have moved the most
obdurate Heart.
After having a long Time tormented myself
in weeping and complaining, I at last took a
Resolution, which offered me some Alleviation
of my Grief; and the saithsul Toxares, seeing
me a little composed, left me to myself, with
aPromiseto return soon, and acquaint me with
what passed surther in the Palace of Mariomire.
As soon as he was gone, I rose from my Bed;
and, dressing myself in those Cloaths I woie
when I was taken Prisoner, I went to the Pa-
lace of Marcomirs; and, demanding to fee him,
I was told he was in the Apartment of Sydimi-
ris; and, at my earnest Desire, they conducted
me thither.
When

<page 99>
88 the FEMALE Book VI.
When I entered the Room, I beheld that
incomparab'e Beauty stretched upon a Couch,
dissolved in Tears ; and Urinoe upon her Knees,
besore her, accompanying with her own, those
precious Drops which fell from the bright Eyes
of her Mistress.
Marccmire, who was walking suriously about
the Room, exclaiming with the utmost Vio-
lence against that sair Sufferer, did no'" observe
my Entrance; so that I had an Opportunity of
going towards Sydimiris, who lifting up her
Eyes to look upon me, gave a loud Shriek;
and, by a Look of extreme Anguish, let me
understand, how great her Apprehensions were
upon my Account.
- I am come, Madam, fid I, to perform
Part of the Promise I made you, and by dying,
to prove your innocence ; and, freeing you from
the Reproaches you suffer on my Account, I
shall have the Happiness to convince you, that
my Life is infinitely less dear to me, than your
Tranquil ity. Sydimiris, who hearkened to
me with great Emotion, was going to make
some Ai s- er, when Marccmire, alarmed by
his Sister i Shriek, came towards us, and, view-
ing me at first with Astonishment, and then
with a Smi!e of Cruelty and Revenge, -
Is it possible, said he, that I behold my de-
signed Murderer again in mv Power?
I am in thy Power, said I, because I am
-willing 1' be so; and came voluntarily to put
myself into your Hands, to free that excellent
Lady from the Imputation you have laid on her:
Know, Marcomire, that it is to myself alone
I owed my Liberty, which I would still pre-
serve
*-

<page 100>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 89
serve against all the Forces thou couldst bring to
deprive me of it; and this Sword, which left
thee Life enough to threaten mine,would haply
once more put yours in Danger, were I not re-
strained by a powersul Consideration, which
leaves me not the Liberty of even wishing you
ill.
Ah ! Dissembler, said Marcomire, in a Rage,
think not to impose upon me by thy counter-
feited Mildness: Thou art my Prisoner once
more, and I shall take Care to prevent your
escaping a second Time.
I am not your Prisoner, replied I, while I
possess this Sword, which has already defended
me against greater Numbers than you have here
to oppose me; but, continued I, throwing down
my Sword at Sydimiris's Feet, I resign my Li-
berty to restore that Lady to your good Opi-
nion, and to free her from those base Aspersions
thou hast unjustly loaded her with, upon my
Account.
It matters not, said the brutal Brother, taking
up my Sword, whether thou hast resigned, or
I have deprived thee of Liberty; but since thou
art in my Power, thou shalt feel all the Effects
of my Resentment: Take him away, pursued
he, to some of his People; put him into the
worst Dungeon you can sind; and let him be
guarded caresully, upon Pain of Death, if he
again escapes.
With these Words, several Men offered to
lead me out of the Room; but I repulsed them
with Disdain; and making a low Reverence to
Sydimiris, whose Countenance expressed the
Extremes of Fear and Anguish, I sollowed my
Con-

<page 101>
$0 Tbe F E M A L E B.ok VI.
Conductors to the Prison allotted sor me; which,
hideous as it was, I contemplated with a secret
Pleasure, since I had by that Action, which
had brought me into it, given a Testimony of
my Love sor the adorable Sydimiris.
Chap. VI.
In which it will be seen, that the Lady is
as generous as her Lover.
1Passed some Days in this Consinement, me-
lancholy enough: My Ignoance of the,
Destiny of Sydimiris gave me more Pain than
the Sense of my own Missortunes; and one
Evening, when I was more then usually dis-
quieted, i ne of my Guard entered my Prison,
and, giving me a Letter, retired, without speak-
ing a Word: I opened this Letter, with Precis
pitation, and by the Light of a Lamp which
was allowed me, I read the sollowing Words.
Sydimiris, To the most generous Bellmour.
IT is not enough to tell you, that the Method
you took to free me from my Brother's Se-
verity, has filled me with the utmost Esteem
and Admiration. So generous an Action merits
a greater Acknowlegement, and I will make no
Scruple to confese, that my Heart is most sen-
sibly touched by it: Yes, Bellmour, I have re-
ceived this glorious Testimony of your Affec-
tion with such a Gratitude, as you yourself
could, have wistied to inspire me with; and it
shall

<page 102>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. 91
shall not be long, besore you will have a con-
vincing Proof of the Effect it has had upon the
Spirit of
Sydimiris.
This Letter, Madam, pursued Sir George,
being wholly calculated to make me Jupe
that I was not hated by the divine Sydimiris;
and that she meditated something in my Favour,
I resigned myself up to the most delightsul Ex-
pectations.
What! cried I, transported with the Ex-
cess of my Joy: Does the most admirable Sy-
dimiri, condescend to assure me, that I have
touched her Heart? And does she promise
me, that I shall receive some convincing Proof
of her Acknowlegement?
Ah! too happy, and too sortunate Bellmour,
to what a glorious Destiny hast thou been re-
served! And how oughtest thou to adore these
Fetters, that have procured thee the Esteem
of the Divine Sydimiris f
Such, Madam, were the Apprehensions
which the Billet I had received, inspired me
with. I continually flattered myself with the
most pleasing Hopes; and during three Weeks
longer, in which I heard no more from Sydi-
miris, my Imagination was wholly filled with
those sweet Thoughts which her Letter had
made me entertain.
At length, on the Evening of a Day which
I had wholly spent in reading over Sydimiris's
Letter; and interpreting the Sense of it a thou-
sand different Ways, but all agreeable to my
ardent Wishes; I saw the sage Urinoe enter my
Piison,

<page 103>
oz ^FEMALE Book VI.
Prison, accompanied by Toxares, whom I had
not seen during my last Consinement. Wholly
transported at the Sight of these Two Friends,
and not doubting but they had brought me the
most agreeable News, I ran towards them ; and
throwing myself at Urinoe'sFeet, I begged her,
in an Extacy of Joy, to accquaint me with Sy-
dimiris's Commands.
Urinoe, in some Consusion at this Action,
intreated me to rife. 'Tis sit, cried I, in a
Transport I could not master, that in this
Posture I should receive the Knowlege of that
Felicity Sydimiris has had the Goodness to
promise me. Urinoe sighed at these Words;
and beholding me with a Look of Compassion
and Tenderness,
Would to God, said she, that all I have to
say, were as agreeable, as the first News I have
to tell you ; which is, that you are free, and at
Liberty to leave the Town this Moment! Sy-
dimiris, continued she, has bought your Free-
dom, at the Expence of her own; and, to de-
liver you from her Brother's Chains, she has
put on others, haply more cruel than those
you have worn: In sine, she has married a
Man, whom she detested, to procure your Li-
berty; her Brother having granted it to her up-
on that Condition alone.
Scarce had Urinoe sinished these Words, when
I fell, without Sense or Motion, at her Feet.
Toxares and she, ,who had soreseen what might
happen, having provided themselves with Cor-
dials necessary to restore me, brought me to
myself with iniinite Trouble.
Cruel!

<page 104>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. 93
Cruel! said I to them, with a Tone and
Look, which witnessed the Excess of my
Despair, Why have you hindered me from
dying, at once to prevent the thousand Deaths
I shall suffer from my Grief? Is this the Con-
sirmation os those glorious Hopes Sydimiris had
permitted me to entertain? Is this that Proof
of the Acknowlegements I was to expect? And
is it by throwing herself into the Arms of my
Rival, that she repays those Obligations she
thinks she owes me?
Ah! inhuman Sydimiris! was it to make
my Despair more poignant, that thou flattered
me with such a Prospect of Happiness? And
was it necessary to the Grandeur of thy Nup-
tials, that my Life should be the Sacrifice?
But, how unjust am I, cried I, repenting in
an Instant of those injurious Suspicions ; How
unjust am I, to accuse the divine Sydimiris of
Inhumanity? Was it not to give me Freedom,
that she bestowed herself upon a Man she
hates? And has she not made herself miserable
sor ever, to procure me a sansied Happiness?
Ah! if it be so, what a Wretch am I? I,
who have been the only Cause of that Misery,
to which she has doomed herself? Ah ! Liberty!
pursued I, how I detest thee, since purchased
by the Missortune of Sydimiris! And how sar
more sweet and glorious were those Chains,
which I wore sor her Sake!
My Sighs and Tears leaving me no longer
the Power of Speech, I sunk down on my Bed,
oppressed with a mortal Grief.
Urinoe and Toxares drew near to comsort me,
4 and

<page 105>
94 ^FEMALE Book VI.
and said all that sensible and discreet Persons
could think of to alleviate my Despair.
Though I have heard that Sydimiris is mar-
ried, replied I, without dying immediately;
yet do not imagine, that I will susfer this odious
Life to continue long. If Sorrow do not quick-
ly dispatch me, 1 will seek Death by other
Means; sor since Sydimiris is lost, I have no
more Business in the World.
The charitable Urinoe and Toxares endea-
voured in vain to diveit me from this sad Re-
solution, when Urinoe, sinding all their Reason-
ings ineffectual, drew a Letteroutof her Pocket,
and, presenting it to me, I had Orders, said
she, not to let this Letter be delivered to you,
till you had left the Town; but the Despair,
to which I see you reduced, does, I conceive,
dispense w ith my rigorous Observation of those
Directions.
While Urinoe was speaking, I opened this
Letter trembling, and sound it as sollows.
Chap. VII.
Containing an Incident full as frobable as
any in Scudery'j Romances.
Sydimiris, To BeHmour.
IF that Proof of my Gratitude, which I pro-
mised to give you, sall short of your Ex-
pectations; blame not the Defect of my Will,
but the Rigour of my Destiny: It was by this
i only
-

<page 106>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. 95
only Way I could give you Liberty; nor is it
too dearly bought by the Loss of all my Hap-
piness, if you receive it as you ought: Had I
been allowed to sollow my own Inclinations,
there is no Man in the World I would have
preferred to yourself. I owe this Confession to
the Remembrance of your Affection, of which
you gave me so generous an Instance; and the
Use I expect you will make of it, is to console
you under a Missortune, which is common to
us both; though I haply have most Reason to
complain, since I could not be just to you,
without being cruel at the same Time, or con-
fer a Benefit, without loading you with a Mis-
sortune. If the Sacrifice I have made of myself
sor your sake, gives me any Claim to the Con-
tinuance of your Love, I command you, by
the Power it gives me over you, to live, and
not add to the Miseries of my Condition, the
Grief of being the Cause of your Death. Re-
member, I will look upon your Disobedience,
as an Act of the most cruel Ingratitude; and
your Compliance with this Request shall ever
be esteemed, as the dearest Mark you can give
of that Passion you have borne to the unsor-
tunate
Sydimiris.
Ah! Sydimiris, cried I, having read this
Letter, more cruel in your Kindness than Se-
verity! After having deprived me of yourself,
do you sorbid me to die; and expose me by so
rigorous a Command to Ills insinitely more
hard and painsul than Death?
Yes, pursued I, after a little Pause; yes Sy-
dimiris,

<page 107>
-96 The FEMALE Book VI.
-dimiris, thou shalt be obeyed ; we will not dye,'
since thou hast commanded us to live; and,
notwithstanding the Tortures to which thou
condemnest us, we will obey this Command;
and give thee a glorious Proof of our present
Submission, by enduring that Life, which the
Loss os thee has rendered truly wretched.
Urinoe and Toxares, somewhat reassuied, by
»the Resolution I had taken, exhorted me by all
the Persuasions, Friendship could put in their
Mouths, to persevere in it; and, Urinoe bid-
ding me sarewel, I endeavoured to prevail upon
her to procure me a Sight of Sydimiris once
more, or at leaft to bear a Letter from me to
hgr; but she resused both these Requests so
obstinately, telling me, Sydimiris would neither
consent to the one nor the other,that I was oblig-
ed to be contented with the Promise she made
me, to represent my Affliction in a true Light
to her Mistress; and to assure her, that nothing
but her absolute Commands could have hin-
dered me from dying. Then, taking leave of
me with much Tenderness, she went out of
the Prison, leaving Toxares with me, who as-
sisted me to dress, and conducted me out os
that miserable Piace,where I had passed so manv
sad, and also joysul Hours. At a Gate to which
he brought me, I sound a Horse waiting; and,
having embraced this saithsul Considant, with
many Expressions of Gratitude, I bestowed a
Ring of some Value upon him to remember me
by; and, mounting my Horse, with a breaking
Heart, I took the first Road which presented
itself to my Eyes, and galloped away, without
knowing whither I went. I rode the whole
Night,

<page 108>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. 97
Night, so totally engrossed by my Despair, that
I did not perceive my Horse was so tired, it
could hardly carry me a Step sarther: At last
the poor Beast fell down under me, so that I
was obliged to dismount; and, looking about
me, perceived I was in a Forest, without see-
ing the least Appearance of any Habitation.
The Wild ness and Solitude of the ['lace,
flattered my Despair, and while my Horse was*
seeding upon what Grass he could sind, I wan-
dered about: The Morning just breaking, gave
me Light enough to direct my Steps. Chance
at last conducted me to a Cave, which seemed
to have been the Residence of some Hermit, or
unsortunate Lover like myself. It was dug at
the Side of a Rock, the Entrance to it thick
set with Bushes, which hid it from View. I
descended by a few Steps cut rudely enough,
and was convinced, it had sormerly served sor
a Habitation for some religious or melan-
choly Person; sor there were Seats of Turf
raised on each Side of it, a Kind os Bed com-
posed of dried Leaves and Rushes, and a Hole
made artificially at the Top, to admit the Light.
While I considered this Place attentively,
I all at once took up a Resolution, inspired by
my Despair; which was, to continue there,
and indulge my Melancholy in a Retirement
so fitted sor my Purpose.
Giving my Horse theresore Liberty to go
where he pleased, and hanging up my Arms
upon a Tree near my Cave, 1 took Possession
os this solitary Mansion, with a gloomy Kind
of Satissaction, and devoted all my Hours to
the Contemplation of tny Missortunes.
Vol.. II. F I lived

<page 109>
98 The FE M A LE Book VI.
I lived in this Manner, Madam, sor ten
Months, without feeling the least Desire to
change my Habitation; and, during all that
time, no Mortal approached my Solitude, so
that I lived perfectly secure and undiscovered.
Sir George pausing here to take Breath, the
old Baronet said what will be sound in the
sollowing Chapter.
Chap. VIII.
A single Combat fought with prodigious
Valour, and described with amazing
Accuracy.
I V E me Leave, Sir, said Sir Charles, to
ask, if you eat in all this Time?
Alas! Sir, replied Sir George, Sighs and Tears
were all my Sustenance.
Sir Charles, Mr. Glanville, and Miss, laugh-
ing at this Answer, Arabella seemed greatly con-
fused:
It is not to be imagined, said she, that Sir
George; or, to say better, Prince Viridomer, lived
ten Months without eating any thing to support
Nature; but such trifling Circumstances are
always left out, in the Relations of Histories;
and truly an Audience must be very dull and
unapprehensive, that cannot conceive, without
being told, that a Man must necessarily eat in
the Space often Months.
But the Food Sir George lived on, replied
the Baronet, was very unsubstantial, and would
not afford him much Nourishment.
I suppose

<page 110>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 99
I suppose', resumed Arabella, he lived upon
such Provisions-as the Forest afforded him; such as
wild Fruits, Herbs, bitter Sallads, and the
like; which, considering the Melancholy that
possessed him, would appear a voluptuous Re-
past; and which the unsortunate Orontes,
when he was in the same Situation, thought
insinitely too good sor him.
Sir Charles, sinding Arabella, took no Notice
of the Historian's H\perbole of living upon His
Sighs and Tears, passed it over, sor Fear of of-
fending her; and Sir George, who had been in
some Anxiety how to bring himself off, when
hs perceived Arabella was reasonable enough
to suppose he must have eat during his Abode
in the Forest, went on with his Relation in
this Manner.
I lived, as I besore observed to you, Ma-
dam, in this Cave sor ten Months; and truly
I was so reconciled to that solitary way of Life,
and sound so much Sweetness in it, that I be-
lieve, I should have remained there till this
Day, but sor the Adventure which I am going
to recount.
It being my Custom to walk out every Even-
ing in the Forest; returning to my Cave,
something later than usual, I heard the Cries
of a Woman at some Distance, who seemed to
be in Distress: I flopped to listen from what
Side those Cries proceeded; and, perceiving
they seemed to approach nearer to me, I took
down my Armour from the Tree where I had
hung it; an ) hastily arming myself, shaped my
Course towards the Place from whence those
F 2 Complaints

<page 111>
wo The F E M A L E Book VI.
Complaints seemed to come, resolving to assist
that unknown Person with all the Strength
that was left me.
Having gone some Paces, I spied through
the Branches of the Trees a Man on Horle-
back with a Lady, who struggled to get loose,
and at Times calling aloud sor Succour.
This Sight inflaming me with Rage against
that impious Ravill.er; I flew towards him:
And when I came within hearing;
Hold, Wretch! cried 1, and cease to offer
Violence to that Lady, whom thou bearest
away by Force; or prepare to defend thyself
against one, who will die, besore he will suffer
thee to prosecute thy unjust Designs.
The Man, without answering me, clapped
Spurs to his Horse; and it would have been
impossible to have overtaken him, had not my
own Horse, which had never quitted the Forest,
appeared in my View: I quickly mounted him,
and sollowed the Track the Ravisher had taken,
with such Speed, that I came up with him in a
Moment.
Caitisf! said I, release the Lady, and de-
fend thyself. These Words, which I accom-
panied with a thundering Blow upon his
Head piece, obliged him to set down the Lady,
who implored Heaven, with the utmost Ar-
dour, to grant me the Victory: And, recoiling
back a few Paces, to take a View of me,
I know not, said he, sor what Reason thou
settest thyself to oppose my Designs; but I
well know, that thou shalt dearly repent of thy
Temerity.
Saying this, he advanced furiously towards
me,

<page 112>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 101
me, and aimed so heavy a Blow at my Head,
that, had I not received it on my Shield, I
might haply have no longer been in a Condi-
tion to defend the distressed Lady: But, hav-
ing with the greatest Dexterity imaginable,
avoided this Blow, I made at him with so
much Fierceness, and directed my Aims fa
well, that in a few Moments I wounded him
in several Places; and his Arms were all dyed
with his Blood.
This good Success redoubled my Vigour;
and having, by a lucky Stroke with my Sword,
Gut the Strings of his Head-piece, it fell off:
And his Head being bare, I was going to let
sall a dreadsul Blow upon it, which doubtless
would have shivered it in a thousand Pieces,
when he cried out sor Quarter, and, letting sall
his Sword, by that Action assured me my Vl»
ctory was intire.
Live Wretch, cried s, since thou art base
enough to value Life after being vanquished:
but swear upon my Sword, that thou wilt ne-
ver more attempt the Liberty of that Lady.
While I was speaking, I perceived he was
no longer able to sit his Horse.: But, staggering
a Moment, he fell off, and lay extended with-
out Motion upon the Ground. Touched with
Compassion at this Sight, I alighted, and, sup-
posing him to be in a Swoon, was preparing to
give him some Assistance; but, upon my nearer
Approach, I sound he was quite dead.
Leaving theresore this mournful Object, I
turned about, with an Intention to go and
offer the distressed Lady my surther Help; but
I perceived her already at my Feet.
F 3 Valiant

<page 113>
102 The FEMALE Book VI.
Valiant Knight, said she, with a Tone of
Voice so bewitching, that all mv Faculties
were suspended, as by Inchantment, susfer
me, on my Knees, to thank you, sor the De-
liverance you have procured me from that base
Man; since to your admirable Valour I owe
not only the Preservation of my Life; but,
what is insinitely dearer to me, my Honour.
The Astonishment, wherewith I beheld the
miraculous Beauty that appeared besore me,
kept me a Moment in such an attentive Gaze,
that I sorgot she was at my Feet: Recollecting
myself, however, with some Consusion at my
Neglect,
Oh ! rise, Madam, cried I, helping her up
with insinite Respect, and debase not such Per-
fection to a Posture, in which all the Mon-
archs on the Earth might glory to appear be-
sore it.
That you may the better conceive the Al-
teration which the Sight of this sair Unknown
produced in my Soul, I will endeavour, to
give you a Description of her Beauty, which
was altogether miraculous.
Chap. IX.
Jn whtih the Reader willfind a "Description
of a Beauty\ in a Style truly sublime.
hp H E new sallen Snow, pursued Sir George^
*- was tanned, in Comparison of the resin-'
ed Purity of that White which made up the
Ground

<page 114>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 103
Ground of her Complexion; and, though Fear
had a little gathered the Carnations of her
Cheeks, yet her Joy at being delivered
seemed to plant them there with such fresh
Advantages, that any Eye might shrink at the
Brightness of that mingled Lustre: Her Mouth,
as well sor Shape as Colour, might lhame the
Imitation of the best Pencils, and the liveliest
Tints; and though through some petty Inter-
vals of Joy, it wanted the Smiles, which Grief
and Terror fequestred, yet she never opened it,
but like the East, at the Birth of a beautisul
Day, and tnen discovered Treasures, whose ex-
celling Whiteness made the Price inestimable:
All the Features of her Face had so near a
Kindred to Proportion and Symmetry, as the
several Masters of dpelles's Art might have
called it his Glory to have copied Beauties from
her, as the best of Models: The Circumfe-
rence of her Visage shewed the Extremes of
an imperfect Circle, and almost sormed it to a
p;rsect Oval: And this Abridgment of Mar-
vels was tapered by a Pair of the brightest
Stars, that ever were lighted up by the Hand
of Nature: As their Colour was the same with
the Heavens, there was a spherical Harmony
in their Motion; and that mingled with a Vi-
vacity so penetrating, as neither the firmest
Eye, nor the strongest Soul, cogld arm them-
selves with a Resistance of Proof against those
pointed Glories: Her Head was crowned with
a prodigious Quantity of sair long Hair, which
Colour as fitly suited the Beauty of her Eyes,
as Imagination could make it: To these Mar-
vels of Face were joined the rest of her Neck,
F 4 Hands,

<page 115>
104 The FEMALE Book VI.
Hands, and Shape; and there seemed a Contest
between the Form and Whiteness of the two
former, which had the largest Commission from
Nature to work Wonders.
In fine, her Beauty was miraculous, and
could not sail of producing a sudden Esfect
upon a Heart like mine.
Having pasted in an Instant from the ex-
tremest Admiration, to something yet more
fender, I reiterated my Offers of Service to
the sair Unknown; who told me, she feared her
Father had Occasion sor some Assistance, her
Ravisher having left his Men to engage him, and
keep off his Pursuit, while he rode off with
his Prize: Hereupon I hegg'd her to direct me
to the Place where she left her Father, assuring
her I would gladly venture my Life a Second
time, to preserve his; and she desiring to go
with me, I placed her besore me on my Horse,
and had the exquisite Pleasure of supporting
with my Arms the fairest and most admirable
Creature in the World.
In less than half an Hour, which had ap-
peared to me but a Moment, we got to the
Place where she had been torn from her Father;
whom we beheld with three of his Servants,
maintaining a Fight against twice as many of
their Enemies.
Having gently set down the beauteous Un-
known upon the Grass, I flew to the Relief
of her Father ; .and, throwing myself suriously
among his Assailants, dispatched two of them
with so many Blows: The others, seeing so un-
expected an Assistance, gave back a little; and
I took

<page 116>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 105
I took Advantage of their Consternation, to
redouble my Blows, and brought Two more
of them at my Feet.
There remained nowbut Four to overcome;
and my Arrival having given new Vigour to
those whose Part I had taken, they seconded
me so well, that we soon had nothing more left
to do; sor the rest, seeing their Comrades slain,
sought their Safety in Flight : We were too
generous to pursue them, the Blood of such
Wretches being unworthy to be shed by our
Swords.
The sair Unknown, seeing us Conquerors,
flew to embrace her Father; who, holding her
pressed between his Arms, turned his Eyes upon
me; then quitting her, came towards me, and
in the most obliging Terms imaginable, re-
turned me Thanks sor the Assistance I had
brought him; and being insormed by his
Daughter, of what I had done sor her Preser-
vation, this old Gentleman renewed his Ac-
knowlegements, calling me the Preserver of
his Life, the valiant Defender of his Daugh-
ter's Honour, his tutelary Angel, and the
Guardian of his House.
In sine, he loaded me with so many Thanks
and Praises, that I could not choose but be m
some Consusion; and, to put an End to them, I
begged he would insorm me, by what Means
became into that Missortune.
He told me, that, residing in a Castle at the
Extremity of this Forest, the Charms of his-
Daughter had captivated a neighbouring Lord;
whose Character and Person being disagreeable
F 5 both

<page 117>
io6 J^FEMALE Book VI.
both to her and himself, he had absolutely re-
fused to gi"e her to him: Thereupon he had set
upon them as they were going to visit a Rela-
tion at some Distance, and dragging Pbilonict
out of the Coach, put her besore him on his
Horse, and. carried her away, leaving Eight of
his Men to engage him, and his Servants; who,
being but Four in Number, must inevitably
have' perished, had I not come to his Relies,
and, by my miraculous Valour, vanquished all
his Enemies.
Saying this, he desired me to go home with
him to the Castle; and having led his Daugh-
ter to the Coach, in'.fted upon my placing my-
self next her; and, getting in himself, ordered
them to return home.
This Accident having altered his Design of
making the Visit which had been the Occasion
of this Journey;
The Baron, sor that I sound was his Title,
entertained me, all the Way, with repeated Ex-
pressions of Acknowlegements and Tenderness;
and the incomparable Pbilonice condescended
also to assure me of her Gratitude fur the Ser-
vice I had done her.
At our Arrival at the Castle, I perceived it
Was very large and magnificent: The Baron
conducted me to one of the best Apartments,
and would stay in the Room till my Armour
was taken off, that he might be assured I had
received no Hurts: Having rendered him the
like Civihty in his own Chamber, and satisfied
myself he was not wounded, we returned to
the beautiful Phiknicc; and this second Sight
having

<page 118>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 107
having sinished my Defeat, I remained so ab-
solutely her Slave, that neither Dorothea nor
Sydlmiris were more passionately beloved.
At the earnest Intreaty of the Baron, I staid
some Weeks in the Castle; durjng which, the
daily Sight of Pbilonice so augmented my
Flames, that I was no longer in a Condition to
conceal them; but, fearing to displease that Di-
vine Beauty by a Confession os my Passion, I
languished in secret; and the Constraint I laid
upon myself, gave me such Torments, that I
fell into a prosound Melancholy, and looked
so pale and dejected, that the Baron was sensi-
ble of the Alteration, and conjured me in the
most pressing Terms, to acquaint him with the:
Cause of my Uneasiness: But though I conti-
nued obstinately silent with my Tongue, yet
my Eyes spoke inr.elligib.ly enough ; and the
Blushes which appeared in-the sair Cheeks of
Pbilonice, whenever she spoke to me on the
Subject of my Grief, convinced me she was
not ignorant of my Passion.
At length the Agitation of my Mind throw-
ing me into a Fever, the Baron, who was firmly
persuaded, that my Illness proceeded from some
concealed Vexation, pressed me continually to
-declare myself; and, sinding all his Intreaties
ineffectual, he commanded his Daughter to en-
deavour to sind out the Cause of that Grief
which had put me into such a Condition.
For that Purpose theresore, having brought
the sair Pbilonice into my Chamber, he staid .a
few Minutes, and leaving the Room, under
Pretence of Business, Pbilonice remained alone
F 6 by

<page 119>
io8 rbe FEMALE Bock VI.
by my Bedside, her Women, out of Respect,
staying at the other End of the Chamber.
This Divine Person, seeing herself alone with
me, and remembering her Father's Command,
blushed, and cast dow n her Eyes in such appa-
rent Consusion, that I could not help observing
it: And interpreting it to the Displeasure she
took in being so near me,
Whatever Joy I take in the Honour your
Visit does me, Madam, said I, in a weak Voice;
yet since nothing is so dear to me, as your Sa-
tissaction, I would rather dispense with this
Mark of your Goodness to an unsortunate
Wretch, than fee you in the least Constraint.
And why, replied she, with a Tone full of
Sweetness, do you suppose that I am here by
Constraint, when it would be more just to be-
lieve, that in visiting the valiant Defender of
my Honour, and the. Life of my Father, I only
follow my own Inclinations?
Ah! Madam, said I, transported with Joy
at so savourable a Speech, the little Service I
had the Happiness to do you, does not merit
so infinite a Favour; and tho' I had lost the best
Part df my Blood in your Defence, I should
have been well rewarded with your Safety.
Since you do not repent of what you have
done, replied she, I am willing to be obliged
to you sor another Favour; and ask it with the
greater Hope of obtaining it, as I must acquaint
you, it is by my Father's Command I take
that Liberty, who is much interested in my
Success.
There

<page 120>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 109
There is no Occasion, Madam, returned F,
to make use of any Interest but your own, to
engage me to obey you, since that is, and ever
-will be, all-powersul with me: Speak then,
Madam, and let me know what it is you desire
of me, that I may, once in my Life, have the
Glory of obeying you.
It is, said she, blushing still more than besore,
that you will acquaint us with the Cause of that
Melancholy, which has, as we imagine, occa-
sioned your present Illness.
At these Words Itrembled, turned pale; and,^
not daring to discover the true Cause of my
Affliction, I remained in a prosound Silence.
I see, saiil the beautisul Philonice, that you
have no Inclination to obey me; and since my
Request has, as I perceive, given you some
Disturbance, I will prevail upon my Father to
press you no sarther upon this Subject.
No Madam, said I, eagerly; the Baron shall
be satisfied, and you shall be obeyed; though,
after the Knowledge of my Crime, you doom
me to that Death I so justly merit.
Yes Madam, this unsortunate Man, who has
had the Glory to acquire your Esteem by the
little Service he did you, has cancelled the Me-
rit of that Service by daring to adore you.
I love you, divine Philonice; and, not being
able either to repent, or cease to be guilty of
loving you, I am resolved to die, and spare
you the Trouble of pronouncing my Sentence.
I beseech you theresore to believe, that I would
have died in Silence, but sor your Command
to declare myself, and you should never have
known

<page 121>
no ^FEMALE Book V,l
known the Excess of my Love and Despair, had
not my Obedience to your Will obliged me to
confess it.
I sinished these Words with so much Fear
and Consusion, that I durst not lift my Eyes
up to the sair Face of Pbihnke, to observe how-
she received this Discourse: I waited theresore,
trembling, sor her Answer; but sinding that in
several Minutes she spoke not a Word, I ven-
tured, at last, to cast a languishing Glance upon
the Visage I adured, and saw so many Marks
of Disorder upon it, that I was almost dead
with the Apprehensions os having offended her
beyond even the Hope os procuring her Pardon
by my Death.
Chap. X.
Wherein Sir George concludes his History;
which produces an unexpected Effect.
THE Silence of Philonice, continued Sir
George, pierced me to the Heart; and
when I saw her rise from her Seat, and prepare
to go away without speaking, Grief took such
Poflesfion of my Spirits, that, uttering a Cry, I
fell into a Swoon, which, as I afterwards was
insormed, greatly alarmed the beautiful Philo-
nici; who, resuming her Seat, had the Good-
ness to assist her Women in bringing me to
myself; and, when I opened my Eyes, I had
4 the

<page 122>
Chap. 10. QUIXOTE. n i
the Satissaction to behold her still by me, and
all the Signs of Compassion in her Face.
This Sight a little re-assuring me; I ask your
Pardon, Madam, said I, sor the Condition in
which I have appeared besore you, and also sor
that I am not yet dead, as is doubtless your
Wish: But I will make Haster pursued I,
sighing, to sulfil your Desires; and you shall
soon be freed from the Sight of a miserable
Wretch, who, to his last Moment, will not
cease to adore you.
It is not your Death that I desire, said the
sair Philonke ; and, after having preserved both
my Father and me from Death, it is not rea-
sonable, that we should suffer you to die, if we
can help it.
Live theresore, Bdlmour, pursued she, blush-
ing; and live, if possible, without continuing in
that Weakness 1 cannot choose but condemn:
Yet whatever are y our Thoughts sor the suture,
remember that your Death will be a Fault I
cannot resolve to pardon.
Speaking these Words without giving me
Time to answer, she left my Chamber; and I
sound something so sweet and savourable in
them, that I resolved to obey her, and sorward
my Cure as much as I was able : However, the
Agitation of Spirits increased my Fever so
much, that my Life was despaired of.
- The Baron hardly ever lest my Bed-side.
Pbilonice came every Day to see me, and seemed
extremely moved at the Danger I was in. One
Pay, when I was worse than usual, she came
close
i

<page 123>
ii2 The FEMALE Book VI.
close to the Bedside; and, opening the Cour-
tain,
What Bellmour, said she, do you pay so
little Obedience to my Commands, that you
resolve to die?
Heaven is my Witness, Madam, said I,
saintly, that nothing is so dear and sacred to
me as your Commands; and since, out of your
superlative Goodness, you are pleased to have
some Care sor my Life, I would preserve it to
obey you, were it in my Power; but, alas!
Madam, I strive in vain to repel the Violence
of my Distemper.
In a few Days more, I was reduced to the
last Extremity: it was then that the sair Phi-
lonke discovered, that she did not hate me; sor
she made no Scruple to weep besore me; and
those Tears she so liberally shed, had so pow-
ersul an Effect upon my Mind, that the Con-
tentment I felt, communicated itself to my
Body, and gave such a Turn to my Distemper,
that my Recovery was not only hoped, but ex-
pected.
The Baron expressed his Satissaction at this
Alteration, by the most affectionate Expressi-
ons; and though the sair Phihnice said very
little, yet I perceived by the Joy that appeared
in her sair Eyes, that she was not less interested
in my Recovery, than her father.
The Physicians having declared me out 6f
Danger, the Baron, who had taken his Re-
solutions long besore, came one Day into my
Chamber; and ordering those who attended
me, to leave us alone,
Prince,

<page 124>
Chap. 10, QUIXOTE. 113
Prince, said he, for in recounting my History
to him, I had disclosed my true Quality, I am
not ignorant of that Affection you bear my
Daughter; and am sensible it has occasioned
the Extremity to which we have seen you re-
duced: Had you been pleased to acquaint me
with your Sentiments, you would have avoided
those Displeasures you have suffered; sor though
your Birth were not so illuflrious as it is, yet,
preferring Virtue to all other Advantages, I
should have esteemed my Daughter honou-
red by your Love, and have freely bestowed
her on you: But since to those rare Qualities
wherewith Heaven has so liberally endowed
you, you add also that of a Birth so noble,
doubt not but I shall think myself highly sa-
voured by your Alliance: If theresore your
Thoughts of my Daughter be not changed,
and you esteem her worthy to be your Bride, I
here solemnly promise you to bestow her upon
you, as soon as you are perfectly recovered.
I leave you to guess, Madam, the Joy which
I felt at this Discourse: It was so great, that
it would not permit me to thank him, as I
should have done, sor the inestimable Blessing
he bestowed on me.
I saw Pbilonice a few Minutes after; and, be-
ing commanded by her Father to give me her
Hand, she did so without any Marks of Reluct-
ance, and, having respectsully kissed it, I vow-
ed to be her Slave sor ever..
Who would have imagined, continued Sir
George, with a prosound Sigh, that Fortune,
while she thus seemed to flatter me, was pre-
paring to make me suffer the severest Tor-
ments?

<page 125>
ii4 the FEMALE Book Vs.
ments? I began now to leave my Bed, and was
able to walk about my Chamber. The Baron
was making great Preparations sor our Nuptials;
when one Night I was alarmed with the Cries
of Philonice's Women; and, a few Moments
after, the Baron came into my Chamber, with
a distracted Air.
0! Son, cried he, sor so he always called
me, now Philonice'w lost both to you and me:
She is carried off by Force. and I am preparing
to sollow and rescue her, if possible: but I fear
my Endeavours will be fruitless, since I know
not which Way her Ravishers have taken.
Oh ! Sir, cried I,'transported both with Grief
and Rage, you shall not go alone: Her Rescue
belongs to me; and I will esfect it, or perish in
the Attempt.
The Baron, having earnestly conjured me
Dot to expose myself to the Danger of a Re-
lapse, by so imprudent a Resolution, was ob-
liged to quit me, Word being brought him, that
his Hoi se was ready: And as soon as he was
gone out of the Room, in spite of all that could
be said to prevent me, by my Attendants, I
made them put on my Armour; and, mounting
a Horse I had caused to be made ready, sallied
suriously out of the Castle, breathing out Vows
of Vengeance against the Wretch who had
robbed me c f Philonice.
1 rode the whole Night without stopping.
Day appeared, when I sound myself near a
small Village. I entered it, and made strict En-
quiry aster the Ravisher of Philonice, describ-
ing that sair Creature, and offering vast Re-
wards to any who could bring me the least In-
telligence

<page 126>
Chap. 10. QU I X O T E. 115
telligence of her: But all was in vain; I could
make no Discovery.
After travelling several Days, to no Purpose,
I returned to the Castle, in order to know if
the Baron had been more successsul in his Pur-
suit than myself; but I sound him oppressed
with Grief: He had heard no Tidings of his
Daughter, and had suffered no small Appre-
hensions upon my Account. Having assured
him I sound myself very able to travel, I took
an affectionate Leave of him, promising him
never to give over my Search, till I had sound
the Divine Philcnice: But Heaven has not per-
mitted me that Happiness; and though I have
spent several Years in searching sor her, I have
never been able to discover where she is: Time
has not cured me os my Grief sor her Loss;
and, though by an Effect of my Destiny,
another Object possesses my Soul, yet I do
not cease to deplore her Missortune, and to of-
fer up Vows sor her Happiness.
And is this all you have to say? said Ara-
bella, whom the latter Part of his History had
extremely surprised; or are we to expect a
Continuance oF your Adventures?
I have saithsully related all my Adventures,
that are worthy your hearing, Madam, re-
turned Sir George; and I flatter myself, you
will do me the Justice to own, that I have
been rather unsortunate than saithless; and that
Mr. Glanvillehzd little Reason to tax me with
Inconstancy.
In my Opinion, resumed Arabella, Mr.
Glanville spoke too savourably of you, when he
called you only inconstant; and if he had add-
ed

<page 127>
n6 The FEMALE Book VI.
ed the Epithet of Ungrateful and Unjust, he
Would have marked your Character better.
For, in sine, Sir, pursued she, you will ne-
ver persuade any reasonable Person, that your
being able to lose the Remembrance of the sair
and generousSydimiris, in your new Passion sor
Philonice, was not an Excess of Levity: But
your susfering so tamely the Loss of this last
Beauty, and allowing her to remain in the
Hands of her Ravisher, while you permit an-
other Affection to take Possession of your Soul,
is such an Outrage to all Truth and Constancy,
that you deserve to be ranked among the salsest
of Mankind.
Alas! Madam, replied Sir George, who had
not soreseen the Inference Arabella would draw
from this last Adventure, What would you
have an unsortunate Man, whose Hopes have
been so often, and so cruelly, disappointed, do?
I have bewailed the Loss of Pbilonice, with a
Deluge of Tears; I have taken insinite Pains to
sind her, but to no Purpose; and when Hea-
ven compassionating my Sufferings, presented
to my Eyes, an Object, to whom the whole
World ought to pay Adoration, how could I
resist that powersul Impulse, which sorced me to
love what appeared so worthy of my Affection?
Call not, interrupted Arabella, that an ir-
resistible Impulse, which was only the Effect
of thy own changing Humour: The fame Ex-
cuse might be pleaded sor all the Faults we fee
committed in the World; and Men would no
longer be answerable sor their own Crimes.
Had you imitated the illustrious Heroes of An-
tiquity, as well in the Constancy of their Af-
fections,

<page 128>
Chap. 10. QUIXOTE. 117
sections, as, it must be confessed, you have done
in their admirable Valour; you would now be
either sighii>g in your Cave sor the Loss of the
generous Sydimiris, or wandering through the
World in Search of the beautisul Philonice.
Had you persevered in your Affection, and con-
tinued your Pursuit of that Fair-one; you
would, perhaps, ere this, have sound her sleep-
ing under the Shade of a Tree in some lone Fo-
rest, as PbilodaJ'pcs did his admirable Delia
t or
disguised in a Slave's Habit, as Ariobarfanes saw
his Divine Olympia; or bound haply in a Cha-
riot, and have had the Glory of freeing her, as
Ambriomer did the beauteous Agione; or in a
Ship in the Hands of Pirates, like the incom-
parable Eliza; or
Enough, dear Niece, interrupted Sir Charles;
you have quoted Examples sussicient, if .this in-
constant Man would have the Grace to sollow
them.
True, J5ir, replied Arabella; and I would
recommend to his Consideration the Conduct
of those illustrious Persons I have named, to the
end that, pursuing their Steps, he may arrive
at their Glory and Happiness, that is the Repu-
tation of being perfectly constant, and the Pos-
session of his Mistress: And be assured, Sir, pur-
sued Arabella, looking at Sir George, that Hea-
ven will never restore you the Crown of your
Ancestors, and place you upon the Throne to
which you pretend, while you make yourself
unworthy of its Protection, by so shamesul an
Inconstancy.
I perhaps speak with too much Freedom to a
great Prince 1 whom though Fortune has de-
spoiled

<page 129>
Ii8 fbe FEMALE Book VI.
spoiled of his Dominions, is intitled to a certain
Degree of Respect: But I conceive, it belongs
to me, in a particular manner, to resent the
Baseness of that Crime, to which you are pleas-
ed to make me the Excuse; and, looking upon
myself as dishonoured by those often prostituted
Vows you have offered me, I am to tell you,
that I am highly disobliged; and sorbid you to
appear in my Presence again, till you have re-
sumed those Thoughts, which are worthy your
noble Extraction; and are capable of treating
me with that Respect, that is my Due.
Saying this, she rose srom her Seat, and walk-
ed very majestically out of the Room, leaving
Sir George overwhelm'd with Shame and Vexa-
tion at having conducted the latter, Part of his*
Narration so ill; and drawn upon himself a
Sentence, which deprived him of all his Hopes.
Containing only a few Inferences, drazim
from the foregoing Chapters.
the unsortunate Baronet; who seemed, by his
Silence, and down-cast Looks, to expect it.
Who would have imagined, said he, that so
renowned a Hero would have tarnished the
Glory of his Lawrels, as my Cousin says, by so
base an Ingratitude? Indeed Prince, pursued
he, laughing, you must resolve to recover your
Reputa-
C H A P. XI.
M

'anville, excessively delighted with
Event, could not help laughing at

<page 130>
Chap. n. QUIXOTE. 119
Reputation, either by retiring again to your
Cave, and living upon bitter Herbs, sor the
generous Sydimiris; or else wander through the
World, in search of the Divine Philonice.
Don't triumph, dear Charles, replied Sir
George, laughing in his Turn; have a little
Compassion upon me, and confess, that no-
thing could be more unsortunate, than that
damn'd £1 p I made at the latter End of my
History: But sor that^ my Reputation sor
Courage and Constancy had been as high as
the great Oroondates, or jtiba.
Since you have so fertile an Invention, said
Sir Charles, you may easily repair this Mistake.
Ods heart! It is pity you are not poor enough
to be an Author; you would occupy a Garret
in Grub-Jlrect, with great Fame to yourself,
and Diversion to the Public.
Oh! Sir, cried Sir George, I have Stock
enough by me, to set up sor an Author To-
morrow, if I please: I have no less than Five
Tragedies, some quite, others almost sinished;
Three or sour Essays on Virtue, Happiness, &c.
Three thousand Lines of an Epic Poem; half a
Dozen Epitaphs ; a few Acrostics; and a long
String of Puns, that would serve to embellish a
Daily Paper, if I was disposed to write one.
Nay, then, interrupted Mr. Glanville, you
are qualified sor a Critic at the Bedford Coffee-
house; where with the rest of your Brothers,
Demy- wits, you may sit in Judgment upon the
Productions of a Young, a Richardson, or a "John-
son. Rail with premeditated iVlalice at the
Rambler; and, sor the want of Faults, turn
even its inimitable Beauties into Ridicule: The
Language,

<page 131>
i2o The FEMALE Book VI.
Language, because it reaches to Perfection,
may be called stiff, laboured, and peclantic; the
Criticisms, when they let in more Light than
your weak Judgment can bear, superficial and
ostentatious Glitter; and because those Papers
contain the sinest System of Ethics yet extant,
damn the queer Fellow, sor over-propping Vir-
tue; an excellent new Phrase ! which those who
can sind no Meaning in, may accommodate
with one of their own; then give shrewd Hints,
that some Persons, though they do not publish
their Persormances, may have more Merit,
than those that do.
Upon my Soul, Charles, said Sir George,
thou art such an ill-natured Fellow, that I am
afraid, thou wilt be sneering at me when I ana
gone; and wilt endeavour, to persuade Lady
Bella, that not a Syllable of my Story is true.
Speak, pursued he, wilt thou have the Cruelty
to deprive me of my lawsul Claim to the great
Kingdom of Kent; and rob me of the Glory
of sighting singly against Five hundred Men?
I do not know, said Sir Charles, whether
my Niece be really imposed upon, by the Gra-
vity with which you told your surprising Hi-
story; but I protest, I thought you were in ear-
nest at sirst; and that you meant to make us
believe it all to be Fact.
You are so fitly punished, said Mr. Glan-
ville, sor ,that ill-judged Adventure you related
last, by the bad Opinion Lady Bella entertains
of you, that I need not add to your Missortune:
And theresore, you shall be Prince Veridomer, if
you please; since, under that Character, you
arc

<page 132>
Chap. it. QUIXOTE. 121
are obliged not to pretend to any Lady, but
the incomparable Philanice.
Sir George, who understood his Meaning,
went home, to think of some Means, by which
he might draw himself out of the Embarrass-
ment he was in; and'Mr. Glanv'dle, as he had
promised, did not endeavour to undeceive Lady;
Bella, with regard to the History he had feign-
ed; being very well satisfied with his having}
put it out of his Power to make his Addresses
td her, since stu now looked upon him as the
Lover of Philonice.
As sor Sir Charles, he did not penetrate into
the Meaning of Sir George's Story; and only
imagined, that by relating such a Heap of Ad-
ventures, he had a Design to entertain the
Company, and give a Proas of the Facility of
his Invention; and Miss Glanv'dle, who sup-
posed, he had been ridiculing her Cousin's
strange Notions, was better pleased with him
than ever.
Arabella, however, was less satisfied than
any of them: She could not endure to fee so
brave a Knight, who drew his Birth from a
Race of Kings, tarnish the Glory of his gallant
Actions by so base a Perfidy.
Alas! said she to hersels, How much Rea-
son has the beautiful Philonice to accuse me for
all the Anguish she suffers? since I am the
Cause, that the ungratesul Prince, on whom
she bestows her Affections, suffers her to re-
main quietly, in the Hands of her Ravisher,
without endeavouring to rescue her.- Hut, Oh!
too lovely, and unsortunate Fair-one, said she,
as if slie had been present, and listening to her,
Vol. II. G distinguish,

<page 133>
122 The FEMALE &c. Book VI.
distinguish, I beseech you, between those Faults,
which theWill, and those which Necessity makes
ws commit I am the Cause, 'tis true, of thy
Lover's Insidelity; but I am the innocent
Cause; and would repair the Evils, my satal
Beauty gives rife to, by any Sacrifice in my
Power to make.
While Arabella, by her romantic Genero-
sity, bewails the imaginary Afflictions of the
full as imaginary Philonice; Mr. Glanville, who
thought the Solitude she lived in, consirmed
her in her absurd and ridiculous Notions, de-
sired his Father to press her to go to London.
Sir Charles complied with his Request, and
earnestly intreated her to leave the Castle, and
spend a few Months in Town. Her Year of
Mourning being now expired, she consented to
go; but Sir Charles, who did not think his
Son's Health absolutely confirmed, proposed to
spend a few Weeks at Bath; which was readi-
ly complied with by Arabella.
The End of BOOK VI.
THE

<page 134>
t 123 3

THE
Female Qjji xote.
BOOK vir.
Chap. I.
For the Shortness of which the Length
of the next shall make some Ame?: is.
IR George, to gratify Arabel'a's
Humour, had not presumed to
come to the Castle sor several
Days ; but, hearing that thev were
preparing to leave the Country,
he wrote a short Billet to her; and in the Style
of Romance, most humbly intreated her to
grant him a Moment's Audience.
Arabella being informed by Lucy, to whom Sir
Geirge's Gentleman had addressed himself, thut
he had brought a Letter from Bis Master, she
G t ordered


<page 135>
124 FEMALE Book VII.
ordered her to bring him to her Apartment, and
as soon as he appeared,
How comes it, said she, that the Prince your
Master, has had the Presumption to impor-
tune me again, after my absolute Commands to
the contrary?
The Prince, my Master, Madam! said the
Man, excessively surprised.
Ay! said Arabella, Are you not Sir George's
'Squire? And does he not trust you with his
most secret Thoughts?
I belong to Sir George Bellmour, Madam,
replied the Man, who did not understand what
flie meant: I have not the Honour to be a
'Squire.
No! interrupted Arabella; 'tis strange then,
that he should have honoured you with his Com-
mission; Pray, what is it you come to request
sor him?
My Master, Madam, said he, ordered me
to get this Letter delivered to your Ladyship,
and to stay sor your Commands.
You would persuade me, said she, sternly,
being provoked that he did not deliver the
Letter upon his Knees, as was the Custom in
Romances, that you are not acquainted with
the Purport of this audacious Billet, since you
express so little Fear of my Displeasure; but
know, presumptuous, that I am mortally of-
fended with your Master, sor his daring to sup-
pose I would read this Proof at once of his In-
solence and Insidelity; and was you worth my
Resentment, I would haply make you suffer
J'or your Want of Respect to me.
The poor Man, surprised and consounded at
her

<page 136>
Chap. r. QUIXOTE. raf
her Anger, and puzzled extremely to under-
stand what she meant, was opening his Mouth
to say something, 'tis probable in his own De-
fence, when Arabella, preventing him,
I know what thou wouldst say, said she:
Thou wouldst abuse my Patience by a salse
Detail of thy Master's Sighs, Tears, Excla-
mations, and Despair.
Indeed, Madam, I don't intend to say any
such Thing, replied the Man.
No! repeated Arabella, a little disappointed,
Bear back this presumptuous Billet then, which
I suppose contains the melancholy Account; -
and tell him, He that could so soon sorget the
generous Sydimiris sor Philonice, and could
afterwards be false to that incomparable Beauty,
is not a Person worthy to adore Arabella.
The Man, who could not tell what to make
of this Message, and feared he should sorget
these two hard Names, humbly intreated her
to be pleased to acquaint his Master, by a Line,
with her Intentions. Arabella, supposing he
meant to importune her still more, made a
Sign with her Hand, very majestically, sor
him to be gone; but he, not able to compre-
hend her Meaning, stood still, with an Air of
Perplexity, not during to beg her to explain
herself; supposing, she, by that Sign, required
something os him.
Why dost thou not obey my Commands?
said Arabella, sinding he did not go.
I will, to be sure, Madam, replied he;
wishing at the same Time secretly, she would
let him, know, what they were.
And yet, said she hastily, thou art disobey-
.. .; G 3 ing

<page 137>
126 The FEMALE Book VII.
iig me this Moment: Did I not bid you get
oit of my Presence, and to speak no more of
your inconstant Master, whose Crimes have
rendered him the Detestation of all generous
Persons whatever?
Sir George's Messenger, extremely surprised
at so harsh a Character os his Master, and the
Rage with which the Lady seemed to be actu-
ated, made haste to get out of her Apartment;
and, at his Return, insormed his Master, very
exactly, of the Reception he had met with,
repeating al! Lady Bella's Words; which, not-
withstanding theBlunders he made in the Names
of Sydimiris and Philonice, Sir George under-
stood well enough ; and sound new Occasion of
wondering at the Excess of Arabella's Extra-
vagance, who he never imagined would have ex-
plained herself in that Manner to his Servant.
Without endeavouring theresore to fee Ara-
bella, he went to pay his Compliments to Sir
C srles, Mr. Glanville, and Mife Glanvilte ; to
the last of whom he said some soft Things, that
made her extremely regret his staying behind
them in the Country.
Chap, II.
Not so long as was first intended; tut con-
tains, however, a surprising Adventure
on the Road.
THE Day of their Departure being come,
they set out in a Coach and Six, attended
by several Servants on Horseback. The first
Day's

<page 138>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE, 12*7
Day's Journey passed off, without any Acci-
dent worthy relating; but, towards the Close
of the Second, they were alarmed by the Ap-
pearance os three Highwaymen, well mounted,
at a small Distance.
One of the Servants, whs had first spied
them, immediately rode up to the Coach; and,,
sor fear of alarming the Ladies, whispered Mr.
Glanville in the Ear.
Sir Charles, who was sitting next his Son, and:
had heard it, cried out with too little Caution,
How's this ? Are we in any Danger of being at-
tacked, say you?
Mr. Glanville, without replying, jumped
out of the Coach; at which Miss Glanville
screamed out; and, lest her Father should sol-
low, sprung into her Brother's Seat, and held
him sast by the Coat.
Arabella^ being in a strange Consternation at
all this, put her Head out of the Ceach, to fee
what was the Matter; and, observing Three or
Four Men of a genteel Appearance, on Horse-
back, who seemed to halt, and gaze on them,
without offering to advance;
Sir, said she to her Uncle, are yonder Knights,
the Persons whom you suppose will attack us?
Ay, ay, said Sir Charles, they are Knights
of the Road indeed: I suppose we shall have a
Bout with them; sor it wifl be scandalous to
deliver, since we have the Odds os our Side*
and are more thin a Match sor them.
Arabella, interpreting these Words in her
own Way, looked out again; and, seeing the
Robbers, who had by this Time taken their
Resolution, galloping towards them, her Cou-
G 4 fin

<page 139>
j28 The FEMALE Book VII.
sin and the Servants ranging themselves of each
Side of the Coach, as if to defend them,
Hold, hold, valiant Men, said she, as loud
as she could speak, addressing herself to the
Highwaymen; do not, by a mistaken Genero-
sity, hazard your Lives in a Combat, to which
the Laws of Honour do not oblige you: We
are not violently carried away, as you salsely
suppose; we go willingly along with these Per-
sons, who are our Friends and Relations.
Hey-day! cried Sir Charles^ staring at her
with great Surprize; what's the Meaning of all
this? Do you think these Fellows will mind
your sine Speeches, Niece?
I hope they will, Sir, said she: Then, pulling
her Cousin, Shew yourself, sor Heaven's Sake,
Miss, pursued she, and second my Assurances,
that we are not sorced away: These generous
Men come to fight sor our Deliverance.
The Highwaymen, who were pear enough
to hear Arabella's Voice, though they could
not distinguish her Words, gazed on her wish
great Surprize ; and, finding they would be very
well received, thought fit to abandon their En-
terprize, and galloped away as sast as they were
able. Some of the Servants made a Motion to
pursue them; but Mr. Glanville sorbad it;and,
entering again into the Coach, congratulated
the Ladies upon the Escape they had had.
Since these Men, said Arabella, did not come
to deliver us, out of a mistaken Notion, that
we were carried away by Force, it must ne-
cessarily sollow, they had some bad Design; and
Iprotest I know not who to suspect is the Au-
thor of it, unless the Person you vanquished,
said.

<page 140>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 129
said she to Mr. Glanville, the other Day in a
single Combat; sor the disguised Edward, yon
assured me, was dead : But perhaps, continued
she, it was some Lover of Miss GlanvilU's
who designed to make an Attempt to carry her
away: Methinks he was too slenderly attended
for such an hazardous Undertaking.
I'll assure you Mad.'m, said Miss Glanville,
I have no Lovers among Highwaymen.
Highwaymen! repeated Arabella.
Why, ay, to be sure, M dam, rejoined Sir
: Charles: What do you take them sor?
For Persons os Quality, Sir, resumed Ara-
bella ; and though they came,questionless, either
upon a good or bad Design, yet it cannot be
doubted, but that their Birth is illustrious;
otherwise they would never pretend either to
sight in our Defence, or to carry us away.
I vow, Niece, said Sir Charles, I can't possi-
'bly understand you. i
My Cousin, Sir, interrupted Mr. Glanville,
has been mistaken in these Persons; and has not
yet, possihly, believed them to be Highwaymen,
who came to rob us.
There is no Question, Sir, said Arabella,
smiling, jthat if they did not come to defend
us, they came to rob you: But it is hard to
guess, which of us it was of whom they de-
signed to deprive you; sor it may very possibly
be.sor my Cousin's Sake, as well as mine, that
this Enterprise was undertaken.
Pardon me, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, who
was willing to prevent his Father from an-
swering her Absurdities; these Men had no
other Design than to rob us of our Money.
G 5 Hovd

<page 141>
j 30 TfoFEMALE Book VII.
How! said Arabella: Were these Cavaliers,
who appeared to be in so handsome a Garb,
that I took them sor Persons of prime Qualitr,
were they Robbers? I have been strangely mis-
taken, it seems: However, I apprehend there is
no Certainty,that your Suspicions are true; and
it may still be as I say, that they erther came to
rescue or carry us away.
Mr. Gliinville, to avoid a longer Dispute,
changed the Discourse; having observed with
Consusion, that Sir Charles, and his Sister, seem-
ed to look upon his beloved Cousin as one that
was out of her Senses.
Chap. IU.
Which concludes with an authentic Pitce
»f History.
ARABELLA, during the rest os this Jour-
ney, was/o wholly taken up in contem-
plating upon the last Adventure, that foe mixed
but Ktt!e in the Conversation. Upon their
drawing near Bath, the Situation of that City
asforded her the Means of making a Com-
parison between the Valley in which it was
placed (with the amphitheatrical View of the
Hills around it) and the VaUey of Tempe.
'Twas in such a Place as this, said foe, pur-
suing her Comparison, that the sair Andronici
delivered the valiant Hortenjius: And really I
could wish, our Entrance into that City might
be

<page 142>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 131
be preceded by an Act of equal Humanity
with that of that fair Princess.
For the Gratification of that Wish, Madam,
said Mr. Glanville, it is necessary some Person
should meet with a Missortune, out of which
you might be able to relieve him ; but I suppose
the Benevolence of your Disposition may be
equally satisfied with not sinding any Occasion*
as of exercising it, when it is sound.
Though it be not my Fortune to meet with
those Occasions, replied Arabella, there is no*
Reason to doubt but others do, who p ssibly
have less Inclination to ufford their Assistance
than myself: And it is possible, if any other
than the Princess of Meflina had happened to
pass by, when Hortensius was in the Hands of
the Tbeffiilians, he would not have been res-
cued from the ignominious Death he was de-
stined to, merely sor killing a Stork.
How! interrupted Sir Charles, put a Man to
Death for killing a Stork! Ridiculous ! Pray, in
what Part of the World did that happen?
Among the Indians of America, I suppose.
No, Sir, said Arabella, in Thejsaly; the sairest
Part in all Macedonia, famous sor the beautisut
Valley of Tempe, which excited the Curiosity
of all Travellers whatever.
No, not all, Madam, returned Sir Charles^
for I am acquainted with several Travellers,
who never saw it, nor even mentioned it; and
if it is so famous as you fey, I am sorprised \
never heard of it besore.
I don't know, said Arabella, what those Tra-
vellers thought worthy of their Notice -y but I
am certain, that if any Chance should conduct
G 6 me

<page 143>
132 The FEMALE Book VII.
me into Macedonia, I would not leave it till I
saw the Valley of Tempe, so celebrated by all
the Poets and Historians.
Dear Cousin, cried Glanville, who could
hardly sorbear smiling, what Chance, in the
Name of Wonder, should take you into
Turky, at so great a Distance from your own
Country?
And so, said Sir Charles, this samous Valley
of Tempe is in Turky. Why you must be
very sond of travelling, indeed, Lady Bella,
if you would go into the Great Mogul's Coun-
try, where the People are all Pagans, they say,
and worship the Devil.
The Country my Cousin speaks of, said Mr.
Glanville, is in the Grand Signor's Dominions:
The Great Mogul, you know, Sir-
Well, interrupted Sir Charles, the Great
Mogul, or the Grand Signor, I know not
what you call him: But I hope my Niece does
not propose to go thither.
Not unless 1 am sorcibly carried thither, said
Arabella; but I do determine, if that Missor-
tune should ever happen to me, that I would,
if possible, visit the Valley of Tempe, which is
in that Part of Greece they call Macedonia.
Then I am persua.led, replied Sir Charles,
j . - _ j *
sor it is not very likely you should be sorcibly
carried away into Turky.
And whv do you think it unlikely, that I
should be carried thither? interrupted Arabella.
Do not the same Things happen now, that
did sormerly ? And is any thing more common,
than Ladies being carried, by their Ravimers,

samous Vale you talk of;
+
into

<page 144>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 133
into Countries sar distant from their own ? May
not the same Accidents happen to me, that have
happened to so many illustrious Ladies besore
me? And may I not be carried into Macedonia
by a Similitude of Destiny with that of a great
many beautisul Princesses, who, though born in
the most distantQuarters of the World, chanced
to meet at one time in the City of Alexandria,
and related their miraculous Adventures to each
other?
And it was sor that very Purpose they met,
Madam* said Mr. Glanville, smiling.
Why, truly, said Arabella, it happened very
luckily sor each of them, that they were
brought into a Place where they sound so many
illustrious Companions in Missortune, to whom
they might freely communicate their Adven-
tures, which otherwise might, haply, have been
concealed, or, at least, have been imperfectly
delivered down to us: However, added she,
smiling, if I am carried into Macedonia, and
by that means have an Oppoitunity of visit-
ing the samous Vale of Tempe, I shall take care
not to draw the Resentment of the Thejsalians
upon me, by an Indiscretion like that of Hor-
tenjius.
For be pleased to know, Sir, said she, ad-
dressing herself to her Uncle, that his killing a
Stork, however inconsiderable a Matter it may
appear to us, was yet looked upon as a Crime
of a very atrocious Nature among the Thes-
Jalians; sor they have a Law, which sorbids,
upon Pa n of Death, the killing of Storks;
'the Reason for which is, that Thejsaly being sub-
ject to be infested with a prodigious Multitude

<page 145>
'134 7& FE MALE Book VII.
of Serpents, which are a delightsul Food to
these sort of Fowls, they look upon them as
sacred Birds, sent by the Gods to deliver them
from these Serpents and Vipers: and though
Hortensius, being a Stranger, was pardoned
through the Intercession of the Princess Aniro-
rtice, they made him promise to send another
Stork into Thejsa/y, to the End that he might
be reputed innocent.
Chap. IV.
In which one of our Heroine's Whims is
justified, by feme others full as whim-
JicaL
np H I S Piece of History, with Sir Charles's
Remarks upon it, brought them into
Bath. Their Lodgings being provided besore-
hand, the Ladies retired to their different Cham-
bers, to repose themselves after the Fatigue
of their Journey, and did not meet again till
Supper was on Table; when Miss Glan-
ville, who had eagerly enquired what Company
was then in the Place, and heard there were a
great many Persons of Fashion just arrived,
prest Arabella to go to the Pump-Room the
next Morning, assuring her she would sind a
very agreeable Amusement.
Arabella accordingly consented to accompany
her; and, being told the Ladies went in an Un-
dress of a Morning, she accommodated herself
to the Custom, and went in a negligent Dress;
but instead of a Capuchin, she wore something
2 like

<page 146>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 135
like a Veil, of black Gauze, which covered
almost: all her F?.ce, and Part of her Waist, and
gave her a verv singular Appearance.
Miss Gla'ivilU was too envious of her Cou-
sin's Superiority in point of Beautv, to insorm
her of any Oddity in her Dress, which she
thought might expose her to the Ridicule of
those that saw her; and Mr. Glanville was too
little a Critic in Ladies Apparel, to be sensible
that Arabella was not in the Fashion ; and since
every Thing she wore became her extremely,
he could not choose but think she drest ad-
mirably well: Heh.inded her theresore, with a
great deal of Satissaction, into the Pump-
Room, which happened to be greatly crouded
that Morning.
The Attention of most Part of the Compa-
ny was immediately engaged by the Appear-
anceLady Bella made. Strangers are here most
strictly criticized, and every new Ob}i ct afsords
a delicious Feast of Raillery and Scandal.
The Ladies, alarmed at the Singularity of
her Dress, crouded together in Parties; and
the Words, Who can she be? Strange Crea-
ture! Ridiculous! and other Exclamations of
the same Kind, were whispered very intelli-
gibly.- -;
The Men were struck with her Figure,
veiled as she was: Her sine Stature, the beauti-
sul Turn of her Person, the Grace and Ele-
gance of her Motion, attracted all their No-
tice: The Phxnomena of the Veil, however,
gave them great Disturbance. So lovely a Per-
son seemed to promise the Owner had a Face
not unworthy of it; but that was totally hid
from

<page 147>
i36 The FEMALE Book VII.
from their View: For Arabella, at her En-
trance into the Room, had puiled the Gauze
quite over her Face, sollowing therein the Cus-
tom of the Ladies in Clelia, and the Grand Cy-
rus, who, in mixed Companies, always hid their
Faces with great Care.
The Wits and Pretty-Fellows, railed at the
envious Covering, and compared her to the
Sun obscured by a Cloud; while the Beaux
dem'd the horrid Innovation, and expressed a
Fear, left it should grow into a Fashion.
Some of the wiser Sort took her sor a Fo-
reigner; others, of still more Sagacity, supposed
her a Scots Lady, covered with her Plaid; and
a third Sort, infinitely wiser than either, con-
cluded she was a Spanish Nun. that had escaped
from a Convent, and had not yet quitted her
Veil.
Arabella, ignorant of the Diversity of Opi-
nions, to which her Appearance gave Rife, was
taken up in discoursing with Mr. Glanville
upon the medicinal Virtue of the Springs, the
Oeconomy of the Baths, the Nature of the
Diversions, and such other Topicks, as the
Objects around them furnished her with.
In the mean Time, Miss GlanvilU was got
amidst a Croud of her Acquaintance, who had
hardly paid the Civilities of a first Meeting, be-
sore they eagerly enquired, who that Lady she
brought with her was.
Miss Glanville insormed them, that she was
her Cousin, ar<4 Daughter to the deceased Mar-
quis of adding with a Sneer, That she had
been brought up in the Ceuntry; knew nothing
os the World ; and had some very peculiar No-
tions,

<page 148>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 137
tions, as you may fee, said she, by that odd
kind of Covering she weaTS.
Her Name and Quality were presently whis-
pered all over the Room: The Men, hearing
she was a great Heiress, sound greater Beauties
to admire in her Person: The Ladies, aw'd
by the Sanction of Quality, dropt their Ridi-
cule on her Dress, and begun to quote Exam-
ples of Whims full as inexcusable.
One remembred, that Lady f— F— al-
ways wore her Ruffles reversed; that the Coun-
tess of went to Court in a Farthingale;
that the Dutchess of sat astride upon a
Horse; and a certain Lady of great Fortune',
and nearly allied to Quality, because she was
not dignified with a Title, invented a new one
sor herself; and directed her Servants to fxy
in speaking to her, Tour Honouress, which af-
terwards became a Custom among al! her Ac-
quaintance; who mortally offended her if
they omitted that Instance of Respect.
C H A P. V.
Containing some historical Anecdotes, the
Truth of which may poffibly be doubted,
as they are not to be found in any of the
Historians.
A F T E R a short Stay in the Room, Ara-
bdla expressing a Desire to return home,
Mr. Glanv 'tlle conducted her out. Two Gentle-
men of his Acquaintance attending Miss Glan-

<page 149>
138 The FEMALE BookVN.
viili, Sir CharU, detained them to Breaksast;
by which Means they had an Opportunity of
satissying their Curiosity; and beheld Arabella,
divested of that Veil, which had, as they said,
and 'tis probable they said no more than they
thought, concealed one of the finest Faces in
the World.
Miss Glanville had the Mortification to fee
both the Gentlemen so charmed with the Sight
of her Cousin's Face, that sor a long time she
sat wholly neglected; but the Seriousness of her
Behaviour, giving some little Disgust to the
youngest of them, who was what the Ladies
call a pretty Fellow, a dear Creature, and the
most diverting Man in the World; he applied
himself wholly to Miss GlanvilU, and soon en-
gaged her in a particular Conversation.
Mr. Selv'tn, so was the other Gentleman
called, was of a much graver Cast: He affected *
to be thought deep-read in History, and never
failed to take all Opportunities of displaying
his Knowledge of Antiquity, which was indeed
but very supersicial; but having some few Anec-
dotes by Heart, which he would take Occa-
sion to introduce as often as he could, he passed
among many Persons sor one, who, by Appli-
cation and Study, had acquired an universal
Knowledge of antient History.
Speaking of any particular Circumstance, he
would fix the Time, by computing the Year
with the Number of the Olympiads.
It happened, he would say, in the 141st
Olympiad.
Such an amazing Exactness, had a suitable
Effect

<page 150>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 139
Effect on his Audience, and always procured
him a great Degree of Attention.
This Gentleman hitherto had no Opportu-
nity of displaying his Knowledge of History,
the Discourse having wholly turned upon News,
and other Trifles; when Arabella, after some
more Enquiries concerning the Place, remark-
ed, that there was a very great Difference be-
tween the medicinal Waters at Bath, and the
sine Springs at the Foot of the Mountain Ther»
mopylte in Greece, as well in their Qualities, as
manner of using them; and 1 am of Opinion,
added she, that Bath, samous as it is sor re-
storing Health, is less frequented by insirm
Persons, than the samous Springs of Thermopylæ
were by the Beauties of Greece, to whom those
Waters have the Reputation of giving new
Lustre.
Mr. Sehirt, who, with all his Reading, had
never met with any Account of these celebrated
Grecian Springs, was extremely disconcerted at
not being able to continue a Conversation,
which the Silence of the rest of the Company
made him imagine, was directed wholly to
him.
The Shame he conceived at seeing himself
posed by a Girl, in a Matter which so imme-
diately belonged to him, made him resolve to
draw himsels out of this Dilemna at any Rate;
and, though he was sar from being convinced,
that there were no such Springs at Thermopylæ as
Arabella mentioned ; yet he resolutely main-
tained that she must be mistaken in their Situa-
tion; sor, to his certain Knowledge, there were
no

<page 151>
r4o The FEMALE Book VII.
no medicinal Waters at the Foot of that Moun-
tain.
Arabella, who could not endure to be con-
tradicted in what she took to be so incontest-
able a Fact, reddened with Vexation at his un-
expected Denial. . ..
it should seem, said she, by your Discourse,
that you are unacquainted with many material
Passages, that pasted among very illustrious
Persons there; and if you knew any thing of
Pi/i/lratus the Athenian, you would know, that
an Adventure he had at those Baths, laid the
Foundation of all those great Designs, which he
afterwards effected, to the total Subversion of
the Athenian Government.
Mr. Selvin, surprised that this Piece of Hi-
story had likewise escaped his Observation, re-
solved, however, not to give up his Point.
I think, Madam, replied he, with great
Self-sussiciency, that I am pretty well acquaint-
ed with every thing which relates to the Af-
fairs of the A,henian Commonwealth; and know
by what Steps Pijiftratus advanced himself to
the Sovereignty. It was indeed a great Stroke
of Policy in him, said he, turning to Mr. Glan-
vjlle, to wound himself, in order to get a
Guard assigned him.
You are mistaken, Sir, said Arabella, if you
believe, there was any Truth in the Report of
his having wounded himself: It was done, either
by his Rival Lycurgus or Theocrites; who be-
lieving him still to be in Love with the sair
Cerinthe, whom he courted, took that Way to
get rid of him: Neither is it true, that Am-
bition alone inspired Pi/i/lraius w.uh a Design of
enflaving

<page 152>
Chap. 5. Q.U1XOT E. 14*:
enslaving his Country: Those Authors who say
so, must know little of the Springs and Motives
of his Conduct. It was neither Ambition nor
Revenge, that made him act as he did; it was
the violent Affection he conceived sor the beau-
tisul Cleorante, whom he first saw at the samous
Baths of Therm-fyla, which put him upon those
Designs; sor, feeing that Lycurgus, who was
not his Rival in Ambition, but Love, would
certainly become the Possessor of Cleorante, un-
less he made himself Tyrant of Athens, he had
Recourse to that violent Method, in order to
preserve her sor himself.
I protest, Madam, said Mr. Selvin, casting
down hss Eyes in great Consusion at her su-
perior Knowledge in History, these Particu-
lars have all escaped my Notice; and this is the
first time lever understood, th.it Pifijlraius was
violently in Love; and that it was not Ambi-
tion, which made him aspire to Sovereignty.
I do not remember any Mention of this in
Plutarch, continued he, Tubbing his Forehead,
or any of the Authors who have treated on the
Affairs of Greece.
Very likely, Sir, replied Arabella; but you
will fee the whole Story of Pijijlratus's Love
sor Cleorante, with the Effects it produced, re-
lated at large in Scudery.
Scudery, Madam! said the sage Mr. Selvin,
I never read that Historian.
No, Sir! replied Arabella, then your Read-
ing has been very consined.
I know, Madam, said he, that Herodotus,
TJjucydides, and Plutarch, have indeed quoted
him frequently.
I am

<page 153>
i42 ^FEMALE Book VII.
I am surprised, Sir, said Mr. Glanville, who
was excessively diverted at this Discovery of
his great Ignorance and Asfectation, that you
have not read that samous Historian; especially,
as the Writers you have mentioned quote him
so often.
Why, to tell you the Truth, Sir, said he;
though he was a Roman; yet it is objected to
him, that he wrote but indifferent Latin; with
no Purity or Elegance; and
You are quite mistaken, Sir, interrupted
Arabella; the great Scudery was a Frenchman;
and both his Clelia and Artamanes were written
in French.
A Frenchman was he? said Mr. Selvin^ with
a lofty Air: Oh! then, 'tis not surprising,
that I have, not read him: I read no Authors,
but the Antients, Madam, added he, with a
Look of Self-applause; I cannot relish the Mo-
dems at all: I have no Taste sor their Way of
Writing.
But Scudery must needs be more ancient
than Thucydides, and the rest of those Greek
Historians you mentioned, said Mr. GlanvilU;
How else could they quote him?
Mr. Selvin was here so utterly at a Loss, that
he could not conceal his Consusion: He held
down his Head, and continued silent; while the
Beau, who had listened to the latter Part of their
Discourse; exerted his supposed Talent of
Raillery against the unhappy Admirer of the
antient Authors; and increased his Consusion
by a thousand Sarcasms, which gave more Di-
version to himself, than any Body else.
Chap.

<page 154>
Ghap. 6. QUIXOTE. 143
Chap. VI.
Which contains some excellent Rules for
Raillery.
\T R. Glanv'ille, who had too much Polite-
ness and Good-nature to insist too long
upon the Ridicule in the Character of his Ac-
quaintance, changed the Discourse: And Ara-
bella, who had observed, with some Concern,
the ill-judged Raillery of the young Beau, took
Occasion to decry that Species of Wit; and
gave it as her Opinion, that it was very dan-
gerous and unpleasing.
For, truly, said she, it is almost impossible
to use it without being hated or feared; and
whoever gets a Habit of it, is in Danger of
wronging all the Laws of Friendship and Hu-
manity.
Certainly, pursued she, looking at the Beau,
it is extremely unjust to railly one's Friends, and
particular Acquaintance: First,choose them well,
and be as nice as you please in the Choice; but
when you have chosen them, by no means play
upon them: 'Tis cruel and m ilicious, to di-
vert one's self at the Expence of one's Friend.
However, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, who
was charmed to hear her talk so rationally, you
may give People Leave to railly their Ene-
mies.
Truly, resumed Arabella, I cannot allow
that, any more than upon Friends; sor Raillery
is the poorest kind of Revenge that can betaken:
Methinks,

<page 155>
i44 V1* FEMALE Book VII.
Methinks, it is mean to railly Persons who
have a small Share of Merit; since, haply, their
Defects were born with them, and not of their
own acquiring; and it is great Injustice to des-
cant upon one slight Fault in Men of Parts, to
the Prejudice of a thousand good Qualities.
For aught I fee, Madam, said the Beau, you
will not allow one to railly any Body.
I am of Opinion, Sir, said Arabella^ that
there are very few proper Objects sor Raillery;
and still fewer, who can railly well: The Ta-
lent of Raillery ought to be born with a Per-
son; no Art can infuse it; and those who en-
deavour to railly in spite of Nature, will be so
far from diverting others, that they will become
the Objects of Ridicule themselves.
Many other pleasing Qualities of Wit may
be acquired by Pains and Study, but Raillery
must be the Gift of Nature: It is not enough
to have many lively and agreeable Thoughts;
but there must be such an Expression, as must
convey their sull Force and Meaning; the
Air, the Aspect, the Tone of the Voice, and
-every Part in general, must contribute to its
Perfection.
There ought also to be a great Distance be-
tween Raillery and Satire, so that one may ne-
ver be mistaken sor the other: Raillery ought
indeed to surprise, and sensibly touch, those to
whom it is directed; but I would not have the-
Wounds it makes, either deep or lasting: Let
those who feel it, be hurt like Persons, who,
-gathering Roses, are pricked by the Thorns,
and End a sweet Smdl to make amends.
I wou!d

<page 156>
Ch^p. 6. QUIXOTE. i45
I would have Raillery raise the Fancy, and
quicken the Imagination, the Fire of its Wit
should only enable us to trace its Original,
and shine as the Stars do, but not burn.
Yet, after all, I Cannot greatly approve of
Raillery, or cease to think it dangerous; and,
to pursue my Comparison, said ihe, with an
inchanting Smile, Persons who possess the
true Talent of Raillery, are like Comets ; they
are seldom seen, and are at once admir'd and
fear'd.
I protest, Lady Bella, said Sir Charles, who
had listen'd to her with many Signs of Admi-
ration, you speak like an Orator. 1
One would not imagine, interrupted Mr.
Glanville, who saw Arabella in some Consusion
at the coarse Praise her Uncle gave her, that
my Cousin could speak so accurately of a Qua-
lity she never practises: And 'tis easy to judge
by what fte has said, that no body can railly
siner than herself, if she pleases.'
Mr. Selvin, tho' he bore her a Grudge sor
knowing more History than he did, yet assur'd
her, that she had given the best Rules imagin-
able sor raillying well. But the Beau, whom
she had silenc'd by her Reproof, was extremely
angry; and, supposing it would mortify h«r to
see him pay Court to her Cousin, he redoubled
his Assiduities to MikGlanville, who was highly
delighted at seeing Arabella less taken Notice of
by this gay Gentleman, than herself.
Vol. II.
H
Chap.

<page 157>
i46 The FEMALE Book VI.
Chap. VII.
In which the Author condescends to be very
minute in the Description of our Heroine's
Dress.
THE Indifference of Mr. Tinsel, convin-
cing Miss Glanville, that Arabella was
less to be dreaded than she imagin'd, she had no
Reluctance at seeing her prepare sor her publick
Appearance the next Ball Night.
Having consulted her Fancy in a rich Silver
Stuff, she had bought sor that Purpose, a Person
was sent sor to make it; zn& Arabella, who
follow'd no Fashion but her own Taste, which
Was sorm'd on the Manners of the Heroines,
order'd the Woman to make her a Robe after
the same Model as the Princess 'Julia's.
The Maqtua-makcr, who thought it might
do her great Prejudice with her new Customer,
to acknowledge she knew nothing of the Prin-
cess Juliaj or the Fashion of her Gown, replied
at Random, and with great Pertness,
That, that Taste was quite out; and, she
would advise her Ladyship to have her Cloaths
made in the present Mode, which was sar more
becoming.
You can never persuade me, said Arabella,
that any Fashion can be more becoming than
that of the Princess Julia's, who was the most
gallant Princess upon Earth, and knew better
than any other, how to set off her Charms.
It may indeed be a little obsolete now, pursued

<page 158>
Chap.7. QJJIXOTE. 147
she, sor the Fashion could not but alter a little
in the Compass of near two thousand Years.
Two thousand Years! Madam, said the Wo-
man, in a great Surprize ; Lord help us Trades-
people, if they did not alter a thousand Times
in as many Days! I thought your Ladyship
was speaking of the last Month's Taste; which,
as I said besore, is quite out now.
Well, replied Arabella, let the present Mode
be what it will, I insist upon having my Cloaths
made after the Pattern of the beautisul Daugh-
ter of Augustus; being convinced, that none
other can be half so becoming.
What Fashion was that, pray, Madam, said
the Woman? I never saw it.
How, replied Arabella, have you already sor-
got the Fashion of the Princess Julia's Robe,
which you said was wore but last Month? Or,
are you ignorant that the Princess Julia, and
the Daughter of Augustus, is the same Person?
I protest, Madam, Lid the Woman, ex-
tremely consus'd, I had sorgot that, till you
called it to my Mind.
Well, said Arabella, make me a Robe in the
same Taste.
The Mantua-maker was now wholly at a
Loss in what Manner to behave; sor, being
conscious that she knew nothing of the Princeii
Julia's Fashion, she could not undertake to
make it without Directions; and she was afraid
of discovering her Ignorance by asking sor any;
so that her Silence and Embarrassment persua-
ding Arabella she knew nothing of the Matter,
she dismist her with a small Present, sor the
Trouble she had given her, and had Recourse
Hz to

<page 159>
i48 The FEMALE Book VI.
to her usual Expedient, which was, to make
one of her Women, who understood a little of
the Mantua-making Business, make a Robe sor
her, after her own Directions.
Miss Glanvillt, who imagin'd she had sent
sor Work women, in' order to have Cioaths
made in the modern Taste, was surpriz'd at her
Entrance into her Chamber, to fee her dressing
sor the Ball, in a Habit singuLr to the last
Degree.
She wore no Hoop, and the Blue and Silver
Stuff of her Robe, was only kept by its own
Richness, from hanging close about her. It
was quite open round her Breast, which was
shaded with a rich Border of Lace ; and clasp-
ing close to her Waist, by small Knots of Dia-
monds, descended in a sweeping Train on the
Ground.
The Sleeves were short, wide, and siash'd,
sastned in different Places with Diamonds, and
her Arms were partly hid by half a Dozen Falls
of Ruffles. Her Hair, which fell in very easy
Ringlets on her Neck, was plac'd with great
Care and Exactness round her lovely Face ; and
the Jewels and Ribbons, which were all her
Head-dress, dispos'd to the greatest Advantage.
Upon the whole, nothing could be more sin-
gularly becoming than her Dress; or set off
with greater Advantage the striking Beauties of
her Person.
Miss Glanvilie, tho' she was not displeas'd to
fee her persist in her Singularity of Dress; yet
could not behold her look so lovely in it, with-
out feeling a secret Uneasiness; but consoling
herself with the Hopes of the Ridicule she
would

<page 160>
Chip, y, QUIXOTE. 149
would occasion, she assum'd a chearsul Air,
approv'd her Taste in the Choice of her Co-
lours, and went with her at the usual Hour,
to the Rooms, attended by Mr. Glanville,
Mr. Selvin^ and the young Beau we have sor-
merly mention'd.
The Surprize Arabella's unusual Appearance
gave to the whole Company, was very visible
to every one but herself.
The Moment she enter'd the Room, every
one whisper'd the Person next to them; and sor
some Moments, nothing was heard but the
Words, the Princess Julia; which was eccho'd
at every Corner, and at last attracted her Ob-
servation.
Mr. GIanville, and the rest of the Company
with her, were in some Consusion at the uni-
versal Exclamation, which they imagin'd was
occasion'd by the Singularity of her Habit;
tho' they could not conceive, why they gave
her that Title. Had they known the Adven-
ture of the Mantua-maker, it would doubtless
have easily occur'd to them; sor the Woman
had no sooner left Arabella? than she related
the Conference she had with a Lady newly ar-
rival, who had requir'd her to make a Robe in
the Manner of the Princess Julia's; and dis-
miss'd her, because she did not understand the
Fashions that prevail'dtwo thousand Years ago.
This Story was quickly dispers'd, and sor its
Novelty, afsorded a great deal of Diversion;
every one long'd to see a Fashion of such An-
tiquity; and expected the Appearance of the
Princess Julia with great Impatience.
It

<page 161>
150 The FEMALE BookVf.
It is not to be doubted but much Mirth was
tfeasur'd up sor her Appearance; and the occa-
sional Humourist had already prepared his ac-
custom'd Jest, when the Sight of the devoted
sair One repell'd his Vivacity, and the defign'd
Ridicule of the whole Assembly.
Scarce had the tumultuous Whisper eseap'd
the Lips of each Individual, when they sound
themselves aw'd to Respect by that irresistable
Charm in the Person of Arabella, which com-
manded Reverence and Love from all who be-
held her.
Her noble Air, the native Dignity in her
Looks, the inexpressible Grace which accom*
pany'd all her Motions, and the consummate
Loveliness of her Form, drew the Admiration
of the whole Assembly,
A respectsul Silence succeeded, and the Asto-
nishment her Beauty occasion'd, left them no
Room to descant on the Absurdity of her Dress.
Miss Glanville, who felt a malicious Joy at
the Sneers she expected would be cast on her
Cousin, was greatly disappointed at the Defer-
ence which seem'd to be paid her; and to vent
some Part of her Spleen, took occasion to men-
tion her Surprize, at' the Behaviour of the
Company on their Entrance; wondering what
they could mean by whispering the Princess
Julia to one another.
I assure you, said Arabella, smiling, I am not
less surpriz'd than you at it; and since they di-
rected their Loots to me at the same Time, I
sancy they either took me sor some Princess of
the Name of Julia, who is expected here to.
Night,

<page 162>
Chap. 8. QJJIXOTE. 151
Night, or else flatter me with some Resem-
blance to the beautisul Daughter of Augustus..
The Comparison, Madam, said Mr. Selvin,
who took all Occasions to shew his Reading, is
too injurious to you, sor I am of Opinion you
as much excel that licentious Lady in the Beau-
ties of your Person, as you do in the Qualities
of your Mind.
I never heard Licentiousness imputed to the
Daughter of Augustus Casar, said Arabella;
and the most her Enemies can say of her, is,
that she loved Admiration, and would permit
herself to be beloved, and to be told so, with-
out shewing any Signs of Displeasure.
Bless me, Madam, interrupted Mr. Selvin,
how strangely do you mistake the Character of
Julia: Tho' the Daughter of an Emperor,
ste was, pardon the Expression, the most aban-
don' d Prostitute in Rome; many of her Intrigues
are recorded in History ; bat to mention only
one, Was not her insamous Commerce with
Ovid, the Cause of his Banishment?
Chap. VIII.
Seme Reflexions very fit, and others very
unfit for an Assembly-Room.
YOU speak in strange Terms, replied Ara-
bella, blushing, of a Princess, who if she
was trot the most referv'd and severe Person m
the World, was yet nevertheless, absolutely
. chaste.
H 4 I know

<page 163>
j 52 The FEMALE Book VI.
I know there were People who represented
her Partiality fur Ovid in a very unsavourable
Light; but that ingenious Poet, when he re-
lated his Hiilory to the great Agrippa^ told him
in Confidence all that had pase'd between him
and the Princess Julia, than which nothing
could be more innocent, tho'a little indiscreet.
For, 'tis certain that she permitted him to love
her, and did not condemn him to any rigorous
Punishment sor daring to tell her so ; yet, sor
a l this, as I said besore, tho' she was not alto-
gether so austere as she ought to have been, yet
she was neveithelcss a most virtuous Princess.
Mr. Selvin, not daring to contradict a Lady
whose extensive Reading had surnish'd her with
Anecdotes unknown almost to any Body else,
by his Silence confess'd her Superiority. But
Mr. Glanville, who knew all these Anecdotes
were drawn from Romances, which he sound
contradicted the known Facts in History, and
afiign'd the most ridiculous Causes sor Things
of the greatest Importance; could not help
smiling at the Facility with which Mr. Selvin
pave into those idle Absurdities. For notwith-
standing his Asfectation of great Reading, his
superficial Knowledge of History made it ex-
tremely easy to deceive him; and as it was his
Custom to mark in his Pocket-Book all the
Scraps of History he heard introduced into Con-
versation, and retail them again in other Com-
pany; he did not doubt but he would make a
Figure with the curious Circumstances Arabella
had surnish'd him with.
Arabella observing Mr. Tinsel by his samiliar
Bows, significant Smiles, and easy Salutations,
was

<page 164>
Chap. 8. QJJIXOTE. .153
was acquainted with the greatest Part of the
Assembly, told him, that she did not doubt but
he knew the Adventures of many Persons whom
they were viewing; and that he would do her
a Pleasure, if he would relate some of them.
Mr. Tinsel was charm'd with a Request which
afforded him an Opportunity of gratifying a sa-
vourite Inclination, and seating himself near
her immediately, was beginning to obey her
Injunctions, when she gracesully intreated him
to stay a Moment; and calling to Mr. Glanville,
and his Sister, who were talking to Mr. Selvin,
ask'd them if they chose to partake of a more
rational Amusement than Dancing, and listen
to the Adventures of some illustrious Persons,,
which Mr. Tinsel had promis'd to relate.
I assure you, Madam, said Mr. Glanvillie,
smiling, you will sind that a less innocent
Amusement than Dancing.
Why so, Sir, replied Arabella, since it is not
an indiscreet Curiosity which prompts me to a
Desire of hearing the Histories Mr. Tinsel has -
promis'd to entertain me with; but rather a
Hope of hearing something which may at once
improve and delight me; something which
may excite my Admiration, engage my Esteem,,
or influence my Practice.
'Twas doubtless', with such Motives as these,
that we sind Princesses and Ladies of the most,
illustrious Rank, in CL lia and the Grand Cyrus,
listning to the Adventures of Persons, in whom .
they were probably as little interested, as. we
are in these around us. Kings, Princes and
Commanders of Armies, thought it 'was no
Waste of their Time, in the midst of the
H 5 Hurry.

<page 165>
i£4 FEMALE Book. VI.
Hurry and Clamour of a Camp, to listen many
Hours to the Relation of one single History,
and not fill'd with any extraordinary Events;
but haply a simple Recital of common Occur-
rences: The great Cyrus while he was busy
in reducing all Asia to his Yoke, heard never-
theless, the Histories of all the considerable Per-
sons in the Camp, besides those of Strangers,
and even his Enemies. If there was theresore
any thing either criminal or mean, in hearing
the Adventures of others, do you imagine so
many great and Illustrious Persons would have
given in to such an Amusement?
After this Arabella turn'd gravely about to
Mr. Tinfil, and told him, he was at Liberty to
begin his Recital.
The Beau, a rittfe disconcerted by the So-
lemnity with which she requested his Insorma-
tion, knew not how to begin with the Forma-
lity that he saw was required of him; and
theresore sat silent sor a sew Moments; which
Arabella fiippos'd was to recall to his Memory
all the Passages he propos'd to relate.
His Perplexity would probably have increas'd
instead of lessening by the prosound Silence
which she observed, had not Miss GlanvrHe
&ated herself wiih a sprightly Air on the other
Side of him, and directing his Eyes to a tall
handsome Woman that had just enter'd, ask'd
him pleasantly, to tell her History if he knew it.
Mr. Tinsel, hrdugFit into his usoal Track, by
this Question, antwer'd smiling, That the-Ht-
ftory of that Lady was yet a Secret, or known
iut to a. veryfew; but Ihy Intelligence, added
he,

<page 166>
Chap. 8. QJJIXOTE. 155
be, is generally the earliest, and may always
be depended an.
Perhaps, said Arabella, the Lady is one of your
Acquaintances, and savour'd you with the Re-
cital of her Adventures from her own Mouth.
No, really, Madam, answer'd Mr. Tinsel,
surpriz'd a t the great Simplicity of Arabella,
sor so he understood it; the Lady, I believe, is
not so communicative: And to say the Truth,
I shauld-nat chuse to hear her Adventures from
herself, since she certainly would suppress the
most material Circumstances.
In a Word, said he, lowering his Voice,
That Lady was sor many Years the Mistress of
a young military Nobleman, whom she was so
complaisant to sollow in all his Campaigns,
Marches, Sieges, and every Inconveniency of
War: He married her in Gibraltar, from
whence he is lately arriv'd, and introduc'd his
new Lady to his noble Brother, by whom she
was not unsavourably receiv'd. 'Tis worth
remarking, that this same haughty Peer thought
fit to resent with implacable Obstinacy, the
Marriage of another of his Brothers, with the
Widow of a brave Ossicer, of considerable
Rank in the Army. 'Tis true, she was several
Years older than the young Lord, and had no
Fortune; but the Duke aslign'd other Reasons
sor his Displeasure: Hecomplain'd loudly, that
his Brother had dilhonour'd the Nobility of his
Birth, by this Alliance, and continued his Re-
sentment till the Death of the young Hero, who
gave many remarkable Prooss of his Courage
and Fortitude upon several Occasions, and died
gloriously besore the Walls of Cartbagena;
H 6 leaving

<page 167>
356 ^ FEMALE BookVI.
leaving his disconsolate Lady a Widow a se-
cond Time, with the Acquisition of a Title
indeed, but a very small Addition to her For-
tune.
Observe that gay, splendid Lady, I beseech
you, Madam, pursued he, turning to Arabella;
how asfectedly she looks and talks, and throws
her Eyes around the Room, with a haughty
Self-sussiciency in her Aspect, and insolent Con-
tempt sor every Thing but herself. -Her Ha-
bit, her Speech, her Motions, are all French;
nothing in England is able to please her; the
People so dull, so aukwardly polite, the Man-
ners so gross; no Delicacy, no Elegance, no
Magnificence in their Persons, Houses, or Di-
versions; every thing is so distastesul, there
is no living in such a Place. One may crawl
about, indeed, she says, and make a shift to
breathe in the odious Country, but one cannot
be said to live; and with all the Requisites to
render Life delightsul, here, one can only suffer,
not enjoy it.
Would one not imagine, pursued he, this
fine Lady was a Person of very exalted Rank,
who has the Sanction of Birth, Riches, and
Grandeur sor her extraordinary Pride; and yet
.she is no other than the Daughter of an Inn-
Keeper at Spa, and had the exalted Post assign'd
her of attending new Lodgers to their Apart-
ments, acquainting them with all the Conve-
niences of the Place, answering an humble
Question or two concerning what Company
was in the Town, what Scandal was stirring,
and the like.
One

<page 168>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 157
One of our great Sea Commanders going
^a^Thither sor his Health, happen'd to lodge at this
Inn; and was so struck with her Charms, that
he marry'd her in a few Weeks, and soon after
brought her to England.
Such was the Origin of this santastick Lady;
whose insupportable Pride and ridiculous Af-
fectation, draws Contempt and Aversion where-
ever she appears.
Did I not tell you, Madam, interrupted
Mr. Glanville, that the Amusement you had
chose was not so innocent as Dancing ? What a
deal of Scandal has Mr. Tinsel utter'd in the
Compass of a few Minutes?
1 assure you, replied Arabella, I know not
what to make of the Histories he has been re-
lating. I think they do not deserve that Name,
and are rather detatched Pieces of Satire on
particular Persons, than a serious Relation of
Facts. I confess my Expectations from this
Gentleman have not been answer'd.
I think, however, Madam, said Mr. Glan-
ville, we may allow that there is a negative
Merit in the Relations Mr. Tinsel has made;
sor, if he has not shewn us any Thing to ap-
prove, he has at least shewn us what to condemn.
The Ugliness of Vice, reply'd Arabella,
ought only to be represented to the Vicious;
to whom Satire, like a magnifying Glass, may
aggravate every Defect, in order to make its
Desormity appear more hideous; but since its
End is only to reprove and amend, it should
never be address'd to any but those who come
. within its Correction, and may be the better
sor it: A virtuous Mind need not be shewn
the

<page 169>
158 Tfo FEMALE BookVI
the Desownity of Vice, to make it be hated and
avoided; the more pure and uncorrupted our
Ideas are, the less shall we be influenc'd by Ex-
ample. A natural Propensity to Virtue or
Vice often determines the Choice: 'Tis suffi-
cient theresore to shew a good Mind what it
ought to pursue, though a bad one must be toki
what to avoid. In a Word, one ought to be
always incited, the other always reftrain'd.
I vow, Lady Bella, (aid Miss Glanville,
you'd make one think one came here to hear a
Sermon; you are so very grave, and talk upon
such high-flown Subjects. What Harm was
there in what Mr. Tinsel was telling us? It
would be hard indeed, if one might not divert
one's self with other Peoples Faults.
I am afraid, Miss, said Arabella, those who
can divert themselves with the Faults of others,
are not behind hand in affording Diversion.
And that very Inclination, addedibe, smilingly,
to hear other Peoples Faults, may by those very
People, be condemned as one, and afford them
the same Kind of ill natur'd Pleasure you are
.*fc desirous of.
Nay, Madam, return'd Miss Glanville, your
Ladyship was the first who introdue'd the Dis-
course you condemn so much. Did not you
desire Mr. Tinsel to tell you Histories about the
Company; and ask my Brother and me, to
eome and hear them?
"Tis true, reply'd Arabella, that I did desire
you to partake with me of a pleasing and
rational Amusement, sor such I imagin'd
Mr. Tinsel's Histories might afford; sar from a
Detail of Vice*, Follies, and Irregularities, I
expected

<page 170>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 159
expected' to have heard the Adventures of some
illustrious Personages related; between whose
Actions, and those of the Heroes and Heroines
of Antiquity, I might have sound some Re-
semblance.
For Instance, I hop'd to have heard imitated
the sublime Courage of a Clelij, who, to save
her Honour from the Attempts of the impious
Tarquin, leapt into- the River Tyber, and swam
to the other Side; or the noble Resolution of
the incomparable Candace, who, to escape out
of the Hands of her Ravisher, the Pirate Ze-
nadorus, set Fire to his Vessel with her own
Hands, and committed herself to the Mercy of
the Waves: Or, the Constancy and Affection
of a Mandana, who, sor the Sake of a Cyrus,
resused the richest Crowns in the World, and
braved the Terrors of Death to preserve herself
sor him.
As sor the Men, I hoped to have heard of
some who might have almost equall'd the great
Oraondates, the invincihle Artahan, the valiant
Juba, the renowned Alcamems, and many
thousand Heroes of Antiquity; whose glorious
Exploits in War, and unftiaken Constancy in
Love, have given them immortal Fame.
While Arabella was uttering this long Speech*
with great Emotion, Miss Glanville, with a sty
Look at the Beau, gave him to understand,
that was her Cousin's Foible.
Mr. "Tinsel, however, not able to compre-
hend the Meaning of what she said, listen'd to
her with many Signs of Perplexity and Wonder.
Mr. Selvin in secret repin'd at her prodigious
Knowledge of History} and Ms, GlanviUe,
with

<page 171>
j6o ^FEMALE BookVI.
with his Eyes fix'd on the Ground, bit his Lips
almost through with Madness.
In the mean Time, several among the Com-
pany, desiroas of hearing what the strange
Lady was saying so loud, and with so much
Eagerness and Emotion, gather'd round them;
which Mr. Glanville observing, and fearing
Arabella would expose herself still sarther, whis-
per'dhis Sister to get her away, if possible.
Miss Glanville, tho' very unwilling, obey'd
his Injunctions; and complaining of a sudden
Head-ach, Arabella immediately propos'd re-
tiring, which was joysully complied with by
Mr. Glanville, who with the other Gentlemen
attended them home.
Chap. IX.
Being a Chapter of the Satyrical Kind.
AT theirReturn, SirCharles told his Niece,
That she had now had a Specimen of the
World, and some of the sashionable Amuse-
ments; and ask'd her, how she had been en-
tertain'd.
Why, truly, Sir, replied she, smiling, I
have brought away no great Relish sor a Re-
newal of the Amusement I have partaken of
To-night. If the World, in which you seem
to think I am but new initiated, affords only
these Kinds of Pleasures, I shall very soon re-
gret the Solitude and Books I have quitted.
Why

<page 172>
Chap. 9. QJJIXOTE. 161
Why pray, said Miss Glanville? What Kind
of Amusements did your Ladyship expect to
find in the World? And what was there dis-
agreeable in your Entertainment to Night? I
am sure there is no Place in England, except
London, where there is so much good Company
to be met with, as here. The Assembly was
very numerous and brillant, and one can be at
no Loss sor Amusements: The Pump-Room in
the Morning, the Parade, and the Rooms, in
the Evening, with little occasional Parties of
Pleasure, will sind one sussicient Employment,
and leave none of one's Time to lye useless up-
on one's Hand.
I am of Opinion, replied Arabella, that
one's Time is sar from being well employ'd in
the Manner you portion it out: And People
who spend theirs in such trifling Amusements,
must certainly live to very little Purpose.
What room, I pray you, does a Lady give
sor high and noble Adventures, who consumes
her Days in Dressing, Dancing, listening to
Songs, and ranging the Walks with People as
thoughtless as herself? How mean and con-
temptible a Figure must a Life spent in such idle
Amusements make in History? Or rather, are
not such Persons always buried in Oblivion,
and can any Pen be sound who would conde-
scend to record such inconsiderable Actions?
Nor can 1 persuade myself, added she, that
any of those Men whom I saw at the Assembly,
with Figures so feminine, Voices so soft, such
tripping Steps, and unmeaning Gestures, have
ever signalized either their Courage or Con-
stancy;

<page 173>
i62 Ibe FEMALE Book VI.
stancy ; but might be overcome by their Enemy
in Battle, or be salse to their Mistress in Love.
Law! Cousin, reply'd Miss Glanville, you
are always talking of Battles and Fighting. Do
you expect that Persons of Quality, and fine
Gentlemen, will go to the Wars? What Bu-
siness have they to sight? That belongs to the
Ossicers.
Then every sine Gentleman is an Ossicer,
said Arabella; and some other Title ought to
be sound out sor Men who do nothing but
Dance and Drefe.
I could never have imagined, interrupted
Mr. Tinsel, surveying Arabella, that a Lady so
elegant and gay in her own Appearance, should
have an Aversion to Pleasure and Magnificence.
I assure you, Sir, replied Arabella, I have
an Aversion to neither: On the contrary, I
am a great Admirer of both. But my Ideas
of Amusements and Grandeur are probably
different from yours.
I will allow the Ladies to be sollickous about
their Habits, and dress with all the Care and
Elegance they are capable of; but such Trifles
are below the Consideration of a Man, who
ought not to owe the Dignity of his Appear-
ance to the Embroidery on his Coat, but to
his high and noble Air, the Grandeur of his
Courage, the Elevation of his Sentiments, and
the many heroick Actions he has persorm'd.
Such a Man will dress his Person with a
gracesul Simplicity, and lavish all his Gold and
Embroidery upon his Armour, to render him
conspicuous in the Day of Battle. The Plumes
in bis Helmet will look more gracesul in the
Field,

<page 174>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 163
Field, than the Feather in his Hat at a Ball;
and Jewels blaze with more Propriety on his
Shield and Cuirass in Battle, than glittering on
his Finger in a Dance.
Do not imagine, however, pursued she, that
I absolutely condemn Dancing, and think it a
Diversion wholly unworthy of a Hero.
History has recorded some very samous Balls,
at which the most illustrious Persons in the
World have appear'd.
Cyrus the Great, we are insorm'd, open'd a
Ball with the divine Mandana at Sardis. The
renown'd King of Scytbia danc'd with the
Princess Cleopatra at Alexandria. The brave
Cleomedon with the sair Candace at Ethiopia;
but these Diversions were taken but seldom,
and consider'd indeed as an Amusement, not
as a Part of the Business of Life.
How would so many glorious Battles have
been sought, Cities taken, Ladies rescu'd, and
other great and noble Adventures been atchiev'd,
if the Men, sunk in Sloth and Effeminacy, had
continually followed the Sound of a Fiddle,
sounter'd in publick Walks, or tattled over a
Tea-table.
I vow, Cousin, (aid'Miss Glanville, you are
insinitely more severe in your Censures than
Mr. Tmsel was at the Assembly. You had
little Reason methinks to be angry with him.
All I have said, reply'd Arabella, was the na-
tural Inference from your own Account of the
Manner in which People live here. When
Actions are a Censure upon themselves, the
Reciter will always be consider'd as a Satirist.
Chap.

<page 175>
164 Ibe FE MA LE Book VI.
Chap. X.
In which our Heroine justifies her own
Notions by some very illustrious Ex-
MR. Seivin and Mr. Tinsel, who had lislen'd
attentively to this Discourse of Ara-
bella, took Leave as soon as it was ended,
and went away with very different Opinions
of her.
Mr. Tinsel declaring she was a Fool, and had
no Knowledge os the World, and Mr. Seivin
convinc'd she was a Wit, and very learn'd in
Antiquity.
Certainly, said-Mr. Seivin, in Support of his
Opinion, the Lady has great Judgment; has
been capable of prodigious Application, as is
apparent by her extensive Reading: Then her
Memory is quite miraculous. I protest, I am
.quite charm'd with her: I never met with
such a Woman in my Life.
Her Cousin, in my Opinion, reply'd Mr.
Tinsel, is insinitely beyond her in every Merit,
but Beauty. How sprightly and free her Con-
versation? What a thorough Knowledge of
the World? So true a Taste sor polite Amuse-
ments, and a Fund of Spirits that sets Vapours
and Spleen at Defiance.
This Speech bringing on a Comparison be-
tween the Ladies, the Champions sor each grew
so warm in the Dispute, that they had like to
have quarrell'd. However, by the Interposition

of

<page 176>
Chap. 10. QUIXOTE. 165
of some other Gentlemen who were with them,
they parted tolerable Friends that Night, and
renew'd their Visits to Sir Charles in the Morn-
ing.
They sound only Miss Glanville with her
Father and Brother. Arabella generally spent
the Mornings in her own Chamber, where
Reading and the Labours of the Toilet em-
ploy'd her Time till Dinner: Tho' it must be
confess'd to her Honour, that the latter en-
grofs'd but a very small Part of it.
Miss Glanville, with whom the Beau had a
long Conversation at one of the Windows;
in which he recounted his Dispute with Mr.
Sclvin, and the Danger he ran of being pink'd
in a Duel, that was his Phrase, sor her Sake,
at last propos'd a Walk; to which she con-
sented, and engaged to prevail upon Arabella to
accompany them.
That Lady at first positively resused, al-
leging in Excuse, That she was so extremely
interested in the Fate of the Princess Melifintha,
whose Story she was reading, that she could not
stir till she had sinish'd it.
That poor Princess, contiiiu'd she, is at pre-
sent in a most terrible Situation. She has just
set Fire to the Palace, in order to avoid the
Embraces of a King who sorced her to marry
him. I am in Pain to know how she escapes
the Flames.
Pshaw, interrupted Miss Glanville, let her
perish there, if she will: Don't let her hinder
our Walk.
Who is it you doom with so much Cruelty
to perish, said Arabella, closing the Book, and
looking

<page 177>
i66. Tte F E M A L E Book VI.
looking stedsastly on her Cousin? Is it the beau-
tisul Melismtba, that Princess, whose Fortitude
and Patience have justly render'd her the Admi-
ration of the whole World? That Princess,
descended from a Race of Heroes, whose he-
roick Virtues all glowed in her own beauteous
Breast; that Princess, who, when taken Cap-
tive with the King her Father, bore her Impri-
sonment and Chains with a marvellous Con-
stancy; and who, when she had enslaved her Con-
queror, and given Fetters to the Prince who
held her Father and herself in Bonds, nobly
resus'd the Diadem he profer'd her, and devoted
herself to Destruction, in order to punish the
Enemy of her House. I am not able to relate
the rest of her History, seeing I have read no
surther myself; but if you will be pleased to
sit down and listen to me while I read what re-
mains, I am persuaded you will sind new Cause
to love and admire this amiable Princess.
Pardon me, Madam, said Miss Glanville, I
have heard enough; and I could have been
very well satisfied not to have heard so much.
I think we waste a great deal of Time talking
about People we know nothing of. The Morn-
ing will be quite lost, if we don't make Haste.
Come, added she, you must go: Yotr have a
new Lover below, who waits to go with us;
he'll die if I don't bring you.
A new Lover! re'turn'd Arabella, surpriz'd.
Aye, aye, said Miss Glanville, the learned
Mr. Selvin; ] assure you, he had almost quar-
rell'd with Mr. Tinsel last Night about your
Ladyship.
Arabella,

<page 178>
Chap. ,10. QUIXOTE. 167
Arabella, at this Intelligence, casting down
her Eyes, discover'd many Signs of Anger and
Consusion: And aster a SiJence of some Mo-
ments, durirsg which, Miss Glanville had been
employ'd in adjusting her Dress at the Glass,
addressing herself to her Cousin with an Accent
somewhat left sweet than besore,
Had any other than yourself, Miss, said she,
acquainted me with the Presumption of that
unsortunate Person, I should haply have diseo-
ver'd my Resentment in other Terms: But, as
it is, must insorm you, that I take it extremely
ill, you should be accessary to giving me this
Offence.
Hey day! said Miss Glanville, turning about
hastily, How have I offended your Ladyfliip,
pray?
I am willing to hope, Cousin, reply'd Ara-
bella, that it was only to divert yourself with
the Trouble and Consusion in which you see
me, that you have indiscreetly told Things
which ought to have been buried in Silence.
And what is all this mighty Trouble and
Consusion about then, Madam, said Mife
Glanville, smiling? Is it because I told you,
Mr. Selvin was a Lover of your Ladyship?
Certainly, said Arabella, such an Insormation
is sussicient to give one a great deal of Perplexi-
ty. Is it such a little Matter, think you, to
be told that a Man has the Presumption to love
one?
A meer Trifle, replied Miss Glanville, laugh-
ing; a hundred Lovers are not worth a Mo-
. ment's Thought, when one's sure of them, sor
then the Trouble is all over. And as sor this
unsortunate

<page 179>
168 TfeFEMALE Book VI.
unsortunate Person, as yourLadyship called him,
let him die at his Leisure, while we go to the
Parade.
Your Levity, Cousin, said Arabella, sorces
me to smile, notwithstanding the Cause I have
to be incens'd; however, I have Charity enough
to make me not desire the Death of Mr. Selvin,
who may repair the Crime he has been guilty
of by Repentance and Discontinuation.
Well then, said Miss Glanville, you are re-
solved to go to the Parade: Shall I reach you
your odd Kind of Capuchin?
How, said Arabella, can I with any Pro-
priety see a Man who has discover'd himself to
have a Passion sor me? Will he not construe
such a Favour into a Permission sor him to
hope?
Oh! no, interrupted Mi&Glanville, he does
not imagine I have told your Ladyship he loves
you; sor indeed he don't know that I am ac-
quainted with his Passion.
Then h,e is less culpable than I thought him,
reply'd Arabella i and if you think I am in no
Danger of hearing a Confession of his Fault
from his own Mouth, I'll comply with your
Request, and go with you to the Parade. But
added she, I must first engage you to promise
not to leave me alone a Moment, lest he should
take Advantage of such an Opportunity, to give
some Hint of his Passion, that would sorce me
to treat him very rigorously.
Miss Glanville answer'd laughing, That she
would be sure to mind her Directions. How-
ever, said she, your Ladyship need not be ap-
prehensive he will say any fine Things to you;
for

<page 180>
Chap, i o. QUIXOTE. 169
sor I knew a young Lady he was sormerly ;n
Love with, and the odious Cieature visited her
a Twelve-month besore he sound Courage
enough to tell her she was handsome.
Doubtless, reply'd Arabella, he was much
to be commended sor his Respect. A Lover
should never have the Presumption to declare
his Passion to his Mistress, unless in certain
Circumstances, which may at the same Time
in part disarm her Anger. For Instance, he
must struggle with the Violence of his Passion,
till it has cast him into a Fever. His Physi-
cians must give him over, pronouncing his Di-
stemper incurable, since the Cause of it being
in his Mind, all their Art is incapable of re-
moving it. Thus he must suffer, rejoicing at
the Approach of Death, which will free him
from all his Torments, without violating the
Respect he owes to the Divine Object of his
Flame. At length, when he has but a few
Hours to live, his Mistress, with many Signs
of Compassion, conjures him to tell her the
Cause of his Despair. The Lover, conscious
of his Crime, evades all her Inquiries; but the
Lady laying at last a peremptory Command
upon him to disclose the Secret, he dares not
disobey her, and acknowledges his Passion with
the utmost Contrition sor having offended her;
bidding her take the small Remainder of his
Life to expiate his Crime; and sinishes his
Discourse by salling into a Swoon.
The Lady is touch'J at his Condition, com-
mands him to live, and is necessary, permits
him to hope.
Vol. II.
I
This

<page 181>
i7o The FEMALE Book VJI.
This is the most common Way in which
such Declarations are, and ought to be brought
about. However, there are others, which are
as well calculated sor sparing a Lady's Consu-
sion, and deprecating her Wrath.
The Lover, sor Example, like the Prince
of the Majsagetes, after having buried his Pas-
sion in Silence sor manv Years, may chance to
be walking with his Considant in a retir'd
Place; to whom, with a Deluge of Tears, he
relates the Excess of hii Passion and Despair.
And while he is thus unbosoming his Griess,
not in the least suspecting he is overheard, his
Princess, who had been listning to him in much
Trouble and Consusion, by some little Rustling
she makes, unawares discovers herself.
The surpriz'd Lover throws himself at her
Feet, begs Pardon sor his Rashness, observes
that he had never presum'd to discover his
Passion to her; and implores her Leave to die
besore her, as a Punishment sor his undesign'd
Offence.i
The Method which the great Artamenes took
to let the Princess of Media know he, adored
her, was not less respectsul. This valiant Prince,
who had long loved her, being to fight a great
Battle, in which he had some secret Presages he
should sall, which however deceiv'd him, wrote
a long Letter to the divine Mandana, wherein
he discover'd his Passion, and the Resolution his
Respect had inspir'd him with,, to consume in
Silence, and never presume to disclose his Love
while he lived; acquainted her, that he had
order'd that Letter not to be deliver'd to her,
till it was certainly known that he was dead.
Accordingly*

<page 182>
Chap, io. QUIXOTE. 171
Accordingly he receiv'd several Wounds in
the Fight, which brought him to the Ground,
and his Body not being sound, they concluded
it was in the Enemy's Possession.
His saithsul 'Squire, who had receiv'd his In-
structions besore the Battle, hastens to the Prin -
cess, who, with all the Court, is mightily af-
fected at his Death.
He presents her the Letter, which (he makes
no Scruple to receive, since the Writer is no
more. She reads it, and her whole Soul is
melted with Compassion; she bewails his Fate
with the most tender and affectionate Marks of
Grief.
Her Confidant asks why she is so much af-
fected, since in all Probability, (he would not
have pardon'd him sor loving her, had he been
alive?
She acknowledges the Truth of her Observa-
tion, takes Notice that his Death having can-
cell'd his Crime, his respectsul Passion alone
employs her Thoughts; she is resolv'd to be-
wail as insiocent and worthy of Compassion,
when dead, him whom living she would treat
as a Criminal, and insinuates, that her Heart
had entertain'd an Affection sor him.
Her Considant treasures up this Hint, and
endeavours to console her, but in vain, till News
is brought, that Artamenes, who had been cai-
ry'd sor dead out of the Field, and by a very
surprizing Adventure conceal'd all this Time,
is retura'd.
The Princess is cover'd with Consusion, and
tho' glad he is alive, resolves to banish him sor
his Crime.
I z Her

<page 183>
172 The FEMALE Book VII.
Her Considant pleads his Cause so well, that
she consents to fee him; and, since he can no
longer conceal his Passion, he consirms the Con-
fession in his Letter, humbly begging Pardon
for being still alive.
The Princess, who cannot plead Ignorance
of his Passion, nor deny the Sorrow she testify'd
sor his Death, condescends to pardon him, and
he is also permitted to hope. In like Manner
the great Piince of Persia f
Does your Ladyship consider how late it is?
interrupted Miss Glanvtlle, who had hitherto
very impatiently listen'd to her. Don't let us
keep the Gentlemen waiting any longer sor us.
I must insorm you how the Prince of Perfia
declar'd his Love sor the incomparable Berenice,
said Arabella.
Another Time, dear Cousin, said Miss
Glanville; methinks we have talk'd long enough
upon this Subject.
. J am sorry the Time has seem'd so tedious to
you, said Arabella, smiling; and theresore I'll
trespass no longer upon your Patience. Then
ordering Lucy to bring her Hat and Gloves, she
went down Stairs, sollow'd by Miss Glanville,
was was greatly disappointed at her not putting
on her Veil.
Chap.

<page 184>
Chap, i1. QUIXOTE. 173
Chap. XI.
In which our Heroine being mistaken her-
self, gives Occasion for a great many
other Mistakes.
AS soon as the Ladies enter'd the Room,
Mr. Selvin, with more Gaiety than usual,
advanc'd towards Arabella, who put on so cold
and severe a Countenance at his Approach, that
the poor Man extremely consus'd, drew back,
and remain'd in great Perplexity, fearing he had
osfended her:
Mr. Tinsel, seeing Mr. Selvin's Reception,
and aw'd by the becoming Majesty in her Per-
son, notwithstanding all his Assurance, accosted
her with less Considence than was his Cuilom;
but Arabella softning her Looks with the most
engaging Smiles, made an Apology sor detain-
ing them so long from the Parade, gave her
Hand to the Beau, as being not a suspected
Person, and permitted him to lead her out,
Mr. Glanville, to whom she always allow'd the
Preference on those Occasions, being a little in-
dispos'd, and not able to attend her.
Mr. Tinjel, whose Vanity was greatly flat-
ter'd by the Preference Arabella gave him to
his Companion, proceeded, according to his
usual Custom, to examine her Looks and Be-
haviour with more Care; conceiving such a
Preference must proceed, from a latent Motive
which was not unfavourable sor him. His
Discernment on these Occasions being very sur-
I 3 prising,

<page 185>
J74 the FEMALE Book VII.
prising, he soon discover'd in the bright Eyes of
Arabella a secret Approbation of his Person,
which he endeavour'd to increase by displaying
it with all the Address he was Master of, and
did not sail to talk her into an Opinion of his
Wit, by ridiculing every Body thatpass'd them,
and directing several study'd Compliments to
herself.
Miss Glanville, who was not so agreeably en -
tertain'd by the grave Mr. Selvin, saw these
Advances to a Gallantry with her Cousin with
great Disturbance: She was resolved to in-
terrupt it, if possible, and being convinc'd
Mr. Selvin preferr'd Arabella's Conversation to
hers, she plotted how to pair them together,
and have the Beau to herself.
As they walk'd afew Paces behind herCousin
and Mr. Tinsel, she was in no Danger of be-
ing over-heard; and taking Occasion to put
Mr. Selvin in mind of Arabella's Behaviour to
him, when he accosted her; (he ask'd him, if
he was conscious of having done any thing to
©ffend her?
I protest, Madam, reply'd Mr.Selvin, I know
not of any thing I have done to displease her.
I never sail'd, to my Knowledge, in my Re-
spects towards her Ladyship, sor whom indeed
I have a most prosound Veneration. *
I know so much of her Temper, resom'd
Miss Glanville, as to be certain, if she has taken
it into her Head to be angry with you, she will
be ten times more so at your Indifference: And
if you hope sor her Favour, you must ask her
Pardon with the most earnest Submission ima-
ginable.

<page 186>
Chap. ii. QJJIX OT E. 175
If I knew I had osfended her, reply'd
Mr. Selvin, I would very willingly ask her Par-
don; but really, since I have not been guilty
of any Fault towards her Ladyship, I don't
know how to acknowledge it.
Well, said Miss Glanville coldly, I only
took the Liberty to give you fume sriendly Ad-
vice, which you may sollow, or not, as you
please. I know my Cousin is angry at some-
thing,, and I wish you were Friends again,,
that's all.
I am mightily oblig'd to you, Madam, said
Mr. Selvin; and since you assure me her Lady-
ship is angry, I'll ask her Pardon, tho', really,
as I said besore, I don't know sor what.
Well, interrupted Miss Glanville, we'll join
them at the End of the Parade; and to give
you an Opportunity os speaking to my Cousin,
I'll engage Mr. Tinsel myself.
Mr. Silvia, who thought himself greatly
oblig'd to Miss Glanville sor her good Intentions,
tho' in reality she had a View of exposing of
her Cousin, as well as an Inclination to engage
Mr. Tinsel, took Courage as they tum'd, to get
on the other Side of Arabella, whom he had not
dar'd besore to approach, while Miss Glanville,
addressing a Whisper of no great Importance to
her Cousin, parted her from the Beau, and
flackning her Pace a little, fell into a particular
Discourse with him, which Arabella being too
polite to interrupt, remain'd in a very perplex-
ing Situation, dreading every Moment that
Mr. Selvin would explain himself. Alarm'd ac
his Silence, y et resolv'd to interrupt him if he
began to speak, and afraid of beginning a Con-
I 4 versatiost

<page 187>
176 The FEMALE Book VII.
versation first, lest he should construe it to his
Advantage.
Mr. Selvin being naturally timid in the Com-
pany of Ladies, the Circumstance of Disgrace
which he was in with Arabella, her Silence and
Reserve so added to his accustom'd Dissidence,
that tho' he endeavour'd several times to speak,
he was not able to bring out any thing but a
preluding Hem; which he observ'd, to his ex-
treme Consusion, seem'd always to encrease
Arabella's Constraint.
Indeed, that Lady, upon any Suspicion that
he was going to break his mysterious Silence,
always contracted her Brow into a Frown, cast
down her Eyes with an Air of Perplexity, en-
deavour'd to hide her Blushes with her Fan;
and to shew her Inattention, directed her Looks
to the contrary Side.
The Lady and Gentleman being in equal
Consusion, no Advances were made on either
Side towards a Conversation, and they had
reach'd almost the End of the Parade in an un-
interrupted Silence; when Mr. Selvin-, fearing he
should never again have so good an Opportu-
nity of making his Peace, collected all his Re-
solution, and with an Accent trembling under
the Importance of the Speech he was going to
make, began,
Madam, Since I have had the Honour of
walking with your Ladyship, I have observed
so many Signs of Constraint in your Manner,
that I hardly dare intreat you to grant me a
Moment's Hearing while I
Sir, interrupted Arabella, besore you go any
surther, I must insorm you, that what you are
going*

<page 188>
Chap. ii. QUIXOTE. 177
going to say will mortally offend me. Take
heed then how you commit an Indiscretion
which will sorce me to treat you very rigorously.
If your Ladyship will not allow me to speak
in my own Justification, said Mr. Selvin, yet I
hope you will not resuse to tell me my Offence,
since I'
You are very consident, indeed, interrupted
Arabella again, to suppose I will repeat what
would be insinitely grievous sor me to hear.
Against my Will, pursued she, I must give you
the Satissaction to know, that I am not igno-
rant of your Crime, but I also assure you that I
am highly incens'd; and that not only with the
Thoughts you have dar'd to entertain of me,
but likewise with your Presumption in going
about to disclose them.
Mt.Selvin, whom the seeming Contradictions
in this Speech astonish'd, yet imagin'd in ge-
neral it hinted at the Dispute between him and
Mr. Tinsel; and supposing the Story had been
told to his Disadvantage, which was the Cause
os her Anger, reply'd in great Emotion at the-
Injustice done him,
Since somebody has been so ossicious to ac-
quaint your Ladyship with an Affair which
ought to have been kept from your Knowledge ;.
'tis a Pity they did not insorm you, that
Mr. Tinsel was the Person that had the least
Respect sor your Ladyship, and is more worthy,
of your Resentment.
If Mr. Tinsel, replied Arabella, is guilty of
an Offence like yours, yet since he has con- -
ceal'd it better, he is less culpable than you;
and you have done that sor him, which haply;
I 5 he

<page 189>
ij% the FEMALE BookVII.
he Would never have had Courage enough to do
sor himself as long as he lived.
Poor Selvin, quite consounded at these intri-
cate Words, would have begg'd her to explain
'herself, had she not silenc'd him with a dreadsul
Frown: And making a Stop till Miss Glanville
and Mr. Tinsel came up to them, she told her
Cousin with a peevish Accent, that she had
"persorm'd her Promise very ill; and whisper'd
her, that she was to blame sor all the Mortifi-
cations fiie had suffer'd.
Mr. Tinsel, supposing the Alteration in
Arabella's Humour proceeded from being so long
depriv'd of his Company; endeavour'd to make
her Amends by a Profusion of Compliments;
which she receiv'd with such an Air of Dis-
pleasure, that the Beau, vex'd at the ill Success of
his Gallantry, told her, he was afraid Mr. Sel-
vin's Gravity had infected her Ladyship.
Say rather, reply'd Arabella, that his Indis-
cretion has offended me.
Mr. Tinsel, charm'd with this beginningCon-
fidence, which consirm'd his Hopes of having
made some Impression on her Heart; conjur'd
her very earnestly to tell him how Mr. Selvin
had offended her.
'Tis sufficient, resum'd she, that I tell you
he has offended me, without declaring the Na-
ture of his Crime, since doubtless it has not
escaped your Observation, which, if I may
believe him, is not wholly disinterested. To
confess yet more, 'tis true that he hath told me
something concerning you, which—
Let me perish, Madam, interrupted the
heau, if one Syllable he has said be true.
How,

<page 190>
Chap. 12. QUIXOTE. 179
How, said Arabella, a little disconcerted,
Will you always persist in a Denial then? »rf
Deny it, Madam, return'd Mr. Tinsels I'll
deny what he has said with my last Breath, 'tia
all a scandalous Forgery: No Man living is less
likely to think of your Ladyship in that Man-
ner. If you knew my Thoughts, Madam,
you would be convinc'd nothing is more im-
possible, and
Sir, interrupted Arabella, extremely morti-
fy'd, methinks you are very eager in your Ju-
stification. I promise you, I do not think you
guilty of the Offence he charg'd you with; if
I did, you would haply experience my Resent-
ment in such a Manner, as would make you
repent of your Presumption.
Arabella', in sinishing these Words, inter-
rupted MissG7tf«z////6,'sDiscourse with Mr.Sehiny
to tell her, she desir'd to return Home; to
which that young Lady, who had not been at
all pleas'd with the Morning's Walk, consented.
Chap. XII.
In which our Heroine reconciles herself to
a mortifying Incident, By recollecting an
Adventure in a Romance, stmilar to her
own.
AS soon as the Ladies were come to their
Lodgings, Arabella went up to her own
Apartment to meditate upon what had pass'd,
and Miss Glami'dle retir'd to dress sor Dinner;
I 6 while

<page 191>
180 ^FEMALE Book VII.
while the two Gentlemen, who thought they
had great Reason to be dissatisfy'd with each
other on Account of Lady Bella's Behaviour,
went to a Colfee-house, in order to come to
some Explanation about it.
Well, Sir, said the Beau, with a sarcastick
Air, 1 am greatly oblig'd to you sor the Endea-
vours you have us'd to ruin me in Lady Bilh's
Opinion. Rat me, if it is not the greatest
Missortune in the World, to give occasion sor
Envy.
Envy, Sir, interrupted Mr. Selvin; I protest
I do really admire your great Skill in Strata-
gems, but I do not envy you the Possession of
it. You have, indeed, very wittily contriv'd
to put your own Sentiments of that Lady,
which you deliver'd so freely the other Night,
into my Mouth. 'Twas a Master-piece of
Cunning, indeed; and, as I said besore, I ad-
mire your Skill prodigiously.
I don't know what you mean, reply'd Tinsel,
you talk in Riddles. Did you not yourself ac-
quaint Lady Bella with the Preference I gave
Miss Glanville to her? What would you pro-
pose by such a Piece of Treachery? You have
ruin'd all my Hopes by it: The Lady resents
it excessively, and 'tis no Wonder, 'saith, it
must certainly mortify her. Upon my Soul, I
can never sorgive thee sor so mal a propos a
Discovery.
Forgive me, Sir, replied Selvin, in a Rage,
I don't want your Foigiveness. I have done
nothing unbecoming a Man of Honour. The
Lady was so prejudiced by your Insinuations»
that (he would not give me Leave to speak;
other-

<page 192>
Chap. 12. QUIXOTE. 181
otherwise, I would have sully insorm'd her of
her Mistake, that she might have known how
much Die was oblig'd to you.
So she would not hear thee, interrupted Tinsel
laughing, dear Soul, how very kind was that?
'Faith, I don't know how it is, but I am very
lucky, without deserving to be so. Thou art
a Witness sor me, Frank, I took no great Pains
to gain this sine Creature's Heart; but it was
damn'd malicious tho', to attempt to make
Discoveries. I fee she is a little piqu'd, but
I'll set all to rights again with a Billet-doux. I've
an excellent Hand, tho' 1 say it, at zBUlet-doux.
I never knew one of mine sail in my Life.
Harkee, Sir, said Selvlgt whispering, any
more Attempts to ih tt your Sentiments upon
me, and you shall hear of it. In the mean
Time, beassur'd, I'll clear myself, and put the
Saddle upon the right Horse.
D.mme, if thou art not a queer Fellow,
said Tinsel, endeavouring to hide his Discom-
posure at this Threat under a sorc'd Laugh-
Selvin, without making any Reph', retir'd
to write to Arabella; which Tinsel suspecting,
rtsolv'd to be besore-hand with him; and with-
out leaving the Coffee house, call'd sor Paper,
and wrote a Billet to her, which he dispatch'd
away immediately.
The Messenger had just got Admittance to
Lucy, when another arriv'd from Selvin.
They both presented their Letters, but Lucy
resus'd them, saying, her Lady would turn her
away, if she receiv'd such Sort of Letters.
Such Sort of Letters, return'd Tinsel's Man!
Why do you know what they contain, then?
To

<page 193>
i$2 "The FEMALE BookVII.
To be sure, I do, reply'd Lucy; they are
Love-Lerters; and my Lady has charg'd me
never to receive any more.
Well, reply'd Selvin's Servant, you may take
my Letter; sor my Master desir'd me to tell
you, it was about Business of Consequence,
which your Lady must be acquainted with.
Since you assure me it is not a Love-Letter^
I'll take it, said Lucy.
And, prai take mine too, said Tinsel's Mer-
cury; sor I assure you, it is not a Love-Letter
neither; 'tis only a Billet-doux.-
Are you sure of that, reply'd Lucy; because
I may venture to take it, I sancy, if 'tis what
you fay.
I'll swear it, said the Man, delivering it to
her. Well, said she, receiving it, I'll take
them both up. But what did you call this,
pursu'd she? I must not sorget it, or else my
Lady will think it a Love-Letter.
A Billet-doux, said the Man.
Lucy, sor fear she should sorget it, repeated
the Words Billet-doux several Times as she went
up Stairs; but entering her Lady's Apartment,
she perceiving the Letters in her Hand, ask'd
her so sternly, how she durst presume to bring
them into her Presence, that the poor Girl, in
her Fright, sorgot the Lesson she had been con-
ning; and endeavouring to recal it into her
Memory, took no Notice of her Lady's Que-
stion, which she repeated several times, but to
no Purpose.
"-Arabella^ surpriz'd at her Inattention, re- -
iterated her Commands, in a Tone somewhat
louder

<page 194>
Chap. 12. QUIXOTE. 183
louder than usual; asking her at the same Time,
"why she did not obey her immediately?
Indeed, Madam, reply'd Lucy, your Lady-
ship would not order me to take back the Let-
ters, if you knew what they were: They are
not Love-Letters; I was resolv'd to be sure of
that besore I took them. This, Madam, is a
Letter about Business of Consequence; and the
other Oh dear! I can't think what the
Man call'd it 1 But it is not a Lore-Letter, in-
deed, Madam.
You are a simple Wench, said Arabella
smiling: You may depend upon it, all Letters
directed to me, must contain Matters of Love
and Gallantry; and those I am not permitted
to receive. Take them away then immediately.
But stay, pursued she, seeing she was about to
obey her, one of them, you say, was deliver'd
to you as a Letter of Consequence; peihaps it
is (0: Indeed it may contain an Advertisement
of some Design to carry me away. How do I
know, but Mr.' Selvin, incited by his Love and
Despair, may intend to make such an Attempt?
Give me that Letter, Lucy, I am resolved to
open it. As sor the other yet who knows
but the other may also bring me Warning of
the same Danger from another Quarter. The
Pains Mr. Tinsel took to conceal his Passion,
nay, almost as I think, to deny it, amounts to
a Proof that he is meditating some Way to
make sure of me. 'Tis certainly so: Give me
that Letter, Lucy; I should be acceflary to
their intended Violence, if I neglected this
timely Discovery.
3 Well*

<page 195>
184 The FEMALE BookVII.
Well, cried she, taking one of the Letters,
this is exactly like what happen'd to the beauti-
sul Princess of Cappadocia; who, like me, in
one and the same Day, receiv'd Advice that
two of her Lovers intended to carry her off.
As she pronoune'd these WordsMikGfonville
entered the Room, to whom Arabella immedi-
ately recounted the Adventure of the Letters;
telling her, she did not doubt, but they contain'd
a Discovery of some Conspiracy to carry her
away.
And whom does your Ladyship suspect of such
a strange Design, pray, said Miss Glanville
smiling?
At present, reply'd Arabella, the two Cava-
liers who walk'd with us To-day, are the Per-
sons who seem the most likely to attempt that
Violence.
I dare answer sor Mr. Tinsel, replied Miss
Glanville, he thinks of no such Thing.
Well, said Arabella, to convince you of your
Mistake, I must insorm you, that Mr. Selvin,
having the Presumption to begin a Declaration
of Love to me on the Parade this Morning, I
reprov'd him severely sor his Want of Respect,
and threatned him with my Displeasure; in the
Rage of his Jealousy, at seeing me treat
Mr. Tinsel well, he discover'd to me, that he
also was as criminal as himself, in order to
oblige me to a severer Usage of him.
So he told you Mr. Tinsel was in Love with
you, interrupted Miss Glanville?
He told it me in otherWords, reply'dArabella;
sor he said, Mr. Tinsel was guilty of that Of-
fence, which I relented so severely to him.
Miss

<page 196>
Chap. 12. QUIXOTE. 185
Miss Glanville beginning to comprehend the
Mystery, with great Dissiculty sorbore laugh-
ing at her Cousin's Mistake; sor she well knew
the Offence Mr. Selvin hinted at, and desirous
of knowing what those Letters contain'd, she
begg'd her to delay opening them no longer.
Arabella, pleas'd at her Solicitude, open'd
one of the Letters; but glancing her Eye to
the Bottom, and feeing the Name of Selvin,
she threw it hastily upon the Table, and avert-
ing her Eyes, What a Mortification have I
avoided, said she, that Letter is from Selvin;
and questionless, contains an Avowal of his
Crime.
Nay, you must read it, ciied Miss Glanville,
taking it up; since you have open'd it, 'tis the
same Thing: You can never persuade him but
you have seen ir. However, to spare your
Nicety, I'll read it to you. Which accordingly
she did, and sound it as sollows.
Madam,
"T Know not what Insinuations have been
** J_ made use of to persuade you I was guilty
"of the Offence, which, with Justice, occa-
"sion'd your Resentment this Morning; but
"I assure you, nothing was ever more salse.
«' My Thoughts of your Ladyship are very
*' different, and sull of the prosoundest Re-
*• spect and Veneration. I have Reason to
"suspect Mr. Tinsel is the Person who has thus
M endeavoured to prejudice me with yourLa-
** dyship; theresore I am excusable is I tell
"you, that those very Sentiments, too dis-
"respectsul to be named, which he would per-
*• suade

<page 197>
186 ^FEMALE Book VII.
"suade you are mine, he difcover'd himself.
"He then, Madam, is the Person guilty of
"that Offence he so saJfly lays to the Charge
"of him, who, is, with the utmost Respect and
41 Esteem,
Madam,
Your Ladyship's
most obedient, and
most humble Servant,
F. Selvin.
How's this, ery'd Miss Glanville? Why,
Madam, you are certainly mistaken. You fee
Mr. Selvin utterly denies the Crime of loving
you. He has suffer'd very innocently in yoi\r
Opinion. Indeed, your Ladyship was too hasty
in condemning htm.
If what he says be true, replied Arabella,
who had been in extreme Consusion, while a
Letter so different from what she expected was
reading; I have indeed unjustly condemn'd
him. Nevertheless, I am still inclin'd to be-
lieve this is all Artifice; and that he is really
guilty of entertaining a Passion sor me.
But why should he take so much Pains to
deny it, Madam, said Miss Glanville ? Methinks
that looks very odd.
Not at all, interrupted Arabella, whose Spi-
rits were rais'd by recolledting an Adventure in
her Romance, similar to this. Mr. Selvin has
sallen up m the very same Stratagem with Sera-
ments; who being in Love with the beautisul
Cleobuline, Princess of Corinth^ took all ima-
ginable Pains to conceal his Pastion, in order
to
I

<page 198>
Chap. 12, QUIXOTE. 187
to be near that sair Princess; who would have
banish'd him from her Presence, had she known
he was in Love with her. Nay, he went so
far in his Dissimulation, as to pretend Love to
one of the Ladies of her Court; that his Pas-
sion sor the Princess might be the less taken no-
tice of. In these Cases theresore, the more re-
solutely a Man denies his Passion, the more
pure and violent it is.
Then Mr. Selvin's Passion is certainly very
violent, reply'd Miss Glanville, sor he denies it
Very resolutely; and I believe none but your
Ladyship would have discover'd his Artifice,
But shall we not open the other Letter? I hav#
a strong Notion it conies from Tin/el.
For that very Reason I would not be ac-
quainted with the Contents, reply'd Arabella.
You fee, Mr. Selvin accuses him of being guilty
of that Offence which he denies: I shall doubt-
less, meet with a Consirmation of his Love in
that Letter. Do not, I beseech you, added
she, seeing her Cousin preparing to open the
Letter, expose me to the Pain of hearing a pre-
sumptuous Declaration of Love. Nay, pur-
sued she, rising in great Emotion, if you are
resolved to persecute me by reading it, I'll en-
deavour to get out of the hearing of it..
You shan't, I declare, said Miss Glanville,
laughing and holding her, I'll oblige you to
hear it.
I vow, Cousin, said Arabella smiling, you
use me just as the Princess Cleopatra did the sair
and wife Antsnia. However, if by this you
-mean to do any Kindness to the unsortunate
Person who wrote that Billet, you are greatly
mistaken;

<page 199>
188 The FEMALE B .ok YII.
mistaken; since, if you oblige me to listen to
a Declaration of his Crime, you will lay me
under a Necessity to banish him. A Sentence
he would have avoided, while I remained ig-
norant of it.
To this Miss Glanville made no other Reply
than by opening the Billet, the Contents of
which may be sound in the sollowing Chapter.
Chap. XIII.
In which our Heroine's Extravagance will
i be thoughts perhaps^ to be carried to an
extravagant Length.
Madam,
"T Had the Honour to assure you this Morn-
"A i"g 00 tne Parade, that the Insinuations
"Mr. Htlvin made use of to rob me of the
"superlative Happiness of your Esteem were
"entirely salse and groundless. May the Beams
'* of your bright Eyes never shine on me more,
"if there is any Truth in what he said to pre-
"judice me with your Lad v ship. If I am
"permitted to attend you to the Rooms this
"Evening, I hope to convince you, that it
"was absolutely impossible I could have been
"capable of such a Crime, who am, with the
"most prosound Respect,
Your Ladyship's
most devoted, &c.
D. Tinsel.
Well,

<page 200>
Chip. 13. QUIXOTE. 189
Well, Madam, said Miss Glanville, when
sbe had read this Epistle, I sancy you need not
pronounce a Sentence of Banishment upon poor
Mr. Tinsel; he seems to be quite innocent of
the Offence your Ladyship suspects him of.
Why, really, return'd Arabella, blushing
with extreme Consusion at this second Disap-
pointment, I am greatly perplexed to know
how I ought to act on this Occasion. I am
much in the same Situation with the Princess
Serena. For you must know, this Princess—
Here Lucy entering, insorm'd the Ladies Din-
ner was serv'd 1 shall defer till anotherOp-
portunity, said Arabella, upon this Interruption,
the Relation of the Princess Serena's Adven-
tures; which you will sind, added she, in alow
Voice, bears a very great Resemblance to mine.
Mise Glanville reply'd, she would hear it
whenever she pleas'd, and then sollow'd Arabella
to the Dining Room.
The Cloth was scarce remov'd, when
Mr. Seivin came in. Arabella blush'd at his
Appearance, and discover'd so much Perplexity
in her Behaviour, that Mr. Seivin was appre-
hensive he had not yet sussiciently justify'd him-
self; and theresore took the first Opportunity
to approach her.
I shall think myself very unhappy, Madam,
Aid he bowing, if the Letter T did myself the
Honour to write to you this Morning
Sir, interrupted Arabella, I perceive you are
going to sorget the Contents of that Letter,
and preparing again to offend me by a presump-
tuous Declaration of Love.
Who

<page 201>
190 FEMALE Book VH.
Who I, Madam, reply'd he, in great Asto-
nishment and Consusion, I-I-I protest—tho'
I—I have a very great Respect sor your Lady-
ship, yet—yet I never presum'd to—to—to—
You hate presum'd too much, replied Ara-
hella, and I should sorget what I ow'd to my
own Glory, if 1 surnisli'd you with any more
Occasions of offending me.—Know then, I
absolutely sorbid you to appear besore me again,
at least, till I am conyinc'd you have chang'd
your Sentiments.
Saying this, she rose from her Seat, and
making a Sign to him not to sollow her, which
indeed he had na Intention to do, she quitted
the Room, highly satisfy'd with her own Con-
duct upon this Occasion, which was exactly
consormable to the Laws of Romance.
Mr. Tinsel, who had just alighted from his
Chair, having a Glimpse of her, as she pass'd
to her own Apartment, resolv'd, if possible, to
procure a private Interview; sor he did not
doubt but his Billet had done Wonders in his
Favour.
For that Purpose he ventur'd up to her Anti-
Chamber, where he sound Lucy in waiting,
whom he desir'd to acquaint her Lady, that he
intreated a Moment's Speech with her.
Lucy, after hesitating a Moment, and look-
ing earnestly at him, replied, Sir, if you'll
promise me saithsully, you are not in Love
with my Lady, I'll go and deliver your Mes-
sage.
Duce take me, said tinsel, if that is not a
very whimsical Condition truly Pray, my
Dear, how came it into thy little Brain, to
suspect
<

<page 202>
Chap. 13. QUI X O TE. i9r
suspect I was in Love with thy Lady? But,
f?.pp6se I should be in Love with her, what
then?
Why, then 'tis likely you would die, that's
all, seid Lucy, without my Lady Would be so
kind to command you to live.
I vow thou haft mighty pretty Notions, Child,
said Tin/el smiling; hast thou been reading
any Play-Book lately? But pray, dost think
thy Lady would have Compassion on me, if I
was in Love with her? Come, I know thou
art in her Considence? Hast thou ever heard
her talk of me? Does she not tell thee all her
Secrets?
Here Arabella's Bell ringing, the Beau stipp'd
half a Guinea into her Hand, which Lucy not
willing to resuse, went immediately to her
Lady 5 to whom with a trembling Accent,
she repeated Mr. TinfeFs Request.
Imprudent Girl, cried Arabella, sor I am
loth to suspect thee of Disloyalty to thy Mistress,
Dost thou know the Nature and Extent of the
Request thou hast deliver'd ? Art thou ignorant
that the presumptuous Man whom thou sollicitest
this Favour sor, has mortally offended me?
Indeed, Madam, said Lucy frighted out of
her Wits, I don't sollicit sor him. I scorn to do
any such Thing. I would not offend your
Ladyship sor the World: For, besore I would
deliver his Message to your Ladyship, I made
him assure me, that he was not in Love with
your Ladyship.
That was very wisely done, indeed, replied
Arabella, smiling: And do you believe he spoke
the Truth?
Yes,

<page 203>
192 ^FEMALE Book VH.
Yes, indeed, I am sure of it, said Lucy
eagerly, if your Ladyship will but be pleas'd to
fee him, he is only in the next Room; I dare
promise
How, interrupted Arabella! What have you
tioner Have you brought him into my Apart-
ment then? I protest this Adventure is exactly
like what befel the beautisul Statira, when, by
a Stratagem of the same Kind Oroondates was
introduc'd into her Presence. Lucy, thou art
another Barsina, I think; but I hope thy In-
tentions are not less innocent than hers was.
Indeed, Madam, reply'd Lucy, almost weep-
ing, I am very innocent. I am no Barsina, as
your Ladyship calls me.
I dare answer sor thee, said Arabella smiling
at the Turn she gave to her Words, thou art
no Barstna; and I should wrong thee very
much to compare thee with that wise Princess j
sor thou art certainly one of the most simple
Wenches in the World. But since thou hast
gone so sar, let me know what the unsortunate
Person desires of me; sor, since I am neither
more rigid, nor pretend to more Virtue than
Statira, I may do at least as much sor him, as
that great Queen did sor Oroondates.
He desires, Madam, said Lucy, that your
Ladyship would be pleas'd to let him speak
with you.
Or, in his Words, I suppose, replied Arabella,
he humbly implor'd a Moment's Audience.
I told your Ladyship his very Words, indeed,
Madam, said Lucy.
I tell

<page 204>
Chap. 13. Q U I X O T E. 193
I tell thee, Girl, thou art mistaken, said
Arabella; 'tis impossible he mould Le sor such
a Favour in Terms like those: Therefore, go
back, and let him know that I consent to grant
him a short Audience upon these Conditions.
First, Provided he does not abuse my Indul-'
gence by offending me with any Protestation*
of his Passion.
Secondly, That he engages to fulsil the In-
junctions I shall lay upon him, however cruel
and terrible they may appear.
Lastly, That his Despair must not prompt
him to any Act of Desperation against himself.
Lucy having received this Message, quitted
the Room hastily, sor fear she should sorget it.
Wei'', my pretty Ambassadress, said 7V»/*/,
when he saw her enter the Anti-chamber,
Will your Lady see me?
No, Sir, replied Lucy.
No, interrupted Tin/el, that's kind 'faith,
after waiting so long.
Pray, Sir, said Lucy, don't put me out so; I
-stiall sorget what my Lady ordered me to tell
you.
Oh! I ask your Pardon, Child, said Tin/el,
Come, let me hear your Message.
Sir, said Lucy, adopting the Solemnity of her
Lady's Accent—My Lady bad me fay, that she
will grant—No, that she consents to grant you
a short Dience.
Audience you would say, Child, said Tinsel;
But how came you to tell me besore she would
not see me?-
Vol. II.
I vow

<page 205>
i94 7& FEMALE Book VII.
I vow and protest, Sir, said Lucy, you have
put all my Lady's Words clean out of my
Head—I don't know what comes next—
Oh, no matter, said Tinsel, you have told
me enough : I'll wait upon her directly.
Lucy, who saw him making towards the
Door, prest between it and him; and having
all her Lady's Whims in her Head, suppos'd
lie was going to carry her away—Pofiess'd with
this Thought, she scream'd out, Help! Help!
sor Heaven's Sake! My Lady will be carry'd
away!
Arabella hearing this Exclamation of her
Woman's, eccho'd her Screams, tho' with a
Voice insinitely moredelicate; and seeing Tinsel,
tvho, consounded to the last Degree at the
Cries of both the Lady and her Woman, had
got into her Chamber he knew not how,
she gave herself over sor lost, and fell back in
her Chair in a Swoon, or something she took
for a Swoon, sor she was persuaded it could
happen no otherwise; since all Ladies in the
fame Circumstances are terrified into a sainting
Fit, and seldom recover till they are conveni-
ently carried away ; and when they awake, sind
themselves many Miles off in the Power of
their Ravisher.
Arabella's other Women, alarm'd by her
Cries, came running into the Room; and see-
ing Mr. Tinsel there, and their Lady in a Swoon,
concluded some very extraordinary Accident
had happen'd.
What is your Business here, cry'd they all at
a Time? Is it you that has frighted her La<dy-

<page 206>
Chap. 13. QUIXOTE. 195
Devil take me, said Tinsel amaz'd, if I can
tell what all this means.
By this Time Sir Charles, Mr. Glanville, and
his Sister, came running astonished up Stairs.
Arabella still continued motionless in her Chair,
her Eyes closed, and her Head reclined upon
Lucy, who with her other Women, was en-
deavouring to recover her.
Mr. Glanville eagerly ran to her Assistance,
while Sir Charles and his Daughter as eagerly
interrogated Mr. Tinsel, who stood motionless
with Surprize, concerning the Cause of her
Disorder.
Arabella then first discovering some Signs of
Life, half opened her Eyes.
Inhuman Wretch, cry'd she, with a faint
Voice, supposing herself in the Hands of her
Ravisher, think not thy cruel Violence shall
procure thee what thy Submissions could not
obtain; and if when thou hadst only my Indif-
ference to surmount, thou didst sind it so dissi-
cult to overcome my Resolution, now that by
this unjust Attempt, thou hast added Aversion;
to that Indifference, never hope sor any Thing
but the most bitter Reproaches from me.—
Why, Niece, said Sir Charles, approaching
her, what's the Matter? Look up, I beseech
you, no-body is attempting to do you any Hurt;
here's none but Friends about you.
Arabella, raising her Head at the Sound of
her Uncle's V oice, and casting a consused Look
on the Persons about her,
May I believe my Senses? Am I rescued,
md in my own Chamber? To whose Va*-
lour is my Deliverance owing? Without
K 2 doubt,


<page 207>
196 The FEMALE Book VII.
>doubt, 'tis to my Cousin's; but where is he?
Let me assure him of my Gratitude.
Mr. Glanville, who had retired to a Window
in great Consusion, as soon as he heard her call
for him, came towards her, and in a Whisper
begg'd her to be compos'd; that she was in no
Danger.
And pray, Niece, said Sir Charles, now you
are a little recovered, be so good to insorm us
of the Cause of your Fright. What has hap-
pen'd to occasion all this Consusion?
How, Sir, said Arabella, don't you know
then what has happen'd? — Pray how was I
brought again into my Chamber, and by what
Means was I rescu'd?
I protest, said Sir Charles, I don't know that
you have been out of it.
Alas, replied Arabella, I perceive you are
quite ignorant of what has besallen me; nor
am I able to give you any Insormation: All I
can tell you is, that alarm'd by my Women's
Cries, and the Sight of my Ravisher, who
came into my Chamber, I sainted away, and
so sacilitated his Enterprize; since doubtless it
was very easy sor him to carry me away while
I remained in that senseless Condition; How I
was rescued, or by whom, one of my Women
can haply insorm you; since its probable one of
them was also sorced away with me Oh
Heav'ns! cry'd she, seeing Tinsel, who all this
while stood gazing like one distracted; what
makes that impious Man in my Presence!
What am I to think of this? Am I really de-
liver'd or no?
What

<page 208>
Chap. 13. QJJIXOTE. 197
What can this mean, cried Sir Charles, turn-
ing to Tinsel? Have you, Sir, had any Hand
in frighting my Niece?
I, Sir, said Tinsel! Let me perish if ever I
was so consounded in my Life : The Lady's
Brain is disordered, I believe.
Mr. Glanville, who was convinced all this
Consusion was caus'd by some of Arabella's
usual Whim?, dreaded lest an Explanation would
the more expose her; and theresore told his
Father, that it would be best to retire, and leave
his Cousin to the Care of his Sister and her Wo-
men; adding, that she was not yet quite reco-
ver'd, and their Presence did but discompose
her. .....
Then addressing himself to Tinsel, told him .
he would wait upon him down Stairs.
Arabella seeing them going away together,
and supposing they intended to dispute the Pos-
session of her with their Swords, call'd out to
them to stay.
Mr. Glanville, however, without minding
her, press'd Mr. Tinsel to walk down.
Nay, pray, Sir, said the Beau, let us go in
again; she may grow outrageous if we disoblige
her.
Outrageous, Sir, said Glanville, do you sup-
pose my Cousin is mad?
Upon my Soul, Sir, replied Tinsel, if she
is not mad, she is certainly a little out of her
Senses, or so
Arabella having reiterated her Commands sor.
her Lovers to return, and sinding they did not
obey her, ran to her Chamber-door, where they
were holding a surly Sort of Conference, el'pe-
K 3 ciatt

<page 209>
198 The FEMALE Book VII.
cially on Glanville's Side, who was horridly out
os Humour.
1 perceive by your Looks, said Arabella to
her Cousin, the Design you are meditating;
but know that I absolutely forbid you, by all
the Power I have over you, not to engage in
Combat with my Ravisher here.
Madam, interrupted Glanville, I beseech you
do not
I know, said she, you will object to me the
Examples of Artamenes, Aronces, and many
others, who were so generous as to promise
their Rivals not to resuse them that Satissaction
whenever they demanded it—but consider, you
have not the same Obligations to Mr.Tinfel that
Artamenes had to the King of Assyria, or that
Aronces had to» .
For God's Sake, Cousin,said Glanville,v>hat's
all this to the Purpose? Curse on Aronces and
the King of Assyria, I say
The Astonishment of Arabella at this intem-
perate Spe*ch of her Cousin, kept her sor a Mo-
ment immoveable, when Sir Charles, who du-
ring this Discourse, had been collecting all the
Insormation he could from Lucy, concerning
this perplexed Affair, came towards Tinsel, and
giving him an angry Look, told him, he should
take it well if he sorbore visiting any of his Fa-
mily sor the suture.
Oh! Your most obedient Servant, Sir, said
Tinsel: You expect, I suppose, I should be ex-
cessively chagtin'd at this Prohibition? But up-
on my Soul, I am greatly oblig'd to you. A gad!
J have no great Mind to a Halter: And since
this Lady is so apt to think People hare a Design

<page 210>
Chap. 13. - Q^U I X O T E. 199
to ravish her, the wisest Thing a Man can do,
is to keep out of her Way.
Sir, replied Glanville, who had sollowed him
to the Door, I believe there has been some little
Mistake in what has happened To-day—How-
ever, I expect you'll take no unbecoming Li-
berties with the Character of Lady Bella—
Oh! Sir said Tinsel, I give you my Honour
I shall always speak of the Lady with the most
prosound Veneration. She is a most accom-
plish'd, incomprehensible Lady: And the De-
vil take me, is I think there is her Fellow iit
the World And so, Sir, I am your most
obedient
A Word with you besore you go, said
Glanville stopping him--No more of theseSneers,
as you value that smooth Face of yours, or I'll
despoil it of a Nose.
Oh! Your humble Servant, said the Beau,
retiring in great Confusion, with something be-
twixt a Smile and a Grin upon his Countenance",
which he took Care hjwever Mr. Glanville
should not fee; who as soon as he quitted him
went again to Arabella's Apartment, in order to
prevail upon his Father and Sister to leave her
a little to herself, sor he dreaded lest some more
Instances of her Extravagance would put it inr
to his Father's Head, that she was really out of
her Senses,
Well, Sir, said Arabella upon his Entrance,
you have I suppose, given your Rival his Li-
berty. I assure you this Generosity is highly
agreeable to me— And herein you imitate the
noble Artainenes^ who upon a like Occasion,
acted as you have done. For when Fortune
K 4. had

<page 211>
2oo The FEMALE Book VII.
had put theRavisher of Mandana in his Power,
and he became the Vanquisher of his Rival,
who endeavour'd by Violence to possess that di-
vine Princess; this truly generous Hero relin-
quished the Right he had of disposing of his Pri-
soner, and iniicad of sacrificing his Life to his
just and reasonable Vengeance, he gave a Proof
of his admirable Virtue and Clemency by dis-
missing him in Safety, as you have done. How-
ever, added she, I hope you have made him
swear upon your Sword, that he will never
make a second Attempt upon my Liberty. I
perceive, pursued she, seeing Mr. GlanvilU con-
tinued silent, with his Eyes bent on the
Ground, sor indeed he was ashamed to look up;
that you would willingly avoid the Praise due
to the heroic Action you havejust persormed—
Nay, I suppose you are resolved to keep it secret,
is possible; yet I must tell you, that you will
not escape the Glory due to it. Glory is as
necessarily the Result of a virtuous Action, as
Light is an Effect of the Sun which causcth it,
and has no Bependance on any other Cause;
since a virtuous Action continues still the same,
tho' it be done without Testimony; and Glory,
which is, as one may say, born with it, con-
stantly attends it, tho'the Action be not known.
I protest, Niece, said Sir Charles, that's very
prettily said.
Jn my Opinion, Sir, pursued Arabella, if
any thing can weaken the Glory of a good
Action, 'tis the Care a Person takes to make it
known: As if one did not do Good sor the
Sake of Good, but sor the Praise that generally
sollows it. Those then that are govern'd by
so

<page 212>
Chap. 14. QUIXOTE. 201
so interested a Motive, ought to be considered
as sordid rather than generous Persons; who
making a Kind .f Trassick between Virtue and
Glory, barter just so much of the one sor the
other, and expect, like other Merchants, to
make Advantage by the Exchange.
Mr. Glanville, who was charm'd into an Ex-
tacy at this sensible Speech ot Arabella's, sorgot
in an Instant all her Absurdities. He did not
sail to express his Admiration of her Under-
standing in Terms that brought a Blush into
her 'air Face, and obliged her to lay her Com-
mands upon him to cease his excessive Com-
mendations. Then making a Sign to them to
leave her alone, Mr.Glanville, who understood
her, took his Father and Sister down Stairs,
leaving Arabella with her saithsul Lucy, whom
she immediately commanded to give her a Re-
lation of what had happened to her from the
Timo of her swooning till she recovered.
Chap. XIV.
A Dialogue between Arabella and Lucy,,
in which the latter seems to havt. the
Advantage,
WHY, Madam, said Lucy, all I can tell
your Ladyship is, that we were all
excessively frighted, to be sure, when you saint-
ed, especially myself; and that we did what
we could to recover you— And so accordingly
your Ladyship did recover.
K s What's

<page 213>
202 The F E M A L E Book VII.
What's this to the Purpose? said Arabella*
perceiving she stop'd here. I know that I saint-
ed, and 'tis also very plain that I recover'd
again—I ask you what happened to me in the
intermediate Time between my Fainting and
Recovery. Give me a saithsul Relation of all
the Accidents, to which by my Fainting I am
quite a Stranger; and which no doubt, are very
considerable
Indeed, Madam, replied Lucy, I have given
your Ladyship a faithsul Relation of all 1 can
remember.
When, resum'd Arabella surpriz'd?
This Moment, Madam, said Lucy.
Why, sure thou dream's!, Wench, replied
she, Hast thou told me how I was sciz'd and
carry'd off! How I was rescued again? And—
No, indeed, Madam, interrupted Lucy, I
don't dreams I never told your Ladyship that
you was carry'd osE
Well, said Arabella, and why dost thou not
satisfy my Curiosity? Is it not fit T should be
acquainted with such, a momentous Part of my
History?
I can't, indeed, and please your Ladyship,
said Lucy.
What, ean'st thou not? said Arabella, en-
rag'd at her Stupidity.
Why, Madam, said Lucy, sobbing, I can't
make a History of nothing.
Of nothing, Wench, resumed Arabella, in
a greater Rage than before: Dost thou call an
Adventure to which thou was a Witness, and
borest haply so great a Share in, nothing?—An
Adventure which hereafter will make a consi-
derable

<page 214>
Chap. 14. QUIXOTE. 203
derable Figure in the Relation of my Life, dost
thou look upon as trifling and of no Conse-
quence?
No, indeed I don't, Madam, said Lucy.
Why then, pursued Arabella, dost thou wil-
sully neglect to relate it? Suppose, as there is
nothing more likely, thou wert commanded by
some Persons of considerable Quality, or haply
some great Princes and Princesses, to recount
the Adventures of my Life,would'st thou omit
a Circumstance of so much Moment?
No indeed, Madam, said Lucy.
I am glad to hear thou art so discreet", said
Arabella; and pray do me the Favour to relate
this Adventure to me, as thou would'st do to
those Princes and Princefles, if thou wert com-
manded..
Here, Arabella making a sull Stop, fixed her
Eyes upon her Woman, expecting every Mo-
ment she would begin the desired Narrative—
But sinding she continued silent longer than she
thought was necessary for recalling the several.
Circumstances, of the Story into her Mind,
I sind, said she, it will be necessary to cau-
tion you against making your Audience wait too
long sor your Relation; it looks as if you was
to make a studied Speech, not a simple Relation
of Facts, which ought to be free from all Af-
fectation of Labour and Art; and be told with
that gracesul Negligence which is so becoming
to Truth.
This I thought proper to tell you, added she,
that you may not sall into that Mistake when you
are called upon to relate my Adventures ——
Well, now if you please to begirt. .
K 6. What,

<page 215>
204 she F E M A L E Book VII.
What, pray, Madam, said Lucy?
What, repeated Arabella? Why, the Ad-
ventures which happened to me so lately. Re-
late to me every Circumstance of my being
carried away, and how my Deliverance was ef-
fected by my Cousin.
Indeed, Madam, said Lucy, I know nothing
about your Ladvship's being carried away.
Begone, cried Arabella, losing all Patience at
her Obstinacy, get out of my Presence this
Moment. Wretch, unworthy of my Consi-
dence and Favour, thy Treason is too manifest,
thou art brib'd by that presumptuous Man to
conceal all the Circumstances of his Attempt
from my Knowledge, to the End that I may
not have a sull Conviction of his Guilt.
Lucy, who never saw her Lady so much of-
fended before, and knew not the Occasion of
it, burst into Tears; which so affected the
tender Heart of Arabella, that losing insensibly
all her Anger, she told her with a Voice soft-
en'd to a Tone of the utmost Sweetness and
Condescension, that provided she would con-
fess how far she had been prevail'd upon by his
rich Presents, to sorget her Duty, she would
pardon and receive her again into Favour—
Speak,addcd she, and be not afraid, after this
Promise, to let me know what Mr. Tinjel re-
quir'd of thee, and what were the Gifts with
which he purchas'd thy Services; doubtless, he
presented thee with Jewels of a considerable
Value
Since your Ladyship, said Lucy sobbing, has
promis'd not to be angry, I don't care if I do
tell

<page 216>
Chip. 14. QUIXOTE. 20$
tel] your Ladyship what he gave me. He gave
me this Half Guinea, Madam, indeed he did;
but sor all that, when he would come into
your Chamber, I struggled with him, and cry'd
out, sor fear he should carry your Ladyship
away
Arabella, lost in Astonishment and Shame at
hearing of so inconsiderable a Present made to
her Woman, the like of which not one of her
Romances could furnish her, order'd her im-
mediately to withdraw, not being willing she
should observe the Consusion this strange Bribe
had given her.
After she had been gone some Time, sheen-
deavour'd to compose her Look5, and went
down to the Dining-Room, where Sir Charles
and his Son and Daughter had been engag'd in
a Conversation concerning her, the Particulars
of which may be sound in the first Chapter of
the next Book.
The End of the Seventh BOOK.

THE

<page 217>
[ 206 ]

THE
Female Qjj ixot e;
BO OK VIIL
Chap. I.
Contains the Conversation refer'd to in:
the last Chapter of the preceding Booh
I S S G/anvllle, who with a mali-
cious Pleasure had secretly tri-
umph'd in the Extravagances her
beautisul Cousin had been guilty
of, was now sensibly disappointed
to sind they had had so little Esfect on her Father
and Brother; sor instead of reflecting upon the
Absurdities to which they had been a Witness,.
Mr. Glanville artsully pursu'd the Subject Ara b$l-
la had just besore been expatiating upon, taking'
notice frequently of some Observations of hers,.
3 and


<page 218>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. 207
and by a well contriv'd Repetition of herWords,
oblig'd his Father a second Time to declare that
his Niece had spoken extremely well.
Mr. GlanvilU taking theWord, launch'd out
into such Praises of her Wit, that Miss Glan-
vilU, no longer able to listen patiently, reply'd,
'Twas true Lady Bella sometimes said very
sensible Things ; that 'twas a great Pity she was
not always in a reasonable Way of thinking,
or that her Intervals were not longer— -
Her Intervals, Miss, said GlanviiUy pray
what do you mean by that Expression ?—
Why, pray, said Miss GlanvilU, don't you
think my Cousin is sometimes a little wrong in
the Head?
Mr. GlanvilU at these Words starting from
his Chair, took a Turn a-cross the Room in
great Discomposure, then stopping all of a sud-
den, and giving his Sister a surious Look
Charlotte, said he, don't give me Cause to think
you are envious of your Cousin's superior Ex-
cellencies ■———
Envious! repeated Miss GlanvilU, I envious
of my Cousin — I vow I should never have
thought of that— Indeed, Brother, you are
much mistaken; my Cousin's superior Excel-
lencies never gave me a Moment's Disturbance—
Tho' I must confess her unaccountable Whims
have often excited my Pity—
No more of this, Charlotte, interrupted
Mr. GlanvilU, as you value my Friendship —
No more of it——
Why, really Son, said Sir Charles, my Niece
has very strange Whimsies sometimes. How
it came into her Head to think Mr. Tinsel would
attempt

<page 219>
2o8 The FEMALE Book VIII.
attempt to carry her away, I can't imagine?
Far after all, he onlv prest rather too rudely
into her Chamber, sor which, as you fee, I
have sorbidden his Visits.
That was of a Piece, said Miss Glanv'ille
sneeringly to her Brotner, with her asking you
if you had made Mr. Tinsel swear upon vour
Sword, that he would never again attempt to
carry her away; and applaudinj; you sor having
given him his Liberty, as thegenerous Atermens
did on the same Occasion.
I Would advise you, Charlotte, said Mr. Glan-
v'ille, not to aim at repeating your Cousin's
Words, till you know how to pronounce them
A operly,
Oh! that's one of her superior Excellencies,
said Miss Glanville. .
Indeed, Miss, said Glanville very provoking-
ly, she is superior to you in many Things ; and
as much so in the Goodness of her Heart, as
in the Beauty of her Person
Come, cqme, Charles, said the Baronet,
who observ'd his Daughter sat swelling and bi-
ting her Lip at this Reproach, personal Reflects
ons are better avoided. Your Sister is very
well, and not to be disparag'd; tho, to be sure,
Lady Bella is the sinest Woman I ever saw in
my Life.
Miss Glanville,v/ns if possible, more disgusted
at her Father's Palliation than her Brother's Re-
proaches ; and, in order to give a Loose to her
Passion, accys'd Mr Glanville of a Decrease in
his Affection sor her, since he had been in Love
with her Cousin; and having found this Excuse
sor her Tears, very freely gave vent to them—

<page 220>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 209
Mr. Glanville being softned by this Sight, sa-
crisiced a few Compliments to her Vanity,
which soon restor'd her to herusual Tranquillity;
then turning the Discourse on his beloved Ara-
bella, pronounc'd a Panegyrick on her Virtues
and Accomplishments of an Hour long-; which,
if it did not absolutely persuade his Sister to
change her Opinion, it certairily"convinc'd his
Father, that his Niece was not only perfectly
well in her Understanding, but even better than
most others of her Sex.
Mr. Glanvtlle had just sinish'd her Eulogium,
when Arabella appear'd; Joy danc'd in his
Eyes at her Approach; hegaz'd upon her with
a Kind of conscious Triumph in his Looks;
her consummate Loveliness justifying his Pas-
sion, and being in his Opinion, more than an
Excuse sor all her Extravagancies.
Chap. N.
In which our Heroine, as we presume,
/hews herself in two very different
Lights.
ARABELLA, who at her Entrance had
perceiv'd some Traces of Uneasiness upon
Miss Glanville'$ Countenance, tenderly ask'dher
the Cause; to which that young Lady answer-
ing in a cold and reserv'd Manner. Mr. GIanr
ville, to divert her Reslexions on it, very freely
accus'd himsels of having given his Sister some
Offence. To be sure, Brother, said Miss Glan-
ville,

<page 221>
2io the FE MA LE BookVIIs.
ville, you are very vehement in your Temper,
and are as violently carry'd away about Things
of little Importance as of the greatest; and then,
whatever you have a Fancy sor, you love so
obstinately.
I am oblig'd to you, Miss, interrupted
Mr. Glanville, sor endeavouring to give Lady
Bella so unsavourable an Opinion of me——
I assure you, said Arahella^ Miss Glanville has
said nothing to your Disadvantage: For, in my
Opinion, the Temperament of great Minds
ought to be such as she represents yours to be.
For there is nothing at so great a Distance from
true and heroick Virtue, as that Indifference
which obliges some People to be pleas'd with all
Things or nothing: Whence it comes to pass,
that they neither entertain great Desires of Glo-
ry, nor Fear of Insamy; that they neither love
nor hate; that they are wholly insluenc'd by
Custom, and are sensible only of the Afflictions
of the Body, their Minds being in a Manner
insensible
To say the Truth, I am inclin'd to conceive
a greater Hope of a Man, who in the Begin-
ning of his Life is hurry'd away by some evil
Habit, than one that sastens on nothing: The
Mind that cannot be brought to detest Vice,
will never be persuaded to loveVirtue; but one
who is capable of loving or hating irreconcile-
ably, by having, when young, his Passions di-
rected to proper Object?, will remain fix'd in
his Choice of what is good. But with him who
is incapable of any violent Attraction, and
whose Heart is chilled by a general Indiffer-
ence, Precept or Example will have no Force—
And

<page 222>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 211
And Philosophy itself, which boasts it hath Re-
medies sor all Indispositions of the Soul, never
had any that can cure an indifferent Mind-—
Nay, added she, I am persuaded that Indiffe-
rence is generally the inseparable Companion of
a weak and imperfect Judgment. For it is so
natural to a Person to be carry'd towards that
which he believes to be good, that if indifferent
People were able to judge of things, they would
sasten on something. But certain it is, that this
Lukewarmness of Soul, which fends sorth but
feeble Desires, fends also but feeble Lights; so
that those who are guilty of it, not knowing
any thing clearly, cannot sasten on any thing
with Perseverance.
Mr. Glanville, when Arabella had sinish'd
this Speech, cast a triumphing Glance at his
Sister, who had affected great Inattention all
the while she had been speaking. Sir Charles,
in his Way, express'd much Admiration of her
Wit, telling her, if she had been a Man, she
would have made a great Figure in Parliament,
and that her Speeches might have come perhaps
to be printed in time.
This Compliment, odd as it was, gave great
Joy to Glanville, when the Conversation was
interrupted by the Arrival of Mr. Selvin, who
had flipt away unobscrv'd at the Time that
Arabella's Indisposition had alarm'd them, and
now came to enquire after heilsHealth ; and also
if an Opportunity offer'd to set her right with
Regard to the Suspicions she had entertain'd of
his designing to pay his Addresses to her.
Arabella, as soon as he had sent in his Name,
appear'd to be in great Disturbance; and upon
his

<page 223>
2i2 7foFEMALE Book VIII.
his Entrance, offer'd immediately to withdraw,
telling Mr. Glanville, who would have detain'd
her, that she sound no Place was likely to se-
cure her from the Persecutions of that Gen-
tleman.
Glanville star'd, and look'd strangely per-
plex'd at this Speech ; Miss Glanville smil'd,
and poor Selvin, with a very silly Look—hem'd
two or three times, and then with a faultring
Accent said, M dam, I am very much con-
cern' d to sind your Ladyship resolv'd to per-
sist in
Sir, interrupted Arabella, my Resolutions
are unalterable. I told you so besore, and am
surpriz'd, aster the Knowledge of my Inten-
tions, you presume to appear in my Presence
again, from whence I had so positively banish'd
you. - -
Pray, Niece, said Sir Charles, what has
Mr. Selvin done to disoblige you?
Sir, reply'd Arabella, Mr. Selvin's Offence
can admit of no other Reparation than that
which I requir'd of him, which was a volun-
tary Banishment from my Presence: And in
this, puisu'd she, I am guilty of no more Seve-
rity to you, than the Princess Udojia was to the
unsortunate Thrastmedes. For the Passion of
this Prince having come to her Knowledge,
notwithstanding the Pains he took to conceal it,
this sair and wife Princess thought it not enough
to sorbid his speaking to her, but also banish'd
him from her Presence; laying a peremptory
Command upon him, never to appear besore
her again till he was perfectly cur'd of that un-
happy Love he had entertain'd sor her—Imitate
there-

<page 224>
Chap. 2. Q/U I XO TE. 213
theresore the meritorious Obedience of this poor
Prince, and if that Passion you profess sor me-
llow, Sir, interrupted Sir.CharUs, Do you
make Love to my Niece then ?—
. Sir, replied Mr. Selvin, who was strangely
-consounded at Arabellas Speech, tho' I really
admire the Perfections this Lady is posTess'd or,
yet I.assure you, upon my Honour, 1 never had
a-Thought of making any Addresses to her;
and I can't imagine why her Ladyship persists
in accusing me of such Presumption.
So sormal a Denial, after what Arabella had
said,- extremely perplex'd Sir Charles, and sill'd
Mr. Glamrille with inconceivable Shame—
Miss Glanville enjoy'd their Disturbance, and
sull of an ill-natur'd Triumph, endeavour'd to
look Arabella into Consusion: But that Lady
not being at all discompos'd by this Declaration
of Mr. Selvin's, having accounted sor. it al-
ready, replied with great Calmness,
Sir, 'Tis easy to see thro' the Artifice ofyour \
disclaiming any Passion sor me—Upon any other
Occasion questionless, you would rather sacri-
fice your Life, than consent to disavow these
Sentiments, which unhappily sor your Peace
you have entertain'd. At present the Desire of
continuing near me, obliges you to lay this
Constraint upon yourself; however you know
Tbra/imedes fell upon the same Stratagem to no
Purpose. The rigid Udojia saw thro' the Dis-
guise, and would not dispense with herself from
banishing him from Rome, as I do you from
, Madam! interrupted Selvin amaz'd—

Yes,

<page 225>
2i4 ^FEMALE Book VIII.
Yes, Sir, replied Arabella hastily, nothing
less can satisfy what I owe to the Consideration
ef my own Glory.
Upon my Word, Madam, said Selvin, half
angry, and yet strongly inclin'd to laugh, I
don't see the Necessity of my quitting my na-
tive Country, to satisfy what you owe to the
Consideration of your own Glory. Pray, how
does my staying in England affect your Lady-
ship's Glory?
To answer your Question with another, said
Arabella, Pray how did the Stay of Thra/tmedet
in Rome, affect the Glory of the Empress
Udosia?
Mr. Selvin was struck dumb with this Speech,
sor he was not willing to be thought so deficient
in the Knowledge of History, as not to be ac-
quainted with the Reasons why Thrafimedes
should not stay in Rome.
His Silence theresore seeming to Arabella to
be a tacit Confession of the Justice of her Com-
mands, a Sentiment of Compassion sor this un-
sortunate Lover, intruded itself into her Mind;
and turning her bright Eyes, sull of a soft Com-
placency upon Selvin, who star'd at her as is he
had lost his Wits—
I will not, said she, wrong the Sublimity of
your Passion for me so much, as to doubt your
being ready to sacrifice the Repose of your own
Life to the Satissaction of mine: Nor -will I
do so much Injustice to your Generosity, as to
suppose the Glory of obeying my Commands,
will not in some Measure soften the Rigour of
your Destiny—I know not whether it may be
lawsul for me to tell you, that your Missortune
does

<page 226>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 215
does really cause me some Affliction; but I am
willing to give you this Consolation, and also
to assure you, that to whatever Part of the
World your Despair will carry you, the good
Withes and Compassion of Arabella shall sollow
you——
Having said this, with one of her sair Hands
she cover'd her Face, to hide the Blushes which
so compassionate a Speech had caus'd—Holding
the other extended with a careless Air, sup-
posing he would kneel to kiss it, and bathe it
with his Tears, as was the Custom on such me-
lancholy Occasions, her Head at the same Time
turned another Way, as if reluctantly and
with Consusion she granted this Favour.—.
But after standing a Moment in this Posture,
and sinding her Hand untouch'd, she concluded
Grief had depriv'd him of his Senses, and that
he would shortly sall into a Swoon as Thrafime-
des did: And to prevent being a Witness of so
dolesul a Sight, she hurry'd out of the Room
without once turning^bout, and having reach'd
her own Apartment, sunk into a Chair, not a
little affected with the deplorable Condition in
which she had left her suppos'd miserable Lover.
Chap. III.
The Contrast continued.
TH E Company she had left behind her be-
ing all, except Mr. Glanville, to the last
Degree surpriz'd at her strange Words and
Actions,

<page 227>
216 1U F E M A L E Book VIII.
Actions, continued mute sor several Minutes
after she was gone, staring upon one another,
as if each wish'd to know the other's Opinion
of such an unaccountable Behaviour. At last
Miss Glanville, who observed her Brother's Back
was towards her, told Mr. Selvin in a low
Voice, that she hop'd he would call and take
his Leave of them besore he set out for the
Place where his Despair would carry him.—
Mr. Selvin, in spite of his natural Gravity,
could not sorbear laughing at this Speech of
Miss Glanville's, which shock'd her Brother,
and not being able to stay where Arabella was
ridicul'd, norin;itled to resent it, which would
have been a manifest Injustice on that Occasion,
he retir'd to his own Apartment to give vent to
that Spleen which in those Moments made him
out of Humour with all the World.
Sir Charles, when he was gone, indulg'd
himself in a little Mirth on his Niece's Extra-
vagance, protesting he did not know what to do
with her. Upon which Miss Glannille obferv'd,
that it was a Pity there were not such Things
as Protestant Nunneries; giving it as her Opi-
nion, that her Cousin ought to be consin'd in
one of those Places, and never suffer'd to see
any Company, by which Means.stie would avoid
exposing herself in the Manner she did now.
Mr. Selvin, who possibly thought this a rea-
sonable Scheme of Miss Glanville's, feem'd by
his Silence to assent to her Opinion; but Sir
Charles was greatly displeas'd with his Daughter
sor expressing herself so freely; alledging that
Arabilla, when she was out of those Whims,
was a very sensible young Lady, and sometimes
4 " tal k'd

<page 228>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 217
talk'd as learnedly as a Divine. To which
Mr. Selvin also added, that she had a great
Knowledge of History, and had a most sur-
prizing Memory; and after some more Dis-
course to the same Purpose, he took his Leave,
earnestly entreating Sir Charles to believe that
he never entertain'd any Design of making hit
Addresses to Lady Bella.
In the mean Time, that Lady after having
given near half an Hour to those Reflexions
which occur to Heroines in the same Situation
with herself, call'd sor Lucy, and order'd her
to go to the Dining-Room, and see in what
Condition Mr. Selvin was, telling her she had
certainly left him in a Swoon, as also the Oc-
casion of it; and bid her give him all the Con-
solation in her Power.
Lucy, with Tears in her Eyes at this Recital,
went down as she was order'd, and entering the
Room without any Ceremony, her Thoughts
being wholly fix'd on the melancholy Circum-
stance her Lady had been telling her; she look'd
eagerly round the Room without speaking a
Word, till Sir Charles and Miss Glanville, who
thought Ihe had been sent with some Message
from Arabella, ask'd her both at the same In-
stant, What she wanted?
I came, Sir, said Lucy, repeating her Lady's
Words, to fee in what Condition Mr. Selvin is
in, .and to give him all the Solation in my
Power.
Sir Charles, laughing heartily at this Speech,
ask'd her what she could do sor Mr. Selvin?
To which (he reply'd, she did not know; but
Vol. II. L her

<page 229>
2i3 The FEMALE Book VHL
iier Lady had told her to give him all the Sola-
tion in her Power.
Consolation thou would'st say, I suppose, said
Sir Charles.
Yes, Sir, said Lftfycurtesying. Well, ChiU,
added he, go up and tell your Lady, Mr. Selvin
docs not need any Consolation.
Lucy accordingly return'd with this Message,
and was met at the Chamber-Door by Arabella,
-who hastily asked her if Mr. Selvin was reco-
vers from his Swoon: To which Lucy reply'd
that stie did not know; but that Sir Charles
bid her tell her Ladyship, Mr. Selvin did not
need any Consolation.
Oh Heavens' cry''d Arabella, throwing her-
self into a Chair as pale as Death—He is dead,
he has sallen upon his Sword, and put an End
to his Life and Miseries at once—Oh ! how un-
happy am I, cry'd she, bursting into Tears, to
be the Cause of so cruel an Accident — Was
<;ver any Fate so terrible as mine — Was ever
Beauty so satal—Was ever Rigour so unsortu-
nate—How will the Quiet of my suture Days
be disturbed by the sad Remembrance of a Man
whose Death was caused by my Disdain — But
why, resum'd she after a little Pause—Why do
I thus afflict myself sor what has happened by an
unavoidable Necessity? Nor am 1 singular in
the Missortune which has besallen me—Did not
the sad Perintbus die sor the beautisul Panthea--
Did not the Rigour of Barstna bring the mise-
rable Oxyatres to the Grave—And the Severity
of Statira make Oroondates sall upon his Sword
in her Presence, tho' happily he escap'd being
kill'd by it—Let us then not afflict ourselves
unreasonably

<page 230>
Chap. 3; QUIXOTE. 219
unreasonably at this sad Accident — Let us la-
ment as we ought the satal Esfects of our
Charms—But let us comsort ourselves with the
Thcught that we have only acted consormable
to our Duty.
Arabella having pronounc'd these last Words
with a solemn and lofty Accent, order'd Lucy,
who listen'd to her with Eyes drown'dinTears,
to go down and ask if the Body was remov'd—
sor added she, all my Constancy will not be
sussicient to support me against that pitisul
Sight.
Lacy accordingly deliver'd her Message to
Sir Charles and Miss Glanville, who were still
together, discoursing on the santastical Turn of
Arabella, when the Knight, who could not
possibly comprehend what she meant by asking
if the Body was removed, bid her tell her Lady
he desired to speak with her.
Arabella, upon receiving this Summons, set
herself to consider what could be the Intent of
it. If Mr. Selvin be dead, said she, what Good
can my Presence do among them? S;>rely it
cannot be to upbraid me with my Severity, that
my Uncle desires to fee me—No, it would be
unjust: to suppose it. Questionless my unhappy
Lover is still struggling with the Pangs of Death,
and sor a Consolation in his last Moments, im-
plores the Favour of resigning up his Life in my
Sight. Pausing a little at these Words, she rose
from her Seat with a Resolution to give the un-
happy Selvin her Pardon besore hedy'd. Meet-
ing Mr. Glanville as he was returning from his
Chamber to the Dining-Room, she told him,
she hop'd the Charity she was going to discover
L 2 towards

<page 231>
2*> The FEMALE Book VIII.
towards his Rival, would not give him any
Uneasiness; and preventing his Reply by going
hastily into the Room, he sollow'd her dreading
some new Extravagance, yet not able to prevent
it, endeavour'd to conceal his Confusion from
her Observation — Arabella, after breathing a
gentle Sigh, told Sir Charles, that she was come
to grant Mr. Selvin her Pardon sor the Offence
he had been guilty of, that he might depart in
Peace.
Well, well, said Sir Charles, he is departed in.
Peace without it.
How, Sir, interrupted Arabella, is he dead
then already? Alas! Why had he not the Satis-
faction of seeing me besore he expir'd, that his
Soul might have departed in Peace ? He would
Jhave been assur'd not only of my Pardon, but
Pity also; and that Assurance would have made
him happy in his last Moments.
Why, Niece, interrupted Sir Charles staring,
you surprize me prodigioufly: Are you in
earnest?
Questionless I am, Sir, said she, noroughtyou
to be surpriz'd at the Concern I express sor the
Fate of thisunhappy Man, nor at the Pardon I
propos'd to have granted him ; since herein I
am justified by the Example of many great and
virtuous Princesses, who have done as much,
nay, haply more than I intended to have done,
sor Perlons whose Offences were greater than
Mr. Selvin's.
I am very sorry, Madam, said Sir Charles,
to hear you talk in this Manner: 'Tis really
enough to make one suspect you are
You

<page 232>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 221'
You do me great Injustice, Sir, interrupted
Arabella, if you suspect me to be guilty of any
unbecoming Weakness sor this Man: if barely
expressing my Compassion sor his Missortunes
be esteem'd so great a Favour, what would you>
have thought if I had supported his Head on my
Knees while he was dying, shed Tears over
him, and discover'd all the Tokens of a sincere
Affliction sor him?
Good God ! said Sir Charles, lifting up his'
Eyes, Did any body ever hear of any thing like
this?
What, Sir, said Arabella, with as great ani
Appearance of Surprize in her Countenance as
his had discover'd, Do you say you never heard
of any thing like this? Then you never .heard'
of the Princess of Media, I suppose
No, not I,Madam, said Sir Charles peevishly.
Then, Sir, resum'd Arabella, permit me to
tell you, that this sair and virtuous Princess
condescended to do all I have mention'd sor the
fierce Labynet, Prince of Assyria ; who tho' he
had mortally offended her by stealing her away
out of the Court of the King her Father, ne-
vertheless, when he was wounded to Death in
her Presence, and humbly implor'd her Pardon
besore he died, she condescended as I have said,
to support him on her Knees, and shed Tears
sor his Disaster — I could produce many more
Instances of the like Compassion in Ladies al-
most as highly born as herself, tho' perhaps their'
Quality was not quite so illustrious, (he being
the Heiress of two powersul Kingdoms. Yet
to mention only these
L 3 Good

<page 233>
222 The FEMALE Book VW.
Good Heavens! cry'd Mr. Glanville here,
being quite out of Patience, I shall go di-
stracted——
Æobella surpriz'd at this Exclamation, look'd
earnestly at him sor a Moment—and then ask'd
htm, Whether any thing fiie had said had given
him Uneasiness?
Yes, upon my Soul, Madam, said Glanville,
so vex'd and consus'd that he hardly knew what
he said
1 am sorry for it, reply'd Arabella gravely.,,
and also am greatly concern'd to sind that in.
Generosity yon are so much exceeded by the il-
lustrious Cyrm; who was so sar from taking
Umbrage at Mandana's Behaviour to the dying
Prince, that be commended her sor the Com-
passion she had shewn him. So also did the
brave and generous- Oroondattsy when the sair
Statira ->".t< .«"
By Heavens! cry'd Glanville rising in a Pas-
sion, there's no hearing this. Pardon me,
Madam, fan upon my Soul, you'll make me
hang myself.
Hang yourself, repeated Arabella, sure you
know not what you say? You meant, I sup-
pose, that you'll sail upon your Sword. What
Hero' ever threatned to give himself so vulgar
a Death? But pray let me know the Cause of
your Despair, so sudden and so violent.
Mr. Glanville continuing in a Sort of sullen
Silence, Arabella raising her Voice went on:
Tho' I do not conceive myself oblig'd to give
you an Account of my Conduct, seeing that I
have only permitted you yet to hope sor my
Favour; yet I owe to myself and my own
Honour

<page 234>
Chap. 3. QUIXOT E. 223
Honour the Justification I am going to make.
Know then, that however suspicious my Com-
passion sor Mr. Selvin may appear to your mi-
staken Judgment, yet it has its Foundation
only in the Generosity of my Disposition, which
inclines me to pardon the Fault when the un-
happy Criminal repents; and to afsord him my
Pity when his Circumstances require it. Let
not theresore the Charity I have difeover'd to-
wards your Rival, b; the Cause of your De-
spair, since my Sentiments sor him, were he
living, would be what they were besore; that
is, full of Indifference, nay, haply Disdain.
And suffer not yourself to be so carried away
by a violent and unjust Jealousy, as to threaten
your own Death, which if you really had any
Ground sor your Suspicions, and truly lov'd me,
would come unsought sor, tho' not undesir'd—
For indeed, was your Despairreasonable, Death
would necessarily sollow it; for what Lover can
Jive under so desperate a Misfortune. In that
Cafe you may meet Death undauntedly when
it comes, nay, embrace it with Joy; but tru'y
the killing one's sels is but a salse Picture of true
Courage, proceeding rather from Fear of a sur-
ther Evil, than Contempt of that you sly to:
For if it were a Contempt of Pain, the same
Principle would make you resolve to bear pa-
tiently and fearlesly all Kinds of Pains; and
Hope being of all other the most contraryThing.
to Fear, this being an utter Banishment of Hope,
seems to have its Ground in Fear.
Chap,

<page 235>
224. The FEMALE Book VIII.
C H a p. IV.
In which Mr. Glanville makes an unsuc-
cessful Attempt upon Arabella.
KRABELLA, when she had sinish'd these
Words, which banish'd in part Mr. Glan-
ville'^ Consusion, went to her own Apartment,
sollow'd by Miss Glanville, to whom she had
made a Sign sor that Purpose; and throwing
herself into a Chair, burls into Tears, which
greatly surprizing Miss Glanville, she prest her
to tell her the Cause.
Alas ! reply'd Arabella, have I not Cause to
think myself extremely unhappy ? The deplo-
rable^ Death of Mr. Selvin, the Despair to which
I see your Brother redue'd, with the satal Con-
sequences which may attend it, sills me with a
mortal Uneasiness.
Well, said Miss Glanville, your Ladyship
may make yourself quite easy as to both these
Matters; sor Mr. Selvin is not dead, nor is my
Brother in Despair that 1 know of.
What do you say, Miss, interrupted Arabella,
is not Mr. Selvin dead ? Was the Wound he
gave himself not mortal then?
I know of no Wound that he gave himself,
not I, said Miss Glanville; what makes your
Ladyship suppose he gave himself a Wound?
Lord bless me, what strange Thoughts come
into your Head.
Truly I am rejoie'd to hear it, reply'd Ara-
bella; and in order to prevent the Effects of his
Despair, I'll instantly dispatch my Commands
to him to liv,e.

I

<page 236>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 225.
I dare answer sor his Obedience, Madam,
laid Miss Glanville smiling.
Arabella then gave Orders sor Paper and Pens
to be brought her, and seeing Mr. Glanville en-
ter the Room, very sormally acquainted him
with her Intention, telling him, that he ought
to be satisfy'd with the Banishment to whxh
she had doom'd his unhappy Rival, and not re-
quire his Death, since he had nothing to fear
horn his Pretensions.
I assure you, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, I
am petfectly easy upon that Account: And in
order to spare you the Trouble of sending to
Mr. Selvin, I may venture to assure you that he
is in no Danger of dying.
'Tis impossible, Sir, reply'd Arabella, ac->
cord;ng to the Nature of Things, 'tis impossi-
ble but he must already be very near Death
You know the Rigour of my Sentence, you
know
I know, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, that:
Mr. Selvin does not think himself under a Ne-
cessity of obeying your Sentence; and has the-
Impudence to question your Authority sor ba-
nishing him from his native Country.
My Authority, Sir, said Arabella strangely
surpriz'd, is sounded upon the absolute Power
he has given me over him.
He denies that, Madam, said Glanville, and
says that he neither can give, nor you exercise
an absolute Power over, him; since you are
both accountable to the King, whose Subjects
you are, and both restrain'd by the Laws un-
der whose Sanction you live.-
L j; AiabeWi

<page 237>
ilh TfefEMALE BookVIII.
Arabella's apparent Consusion at theseWor d
giving Mr. Glanville Hopes that he had sallen
upon a proper Method to cure her of some of
h:r strange Notions, he was going to pursue his
Arguments, when Arabella looking a little
fle-nlv upon him,
The Empire of Love, CiJ she, like the Em-
pire of Honour, is sovern'd by Laws of its
own, which have no Dependence upon, or Re -
lation to any other.
Pardon me, Madam, said Glanville, if I pre-
sume to differ from you. Our Laws have fix'd
t ie Boundaries of Honour as well as those cf
Love.
How is that possible, reply'd Arabella, when
they differ so widely, that a Mart may be justi-
fy'd by the one, and yet condemn'd by the
other? For Instance, pursued she, you are not
permitted by the Laws of the Land to take
away the Life of any Person whatever; )et the
Laws of Honour oblige you to hunt your Ene-
my thro' the World, in order to sacrifice him
so your Vengeance. Since it is impossible then
sor the same Actions to be at once just and un-
just, it must neceflaiily follow,.that the La\fr
which condemns is, and that which justifies it
is not the same, but directly opposite—And
now, added she, after a little Pause, I hope I
have entirely clear'd up that Point to yeftr.
You have indeed, Madam, reply'd Mr. Glan-
ville, proved to a Demonstration, that what
is called Honour is something distinct from Ju*
stice, since they command Things absolutely
opposite to each other.
Arabella

<page 238>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 227
Arabella without reflecting on this Inference,
went on to prove the independent Sovereignty
of Love, which, said she, may be collected
from all the Words and Actions of those Heroes
who were inspir'd by this Passion. We fee it
in them, pursued she, triumphing not only over
all natural and avow'd Allegiance, but superior
even to Friendship, Duty, and Honour itself.
This the Actions of Oroondates, Artaxerxes,
Spitridates, and many other illustrious Princes
sussiciently testify.
Love requires a more unlimited Obedience
from its Slaves, than any other Monarch can
expect from his Subjects; an Obedience which
is circumscrib'd by no Laws whatever, and de-
pendent upon nothing but itself.
I shall live, Madam, says the renowned
Prince of Scythia to the divine Statira, I shall
live, since it is your Command I should do so;
and Death can have no Power over a Life which
you are pleas'd to take Care of——
Say only that you wish I should conquer,
said the great Juba to the incomparable Cleo-
patra, and my Enemies will be already var-
q:iish'd—Victory will come over to the Side
you savour—and an Army of a hundred thou-
sand Men will not be able to overcome the Man
who has your Commands to conquer—
How mean and insignificant, pursued she,
are the Titles bestow'd on other Monarchs com--
par'd with those which dignify the Sovereigns of
Hearts, such as divine Arbitress of my Fate,
Visible Divinity, Earthly Goddess, and many
others equally sublime—-
L6
Mr.

<page 239>
228 The FEMALE Bock VIII.
Mr. Glanville losing all Patience at her obsti-
nate Folly, interrupted her here with a Question
quite soreign to the Subject she was discussing,
and soon after quitting her Chamber, retir'd to
his own, more than ever despairing of her Re-
covery.
Chap. V.
In which is introduc'd a very singular
CharaEier,
MISS Glanville, whose Envy and Diflike
of her lovely Cousin was heighten'd by
her Su(picions that she disputed with her the
Possession of Sir George's Heart, Ihe having
been long in reality a great Admirer of that gay
Gentleman, was extremely delighted with the
Ridicule her absurd Behaviour had drawn upon
her at Bath, which she sound by Enquiry was
thro' Mr. Tinsel's Representation grown almost
general.
In order theresore to be at Liberty to go to the
Publick Places un-eclips'd by the superior Beau-
ty of Arabella, she acquainted her Father and
Brother with Part of what she had heard, which
determin'd them to prevent that young Lady's
Appearance in Publick while they staid at Bath;
this being no dissicult Matter to bring about,
since Arabella only went to the Rooms or Pa-
rade in Compliance with the Invitation of her
Cousins.
. Miss


<page 240>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 229
Miss Glanv'dle being by these Means rid os a
Rival too powersul even to contend with, went
with more than usual Gaiety to the Assembly,
where the Extravagancies of Arabella asforded
a perpetual Fund sor Diversion. Her more
than passive Behaviour upon this Occasion, ba -
nishing all Restraint among those she convers'd
with, the Jest circulated very freely at Arabella's
Expence. Nor did Miss Glanville sail to give
new Poignancy to their Sarcasms, by artsully
deploring the bent of her Cousin's Studies, and
enumerating the many Absurdities they had
made her guilty of.
Arabella's, uncommon Beauty had gain'd her
so many Enemies among the Ladies that com-
pos'd this Assembly, that they feem'd to con-
tend with each other who should ridicule her
most. The celebrated Countess of be-
ing then at Bath, approach'd a Circle of these
fair Desamers, and listning a few Moments to
the contemptuous Jests they threw out against
the absent Beauty, declar'd herself in her Fa-
vour ; which in a Moment, such was the Force
of her universally acknowledg'd Merit, and the
Deference always pay'd to her Opinion, silene'd
every pretty Impertinent arou'nd her.
This Lady, who among her own Sex had no
Superior in Wit, Elegance, and Ease, was in-
ferior to very few of the other in Sense, Learn-
ing, and Judgment. Her Skill in Poetry.
Painting, and Mustek, tho' incontestably great,
was number'd among the least of her Accom-
plishments. Her Candour, her Sweetness, her
Modesty and Benevolence, while they fecur'd
her from the Darts of Envy, render'd her fu-
4 perior

<page 241>
230 The FE MA LE Book VIII.
perior to Praise, and made the one as unneces-
sary as the other inesfectual.
She had been a Witness of the Surprize
Arabella's extraordinary Appearance had occa-
sions, and struck with that as well as the un-
common Charms of her Person, had prest near
her with several others of the Company, when
she was discoursing in the Manner we have re-
lated.
A Person of the Countess's nice Discern-
ment could not sail of observing the Wit and
Spirit, which tho' obscur'd, was not abso-
lutely hid under the Absurdity of her No-
tions. And this Discovery adding Esteem to
the Compassion she felt sor the sair Visionary,
fiie resolv'd to rescue her from the ill-natur'd
Raillery of her Sex; praising therefore her
Understanding, and the Beauty of her Person
with a Sweetness and Generosity peculiar to
herself, she accounted in the most delicate
Manner imaginable sor the Singularity of her
Notions, from her Studies, her Retirement, her
Ignorance of the World, and her lively Ima-
gination. And to abate the Keenness of their.
Sarcasms, acknowledg'd, that she herself had,
when very young, been deep read in Roman-
ces; and but sor an early Acquaintance with
the World, and being directed to other Studies,
was likely to have been as much a Heroine as
Lady Bella.
Miss Glanville, tho' she was secretly vex'd at
this Defence of her Cousin, was however under
a Necessity of seeming oblig'd to the Countess
for it : And that Lady expressing a Desire to be
acquainted with Lady Bella, Miss Glanville
respectfully

<page 242>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 231
respectsully offer'd to attend her Cousin to her
Lodgings, which the Countess as respectsully
declln'd, saying, As Lady Bella was a Stranger,
she would make her the first Visit.
Miss Glanville at her Return gave her Bro-
ther an Account of what had happen'd at the
Assembly, and fill'd him with an inconceivable
Joy at the Countess's Intention. He had al-
ways been a zealous Admirer of that Lady's
Character, and flatter'd himself that the Con-
versation of so admirable a Woman would be
of the utmost Use to Arabella.
That very Night he mention'd her to his be-
loved Cousin; and after enumerating all her
sine Qualities, declar'd that she had already con-
ceiv'd a Friendship sor her, and was solicitous of
her Acquaintance.
I think myself extremely sortunate, replied
jfrabella, in that I have (tho' questionless un-
deservedly) acquir'd the Amity of this lovely
Person; and I beg you, pursued she to Miss
Glanville, to tell her, that I long with Impa-
tience to embrace her, and to give her that
Share in my Heart which her transcendent Me-
rit deserves.
Miss Glanville only bow'd her Head in An-
swer to this Request, giving her Brother at the
same Time a significant Leer; who tho' used
to Arabella's Particularities, could not help be-
ing a little consounded at the heroic Speech
she had made.
Chap.

<page 243>
232 The FEMALE Book Via
Chap, VI.
Containing something which at first Sight-
may possibly puzzle the Reader.
TH E Countess was as good as her Word,
and two Days after sent a Card to Ara~
Lella, importing her Design to wait on her that
Afternoon.
Our Heroine expected her with great fmpa^
tience, and the Moment she enter'u the Room
flew tow rJs her with a gracesul Eagerness, and
straining her in her Arms, embrac'd her with
all the Fervour of a long absent Friend.
Sir Charles and Mr. Glanville were equally
embarrass'd at the Familiarity of this Address;
but observing that the Countefe seern'd not to
be surpriz'd at it,, but rather to receive it with
Pleasure,, they were soon compos'd.
You cannot imagine, lovely Stranger, said
Arabella to the Counts si, as soon as they were
seated,, with what Impatience I.have long'd to
behold you, since the Knowledge I have receiv'd
of your rare Qualities, and the Friendship you
have been pleas'd to honour me with—And I
may truly protest to you, that such is my Ad*
miration os your Virtues,, that I would have
gone to the sarthest Part of the World to ren-
der you that which you with so much Genero-
sity have condescended to bestow upon me.
SlrCbarles star'd at this extraordinary Speech,
and not being able to comprehend a Word of
it, was concern'd to think how the Lady to<
whom- it was addiesc'd would understand it.
Mr. Glanville

<page 244>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. 233
Mr. Glanville look'd down, and bit his Nails
in extreme Consusion; but the Countess who
had not sorgot the Language of Romance, re-
turn'd the Compliment in a Strain as heroic as
hers.
The Favour I have receiv'd from For-
tune, said she, in bringing me to the Happiness
of your Acquaintance, charming Arabella, is
so great, that I may rationally expect some ter-
rible Missortune will besall me: Seeing that in
this Life our Pleasures are so constantly succeed-
ed by Pains, that we hardly ever enjoy the one
without suffering the other soon after.
Arabella was quite transported to hear the
Countess express herself in Language so con-
sormable to her own; but Mr. Glanville was
greatly consounded, and began.to suspect she was
diverting herself with his Cousin's Singularities:
And Sir Charles was within a little of thinking
her as much out of the Way as his Niece.
Missortunes, Madam, said Arabella^ are to<»
often the Lot of excellent Persons like yourself.
The sublimest among Mortals both sor Beauty
and Virtue have experienc'dthe Frowns of Fate.
The Sufferings of the divine Staiira or Caffan-
dra, sor she bore both Names, the Persecutions
of the incomparable Cleopatra, the Distresses of
the beautisul Candace, and the Afflictions of the
fair and generous Mandana, are Prooss that the
most illustrious Persons in the World have felt
the Rage of Calamity.
It must be confess'd, said the Countess, that
all those sair Princesses you have nam'd, were
sor a while extremely unsortunate: Yet in the
Catalogue of these lovely and afflicted Persons
you

<page 245>
234 7& FEMALE BookVltt.
you have sorgot one who might with Justice
dispute the Priority os Sufferings with them ail—
I mean the beautisul Elisa, Princels of Partbia.
Pardon me, Madam, reply'd Arabella^ lean-
not be of your Opinion. The Princess of Par-
tbia may indeed justly be rank'd among the
Number of unsortunate Persons, but sue can
by no means dispute the melancho y Precedence
with the divine Ckopatra-^-Y ox in sine, Madam,
what Evils did the Princess of Partbia suffer
which the sair Cleopatra did not likewise en-
dure, and son-re of them haply in a greater De-
gree? Is is///a by the tyrannical Authority of
the King her Father, saw herself upon the Point
of becoming the Wife of a Prince she detested',
was not the beautiful Daughter ol Antony\ by
the moreunjustifiableTvranny of Augustus, likely
to be sorced into the Arms os Tyieriusy a proud
and cruel Prince, who was odious to the whole
World as well as to her? If Elisa was sor some
time in the Power of Pyrates, was not Glee-
patra Captive to an inhuman King, who pre-
sented his Sword to the sair Breast of that di-
vine Princess worthy the Adoration of the
whole Earth? And in sine, if Elisa had the
Grief to fee her dear Anaban imprison'd by the
Order of Augustus, Cleopatra beheld with mor-
tal Agonies, her beloved Coriolanus inclos'd
amidst the Guards of that er.rag'd Prince, and
doom'd to a cruel Death.
'Tis certain, Madam, reply'd the Countess,
that the Missortunes of both these Princesses
were very great, tho' as you have shew'd me
with some Inequality: And when one reflects
upon the dangerous Adventures to which Per-
sons

<page 246>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. 235
sons of their Quality were expos'd in those
Times, one cannot help rejoicing that we live
in an Age in which the Customs, Manners,
Habits, and Inclinations disfer so widely from
theirs, that 'tis impossible such Adventures
should everwhappen.
Such is tft strange Alteration of Things, that
some People I dare say at present, cannot be per-
suaded to believe there ever were Princesses wan-
dering thro' theWorld by Land and Sea in mean
Disguises, carry'daway violently out of their Fa-
ther's Dominions by insolent Ldvers—Some
difcover'd sleeping in Forests, other ship\*reck'd
on desolate Islands, connn'd in Castles, bound
in Chariots, and even struggling amidst the tem-
pestuous Waves of the Sea, into which they
bad cast themselves to avoid the brutal Force of
their Ravish er* Not one of these Things hav-
ing happen'd within the Compass of several'
thousand Years, People unlearir,d! iss Antiquity
would be apt to deem them idle Tales, so im-
probable do they appear at present.
Arabella^ tho' greatly surpriz'd at this Dis-
course, did not think proper to express her
Thoughts of it. She was unwilling to appear
absolutely ignorant of the present Customs of
the World, besore a Lady whose good Opinion
she was ardently desirous of improving. Her
Prepossessions in savour of the Countess made
her receive the new Lights she held out to her
with Respect, tho' not without Doubt and Ir-
resolution. Her Blushes, her Silence, and
down-cast Eyes gave the Countess to understand
Part of her Thoughts; who sor fear of alarm-
ing her too much sor that Time, dr opt the
Subject,

<page 247>
236 The FEMALE Book VIIL
Subject, and turning the Conversation on others
more general, gave Arabella an Opportunity of
mingling in it with that Wit and Vivacity
which was natural to her when Romances
were out of the Question.
Chap. VII. .%
In which, if the Reader has not antici-
pated it, he will find an Explanation
of some seeming Inconsistencies in the
foregoing Chapter.
TH E Countese, charm'd with the Wit
and good Sense of Arabella, could not
conceal her Admiration, but exprest it inTerms-
the most obligingly imaginable: And Arabella^
who was excessively delighted with her, return'd
the Compliments she made her with the most
respectsul Tenderness.
In the midst of these mutual Civilities,
Arabella in the Style of Romance, intreated
the Countess to savour her with the Recital of
her Adventures.
At the Mention of this Request, that Lady
convey'd so much Consusion into her Counte-
nance, that Arabella extremely embarrass'd by
it, tho' she knew not why, thought it neces-
sary to apologize sor the Disturbance she seem'd
to have occasion'd in her.
Pardon me, Madam, reply'd the Countess
recovering herself, if theUncommoness of your
Request made a Moment's Reflexion necessary
to

<page 248>
Ghap. 7. QUIXOTE. 237
to convince me that a young Lady of your
Sense and Delicacy could mean no Offence to
Decorum by making it. The Word Adven-
tures carries in it so sree and licentious a Sound
in the Apprehensions of People at this Period
os Time, that it can hardly with Propriety be
apply'd to those few and natural Incidents which
compose the History of a Woman of Honour;
And when I tell you, pursued she with a Smile,
that I was born and christen'd, had a usesul
and proper Education, receiv'd the Addresses of
my Lord through the Recommendation
of my Parents, and marry'd him with their
Consents and my own Inclination, and that
since we have ltv'd in great Harmony together,
I have told you all the material Passages of my
Life, which upon Enquiry you will find differ
very little from those of other Women of the
same Rank, who have a moderate Share of
Sense, Prudence and Virtue.
Since you have already, Madam, replied
Arabella blushing, excus'd me sor the Liberty
I took with you, it will be unnecessary to tell
you it was grounded upon the Customs of an-
tient Times, when Ladies of the highest Rank
and sublimest Virtue, were often expos'd to a
Variety of cruel Adventures which they im-
parted in Considence to each other, when
Chance brought them together.
Custom, said the Countess smiling,changes the
very Nature of Things, and what was honour-
able a thousand Years ago, mayprobably be look'd
upon as insamous now—A Lady in the heroic
Age you speak of, would not be thought to pos-
sess any great Share of Merit, is the had not
been

<page 249>
238 'The FEMALE Book VIII.
been many times carried away by one or other
of her insolent Lovers: Whereas a Beauty in
this could not pass thro' the Hands of several
disferent Ravishers, without bringing an Impu-
tation on her Chastity.
The same Actions which made a Man a
Hero in those Times, would constitute him a
Murderer in These—And the same Steps which
led him to a Throne Then, would insallibly
conduct him to a Scafsold Now.
But Custom, Madam, said Arabella, cannot
possibly change the Nature of Virtue or Vice:
And since Virtue is the chief Characteristic of
a Hero, a Hero in the last Age will be a Hero
in this—Tho' the Natures of Virtue or Vice
cannot be changed, replied the Countess, yet
they may be mistaken ; and disferent Princi-
ples, Customs, and Education, may probably
change their Names, if not their Natures.
Sure, Madam, said Arabella a little moved,
you do not intend by this Inference to prove
Oroondates, Artaxerxes, jfuba, Artaban, and the
other Heroes of Antiquity, bad Men?
Judging them by the Roles of Christianity,
and our present Notions of Honour, Justice,
and Humanity, they certainly are, replied the
Countess.
Did they not possess all the necessary Quali-
fications of Heroes, Madam, said Arabella, and
each in a superlative Degree ?—Was not their
Valour invincible, their Generosity unbounded,
and theirFidelity inviolable?
It cannot be denied, said the Countess, but
that their Valour was invincible; and many
thousand Men less courageous than themselves,
felt

<page 250>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. 239
felt the satal Esfects of that invincible Valour,
which was perpetually seeking after Occasions
to exert itself. Oroondata gave many extraor-
dinary Prooss of that unbounded Generosity so
natural to the Heroes of his Time. This Prince
being sent by the King his Father, at the Head
of an Army, to oppose the Persian Monarch,
who had unjustly invaded his Dominions, and
was destroying the Lives and Properties of his
Subjects; having taken the Wives and Daugh-
ters of his Enemy Prisoners had by these Means
an Opportunity to put a Period to a War so
destructive to his Country: Yet out of a Ge-
nerosity truly heroic, he releas'd them imme-
diately without any Conditions; and salling in
Love with one of those Princesses, sceredy
quitted his Father's Court, resided several Years
in that of the Enemy of his Father and Coun-
try, engag'd himself to his Daughter, and when
the War broke out again between the two
Kings, sought suriously against an Army in
which the King his Father was in Person, and
shed the Blood of his suture Subjects without
Remorse; tho' each of those Subjects, we are
told, would have sacrifie'd his Life to save that
of their Prince, so much was he belov'd.
Such are the Actions which immortalize the
Heroes of Romance, and are by the Authors
of those Books styi'd glorious, godlike, and di-
vine. Yet judging of them as Christians, we
shall sind them impious and base, and directly*
opposite to our present Notions of moral and re-
lative Duties.
'Tis certain theresore, Madam, added the
Countess with a Smile, that what was Virtue in
those

<page 251>
240 the FEMALE BookVIII.
those Days, is Vice in ours: And to sorm a
Hero according to our Notions of 'em at pre-
sent,'tis necessary to give him (Qualities very dif-
ferent from Oroondates.
The secret Charm in the Countenace, Voice,
and Manner of the Countess, join'd to the
Force of her Reasoning, could not sail of mak-
ing some Impression on the Mind of Arabella;
but it was such an Impression as came sar short
of Conviction. She was surpriz'd, embarr..ss'd,
perplex'd, but not convinc'd. Heroism, roman-
tic Heroism, was deeply rooted in her Heart;
it was her Habit os thinking, a Principle im-
bib'd from Education. She could not separate
her Ideas of Glory, Virtue, Courage, Gene-
rosity, and Honour, from the salse Representa-
tions of them in the Actions of Oroondates,
Juba, Artaxerxes, and the rest of the imaginary
Heroes. The Countess's Discourse had rais'd a
Kind of Tumult in her Thoughts, which gave
an Air of Perplexity to her lovely Face, and
made that Lady apprehensive she had gone too
sar, and lost that Ground in her Esteem, which
she bad endeavour'd to acquire by a Consormity
to some of her Notions and Language. In this
however^ she was mistaken; Arabella felt a
Tenderness sor her that had already the Force of
a long contracted Friendship, and an Esteem
little less than Veneration.
When the Countess took Leave, the Profes-
sions of Arabella, tho' deliver'd in the Language
of Romance, were very sincere and affecting,
and were return'd with an equal Degree of
Tenderness by the Countess, who had conceiv'd
a more than ordinary Affection sor her.
Mr. Glanv'ilU

<page 252>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 241
Mr. Glanville, who could have almost wor-
ship'd the Countess sor the generous Design he
saw she had entertain'd, took an Opportunity
as he handed her to her Chair, to intreat in a
Manner as earnestly as polite, that she would
continue the Happiness of her Acquaintance to
his Cousin; which with a Smile of mingled
Dignity and Sweetness she assur'd him of.
Chap. VIII.
Which concludes Book the Eighth,
MR. Glanville at his Return to the Dining-
Room, sinding Arabella retir'd, told his
Father in an Rapture ofjoy, that the charming
Countess would certainly make a Convert of
Lady Bella.
Methinks, said the Baronet, she has as strange
Whims in her Head as my Niece. Ad's-heart
what a deal of Stuff did she talk about 1 A
Parcel of Herues as she calls them, with con-
founded hard Names—In my Mind she is more
likely to make Lady Bella worse than better.
Mr. Glanville, a little vex'd at his Father's
Mis-apprehension, endeavour'd with as much
Delicacy as he could, to set him right with Re-
gard to the Countess; so that he brought him
at last to confess she manag'd the Thing very
The Countess, who had rcsolv'd to take
Arabella openly into her Protection, was think-
ing oa Means to engage her to appear at the
well.

Assembly,

<page 253>
242 72* FEMALE Book VIII.
Assembly, whither sbe propos'd to accompany
her in a modern Dress. But her good Inten-
ons towards our lovtly Heroine were suspended
by the Account she receiv'd of her Mother's
Indisposition, which commanded her immedi-
ate Attendance on her at her Seat in
Her sudden Departure gave Arabella an ex-
treme Uneasiness, and proved a cruel Disap-
pointment to Mr. Glanville, who had sounded
all his Hopes ol' her Recovery on the Conver-
sation of that Lady.
Sir Charles having Affairs that requir'd his
Presence in London, propos'd to his Niece the
leaving Bath in a few Days, to which she con-
sented; and accordingly they set out tor Lon-
don in Arabella's Coach and Six, attended by
several Servants on Horseback, her Women
having been sent away besore in the Stage.
Nothing very remarkable happen'd during
this Journey, so we shall not trouble our Read-
ers with several small Mistakes os Arabella's,
such as her supposing a neat Country Girl who
was riding behind a Man, to be some Lady or
Princess in Disguise, sore'd away by a Lover
she hated, and intreating Mr. Glanville to at-
tempt her Rescue; which occasion'd some
little Debate between her and Sir Charles, who
could not be persuaded to believe it was as she
said, and sorbid his Son to meddle in other
People's Affairs. Several of these Sort of Mi-
stake--, as we said besore, we omit, and will
theresore, if our Reader pleases, bring our He-
roine without surther Delay to London.
The End of thi Eighth Book.
THE

<page 254>
[ 243 J

THE
Female Qjji xote,
BOOK IX.
Chap. I.
In which is related an admirable Ad-
venture. -
I S S GlanvUle, whose Spirits were
greatly exhilerated at iheir En-
trance into London, that Seat of
Magnificence and Pleasure, con-
gratulated her Cousin upon the
Entertainment she would receive from the new
and surprizing Objects which every Day sor a
considerable lime would surnish her with; and
ran over the Catalogue of Diversions with (uch
a Volubility of Tongue, as drew a gentle Re-
primand lrom her Father, and made her keep
a iulLn Silence ti 1 they were sit down in
M 2 St. Jams


<page 255>
244 755* FEMALE BookIX.
St. James's Square, the Place of their Residence
in Town.
Sir Charles having order'd his late Lady's
Apartment to be prepar'd sor the Accommoda-
tion of his Niece; as soon as the first Civilities
were over, she retired to her Chamber, where
she employ'd herself in giving her Women Di-
rections sor placing her Books, of which she
had brought a moderate Quantity to London, in
her Closet.
Miss GlanvilU as soon as she had dispatch'd
away some hundred Cards to her Acquaintance,
to give them Notice she was in Town, attend-
ed Arabella in her own Apartment; and as they
sat at the Tea she begun to regulate the Diver-
sions of the Week, naming the Drawing-Room,
Park, Concert, Ranelagh, Lady — As-
sembly, the Dutchessof—RautrFaux-Hall, and
a long tsfc. of Visits; at which Arabella, with
an Accent that express'd her Surprize, ask'd
her, if she suppos'd she intended to stay in
Town three or sour Years
Law, Cousin, said Miss Glanville, all this is
but the Amusement of a few Days.
Amusement, do you say, replied Arabella,
methinks it seems to be the sole Employment of
those Days: And what you call the Amuse-
ment, must of Necessity be the Business of Life.
You are always so grave, Cousin, said Miss
Glanville, one does not know what to say to
you. However, I shan't press you to go to
PublicPlaces against your Inclination, yet you'll
condescend to receive a few Visits, I suppose?
Yes, replied Arabella, and if among the La-
dies whom I shall see, I sind any like the amia-
ble

<page 256>
Chap. r. QJLJ I X OT E. tjf
ble Countess of———, I shall not scruple to
enter into the most tender Amity with them.
The Countess of is very well, to be sure,
said Mise Glanville, yet I don't know how it is,
she does not suit my Taste — She is very par-
ticular in a great many Things, and knows too
much sor a Lady, as I heard my Lord Trifle }
say one Day: Then she is quite unsashionable:
She hates Cards, keeps no Assembly, is seen but
seldom at Publick Places; and in my Opinion,
as well as in a great many others, is the dullest
Company in the World. I'm sure I met her
at a Visit a little besore I went down to your
Seat, and she had not been a quarter of an Hour
in the Room, besore she set a whole Circle of
Ladies a yawning.
Arabella, tho? she had a sincere Contempt sor
her Cousin's Manner of thinking, yet always
politely conceal'd it; and vex'd as she was at
her Sneers upon the Countess, she contented
herself with gently defending her, telling her at
the same Time, that till she met with a Lady
who had more Merit than the Countess, she
should always possess the first Place in her
Esteem.
Arabella, who had from her Youth adopted
the Resentments of her Father, resus'd to make
her Appearance at Court, which Sir Charles
gently intimated to her; yet being not wholly
divested of the Curiosity natural to her Sex, she
condescended to go incog, to the Gallery on a
Ball Night, accompanied by Mr Glanville and
his Sister, in order to behold the Splendor of the
, Britijh Court.
'Mj As

<page 257>
2^6 Tie FEMALE Book IX.
As her Romances had long samiliariz'd her
Thoughts to Objects ol Grandeur and Magni-
ficence, she was not so much struck as might
have been expected, with those that now pre-
f nted themselves to her View. Nor was she
ii little disappointed io find that among the Men
she saw none whose Appearance came up to her
Ideas of the Air and Port of an rfrtahan^ Oroon-
dates, or Juba; or any of the Ladies, who did
not in her Opinion, sall short of the Perfections
of Eli/a, Mundana, Statira, &c. 'Twas re-
markable too, that she never enquir'd how often
the Princesses had been carried away by love-
captiva'ed Monarch-, or how many Victories
the Kind's Sons had gain'd; but seem'd the
whole Time she was there to have suspended
all her Romantick Ideas of Glory, Beauty,
Gallantry, and Love.
Mr. Ghnv'tllt was highly pleas'd with her
compos'd Behaviour, and a Day or two after
ritreated her to allow him the Honour of shew-
ing her what was remarkable and worthy of her
Observation in this groat Metropolis. To this
she also consented, ami for the greater Privacy
began their Travels in a hii'd Coach.
Part of several Days were taken up in this
Employment ; but Mr. Glan-oille had the Mor-
t fixation to find she was sull of Allusions to her
Romances upon every Occasion, luch as her
asking the Peison who stiews the Armoury at
the Tctuer, the Names ol the Knights to whom
each Suit belong'd, and wondering there were no
Devices on ihe Shields or Plumes of Feathers
in the Helmets: She observ'd that the Lion Ly-
Ji'macbuS kill'd, was, according to the History of
that

<page 258>
Chap, i. QJJ I X O T E. 247
that Prince, much larger than any of those slie
was shew'd in the Tower, and also much fiercer:
Took Notice that St. Paul's was less magnifi-
cent in the Inside, than the Temple in which
Cyrus, whtn he went to Mandarin, heard her
return Thanks lor his suppos'd Death: En-
quir'd if it was not customary sor the King and
his whole Court to s'il in Barges upon the
Thames, as Augujius used to do upon the T)ber,
whether they had not Musick and Collations
in the Park, and where they celebrated the Justs
and Tournaments.
The Season sor Vaux-Hall being not yet over,
she was desirous of once seeing a Plac;, which
by the Description she had heard of it, greatly
resembled the Gardens of Lucultus at Rome, in
which the Emperor, with all the Princes and
Princelles os his Court were so nobly eniertain'd,
and where so many gallant Conversations had
pass'd among those admirable Persons.
The Singularity of her Dress, sor she was
cover'd with her Veil, drew a Number of
Gazers after her, who prest round her with so
little Respect, that she was greatly embarrass'd,
and had Thoughts of quitting the Place, de-
lightsul as she own'd it, immediately, when her
Attention was wholly engross'd by an Adven-
ture in which she soon interested herself very
deeply.
An Ossicer of Rank in the Sea Service had
brought his Mistress disguis'd in a Suit of Man's
or rather Boy's Cloaths, and a Hat and Fea-
ther, into the Gardens. The young Creature
being a little intoxicated with the Wine she had
taken too freely, was thrown so much off" her
M 4 Guard!

<page 259>
248 The FEMALE Book IX.
Guard as to give Occasion to some of the Com-
pany to suspect her Sex; and a gay Fellow, in
order to give them some Diversion at her Ex-
pence, pretending to be affronted at something
stie said, drew his Sword upon the disguis'd Fair
One, which so alarm'd her, that she shriek'd
out, She was a Woman, and ran sor Protection
to her Lover.who was so disorder'd with Liquor,
that he was not able to defend her.
Miss Glar.viUe, ever curious and inquisitive,
demanded the Cause why the Company ran in
Crouds to that particular Spot; and receiv'd
sor Answer, That a Gentleman had drawn his
Sword upon a Lady disguis'd in a Man's Habit.
Oh Heav'ns! cry'd Arabella, this must cer-
tainly be a very notable Adventure. The Lady
has doubtless some extraordinary Circumstances
in her Story, and haply upon Enquiry, her Mis-
sortunes will be sound to resemble those which
oblig'd the beautisul Aspasia to put on the same
Disguise, who was by that Means murder'd by
the cruel Zenodorus in a Fit of Jealousy at the
Amity his Wife express'd sor her. But can I
not fee this unsortunate Fair One, added she,
pressing in Spite of Mr. Glanville's Intreaties
thro' the Croud—I may haply be able to afford
her some Consolation.
Mr. Glanville sinding his Persuasions were
not regarded, sollow'd her with very little Dif-
ficulty: For herVeil salling back in her Hurry,
she did not mind to replace it, and the Charms
of her Face, join'd to the 'Majesty of her Per-
son, and Singularity of her Dress, attracting
every Person's Attention and Respect, they
made Way sor her to pass, not a little surpriz'd
• at

<page 260>
Chap. x. QUIXOTE. 249
at the extreme Earnestness and Solemnity that
appear'd in her Countenance upon an Event so
diverting to every one else.
The disguis'd Lady whom she was endea-
vouring to approach, had thrown herself upon
a Bench in one of the Boxes, trembling still
with the Apprehension of the Sword, tho' her
Antagonist was kneeling at her Feet, making
Love to her in Mock-Heroicks sor the Diver-
sion of the Company.
Her Hat and Peruke had sallen off in her
Fright, and her Hair which had been turn'd
up under it, hung now loosely about her Neck,
and gave such an Appearance of Woe to a Face,
which notwithstanding the Paleness that Terror
had overspread it with, was really extremely
pretty, that Arabella was equally struck with
Compassion and Admiration of her.
Lovely Unknown, said (he to her with ant
Air of extreme Tenderness, tho' I am a Stran-
ger both to your Name and History, yet your
Aspect persuadeth me your Quality is not mean,
and the Condition and Disguise in which I be-
hold you, shewingthat you are unsortunate,per-
mit me to offer you all theAssistances in my Pow-
er, seeing that I am mov'd thereto by my Com-
passion for your Distress, and that Esteem which
the Sight of you most necessarily inspire.
Mr. Glanville was struck dumb with Consu-
sion at this strange Speech, and at the Whispers
and Scoffs it occasion'd among the Spectators. He
attempted to take hold of her Hand, in order to
lead her awav, but she disengag'd herself from
him with a Frown of Displeasure; and taking
no Notice of Miss Glanville, who whisper'd
M 5 with

<page 261>
250 72* FEMALE Book IX.
with great Emotion, Lord, Cousin, how you
expose yourself! prest nearer to the beautisul
Disgui'd, an J agiin repeated her Offers of
Service.
The Girl being perfectly recover'd from her
Intoxication by the Fright she had been in, gaz'd
upon Arabella with a Look of extreme Sur-
prize: Yet being mov'd to respect by the Dig-
nity of her Appearance, and strange as her
Words feem'd to be by the obliging Purport of
them, and the affecting Earnestness with which
they were deliver'd, she rose from her Seat and
think'd her, with an Accent sull of Regard
and Submilsion.
Fair Maid, said Jrabe'la, taking her Hand,
let us quit this Place, where your Discovery
may probably subject you to more Dangers : If
you will be pleas'd to put yourself into my Pro-
tection, and acquaint me with the History of
your Missortunes; I have Interest enough with
a valiant Person who shall undertake to free you
from your Persecutions, and re establish the
.Repose of your Life.
The kneeling Hero, who as well as every
eneelse that were present, had gaz'd with Asto-
nishment at Arabella during all this Passage,
perceiving she was about to rob him of the dis-
-guis'd Fair, seiz'd hold of the Hand she had at
Liberty, and swore he would not part with her.
Mr. Glanville almost mad with Vexation,
endeavour'd to get Arabella away.
Are you mad, Madam, said he in aWhisper, to
make all this Rout about a Prostitute? Do you fee
how every Body stares at you? What will they
think—For Heav'ns sake let us be gone.
What,

<page 262>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. 251
Wh;it, Sir, replied Arabella in a Rage, Are
you base enough to leave this admirable Crea-
ture in the Power of that Man, who is que-
stionless her Ravisher ; and will you not draw
your S word in her Defence?
Hey day ! cry'd the Sea-Ossicer, wak'd out of
his ftupidDofe bytheClamour about him: What's
the Matter here—What are you doing? Where's
my Lucy? Zoons! Sir, said he to the young.
Fellow who held her, What Business have you
with my Lucy? And uttering a dreadsul Oath,
drew out his Sword, and stagger'd towards his.
gay Rival, who observing the Weakness of his-
Antagonist, flouristVd with his Sword to soew
his Courage and frighten the Ludies, whe all
ran away screaming. Arabella taking Miss
Glanville under the Arm, cried out to Mr.
Glanvllle as she lest the Place, to take Care of
the distress'd Lady, and while the two Comba-
tants were disputing sor her, to carry her away
in Safety.
But Mr. Glanville without regarding this In-
junction, hasten'd after her; and to pacify her,,
told her the Lady was rescu'd by her savourite
Lover, and carry'd off in Triumph.
But are you sure, said Arabella, it was not
some other of her Ravishers who carry'd her
away, and not the Person whom she has haply
savour'd with her Affection! May not the same
Thing have happen'd to her, as did to the beau-
tisul Candace, Queen of Ethiopia; who while
two of her Ravishers were fighting sor her, a
third whom she took sor her Deliverer, came
and carry'd her away.
M 6 But

<page 263>
252 7£f FEMALE Book IX-
'But she went away willingly, I assure you,
Madam, said Mr. Glanville: Pray don't be in
any Concern about her
If she went away willingly with him, reply'd
Arabella, 'tis probable it may not be another
Ravisher: And yet if this Person that rescu'd
her happen'd to be in Armour, and the Vizor
of his Helmet down, she might be mistaken as
well as Qiieen Candact.
-^Well, well, he was not in Armour, Madam,
said Glanville almost beside himself with Vexation
at her Folly
You seem to be disturb'd, Sir, said Arabella
a. little surpriz'd at his peevish Tone: Is there
any Thing in this Adventure which concerns
you? Nay, now I remember, you did not of-
ser to defend the Beautisul Unknown. I am
not willing to impute your In-action upon such
an Occasion, to Want of Courage or Genero-
sity; perhaps you are acquainted with her Hi-
story, and from this Knowledge resus'd to en-
gage in her Defence.
Mr. Glanville perceiving the Company gather
from all Parts to the Walk they were in, told
her he would acquaint her with all he knew
concerning the disguis'd Lady when they were
in the Coach on their Return Home; and Ara-
bella impatient sor the promis'd Story, propos'd
to leave the Gardens immediately, which was
gladly comply'd with by Mr. Glanville, who
heartily repented his having carry'd her thither.
Chap.

<page 264>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 253
Chap. II.
Which ends with a very unfavourable Pre-
diction for our Heroine.
A S soon as they were seated in the Coach she
did not sail to call upon him to persorm
his Promise: But Mr. Glanville, excessively out
of Humour at her exposing herself in the Gar-
dens, reply'd, without considering whether he
should not offend her, That he knew no more
of the disguis'd Lady than any body else in the
Place.
How, Sir, reply'd Arabella, Did you not
promise to relate her Adventures to me ? And
would you have me believe you knew no more
of them than the rest of the Cavaliers and La-
dies in the Place?
Upon my Soul, I don't, Madam, said Glan-
ville; yet what I know of her is sussicient to
let me understand she was not worth the Con-
skteration you seem'd to have sor her.
She cannot sure be more indiscreet than the
sair and unsortunate Hermione, reply'd Arabella;
who like her put on Man's Apparel, through
Despair at the ill Success of her Passion sor Alex-
ander—And certain it is, that tho' the beautisul
Hermione was guilty of one great Error 'vhich
lost her the Esteem of Alexander, yet sht: had a
high and noble Soul; as was manilest by her
Behaviour and Words when she was murder'd
by the Sword of Demetrius. Oh! Death, cry'd
Hie, as fiie was salling, how sweet do I sind
thee,

<page 265>
254 Tfe FEMALE Book Xf.
thee, and how much and how earnestly have I
desu'd thee!
Oh Lord! oh Lord! cry'J Mr. Glanville
hardly sensible of what he saiJ, Was there ever
any Thing so intolerable/
You pity the unhappyHim'o»e, Sir? said
Arabella interpreting his Jixcla nation her own
Way. Indeed she is well worthy of your Com-
panion. And if the b^re Recital of the Words
she utter'd at receiving her Death's Wound af-
fects you so much, you may guess what would
have been your Agonks, had you been Deme-
trius that gave it her.
Here Mr. Glanville groaning aloud thro' Im-
patience at her Absurdities
This Subject affects you deeply, I perceive,
said Arabella. There is no Question but you
would have acted in the same Circumstance, as
Demetrius did: Yet let me tell you, the Ex-
travagancy of his Rage and Despair sor what
he had innocently committed, was imputed to
him as a great Imbetillity, as was also the vio-
lent Passion heconceiv'd soon after sor the Fair
Dtidamia. You know the A cident which
brought that sair Princess into his Way.
Indeed, I do not, Madam, said Glanville
peevishly.
Well, then I'll tell you, said Arabella, but
pausing a little:
The Recital I have engag'd myself to make,
added she, will necessarily take up some Hours
Time, as upon Reflexion I have f und: So if
you will dispense with my beginning it at pre-
sent, I will satisfy your Curiosity To-morrow,
when I may be able to pursue it without Inter-
ruption. 2 To

<page 266>
Chap. 2. QJLJI X O T E. 255
To this Mr. Glanville made no o her An-
swer than a Bow with his Head ; and the Coach
a few Moments after arriving at their own
House, he led her to her Aparment, firmly
refolv'd never to attend hertoany morePublick
Places while she continued in the same ridicu-
lous Folly.
Sir Charles, who had several Times been in
doubt whether Arabella was not really disorder'd
in her Senses; upon Miss Glanville's Account
of her Behaviour at the Gardens, concluded
she was absolutely mad, and held a short Debate
with himself, Whether he ought not to bring
a Commission of Lunacy against her, rather
than marry her to his Son, whom he was per-
suaded could never be happy with a Wife so un-
accountably absurd. Tho* he only hinted at
this to Mr. Glanville, in a Conversation he had
with him while his Dissatissaction was at its
Height, concerning Arabella, yet the bare Sup-
position that his Father ever thought of such a
Thin?, threw the young Gentleman into such
Agonies, that Sir Charles to compose him, pro-
tested he would do nothing in relation to his
Niece that he would not approve of. Yet he
expostulated with him on the Absurdity of her
Behaviour, and the Ridicule to which ste ex-
pos'd hersels wherever me went; appealing to
him, whether in a Wife he could think those
Follies supportable, which in a Mistress occa-
sion'd him so much Consusion.
Mr. Glanville, as much in Love as he was,
felt all the Force of this Inference, and acknow-
ledge to his Father, That he could not think
of marrying Arabella, till the Whims her Ro-
mances

<page 267>
256 The F E M A L E Baok IX.
mances had put into her Head, were eraz'd by
a better Knowledge of Life and Manners. But
he added with a Sigh, That he knew not how
this Resormation would be effected; sor she
had such a strange Facility in reconciling every
Incident to her own santaltick Ideas, that every
newObject added Strength to the satal Deception
she laboured under.
Chap. III.
In which Arabella meets with another
admirable Adventure.
OU R lovely Heroine had notbeen above a
Fortnight in London, besore the gross Air
of that smoaky Town affected her Health so
much, that Sir Charles propos'd to her to go for
a few Weeks to Richmond, where he hir'd a
House elegantly surnish'd sor her Reception.
Miss Gla/.ville had been too long out of that
darling City, to pay her the Compliment of at-
tending her constantly at Richmond; yet she
premis'd to be as often as possible with her : And
Sir Charles, having Affairs that could not dis-
pense with his Absence from Town, plac'd his
Steward in her House, being a Person whose
Prudence and Fidelity he could rely upon; and
he, with her Women, and some other menial
Servants, made up her Equipage.
As it was not consistent with Decorum sor
Mr. Glanville to reside in her House, he con-
tented himself withriding to Richmond generally
every

<page 268>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 257
every Day: And as long as Arabella was pleas'd
with that Retirement, he resolv'd not to
press her Return to Town till the Countess
of arriv'd, in whose Conversation he
grounded all his Hopes of her Cure.
At that Season of the Year Richmond not
being quite deserted by Company, Arabella was
visited by several Ladies of Fashion; who
charm'd with her Affability, Politeness, and
good Sense, were strangely perplex'd how to ac-
count sor some Peculiarities in her Dress and
Manner of thinking.
Some of the younger Sort from whom Arabella's
extraordinary Beauty took away all Pretensions
to Equality on that Score, made themselves ex-
tremely merry with her Oddnesses, as they call'd
them, and gave broad Intimations that her
Head was not right.
As sor Arabella, whose Taste was as delicate,
Sentiments as resin'd, and Judgmentas clear as
any Person's could be who believ'd the Authen-
ticity of Scudery's Romances, she was strange-
ly disappointed to find no Lady with whom she
could converse with any tolerable Pleasure: And
that instead os Clelia's, Staiira\Ma»dana's &c.
she sound only Miss Glanville's among all she
knew.
The Comparison she drew between such as
these and the charming Countess of whom
she had just beaun to be acquainted with at Bath,
increas'd her Regret sor the Interruption that
was given to so agreeable a Friendship: And it
was with insinite Pleasure Mr. Glanville heard
her repeatedly wish sor the Arrival of that admi-
rable Lady (as she always call'd her) in Town.
Not

<page 269>
258 The F EM AL E Book IX.
Not being able to relish the insipid Conver-
sation os the young Ladies that visited her at
Richmond, her chies Amusement was to walk in
the Park there; which because of its Rural Priva-
cy, was extremely agreeable to her Inclinations.
Here she indulg'd Contemplation, leaning on
the Arm of her saithsul Lucy, while her other
Women walk'd at some Distance behind her,
and two Men Servants kept her always in Sight.
One Evening when she was returning lrom
her usual Walk, she heard the Sound of a Wo-
man's Voice, which seem'd to proceed from a
Tuft of Trees that hid her from her View.
And stopping a Moment, dillinguish'd some
plaintive Accents, which increasing her Curio-
sity, she advane'd towards the ! lace, telling
Lucy, she was resolv'd if possible to discover
who the distress'd Lady was, and what was the
Subject of her Asfliction.
As she drew nearer with softly treading Steps,
she could distinguilh through the Branches cf
the Trees, now defpoil'd of great part of their
Leaves, two Women seated on the Ground,
their Backs towaids her, and one of them with
her Head gently reclin'd on theother'sShoulder,
seem'd by her mournsul Action to be weeping;
sor she often put her Handkerchief to her Eyes,
breathing every Time a Sigh, which, z%Arabella
phras'd it, seem'd to proceed from the deepest
Receslis of her Heart.
This Adventure, more worthy indeed to be
styl'd an Adventure than all our Fair Heroine
had ever yet met with, and so consormable to
what she had red in Romances, fill'd her Heart
with eager Expectation. She made a Sign to

<page 270>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 259
Lucy to make no Noise, and creeping still closer
towards the Place where this asflicted Person
sat, she heard her distinctly utter these Words,
which however were often interrupted with her
Sighs.
Ah! jfn'amenes, whom I to my Missortune
have too much loved, and whom to my Mis-
fortune I fear I shall never sussiciently hate,
since that Heav'n and thy cruel Ingratitude hath
ordain'd that thou shalt never be mine, and that
so many sweet and dear Hopes are sor ever
taken from me, return me at least, ungratesul
Man, return me those Testimonies of my in-
nocent Affection, which were sometimes so
dear and precious to thee. Return me those
Favours, which all innocent as they were, are
become Criminal by thy Crime. Return me,
Cruel Man, return me those Reliques of my
Heart which thou detainest in Despight of me,
and which, notwithstanding thy Inlidelity, I
cannot recover.
Here her Tears interrupting her Speech,
Arabella being impatient to know the History
of this afflicted Person, came softly round to
the other Side, and shewing herself, occasion'd
some Disturbance to the sad Unknown; who
rising; from her Seat, with her Face averted, as
if asham'd of having so sar disclos'd her Sor-
rows in a Stranger's Hearing, endeavour'd to
piss by her un-notie'd.
Arabella perceiving her Design, stop'd her
with a very graceful Action, and with a Voice
all compos'd of Sweetness, earnestly conjur'd
her to relate her History.
Think

<page 271>
26o ^FEMALE Book IX.
Think not, Lovely Unknown, said she (sor
she was really very pretty) that my Endeavours
to detain you proceed from an indiscreet Curio-
sity. 'Tis true, some Complaints which have
sallen from your sair Mouth, have rais'd in me a
Desire to be acquainted with your Adventures;
but this Desire has its Foundation in that Com-
passion your Complaints have fill'd me with:
And if I wish to know your Missortunes,
'tis only with a View of assording you some;
Consolation.
Pardon me, Madam, said the Fair Afflicted,
gazing on Arabella with many Signs of Ad-
miration, if my Consusion at being over-heard
in a Place I had chosen to bewail my Missor-
tunes, made me be guilty of some Appearance
of Rudeness, not seeing the admirable Person I
wanted to avoid. But, pursued she, hesitating
a little, those Characters of Beauty I behold in
your Face, and the Gracesulness of your De-
portment convincing me you can be of no or-
dinary Rank, I will the less scruple to acquaint
you with my Adventures, and the Cause of
those Complaints you have heard proceed from
my Mouth.
Arabella assuring her, that whatever her Mis-
sortunes were, she might depend upon all the
Assistance in her Power, seated herself near her
at the Foot os the Tree where she had been sit-
ting, and giving Lucy Orders to join the rest of
her Women, and stay at a Distance till she
made a Sign to them to advance, she pre-
par'd to listen to the Adventures of the Fair
Unknown, who after some little Pause, began
to relate them in this Manner.
Chap.

<page 272>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 261
Chap. IV.
In which is related the History of the
Princess of Gaul.
MY Name, Madam, is Cynecia, my Birth
illustrious enough, feeing that I am the
Daughter of a Sovereign Prince, who possesses
a large and spacious Territory in what is now
called Antient Gaul.
What, Madam, interrupted Arabella, Are
you a Princess then?
Questionless I am, Madam, replied the La-
dy ; and a Princess happy and prosperous, till
the Felicity of my Life was interrupted by the
perfidious Ariamenes.
Pardon me, Madam, interrupted Arabella
again, that my Ignorance of your Quality
made me be deficient in those Respects which
are due to your high Birth, and which notwith-
standing those Characters of Greatness 1 might
read in the Lineaments of your Visage, I yet
neglected to pay,
Alas! Madam, said the Stranger, that little
Beauty which the Heavens bestow'd on me
only to make me wretched, as by the Event it
has proved, has long since taken its Flight, and
together with my Happiness, I have lost that
which made me Unhappy. And certain it is,
Grief has madesuch Ravages among what might
once have been thought tolerable in my Face,
that I should not be surpriz'd if my being no
longer Fair, should make you with Dissiculty
believe I ever was so.
4 Arabella

<page 273>
262 ^FEMALE Book IX.
Arabella aster a proper Compliment in An-
swer to this Speech, intreated the Princess to go
on with her History, who hesitating a little,
comply'd with her Request.
Be pleas'd to know then, Madam, said she,
that being bred up with all imaginable Tender-
ness in my Father's Court, 1 had no sooner
arriv'd to my Sixteenth Year than I saw myself
surrounded with Lovers; who nevertheless,
such was the Severity with which I behav'd
myself, conceal'd their Passions under a respect-
sul Silence, well knowing Banishment from my
Presence was the least Punishment they had to
expect, if they presum'd to declare their Senti-
ments to me.
I liv'd in this Fashion, Madam, sor Two
Years longer, rejoicing in the Insensibility of
my own Heart, and triumphing in the Suffer-
ings of others, when my Tranquilli.y was all
at once interrupted by an Accident which I am
going to relate to you.
The Princess (!opt here to give Vent to some
Sighs which a cruel Remembrance sore'd from
her; and continuing in a deep Muse sor five
or six Minutes, resum'd her Story in this
Manner.
It being my Custom to walk in a Forest
adjoining to one of my Father's Summer
Residence?, attended only by my Women,
one Day when I was taking this Amuse-
ment, I perceiv'd at some Distance a Man ly-
ing on the Ground ; and impell'd by a sudden
Curiosity, I advnnc'd towards this Ptrson, whom
upon a nearer View I perceiv'd to have been
wounded very much, aud sainted away through
Loss

<page 274>
Chap. 4- Q.UIXOTE. 263
Loss of Blood. His Habit being very rich, I
concluded by that he was of no mean Quality:
But when I had look'd upon his Countenance,
pale and languishing as it was, methought there
appear'd so many Marks of Greatness, accom-
pany'd with a Sweetness so happily blended, that
. my Attention was engag'd in an extraordinary
Manner, and interested me so powersully in his
Safety, that I co nmanded soaie of my Women
to run immediately sor proper Assistance, and
convey him to the Castle, while I directed
others to throw some Water in his Face, and
to apply some Linen to his Wounds, to stop
the Bleeding.
These charitable Cares restor'd the wounded
Stranger to his Senses; he open'd his Eyes, and
turning them slowly to the Objects around him,
fix'd at last their languishing Looks on me:
When mov'd, as it mould seem, to some Respect
by what he saw in my Countenance, he rose
with some Dissiculty from the Ground, and
bowing almost down to it again, by that Action
seem'd to pay me his Acknowledgments sorwhat
he suppos'd I had done sor his Preservation.
His extreme Weakness having oblig'd him to
creep towards aTree, against the Back of which
he supported himself, I went nearer to him, and
having told him the Condition in which I sound
him, and the Orders I had dispatch'd sor Assist-
ance, requested him to acquaint me with his
Name and Quality, and the Adventure which
had brought him into that Condition.
My Name, Madam, answcr'd he, is Ar'ia-
menes, my Birth is Noble enough ; I have spent
some Years in my Travels, and was returning
to

<page 275>
264 tffe FEMALE Book IX.
to my native Country, when passing thro' this
Forest I was seiz'd with an Inclination to sleep.
I had ty'd my Horse to a Tree, and retiring
some few Paces off, stretch'd myself at the Foot
of a large Oak whose Branches promis'd me an
agreeable Shade. I had not yet clos'd my Eyer,
when the Slumber I invited was dissipated by
the Sound of some Voices near me.
A Curiosity, not natural to me, made me
listen to the Discourse of these Persons, whom by
the Tone of their Voices, tho' I could not fee
them, I knew to be Men.
In short, Madam, I was a Witness to a most
horrible Scheme which they concerted together;
my Weakness will not I permit me to enter into
an exact Detail of all 1 heard: The Result of
their Conference was, To seize the Princess of
this Country and carry her off.
Here, pursued Cynecia, I interrupted the
Stranger with a loud Cry, which giving him
to understand who I was, he apologiz'd in the
most gracesul Manner imaginable sor the little
Respect he had hitherto paid me.
I then in treated him to tell me, If he had any
Opportunity of hearing the Name of my design'd
Ravisher ; to which he reply'd, that he under-
stood it to be Taxander.
This Man, Madam, was one of my Father's
Favourites, and had been long secretly in Love
with me.
Ariamenes then insorm'd me, that being en-
flam'd with Rage against these impious Villains,
he rose from the Ground, re-mounted his Horse,
and defy'd the two Traytors aloud, threatning
them with Death, unless they abandon'd their
impious Design. Taxandtr

<page 276>
Chap. 4. QJJIXOTE. 265
Taxander made no Answer, but rush'd suri-
.oufly upon him, and had the Baseness to susfer
his wicked Associate to assist him.: But the va-
riant Ariamenes, tho' he spoke modestly ot his
Victory, .yet gave me to understand that he had
made both the Villains abandon their wicked En-
terprize, with their Lives; and that dismount-
ing, in order to see if they were quite dead, he
found himself sosaint with the Wounds he had
received from them both, that he had not
.Strength to re-mount his Horse; but crawling
on, in Hopes of meeting with some Assistance,
tainted away at last through Weariness and.Lofs
of Blood.
While-he was giving me this Account, the
-Chariot ! had fcnfsor arrived, and having made
him such Acknowledgments as the Obligation
I had received from him demanded, I caus'd
him to get into the Chariot, and sending one
with him to acquaint the Prince my Father
with all that had happen'd, and the Merit of
the valiant Stranger, I returned the same Way
I came with my Women, my Thoughts being
wholly engross'd by this Unknown.
The Service he had done me silled me with a
Gratitude and Esteem sor him, which prepar'd
.my Heart sor those tender Sentiments -I after-
wards entertain'd, rto the Ruin of my Repose.
I will not . tire-your Patience, Madam, with
a minute Detail of all the succeeding Passages
of my Story,; . it shall sussice to tell you. That
Ariamenes was received with extraordinary
Marks of Esteembby my J?ather.; that his Cure
was soonvcompleated; and that having vow'd
himself to my Service, and declar'd an unal-
Vot. II. N terablc

<page 277>
266 T^FEMAL'E BookJX.
terable Passion sor me, I permitted him to love
tne, and gave him that Share in my Heart,
which I fear not all his Insidelities will ever de-
prive him of.
His Attachment to me was soon suspected
-by Taxander's Relations, who having secretly
.vow'd his Rum, endearour'd to discover if I
had admitted his Addresses, and having made
themselves Masters of our Secrets, by means of
the Treachery of one of my Women, procur'd
Insormation to be given to my Father of our
mutual Passion.
Alas! what Mischiefs did not this satal Dis-
covery produce: My Father, enrag'd to the
last Degree at this Intelligence, consined me to
my Apartments, and order'd Ar'tamenes to leave
his Dominions within three Days.
'-Spare me, Madam, the Repetition of what
pase'd at our last sad Interview, which by large
Bribes to my Guards he obtain'd.
His Tears, his Agonies, his Vows of ever-
lasting Fidelity, so sooth'd my Melancholy at
parting with him, and persuaded me of his
Constancy, that I waited sor several Months
'.with perfect Tranquillity sor the Persormance
L'of'the Promise he made me, to do my Father
tttch considerable Services in the War he was
engag'd in with one of his Neighbours, as should
- oblige him to give me to him sor his Reward.
But, alas! two Years roll'd on without
-' bringing back the unfaithsul Ariamenes. My
- Father died, and my Brother who succeeded
. fttmi being about to sorce me to marry a Prince
whom I detested, I secretly quitted the Court,and
'attended only by this saithsul Considant whom
- : 1 4 i- you

<page 278>
Chap-4. dUIX-OTE. 267
ypu behold with rne, and some sew of my trusty
DQsriefticlts, I came hither in Search of Aria-
mines, he having told me this Country was the
Place of his Birth.
Pglenor, the most prudent and faithsul of my
Servants, undertook to find out the ungrateful
Ariqrnenes, whom yet I was willing to find Ex-
cuses sor; but all his Enquiries were to no Ef-
fect; the Name of Ariamenes was not known
in this Part of the World.
Tir'd out with unsuccesssul Enquiries, I re-
splv'd to seek out some obscure Place, where
I might in secret lament my Missortunes, and
expect the End of them in Death. My At-
tendants sound me out such a Retreat as I
wanted, in a neighbouring Village, which they
call Twickenham, I think, from whence I osten
make Excursions to this Park, attended only as
you fee; and here indulge myself in Com-
plaints upon the Cruelty of my Destiny.
The sorrowsul Cyntcia here ended her Story,
to which in the Course of her Relation she had
given a great many Interruptions through the
violence of her Grief: And Arabella, after
having said eveiy Thing she could think on to
alleviate her Affliction, earnestly entreated her
K> accept ps »n Asylum at her House; where
she should be treated with all the Respect due
tp her.illustrious Birth-
Theaffucted J^dy, tho' she respectsully de-
clin'd this Offer, yet express'd a great Desire of
commencing a.strict Amity with our fair He-
roine, who on her Part, made her the most
tender Protestations os Friendship.
N 2 - The

<page 279>
268 The FEMALE BooklX.
The Evening being almost clos'd, they parted
with great Reluctancy on both Sides; mutually
promising to meet in the same Place the next
Day.
Cynecia, having enjoin'd her new Friend ab-
solute Secrecy, Arabella was under a Necessity
of keeping this Adventure to herself. And tho'
she long'd to tell Mr. Glanville, who came to
visit her the next Day, that the Countess was
extremely mistaken, when she mainrain'd there
were no more wandering Princesses in the
Woild, yet the Engagement she had submitted
to, kept her silent.
Chap. V.
A very mysterious Chapter.
a R AB B LL A, who impatiently long'd
v sor the Hour of meeting the sair Princess,
with whom she was extremely delighted, con-
sulted her Watch so often, and discovered so
much Restlessness and Anxiety, that Mr. Glan-
villt began to be sorpriz'd; and the more, as
she peremptorily commanded him not to attend
her in her Evening Walk. This Prohibition,
which, tho' he durst not dispute, he secretly re-
solv'd to disobey; and as soon as she set out sor
the Park with her usual Attendants, he flipp'd
out by a Back-door, and keeping her in his
Sight, himself unseen, he ventur'd to watch her
Motions.

<page 280>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. 269
As he had expected to unravel some great
Mystery, he was agreeably disappointed to sind
she continued her Walk in the Park with great
Composure ; and tho' she was soon join'd by the
imaginary Princess, yet conceiving her to be some
young Lady, with whom she had commenced an
Acquaintance utRicbmond, his Heart wasatRest*
and sor fear of displeasing her, he took a con-'
trary Path from that she was in, that he might
not meet her, yet relolv'd to stay till he thought
she would be inclin'd to return, and then shew'
himself, and conduct her Home. 'A Solicitude
for which he did not imagine she need be of-'
fended.
The two Ladies being met, after reciprocal
Compliments, the Princess intreated Arabella'
to relate her Adventures; who not being wil-.
ling to violate the Laws of Romance, which
require an unbounded Considence upon these
Occasions, began very succinctly to recount the1'
History of her Life; which, as (he manag'd it,
contain'd Events almost as Romantick and In-'
credible as'any in her Romances ; winding them
up with a Confession that she did not hate Mr.
Glanville, whom she acknowledg'd to be one
of the most saithsul and zealous of Lovers.
Cynecia with a Sigh, congratulated her upon
the Fidelity of a Lover, who by her Descrip-
tion, was worthy the Place he pofless'd in her
Esteem: And expressing a Wish, that (he could
fee, unobserv'd by him, this gallant and gene-
rous Person, Arabella, who that Moment espy'd
him at a Distance, yet advancing towards them,^
told her, with a Blush that overspread all her
Face, That her Curiosity might be satisfied in
Nj the

<page 281>
270 The F E M A L E Book IX.
the Manner she wisiVd, sor yonder, added she,
is the Person we have been talking of.
Cynecia, at these Words, looking toward*
the Place where her fair Friend had directed;
no sooner cast her Eyes upon Mr. Glanville,
than giving a loud Cry, she sunk into the Arms
of Arabella, who, astonish'd and perplex'd as
fiie was, eagerly held them out to support her.
Finding her in a Swoon, she dispatch d Lucy,
who was near her, to look sor some Water to
throw in her Face; but that Lady, breathing a
deep Sigh, open'd her languishing Eyes, and fix-
ing a melancholy Look upon Arabella,
Ah! Madam, sa:d she, wonder not at my
Asfliction and Surprize, since in the Person of
your Lover I behold the ungratesul Arlanterus.
Oh Heavens! my sair Princess, replied Ara-
bella, What is it you fay? Is it possible Glan~
vilU can be Ariamenes? ,
He, cried the afflicted Princess with a dis-
order' d Accent, He whom I now behold! and
whom you call Glanville, was once Ariamenes,
the perjur'd, the ungratesul Ariamenes. Adieu,
Madam, I cannot bear his Sight; I will hide
myself from the World sor ever; nor need you
fear a Rival or an Enemy in the unsortunate
Cynecia, who, if possible, will cease to love the
unsaithful Ariamenes, and will never hate the
beautisul Arabella.
Saying this, without giving her Time to an-
swer, she took hold of her Confidant by the
Arm, and went away with so much Swiftness,
that she was out of Sight besore Arabella was
enough recover'd from her Astonishment to be
able to intreat her Stay.

<page 282>
Chap. 5. QJJ IX OT E. 271
Our charming Heroine, ignorant till now of
the true State of her Heart, was surpriz'd to
sind it aflaulted at once by all the Passions which
attend disappointed Love. Grief, Rage, Jea^
lousy, and Despair made so cruel a War in her
gentle Bosom, that, unable either to express or
to conceal the strong Emotions with which she
was agitated, she gave Way to a violent Burst
of Tears, leaning her Head upon Lucy's Shoulder,,
who wept as heartily as her Lady, tho' igno-
rant of the Cause of her Affliction.'
Mr. Glanville, who was now near enough
to take Notice of her Posture, came running
with eager Haste to fee what was the Matter;
when Arabella, rous'd from her Extacy of Grief
by the Sound of his Steps, listed up bet Head,
and seeing him approach,
Lucy, cried she, trembling with the Violence'
of her Resentment, Tell that Traitor to keep
out of my Sight. Tell him, I sorbid him ever
to appear besore me again. And, tell him, ad-
ded (he, with a Sigh that shook her whole-
tender Frame, All the Blood in his Body is too
little to wash away his Guilt, or to pacify my
Indignation.
Then hastily turning away, she ran towards
her other Attendants, who were at some Dis-
tance; and joining her Women, proceeded'
directly Home.
Mr. Glanville, amaz'd at this Action, was
making after her as fast as he could, when Lucy
crossing in his Way, cried out to him to stop.
My Lady, said she, bid me tell you, Trai-
tor.——-
N 4 Hey

<page 283>
272 ^FEMALE Book IX.
Hey day! interrupted GlanviUe> What the
Devil does the Girl mean?
Pray, Sir, said she, Jet me deliver my Mes-
sage: I shall sorget if you speak to me till I
have said it all—Stay, let me see, What comes
next?
No more Traitor, I hope, said GianvHIe.
No, Sir, said Lucy -T but there was some-
thing about washing in Blood, and you must
keep out of her Sight, and not appear besore
the Nation Oh dear! I have sorgot it half:
My Lady was in such a piteous Taking, I sor-
got it, I believe, as soon as she said it. What
shalll: do?
No Matter, said Glanville, I'll overtake herr
and ask
No, no, Sir, said Lucy, Pray don't do thaf,
Sir, my Lady will be very angry: I'll venture
to ask her to tel! me over again, and come back
and let you know it.
But tell me, reply'd Glanville, Was any thing
the Matter with your Lady? She was in a pi-
teous Taking, you say.
Oh dear! yes, Sir, said Lucy; but I was not
bid to say any thing about that. To be sure,
my Lady did cry sadly, and sigh'd as if her
Heart would break; but I don't know what
was the Matter with her.
Well, said Glanville, excessively shock'd at
this Intelligence, Go to your Lady; I am go-
ing Home—You may bring me her Message to
my own Apartment.
Lucy did as she was desir'd; and Mr. Glan-
ville, impatient as he was to unravel the My-
stery, yet dreading lest his Presence should make
Arabella

<page 284>
Chap. 6. QJJ I X O T E. 273
Arabella be guilty of some Extravagance besore
the Servants who were with her, he sollow'd
slowly after her, resolving, if possible, to pro-
cure a private Interview with the lovely Visiona-
ry, sor whose Sorrow, tho' he suspected it was
owing to some ridiculous Cause, he could not
help being affected.
Chap. VI.
Not much plainer than the former.
ARABELLA^ who had walk'd as sast as
her Legs would carry her, got Home be-
sore Lucy could overtake her, and retiring to her
Chamber, gave Way to a fresh Burst ot Grief>
and bewail'd the Infidelity of Glanville in Terms
befitting a Clelia or Mandana.
As soon as she saw Lucy enter, she started
from her Chair with great Emotion.
Thou comest, said she, Iknow, to inter-
cede sor that ungratesul Man, whose Insidelity
I am weak enough to lament: But open not'
thy Mouth, I charge thee, in his Defence.
No, indeed, Madam, said Lucy.
Nor bring me any Account of his Tears, his
Desperation, or his Despair, said Arabella, since -
questionless he will feign them all to deceive
nie.
Here Glanville, who had watch'd Lucy's com-
ing, and had sollow'd her into Arabella's Apart-*
ment, appear'd at the Door.
Ns Gh

<page 285>
274 7& F E M A L E Book IX.
Oh Heavens! cried Arabella, lifting up her
fine Eyes, Can it be that this diljoyal Man,
unaw'd by the discovery oF hfcs Guilt, again
pre/umes,to approach me]—•
Dearest Cousin, said Gllanville, What is the
Meaning of all this ? — How have I disoblig'd
you ?—What is my Offence? I beseech you,
tell me»-
* Ask the inconstant Ariamenes, replied
Arabella, the Offence of the ungratesul Glan-
villit. The Betrayer of Cynecia can best answer
that Question to the Deceiver of Arabella. And
the Guilt of the one can only be compar'd to
the Crimes of the other. \ _
Good God! interrupted Mr. Glanville fret-
ting excessively, What am 1 to understand by
afl this? On my Soul, Madam, I don't know
the Meaning of one Word you fay.
Oh Dissembler! said Arabella, Is it thus that
thou would'stimpose upon my Incredulity ? Does
mot the Name of Ariamenes make thee tremble
th»n? And can'st thou hear that of Cynecia
trithout Consusion i ;. . ,
Dear Lady Bella, said Glanville smiling,
What are these Names to me? ,
False Man, interrupted Arabella, Dost thou
presume to sport with thy Crimes then? Are
not the Treacheries of Ariamenes the Crimes of
Glanville? Could Ariamenes be salse to the Prin-
• Thw Enigmatical Way os fpealing «pdn such Occasions, rs
of great Use in the voluminous Fr^wc' Romances ; since theEoubt
■ad Con-vision it is the Ca use os, both to the Accus'd and Acciiftr,
ttvcs Rise to a great Number of succeeding Mistakes, and con-
feo,u«sUj Adventures.
ce6

<page 286>
Chap. 6. QVIX 0TE. i?§
cess of Ggvh and can Gl&nviHt be innpcent to-
wards Arabelh f
Mr. QlmviUd who bad never heard her ffi
his Opinion, talk fy ridiculoufly besore, was so
ftmaz'd at she incomprehensible.Stuffshe utter'd
with so much Emotion, that he began ,to fear
her Intellects were really touch'd. This
Thought gave him a Concern .that spread itself
in a Moment over his Countenance. He gaj&'d
on her with a fijc'd Attention, dreading, yet
wishing she would speak again; equally divided
between his Hopes that her next Speech would
remove his Suspicion, and his Fears, that it
might more confirm them.
Arabella taking Notice of his pensi ve Posture,.
turn'd away her Head, lest, by beholding him,
she should relent, .and treat bjm with lese Seve-
rity than she had intended; making at the same
Time a Sign to him to be gone.
Indeed, Lady Btllp, said Glat^ilU who un-
derstood her perfectly well, J cannot l§ave you;
, in this Temper. I must know how I have
been so unsortunate as tp offend you.
Arabella^ no longer able/to contain herself,,
burst into Tears at this Question: \Vith one
Hand she made repeated Signs to him to be-
gone, with the other she held her Handkerchief
to her Eyes, vejc'd and afliam'd of her Weak-
ness.
iButMr.G&?»*/7/<?, cxcestiyely Ihock'd at this
Sight, instead of leaving her, threw himself pn.
his Knees besore her, and taking her Ha^id, ,
which he tenderly prest to bis Lips,
Good God! my dearest Cousin,. said he,
How you distract me by: tbjsÆeJ^vg^ur r 'Sure
N 6 something;

<page 287>
276 72* FEMALE BookIX.
something extraordinary must be the Matter.
What can it be that thus asflicts you ?—Am I
the Ca' fe of these Tears ?—Can I have offended
you so much?—Speak, dear Madam—Let me
know my Crime. Yet may I perish if I am
conscious of any towards you
Disloyal Man, said Arabella disengaging her
Hand from his, Does then the Crime of Arid-
menes seem so light in thy Apprehension, that
thou can'st hope to be thought innocent by
Arabella? No, no. ungratelul Man, the un-
fortunate Cynecia shall have no Cause to say,
that I will triumph in her Spoils. 1 myself will
be the Minister of her Revenge; and Glanville
shall susfer sor the Crime of Ariamenes.
Who the Devil is this Ariamenes, cry'd
Glanville rising in a P.iffion? And why am I to
suffer sor his Crime, prav? For Heav'ns Sake,
dear Cousin, don't let .our Imagination wander
thus. Upon mv >oul, I don't believe there is
any such Person as Ariamenes in the World.
Vile Equivoc.itor, said Arabella; Ariamenes,
tho' dead to Cynecia, is alive to the deluded
Arabella. The Crimes of Ariamenes are the
Guilt of Glanville: And if the one has made
himself unworthy of the Princess of Gaul, by
his Perfidy and Ingratitude, the other by his
Baseness and Deceit, merits nothing but Con-
tempt and Detestation from Arabella.
Frenzy, by my Soul, cry'd Glanville mutter-
ingly between his Teeth: This is downright
Frenzy. What shall1* do?
Hence, from my Presence, resum'd Arabella,
salse and ungrateful Man; persecute me no
more with the hateful Osfers of thy Love. From
this

<page 288>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. 277
this Moment I banish thee from my Thoughts
sor ever; and neither as Glanvtlle or as Aria-
menes, will I ever behold thee more.
Stay, dear Cousin, said Glanville holding her
(sor she was endeavouring to rush by him, un-
willing he should sec the Tears that had over-
spread her Face as she pronounc'd those Words)
hear me, I beg you, but one Word. Who is
it you mean by Ariamenes ?—Is it me ?—Tell
me, Madam, I beseech you—This is some hor-
rid Mistake—You have been impos'd upon by
some villainous Artifice — Speak, dear Lady
Bella—Is it me you mean by Ariamenes f For
so your last Words seem'd to hint.
Arabella, without regarding what he said,
struggled violently to sorce her Hand from his:
and sinding him still earnest to detain her, told
him with an enrag'd Voice, That she would
call sor Help, if he did not unhand her directly.
Poor Glanvtlle, at this Menace, submissively
dropt her Hand; and the Moment she was free,
she flew out of the Room, and locking herself
up in her Closet, sent her Commands to him
by one of her Women, whom she call'd to
her, to leave her Apartment immediately.
Chap. VII.
Containing indeed no great Matters, but
being a Prelude to greater.
MR. Glanville, who stood fix'd like a Statue
in the Place where Arabella had left him,
was rous'd by this Message, which tho' palliated
a little

<page 289>
a.78 FEMALE BookIX.
a little by the Girl that deliver'd it, who was
not quite so punctual as Lucy, nevertheless fill'd
him with extreme Consusion. He obey'd bow-
ever immediately, and retiring to his own Apart-
ment, endeavoured to recall to his Memory
all Lady Bella had said
The Ambiguity of her Stile, which had led
him into a Suspicion he had never entertain'd
-besore, her last Words had partly explain'd, if
as he understood she did, stie meant him by
Ariamenes. Taking this for granted, he easily
conceiv'd some Plot grounded on her Roman-
tick lotions had been laid, to prepossess her
agatirft him.
S'uGeerge's Behaviour to her rush'd that Mo-
ment into feis Thoughts: He instantly recollect -
- ed all his Fooleries, his Hiftory, his Letter, his
Conversation, aM apparently copied <from those
Books fiie was so fond of, and probably done
with a View to some other Design upon her.
These Reflections, join'd to 'his new-awak'd
Suspicions, that he was in Love with her, con-
vinced "him he was the Author of their present
Misunderstanding; and that he had impos'd
some new Fallacy 'upon Arabella, in order to
promote a Quarrel between them.
Fir'd almost to Madness at this Thought, he
stamp'd about his Room, vowing Revenge up-
on Sir George, execrating Romances, and curs-
ing his own Scupidity, for not discovering Sir
George was his Rival, anti -knowing his plotting
Talent, not providing against his Artifices.
:His first Resolutions were, to set out imme-
diately sor-Sir George's Seat, and sorce him to
confess the Part he had acted against him: But a
Moment's

<page 290>
Chap.% QJJ IXOTE. 279
Moment's Consideration convinc'd him, that
was not the most probable Place to find him in,
since it was much more likely he was waiting
the Success of his Schemes in London, or perhaps
at Richmond.
Next to satiating hts Vengeance, the Pleasure
of detecting him in such a Manner, that be
could riot possibly deny or palliate his Guilt, was
next his Heart.
He resolv'd theresore to give rt out, that he
was gone to London, to make Lady Bella be-
lieve it was in Obedience to her Commands
that he had left her, with'a Purpose not to re-
turn till he had clear'd his Innocence; hut, in
Reality, to conceal himself in his own Apart-
ment, and fee what Effects his reputed Absence
'would produce.
Having thus taken his Resolution, he sent
sor Mr. Roberts his Father's Steward, to whose
Care he had entrusted Lady Bella in'her Retire-
ment, and acquainting him with Part as his
Apprehensions with Regard to Sir ^Gevrge's At-
tempts upon iiis Cousin; he imparted to him
his Design ol staying conceal'd there, in order
to discover more effectually those Attempts, and
to preserve Lady Bella from any Consequence
of them.
Mr. Roberts approv'd of his Design; and as-
Tur'd h'tm os his Vigilance and Care, 'both in
concealing his 'Stay, and also in giving him
Notice of every Thing that .pass'd.
Mr. Gldnvi'He then wrote a lhort BiHet to
Arabella, expressing his Grief sorrier Difplea-
sure, his Departure in Obedience to her Orders,
and his Resolution not to appear in her Presence,
- till

<page 291>
280 'xtaTV FEMALE Book IX.
f
till he could give «^r convincing Proofs of his
Innocence.
This Letter he sent by Robert s, which Ara-
bella condescended to read, but would return no
Answer.
Mr. Glanville then mounting his Horse,
which Roberts had order'd to be got ready, rode
away, and leaving him at a House he sometimes
put up at, return'.: on Foot, and was let in by
Mr. Roberts at the Garden-door, and conducted
unseen to his Chamber.
While he pasc'd that Night and great Part of
the next Day, meditating on the Treachery of
Sir George, and soothing his Uneasiness with the
Hopes of Revenge, Arabella^ no less disquieted,
mused on the Insidelity of her Lover, the De-
spair of Cynecia, and the Impossibility of her
ever being happy. Then ransacking her Me-
mory sor Inltances in her Romances of Ladies
equally unsortunate with herself, she would
sometimes compare herself to one Lady, some-
times to another, adapting their Sentiments,
and making Use of their Language in her Com-
plaints.
Great Part of the Day being spent in this
Manner, the uneasy Restlessnels of her Mind
made her wish to fee Cynecia again. She long'd
to ask her a hundred Questions about the un-
faithsul Ariamenes, which the suddenness of her
Departure, and her own Astonishment prevented
her from doing, when she made that satal Dis-
covery, which had cost her fc much Uneasiness.
Sometimes a saint Hope would arise in her
Mind t-iat Cynecia might be mistaken, thro' the
great Resemblance that possibly was between
Ariamenes and Glanville.
She

<page 292>
Chap. 7. QU IXOTE. 281
She remember'd that Mandana had been de-
ceiv'd by the Likeness of Cyrus to Spitridata;
and concluded that illustrious Prince inconstant,
because Spitridates, whom she took sor Cyrus,
saw her carried away, without offering to rescue
her.
Dwelling with Eagerness upon this Thought,
because it afforded her a temporary Relief from
others more tormenting, she resolved to go to
the Park, tho' she had but little Hopes of sind-
ing Cynecia there; supposing it but too proba-
ble, that the Disturbance which the Sight, or
sancied Sight os Ariamenes had given her, would
consine her for some Days to her Chamber.
Yet however small the Probability was of meet-
ing with her, she could not resist the impatient
Desire she felt of going to seek her.
Dispensing theresore with the Attendance of
any other Servant but Lucy, she left her Apart-
ment, with a Design of resuming her usual
Walk, when she was met, at her stepping out
of the Door, by Lady L—'s three Daughters,
(who had visited her during her Residence at
Richmond) and another young Lady.
These Ladies, who to vary the Scene of their
Rural Diversions, were going to cross over to
Txvickenbam, and walk there, prest Lady Bella
to accompany them. Our melancholy Heroine
refus'd them at first, but upon their repeated
Importunity, recollecting that the Princess of
Gaul had informed her she resided there, she
consented to go, in Hopes some savourable
Chance might bring her in their Way, or dis-
cover the Place of her Retreat, when she could
easily find some Excuse sor leaving her Compa-
nions, and going to her.

<page 293>
282 The F E M A L E Book IX.
Mr. Roberts, who according to his Instructi-
ons, narrowly watch'd Arabella's Motions, sind-
ing she did not command his Attendance as
ufcial, resolv'd however to be privately of this
Party. He had but just Time to run up and
acquaint Mr. Glanvillc, and then sollow'd the
Ladies at a Distance, who taking Boat, pass'd
over to Twickenham, which he also did as soon
as he saw them landed.
Chap. VIII.
Which acquaints the Reader with two very
extraordinary Accidents.
MR. Gianvili*, who did not doubt but
Roberts would bring him some Intelli-
gence, sat waiting with anxious Impatience sor
his Return. The Evening drew on apace, he
number'd the Hours, and began to grow uneasy
at Arabella's long Stay. His Chamber-Win-
dow looking into the Garden, b« thought he
saw his Cousin, cover'd^ith her Veil as usual,
hasten down one of the Walks; his Heart
leap'd at this transient View, he threw up the
Sam, and looking out, saw her very plainly
strike into a cross Walk, and a Moment after
saw Sir George, who came out of a little
Summer-house, at her Feet. Transported with
Rage at this Sight, he snatch'd up his Sword,
flew down the Stairs into the Garden, and
came running like a Madman up the Walk in
which the Lovers were. The Lady observing
him sirst, sor Sir George's Back was towards
him,

<page 294>
Ghap. 9. QUIXOTE. 283
him, shriek'(Palbud', and not knowing what she
did, ran towards the House, crying sor Help,
and came>ack assast, yet not Time enough to
prevent Mischief: For Mr. Glanville, actuated
by an irresistible Fury, cried out to Sir George
to defend himself, who had but just Time to
draw his Sword, and make an inesfectual Pass
at Mr. Glanville, when he receiv'd his into his
Body, and fell to the Ground.
Mr. Glanville losing his Resentment insensi-
bly, at the Sight of his Rival's Blood, threw7
down his Sword, and endeavour'd to support
him; while the Lady, who had lost her Veil
in her running, and to the great Astonishment
of Mr. Glanville, prov'd to be his Sister, came
up" to' them, with Tears and Exclamations,
blaming herself for all that had happen'd. Mr.
Glanville, with a Heart throbbing with Remorse
for what he had done, gaz'd on his Sifter with;
an accusing Look, as she hung over the wounded
Baronet with streaming Eyes, sometimes wring-
ing her Hands, then clasping them together in
an Agony of Grief.
Sir George Raving Strength enough left to ob-
serve her Disorder, and the generous Concern
of Glanville, who holding him in his Arms,
intreated his Sifter to fend sor proper Assistance,
Dear Charles, said he, you are too kind, I have
us'd you very ill, I have deserved my Death from
your Hand—You knoW not what I have' beeri
base enough to practise against you If I can
but live to clear your Innocence to Lady Bella,
and free you from the Consequences of this
Action, 1 shall die fatisfy'd—
His

<page 295>
284 The FEMALE Book IX.
His Strength sailing him at these Words, he
fainted away in Mr. Glanville'* Arms; who tho'
nowconvinc'd of his Treachery, was extremely
fhock'd at the Condition he saw him in.
Miss Glanville renewing her Tears and Ex-
clamations at this Sight, he was oblig'd to lay
Sir George gently upon the Ground, and ran to
sind out somebody to fend sor a Surgeon, and
to help him to convey him into the House.
In his Way he was met by Mr. Roberts, who
was coming to seek him; and with a Look of
Terror and ConsuGon told him, Lady Bella
was brought Home extremely ill—that her Life
had been in Danger, and that she was but just
recover'd from a terrible sainting Fit.
Mr. Glanville, tho' greatly alarm'd at this
News, sorgot not to take all possible Care of
Sir George; directing Roberts to get some Per-
son to carry him into the House, and giving
him Orders to procure proper Assistance, flew
to Lady Bella's Apartment.
Her Women had just put her to Bed, raving
as in a strong Delirium. Mr. Glanville ap-
proach'd her, and finding she was in a violent
Fever, dispatch'd a Man and Horse immedi-
ately to Town, to get Physicians, and to ac-
quaint his Father with what had happen'd.
Mr. Roberts, upon the Surgeon's Report that
Sir George was not mortally wounded, came to
insorm him of this good News, but he sound
him incapable of listning to him, and in Ago-
nies not to be exprest. 'Twas with Dissiculty
they sorc'd him out of Arabella's Chamber into
his own; where throwing himself upon his
Bed, he resus'd to fee or speak to any Body, till

<page 296>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 285
he was told Sir Charles and the Physicians were
arriv'd.
He then ran eagerly to hear their Opinions of
his beloved Cousin, which he soon discover'd,
by their significant Gestures and half-pronounc'd
Words, to be very bad. They comsorted him
however, with Hopes that she might recover,
and insisting upon her being kept very quiet,
oblig'd him to quit the Room. While all the
necessary Methods were taken to abate the Vio-
lence of the Disease, Sir Charles, who had been
inform'd by his Steward of his Son's Duel with
Sir George, was amaz'd to the last Degree at twa
such terrible Accidents.
Having seen his Son to his Chamber, and re-
commended him to be patient and compos'd,
he went to visit the young Baronet, and was
not a little surpriz'd to sind his Daughter sitting
at his Bed's Head, with all the Appearance of
a violent Affliction.
Indeed Miss Glanvitte's Cares were so whol-
ly engross'd by Sir George, that she hardly
ever thought of her Cousin Arabella, and had
just stept into her Chamber while the Surgeons
were dressing Sir George's Wound, and renew'd
her Attendance upon him as soon as that was
over.
Miss Glanville, however, thought proper to
make seme trifling Excuses to her Father sor
her Solicitude about Sir George. And the
young Baronet, on whom the Fear of Death
produc'd its usual Esfects, and made him ex-
tremely concern'd sor the Errors of his past
Lite, and very desirous of attoning sor them, if
possible, assur'd Sir Charles, that if he li/d he
would

<page 297>
2&6 <r& TOWAGE Bookie.
.wojuld offer himself to.his Acceptance for a Son-
in-law; declaring that he had basely trifled
with the Esteem pf his XKaughter, but that she
bad wholly subdued hun to herself by her for-
giving Tenderness.
Six Qbarhs was very desirous of knowing she
Occasion of his Quarrel with his §on, but §jr
Gterge was too weak to hold any sarther Con-
versation; upon which Sir Qhaxk^i after a short
Visit retir'd, taking; Miss Glanvilk along with
,hirn.
That the Reader, whose Imagination is no
doubt upon the Stretch to conceive the Mean-
ing of these Two extraordinary Incidents, ma,y
be left no longer in Suspense, we think proper
to explain them both in the following Chapter,
that we may in the next pursue our History
without Interruption,.
Chap. IX.
Winch will be found to contain Information
absolutely necejsary for the right under-
standing of this History.
OU R sair and afflicted Heroine, accompa-
nied by the Ladies we have mention'd,
having cross'd the River, pursu'd their Walk
upon its winding Banks, entertaining them-
selves with the usual Topicks of Conversation
among young Ladies, such as their Winnings
and Losings at Brag, the Prices of Silks, the
newest Fashions, the best Hair-Cutter, the
Scjmdal at. the last .Assembly, jtSV. ...
,' Arabella

<page 298>
Chap. 9. QUIXO T.E. zfy
Arabella was so disgusted with this (as she
thought) insipid Discourse, which gave no
Relief to the Anxiety of her Mind, but added
a Kind of Fretsulness and Impatience to her
Grief, that she resolv'd to quit them, and
with Lucy, go in quest of the Princess of Gaul's
Retreat.
The Ladies, however, insisted upon her not
leaving them; and her Excuse that she was
going in Search of an unsortunate Unknown,
sor whom she had vow'd a Friendship, made
them all immediately resolve to accompany her,
extremely diverted with the Oddity of the De-
sign, and sacrisicing her to their Mirth by fly
Leers, Whispers, stifled Laughs, and a thou-
sand little sprightly Sallies, which the disconso-
late Arabella took no Notice of, so deeply were
her Thoughts engag'd.
Tho' she knew not which Way to direct her
Steps, yet concluding the melancholy Cynecia
would certainly chuse some very solitary Place
sor her Residence, she rambled about among
the least frequented Paths, sollow'd by the young
Ladies, who ardently desir'd to fee this unsortu-
nate unknown; tho' at Arabella's earnest Re-
quest, they promis'd not to shew themselves to
the Lady, who, she insorm'd them, sor very ur-
gentReasons,wasoblig'd to keep herself conceal'd.
Fatiguing as this Ramble was to the delicate
Spirits of Arabella's Companions, they were en-
abled to support it by the Diversion her Beha-
viour afsorded them.
Every Peasant she met, she enquir'd if a Beau-
tisul Lady disguis'd did not dwell somewhere
thereabout.
To

<page 299>
a$8 73* FEMALE Book IX.
To some she gave a Description of her Per-
son, to others an Account of the Domcsticks
that were with her; not sorgetting her Drets,
her Melancholy, and the great Care she took
to keep herself conceal'*!.
These strange Enquiries, with the strange
Language in which they were made, not a little
surprtz'd the good People to whom she address'd
herself, yet mov'd to Respect by the majestick
Loveliness of her Person, they aoswer'd her in
the Negative, without any Mixture os Scoff and
Impertinence.
How unsavourable is Chance, said Arabella,
fretting at the Disappointment, to Persons who
have any Reliance upon it! This Lady that I
have been in Search of so long without Success,
may probably be sound by others who do not
seek her, whose Presence (he may wish to avoid,
yet not be able.
The young Ladies finding it grew late, ex-
prefs'd their Apprehensions at being without any
Attendants; and desir'd Arabella to give over
her Search sor that Day. Arabella at this Hint
of Danger, enquir'd very earnestly, If they ap-
prehended any Attempts to carry them away?
And without sraying for an Answer, urg'd them
to walk Home as fast as possible, apologizing
sor the Danger into which she had so indiscreet-
ly drawn both them and herself; yet added her
Hopes, that, if any Attempt should be made
upon their Liberty, some generous Cavalier
would pass by who would rescue them: A
Thing so common, that they had no Reason to
despair of it.
Arabella

<page 300>
Chnp.9. QJJIXOTE. 289
Arabella conllruing the Silence with which
her Companions heard these Assurances, into a
Douht ot their being so favoured by Fortune,
proceeded to insorm them of several Instances
wherein Ladies met with unexpected Relief and
Deliverance from Ravishers.
She mentioned particularly the Rescue of
Statira by her own Brother, whom she ima-
gin'd sor many Years dead; that of the Prin-
cess Berenicehy an absolute Stranger, and many
others, whose Names, Characters and Adven-
tures she occasionally run over; all which the
young Ladies heard with inconceivable Alio-
nishment. And the Detail had such an Effect
upon Arabella's Imagination, bewilder'd as it'
was in the Follies of Romances, that 'spying
three or sour Horsemen riding along the Road
towards them, she immediately concluded they
would be all sciz'd and carried off.
Possess'd with this Belief, she utter'd a loud
Cry, and fleiv to the Water-side, which alarm-
ing the Ladies, who could not imagine what,
was the Matter, they ran after her as fast is
possible,
Arabella stop'd when she came to the Water-
side, and looking round about, and not perceiv-
ing any Bo;t to waft them over to Richmond, a
Thought suddenly darted int i her Mind, wor-
thy those ingenious Books which gave it Birth.
Turning theresore to the Ladies, who all at
once were enquiring the C iuse of her Fright;
'Tis now, my sair Companions, said she,
with a solemn Accent, that the Destinies have
surnish'd you with an Opportunity of display-
ing in a Manner truly Heroick, the Sublimity
Vol. Is. O of

<page 301>
290 The F E M A L E Book IX.
of your Virtue, and the Grandeur of your
Courage to the World.
The Action we have it in our Power to per-
form will immortalize our Fame, and raise us
to a Pitch of Glory equal to that of the re-
nown'd Clelia herftlf.
Like her, we may expect Statues erected so
our Honour: Like her, be propos'd as Patterns
to Heroines in ensuing Ages: And like her,
perhaps, meet with Sceptres and Crowns sor
©ur Reward.
What that beauteous Roman Lady persorm'd
to preserve herself from Violation by the impi-
ous Sextus, let us imitate to avoid the Violence
our intended Ravishers yonder come to offer us.
Fortune, whxh has thrown us in'o this Exi-
gence, presents us the Means of gloriously
escaping: And the Admiration and Esteem of
all Ages to come, will be the Recompence of
our noble Daring.
Once more, my sair Companions, If your
Honour be dear to you, if an immortal Glory
be worth your seeking, sollow the Exam-
ple I shall set you, and equal with me the Ro-
man Clelia.
Saying this, sheplung'd into the Thames, in-
tending to swim over it, as Clelia did the Tyber.
The young Ladies, who had listened with
silent Astonishment at the long Speech she had
made them, the Purport os which not one of
them understood, scream'd out aloud at this
horrid Spectacle, and wringing their Hands,
ran backwards and sorwards like distracted Per-
sons, crying sor Help. Lucy tore her Hair,
and was in the utmost Agony of Grief, when
Mr."

<page 302>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 291
Mr. Roberts, who, as we have said besore, kept
themaiways in Sight, having observ'd Arabilla
running towards theWater-side, sollow'd them
as sast as he could, and came Time enough up
to fee her frantick Action. Jumping into the
River immediately after her, he caught ho'd of
her Gown, and drew her after him to the Shore,
A Boat that Instant appearing, he put her into
it, senseless, and to ail Appearance dead. He
and Lucy supporting her, they were wafted over
in a few Moments to the other Side: Her House
being near the River, Mr. Roberts carry'd her
in his Arms to it; and as soon ^s he saw her
shew Signs of returning Life, left her to the
Care of the Women, who made haste to put
her into a warm Bed, and ran to find out
Mr. Glanville, as we have related.
There remains now only to account sor
Sir George and Miss Glanville's sudden Appear-
ance, which happen'd, gentle Reader, exactly
as follows.
Miss Glanville, having set out pretty late in
the Afternoon, with a Design of staying all
Night at Richmond, as her Chaise drove up
Kew Lane, saw one of her Cousin's Women,
Deborah by Name, t.dking to a Gentleman,
whom, notwithstanding the Disguiseofa Horse-
man's Coat, and a Hatslouch'd over his Face,
she knew to be cir George Bellmour.
This Sight a'arming her Jealousy, and. re-
newing all her sormer Suspicions, that her Cou-
sin's Charms rival'd hers in his Heart, as soon
as she alighted, finding Arabella w^s not at
Home, she retir'd in gieat Anguish of Mind lo
her Chamber, revolving in her Mind ei ery
O 2 Par-

<page 303>
292 TfcFEMALE Book IX.
Particular of Sir George's Behaviour to her Cou-
sin in the Country, and rinding new Cause sor
Sulpicion in every Thing she recollected, and
reflecting upon the Disguise in which she saw
him, and his Conference with her Woman, she
concluded herself had all along been the Dupe
of his Artifice, and her Cousin the real Object
of his Love.
This Thought throwing her into an Extre-
mity of Rage, all her tenderest Emotions were
lost in the Desire of Revenge. She imagin'd
to herself so much Pleasure from exposing his
Treachery, and putting it out of his Power to
-deny it, that she resolv'd, whatever it cost ber,
to have that Satissaction.
Supposing theresore Deborah was now re-
turn'd, she rung her Bell, and commanded her
Attendance on her in her Chamber.
The stern Brow with which she receiv'd
her, frighten'd the Girl, conscious of her Guilt,
into a Disposition to confess all, even besore she
was tax'd with any thing.
Miss Glanville saw her Terror, and endea-
vour'd to heighten it, by entering at once into
Complaints and Exclamations against ber4
threatning to acquaint her Father with her Plots
to betray her Lady, and assuring her of a very
severe Punishment sor her Treachery.
The Girl, terrify'd extremely at these Mena-
ces, begg'd Miss Glanville^ with Tears, to sorgive
her, andnottoacquaintSir Charles or her Lady,
with her Fault; adding, that she would confessall,
and never while she liv'd, do such a Thing again.
Miss Glanville would make her no Promises,
but urg'd her to confess: Upon which Deborah
sobbing,

<page 304>
Chap. 9- QUIXOTE. 293
sobbing, own'd, That sor the Sake of the Pre-
sents Sir George had made her, sty: consented to
meet him privately from Time to Time, and
give him an Account of every Thing that
'pass'd with Regard to her Lady; not thinking
there was any Harm in it. That according to
his Desires, flie had constantly acquainted him
with all her Lady's Motions, when, and where
she went, how she and Mr. GlanvilU agreed,
and a hundred other Things which he enquir'd
about. Thatthat Day in particular, he had in-
treated her to procure him the Means of an In-
terview with her Lady, if possible; and under-
standing Mr. GlanvilU was not at Richmond, (he
had let him privately into the Garden, where
ihe hop'd to prevail upon her Lady to go.
""slat, fa!a*w& '^aw^surprizi'^ IsSn;
George waiting sor my Coulm in Garden
then?
Yes, indeed, Madam, said Deborah: But
I'll go and tell him to wait no longer; and
never speak to him again, if your Ladyship
will hut be pleas'd to sorgive me.
Miss Glanvilie having taken her Resolution,
not only promis'd Deborah her Pardon, but also
a Reward, provided she would contrive it so,
-that she might meet Sir George instead of her
Cousin.
The Girl, having the true Chamber-Maid
Spirit of Intrigue in her, immediately propos'd
her putting on one of her Lady's Veils; which
as it was now the Close of the Evening, would
disguise her sussiciently; to which Miss GlanvilU^
transported with the Thoughts of thus having
an Opportunity of convincing Sir George of his
O 3 Perfidy,

<page 305>
294 ^FEMALE Book IX.
Pertidy, and reproaching him for it, consented,
and bid her bring it without being observ'd into
her Chamber".
Deborah insorming her, that Sir George was
'conccal'd in the Summer-House, as soon as she
hid equip'd herself with Arabella's Veil, she
went into the Walk that led to it; and StrGecrge,
beiiev ing her to be that Lady, hasten'd to throw
himself at her Ftet, and had scarce got through
half a Speech he had fludy'd sor his present
Purpose, when Mr. Glanville gave a satal In-
terruption to his Heroicks, in the Manner we
have already related.
Chap. X. |;.;
j^MlS^t^^na, but full cf Matter:
inlCHMOND was now a Scene of the ut-
most Consusion and Distress. Arabella's
Fever wa« r fen to such a Height, that stie was
given over by the Phy1 "cians; and Sir Gto-ge's
Wounds, tho' not judg'd mortal at first, >et by
the great Effusion of Blood had left him in so
weak a Condition, that he was thought to be
in great Danger. , ,
iir Charles, almost distracted with the Fears
of the Consequences os Sir George's Death, in-
treated his Son to quit the Kingdom; but
Mr. Glanviile, protesting he would rather die
than leave Arabella in that Illness, he was
oblig'd to give Bail sor his Appearance, incase
Sir George Ay'd: This Affair, notwithstanding
all Endeavours to prevent it, having made a
great Noise. , , . ,
 . . ''- Poor

<page 306>
Chap, io. QUIXOTE. 295
Poor Sir Charles, opprest as he was with the
Weight of all t^ese Ca'amities, was yet oblig'd
to labour incessantly to keep up the Spirits of
his Son and Daughter. The settled Despair of
the one, and the silent swelling Grief of the
other, cut him to the Heart. He omitted no
Arguments his Paternal Affection suggested to
.him, to moderate their Affliction. Mr. Glan-
vllU often endeavour'd to assume a Composure
he was very sar from feeling, in order to satisfy
his Father. But Miss Glanville, looking upon
herself to be the Cause of Sir George's Missor-
tune, declar'd, She should be miserable all her
Life, if he died.
Arabella in her lucid Intetvals, being sensible
of her Danger, prepar'd sor Death, with great
Piety and Constancy of Mind, having solemnly
assur'd Mr. Glanville of her Forgiveness, who
would not at that Time enter into an Explana-
tion of the Affair which had given her Offence
for fear of perplexing her. She permitted his
Presence often in her Chamber, and desir'd with
great Earnestness the Assistance of some worthy
Divine in her Preparations sor Death. The
Pious and Learned Doctor at St Charles's
Intimation of his Niece's Desire, came con-
stantly twice a Day to attend her. Her Fever,
bv a savourable Crisis, and the great Skill of her
Physicians, left her in a Fortnight; but this
violent Distemper had made such a Ravage in
her c elicate Conltitution, and redue'd her so low
that there seem'd very little Probability of her
Recovery. Doctor , in whom her un-
feign'd Piety, her uncommon Firmness of Mind,
had created a great Esteem and Tenderness sor
O i- her,

<page 307>
296 The FE M A L E Book FX.
her, took all Opportunities of comforting, ex-
horiing, and praying by her. The Occasion of
her Illness being the Subj st of every body's
Conversation at Richmond, he gently hinted it
to her, and urg'd her to explain her Reasons sor
ib extravagant an Action.
In the Divine Frame Arabella was then in,
this Action appear'd to her rash and vain-glori-
ous, and she acknowledg'd it to be so to her
pious Monitor: Yet she related the Motives
which induc'd her to it, the Danger she was in
of being carry'd away, the Parity of her Cir-
cumstances then with delta, and her emulous
Desire of doing as much to preserve her Ho-
nour as that renown'd Roman Lady did sor fiers.
The good Doctor was extremely surpriz'd at
this Discourse: He was beginning to think her
again delirious ; but Arabella added to this Ac-
count such sensible Reasoning on the Nature of
that Fondness sor Fame, which prompted her
to so ra(h an Undertaking, that the Doctor
left her in strange Embarrassment, not knowing
how to account sor a Mind at once so enlight-
en'd, and so ridiculous.
Mr. Glanville, meeting him as he came out
of her Chamber, the Doctor took this Oppor-
tunity to acknowledge the DlfRcuhksrfrabella's
inconsistent Discourse had thrown him into.
Mr. Glanville taking him into hi; own Apart-
ment, explain'd the Nature of that seeming
Inconsistency, and expatiated at large upon the
Disorders Romances had occasional in her Ima-
gination; several Instances os which he re-
counted, and fill'd the Doctor with the greatest
Astonishment and Concern. He lamented pa-
thetically

<page 308>
Chap, io. QJJIXOTE. 297
rheticaHy the Ruin such a ridiculous Study had
brought on so noble a Mind; and assur'd Mr.
Glanville,he would spare noEndeavourb to rescue
it from so shocking -a Delusion.
Mr. Glanville thank'd him sor his good De-
sign, with a Transport which his Fears of his
Cousin's Danger almost mingled with Tears;
and the Doctor and heagreed to expect sor some
few Days longer an Alteration sor the better in'
the Health of her Body, besore he attempted
the Cure of-her Mind. Mr. Glanville's extreme
Anxiety had made him in Appearance neglect
the repentant Sir George, contenting himself
with constantly sending twice a Day to enquire
aster his Health, but had not yet visited him.
No sooner had the Physicians declared that
Arabella was no longer in Danger, . than h s
Mi'nd being freed from that tormenting -Load
of Suspence .under which it had labour'd while
her Recovery was yet doubtsul, he went to
Sir Georgts Chamber, who by reason of his
Weakness, tho' he was also upon-the Recovery,
still kept his Bed.
Sir George, tho' he ardently wifli'd to fee him,
yet conscious of the Injuries he had both dore
and design'd him, Could not receive his Visit
without extreme Consusion: But entering into
the Cause of their Quarrel, as soon as he was
able to speak, he freely acknowledg'd his Fault,
and all the Steps he had taken to supplant him
in Arabella's Affection-
Mr. Glanville understanding by this Means,,
that he had brib'd a young Actress to personate
a Princess sorsaken by him; and had taught her
all that Heap of Absurdity with which she hail
impos'dupon//r«i<//(J,as has been related, desir'd
O 5 only

<page 309>
298 ^FEMALE Book IK.
only by Way of Reparation, That when his
Cousin was in a Condition to be spoken to upon
that Subject, he would condescend to own the
Fiaud to her; which Sir George saithsully pro-
mising, an Act os Oblivion pass'd on Mr.
G'anville's Side sor all sormer Injuries, and a so-
lemn Assurance from Sir George of inviolable
Friendlhip sor the suture. An Assurance, how-
ever, which Mr. Glanville would willingly have
dispsn'd with: For tho' n 't of a vindictive
Temper, it was one of his Maxims, That a
Man who had once betray'd him, it would be
an Error in Policy ever to trust again.
Chap. Xf.
Being in the Author's Opinion, the best
Chapter in this History.
THE good Divine, who had the Cure of
Arabella's Mind greatly at Heart, no.
sooner perceiv'd that the Health of her Body was
almost restor'd, and that he might talk to her
without the Fear of any Inconvenience, than
he introdue'd the Subject of her throwing her-
self into the River, which he had besore lightly
touch'd upon, and still declar'd himself dissatif-
fy'd with. ,
Arabella, now more dispos'd to defend this
Point than when languishing under the Pressure
of Pain and Dejection of Mind, endeavour'd
by Arguments sounded upon Romantick Hero-
ism, to prove, That it was not only reasonable
and just, but also great and glorious, and exactly
consormable to the Rules of Heroick Virtue.
The

<page 310>
Chap. n. QJJIXOTE. 299
- The Doctor listen'd to her with a rrw'x'd
Emotion, between Pity,Reverence, andAmaze-
ment: And tho' in the Persormance of his Of-
fice he had been accustom'd to accommodate his
Notions to every Understanding, and had there-
sore accumulated a great Variety of Topicks and
Jllustiations ; yet he sound himself nowengag'd
in a Controversy sor which he was not so well
prepar'd as he imagin'd, and was at a Loss sor
some leading Principle, by which he might in-
troduce h sReasonings,andbeginhisConsutationi
Tho' he saw much to praise in her Discourse,
he was asraid of confirming her Obstinacy by
Commendation : And tho' he also sound much
to blame, he dreaded to give Pain to a Delicacy
he rever'd. , ,
Perceiving however, that Arabella was silent,
as if expecting his Reply, he resolv'd not to;
bring upon himself the Guilt of abandoning her
to her Mistake, and the Necessity of speaking
sor'c'd him to sind something to say.
Tho' it is not easy, Madam, said he, sor any
one that has the Honour of conversing withi
your Ladyship to preserve his Attention free to-
any other Idea, than such as your Discourse
tends immediately to impress, yet I have not
been able while you was speaking, to resrain
from some very mortifying Reflections on the
Imperfection of all hu.nan Happiness, and the
uncertain Consequences of all those Advantages
.which we think ourselves not only at Liberty
to desire, but oblig'd to cultivate.
Tho' I have known some Dangers and Dis-
tresses, reply'd Arabella gravely, yet I did not
imagine myself such a Mirror- os Calamity as
O 6 could

<page 311>
3 oo The F E M A L[E Book IX.
could not be seen without Concern. If my Life
his not been eminently sortunate, it has yet
eseap'd the great Evils of Persecution, Captivity,
Shipwrecks and Dangers, to which many Ladies
far more illustrious both by Birth and Merit
than myself, have been expos'd. And indeed
tho' I have sometimes rais'd Envy, or possibly
incurr'd Hatred, yet I have no Reason to believe
I was ever beheld with Pity besore.
The Doctor saw he had not introduc'd his-
Discourse in the most acceptable Manner ; but
it was too late to repent.
Let me not, Madam, said he, be censur'd
besore I have sully explain'd my Sentiments.
That you have been envy'd, I can readily
believe: For who that gives Way to natural
Passions has not Reason to envy the Lady Ara-
bella? But that you have been hated, I am in-
deed less willing to think, tho' I know how ea-
sily the greater Part of Mankind hate those by
whom they are excell'd.
Arabella, has been able to excite that Melan-
choly your first Words seem'd to imply, Flat-
tery will contribute very little towards the Im-
provement of it. Nor do 1 expect from the
Severity of the Sacerdotal Character, any of
those Praises, which 1 hear perhaps with too
much Pleasure, from the rest of the World.
Having been so lately on the Brink of that
State, in which all Distinctions but that of Good-
ness are destroy'd, I have not recover'd so muck
Levity, but that I would yet rather hear In-
structions ihan Compliments.
If theresore you hive observed',in me any
dangerous Tenets, corrupt Passions, or crimi-
￼

Condition, reply'd
2

oaJ

<page 312>
Chap. ii. QJJIXOTE. 301
nal Desires, I conjure vou discover m: to my-
self. Let no salse Civility restrain your Admo-
nitions. Let me know this Evil which can
strike a good Man with Horror, and which I
dread the more, as I do not feel it.
I cannot suppose that a Man of your Order
would be alarm'd at any other Misery than Guilt:
Nor will I think so meanly of him whose Di-
rection I have intreated, as to imagine he can
think Virtue unhappy, however overwhelms]
by Disasters or Oppression.
Keep me theresore no longer in Suspence : I
expect you will exert the Authority of you?
Function, and I promise you on my Part, Sin-
cerity and Submission.
The good Man was now compleatly embar-
rass'd; he saw his Meaning mistaken, but was
afraid to explain it, lest he should seem to pay
Court by a cowardly Retraction: He theresore
paus'd a little, and Arabella supposed he was
studying sor such Expressions as might convey
Censure without Offence.
Sir, said she, if you are not yet satisfy'd of
my Willingnese to hear your Reproofs, let me
evince my Docility, by intreating you to con-
sider yourself as dispens'd from all Ceremony
upon this Occasion.
Your Imaginations, Madam, reply'd the
Doctor, are too quick sor Language ; you con-
jecture too soon, what you do not wait to
hear : and reason upon Suppositions which can-
not be allow'd you.
When I mention'd my Reflections upon hu-
man Misery, I was sar from concluding your
Ladyship miserable, compar'd with the rest of
Man.-

<page 313>
302 The FEMALE Book IX.
Mankind and though contemplating the ab-
stracted Idea of possible Fel city, I thought that
even You might be pioduc'd as an Inltance that
it is not attainable in this World, I did not
impute the Imperfection of your State to
Wickedness, but intended to observe, That
though even Virtue be added to external Ad-
vantages, there will yet be something wanting
to Happiness.
Whoever fees you, Madam, .will immedi-»
ately say, That nothing can hinder you from
being the happieit of Mortals, but Want of
Power ,to understand your own Advantages.
And whoever is admitted to your Conversation,
will be convinc'd that you enjoy all that Intel-
lectual Excellence can confer; yet I see you
harrass'd with innumerable Terrors and Per-
plexities, which never disturb the Peace os Po-
verty or. Ignorance.
I cannot diicuver, said Arabella, how Po-
verty or Ignorance can be privijeg'd from Ca-
sualty or Violence, from the Ravisher, the
Robber, or the Enemy. I should hope rather
that is Wealth and Knowledge can give no-
thing else, they at least confer Judgment to
soresee Danger, and Power to oppose it.
They are not indeed, return'd the Doctor,
fccur'd against real Missortunes, but they are
happily defended from wild Imaginations:
They do not suspect what cannot happen, nor
sigure Ravishers at a Distance, and leap into
Rivers to escape them.
Do you suppose then, f id Arabella, that I
was frighted without Cause?
It is certain, Madam, reply'd he, that no In-
jury was intended you. Dism-

<page 314>
Chap. u. Q1JIXOT E. 303
- Disingemiityy! $h; said Arabella, does not
become a Clergyman—I think too well of \ cur
Under (landing to imagmeyour Fallacy deceives
yourself: Why then should you hope that it
will deceive me?
The Laws of Conference require that the
Terms of theQueslion and Answer be the same:
I ask, if I had not Cause to be srighted i Why
then am I answer'd that no Injury was intended?
Human Beings cannot penetrate Intention?,
nor regulate their Conduct but by exterior
Appearances. And surely there was sussicient
Appearance of intended Injury, and that the
greatest which my Sex can suffer.
Why, Madam, said the Doctor, should you
ftill persist in so wild an Assertion?
A coarse Epithet, said Arabella, is no Con-
sutation. It rests upon you to shew, That
in giving Way to my Fears, even supposing
them groundless, I departed from the Character
of a reasonable Person.
I am afraid, replied the Doctor, of a Dis-
pute with your Ladyship, not because I think
myself in Danger of Defeat, but because being
accustom'd to Ipeak to Scholars with Scholastics
Ruggedness, I may perhaps depart in the Heat
of Argument, from that Respect to which you
-have so great a Right, and give Offence to a
Person I am really afraid to displease.
But, if you will promise to excuse my Ardour,
I will endeavour to prove that you have been
frighted without Reason.
I should be content, replied Arabella, to ob*
tain Truth upon harder Terms, and theresore
intreat you to begin.
. . The

<page 315>
304 The FEMALE Book IX.
The Apprehension of any suture Evil, Ma-
dam, said the Divine, which is called Terror,
when the Danger is from natural Causes, and
Suspicion, when it proceeds from a moralAgent,
must: always arise from Comparison.
We can judge os the Future only by the Past,
and have theresore only Reason to fear or sus-
pect, when we see the same Causes in Motion
which have sormerly produe'd Mischief, or the
same Measures taken as have besore been pre-
paratory to a Crime. • - i
Thus, when the Sailor in certain Latitudes
fees the Clouds rife, Experience bids him expect
a Storm. When any Monarch levies Armies,
his Neighbours prepare to repel an Invasion.
This Power of Prognostication, may, by
Reading and Conversation, be extended be-
yond our own Knowledge: And the great Use
of Books, is that of participating without La-
bour or Hazard the Experience of others.
But upon this Principle how can you sind any
Reason sor your late Fright.
Has it ever been known, that a Lady of your
Rank was attack'd with such Intentions, in a
Place so publick, without any Preparations
made by the Violator sor Defence or Escape?
Can it be imagin'd that any Man would so
rashly expose himself to Infamy by Failure, and
to the Gibbet by Success?; .
Does there in the Records of the World ap-
pear a single Instance of such hopeless Villan.y?
It is now Time, Sir, said Arabella, to answer
your Questions, besore they are too many to be
remembered. . . u
The Dignity of my Birth, can very little de-
send me against an Insult to which the Heiresses
'of

<page 316>
Chip. ii. QUI X OT E. 305
of great and powersul Empires, the Daughters
of valiant Princes, and the Wives of renowned
Monarchs, have been a thousandTimes exposed.
The Danger which you thinkso great, would
hardly repel a determin'd Mind ; sor in Effect,
Who would have attempted my Rescue, seeing
that no Knight or valiant Cavalier was within
View?
What then mould have hinder'd him from
placing me in a Chariot? Driving it into the
pathless Dt sart ? And immuring me in a Castle,
-among Woods and Mountains ? Or hiding me
perhaps in the Caverns of a Rock ? Or consining
me in some Illand of an immense Lake?
From all this, Madam, interrupted theClergy-
man, he is hinder'd by Impossibility.
H« cannot carry you to any of these dreadsul
Places, because there is no such Castle, Desarf,
Cavern, or Lake.
You will pardon me, Sir, said Arabella, if I
recur to your own Principles:
You allow that Experience may be gain'd
by Books: And certainly there is no Part of
Knowledge in which we are oblig'd to trust
-them more than in Descriptive Geography.
The most restless Activity in the longest L'fe,
can survey but a small Part of the habitable
Globe : And die rest can only be known from
the Report of others.
Universal Negatives are seldom safe, and are
least to be allow d when the Disputes are about
Objects of Sense; where one Position cannot
be mserr*d from another.
That there is a Castle, any Man who has
seen it may safely assirm. Eut you cannot with
equal

<page 317>
306 ^FEMALE Book IX.
equal Reason, maintain that there is no Castle,
bcCiuse you have not seen it.
Why should I imagine that the Face of the
Earth is alter'd since the Time of those He-
roines, who experiene'd so many Changes of
uncouth Captivity ?t
Castles indeed, are the Works of Art; and
are theresore subject to Decay. But Lakes, and
Caverns, and Desarts, must always remain.
And why, since vou call sor Instances, should
I not dread the Missortunes which happen'd to
the divine CUlia, who was carry'd to one of
the Ifles of the Thrajymtnian Lake?
Or those which befel the beautisul Car.dace,
.Queen of Ethiopia, whom the Pyrate Zenedorus
wander'd with on the Seas?
Or the Accidents which imbitter'd the Life
of the incomparable Cleopatra?
0. [\k ?z:'zz~:lzv< which made that of the
/air Eli/a miserable t
Or, in sine, the various Distresses of many
other sair and virtuous Princesses: Such as those
which happen'd to Oiympia, Bel.'amira, Pari-
fatis, Berenice, Amalazantha, Agione, Æbyjinda,
Placidia, Arsmoe, Dticiamia, and a thousand
others I could mention.
To the Names cf many of these illustrious
Sufferers I am an absolute Stranger, replied the
Doctor.
The rest I saintly remember some Mention
of in those contemptible Volumes, with which
Children are sometimes ii-judiciously suffer'd to
amuse their Imaginations; but which I little
expected to hear quoted by your Ladyship in a
serious Discourse.
And

<page 318>
Chap, i 1. QJLT IX O T E. 307
And though I am very sar from catching
Occasions ot Resentment, yet I think myself
at Liberty to observe, That if I merited yi ur
Censure sor one indelicate Epithet, we have
engag'd on very unequal Terms, if I may not
likewise complain of such contemptuous Ridi-
cule as you are pleas'd to exercise upon my O-
pinions by opposing them with the Authority
of Scriblers, not only of Fictions, but of sense-
less Fictions; which at once vitiate the Mind,
and pervert the Understanding; and which if
they are at any Time read with Safety*-owe
their Innocence only to their Absurdity.'
From these Books, Sir, said Arabella, which
you condemn with so much Ardour, though you
acknowledge yourself little acquainted with
them, I have learnt not to recede from the Con-
ditions I have granted, and sball not theresore
censure the Licence of your Language, which
clancss from the fw.i-> ..r^>n the Readers/'
cj -' '*' "t''- -; - _
- These Books, Sir, thu. coi+upr,- thirf absurd,
thus dangerous alike to the Intellect and Mo-
rals, I have read; and that 1 hope without In-
jury to my Judgment, or my Virtue.
The Doctor, whose Vehemence had hin-
der'd him from discovering all the Consequen-
ces of his Position, now sound himself entan-
gled, and reply'd in a submissive Tone,
I confess, A/Iadam,' my Words imply an
Accusation very remote from my Intention.
It has always been tfe'e Rule of my Life, not
to justify any Words or .Actions because they
are mine. ..'-"'
1 am afham'd of my Negligence, I am sorry
sur nay .Warmth,.,and intreat your Ladyship to
- - -».Q,».; par-

<page 319>
308 FEMALE Book IX.
pardon a Fault which I hope never to repeat.
The Reparation, Sir, said Arabella smiling,
-over-balances the Offence, and by thus daring t©
own you have been in the Wrong, you have
rais'd in me a much higher Esteem for you.
Yet I will notpardon you, added she, w thout
enjoining you a Penance sor the Fault you own
you have committed; and this Penance shall
be to piove,
First, That these Histories you condemn
are Fictions.; . . - -
Next* That they are absurd.
And Lastly, That they are Criminal.
The Doctqir.was pleas'd to find a Reconci-
liation offer'd upon so very easy Terms, with
« Person whom he beheld at once wish Reve-
jence and Affection, and could not osfen4
without extreme Regret.
He theresore ans'.Tsred with a Very chearsul
Composure: 1
To prove those Narratives to be Fictions,
Madam, is only dissicult, because the Position
is almost too evident sor Proof.
Your Ladyship knows, I suppose to what
Authors these Writings are ascrib'd?
To the French Wits of the last Century,
said Arabella.
And at what Distance, Madam, are the Facts
related in them from the Age of the Writer?
I was never exact in my Computation, re-
plied Arabella; but I think most of the Events
happen'd about two thousand Years ago,
How then, Madam, resum'd the Doctor,
could these Events be so minutely known to
Writers so sar remote from the Time in which
they happened? By

<page 320>
Chap, it: QJJI X'QTE. 309
By Records, Monuments, Memoirs, and
Histories, answered the Lady.
But by what Accident, then, said the Doctor
smiling, did it happen these Records and Mo-
numents were kept universally secret to Man-
kind till the last Century?
What brought all the Memoirs of the remot-
est Nations and earliest Ages only to France .
Where were they hidden that none couldt
consult them but a few obscure Authors?
And whither are they now vanished again
that they can be sound no more?
Arabella having sat silent a while, told him,
That she sound his Questions very dissicult to be
answer'd; and that though perhaps the Authors
themselvescould have told whence they borrow-
ed their Materials, she should not at present re-
quire any other Evidence of the first Assertion:
But allow'd him to suppose them Fictions,and
requir'd now that he should shew them to be
absurd.
Your Ladyship, return'd he, has, I find, too
muchUnderstanding to struggle against Demon-
stration, and too much Veracity to deny your
Convictions; theresore some os theArguments-
by which I intended to shew the Falshood of
these Narratives may be now used to prove
their Absurdity.
You grant them, Madam, to be Fictions?
Sir, interrupted Arabella eagerly, You are
again infringing the Laws of Disputation.
You are not to consound a Supposition of
which I allow you only the present Use, with
an unlimited and irrevocable Concession.
I am too well acquainted with my own Weak-
ness

<page 321>
3 ro Tse FEMALE Book IX.
ness to conclude an Opinion salse, merely be-
cause I sind myself unable to defend it.
But I am in haste to hear the Proof os the o-
ther Positions, not only because they may per-
haps supply what is desicient in your Evidence
of the first, but because I think it of more Im-
portance to detect Corruption than Fiction.
Though indeed Falshood is a Species of Cor-
ruption, and what Falshood is more hatesul
than the Falshood of History.
Since you have drawn me back, Madam, to
the first Question, returned the Doctor, Let
me know what Arguments your Ladyship can
produce sor the Veracity of these Books.
That there are many Objectinnsagainstit,you
yourself have allowed, and the highest moral Evi-
dence of Falshood appears when there are many
A rguments against an Assertion, and none sor it.
Sir, replied Arabella, I shall never think that
any Narrative, which is not consuted by its own
Absurdity, is without one Argument at least on
its Side; there is a Love of Truth in the human
Mind, if not naturally implanted, so easily ob-
tained from Reason and Experience, that 1
should expect it universally to prevail where there
is no strong Temptation to Deceit; we hate to
be deceived, we theresore hate those that deceive
us; we desire not to be hated, and theresore
know that we are not to deceive. Shew me an
equal Motive to Falshood, or confess that every
Relation has some Right to Credit.
This may be allowed, Madam, said the Doctor,
when we claim to be credited, but that seems not
to be the Hope or Intention of these Writers.
Surely Sir, replied Arabella^ you must mis-
take

<page 322>
Chap. ii. QUIXOTE. 311
take their Design; he that writes without In-
tention to be credited, must write to little Fur-
pose; sor what Pleasure or Advantage can arise
from Facts that never happened ? What Exam-
ples can be afsorded by the Patience of those
who never susfered, or the Chastity of those who
were never solicited? The great End of Histo-
ry, is to shew how much human Nature can en-
dure er persorm. When we hear a Story in
common Life that raises our Wonder or Com-
passion, the sirst Consutation stills our Emoti-
ons, and however we were touched besore, we
then chafe it from the Memory with Contempt
as a Trifle, or with Indignation as an Imposture.
Prove, theresore, that the Books which I have
hitherto read as Copies' of Li sie, and Models of
Conduct, are empty Fictions, and from this
Hour I deliver them to Moths and Mould; and
from this Time sorward consider their Authors
as Wretches who cheated me of those Hours I
ought to have dedicated to Application and Im-
provement, and betrayed me toaWasteof those
Years in which I might have laid up Know-
ledge sor my suture Life.
Shakespear, said the Doctor, calls just Re-
sentment the Child of Integrity, and theresore
I do not wonder, that what Vehemence the
Gentleness of your Ladyship's Temper allows,
should be exerted upon this Occasion. Yet
though I cannot sorgive these Authors sor ha-
ving destroyed so much valuable Time, yet I
cannot think them intentionally culpable, be-
cause I cannot believe they expected to be cre-
dited. Truth isnotalways injured by Fiction.
An

<page 323>
3,12 The F E M A L E Book IX.
An admirable * Writer of our own Time, has
sound the Way to convey the most solid In-
struction*!, the noblest Sentiments, and the most
exalted Piety, in the pleasing Dress of a f No-
vel, and j t0 ufe the Words of the greatest J
Genius in the present Age, " Has taught the
"Passions to move at the Command of Vir-
"tue." The Fables of Æsop, though never
I suppose believed, yet have been long consi-
dered as Lectures, of moral and domestic
Wisdom, so well adapted to the Faculties of
Man, that they have been received by all civi-
lized Nations; and the Arabi themselves have
honoured his Tranflator with the Appellation
©f Locman the Wife.
The Fables of Æsop, said Arabella, are a-
mong those of which the Absurdity discovers,
itself, and the Truth is comprised in the Ap-
plication; but what can be said of those Talej
which are told with the solemn Air of histori-
cal Truth, and il salse con vey no Instruction?
That they cannot be defended, Madam, said,
the Doctor, it is my Purpose to prove, and i! tqr
evince their Falshood be sussicient to procure
their Banishment sromiyour Ladyship's Closet,
their Day of Grace is near an Eud. How is
any oral, or written Testimony, confuted or
confirmed?
By comparing it, says the Lady, with the
Testimony of others, or with the natural Ef-.
sects and standing Evidence of the Facts rela-
ted, and sometimes by comparing it with itself,
If then your Ladyship will abide by this last,
returned he, and compare these Books with
antient -
* Richardson. f Ctarijsa.
X The Author os the Rambler.

<page 324>
Chap. ii. Q^U I X O T E. 313
antient Histories, you will not only sind innu-
merable Names, of which no Mention was
ever made rxsore, but Persons who lived in
different Ages, engaged as the Friends or Ri-
vals of each other. You will perceive that
your Authors have parcelled out the World at
Discretion, erected Palaces, and established
Monarchies wherever the Conveniency of
their Narrative required them, and set Kings
and Queens over imaginary Nations. Nor have
they considered themselves as invested with less
Authority over the Works of Nature, than the
Institutions if Men; sor they have distributed
Mountains and Deserts, Gulphs and Rocks,
wherever they wanted them, and whenever the
Course of their Story required an Expedient,
raised a gloomy Forest, or overflowed the Re-
gions with a rapid Stream.
I suppose, said Arabella, you have no Inten-
tion to deceive me, and since, if what you have
asserted be true, the Cause is undefensible, I
dall trouble you no longer to argue on this To-
pic, but desire now to hear why, supposing
them Fictions, and intended to be received as
Fictions, you censure them as absurd?
The only Excellence of Falshood, answered
he, is its Resemblance to Truth; as theresore
any Narrative is more liable to be consuted by
its Inconsistency with known Facts, it is at a
greater Distance from the Perfection of Fic-
tion; sor there can be no Dissiculty in framing
a Tale, if we are left at Liberty to invert all
History and Nature sor our own Conveniency.
When a Crime is to be concealed, it is easy
to cover it with an imaginary Wood. When
Vol. II. P Virtue
V

<page 325>
3H 7& FEMALE BooklX.
Virtue is to be rewarded, a Nation with
a new Name may, without any Ex-
pence of Invention, raise her to the Throne.
When Ariofto was told of the Magnificence of
his Palaces, he answered, that the Cost of po-
etical Architecture was very little; and
still less is the Cost of Building without Art,
than without Materials. But their historical
Failures may be easily passed over, when we
consider their physical or philosophical Absur-
dities; to bring Men together from different
Countries does not shock with every inherent or
demonstrable Absurdity, and theresore when
we read only sor Amusement, such Impropri-
eties may be born: But who can sorbear to
throw away the Story that gives to one Man
the Strength of Thousands; that puts Life
or Death in a Smile or a Frown; that recounts
Labours and Sufferings to which the Powers
of Humanity are utterly unequal; that disfigures
the whole Appearance of the World, and re-
presents every Thing in a Form different from
that which Experience has shewn. It is the
Fault of the best Fictions, that they teach
young Minds to expect strange Adventures
and sudden Vicissitudes, and theresore encou-
rage them often to trust to Chance. A long
Life may be pasted without a single Occur-
rence that can cause much Surprize, or pro-
duce any unexpected Consequence of great
Importance; the Order of the World is so
.established, that all human Affairs proceed in
a regular Method, and very little Opportunity
is left sor Sallies or Hazards, sor Assault or
Rescue; but the Brave and the Coward, the
Sprightly

<page 326>
Chap. ii. QUIXOTE. 315
Sprightly and the Dull, suffer themselves to
be carried alike down the Stream of Custom.
Arabella, who had sor some Time listened
with a Wish to interrupt him, now took
Advantage os a Ihort Pause. I cannot imagine,
Sir, said she, that you intend to deceive me,,
and theresore I am inclined to believe that you
are yourself mistaken, and that your Applica-
tion to Learning has hindered you from that
Acquaintance with the World, in which these
Authors excelled. I have not long conversed
in Public, yet I have sound that Life is sub-
ject to many Accidents. Do you count my
late Escape sor nothing? Is it to be numbered
among daily and cursory Transactions, that a
Woman flies from a Ravisher into a rapid
Stream?
You must not, Madam, said the Doctor,
urge as an Argument the Fact which is at pre-
sent the Subject of Dispute.
Arabella blushing at the Absurdity she had
been guilty of, and not attempting any Sub-
tersuge or Excuse, the Doctor sound himself
at Liberty to proceed:
You must not imagine, Madam, continued
he, that I intend to arrogate any Superiority,
when I observe that your Ladyship must suffer
me to decide, in some Measure authoritatively,
whether Life is truly described in those Books;
the Likeness of a Picture can only be determin-
ed by a Knowledge of the Original. You
have yet had little Opportunity of knowing the
Ways of Mankind, which cannot be learned
but from Experience, and of which the highest
Understanding, and the lowest, must enter the
P 2 World.

<page 327>
316 the FEMALE Book IX.
World in equal Ignorance. I have Jived long
in a public Character, and have thought
it my Duty to study those whom I have under-
taken to admonish or instruct. I have never
been so rich as to asfright Men into Disguise
and Concealment, nor so poor as to be kept
at a Distance too great sor accurate Observa-
tion. I theresore presume to tell your Lady-
ship, with great Confidence, that your Wri-
ters have instituted a World of their own, and
that nothing is more different from a human
Being, tha-s-Heroes or Heroines.
I am afraid, Sir, said Arabella, that the
Difference is not in Favour of the present
World.
That, Madam, answered he, your own Pene-
tration will enable you to judge when it shall
have made you equally acquainted with both:
I have no Desire to determine a Question, the
Solution of which will give so little Pleasure to
Purity and Benevolence.
The Silence of a Man who loves to praise
is a Censure sussiciently severe, seicf the Lady.
May it never happen that you should be unwil-
ling to mention the Name of Arabella. I hope
wherever Corruption prevails in the World, to
live in it with Virtue, or, if I find myself too
much endanger'd, to retire from it with Inno-
cence. But if you can say so little in Commen-
dation of Mankind, how will you prove these
Histories to be vicious, which if they do not de-
scribe real Life, gives us an Idea of a better
Race of Beings than now inhabit the World.
It is of little Importance, Madam, replied
the Doctor, to decide whether in the real or
fictitious

<page 328>
Cbap, it. QUIXOTE. 317
fictitious Life, most Wickedness is to be sound.
Books ought to supply an Antidote to Example,
and if we retire to a Contemplation of Crimes,
and continue in our Closets to inflame our Pas-
sions, at what time must we rectify ourWords,
or purify our Hearts? The immediate Ten-
dency of these Books which your Ladyship
must allow me to mention with some Severity,
is to give new Fire to the Passions of Revenge
and Love; two Passions which, even without
.such powersul Auxiliaries, it is one of the se-
verest Labours of Reason and Piety to suppress,.
and which yet must be suppressed if we hope to
be approved in the Sight of the only Being
whose Approbation can make us happy. I am
afraid your Ladyship will think me too serious.
I have already learned too much from you, said
Arabella, to presume to instruct you, yet suffer
me to caution you never to dishonour your sa-
cred Ossice by the Lowliness of Apologies.Then .
let me again observe, resumed he, that these
Books soften the Heart to Love, and harden it
to Murder. That they teach Women to exact .
Vengeance, and Men to execute it; teach
Women to expect not only Worship, but the
dreadsul Worship of human Sacrisices. Every
Page of these Volumes is silled with such extra-
vagance of Praise, and expressions of Obedience -
as one human Being ought not to hear from
another; or with Accounts of Battles, in which
thousands are slaughtered sor no other Purpose
than to gain a Smile from the haughty Beauty,
who sits a calm Spectatress of the Ruin and De-
solation, Bloodshed and Misery, incited by her- -
self.
P 3 It

<page 329>
318 ^FEMALE Book IX.
It is impossible to read these Tales without
lessening part of that Humility, which by pre-
serving in us a Sense of our Alliance with all
Human Nature, keeps us awake toTenderness
and Sympathy, or without impairing that Com-
passion which is implanted in us as an Incentive
to Acts of Kindness. If there be any preserved
by natural Softness, or early Education, from
learning Pride and Cruelty, they are yet in dan-
ger of being betrayed to the Vanity of Beauty,
and taught the Arts of Intrigue.
Love,Madam, is, you know, the Business, the
sole Business of Ladies in Romances. Aratella's
Blushes now hinder'd him from proceeding as he
had intended. I perceive, continued he, that
my Arguments begin to be less agreeable to
your Ladyship's Delicacy, 1 shall theresore in-
sist no longer upon salse Tenderness of Senti-
ment, but proceed to those Outrages of the
violent Passions, which, though not more dan-
gerous, are more generally hatesul.
It is not neceflary, Sir, interrupted Arabella,
that you strengthen by any new Proof a Position
which when calmly considered cannot be denied;
my Heart yields to the Force of Truth, and I
now wonder bow the Blaze of Enthusiastic
Bravery, could hinder me from remarking
with Abhorrence the Crime of deliberate un-
necessary Bloodshed.
I begin to perceive that I have hitherto at
least trifled away my Time, and fear that I have
alrea iy made some Approaches to the Crime of
encouraging Violence and Revenge. I hope,
Madam, sa:d the good Man with Horror in his
Looks, that no Life was ever lost by your In-
cite-

<page 330>
Chap. 12. QUIXOTE. 319
citement. Arabella seeing him thus moved,
burst into Tears, and could not immediately
answer Is it possible, cried the Doctor, that
such Gentleness and Elegance mould be stained
with Blood? Be not too hasty in your Censure,
said Arabella, recovering herself, I tremble in-
deed to think how neaily I have approached
the Brink o! Murder, when I thought myself
only consulting my own Glory ; but whatever
I suffer, 1 will never more demand orinliigate
Vengeance, nor consider my Punctilios as
important enough to be ballanced against Life.
The Doctor consirmed her in her new Re-
solutions, and thinking Solitude was necessary
to compose her Spirits after the Fatigue of so
long a Conversation, he retired to acquaint Mr.
Glanville with his Success, who in the Trans-
port of his Joy was almost ready to throw him-
self at his Feet, to thank him sor the Miracle,
as he called it, that he had persormed.
Chap. XII.
In which the History is concluded.
MR, Glanville, who sancied to himself the
most ravishing Delight from conversing
with his lovely Cousin, now recovered to the
free Use of all her noble Powers of Reason,
would have paid her a Visit that Afternoon,
had not a Moment's Reslection convinced him
that now was the Time, when her Mind was
labouring under the Force of Conviction, to
introduce the repentant Sir George to her, who
4 by
r
t

<page 331>
32o The FEMALE Book IX.
by confessing the ridiculous Farce he had inven-
ted to deceive her, might restore him to her
good Opinion, and add to the Doctor's solid
Arguments the poignant Sting of Ridicule which
she would then perceive she had incurred.
Sir George being now able to leave his Cham--
ber, and Arabella well enough recovered to
admit a Visit in hers, Mr. Glanville intreated
his Father to w^it on her, and get Permission
sor Sir George to attend her upon a Business
of some Consequence. Sir Charles no sooner
mentioned this Request, than Arabella after
a little Hesitation complied with it. As she had
been kept a Stranger to all the Particulars of
Mr. Glanville's Quarrels with the young Ba-
ronet, her Thoughts were a little perplex'd con-
cerning the Occasion of this Visit, and her Em-
barrassment was consi lerably increased by the
Consusion which she perceived in the Counte-
nance of Sir George. It was not without some
Tokens of a painsully supprest Reluctance that
Sir George consented to persorm his Promise,
when Mr. Glanville, claim'd it, but the Disad-
vantages that would attend his Breach of it, de-
jectc l and humbled as he now was, presenting
themselves in a sorcible manner to his Imagi-
nation, consirmed his wavering Resolutions.
And since he sound himself obliged to be his
own Accuser, he endeavoured to do it with the
best Grace he could. Acknowledging there-
sore to Lady Bella all the Artifices her Decep-
tion by Romances had given him Encourage-
ment to use upon her, and explaining very ex-
plicitly the last with relation to the pretended
Princess of Gaul, He submissively asked her Par-

<page 332>
Chap. i2. QUIXOTE. 321
don sor the Osfence it would now give her, as
well as sor the Trouble it had sormerly.
Arabella struck with inconceivable Consusion,
having only bowed her Head to hisApology, de-
sired to be left alone, and continued sor near
two Hours afterwards wholly absorb'd in the
most disagreeable Reflections on the Absurdity
of her past Behaviour, and the Contempt and
Ridicule to which she now saw plainly she had
exposed herself. The Violence of these first
Emotions having at length subsided, she sent sor
Sir Charles, and Mr. Glanville, and having with
a noble Ingenuity expatiated upon the Follies
her vitiated Judgment had led her into, she a-
pologized to the first, sor the frequent Causes
she had given him of Uneasiness; and, turning
to Mr. Glanville, whom she beheld with a Look
of mingled Tenderness and Modesty, To give
you myself, said she with all my remaining Im-
perfections, is making you but a poor Present
in return sor the Obligations your generous
Affection has laid me under to you; yet since
I am so happy as to be desired sor a Partner sor
Life by a Man of your Sense and Honour, I
will endeavour to make myself as worthy as I
am able of such a savourable Distinction.
Mr. Glanville kissed the Hand she gave him
with an emphatic Silence, while Sir Charles,
in the most obliging Manner imaginable,
thanked her sor the Honour she conferred both
on himself and Son by this Alliance.
Sir George, entangled in his own Artifices,
saw himself under a Necessity of consirming the
Promises he had made to Miss Glanville during
his Fit os Penitence, and was accordingly mar-
ried

<page 333>
322 The FEMALE Book IX.
ried to that young Lady, at the same Time
that Mr. Glanville and Arabella were united.
We chuse, Reader, to express this Circum-
stance, though the same, in disferent Words,
as well to avoid Repetition, as to intimate that
the first mentioned Pair were indeed only mar-
ried in the common Acceptation of the Word;
that is, they were privileged to join Fortunes,
Equipages, Titles, and Expence; while Mr.
Glanville and Arabella were united, as well in
these, as in every Virtue and laudable Affection
of the Mind.
FINIS.


<page 334>
º!
i.
º:
#
:








<page 335>

<page 336>

<page 337>

<page 338>
*** --~~~~ ~~~~ ~~ --- ----





<page 339>
， ！ - （ ） |-|- |-|-|- |-|-|-- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - ------|-• ae*
- º **********）→ ·- - -· · · · · ·， ！·- -|----- «- - - - - -！ -· · · ·|-* * · · -， ！---* ~~~~ ~~~ ~~*** • •--- ----***
|-|-|-|-

<page 340>
（~~~~ ~
|-
----
|--
~
|×|-|-|-
|-|-•
|-
|-
|-
|-
----
----
|-*|-
|-
|-|-|-
|-|-|-|-
|-
|-|-·
----|-
|-
·
----
----|-
|-
|-·
·|-
·
-·|-
-
~~ ~~~~ ---------*==） …….….………… ）- - - - ----- --------|-
|-|-~~ ~~~~ ~~~~ ~~~~ ~~~~）. ：） ……… ）（~~~~ ~~~~ ~- - --------------- ---- _… . . . . . … .
----· · · · · · · · · · * ， ， ， ， ，|-， ، ، ، ،|-- - -
æ- ）---- --|-- - - -- - -|-|-|-|-|-


<page 341>


<page 342>


<page 343>


<page 344>
