The life of Richard Nash, Esq., late master of the ceremonies at BathOliver Goldsmith, Richard Nash

<page 1>


<page 2>


<page 3>
1

<page 4>

<page 5>

<page 6>


<page 7>

<page 8>
THE HEW YORK
PUBLIC LIBRARY
A8TOR. IÆNCX AND
TILDES FOUNDATIONS'

<page 9>

/

<page 10>
THE
L I F
E
O F
RICHARD NASH, Esq;
Master of the Ceremonies at Bath.
Extracted principally from
His O RIG IN AL PAPERS.
THE SECOND EDITION.
LONDON:
Printed for J. Newbery, in St. Paul's Church-
yards W.Frederick, at Bath,; and
G. Faulkener, in Dublin.
..•MDCCLXtf.:
LATE

-Non ego paucis
Offendar Maculis..
Hor.

<page 11>
vv~.

<page 12>
T O
TITO RIGHT WORSHIPFUL,
THE MAYOR,
RECORDER,
ALDERMEN,
AND
COMMON COUNCIL,
OF THE
CITY of BATH;
This VOLUME
Is Humbly INSCRIBED
By their
Most Obedient Humble Servant,
The EDITOR.

<page 13>
ADVERTISEMENT.
We have the Permission of George Scott, Esq;
(who kindly undertook to settle the Affairs of Mr.
Na/b, for the Benefit of his Family and Creditors)
to assure the Publick, that all the Papers found in
the Custody of Mr. Nq/b, which any ways respect-
ed his Life, and were thought interesting to the
Publick, were communicated to the Editor of this
Volume; so that the Reader will, at least, have the
Satisfaction of perusing an Account that is genuine,
-ind not the Work of Imagination, as Biographical
Writings too frequently are.

<page 14>
PREFACE.
THE following memoir is neither
calculated to enflame the reader's
passions with descriptions of gallantry, nor
to gratify his malevolence with details of
icandal. The amours of coxcombs, and
the pursuits of debauchees, are as destitute
of novelty to attract us, as they are of va-
riety to entertain, they still present us but
the fame picture, a picture we have seen
a thousand times repeated. The life of
Mr. Najh is incapable of supplying any
entertainment of this nature to a prurient
curiosity. Tho' it was past in the very
midst of debauchery, he practised but
few of those vices he was often obliged
to aslent to. Tho' he lived where gal-
lantry was the capital pursuit, he was ne-
ver known to favour it by his example,
and what authority he had was set to op-
pose it. Instead therefore of a romanfic
history, filled with warm pictures and fan-
ciful adventures, the reader of the follow-
ing

<page 15>
vi PREFACE.
ing account must rest satisfied with a ge-
nuine and candid recital compiled from the
papers he left behind, and others equally
authentic; a recital neither written with a
spirit of satire nor panegyric, and with
scarce any other art, than that of arrang-
ing the materials in their natural order.
But tho' little art has been used, it is
hoped that some entertainment may be
collected from the life of a person so much
talked of, and yet so little known as Mr.
Nash. The history of a man, who for
more than fifty years presided over the
pleasures of a polite kingdom, and whose
life, tho' without any thing to surprise,
was ever marked with singularity, de-
serves the attention of the present age;
the pains he took in pursuing pleasures
and the solemnity he assumed in adjusting
trifles, may one day claim the smile of
posterity. At least such an history is well
enough calculated to supply a vacant
hour with innocent amusement, however
it may fail to open the heart, or improve
the understanding.
Yet

<page 16>
PREFACE. v3
Yet his life, how trifling soever it may
appear to the inattentive, was not with-
out its real advantages to the public. He
was the first who diffused a desire of so-
ciety, and an easiness of address among a
whole people who were formerly censured
by foreigners for a reservedness of beha-
'viour, and an aukward timidity in their
first approaches. He first taught a fa-
miliar intercourse among strangers at
Bath and Tunbridge, which still subsists
among them. That ease and open access
first acquired there, our gentry brought
back. to the metropolis, and thus the
whole kingdom by degrees became more
refined by lessons originally derived. from
him.
Had it been my design to have made
this history more pleasing at the expence
of truth, it had been easily performed;
but I chose to describe the man as he was,
not such as imagination could have help-
ed in compleating his picture; he will
be found to be a weak man, governing
weaker subjects, and may be considered
as resembling a'monarch of Cappadocia,
i whom

<page 17>
-viii PREFACE.
whom Cicero somewhere calls, the littti
king of a little peopki
But while I have been careful iri de-
scribing the monarch, his dominions have
claimed no small share of my attention;
I have given an exact account of the rise,
regulation, and nature of the amusements
of the city of Bath, how far Mr. NajJj
contributed to establish and refine them,
and what pleasure a stranger may expect
there upon his arrival. Such anecdotes as
are at once true and worth preserving are
produced in their order, and some stories
are added, which, tho'commonly known,
more necessarily belong to this history,
than to the places from whence they have
been extracted. But it is needless to point
out the pains that have been taken, or the
entertainment that may be expected from
the perusal of this performance. It is butan
indifferent way to gain the reader's esteem,
to be my own panegyrist, nor is this pre-
face so much designed to lead him to
beauties, as to demand pardon for defects.
THE

<page 18>
^ W W ^ tR? If f f * f f t t.. f t I f f *
* *
* *
#############*######*
THE
LIFE
O F
RICHARD NASH, Esq;
)9( IS T O RY Owes its excellence.
H ^ more to the writer s manner
k _*( than the materials of which it
^ is composed. The intrigues of
courts, or the devastation of armies, are re-
garded by the remote spectator with .as
little attention as the squabbles of a vil-
lage, or the fate of a malefactor, that
fall under his own observation. The
.great and the little, as they have the
I> fame

<page 19>
2 The LIFE ok
same senses, and the fame affections, ge-
nerally present the same picture to the
hand of the draughtsman; and whether
the heroe or the clown be the subject of
the memoir, it is only man that appears
with all his native minuteness about
him; for nothing very great was ever yet
formed from the little materials of hu-
manity.
Thus none can properly be said to
write history, but he who understands
the human heart, and its whole train of
affections and follies. Those affections
and follies are properly the materials he
has to work upon. The relations of
great events may surprize indeed; they
may be calculated to instruct those very
few, who govern the million beneath,
but the generality of mankind find the
most real improvement from relations
which are levelled to the general surface
of life; which tell, not how men
learned to conquerr, but how they en-
deavoured to live; not how they gained
the ihout of the admiring croud, but
how
7

<page 20>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 3
how they acquired the esteem of their
friends and acquaintance.
Every man's own life would perhap9
furnish the most pleasing materials for
history, if he only had candour enough
to be sincere, and skill enough to select:
such parts as once making him mere
prudent, might serve to render his
readers more cautious. There are few
who do not prefer a page of Montaigne
or Colley Cibber, who candidly tells us"
what they thought of the world, and
the world thought of them, to the more
stately memoirs and transactions of Eu-
rope, where we fee Kings pretending
to immortality, that are now almost
forgotten, and statesmen planning fri-
volous negociations, that scarce outlive
the signing.
It were to be wished that ministers and
Kings were left to write their own histo-
ries; they are truly useful to few but
themselves; but for men who are con-
tented with more humble stations, I
fancy such truths only are serviceable as
H 2 may

<page 21>
4 The LIFE ok
may conduct them safely through life.*
That knowledge which we can turn to
our real benefit should be most eagerly
pursued. Treasures which we cannot
use but little encrease the happiness of
even the pride of the possessor.
I profess to write the history of a man
placed in the middle ranks of life; of
one, whose vices and virtues were open
to the eye of the most undiscerning
spectator, who was placed in public
view, without power to repress censure,
or command adulation, who had too
much merit not to become remarkable,
yet too much folly to arrive at greatness.
I attempt the character of one, who was
just such a man as probably you or I
may be, but with this difference, that
he never performed an action which the
world did not know, or ever formed a
wish which he did not take pains to
divulge. In short, I have chosen to write
the life of the noted Mr. Najh, as it will
be the delineation of a mind without
disguise, of a man ever assiduous without
industry

<page 22>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 5
industry, and pleasing to his superiors,
without any superiority of genius or un-
derstanding.
Yet if there be any who think the
subject of too little importance to com-
mand attention, and had rather gaze at
the actions of the great, than be direct-
ed in guiding their own, I have one
undeniable claim to their attention. Mr.
Najb was himself a King. In this par-
ticular, perhaps no Biographer has been
so happy as I. They who are for a de-
lineation of men and manners may find
some satisfaction, that way, and those
who delight in adventures of Kings and
(Qneens, may perhaps find their hopes
satisfied in another.
It is a matter of very little importance
who were the parents, or what was the
education of a man who owed so little of
his advancement to either. He seldom
boasted of family or learning, and his
father's name and circumstances were so
little known, that Doctor Cheyne used
B 3 fre-

<page 23>
6
The LIFE of
frequently to say, that Nafh had no fa-
ther. The Dutchess of Marlborough one
day rallying him in public company upon
the obscurity of his birth, compared him
to Gil Bias, who was ashamed of his fa-
ther: No, Madam, replied Najh, I sel-
dom mention my father in company, not
because I have any reason to be ashamed
of him; but because he has some reason
to be ashamed of me.
However, though such anecdotes be
immaterial, to go on in the usual course
of history, it may be proper to observe,
that Richard Nap, Esq; the subject of this
memoir, was born in the town of Swan-
sea, in Glamorganshire, on the 18 th of
October, in the year 1674 *. His father
was
* This account of his birth and parentage is
confirmed by the following memorandum, written
by Mr. Na/h himself in a book belonging to Mr.
Charles Morgan, at the CofFee-House in Bath;
whence it was transcribed by George Scott, Esq; to
whom we arc indebted for this and many other
anecdotes respecting the life of Mr. Najh.
"My father was a Welch Gentleman, my mo-
ther niece to col. Poyer, who was murdered by
Oliver for defending Pembroke. I was born Ocl. 10,
1674, 'n Swaafey, Glamorgan/hire"

<page 24>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 7
was a gentleman, whose principal income
arose from a partnership in a glass-house;
his mother was niece to Colonel Poyer,
who was killed by Oliver Cromwell, for
defending Pembroke castle against the re-
bels. He was educated under Mr. Mad-
Jocks at Carmarthan school, and from
thence sent to 'Jesus college, in Oxford,
in order to prepare him for the study
of the law. His father had strained
his little income to give his son such
an education, but from the boy's natural
vivacity, he hoped a recompence from
his future preferment. In college, how-
ever, he soon shewed that though much
might be expected from his genius, no-
thing could be hoped from his industry.
A mind strongly turned to pleasure, al-
ways is first seen at the university: there
the youth first finds himself freed from
the restraint of tutors, and being treated
by his friends in some measure as a man,
assumes the passions and desires of riper
age, and discovers in the boy, what are
likely to be the affections of his matu-
rity.
B 4 The

<page 25>
8 The LIFE of
The first method Mr. Najh took to dis»
^inguisti himself at college was not by ap-r
plication to study, but by his assiduity in
intrigue. In the neighbourhood of every
university there are girls who with some
beauty, some coquetry, and little fortune,
lie upon the watch for every raw amorous
youth, more inclined to make love than
to study. Our Heroe was quickly caught,
and went through all the mazes and ad-
ventures of a college intrigue, before he
was seventeen; he offered marriage, the
offer was accepted, but the whole affair
coming to the knowledge of his tutor,
his happiness, or perhaps his future mi-
sery, was prevented, and he was sent
home from college, with necessary advice
to him, and proper instructions to hisj
father *.
When
* Since the publication of the first edition of this
book, notice has been taken in some of the news-
papers of Mr. Nasiss leaving the University without
discharging a small debt which heowedto the college
where he was placed, and which stands on their
books to this day. This is a circumstance, which
we were informed of before the publication of our
former Edition j but as our business was to write

<page 26>
RICIJ ARP NAS H; Esq; 9
When a man knows his power over
the fair lex, he generally commences their
admirer for the rest of life. That tri-
umph which he obtains over one, only
makes him the stave of another; and thus
he proceeds, conquering and conquered,
to the closing of. the scene. The army
seemed the most likely profession in which
to display this inclination for gallantry;
he therefore purchased a pair of colours,
commenced a professed admirer of the
sex, and dressed to the very edge of his
finances. But the life of a soldier is more
pleasing to the spectator at a distance than
to the person who makes the experiment,
Mr. Najh soon found that a red coat alone
would never succeed, that the company of
the
the life of Mr. Najb, and not to fettle his accounts,
it seemed to us too immaterial to deserve any parti-
.cular notice : besides, had we paid any regard to
thij, we ought also to have taken some notice of
another anecdote, communicated to us, which was,
that when he .was sent from college he left behind
him a pair,of boots, two plays, a tobacco-box, and
a fiddle, which had engaged more of his attention
than either the publick. or private lectures. But as
this, as well as the other, could afford neither en-
tertainment nor edification, they were purposely
emitted.

<page 27>
IO
The LIFE of
the fair sex is not to be precured without
expence, and that his scanty commission
could never procure him the proper re-
imbursements. He found too that the
profession of arms required attendance and
duty, and often encroached upon those
hours he could have wished to dedicate
to softer purposes. In short, he soon be-
came disgusted with the life of a soldier,
quitted the army, entered his name as a
student in the temple books, and here
went to the very summit of second-rate
luxury. Though very poor he was very
fine; he spread the little gold he had, in
the most ostentatious manner, and though
the gilding was but thin, he laid it on as
far as it would go. They who know the
town, cannot be unacquainted with such
a character as I describe; one, who,
though he may have dined in private
upon a banquet served cold from a cook's
shop, shall dress at six for the side box;
one of those, whose wants are only
known to their laundress and trades-
men, and their fine cloaths to half
the nobility; who spend more in chair
hire,

<page 28>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; n
hire, than housekeeping; and prefer a
bow from a Lord, to a dinner from a
Commoner.
In this manner Mr. Na/h spent some
years about town, till at last his genteel
appearance, his constant civility, and still
more, his assiduity, gained him the ac-
quaintance of several persons qualified to
lead the fashion both by birth and fortune.
To gain the friendship of the young no-
bility little more is requisite than much
submission and very fine cloaths; dress
has a mechanical influence upon the
mind, and we naturally are awed into re-
spect and esteem at the elegance of those,
whom even our reason would teach us to
contemn. He seemed early sensible of hu-
man weakness in this respect, he brought
a person genteely dressed to every assem-
bly, he always made one of those who
are called very good company, and as-
surance gave him an air of elegance and
ease.
When

<page 29>
12 The LIFE ot
When King William was upon the
throne, Mr. Najh was a member of the
Middle 'Temple. It had been long custo-
mary for the Inns of court to entertain our
Monarchs upon their accession to the
crown, or some such remarkable occasion,
with a revel and pageant. In the earlier
periods of our history, Poets were thecon-
ductois of these entertainments; plays
were exhibited, and complimentary verses
were then written; but by degrees the par.
geant alone was continued, Sir John Davis
being the last poet that wrote verses upon
such an occasion in the reign of James I,
This ceremony,which has been at length
totally discontinued, was last exhibited in
honour of King William, and Mr. Najh
was chosen to conduct the whole with
proper decorum. He was then but a
very young man, but we fee at how early
an age he was thought proper to guide
the amusements of his country, and be
the Arbiter Elegantiarum of his time; we.
fee how early he gave proofs of that spirit
of regularity, for which he afterwards be-
came
i

<page 30>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 13
came famous, and shewed an attention to
those little circumstances, of wr ch, tho'
the observance be trifling, the neglect has
often interrupted men of the greatest
abilities in the progress of their fortunes.
In conducting this entertainment, Najh
had an opportunity of exhibiting all his
abilities, and King William was so well
satisfied with his performance, that he
made him an offer of knighthood. This,
however, he thought proper to refuse,
which in a person of his disposition seems 1
strange. Please your Majejly, replied he,
when the offer was made him, if you
intend to make me a Knight, I wish it may
be one of your poor Knights of Windsor,
and then I Jhall have a fortune, at least
able to support my title. Yet we do not
find, that the King took the hint of
encreasing. his fortune, perhaps he could
not, he had at that time numbers to ob-
lige, and he never cared to give money
without important services.
But

<page 31>
14 The LIFE of
But though Najh acquired no riches by
his late office, yet he gained many friends,
or what is more easily obtained, many
acquaintance, who often answer the end
as well. In the populous city where he
resided, to be known was almost synoni-
mous with being in the road to fortune.
How many little Things do we fee, with-
out merit, or without friends, push them-
selves forward into public notice, and by
self-advertizing, attract the attention of
the day. The wise despise them, but
the public are not all wise. Thus they
succeed, rise upon the wing of folly, or
of fashion, and by their success give a
new sanction to effrontery.
But beside his assurance, Mr. Na/b had
in reality some merit and some virtues.
He was, if not a brilliant, at least an easy
companion. He never forgot good man-
ners, even in the highest warmth of fa-
miliarity, and, as I hinted before, never
went in a dirty shirt to disgrace the table
of his patron or his friend. These quali-
fications might make the furniture of his
head f

<page 32>
RICHARD NASH, Esq;
*5
head; but for his heart, that seemed an
assemblage of the virtues which display
an honest benevolent mind; with the
vices which spring from too much good
nature. He had pity for every creature's
distress, but wanted prudence in the ap-
plication of his benefits. He had gene-
rosity for the wretched in the highest de-
gree, at a time when his creditors com-
plained of his justice. He often spoke
falfhoods; but never had any of his harm-
less tales tinctured with malice.
An instance of his humanity is told us
in the Spectator, though his name is not
mentioned. When he was to give in his
accompts to the masters of the temple,
among other articles, he charged For
making one man happy 10/. Being ques-
tioned about the meaning of so strange an
item, he frankly declared, that happen-
ing to over-hear a poor man declare ta
his wife and a large family of children,
that 10/. would make him happy, he
could not avoid trying the experiment.
He added, that if they did not chuse to
acquiesce

<page 33>
l6 The L I F £ of
i
acquiesce In his charge, he was ready to*
refund the money. The masters, struck
with such an uncommon instance of good
nature, publicly thanked him for his be-
nevolence, and desired that the sum might
be doubled as a proof of their satisfaction.
Another instance of his unaccountable
generosity, and I shall proceed. In some
transactions with one of his friends, Mr.
NaJL was brought in debtor twenty pounds.
His friend frequently asked for the money,
and was as often denied. He found at
last, that assiduity was likely to have
no effect, and therefore contrived an ho-
nourable method of getting back his mo-
ney without dissolving the friendship that
subsisted between them. One day, re-
turning from Nafl/s chamber with the
usual assurance of being paid to morrow,
he went to one of their mutual acquaint-
ance, and related the frequent disappoint-
ments he had received, and the little hopes
he had of being ever paid. ** My design,
"continues he, is that you mould go, and
** try to borrow twenty pounds from Nafo*
*r and

<page 34>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 17
"and bring me the money. I am apt
-* to think, he will lend to you, though
"he will not pay me. Perhaps we
"may extort from his generosity, what
"I have failed to receive from his jus-'
"tice." His friend obeys, and going to
Mr. Nafi, assured him, that, unless re-
lieved by his friendship, he should cer-
tainly be undone; he wanted to borrow
twenty pounds, and had tried all his ac-
quaintance without success. Mr. Naflj,
who had, but some minutes before, re-
fused to pay a just debt, was in raptures
at thus giving an instance of his friend-
ship, and instantly lent what was requir-
ed. Immediately upon the receipt, the
pretended borrpwergoes to the real credi-
tor, and gives him the money, who met
Mr. Nap the day after; our heroe, upon
feeing him, immediately began his usual
excuses, that the billiard room had stript
him, that he was never so damnably out
of cash; but that in a few davs Mv
dear Sir, be under no uneasiness, replied
the other, I would not interrupt your
tranquillity for the world, you lent twenty
C pounds

<page 35>
i8 The LIFE of
pounds yesterday to our friend of the back
stairs, and he lent it to me, give him;
your receipt, and you shall have mine.
"Perdition seize thee, cried Na/b, thou
** hast been too many for me. You de-
"manded a debt, he asked a favour; to
** pay thee, would not encrease our
** friendship, but to lend him was pro-
"curing a new friend, by conferring a
"new obligation."
Whether men, at the time I am now
talking of, had more wit than at present,
I will not take upon me to determine •>
but certain it is, they took more pains
to shew what they had. In that age, a
fellow of high humour would drink no
wine, but what was strained through his
mistress's smock. He would eat a pair
of her shoes tossed up in a fricafee. He.
would swallow tallow-candles instead of
toasted cheese, and even run naked
about town, as it was then said, to di-
vert the ladies. In short, that was the
age of such kind of wit, as is the most
distant of all others from wisdom.
Ms,

<page 36>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 19
Mr. Nash, as he sometimes played
tricks with others, upon certain occa-
sions, received very severe retaliations.
Being at York, and having lost all his
money; some of his companions agreed
to equip him with fifty guineas, upon
this proviso, that he would stand at the
great door of the Minster, in a blanket,
as the people were coming out of church.
To this proposal he readily agreed, but
the Dean passing by unfortunately knew
him. What, cried the Divine, Mr.
Nash, in masquerade? Only a Yorkshire
penance, Mr. Dean, for keeping bad.
company, says Najh, pointing to his com-
panions.
Some time after this, he won a wager
of still greater consequence, by riding
naked through a village upon a cow.
This was then thought an harmless fro-
lic, at present it would be looked upon
with detestation.
He was once invited by some gen-
tlemen of the navy, on board a man of
war, that had sailing orders for the Me-
C 2 diterranean,

<page 37>
io The LIFE op 4
diterranean. This was soon after the
affair of the revels, and being ignorant
of any design against him, he took his
bottle with freedom. But he soon
found, to use the expression then in
fashion, that he was absolutely bitten.
The ship sailed away before he was
aware of his situation, and he was oblig-
ed to make the voyage in the company
where he had spent the night.
Many lives are often passed without a
single adventure, and I do not know of
any in the life of our hero, that can be
called such, except what we are now
relating. During this voyage, he was
in an engagement, in which his par-
ticular friend was killed by his side,
and he himself wounded in the leg.
For the anecdote of his being wounded,
we are solely to trust to his own veraci-
ty; but most of his acquaintance were
not much inclined to believe him, when
he boasted on those occasions. Telling
one day of the wound he had received
for his country, in one of the public
rooms at Bath, (Wihjkirfs if I don't
forget)

<page 38>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; ar
forget) a lady of distinction, that sat by,
said it was all false. I protest, Madam,
replied he, it is true; and if I cannot be
believed, your Ladyship may, if you
please, receive farther information, and
feel the ball in my leg.
Mr. Najh was now fairly for life en-
tered into a new course of gaiety and
dissipation, and steady in nothing but in
pursuit of variety. He was thirty years
old, without fortune, or useful talents
to acquire one. He had hitherto only
led a life of expedients, he thanked
chance alone for his support, and hav-
ing been long precariously supported,
he became, at length, totally a stranger
to prudence, or precaution. Not to
disguise any part of his character, he was
now, by profession, a gamester, and
went on from day to day, feeling the
vicissitudes of rapture and anguish, in
proportion to the fluctuations of for*
tune.
At this time, London. was the only
theatre in England, for pleasure, or in-
v. C 3 trigue.

<page 39>
22 The LIFE op
trigue. A spirit of gaming had been
introduced in the licentious age of
Charles II. and had by this time
thriven surprizingly. Yet all its de-
vastations were confined to London alone.
To this great mart of every folly, sharpers
from every country daily arrived, for the
winter, but were obliged to leave the
kingdom at the approach of summer, in
order to open a new campaign at Aix,
Spaw, or the Hague. Bath, Tunbridge,
Scarborough, and other places of the
fame kind here, were then frequented
only by such as really went for relief;
the pleasures they afforded were merely
rural, the company splenetic, rustic,
and vulgar. In this situation of things,
people of fashion had no agreeable sum-
mer retreat from the town, and usually
spent that season amist a solitude of
country squires, parsons wives, and vi-
siting tenants, or farmers; they wanted
some place where they might have each
others company, and win each others
money, as they had done during the
winter in town.
To

<page 40>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 23
To a person, who does not thus calm-
ly trace things to their source, nothing
will appear more strange, than how the
healthy could ever consent to follow the
sick to those places of spleen, and live
with those, whose disorders are ever
apt to excite a gloom in the spectator.
The truth is, the gaming table was
properly the salutary font, to which
such numbers flocked. Gaming will
ever be the pleasure of the rich, while
men continue to be men, while they
fancy more happiness in being possessed
of what they want, than they experience
pleasure in the fruition of what they
have. The wealthy only stake those
riches, which give no real content, for
an expectation of riches, in which they
hope for satisfaction. By this calcula-
tion, they cannot lose happiness, as they
begin with none; and they hope to gain
it, by being possessed of something they
have not had already.
Probably upon this principle; and by
the arrival of Queen Afine there for her
health, about the year 1703, the city of
• C $ Bath

<page 41>
2.4 Tin: L I F E of
Bath became in some measure frequent-
ed by people of distinction. The com•*
pany was numerous enough to form a
country dance upon the bowling green;
they were amused with a fiddle and
hautboy, and diverted with the romantic
walks round the city. They usually
sauntered in fine weather in the grove,
between two rows of sycamore trees.
Several learned physicians, Doctor "Jor-
dan, and others, had even then praised
the salubrity of the wells, and the amuse-
ments were put under the direction of a'
master of the ceremonies.
Captain Webster was the predecessor of
Mr. Najh: This I take to be the fame
gentleman, whom Mr. Lucas describes
in his history of the lives of the game-
sters, by which it appears, that Bath,
even before the arrival of Mr. NaJJi,
was found a proper retreat for men of
that profession. This gentleman, in the
year 1704, carried the balls to the town
hall, each man paying half a guinea each
ball.
Still
• . ..:

<page 42>
RIC H ARD N AS H, Esq; 2$
Still, however, the amusements of
this place were neither elegant, nor con-
ducted with delicacy. General society
among people of rank or fortune was
by no means established. The nobility
still preserved a tincture of Gothic
\ haughtiness, and refused to keep com-
pany with the gentry at any of the pub-
lic entertainments of the place. Smoak-
• ing in the rooms was permitted; gentle-
men and ladies appeared in a disrespect-
ful manner at public entertainments in
aprons and boots. With an eagerness
common to those, whose pleasures
come.but seldom, they generally con-
tinued them too long; and thus they
were rendered disgusting by too free an
enjoyment. If the company liked each
other, they danced till morning; if any
person lost at cards, he insisted on conti-
nuing the game till luck should turn.
The lodgings for visitants were paltry,
though expensive, the dining rooms and
other chambers were floored with boards,
coloured brown with soot and small beer,
to hide the dirt; the walls were covered
with unpainted wainscot, the furniture
cor-

<page 43>
26 The LIFE of
corresponded with the meanness of the
architecture; a few oak chairs, a small
looking glass, with a sender and tongs,
composed the magnificence of these
temporary habitations. The city was
in itself mean and contemptible, no
elegant buildings, no open streets, nor/
uniform squares. The pump-house was
without any director; the chairmen per-
mitted no gentlemen or ladies to walk
home by night without insulting them;
and to add to all this, one of the
greatest physicians of his age conceiv-
ed a design of ruining the city, by
writing against the efficacy of the wa-
ters. It was from a resentment of some
affronts he had received there, that he
took this resolution; and accordingly
published a pamphlet, by which he said,
be would cast a toad into the spring.
In this situation of things it was, that
Mr. Nap first came into that city, and
hearing the threat of this physican, he
humorously assured the people, that if
they would give him leave, he would
charm away the poison of the Doctor's
toad,

<page 44>
RICHARD N AS H, Esq; 27
toad, as they usually charmed the venom
of the Tarantula, by music. He there-
fore was immediately empowered to set
up the force of a band of music, against
the poison of the Doctor's reptile; the
company very sensibly encreased, Najh
triumphed, and the sovereignty of the
city was decreed to him by every rank
of people.
We are now to behold this gentleman
as arrived at a new dignity for which
nature seemed to have formed him we
are to see him directing pleasures, which
none had better learned to share; placed
over rebellious and refractory subjects,
that were to be ruled only by the force
of his address, and governing such as
had been accustomed to govern others.
We fee a kingdom beginning with him,
and sending off Tunbridge as one of its
colonies.
But to talk more simply, when we talk
at best of trifles. None could possibly
conceive a person more fit to fill this em-
ployment than Najh: He had some wit,
as

<page 45>
28 The LIFE of
as I have said once or twice before; but
it was of that fort which is rather hap->
py than r°rmanent. Once a week he
might say a good thing; this the little
ones about him took care to divulge;
or if they happened to forget the joke,
he Usually remembered to repeat it him~
self; In a long intercourse with the
world he had acquired an impenetrable
assurance; and the freedom with which'
he was received by the Great, furnished
him with vivacity, which could be
commanded at any time, and which
some mistook for wit. His former in-.
tercourse among people of. fashion in
town, had let him into most of the cha-
racters of the nobility; and he was ac-
quainted with many of their private in-
trigues. He understood' rank and pre-r
cedence with the utmost exactness, was
fond of shew and finery himself, and
generally set a pattern of it to others.
These were his favourite talents, and he
was the favourite of such as had no other.
But to balance these, which some may
Consider as foibles, he was charitable him-
self,'

<page 46>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 29
»
self, and generally shamed his betters
into a similitude of sentiment, if they
were not naturally so before, He was
fond of advising those young men, who,
by youth and too much money, are
taught to look upon extravagance as a
virtue. He was an enemy to rudeness in
others, though in the latter part of his
life he did not much seem to encourage a
dislike of it by his own example. None
talked with more humanity of the foibles
of others, when absent, than he, nor kept
those secrets with which he was entrusted
more inviolably. But above all (if mora-
lists will allow it among the number of
his virtues) tho'he gamed high, he always
played very fairly. These were his quali-
fications. Some of the nobility regarded
him as an inoffensive, useful companion,
the size of whose understanding was, in
general, level with their own; but their
little imitators admired him as a person
of fine sense, and great good breeding.
Thus people became fond of ranking him
in the number of their acquaintance, told
over his jests, and Beau Na/h at length
became the famionable companion.
7 His

<page 47>
The LIFE op
His first care, when made master of the
ceremonies, or king of Bath, as it is call-
ed, was to promote a music subscription,
of one guinea each, for a band which
was to consist of six performers, who
were to receive a guinea a week each for
their trouble. He allowed also two gui-
neas a week for lighting and sweeping
the rooms, for which he accounted to
the subscribers by receipt.
The pump-house was immediately put
under the care of an officer, by the name
of the Pumper; for which he paid the
corporation an annual rent. A row of
new houses was begun on the south side
of the gravel walks, before which a hand-
some pavement was then made for the
company to walk on. Not less than se-
venteen or eighteen hundred pounds was
raised this year, and in the beginning of
1706, by subscription, and laid out in
repairing the roads near the city. The
streets began to be better paved, cleaned
and lighted, the licences of the chair-
men were repressed, and, by an act of
3 parlia-

<page 48>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 31
parliament procured on this occasion, tha
invalids, who came to drink or bathe,
were exempted from all manner of toll,
as often as they mould go out of the city
for recreation.
The houses and streets now began to
improve, and ornaments were lavished
upon them even to profusion. But in
the midst of this splendor the company
still were obliged to assemble in a booth
to drink tea and chocolate, or to game.
Mr. Najh undertook to remedy this in-
convenience. By his direction, one 'Tho-
mas Harrison erected a handsome Assem-
bly-house for these purposes. A better
band of music was also procured, and the
former subscription of one guinea was
raised to two. Harbison had three guineas.
a week for the room and candles, and the
music two guineas a man. The money
Mr. Najh received and accounted for with
the utmost exactness and punctuality.
To this house were also added gardens for
people of rank and fashion to walk in;
and the beauty of the suburbs continued
to encrease, notwithstanding the oppo-
sition

<page 49>
32 The L I F E of
sition that was made by the corporation;
who, at that time, looked upon every
useful improvement, particularly with-:
out the walls, as dangerous to the inha-
bitants within.
His dominion was now extensive and
secure, and he determined to support it
with the strictest attention. But, in or-
der to proceed in every thing like a king,•
he was resolved to give his subjects a
law, and the following rules Vere ac-
cordingly put up in the pump-room.
RULES to be observed at Bath:
i .' I * H AT a visit of ceremony atf
JL first coming and another at go-
ing away, are all that are expected or de-
sired, by ladies of quality and fashion,
—except impertinents.
2. That ladies coming to the ball ap-
point a time for their footmen coming to
wait on them home, to prevent distur-
bance and inconveniencies to themselves
and others.
3. Thai

<page 50>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 33
3. That gentlemen of fashion never
appearing in a morning before the ladies
in gowns and caps, mew breeding and
respect..
4. That no person take it ill that any
one goes to another's play, or breakfast,
and not theirs ;——except captious by
.nature.
5. That no gentleman give his ticket
for the balls, to any but gentlewomen.—
N. B. Unless he has none of his ac-
quaintance.
6. That gentlemen crowding before the
Jadies at the ball, shew ill manners; and
that none do so for the future,—except
such as respect nobody but themselves.
7. That no gentleman or lady takes if
ill that another dances before them
except such as have no pretence to dance
at all,
D tf. That

<page 51>
The LIFE of
8. That the elder ladies and children
be content with a second bench at the
ball, as being past or not come to per-
fection.
9. That the younger ladies fake no-
tice how many eyes observe them.
N. B. This does not extend to the
Have-at-alls. t
10. That all whisperers of lies and
scandal, be taken for their authors.
11. That all repeaters of such lies,
and scandal, be (hun'd by all company;
except such as have been guilty of
the fame crime.
iV. B. Several men of no character,
old "women and young ones, of questioned
reputation, are great authors of lies in
these places, being of thesett of levellers.
These laws were written by Mr. NajTx
himself, and, by the manner in which
they are drawn up, he undoubtedly de-
signed

<page 52>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 35
signed them for wit. The reader, how-
ever, it is feared, will think them dull.
Poor Nash was not born a writer; for
whatever humour he might have in con-
versation, he used to call a pen his tor-
pedo; whenever he grasped it, it numb-
ed all his faculties.
But were we to give laws to a nursery,
we should make them childish laws; his
statutes, tho' stupid, were addressed to
line gentlemen and ladies, and were pro-
bably received with sympathetic appro-
bation. It is certain, they were in ge-
neral religiously observed by his subjects,
and executed by him with impartiality;
neither rank nor fortune shielded the
refractory from his resentment.
The balls, by his directions, were to
begin at six, and to end at eleven. Nor
would he suffer them to continue a mo-
ment longer, lest invalids might commit
irregularities, to counteract the benefit
of the waters. Every thing was to be
performed in proper order. Each ball
was to open with a minuet, danced by
D 2 two

<page 53>
36
The LIFE
two persons of the highest distinction
present. When the minuet concluded,
the lady was to return to her feat, and
Mr. Nash was to bring the gentleman a
new partner. This ceremony was to be
observed by every succeeding couple,
every gentleman being obliged to dance
with two ladies till the minuets were
over, which generally continued two
hours. At eight, the country dances
were to begin, ladies of quality, accord-
ing to their rank, standing up first.
About nine o'clock a short interval was
allowed for rest, and for the gentlemen
to help their partners to tea. That over.*
the company were to pursue their amuse-
ments till the clock struck eleven. Then
the master of the ceremonies entering the
ball-room, ordered the music to desist,
by lifting up his finger. The dances
discontinued, and some time allowed for
becoming cool, the ladies were handed.
to their chairs.
Even the royal family themselves had
not influence enough to make him deviate
from any of these rules. The princess
Amelia

<page 54>
RI C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 37
Jlmelia once applying to him for one
dance more, after lie had given the sig-
nal to withdraw, he assured her royal
highness, that the established rules of
Bath resembled the laws of Lycurgus,
which would admit of no alteration,
without an utter subversion of all his
authority.
He was not less strict with regard to
the dresses, in which ladies and gentle-
men were to appear. He had the strong-
est aversion to a white apron, and abso-
>. lutely excluded all who ventured to come
to the assembly dressed in that manner.
I have known him on a ball night strip
even the dutchess of ^ , and throw
her apron at one of the hinder benches
among the ladies women; observing,
that none but Abigails appeared in white
aprons. This from another would be
insult, in him it was considered as a
just reprimand; and the good natured
dutchess acquiesced in his censure, and
with great good sense, and good hu-
mour, begged his Majesty % pardon.
d3 Bm

<page 55>
38 The LIFE of
But he found more difficulty in at-
tacking the gentlemen's irregularities; and
for some time strove, but in vain, to pro-
hibit the use of swords. Disputes aris-
ing from love or play, were sometimes
attended with fatal effects. To use his
own expression, he was resolved to hin-
der people from doing, what they had no
mind to; but for some time without ef-
fect. However, there happened about
that time, a duel between two game-
sters, whose names were Taylor and
Clarke, which helped to promote his
peaceable intentions. They fought by
torch-light in the grove; Taylor was run
through the body, but lived seven years
after, at which time his wound break-
ing out afresh, it caused his death. Clarke
from that time pretended to be a Qua-
ker, but the orthodox brethren never
cordially received him among their num-
ber; and he died at London, about eigh-
teen years after, in poverty and contri-
tion. From that time it was thought ne-
ceaary to forbid the wearing of swords at
Bath, as they often tore the ladies cloaths,
and frighted them, by sometimes appear-
*' ing

<page 56>
RICHARD NASH, Esq* 39
ing upon trifling occasions. Whenever
therefore Najh heard of a challenge given,
or accepted, he instantly had both parties
arrested. The gentlemen's boots also made
a very desperate stand against him, the
country 'squires were by no means sub-
missive to his usurpations; and probably
his authority alone would never have car-
ried him thro', had he not reinforced it
with ridicule. He wrote a song upon
the occasion, which, for the honour of
his poetical talents, the world shall see.
Frontinella's invitation to the Assembly %
Come, one and all, to Hoyden Hall,
For there's the assembly this night;
None but prude fools,
Mind manners and rules;
We Hoydens do decency slight.
Come Trollops and Slatterns,
Cockt hats and white aprons,
This best our modesty suits;
For why should not we,
In dress be as free,
As Hogs-Norton 'iquires in boots.
The

<page 57>
The LIFE of
The keenness, severity, and particularly
the good rhymes of this little morceau^
which was at that time highly relished
by many of the nobility at Bath, gained
him a temporary triumph. But to push
his victories, he got up a puppet-shew,
in which Punch came in booted and
spurred, in the character of a country
Uquire. Y\& was introduced as courting
his mistress, and having obtained her con-
sent to comply with his wishes, upon go-
ing to bed, he is desired to pull off his
bools. My boots, replies Punch, why,
madam, you may as well bid me pull off"
my legs, I never go without boots, I never
ride, I never dance without them j and
this piece of politeness is quite the thing
at Bath. We always dance at our town
in boots, and the ladies often move mi-r
nuets in riding-hoods. Thus he goes on,
till his mistress, grown impatient, kickg
him off the stage.
From that time few ventured to ap-
pear at the assemblies in Bath in a riding-
dress; and whenever any gentleman, thro'
ignorance, or haste, appeared in the rooms
in

<page 58>
RICH ARD NAS H, Esq; 41
jin boots, Najh would make up to him,
end, bowing in an arch manner, would tell
him, that he had forgot his horse. Thus
he was at last completely victorious.
Dolisq; coaEti
Quos neque Tydides nec Larijsaus Achilles
Non anni domuere decem.
He began therefore to reign without a
rival, and like other kings had his mis-
tresses, flatterers, enemies and calumnia-
tors. The amusements of the place how-
ever wore a very different aspect from
what they did formerly. Regularity re-
pressed pride, and that lessened, people
of fortune became fit for society. Let the
morose and grave censure an attention to
forms and ceremonies, and rail at those,
whose only business it is to regulate them;
but tho' ceremony is very different from
politeness, no country was ever yet polite,
that was not first ceremonious. The na-
tural gradation of breeding begins in
savage disgust, proceeds to indifference,
improves into attention, by degrees re-r
sines into ceremonious observance, and
she trouble of being ceremonious at
$ length

<page 59>
42 The LIFE of
length produces politeness, elegance and
ease. There is therefore some merit in
mending society, even in one of the infe-
rior steps of this gradation; and no man
was more happy in this respect than Mr.
Najh. In every nation there are enough
who have no other business or care, but
that of buying pleasure; and he taught
them, who bid at such an auction, the art
of procuring what they sought without
diminishing the pleasure of others.
The city of Bath, by such assiduity,
soon became the theatre of summer
amusements for all people of fashion; and
the manner of spending the day there
must amuse any, but such as disease or
spleen had made uneasy to themselves.
The following is a faint picture of the
pleasures that scene affords. Upon a
stranger's arrival at Bath, he is welcomed
by a peal of the Abbey bells, and in the
next place, by the voice and music of
the city waits. For these civilities the
ringers have generally a present made
them of half a guinea; and the waits of
half a crown, or more, in proportion to
the

<page 60>
RIC H A R D N A S H, Esq; 43
the persons fortune, generosity, or osten-
tation. These customs, tho' disagreeable
are however generally liked, or they
would not continue. The greatest incom-
modity attending them is the disturbance
the bells must give the sick. But the
pleasure of knowing the name of every
family that comes to town recompences
the inconvenience. Invalids are fond of
news, and upon the first found of the
bells, every body fends out to enquire for
whom they ring.
After the family is thus welcomed to
Bath, it is the custom for the master of it
to go to the public places, and subscribe
two guineas at the assembly-houses to-
wards the balls and music in the pump-
house, for which he is entitled to three
tickets every ball night. His next sub-
scription is a crown, half a guinea, or a
guinea, according to his rank and quali-
ty, for the liberty of walking in the pri-
vate walks belonging to Simpsons assem-
bly-house; a crown or half a guinea is
also given to the booksellers, for which
the gentleman is to have what books he
pleases

<page 61>
44 The LIFE of
pleases to read at his lodgings. And at
the coffee-house another subscription is
taken for pen, ink and paper, for such
letters as the subscriber shall write at it
during his stay. The ladies too may sub-
scribe to the booksellers, and to an house
by the pump-room, for the advantage of
reading the news, and for enjoying each
other's conversation,
t ,
-- Things being thus adjusted, the amuse-
ments of the day are generally begun by
bathing, which is no unpleasing method
of pasting away an hour, or so.
*
The baths are five in number. On the
seuth-west fide of the abbey church is the
King's Bath ; which is an oblong square,
the walls are full of niches, and at every
corner are steps to descend into it: this
bath is said to contain 427 tons and 50
gallons of water and on its rising out of
the ground over the springs, it is some-
times too hot to be endured by these who
bathe therein. Adjoining to the King's
Bath there is another, called the Queen'3
Bath; this is of a more temperate warmth*
as borrowing its water from the other.

<page 62>
Richard nash, Esq; 4$
In the south-west part of the city are
three other baths, viz. The Hot Bath,
which is not much inferior in heat to the
King's Bath, and contains 53 tons 2 hogs-
heads, and 11 gallons of water. The
Cross Bath, which contains 52 tons 3
hogsheads, and 11 gallons; and the Le-
per's Bath, which is not so much fre-
quented as the rest.
The King's Bath (according to the best
observations) will fill in about nine hours
and a half; the Hot Bath in about eleven
hours and a halfand the Cross Bath ia
about the fame time.
The hours for bathing are commoaly
between six and nine in the morning; and
the Baths are every morning supplied with
fresh water; for when the people have
done bathing, the fluices in each Bath are
pulled up, and the water is carried off by
drains into the river Avon.
In the morning the lady is brought in a
close chair, dressed in her bathing cloaths,
to the Bath j and, being in the water,
th.e

<page 63>
46 The LIFE op
the woman who attends, presents her
with a little floating dish like a bason j
into which the lady puts a handkerchief,
a snuff-box, and a nosegay. She then
traverses the Bath; if a novice with a
guide, if otherwise by herself; and hav-
ing amused herself thus while she thinks
proper, calls for her chair, and returns to
her lodgings.
The amusement of bathing is immedi-
ately succeeded by a general assembly of
people at the pump-house, some for plea-
sure, and some to drink the hot waters.
Three glasses, at three different times, is
the usual portion for every drinker; and
the intervals between every glass are enli-
vened by the harmony of a small band
of music, as well as by the conversa-
tion of the gay, the witty, or the for-
ward.
From the pump-house the ladies, from
time to time, withdraw to a female
coffee-house, and from thence return
to their lodgings to breakfast. The
gentlemen withdraw to their coffee-
houses,

<page 64>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 47
houses, to read the papers, or converse
on the news of the day, with a free-
dom and ease not to be found in the
metropolis.
People of fashion make public break-
fasts at the assembly-houses, to which
they invite their acquaintances, and they
sometimes order private concerts; or
when so disposed, attend lectures upon the
arts and sciences, which are frequently
taught there in a pretty superficial man-
ner, so as not to teize the understanding,
while they afford the imagination some
amusement. The private concerts are
performed in the ball-rooms, the tickets
a crown each.
Concert breakfasts at the assembly-
house, sometimes make also a part of the
morning's amusement here, the expences
of which are defrayed by a subscription.
among the men. Persons of rank and for-
tune who can perform are admitted into
the orchestra, and find a pleasure in join-
ing with the performers.
3 Thus

<page 65>
48 The LIFE at
Thus we have the tedious morning
fairly oven When noon approaches, and
church (if any please to go there) is
done, some of the company appear upon
the parade, and other public walks, where
they continue to chat and amuse each
other, 'till they have formed parties for
the play, cards, or dancing for the even-
ing. Another part of the company divert
themselves with reading in the booksellers
shops, or are generally seen tasting the air
and exercise, some on horseback, some in
coaches. Some walk in the meadows round
the town, winding along the side of
the river Avon, and the neighbouring ca-
nal; while others are seen scaling some
of those romantic precipices that over-
hang the city.
When the hour of dinner draws nigh,
and the company is returned from their
different recreations, the provisions are
generally served with the utmost elegance
and plenty. Their mutton, butter, fish,
and fowl, are all allowed to be excellent,
and their cookery still exceeds their meat.
After

<page 66>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 49
After dinner is over; and evening pray-
ers ended, the company meet a second
time at the pump-house. From this they
retire to the walks, and from thence go
to drink tea at the assembly-houses, and
the rest of the evenings are concluded
either with balls, plays or visits. A
theatre was erected in the year 1705
by subscription, by people of the highest:
rank, who permitted their arms to be
engraven on the inside of the house,
as a public testimony of their libera-
lity towards it. Every tuesday and fri-
day evening is concluded with a pub-
lic ball, the contributions to which are
so numerous, that the price of each
ticket is trifling. Thus Bath yields a
continued rotation of diversions, and
people of all ways of thinking, even
from the libertine to the methodist,
have it in. their power to complete the
day with employments suited to their
inclinations.
In this manner every amusement soon
improved under Mr. Na/h's administra-
£ tion.

<page 67>
The LIFE of
tion. The magistrates of the city
found, that he was necessary and use-
ful, and took every opportunity of pay-
ing the same respect to his fictitious
royalty, that is generally extorted by real
power. The fame satisfaction a young
lady finds upon being singled out at her
first appearance; or an applauded poet*
on the success of his first tragedy, in-
fluenced him. All admired him as an ex-
traordinary character; and some who knew
no better, as a very fine gentleman; he
was perfectly happy in their little ap-<
plausc, and affected at length something
particular in his dress, behaviour and
conversation.
His equipage was sumptuous, and he
usually travelled to Tunbridge, in a post
chariot and six greys, with out-riderr,
foot-men, French horns, and every other
appendage of expensive parade. He al-
Ways wore a white hat, and, to apo-
logize for this singularity, said* he did
it purely to secure it from being stolen;
his dress was tawdry, tho' not perfectly
genteel; he might be considered as a
6 beau

<page 68>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; Si
beau of several generations, and in his
appearance he, in some measure, mixed
the fashions of the last age with those of
the present. He perfectly understood ele-
gant expence, and generally passed his
time in the very best company, if per-
sons of the first distinction deserve that
title.
But I hear the reader now demand,
what finances were to support all this
finery, or where the treasures, that gave
him such frequent opportunities of dis-
playing his benevolence, or his vanity?
To answer this, we must now enter upon
another part of his character, his talents
as a gamester; for by gaming alone at
that period, of which I speak, he kept
up so very gentepl an appearance. When
Be first figured at BatBt there were few
laws against this destructive amusement.
The gaming-table was the constant re-
source of despair and indigence, and the
frequent ruin of opulent fortunes. Where-
ever people of fashion came, needy ad-
venturers were generally found in wait-
ing. With such Bath swarmed, and
E z among

<page 69>
52 The LIFE of
among this class Mr. Nash was certains
to be numbered in the beginning, only
with this difference, that he wanted the
corrupt heart, too commonly attending a
life of expedients; for he was generous,
humane and honourable, even tho' by
profession a gamester.
A thousand instances might be given of
his integrity, even in this infamous pro-
fession } where his generosity often im-
pelled him to act in contradiction to his
interest. Wherever he found a novice in
the hands of a sharper, he generally fore-
warned him of the danger; whenever he
found any inclined to play, yet ignorant
of the game, he would offer his ser-
vices, and play for them. I remember
an instance to this effect, tho' too
nearly concerned in the affair to publish
the gentleman's name of whom it is re-
lated. In the year 1725, there came to
Bath a giddy youth, who had just resigned
his fellowship at Oxford. He brought
his whole fortune with him there, it was
but a trifle, however he was resolved to
venture it all. Good fortune seemed
5. kinder

<page 70>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 53
kinder than could be expected. With-
out the smallest skill in play, he won , a
sum sufficient to make any unambitious
man happy. His desire of gain encreaf-
ing with his gains, in the QSlober fol-
lowing he was at all, and added four
thousand pounds to his former capital.
Mr. Nap one night, after losing a consi-
derable sum to this undeserving son of
, fortune, invited him to supper. Sir, cried
this honest, tho' veteran gamester, per-
haps you may imagine I have invited
you, in order to have my revenge at
home; but, sir! I scorn so inhospitable
an action. I desired the favour of your
company to give you some advice, which
you will pardon me, Sir, you seem to
stand in need of. You are now high in
spirits, and drawn away by a torrent of
success. But there will come a time,
when you will repent having left the calm
of a college life for the turbulent profes-
sion of a gamester. Ill runs will come, as
sure as day and night succeed each other.
Be therefore advised, remain content with
your present gains; for be persuaded,
that had you the bank os England, with
E 3 yous

<page 71>
54 The LIFE of
your present ignorance of gaming, it
would vanish like a fairy dream. You
are a stranger to me, but to convince
you of the part I take in your welfare,
I'll give you fifty guineas, to forfeit
twenty, every time you lose two hun-
dred at one sitting. The young gentle-
man refused his offer, and was at last
undone!
The late duke of B. being chagrined at
losing a considerable sum, pressed Mr.Nafo
to tie him up for the future from playing
deep. Accordingly, the beau gave his
grace an hundred guineas to forfeit ten
thousand, whenever he lost a sum to the,
same amount at play, in one sitting. The
duke loved play to distraction, and soon
after at hazard lost eight thousand guineas,
and was going to throw for three thousand
more; when Nash, catching hold of the
dice-box, intreated his Grace to reflect
upon the penalty if he lost : the Duke for
that time desisted; but so strong was the
furor of play upon him, that soon after,
losing a considerable sum at New-market,
he was contented to pay the penalty.

<page 72>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 55
When the late earl of ¥ d was
a youth, he was passionately fond of
play, and never better pleased than with
having Mr. Najh for his antagonist. Najh
saw with concern his lordship's foible,
and undertook to cure him, tho' by a
very disagreeable remedy. Conscious of
his own superior skill, he determined to
engage him in single play for a very
considerable sum. His lordship, in pro-
portion as he lost his game, lost his tem-
per too; and as he approached the
gulph, seemed still more eager for ruin.
He lost his estate; some writings were
put into the winner's possession; his very
equipage was deposited as a last stake,
and he lost that also. But, when our
generous gamester had found his lord-
ship sufficiently punished for his teme-
rity, he returned all; only stipulating,
that he should be paid five thousand
pounds whenever he should think pro-
per to make the demand. However,
he never made any such demand during
his lordship's life; but some time after
his decease, Mr. Na/h's affairs, being in
E 4 the

<page 73>
56 The LIFE or
the wane, he demanded the money of his
lordship's heirs, who honourably paid it
without any hesitation.
. But whatever skill Najh might have
acquired by long practice in play, he
was never formed by nature for a suc-
cessful gamester. He was constitution-
ally passionate and generous. To acquire
a perfection in that art, a man must be
naturally phlegmatic, reserved and cool;
every passion must learn to obey con-
troul; but he frequently was unable to
restrain the violence of his, and was often
betrayed by this means into unbecoming
rudeness, or childish impertinence; was
sometimes a minion of fortune, and as
often deprest by adversity. While others
made considerable fortunes at the gamT
ing-table, he was ever in the power
of chance; nor did even the intimacy
with which he was received by the
great, place him in a state of inder
pendance.
The considerable inconveniences that
were found to result from a permission of
gaming,

<page 74>
KICH ARD NAS H, Esq; 57
gaming, at length attracted the attention
of the legislature, and in the twelfth
year of his late majesty, the most pre-
valent games at that time were declared
fraudulent and unlawful. Every age has
had its peculiar modes of gaming. The
games of Gleek, Primero, In and In,
and several others now exploded, em-
ployed our (harping ancestors; to these
succeeded the Ace of hearts, Pharaoh, Bas-
set, and Hazard, all games of chance
like the former. But tho' in these the
chances seemed equal to the novice;
in general those who kept the bank
were considerable winners. The act
therefore, passed upon this occasion, de-
clared all such games and lotteries il-
licit, and directed, that all who should
set up such games, should forfeit
two hundred pounds, to be levied by
distress on the offender's goods; one
third to go to the informer, the residue
to the poor.
The act further declared, that every
person who played in any place, except
in the royal palace where his majesty
resided,

<page 75>
58 The LIFE ©p
resided, should forfeit fifty pounds, and
should be condemned to pay treble costs
in cafe of an appeal.
This law was scarcely made, before it
was eluded by the invention of divers
fraudulent and deceitful games; and a
particular game, called Passage, was daily
practised, and contributed to the ruin of
thousands. To prevent this, the ensuing
year it was enacted, that this and every
other game invented, or to be invented,
with one die, or more, or any other in-
strument of the fame nature, with num-
bers thereon, should be subject to a simi-
lar penalty; and at the same time, the
persons playing with such instruments
ihould be punished as above.
This amendment of the law soon
gave birth to new evasions; the game
of Roily Polly, Marlborough's Battles,
but particularly the E O, were set up;
and strange to observe! several of those
very noblemen, who had given their
voices to suppress gaming, were the
most ready to encourage it. This game
was

<page 76>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 59
was at first set up at ctunbridge. It was
invented by one C—i, and carried on
between him and one Mr. A—e, pro-
prietor of the assembly-room at that
place; and was reckoned extremely pro-
fitable to the bank, as it gained two and
an half per cent, on all that was lost or
won.
As all gaming was suppressed but this,
Mr. Nap was now utterly destitute of
any resource that he could expect from
his superior skill, and long experience
in the art. The money to be gained in
private gaming is at best but trifling,
and the opportunity precarious. The
minds of the generality of mankind
shrink with their circumstances; and
Najh, upon the immediate prospect of
poverty, was now mean' enough (I will
call it no worse) to enter into a base
confederacy with those low creatures
to evade the law, and to share the plun-
der. The occasion was as follows. The
profits of the table were, as I observed,
divided between C—i, the inventor,
and A—e the room-keeper. The first

<page 77>
6© The LIFE of
year's profits were extraordinary, and
A—e the room-keeper now began to
wisti himself sole proprietor. The com-
binations of the worthless are ever of
sliort duration. The next year therefore
A—e turned C—k out of his room, and
set up the game for himself. The gen-
tlemen and ladies who frequented the
wells, unmindful of the immense profit
gained by these reptiles, still continued
to game as before; and A—e was tri-
umphing in the success of his politics,
when he was informed, that C—k and
his friends hired the crier to cry. the
game down. The consequences of this
would have been fatal to A—es interest,
for by this means frauds might have been
discovered, which would deter even the
most ardent lovers of play. Immediate-
ly, therefore, while the crier was yet
upon the walks, he applied to Mr. Najh
to stop these proceedings, and, at the
fame time, offered him a fourth stiare of
the bank, which Mr. Nap was mean
enough to accept. This is the greatest
blot in his life, and this it is hoped will
find pardon.
V

<page 78>
RICHARD NASH, E% 6t
The day after, the inventor offered an
half of the bank; but this Mr. Najb
thought proper to refuse, being pre-en-
gaged to A—e. Upon which, being dis-
appointed, he applied to one Mr. J—e,
and under his protection another table
was set up, and the company seemed to
be divided equally between them. I can-
not reflect, without surprize, at the wis-
dom of the gentlemen and ladies, to suf-
fer themselves to be thus parcelled out
between a pack of sharpers, and permit
themselves to be defrauded, without even
the mew of opposition. The company
thus divided, Mr. Nap once more availed
himself of their parties, and prevailed
upon them to unite their banks, and to
divide the gains into three stiares, of
which he reserved one to himself.
Nash had hitherto enjoyed a fluctuat-
ing fortune; and, had he taken the ad-
vantage of the present opportunity, he
might have been for the future not only
above want, but even in circumstances of
opulence. Had he cautiously employed
himself in computing the benefits of th«.
table*

<page 79>
62 TtiE LIFE of
table; and exacting his stipulated share,'
he might have soon grown rich; but he
entirely left the management of it to the
people of the rooms; he took them, (as
he fays in one of his memorials upon this
occasion) to be honest, and never en-
quired what was won or lost; and, it is
probable, they were seldom assiduous in
informing him. I find a secret pleasure in
thus displaying the insecurity of friend-
ships among the base. They pretended
to pay him regularly at first, but he soon
discovered, as he fays, that at T"unbridge
he had suffered to the amount of two
thousand guineas.
In the mean time, as the E O table
thus succeeded at Tunbridge, Mr. Na/b
was resolved to introduce it at Batb, and
previously asked the opinion of several
lawyers, who declared it no way illegal.
In consequence of this, he wrote to Mrs.
A—e, who kept one of the great rooms at
Bath, acquainting her with the profits at-
tending such a scheme, and proposing to
have a fourth share with her, and Mr.
TV—, the proprietor of the other room,
for

<page 80>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 63
for his authority, and protection. To
this Mr. W— and she returned him for
answer, that they would grant him a
fifth (hare; which he consented to accept.
Accordingly, he made a journey to Lon-
don, and bespoke two tables, one for
each room, at the rate df fifteen pounds
each table.
The tables were no sooner set up at
Bath, than they were frequented with a
greater concourse of gamesters than those
at ctunbridge. Men of that infamous pro-
fession, from every part of the kingdom,
and even other parts of Europe, flocked
here to feed on the ruins of each other's
fortune. This afforded another oppor-
tunity for Mr. NaJJj to become rich; but,
as at Hunbridge, he thought the people
here also would take care of him, and
therefore he employed none to look after
his interest. The first year they paid him
what he thought just; the next, the wo-
man of the room dying, her son paid
him, and shewed his books. Some-
time after the people of the rooms offered
him one hundred pounds a year eatjj for
his

<page 81>
64 The L I F E op
his share, which he refused; every sue'-*
ceeding year they continued to pay him
less and less; 'till at length he found,-
as he pretends, that he had thus lost
riot less than twenty thousand pounds.
Thus they proceeded, deceiving the
public and each other, 'till the legislature
thought proper to suppress these semina-
ries of vice. It was enacted, that after
the 24th of June, 1745s, none should be
permitted to keep an house, room or
place, for playing, upon pain of such
forfeitures, as were declared in former
acts instituted for that purpose.
The legislature likewise amended a
law, made in the reign of queen Anne,
for recovering money lost at play, on the
oath of the winner. By this act, no per-
son was rendered incapable of being a
Witness; and every person present at a
gaming-table might be summoned by the
magistrate, who took cognizance of the
affair. No privilege of parliament was
allowed to those convicted of having
gaming-tables ia their houses. Those
who

<page 82>
RI C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 65
who lost ten pounds at one time, were
liable to be indicted within fix months
after the offence was committed; and
being convicted, were to be fined five
times the value of the sum won or lost,
for the use of the poor. Any offender
before conviction, discovering another,
so as to be convicted, was to be discharg-
ed from the penalties incurred by his
own offences.
t
By this wise and just act, all Na/h's
future hopes of succeeding by the tables
were blown up. He had now only the
justice and generosity of his confederates
to trust to; but that he soon found to
be a vain expectation; for, if we can
depend on his own memorials, what at
one time they confessed, they would at
another deny; and tho' upon some oc-
casions they seemed at variance with
each other, yet when they were to op-
pose him, whom they considered as a
common enemy, they generally united
with confidence and success. He now
therefore had nothing but a law-suit to
confide in for redress; and this is ever'
F the

<page 83>
66 The LIFE or
the last expedient to retrieve a desperater
fortune. He accordingly threw his suit
into Chancery, and, by this means, the
public became acquainted with what he
had long, endeavoured to conceal. They
now found that he was himself concern-
ed in the gaming-tables, of which he"
only seemed the conductor; and that he
had shared part of the spoil, tho' he
complained of having been defrauded of-
a just share.
The success of his suit was what might
have been natuarlly expected; he had but
at best a bad cause, and as the oaths of
the defendants were alone sufficient to-
cast him in Chancery, it was not surpri-
zing that he was nonsuited. But the
consequence of this affair was much more
fatal than he had imagined, it lessened
him in the esteem of the public, it drew
several enemies against him, and in some
measure diminished the authority of any
defence he could make. From that time *
(about the yeae 1745), I find this poor,
good-natured, but misguided man in-
volved in continual disputes, every day
ca-

<page 84>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 67
calumniated with some new slander, and
continually endeavouring to obviate its
effects.
Upon these occasions his usual method
was, by printed bills handed about
among his acquaintance, to inform the
public of his most private transactions
with some of those creatures, with whom
he ha"d formerly associated; but these
apologies served rather to blacken his
antagonists, than to vindicate him. They
were in general extremely ill written,
confused, obscure, and sometimes unin-
telligible. By these, however, it ap-
peared, that W— was originally obliged
to him for the resort of company to his
room; that lady H , who had all
the company before W—'s room was
built, offered Mr. Na/h an hundred
pound for his protection; which he re-
fused, having previously promised to sup-
port Mrs. W—. It appears by these
apologies, that the persons concerned in
the rooms made large fortunes, while he
still continued in pristine indigence; and
that his nephew, for whom he had at
F 2 first

<page 85>
68 The LIFE of
first secured one of the rooms, was left
in as great distress as he.
His enemies were not upon this oc-
casion contented with aspersing him, as
a confederate with sharpers, they even
asserted, that he spent and embezzled
the subscriptions of gentlemen and la-
dies, which were given for useful or
charitable purposes. But to such asper-
sions he answered, by declaring, to use
- his own expression, before God and
man, that he never diverted one mil-
ling of the said subscriptions to his own
use; nor was he ever thought to have
done it, till new enemies started up a-
gainst him. Perhaps the reader may be
curious to fee one of these memorials,
written by himself; and I will indulge
his curiosity, merely to shew a specimen
of the stile and manner of a man, whose
whole life was past in a round of gaiety
and conversation, whose jests were a
thousand times repeated, and whose
company was courted by every son and
v daughter os fashion, The following is
particularly levelled against those, who,
in

<page 86>
RI C H A R D N A S H, Efy 69
in the latter part of his life, took every
opportunity to traduce his character.
A MONITOR.
Fer the Lord hat eth lying and deceitful lips.
Ps AL.
M' I ''HE curse denounced in my mot-
J. to, is sufficient to intimidate any
person, who is not quite abandoned in
their evil ways, and who have any fear
of God before their eyes; everlasting
burnings are a terrible reward for theif
misdoings ; and nothing but the most
hardened sinners will oppose the judg-
ments of heaven, being without end.
This reflection must be shocking to
such, as are conscious to themselves,
of having erred from the sacred dic-
tates of the Psalmist, and who follow-
ing the blind impulse of passion, daily
forging lies and deceit, to annoy theiir
neighbour. But there are joys in heaven
which they can never arrive at, whose
whole study is to destroy the peace and
F 3 bar-

<page 87>
jo ..The LIFE of
and harmony, and good order os society,
in this place."
This carries little the air of a bagatelle,
it rather seems a sermon in miniature, so
different are some men in the closet, and
in conversation. The following I have
taken at random from an heap of other
memorials, all tending to set his combi-.
nation with the afore-mentioned partners
in a proper light.
EO was first set up in A—e room,
the profits divided between one
€—k' (the inventor of the game) and
A—e. .
The next ysar, A—e finding the game
so advantageous, turned C—k out of his
room, and set the game up himself; but
C—k and his friends hired the crier to
cry the game down; upon which
A—e came running to me to stop it,
after" he had cried it once, which I
immediately did, and turned the crier off
the walks,
Then,

<page 88>
R I C H A R D N A S.H, Esq; 71
1
w \ ■
Then A—e asked me to go a fourth
with him in the bank, which I consented
to; C—k next day took me into his room
which he had hired, and proffered me to
. £0 half with him, which I refused, being
engaged , before X.0 A—e.
J—e then set up the same game, and
complained that he had not half play at
his room; upon which I made them
agree to join their banks, and divide
equally the gain and loss, and I to go the
like share in the bank.
I taking them to be honest, never
enquired what was won or lost; and
thought they paid me honestly, 'till it
was discovered, that they had defrauded
me of 2000 guineas.
I then arrested A—es who told me I
must go into Chancery, and that I should
"begin with the people of Bath, who had
cheated me of ten times as much; and
"told my attorney, that J—e had cheated
me of 500, and wrote me word that I
F 4 pro-

<page 89>
The LIFE of
probably had it not under his hand, which
never was used in play.
Upon my arresting A—e, I received a
letter not to prosecute J- —e, for he would
be a very good witness: I writ a discharge
to J—e for 125I. in full, though he
never paid me a farthing, upon his tell-
ing me, if his debts were paid, he was
'not worth a milling.
Every article of this I can prove
from A—e's own mouth, as a reason
that he allowed the bank keepers but
10 per cent, because I went 20 and his
suborning * * * * to alter his informa-
tions.
Richard Nash.
This gentleman's simplicity, in trusting
perse ns whom he had no previous reasons
to place confidence in, seems to be one of
those lights into his character, which,
while they impeach his understanding, do
honour to his benevolence. The low and
timid are ever suspicious; but a heart im-
pressed with honourable sentiments, ex-
pects

<page 90>
RICH ARD NAS H, Esq; 73
pects from others sympathetic since-
rity.
But now that we have viewed his con-
duct as a gamester, and seen him on that
side of his character, which is by far the
most unfavourable, seen him declining
from his former favour and esteem, the
just consequence of his quitting, tho'but
ever so little, the paths of honour; let
me turn to those brighter parts of his
life and character, which gained the af-
fection of his friends, the esteem of the
corporation which he assisted, and may
possibly attract the attention of posterity.
By his successes we shall find, that
figuring in life, proceeds less from the
possession of great talents, than from the
proper application of moderate ones. Seme
great minds are only fitted to put forth
their powers in the storm; and the occa-
sion is often wanting during a whole life
for a great exertion: but trifling oppor-
tunities of shining, are almost every hour
offered to the little sedulous mind; and
a person thus employed, is not only more
pleasing

<page 91>
74 The LIFE of
pleasing, but more useful in a state of
tranquil society.
Tho' gaming first introduced him into
polite company, this alone could hardly
have carried him forward, without the
assistance of a genteel address, much viva-
city, some humour, and some wit. But
once admitted into the circle of the Beau
Monde, he then laid claim to all the pri-
vileges by which it is distinguished. A-
mong others, in the early part of his life,
he entered himself professedly into the ser-
vice of the fair sex; he set up for a man
of gallantry and intrigue; and if we can
Credit the boasts of his old age, he often
succeeded. In fact, the business of love
somewhat resembles thfe business of physic;
no matter for qualifications, he that makes
vigorous pretensions to either is surest of
success. Nature had by no means formed
Mr. Najh for a Beau Garcon; his person
was clumsey, too large and aukward, and
his features harsh, strong, and peculiarly
irregular; yet even, with those disadvan-
tages, he made love, became an univer-
sal

<page 92>
RICHARD NAS H, Esq. 7$
sal admirer of the sex, and was universally.
admired. He was possessed, at least, of
some requisites of a lover. He had assi-
duity, flattery, fine cloaths, and as much,
wit as the ladies he addressed. Wit, flat-
tery, and fine cloaths, he used to say,
were enough to debauch a nunnery. But
my fair readers of the present day are
exempt from this scandaland it is no
matter now, what he said of their grand-
mothers.
As Nestor was a man of three ages, so
Nap sometimes humorously called hinw
self a beau of three generations. He had
seen flaxen bobs succeeded by majors,
which in their turn gave way to negli?
gents, which were at last totally routed
by bags and ramilees. The manner in
which gentlemen managed their amours,
in these different ages of fashion, were
not more different than their perriwigs,
The lover in the reign of king Charles
was solemn, majestic, and formal. He vi^.
sited his mistress in state. Languished
for the favour, kneeled when he toasted
his goddess, walked with solemnity, per-
'formed

<page 93>
76 The LIFE of
formed the most trifling things with de-
corum, and even took snuff with a flou-
rish. The beau of the latter part of
queen Ann's reign was disgusted with
so much formality, he was pert, smart
and lively; his billet-doux were written
in a quite different stile from that of his
antiquated predecessor; he was ever
laughing at his own ridiculous situation;
till at last, he persuaded the lady to be-
come as ridiculous as himself. The beau
of the third age, in which Mr. Na/b
died, was still more extraordinary than
either; his whole secret in intrigue
consisted in perfect indifference. The
only way to make love now, I have
heard Mr. Na/b say, was to take no man-
ner of notice of the lady, which method
was found the surest way to secure her
affections.
However these things be, this gentle-
man's successes in amour were in reality
very much confined in the second and
third age of intrigue; his character was
too public for a lady to consign her repu-
tation to his keeping. But in the begin-
ning

<page 94>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 77
ning of life it is said, he knew the secret
history of the times, and contributed
himself to swell the page of scandal. Were
I upon the present occasion to hold the
pen of a novelist, I could recount some
amours, in which he was successful. I
could fill a volume with little anecdotes,
which contain neither pleasure nor instruc-
tion; with histories of professing lovers,
and poor believing girls deceived by such
professions. But such adventures are easily
written, and as easily atchieved. The
plan even of fictitious novel is quite ex-
hausted; but truth, which I have fol-
lowed here, and ever design to follow,
presents in the affair of love scarce any
variety. The manner in which one re-
putation is lost, exactly resembles that
by which another is taken away. The
gentleman begins at timid distance,
grows more bold, becomes rude, till
the lady is married or undone; such is
the substance of every modern novel;
nor will I gratify the pruriency of folly,
at the expence of every other pleasure
my narration may afford.
'3 Mr.

<page 95>
78 The LIFE of
Mr. Nap did not long continue ari
universal gallant; but in the earlser years
of his reign, entirely gave up his en-
deavours to deceive the sex, in order to
become the honest protector of their in-»
nocence, the guardian of their reputa-
tion, and a friend to their virtue.
This was a character he bore for many
years, and supported it with integrity,
assiduity and success. It was his con-
stant practice to do every thing in his
power to prevent the fatal consequences
of rash and inconsiderate love ; and there
are many persons now alive, who owe
their present happiness to his having in-
terrupted the progress of an amour, that
threatened to become unhappy, or even
criminal, by privately making their
guardians or parents acquainted with
what he could discover. And his man-
ner of disconcerting these schemes was
such as generally secured him from the
rage and resentment of the disappointed.
One night, when I was in Wiltjlrires
room, Na/h came up to a lady and her
daughter, who were people of no in-
con-

<page 96>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 79/
considerable fortune, and bluntly told
the mother, jhe had better be at home:
this was at that time thought an auda-
cious piece of impertinence, and the lady
turned away piqued and disconcerted.
Najhy however, pursued her, and re-
peated the words again; when the old
lady, wisely conceiving there might be
some hidden meaning couched under this
seeming insolence, retired, and coming
to her lodgings, found a coach and six
at the door, which a sharper had pro-
vided to carry off her eldest daughter.
I shall beg leave to give some other
. instances of Mr. Nafb's good-fense and
good-nature on these occasions, as I have
had the accounts from himself. At
the conclusion of the treaty of peace at
Utrecht, colonel M was one of the
thoughtless, agreeable, gay creatures,
that drew the attention of the compa-
ny at Bath. He danced and talked with
great vivacity; and when he gamed
among the ladies, he shewed, that his
attention was employed rather upon
their hearts than their fortunes. His
5 < owa

<page 97>
So The LIFE of
own fortune however was a trifle, when
compared to the elegance of his expence;
and his imprudence at last was so great,
that it obliged him to sell an annuity,
arising from his commission, to keep up
his splendor a little longer.
However thoughtless he might be, he
had the happiness of gaining the affecti-
ons of Miss L , whose father de-
signed her a very large fortune. This
lady was courted by a nobleman of dis-
tinction, but she refused his addresses,
resolved upon gratifying rather her in-
clinations than her avarice. The intrigue
went on successfully between her and the
colonel, and they both would certainly
have been married, and been undone, had
not Mr. Najh apprized her father of their
intentions. The old gentleman, recalled
his daughter from Bath, and offered Mr.
Najh a very considerable present, for the
care he had taken, which he refused.
In the mean time colonel M— had an
iatimation how his intrigue came to be
discovered; and by taxing Mr. Najht
found

<page 98>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; %i
found that his suspicions were not without
foundation. A challenge was the imme-
diate consequence, which the king of
Batb, conscious of having only done his
duty, thought proper to decline. As
none are permitted to wear swords at
Bath, the colonel found no opportunity
of gratifying his resentment, and waited
with impatience to find Mr. Najh in
town, to require proper satisfaction.
During this interval, however, he found
his creditors became too importunate for
him to remain longer at Bath; and his
finances and credit being quite exhausted,
he took the desperate resolution of going
over to the Dutch army in Flanders, where
he enlisted himself a volunteer. Here he
underwent all the fatigues of a private
centinel, with the additional misery of
receiving no pay, and his friends in Eng-
land gave out, that he was shot at the
battle of
In the mean time the nobleman pressed
his pastion with ardour, but during the
progress of his amour, the young lady's
G father

<page 99>
82 The LIFE of
father died, and left her heiress to a for-
tune of fifteen hundred a year. She
thought herself now disengaged from her
former passion. An absence of two years-
had in some measure abated her love for
the colonel; and the assiduity, the merit,
and real regard of the gentleman who
still continued to solicit her, were almost
too powerful for her constancy. Mr. Najfj,
in the mean time, took every opportunity
of enquiring after colonel M , and
found, that he had for some time been
returned to England, but changed his
name, in order to avoid the fury of his
creditors; and that he was entered into
a company of strolling players, who
were at that time exhibiting at Peterbo-
rough.
He now therefore thought he owed
the colonel, in justice, an opportunity of
promoting his fortune, as he had once
deprived him of an occasion of satisfying
his love. Our Beau therefore invited the
lady to be of a party to Peterborough, and
offered his own equipage, which was then
©ne of the most elegant in England, to
con-

<page 100>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 83
fconduct her there. The proposal being
accepted, the lady, the nobleman, and
Mr. Nash, arrived in town just as the
players were going to begin.
Colonel M—, who used every means
of remaining incognito, and who was too
proud to make his distresses known to any
of his former acquaintance, was now de-
graded into the character of 'Tom in the
Conscious Lovers. Miss L— was placed in
the foremost row of the spectators, her
lord on one fide, and the impatient Najb
on the other; when the unhappy youth
appeared in that despicable situation upon
the stage. The moment he came on,
his former mistress struck his view, but
his amazement was encreased, when he
saw her fainting away in the arms of
those who sate behind her. He was in-
capable of proceeding, •and scarce know-
ing what he did, he flew and caught her
in his arms.
Colonel, cried Nap, when they were
in some measure recovered, you once
thought me your enemy, because I en-
G 2 dea-

<page 101>
§4 The LIFE of
deavoured to prevent you both from ruin—
ing each other, you were then wrong,
and you have long had my forgiveness.
If you love well enough now for matri-
mony, you fairly have my consent, ancs
d—n- him, say I, that attempts to part
you. Their nuptials were solemnized
soon after, and affluence added a zest to
all their future enjoyments. Mr. Najh
had the thanks of each, and he afterwards
spent several agreeable days in that so-
ciety, which he had contributed to ren-
der happy.
I mall beg the reader's patience, while
I give another instance, in which he in-
effectually offered his assistance and ad-
vice. This story is not from himself;
but told us partly by Mr. Wood, the ar-
chitect of Bath, as it fell particularly
within his own knowledge; and partly
from another memoir, to which he re-
fers.
Miss Sylvia S— was descended from
one of the best families in the kingdom,
and was left a large fortune upon her
Sister'*

<page 102>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 8;
Sister's decease. She had early in life
been introduced into the best company,
and contracted a passion for elegance and
sixpence. It is usual to make the heroine
of a story very witty, and very beautiful,
and such circumstances are so surely ex-
pected, that they are scarce attended to. But
whatever the finest poet could conceive of
wit, or the most celebrated painter ima-
gine of beauty, were excelled in the per-
fections of this young lady. Her superio-
rity in both was allowed by all, who either
heard, or had seen her. She was natu-
rally gay, generous to a fault, good-na-
tured to the highest degree, affable in
conversation, and some of her letters,
and other writings, as well in verse as
prose, would have shone amongst those
of the most celebrated wits of this,
or any other age, had they been pub-
lished.
But these great qualifications were
marked by another, which lessened the
value of them all. She was imprudent!
But let it not be imagines!, that her repu-
tation or honour suffered by her impru-
G 3 dence';

<page 103>
t6 The LIFE of
prudence; I only mean, she had no
knowledge of the use of money, she re-,
lieved distress, by putting herself into the
circumstances of the object whose wants
she supplied.
SJie was arrived at the age of nineteen,
when the croud of her lovers, and the
continual repetition of new flattery, had
taught her to think she could never be
forsaken, and never poor. Young ladies
are apt to expect a certainty of success,
from a number of lovers; and yet I have
seldom seen a girl courted by an hundred
lovers, that found an husband in any.
Before the choice is fixed, she has either
lost her reputation, or her good fense;
and the loss of either is sufficient to con-
sign her to perpetual virginity.
Among the number of this young la-*
day's lovers was the celebrated S—,
who, at that time, went by the name of
the good-natured man. This gentleman,
with talents that might have done ho-
• nour to humanity, suffered himself to fall
at length into the lowest state of debase-
ment.

<page 104>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; S>
unent. He followed the dictates of every 1
newest passion, his love, his pity, his ge- (
nerosity, and even his friendships were
all in excess he was unable to make
head against any of his sensations or de-
sires, but they were in general worthy
wishes and desires for he was constitu •
lionally virtuous. This gentleman, who
at last died in a goal, was at that time
jthis lady's envied favourite.
It is probable that he, thoughtless
creature, had no other prospect from this
amour, but that of passing the present
moments agreeably. He only courted
dissipation, but the lady's thoughts were
sixed on happiness, At length, however,
his debts amounting to a considerable
sum, he was arrested, and thrown into
prison. He. endeavoured at first to conceal
his situation from his beautiful mistress;
but she soon came to a knowledge of his
distress, and took a fatal resolution of
freeing him from confinement by dis-
charging all the demands of his credi-
tors..
G 4
Mr.

<page 105>
$t The L I F E op
Mr. Najh was at that time in London,
and represented to the thoughtless young
lady, that such a measure would effectualr-
ly ruin both; that so warm a concern for
the interests of Mr. S—, would in the
first place quite impair her fortune, in
the eyes of our sex; and what was worse,
lessen her reputation in those of her own.
He adde'd, that thus bringing Mr. S
from prison, would be only a temporary
relief; that a mind so generous as his,
would become bankrupt under the load of
gratitude; and instead of improving in
friendship or affection, he would only
study to avoid a creditor he could never
repay; that tho' small favours produce
good-will, great ones destroy friendship.
These admonitions however were difrer
garded, and she too late found the pru-
dence and truth of her adviser. In short,
her fortune was by this means exhaustr
cd, and, with all her attractions, she
found her acquaintance began to dis-
esteem her, in proportion as. she became
poor.
In

<page 106>
RICH ARD NAS H, Esq; 89
In this situation she accepted Mr.
Najtis invitation of returning to Bath;
he promised to introduce her to the best
company there, and he was assured that
her merit would do the rest; upon her
very first appearance, ladies of the
highest distinction courted her friend-
ship and esteem; but a settled melan-
choly had taken possession of her mind,
and no amusements that they could pro-
pose were sufficient to divert it. Yet still,
as if from habit, she followed the crowd
in its levities, and frequented those
places, where all persons endeavour to
forget themselves in the bustle of cere-
mony and shew.
Her beauty, her simplicity, and her
unguarded situation, soon drew the atten-
tion of a designing wretch, who at that
time kept one of the rooms at Bath, and
who thought, that this lady's merit, pro-
perly managed, might turn to good ac-
count. This woman's name was dame
Lindsey, a creature, who, though vicious,
was in appearance sanctified; and, though
designing, had some wit and humour.
She

<page 107>
go The LIFE or
She began by the humblest assiduity to
fngratiate herself with miss S—; shew-
ed, that she could be amusing as a com-
panion, and by frequent offers of mo-
ney, proved, that she could be useful as
a friend. Thus, by degrees, she gain-
ed an entire ascendant over this poor,
thoughtless, deserted girl; and, in less
than one year, namely about 1727, miss
S—, without ever transgressing the laws
of virtue, had entirely lost her reputation.
Whenever a person was wanting to make
up a party for play at dame Lindfey's,
£yhia, as she was then familiarly called,
was sent for, and was obliged to suffer
all those slights, which the rich but too
often let fall upon their inferiors in point
of fortune.
In most, even the greatest, minds, the
heart at last becomes level with the
meanness of its condition; but, in this
charming girl, it struggled hard with ad-
versity, and yielded to every encroach-
ment of contempt with sullen reluct-
ance.
But

<page 108>
RICHARD NAS H, Esq; 9j
But though in the course of three
years she was in the very eye of public
inspection, yet, Mr. Wood the architect,
avers, that he could never, by the strict-
est observations, perceive her to be taint- p
ed with any other vice, than that of suf-
fering herself to be decoyed to the gam-
ing-table, and, at her own hazard, play-
ing for the amusement and advantage of
others. Her friend, Mr. Nafit therefore,
thought proper to induce her to break
off all connections with dame Lindsey,
and to rent part of Mr. Woods house, in
Queen square, where she behaved with
the utmost complaisance, regularity, and
virtue.
In this situation her detestation of life
still continued; stie found, that time/
would infallibly deprive her of part of her
attractions, and that continual solicitude
would impair the rest. With these re-
flections she would frequently entertain
herself, and an old faithful maid in the
vales of Bath, whenever the weather
would permit them to walk out. She
vvould even sometimes start questions in
5 com-

<page 109>
92 The LIFE of
company, with seeming unconcern, in
order to know what act of suicide was
easiest, and which was attended with the
smallest pain. When tired with exercise,
she generally retired to meditation, and
she became habituated to early hours of
ileep and rest. But when the weather
prevented her usual exercise, and her
sleep was thus more difficult, she made
it a rule to rise from her bed, and walk
about her chamber, till she began to find
an inclination for repose.
This custom made it necessary for her
to order a burning candle to be kept all
night in her room. And the maid usu-
ally, when she withdrew, locked the
chamber door, and pushing the key un-
der it beyond reach, her mistress by that
constant method lay undisturbed till
seven o'clock in the morning, then she
arose, unlocked the door, and rang the
bell, as a signal for the maid to return.
This state of seeming piety, regulari-
ty, and prudence, continued for some
time, till the gay, celebrated, toasted
. . miss

<page 110>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 93
miss Sylvia was funk into an housekeeper
to the gentleman, at whose house she
lived. 'She was unable to keep compa-
ny for want of the elegancies of dress*
that are the usual passport among the
polite, and she was too haughty to seem
to want them. The fashionable, the
amusing, and the polite in society now
seldom visited her, and from being once
the object of every eye, she was now
deserted by all, and preyed upon by
the bitter reflections of her own im-
prudence,
Mr. Wood, and part of his family,
were gone to London. Miss Sylvia was
left with the rest as a governess at Bath.
She sometimes saw Mr. Najh, and ac-
knowledged the friendship of his admo-
nitions, though she refused to accept any
other marks of his generosity, than that
of advice. Upon the close of the day,
in which Mr. Wood was expected to re-
turn from London, she expressed some
uneasiness at the disappointment of not
seeing him took particular care to set-
tle the affairs of his family, and then
a«

<page 111>
94 The LIFE 01*
1
as usual sate down to meditation. Shd
now cast a retrospect over her past mis-
conduct, and her approaching misery 5
she saw, that even affluence gave her no
real happiness, and from indigence she
thought nothing could be hoped but lin-
gering calamity. She at length conceiv-
ed the fatal resolution of leaving a life,
in which she could see no corner for
comfort, and terminating a scene of im-
prudence in suicide.
Thus resolved, she sate down at her
dining-room window, and with cool in-
trepidity, wrote the following elegant
lines on one of the panes of the window.
O death; thou pleasing end of human woe!
Thou cure for life! Thou greatest good
below!
Still may'st thou fly the coward, and the
slave,
And thy soft slumbers only bless the brave.
She then wer.t into company with the
most chearful serenity; talked of in-
different subjects till supper, which she
ordered

<page 112>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 95
ordered to be got ready in a little library
belonging to the family. There she spent
the remaining hours, preceding bed-time,
in dandling two of Mr. Wood's children
on her knees. In retiring from thence to
her chamber she went into the nursery,
to take her leave of another child, as it
lay sleeping in the cradle. Struck with
the innocence of the little babe's looks,
and the consciousness of her meditated
guilt, she could not avoid bursting into
tears, and hugging it in her arms; she
then bid her old servant a good night,
for the first time she had ever done so,
and went to bed as usual.
It is probable she soon quitted her bed,
and was seized with an alternation of
passions, before she yielded to the im-
pulse of despair. She dressed herself in
clean linnen, and white garments of
every kind, like a bride-maid. Her
gown was pinned over her breast, just as
a nurse pins the swaddling cloaths of an
infant. A pink silk girdle was the in-
strument with which she resolved to ter-
minate her misery, and this was length-
ened

<page 113>
o6' The LIFE of
ened by another made of gold thread*.
The end of the former was tied with at
noose, and the latter with three knots,.
at a small distance from one another.
Thus spared, she fate down again,
and read; for she left the book open at
that place, in the story of Olympia, in the
Orlando Furioso of Ariojio, where, by the
perfidy and ingratitude of her bosom
friend, me'was ruined, and left to the
mercy of an unpitying world. This tra-
gical event gave her fresh spirits to go
through her fatal purpose; so standing
upon a stool, and flinging the girdle,
which was tied round her neck, over a
doses-door that opened into her cham-
ber, she remained suspended. Her weighs
however broke the girdle, and the poor
despairer fell upon the floor with such
violence, that her fall awakened a work-
man that lay in the house about half an!
hour after two o'clock.
Recovering herself, she began to walk
about the room, as her usual custom was
when she wanted sleepand the work-
man.

<page 114>
RICHARD N A S H, Esq; 97
man imagining it to be only some ordi-
nary accident, again went to sleep. She
once more, therefore, had recourse to a
stronger girdle made of silver thread;
and this kept her suspended till she
died. tn
Her old maid continued in the morn-
ing to wait as usual for the ringing of
the bell, and protracted her patience, hour
after hour, till two o'clock in the after-
noon; when the workmen at length en-
tering the room through the window,
found their unfortunate mistress still
hanging, and quite cold. The coroner's
j4jry being, impanelled, broughttin their
verdict lunacy; 4a.nd hoF*porpse, Was next
night decently buried in her father's
grave, at the charge of a female compa-
nion, with whom she had for many
years an inseparable intimacy.
Thus ended a female wit, a toast, and
a garjasster; loved, admired, and forsaken.
Formed for the delight of society, fallen
by imprudence into an object of pity.
Hundreds in high life lamented her fate,
H and

<page 115>
98 The LIFE of
and wished, when too late, to redress her
injuries. They who once had helped to
impair her fortune, now regretted that
they had assisted in so mean a pursuit.
The little effects. she had left behind were
bought up with the greatest avidity, by
those who desired to preserve some token
of a companion, that once had given them
such delight. The remembrance of every
virtue she was possessed of was now im-
proved by pity. Her former follies were
few, but the last swelled them to a large
amount. As she remains the strongest
instance to posterity, that want of pru-
dence alone, almost cancels every other
virtue, tytrlfo• Jf«<(£i~
In all this unfortunate lady's affairs
Mr. Najh took a peculiar concern, he di-
rected her when they played, advised. her
when she deviated from the rules of cau-
tion, and performed the last offices of
friendship atfer her decease, by raising the
auction of her little effects.
But he was not only the assistant and
the friend of the fair sex, but also their
. defen-

<page 116>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 9$
defender. He secured their persons from
insult, and their reputations from scan-
dal. Nothing offended him more, than
a young fellow's pretending to receive fa-
vours from ladies he probably never saw >
nothing pleased him so much, as seeing
such a piece of deliberate mischief pu-
nished. Mr. Nash and one of his friends,
being newly arrived at Tunbridge from
Bath, were one day on the walks, and
seeing a young fellow of fortune, with
whom they had some slight acquaintance,
joined him. Aster the usual chat and
news of the was day over, Mr. Najh
asked him, how long he had been at the
wells, and what company was there?
The other replied, he had been at
bridge a month; but as for company, he
could find as good at a Tyburn ball. Not
a foul was to be seen, except a parcel of
gamesters and whores, who would grant
the last favour, for a single stake at the
Pharaoh bank. "Look you there," con-
tinued he, "that Goddess of midnight,
so fine, at t'other end of the walks, by
Jove, she was mine this morning for half
a guinea. And Hie there, who brings up
H 2 ~ the

<page 117>
I0O
The LIFE or
the rear with powdered hair and dirty
ruffles, she's pretty enough, but cheap,
perfectly cheap; why, my boys, to my
own knowledge, you may have her for a
crown, and a dish of chocolate into the
bargain. Last. Wednesday night we were
happy." Hold there, fir, cried the gen-
tleman; as for your having the first lady,
it is possible it may be true, and I intend
to ask her about it, for she is my sister;
but as to your lying with the other last
Wednesday, I am sure you are a lying ras-
cal—she is my wife, and we came here
but last night." The Buck vainly asked
pardon ; the gentleman was going to give
him proper chastisement; when Mr.NaJJj
interposed in his behalf, and obtained his
pardon, upon condition that he quitted
Tunlridge immediately.
But Mr. NaJJj not only took care, during
his administration, to protect the ladies
from the insults of our sex, but to guard
them from the slanders of each other. He,
in the first place, prevented any animosi-
ties that might arise from place and pre-
cedence, by being previously acquainted
with

<page 118>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 101
with the rank and quality of almost every
iamily in the British dominions. He en-
deavoured to render scandal odious, by
marking it as the result of envy and folly
united. Not even Solon could have enac-
ted a wiser law in such a society as Bath.
The gay, the heedless, and the idle, which
mostly compose the groupe of water-
drinkers, seldom are at the pains of talk-
ing upon universal topics, which require
comprehensive thought, or abstract rea-
soning. The adventures of the little cir-
cle of their own acquaintance, or of some
names of quality and fashion, make up
their whole conversation. But it is too
likely, that when we mention those, we
wish to depress them, in order to render
ourselves more conspicuous; scandal must
therefore have fixed her throne at Bath,
preferable to any other part of the king-
dom. However, tho' these endeavours
could not totally supprefc this custom
among the fair, yet they gained him the
friendship of several ladies of distinction,
who had smarted pretty severely under
the lash of censure. Among this numbe?
H 3 was

<page 119>
loz The LIFE of
was the old duchess of Marlborough, who>
conceived a particular friendship for him,
and which continued during her life. She
frequently consulted him in several con-
cerns of a private nature. Her letting
leases, building bridges, or forming ca-
nals, were often carried on under his gui-
dance; but me advised with him parti- -
cularly in purchasing liveries for the foot-
men; a business to which she thought his
genius best adapted. As any thing rela-
tive to her may please the curiosity of
such as delight in the anecdotes and let-
ters of the great, however dull and insi-
pid, I shall beg leave to present them with
one or two of her letters, collected at a
venture from several others to the fame
purpose.
To Mr. Nash, at the Bath.
Blenheim^ Sept. 18, 1724.
MR. "Jennens will give you an ac-
count how little time I have in
my power, and that will make my ex-
cuse for not thanking you sooner for the
favour

<page 120>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 103
favour of your letter, and for the trouble
you have given yourself in bespeaking
the cloth, which I am sure will be good,
since you have undertaken to order it.
Pray ask Mrs. Jennens concerning the
cascade, which will satisfy all your doubts
in that matter; she saw it play, which it
will do in great beauty, for at least six
hours together, and it runs enough to
cover all the stones constantly, and is a
hundred feet broad, which I am told is a
much greater breadth than any cascade is
in England; and this will be yet better
than it is, when it is quite finished;
this water is a great addition to this place,
and the lake being thirty acres, out of
which the cascade comes and falls into
the canal that goes through the bridge,
it makes that look as if it was necessary,
which before seemed so otherwise.
I am
Tour most humble Servant,
S. Marlborough.
H4 To

<page 121>
io4 The LIFE of
to Mr. Nash, at the Bath.
Marlborough-bouse, May 17,173
Sir,
IHave received the savour of yours of
the tenth of May, with that from Mr.
Harvey. And by, last post I received a
letter from Mr. Overton, a sort of a bailiff
and a surveyor, whom I have employed a
great while upon my estates in Wiltshire.
He is a very active and' very useful man
of his sort. He writes to me, that Mr.
Harvey has been with him, and brought
him a paper, Avhich I sent you. He says,
that finding he was a man that was desir-
ous to serve me, he had assisted him all
he could, by informations which he has
given; and that he should continue to
assist him. I have writ to him that he
did mighty well. There is likewise a con-
siderable tenant of my lord Bruce's, his
name is Cannons, who has promised me
his assistance towards recommending te-
nants for these farms. And if Mr. Har-
vey happens to know such a man, he may
put him in mind of it. I am sure you
do
«

<page 122>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; J05
do me all the good you can. And I hope
you are sure that I mail always be sensi-
ble of the obligations I have to you, and
ever be
Tour most thankful and obliged
humble Servant,
S. Marlborough.
Mr. Harvey may conclude to take any
prices that were given you in the paper.
But as I know that we have been scan-
dalously cheated, if he finds that any
thing can be let better than it has been
let, I do not doubt but he will do it.
The duchess of Marlborough seems
not to be a much better writer than
Mr. Najh, but she was worth many hun-
dred thousand pounds, and that might
console her. It may give splenetic phi-
losophy, however, some scope for me-
ditation, when it considers, what a par-
cel of stupid trifles the world is ready to
admire.
Wha*

<page 123>
106 The LIFE of
Whatever might have been Mr. Najtis
other excellencies, there was one in which
few exceeded him; I mean his extensive
humanity. None felt pity more strong-
ly, and none made greater efforts to re-
lieve distress. If I were to name any
reigning and fashionable virtue in the
present age, I think it should be charity.
The numberless benefactions privately
given, the various public solicitations for
charity, and the success they meet with,
serve to prove, that though we may fall
short of our ancestors in other respects,
yet in this instance we greatly excel
them. I know not whether it may not be
spreading the influence of Mr. Nafb too
widely to say, that he was one of the
principal causes of introducing this noble
emulation among the rich; but certain
it is, no private man ever relieved the
distresses ef so many as he did.
Before gaming was suppressed, and
|n the meridian of his life and fortune,
his benefactions were generally found to
equal his other expences. The money
he got without pain, he gave away
without

<page 124>
RICHARD N AS H, Esq; 107
without reluctance; and whenever un-
able to relieve a wretch, who sued for
assistance, he has been often seen to
shed tears. A gentleman of broken for-
tune, one day standing beeind his chair,
as he was playing a game of picquet for
two hundred pounds, and observing
with what indifference he won the mo-
ney, could not avoid whispering these
words to another who stood by; "Hea-
vens! how happy would all that money
make me 1" Nash, overhearing him,
clapped the money into his hand; and
cried, Go and be happy.
About six and thirty years ago, a cler-
gyman brought his family to Bath for
the benefit of the waters. His wife la-
boured under a lingering disorder, which
it was thought nothing but the Hot
Wells could remove. The expences of
living there soon lessened the poor man's
finances; his cloaths were fold, piece
by piece, to provide a temporary relief
for his little family; and his appearance
was at last so shabby, that, from the
number of holes in his coat and stock-
ings,

<page 125>
jo8 The LIFE or
/
ings, Najh gave him the name of doctor
Cullender. Our beau, it seems, was rude
enough to make a jest of poverty, though
he had sensibility enough to relieve it.
The poor clergyman combated his dis-
tresses with fortitude; and, instead of
attempting to solicit relief, endeavoured
to conceal them. Upon a living of thir-
ty pounds a year, he endeavoured to
maintain his wife and six children; but
all his resources at last failed him, and
nothing but famine was seen in the
wretched family. The poor man's cir-
cumstances were at last communicated to
Nap; who, with his usual chearsulness,
undertook to relieve him. On a sunday
evening, at a public tea-drinking at
Harrison's, he went about to collect a
subscription, and began it himself, by
giving five guineas. By this means, two
hundred guineas were collected in less
than two hours, and the poor family
raised from the lowest despondence into
affluence and felicity. A bounty so un-
expected had a better influence even upon
the woman's constitution, than all that
either the physicians or the waters of
Bath

<page 126>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 109
Bath conld produce, and she recovered.
But his good offices did not rest here.
He prevailed upon a nobleman of his
acquaintance, to present the Doctor with
a living of an hundred and sixty pounds
a year, which made that happiness, he
had before produced, in some measure
permanent.
In the severe winter, which happened
in the year 1739, his charity was great,
useful, and extensive. Pie frequently,
at that season of calamity, entered the
houses of the poor, whom he thought
too proud to beg, and generously reliev-
ed them. The colliers were at this time
peculiarly distressed; and, in order to
excite compassion, a number of them
yoaked themselves to a waggon loaded
with coals, and drew it into Bath, and
presented it to Mr. Najh. Their scheme
had the proper effect. Mr. Nash pro-
cured them a subscription, and gave ten
guineas towards it himself. The weavers
also ssiared his bounty at that season.
They came begging in a body into Bath,
and he provided a plentiful dinner for
their
S

<page 127>
Iio The LIFE of
their entertainment, and gave each a
Week's subsistence at going away.
There ate few public charities to
which he was not a subscriber, and
many he principally contributed to sup-
port. Among others, Mr. Annejly, that
strange example of the mutability of for-
tune, and the inefficacy of our Laws,.
shared his interest and bounty. I have
now before me a well written letter, ad-
dressed to Mr. Nap, in order to obtain
his interest for that unhappy gentleman;
it comes from Mr. Henderson, a quaker,
who was Mr. Annejly s father's agent.
This gentleman warmly espoused the
young adventurer's interest, and, I am
told, fell with him.
London, OSlober 23, 1756.
My Good Friend,
WH E N I had the honour of con-
versing with thee at Tsutibridge,
in September last, concerning that most
singular striking case of Mr. Annejley,
whom I have known since he was about
fix

<page 128>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; tit
six years old, I being then employed by
the late Lord Baron of Alt ham, his fa-
ther, as his agent. From what 1 know
of the affairs of that family, I am well
assured, that Mr. Annejley is the legiti-
mate son of the late Lord Baron of Al-
tham, and, in consequence thereof, is in-<
titled to the honours and estates of An-
glesey. Were I not well assured of his
right to those honours and estates, I
would not give countenance to his claim.
1 well remember, that thou then
madest me a promise to assist him in
solliciting a subscription, that was then
begun at 'Tunbridge; but, as that place
was not within the limits of thy pro-
vince, thou couldest not promise to do
much there. But thou saidst, that in
case he would go to Bath in the season,
thou wouldest then and there shew how
much thou wouldest be his friend.
And now, my good friend, as the sea-
son is come on, and Mr. Annejley now at
Bath, I beg leave to remind thee of that
promise; and that thou wilt keep in full
view the honour, the everlasting honour,
6 that

<page 129>
113 The LIFE of
that will naturally redound to thee from
thy benevolence, and crown all the good
actions of .hy life. 1 fay, now in the
vale of life, to relieve a distressed young
nobleman, to extricate so immense an
estate, from the hands of oppression; to
do this, will fix such a ray of glory on
thy memory, as will speak forth thy
praise to suture ages. This with greafc
respect is the needful,
from thy assured Friend,
William Henderson.
Be pleased to give my respects to Mr,
Annejley and his spouse.
Mr. NaJJj punctually kept his word
with this gentleman; he began the sub-
scription himself with the utmost libe-
rality, and procured such a list of en-
couragers, as at once did honour to Mr.
Annejley % cause, and their own genero-
sity. What a pity it was, that this mo-
ney, which was given for the relief of
indigence only, went to feed a set of
reptiles,

<page 130>
RICHARD NASH, .Esq; n3
reptiles, who batten upon our weakness
miseries, and vice. .
It may not be Jcnewn. to the>[genera-
lity of my readers, that the last act of
the comedy, called Esop, which was
added to the French plot of Boursaulty
by Mr. Vanburgh, was taken from a
story told of Mr. Najh, upon a similar
occasion. He had in the early part of
life made proposals of marriage to miss
V-----i of D ;his affluence at that
time, and the favour which he was in
with the nobility, readily induced the
young lady's father to favour his ad-
dresses. However, upon opening .the
affair to herself, she candidly told him,
her affections Were placed upon another,
and that she could not possibly comply.
Though this answer satisfied Mr. Najby
it was by no means sufficient to appease
the father; and he peremptorily insisted
upon her obedience. Things were car-
ried to the last extremity; when Mr.
Ntt/b undertook to settle the affair and
desiring his favoured rival to be sent for,
with his own hand presented his mistress
1 to

<page 131>
114 The LIFE of
to him, together with a fortune equal to
-what her father intended to give her.
Such an uncommon instance of genero-
sity had an instant effect upon the se-
vere parent; he considered such disinte-
restedness as a just reproach to his own
mercenary disposition, and took his
daughter once more into favour. I wish,
for the dignity of history, that the sequel
could be concealed, but the young lady
ran away with her footman, before half
a year was expired and her husband
died of grief.
In general, the benefactions of a ge-
nerous man are but ill bestowed. His
heart seldom gives him leave to examine
the real distress of the object which sues
for pity; his good-nature takes the
alarm too soon, and he bestows his for-
tune on only apparent wretchedness. The
man naturally frugal, on the other hand,
seldom relieves, but when he does, his
reason, and not his sensations, generally
sind out the object. Every instance of
his bounty is therefore permanent, and
bears witness to his benevolence.
Of

<page 132>
RICHARD NASH, Esq$ 115
Of all the immense sums which Na/h
lavished upon real or apparent wretched-
ness, the effects, after a few years, seem-
ed to disappear. His money was gene-
rally given to support immediate want,
or to relieve improvident indolence, and
therefore it vanished in an hour. Per-
haps towards the close of life, were he
to look round on the thousands he had
relieved, he would find but few made
happy, or fixed by his bounty in a state
of thriving industry; it was enough for
him, that he gave to those that wanted;
he never considered, that charity to some
might impoverish himself without re-
lieving them; he seldom considered the
merit or the industry of the petitioner;
or he rather fancied, that misery was
an excuse for indolence and guilt. It
was an usual saying of his, when he
went to beg for any person in distress,
that they who could stoop to the mean-
ness of solicitation, must certainly want
the favour for which they petitioned.
In

<page 133>
n6 The LIFE of
In this manner therefore he gave
away immense sums of his own, and
still greater, which he procured from
others. His way was, when any per-
son was proposed to him as an object of
charity, to go round with his hat, first
among the nobility, according to their
rank, and so on, till he left scarce a sin-
gle person unsolicited. They who go
thus about to beg for others, generally
find a pleasure in the task. They con-
sider, in some measure, every benefac-
tion they procure, as given by themselves,
and have at once the pleasure of being
liberal, without the self-reproach of be-
ing profuse.
But of all the instances of Mr. A^'s
bounty, none does him more real honour,
than the pains he took in establishing an
hospital at Bath, in which benefaction,
however, Doctor Oliver had a great stiare.
This was one of those well guided chari-
ties, dictated by reason, and supported
by prudence. By this institution the dis-
eased poor might recover health, when
. . inca-

<page 134>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 117
incapable of receiving it in any other part
of the kingdom. As the disorders of the
poor, who could expect to find relief at
Bath, were mostly chronical, the expence
of maintaining them there was found more
than their parishes thought proper to af-
ford. They therefore chose to support
them in a continual state of infirmity, by
a small allowance at home, rather than be
at the charge of an expensive cure. An
hospital therefore at Bath it was thought
would be an assylum, and a place of re-
lief to those disabled creatures, and would,
at the fame time, give the physician more
thorough insight into the efficacy of the
waters, from the regularity with which
such patients would be obliged to take
them. These inducements therefore in*
fluenced Doctor Oliver, and Mr. Nash, to
promote a subscription towards such a be-
nefaction. The design was set on foot so
early as the year 1711, but not complet-
ed till the year 1742. This delay, which
seems surprizing, was in fact owing to
the want of a proper fund for carrying *
the work into execution. What I said
I 3 above,

<page 135>
ii8 The LIFE op
above, of charity being the characteristic
virtue of the present age, will be more
fully evinced, by comparing the old and
new subscriptions for this hospital. These
will shew the difference between ancient
and modern benevolence. When I run •
my eye over the list of those who sub-
scribed in the year 1723, I find the sub-
scription in general seldom rise above a
guinea each person; so that, at that time,
with all their efforts, they were unable to
raise four hundred pounds; but in about
twenty years after, each particular sub-
scription was greatly encreased, ten, twen-
ty, thirty pounds, being the most ordinary-
sums subscribed, and they soon raised
above two thousand pounds for the pur*'
pose.
Thus chiefly by the means of Doctor
Oliver and Mr. Najh, but not without
the assistance of the good Mr. Allen, who
gave them the stone for building and
other benefactions, this hospital was erect-
ed, and it is at present fitted up for the
reception of patients, the cafes most pa-
ralytic
3

<page 136>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 119
1
ralytic or leprous. The following condi-
tions are* observed previous to admit-
tance.
"I. The case of the patient must be
described by some physician, or person of
skill, in the neighbourhood of the place
where the patient has resided for some
time ; and this description, together with
a certificate of the poverty of the patient,
attested by some persons of credit, must
be sent in a letter post-paid, directed ta
the register of the Genera/ Hospital at
Bath.
II. After the patient's case has been
thus described, andsent, hemustremainia
his usual place or residence 'till he has
notice of a vacancy, signified by a letter
from the register.
III. Upon the receipt of such a letter,
the patient must set forward for Bath^
bringing with him this letter, the parisla
certificate duly executed, and allowed by
two justices, and three pounds caution-
money, if from any part of England or
I 4 Wtlbs;

<page 137>
i2o The LIFE of
Wales; but if the patient comes from
Scotland or Ireland, then the caution -
money, to be deposited before admission,
is the sum of five pounds.
IV. Soldiers may, instead of parish cer-
tificates, bring a certificate from their
commanding officers, signifying to what
corps they belong, and that they shall be
received into the same corps, when dis-
charged from the Hospital, in whatever
condition they are. But it is necessary,
that their cases be described, and sent
previously, and that they bring with them
three pounds caution-money.
Note, The intention of the caution-
money is to defray the expences of re-
turning the patients after they are dis-
charged from the Hospital, or of their
burial in case they die there. The re-
mainder of the caution-money, after these
expences are defrayed, will be returned
to the person who made the deposit."
I am unwilling to leave this subject of
his benevolence, because it is a virtue in
his

<page 138>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 121
his character, which must stand almost
single against an hundred follies; and it
deserves the more to be insisted on, be-
cause it was large enough to outweigh
them all. A man may be an hypocrite
safely in every Other instance, but in cha-
rity; there are few who will buy the
character of benevolence at the rate for
which it must be acquired. In short,
the sums he gave away were immense;
and, in old age, when at last grown too
poor to give relief, he gave, as the poet
has it, all he had, a tear; when incapable
of relieving the agonies of the wretched,
he attempted to relieve his own by a
flood of sorrow.
The sums he gave, and collected for
the hospital, were great, and his manner
of doing it was np less admirable. I am
told that he was once collecting money
in Wiltshire's room for that purpose,
when a lady entered who is more rer
markable for her wit than her charity,
and not being able to pass by him unob-
served, she gave him a pat with her fan,
and said, You must put down a trifle for
6 me.

<page 139>
122 The L.I F E of
me, Nafli, for I have no money in rnj
pocket. Yes, madam, fays he, that I will
with pleasure, if you grace will tell me
when to stop: then taking an handful of
guineas out of his pocket, he began to
tell them into his white hat, one, two,
three, four, five. Hold, bold, fays the
dutchefs, con/ider what you are about.
Consider your rank and fortune, madam,
fays Najh, and continued telling, six, se-
ven, eight, nine, ten. Here the dutchefs
called again, and seemed angry. Pray
compose yourself, madam, cried Najh,
and don't interrupt the work of charity
eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen.
Here the dutchefs stormed, and caught
hold of his hand. Peace, madam, says
Najh; you shall have your name written
in letters of gold, madam, and upon the
front of the building, madam. Sixteen,
seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty.
I won't pay a farthing morels, says the
dutchefs. Charity hides a multitude of
sins, replies Najh. Twenty-one, twenty-
two, twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-
five. Najh, fays she, I protest youfrighten
me out of my wits, h~-d, I /hall die \
Madam,

<page 140>
1UCHARD NASH, Esq; 123
Madam, you will never die with doing
good; and if you do, it will be the better
for you, answered Najh, and was about
to proceed; but perceiving her grace had
lost all patience, a parley ensued, when
he, after much altercation, agreed to stop
his hand, and compound with her grace
for thirty guineas. The dutchess, how-
ever, seemed displeased the whole evening;
and when he came to the table where she
was playing, bid him Jland farther, an
ugly devil, for fie bated the Jight of him.
But her grace afterwards, having a run
of good luck, called Najh to her. Come,
fays she, I will be friends with you, though
you are a fool; and to let you fee I am not
angry, there is ten guineas more for your
charity. But this I infjl on, that nei-
ther my name, nor the sum, /hall be men-
tioned.
From the hospital erected for the be-
nefit of the poor, it is an easy transition
to the monuments erected by him in ho-
nour of the great. Upon the recovery of
the Prince of Orange, by drinking the
Bath waters, Mr. Najh caused a small
obelisk,

<page 141>
124 The LIFE of
obelisk, thirty feet high, to be erected
in a grove near the. Abbey church, since
called Orange Grove. This Prince's
arms adorn the west side of the body
of the pedestal. The inscription is
on the opposite side, in the following
words:
In memoriam
Sanitatis
Principi Auriaco
Aquarum thermalium potu,
Favenie Deo,
Qvante Britannia,
Feliciter rejlituta,
M. pec, xxxiv.
In English thus.
In memory
Of the happy restoration
Of the health of the
Prince of Orange,
Through the favour of God,
And to the great joy of Britain,
By drinking the Bath waters.
*734-
I find

<page 142>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 125
I find ifra general custom, at all Baths
and Spaws, to erect monuments of this
kind to the memory of every Prince,
who has received benefit from the wa-
ters. Aix, Spaiv, and Pisa, abound with
inscriptions of this nature, apparently
doing honour to the Prince, but in
reality celebrating the efficacy of their
springs. It is wrong, therefore, to call
such monuments instances of gratitude,
though they may wear that appear-
ance.
In the year 1738, the Prince of Wales
came to Bath, who presented Mr. Najh
with a large gold enamelled snuft-box;
and upon his departure, Nafi, as king of
Bath, erected an obelisk in honour of this
Prince, as he had before done for the
Prince of Orange. . This handsome me-
morial in honour of that good-natured
Prince is erected in £>ueen-Jquare. It is
enclosed with a stone balustrade, and in
the middle of every side there are large
iron gates. In the center is the obelisk,
seventy feet high, and terminating in a
point. The e^pences of this were eighty
pounds;
*

<page 143>
126 The LIFE of
pounds j ind Mr. Najh was determined,
that the inscription should answer the
magnifiv ice of the pile. With this
view he wrote to Mr. Pope, at London,
requesti g an inscription. I ihould have
been glad to have given Mr. Na/h's letter
upon this occasion; the reader, however,
must be satisfied with Pope's reply; which
is as fcilows.
S I R,
IHave received yours, and thank your
partiality in my favour. You fay
words cannot express the gratitude you
feel for the savour of his R. H. and yet
you would have me express what you feel,
and in a few words. I own myself unequal
to the task; for even granting it possible to
express an inexpressible idea, I am the
worst person you could have pitched upon
for this purpose, who have received so few
favours from the great myself, that I am
utterly unacquainted with what kind
of thanks they like best. Whether the
P most loves poetry or prose, I protest
I do not know; but this I dare venture
lo

<page 144>
RICHARD NASH Esq; 127
to affirm, that you can gi\f him as
much satisfaction in either as <,can.
I am,
S 1 r, n
Tour affectionate Servants
Pope.
u
What Mr. Najh's answer to this billet
was, I cannot take upon me to ascertain,
but it was probably a perseverance in his
former request. The following is the
copy of Mr. Pope's reply to his second
letter.
S I R,
IHad sooner answered yours, but in the
hope of procuring a properer hand
than mine; and then in consulting with
some, whose office about the P— might
make them the best judges, what fort of
inscription to set up? Nothing can be
plainer than the inclosed; it is nearly the
common fense of the thing, and I do not
know how to flourish upon it. But this
you

<page 145>
128 The LIFE of
you would do as well, or better your-
self, and I dare say may mend the ex-
pression. I am truly,
Dear S i r,
Tour affeSlionatc Servant,
A. Pope.,
I think I need not tell you my name
should not be mentioned. •
Such a letter as this was what might
naturally be expected from Mr. Pope.
Notwithstanding the seeming modesty
towards the conclusion, the vanity of arr
applauded writer bursts through every
line of it. The difficulty of concealing
his hand from the clerks at the Post-
office, and the solicitude to have his name
concealed, were marks of the conscous-
ness of his own importance. It is pro-
bable, his hand was not so very well
known, nor his letters so eagerly opened
by the clerks of the Office, as he seems
always to think. But in all his letters,
as

<page 146>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; iij
as' well as those of Swift, there runs a
strain of pride, as if the world talked
of nothing but themselves. Alass, fays
he, in one of them, the day after I am
dead, the fun will shine as bright as the day
before, and the world will be as merry as
usual! Very strange, that neither ari
eclipse nor an earthquake mould follow
the loss of a Poet!
The inscription referred in this letter,
was the fame which was afterwards en-
graved on the obelisk; a'nd is as fol-
lows.
In memory of honours bestbw'd,
And in gratitude for benefits conferred irf •
this city,
By his Royal Highness
Frederick, Prince of Wales,
And his Royal Consort;
In the Year 1738,
This obelisk is erected by
Richard Nap, Esq;
I dare venture to say, there was scarce
a cOmmon-couneil-man in the corpora-
ls • tion

<page 147>
130 The LIFE of
tion of Bath, but could have done this
as well. Nothing can be more frigid j
though the subject was worthy of the
utmost exertions of Genius.
About this period every season brought
some new accession of honour to Mr.
Najh; and the corporation now univer-
sally found, that he was absolutely ne-
cessary for promoting the welfare of the
city; so that this year seems to have
been the meridian of his glory. About
this time he arrived at such a pitch of
authority, that I really believe Alex-
der was not greater at Persepolis. The
countenance he received from the Prince
of Orange, the favour he was in with the
Prince of Wales, and the caresses of the
nobility, all conspired to lift him to the
utmost pitch of vanity. The exultation of
a little mind, upon being admitted to the
familiarity of the Great is inexpressible.
The prince of Orange had made him
a present of a very fine snuff-box. Upon
this some of the nobility thought it
would be proper to give snuff-boxes too;
they were quickly imitated by the mid-
dling
i

<page 148>
RI C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 131
dling gentry, and it soon became the
fashion to give Mr. Nash snuff-boxes;
who had in a little time a number suffi-
cient to have furnished a good toy-
shop t
To add to his honours, there was
placed a full length picture of him, in
Wilt/hire's-Ball-room, between the busts
of Newton and Pope. It was upon this
occasion that the Earl of Chesterfieldwrote
the following severe but witty epigram. .
Immortal Newton never spoke
More truth than here you'll find;
Nor Pope himself e'er pen'd a joke
Severer on mankind.
This picture placed these busts between,
Gives satire its full strength;
Wisdom and Wit are little seen,
But Folly at full length.
There is also a full length picture of
Mr. Nap in Simpson's Ball-room; and his
Statue at full length in the Pump-r.om,
with a plan of the Bath-Hospital in his
K 2 hand,

<page 149>
132 The LIFE of
hand. He was now treated in every
respect like a great man; he had his
levee, his flatterers, his buffoons, his
good-natured creatures, and even his de-
dicators. A trifling ill supported vanity
was his foible, and while he received the
homage of the vulgar, and enjoyed the
familiarity of the great, he felt no pain
for the unpromising view of poverty that
lay before him; he enjoyed the world as
it went, and drew upon content for the
deficiencies of fortune. If a cringing
wretch called him his Honour, he was
pleased; internally conscious, that he had
the justest pretensions to the title. If a
beggar called him my Lord, he was hap-
py, and generally sent the flatterer off
happy too. I have known him, in Lon-
don, wait a whole day at a window in the
Smyrna coffee-house, in order to receive
a bow from the Prince, or the Dutchess
of Marlboroughy as they passed by where
he was standing; and he would then look
round upon the company for admiration
and respect.
But

<page 150>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 133
But perhaps the reader desires to know,
"who could be low enough to flatter a.
man, who himself lived in some mea-
sure by dependance. Hundreds are rea-
dy upon those occasions. The very needy
are almost ever flatterers. A man in
wretched circumstances forgets his own
value, and feels no pain in giving up
superiority to every claimant. The very
vain are ever flatterers; as they find it
necessary to make use of all their arts, to
keep company with such as are superior
to themselves. But particularly the prodi-
gal are prone to adulation, in order to
open new supplies for their extravagance.
The poor, the vain, and extravagant,
are chiefly addicted to this vice; and
such hung upon his good nature. When
these three characters are found united in
one person, the composition generally
becomes a great man's favourite. It was
not difficult to collect such a groupe in a
city, that was the center of pleasure.
Najh had them of all sizes, from the half
pay captain in laced cloaths, to the hum-
ble boot-catcher at the Bear.
K ^ I have,

<page 151>
134 The LIFE of
I have before me a bundle of letters,
all addressed from a pack of flattering
reptiles, to his" Honour; and even some
printed dedications, in the fame servile
strain. In these his Honour is compliment-
ed as the great encourager of the polite
arts, as a gentleman of the most accom-
plished taste, of the most extensive learn-
ing, and in short of every thing in the.
world. But perhaps it will be thought
wrong in . me, to unveil the blushing
muse, to brand learning with the mean-
ness of its professors, or to expose scho-
lars in a state of contempt. For the
honour of letters, the dedications to Mr,
Najh are not written by scholars or poets^
but by people of a different stamp.
Among this number was the highway-
man, who was taken after attempting to
rob and murder Doctor Hancock. He
was called Poulter, alias Baxter, and
published a book, exposing the tricks of
gamblers, thieves and pick-pockets. This
he intended to have dedicated to Mr.
NaJJj; but the generous patron, tho' no
man loved praise more, was too modest
to

<page 152>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 135
to have it printed. However, he took
care to preserve the manuscript, among
the rest of his papers. The book was
entitled, The discoveries of John Poulter,
alias Baxter, •who was apprehended for
robbing Doctor Hancock, of Salisbury, on
Claverton Down near Bath and who
hassince been admitted kings evidence, and
discovered a mojl numerous gang of villains.
Being a full account of all the robberies he
committed, and the surprizing tricks and
frauds he has practised for thespace of five
years lajlpajl, in different parts of England,
particularly in the Weft. Written wholly
by himself The dedication intended to
be prefixed is as follows, and will give a
specimen of the stile of an highwayman
and a gambler.
To the Honourable Richard Nap, Esq;
May it please your Honour,
WITH humblest submission, I make
bold to present the following
sheets to your Honour's consideration,
and well known humanity. As I am in-
dustriously careful, in respect to his Ma-
K 4 jesty,

<page 153>
j36 The LIFE of
jesty, and good subjects, to put an end to
the unfortunate misconducts of all I know,
by bringing them to the gallows. . To be
sure some may censure, as if from self-
preservation I made this ample discovery;
but I communicate this to your Honour
and gentry, whether the life of one per-
son being taken away, would answer the
end, as to let escape such a number of
villains, who has been the ruining of
many a poor family, for whom my foul
is now much concerned. If my incli-
nations was ever so roguish inclined, what
is it to so great a number of villains, when
they consult together. As your Honour's
wisdom, humanity, and interest are
the friend of the virtuous, I make bold
to lay, at your Honour's feet, the fol-
lowing lines, which will put every honest
man upon his defence against the snares
of the mischievous; . and am, with the
greatest gratitude, honoured Sir,
Your Honour's
Most truly devoted and obedient Servant,
John Poulter, alias Baxter >
Taunton Coal, .»
'1 June id1 :..
Flattery

<page 154>
RICHARD N AS H, Esq; ;37
Flattery from such a wretch as this,
one would think but little pleasing; how-
ever, certain it is, that Nash was pleased
with it: he loved to be called your Ho-
nour, and Honourable; and the high-
wayman more than once experienced his
generosity.
But since I have mentioned this fel-
low's book, I cannot repress an impulse
to give an extract from it, however fo-
reign from my subject. I take the follow-
ing picture to be a perfectly humorous
description of artful knavery affecting ig-
norance on one hand, and rustic simpli-
city pretending to great wisdom and sa-
gacity on the other. It is an account of
the manner in which countrymen are de-
ceived by gamblers, at a game called
Pricking in the Belt, or the Old Nob.
This is a leathern strop, folded up dou-
ble, and then laid upon a table; if the
person who plays with a bodkin pricks
into the loop of the belt he wins; if
ptherwise, he loses. However, by slip-
ping one end of the strop, the sharper
tan win with pleasure.
6' « There

<page 155>
138 The LIFE of
** ' I ^HERE are generally four persons
A concerned in this fraud, one to
personate a Sailor, called a Legg Cull, ano-
ther called the Capper, who always keeps
with the Sailor; and two pickers up, or
Money-Droppers, to bring in FAzAc or Bub-
bles. The first thing they do at a fair, is
to look for a room clear of company,
which the Sailor and Capper immediately
take, while the Money-Droppers go out
lo look for a Flat. If they fee a country-
man, whose looks they like, one drops a
/hilling, or half a crown, just before him,
and picking it up again, looks the man in
the face, and fays, I have found apiece of
money, friend, did you fee me pick it up?
The man fays, yes: Then fays the sharper,
if you had found it, I would have had half,
so I will do as I would be done unto;
come, honest friend, we will not part with
dry lips. Then taking hifh into the room
where the other two are, he cries, By
your leave gentlemen, I hope we don't
disturb thecompany. No, cries the Sailor;
no brothers; Will you drink a glass of
brandy, I don't like your weak liquors;
and then begins a discourse, by asking the
Capper

<page 156>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 139
Capper how far it is to London; who re-
plies, I don't know perhaps the gentle-
man there can tell you, directing his dis-
course to the Flat; perhaps the Flat will
answer, a hundred miles; the Sailor cries,
I can ride that in a day, ay, in four or five
hours; for, fays he, my horse will run
twenty nots an hour for twenty-four
hours together: Capper, or the Sailors
supposed companion, says, I believe
Farmer you have not got such a horse
as the Sailor has; the Farmer cries No,
and laughs; and then the Sailor fays, I
must go and get half a pint of brandy,
for I am griped, and so leaves them. The
Capper, affecting a look of wisdom in
his absence observes, that it is an old
saying, and a true one, that Sailors get
their money like horses, and spend it like
asses; as for that there Sailor I never saw
him till now, buying a horse of my man;
he tells me he has been at Sea, and has
got about four hundred pounds prize-
money, but I believe he will squander it
all away, for he was gaming just now
with a (harping fellow, and lost forty shil-
lings, at a strange game of pricking, in a
5 string-

<page 157>
140 The LIFE of
string. Did either of you ever see it,
gentlemen? continued the Capper; if
you two are willing, I will ask him to
shew it, for we may as well win some of
his money as any body else: The Flat
and the Dropper cry, Do. Then in
comes the Sailor, staggering as if drunk,
and cries, What cheer, brothers? I have
just seen a pretty girl in the fair, and
went in to drink with her, we made a
bargain, and I gave her a fix and thirty
milling piece, but an old b~h her mo-
ther came and called her away, but I
hope she will come back to me present-
ly; then the Capper laughs, and fays,
Have you got your money of her again?
The Sailor fays, No; but she will come
to me I'm sure; then they all laugh. This
is done to deceive the Flat: then fays the
Capper, What have you done with the
stick and the string, Sailor? he answers,
What, that which I bought of the boys j
I have got it here, but will not fell it, and
then he pulls out the Old Nobb, faying,
What do you think I gave for it? I gave
but six-pence, and as much brandy as the
two boys could drink; it is made out of
a mon-

<page 158>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 141
a monkey's hide, as the boys told me,
and they told me, there is a game to be
played at it, which no body can do twice
together; I will go down aboard ship,
and play with my Captain, and I do not
fear but I shall win his (hip and cargo:
then they all laugh, and the Sailor makes
up the Old Nobb, and the Capper lays a
shilling, and pricks himself and wins;
the Sailor cries, You are a dab, I will
not lay with you, but if you will call a
stranger, I will lay again; why if you
think me a dab, as you call it, I will
get this strange gentleman, or this (point-
ing to the Flat) Done, cries the Sailor,
but you shall not tell him; then he makes
up the Nob, and Capper lays a shilling,
Flat pricks, being permitted to go six-
pence; to which he agreeing, wins ; and
Capper fays to the Flat, Can you change
me half a crown? This is done to find
the depth of his pocket; if they see
a good deal of gold, Flat must win
three or four times; if no gold,
but twice. Sometimes, if the Flat has
no money, the Sailor cries, I have more
t money than any man in the fair, and pulls
L out

<page 159>
142 The LIFE oP
out his purse of gold, and saith, Not
one of you can beg, borrow or steal half
this sum in an hour for a guinea. Capper
cries, I have laid out all mine; Farmer,
Can you? I'll go your halves, if you
think you can do it. The Sailor faith,
you must not bring any body with you;
then the Dropper goes with the Flat, and
faith, you must not tell your friend it is
for a wager; if you do, he will not lend
it you. Flat goes and borrows it, and
brings it to the Sailor, shews it him, and
wins the wager; then the Sailor pinches
the Nob again, and the Capper whispers
to the Flat, to prick out purposely this
time, saying, it will make the Sailor
more eager to lay on ; we may as well win
his money as not, for he will spend it
upon whores: Flat, with all the wisdom
in the world, loses on purpose; upon
which the Sailor swears, pulls out all
his money, throws it about the room,
and cries, I know no man can win for
ever, and then lays a guinea, but will
not let him prick, but throws down five
guineas; and the Capper urging the Flat,
and going his halves, the Sailor faith,
my

<page 160>
Rl C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 143
fny cabbin boy will lay as much as that,
I'll lay no less than twenty guineas; the
Capper cries, lay Farmer and take up
forty; which, being certain of winning,
he instantly complies with, and loses the
whole. When he has lost, in order to
advise him, the Dropper takes him by
the arm, and hauls him out of doors;
and the reckoning being in the mean
time paid within, the Capper and Sailor
follow after, and run another way. When
they are out of sight, the Dropper faith
to the Flat, go you back, and play with
the Sailor for a shilling, whilst I go
and borrow money; but when the Flat
goes to the house, he finds them gone,
and then he knows that he is bit, but not
till he has dearly paid for it."
By this fellow's discoveries Mr. NaJIj
was enabled to serve many of the nobili-
ty and gentry of his acquaintance; he
received a list of all those houses of ill
fame which harboured or assisted rogues,
and took care to furnish travellers with
proper precautions to.avoid them. It was
odd

<page 161>
144 The LIFE of
odd enough to see a gamester thus employ-
ed, in detecting the frauds of gamblers.
Among the Dedications, there is one
from a Professor of Cookery, which is
more adulatory than the preceding. It
is prefixed to a work, entituled, The
complete preserver, or a new method of
preserving fruits, flowers, and other vege-
tables, either with or withoutsugar, vine-
gar orspirits, &c.
To the very Honourable RichardNa/h,Esq;
Honoured SIR,
AS much as the oak exceeds the
bramble, so much do you exceed
the rest of mankind, in benevolence,
charity, and every other virtue that
adorns, enobles, and refines the human
species. I have therefore made bold to
prefix your name, though without per-
mission, to the following work, which
stands in need of such a patron, to excuse
its errors, with a candour, only known
to such an heart as your own; the obliga-
tions I have received at your hands, it is
impossible for me ever to repay, except

<page 162>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 145
by my endeavours, as in the present case,
to make known the many excellent vir-
tues which you possess. But what can
my wit do to recommend such a genius
as yours, a single word, a smile from
yourself, outweighs all that I, or perhaps
the best of our poets could express in
writing in the compass of a year. It
would ill become my sex, to declare
what power you have ever us, but your
generosity is, even in this instance,
greater than your desire to oblige. The
following sheets were drawn up at my
hours of leisure, and may be serviceable
to such of my sex, as are more willing to
employ their time in laudable occupa-
tions, and domestic oeconomy, than in
dress and dissipation. What reception
they may receive from your honour, I
am incapable of telling; however, from
your known candour and humanity, I
expect the most favourable.
I am, Honoured Sir,
Tour mofi obedient,
and obliged humble Servant,
H. W.
L A mu-

<page 163>
146 The LIFE of
A musician in his dedication still ex-
ceeds the other two in adulation. \How-
ever, though the matter may be some
impeachment on his sincerity, the man-
ner in which it is written reflects no dis-
grace upon his understanding.
To Richard Na/h, Esq;
S I R,
TH E kind partiality of my friends
prevailed with me to present to
the world these my first attempts in mu-
sical composition; and the generous
protection you have been pleased to af-
ford me, makes it my indispensable duty
to lay them at your feet. Indeed, to
whom could I presume to offer them,
but to the great encourager of all polite
arts; for your generosity knows no
bounds nor are you more famed for
that dignity of mind, which enobles and
gives a grace to every part of your con-
duct, than for that humanity and bene-
ficence, which makes you the friend and
benefactor of all mankind. To you, the
poor and the rich, the diseased and the
healtny,

<page 164>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 147
healthy, the aged and the young, owe
every comfort, every conveniency, and
every innocent amusement, that the best
heart, the most skilful management, and
the most accomplished taste can furnish.
Even this age, so deeply practised in all
the subtilties of refined pleasure, gives
you this testimony: even this age, so
ardently engaged in all the ways of the
most unbounded charity, gives you this
praise. Pardon me then, if, amidst the
croud of votaries, I make my humble
offering, if I seize this first opportunity
of publickly expressing the grateful senti-
ments of my own heart and profound
respect, with which,
I am, Sir,
Tour most obliged, most devoted,
and most obedient Servant,
J. G.
I fancy I have almost fatigued the
reader, and I am almost fatigued myself,
with the efforts of those elegant pane-
gyrists; however, I can't finish this run
L 2 of

<page 165>
148 The LIFE of
of quotation, without giving a specimen
of poetry, addressed to him upon a cer--
tain occasion; and all I shall say in Ito
defence is, that those, who are pleased
with the prose dedications, will not dis-
like the present attempt in poetry*
To Richard Nafi, Esq;
On his sickness at Tunbridgc.
SAY, must the friend of human kind,
Of most refin'd—of most diffusive mind;
MuftNafh himself beneath these ailmentsgrieve?
He felt for all—He felt—but to relieve,
To heal the sick—the wounded to restore,
And bid desponding nature mourn no more.
Thy quick'ning warmth, O let thy patron feel,
Improvethy springs with double powertoheal;
Quick, hither all inspiring health, repair,
And save the gay—and wretched from despair;
Thou only Hsra's drooping sons can'st chear,
And stop the fbft-ey'd virgin's trickling tear;
In murmurs who their monarch'spains deplore;
"While sickness faints—and pleasure is no more;
O let not death, with hasty strides advance,
Thou, mildest chanty, avert the lance;
His

<page 166>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; i49
His threat'ning power, coelestial maid! defeat;
Nor take him with thee, to thy well known feat;
Leave him on earth some longer date behind,
To bless,—to polish,—and relieve mankind:
Come then kind health, O quickly come away,
Bid Najh revive—and all the world be gay.
Such addresses as these were daily
offered to our titular King. When in
the meridian of power, scarce a morning
passed, that did not encrease the number
of his humble admirers, and enlarge the
sphere of his vanity.
The man, who is constantly served up
with adulation, must be a first-rate phi-
losopher, if he can listen without con-
tracting new affectations. The opinion
we form of ourselves, is generally mea-
sured by what we hear from others and
when they conspire to deceive, we too
readily concur in the delusion. Among
the number of much applauded men
in the circle of our own friends, we can
recollect but few that have heads quite
strong enough to bear a loud acclama-
tion of public praise in their favour;
among the whole list, we si 1 all scarce
L 3 find

<page 167>
150 The LIFE of
find one, that has not thus been made,
on some side of his character, a cox-
comb.
When the best head turns and grows
giddy with praise, is it to be wondered
that poor Najh should be driven by it
almost into a phrenzy of affectation?
Towards the close of life he became
affected. He chiefly laboured to be
thought a sayer of good things; and
by frequent attempts was now and
then successful, for he ever lay upon the
lurch.
There never perhaps was a more silly
passion, than this desire of having a
man's jests recorded. For this purpose,
it is necessary to keep ignorant or ill-
bred company, who are only fond of re-
peating such stories; in the next place,
a person must tell his own jokes, in or-
der to make them more universal but
what is worst of all, scarce a joke of
this kind succeeds, but at the expence
of a man's good nature and he who
exchanges the character of being thought
agree-

<page 168>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 151
agreeable, for that of being thought
witty, makes but a very bad bargain.
The success Na/h sometimes met with
led him on, when late in life, to mistake
his true character. He was really agree-
able, but he chose to be thought a wit.
He therefore indulged his inclination,
and never mattered how rude he was,
provided he was thought comical. He
thus got the applause he sought for, butt
too often found enemies, where he least
expected to find them. Of all the jests
recorded of him, I scarce find one that
is not marked with petulance; he said
whatever came uppermost, and in the
number of his remarks it might naturally
be expected that some were worth re-
peating; he threw often, and sometimes
had a lucky cast.
In a life of almost ninety years, spent
in the very point os public view, it is
not strange, that five or fix sprightly
things of his have been collected, par-
ticularly as he took every opportunity of
repeating them himself. His usual way,.
L 4 whea

<page 169>
152 The LIFE of
when he thought he said any thing cle-
ver, was to strengthen it with an oath,
and to make up its want of sentiment by
asseveration and grimace. For many
years he thus entertained the company
at the coffee-house with old stories, in
which he always made himself the prin-
cipal character. Strangers liked this well
enough; but they who were used to his
conversation found it insupportable. One
story brought on another, and each came
in the same order that it had the day pre-
ceding. But this custom may be rather
ascribed to the peculiarity of age, than a
peculiarity of character; it seldom hap-
pens, that old men allure, at least by no-
velty; age that shrivels the body contracts
the understanding instead of exploring
new regions, they rest satisfied in the
old, and walk around the circle of their
former discoveries. His manner of tell-
ing a story, however, was not displeas-
ing, but few of those he told are worth
transcribing. Indeed it is the manner,
which places the whole difference be-
tween the wit of the vulgar, and of those
who assume the name of the polite; one
has

<page 170>
RI CHARD NASH, Esq; 153
has in general as much good sense as the
other; a story transcribed from the one,
will be as entertaining as that copied
from the other but in conversation, the
manner will give charms even to stupidi-
ty. The following is the story which he
most frequently told, and pretty much in
these words. Suppose the company to be
talking of a German war, or Elizabeth
Canning, he would begin thus. "I'll
"tell you something to that purpose that
"I fancy will make you laugh. A co-
"vctous old parson, as rich as the Devil,
"scraped a fresh acquaintance with me
"several years ago at Bath. I knew him
'* when he and I were students at Oxford,
u where we both studied damnationly
"hard, but that's neither here nor there.
"Well. Very well. I entertained him
"at my house in John's Court. (No,
"my house in John's Court was not built
"then) but I entertained him with all that
"the city could afford; the rooms, the
'* music, and every thing in the world.
"Upon his leaving Bath, he pressed me
** very hard to return the visit; and de-
f sired me to let him have the pleasure
c "of

<page 171>
The LIFE of
"of seeing me at his house in De-
"vonfhire. About six months after, I
"happened to be in that neighbourhood,
"and was resolved to see my old friend,
"from whom I expected a very warm
** reception. Well: I knocks at his
*' door, when an old queer creature of
"a maid, came to the door, and denied
"him. I suspected, however, that he
"was at home; and going into the par-
"lour, what should I fee, but the Par-
"son's legs up the chimney, where he
** had thrust himself to avoid entertain-
"ing me. This was very well. My
"dear, fays I to the maid, it is very cold,
"extreme cold indeed, and I am afraid
"I have got a touch of my ague, light
"me the fire, if you please. La, Sir,
"says the maid, who was a modest crea-
"ture to be sure, the chimney smokes
"monstrously; you could not bear the
"room for three minutes together. By
"the greatest good luck there was a
"bundle of straw in the hearth, and I
** called for a candle. The candle came.
"Well, good woman, fays I, since you
<f won't light me a fire, I'll light one
"for

<page 172>
RICHARD N AS H, Eiq; i55
04 for myself, and in a moment the straw
** was all in a blaze. This quickly un-
"kennelled the old fox; there he stood
"in an old rusty night gown, blessing
** himself, and looking like a—hem
** egad."
He used to tell surprizing stories of his
activity when young. "Here I stand,
"gentlemen, that could once leap forty
** two feet upon level ground, at three
** standing jumps, backward or forward.
"One, two, three, dart like an arrow
"out of a bow. But I am old now. I
"remember I once leaped for three
"hundred guineas with Count Klopfiock,
"the great leaper, leaping-master to the
1" Prince of PaJJ'aw, you must all have
"heard of him. First he began with
** the running jump, and a most dam-
nable bounce it was, that's certain:
"Every body concluded that he had the
"match hollow; when only taking off
"my hat, stripping off neither coat,
** shoes, nor stockings, mind me, I
*' fetches a run, and went beyond him
"one

<page 173>
156 The LIFE of
*.* one foot, three inches and three
** quarters measured, upon my soul, by
"Captain Patelys own standard."
But in this torrent of insipidity, there
sometimes were found very severe satire,
strokes of true wit, and lines of humour,
cum jiuerent lutulentus, &c. He rallied
very successfully, for he never felt ano-
ther's joke; and drove home his own
without pity. With his superiors he was
familiar and blunt, the inferiority of his
station secured him from their resent-
ment; but the same bluntness which
they laughed at, was by his equals re-
garded as insolence. Something like
a familiar boot-catcher at an inn, a gen-
tleman would bear that joke from him,
for which a brother boot-catcher would
knock him down.
Among other stories of NajlJs telling, I
remember one, which I the more chear-
fully repeat, as it tends to correct a piece
of impertinence that reigns in almost
every
.

<page 174>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 157
every country assembly. The principal
inhabitants of a market-town, at a great
distance from the capital, in order to en-
courage that harmony which ought to
subsist in society, and to promote a mu-
tual intercourse between the sexes, so
desirable to both, and so necessary for
all, had established a monthly assembly in
the Town Hall, which was conducted
with such decency, decorum, and polite-
ness, that it drew the attention of the
gentlemen and ladies in the neighbour-
hood; and a nobleman and his family
continually honoured them with their
presence. This naturally drew others,
and in time the room was crouded with,
what the world calls, good company,
and the assembly prospered, till some of
the new admitted ladies took it into
their heads, that the tradesmen's daugh-
ters were unworthy of their notice, and
therefore refused to join hands with them
in the dance. This was complained of
by the town ladies, and that complaint
was resented by the country gentlemen,
who, more pert than wise, publickly
advertised, that they would not dance
with

<page 175>
158 The LIFE of
with tradesmen's daughters. This the
most eminent tradesmen considered as an
insult on themselves, and being men of
worth, and able to live independently,
they in return advertised that they would
give no credit out of their town, and
desired all others to discharge their ac-
counts. A general uneasiness ensued;
some writs were actually issued out, and
much distress would have happened, had
not my Lord, who sided with no party,
kindly interfered and composed the dif-
ference. The assembly however was
ruined, and the families I am told are
not friends yet, though this affair hap-
pened thirty years ago.
Nothing debases human nature so much
as pride This Najh knew, and endea-
voured to stifle every emotion of it at
Bath. When he observed any ladies so
extremely delicate and proud of a pedi-
gree, as to only touch the back of an
inferior's hand in the dance, he always
called to order, and desired them to
leave the room, or behave with common
decency; and when any Ladies and Gen-
tlemen
3

<page 176>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; i59
tlemen drew off, after they had gone
down a dance, without standing up till
the dance was finished, he made up to
them, and after asking whether they had
done dancing, told them, they should
dance no more unless they stood up for
the rest; and on these occasions he al-
ways was as good as his word.
Na/h, tho' no great wit, had the art
of sometimes saying rude things with
decency, and rendering them pleasing
by an uncommon turn. But most of
the good things attributed to him, which
have found their way into the jest books,
are no better than puns; the smartest
things I have seen are against him. One
day in the grove, he joined some ladies,
and asking one of them, who was
crooked, whence flie came? She re-
plied, strait from London. Confound
me, madam, said he, then you must
have been damnably wa-pt by the way.
She soon, however, had ample re-
venge. Sitting the following evening
in one of the rooms, he once more join-
ed

<page 177>
i6o The LIFE of*
ed her company, and with'a sneer and"
a bow, asked her, if she knew her Cate-
chism, and could tell the name of Tobit's
dog? His name, Sir, was Najli, replied
the lady, and an impudent dog he was.
This story is told in a celebrated romance;
I only repeat it here to have an oppor-
tunity of observing, that it actually hap-
pened.
Queen Anne pnce asked him, why he
would not accept of knighthood? To
which he replied, lest Sir William Read*
the mountebank, who had been just
knighted, should call him brother.
An house in Bath was said to be haunt-
ed by the Devil, and a great noise was
made about it, when Najh going to the
Minister of St. Michael's, intreated him
to drive the Devil out of Bath for ever,
if it were only to oblige the ladies.
Nash used sometimes to visit the great
Doctor Clarke. The Doctor was one
day conversing with Locke, and two or
three more of his learned and intimate
companions,

<page 178>
RICHARDNASH, Escy 161
companions, with that freedom, gaiety
and chearfulness, which is ever the re-
sult of innocence. In the midst of their
mirth and laughter, the Doctor, looking
from the window, saw Najh's chariot
stop at the door. Boys, boys, cried the
philosopher, to his friends, let us now
be wise, for here is a fool coming.
Nastj was one day complaining in the
following manner to the Earl of Chester-
field of his bad luck at play. Would
you think it, my Lord, that damned
bitch fortune, no later than last night,
tricked me out of 500. > Is it not sur-
prizing, continued he, that my luck
should never turn, that I should thus
eternally be mauled? I don't wonder at
your losing money Na/h, fays his lordship,
but all the world is surprized where you
get it to lose.
Doctor Cheney once, when Najh was
ill, drew up a prescription for him,
which was sent in accordingly. The
next day the Doctor coming to see his
patient, found him up and well; upon
M which

<page 179>
i6i tfiE LIFE
which he asked, if he had followed his
prescription? Followed your prescrip-
tion, cried Nafi, No. Egad, if I had,
I should have broke my neck, for I
flung it out of the two pair stairs win-
dow.
it Would have been well, had he con-
fined himself to such sallies; but as he
grew old he grew insolent, and seemed,
in some measure,. insensible of the pain
his attempts to be a wit gave others. Up-
on asking a lady to dance a minuet; if
she refused, he would often demand, if
she had got bandy legs. He would at-
tempt to ridicule natural defects; he for-
got the deference due to birth and qua-
lity, and mistook the manner of settling
rank and precedence upon many occasi-
ons. He now seemed no longer fashion-
able among the present race of gen-
try, he grew peevish and fretful, and
they who only saw the remnant of a
man, severely returned that laughter up-
on him, which he had once lavished upon
others.
Poof

<page 180>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 163
Poor NaJJo was no longer the gay,
thoughtless, idly industrious creature he
once was; he now forgot how to supply
new modes of entertainment, and be-
came too rigid, to wind with ease through
the vicissitudes of fashion. The even-
ing of his life began to grow cloudy.
His fortune was gone, and nothing but
poverty lay in prospect. To embitter
his hopes, he found himself abandoned
by the great, whom he had long en-
deavoured to serve; and was obliged to
fly to those of humbler stations for pro-
tection, whom he once affected to des-
pise. He now began to want that cha-
rity, which he had never refused to any;
and to find, that a life of dissipation and
gaiety, is ever terminated by misery and
regret.
Even his place of master of the cere-
. monies (if I can trust the papers he has
left behind him) was sought aster. I
would willingly be tender of any living
reputation; but these papers accuse Mr.
Quin of endeavouring to supplant him.
M 2 He

<page 181>
164 The LIFE op
He has even left us a letter, which he
supposed was written by that gentleman,
soliciting a Lord for his interest upon the
occasion. As I chuse to give Mr. Quin
an opportunity of disproving this, I will
insert the letter, and, to shew the im-
probability of its being his, with all its
faults, both of style and spelling. I am
the less apt to believe it written by Mr.
Quin, as a gentleman, who has mended
Shakespear's plays so often, would surely
be capable of something more correct
than the following. It was sent, as it
should seem, from Mr. Quin to a noble-
man, but left open for the perusal of an
intermediate friend. It was this friend
who sent a copy of it to Mr. Na/h, who
caused it to be instantly printed, and left
among his other papers. '*
The letter from the intermediate friend to
Nafli, is as fellows.
London, October 8, 1760.
Dear Na/h,
TW O posts ago I received a letter
from Quin, the old player, co-
vering one to my Lord, which he left
5 . . open

<page 182>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 165
open for my perusal, which after read-
ing he desired I might seal up and deli-
ver. The request he makes is so ex-
traordinary, that it has induced me to
fend you the copy of his letter to my
Lord, which is as follows.
Bath, 03oltr 3, 1760.
My der Lord *,
OLD beaux Knap has mead himfelfe
so dissagreeable to all the com-
paney that comes here to Bath that the
corperatian of this city have it now un-
der thier consideration to remove him
from beeing master of the cereymoines,
should he be continuead the inhabitants
pf thiss city will be rueind, as the best
* Can any one, who has read what precedes and
what follows this letter, suppose that we thought it
was written by Mr. ^uin, or that it would give any
uneasiness either to him or his friends ?—The letter
was really found among Mr. Na/h's papers, as the
Editor can at any time prove,and it was inserted here,
to (hew what artifices were used, by those who had
mere levity than good.nature, to impose upon a poor
old man, and to embitter his last moments.
This Note has been rendered necessary, by a piece
of criticism without candour, and an epigram without
wit, which appeared on this occasion, in the publiclc
papers.
M 3 com-

<page 183>
i66 The LIFE of
companey declines to come to Bath on
his accu
Give me leave to show to your Lords'hip
how he beheaved at the firs't ball he had
here thiss' season whichwas Tusday las't.
AyoungeLady was at.'ked to dance a mi-
nueat she begg the gentm would be pleas-
ed to exquise here, as' she did not chuse
to dance; upon thiss' old Najh called out
so as to be head by all the companey in
the room G— dam yo Madam what
buisness have yo here if yo do not dance,
upon which the Lady was so afrighted,
she rose and danced, the ress'et of the
companey was so much offended at the
rudness of Nafo that not one Lady more,
would dance a minueat that night. In
country dances' no person of note danced
except two boys' Lords $ and "T ,
the res't of the companey that danced
waire only the families of all the hab-
berdas'hers' machinukes and inkeepers in
the three kingdoms' brushed up and
colexted togither.
I have

<page 184>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 167
I have known upon such an occaison
as' thiss' seventeen Dutchess' and ConthV
to be at the opening of the ball at Bath
now not one. This man by his' pride
and extravagancis has out-lived his' rea-
scin it would be happy for thiss' city that
he was ded; and is, now only fitt to reed
Shirlock upon death by which he may
seave his soul and gaine more than all
the proffits he can make, by his white
hatt, suppose it was to be died red:
The favr I have now to reques't by
what I now have wrote yo; is' that your
Lordship will speke to Mr. Pitt, for to
recommend me to the corporeatian of
this city to fuccede this old sinner as master
of the cerremonies and yo will much
oblige,
My Lord your
Lords and Hu*
Ob1 Ser*.
N. B. There were some other private
matters and offers in Ruin's letter to my
Lprd, which do not relate to you.
M 4 ' Here

<page 185>
i68 The LIFE of
Here Najh, if I may be permitted the
use of a polite and fashionable phrase,
was humm'd; but he experienced such
rubs as these, and a thousand other
mortifications every day. He found po-
verty now denied him the indulgence
not only of his favourite follies, but
of his favourite virtues. The poor now
solicited him in vain; he was himself a
more pitiable object than they. The
child of the public seldom has a friend,
and he who once exercised his wit at the
expence of others, must naturally have
enemies. Exasperated at last to the highest
degree, an unaccountable whim struck
him; poor Najh was resolved to become
an author; he, who in the vigour os
manhood, was incapable of the talk,
now at the impotent age of eighty-six,
was determined to write his own history!
from the many specimens already given of
his style, the reader will not much regret
that the historian was interrupted in his
design. Yet as Montaigne observes, as
the adventures of an infant, if an infant
could inform us of them, would be
pleasing;

<page 186>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 169
pleasing; so the life of a Beau, if a beau
could write, would certainly serve to re-
gale curiosity.
Whether he really intended to put this
design in execution, or did it only to
alarm the nobility, I will not take upon
me to determine; but certain it is, that
his friends went about collecting sub-
scriptions for the work, and he received
several encouragements from such as
were willing to be politely charitable.
It was thought by many, that this history
would reveal the intrigues of a whole
age; that he had numberless secrets to
disclose; but they never considered, that
persons of public character, like him,
were the most unlikely in the world to be
made partakers of those secrets which
people desired the public should not know.
In fact, he had few secrets to discover,
and those he had, are now buried with
him in the grave.
He was now past the power of giving
or receiving pleasure, for he was poor,
old and peevish; yet still he was incapa-
ble

<page 187>
170 The LIFE of
ble of turning from his former manner
of life to pursue his happinefi. The old
man endeavoured to practise the follies of
the boy, he spurred on his jaded passions
after every trifle of the day; tottering
with age he would be ever an unwelcome
guest in the assemblies of the youthful
and gay; and he seemed willing to find
lost appetite among those scenes where
he was one young.
An old man thus striving after plea-
sure is indeed an object of pity; but a
man at once old and poor, running on
in this pursuit, might excite astonish-
ment. To see a Being both by fortune
and constitution rendered incapable of
enjoyment, still haunting those pleasures
he was no longer to mare in; to fee one
of almost ninety settling the fashion of
a lady's cap, or assigning her place in a
country dance; to fee him Unmindful
of his own reverend figure, or the res-
pect he should have for himself, toasting
demireps, or attempting to entertain the
lewd and idle; a sight like this might
well serve as a satire on humanity; might
shew

<page 188>
RICHARD NAS H, Esq; 171
shew that man is the only preposterous
creature alive, who pursues the shadow
of pleasure without temptation.
But he was not permitted to run on
thus without severe and repeated reproof.
The clergy sent him frequent calls to
reformation; but the asperity of their
advice in general abated its intended ef-
fects; they threatened him with fire and
brimstone, for what he had long been
taught to consider as foibles, and not
vices; so, like a desperate debtor, he did
not care to settle an account, that, upon
the first inspection, he found himself ut-
terly unable to pay. Thus begins one of
his monitors.
**' A ^HIS admonition comes from your
JL friend, and one that has your
interest deeply at heart: It comes on a
design altogether important, and of no less
consequence than your everlasting hap-
piness: so that it may justly challenge
your careful regard. It is not to upbraid
or reproach, much less to triumph and
insult over your misconduct or misery;
6 no,

<page 189>
172 The LIFE of
no, 'tis pure benevolence, it is disinte-
rested good-will prompts me to write ',
I hope therefore I shall not raise your
resentment. Yet be the consequence
what it will, I cannot bear to see you
walk in the paths that lead to death,
without warning you of the danger,
without sounding in your ear the lawful
admonition, "Return and live! Why
do you such things? I hear of your evil
dealings by all this people." I have long
observed and pitied you; and must tell
you plainly, Sir, that your present beha*
viour is not the way to reconcile your-
self to God. You are so far from making
atonement to offended justice, that each
moment you are aggravating the future
account, and heaping up an increase of
his anger. As long as you roll on in a
continued circle of sensual delights and
- vain entertainments, you are dead to all
the purposes of piety and virtue. You
are as odious to God as a corrupt car-
case that lies putrefying in the church-
yard. You are as far from doing your
duty, or endeavouring after salvation, or
restoring yourself to the divine favour,
as

<page 190>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 173
as a heap of dry bones nailed up in a
coffin is from vigour and activity.
Think, Sir, I conjure you, think upon
this, if you have any inclination to es-
cape the fire that will never be quench-
ed. Would you be rescued from the
fury and fierce anger of God? Would
you be delivered from weeping and wail-
ing, and incessant gnashing of teeth?
sure you would! But be certain, that
this will never be done by amusements,
which at best: are trifling and imperti-
nent; and for that, if for no other rea-
son, foolish and sinful. 'Tis by serious-
ness; 'tis by retirement and mourning,
you must accomplish this great and de-
sirable deliverance. You must not ap-
pear at the head of every silly diversion,
you must enter into your closet, and shut
the door; commune with your own heart,
and search out its defects. The pride of
life, and all its superfluity of follies must
be put away. You must make haste,
and delay not to keep every injunction
of heaven. You must always remem-
ber, that mighty sinners must be mighti-

<page 191>
174 The LIFE of
ly penitent, or else mightily tormented.
Your example and your projects have
been extremely prejudicial; I wish I
could not say, fatal and dejlruclive, to
many: For this there is no amends
but an alteration of your conduct, as
signal and remarkable as your person and
name"
"If you do not by this method re-
medy in some degree the evils that you
have sent abroad, and prevent the mis-
chievous consequences that may ensue—
wretched will you be, wretched above
all men to eternity. The blood of souls
will belaid to your charge; God's jea-
lousy, like a consuming flame, will
smoke against you; as you yourself will
see in that day, when the mountains
shall quake, and the hills melt, and the
earth be burnt up at his presence."
"Once more then I exhort you as a
friend; I beseech you as a brother; I
charge you as a messenger from God, in
his own most solemn words; "Cast
*' away

<page 192>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 175
V away from you your trangreffions;
"makeyou a new heart, and a new spi-
"it; so iniquity mall not be your ruin."
** Perhaps you may be disposed to
contemn this, and its serious purport;
or to recommend it to your companions
as a subject for raillery—Yet let me tell
you before hand, that for this, as well
as for other things, God will bring you
to judgment. He fees me now I write:
He will observe you while you read.
He notes down my words; he will also
note down your consequent procedure.
Not then upon me, not upon me; but
upon your own soul, will the ne-
glecting or despising my sayings turn.
"If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for
. " thyself; if thou scornest, thou alone
"shalt bear it."
Thus we fee a variety of causes con-
curred to embitter his departing life.
The weakness and infirmities of exhaust-
ed nature, the admonitions of the grave,
who aggravated his follies into vices;
the ingratitude of his dependants, who
for-

<page 193>
I76 The LIFE of
formerly flattered his fortunes; but par-
ticularly the contempt of the great, many
of whom quite forgot him in his wants';
all these hung upon his spirits and soured
his temper, and the poor man of plea-
sure might have terminated his life very
tragically, had not the corporation of
Bath charitably resolved to grant him ten
guineas the first Monday of every month.
This bounty served to keep him from
actual necessity, though far too trifling,
to enable him to support the character
of a gentleman. Habit, and not na-
ture, makes almost all our wants; and
he who had been accustomed in the early
parts of life to affluence and prodigality,
when reduced to an hundred and twen-
ty-fix pounds a year, must pine in actual
indigence.
In this variety of uneasiness his health
began to fail. He had received from
nature a robust and happy constitution',
• that was scarce even to be impaired by
intemperance. He even pretended, a-
mong his friends, that he never follow-
ed a single prescription in his life; how-
ever,

<page 194>
RI C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 1.77
ever, in this he was one day detected on
the parade; for boasting there of his
contempt and utter disuse of medicine,
unluckily the water of two blisters,
which Dr. Oliver had prescribed, and
which he then had upon each leg, ouzed
through his stockings, and betrayed him.
His aversion to physic, however, was
frequently a topic of raillery between
him and Doctor Cheney, who was a man
of some wit and breeding. When Che-
ney recommended his vegetable diet,
Najh would swear, that his design was
to fend half the world grazing like Ne-
buchadnezzar. Ay, Cheney would reply,
Nebuchadnezzar was never such an infidel
as thou art. It was but last week, gen-
tlemen, that I attended this fellow in a
fit of sickness; there I found him roll-
ing up his eyes to heaven, and crying
for mercy; he would then swallow my
drugs like breast-milk, yet you now
hear him, how the old dog blasphemes
the faculty. What Cheney said in jest
was true, he feared the approaches of
death more than the generality of man-
N 1 . kind,

<page 195>
178 The LIFE of
I
kind, and was generally very devout
while it threatened him. Though he
Was somewhat the libertine in action,
none believed or trembled more than
he; for a mind neither schooled by phi-
losophy, nor encouraged by conscious
innocence, is ever timid at the appear-
ance of danger.
For some time before his decease na-
ture gave warning of his approaching
dissolution. The worn machine had run
itself down to an utter impossibility of
repair; he saw, that he must die, and
shuddered at the thought. His virtues
were not of the great, but the amiable
kind; so that fortitude was not among
the number. Anxious, timid, his thoughts
still hanging on a receding world, he de-
sired to enjoy a little longer that life, the
miseries of which he had experienced so
long. The poor unsuccessful gamester
husbanded the wasting moments, with
an encreased desire to continue the game,
and to the last eagerly wished for one
yet more happy throw. He died at his
house

<page 196>
RICHARD NASH,
Esq; 179
house in St. yo/jn's Court, Bath, on the
12 th of February, ij6\, aged eighty-
seven years, three months, and some days.
His death was sincerely regretted by
the city, to which he had been so long,
and so great a benefactor. The day af-
ter he died, the Mayor of Bath called
the corporation together, where they
granted fifty pounds towards burying
their sovereign with proper respect.
After the corpse had lain four days, it
was conveyed to the abbey church in
that city, with a solemnity somewhat
peculiar to his character. About five
the procession moved from his house;
the charity girls two and two preceded,
next the boys of the charity school sing-
ing a solemn occasional hymn *. Next
N 2 marched
The HYMN fung at hit Funeral.
I.
* Most unhappy are we here,
Full of sin and full of fear,
Ever weary, ne'er at rest,
When, O Lord, shall we be blest.
II. Earth's
.

<page 197>
180 The L I F £ of
marched the city music, and his own band
sounding at proper intervals a dirge.
Three clergymen immediately preceded
the coffin, which was adorned with
fable plumes, and the pall supported by
the six senior aldermen. The masters
of the assembly-rooms followed as chief
II.
Earth's a clog, a pageant Iise,
Fill'd with folly, guilt, and strife;
'Till we all unite in thee,
With ourselves we disagree.
III.
What's our comfort here below,
Empty bubble, transient (hew;
Wrapt in the body's vile disguise.
None truly is until he dies.
IV.
Here we dwell, but not at home,
To other worlds ordain'd to roam;
Yet still we seek for joys that waste,
Fleeting as the vernal blast.
V.
Lord remove these shadows hence,
Give us faith instead of fense;
Teach us here in life to die,
That we may live eternally..
mourners r

<page 198>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 181
mourners; the beadles of that hospital,
which he had contributed so largely to
endow, went next; and last of all, the
poor patients themselves, the lame, the
emaciated, and the feeble, followed their
old benefactor to his grave, shedding
unfeigned tears, and lamenting them-
selves in him.
The crowd was so great, that not
only the streets were filled, but, as one
of the journals in a Rant expresses it,
"even the tops of the houses were co-
"vered with spectators, each thought
"the occasion affected themselves most;
"as when a real king dies, they asked
"each other, where jhall we find such
"another; sorrow sate upon every face,
"and even children lisped that their
"Sovereign was no more. The awful-
"ness of the solemnity made the deep-
** est impression on the minds of the
** distressed inhabitants. The peasant
"discontinued his toil, the ox rested
** from the plough, all nature seemed
ff to sympathize with their loss, and
N 3 "the

<page 199>
182 The LIFE of
"the muffled bells rung a peal of Bob
"Major."
Our deepest solemnities have fbmer
thing truly ridiculous in them: there is
somewhat ludicrous in the folly of his-
torians, who thus declaim upon the
death of kings and princes, as if there
was any thing dismal, or any thing unu-
sual in it, " For my part," says Poggi,
the Florentine, "I can no more grieve
for another's death, than I could for
my own. I have ever regarded death
as a very trifling affair; nor can black
staves, long cloaks, or mourning coaches,
in the least influence my spirits. Let
us live here as long, and as merrily as
we can, and when we must die, why
let us die merrily too, but die so as to
be happy."
The few things he was possessed of
were left to his relations. A small libra-
ry of well chosen books, some trinkets
and pictures, were his only inheritance.
Among the latter (besides the box given

<page 200>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 183
him by the prince of Wales), were a
gold box, which was presented to him
by the countess of Burlington, with lady
Eujlon's picture in the lid. An etui
mounted in gold, with a diamond f)
open it, and ornamented with another
diamond at the top, given him by the
princess dowager of Wales. He had also a
silver terene, which was given him by
the princess Amelia; and some other
things of no great value. The rings,
watches, and pictures, which he former-
ly received from others, would have come
to a considerable amount; but these his
necessities had obliged him to dispose of:
Some family pictures, however, remain-
ed, which were sold by advertisement,
for five guineas each, after Mr. Najh's
decease.
It was natural to expect, that the death
of a person so long in the eye of the
public, must have produced a desire in
several to delineate his character, or de-
plore his loss. He was scarce dead, when
the public papers were filled with ele-
N 4 gies,

<page 201>
184 The LIFE of
gics, groans and characters; and before
he was buried, there were epitaphs ready
made to inscribe on his stone. I re-
member one of those character writers,
and a very grave one too, after observing,
alas! that Richard Nap, Esq; was no
more, went on to assure us, that he was
sagacious, debonair, and commode; and
concluded with gravely declaring, that
impotent pojlerity would in vain fumble to
produce his fellow. Another, equally
sorrowful, gave us to know, that he was
indeed a man; an assertion, which I fancy
none will be so hardy as to contradict.
But the merriest of all the lamentations
made upon this occasion was that where
he is called, A conjlellation of the heavenly
sphere. * ".y
One thing,however, is common almost
with each of them,and that is, that Venus,
Cupid, and the Graces, are commanded to
weep; and that Bath shall never find
such another.
But

<page 202>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 185
But though he was satirized with the
praises of those, yet there were some of
real abilities, who undertook to do
justice to his character, to praise him
for his virtues, and acknowledge his
faults. I need scarcely mention, that
Doctor Oliver, and Doctor King are of
this number. They had honoured him
with their friendship while living, and
undertook to honour his memory when
dead. As the reader may chuse to com-
pare their efforts upon the fame subject,'
I have subjoined them, and perhaps ma-
ny will find in either enough, upon so
unimportant a subject as Mr. Najb'& life,
to satisfy curiosity. The first published,
was that by Doctor Oliver, written with
much good fense, and still more good
nature. But the reader will consider,
that he has assumed in his motto the
character of a panegyrist, and spares his
friend's faults, though he was too candid
entirely to pass them over in silence.
A

<page 203>
186 The LIFE of
Asaint Sketch of the Life, Character, and
Manners, of the late Mr. NASH.
Imperium in Imperio.
De mortuis nil nisi bonum.
Bath, February 13, 1761.
This morning died
RICHARD NASH, Esq;
Aged eighty.eight.
He was by birth a gentleman, an ancient Brittm;
By education, a student of Jesus College, in Oxford;
By profession .
His natural genius was too volatile for any.
He tried the army and the law;
But soon found his mind superior to both—
He was born to govern,
Nor was his dominion, like that of other legislators
Over the Servility of the vulgar,
But over the pride of the Noble, and the Opulent.
His public character was great,
As it was self-built, and self-maintained:
His private amiable,
As it was grateful, beneficent, and generous.
By the force of genius
He erected the city of Bath into a province of pleasure,
And became, by universal consent,
Its Legillator, and ruler.
He plan'd, improv'd, and regulated all the amusements
of the place;
His fundamental law was, that of good breeding;
Hold /acred decency, and decorum,
His constant maxim:
Nobody, howsoever exalted
By beauty, blood, titles, or riches,
Could

<page 204>
RICHARD NAS H, Esq; 187
Could be guilty of a breach of it, unpunished—
The penalty, bit disapprobation, and public Jbanu.
To maintain the sovereignty he had established,
He published rules of behaviour.
Which, from their propriety, acquired the Force of laws;
And which the highest never infring'd, without im-
mediately undergoing the public censure.
He kept the men in order; most wisely,
By prohibiting the wearing swords in his dominions;
By which means
He prevented sudden passion from causing
The bitterness of unavailing repentance,
In all quarrels he was chosen the Umpire——
And so just were his decisions,
That peace generally triumphed,
Crowned with the mutual thanks of both parties.
He kept tbe ladies in gosd humour; most effectually
By a nice observance of the rules of place and prece-
dence;
By ordaining scandal to be the infallible mark
Os a foolish head, and a malicious heart,
Always rendering more suspicious
The reputation of her who propagated it.
Than that of the person abused.
Of the young, the gay, the heedless fair,
Just launching into the dangerous sea of pleasure,
He was ever, unsolicited (sometimet unregarded)
The kind protector:
Humanely correcting even their mistakes in dress,
As well as improprieties in conduct:
Nay, often warning them,
Though at the hazard of his life,
Against the artful snares of designing men,
Or an improper acquaintance with women, of doubtful
characters.
Thus did he establish his government on pillars
Of honour and politeness,
Which could never be shaken;

<page 205>
188 The L I'J of
And maintained it, for i ' alf a century,
With reputation, honour, ant. ndisputed authority,
Beloved, respected, a. J 'tevered.
Of his private character, be it the first praise,
That, while by his conduct, the highest ranks became
his subjects,
He himself became
The servant of the poor, and the distressed:
Whose cause he ever pleaded amongst the rich,
And enforced with all the eloquence of a good example:
They were ashamed not to relieve those wants,
To which they saw him administer with
So noble an heart, and so liberal an hand.
Nor was his munificence confined to particulars,
He being, to all the publick charities of this city,
A liberal benefactor;
Not only by his own most generous subscriptions,
But, by always assuming, in their behalf, the character of
A sturdy beggar;
Which he performed with such an authoritative address
To all ranks, without distinction,
That few of the worst hearts had courage to refuse,
What their own inclinations would not have prompted
them to bestow.
Of a noble public spirit.
And
A warm grateful heart,
The obelisk in the grove,
And
The beautiful needle in the square,
Are magnificent testimonies.
The One
Erected to preserve the memory of a
Most interesting event to his country,
The restitution of health, by the healing waters of
this place,
To the illustrious prince of Orange,
Who came hither in a most languishing condition:
The

<page 206>
R IC „ p N A S H, Esq; 189
. : [i.^he Other,
A not, offering ot thanks
To the late Prince «,n,Walks, and his royad Consort,
For favours bestowed,
And honours by them conferred, on this cily.
His long and peaceful reign of
Absolute power,
Was so tempered by his
Excessive good-nature,
That no instance can be given either of his own cruelty,
Or of his suffering that of others, to escape
Its proper reward.
Example unprecedented amongst absolute monarchs.
READER.
This monarch was a man.
And had his foibles, and his faults;
Which we would wish covered with the veil of good-
nature,
Made of the same piece with his own:
But, truth forceth us unwillingly to confess,
His passions were strong;
Which, as they fired him to act strenuously in good,
Hurried him to some excesses of evil.
His fire, not used to be kept under by an early restraint,
Burst out too often into flaming acts,
Without waiting for the cool approbation of his judgment.
His generosity was so great,
That prudence often whispered him, in vain,
That she seared it would enter the neighbouring con-
fines of profusion:
His charity so unbounded,
That the severe might suspect it sometimes to be
The offspring of folly, or ostentation.
With all these,
Be they foibles, follies, faults, ar frailties,
It

<page 207>
190 The LIFE of1
It will be difficult to point out,
Amongst his cotemporary Kings of the whole earthy
More than ONE
Who hath fewer, or less pernicious to mankind.
His existence
(For life it scarcely might be called)
Was spun out to so great an age, that
The man
Was funk, like many former heroes in
The weakness and infirmities of exhausted nature;
The unwilling tax all animals must pay
For multiplicity of days.
Over his closing scene,
Charity long spread her all-covering mantle,
And dropped the curtain,
Before the poor actor, though he played his part,
Was permitted to quit the stage.
Now may she protect his memory!
Every friend of Bath,
- Every lover of decency, decorum, and good breeding,
Must sincerely deplore
The loss of so excellent a governor;
And join in the most fervent wishes (would 1 could fay
hopes)
That there may soon be found a man
Able and worthy,
To succeed him.
The reader sees in what alluring co-
lours Mr. Najh's character is drawn; but
he must consider, that an intimate friend
held the pencil; theDoctor profesies to fay
nothing of the dead, but what was
good; and such a maxim, tho' it serves
his departed friend, is but badly calcu-
lated

<page 208>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; i9i
lated to improve the living. Dr. King
in his Epitaph, however, is still more
indulgent, he produces him as an exam-
ple to kings, and prefers his laws, even
to those of Solon, or Lycurgus.
Epitaphium Richardi Na/h, Armigeri.
H. S. E.
R I C HARDUS NASH
Obscuro loco natus,
Et nullis ortus majoribus:
Cui tamen
(O rem miram, et incredibilem !)
Regnum opulentissimum florentiisimum-
que
Plebs, proceres, principes,
Liberis suis suffragiis
Ultro detulerunt,
Quod etipse summa cum dignitate tenuit,
Annos plus quinquaginta,
Universo populo consentiente, approbante,
plaudente
Una voce præterea, unoque omnium or-
dinum consensu,
Ad imperium suum adjuncta est
6 Magni

<page 209>
102 The L I F E of
Magni nominis * Provincia:
Quam admirabili consilio et ratione
Per fe, non unquam per legatos, admi-
nistravit;
Earn quotannis invisere dignatus,
Et apud provinciates, quod necesse suit,
Solitus manere.
In tanta fortuna
Neque fastu turgidus Rex incessu patuit,
Neque, tyrannorum more, fe jusiit coli,
Aut amplos honores, titulofque sibi arro-
gavit;
Sed cuncta insignia, etiam regium diade-
ma rejiciens,
Caput contentus suit ornare
Galero albo,
Manifesto animi fui candoris signo.
Legislator prudentissimus,
Vel Solone et Lycurgo illustrior
Leges, quafcunque voluit,
Statuit, fixit, promulgavit:
Omnes quidem cum civibus fuis,
Turn verb hofpitibus, advenis, peregrinis
Gratas, jucundas, utiles.
* Tunbridgi,
Vol-

<page 210>
til C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 193
Voluptatem arbiter et minister,
Sed gravis, sed ekgans, fed urbanus,
Et in summa comitate satis adhibens fe-*
veritatis,
Imprimis curaVit,
Ut in virorum et fœminarum coetibus
Nequis impudenter facer.et,,
Neque in iis quid inesset
Impuritatis, clamoris, tumulti.
Civitatem hanc celeberrimam,
Delicias fuas,
Non modo pulcherrimisædificiis auxit,
Sed præclara disciplina et moribus ornavit;
Quippe nemo quifquam
To Prepon melius intellexit, excoluit,
docuit.
Justus, liberalis, benignus, facetus>
Atque amicus omnibus, præcipue miseris
et egenis,
Nullos habuit inimicos,
Præter magnos quosdam ardeliones,
Et declamatores eos tristes ct faniticos,
Qui generi humano funt inimiciflimi,
Pacis et patriæ amans
Concordiam, felicem et perpetuam,
O In

<page 211>
194 The LIFE of
In regno suo constituit,
Usque adeo,
Ut nullus alteri petulanter maledicere,
Aut facto nocere auderet;
Neque, tanquam iibi metuens,
In publicum armatus prodire*
Fuit quanquam potentissimus,
Omnia arbitrio suo gubernans:
Haud tamen ipsa libertas
Magis usquam floruit
Gratia, gloria, auctoritate.
Singulare enim temperamentum invents,
(Rem magnæ cogitationis,
Et rerum omnium fortasse dirflcillimam)
Quo ignobiles cum nobilibus, pauperes
cum divitibus,
Indocti cum doctissimis, ignavi cum for-
tissimis
Æquari fe putarent,
Rex Omnibus Idem. .
QuiCQUID PECCAVERIT,
(Nam peccamus omnes)
In seipfum magis, quam in alios,
Et errore, aut imprudentia magis quam
fcelere, aut improbitate.
Pecca-

<page 212>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 195
Peccavit;
Nusquam Vero ignoratione decori, aut
honesti,
Neque ita quidem usqiiam,
Ut non veniam ab humanis omnibus
Facile impetrarit. ,
Hujus vitæ morumque exemplar
Si cæteri reges, regulique,
Et quotquot sunt regnorum præfecti,
Imitarentur;
(Utinam! iterumque utinam !)
Et ipfi essent beati,
Et cunctæ orbis regiones beatissimæ.
Talem virum, tantumque ademptum
Lugeant musæ, charitesque!
Lugeant Veneres, Cupidinesque!
Lugeant omnes juvenum et nympharum
chori!
Tu vero, O Bathonia,
Ne cesses tuum lugere
Principem, præceptorem, amicum pa-*
tronum;
Heu, heu, numquam posthac
Habitura parem!
O 2 The

<page 213>
196 The LIFE of
The following translation of this Epi-
taph, will give the English reader aa
idea of its contents, tho' not of its ele-
gance.
The Epitaph of Richard Nash, Esq;
Here lies
Richard Nap,
Born in an obscure village,
• • And from mean ancestors.
To whom, however,
Strange to relate,
Both the vulgar, and the mighty,
Without bribe or compulsion,
Unanimously gave
A kingdom, equally rich and flourishing.
A kingdom which he governed
More than fifty years,
With universal approbation and applause.
To his empire also was added,
By the consent of all orders,
A celebrated province *
Which he ever swayed with great pru-
dence,
• Tunbridge. .
Not

<page 214>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 197
Not by delegated power, but in person.
He deigned to vifit it every year,
And while the necessities of state de-
manded his presence,
He usually continued there.
In such greatness of fortune
His pride discovered itself by no marks
of dignity;
Nor did he ever claim the honours of
prostration.
Despising at once titles of adulation,
And laying aside all royal splendor,
Wearing not even the diadem,
He was content with being distinguished
only by the ornamental ensign
Of a white hat;
A symbol of the candour of his mind.
He was a most prudent legislator,
And more remarkable even than Solon or
Lycurgus.
He at once established and authorized
Whatever laws were thought convenient,
Which were equally serviceable to the
city,
And grateful to strangers,
Who made it their abode.
O 3 He

<page 215>
198 The L I F E of
He was at once a provider and a judge of
pleasures,
But still conducted them with gravity
and elegance,
And repress'd licentiousness with severity.
His chief care was employed,
In preventing obscenity or impudence
From offending the modesty or the morals
Of the Fair Sex.
And in banishing from their assemblies
Tumult, clamour, and abuse.
He not only adorned this city,
which he loved,
With beautiful structures,
But improved it by his example;
As no man knew, no man taught
what was becoming
Better than he.
He was just, liberal, kind, and facetious,
A friend to all, but particularly to the poor.
He had no enemies,
Except some of the trifling great,
Or dull declaimers, foes to all mankind.
Equally a lover of peace and of his coun-
try;
He fix'd a happy and lasting concord
In his kingdom,
So

<page 216>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 199
So that none dare convey scandal, or injure
by open violence the universal peace,
Or even by carrying arms appear prepar'd
for war,
With impunity.
But tho' his power was boundless,
Yet never did liberty flourish more,
which he promoted,
Both by his authority, and cultivated
for his fame.
He found out the happy secret
(A thing not to be considered without
surprize)
Of uniting the vulgar and the great,
The poor and the rich,
The learn'd and ignorant,
The cowardly and the brave,
In the bonds of society, an equal king to all.
Whatever his faults were,
For we have all faults,
They were rather obnoxious to himself
than others
They arose neither from impradence nor
mistake,
O 4 Never-

<page 217>
joo The L I F E op
Neversrom diihonestyor corrupt principle,
But so harmless were they,
That tho' they fail'dto create our esteem,
Yet can they not want our pardon.
Could other kings and governors
But learn to imitate his example,
(Would to heaven they could)
Then might they fee themselves happy,
And their people still enjoying
more true felicity.
Ye muses and graces mourn
His death;
Ye powers of love, ye choirs
of youth and virgins,
But thou, O Bathonia, more than the rest,
Cease not to weep,
Your king, your teacher, patron, friend.
Never, ah, never, to behold
His equal.
Whatever might have been justly ob-
served of Mr. Najh's superiority as a go^
vernor, at least it may be said, that sew
cptemporary kings have met with such
able panegyrists. The former enume-
rates

<page 218>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; zor
rates all his gocd qualities with tender-r
ness; and the latter enforces them with
impetuosity. They both seem to have
loved him, and honourably paid his re-
mains the last debt of friendship. But a
cool biographer, unbiassed by resentment
or regard, will probably find nothing in
the man either truly great, or strongly
vicious. His virtues were all amiable, and
more adapted to procure friends and ad-
mirers, they were mere capable of raising
love than esteem. He was naturally en-
dued with good fense; but by having
been long accustomed to pursue trifles,
his mind shrunk to the size of the little
objects on which it was employed. His
generosity was boundless, because his
tenderness and his vanity were in equal
proportion; the one impelling him to
relieve misery, and the other to make
his benefactions known. In all his ac-
tions, however virtuous, he was guided
by sensation, and not by reason; so that
the uppermost passion was ever lure to
prevail. His being constantly in com-
pany had made him an easy tho' not a
polite

<page 219>
202 The LIFE of
polite companion. He chose to be
thought rather an odd fellow, than a
well-bred man perhaps that mixture
of respect and ridicule, with which his
mock royalty was treated, first; inspired
him with this resolution. The founda-
tions of his empire were laid in vicious
• compliance, the continuance of his reign
was supported by a virtuous impartiality.
In the beginning of his authority, he in
reality obeyed those whom he pretended
to govern ; towards the end, he attempt-
ed to extort a real obedience from his
subjects, and supported his right by pre-
scription. Like a monarch Tacitus talks
of; they complied with him at first
because they loved, they obeyed at last
because they seared him. He often led the
rich into new follies, in order to promote
the happiness of the poor, and served the
one at the expence of the other. What-
ever his vices were, they were of use
to society; and this neither Petronius,
nor Apicius, nor Tigellius, nor any
other professed voluptuary, could say.
To set him up, as some do, for a pat-
2 tern

<page 220>
RIC H A R D N A S H, Esq; 203
tern of imitation, is wrong, since all
his virtues received a tincture from the
neighbouring folly; to denounce pe-
culiar judgments against him, is equally
unjust, as his faults raise rather our
mirth than our detestation. He was
fitted for the station in which fortune
placed him It required no great abi-
lities to fill it, and few of great abi-
lities, but would have disdained the em-
ployment. He led a life of vani-
ty, and long mistook it for happi«.
ness. Unfortunately he was taught
at last to know, that a man of plea-
sure leads the most unpleasant life in the
world.
A Letter

<page 221>
2C4 The LIFE of
A Letter from Mr. **** in Tunbridge,
to Lord in London ; sound among
the Papers of Mr. Nash, and prepared
by him for the press,
My Lord,
WHAT I foresaw has arrived,poor
fenners, after losing all his for-
tune, has shot himself through the
head. His losses to Bland were consi-
derable, and his playing soon after with
Spedding contributed to hasten his ruin.
No man was ever more enamour'd of
play, or understood it less. At what-
ever game he ventured his money, he
was most usually the dupe, and still
foolishly attributed to his bad luck,
those misfortunes that entirely proceeded
from his want of judgment.
After finding that he had brought on
himself irreparable indigence and con-
tempt, his temper, formerly so sprightly,
began to grow gloomy and unequal; he
grew more fond of solitude, and more
liable

<page 222>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 205
liable to take offence at supposed injuries;
in short, for a week before he shot him^
self, his friends were of opinion, that
he meditated some such horrid design.
He was found in his chamber fallen on
the floor, the bullet having glanced on
the bone, and lodged behind his right
eye.
You remember my Lord, what a
charming fellow this deluded man was
once. How benevolent, just, temperate,
and every way virtuous; the only faults
of his mind arose from motives of hu-
manity; he was too easy, credulous and
good-natured, and unable to resist tempta-
tion, when recommended by the voice
of friendship. These foibles the vicious
and the needy soon perceived, and what
was at first a weakness they soon pervert-
ed into guilt; he became a gamester, and
continued the infamous profession, 'till he
could support the miseries it brought with
it no longer.
I have often been not a little concerned
to see the first introduction of a • young
'.7 man

<page 223>
2o6 The LIFE of
man of fortune to the gaming-table*
With what eagerness his company is
courted by the whole fraternity of sharp-
ers, how they find out his most latent
wishes, in order to make way to his af-
fections by gratifying them; and con-
tinue to hang upon him with the meanest
degree of condescension. The youthful
dupe no way suspecting, imagines him-
self surrounded by friends and gen-
tlemen, and incapable of even suspect-
ing that men of such seeming good sense,
and so genteel an appearance, should de-
viate from the laws of honour, walks into
the snare, nor is he undeceived till
schooled by the severity of experience.
As I suppose no man would be a game-
ster unless he hoped to win, so I fancy
it would be easy to reclaim him, if he
was once effectually convinced, that by
continuing to play he must certainly lose.
Permit me, my Lord, to attempt this
task, and to shew, that no young gen-
tleman by a year's run of play, and
in a mixed company, can possibly be a
gainer.
Let

<page 224>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 207
Let me suppose in the first place, that
the chances on both sides are equal, that
there are no marked cards, no pinching,
muffling, nor hiding; let me suppose that
the players also have no advantage of
each other in point of judgment, and still
further let me grant, that the party is
only formed at home, without going to
the usual expensive places of resort fre-
quented by gamesters. Even with all these
circumstances in the. young gamester's
favour, it is evident he cannot beagainer.
With equal players after a year's conti-
nuance of any particular game it will be
found, that, whatever has been played for,
the winnings on either side are very in-
considerable, and most commonly no-
thing at all. Here then is a year's anxie-
ty, pain, jarring, and suspense, and no-
thing gained; were the parties to sit down
and professedly play for nothing, they
would contemn the proposal, they would
call it trifling away time, and one of
the most insipid amusements in nature;
yet in fact, how do equal players differ;
it is allowed that little or nothing can be
gained; but much is lost; ouryouth, our
time, those moments that may be laid

<page 225>
2o8 The L I F E of
out in pleasure or improvement are foolish-
ly squandered away, in tossing cards, fret-
ting at ill luck, or, even with a run of luck
in our favour, fretting that our winnings
are so small.
I have now stated gaming in that point
of view in which it is alone defensible,
as a commerce carried on with equal ad-
vantage and loss to cither party, and it
appears, that the loss is great, and the
advantage but small. But.let me sup-
pose the players not to be equal, but the
superiority of judgment in our own fa-
vour. A person who plays under this
conviction, however, must give up all
pretensions to the approbation of his own
mind, and is guilty of as much injus-
tice, as the thief who robbed a blind
man, because he knew he could nos
swear to his person.
But in fact, when I allowed the supe-
riority of skill on the young beginner's
side, I only granted an impossibility.
Skill in gaming, like skill in making a
watch, can only. be acquired by long and
painful

<page 226>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 209
painful industry. The most sagacious
youth alive was never taught at once all
the arts, and all the niceties of gaming.
Every passion must be schooled by long
habit into caution, and phlegm; the
very countenance must be taught proper
discipline; and he who would practice
this art with success, must practice on
his own constitution, all the severities of
a martyr, without any expectation of
the reward. It is evident therefore every
beginner must be a dupe, and can only
be expected to learn his trade by losses,
disappointments, and dishonour.
If a young gentleman therefore begins
to game, the commencements are sure
to be to his disadvantage; and all that
he can promise himself is, that the com-
pany he keeps, though superior in skill,
are above taking advantage of his igno-
rance, and unacquainted with any sinister
arts to correct fortune. But this, how-
ever, is but a poor hope at best, and
what is worse, most frequently a false
one. In general, I might almost have
said always, those who live Jby gaming,
P ar

<page 227>
210 The LIFE of
are not beholding to chance alone for
their support, but take every advantage
which they can practise without danger
of detection. I know many are apt to
say, and I have once said so myself, that
after I have shuffled the cards, it is not
in the power of a (harper to pack them;
but at present I can confidently assure
your Lordship, that such reasoners are
deceived. I have seen men, both in Pa-
ris, the Hague, and London, who, after
three deals, could give whatever hands
they pleased to all the company. How-
ever, the usual way with sharpers is to
correct fortune thus but once in a night,
and to play in other respects without
blunder or mistake, and a perseverance
in this practice always balances the year
in their favour.
It is impossible to enumerate all the
tricks and arts practised upon cards; few
but have seen those bungling poor fel-
lows who go about at coffee-houses per-
form their clumsy seats, and yet, indif-
ferently as they are versed in the trade,
they often deceive us; when such as
these

<page 228>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; tit
these are possessed of so much art, what
must not those be, who have been bred
up to gaming from their infancy, whose
hands are not like those mentioned above,
rendered callous by labour, who have
continual practice in the trade of deceiv-
ing, and where the eye of the spectator
is less upon its guard.
Let the young beginner only reflect
by what a variety of methods it is possi-
ble to cheat him, and perhaps it will
check his confidence. His antagonists
may act by signs and confederacy, and
this he can never detect; they may cut
to a particular card after three or sous
hands have gone about, either by having
that card pinched, or broader than the
rest, or by having an exceeding fine wire
thrust between, the folds of the paper,
and just peeping out at the edge. Or the
cards may be chalked with particular
marks, which none but the sharper can
understand, or a new pack may be flip-
ped in at a proper opportunity. I have
known myself in Paris, a fellow thus
detected with a tin cafe, containing two
P 2 packs

<page 229>
212 The L I F E of
1
packs of cards concealed within his shirt
sleeve, and which, by means of a spring,
threw the cards ready packed into his
hands. These and an hundred other arts
may be practised with impunity, and es-
cape detection.
The great error lies in imagining
every fellow, with a laced coat to be a
gentleman. The address and transient
behaviour of a man of breeding are easily
acquired, and none are better qualified
than gamesters in this respect. At first,
their complaisance, civility, and apparent
honour is pleasing, but upon examination,
few of them will be found to have their
minds sufficiently stored with any of the
more refined accomplishments, which
truly characterize the man of breeding.
This will commonly serve as a criterion to
distinguish them, though there are other
marks which every young gentleman of
fortune should be apprized of. A sharper,
when he plays, generally handles and
deals the cards aukwardly like a bungler;
he advances his bets by degrees, and
keeps his antagonist in spirits by small
advan-

<page 230>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 213
advantages and alternate success at the
beginning; to shew all his force at once,
would but fright the bird he intends to
decoy; he talks of honour and virtue, and
his being a gentleman, and that he knows
great men, and mentions his coal mines, .
and his estate in the country; he is total-
ly divested of that masculine confidence,
which is the attendant of real fortune; he
turns, yields, assents, smiles, as he hopes
will be most pleasing to his destined prey;
he is afraid of meeting a shabby acquaint-
ance, particularly if in better company; as
he grows richer, he wears finer cloaths;
and if ever he is seen in an undress, it is
most probable he is without money; so
that seeing a gamester growing finer each
day, is a certain symptom of his success.
The young gentleman who plays with
suchlnen for considerable sums, is sure to
be undone, and yet we seldom see even
the rook himself make a fortune. A life
• of gaming must necessarily be a life of
extravagance: parties of this kind are
formed in houses, where the whole pro-
fits are consumed; and while those who
P 3 play,

<page 231>
214 The LIFE of
play, mutually ruin each other, they only
who keep the house or the table acquire
fortunes. Thus gaming may readily ruin
a fortune, but has seldom been found to
retrieve it. The wealth which has been
acquired with industry and hazard, and
preserved for ages by prudence and fore-
sight, is swept away on a sudden; and
when a besieging sharper sits down before
an estate, the property is often transfer-
red in less time, than the writings can
be drawn to secure the possession. The
neglect of business, and the extravagance
of a mind which has been taught to covet
precarious possession, brings on premature
destruction; though poverty may fetch
a compass and go somewhat about, yet
will it reach the gamester at last; and
though his ruin be slow, yet it is cer-
tain.
A thousand instances could be given
of the fatal tendency of this passion,
which first impoverishes the mind, and
then perverts the understanding. Permit
me to mention one, not caught from re-
port, or dressed up by fancy, but such
as

<page 232>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 215
as has actually fallen under my own ob-
servation, and of the truth of which, I
beg your Lordihip may rest satisfied.
At Tunbridge, in the year 1715, Mr.
js. Hedges made a very brilliant appear-
ance; he had been married about two
years to a young lady of great beauty and
large fortune; they had one child, a
boy, on whom they bestowed all that
affection, which they could spare from
each other. He knew nothing os gam-
ing, nor seemed to have the least passion
for play; but he was unacquainted with
his own heart; he began by degrees to
bett at the tables for trifling sums, and
his soul took fire at the prospect of im-
mediate gain; he was loon surrounded
with sharpers, who with calmness lay
in ambush for his fortune, and ccoly
took advantage of the precipitancy of
his passions.
His lady perceived the ruin of her fa-
mily approaching, but, at first, without
being able to form any scheme to pre-
vent it. She advised with his brother,
P 4 who,

<page 233>
2i6 The LIFE of
who, at that time, was possessed of a
small fellowship in Cambridge. It was
easily seen, that whatever passion took
the lead in her husband's mind, seemed to
be there fixed unalterably; it was de-
termined therefore, to let him pursue
fortune, but previously take measures, to
prevent the pursuits being fatal.
Accordingly every night this gentle-
man was a constant attender at the hazard
table; he understood neither the arts of
sharpers, nor even the allowed strokes of
a connoisseur, yet still he played. The
consequence is obvious; he lost his
estate, his equipage, his wife's jewels,
aud every other moveable that could be
parted with, except a repeating watch.
His agony upon this occasion was inex-
pressible; he was even mean enough to
ask a gentleman, who fate near, to lend
him a few pieces, in order to turn his
fortune ; but this prudent gamester, who
plainly saw there were ho .expectations
of being repaid, refused to lend a far-
thing, alledging a former resolution
against lending. Hedges was at last fuT
riouj

<page 234>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 217
rious with the continuance of ill success,
and pulling out his watch, asked if any
person in company, would set him sixty
guineas upon it: the company were
silent; he then demanded fifty, still no
answer; he sunk to forty, thirty, twen-
ty, finding the company still without
answering, he cried out, by G—d it shall
never go for less, and dashed it against
the floor, at the fame time, attempting
to dash out his brains against the marble
chimney-piece.
This last act of desperation immedi-
ately excited the attention of the whole
company; they instantly gathered round,
and prevented the effects of his passion;
and after he again became cool, he was
permitted to return home, with sullen
discontent, to his wife. Upon his en-
tering her apartment, she received him
with her usual tenderness and satisfaction;
while he answered her caresses with con-
tempt and severity; his disposition being
quite altered with his misfortunes. But
my dear Jemmy, fays his wife, perhaps
you don't know the news I have to tell;
My

<page 235>
218 The LIFE of
My Mammas old uncle is dead, the mes-
senger is now in the house, and you know
his ejlate is settled upon you. This account
seemed only to encrease his agony, and
looking angrily at her, he cried, there
you lie, my dear, his estate is not settled
upon me. / beg your pardon, says Jhe,
I really thought it was, at least you
have always told me so. No, returned he,
as sure as you and I are to be miserable
here, and our children beggars hereafter,
I have fold the reversion of it this day,
and have lost every farthing I got for it
at the hazard table. What all I replied
the lady. Yes, every farthing, returned
he, and I owe a thousand pounds more
than I have to pay. Thus speaking, he
took a few frantic steps across the room.
When the lady had a little enjoyed his
perplexity. No my dear, cried fie, you
have lost but a trifle, and you owe nothing.
Our brother and I have taken care to
prevent the effects of your rafmess, and
are actually the persons, who have won
your fortune; we employed proper persons
for this purpose, who brought their win-
nings to me; your money, your equipage,
are

<page 236>
RICHARD NAS H, Esq; 219
are in my pojj'ejfion, and here I return them
to you, from whom they were unjustly taken.
I only ajk permission to keep my jewels, and
to keep. you, my greatest jewel, from such
dangers for the future. Her prudence
had the proper effect, he ever after re-
tained a sense of his former follies, and
never played for the smallest sums, even
for amusement.
Not less than three persons in one day,
fell a sacrifice at Bath, to this destructive
passion. Two gentlemen sought a duel,
in which one was killed, and the other
desperately wounded; and a youth of great
expectation, and excellent disposition, at
the same time ended his own life by a
pistol. If there be any state that deserves
pity, it must be that of a gamester; but
the state of a dying gamester is of all si-
tuations the most deplorable.
There is another argument which your
lordship, I fancy, will not entirely de-
spise; beauty, my lord, I own is at best
but a trifle, but such as it is, I fancy few
would willingly part with what little
they

<page 237>
220 The LIFE of
they have. A man with an healthful
complexion* how great a philosopher so-
ever he be, would not willingly exchange
it for a sallow hectic phyz, pale eyes, and
a sharp wrinkled visage. I entreat you
only to examine the faces of all the noted
gamblers round one of our public tables;
have you ever seen any thing more hag-
gard, pinched, and miserable? and it is
but natural that it should be so. The
succession of passions flush the cheek with
red, and all such flushings are ever suc-
ceeded by consequent paleness; so that a
gamester contracts the sickly hue of a
student, while he is only acquiring the
stupidity of a fool.
Your good fense, my lord, I have often
had an occasion of knowing, yet how
miserable is it to be in a set of company
where the most sensible is ever the least
skilful: your footman, with a little in-
struction, would, I dare venture to as-
firm, make a better and more successful
gamester than you; want of passions,
and low cunning, are the two great arts;
and it is peculiar to this science alone,
that

<page 238>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 221
that they who have the greatest passion
for it, are of all others the most unfit to
practise it.
Of all the men I ever knew, Spedding
was the greatest blockhead, and yet the
best gamester: he saw almost intuitively
the advantage on either side, and ever
took it; he could calculate the odds in
a moment, and decide upon the merits
of a cock or an horse, better than any
man in England; in short, he was such
an adept in gaming, that he brought it
up to a pitch of sublimity it had never
attained before; yet, with all this, Sped-
ding could not write his own name. What
he died worth, I cannot tell; but of this
I am certain, he might have poslest a mi-
nisterial estate, and that won from men,
famed for their fense, literature, and pa-
triotism.
If after this description, your Lordship
is yet resolved to hazard your fortune at
gaming, I beg you would avert to the
situation of an old and luckless gamester.
Perhaps there is not in nature a more de-
plorable

<page 239>
222 The LIFE of
plorable being, his character is too well
marked, he is too well known to be
trusted. A man that has been often a
bankrupt, and renewed trade upon low
compositions, may as well expect exten-
sive credit as such a man. His repu-
tation is blasted, his constitution worn,
by the extravagance and ill hours of his
profession, he is now incapable of allur-
ing his dupes, and like a superannuated
savage of the forest, he is starved for want
of vigour to hunt after prey.
Thus gaming is the source of poverty,
and still worse, the parent of infamy and
vice. It is an inlet to debauchery; for
the money thus acquired is but little
valued. Every gamester is a rake, and
his morals worse than his mystery. It
is his interest to be exemplary in every
scene of debauchery, his prey is to be
courted with every guilty pleasure;
but these are to be changed, repeated,
and embellished, in order to employ
his imagination, while his reason is
kept asleep; a young mind is apt to
shrink at the prospect of ruin, care must
3 be

<page 240>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 223
be taken to harden his courage, and make
him keep his rank; he must be either
found a libertine, or he must be made one.
And when a man has parted with his
money like a fool, he generally fends his
conscience after it like a villain, and the
nearer he is to the brink of destruction,
the fonder does he grow of ruin.
Your friend and mine, my Lord, had
been thus driven to the last reserve: he
found it impossible to disentangle his af-
fairs, and look the world in the face;
impatience at length threw him into the
abyss he feared, and life became a bur-
then, because he feared to die. But I
own that play is not always attended with
such tragical circumstances, some have
had courage to survive their losses, and
go on content with beggary; and sure
those misfortunes, which are of our own
production, are of all others most pun-
gent. To fee such a poor disbanded be-
ing an unwelcome guest at every table,
and often flapped off like a fly is affect-
ing; in this cafe the closest alliance is
forgotten,

<page 241>
224 The LIFE of
forgotten, and contempt is too strong for
the ties of blood to unbind.
But however fatal this passion may be in
its consequence, none allures so much in
the beginning, the person once listed as a
gamester, if not soon reclaimed, pursues
it throughvhis whole life; no loss can
retard, no danger awaken him to com-
mon sense; nothing can terminate his
career but want of money to play, or of
honour to be trusted.
Among the number of my acquain-
tance, I knew but of two who succeeded
by gaming; the one a phlegmatic heavy
man, who would have made a fortune
in whatever way of life he happened to
be placed; the other who had lost a fine
estate in his youth by play, and retrieved
a greater at the age of sixty-five, when
he might be justly said, to be past the
power of enjoying it. One or two suc-
cessful gamesters are thus set up in an
age to allure the young beginner; we all
regard such, as the highest prize in a
lottery, unmindful of the numerous losses
6 that

<page 242>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 225
that go to the accumulation of such in-
frequent success.
Yet I would not be so morose, as to
refuse your youth all kinds of play: the
innocent amusements of a family, must
often be indulged, and cards allowed to
supply the intervals of more real plea-
sure; but the sum played for in such
cases should always be a trifle; some-
thing to call Up attention, but not engage
the passions. The usual excuse for laying
large sums is, to make the players at-
tend to their game; but in fact, he that
plays only for shillings, will mind his
cards equally well, with him that betts
guineas; for the mind, habituated to
stake large sums, will consider them as
trifles at last; and if one shilling could
not exclude indifference at first, neither
will an hundred in the end.
I have often aiked myself, how it is
possible that he who is possessed of com-
petence, can ever be induced to make it
precarious, by beginning play with the
odds against him; for wherever he goes
to

<page 243>
226 The LIFE ofr
sport his money, he will find himself
overmatched and cheated. Either at
Whites, New-market, the Tennis-Court i
the Cock-Pit, or the Billiard-Table, he*
will find numbers who have no other re-
source, but their acquisitions there; and
if such men live like gentlemen, he may
readily conclude it must be on the spoils
of his fortune, or the fortunes of ill
judging men like himself. Was he to
attend but a moment to their manner of
betting at those places he would readily
find the gamester seldom proposing bettsy
but with the advantage in his own fa-
vour. A man of honour continues to
lay on the side on which he sirst won $
but gamesters shift, change, lie upon
the lurch, and take every advantage, ei-5
ther of our ignorance or neglect,
In short, my Lord, is a man designs
to lay out his fortune in quest of plea-
sure, the gaming table• is, of all other
places, that where he can have least for
his money. The company are super-
ficial, extravagant, and unentertaining >
the conversation flat, debauched, and ab-
surd •>

<page 244>
R I C H A R D N A S H, Esq; 227
surd; the hours unnatural, and fatiguing;
the anxiety of losing is greater than
the pleasure of winning; friendship must
be banished from that society, the mem-
bers of which are intent only on ruining
each other; every other improvement,
either in knowledge or virtue, can scarce
find room in that breast, which is
possessed by the spirit of play;
the spirits become vapid, the con-
stitution is enfeebled, the complexion
grows pale; till, in the end, the mind,
body, friends, fortune, and even the
hopes of futurity sink together! Happy,
if nature terminates the scene, and nei-
ther justice nor suicide are called in to
accelerate her tardy approach.
I am,
my Lord, &c.
2 Among

<page 245>
228 The LIFE of
Among other Papers in the custody of Mr.
Nash, was the following angry Letter?
addressed to him in this manner.
To Richard Nash, Esq;
King of Bath.
SIRE,
IMust desire your Majesty to order the
inclosed to be read to the great Mr.
Hoy/e, if he be found in any part of your
dominions. You will perceive, that it is
a panegyrick on his manifold virtues, and
that he is thanked more particularly for
spending his time so much to the emolu-
ment of the public, and for obliging the
world with a book more read than the
Bible, and which so eminently tends Jo
promote christian knowledge, found
morality, and the happiness of man-
kind.
{The inclosed we have omitted, as it con-
tains a satire on gaming, and may pro-
bably give offence to our betters.)
This

<page 246>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 229
This author, however (continues the
letter writer) has not set forth half the
merits of the piece under consideration,
nor is the great care which he has taken
to prevent our reading any other book, in-
stead of this, been sufficiently taken no-r
tice of: beware of counterfeits, these
books are not to be depended on, unless
signed by E. Hoyle, is a charitable adr
monition. As you have so much power
at Bath, and are absolute, I think you
should imitate other great monarchs, by
rewarding those with honours who have
been serviceable in your state; and I beg
that a new order may be establisljed for
that purpose. Let him who has done
nothing but game all his life, and has
reduced the most families to ruin and
beggary, be made a Mar/hal of the Black
Ace •, and those who are every day mak-
ing proselytes to the tables, have the ho-
nour of knighthood conferred on them,
#nd be distinguished by the style and title
of Knights of the four Knaves.
The

<page 247>
230 The LIFE of
The moment I came into Bath, my
ears were saluted with the news of a
gentleman's being plundered at the gam-
ing table, and having lost his fenses on
the occasion. The same day a duel was
fought between two gentlemen gamesters
on the Downs, and in the evening ano-
ther hanged himself at the Bear; but
first wrote a note, which was found near
him, importing that he had injured the
best of friends. These are the atchieve-
ments of your Knights of the four Knaves.
The Devil will pick the bones of all
gamesters, that's certain! Ay! and
of duellers too! but in the mean time
let none think that duelling is a mark of
courage; for I know it is not. A person
served under me in Flanders who had
fought four duels, and depended so much
on his skill, the strength of his arm, and the
length of his sword, that he would take
up a quarrel for any body y yet, in the
field, I never saw one behave so like a pol-
troon. If a few of these gamesters and
duellers were gibbeted, it might perhaps
2 help

<page 248>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 231
help to amend the rest. I have often,
thought, that the only way, or at
least, the most effectual way, to pre-
vent duelling, would be to hang both
parties, the living and the dead, on the
fame tree *; and if the winner and the
loser
* A scheme to prevent duelling, similar to this,
was attempted by Gustayus Adolf bus; and is thus re-
cordrd by the writer of his life.
** In one of the Prufftan Campaigns, when the
irrational practice of duelling arose to a considerable
height in the Swedijh army, not only amongst persons
of rank and fashion, but even amongst common sol-
diers, this prince published a severe edict, and de-
nounced death against every delinquent. Soon after
a quarrel arose between two officers of very high
command, and as they knew the king's firmness in
preserving his word inviolable, they agreed to request
an audience, and besought his permission to decide the
affair like men of honour. His majesty took fire in a
moment, but repressed his paffion with such art, that
they easily mistook him; of course with some reluct-
ance, but under the appearance of pitying brave men,
who thought their repuuation injured, he :old them,
that he blamed them much for their mistaken notions,
concerning Fame and Glory ; yet as this unreasonable
determination appeared to be the result of deliberate re-
flection, to thebestof their deluded capacity, he would
allow them to decide the affair at the time and place
specified: and, gentlemen, said he? I will be an
eye

<page 249>
232 The LIFE of
loser were treated in the same manner,
it would be better for the publick;
since the tucking up of a few R Is
might be a warning to others, and
save many a worthy family from de-
struction.
I am yours, &c]
The author of this letter appears to
have been very angry, and not without
reason; for, if I am rightly informed,
his only son was ruined at Bath, and
eye witness myself of your extraordinary valour and
prowess.
At the hour appointed Gustavut arrived, accom-
panied by a small body of infantry, whom he form-
ed into a circle round the combatants. "Now,
fays he, fight till one man dies;" and calling the
executioner of the army to him (or the provost-
marshal, as the language then ran) " Friend, ad-
ded he, the instant one is killed, behead the other
before my eyes.''
Astonished with such inflexible firmness, the two
generals, after pausing a moment, fell down on
their knees, and asked the king's forgiveness,
who made them embrace each other, and give
their promise to continue faithful friends to their
last moments; as they did with sincerity and
thankfulness.
by

<page 250>
RICHARD N AS H, Esq; 233
by. sharpers. But why is Najl) to be
blamed for this.? It must be acknow.r
ledged, that he always took pains to
prevent the ruin of the youth of both
sexes, and had so guarded against duel-
ling, that he would not permit a sword
to be worn in Bath.
As the heart of a man is better known
by his private than public actions, let us
take a view of Najh in domestick life;
among his servants and dependants where
no gloss was required to colour his sen-
timents and disposition, v nor any mask
necessary to conceal his foibles. Here
we shall find him the fame open-heart-
ed, generous, good-natured man we
have already described; one who was
ever fond of promoting the interests of
his friends, his servants, and dependants,
and making them happy. In his own
house no man perhaps was more regular,
chearful, and beneficent than Mr. Nafli.
His table was always free to those who
sought his friendship, or wanted a din-
ner; and after grace was said, he usual-

<page 251>
234 The LIFE of
ly accosted the company in the following.
extraordinary manner, to take off all
restraint and ceremony. ** Come, gen-
tlemen, eat and welcome, spare, and the
Devil choak you." I mention this cir-
cumstance for no other reason, but be-
cause it is well known, and is consistent
with the singularity of his character and
behaviour.
As Mr. Na/h's thoughts were entirely
employed in the affairs of his govern-
ment, he was seldom at home but at the
time of eating or of rest. His table was •
well served, but his entertainmept con-
sisted principally of plain dishes. Boiled
chicken and roast mutton were his fa-
vourite meats, and he was so fond of the
small sort of potatoes, that he called
them English pine-apples, and generally
eat them as others do fruit, after dinner.
In drinking he was altogether as regular
and abstemious. Both in this, and in
eating, he seemed to consult nature, and
obey only her dictates. Good small beer,
with or without a glass of wine in it,
. .1

<page 252>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 235
and sometimes wine and water, was his;
drink at meals, and after dinner he ge-
nerally drank one glass of wine. He
seemed fond of hot suppers, usually
supped about nine or ten o'clock, upon
roast breast of mutton and his potatoes,
and soon after supper went to bed;
which induced Dr. Cheney to tell him
jestingly, that he behaved like other brutes,
and lay down as soon as he had filled his
belly. Very true, replied Nash, and this
prescription I had from my neighbour's
Cow, who is a better physician than you,
and a superior judge of plants, notwith-
standing you have written so learnedly on
the vegetable diet.
Nafi generally arose early in the morn-
ing, being seldom in bed after five; and
to avoid disturbing the family, and de-
priving his servants of their rest, he had
the fire laid after he was in bed, and in
the morning lighted it himself, and sat
down to read some of his few, but well
chosen books. After reading some time,
he usually went to the pump-room and
drank

<page 253>
236 The LIFE of
drank the waters; then took a walk on
the parade, and went to the coffee-house
to breakfast; after which, till two
o'clock (his usual time of dinner) his
hours were spent in arbitrating differences
amongst his neighbours, or the company
resorting to the wells; directing the di-
versions of the day, in visiting the new
comers, or receiving friends at his own
house, of which there were a great con-
course till within six or eight years before
his death.
His generosity and charity in private
life, though not so conspicuous, was as
great as that in publick, and indeed far
more considerable than his little income
would admit of. He cpuld not stifle
the natural impulse which he had to
do good, but frequently borrowed mo-
ney to relieve the distressed; and when
he knew not conveniently where to
borrow, he has been often observed
to shed tears, as he passed through the
wretched supplicants who attended his
gate.

<page 254>
RICHARD NASH, Esq; 237
This sensibility, this power of seeling
the misfortunes of the miserable, and
his address and earnestness in relieving
their wants, exalts the character of Mr.
Nash, and draws an impenetrable veil
over his foibles. His singularities are
forgotten when we behold his virtues,
and he who laughed at the whimsical
character and behaviour of this Mo-
narch of Baths now laments that he is
no more.
FINIS.

<page 255>


<page 256>

v.
'.•>

<page 257>


<page 258>

<page 259>

<page 260>

<page 261>

<page 262>


<page 263>


<page 264>


<page 265>


<page 266>
