

<page 1>


<page 2>
.


<page 3>
*********************************************，
*· · · · · · ************************--



<page 4>
~~~~

<page 5>


<page 6>

<page 7>
r
]

<page 8>
Tazz ºr 2. 2 º'
| ºf T H E 3/2
" . ** *
Female QUIxote,
| 'O R, T H E
| AD v E N T U R E s
«O F
A R A B E L L A.
In TWO V O L U M E S.
V O L. I.
The S E c on D. ED 1 ºr 1 on :
| Reviſed and Correàed.
-- *
* º *
(ºr a tº ſº. s - . . .
L O N D O N :
Printed for A. M11 lar, over-againſt
Catharine-ſtreet in the Strand.
M, DCC, LII.






<page 9>
.THENEW.YORK
PUBLIC LIBRARY
AffFOR. LBNOX AND
TM.DEN FOUNDATIONS

<page 10>
TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE
THE
EarlofMiDDLESEx.
My Lord,
SUCH is the Power of In-
terest over almost every
Mind, that no one is long with-
out Arguments to prove any
Position which is ardently
wished to be true, or.to justify
any Measures which are dictated
by Inclination.
A 2 , By

<page 11>
iv DEDICATION.
By this subtil Sophistry of
Desire, I have been persuaded
to hope, that this Book may,
without Impropriety, be in-
scribed to Your Lordship; but
am not certain, that my Rea-
sons will have the fame Force
upon other Understandings.
The Dread which a Writer
feels of the public Censure; the
still greater Dread of Neglect;
and the eager Wish for Support
and Protection, which is im-
pressed by the Consciousness of
Jmbecillity; are unknown to
those who have never adven.r
tured into the World; and I am
afraid, my Lord, equally un^r
known to those, who have al-
ways found the World ready to
applaud them,
'Tie,

<page 12>
DEDICATION. v
'Tis, therefore, not unlikely,
that the Design of this Address
may be mistaken, and the Ef-
fects of my Fear imputed to
my Vanity : They who fee Your
Lordship's Name prefixed to
my Performance, will rather
condemn my Presumption, than
compassionate my Anxiety.
But, whatever be supposed
my Motive, the Praise os Judg-
ment cannot be denied me; for
to whom can Timidity so pro-
perly fly for Shelter, as to
him who has been so long di-
stinguished for Candour and
Humanity ? How can Vanity be
ib completely gratified, as by the
allowed Patronage of him whose
Judgment has so long given a
A 3 Stand-

<page 13>
vi DEDICATION.
Standard to the National Taste?
Or by what other means could
I so powerfully suppress all Op-
position, but that of Envy, as
by declaring myself,
My Lord,
Tour Lordship's
Obliged and most Obedient
\ Humble Servants
The Author?

<page 14>
CONTENTS.
V O L. I.
BOO K L
Chap.. L>
fONTAINS a Turn at Court, neither new
nor surprizing—Some useless Additions to a
fine Lady's Education.—The bad EffeSfs of
a whimsical Study, which, some will say, is
borrowedfrom Cervantes. 1
Chap. II.
Contains a Description of a Lady's Dress, in
Fastiion not much above Two thousand Years
ago—The Beginning of an Adventure, which
seems to promise a great deal. f>
Chap, III.
Jn which the Adventure goes on after the ac-
customed Manner. 9
. ... Chap. IV.
A Mistake which produces no great Consequences—
An extraordinary Comment upon a Behaviour
natural enough—An Instance of a Lady's Com-
passion for her Lover, which the Reader may
possibly think not very compasstonate, 13
A 4 Chap.

<page 15>
C O N TE NTS.
Chap. V.
In which one. would imagine the Adventure con*
eluded, but for a Promise that something else is
to come. tq
Ch.ap. VI. <
In which the Adventure is really concluded, tho*
possibly not as the Reader expected. 23
Chap. VII.
Jn which some Contradictions art very happily re-
conciled. Vf
Chap. VIII.
In which a Mistake, in point of Ceremony, it .
rectified. 35 <
Chap. IX.
In which a Lover is severely punijhed for Faults
the Reader never would have discovered, if ht
had: not been told what they were. 40
Chap. X.
Contains several Incidents, in which the Reader
is expected to be.extremely interested. 48
Chap. XI. .. , ..^
In which a logical Argument is unseasonably in-
terrupted. 60
Chap. XIJ.:
In which the Reader will find a Specimen of the
true Pathetic, in a Speech of Oroondates—-.
The Adventure of the Booii: 6$
Chap. XIII.
The Adventure os' the Books continued. 75
BOOK It. v.
Chap. Jv
In which the Adventure of the Books is' Happily
concluded* . - '* . *1 V- . .8 r
Chap:

<page 16>
CONTENTS.
Chap. II.
JVhich contains a very natural Incident. 84
Chap. HI.
JVhich treats of a consolatory Visit, and other
grave Matter's. 87
Chap. IV.
JVhich contains some common Occurrences, but
placed in a new Light. 96
Chap. V.
The Hi/lory of Miss Groves, interspersed with
some very curious Observations. 104
Chap. VI.
Containing what a judicious Reader will hardly
approve. 114
. Chap. VII.
JVhich treats of the Olympic Games. X18
1 ;Ch.* p- VIII.
JVhich concludes with an excellent moral Sentence.
Chap. IX.
Containing some curious Anecdotes. 130
Chap. X. f. .
Jn which our fteroine is engaged in a very pe-
rilous Adventure. iifi.
Chap. XI.
In which the Lady is wonderfully delivered. 149*
BOOK III. .
C H A P. I.
Two Conversations, out of which the Reader may
pick up a great deal. . >. 163
Chap. It,
A solemn Interview. . J 70
. . :j C h a

<page 17>
CONTENTS.
Chap! IU.
In which the. Interview is ended, not much to the
Lover's Satisfaction, but exactly conformable to
the Rules of Romance. 175
Ghap. IV.
In which our Heroine is greatly disappointed. 178
Chap. V.
Some curious Instructions for relating an Mi/lory.
. ''. 184.
Chap. VI.
A very Heroic Chapter. '*. .' 189
Chap: VII.
In which our Heroine is suspected of Insensibility*
. . .' . . - ..- 1^
Chap. VIII.
By which, we hope, the Reader will be dif-
ferently affected. . »V.\ .'. '. 203
B O O K IV. .. .,..
c h a p! i.
In which our Heroine discovers her Knowlege
in Ajlronomy 211
Chap. II.
In which a very pleasing Conversation is left un-
finished. '2i9
Chap. III.
Definition of Love and Beauty.—Tl)e necessary
Qualities of an Hero and Heroine. 226
. Ch A J.. \V.
In which our Heroine is engaged in a new Ad-
venture, . . .234
Chap. V. /. ...
Being a Chapter of Mistakes. 244
Chap, VI.
In which the Mistakes are continued. 250
Chap.

<page 18>
CONTENTS.
Chap. VII.
In which the Mistakes are not yet cleared up. 255
Chap. VIII.
Which contains some necejsary Consequences of the
foregoing Mistakes—A Soliloquy on a Love-
Letter. 262
Chap. IX.
Containing a Love-Letter in the Heroic Stile, with
some occasional Reasonings by Lucy, full of
Wit and Simplicity. 266
VOL. II
BOOK V.
Chap. L
A Dispute very learnedly handled by two Ladfei,
in which the Reader may take what Part he
pleases. t
Chap. II.
Which inculcates, by a very good Example, that
a Person ought not to be too hasty, in deciding a
Question he does not perfectly understand. 12
Chap. III.
In which our Heroine is in some little Confufion.
20
Chap. IV.
IVherein the Lady extricates herselfout of her for-
mer Confusion, to the great Ajlonijhment, we
will suppose, of the Reader. 24
Chap. V.
In which will be found one of the former Mistakes
pursued, and another cleared up, to the great
Satisfaction of twa Persons, among whom, we
.expect, the Reader will make a third. 35
Chap.

<page 19>
CONTENTS.
Chap. VI.
Containing some Account of Thalestris, Queen of
the Amazons; with other curious Anecdotes.
BOOK VI.
Chap. I.
Containing the Beginning of Sir George'x Hi"
story, in which the ingenious Relater has ex~
actly copied the Stile of Romance. 49
Chap. II.
In which Sir George, continuing his surprising
Hi/lory, relates a moststupendous Instance of a
Valour only to be paralleled by that of the great
Oroondates, Cæsario, lie. &c. fcf*. 63
Chap. HI.
A Love-Adventure, after the Romantic Taste. 69
Chap. IV-
the Adventure continued. Jj
Chap. V.
An extraordinary Inflame of Generosity in a Lo-
ver, somewhat resembling that of the great
Artaxerxes in Cassandra. 84
Chap. VI.
In which it will be seen, that the Lady was ds
generous as her Lover. 90
Chap. VII.
Containing an Incident, full as probable as any
in ScudeTy'.f Romances. 94
Chap. VIII.
A single Combat fought with prodigious Valour;
and described with amazing Accuracy. 98
Chap. IX.
In which the Reader will find a Description os a
Beauty, in a Stile truly sublime. 102
Chap.

<page 20>
CONTENTS,
Chap. X.
IVberein Sir George concludes his History; which
produces an unexpetled EffeSf. no
Chap. XI.
Containing only a few Inferences drawn from the
foregoing Chapters. It8
BOOK VII.
Chap. I.
For the Shortness of which the Length of the next
shall make Jome Amends. 123
Chap. II.
Not so long as was firjl intended: But contains,
however, a surprising Adventure on the Road.
126
Chap. III.
JVhich concludes with an authentic Piece of
History. I 39
C H a p. IV,
In which one of our Heroine's Whims is justified,
by some others full as whimsical. 134
Chap. V,
Containing some historical Anecdotes: Hie Truth
of which may, possibly, be doubted, as they are
not to be found in any of the Historians. 137
G h a p. VI.
Which contains some excellent Rules for Raillery.
143
Chap. VII,
In which the Author condescends to be very mi-
nute in the Description of our Heroine's Press*
14.6
Chap. VIII. .
Some Reflections very fit, and Others very unfit,
fir an Assembly-Room, 'S1
8 Chap,

<page 21>
CONTENTS.
Chap. IX.
Being a Chapter of the satirical kind. 160
Chap. X.
In which our Heroine justifies her own Notions by
. some very illustrious Examples. 164
C HAP. XL .
In which our Heroine, being mistaken herself, gives
Occasion for a great many other Mistakes. 173
Chap. XII.
In which our Heroine reconciles herself to a morti-
fying Incident, by recollecting an Adventure in
a Romance, similar to her own. 179
Chap. XIII.
In which our Heroine's Extravagance will be
thought, perhaps, to be carried to an extrava-
gant Length. 188
Chap. XIV.
A Dialogue between Arabella and Lucy: In which
the latter seems to have the Advantage. 201
BOOK VIII.
'Chap. I.
Contains the Conversation referred to in the last
Chapter of the preceding Book. 206
Chap. II.
In which our Heroine, as we presume, shews her-
self in two very different Lights. 209
Chap. III.
The Contrast continued. 215
Chap. IV.
In which Mr. Glanville makes an unsuccessful
Attempt upon Aiabella. 224

<page 22>
CONTENTS.
Chap. V.
Jin which is introduced a very singular Character.
228
Chap. VI.
Containing something which, at first Sight, may,
possibly, puzzle the Reader. 232
Chat. VII.
Jn which, if the Reader has not anticipated it,
he will find an Explanation ef some seeming In-
confistences in theforegoing Chapter, 236
Chap. VIII.
yifhich concludes Book the Eighth. 241
BOOK. IX.
Chap. I.
Jn which is related an admirable Adventure. 243
Chap. II.
Which ends with a very unfavourable Prediction
for our Heroine. 253
Chap. III.
In which Arabella meets with another admirable
Adventure. 256
Chap. IV.
Jn which is related the History of the Princess of
Gaul. 261
C h ap. V.
A very mysterious Chapter. 268
Chap. VI.
Not much plainer than the former. 273
Chap. VII.
Containing indeed no great Matters, but is a Pre-
lude to greater. 277
Chap,

<page 23>
C O N T E N T S.
Chap. VIII.
Jf^hich acquaints the Reader with two very extra-.
ordinary Occidents. . . 28 r
Chap. IX.
JVhich will be found to contain Informations abso-
lutely necessary for the right Understanding of:
this Hi/lory. 286
C H A P. X.
JJhort Chapter indeed, but filled with Matter. 294.
Cm As, XI.
Being, in the Author's Opinion, the best Chapter
in this Hi/lory. 298
Chap. XII.
In which the History is concluded, 320
. 1. 'i
THE

<page 24>
THE
Female Quixote
book I.
C HAP. I.
Contains a 'turn at Court, neither new
nor surprising.—Some useless Additions
to a fine Lady's Education.—The bad
Effects of a whimsical Study, which
some will say is borrowed from Cer-
vantes.
H E Marquis of for a long Se-
ries of Years, was the first and most
distinguished Favourite at Court:
He held the most honourable Em-
ployments under the Crown, dis-
posed of all Places of Prosit as he pleased, pre-
sided at the Council, and in a manner governed
the whole Kingdom.
Vol. I B This


<page 25>
2 Tht F E M A L E Book I
This extensive Authority could not fail of
making him many Enemies: He sell at last a
Sacrifice to the Plots they were continually
forming against him; and was not only re-
moved from all his Employments, but banished
the Court for ever.
The Pain his undeserved Disgrace gave him,
he was enabled to conceal by the natural
Haughtiness of his Temper; and, behaving
rather like a Man who had resigned, than been
dismissed from his Posts, he imagined he
triumphed sufficiently over the Malice of his
Enemies, while he seemed to be wholly in-
sensible of the Effects it produced. His secret
Discontent, however, was so much augmented
by the Opportunity he now had of observing
the Baseness and Ingratitude of Mankind,
which in some Degree he experienced every
Day, that he resolved to quit all Society what-
ever, and devofe the rest of his Lise to Solitude
and Privacy. For the Place of his Retreat he
pitched upon a Castle he had in a very remote
Province of the Kingdom, in the Neighbour-
hood of a small Village, and several Miles distant
from any Town. The vast Extent of Ground
which surrounded this noble Building, he had
caused to be laid out in a Manner peculiar to
his Taste: The most laborious Endeavours of
Art had been used to make it appear like the
beautifulJProduct of wild, uncultivated Nature.
But if this Epifome of Arcadia could boast of
only artless and simple Beauties, the Inside of
the Castle was adorned with a Magnificence
suitable to the Dignity and immense Riches of
the Owner.
. While

<page 26>
Chap. i. Q,U I X OT E. 3
While Things were preparing at the Castle
for his Reception, the Marquis, though now
advanced in Years, cast his Eyes on a young
Lady, greatly inserior to himseif in Quality,
but whose Beauty and good Sense promised
him an agreeable Companion. After a very
short Courtship, he married her, and in a sew
Weeks carried his new Bride into the Country,
from whence he absolutely resolved never to
return.
The Marquis, following the Plan of Life
he had laid down, divided his Time between
the Company of his Lady, his Library, which
was large and well furnished, and his Gardens.
Sometimes he took the Diversion of Hunting,
but never admitted any Company whatever;
his Pride and extreme Reserve rendered him
so wholly inaccessible to the Country Gentry
about him, that none ever presumed to solicit
his Acquaintance.
In the second Year of his Retirement, the
Marchioness brought him a Daughter, and
died in Three Days after her Delivery. The
Marquis, who had tenderly loved her, was
extremely afflicted at her Death; but Time
having produced its usual Effects, his greaf
Fondness for the little Arabella intirely en-
grossed his Attention, and made up all the
Happiness of his Lise. At Four Years of
Age he took her from under the Direction of
the Nurses and Women appointed to attend
her, and permitted her to receive no Part of her
Education from another, which he was capable
of giving her himself. He taught her to rc^d
and write in a very sew Months; and, as she
B 2 giew.

<page 27>
4 TkF'EMALE Book I'
I
grew older, finding in her an uncommon
jQuickness of Apprehension, and an Under-
standing capable of great Improvements, he!
.resolved to cultivate so promising a Genius
with the utmost Care; and, as he frequently,
in the Rapturefdf paternal Fondness, expresied
himself, render her Mind as beautifrd as her
Person was lovely.
Nature had indeed giv«n her a most charm-
ing Face, a Shape easy and delicate, a sweet and
inlinuating Voice, and an Air so full of Dig-
nity and Grace, as drew the Admiration of aE
that saw her. These native Charms were im-
proved with all the Heightenings of Art; her
Dress was persectly magnificent; the best
Masters of Music and Dancing were sent for j
from London to attend her. She soon became
a persect Mistress of the French and Italian
Languages, under the Care of her Father 5
and it is not to be doubted, but she would
have made a great Proficiency in all useful
Knowlege, had not her whole Time been
taken up by another Study.
From her earliest Youth she had discovered
a Fondness for Reading, which extremely de-
lighted the Marquis; he permitted her there-
fore the Use of his Library, in which, unfor-
tunately for her, were great Store of Ro-
mances, and, what was still more unfortunate,
not in the original French, but very bad
Tran stations.
The deceased Marchioness had purchased
these Books to soften a Solitude which she
"^pund v«ry disagreeable; and, after her Death,
th«
5 .

<page 28>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. 5
die Marquis removed tkem from her Cloll.t
into his Library, where Arahclla found them.
The surprising Adventures with which*
they were filled, proved a most pleasing Enter-
tainment to a young Lady, who was wholly
secluded from the World; who had no other
Diversion, but ranging like a Nymph through
Gardens, or, to fay better, the Woods and
Lawns in which (he was inclosed; and who
had no other Conversation but that of a grave
and melancholy Father, or her own Attend-
ants.
Her Ideas, from the Manner of her .Lise,
and the Objects around her, had taken a
romantic Turn; and, supposing Romances
were real Pictures of Lise, from them she
drew all her Notions and Expectations. By
them she was taught to believe, that Love was
the ruling Principle of the World; that every
©ther Passion was subordinate to this; and
that it caused all the Happiness and Miseries n&
Lise. Her Glass, which she often consulted,
always shewed her a Form so extremely lovely,
that, not finding herself engaged in such Ad-
ventures as were common to the Heroines in
the Romances she read, she often complained
of the Insensibility of Mankind, upon whom
her Char.ms seemed to have so little Influence.
The persect Retirement she lived in, af-
forded indeed no Opportunities of making the
Conquests she desired; but she could not
comprehend, how any Solitude could be ob-
scure enough to conceal a; Beauty like hers
from Notice; and thought' the Reputation of
her Charms sufficient to. bring a Croud of
B 3 Adorer?

<page 29>
6 The F E M A L E Book II
Adorers to demand her of her Father. Heir
Mind being wholly filled with the most: extras
vagant Expectations, she was alarmed by every
trifling Incident; and kept in a continual An-
xiety by a Vicissitude of Hopes, Fears, Wishes,
and Disappointments.
Chap. II.
Contains a Description of a Lady's Dress,
in Fashion not much above Two thousand
Tears ago.—The Beginning of an Ad-
venture which seems to promise a great
deal.
SIR ABE LLA had now entered into her
Seventeenth Year with the Regret of see-
ing herself the Object of Admiration to a sew
Rustics only, who happened to see her; when,
one Sunday, making use of the Permission the
Marquis sometimes allowed her, to attend Di-
vine Service at the Church belonging to the
Village near which they lived, her Vanity was
flattered with an Adorer not altogether unwor-
thy of her Notice.
.. This Gentleman was young, gay, hand-
some, and very elegantly drefied; he was just
come from London with an Intention to pass
lbme Weeks with a Friend in that Part of the
Country; and at the time Arabella entered
the Church, his Eyes, which had wandered
from one rural Fair to another, were in an la%
stant fixed upon her Face. She bluflied with
a very becoming Modesty; and, pleased with

<page 30>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. }
r
the unusual Appearance of so fine a Gentleman *
and the particular Notice he took of her, passed
on to her Seat thro' a double Row of Countrj
People; who, with a Profusion of aukwaid Bows
and Courtesies, expressed their Respect.
Mr'. Hervey, for that was the Stranger's
Name, was no less sarprised at her Beauty,
than the Singularity of her Dress; and the odd
Whim of being followed into the Church by
three Women-Attendants, who, as soon as she
was seated, took their Places behind her.
Her Dress, though singular, was far from be^
ing unbecoming. AU the Beairties. of her Neck
and Shape were set off to the greatest Advan-
tage by the Fashion of her Gown, which, in the
Manner of a Robe, was made to sit tight to
her Body; and fastened on the Breast with a
Knot of Diamonds. Her fine black Hair hung
upon her Neck in Curls, which had so much
the Appearance of being artless, that all but
.her Maid, whose Employment it W2S to give
them that Form, imagined they were so. Her
Head-dress was only a sew Knots advantage-
ously disposed, over v/hich she wore a white
Sarsenet Hood, somewhat in the Form of a
Veil, with which she sometimes wholly covered
her fair'Face, when she saw herself beheld with.
too much Attention; .
This Veil had never appeared to her so ne-
cessary before. Mr. Hervty's eager Glances
threw Her into so much Confusion, that, pulling
it over her Face as much as she was able, she
remained invisible to him all the time they af-
terwards stayed in the Church. This Action,
by which she would have had him understand,
B 4 that

<page 31>
8 ^FEMALE Book h
1
that she was displeased at his gazing on her
with so little Respect, only increased his Cu-
riosity to know who she was.
When the Congregation was dismissed, he
hastened to the Door, with an Intention to of-
ser her his Hand to help her to her Coach; but
seeing the magnificent Equipage that waited
for her, and the Number of Servants that at-
tended it, he conceived a much higher Idea of
her Quality than he had at first; and, changing
his Design, contented himself with only bowing
to her as she pasted; and as soon as her Coach
drove away, inquired of some Persons nearest
him, who she was?
These Rustics, highly delighted with the
Opportunity of talking to the gay Londoner,
whom they looked upon as a very extraordinary
Person, gave him all the Intelligence they were
able, concerning the Lady he inquired after;
und silled him with an inconceivable Surprize at
the strange Humour of the Marquis, who bu-
ried so beautiful a Creature in Obseurity.
At his Return home he expressed his Admi-
ration of her in Terms that persuaded his Friend,
she had made some Impression on his Heart;
und, after raillying him a little upon this Suspi-
cion, he assumed a more serious Air, and told
him, If he really liked Lady Bella, he thought
it not impossible but he might obtain her. The
poor Girl, added he, has been kept in Confine-
ment so long, that I believe it would not be dif-
ficult to persuade her to free herself by Marriage.
She never had a Lover in her Lise; and there-
fore the first Person who addresses he« has the
fairest Chanrt for succeeding.
Mr.

<page 32>
Chap; 3. QVTTOTZ: ST
Mr: Hervey, tho' he could not persuade him-
self his Cousin was in Earnest when he advised1
him to court the only Daughter of a Man of
the Marquis's Quality, and Heiress to his vast
Estates; yet relished the Scheme, and resolved
to make some Attempt upon her before he left
the Country. However, he concealed his De-
sign from h'13 Cousin, not being willing to ex-
pose himself to be ridiculed, if he did not suc-
ceed; and, turning the Advice he had given
him into a Jest, left him in the Opinion, that
he thought no more of it.
Chap. III.
In which the Jdventure goes on after tb*
accustomed Manner.
ylRABELLA, in the mean time, was
wholly taken up with the Adventure, a*
she called it, at Church: The Person and
Dress of the Gentleman who had so particu-
larly gazed on her there, was so different from .
what she had been accustomed to see, that she
immediately concluded, he was of some distin-
guished Rank. It was past a Doubt, she
thought, that he was excessively in Love with
her; and as she soon expected to have some
very extraordinary Proofs of his Passion, her
Thoughts were wholly employed on the Man-
ner in which she should receive them.
As soon as she came home, and had paiet-
her Duty to the Marquis, she hurried to her
Chamber, to be at Liberty to indulge her agree-
B 5 ' abfe

<page 33>
io The FEMALE Book I.
1
able Reflections; and, after the Example of
her Heroines, when any thing extraordinary
happened to them, called her favourite Wo-
man; cr, to use her own Language, her,
"in whom she confided her most secret
« Thoughts."
Well, Lucy, said she, did you observe that
Stranger who ey'd us * so heedfully To-day at
Church?
This Girl, notwithstanding her Country-
Simplicity, knew a Compliment was expected
from her on this Occasion; and therefore re-
plied, " That she did not wonder at the Gen-
"tleman's staring at her; for she was sure he
.: had never seen any body so handsome as her
"Ladyship before."
I have not all the Beauty you attribute to me,
said Arahella, smiling a little: And, with a very
moderate Share of it, I might well fix the At-
tention of a person who seemed not to be over-
much pleased with the Objects about him,:
However, .jpurfued she, assuming a more seri-
ous Air, if this Stranger be weak enough to en-
tertain any Sentiments more than indifferent
for me; I charge you, upon Pain of my Dis-
pleasure, do not be accessary to the Conveying
his presumptuous Thoughts to me either by
Letters or Messages; nor suffer him to corrupt
y<Kir Fidelity with the Presents he will very
probably offer you.
Lucy,. to whom this Speech first gave a Hint
of what she ought to expect from her Lady's
Lovers, finding herself of more Importance
than
• The Heroines always speak of thimselves in the Plural
K«ubcr.

<page 34>
Chap. 3. (QUIXOTE. ii
than she imagined, was so pleased at th
Prospect which opened to her, that it was with
some Hesitation she promised to obey her Or-
ders.
Arabella, however, was satisfied with her As-
surances of observing her Directions; and dis-
missed her from her Presence, not without an
Apprehension of being too well obeyed.
A whole Week being elapsed without meet-
ing with the Importunities she expected, she
could hardly conceal her Surprize at so morti-
fying a Disappointment; and frequently inter-
rogated Lucy, concerning any Attempts the
Stranger had made on her Fidelity; but the
Answers she received, only increased her Dis-
content, . as they convinced her, her Charms
had not had the Effect she imagined.
Mr. Hervey, however, had been all this
time employed in thinking of some Means to
get acquainted with the Marquis; for, being
possessed with an extraordinary Opinion of his
Wit, and personal Accomplishments, he did
not sear making some Impression on the Heart
of the young Lady; provided he could have an
Opportunity of conversing with her.
His Cousin's Advice. was continually in his
Mind, and flattered his Vanity with the most
agreeable Hopes: But the Marquis's Fondness
for Solitude, and that Haughtiness which was
natural to him, rendered him so difficult of Ac-
cess, that Hervey, from the Intelligence he re-
ceived of his Humour, despaired of being able
to prosecute his Scheme; when, meeting with
a young Farmer in one of his Evening-Walks,
. and entering into Conversation with him upon
B 6 several

<page 35>
The FEMALE Book I.
several Country Subjects, the Discourse at last
turned upon the Marquis of . whose fine
House and Gardens were within their Viewj
upon which the young Fellow informed him,
he was Brother to a young Woman* that at-
tended the Lady Arabella; and, being fond of
lengthening out the Conversation with so fine a
Gentleman, gave him, without being desired,
the domestic History of the whole Family, as
he had received it from Lucy, who was the
Sister he mentioned.
Hervey, excessively delighted at this acci-
dental Meeting with a Person so capable of
ferying his Design, affected a great Desire of
being better acquainted with him; and, under
Pretence of acquiring some Knowlege in rural
Affairs, accustomed himself to call so often at
William's Farm, that, at last, he met with the
Person whom the Hopes of seeing had so often
carried him thither.
Lucy, the Moment she saw him enter, know-
ing him again, blushed at the Remembrance
of the ,Discourse which had passed between hex
Lady and herself concerning him; and was not
at all surprised at the Endeavours he used to
speak to her apart: But, as soon as he began a
Conversation concerning Arabella, she inter-
rupted him by saying, I know, Sir, that you
are dijlracledly in Love with my Lady; but she
has forbid me to receive any Letters orMesiages
from you; and therefore I beg you will not
offer to bribe me; for I dare not disobey her.
Mr. Hervey was at first so astonished at hor
Speech, that he knew not what to think of it;
but, after a little Reflectioxij attributing to an
Excel*

<page 36>
Clup. 4. QUIXOTE. ij
Excess of aukward Cunning what, in Reality,
was an Effect. of her Simplicity, he resolved to
make use of the Hint she had given him; and,
presenting her with. a couple of Guineas, in-
treated her to venture displeasing her Lady,. by
bearing a Letter from. him; promising to re-
ward her better, if she succeeded;
Lucy made some Difficulty to comply; but;,
r$)t being able absolutely to refuse the first Bribe
that ever was offered to her, she, after some
Intreaties, consented to take the Letter; and,
receiving the Money he presented her, left him
at Liberty to write, after she had got her Bro-
ther to furnish, him with Materials tor that Pur-
pose.
Chap. IV.
A Mistake, which produces no great Conse-
quences — An extraordinary Comment
upon a Behaviour natural enough—An
Instance of a Lady's Companion for her
Lover, which the Reader may possibly
think not very compassionate.
"LJERVEY, who was Master of no great
■* .* Elegance in Letter-writing, was at first
at some Loss, how to address a Lady of her
Quality, to whom he was an absolute Stranger,
upon the Subject of Love; but, conceiving
there was no great Occasion for much Cere-
mony in declaring himself to one who had been
educated in the Country, and who, he believ-
ed, could not be displeased with a Lover of his
Figure,

<page 37>
i4 The FEMALE Book I.
Figure, he therefore, in plain Terms, told
her, how deeply he was enamoured of her; and
conjured her to afford him some Opportunity
of paying his Respects to her.
Lucy received this Letter from him with a
worse Grace than she did the Gold; and, the/
she promised him to deliver it to her Lady im-
mediately, yet she kept it a Day or two before
she had the Courage to attempt it: At last,
drawing it out of her Pocket, with a bashful
Air, she presented it to her Lady, telling her it
came from the fine Gentleman whom she saw
at Church.
Arabella blushed at the Sight of the Letter;
and tho', in Reality, she was not displeased,
yet, being a strict Observer of romantic Forms,
. v she chid her Woman severely for taking it.
Carry it back, added she, to the presumptuous
Writer of it; and let him know how greatly
his Insolence has offended me.
Lucy, however, suffered the Letter to> re-
main on the Toilet, expecting some Change
in her Lady's Mind; for she traversed the
Chamber in great seeming Irresolution, often
stealing a Glance to the Letter, which she had
a strong Inclination to open; but, searching
the Records of her Memory for a Precedent,
and not finding, that any Lady ever opened a
Letter from an unknown Lover, she reiterated
her Commands to Lucy to carry it back, with
a Look and Accent so very severe, that the Girl,
extremely apprehensive of having offended her,
put the Letter again in her Pocket, resolving
to return it the first Opportunity.
3 M^..

<page 38>
Chap. 4. Q,U IX O T E,^ '«% i f
Mr. Hervey, who had his Thoughts^whdly
taken up with the flattering Prospect of Suc-
cess, no sooner saw Lucy, who gave him his
Letter without speaking a Word, than, sup-
posing it had been the Answer he expected, ha
eagerly snatched it out of her Hand, and,
kissing it first in a Rapture of Joy, broke k
©pen; but his Surprize and Confusion, when
he saw it was his own Letter returned, was
inexpressible. For some Moments he kept
his Eyes fastened upon the tender Billet, as if
he was really reading it. His Disappointment,
and the ridiculous Figure he knew he must
make in the Eyes of his Messenger, filled him
with so much Confusion, that he did not dare
to look up; but, recovering himself at last,
he affected to turn it into a Jest; and, laugh-
ing first himself, gave Lucy the Liberty of
laughing also, who had, with much Difficulty,
been able to prevent doing it before.
The Curiosity he selt to hear how she had
acquitted herself of the Trust he had reposed
in her, made him oblige her to give a Truce
to her Mirth, in order to satisfy him; and
Lucy, who was extremely exact in her Rela-
tions, told him all that had passed, without
omitting the smallest Circumstance.
Though it was impossible to draw any
favourable Omen from what he heard, yet he
determined to make another Effort, before he
set out for London; and, taking Leave of his
Confident, after he had appointed her to meet
him again the next Day, at her Brother's, he
went home to consider upon Means to effect
his

<page 39>
16 Xhe FEMALE Book E
his Designs, which the ill Success of his first At-
tempt had not forced him to abandon.
Arabella, who expected to hear, that the
Return of his Letter would make her Lover
commit some very extravagant Actions; and
having impatiently waited for an Account of
them from Lucy; finding she seemed to
have no. Intention to begin a Discourse concem*.
mg him; asked her, at last, If she had exe-
cuted her Commission, and returned.the Letter
to the insolent Unknown?
The Girl answered, Yes.
Which tiot being all that her Lady expected,
And how did he receive it? resumed she, pee-
vishly.
Why, Madam, replied Lucy, I believe he .
thought your Ladyship had sent him an An-
swer; for he kissed the Letter several times.
Foolish Wench! replied Arabella, How can
you imagine he had the Temerity to think I
should answer his Letter? A Favour, which,
though he had spent Years in my Service,
would have been infinitely greater than he
could have expected. No, Lucy, he kissed.
the Letter, either because he thought it had been
touched'at least by my Hands, or to shew the
persect Submission with which he received my
Commands; and it is not to be doubted but.
his Despair will force him to commit some
desperate Outrage against himself, which I do
not hate him enough to wish, though he has
mortally offended me.
Arabella was possessed of great Sensibility
and Softness; and, being really persuaded, that
her Lover would entertain some fatal Design,
seemed

<page 40>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. i7
~med so much affected with die Th« never be
Nat might happen, that Lucy, w* charitable
ed her, begged her not to be fo con-
ed for the Gentleman: There is no Fear,
added file, that he will do himself a Mischief;
for when he discovered his Mistake, he laughed
heartily, as well as myfelf.
How! replied Arabella, extremely surprised,
Did he laugh?
Which Lucy confirming, Doubtless, re-
sumed she, having taken a little Time to con-
sider of fo strange a Phenomenon, he laughed^
because his Reason was disturbed at the sudden
Shock he received: Unhappy ManX his Pre-
sumption will be severely enough punished,
though I do not add Anger to the Scorn which
I have expressed for him: Therefore, Lucy,
you may tell him, if you please, that, not-
withstanding the Offence he has been guilty
of, I am not cruel enough to wish his Death,
and that I command him to Hve, if he can
live without Hope
Chap. V.
In which one would imagine the Adven-
ture concluded, but for a Promise that
something elje is to come.
T UCT now began to think there was feme-
.*—J thing more, than she imagined, in this
Affair. Mr. Hervey indeed, in her Opinion,
had seemed to be very far from having any
Design to attempt his own Lise; but her
Lady,,

<page 41>
i8 f/^FEMALE Book T.
thought, could not possibly be miP
___hwUehgns, i therefore she resolved to carry her
^Me1firg%095 him immediately, though it was
then late in the Evening. >
Accordingly she went to her Brother's,
where she had some Hope of meeting with
him; but not finding him there, she obliged
him to go to the House where he lived, and tell
him she desired to speak with him.
IVilliam, being let into the Secret of his
Sister's frequent Meetings with Mr. Hervey,
imagined she had some agreeable News to ac-
quaint him with; and therefore ran imme-
diately to his Relation's House, which was but
at a small Distance; but he was told Mr.
Hervey was in Bed, very much indisposed, and
could not be seen.:
This News put Lucy in a terrible Fright:
She told her Apprehensions to her Brother;
which being such as her Lady had put into her
Head, and were now confirmed by Mr. Her-
vey s Illness, the young Farmer stood amazed,
not being able to comprehend her Meaning;
and she, without staying to explain herself any
further, went home to the Castle, and told
her Lady, That what she seared was come to
pass; the Gentleman would certainly die; for
he was very ill in Bed.
This being no more than what Arabella ex-
pected, she discovered no Surprize; but only
asked Lucy, If she had delivered her Message
to him?
Would you have me, Madam, replied she,
go to his House? I am afraid the Marquis
will hear of it.
My

<page 42>
Chap. f. QUIXOTE. 19
My Father, replied Arabella, can never be
offended with me for doing a charitable
Action.
Ah! Madam, interrupted Lucy, let me go
then immediately, for. sear the poor Gentle-
man should grow worse.
If he be sick. almost to Death, resumed Ara-
bella, he will recover, if I command him to do
so: When did you hear of a Lover dying
through Despair, when his Mistress let him
know it was her Pleasure he should live? But
as it will not be altogether so proper for you to
go to his House, as it may be suspected you
come from me; PJJ write a sew Lines, which
you shall copy, and your Brother may carry
them to him To-morrow, and I'll engage.he
shall be well in a sew Hours.
Saying this, she went into her Closet, and,
having written a short Note, made Lucy write
it over again. It was as follows:
Lucy, To the Unfortunate Lover os her Lady.
~\A Y Lady, who is the most generous Per-
. son in the World, has commanded me
to tell you, that, presumptuous as you are, she
does not desire your Death; nay more, flic
commands you to live, and permits you, in
case you obey her, to hope for her Pardon,
provided yo\a keep within the Bounds she pre-
scribes to you.
Adieu.
This Letter Lucy copied, and, Arabella, ex-
amining it again, thought it rather too kind;
and,

<page 43>
20
The FEMALE Book I.
and, seeming desirous of making some Altera-
tion in it, Lucy, who was extremely anxious for
Mr. Herve/s Lise, searing lest she should alter i*
in such a manner, that the Gentleman might
he at Liberty to die, if he chose it, conjured
her Lady in such pressing Terms to let it re-
main as it was, that Arabella suffered herself
to be prevailed upon by her Intreaties; and,
remembring that it was not uncommon for the
Ladies in Romances to relax a little in then?
Severity through the Remonstrances of their
Women, told her, with an inchanting Smile,
that she would grant her Desire; and went
to Bed with that pleasing Satisfaction, which
every generous Mind experiences at the Con-
sciousness of having done some very benevolent
Action.
In the Morning, this life-reftoring Billet
was. dispatched by Lucy to her Brother, ii*^
closed in one to him, charging him to- carrji
it to the sick Gentleman immediately.
William, having a> strong Curiosity to sec
what his Sister had written, ventured to open it;
and, not being able to imagine Lady Bella had
really given her Orders to write what appeared
to him the most unintelligible Stuff in the
World, resolved to suppress this Letter till he
had questioned her a Httfe concerning it.
A sew Hours after, Mr. Hnvey, who ex-
pected to meet Lucy at her Brother's, came in..
His Illness having been only a violent Head-
ach, to which he was subject, being now quite
©ff, he remembred the Appointment he had
made; but, having waited some time, and;
she not coming, lie returned again to his
Cousin's,

<page 44>
Chap. f. Q.V 1 X OT E. 2*
Cousin's, leaving Word for her, that he would
fee her the next Day.
Scarce was he gone out, when Lucy, who
ionged to know what Effect her Letter had
produced in his Health, came in; and eagerly
inquiring of her Brother how Mr. Hervey was,
received for Answer, that he had been there a
Moment before she came.
Well, cried she, clasping her Hands to-
gether, with Surprize, my Lady said, her Let-
ter would cure him, if he was ever so sick; but
I did not imagine he would have been well
enough to come abroad so soon.
Your Lady! interrupted William; why was
it not yourself that wrote the Letter you gave
to me?
No, truly, Brother, resumed she: How
was it possible I should write so fine a Letter?
.My Lady made every Word of it, add I only
wrote it after her.
IVilliam, hearing this, would not own the
Indiscretion he now thought he had been guilty
.of, in keeping the Letter; but suffered his
Sister to return to her Lady, in the Belief that
he had delivered k, resolving, when he saw her
next, to say he had lost it; for he knew not
what Excuse to make to Mr. Hervey for not
.jgiving it him when he saw him.
Arabella received the Account of her Lover's
Recovery as a Thing she was absolutely sure
of before; and thinking she had now done all
that could be expected from her Compassion,
resumed her usual Severity, and commanded
JLucy to mention him no more. If he loves
me with that Purity he ought to do, pursued

<page 45>
22 The FEMALE Book I.
(he, he will cease to importune me any further:
And though his Passion he ever Ib violent, his
Respect and Submission to my Commands will
oblige him to Silence. The Obedience he
has already shewn, in recovering at the first
Intimation I gave, that it was my Will he
should do so, convinces me, I need not ap-
prehend he will renew his Follies to displease
me.
Lucy, who found by this Discourse of her
Lady's, that her Commission was at an End
with regard to Mr. Hervey, followed her Di-
rections so exactly, that she not only spoke no
more of him to her, but also, in order to avoid
him, neglected to 2:0 to her Brother's.
His Impatience at not seeing her made him
prevail upon her Brother to go to the Castle, and
intreat her to give him another Interview: But
Lucy positively refused; and, to make a Merit
with her Lady of her Obedience, informed her
what he had requested.
Arabella, resenting a Boldness which.argued
so little Respect to her Commands, began now
to repent of the Compassion she had shewn
him; and, commending Lucy for what she
had done, bid her tell the insolent Unknown,
?f he ever sent to her again, that she was re-
solved never to pardon the Contempt he had
(hewn for her Orders.
Mr. Hervey, finding himself deserted by
Lucy, resolved to give over his Attempts, con-
gratulating himself for his Discretion in not
acquainting his Cousin with what he had al-
ready done: His Heart not being very much
.engaged, he found no great Difficulty in con-
..»..? soling

<page 46>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. t$
soling himself for his bad Success. Tn a few
Days he thought of Lady Bella no more, than
if he had never seen her; but an Accident
bringing her again in his Way, he could not
resist the Inclination he selt to speak to her;
and by that means drew upon himself a very
sensible Mortification.
Chap. VI.
In which the Adventure is really concluded;
tho\ pojstbly^ not as the Reader expecled.
THE Marquis sometimes permitting his
Daughter to ride out, and this being
the only Diversion file was allowed, or ever ex-
perienced, flia did not fail to take it as often as
ihe could. . .
She was returning from one of these Airings
one Day, attended by two Servants, when
Mr. Hervey, who happened to be at some Di-
stance, observing a Lady on Horseback, who
made a very graceful figure, he rode up to
her, in order to have a nearer View; and,
knowing Lady Bella again, resolved to speak
to her: But while he was considering how he
fliould accost her, Arabella suddenly seeing him,
and observing he was making up to her, her
Imagination immediately suggested to her, that
this insolent Lover had a Design to seize her
Person; and this Thought terrifying. her ex-
tremely, she gave a loud Shriek; which Mr.
Heryey hearing, rode eagerly up to her to in-

<page 47>
2* The FEMALE Book I.
quire the Reason of it, at the same time that
her two Attendants, as much amazed as him-
self, came galloping up also.
Arabella, upon his coming close to her, re-
doubled her Cries. If you have any Valour,
said she to her Servants, desend your unfortu-
nate Mistress, and rescue her from this unwor-
thy Man.
The Servants, believing him to be an High-
wayman, by this Exclamation, and dreading
lest he should present his Pistol at their Heads,
if they offered to make any Resistance, recoiled
a sew Paces back, expecting he would demand
their Purses when he had robbed their Lady:
But the extreme Surprize he was in, keeping
him motionless, the Fellows not seeing any
Pistols in his Hand, and animated by Arabellas
Cries, who, calling them Cowards and Trai-
tors, urged them to deliver her; they both, in
a Moment, laid hold of Mr. Hervey, and forced
him to alight ., which they did also themselves,
•still keeping fast hold of him, whom Surprize,
Shame, and Rage, had hitherto kept silent.
Rascals! cried he, when he was able to
speak, what do you mean by using me in this
manner? Do you suppose I had any Intention
to hurt the Lady ? — What do you take me
for?
For a Ravisher, interrupted Arabella, an im-
pious Ravisher, who, contrary to all Laws both
human and divine, endeavour to possess yourself
by Force of a Person whom you are not worthy
to serve; and whose Charity and Compassion
you have returned with the utmost Ingratitude.
Upon

<page 48>
Chap. 6. Q.UIXOT E. 25
Upon my Word, Madam, said Mr. Hervey,
I don't understand one Word you say : You
either mistake me for some other Person, or are
pleased to divert yourself with the Surprize I am
in: But I beseech you carry the Jest no farther,
and order your Servants to let me go; or, by
Heaven — cried he struggling to get loose, if I
can but free one of my Hands, I'll stab the
Scoundrels before your Face.
It is not with Threats like these, resumed
Arabella with great Calmness, that I can be
moved. A little more Submission and Respect
would become you better; you are now wholly
in my Power; I may, if I please, carry you to
my Father, and have you severely punished for
your Attempt: But to shew you, that I am as
generous as you are base and designing, I'll give
you Freedom, provided you promise me never
to appear before me again: But, in order to se-
cure my own Sasety, you must deliver up your
Arms to my Servants, that I may be assured you
will not have it in your Power to make a second
Attempt upon my Liberty.
Mr. Hervey, whose Astonishment was in-
creased by every Word she spoke, began now to
be apprehensive, that this might prove a very
serious Affair, since she seemed resolved to be-
lieve he had a Design to carry her off; and,
knowing that an Attempt of that Nature upon
an Heiress might have dangerous Consequences,
he resolved to accept the Conditions she offered
him: But while he delivered his Hanger to the
Servant, he assured her in the strongest Terms,
that he had no other Design in riding up to her,
but to have a nearer View of her Person.
Vol. I. C Add

<page 49>
26 FEMALE Book

Add not Falshood, said Arabella sternly, to a
Crime already black enough; for tho', by ar
Effect of my Generosity, I have resolved not v*
deliver you up to the Resentment of my Father,
yet nothing shall ever be able to make me par-
don this Outrage. Go then, pursued she, go,
base Man, unworthy of the Care I took of thy
Sasety; go to some distant Country, where I
may never hear of thee more; and suffer ire, if
possible, to lose the Remembrance of thy
Crimes.
Saying this, she ordered her Servants, who
had got the Hanger in their Possession, to set
him at Liberty, and mount their Horses; which
they did immediately, and followed their Lady,
who rode with all imaginable Speed to the
Castle.
Mr. Hervey, not yet recovered from his Sur-
prize, stood some Moments considering the
strange Scene he had been Witness to ; and in
which he had, much against his Will, appeared
the principal Character. As he was not ac-
quainted with Lady Bella's Foible, he concluded
her Fears of him were occasioned by her Sim1
plicity, and some Misrepresentations that had
been made her by Lucy, who, he thought, had
betrayed him; and, searing this ridiculous Ad-
venture would be soon made public, and him-
self exposed to the Sneers of his Country Ac-
quaintance, he resolved to go back to London as
soon as possible.
The next Day, pretending he had received a
Letter which obliged him to set out immedi-
ately, he took Leave of his Cousin, heartily
glad at the Escape he should make from his Rail-
lery;

<page 50>
€bap..7. QJJIXOTE. 27
lery; for he did" not doubt but the Story would
'.ery soon be known, and told greatly to his Dis-
advantage.
But Arabella, in order to be completely ge-
nerous, a Quality for which all the Heroines
are famous, laid a Command upon her two At-
tendants not to mention what had passed, giv-
ing them, at the fame time, Money to secure
their Secrecy; and threatening them with her
Displeasure, if they disobeyed.
Arabella, as soon as she had an Opportunity,
did not fail to acquaint her faithful Lucy with.
the Danger from which flie had so happily
escaped, thanking Heaven at the same time
with great Devotion, for having preserved her
from the Hands of the Raviiher.
Two or three Months rolled away, after this
Accident, without offering any new Adventure
to our fair Visionary ; when her Imagination,
always prepossessed with the fame fantastic Ideas,
made her stumble upon another Mistake, equal-
ly absurd and ridiculous.
Chap. VII.
In which some Contradictions are very hap-
pily reconciled.
THE Marquis's head Gardener had received
a young Fellow into his. Master's Service,
who had lived in several Families of Distinction.
He had a good Face; was tolerably genteel;
and, having an Understanding something above
his Condition, join'd to a great deal of second-
C 2 band

<page 51>
28 FEMALE Book I.
hand Politeness, which he had contracted while
he lived at London, he appeared a very extraor-
dinary Person among the Rustics who were his
Fellow-Servants.
Arabella, when she walked in the Garden,
had frequent.Opportunities of seeing this young
Man, whom she observed with a very particular
Attention. His Person and Air had something,
she thought, very distinguishing. When she
condescended to speak to him about any Busi-
ness he was employed in, she took Notice, that
his Answers were framed in a Language vastly
superior to his Condition ; and the Respect he
paid her had quite another Air from that of
the aukward Civility of the other Servants.'
Having discerned so many Marks of a Birth
far from being mean, she easily passed from an
Opinion, that he was a Gentleman, to a Belief
that he was something more ; and every new
Sight of him adding Strength to her Suspicions,
she remained, in a little time, persectly con-
vinced that he was some Person of Quality, who,
disguised in the Habit of a Gardener, had intro-
duced himself into her Father's Service, in or-
der to have an Opportunity of declaring a Pas-
sion to her, which must certainly be very great,
since it had forced him to assume an Appearance.
so unworthy of his noble Extraction.
Wholly possessed with this Thought, she set
herself to observe him more narrowly; and soon
.found out, that he went very aukwardly about
his Work; that he sought Opportunities' of be-
ing alone; that he threw himself in her Way
gs often as he could, and gazed on her very at-
tentively: She sometimes fansied she saw him
endeavour

<page 52>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE, 29
endeavour to smother a Sigh when he answered
her any Question about his Work; once saw
him leaning against a Tree with his Hands
crossed upon his Breast; and, having lost a
String of small Pearls, which she remembered
he had seen her threading as she fat in one of the
Arbours, was persuaded he had taken it up,
and kept it for the Object of his secret Adora-
tion.
She often wondered, indeed, that she did not
find her Name carved on the Trees, with some
mysterious Expressions of Love; that he was
never discovered lying along the Side of one of
the little Rivulets, increasing the Stream with his
Tears i nor, for three Months that he had lived
there, had ever been sick of a Fever caused by
his Grief, and the Constraint he put upon himself
in not declaring his Passion: But she considered
again, that his Fear of being discovered kept
him from amusing himself with making the
Trees bear the Records of his secret Thoughts,
or of indulging his Melancholy in any Manner
expressive of the Condition of his Soul; and, as.
for his not being sick, his Youth, and the
Strength of his Constitution, might, even for a
longer time, bear him up against the Assaults of
a Fever: But he appeared much thinner and
paler than he used to be; and she concluded,
therefore, that he must in time sink under the
Violence of his Passion, or else be forced to de-
clare it to her; which she considered as a very
great Misfortune; for, not finding in herself
any Disposition to approve his Love, she must ne-
cessarily banish him from her Presence, for fear
he should have the Presumption to hope, that
C 3 Time

<page 53>
3o she FEMALE Book I
Time might do any thing in his Favour: And
it was possible also, that the Sentence she would
be obliged to pronounce, might either cause'his
Death, or force him to commit some extrava-
gant Action, which would discover him to her
Father, who would, perhaps, think her guilty
of holding a secret Correspondence with him.
These Thoughts perplexed her so much, that,
hoping to find some Relief by unburdening hef
Mind to Lucy, she told her all her Uneasiness,
Ah! said she to her, looking upon Edward,
who had just passed them, how unfortunate do
I think myself in being the Cause of that Passion
which makes this illustrious Unknown wear
away his Days in so shameful an Obscurity!
Yes, Lucy, pursued she, that Edward, whom
you regard as one of my Father's menial Ser-
vants, is a Person of sublime Quality, who sub-
mits to this Disguise only to have an Opportu-
nity of seeing me every Day. But why do you
seem so surprised? Is it possible, that you have
not suspected him to be what he is? Has he ne-
yer unwittingly made any Discovery of himself?
Have you not surprised him in Discourse with
liis faithful 'Squire, who, certainly, lurks here
abouts to receive his Commands, and is haply
the Confident of his Passion ? Has he never en-
tertained you with any Conversation about me?
Or have you never seen any valuable Jewels in
his Possession by which you suspected him to be
not what he appears?
Truly, Madam, replied Lucy, I never took
him for any body else but a simple Gardener;
but now you open my Eyes, methinks I can
find I have been strangely mistaken; for he does
not

<page 54>
Chap. 7. QV I X O T E. 3 r
not look like a Man of low Degree; and he
talks quite in another Manner from our Ser-
vants. I never heard him indeed speak of your
Ladyship, but once; and that was, when he
first saw you walking in the Garden, he asked
our yobn, If you was not the Marquis's Daugh-
ter f And he said, You was as beautiful as an
Angel. As for sine Jewels, I never saw any;
and I believe he has none ; but he has a Watch,
and that looks as if he was something, Madam:
Nor do I remember to have seen him talk with
any Stranger that looked like a 'Squire.
Lucy having thus, with her usual Punctuality,
answered every Question her Lady put to her,
proceeded to ask her, What she should say, if
he should beg her to give her a Letter, as the
o'.her Gentleman had done?
You must by no means take it, replied Ara-
bella: My Compassion had before like to have
been fatal to me. If he discovers his Quality to
me, I shall know in what manner to treat him.
They were in this Part of their Discourse,
when a Noise they heard at some Distance,
made Arabella bend her Steps to the Place from
whence it proceeded; and, to her infinite Amaze-
ment, saw the head Gardener, with a Stick he
had in his Hand, give several Blows to the con-
cealed Hero, who suffered the Indignity with
admirable Patience.
Shocked at seeing a Person of sublime Quality
treated so unworthily, she called out to the
Gardener to hold his Hand; who immediately
obeyed; and Edward, seeing the young Lady
advance, sneaked off, with an Air very different
from an Oroondates,
C 4 For

<page 55>
"3* The FE MALE Book L
For what Crime, pray, said Arabella, with
a stern Aspect, did you treat the Person I saw
with you so cruelly s He whom you take such
unbecoming Liberties with, may possibly—But
again I ask you, What has he done? You
should make some Allowance for his want of
Skill in the abject Employment he is in at
present.
It is not for his want of Skill, Madam, said the
Qardener, that I corrected him; he knows his
Business very well, if he would mind it; but,
Madam, I have discovered him—.
Discovered him, do you say? interrupted
Arabella: And has the Knowledge of his Con-
dition not been able to prevent such Usage? or
rather, Has it been the Occasion of his receiv-
ing it?
His Conditions are very bad, Madam, re-
turned the Gardener; and I am afraid are such
as will one Day prove the Ruin of Body and
Soul too. I have for some time suspected he
had evil Designs in his Head; and' just now
watched him to the Fish-pond, and prevented
him from —
O dear! interrupted Lucy, looking pitifully
on her Lady, whose fair Bosom heaved with
Compassion, I warrant he was going to make
away with himself.
No, resumed the Gardener, smiling at the
Mistake, he was only going to make away with
some of the Carp, which the Rogue had caught,
and intended, I suppose, to sell; but I threw
them into the Water again; and if your Lady-
ship had not forbid me, I would have drubbed
him soundly for his Pains.

<page 56>
Chap. 7; QJJ1XOTE. 33
Fye ! fye! interrupted Arabella, out of Breath
with Shame and Vexation, tell me no more of
these idle Tales.
Then, hastily walking on to hide the Blushes
which this strange Accusation of her illustrious
Lover had raised in her Face, she continued far
some time in the greatest Perplexity imagin-
able.
Lucy, who followed her, and could not pos-
sibly reconcile what her Lady had been telling
her concerning Edward, with the Circumstance
of his stealing the Carp, ardently wished to hear
her Opinion of this Matter; but, teeing her
deeply engaged with her own Thoughts, she
would not venture to disturb her.
Arabella indeed had been in such a terrible
Consternation, that it was some Time before
she even reconciled Appearances to herself; but,
as she had a most happy Facility in accommo-
dating every Incident to her own Wishes and
Conceptions, she examined this Matter so many
different Ways, drew so many Conclusions, and
fansied so many Mysteries in the most indif-
serent Actions of the supposed noble Unknown,
that she remained, at last, more than ever
confirmed in the Opinion, that he was some.
great Personage, whom her Beauty had forced
to assume an Appearance unworthy of himself:
When Lucy, no longer able to keep Silence,
drew off her Attention from those pleasing
Images, by speaking of the Carp-stealing Affair
again.
Arabella, whose Confusion returned at that
disagreeable Sound, charged her, in an angry
Tone, never to mention so injurious a Suspi-
C 5 , cioa

<page 57>
34 the FEMALE Book I.
cion any more: For, in fine, said she to hen
do you imagine a Person of his Rank could be
ijuifty of stealing Carp? Alas ! pursued she,
lghing, he had, indeed, some fatal Design;
and, doubtless, would have executed it, had not
this Fellow so luckily prevented him. .
But Mr. Woodbinds Madam, said Lucy, saw
the Carp in his Hand: I wonder what he was
going to do with them.
Still, resumed Arabella, extremely chagrined,
still will you wound my Ears with that horrid
Sound? I tell you, obstinate and foolish Wench,
that this unhappy Man went thither to die ; and
if he really caught the Fish, it was to conceal
his Design from Woodbind: His great Mind
could not suggest to him, that it was possible he
might be suspected of a Baseness like that this
ignorant Fellow accused him of; therefore he
took no Care about it, being wholly possessed
by his despairing Thoughts.
However, Madam, laid Lucy, your Ladyship
may prevent his going to the Fish-pond againr
by laying your Commands upon him to live.
I shall do all that I ought, answered Arabella .T
but my Care for the Sasety of other Persons must
not make me forget what I owe to my own.
As she had always imputed Mr. Hervey's fan-
ned attempt to carry her away, to the Letter
she had written to him, upon which he had pro-
bably founded his Hopes of being pardoned for
it, me resolved to be more cautious for the fu-
ture in giving such Instances of her Compassion;
and was at a great Loss in what manner to com-
fort her despairing Lover, without raising Ex-
pectations slic had no Inclination to confirm:
But

<page 58>
Chap. 8. QJJ IX OT E. f5
But she was delivered from her Perplexity a sew
Days after, by the News of his having left the
Marquis's Service ; which she attributed to some
new Design he had formed to obtain her; and
Lucy, who always thought as her Lady did, was
.of the fame Opinion; tho' it was talked among
the Servants, that Edward feared a Discovery of
more Tricks, and resolved not to stay still he
was disgracefully dismissed.
Chap. VIII.
In which a Mistake, in point of Ceremony,
is rectified*
jRABELLA had scarce done thinking of
.** this last Adventure, when the Marquis
communicated a Piece of Intelligence to her,.
which opened a Prospect of an infinite Number
©f new ones.
His Nephew, having just returned from his
Travels, was preparing to come and pay him a
Visit in his Retreat; and, as he always designed
.to marry Arabella to this Youth, of whom he
was extremely fond, he told his Daughter of
the intended Visit of her Cousin, whom she had
not seen since she was eight Years old ; and,
for the first time, insinuated his Design of giving
.him to her for an Husband.
Arabella, whose Delicacy was extremely
shocked at this abrupt Declaration of her Fa-
ther, could hardly hide her Chagrin; for,
C & tho'

<page 59>
36 The FEMALE Book I.
tho' flic always intended to marry some time or
other, as all the Heroines had done, yet she
thought such an Event ought to be brought about
with an infinite deal of Trouble; and that it
was neceflary fl>e should pass to this State thro'
a great Number of Cares, Disappointments, and
Distresses of various Kinds, like them; that her
Lover should purchase her with his Sword from
a Croud of Rivals; and arrive to the Pofleflion
of her Heart by many Years of Services and
Fidelity.
The Impropriety of receiving a Lover of a
Father's recommending appeared in its strongest
Light. What Lady in Romance ever married
the Man that was chose for her? In those Cafe
the Remonstrances of a Parent are called Perse-
cutions; obstinate Resistance, Constancy and
.Courage ; and an Aptitude to dislike the Per-
son proposed to them, a noble Freedom of Mind
which disdains to love or hate by the Caprice of
others.
Arabella, strengthening her own Resolutions
by those Examples of heroic Disobedience, told
her Father, with great Solemnity of Accent,
that she would always obey him in all just and
reasonable Things; and, being persuaded that
he would never attempt to lay any Force upon
her Inclinations, she would endeavour to make
them conformable to. his,. and receive her Cou-
sin with that CivHiry and Friendship due to so
near a Relation, and a Person whom he honoured
with his Este2m.
The Marquis, having had frequent Occasions
of admiring his Daughter's Eloquence, did not
draw any unplcasing^ Conclusion from the nice
Distinctions.

<page 60>
Chap. 8. Q U I X O T E. 37
Distinctions she made; and, being perfectly as-
sured of her Consent whenever he demanded it,
expected the Arrival of his Nephew with great
Impatience.
Arabella, whose Thoughts had been fully em-
ployed since this Conversation with her Father,
was indulging her Meditations in one of the
most retired Walks in the Garden; when she
was informed by Lucy, that her Cousin was
come, and that the Marquis had brought him
into the Garden to look for her.
That Instant they both entered the Walk,
when Arabella, prepossessed, as she was, against
any favourable Thoughts of the young Glanville,
could not help betraying some Surprize at the
Gracefulness of his Figure.
It must be consessed, said she to her Attendant,
with a Smile, that this Lover my Father has
brought us, is no contemptible Person: Never-
theless I seel an invincible Repugnance in myself
against receiving him in that Character.
As she finished these Words, the Marquis
came up, and presented Mr. Glanville to her;
who, saluting her with the Freedom of a Rela-
tion, gave her a Disgust that shewed itself imme-
diately in her fair Face, which was overspread
with such a Gloom, that the Marquis was quite
astonished at it. Indeed Arabella, who expected
he would hardly have presumed to kiss her Hand,
was so surprised at his Freedom, in attempting
her Lips, that she not only expressed her Indig-
nation by Frowns, but gave him to understand
he had mortally offended her.
Mr. Glanville, however, was neither surprised
nor angry at her Resentment; but,. imputing it
to

<page 61>
38 The F E M A L E Book I.
to her Country Education, endeavoured to rally
her out of her ill Humour; and the Marquis, be-
ing glad to find a Behaviour, which he thought
proceeded from her Diſlike of her Couſin, was
only an Effect of an over-ſcrupulous Modeſty,
told her that Mr. Glanville had committed no
Offence by ſaluting her, ſince that was a Civi-
lity which was granted to all Strangers at the
firſt Interview, and therefore could not be re-
fuſed to a Relation.
Since the World is ſo degenerate in its Cuſ-
toms from what it was formerly, ſaid Arabella,
with a Smile full of Contempt upon her Couſin,
I am extremely happy in having lived in a Soli-
tude which has not yet expoſed me to the Mor-
tification of being a Witneſs to Manners I can-
not approve; for if every Perſon I ſhall meet
with for the future be ſo deficient in their Re-
fpects to Ladies, as my Couſin is, I ſhall not care
how much I am ſecluded from Society.
But, dear Lady Bella, interrupted Mr. Glan-
ville gaily, tell me, I beſeech you, how I muſt
behave to pleaſe you; for I ſhould be extremely
glad to be honoured with your good Opinion.
The Perſon, reſumed ſhe, whom I muſt teach
how to acquire my good Opinion, will, I am
afraid, hardly recompenſe me by his Docility
in learning, for the Pains I ſhould be at in in-
ftrućting him.
But, reſumed Glanville, that I may avoid any
more Occaſions of offending you, only let me
know how you would be approached for the fu-
ture.
Since, anſwered ſhe, there is no Neceſſity to
renew the Ceremony of introducing you again
tº

<page 62>
Chap. 8. QUI X O TE. 39
to me, I have not a ſecond Affront of that kind
to apprehend; but I pray tell me, If all Cavaliers.
are as preſuming as yourſelf; and if a Relation
of your Sex does not think a modeſt Embrace
“from a Lady a Welcome ſufficiently tender * *
Nay, Couſin, cried Glanville eagerly, I am
now perſuaded you are in the Right; an Em-
-brace is certainly to be preferred to a cold Salute.
: What would I give, that the Marquis would in-
-troduce me a ſecond time, that I might be re-
“ceived with ſo delightful a Welcome
: The Vivacity with which he ſpoke this was ſo
extremely diſagreeable to Arabella, that ſhe turned
from him abruptly, and, ſtriking into another
Walk, ordered Lucy to tell him ſhe commanded
him not to follow her.
Mr. Glanville, however, who had no Nu-
...tion of the exact Obedience which was expected
from him, would have gone after her, notwith-
ſtanding this Prohibition, which Lucy delivered
in a moſt peremptory Manner, after her Lady’s
Example: But the Marquis, who had left the
two young People at Liberty to diſcourſe, and
had walked on, that he might not interrupt them,
turning about, and ſeeing Glanville alone, called
him to have ſome private Diſcourſe with him;
and, for that time, ſpared Arabella the Mortifi-
cation of ſeeing her Commands diſobeyed.
: * The Heroines, tho' they think a Kiſs of the Hand a
great Condeſcenfien to a Lover, and never grant it without
Bluſhes and Confuſion; yet make no Scruple to embrace him.
upon every ſhort Abſence.
CHAP.

<page 63>
^ FEMALE Book I.
Chap. IX.
In which a Lover is severely -punished for
Faults which the Reader never would have
discovered, if be had not been told.
TH E Marquis, tho'he had resolved to give
Arabella to his Nephew, was desirous he
should first receive some Impressions of Tender-
ness for her, before he absolutely declared his
Resolution; and ardently wished he might be
able to overcome that Reluctance which she
seemed to have for Marriage: But, tho' Glanville
in a very sew Days became passionately in Love
with his charming Cousin, yet she discovered so
strong a Dislike to him, that the Marquis seared it
would be difficult to make her receive him for an
Husband: He observed she took all Opportu-
nities of avoiding his Conversation; and seemed
always out of Temper when he addressed any
thing to her; but was well enough pleased,
'When he discoursed with him; and would listen
to the long Conversations they had together with
great Attention.
The Truth is, she had too much Discernment
not to see Mr. Glanville had zc great deal of Me-
rit; his Person was persectly handsome; he
possessed a great Share of Understanding, an
easy Temper, and a Vivacity which charmed
every one, but the insensible Arabella.
She often wondered, that a Man, who, as.
she told her Confident, was Master of so many
fine Qualities, should have a Disposition so little.
capable of seeling the Passion of Love, with the
Delicacy

<page 64>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 4i
Delicacy and Fervour she expected to inspire;
or, that he, whose Conversation was so pleasing
on every other Subject, should make so poor a
Figure when he entertained her with Matters
of Gallantry. However, added she, I should
be to blame to desire to be beloved by Mr. Glan-
ville; for I am persuaded that Passion would
cause no Reformation in the Coarseness of his
Manners to Ladies, which makes him so dis-
agreeable to me, and might possibly increase my
Aversion.
The Marquis, having studied his Nephew's
Looks for several Days, thought he saw Incli-
nation enough in them for Arabella, to make
him receive the Knowledge of his Intention with
Joy: He, therefore, called him into his Closet,
and told him in sew Words, that, if his Heart
was not pre-engaged, and his Daughter capable
of making him happy, he resolved to bestow her
upon him, together with all his Estates.
Mr. GlanvUl e received this agreeable News
with the strongest Expressions of Gratitude; as-
suring his Uncle, that Lady Bella, of all the
Women he had ever seen, was most agreeable
to his Taste; and that he selt for her all the
Tenderness and Affection his Soul was capable
of.
I am glad of it, my dear Nephew, said the
Marquis, embracing him: I will allow you,
added he smiling, but a few Weeks to court her:
Gain her Heart as soon as you can, and when
you bring me her Consent, your Marriage shall
be solemnized immediately.
Mr. Glanville needed not a Repetition of so
agreeable a Command: He lest his Uncle's Clo-
set,

<page 65>
42 she FEMALE Book I.
set* with his Heart filled with the Expectation of
his approaching Happiness; and, understanding
Arabella was in the Garden, he went to her
with a Resolution to acquaint her with the Per-
mission her Father had given him to make his
Addresses to her.
He found his fair Cousin, as usual, accompa-
nied with her Women; and, seeing that, not-
withstanding his Approach, they still continued
to walk with her, and impatient of the Restraint
they laid him under, I beseech you, Cousin,.
said he, let me have the Pleasure of walking with
you alone: What Necessity is there for always
having so many Witnesses of our Conversation?
You may retire, said he, speaking to Lucy, and
the other Woman; I have something to say to
your Lady in private. 1
Stay, I command you, said Arabella, blushing
at an Insolence so uncommon, and take Orders
from no one but myself.—I pray you, Sir, pur-'
sued she frowning, What Intercourse of Secrets
is there between you and me, that you expect
I should favour you with a private Conversation?
An Advantage which none of your Sex ever
boasted to have gained from, me; and which,
haply, you should be the last upon whom I
should bestow it. .
You have the strangest Notions, answered
Glanville, smiling at the pretty Anger she disco-
vered: Certainly you may hold a private Con-
versation with any Gentleman, without giving
Offence to Decorum; and I may plead a Right
to this Happiness, above any other, since I have
the Honour to be your Relation.
It

<page 66>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 4 j
It is not at all surprising, resumed Arabella
gravely, that you and I should differ in Opinion
upon this Occasion : I don't remember that ever
we agreed in any thing; and, I am apt to be-
lieve, we never shall.
Ah! don't say so, Lady Bella, interrupted
he: What a Prospect of Misery you lay before
me! For, if we are always to be opposite to each
other, it is neceflary you must hate me as much
as I admire and love you.
These Words, which he accompanied with
a gentle Pressure of her Hand, threw the asto-
nished Arabella into such an Excess of Anger
and Shame, that, for a sew Moments, she was
unable to utter a Word.
What a horrid Violation this, of all the
Laws of Gallantry and Respect, which decree
a Lover to suffer whole Years in Silence before
he declares his Flame to the divine Object that
causes it; and then with awful Tremblings and
submissive Prostrations at the Feet of the of-
fended Fair \
Arabella could hardly believe her Senses when
she heard a Declaration, not only made with-
out the usual Forms, but also, that the presum-
ptuous Criminal waited for an Answer, without
seeming to have any Apprehension of the Pu-
nishment to which he was to be doomed; and
that, instead of deprecating her Wrath, he
looked with a smiling Wonder upon her Eyes,
as if he did not sear their Lightnings would
strike him dead.
Indeed, it was scarce possible for him to help
smiling, and wondering too, at the extraordinary
Action of Arabella; for, as soon as he had pro-
nounced

<page 67>
44 ^ FEMALE Book I.
nounced those fatal Words, she started back two
or three Steps; cast a Look at him full of the.
highest Indignation; and, lifting up her fine
Eyes to Heaven, seemed, in the Language of
Romance, to accuse the Gods for subjecting
her to so cruel an Indignity.
. The Tumult of her Thoughts being a little.
settled, she turned again towards Glanville, whose
Countenance expressing nothing of that Confu-
sion and Anxiety common to an Adorer in so
critical a Circumstance, her Rage returned with
greater Violence than ever.
If I do not express all the Resentment your In-
solence has filled me with, said she to him, af-
fecting more Scorn than Anger, 'tis because I
hold you too mean for my Resentment; but
never hope for my Pardon for your presumptuous
Consession of a Passion I could almost despise.
myself for inspiring. If it be true that you love
me, go and find your Punishment in that Absence.
to which I doom you ; and never hope I will
suffer a Person in my Presence, who has affronted
me in the manner you have done. ... ...
Saying this, she walked away, making a Sign
to him not to follow her.
Mr. Glanville, who was at first disposed to
laugh at the strange Manner in which she re-
ceived his Expressions of Esteem for her, found
something, so extremely haughty and contemp-
tuous in the Speech she had made, that he was
almost mad with Vexation. „.. .. ...
As he had no Notion of his Cousin's heroic
Sentiments, and had never read Romances, he
was quite ignorant of the Nature of his Offence v
and, supposing the Scorn she had expressed for
him

<page 68>
Chap.9. QUIXOTE. 45
him was founded upon the Difference of their
Rank and Fortune, his Pride was so sensibly
mortified at that Thought, and at her so inso-
lently forbidding him her Presence, that he was
once inclined to shew his Resentment of such un-
genteel Usage, by quitting the Castle without
taking Leave even of the Marquis, who, he
thought, could not be ignorant of the Recep-
tion he was likely to meet with from his Daugh-
ter; and ought to have guarded him against it,
if he really meant him so well as he seemed to
do.
As he was extremely violent and hasty in his
Resolutions, and nicely sensible of the least Af-
front, he was not in a Condition to reason justly
upon the Marquis's Conduct in this Affair; and
while he was fluctuating with a thousand differ-
ent Resolutions, Lucy came to him with a Bil-
let from her Lady, which she delivered without
staying till he opened it; and was superscribed
in this Manner;
. Arabella, . To the most presumptuous Man in
< the World —
YOU seem to acknowledge so little Respect
and Deserence for the Commands of a
Lady, that I am afraid it will be but too neces-
sary to reiterate that, which, at parting, I laid
upon you: Know then, that I absolutely insist
upon your repairing, in the only manner you
are able, the Affront you have put upon me;
which is, by never appearing before me again.
If you.think proper to confine me to my Cham-
ber, by continuing here any longer, you will
add

<page 69>
46 The FEMALE Book I.
add Disobedience to the Crime by which you
have already mortally offended
Arabella.
The Superscription of this Letter, and the un-
common Style of it, persuaded Mr. Glanvillt,
that what he had been foolish enough to resent
as an Affront, was designed as a Jest, and
meant to divert him as well as herself: He exa-
mined her Behaviour again, and wondered at
his Stupidity in not discovering it before. His
Resentment vanishing immediately, he returned
to the House ; and went, without Ceremony,
to Arabella's Apartment, which he entered be-
fore she perceived him, being in a profound
Musing at one of the Windows: The Noise he
made, in approaching her, obliged her at last
to look up; when, starting, as if she had seen a
Basilisk, she flew to her Closet, and, shutting the
Door with great Violence, commanded him to
leave her Chamber immediately.
Mr. Glanville, still supposing her in Jest, in-
treated her to open the Door; but, finding she
continued obstinate, Well, said he, going away,
I shall be revenged on you some time hence,
and make you repent the Tricks you play me
now.
Arabella not being able to imagine any thing,
by these Words he spoke in Raillery, but that
he really, in the Spite and Anguish of his Heart,
threatened her with executing some terrible En-
terprise; she did not doubt, but he either in-
tended to carry her away; or, thinking her
Aversion to him proceeded from his having a
Rival happy enough to be esteemed by her, those
2 mysterious

<page 70>
Chap. 9. QJJ I X O T E. 47
mysterious Words he had uttered related to his
Design of killing him; so that as she knew, he
could discover no Rival to wreak his Revenge
upon, she seared, that, at once to satisfy that
Passion as well as his Love, he would make him-
self Master of her Liberty: For, in fine, said she
to Lucy, to whom she communicated all her
Thoughts, have I not every thing to apprehend
from a Man, who knows so little how to treat
my Sex with the Respect which is our Due;
and. who, after having, contrary to the timorous
Nature of that Passion, insulted me with a free
Declaration of Love, treated my Commands
with the utmost Contempt by appearing before
me again ; and even threatens me with the Re-
venge he is meditating at this Moment?
Had Mr. Glanville been present, and heard
the terrible Misfortunes which she presaged from
the sew Words he had jestingly spoke, he would
certainly have made her quite furious, by the
Diversion her Mistake would have afforded him.
But the more she reflected on his Words, the
more she was persuaded of the terrible Purpose
of them.
'Twas in vain to acquaint her Father with
the Reasons she had for disliking his Choice : His
Resolution was fixed, and if she did not volun-
tarily conform to it, she exposed herself to the
Attempts of a violent and unjust Lover, who
would either prevail upon the Marquis to lay
a Force upon her Inclinations, or make himself
Master of her Person, and never cease perse-
cuting'her, till he had obliged her to give him
her Hand.
Having

<page 71>
4 8 7& FEMALE Book I.
Having reasoned herself into a persect Con-
viction that all these things must necessarily hap-
pen, she thought it both just and reasonable to
provide for her own Security, by a speedy Flight:
The Want of a Precedent, indeed, for an Action
of this Nature, held her a sew Moments in Sus-
pense; for she did not remember to have read
of any Heroine that voluntarily left her Father's
House, however persecuted she might be; but she
considered, that there was not any of the Ladies
in Romances, in the fame Circumstances with
herself who was without a favoured Lover, for
whose sake it might have been believed she had
made an Elopement, which would have been
highly prejudicial to her Glory; and, as there
was no Foundation for any Suspicion of that
Kind in her Case, she thought there was no-
thing to hinder her from withdrawing from a ty-
rannical Exertion of parental Authority, and the
secret Machinations of a Lover, whose Aim was
to take away her Liberty, either by obliging her
to marry him, or by making her a Prisoner.
Chap. X.
Contains several Incidents, in which the
Reader is expecjed to be extremely inte-
rested.
A
'RA BELLA had spent some Hours in her
Closet, revolving a thousand different
Stratagems to escape from the Misfortune that
c threatened

<page 72>
Chap. io. Q^U I X O T E. 49
threatened her, when she was interrupted by
Lucy, who, after desiring Admittance, informed
her, that the Marquis, having rode out to take
the Air that Evening, had fallen from his Horse
and received some Hurt; that he was gone to
Bed, and desired to see her.
Arabella, hearing her Father was indisposed,
ran to him, excessively alarmed; and reflecting
on the Resolution she had just before taken, of
leaving him, which aggravated her Concern,
she came to his Bedside with her Eyes swiming in
Tears. Mr. Glanville was sitting near him; but,
rising at her Appearance to give her his Chair,
which she accepted without taking any Notice
of him, he stood at some Distance contem-
plating her Face, to which Sorrow had given
so many Charms, that he gazed on her with an
Eagerness and Delight that could not escape her
Observation.
She blushed excessively at the passionate Looks
he gave her; and, finding the Marquis's Indis-
position not considerable enough to oblige her
to a constant Attendance at his Bed-side, she took
the first Opportunity of returning to her Cham-
ber; but, as she was going out, Glanville pre-
sented his Hand to lead her up Stairs: Which
she scornfully refusing;
Sure, Cousin, said he, a little piqued, you
are not disposed to carry on your ill-natured Jest
any further?
If you imagined I jested with you, said Ara-
bella, I am rather to accuse the Slowness of your
Understanding, for your persisting in treating
me thus freely, than the Insolence I first im-
puted it to: But, whatever is the Cause of it,
Vol. I. D I

<page 73>
5o The FEMALE
I now tell you again, that you have extr
offended me; and, if my Father's Illness
not set Bounds to my Resentment at present,
.would make you know, that I would not fitffer
the Injury you do me, so patiently.
Since you would have me to believe you are sei.
rious, replied Glanville, be pleased to let me
know what Offence it is you complain of; for
I protest I am quite at a Loss to understand
you.
Was it not enough, resumed Arabella, to af-
front me with an insolent Declaratiori of your
Passion, but you must also, in Contempt of my
Commands to the contrary, appear before me
again, pursue me to my Chamber, wad use the
most brutal Menaces to me?
Hold, pray, Madam, interrupted Glanville*
and suffer me to ask you, If it is my Presump-
tion, in declaring myself your Admirer that
you are so extremely offended at f
Doubtless it is, Sir, answered Arabella; and
such a Presumption, as, without the aggravating
Circumstances you have since added to it, is suf-
ficient to make me always your Enemy.
I beg Pardon, returned Mr. Glanville gravely,
for that Offence; and also, for staying any
longer in a House, which you have, so gen^
teelly, turned me out of.
My Pardon, Mr. Glanville, resumed she, is
not so easily gained: Time, and your Repent-
ance, may, indeed, do much towards obtaining
it.
Saying this, she made a Sign to him to retire;
for he had walked up with her to her Chamber:
But, finding he did not .obey her, for really fae
was

<page 74>
Chap. i0. QJJIXOTE. 5i
Was quite unacquainted with these Sorts of dumb
Commands, she hastily retired to her Closet, left
he should attempt to move her Pity, by any E*-
pressions of Despair for the cruel Banishment Ihe
had doomed him to.
Mr. Gkaviik, seeing she had shut herself up
in her Closet, left her Chamber, and retired to
his own, more confounded than ever at the Be-
haviour of his Cousin.
Her bidding him so peremptorily to leave the
House, would have equally persuaded him of
her Ignorance and Ill-breeding, had not the Ele-
gance of her Manners, in every other respect,
proved the contrary: Nor was it possible to doubt
she had a great Share of Understanding; since
her Conversation, singular as some of her Sen-
timents seemed to him, was far superior to most:
other Ladies. Therefore, he concluded, the
Affront he had received proceeded from her
Disdain to admit the Addresses of any Person,
whose Quality was inserior to her's; which,
probably, was increased by some particular Dis-
like she had to his Person.
His Honour would not permit him to make
Use of that Advantage her Father's Authority
could give him; and, wholly engrossed by his
Resentment of the Usage he had received from
her, he resolved to set out for London the next
Day without seeing the Marquis, from whom
he was apprehensive of some Endeavours to de-
tain him.
Having taken this Resolution, he ordered his
Servant to have the Horses ready early in the
Morning; and, without taking any Notice of
iiis Intention, he left the Castle, riding, as fast
D 2 as

<page 75>
52 7k? FEMALE Book I.
as possible, to the next Stage, from whence he
wrote to his Uncle; and, dispatching a Messen-
ger with his Letter, held on his Way to Lon-
don.
The Marquis, being pretty well recovered
from his Indisposition by a good Night's Reft,
sent for Mr. Glanville in the Morning, to walk
with him, as was his Custom, in the Garden;
but, hearing he had rode out, tho' he imagined
.it was only to take the Air, yet he could not
help accusing him, in his own Thoughts, of a
little Neglect; for which he resolved to chide
him, when he returned: But his long Stay fill-
ing him with some Surprize, he was beginning
to express his Fears that something had befallen
him, to Arabella, who was then with him; when
a Servant presented him the Letter, which Mr.
Glanville's Messenger had that Moment brought.
The Marquis casting his Eyes on the Di-
rection, and knowing his Nephew's Hand, Blels
me, cried he, extremely surprised, What can
this mean? Bella, added he, here's a Letter
from your Cousin.
Arabella, at these Words, started up; and,
preventing her Father, with a respectful Action,
from opening it, I beseech you, my Lord, said
she, before you read this Letter, suffer me to
assure you, that, if it contains any thing fatal,
I am not at all accessary to it: 'Tis true I have
banished my Cousin, as a Punishment for the
Offence he was guilty of towards me; but, Hea-
ven is my Witness, I did not desire his Death;
and if he has taken any violent Resolution against
himself, he has greatly exceeded my Com-
mands.

<page 76>
Chap. to. QJJIXOTE. 53
The Marquis, whose Surprise was considera-
bly increased by these Words, hastily broke
open the Letter, which she perceiving, hurried
out of the Room; and, locking herself up in
her Closet, began to bewail the Effect of her
Charms, as if she was persectly assured of her
Cousin's Death.
The Marquis, however, who, from Lady
Bella's Exclamation, had prepared himself for the
Knowledge of some very extraordinary Accident,
was less surprised, than he would otherwise have
been, at the Contents; which were as follow:
My Lord,
AS my leaving your House so abruptly will
certainly make me appear guilty of a most
unpardonable Rudeness, I cannot dispense with
myself from acquainting your Lordship with the
Cause; though, to spare the Reproaches Lady
Bella will probably cast on me for doing so, I
could wish you knew it by any other Means.
But, my Lord, I value your Esteem too much
to hazard the Loss of it by suffering you to ima-
gine, that I am capable of doing any thing to
displease you. Lady Bella was pleased to ordet
me to stay no longer in the House; and menaced
me with some very terrible Usage, if I disobeyed
her: She used so many other contemptuous Ex-
pressions to me, that, I am persuaded, I shall
never be so happy as to possess the Honour you
designed for,
My Lord
Your most obedient, tsftt
Charles Glarrv'tlle.
D 3 When

<page 77>
54 tbi FEMALE Book I.
When the Marquis had read this Letter, he
went to his Daughter's Apartment with an In-
tention to chide her severely for her Usage of his
Nephew) but, seeing her come to meet him
with her Eyes bathed in Tears, he insensibly.
lost some Part of his Resentment.
Alas! my Lord, said she, I know you come
prepared to load me with Reproaches, upon my
Cousin's Account; but, I beseech your Lord-
ship, do not aggravate my Sorrows: Tho' I ba-
nished Mr. Glanville, I did not desire his Death $
and, questionless, if he knew how I resent it,
his Ghost would be satisfied with the Sacrifice
I make him.
The Marquis, not being able to help smiling
at this Conceit, which he saw had so strongly
possessed her Imagination, that she had no fort
tor Doubt but that her Cousin was dead, asked
her, If she really believed Mr. Glanville loved
her well enough to die with Grief at her ill Usage
of him?
If, said she, he loves me not well enough to
die for me, he certainly loves me but little; and
I am the less obliged to him.
But I desire to know, interrupted the Mar-
quis, For what Crime it was you took the Li-
berty to banish him from my House?
I baniflied him, my Lord, resumed she, fof
his Presumption in telling me he loved me.
That Presumption, as you call it, tho' I
know not for what Reason, said the Marquis,
was authorized by me: Therefore, know, Bella t
that I not only permit him to love you, but I
also e\pect you should endeavour to return his
Affection; and look upon him as the Man
whom

<page 78>
Chap. 10. QJJ 1XOTE. 55
whom I design for your Husband: There's his
Letter, pursued he, putting it into her Hand.
I blush for the Rudeness you have been guilty
of; but endeavour to repair it, by a more ob-
liging Behaviour for the future: I am going to
fend after him immediately to prevail upon him
to return : Therefore, write him an Apology, I
charge you; and have it done by the Time my
Messenger is ready to set out.
Saying this, he went out of the Room; Ara-
bella eagerly opened the Letter; and, finding it
in a Style so different from what she expected,
her Dislike of him returned with more Violence
than ever.
Ah! the Traitor! said she aloud, Is it thus
that he endeavours to move my Compassion?
How greatly did I over-rate his Affection, when
I imagined his Despair was capable of killing
him? Disloyal Man! pursued she, walking
about, Is it by Complaints to my Father that
thou expectest to succeed? And dost thou ima-
gine the Heart of Arabella is to be won by Vio-
lence and Injustice?
In this manner she wasted the Time allotted
1 for her to write; and, when the Marquis sent
for her Letter, having no Intention to comply,
she went to his Chamber, conjuring him not to
oblige her to a Condescension so unworthy of
her.
The Marquis, being now excessively angry
with her, rose up in a Fury, and, leading her
to his Writing-Desk, ordered her, instantly, to
write to her Cousin.
If I must write, my Lord, said she, sobbing,
pray be so good as to dictate what I must fay.
D 4 Ape-

<page 79>
56 7&FEMALE Book h
Apologize for your rude Behaviour, said the
Marquis; and desire him, in the most obliging
manner you can, to return.
Arabella, seeing there was a necessity for obey-
ing, took up the Pen, and wrote the following
Billet:
i
the unfortunate Arabella, to the most ungenerous
Glanville.
T T is not by the Power I have over you, that
JL I command you to return, for I disclaim any
Empire over so unworthy a Subject ; but, since
it is my Father's Pleasure I should invite you
back, . I must let you know, that I repeal your
Banishment, and expect you will immediately
return with the Messenger who brings this; how-
ever, to spare your Acknowledgments, know,
that it is in Obedience to my Father's absolute
Commands, that you receive this Mandate
from
Arabella.
Having finished this Billet, she gave it to the
Marquis to read; who, finding a great deal of
his own Haughtiness of Temper in it, could not
resolve to check her for a Disposition so like his
©wn: Yet he told her, her Stile was veiy uncom-
mon : And pray, added he smiling, who taught
you to superscribe your Letters thus, " The un-
". fortunate Arabella, to the most ungenerous
"Glanville ?" Why, Bella, this Superscription is
wholly calculated for the Bearer's Information:
But come, alter it immediately; for I don't
choose my Messenger should knpw, that you
"axe
J'

<page 80>
Chap. i0. QU IX O TE. 57
are unfortunate, or that my Nephew is unge-
nerous.
Pray, my Lord, replied Arabella, content
yourself with what I have already done in Obe-
dience to your Commands, and suffer my Letter
to remain as it is: Methinks it is but reasonable
I should express some little Resentment at the
Complaint my Cousin has been pleased to make
to you against me; nor can I possibly make my
Letter more obliging, without being guilty of
an unpardonable Meanness.
You are a strange Girl, replied the Marquis,
taking the Letter, and inclosing it in one from
himself; in which he earnestly intreated his
Nephew to return, threatning him with his
Displeasure, if he disobeyed; and assuring him,
that his Daughter would receive him as well as
he could possibly desire.
The Messenger being dispatched, with Orders
to ride Post, and overtake the young Gentle-
man, he obeyed his Orders so well, that he came
up with him at—, where he intended to lodge
that Night.
Mr. Glanville, who expected his Uncle would
make use of some Methods to recall him, opened,
his Letter without any great Emotion; but see-
ing another inclosed, his Heart leaped to his
Mouth, not doubting but it was a Letter from
Arabella; but the Contents surprised htm so.
much, that he hardly knew whether he ought to.
look upon them as an Invitation to return, or
a new Affront, her Words were so distant and
haughty. The Superscription being much the
fame with a Billet he had received from her in.
the Garden, which had made him conclude her
D 5 in

<page 81>
58 ^FEMALE Book I.
in Jest, he knew not what to think of it: One
would swear this dear Girl's Head is turned,
said he to himself, if she had not more Wit than
her whole Sex besides.
After reading Arabella's Letter several times,
he at last opened his Uncle's; and, seeing the
pressing Instances he made him to return, he
resolved to obey; and the next Morning set out
for the Castfe.
Arabella, during the time her Cousin was
expected, appeared so melancholy and reserved,
that the Marquis was extremely uneasy: You
have never, said he to her, disobeyed me in any
one Action of your Lise ; and I may with reason
expect you will conform tomy Will in theChoice
I have made of a Husband for you, since it is
impossible to make any Objection either to his
Person or Mind; and, being the Son of my
Sister, he is certainly not unworthy of you, tho'
he has not a Title.
My first Wish, my Lord, replied Arabella, is
to live single, not being desirous of entering into
any Engagement which may hinder my Solici-
tude ana Cares, and lessen my Attendance, upon
the best of Fathers, who, till now, has always
most tenderfy complied with my Inclinations
in every thing: But if it is your absolute Com-
mand, that I should marry, give me not to one
who, tho' he has the Honour to be allied to you,
has neither merited your Esteem, or my Favour,
by any Action worthy of his Birth, or the Pas-
sion he pretends to have for me; for, in fine,
my Lord, by what Services has he deserved the
Distinction with which you honour him? Has
he ever delivered you from any considerable
Danger?


<page 82>
Chap, i o. QUIXOTE.
59
Danger? Has he saved your Lise, and hazarded
his own, for you, upon any Occasion whatever?
Has he merited my Esteem, by his Sufferings,
Fidelity, and Respect; or, by any. great and
you, think not so unworthily of your Daughter,
as to bestow her upon one who has done so
little to deserve her: If my Happiness be dear
to you, do not precipitate me into a State from
whence you cannot recal me, with a Person
whom I can never affect.
She would have gone on, but the Marquis in-
terrupted her sternly: I'll hear no more, said
he, of your foolish and ridiculous Objections:
What Stuff is this you talk of? What Service
am I to expect from my Nephew? And by
what Sufferings is he to merit your Esteem?
Assure yourself, Arabella, continued he, that
I will never pardon you, if you presume to treat
my Nephew in the Manner you have done: I
perceive you have no real Objection to make tc*
him; therefore I expect you will endeavour to
obey me without Reluctance; for, since you
seem to be so little acquainted with what will
most conduce to your own Happiness, you must
not think it strange, if I insist upon directing
your Choice in the most important Business of
your Lise.
Arabella was going to reply; but the Marquis
ordered her to be silent; and she went to her
own Apartment in so much Affliction, that she
thought her Misfortunes were not exceeded by
any she had ever read.

D 6
Chap.

<page 83>
6o ^FEMALE Book I.
Chap. XI.
In which a logical Argument is unseason-
ably interrupted.
THE Marquis was also extremely uneasy
at her Obstinacy: He desired nothingmore
ardently than to marry her to his Nephew; but
he could not resolve to force her Consent; and,
however determined he appeared to her, yet,
in Reality, he intended only to use Persuasions
to effect what he desrred; and, from the natural
Sweetness of her Temper, he was sometimes
not without Hopes, that she might, at last, be
prevailed upon to comply.
His Nephew's Return restored him to Part of
his usual Tranquillity: After he had gently chid
him for suffering himself to be so far transported
with his Resentment at the little Humours of a
Lady, as to leave his House, without acquaint-
ing him, he bid him go to Arabella, and en-
deavour to make his Peace with her.
Mr. Glanville accordingly went to her Apart-
ment, resolving to oblige her to eome to some
Explanation with him concerning the Offence
she complained of; but that fair incensed Lady,
who had taken Shelter in her Closet, ordered
Lucy to teH him she was indisposed, and could
not see him.
Glanville, however, comforted' himself for
this Disappointment by the Hopes of seeing her
at Supper; and accordingly {he came, when the
Supper-Bell rung, and, making avery cool Com-
pliment to her Cousin, placed herself at Table.:
The.

<page 84>
Chap. n. QUIXOTE. 6?
The soft Languor that appeared in her Eyes,
gave such an additional Charm to one of the
loveliest Faces in the World, that Glanville,
who fat opposite to her, could not help gazing
on her with a very particular Attention; he
often spoke to her, and asked her trifling Ques-
tions, for the fake of hearing the Sound of her
Voice, which Sorrow had made inchantingly
sweet.
When Supper was over, she would have re-
tired; but the Marquis desired her to stay and
entertain her Cousin, while he went to look over
some Dispatches he had received from London.
Arabella blushed with Anger at this Com-
mand; but not daring to disobey, she kept her
Eyes fixed on the Ground, as if she dreaded to
hear something that would displease her.
Well, Cousin, said Glanville, tho' you desire
to have no Empire over so unworthy a Subject
as myself, yet I hope you are not displeased at
my returning, in Obedience to your Commands.
Since I am not allowed any Will of my own,
said she, sighing, it matters not whether I am
pleased, or displeased; nor is it of any Conse-
quence to you to know.
Indeed but it is, Lady Bella, interrupted he;
for if I knew how to please you, I would never,
if I could help. it, offend. Therefore, I beg you,
tell me how I have disobliged you; for, certain-
ly, you have treated me as harshly as if I had
been guilty of some very terrible Offence.
You had the Boldness, said she, to talk to
me of Love; and you well know that Persons
of my Sex and Quality are not permitted to
listen!

<page 85>
62
the FEMALE Book I.
listen to such Discourses; and if, for that Of-
sence, I banished you my Presence, I did no
more than Decency required of me; and which
I would yet do, were I Mistress of my own
Actions.
But is it possible, Cousin, said Glanville, that
you can be angry with any one for loving you?
Is that a Crime of so high a Nature as to merit
an eternal Banishment from your Presence?
Without telling you, said Arabella, blushing,
whether I am angry at being loved, *tis sufficient
you know, that I will not pardon the Man who
shall have the Presumption to tell me he loves me.
But, Madam, interrupted Glanville, if the
Person who tells you he loves you, be of a
Rank not beneath you, I conceive you are not
at all injured by the favourable Sentiments he
seels for you; and, tho' you are not disposed to
make any Returns to his Passion, yety ou are cer-
tainly obliged to him for his good Opinion.
Since Love is not voluntary, replied Arabella,
I am not obliged to any Person for loving me;
for, questionless, if he could help it, he would.
If Lt is not a voluntary Favour, interrupted
Glanville, it is not a voluntary Offence; and, if
you do not think yourself obliged by the one,
neither are you at Liberty to be offended with
the other.
The Question, said Arabella, is not whether
I ought to be offended at being loved, but
whether it is not an Offence to be told I am so.
If there is nothing criminal in the Passion it-
self, Madam, resumed Glanville, certainly there
can be no Crime hi declaring it
Howevex

<page 86>
Chap. n. QU I X OT E. 63
However specious your Arguments may appear,
interrupted Arabella, I am persuaded it is an un-
pardonable Crime to tell a Lady you love her;
and, tho' I had nothing else to plead, yet the
Authority of Custom is sufficient to prove it.
Custom, Lady Bella, laid Glanvilie, smiling,
is wholly on my Side; for the Ladies are so far
from being displeased at the Addresses of their
Lovers, that their chiesest Care is to gain them,
and their greatest Triumph to hear them talk of
their Passion: So, Madam, I hope you'll allow
that Argument has no Force.
I don't know, answered Arabella, what Sort
of Ladies they are who allow such unbecoming
Liberties, but I am certain, that Statira, Pa-
risatis, delta, Mandana, and all the illustrious
Heroines of Antiquity, whom it is a Glory
to resemble, would never admit of such Dis-
courses.
Ah for Heaven's lake, Cousin, interrupted
Glanvilie, endeavouring to stifle a Laugh, do not
suffer yourself to be governed by such antiquated
Maxims! The World is quite different to what
it was in those Days; and the Ladies in this
Age would as soon follow the Fashions of the
Greek and Roman Ladies, as mimick their Man-
ners; and I believe they would become one as
ill as the other.
I am sore, replied Arabella, the World is not
more virtuous now than it was in their Days,
and there is good Reason to believe it is not
much wiser; and I don't see why the Manners
of this Age are to be preserred to those of for-
mer ones, unless they are wiser and better i
However, I cannot be peisuaded, that Things

<page 87>
64 Tif FEMALE Book I.
are as you fay, but that when 1 am a little better
acquainted with the World, I shall find as marry
Persons who resemble Oroondates, Artaxerxes,
and the illustrious Lover of delta, as those
who are like Tiribases, Artaxes, and the pre-
suming and insolent Glanville.
By the Epithets you give me, Madam, said
Glanville, I find you have placed me in very.
bad Company: But pray, Madam, if the illus-
trious Lover of Clelia had never discovered his
Passion, how would the World have come to
the Knowledge of it?
He did not discover his Passion, Sir, resumed
Arabella, till, by the Services he did the noble
Clelius, and his incomparable Daughter, he
could plead some Title to their Esteem: He se-
veral times preserved the Lise of that renowned
Roman; delivered the beautiful Clelia when
she was a Captive; and, in fine, conserred (b
many Obligations upon them, and all their
Friends, as he might well expect to be par-
doned by the divine Clelia for daring to love
her. Nevertheless, she used him very harshly,
when he first declared his Passion, and banished
him also from her Presence; and it was a long
time before she could prevail upon herself to
compassionate his Sufferings.
The Marquis coming in interrupted Ara-
bella; upon which she took Occasion to retire;
leaving Glanville mote captivated with her than,
ever.
He found her Usage of him was grounded
upon Examples she thought it her Duty to fol-
low; and, strange as her Notions of Lise ap-
peared, yet they were supported with so much
WLt

<page 88>
Chap. i2. QUIXOTE. 65
Wit and Delicacy, that he could not help ad-
miring her, while he foresaw, the Oddity of her
Humour would throw innumerable Difficulties
in his Way, before he should be able to obtain
her.
However, as he was really passionately ill
Love with her, he resolved to accommodate
himself, as much as possible, to her Taste, and
endeavour to gain her Heart by a Behaviour
most agreeable to her: He therefore assumed an
Air of great Distance and Respect; never men-
tioned his Affection, nor the Intentions of her
Father in his Favour; and the Marquis, ob-
serving his Daughter conversed with him with
less Reluctance than usual, leaving to Time,
and the Merit of his Nephew, to dispose her to
comply with his Desires, resolved not to inter-
pose his Authority in an Affair upon which her
own Happiness so much depended.
Chap. XII.
In which the Reader will find a Specimen
of the true Pathetic, in a Speech of
Oroondates.—The Adventure of the
Books.
ylRABELLA saw the Change in her
Cousin's Behaviour with a great deal of
Satisfaction; for she did not doubt but his Passion
was as strong as ever; but that he forebore,
thro' Respect, from entertaining her with any
Expres-

<page 89>
66
^FEMALE Book I.
Expressions of it: Therefore she now conversed
with him with the greatest Sweetness and Com-
plaisance: She would walk with him for several
Hours in the Garden, leaning upon his Arm;
and charmed him to the last Degree of Admira-
tion by the agreeable Sallies of her Wit, and
her fine Reasoning upon every Subject he pro-
posed.
It was with the greatest Difficulty he restrain-
ed himself from telling her a Thousand times a
Day that he loved her to Excess, and conjuring
her to give her Consent to her Father's Designs
in his Favour: But, tho' he could get over
his Fears of offending her, yet it was impossible
to express any Sentiments of this Nature to her,
without having her Women Witnesses of his
Discourse; for when he walked with her in
the Garden, Lucy, and another Attendant, al-
ways followed her: If he fat with her in her
own Chamber, her Women were always at one
End of it: And, when they were both in the
Marquis's Apartment, where her Women did
not follow her, poor GlanvilU found himself
embarrassed by his Presence ;. for, conceiving
his Nephew had Opportunities enough of talk-
ing to his Daughter in private, he always partook
of their Conversation.
He passed some Weeks in this Manner, ex-
tremely chagrined at the little Progress he made;
and was beginning to be heartily weary of the
Constraint he laid upon himself, when Arabella,
one Day, furnished him, without designing it,
with an Opportunity of talking to her on the
Subject he wished for.
When

<page 90>
Chap. i2. QUIXOTE. 67
Whfen I reflect, said she, laughing, upon the
Difference there was between us some Days
ago, and the Familiarity in Which we live at
present, I cannot imagine by what means you
have arrived to a good Fortune you had so little
Reason to expect; for, in fine, you have given
me no Signs of Repentance for the Fault you
committed, which moved me to banish you;
and I am not certain whether, in conversing
with you in the manner I do, I give you not as
much Reason to find Fault with my too great
Easiness, as you did me to be displeased with
your Presumption.
Since, returned Glanville, I have not persisted
in the Commission of those Faults which dis-
pleased you, what greater Signs of Repentance
can you desire, than this Reformation in my Be-
haviour?
But Repentance ought to precede Reforma-
tion, replied Arabella; otherwise, there is great
room to suspect it is only seigned : And a sincere
Repentance shews itself in such visible Marks,
that one can hardly be deceived in that which is
genuine. I have read of many indiscreet Lovers,
who not succeeding in their Addresses, have
pretended to repent, and acted as you do; that
is, without giving any Signs of Contrition for
the Fault they had committed, have eat and
slept well, never lost their Colour, or grew one
bit thinner, by their Sorrow; but contented
themselves with saying they repented; and,
without changing their Disposition to renew
their Fault, only concealed their Intention, for
sear of losing any favourable Opportunity of
committing it again: But true Repentance, as
I was

<page 91>
68 The FEMALE Book t
I was saying, not only produces Reformation,
but the Person who is possessed of it voluntarily
punishes himself for the Faults he has been
guilty of. Thus Mazares, deeply repenting of
the Crime his Passion for the divine Mandana
had forced him to commit; as a Punishment,
obliged himself to follow the Fortune of his
glorious Rival; obey all his Commands; and,
fighting under his Banners, assist him to gain
the Possession of his adored Mistress. Such a
glorious Instance of Self-denial was, indeed, a
sufficient Proof of his Repentance; and infi-
nitely more convincing than the Silence he im-
posed upon himself with respect to his Passion.
Oroondates, to punish himself for his Pre-
sumption, in daring to tell the admirable Statira,
that he loved her, resolved to die, to expiate
his Crime; and, doubtless, would have done sp,
if his fair Mistress, at the Intreaty of her Bro-
ther, had not commanded him to live.
But pray, Lady Bella, interrupted Glanvi/le,
were not these Gentlemen happy at last in the
Possession of their Mistresses?
Doubtless they were, Sir, resumed she; but
it was not till after numberless Misfortunes, in-
finite Services, and many dangerous Adventures,
in which their Fidelity was put to the strongest
Trials imaginable.
I am glad, however, said Glanville, that the
Ladies were not insensible; for, since you do
not disapprove of their Compassion for their
Lovers, it is to be hoped you will not be always
as inexorable as you are now.
When I shall be so fortunate, interrupted ihe,
to meet with a Lovex who shall have as pure
and

<page 92>
Chap. i2. Q.U IX OTE. 69
and persect a Passion for me, as Oroondates had
for Statira; and give me as many glorious
Proofs of his Constancy and Affection, doubt-
less I shall not be ungrateful: But, since I have
not the Merits of Statira, I ought not to pre-
tend to her good Fortune; and shall be very
well contented if I escape the Persecutions which
Persons of my Sex, who are not frightfully ugly,
are always exposed to, without hoping to inspire
such a Passion as that of Oroondates.
I should be glad to be better acquainted with
the Actions of this happy Lover, Madam, said
Glanville; that, forming myself upon his Ex-
ample, I may hope to please a Lady as worthy
of my Regard as Statira was of his.
. For Heaven's fake, Cousin, resumed Arabella,
laughing, how have you spent your Time;
and to what Studies have you devoted all your
Hours, that you could find none to spare for
the Perusal of Books from which all useful
Knowledge may be drawn ; which give us the
most shining Examples of Generosity, Courage,
Virtue, and Love; which regulate our Actions,
form our Manners, and inspire us with a noble
Desire of emulating those great, heroic, and
virtuous Actions, which made those Persons so
glorious in their Age, and so worthy Imitation
in ours? However, as it is never too lute to
improve, suffer me to recommend to you the
reading of these Books, which will soon make
you discover the Improprieties you have been«
guilty of; and will, probably, induce you to
avoid them for the future.
I shall certainly read them, if you desire it,
said Glanville \ and I have so great an Inclina-
tion

<page 93>
70 the FEMALE Book I.
tion to be agreeable to you, that I shall embrace
every Opportunity of becoming (o; and will
therefore take my Instructions from these Books,
if you think proper, or from yourself; which,
indeed, will be the quickest method of teaching
me.
Arabella having ordered oae of her Women
to bring Cleopatra, Caffandra, Clelia, and the
Grand Cyrus, from her Library, Glanville no
sooner saw the Girl return, jinking under the
Weight of those voluminous Romances, but he
began to tremble at the Apprehension of his
Cousin laying her Commands upon him to read
them; and repented of his Complaisance, which
exposed him to the cruel Necessity of performing
what to him appeared an Herculean Labour, or
else incurring her Anger by his Refusal.
Arabella, making her Women place the Books
upon a Table before her, opened them, one
after another, with Eyes sparkling with Delight;
while Glanville fat wrapt in Admiration at the
Sight of so many huge Folio's written, as he
conceived, upon the most trifling Subjects ima-
ginable.
I have chosen out these sew, said Arabella
(not observing his Consternation) from a great
many others, which compose the most valuable
Part of my Library ; and, by that time you
have gone thro' these, I imagine you will be
considerably improved.
Certainly, Madam, replied Glanville, turn-
ing over the Leaves in great Confusion, one
may, as you fay, be greatly improved; for these
Books contain a great deal: And, looking over
a Page of CaJJandra, without any Design, read
2 these

<page 94>
Chap. i2. QJJIXOTE. 7i
these Words, which were Part of Oroondates's
Soliloquy when he received a cruel Sentence
from Statira: .
M Ah cruel \ (fays this miserable Lover,) and
** what have I done to merit it? Examine the
"Nature of my Offence, and you will see I am
"not so guilty, but that my Death may free me
from Part of that Severity: Shall your Hatred
"last longer than my Lise ? And can you detest
*.< a Soul that forsakes its Body only to obey
t* you? No, no, you are not so hard-hearted;
"that Satisfaction will, doubtless, content you:
* Awl, when I shall cease to be, doubtless I
*' shall cease to be odious to you."
Upon my Soul, said Glanville, stifling a
Laugh with great Difficulty, I cannot help
blaming the Lady this sorrowful Lover com-
plains of, for her great Cruelty; for here he
gives one Reason to suspect, that she will not
even be contented with his dying in Obedience
to her Commands, but will hate him after
Death; an Impiety quite inexcusable in a
Christian!
You condemn this illustrious Princess with
very little Reason, interrupted Arabella, smiling
at his Mistake ; for, besides that she was not a
Christian, and ignorant of those Divine Maxims
of Charity and Forgiveness, which Christians,
by their Prosession, are obliged to practise, she
was very far from desiring the Death of Oroon-
dates; for, if you will take the Pains to read
the succeeding Passages, you will find, that she
expresses herself in the most obliging Manner in
the World 4 for when Oroondates tells her he
would live, if Ihe would consent he should, the
Princess

<page 95>
7z Me FEMALE Book I.
Princess most sweetly replies, "I not only con-
"sent, but also intreat it; and, if I have any
"Power, command it." However, lest you
should fall into the other Extreme, and blame
this great Princess for her Easiness (as you be-
fore condemned her for her Cruelty), 'tis neces-
sary you should know how she was induced to
this favourable Behaviour to her Lover : There-
fore pray read the whole Transaction. Stay!
here it begins, continued she; turning over a
good many Pages, and marking where he should
begin to read.
Glanville, having no great Stomach to the
Task, endeavoured to evade it, by intreating
his Cousin to relate the Passages she desired he
should be acquainted with : But she declining it,
he was obliged to obey ; and began to read
where she directed him : And, to leave him at
Liberty to read with the greater Attention, she
left him, and went to a Window at another
End of the Chamber.
Mr. Glanville, who was not willing to dis-
please her, examined the Task she had set him,
resolving, if it was not a very hard one, to
comply ; but, counting the Pages, he was quite
terrified at the Number, and could not prevail
upon himself to read them : Therefore glancing
them over, he pretended to be deeply engaged
in reading, when, in Reality, he was contem-
plating the surprising Effect these Books had
produced in the Mind of his Cousin; who,
had she been untainted with the ridiculous
Whims they created in her Imagination, was,
in his Opinion, one of the most accomplished
Ladies in the World.
When

<page 96>
Chap. i2. Q.UIXOTE. 73
When he had sat long enough to make her
believe he had read what she had desired, he
rose up, and joining her at the Window, began
to talk of the Pleasantness of the Evening, in-
stead of the Rigour of Statira.
Arabella coloured with Vexation at his ex-
treme Indifference in a Matter which was of
such prodigious Consequence, in her Opinion;
but disdaining to put him in mind of his Rude-
ness, in quitting a Subject they had not tho-
roughly discussed, and which me had taken so
much rains to make him comprehend, she con-
tinued silent; and would not condescend to af-
ford him an Answer to any thing he said.
Glanville, by her Silence and Frowm, was
made sensible of his Fault; and, to repair it,
began to talk of the inexorable Statira, though,
indeed, he did not well know what to fay.
Arabella, clearing up a little, did not disdain
to answer him upon her favourite Topic: I
knew, said Ihe, you would be ready to blame
this Princess equally for her Rigour and her
Kindness; but it must be remembered that,
what she did in Favour of Oroandates, was
wholly owing to the Generosity of Artaxerxeu
Here she stopped, expecting Glanville to give
his Opinion; who, strangely puzzled, replied
at random, To be sure, Madam, he was a very
generous Rival.
Rival! cried Arabella; Artaxerxes the Rival
of Oraondates ! Why certainly you have lost your
Wits : He was Statira's Brother; and it was to
his Mediation that Oroondates, or Orontes, owed
his Happiness.
Vol. L E . Cer-

<page 97>
74 7& FEMALE BookL
Certainly, Madam, replied Glanville, it was
very generous in Artaxerxes, as he was Brother
to Statira, to interpose in the Behalf of an un-
fortunate Lover; and both Oroondates, and
Orontes, were extremely obliged to him.
Orontes, replied Arabella, was more obliged
to him than Oroondates ; since the Quality of
Orontes was infinitely below that of Oroondates.
But, Madam, interrupted Glanville (extreme-
ly pleased at his having so well got over the Dif-
ficulty he had been in), which of these two
Lovers did Statira make happy?
This unlucky Question immediately informed
Arabella, that she had been all this time the
Dupe of her Cousin; who, if he had read a
single Page, would have known that Orontes
and Oroondates was the fame Person; the Name
of Orontes being assumed by Oroondates, to con-
ceal his real Name and Quality.
The Shame and Rage she conceived at ft*
glaring a Proof of his Disrespect, and the Ridi-
cule to which she had exposed herself, were so
great, that she could not find Words severe
enough to express her Resentment; but, pro-
testing that no Consideration whatever should
oblige her to converse with him again, she or-
dered him instantly to quit her Chamber; and
assured him, if he ever attempted to approach
her again, she would submit to the most terri-
ble Effects of her Father's Resentment, rather
than be obliged to see a Person who had, by his1
unworthy Behaviour, made himself her Scorn
and Aversion.
Glanville, who saw himself going to be dis-
carded a second time, attempted, with great
Sub-

<page 98>
Chap. i3. QUIXOTE. 75
Submission, to move her to recal her cruel Sen-
tence; But Arabella, bursting into Tears, com-
plained so pathetically of the Cruelty of her De-
stiny, in exposing her to the hated Importunities
of a Man she despised, and whose Presence was
so insupportable, that Glanville, thinking it best
to let her Rage evaporate a little before he at-
tempted to pacify her, quitted her Chamber;
cursing Statira and Orontes a thousand times,
and loading the Authors of those Books with all
the Imprecations his Rage could suggest.
Chap. XIII.
The Adventure of the Books continued.
IN this Temper he went to the Gardens to
pass over the Chagrin this unfortunate Acci-
dent had given him; when, meeting the Mar-
quis, who insisted upon knowing the Cause of
that ill Humour, so visible in his Countenance,
Glanville related all that had passed, but, in
Spite of his Anger, it was impossible for him
to repeat the Circumstances of his Disgrace with-
out laughing, as well as the Marquis; who
thought the Story so extremely diverting, that
he would needs hear it over again.
However, Charles, said he, though I shall do
what I can to gain your Pardon from Bella, yet
I shall not scruple to own you acted extremely
wrong, in not reading what she desired you;
for, besides losing an Opportunity of obliging
her, you drew yourself into a terrible Dilemma;
E 2 for

<page 99>
76 The FEMALE Book I.
for how was it possible for you to evade a Dis-
covery of the Cheat you put upon her, when
she began to talk with you upon those Passages
she had desired you to read?
I acknowledge my Error, my Lord, answered
Glanville; but if you restore me to my Cousin's
Favour again, I promise you to repair it by a
different Behaviour for the future.
I'll see what I can do for you, said the Mar-
quis; leaving him, to go to Arabella's Apart-
ment, who had retired to her Closet, extremely
afflicted at this new Insult she had received
from her Cousin: Her Grief was. the more
poignant, as she was beginning to imagine, . by
the Alteration in his Behaviour, that he would
prOve such a Lover as she wished; for Mr.
Glanville's Person and Qualifications had at-
tracted her particular Notice: And, to speak
jn the Language of Romance, she did not hate
him; but, on the contrary, was very much
disposed to wilh him well: Therefore, it was no
Wonder she extremely resented the Affront she
had received from him.
The Marquis not finding her in her Chamber,
proceeded to her Closet, where her Women
informed him she was retired; and, knocking
gently at the Door, was admitted by Arabella,
whom he immediately discerned to have been
weeping very much ; for her fine Eyes were red
and swelled, and the Traces of her Tears might
still be observed on her fair Face; which, at the
Sight of the Marquis, was overspread with a
Blush, as if she was conscious of her Weak-
ness in lamenting the Crime her Cousin had been
guilty of.
The

<page 100>
Chap. i3. QJJIXOTE. 77
The Marquis drew a favourable Omen for his
Nephew from her Tears and Confusion ; but,
not willing to increase it, by acknowledging he
had observed it, he told her he was come, at
Mr. Gianville's Request, to make up the Quar-
rel between them.
Ah! my Lord, interrupted Arabella. speak
no more to me of that unworthy Man, who
has so grosly abused my Favour, and the Pri-
vilege I allowed him: His Baseness and Ingrati-
tude are but too manisest; and there is nothing
I so much regret a$ my Weakness in restoring
him to Part of my good Opinion, after he had
once forseited it, by an Insolence not to be pa-
ralleled.
Indeed, Bella, said the Marquis, smiling, you
resent too deeply these slight Matters: I can't
think my Nephew so guilty as you would have
me believe he is -T and you ought neither. to be
angry or surprised, that he preserred your Con-
versation before reading in aibolish old-fashioned
Book that you put in his Hands.
If your Lordship had ever read these Books,
replied Arabella., reddening with Vexation, 'tis
probable you would have another Opinion of
them; but however that may be, my Cousin is
not to be excused for the Contempt he shewed
to my Commands; and for daring, by the Cheat
he put on me, to expose me to the Shame of
seeing myself so ridiculously imposed upon.
However, you must forgive him, said the
Marquis ; and I insist upon it, before I quit your
Apartment, that you receive him into Favour.
Pardon me, my Lord, replied Arabella; this
is what I neither can, nor ought to do; and I
E 3 hope

<page 101>
78 FEMALE Book L
hope you will not wrong me so much as to
continue to defire it.
Nay, Bella, said he, this is carrying Thing*
too far, and making trifling Disputes of too
£ieat Consequence: I am surprised at your
Treatment of a Man whom, after all, if ever
you intend to obey me, you must consent to
marry.
There is no Question, my Lord, replied she,
but it would be my Glory to obey you in what-
ever is possible; but this you command me now
to do, not being so, I conceive you will rather
impute my Refusal to Necessity, than Choice.
How! returned the Marquis, will you en-
deavour to persuade me, that it is not possible
Mr. Glanville should be your Husband?
'Tis impossible he should be so with my Con-
sent, resumed Arabella; and I cannot give it
without wounding my own Quiet in a most
sensible manner.
Come, come, Bella, said the Marquis (fret-
ting at her extreme Obstinacy), this is too much:
I am to blame to indulge your Foibles in this
Manner: Your Cousin is worthy of your Af-
section, and you cannot refuse it to him with-
out incurring my Displeasure.
Since my Affection is not in my own Power
to bestow, said Arabella, weeping, I know not
how to remove your Displeasure ; but, question-
less, I know how to die, to avoid the Effects
of what would be to me the most terrible Mis-
fortune in the World.
Foolish Girl! interrupted the Marquis, how
strangely do you talk? Are the thoughts of

<page 102>
Chap. i3. QUIXOTE. 79
Death become so familiar to you, that you speak
of dying with so little Concern?
Since, my Lord, resumed me, in an exalted
Tone, I do not yield, either in Virtue or Courage,
to many others of my Sex, who, when perse-
cuted like me, have fled to Death for Relief, I
know not why I mould be thought less capable
of it than they; and if Artimisa, Candace, and
the beautiful Daughter of Cleopatra, could brave
the Terrors of Death for the fake of the Men
they loved, there is no Question but I also could
imitate their Courage, to avoid the Man I have
so much Reason to hate.
The Girl is certainly distracted, interrupted
the Marquis, excessively enraged at the strange
Speech she had uttered: These foolish Books my
Nephew talks of have turned her Brain! Where
are they? pursued he, going into her Chamber:
I'll burn all I can lay my Hands upon.
Arabella, trembling for the Fate of her Books,
followed her Father into the Room; who seeing
the Books which had caused this woful Ad-
venture lying upon the Table, he ordered one
of her Women to carry them into his Apart-
ment, vowing he would commit them all to the
Flames.
Arabella not daring, in the Fury he was in,
to interpose, he went out of the Room, leaving
her to bewail the Fate of so many illustrious
Heroes and Heroines, who, by an Effect of a
more cruel Tyranny than any they had ever ex-
perienced before, were going to be cast into the
merciless Flames; which would, doubtless, pay
very little Regard to the divine Beauties of the
admirable Clelia, or the heroic Valour of the
E 4» brave

<page 103>
So The FEMALE, &c. Book I.
brave Orontes; and the rest of those great
Princes and Princesses, whose Actions Arabella
proposed for the Model of hers.
Fortune, however, which never wholly for-
sook these illustrious Personages, rescued them
from so unworthy a Fate, and brought Mr.
Glanvilli into the Marquis's Chamber just as he
was giving Orders to have them destroyed.
END of the First Book.
THE

<page 104>
[ 8i J

THE
Female QjJ ixote.
BOOK II.
C H A P. I.
In which the Adventure of the Books ts
happily concluded.
HE Marquis, as soon as he saw
Mr. Glanville, told him he was
resolved to cure Arabella of her
Whims, by burning the Books
that had put them into her Head:
I have seized upon some of them, pursued he,
smiling; and you may, if you please, wreak
your Spite upon these Authors of your Disgrace,
by burning them yourself.

E 5
Though.

<page 105>
82 7^ FE MALE Book II.
Though I have all the Reason in the World
to be enraged with that Incendiary Statira, said
Glanv'ill e laughing, for the Mischief she has
done me; yet I cannot consent to put such an
Affront upon my Cousin, as to burn her fa-
vourite Books: And now I think of it, my Lord,
pursued he, I'll endeavour to make a Merit with
Lady Bella by saving them: Therefore spare
them, at my Request, and let me carry them
to her. I shall be quite unhappy till we are
Friends again.
You may do as you will, said the Marquis;
but I think it encouraging her in her Follies to
give them to her again.
. GlanviUe, without replying, eagerly took up
the Books, for sear the Marquis should change
his Mind; and, highly delighted with the Op-
pa rtunity he had got of making his Peace with
Lady Bella, ran to her Apartment, loaded with
these kind Intercessors; and, making his Way by
Lucy, who would have opposed him, penetrated
even into the Closet of the melancholy Fair-one,
who was making bitter Reflections on the Cru-
elty of her Destiny, and bewailing her Loft
with a Deluge of Tears.
As ridiculous as the Occasion of these Tears
was, yet Glanville could not behold them with-
eut being affected: Assuming, therefore, a Coun-
tenance as fad as he was able, he laid the Books
before her; and told her, he hoped she would
excuse his coming into her Presence without
her Permission, since it was only to restore her
those Books, whose Loss she seemed so greatly
to lament; and added, that it wag with much
Difficulty he prevailed upon the Marquis not to
i bum

<page 106>
Chap. r. QUIXOTE. 83
burn them immediately; and his Fears, that he
might really do as he threatened, made him
snatch them up, and bring them, with so little
Ceremony, into her Closet.
Arabella, whose Countenance brightened into
a Smile of pleasing Surprize at the Sight of her
recovered Treasure, turned her bright Eyes upon
Glanville with a Look. of Complacency that went
to his Heart.
I well perceive, said she, that, in exaggera-
ting the Merit of this little Service you have done.
me, you expect I should suffer it to cancel your
past Offences: I am not ungrateful enough to
be insensible of any Kindness that is shewn me;
and, tho' I might be excused for suspecting it
was rather Policy than Friendship, that induced
you to seek my Satisfaction, by saving these in-
nocent Victims of my Father's Displeasure, ne-
vertheless I pardon you upon the Supposition,.
that you will, for the future, avoid all Occasion:
of offending me.
At these Words, she made a Sign to him to
be gone, searing the Extravagance of his Joy
would make him throw himself at her Feet to
thank her for the infinite Favour she had con-
ferred upon him ; but, finding he seemed dis-
posed to stay longer, she called one of her Wo-
men into the Closet; and, by some very signi-
ficant Frowns, gave Glanville to understand his
Stay was displeasing; so that he left herewith a
very low Bow, highly pleased at her having
repealed his Banishment; and, assured the Mar-
quis, that nothing could have happened more
fortunate for. him, than his intended Disposal of
E 6. htsr.

<page 107>
84 ^ FEMALE Book II.
his Daughter's Books, since it had proved the
Means ot restoring him to her Favour.
Chap. II.
Which contains a very natural Incident.
FROM this Time Mr. Glanville, tho' he
was far from coming up to Lady Bella's
Idea of a Lover, yet, by the Pains he apparently
seemed to be at in obliging her, made every
Day some Progress in her Esteem. The Mar-
quis was extremely pleased at the Harmony
which subsisted between them ; tho' he could
have wished to have seen their Marriage advance
a little faster ; but Glanville., who was better ac-
quainted with Arabella's Foible than the Mar-
quis, assured him, he would ruin all his Hopes,
if he pressed her to marry; and intreated him
to leave it intirely to him, to dispose her to con-
sent to both their Wishes.
The Marquis was satisfied with his Reasons,
and resolving not to importune hi« Daughter,
upon that Subject, any more, they lived for
fomt Months in a persect Tranquillity 5 to which
an Illness the Marquis was seized with, and
which was, from the first, thought to be dan-
gerous, gave a fad Interruption.
Arabella's extreme Tenderness upon this Oc-
casion» her anxious Solicitude, her pious Cares,
and never-ceasing Attendance at the Bedside of
her sick Father, were so many new Charms,
i . that

<page 108>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 85'
that engaged the Affection of Glanvill e more
strongly. As the Marquis's Indisposition in-
creased, so did her Care and Assiduity: She would
not allow any one to give him any thing but her-
self; bore all the pettish Humours of a sick Man
with a surprizing Sweetness and Patience; watched
whole Nights, successively, by his Bedside; and
when, at his Importunity, she consented to take
any Rest, it was only upon a Couch in his
Chamber, from whence no Intreaties could
make her remove. Mr. Glanvill e partook with
her in these Fatigues; and, by his Care of her
Father, and Tenderness for her, confirmed her
in the Esteem she had entertained of him.
The Marquis, who had struggled with the Vi-
olence of his Distemper for a Fortnight, died
on the Fifteenth Day in the Arms of Arabella,
who received his last Looks} his Eyes never re-
moving themselves from her Face, till they were
closed by Death. Her Spirits, which the De-
sire she had of being useful to him, had alone
supported, now failed her at once ; and she sell
upon the Bed, without Sense or Motion, as soon
as she saw him expire.
Mr. Glanville, who was kneeling on the other
Side, and had been holding one of his Uncle's
Hands, started up in the most terrible Conster-
nation, and, seeing the Condition she was in,
flew to her Relief: Her Women, while he sup-
ported her, used all the Endeavours they could
think of to recover her; but she continued so
long in her Swoon, that they apprehended she
was dead; and Glanvill e was resigning himself
up to the most bitter Sorrow, when she opened
her Eyes; but it was only to close them again.

<page 109>
86 7"^ FEMALE Book U*
Her Faintings continued the whole Day; and
the Physicians declaring she was in great Danger,
from her extreme Weakness, she was carried
to Bed in a Condition that seemed to promise
very little Hopes of her Lise.
The Care of the Marquis's Funeral devolving
upon Mr. Glanville, he sent a Messenger express
for his Father, who was appointed Guardian
to Lady Bella; the Marquis having first asked
her if she was willing it should be so. This
Gentleman arrived Time enough to be Witness
of that fad Ceremony, which was performed
with a Magnificence suitable to the Birth and
Fortune of the Marquis.
Lady Bella kept her Bed several Days, and
her Lise was thought to be in Danger; but her
Youth, and the Strength of her Constitution,
overcame her Disease; and, when she was so
well recovered as to be able to admit of a Visit
from her Uncle, Mr. Glanville sent for Permis-
sion to introduce him: The afflicted Arabella
granted his Request; but, being then more in-
disposed than usual, she intreated they would de-
fer their Visit for an Hour or two, which they
complied with; and, returning at the appointed
Time, were conducted into her Dressing-Room
by Lucy, who informed them her Lady was jult
fallen into a Slumber.
Mr. Glanville, who had not seen her for
some Days, expected her waking with great
Impatience; and pleased himself with describing
her, with a Lover's Fondness, to his Father,
when the Sound of her Voice in the next Room
interrupted him.
Chap*.

<page 110>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 87
Chap. III.
Which treats of a consolatory Visits and
other grave Matters.
ARABELLA, being then awaked from her
Slumber, was indulging her Grief by Com-
plaints, which her Women were so used to hear,
that they never offered to disturb her. Merci-
less Fate! said she, in the most moving Tone
imaginable, Cruel Destiny! that, not contented
with having deprived my Infancy of the soft
Cares, and tender Indulgences, of a Mother's
Fondness, has robbed me of the only Parent I
had left, and exposed me, at these early Years,
to the Grief of losing him, who was not only
my Father, but my Friend, and Protector of
my Youth!
Then, pausing a Moment, she renewed her
Complaints with a deep Sigh: Dear Relics of
the best of Fathers! pursued she, Why was it
not permitted me to bathe you with my Tears?
Why were those sacred Remains of him, from
whom I drew my Lise, snatched from my Eyes,
ere they had poured their Tribute of Sorrow
over them? Ah! pitiless Women! said she to
her Attendants, you prevented me from per-
forming the last pious Rites to my dear Father!
You, by your cruel Care, hindered me from
easing my fad Heart, by paying him the last
Duties he could receive from me! Pardon, O
dear and sacred Shade of my loved Father!
pardon this unwilling Neglect of thy afflicted
Child,

<page 111>
88 ^FEMALE Book II.
Child, who, to the last Moment of her wretched
Lise, will bewail thy Loss!
Here she ceased speaking; and Mr. Glanville,
whom this Soliloquy had much less confounded
than his Father, was preparing to go in, and
comfort her; when the old Gentleman stopping
him with a Look of great Concern: My Niece
is certainly much worse than we apprehend,
said he: She is in a Delirium: Our Presence may,
perhaps, discompose her too much.
No, Sir, replied Glanville, extremely con-
fused at this Suspicion; my Cousin is not so bad
as you suppose: It is common enough for Peo-
ple in any great Affliction to ease themselves by
Complaints.
But these, replied the Knight, are the strangest
Complaints I ever heard, and savour so much of
Phrensy, that I am persuaded her Head is not
quite right.
Glanville was going to reply, when Lucy, en-
tering, told them her Lady had ordered their
Admission: Upon which they followed her into
Arabella's Chamber, who was lying neglU
gently upon her Bed.
Her deep Mourning, and the black Gawse,
which covered Part of her fair Face, was so ad-
vantageous to her Shape and Complexion, tfiat
Sir Charles, who had not seen her since she grew
up, was struck with an extreme. Surprize at her
Beauty, while his Son was gazing on her so
passionately, that he never thought of introducing
his Father to her, who contemplated her with
as much Admiration as his Son, though with less
Passion.
Arabella*

<page 112>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 89
Arabella, rising from her Bed, saluted her
Uncle with a Grace that wholly charmed him;
and turning to receive Mr. Glanville, shc burst
into Tears at the Remembrance of his having
assisted her in her last Attendance upon her Fa-
ther. Alas! Sir, said she, when we saw each
other last, we were both engaged, in a very
melancholy Office: Had it pleased Heaven to
have spared my Father, he would, doubtless,
have been extremely sensible of your generous
Cares; nor shall you have any Reason to accuse
me of Ingratitude, since I shall always acknow-
ledge your Kindness as I ought.
If you think you owe me any Obligation, re-
turned Glanville, pay me, dearest Cousin, by
yourself to sink too much under an Affliction
which is impossible to be remedied.
Alas! answered Arabella, my Grief is very
flight, compared to that of many others upon
the Death of their Relations: The Great Syfi-
gambh, who, questionless, wanted neither For-
titude nor Courage, upon the News of her
Grand-daughter's Death, wrapt herself up in her
Veil; and, resolving never more to behold the
Light, waited for Death in that Posture.
Menecrates, upon the Loss of his Wise, built
a magnificent Tomb for her; and, shutting him-
self up in it, resolved to pass away the Remain-
der of his Lise with her Ashes. These, in-
deed, were glorious Effects of Piety. and Affec-
tion, and unseigned Signs of an excessive Sor-
row: What are the sew Tears I fixed to such
illustrious Instances of Grief and Affection* as
these!
moderating

Sorrow: Indeed you suffer
Glanville,

<page 113>
go 7& FEMALE Book8.
Glanville, finding his Coufin upon this Strain,
blushed extremely, and would have changed the
Subject; but the old Gentleman, who had never
heard of these two Persons she mentioned, who
expressed their Sorrow for their Losses in so
strange a Manner, was surprised at it; and was
resolved to know more about them.
Pray, Niece, said he, were you acquainted
with these People, who could not submit to the
Dispensation of Providence, but, as one may
fay, flew in the Face of Heaven by their Impa-
tience?
I am very well acquainted with their History,
resumed Arabella; and I can assure you, they
were both very admirable Persons.
Oh! Oh! their History! interrupted the
Knight! What, I warrant you, they are to be
found in the Fairy Tales, and those fort of Books f
Well, I never could like such Romances, not
I; for they only spoil Youth, and put strange
Notions into their Heads.
I am sorry, resumed Arabella, blushing with
Anger, that we are like to differ in Opinion
upon so important a Point.
Truly, Niece, said Sir Charles, if we never
differ in any thing else, I shall be very easy about
this flight Matter; tho' I think a young Lady
of your fine Sense (for my Son praises you to
the Skies for your Wit) should not be so fond
of such ridiculous Nonsense as these Story. Books
are filled with.
Upon my Word, Sir, resumed Arabella, all the
Respect I owe you cannot hinder me from tell-
ing you, that 1 take it extremely ill you should,
in my Presence, rail at the finest Productions in
the

<page 114>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 9i
the World: I think we are infinitely obliged
to these Authors, who have, in so sublime a Style,
delivered down to Posterity the heroic Actions
of the bravest Men, and most virtuous of Wo-
men: But for the inimitable Pen of the famous
Scudery, we had been ignorant of the Lives of
many great and illustrious Persons: The war-
like Actions of Oroondates, Aronces, jfuba, and
the renowned Artaban, had, haply, never been
talked of in our Age; and those fair and chaste
Ladies, who were the Objects of their pure and
constant Passions, had still been buried in Obscu-
rity; and neither their divine Beauties, or sin-
gular Virtue, been the Subject of our Admira-
tion and Praise. But for the famous Scudery,
we had not known the true Cause of that Action
of CUlia's, for which the Senate decreed her a
Statue; namely, Her casting herself, with an
unparalleled Courage, into the Tyber, a deep
and rapid River, as you must certainly know,
and swimming to the other Side. It was not, as
the Reman Historians falfly report, a Stratagem to
recover herself, and the other Hostages, from the
Power of Porfena; it was to preserve her Ho-
nour from Violation by the impious Sextus,
who was in the Camp. But for Scudery, we had
still thought the inimitable Poetess Sappho to be
a loose Wanton, whose Verses breathed nothing
but unchaste and irregular Fires: On the con-
trary, she was so remarkably chaste, that she
would never even consent to marry; but, loving
Phaon, only with a Platonic Passion, obliged
him to restrain his Desires within the Compass
of a Brother's Affection. Numberless are the
Mistakes he has cleared up of this Kind; and
I que-

<page 115>
92 ^ FEMALE Book IL
I question, if any other Historian, but himself,
knew that Cleopatra was really married to "Julius
Cæsar; or that Casario, her Son by this Mar-
riage, was not murdered, as was supposed, by
the Order of Augujlus, but married the fair
Queen of Ethiopia, in whose Dominions he took
Refuge. The prodigious Acts of Valour, which
he has recounted of those accomplished Princes,
have never been equalled by the Heroes, of either
the Greek or Roman Historians: How poor and
insignificant are the Actions of their Warriors
to Scudery's, where one of those admirable He-
roes would put whole Armies into Terror, and
with his single Arm oppose a Legion!
Indeed, Niece, said Sir Charles, no longer
able to forbear interrupting her, these are all
very improbable Tales. I remember, when I
was a Boy, I was very fond of reading the Hi-
story of jack the Giant killer, and Tom Thumb;
and these Stories so filled my Head, that I really
thought one of those little Fellows killed Men an
hundred Feet high; and that the other, after a
great many surprising Exploits, was swallowed
up by a Cow.
You was very young, Sir, you fay, interrupted
Arabella tartly, when those Stories gained your
Belief.. However, your Judgment was certainly
younger, if you ever believed them at all; for
as credulous as you are pleased to think me, I
should never, at any Age, have been persuaded
such Things could have happened.
My Father, Madam, said Glanville, who
was strangely confused all this Time, bore Arms
in his Youth; and Soldiers, you know, never
trouble themselves much with reading.
Has

<page 116>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 93
Has my Uncle been a Soldier, said Arabella,
and does he hold in Contempt the Actions of
the bravest Soldiers in the World?
The Soldiers you speak of, Niece, said Sir
Charles, were indeed the bravest Soldiers in
the World; for I don't believe, they ever had
their Equals.
And yet, Sir, said Arabella, there are a great
Number of such Soldiers to be found in Scudery.
Indeed, my dear Niece, interrupted Sir Charles,
they are to be found no-where else, except in
your Imagination, which, I am sorry to see, is
filled with such Whimsies.
If you mean this to affront me, Sir, resumed
Arabella, hardly able to forbear Tears, I know
how far, as my Uncle, I ought to bear with
you: But, methinks, it is highly unkind to ag-
gravate my Sorrows by such cruel Jests 5 and,
since I am not in an Humour to suffer them,
don't take it ill, if I intreat you to leave me to
myself.
Mr. Glanvllle, who knew nothing pleased his
Cousin so much as paying an exact Obedience
to her Commands, rose up immediately; and,
bowing respectfully to her, asked his Father, If
he should attend him into the Gardens?
The Baronet, who thought Arabella's Beha-
viour bordered a good deal upon Rudeness, took
his Leave with some Signs of Displeasure upon
his Countenance; and, notwithstanding all his
Son could fay in Excuse for her, he was ex-
tremely offended.
What, said he, to Mr. Glamnlle, does she
so little understand the Respect that is due to me
as her Uncle, that she, so peremptorily, desired
. . me

<page 117>
94 fbe FEMALE Bbok II.
me to leave her Room? My Brother was to
blame to take so little Care of her Education;
she is quite a Rustic!
Ah! don't wrong your Judgment so much,
Sir, said Glanville; my Cousin has as little of
the Rustic as if she had passed all her Lise in a
Court: Her fine.Sense, and the native Elegance
of her Manners give an inimitable Grace to her
Behaviour; and as much exceed the studied Po-
liteness of other Ladies I have conversed with,
as the Beauties of her Person do all I have ever
seen.
She is very handsome, I consess, returned Sir
Charles; but I cannot think so well of her Wit
as you do; for methinks me talks very oddly,
and has the strangest Conceits! Who, but her-
self, would think it probable that one Man
could put a whole Army to Flight; or commend
a foolish Fellow for living in a Tomb, because
his Wise was buried in it? Fie, fie! these are
filly and extravagant Notions, and will make
her appear very ridiculous.
Mr. Glanville was so sensible of the Justness
of this Remark, that he could not help sighing;
which his Father observing, told him, That,
since she was to be his Wise, it was his Business
to produce a Reformation in her; for, added
he, notwithstanding the immense Fortune she
will bring you, I should be sorry to have a
Daughter-in-law, for whom I should blush as
often as she opens her Mouth.
I assure you, Sir, said Mr. Glanville, I have
but very little Hopes, that I shall be so happy as
to have my Cousin for a Wise; for tho' it was
my Uncle's Command I sliould make my Ad-
dresses

<page 118>
Chap. 3. QJJIXOTE. 95
dresses to her, she received me so ill, as a Lover,
that I have never dared to talk to her upon that
Subject since.
And pray, resumed Sir Charles, upon what
Terms are you at present?
While I seem to pretend nothing to her, as a
Lover, replied Mr. Gkmville, she is very oblig-
ing, and we live in great Harmony together;
but I am persuaded, if I exceed the Bounds of
Friendship in my Prosessions, she will treat me
extremely ill.
But, interrupted Sir Charles, when she shall
know, that her Father has bequeathed you one
Third of his Estate, provided she don't many .
you, 'tis probable her Mind may change; and
you may depend upon it, since your Heart is so
much set upon her, that, as I am her Guardian,
I shall press her to perform the Marquis's Will.
Ah! Sir, resumed Mr. Glatruille, never at-
tempt to lay any Constraint upon my Cousin in
an Affair of this Nature: Permit me to tell you,
it would be an Abuse of the Marquis's generous
Confidence, and what I would never submit
to.
Nay, nay, said the old Gentleman, you have
no Reason to sear any Compulsion from me:
Tho' her Father has left me her Guardian, till
she is of Age, yet it is with such Restriction,
that my Niece is quite her own Mistress in that
Respect; for tho' she is directed to consult me
in her Choice of an Husband, yet my Consent
is not absolutely necessary. The Marquis has
certainly had a great Opinion of his Daughter's
Prudence; and I hope, she will prove herself
worthy of it by her Conduct.
Mr.

<page 119>
96 7& FEMALE Book II.
Mr. GlanvilU was so taken up with his Re-
flections upon the State of his Affairs, that he
made but little Reply; and, as soon as he had
disengaged himself, retired to .his Chamber, to
be at more Liberty to indulge his Meditations.
As he could not flatter himself, with having
made any Impression upon the Heart of Arabella,
he foresaw a thousand Inconveniences from the
Death of the Marquis; for, besides that he lost
a powerful Mediator with his Cousin, he seared
that, when she appeared in the World, her
Beauty and Fortune would attract a Croud of
Admirers, among whom, it was probable, flie
would find some one more agreeable to her
Taste than himself. As he loved her with great
Tenderness, this Thought made him extremely
uneasy; and he would sometimes wilh the Mar-
quis had laid a stronger Injunction upon her in
his Will to marry him; and regretted the little
Power his Father had over her: But he was too
generous, to dwell long upon these Thoughts,
and contented himself with resolving to do all that
was honourable to obtain her, without seeking
for any Assistance from unjustifiable Methods.
Chap. IV.
Which contains some common Occurrences,
but placed in a new Light.
ARABELLA, in a sew Days, leaving her
Chamber, had so many Opportunities of
charming her Uncle by her Conversation,
which,

<page 120>
Chap. 4. aU I X O T E. 97
which, when it did not turn upon any Incident
in her Romances, was persectly fine, easy, and
entertaining, that he declared, he should quit
the Castle with great Regret; and endeavoured
to persuade her to accompany him to Town:
But Arabella, who was determined to pasi the
Year of her Mourning, in the Retirement Ihc
had always lived in, absolutely refused, strong
as her Curiosity was, to fee London.
Mr. Glanville secretly rejoiced at this Reso-
lution, tho' he seemed desirous of making her
change it; but she was unalterable; and, there-
fore, the Baronet did not think proper to press
her any more.
Her Father's Will being read to her, she
seemed extremely pleased with the Article in fa-
vour of Mr. Glanville, wishing him Joy of the
Estate that was bequeathed to him, with a most
inchanting Sweetness.
Mr. Glanville sighed, and cast his Eyes on
the Ground, as he returned her Compliment,
with a very low Bow; and Sir Charles, observ-
ing his Confusion, told Arabella, that he thought
it was a very bad Omen for his Son, to wish
him Joy of an Estate, which he could not come to
the Possession of, but by a very great Misfortune.
Arabella, understanding his Meaning, blushed;
and, willing to change the Discourse, proceeded
to consult her Uncle upon the Regulation of her
House. Besides the Legacies her Father had
bequeathed to his Servants, those, who were
more immediately about his Person, she desired,
might have their Salaries continued to them:
She made no other Alteration, than discharging
these Attendants, retaining all the others; and
Vol. I. F sub-

<page 121>
98 The FEMALE BookIJ.j
submitting to her Uncle the Management of he.
Estates, receiving the Allowance he thought
proper to assign her, till she was of Age, of
which she wanted three Years.
Every Thing being settled, Sir Charles pre-
pared to return to Town. Mr. Glanville, sW
desired nothing so much as to stay some tiA
longer with his Cousin in her Solitude, got »..>
Father to intreat that Favour for him of Ara-
bella: But she represented to her Uncle the Im- |
propriety of a young Gentleman's staying with
her, in her House, now her Father was dead,
in a manner so genteel and convincing, that
Sir Charles could press it no further; and all
that Mr. Glanville could obtain, was a Permis-
sion to visit her some time after, provided he
could prevail upon his Sister, Miss Charlotte
Glanville, to accompany him.
The Day of their Departure being come, Sir
Charles took his Leave of his charming Niece,
with many Expressions of Esteem and Affection;
and Mr. Glanville appeared so concerned, that
Arabella could not help observing it; and bade
him adieu with great Sweetness.
When they were gone, she found her Time
hung heavy upon her Hands; her Father was
continually in her Thoughts, and made her ex-
tremely melancholy: She recollected the many
agreeable Conversations she had had with Glan-
ville; and wished it had been consistent with
Decency to have detained him. Her Books
being the only Amusement she had lest, she ap-
plied herself to reading with more Eagerness
than ever; but, notwithstanding the Delight
she took in this Employment, she had so many
Hours of Solitude and Melancholy to indulge

<page 122>
Chap. 4. QJUIXOTE. 99
the Remembrance of her Father in, that she
was very far from being happy.
As she wished for nothing more passionately
than an agreeable Companion of her own Sex
and Rank, an Accident threw a Person in her
_iy, who, for some Days, afforded her a little
musement. Stepping one Day out of her Coach,
..o go into Church, she saw a young Lady enter,
accompanied with a middle.aged Woman, who
seemed to be an Attendant. As Arabella had'
never seen any one, above the Rank of a Gen-
tleman Farmer's Daughter, in this Church., her
Attention was immediately engaged by the Ap-
pearance of this Stranger, who was very mag-
nificently dressed: Tho' ihe did not seem to be
more than eighteen Years of Age, her Stature
was above the ordinary Size of Women; and,
being rather too plump to be delicate, her Mien
was so majestic, and such an Air of Grandeur
was diffused over her whole Person, joined to
the Charms of a very lovely Face, that Arabella
could hardly help thinking she saw the beautiful
Candace before her, who, by Scudery's Descrip-
tion, very much resembled this Fair one.
Arabella, having heedfully observed her Looks,
thought she saw a great Appearance of Melan-
choly in her Eyes, which nlled her with a gene^
rous Concern for the Misfortunes of so admira-
ble a Person; but, the Service beginning, she
was not at Liberty to indulge her Reflections
upon this Occasion, as she never suffered any
Thoughts, but those of Religion, to intrude
upon her Mind, during these pious Rites.
As she was going out of Church she observed
the young Lady, attended only with the Wo-
man who came with her, preparing to walk
F 2 home,
'232088

<page 123>
1 00
the FE MALE Book II.
home, and therefore stept forward, and, salu-
ting her with a Grace peculiar to herself, in-
treated her to come into her Coach, and give
her the Pleasure of setting her down at her own
House: So obliging an Offer from a Person of
Arabella's Rank could not fail of being received
. with great Respect by the young Lady, who was
not ignorant of all the Forms of Good-breeding;
and, accepting her Invitation, she stepped into
the Coach; Arabella obliging her Woman to
come in also, for whom, as she had that Day only
Lucy along with her, there was Room enough.
As they were going home, Arabella, who
longed to be better acquainted, intreated the
fair Stranger, as she called her, to go to the Ca-
stle, and spend the Day with her; and she con-
senting, they passed by the House where she
lodged, and alighted at the Castle, where Ara-
bella welcomed her, with the most obliging Ex-
pressions of Civility and Respect. The young
Lady, tho' persectly versed in the Modes of
Town-Breeding, and nothing-meaning Ceremo-
ny, was at a Loss how to make proper Returns
to the Civilities of Arabella: The native Elegance
and Simplicity of her Manners were accompa-
nied with so much real Benevolence of Heart,
such insinuating Tenderness, and Graces so ir-
resistible, that shc was quite oppressed with
them; and, having spent most of her Time be-
tween her Toilet and Quadrille, was so little
qualified for partaking a Conversation so refined
as Arabella's, that her Discourse appeared quite
tedious to her, since it was neither upon Fa-
shions, Assemblies, Cards, or Scandal,
Her Silence, and that Absence of Mind, which
slie betrayed, made Arabella conclude, she was
under

<page 124>
Chap. 4. QJJIXOTE. i0i
under some very great Affliction; and, to amuse
her after Dinner, led her into the Gardens, sup-
posing a Person, whose Uneasiness, as she did
not doubt, proceeded from Love, would be
pleased with the Sight of Groves and Streams,
and be tempted to disclose her Misfortunes,
while they wandered in that agreeable Privacy.
In this, however, she was deceived 5 for, tho' the
young Lady sighed several times, yet, when she
did speak, it was only of indifserent things, and
not at all in the manner of an afflicted Heroine.
After observing upon a thousand Trifles, she
told Arabella at last, to whom she was desirous
of making known her Alliance to Quality, that
these Gardens were extremely like those of her
Father's in-Law, the Duke of at
At this Intimation, she expected Arabella
would be extremely surprised; but that Lady,
whose Thoughts were always familiarized to Ob-
jects of Grandeur, and would not have been
astonished, if she had understood her Guest was
the Daughter of a King, appeared so little moved,
that the Lady was piqued by her Indifference;
and, after a sew Moment's Silence, began to
mention going away.
Arabella, who was desirous of retaining her a
few Days, intreated her so obligingly to favour
her with her Company, for some time, in her
Solitude, that the other could not refuse; and,
dispatching her Woman to the House where she
lodged, to inform them of her Stay at the Castle,
would have dispensed with her coming again to
attend her, had not Arabella insisted upon the
contrary.
The Reserve, which the Daughter-in-Law
of the Duke of still continued to main ain,
F 3 not-

<page 125>
102 The F E M AX E Book II.
notwithstanding the repeated Expressions of
Friendship Arabella used to her, increased her
Curiosity to know her Adventures, which she
was extremely surprised, she had never offered
to relate; but, attributing her Silence, upon this
Head, to her Modesty, she was resolved, as was
the Custom in those Cases, to oblige her Wo-
man, who, she presumed, was her Confidante,
to relate her Lady's History to her; and send-
ing for this Person one Day, when she was
alone, to attend her in her Closet, she gave
Orders to her Women, if the fair Stranger came
to inquire for her, to fay she was then busy, but
would wait on her as soon as possible.
After this Caution, she ordered Mrs. Morris
to be admitted; and, obliging her to sit down,
told her, me lent for her in order to hear from
her the History of her Lady's Lise, which &e
was extremely desirous of knowing.
Mrs. Morris, who was a Person of Sense,
and had seen the World, was extremely surprised
at this Request of Arabella, which was quite
contrary to the Laws of Good-breeding; and,
as she thought, betrayed a great deal of imperti-
nent Curiosity : She could not tell how to account
for the free Manner in which she desired her to
give up her Lady's Secrets, which, indeed, were
not of a Nature to be told; and appeared so
much confused, that Arabella took Notice of it;
and, supposing it was her Balhfulnefs which
caused her Embarrassment, she endeavoured to
re-assure her by the most affable Behaviour ima-
ginable.
Mrs. Morris, who was not capable of much
Fidelity for her Lady, being but lately taken
into

<page 126>
Chap. 4. QJJ I X O T E. i03
into her Service, and not extremely fond of her,
thought she had now a fine Opportunity of re-
commending herself to Arabella, by telling her
all she knew of Miss Groves, for that was her
Name; and, therefore, told her, since she was
pleased to command it, she would give her what
Account she was able of her Lady; but in-
treated her to be secret, because it was of great
Consequence to her, that her Affairs should not
be known.
I always imagined, said Arabella, that your
beautiful Mistress had some particular Reason
for not making herself known, and for coming
in this private Manner into this Part of the
Country: You may assure yourself therefore,
that I will protect her as far as I am able, and
offer her all the Assistance in my Power to give
her: Therefore you may acquaint me with her
Adventures, without being apprehensive of n
Discovery that would be prejudicial to her.
Mrs. Morris,. who had been much bettec
pleased' with the Assurances of a Reward for th'a
Intelligence she was going to give her, looked
a liule foolish at these fine Promises, in which she
bad no Share; and Arabella, supposing she was
endeavouring to recollect all the Passages of her
Lady's Lise, told her, She need not give herself
the Trouble to acquaint her with any thing that
passed during the Infancy of her Lady, but pro-
ceed to acquaint her with Matters of greater Im-
portance: And since, said she, you have, no
doubt, been most favoured with her Confidence,
you will do me a Pleasure to describe to me, ex-
actly, all the Thoughts of her Soul, as she haa
communicated them.to you, that I may the
better comprehend her History.
F 4 Chap.
. If

<page 127>
^FEMALE BookII.
C H A P. V.
The History of Miss Groves, interspersed
with some very curious Observations.
THOUGH, Madam, said Mrs. Morris,
I have not been long in Miss Groves's Ser-
vice, yet I know a great many Things by the
means of her former Woman, "who told them
to me, tho' my Lady thinks I am ignorant of
them; and I know that this is her second Trip
into the Country.
Pray, interrupted Æalelli, do me the Fa-
vour to relate Things methodically: Of what
Use is it to me to know that this is your Lady's
second Trip, as you call it, into the Country,
if I know not the Occasion of it? Therefore be-
gin with informing me, who were the Parents
of this admirable young Person.
Her Father, Madam, said Mrs. Morris, was
a Merchant; and, at his Death, left her a large
Fortune, and so considerable a Jointure to his
Wise, that the Duke of —, being then a Wi-
dower, was tempted to make his Addresses to
her. Mrs. Groves was one of the proudest Wo-
men in the World; and, this Offer flattering
her Ambition more than ever she had Reason to
expect, she married the Duke after a very short
Courtship; and carried Miss Groves down with
her to , where the Duke had a fine Seat,
and where she was received by his Grace's
Daughters, who were much about her own Age,
with great Civility. Miss Groves, Madam, was
then about twelve Years old, and was educated
with

<page 128>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. i05
with the Duke's Daughters, who, in a little
time, became quite disgusted with their new
Sister; for Miss Groves, who inherited her Mo-
ther's Pride, tho' not her Understanding, in all
things affected an Equality with those young
Ladies, who, Conscious of the Superiority of
their Birth, could but ill bear with her Insolence
jind Presumption. As they grew older, the Dif-
ference of their Inclinations caused perpetual
Quarrels amongst them; for his Grace's Daugh-
ters were serious, reserved, and pious. Miis
Groves affected noisy Mirth, was a great Romp,
and delighted in masculine Exercises.
The Duchess was often reflected on for suf-
fering her Daughter, without any other Com-
pany than two or three Servants, to spend great
Part of the Day in riding about the Country,
leaping over Hedges and Ditches, exposing her
fair Face to the Injuries of the Sun and Wind;
and, by those coarse Exercises, contracting a
masculine and robust Air not becoming her Sex,
and tender Years : Yet she could not be prevailed
upon to restrain her from this Diversion, till it
was reported, she had listened to the Addresses
of a young Sportsman, who used to mix in her
Train, when she went upon those Rambles, and
procured frequent Opportunities of conversing
with her.
There is a great Difference, interrupted Ara-
bella, in suffering Addresses, and being betrayed
into an involuntary Hearing of them, and this
last, I conceive to have been the Cale of your
Lady; for it is not very probable she would
Co far forget what she owed to her own Glory,
F 5 as

<page 129>
io6 ^FEMALE Book si.
as to' be induced to listen quietly to Discourses
like those you mention.
However, Madam, resumed Mrs. Morris,
the Duchess thought it necessary to keep her
more at home; but, even here she was not
without meeting Adventures, and found a Lo-
ver in the Person who taught her to write.
That, indeed, was a very notable Adventure,
said Arabella; but it is not strange, that Love
should produce such Metamorphoses: 'Tis not
very long ago, that I heard of a Man of Qua-
lity, who disguised himself in a poor Habit, and
worked in the Gardens of a certain Nobleman,
whose Daughter he was enamoured with: These
things happen every day.
The Person I speak of, Madam, said Mrs,
Morris, was never discovered to be any thing
better than a Writing-master; and yet, for all
that, Miss was smitten with his fine Person, and
was taking Measures to run away with him^.
when the Intrigue was discovered, the Lover
dismissed, and the young Lady, whose faulty
Conduct had drawn upon her her Mother's Dis-
like, was sent up to Linden, and allowed to be
her own Mistress at Sixteen; to which unpar-
donable Neglect of her Mother she owes the
Misfortunes that have since befallen her..
Whatever may be the common Opinion ©f
this Matter, interrupted Arabella again, I am
persuaded the Writing-master, as you call him,
was some Person of Quality, who made use of
that Device to get Access to his beautiful Mistress.
Love is ingenious in Artifices: Who would
have. thought, that, under the Name of Ahi£pus,
a am.-

<page 130>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. i07
a simple Attendant of the fair Artermsa Princess
of Armenia, the gallant Alexander Son of the great
and unfortunate Antony, by Qiieen Cleopatra*
was concealed, who took upon himself that.
mean Condition for the sake of seeing his adored
Princess ? Yet the Contrivance of Otontes, Prince
of the Maffhgetes. was far more ingenious, and
even dangerous; for this valiant and young
Prince, happening to see the Picture of the beau-
tiful thalejlrh, Daughter of the Qiieen of the
Amazons, he sell passionately in Love with her ;.
and, knowing that the Entrance into that Coun-
try was forbid to Men, he dressed himself irt
Womens Apparel; and, finding means to be
introduced to the Queen, and her fair Daughter,
whose Amity he gained by some very singular
Services in the Wars, he lived several Years un-
discovered in their Court: I see, therefore, no
Reason to the contrary, but that this Writing-
master might have been some illustrious Person,
whom Love had disguised ; and, lam persuaded,
added she, smiling, that I shall hear more of him
anon, in a very different Character.
Indeed, Madam, said Mrs. Morris, whom
this Speech of Arabella had extremely surprised,
I never heard any thing more about him, than
what I have related; and, for what I know, he
continues still to teach Writing; for I don't sup-
pose the Duchess's Displeasure could affect
him.
How is it possible, said Arabella, that you
can suppose such an Offence to Probability ?. In
my Opinion, 'tis much more likely, that this
unfortunate Lover is dead thro' Despair; or,
perhaps, wandering over the World in Search
F 6 of

<page 131>
To 8 . The FE M A L E Book II.
of that Fair one, who was ſnatched from his
Hopes. -
If it was his Deſign to ſeek for her, Madam,
reſumed Mrs. Morris, he need not have gone
far, ſince ſhe was only ſent to London, whither
he might eaſily have followed her.
There is no accounting for theſe Things, ſaid
Arabella : Perhaps he has been impoſed upon, and
made to believe, that it was ſhe herſelf that ba-
niſhed him from her Preſence: 'Tis probable too,
that he was jealous, and thought ſhe preferred
ſomeone of his Rivals to him. Jealouſy is inſepara-
ble from true Love; and the ſlighteſt Matters ima-
ginable will occaſion it: And, what is ſtill more
wonderful, this Paſſion creates the greateſt Diſ-
orders in the moſt ſenſible and delicate Hearts.
Never was there a more refined and faithful
Paſſion, than that of the renowned Artamenes for
Mandana; and yet this Prince was driven al-
moſt to Diſtraćtion by a Smile, which, he fan-
fied, he ſaw in the Face of his Divine Miſtreſs,
at a time when ſhe had ſome Reaſon to believe
he was dead; and he was ſo tranſported with
Grief and Rage, that, tho’ he was a Priſoner in
his Enemy's Camp, where the Knowlege of his
Quality would have procured him certain Death,
yet he determined to hazard all Things for the
ſake of preſenting himſelf before Mandana, and
upbraiding her with her Infidelity; when, in
Reality, nothing was farther from the Thoughts
of that fair and virtuous Princeſs, than the Light-
neſs he accuſed her of: So that, as I ſaid before,
it is not at all to be wondered at, if this diſguiſed
Lover of your Lady was driven to Deſpair by
Suſpicions as groundleſs, perhaps, as thoſe of

<page 132>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. i09
'Artamenes, yet not the less cruel and torment-
Mrs. Morris, finding Arabella held her Peace
at these Words, went on with her History in
this manner : — Miss Groves, Madam, being
directed by her Woman in all things, took up
her Lodgings in her Father's House, who was a
broken Tradesman, and obliged to keep himself
concealed for sear of his Creditors: Here she
formed her Equipage, which consisted of a
Chair, one Footman, a Cook, and her Wo-
man: As she was indulged with the Command
of what Money she pleased, her Extravagance
was boundless : She lavished away large Sums
at Gaming, which was her favourite Diversion;
kept such a Number of different Animals for
Favourites, that their Maintenance amounted
to a considerable Sum every Year: Her Wo-
man's whole Family were supported at her Ex-
pence; and, as she frequented all public Places,
and surpassed Ladies of the first Quality in Fine-
ry, her Dress alone consumed great Part of her
Income. I need not tell you, Madam, that my
Lady was a celebrated Beauty: You have your-
self being pleased to say, that she is very hand-
some. When she first appeared at Court, her
Beauty, and the uncommon Dignity of her Per-
son, at such early Years, made her the Object
of general Admiration. The King was particu-
larly struck with her ; and declared to those about
him, that Miss Groves was the finest Woman
at Court. The Ladies, however, found means
to explain away all that was flattering in this
Distinction: They said, Miss Groves was clumsy;
and it was her Resemblance to the unwieldy Ger-
in:

man

<page 133>
no 77^ FEMALE Book II.
man Ladies that made her so much admired by
si is Majesty. Her Pride, and the Quality Airs
she affected, were the Subject of great Ridicule
to those that envied her Charms: Some Ceiv.
sures were maliciously cast on her Birth ;. forr
as she Was always styled the Duchess of '&
Daughter, a Custom she introduced herself, she
seemed to'disclaim all Title to a legal Father.
Miss Groves, as universally admired as she was,
yet made but very sew particular Conquests.
Her Fortune was known to be very considerable,
and her Mother's Jointure was to descend to her
after her Death: Yet there was no Gentleman,
who would venture upon a Wise of Miss Groves'^
Taste for Expence, as very sew Estates, to which
Jhe could pretend, would support her Extrava-
gance. — The Honourable Mr. L—, Brother
to the Earl of ——-, was the only one, amidst
a Croud of Admirers, who made any particular
Address to her. This Gentleman was tolera-
bly handsome, and had the Art of making him-
self agreeable to the Ladies, by a certain Air of
Softness and Tenderness, which never failed to
make some Impression upon those he desired to
deceive.
Miss Groves was ravished with her Conquest,
and boasted of it so openly, that People, who
were acquainted with this Gentleman's Cha-
racter, foreseeing her Fate, could not help pi-
tying her.
A very sew Months Courtship completed'
the Ruin of poor Miss Groves: She sell a Sacri-
fice to Oaths which had been often prostituted
for the fame inhuman Purposes; and became
so for.d of her Betrayer, that it was with great
- Dif-

<page 134>
Chap. j. QUIXOTE. in
Difficulty he could persuade her not to give him,
even in public, the most ridiculous Proofs of
her Tenderness. Her Woman pretends, that she
was ignorant of this Intrigue, till Miss Groves
growing big with Child, it could no longer be
concealed; it was at length agreed, she should
lie-in at her own Lodgings, to prevent any Sus-
picions from her retreating into the Country;
but that Scheme was over ruled by her Wo-
man's Mother, who advised her to conceal her-
self in some Village, not far from Town, tilt
the Affair was over.
Miss Groves approved of this second Proposal,
but took Advantage of her Shape, which, being
Sir from delicate, would not easily discover any
growing Bigness, to stay in Town as long as
the poslibly could. When her Removal was
necessary, she went to the Lodgings provided for
her, a sew Miles distant from London: And,
notwithstanding the Excuses which were framed
.for this sudden Absence, the true Cause was
more than suspected by some busy People, who
industriously inquired into her Affairs.
Mr. L— saw her but seldom during her Ill-
ness : The Fear of being discovered was his Pre-
tence: But her Friends easily saw through this
Disguise, and were persuaded Miss Groves was
waning in his Affections.
As she had a very strong Constitution, she re-
turned to Town at the End of three Weeks:
The Child was dead, and she looked hand-
somer than ever. Mr. L— continued his Vi-
sits; and the Town to make Remarks of
them. All this time the Duchess never trou-
bled herself about the Conduct of this unfortu-
2 nate

<page 135>
i12 the FE MALE Book II.
rate young Creature: And the People she was
with had not the Goodness to give her any Hint
of her Misconduct, and the Waste of her For-
tune: On the contrary, they almost turned her
Head with their Flatteries, preyed upon her
Fortune, and winked at her Irregularities. 1
She was now a second time with Child : Her
Character was pretty severely handled by her
Enemies : Mr. L— began openly to flight her:
And she was several thousand Pounds in Debt.
The Mother and Sisters of her Woman, in
whose House she still was, were base enough
to whisper the Fault she had been guilty of to
all their Acquaintances. Her Story became ge-
nerally known : She was shunned and neglected
by every body; and even Mr. L—, who had
been the Cause of her Ruin, intirely abandoned
her, and boasted openly of the Favours he had
received from her.
Miss Groves protested to her Friends, That
he had promised her Marriage; but Mr. Z—»
constantly denied it ; and never scrupled to say,
when he was questioned about it, That he found
Miss Groves too easy a Conquest to make any
Perjury necefiary. Her Tenderness, however,
for this base Man, was so great, that she never
could bear to hear him railed at in her Presence;
but would quar.sel with the only Friends she had
left, if they said any thing to his Disadvantage.
As she was now pretty far advanced with Child,
she .would have retired into the Country; but
the bad Condition of her Affairs made her Re-
moval impossible: In this Extremity she had
Recourse to her Uncle, a rich Merchant in the
City, who, havini taken all the necessary Pre-
cautions.

<page 136>
Chap. 5, QUIXOTE. ii3
cautions for his own Security, paid Miss Groves's
Debts, carrying on, in her Name, a Law-suit
with the Duchess, for some Lands, which were
to be put into her Hands, when she was of Age,
and which that great Lady detained. Miss
Groves, being reduced to live upon something
less than an Hundred a Year, quitted London,
and came into this Part of the Country, where
she was received by Mrs. Barnet, one of her
Woman's Sisters, who is married to a Country
Gentleman of some Fortune: In her House she
lay-in of a Girl, which Mr. Z— sent to de-
mand, and will not be persuaded to inform her
how, or in what manner, he has disposed of
the Child.
Her former Woman leaving her, I was re-
ceived in her Place, from whom I learnt all
these Particulars: And Miss Groves having
gained the Affections of Mr. Barnei's Brother,
her Beauty, and the large Fortune which she
has in Reversion, has induced him, notwith-
standing the Knowledge of her past unhappy
Conduct, to marry her. But their Marriage is
yet a Secret, Miss Groves being apprehensive of
her Uncle's Displeasure for not consulting him
in her Choice.
Her Husband is gone to London, with an
Intention to acquaint him with it; and, when
he returns, their Marriage will be publicly
owned.
Chap.

<page 137>
1i4 ^ FEMALE BookII.
Chap. VI.
Containing what a judicious Reader will
hardly approve.
MRS. Morris ending her Narration, Ara-
bella, who had not been able to restrain
her Tears at some Parts of it, thanked her
for the Trouble she had been at; and assured
her of her Secrecy: Your Lady's Case, said
she, is much to be lamented; and greatly re-
sembles the unfortunate Cleopatra's, whom Ju-
lius Ca/ar privately marrying, with a Promise
to own her for his Wife, when he should be
peaceable Master of the Roman Empire, left
that great Queen big with Child, and, never in-
tending to perform his Promise, sufteredher to
be exposed to the Censures the World has so
freely cast upon her; and which she so little
deserved. .
Mrs. Morris, seeing the favourable Light in
which Arabella viewed the Actions of her Ladyr
did not think proper to fay any thing to unde-
ceive her; but went out of the Closet, not a
little mortified at her Disappointment: For she
saw she was likely to receive nothing for betray-
ing her Lady's Secrets, from Arabella: Who
seemed so little sensible of the Pleasure of Scan-
dal, as to be wholly ignorant of its Nature ; and
not to know it when it was told her.
Miss Groves, who was just come to Lady
Bella's Chamber-door, to inquire for her, was
surprised to see her Woman come out of it;
and

<page 138>
Chap. 6. QTJ I X O T E. ii5
and who, upon meeting her, expressed great
Confusion. As she was going to ask her some
Questions concerning her Business there, Ara-
bella came out of the Closet; and, seeing Miss
Groves in her Chamber, asked her Pardon for
flaying so long from her.
I have been listening to your History, said
file, with great Frankness, which your Woman
has been relating: And I assure you I am ex-
trernely sensible of your Misfortunes.
Miss Groves, at these Words, blushed with
extreme Confusion; and Mrs. Morris turned
pale with Astonishment and Fear. Arabella,
not sensible that she had been guilty of any In-
discretion, proceeded to make Reflections upon
some Part of her Story; which, though they
were not at all disadvantageous to that young
Lady, she received as so many Insults: And
asked Lady Bella, If she was not ashamed to
tamper with a Servant to betray the Secrets of
her Mistress?
Arabella, a Kttle surprised at so rude a Que-
stion, answered, however, with great Sweetness;
and protested to her, that she would make no
ill Use of what she had learned of her Affairs:
For, in fine, Madam, said she, do you think I
am less fit to be trusted with your Secrets, than
the Princess of the Leontines was with those of
Clelia; between whom there was no greater
Amity and Acquaintance, than with us? And
.you must certainly know, that the Secrets which
that admirable Person entrusted with Lyfimena,
were of a Nature to be more dangerous, if re-
vealed, than yours. The Happiness of Clelia
depended upon Lyjimcna's Fidelity: And the
Liberty,

<page 139>
1i6 The FEMALE Book II.
Liberty, nay, haply, the Lise, of Aroiues, would
have been in Danger, if she had betrayed them.
Though I do not intend to arrogate to myself
t'ie Pofleslion of those admirable Qualities which
adorned the Princess of the Leontines, yet I will
not yield to her, or any one else, in Generosity
and Fidelity: And if you will be pleased to re-
pose as much Confidence in me, as those illustri-
ous Lovers did in her, you mail be convinced I
will labour as earnestly for your Interest, as that
fair Princess did for those of Aror.ces and delta.
Miss Groves was so busied in reflecting upon
the Baseness of her Woman in exposing her,
that she heard not a Word of this fine Harangue
(at which Mrs. Morris, notwithstanding the
Cause she had for Uneasiness, could hardly help
laughingj; but, assuming some of that Haughti-
ness in her Looks, for which she used to be re-
markable, she told Lady Bella, that she imputed
her impertinent Curiosity to her Country igno-
rance, and ill Breeding: And she did not doubt
but she would be served in her own kind, and
meet with as bad Fortune as she had done; and,
perhaps, deserve it worse than she did: For
there are more false Men in the World besides
Mr. L—; and she was no handsomer than
other People.
Saying this, she flung out of the Room, her
Woman following, leaving Arabella in such
Confusion at a Behaviour of which she had never
before had an Idea, that for some Moments she
remained immoveable.
Recollecting herself, at last, and conceiving,
that Civility required she should endeavour to
appease this incensed Lady, she went down
Stairs

<page 140>
Chap. 6. Q.U I X OTE. n7
Stairs after her; and, stopping her just as she
was going out of the House, intreated her to be
calm, and sufser her to vindicate herself from
the Imputation of being impertinently curious
to know her Affairs.
Miss Groves, quite transported with Shame
and Anger, refused absolutely to stay.
At least, Madam, said Arabella, stay till my
Coach can be got ready; and don't think of
walking home, so slightly attended.
This Offer was as sullenly answered as the
other: And Arabella, finding she was deter-
mined to venture home, with no other Guard
than her Woman, who silently followed her,
ordered two of her Footmen to attend her at
a small Distance; and to desend her, if there
sliould be Occasion.
For who knows, said she to Lucy, what Ac-
cident may happen ? Some one or other of her
insolent Lovers may take this Opportunity to
carry her away ; and I should never forgive
myself for being the Cause of such a Misfortune
to her.
Mrs. Morris having found it easy to recon-
cile herself to her Lady, by afluring her, that
Lady Bella was acquainted with great Part of
her Story before; and that what she told her,
tended only to justify her Conduct, as she might
have been convinced by what Lady Bella said;
they both went home with a Resolution to say
nothing of what had passed, with relation to the
Cause of the Disgust Miss Groves had received:
But only said, in general, that Lady Bella was
the most ridiculous Creature in the World ; and
2 was

<page 141>
1i8 The F EMA L E Book II.
was so totally ignorant of good Breeding, that
it was impossible to converse with her.
Chap. VII.
Which treats of the Olympic Games.
WHILE Arabella was ruminating on
the unaccountable Behaviour of her
new Acquaintance, she received a Letter frorii
her Uncle, informing her (for she had ex-
prefly forbid Mr. Glanville to write to her), that
his Son and Daughter intended to set out for her
Seat in a sew Days.
This News was received with great Satis-
faction by Arabella, who hoped to find an
agreeable Companion in her Cousin; and was
not so insensible of Mr. Glanville's Merit, as
not to seel some kind of Pleasure at the Thought
of seeing him again.
This Letter was soon followed, by the Arri-
val of Mr. Glanville, and his Sister; who, upon
the Sight of Arabella, discovered some Appear-
ance of Astonishment and Chagrin ; for, not-
withstanding all her Brother had told her of her
Accomplishments, she could not conceive it
possible for a young Lady, bred up in the
Country, to be so persectly elegant and genteel
as she found her Cousin.
As Miss Charlotte had a large Share of Co-
quetry in her Composition, and was fond of
Beauty in none of her own Sex but herself, she
was

<page 142>
Chap. 7. QJJIXOTE. ii9
was sorry to see Lady Bella possessed of so great
a Share; and, being in Hopes her Brother had
drawn a flattering Figure of her Cousin, she
was extremely disappointed at finding the Ori-
ginal so handsome.
Arabella, on the contrary, was highly pleased
with Miss Glanville; and, finding her Person
very agreeable, did not fail to commend her
Beauty: A sort of Complaisance mightily in
Use among the Heroines, who knew not what
Envy or Emulation meant.
Miss Glanville received her Praises with great
Politeness, but could not find in her Heart to
return them: And, as soon as these Compli-
ments were over, Mr. Glanville told Lady Bella*,
how tedious he had found the short Absence she
had forced him to, and how great was his Sa-
tisfaction at seeing her again.
I shall not dispute the Truth of your last As-
sertion, replied Arabella, smiling, since I verily
believe, you are mighty well satisfied at pre-
sent; but I know not how you will make it ap-
pear, that an Absence, which you allow to be
short, has seemed so tedious to you; for this is
a manisest Contradiction: However, pursued
she, preventing his Reply, you look so well,
and so much at Ease, that I am apt to believe,
Absence has agreed very well with you.
And yet I assure you, Madam, said Mr. Glan-
ville, interrupting her, that I have suffered more
Uneasiness during this Absence, than I sear you
will permit me to tell you.
Since, replied Arabella, that Uneasiness has
neither made you thinner, nor paler, I don't
think you ought to be pitied: For, to fay the
Truth,

<page 143>
i20 ^ FEMALE BookII.
Truth, in these Sort of Matters, a Person's bare
Testimony has but little Weight.
Mr. Glanville was going to make her some
Answer; when Miss Glanville, who, while they
had been speaking, was adjusting her Dress at
the Glass, came up to them, and made the
Conversation more general.
After Dinner, they adjourned to the Gardens,
where the gay Miss Glanville, running eagerly
from one Walk to another, gave her Brother
as many Opportunities of talking to Lady Bella
as he could wish: However, he stood in such
Awe of her, and dreaded so much another Ba-
jiifhmcnr, that he did not dare, otherwise than
by distant Hints, to mention his Passion; and
Arabella, well enough pleased with a Respect
that in some measure came up to her Expecta-
tion, discovered no Resentment at Insinuations
she was at Liberty to dissemble the Knowledge
of: And if he could not, by her Behaviour,
flatter himself with any great Hopes, yet he
found as little Reason,'in Arabella's Language,
to despair.
Miss Glanville, at the End of a sew Weeks,
was so tired of the magnificent Solitude she
lived in, that she heartily repented her Journey;
and insinuated to her Brother, her Inclination to
return to Town.
Mr. Glanville, knowing his Stay was regu-
lated by his Sister's, intreated her not to expose
him to the Mortification of leaving Arabella so
soon; and promised her he would contrive some
Amusements for her, which should make her
lelisti the Country better than she had yet done.
Accord-

<page 144>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. in
Accordingly, he proposed to Arabella to go
to the Races, which were to be held at .
a sew Miles from the Castle: She would have
excused herself, upon account of her Mourn-
ing; but Miss Glanville discovered so great an .
Inclination to be present at this Diversion, that
Arabella could .no longer refuse to accompany
her. .
Since, said she to Miss Glanville, you are
fond of public Diversions, it happens very
luckily* that these Races are to be held at the
Time you are here: I never heard of them be-
fore, and I presume 'tis a good many Years since
they were last celebrated. Pray, Sir, pursued
she, turning to Glanville, do not these Races,
in some Degree, resemble the Olympic Games?
Do the Candidates ride in Chariots?
No, Madam, replied Glanville; the Jockeys
are mounted upon the fleetest Coursers they can
procure; and he who. first reaches the Goal ob-
tains the Prize.
And who is the fair Lady that is to bestow it?
resumed Arabetla: I dare engage one of her
Lovers will enter the Lists; she will; doubtless,
be in no lese Anxiety than he; and the Shame
of being overcome, will hardly affect him with
more Concern, than herself; that is, provided
he be so happy as to have gained her Affections.
I cannot help thinking the fair Elifmonda was
extremely happy in this Particular: For she had
the Satisfaction to see her secret Admirer Victor
in all the Exercises at the Olympic Games, and
carry away the Prize from many Princes, and
Persons of rare Quality, who were Candidates
with him; and he had also the Glory to receive
Vol. I. G three

<page 145>
122 the FEMALE BookII.
three Crowns in one Day, from the Hands of
his adored Princess; who, questionless, be-
stowed them upon him with an infinite deal of
Joy.
What Sort of Races were those, Madam?
said Miss Glanville; whose Reading had been
very confined.
The Olympic Games, Miss, said Arabella, so
called from Qlympia, a City near which they
were performed, in the Plains of Elis, consisted
of Foot and Chariot Races; Combats with the
Cestus; Wrestling, and other Sports, They
were instituted in Honour of the Gods and
Heroes; and were therefore termed sacred, and
were considered as a Part of Religion.
They were a kind of School, or military Ap-
prenticeship; in which the Courage of the Youth
found constant Employment: And the Reason
why Victory in those Games was attended with
such extraordinary Applause, was, that their
Minds might be quickened with great and noble
Prospects, when, in this Image of War, they
arrived to a Pitch of Glory, approaching, in
some Respects, to that of the most famous Con-
querors. They thought this Sort of Triumph
one of the greatest Parts of Happiness of which
Human Nature was capable: So that when
Diagoras had seen his Sons crowned in the
Olympic Games, one of his Friends made him
this Compliment, Now, Diagoras, you may die
satisfied; since you can't be a God. It would
tire you, perhaps, was I to describe all the Ex-
ercises performed there: But you may form a
general Notion of them, from what you have
doubtless read of Justs and Tournaments.
Really,

<page 146>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. i23
Really, said Miss Glanville, I never read
about any such Things.
No! replied Arabella, surprized : Well, then,
I must tell you, that they hold a middle Place,
between a Diversion and a Combat; but the
Olympic Games were attended with a much
greater Pomp and Variety: And not only all
Greece, but other neighbouring Nations, were
in a manner drained, to furnilh out the Ap-
pearance.
Well, for my Part, said Miss Glanville, I
never before heard of these Sort of Races; those
1 have been at were quite different. I know
the Prizes and Bets are sometimes very con-
siderable.
And, doubtless, interrupted Arabella, there
are a great many Heroes who signalize them-
1 selves at these Races; not for the fake of the
Prize, which would be unworthy of great Souls,
>but to satisfy that burning Desire of Glory,
which spurs them on to every Occasion of gain-
ngit.
As for the Heroes, or Jockeys, said Miss
Glanville, call them what you please, I believe
they have very little Share, either of the Profit
or Glory' For their Masters have the one, and
the Horses the other.
Their Masters ! interrupted Arabella: What,
I suppose a great many foreign Princes send their
Favourites to Combat, in their Name? I re-
member to have read, that Alcibiades triumphed
three times successively at the Olympic Games,
by means of one of his Domestics, who, in his
Master's Name, entered the Lists.
G 2 Mr.

<page 147>
i24 The FEMALE Book.II.
Mr. Glanville, searing his Sister would make
some absurd Answer, and thereby disoblige his
Cousin, took up the Discourse: And, turning
it upon the Grecian History, engrossed her Con-
versation for two Hours, wholly to himself;
while Miss Glanville (towhom2lj they said was
quite unintelligible) diverted herself with hum-
ming a Tune, and tinkling her Cousin's Harp-
sichord; which proved no Interruption to the
more rational Entertainment of her Brother and
Arabella.
Chap. VIII.
Which concludes with an excellent moral
Sentence.
TH E Day being come on which they de-
signed to be present at the Races (or, as
Arabella called them, the Games), Miss Glan-
ville, having spent four long Hours in dressing
herself to the greatest Advantage, in order, if
possible, to eclipse her lovely Cousin, whose
Mourning, being much deeper, was less capa-
ble of Ornaments, came into her Chamber; and,
finding her still in her Morning Dress, For
Heaven's fake, Lady Bella, said she, when do
you purpose to be ready? Why it is almost
time to be gone, my Brother fays, and here
you are not a bit dressed •
Don't
2

<page 148>
Chap. "8. QUIXOTE. i25
Don't be uneasy, said Arabella, smiling; and,
going to her Toilet, I shan't make you wait
long.
Miss Gl'anville, seating herself near the Table,
resolved to be present while her Cousin was
dressing, that she might have an Opportunity to
make some Remarks to her Disadvantage: But
she was extremely mortified, to observe the
Haste and Negligence she made her Women
use.in this important Employment; and that,
notwithstanding her Indifference, nothing could
appear more lovely and genteel.
Miss Glativille, however, pleased herself with
the Certainty of seeing her Cousin's Dress ex-
tremely ridiculed, for the peculiar Fashion of
her Gown: And the Veil, which, as becoming
as it was, would, by its Novelty, occasion great
Diversion among the Ladies, helped to comfort
her for the Superiority of her Charms; whidh,
partial as she was to her own, she could not
help secretly confessing.
Arabella being dressed in much less Time
than her Cousin, Mr. Glanville was admitted,
who led her down Stairs to her Coach. His
Sister, (secretly repining at the Advantage Ara-
bella had over her, in having' so respectful an
Adorer) followed: And, being placed in the
Coach, they set out with great Appearance of
Good-humour on all Sides.
They got to .—but just time enough to
fee the Beginning of the first Course: Arabella,
who fansied the Jockeys were Persons of great
Distinction, soon became interested in the Fate
of one of them, whose Appearance pleased her
G 3 more

<page 149>
126 The FEMALE Book II.
more than the others. Accordingly, she made
Vows for his Success, and appeared so extremely
recjoiced at the Advantage he had gained, that
Miss Glanville maliciously told her, People
would make Remarks at the Joy (be expressed,
and fanfy she had a more than ordinary Interest
in that Jockey, who had first reached the Goal.
Mr. Glanville, whom this impertinent Insi-
nuation of his Sister had filled with Confusion
and Spite, fat biting his Lips, trembling for
the Effect it would produce in Arabella; But
she, giving quite another Turn to her Cousin's
Words, I assure you, said she, with a Smile,
I am not any farther interested in the Fate of
this Person, who has hitherto been successful,
than what the Handsomeness of his Garb, and
the Superiority of his Skill, may demand, from
an unprejudiced Spectator: And, though I per-
ceive you imagine he is some concealed Lover
of mine, yet I don't remember to have: ev,er
seen him: And I am confident it is. not for my
fake that he entered the Lists; hor is it my
Presence which animates him. . .)
Lord bless me, Madam! replied Miss Glan-
ville, Who would ever think of such strange
Things as these you talk of? No-body will pre-
tend to deny that you are very handsome, to be
sure; but yet, thank Heaven, the Sight of you
is not so dangerous, but that such fort of Peo-
ple, as these are* may escape your Chains.
Arabella was so wholly taken up with the
Event of the Races, that she gave but very little
Heed to this sarcastic Answer of Miss Glanville;
whose Brother, taking Advantage of an Oppor-
tunity which Arabella gave him by putting her
Head

<page 150>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. iz;
Head quite out of the Coach, chid her very se-
verely for the Liberty she took with her Cousin.
Arabella, by looking earnestly out of the Win-
dow, had given so full a View of her fine Per-
son to a young Baronet, who was not many
Paces from the Coach, that, being struck with
Admiration at the Sight of so lovely a Creature,
fie was going up to some of her Attendants to
ask who she was, when lie perceived Mr. Glan~
iiille, with whom he was intimately acquainted,
in the Coach with her: Immediately he made
himself known to his Friend, being excessively
rejoiced at having got an Opportunity of be-
ginning an Acquaintance with a Lady whose
Sight had so charmed him.
Mr. Glawvitle, who had observed the pro-
found Bow'he made to Arabella, accompanied
with a GlanCe that shewed an extreme Admi-
ration of her, Was very little pleased at this
Meeting; yet he dissembled his Thoughts well
enough in his Reception of him. But Miss
Glanvtlle was quite overjoyed, hoping she would
now have her Turn of Gallantry and Compli-
ment : Therefore, accosting him in herfreeMan-
ner, Dear Sir George, said she, you come in a
kicky Time to brighten up the Conversation:
Relations are such dull Company for one an-
other, 'tis half a Minute since we have ex-
changed a Word.
My Cousin, said Arabella smiling, has so
strange a Disposition for Mirth, that she thinks
all her Moments are lost, in which she finds
nothing to laugh at: For my part, I do so
earnestly long to know, to which of these Pre-
tenders Fortune will give the Victory, that I
G 4. can

<page 151>
i28 The FEMALE Book II.
can suffer my Cares for them to receive no In-
terruption from my Cousin's agreeable Gaiety.
Mr. Glanvllle, observing the Baronet gazed
upon Arabella earnestly while she was speaking
those sew words, resolved to hinder him from
making any Reply, by asking him several Que-
stions concerning the Racers, their Owners, and
the Bets which were laid; to which Arabella
added, And pray, Sir, said she, do me the Fa-
vour to tell me, if you know who that gallant
Man is, who has already won the first Course.
I don't know really, Madam, said Sir George,
what his Name is, extremely surprized at her
Manner of asking.
The Jockey had now gained the Goal a Se-
cond time; and Arabella could not conceal her
Satisfaction. Questionless, said she, he is a
very extraordinary Person; but I am afraid we
shall not have the Pleasure of knowing who he
is; for if he has any Reason for keeping himself
concealed, he will evade any Inquiries after
him, by flipping out of the Lists while this Hurry
and Tumult lasts, as Hortenftus did at the Olym-
pic Games; yet, notwithstanding all his Care, he
was discovered by being obliged to fight a single
Combat with one of the Persons whom he had
Worsted at those Games.
Mr. Glanville, who saw his Sister, by her lit-
tle Coquetries with Sir George, had prevented
him from hearing great Part of this odd Speech,
proposed returning to the Castle; to which Ara-
bella agreed: But, conceiving Civility obliged
her to offer the Convenience of a Lodging to a
Stranger of Sir George's Appearance, and who
was an Acquaintance of her Cousins, You must
permit

<page 152>
Chap. V. QUI X O T E. i29
permit me, said she to Mr. Glanville, to in-
treat your noble Friend will accompany us to
the Castle, where he will meet with better Ac-
commodations than at any Inn he can find; for
I conceive, that, coming only to be a Spectator
of these Games, he is wholly unpr. vided with a
Lodging.
The Baronet, surprized at so uncommon a
Civility, was at a Loss what Answer to make
her at first; but recollecting himself, he told
her that he would, if she pleased, do himself the
Honour to attend her home; but, as his House
was at no great Distance from —.—, he would
be put to no Ineonven'iency for a Lodging.
Miss Glanville, who was not willing to part
so soon with the Baronet, insisted, with her
Cousin's Leave, " upon his coming into the
Coach; which he accordingly did, giving his
Horse to the Care of his Servant; and they pro-
ceeded together to the Castle; Arabella still
continuing to talk of the Games, as she called
them, while poor Glanville, who was excessively
confused, endeavoured to change the Discourse,
not without an Apprehension, that every Sub-
ject he could think of, would afford Arabella an
Occasion of shewing her Foible; whichK riotr
withstanding the Pain it gave' him, could not
leflen his Love.
Sir George, whose Admiration of Lady Belfa
increased the longer he saw her, was extremely
pleased with the Opportunity she had given him
of cultivating an Acquaintance with her: He
therefore lengthened out his Visit, in hopes of
being able to fay some fine Things to her before
he went away; but Miss Glanville, who strove
G s by

<page 153>
i30 the FEMALE Book II.
by all the little Arts she was Mistress of, to en-
gage his Conversation wholly to herself, put it
absolutely out of his Power; so that he was
obliged to take his Leave without having the
Satisfaction of even pressing the fair Hand of
Arabella ; so closely was he observed by her Cou-
sin. Happy was it for him, that he was pre-
vented by her Vigilance from attempting a Piece
of Gallantry, which would,i undoubtedly, have
procured him a Banishment from her Presence;
but, ignorant, how kind Fortune was to him ii)
balking his Designs, he was ungrateful enough
to go away in a mighty ill Humour with this
fickle Goddess: So little capable are poor Mor-
tals of knowing what is best for them!
Chap, IX. . V .
Containing some' curious Anecdotes.
LADY Bella, from the Familiarity with
which Miss Glanville treated this gay Gen-
tleman, concluding him her Lover, and. one
who was apparently well received by her, had a
strong Curiosity to know her Adventures; and
as they were walking the next Morning in the
Garden, she told her, that she thought it was
very strange they had hitherto observed such a Re-
serve to each other, as to banish mutual Trust and
Confidence from their Conversation: Whence
comes it, Cousin, added she, being so young and
lovely as you are, that you, questionless, have
been engsged in many Adventures,. you have
never

<page 154>
Chap. 9. QUIX OTE. i31
never reposed Trust enough in me to favour me
.with a Recital of them?
Engaged in many Adventures, Madam! re-
turned. Miss Gianvilie, not liking the Phrase:
1 believe I have.been engaged in as sew as your
Ladyship.
You are too obliging, returned Arabella,
who mistook what flie said for a Compliment;
for since you have more Beauty than I, and
have also had more Opportunities of making
yourself beloved, questionless you have a greater
Number of Admirers.
As for Admirers, said Mite Charlotte bridling,
I fansy I have had my Share! Thank God, I
never found myself neglected; but, I assure
you, Madam, 1 have had no Adventures, as
you call them, with any of them.
No, really! interrupted Arabella, inno-
cently.
No, really, Madam, reported Mits Gianvilie;
and I am surprised you should think so.
Indeed, my dear, said Arabella, you are
very happy in this respect, and also very singu-
lar; for I believe there are sew young Ladies in
the World, who have any Pretensions to Beau*.
ty, that have net given Rise to a great many
Adventures; and some of them haply very fa-
tal.
If you knew more of the World, Lady Bella,
said Miss Gianvilie pertly, you would not be so
apt to think, that young Ladies engage them-
selves in troublesome Adventures: Truly the
Ladies that are brought up in Town are not so
ready to run away with every Man they see.
G6

<page 155>
i32 The FEMALE BookII.
No, certainly, interrupted Arabella; they do
not give their Consent to such Proceedings; but
for all that, they are, doubtless, run away with
many times; for truly there are some Men,
whose Passions are so unbridled, that they will
have recourse to the most violent Methods to
possess themselves of the Objects they love.
Pray do you remember how often Mandanafwas
run away with?
Not I indeed, Madam, replied Miss Glan-
ville; I know nothing about her; but I suppose
she is a Jew, by her outlandish Name.
She was no jew, said Arabella, tho' she fa-
voured that People very much ; for she obtained
the Liberty of great Numbers of them from Cy-
rus, who had taken them Captives, and could
deny her nothing she asked.
Well, said Miss Glanville; and I suppose she
denied him nothing he asked; and so they were
even.
Indeed but she did tho', resumed Arabella;
for she refused to give him a glorious Scarf
which she wore, tho' he begged it on his Knees.
And she was very much in the right, said
Miss Glanville; for 1 see no Reason why a Lo-
ver should expect a Gift of any Value from his
Mistress.
Doubtless, said Arabella, such a Gift was
worth a Million of Services; and, had he ob-
tained it, it would have been a glorious Di-
stinction for him: However, Mandana refused it;
and, severely virtuous as you are, I am persuaded
you can't help thinking, she was a little too ri-
gorous in denying a Favour to a Lover like
him —
Severely

<page 156>
Chap. 9. QJJIXOTE. i33
Severely virtuous, Lady Bella! said Miss
Glanville, reddening with Anger: Pray what
do you mean by that? Have you any Reason
to imagine, I would grant any Favour to a.
Lover?
Why, if I did, Cousin, said Arabella, would
it derogate so much from your Glory, think you,
to bestow a Favour upon a Lover worthy your
Esteem, and from whom you had received a
thousand Marks of a most pure and faithful Pas-
sion, and also a great Number of very singular
Services?
I hope, Madam, said Miss Glanville, it will
never be my Fate to be so much obliged to any
Lover, as to be under a Necessity ot granting
him Favours in Requital.
I vow, Cousin, interrupted Arabella, you
put me in mind of the fair and virtuous Antonia,
who was so rigid and austere, that she thought
all Expressions of Love were criminal; and was
so far from granting any Person Permission to
love her, that she thought it a mortal Offence
to be adored even in private.
Miss Glanville, who could not imagine Ara-
bella spoke this seriously, but that it was de-
sigifed to sneer at her great Eagerfiess to make
Conquests, and the Liberties she allowed herself
in, which had probably come to her Knowledge,
was so extremely vexed at the malicious Jest, a*
flie thought it, that, not being able to revenge
herself, she burst into Tears.
Arabella's Good-nature made her be greatly
affected at this Sight; and, asking her Pardon
for having undesignedly occasioned her so much
Uneasiness, begged her to be composed, and
tell

<page 157>
SJ4 Me F'E MALE Book IT..
tell her in what she had offended her, that she
might be able to justify herself in her Appre-
hensions.
You have made no Scruple to own, Madam,
said she, that you think me capable of granting
Favours to Lovers, when, Heaven knows, I ne-
ver granted a Kiss without a great deal of Con-
fusion.
And you had certainly much Reason for Con-
fusion, said Arabella, excessively surprised at such
a Consession: I assure you I never injured you
so much in my Thoughts,. as to suppose you
ever granted a Favour of so criminal a Nature.
Look you there. now! said Miss Glanville,
weeping more violently than before: I knew
what all your round about Speeches would come
to: All you have said in Vindication of grant-
ing Favours, was only to draw me into a Con-
session of what I have done.: How ungenerous
was that!
The Favours I spoke of, Madam, said Ara-
bella, were quite of another Nature, than those
it seems you have so liberally granted: Such as
giving a Scarf, a Bracelet, or some such Thing,
to a Lover, who had haply sighed whole Years
in Silence, and did not presume to declare his
Passion, till he had lost best Part of his Blood in
Desence of the Fair-one he loved: It was when
you maintained, that Mandana was in the right
to refuse her magnificent Scarf to the illustrious
Cyrus, that I took upon me to oppose your Ri-
gidness; and so much mistaken was I in your
Temper, that I foolishly compared you to the
fair and wise Antonia, whose Severity was so
remarkable; but really, by what I understand
from

<page 158>
Chap. 9. QJJIX O T E. 13'5:
from your own Consession, your Disposition re—
sembles that of the inconsiderate Julia, who
would receive a Declaration of Love without
Anger from any one; and was not over-shy,
any more than yourself, of granting Favours al-
most as considerable as that you have men-
tioned.
While Arabella was speaking, Miss Glanvi/k,
having dried up her Tears,. lat silently swell-
ing with Rage, not knowing whether she should
openly avow her Resentment for the injurious
Language her Cousin. had used to her,. by go-
ing away immediately, or, by making up the
Matter, appear still to be her Friend, that she
might have the more Opportunities of revenge-
ing herself. The Impetuosity of her Temper
made her most inclined to the former; but the
Knowledge that Sir George was to stay yet some
Months in the Country, made her unwilling to
leave a.Place, where she might often see a Man
whose fine Person had made some Impression
upon her Heart; and, not enduring to leave such
a charming Conquest to Arabella, she resolved
to suppress her Resentment for the present; and
listened, without any Appearance of Discom-
posure, to a fine Harangue of her Cousin upon
the Necessity of Reserve, and distant Behaviour.,
te Men who presumed to declare themselves
Lovers, enforcing her Precepts with Examples
drawn from all the Romances she had ever read .;
at the End of which she embraced her, and
assured her, if she had said any thing harsh, it
proceeded from her great Regard to her Glory,
of which she ardently wished .to see her as.forui
as.herself.. . . i. . . a,. . o..
Miss.

<page 159>
i36 the FEMALE BookII.
Miss Glanville constrained herself to make a
Reply that might not appear disagreeable: And
they were upon these Terms, when Mr. Glan-
ville came up to them, and told Lady Bella, Sir
George had sent to intreat their Company at his
House that Day: But, added he, as I presume
you will not think proper to go, on account of
your Mourning, neither my Sister nor I will ac-
cept the Invitation.
I dare say, interrupted Miss Glanville hastily,
Lady Bella writ not expect such a needless Piece
of Ceremony from us; and, if she don't think
proper to go, Ihe won't confine us.
By no means, Cousin, said Arabella, smiling;
and, being persuaded Sir George makes the En-
tertainment purely for your Sake, it would not
be kind in me to deprive him of your Com-
pany.
Mr. Glanville, being pleased to find his Cou-
sin discovered no Inclination to go, would have
persuaded his Sister not to leave Lady Bella;
But Miss Glanville looked so much displeased at
his Request, that he was obliged to insist upon
it no more; and, both retiring to dress, Lady
Bella went up to her Apartment, and betook
herself to her Books, which supplied the Place
of all Company to her.
Miss Glanville, having taken more than or-
dinary Pains in dressing herself, in order to ap-
pear charming in the Eyes of Sir George, came
in to pay her Compliments to Lady Bella before
she went, not doubting but Ihe would be cha-
grined to see herjook so well: But Lady Bella,
on the contrary, praised the Clearness of her
Complexion, and the Sparkling of her Eyes.

<page 160>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. i37
I question not, said she, but you will give
Fetters to more Persons than one To-day; but
remember, I charge you, added she smiling,
while you are taking away the Liberty of others,
to have a special Care of your own.
Miss Glanville, who could not think it pos-
sible, one Woman could praise another with
any Sincerity, cast a Glance at the Glase, sear-
ing it was rather because she looked but indif-
serently, that her Cousin was so lavish in her
Praises; and, while she was settling her Fea-
tures in a Mirror which every Day represented
a Face infinitely more lovely than her own, Mr.
Glanville came in, who, after having. very re-
spectfully taken Leave of Lady Bella, led his
Sister to the Coach.
Sir George, who was extremely mortified to
find Lady Bella not in it, handed Miss Glan-
ville out with an Air so reserved, that (he rail-
lied him upon it; and gave her Brother a very
unpleasing Emotion, by telling Sir George, she
hoped Lady Bella's not coming along with them,
would not make him bad Company.
As he was too gallant to suffer an handsome
oung Lady, who spread all her Attractions for
tm, to believe he regretted the Absence of an-
other when she was present; he coquetted with
her so much, that Mr. Glanville was in hopes
his Sister would wholly engage him from Lady
Bella.
Chap.

<page 161>
i38 The FEMALE BookII.
Chap. X.
In ivbicb our Heroine is engaged in a very
perihus Adventure.
IN the mean time, that solitary Fair-one was
alarmed by a Fear of a very unaccountable
Nature; for being in the Evening in her Closet,
the Windows of which had a Prospect of the
Gardens, she saw her illustrious concealed Lo-
ver, who went by the Name of Edward, while
he was in her Father's Service, talking with
great Emotion to her House-Steward, who
seemed earnestly to listen to some Propositions
he was making to him. Her Surprise at this
Sight was so great, that she had not Power to
observe them any longer; but, seating herself in
her Chair, she had just Spirits enough to call
Lucy to her Assistance ; who, extremely frighted
at the pale Looks of her Lady, gave her a
Smelling-bottle, and was preparing to cut her
Lace, when Arabella, preventing her, told her,
in a low Voice, that ihe seared she should tee
betrayed into the Hands of an insolent Lover,
who was come to steal her away. Yes, added
she with great Emotion, I have seen this pre-
sumptuous Man holding a Conversation with
one of my Servants; and tho' I could not pos-
sibly, at this Distance, hear their Discourse,
yet the Gestures they used in speaking, explained
it too well to me; and I have Reason to ex-
pect, I shall suffer the same Violence that many
illustrious Ladies have done before me; and be
carried.

<page 162>
Chap. io. QUIXOTE. ijg
carried away by Force from my own House, as
they were.
Alas! Madam! said Lucy, terrified at this
Discourse, who is it that intends to carry your
Ladyship away? Sure no Robbers will attempt
any Mischief at such a time as this!
Yes, Lucy, replied Arabella, with great Gra-
vity, the worst kind of Robbers v Robbers who
do not prey upon Gold and Jewels; but,
what is infinitely more precious, Liberty and
Honour. Do you know that Person who called
himself Edward, and worked in these Gardens
like a common Gardener, is now in the House,
corrupting toy Servants; and, questionless, pre-
paring to force open my Chamber, and carry
me away? And. Heaven knows when I shall be
delivered from his Chains.
God forbid, said £ary, sobbing, that ever
,.such a Lady should have such hard Hap! What
Crime,; I wonder, can you be guilty of, to de-
serve to be in Chains?:
'. My Crime, resumed Arabella, is to have At-
tractions which expose me to these. inevitable
Misfortunes, which even the greatest Princesses
have not escaped.—But, dear Lucy, can you
not think of some Methods by which I may
avoid the Evil which waits me? Who knows
but that he may, within these sew Moments,
force a Passage into my Apartment? These
slight Locks can make but a poor Resistance to
the Violence he will be capable of using.
Oh, dear Madam! cried Lucy, trembling,
and pressing near her, what shall we do?
I asked your Advice, said she; but I perceive
you are less able than myself to think of any
things

<page 163>
i4o the FEMALE Book IT.
thing to save me.—Ah! Glanville, pursued she,
sighing, would to Heaven thou wert here now!
Yes, Madam, said Lucy, Mr. Glanville,
I am sure, would not suffer any one to hurt
your Ladyship.
. As thou valuest my Friendship, said' Arabella,
wkh great Earnestness, never acquaint him
with.what has just now escaped my Lips: True,
I idid. call upon.him in this Perplexity; I did
pronounce his Name ;'.and that, haply, with' a
Sigh, which involuntarily forced its> Way: And,
questionless, if he knew his good Fortune, even
amidst the Danger of losing me for ever, he
would resent some Emotions of Joy: But I
should die with Shame at having so indiscreetly
contributed to his Satisfaction: And, therefore,
again I charge you, conceal, With the utmost
Care, what I have.said.
Indeed, Madam, said Lucy, I shall tell Kim
nothing but what your Ladyship bids me; and
I am so frighted, that I can think of nothing
but that terrible Man, that wants to carry you
* * I 1.11 n . n * . > T
think I hear somebody on the Stairs. \
Do not be alarmed, said Arabella, in a ma-
jestic Tone: It is I who have most Reason to
sear: Nevertheless, I hope the Grandeur of my
Courage will not sink under this Accident.
Hark, somebody knocks at the Door of my
Antechamber:—My own Virtue shall support
me:—Go, Lucy, and ask who it is.
Indeed I can't, Madam, said she, clinging
to her: Pray pardon me: Indeed I am so afraid,
I cannot stir.

Mercy on us! added . she,' starting, I
. Weak-
) .

<page 164>
Chap. 10. QU IX 0 T Es i41
Weak.fouled Wench! said Arabella, How
unfit art thou for Accidents like these! Ah!
had Cylenia an J Alartesia been' like thee, the
fair Berenice, and the Divine Princess of Media,
had not so eagerly intreated their Ravishers to
afford them their Company in their Captivity:
But go, I order you, and ask who it is that
is at the. Door of my Apartment: They
knock again: Offer at no Excuses; but do your
Duty.
Lucy, seeing her Lady was really angry, went
trembling out of the Closet; but would go no
farther than her Bedchamber, from whence she
called out to know who was at the Door.
I have some Business with your Lady, said
the House.Steward (for it was he that knocked :)
Can I speak with her at present?
Lucy, a little re-assured by his Voice, made
no Answer; but, creeping softly to the Door of
the Antechamber, double.locked it; and then
cried out in a Transport, No, I will take Care
you shall not come to my Lady.
And why, pray, Mrs. Lucy? said the Steward:
What have I done, that you are so much my
Enemy?
You are a Rogue, said Lucy, growing very
courageous, because the Door was locked be-
tween them.
A Rogue! said he, What Reason have you
for calling me a Rogue? I assure you I will ac-
quaint my Lady with your Insolence. I came
to speak to her Ladyship about Edward; who
prayed me to intercede for him, that he may
be taken again into her Service: For he says,
my Lady never believed any thing against him;

<page 165>
142 The F E M AL E Book U.
and that was my Business: But, when I see
her, I'll know whether you are allowed to abuse
me in this manner.
Arabella, by this time, was advanced as
far as the Bedchamber, longing to know what
fort of Conserence Lucy was holding.with her
intended Ravisher: When that faithful Confi-
dant, seeing her, came running to her, and
. whispered her, that the House-Steward was at
the Door, and said he wanted to intercede for
Edward.
Ah! the Traitor! said Arabella, retiring
again: Has he, then, really bargained with that
disloyal Man, to deliver up his Mistress? I am
undone, Lucy, said she, unless I can find a
Way to escape out of the House. They will,
questionless, soon force the Doors of my Apart-
ment.
Suppose, said Lucy, your Ladyship went
down the Stairs that lead from your Dressing-
room into the Garden; and you may hide your-
self in the Gardener's House till Mr. Glanville
come.
I approve, said Arabella, of one Part of your
Proposal: But I shall not trust myself in the
Gardener's House; who, questionless, is in the
Plot with the rest of my perfidious Servants,
since none of them have endeavoured to adver-
tise me of my Danger. If we can gain the
Gardens undiscovered, we may get out by that
Door at the Foot of the Terrace, which leads
into the Fields; for you know I always keep
the Key of that private Door: So, Lucy, let us
commend ourselves to the Direction of Provi-
dence, and be gone immediately.
8 But

<page 166>
Chap. io. QUIXOTE. i43
But what shall .we do, Madam, said Lucy,
when we are got out?
Why, said Arabella, you shall conduct me
to your Brother's; and, probably, we may meet
with some generous Cavalier by the Way, who
will protect us till we get thither: However, as
I have as great a Danger to sear within Doors,
as without, I will venture to make my Escape,
though I should not be so fortunate as to meet
with any Knight who will undertake to pro-
tect me from the Danger which I may appre-
hend in the Fields.
Saying this, she gave the Key of the Door to
Lucy, whose Heart beat violently with Fear;
and, covering herself with some black Cypress,
which she wore in the Nature of a Veil, went
softly down the little Staircase to the Terrace,
followed by Lucy (who looked eagerly about her
every Step that she went ;) and, having gained
the Garden-door, hastily unlocked it, and fled,
as fast as possible, cross the Fields, in order to
procure a Sanctuary at William's House: Ara-
bella, begging Heaven to throw some generous
Cavalier in her Way, whose Protection she
might implore, and, taking every Tree at a
Distance for a Horse and Knight, hastened her
Steps to meet her approaching Succour; which
as soon as she came near, miserably balked her
Expectations.'
Though IVilliam's Farm was not more than
two Miles from the Castle; yet Arabella, un-
used to such a rude Way of Travelling, began
to be greatly fatigued: The Fear she was in of
being pursued by her apprehended RaviOier, had
so violent an Effect upon her Spirits, that ihe
was

<page 167>
i44 7&FEMAL E. Book II.
was hardly able to prosecute her Flight; and, to
complete her Misfortunes, happening to stumble
over a Stump of a Tree that lay in her Way,
shc strained her Ancle; and the violent Anguish
she selt, threw her into a Swoon.
Lucy, upon whose Arm she leaned, perceiv-
ing her fainting, screamed out aloud, not know-
ing what to do with her in that Condition: she
placed her upon the Ground; and, supporting
her Head against that fatal Stump, began to rub
her Temples, weeping excessively all the Time.
Her Swoon .still continuing, the poor Girl was
in inconceivable Terror: Her Brother's House
was now but a little Way off; but it being im-
possible for her to carry her Lady thither with-
out some Help, she knew not what to resolve
upon.
At length, thinking it better to leave her for
a sew Moments, to run for Assistance, than to
sit by her and see her perish for want of it, she
left her, though not without extreme Agony;
and flew, with the utmost Eagerness, to her
Brother's. She was lucky enough to meet
him just coming out of his Door; and, telling
him the Condition in which she left her Lady,
he, without asking any Questions about the
Occasion of so strange an Accident, notwith-
standing his Amazement, ran with all Speed to
the Place where Lucy had left her: But, to their
Astonishment and Sorrow, she was not to be
found: They walked a long time in Search of
her; and Lucy, being almost distracted with
Fear lest she had been carried away, made
Complaints that so puzzled her Brother he
knew not what to say to her: But, finding their
Search

<page 168>
Chap. io. QJJIXOTE. i45
Search fruitless, they agreed to go home to the
Castle, supposing, with some Appearance of
Reason, that they might hear of her there.
Here they found nothing but Grief and Con-
fusion. Mr. Glanville and his Sister were just
returned, and had been at Lady Bella's Apart-
ment; but, not finding her there, they asked
her Women where she was, who, not know-
ing any thing of her Flight, concluded she was
in the Garden with Lucy. Mr. Glanville, sur-
prised at her being at that Hour in the Garden,
ran eagerly to engage her to come in, being ap-
prehensive she would take Cold, by staying so
late in the Air: But, not finding her in any of
her usual Walks, he ordered several of the
Servants to assist him in searching the whole
Garden, sending them to different Places: But
they all returned without Success; which filled
him with the utmost Consternation.
He was returning, excessively uneasy, to the
House, when he saw Lucy; who had been just
told, in answer to her Inquiries about her Lady,
that they were gone to lopk for her in the
Garden; and running up to Mr. Glanville,
who hoped to hear News of Lady Bella from
her, Oh! Sir, said she, is my Lady found?
What! Lucy, said Mr. Glanville (more
alarmed than before), do not you know where
Ihe is? I thought you had been with her.
Oh ! dear, cried Lucy, wringing her Hands;
for certain my poor Lady was stolen away while
she was in that fainting Fit. Sir, said she to
Glanville, I know who the Person is that my
Lady said (and almost broke my Heart) would
Vol. I. H' keep

<page 169>
i46 The F E M A L E Book II.
keep her in Chains: He was in the House not
many Hours ago.
Mr. Glanville, suspecting this was some new
Whim of Arabella's, would not suffer Lucy to
say any more before the Servants, who flood
gaping with Astonishment at the strange Things
she uttered; but bid her follow him to his
Apartment, and he would hear what she could
inform him concerning this Accident. He
would, if possible, have prevented his Sister
from being present at the Story; but, not being
able to form any Excuse for not suffering her to
hear every thing that related to her Cousin, they
all three went into his Chamber; where he de-
sired Lucy to tell him what she knew about her
Lady.
You must know, Sir, said Lucy, sobbing,
that there came a Man here to take away my
Lady: A great Man he is, though he worked
in the Gardens; for he was in Love with her:
And so he would not own who he was.
And pray, interrupted Miss Glanville, Who
told you he was a great Man, as you fay?
My Lady told me, said Lucy: But, how-
somever, he was turned away; for the Garde-
ner fays he catched him stealing Carp.
A very great Man, indeed, said Miss Glan-
ville, that would steal Carp!
You must know, Madam, said she, that was
only a Pretence: For he went there, my Lady
fays, to drown himself.
Bless me! cried Miss Glanville, laughing;
the Girl's distracted, sure. Lord! Brother,
don't listen to her nonsensical Tales; we shall
never find roy Cousin by her.
Leave

<page 170>
Chap. i0. QJJIXOTE. i47
Leave her to me, said Mr. Glanville, whis-
pering: Perhaps I may discover something by
her Discourse, that will give us some Light
into this Affair.
Nay, I'll stay, I am resolved, answered flie;
for I long to know where my Cousin is: Tho',
do you think what this Girl fays is true, about
a great Man disguised in the Gardens ? Sure my
Cousin could never tell her such Stuff: But,
now I think of it, added she, Lady Bella,
when we were speaking about the Jockey,
talked something about a Lover : I vow I believe
it is as the Girl fays. Pray let's hear her out.
Mr. Glanville was ready to die with Vexation,
at the Charmer of his Soul's being thus exposed;
but there was no Help for it.
Pray, said he to Lucy, tell us no more about
this Man: But, if you can guess where your
Lady is, let me know.
Indeed I can't, Sir, said she; scr my Lady and
I both stole out of the House, for fear Ed%vard
fliould break open the Doors of her Apartment;
and we were running as fast as possible to my
Brother's House (where she said she would hide
herself till you came); but my poor dear Lady.
fell down and hurt herself so much, that she
fainted away: I tried what I could to setch her
aagin; but she did not open her Eyes: So I ran
like Lightning to my Brother, to come and help
me to carry her to the Farm; but, when we
came back, she was gone.
What do you fay? cried Mr. Glanville, with
a distracted Look: Did you leave her in that
Condition in the Fields? And was she not to
be found when you came back?
H 2 No,

<page 171>
i48 r&FEMALE Book II.
No, indeed, Sir, said Lucy, weeping, we
could not find her, though we wandered about
a long time.
Oh! Heavens! said he, walking about the
Room in a violent Emotion, Where can she be?
What is become of her? Dear Sister, pursued
he, order somebody to saddle my Horse: I'll
traverse the Country all Night in quest of her.
You had best inquire, Sir, said Lucy, if
Edward is in the House: He knows, may be,
where my Lady is.
Who is he? cried Glarruille.
Why the great Man, Sir, said Lucy, whom
we thought to be a Gardener, who came to
carry my Lady away; which made her get out
of the House as fast as she could.
This is the strangest Story, said Miss Glan~
vllle, that ever I heard: Sure nobody would be
so mad to attempt such an Action ; my Cousin
has the oddest Whims!
Mr. Glanville, not able to listen any longer,
charged Lucy to fay nothing of this Matter to
any one; and then ran eagerly out of the Room,
ordering two or three of the Servants to go in
Search of their Lady: He then mounted his
Horse in great Anguish of Mind, not knowing
whither to direct his Course.
Chap.

<page 172>
Chap. ii. QJUIXOTE. i49
Chap.' XI.
In which the Lady is wonderfully de-
livered.
BU T to return to Arabella, whom we lest
in a very melancholy Situation: Lucy
had not been gone long from her before she
opened her Eyes; and, beginning to come
persectly to herself, was surprised to find her
Woman not near her: The Moon shining very
bright, she looked round her, and called Lucy
as loud as she was able; but not seeing her, or
hearingany Answer,her Fears becameso power-
ful, that she had like to have relapsed into her
Swoon.
Alas! unfortunate Maid that I am! cried she,
weeping excessiyely, questionless I am betrayed
by her on whose Fidelity I relied, and who was
acquainted with my most secret Thoughts: She
is now with my Ravisher, directing his Pursuit,
and I have no Means of escaping from his
Hands! Cruel and ungrateful Wench, thy un-
paralleled Treachery grieves me no less than all
my other Misfortunes: But why do I fay, Her
Treachery is unparalleled ? Did not the wicked
Arianta betray her Mistress into the Power of
her insolent Lover? Ah! Arabella, thou art
not single rn thy Misery, since the divine Man-
dana was, like thyself, the Dupe of a merce-
nary Servant.
Having given a Moment or two to these sad
Reflections, she rose from the Ground with an
H 3 Intention

<page 173>
i50 Tie FEMALE BookH.
Intention to walk on; but her Ande was so pain-
ful, that she could hardly move: Her Tears began
now to flow with greater Violence: She ex-
pected every Moment to see Edward approach
her; and was resigning herself up to Despair,
when a Chaise, driven by a young Gentleman,
passed by her. Arabella, thanking Heaven for
sending this Relief, called out as loud as she
could, conjuring him to stay.
The Gentleman, hearing a Woman's Voice,
stopped immediately, and asked what Ihc
wanted.
Generous Stranger, said Arabella, advancing
as well as she was able, do not refuse your As-
sistance to save me from a most terrible Danger:
1 am pursued by a Person whom, for very ur-
gent Reasons, I desire to avoid. I conjure you,
therefore, in the Name of her you love' best, to
protect me ; and may you be crowned with the
Enjoyment of all your Wishes, for so charita-
ble an Action!
If the Gentleman was surprised at this Ad-
dress, he was much more astonished at the
Beauty of her who made it: Her Stature ; her
Shape, her inimitable Complexion ; the Lustre
of her fine Eyes, and the thousand Charms that
adorned her whole Person, kept him a Minute
silently gazing upon her, without having the
Power to make her an Answer.
Arabella, finding he did not speak, was ex-
tremely disappointed. Ah! Sir, said she,
What do you deliberate upon? Is it possible
vou can deny so reasonable a Request, to a
Lady in my Circumstances f
For

<page 174>
Chap. ii. QUIX O T E. i5i
For God's fake, Madam, said the Gentle-
man, alighting, and approaching her, let me
know who you are, and how I can be of any
Service to you.
As for my Quality, said Arabellas assured it
is not mean; and let this Knowledge suffice at
present: The Service I desire of you is, to con-
vey me to some Place where I may be in Sasety
for this Night: To-morrow I will intreat you
ro let some Persons, whom I shall name to you,
know where I am; to the end they may take
proper Measures to secure me from the Attempts
of an insolent Man, who has driven me from
my own House, by the Designs he was going
to execute.
The Gentleman saw there was some Mystery
in her Case, which. she did not choose to ex-
plain; and, being extremely glad at having so
beautiful a Creature in his Power, told her she
might command him in all file pleased; and,
helping her into the Chaise, drove off as fast as
he could; Arabella suffering no Apprehensions
from being alone with a Stranger, since nothing
was more common to Heroines than such Ad-
ventures ; all her Fears being of Edward, whom
she fansied every Moment she saw pursuing
them: And, being extremely anxious to be in
some Place of Sasety, she urged her Protector to
drive as fast as possible; who, willing to have her
at his own House, complied with her Request;
but was so unlucky in his Haste, as tc overturn
the Chaise. Though neither Arabella nor him-
self were hurt by the Fall, yet the Necessity
there was to slay some time to put the Chaise
in a Condition to carrv them any farther, filled
H 4 bet
;»

<page 175>
i52 rhe FEMALE BookII.
her with a thousand Apprehensions, lest they
should be overtaken.
In the mean time, the Servants of Arabella,
among whom Edward, not knowing how much
he was concerned in her Flight, was resolved
to distinguish himself by his Zeal in searching
for her, had dispersed themselves about in dif-
serent Places: Chance conducted Edward to
the very Spot where slie was: When Arabella,
perceiving him while he was two or three
Paces off, Oh! Sir, cried flie, behold my
Persecutor! Can you resolve to desend me
against the Violence he comes to offer me?
The Gentleman, looking up, and seeing a
Man in Livery approaching them, asked her, If
that was the Person she complained of; and
if he was her Servant?
If he is my Servant, Sir, replied she, blush-
ing, he never had my Permission to be so: And,
indeed, no one else can boast of my having
granted them such a Liberty.
Do you know whose Servant he is, then,
Madam? replied the Gentleman, a little sur-
prised at her Answer ; which he could not well
understand.
You throw me into a great Embarrassment,
Sir, resumed Arabella, blushing more than be-
fore: Questionless, he appears to be mine;
but, since, as I told you before, he never dis-
covered himself to me, and I never permitted
him to assume that Title, his Services, if ever I
received any from him, were not at all consi-
dered by me, as Things for which I was ob-
liged to him.
The
ILL . —

<page 176>
Ghap. ii. QUIXOTE. i53
The Gentleman, still more amazed at An-
swers so little to the Purpose, was going to de-
sire her to explain herself upon this strange Af-
fair; when Edward, coming up close to Ara~
bdla, cried out in a Transport, Oh! Madam!
thank God you are found.
Hold, impious Man! said Arabella, and do
not give Thanks for that which, haply, may
prove thy Punishment. If I am found, thou
wilt be no better for it: And, if thou continuest
to persecute me, thou wilt probably meet with
thy Death, where thou thinkest thou hast found
thy Happiness.
The poor Fellow, who understood not a
Word of this Discourse, stared upon her like
one that had lost his Wits ; when the Protector
of Arabella, approaching him, asked him, with
a stern Look, What he had to say to that
Lady, and why he presumed to follow her?
As the Man was going to answer him, Mr.
Glanville came galloping up; and Edward, see-
ing him, ran up to him, and informed him,
that he had met with Lady Bella, and a Gentle-
man, who seemed to have been overturned in a
Chaise, which he was endeavouring to refit;
and that her Ladyship was offended with him
for coming up to hti; and also, that the Gen-
tleman had used some threatening Language to
him upon that Account.
Mr. Glanville, excessively surprised at what
be heard, stopped; and, ordering a Servant who
came along with him, to run back to the
Castle, and bring a Chaise thither to carry Lady
Bella home, he asked Edward several more
Questions relating to what slhe and the Gentte-
H 5 man

<page 177>
i$4 23? FEMALE Bookll.
man had said to him: And, notwithstanding
his Knowledge of her ridiculous Humour, he
could not help being alarmed by her Behaviour,
nor concluding that there was something very
mysterious in the Affair.
While he was thus conversing with Edward,
Arabella, who had spied him almost as soon,.
was filled with Apprehension to see him hold so
quiet a Parly with her Ravisher: The more she
reflected upon this Accident, the more her Su-
picions increased; and, persuading herself
at last, that Mr. Glanville was privy to his
Designs, this Belief, however improbable,
wrought so powerfully upon her Imagination,
that she could not restrain her Tears. «
Doubtless, said she, I am betrayed, and the
perjured Glanville is no longer either my Friend
or Lover: He is this Moment concerting Mea-
sures with my Raviflier, how to deliver me into
his Power; and, like Philidaspes, is glad of an
Opportunity, by this Treachery, to be rid of a
Woman whom his Parents and hers had destined
for his Wise.
Mr. Glanville, having learned all he could
from Edward, alighted ; and, giving him his
Horse to hold, came up to Arabella: And, after
expressing his Joy at meeting with her, begged
her to let him know what Accident had brought
her, unattended, from the Castle, at that time
of Night.
If by this Question, said the incensed Ara-
bella, you would persuade me you are ignorant
r>f the Cause of my Flight, know, your Dissimu-
lation will not succeed; and that, having Reason
t» believe you are equally guilty with him from
whole

<page 178>
Chap. ii. QJJIXOTE. i55
whose intended Violence I fled, I shall have re-
course to the Valour of this Knight you see with
me, to desend me, as well against you, as that
Ravifher, with whom I see you leagued.—Ah!
unworthy Cousin, pursued she, What dost thou
propose to thyself by so black a Treachery?
What is to be the Price of my Liberty, which
thou so freely disposest of? Has thy Friend
there, said she (pointing to Edward), a Sister,
or any Relation, for whom thou barterest, by
delivering me up to him? But, assure thyself,
this Stratagem shall be of no Use to thee: For,
if thou art base enough to oppress my valiant
Deliverer with Numbers, and thinkest, by Vio-
, lence, to get me into thy Power, my Cries
shall arm Heaven and Earth in my Desence.
Providence may, haply, send some generous
Cavaliers to my Rescue; and, if Providence fails
me, my own Hand shall give me Freedom ; for
Moment shall be the last of my Lise.
While Arabella was speaking, the young
Gentleman and Edward, who listened to her,
eagerlv, thought her Brain was disturbed: But
Mr. Glanvilh was in a terrible Confusion, and
silently cursed his ill Fate, to make him in
Love with a Woman so ridiculous.
For Heaven's fake, Cousin, said he, striving
to repress some Part of his Disorder, Do not
give way to these extravagant Notions: There
is nobody intends to do you any Wrong.
What! interrupted she, would you persuade
me, that that Impostor there, pointing to Ed-
ward, has not a Design to carry me away;

H 6
which

<page 179>
i56 The FEMALE BookII.
which you, by supporting him, are not equally
guilty of?
Who ? I! Madam! cried out Edward: Sure
your Ladyship does not suspect me of such a
strange Design ! God knows I never thought of
such a Thing!
Ah! Dissembler! interrupted Arabella, do
not make use of that sacred Name to mask thy
impious Falsboods: Consess with what Intent
you came into my Father's Service disguised.
I never came disguised, Madam, returned
Edward.
No! said Arabella: What means that Dress
in which I see you, then?
'Tis the Marquis's Livery, Madam, said
Edward, which he did not order to be taken
from me when I left his Service..
And with what Purpose didst thou wear it?
said she, Do not your Thoughts accuse you of
your Crime?
I always hoped, Madam*——said he.
You hoped! interrupted Arabella: frowning,
Did I ever give you Reason to hope? I will not
deny but I had Compassion on you; but even
That you was ignorant of.
I know, Madam, you had Compassion on
me, said Edward; for your Ladyship, I always
thought, did not believe me guilty.
I was weak enough, said she, to have Com-
passion on you, though I did believe you guilty.
Indeed, Madam, returned Edward, I al-
ways hoped, as I said before (but your Ladyship
would not hear me out), that you did not be-
lieve any malicious Reports; and therefore
you had Compassion on me.
I had

<page 180>
Chap. ii. QJJIXOTE. i57
I had no Reports of you, said she, but what
rav own Observation gave me; and that was
sufficient to convince me of your Fault.
Why, Madam, said Edward, did your La-
dyship see me steal the Carp then, which was
the Fault unjustly laid to my Charge?
Mr. Glanville, as much Cause as he had for
Uneasiness, could with great Difficulty restrain
Laughter at this ludicrous Circumstance; for he
guessed what Crime Arabella was accusing him
of: As for the young Gentleman, he could not
conceive what she meant, and longed to hear
what would be the End of such a strange Con-
serence. But poor Arabella was prodigioufly
confounded at his mentioning so low an Affair;
not being able to endure that Glanville and her
Protector should know a Lover of hcr's could
be suspected of so base a Theft.
The Shame she conceived at it, kept her
silent for a Moment: But, recovering herself
at last, No, said she, I knew you better than
to. give any Credit to such an idle1 Report:
Persons of your Condition do not commit such
paltry Crimes.
Upon my Soul, Madam, said the young
Gentleman, Persons of bis Condition often do
worse.
I don't deny it, Sir, said Arabella; and the
Design he meditated of carrying me away was
infinitely worse.
Really, Madam, returned the Gentleman,
if you are such a Person as I apprehend, I
don't fee how he durst make such an At-
tempt.
u

<page 181>
i58 The FEMALE Book II.
It is very possible, Sir, said she, that I might
be carried away, though I was of greater Qua-
lity than I am: Were not Mandana, Cendace,
Clelia, and many other Ladies who underwent
the fame Fate, of a Quality more illustrious
than miner
Really, Madam, said he, I know none of
these Ladies.
No, Sir! said Arabella; extremely mortified.
Let me intreat you, Cousin, interrupted
Glanville (who feared this Conversation would
be very tedious), to expose yourself no longer
to the Air at this time of Night: Suffer me
to conduct you home.
It concerns my Honour, said she, that this
generous Stranger should not think I am the
only one that was ever exposed to these inso-
lent Attempts. You fay, Sir, pursued she, that
you don't know any of these Ladies I mention-
ed before: Let me ask you, then, If you are
acquainted with Partkeniffh, or Cleapatra ? who
were both, for some Months, in the Hands of
their Ravishers.
As for Partbeniffa, Madam, said he, neither
have 'I heard tif her; nor do I remember to
have heard of any more than one Cleopatra:
But she was never ravished, I am certain; for
she was too willing.
How! Sir, said Arabella: Was CUopafra
ever willing to run away with her Ravisher?
Cleopatra was a Whore, was file not, Ma-
dam? said he.
Hold thy Peace, unworthy Man, said Ara-
bella; and profane not the Memory of that fair
and glorious Queen, by such injurious Lan-
guage;

<page 182>
Chap. ii. QJJIXOTE. i59
guage: That Queen, I say, whose Courage was
equal to her Beauty; and her Virtue surpassed
by neither. Good Heavens! What a black
Defamer have I chosen for my Protector!
Mr. Glanville, rejoicing to see Arabella in a
Disposition to be offended with her new Ac-
quaintance, resolved to soothe her a little, in
hopes of prevailing upon her to return home.
Sir, said he to the Gentleman, who could not
conceive why the Lady should so warmly de-
send Cleopatra, you were in the Wrong to cast
such Reflections upon that great Queen (re-
peating what he had heard his Cousin say be-
fore): For all the World, pursued he, knows
she was married to Julius Cæsar.
Though I commend you, said Arabella., for
taking the Part of a Lady so basely vilified ; yet
let not your Zeal for her Honour induce you
to say more than is true for its Justification;
for thereby you weaken, instead of strengthen-
ing, what may be said in her Desence. One
Falfhood always supposes another, and renders
all you can fay suspected: Whereas pure, un-
mixed Truth, carries Conviction along with it,
and never fails to produce its desired Effect.
Suffer me, Cousin, interrupted Glanville,
again to represent to you, the Inconveniency
you will certainly seel, by slaying so late in the
Air: Leave the Justification of Cleopatra to
some other Opportunity; and take care of your
own Preservation. .
What is it you require of me? said Arabella.
Only, resumed Glanville, that you would be
pleased to return to the Castle, where my Sister,
and all your Servants, are inconsolable for your
Absence. But

<page 183>
*6o ^FEMALE BookII.
But who can .assure me, answered she, that I
shall not, by returning home, enter voluntarily
into my Prison? The same Treachery which
made the Patace of Candace the Place of her
Confinement, may turn the Castle of Arabella
into her Jayl. For, to say the Truth, I still
more than suspect you abet the Designs of this
Man; since I behold you in his Party, and
ready, no doubt, to draw your Sword in his
Desence: How will you be able to clear your-
self of this Crime? Yet I will venture to re-
turn to my House, provided you will swear to
me, you will offer me no Violence, with re-
gard to your Friend there: And also I insist,
that he, from this Moment, disclaim all Inten-
tions of persecuting me, and banish himself
from my Presence for ever. Upon this Condi-
tion I pardon him, and will likewise pray to
Heaven to pardon him also. Speak, presumptu-
ous Unknown, said flie to Edward, Wilt thou
accept of my Pardon upon the Terms I offer
it thee? And wilt thou take thyself to some
Place where I may never behold thee again?
Since your Ladyship, said Edward, is resolved
not to receive me into your Service, I shan't
trouble you any more: But I think it hard to
be punished for a Crime I was not guilty of.
'Tis better, said Arabella, "turning from him,
that thou shouldst complain of my Rigour, than
the World tax me with Lightness and Indiscre-
tion. And now, Sir, said she to Glanville, I
must trust myself to your Honour, which I
consess I do a little suspect: But, however, 'tis
possible you have repented, like the poor Prince
Tbrasybuluf) when he submitted to the Sug-
gestions

<page 184>
Chap. ii. QUIXOTE. i6i
gestions of a wicked Friend, to carry away
the fair Alcionida, whom he afterwards restored.
Speak, Glanville, pursued she, are you desirous
of imitating that virtuous Prince, or do you
still retain your former Sentiments?
Upon my Word, Madam, fz\d'Glanville,
you will make me quite mad, if you go on in
this manner: Pray let me see you sase home;
and then, if you please, you may forbid my
Entrance into the Castle, if you suspect me of
any bad Intentions towards you.
'Tis enough, said she; I will trust you. As
for you, Sir, speaking to the young Gentleman,
you are so unworthy, in my Apprehensions, by
the Calumnies you have uttered against a Per-
son of that Sex which merits all your Admira-
tion and Reverence, that I hold you very unfit
to be a Protector of any of it: Therefore I
dispense with your Services upon this Occasion;
and think it better to trust mvself to the Con-
duct of a Person, who, like Thrasybulus, by his
Repentance, has restored himself to my Con-
fidence, than to one, who, though, indeed, he
has never betrayed me, yet seems very capable
of doing so, if he had the Power.
Saying this, she gave her Hand to Glanville,
who helped her into the Chaise that was come
from the Castle; and the Servant, who brought
it, mounting his Horse, Mr. Glanville drove
her Home, leaving the Gentleman, who,
by this time, had refitted his Chaise, in the
greatest Astonishment imaginable at her un-
accountable Eehaviour.
END of the Second Book.
THE
t

<page 185>

<page 186>
[ i63 ]
mi
THE
Female Qjj ixote,
BOOK III.
G H A P. I.
Two Conversations, out of which the
Reader may pick up a great .deal.
RABELL/i, continuing to rumi-
nate upon her Adventure during
their little Journey, appeared so
low-spirited and reserved, that Mr.
Glanville, tho' he ardently wished
to know all the Particulars of her Flight, and
Meeting with that Gentleman, whose Com-
pany he found her in, was obliged to suppress
his Curiosity for the present, out of a Fear of
displeasing her. As soon as they alighted at the
Castle,


<page 187>
i64 The FEMALE Book III.
Castle, her Servants ran to receive her at the
Gates, expressing their Joy to see her again, by
a thousand confused Exclamations.
Miss Glanville, being at her Toilet when she
heard of her Arrival, ran down to welcome her,
in her Hurry forgetting, that as her Woman
had been curling her Hair, she had no Cap on.
Arabella received her Compliments with a
little Coolness; for, observing that her Grief
for her Absence had not made her neglect any
of her usual Solicitude about her Person, she
could not conceive it had been very great:
Therefore, when she had made some flight
Answer to the hundred Questions she asked in
a Breath, she went up to her Apartment; and,
calling Lucy, who was crying with Joy for her
Return, she questioned her strictly concerning
her leaving her in the Fields, acknowledging
to her, that she suspected her Fidelity, tho'
sbe wished, at the same time, she might be
able to clear herself.
Lucy, in her Justification, related, after her
punctual Way, all that had happened: By
which, Arabella was convinced she had not be-
trayed her; and was also in some Doubt, whe-
ther Mr. Glanville was guilty of any Design
against her.
Since, said she to Lucy, thou art restored to
my good Opinion, I will, as I have always
done, unmask my Thoughts to thee. I con-
sess then, with Shame and Confusion, that I
cannot think of Mr. G/anville's assisting the Un-
known to carry^ me away, without resenting a
most poignant Grief: Questionless, my Weak-
ness will surprise thee; and could I conceal it
from

<page 188>
Chap. i. QJJIXOTE. i65
from myself, I would from thee; but, alas! it
is certain, that I do not hate him; and I be-
lieve I never (hall, guilty as he may be in my
Apprehensions.
Hate him! Madam, said Lucy: God forbid
you should ever hate Mr. Glariville, who, I am
sure, loves your Ladyship as well as he does his
own Sister!
You are very confident, Lucy, said Arabella
blushing, to mention the Word Love to me:
If I thought my Cousin hat! bribed thee to it, I
should be greatly incensed: However, tho' I
forbid you to talk of his Passion, yet I permit
you to tell me the Violence of his Trans-
ports when I was missing; the Threats he ut-
tered against my Ravishers; the Complaints
he made against Fortune; the Vows he of-
fered for my Preservation; and, in fine, what-
ever Extravagances the Excess of his Sorrow
forced him to commit.
I assure you, Madam, said Lucy, I did not
hear him say any of all this.'
What! interrupted Arabella : And didst thou
not observe the Tears trickle from his Eyes,
which, haply, he strove to conceal f Did he
not strike his Bosom with the Vehemence of
his Grief; and cast his accusing and despairing
Eyes to Heaven, which had permitted such a
Misfortune to befal me?
Indeed, Madam, I did not, resumed Lucy;
but he seemed to be very sorry; and said, He
would go and look for your Ladyship.
Ah! the Traitor! interrupted Arabella in a
Rage: Fain would I have found out some Ex-
cuse for him, and justified him in my Appre-
2 hensions;

<page 189>
i66 The FEMALE Book III.
hensions; but he is unworthy of these favourable
Thoughts: Speak of him no more, I command
you; he is guilty of assisting my Ravisher to
carry me away; and therefore merits my eter-
nal Displeasure: But tho' I could find Reasons
to clear him even of that Crime, yet he is guilty
of Indifference and Insensibility for my Loss,
since he neither died with Grief at the News of
it; nor needed the Interposition of his Sister, or
the Desire of delivering me, to make him live.
Arabella, when she had said this, was silent;
but could not prevent some Tears stealing down
her fair Face: Therefore, to conceal her Un-
easiness, or to be at more Liberty to indulge it,
she ordered Lucy to make haste and undress
her; and, going to-bed, passed the small Re-
mainder of the Night, not in Rest, which she
very much reeded, but, in Reflections on all
the Passages of the preceding Day: And, find-
ing, or imagining she found, new Reasons for
condemning Mr. Granville, her Mind was very
far from being at Ease.
In the Morning, lying later than usual, she
received a Message from Mr. Glanville, in-
quiring after her Health; to which she an-
swered, That he was too little concerned in the
Preservation of it, to make it necessary to ac-
quaint him.
Miss Glanville soon after sent to desire Per-
mission to drink her Chocolate by her Bedside;
which as she could not in Civility refuse, she
was very much perplexed how to hide her Me-
lancholy from the Eyes of that discerning Lady,
who, she questioned not, would interpret it in
favour of her Brother.
Upon

<page 190>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. i67
Upon Miss G/anville's Appearance, she forced
herself to assume a chearful Look, asking her
Pardon, for receiving her in Bed ; and com-
plaining of bad Rest, which had occasioned
her lying late.
Miss Glanville, after answering her Compli-
ments with almost equal Politeness, proceeded
to ask her an hundred Questions concerning the
Cause of her Absence from the Castle: Your
Woman, pursued she, laughing, told us a
strange Medley of Stuff about a great Man,
who was a Gardener; and wanted to carry
you away: Sure there was nothing in it! Was
there?
You must excuse me, Cousin, said Arabella,
if I do not answer your Questions precisely
now: 'Tis sufficient that I tell you, Certain
Reasons obliged me to act in the Manner I did,
for my own Preservation; and that, another
time, you shall know my History; which will
explain many Things you seem to be surprised
at, at present.
Your History, said Miss Glanville! Why,
will you write your own History then?
I shall not write it, said Arabella; tho', que-
stionless, it will be written after my Death.
And must I wait till then for it, resumed
Miss Glanville, gaily?
No, no, interrupted Arabella: I mean to
gratify your Curiosity sooner; but it will not
be yet .a good time; and, haply, not till you
have acquainted me with yours.
Mine! said Miss Glanville: It would not be
worth your hearing; for really I have nothing
to tell, that would make an History.
You
4

<page 191>
i68 ^ FEMALE Book III.
You have, questionless, returned Arabella,
gained many Victories over Hearts; have oc-
casioned many Quarrels between your Servants,
by savouring some one, mere than tiie others:
Probably, you have cauled some Bloodshed;
and have not escaped being carried away once
or twice: You have also, I suppose, undergone
some Persecution, from those who have the
Disposal of you, in Favour of a Lover whom
you have an Aversion to; and lastly, there is
haply some one among your Admirers, who is
happy enough not to be hated by you.
I assure you, interrupted Miss Glanville, I
hate none of my Admirers; and I can't help
thinking you "very unkind to use my Brother
as you do: I am sure, there is not one Man in
an hundred, that would take so much from
your Hands as he does.
Then there is not one Man in an hundred,
resumed Arabella, whom I should think wor-
thy to serve me: But, pray, Madam, What ill
Usage is it your Brother cemplains of? I have
treated him with much less Severity than he had
Reason to expect; and, notwithstanding he had
the Presumption to talk to me of Love, I have
endured him in my Sight; an Indulgence, for
which I may haply be blamed in After-ages.
Why, sure, Lady Bella, said Miss Glanville,
it would be no such Crime for my Brother to
love you!
But it was a mortal Crime to tell me so, in-
terrupted Arabella.
. And why was it such a mortal Crime to tell
you so, said Miss Glanville? Are you the first
Woman by Millions, that has been told so?
Doubtless,
.

<page 192>
Chap. i. QUIXOTE. i69
Doubtless, returned Arabella, I am the first
Woman of my Quality, that ever was told so
by any Man, till after an infinite Number of
Services, and secret Sufferings: And truly, I
am of the illustrious Mandana'% Mind; for she
said, That she should think it an unpardonable
Presumption, for the greatest King on Earth to
tell her he loved her, tho' after Ten Years of the
most faithful Services, and concealed Tor-
ments.
Ten Years! cried out Miss Glanville, in
Amazement; Did she consider what Altera-
tions Ten Years would make in her Face, and
how much older she would be at the End of
Ten Years, than she was before?
Truly, said Arabella, it is not usual to consi-
der such little Matters so nicely; one never has
the Idea of an Heroine older than Eighteen,
tho' her History begins at that Age; and the
Events, which compose it, contain the Space
of Twenty more.'
But, dear Cousin, resumed Miss Glanville,
do you resolve 10 be Ten Years a courting? Or
rather, will you be loved in Silence Ten Years,
and be courted the other Ten; and so marry
when you are an old Woman?
Pardon me, Cousin, resumed Arabella; I
must really find Fault with the Coarseness of
your Language. Courting, and Old Woman!
What strange Terms! Let us, I beseech you,
end this Dispute: If you have any thing to Ly in
Justification of your Brother, which, I suppose,
was the chief Intention of your Visit, I Hull net
be rude enough to restrain you; tho' I could
wish you would not lay me under the NcceC
Vol. L I sity

<page 193>
170 7"^ FEMALE Book III.
sity of hearing what I cannot persuade myself
to believe.
Since, returned Miss Glanville, I know of
no Crime my Brother has been guilty of, I have
nothing to fay in his Justification: I only know,
that he is very much mortified at the Message
you sent him this Morning; for I was with him
when he received it: But pray, What has he
done to offend you?
If Mr. Glanville, interrupted Arabella, hopes
for my Pardon, he must purchase it by his Re-
pentance, and a sincere Consession of his Fault;
which you may much better understand from
himself, than from me: And, for this Purpose,
I will condescend to grant him a private Au-
dience, at which I desire you would be present;
and also, I should take it well, if you will let
him know, that he owes this Favour wholly to
your Interposition.
Miss Glanville, who knew her Brother was
extremely desirous of seeing Arabella, was glad
to accept of these strange Terms; and left her
Chamber, in order to acquaint him with that
Lady's Intentions.
Chap. II.
A solemn Interview.
IN the mean time, that Fair-one, being risen,
and negligently dressed, as was her Custom,
went into her Closet, sending to give Miss
Glanville
1

<page 194>
Chap. 2. QJJIXOTE. i7i
GlaniAlle Notice, That she was ready to see her.
This Message immediately brought both the
Brother and the Sister to her Apartment: And
Mife Glanville, at her Brother's Request, stay-
ing in the Chamber, where she bulled herself
in looking at her Cousin's Jewels, which lay
upon the Toilet, he came alone into the Clo-
set, in so much Confusion at the Thoughts of
the ridiculous Figure he made in complying
with Arabella's fantastical Humours, that his
Looks persuading her there was some great
Agitation in his Mind, she expected to see him
fall at her Feet, and endeavour to deprecate
her Wrath by a Deluge of Tears.
Mr. Glanville however disappointed her in
that respect; for, taking a Seat reir her, he
began to intreat her, with a smiling Counte-
nance, to tell him in what he had offended her;
protesting, that he was not conscious of doing
or saying any thing to displease her.
Arabella was greatly confused at this Question,
which she thought she had no Reason to expect;
it not being possible for her to tell him (he was
ofsended, that he was not in absolute Despair for
her Absence, without, at the same time, confessing
she looked upon him in the Light of a Lover,
whose Expressions of a violent Passion would not
have displeased her: Therefore, to disengage
herself from the Perplexity his Question threw
her into, she was obliged to offer some Violence
to her Ingenuousness; and, contrary to her real
Belief tax him again with a Ddign of betray-
ing her into the Power of the Unknown.
Mr. Glanville, tho' excessively vexed at her
persisting in so ridiculous an Error, could hardly
I 2 help

<page 195>
i72 7^ FEMALE Book III.
help smiling at the stern Manner in which she
spoke, but, knowing of.what fatal Consequence
it would be to him, if he indulged any Gaiety
in so solemn a Conserence, he composed his
Looks to a Gravity suitable to the Occasion;
and asked her in a very submissive Tone, What
Motive she was pleased to assign for so extra-
ordinary a Piece of Villainy, as that she supposed
him guilty of?
Truly, answered she blushing, I do not pre-
tend to account for the Actions of wicked and
ungenerous Persons.
But, Madam, resumed Glanville, if I mustneeds
be suspected of a Design to seize upon your Per-
son, methinks it would have been more rea-
sonable to suppose, I would rather use that Vio-
lence in Favour of my own Pretensions, than
those of any other whatever; for, tho' you have
expresly forbid me to tell you I love you, yet
I hope, you still continue to think I do.
I assure you, returned Arabella, assuming a
severe Look, I never gave myself the Trouble to
examine your Behaviour with Care enough to
be sensible, if you still were guilty of the Weak-
ness, which displeased me; but, upon a Suppo-
sition, that you repented of your Fault, I was
willing to live with you upon Terms of Civi-
lity and Friendship, as became Persons in that
Degree of Relationship in which we are: There-
fore, if you are wise, you will not renew the Re-
membrance of those Follies I have long since
pardoned; nor seek Occasions of offending me
by new ones of the fame kind, lest it produce a
more severe Sentence than that I formerly laid
upon you.
How-

<page 196>
Chap. 2. QJJIXOTE. i73
However, Madam, returned Mr. Glanville*
you must suffer me to assure you, That my own
Interest, which was greatly concerned in your
Sasety, and my Principles of Honour, would
never allow me to engage in so villainous an
Entcrprize, as that of abetting any Person in
stealing you away: Nor can I conceive, how
you poffibly could imagine a Fellow who was
your menial Servant, could form so presump-
tuous and dangerous a Design.
By your Manner of speaking, resumed Ara-
bella, one would imagine you were really igno-
rant, both of the Quality of that presumptuous
Man, as well as his designed Offence: But
yet, "tis certain, I saw you in his Company;
and saw you ready to draw your Sword in his
Desence, against my Deliverer. Had I not the
Evidence of my own Senses, for your Guilt, I
must consess, I could not be persuaded of it by
any other Means: Therefore, since Appear-
ances are certainly against you, it is not strange, if
I cannot consent to acquit you in my Apprehen-
sions, till I have more certain Confirmation of
your Innocence, than your bare Testimony only;
which, at present, has not all the Weight with
me it had some time ago.
I protest, Madam, said Mr. Glanville, who
was strangely perplexed, I have Reason to think
my Case extremely hard, since I have brought
myself to be suspected by you, only through my
Eagerness to find you, and Solicitude for your
Welfare.
Doubtless, interrupted Arabella, if you are
innocent, your Case is extremely hard; yet
it is not singular; and therefore you have
I 3 less
/

<page 197>
174 7^ FEMALE Book III.
less Reason to complain: The valiant Corio-
lanus, who was the most passionate and faith-
ful Lover imaginable, having, by his admira-
ble Valour, assisted the Ravifhers of his adored
Cleopatra, against those who came to rescue her;
and, by his Arm alone, opposed to great Num-
bers of their Enemies, facilitated the Execution
of their Design, had the Mortification after-
wards to know, that he had, all that time
been fighting against that Divine Princess, who,
loaded him with the most cruel Reproaches for
the Injury he had done her: Yet Fortune was
fb kind, as to give him the Means of repairing
his Fault, and restoring him to some Part of
her good Opinion; for, covered with Wounds
as he was, and fatigued with fighting, before,
yet he undertook, in that Condition, to pre-
vent her Ravifhers from carrying her off; and,
for several Hours, continued fighting alone with
near Two hundred Men, who were not able to
overcome him, notwithstanding his extreme
Weariness, and the Multitude of Blows which
they aimed at him: Therefore, Glartville, con-
sidering you, as Cleopatra did that unfortunate
Prince, who was before suspected by her, as
neither guilty nor innocent, I can only, like her,
wilh you may find some Occasion of justifying
yourself, from the Crime laid to your Charge;
Till then, I must be under a Necessity of banish^
ing you from my Presence, with the same con-
solatory Speech (he used to that unfortunate
Prince:—44 Go, therefore, Glanville, go, and
*' endeavour your own Justification; I desire
"you should effect it, no less than you do your-
** self; and, if my Prayers can obtain from
« Heaven

<page 198>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. i75
«« Heaven this Favour for you, I shall not
** scruple to offer some in your Behalf."
Chap. III.
In which the Interview is ended, not much
to the Lover's Satisfaction, hut ex-
actly conformable to the Rules of Ro-
mance.
ARABELLA, when she had pronounced
these Words, blushed excessively, think-
ing she had said too much: But, not seeing
any Signs of extreme Joy in the Face of Glan-
inllt, who was silently cursing Cleopatra, and
the Authors of those Romances, that had ruined
so noble a Mind ; and exposed him to perpe-
tual Vexations, by the unaccountable Whims
they had raised—Why are you not gone, said
she, while I am in an Humour not to repent of
the Favour I have shewn you?
You must excuse me, Cousin, said Mr.
Glanville, peevishly, if I do not think so highly
as you do of the Favour. Pray how am I
obliged to you for depriving me of the Pleasure
of seeing you, and sending me on a Wild-goose
Chace, after Occasions to justify myself of a
Crime I am wholly innocent of, and would
scorn to commit?
Though, resumed Arabella, with great Calm-
ness, I have Reason to be diflatisfied with the
cool and unthankful manner in which you re-
I 4 ceive

<page 199>
i76 fife FEMALE Book III.
Ceive my Indulgence, yet I shall not change the
favourable Disposition I am in towards you, un-
less ycu provoke me to it by new Acts of Dis-
obedience: Therefore, in the Language of
Cleopatra, I shall tell you.
Upon my Soul, Madam, interrupted Glan-
ville, I have no Patience with that rigorous
Gipsy, whose Example you follow so exactly,
to my Sorrow: Speak in your own Language,
I beseech you; 'for I am sure neither hers,
nor any one':. upon Earth, can excel it.
Yet, said Arabella, striving to repress some
Inclination to smile at this Sally, notwithstand-
ing your unjust Prohibitions, I shall make use
of the Language of that incomparable Lady, to
tell you my Thoughts; which are, That 'tis
possible you might be sufficiently justified in my
Apprehensions, by the Anxiety it now appears
ou had for my Safety, by the Probability which
find in your Discourse, and the good Opinion,
I have of you, were it not requisite to make
your Innocence apparent to the World, that so
it might be lawful for Arabella to readmit you,
with Honour, into her former Esteem and
Friendship. ...
Mr. Glanville, seeing it would be in vain to
attempt to make her alter her fantastical Deter-
mination at this time, went out of the Closet
without deigning to make any Reply to his
Sentence, though delivered in the Language of
the admirable Cleopatra: But his ill Humour
was so visible in his Face, that Arabella, who
mistook it for an Excess of Despair, could not
help seeling some kind of Pity for the Rigour
which the Laws of Honour and Romance
obliged

<page 200>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. i77
obliged her to use him with. And while she
sat meditating upon the Scene which had
just passed, Mr. Glanville returned to his own
Room, glad that his Sister, not being in Ara-
bella's. Chamber, where he had left her, had no
Opportunity of observing his Discontent, which
flie would not fail to inquire the Cause of.
Here he sat, ruminating upon the Follies of
Arabella, which he found grew more glaring
every Day: Everything furnished Matter for
some new Extravagance; her Character was so
ridiculous, that he could propose nothing to
himself but eternal Shame and Disquiet, in the
Possession of a Woman, for whom he must
always blush, and be in Pain. But her Beauty
had made a deep Impression on his Heart: He
admired the Strength of her Understanding;
her lively Wit; the Sweetness of her Temper;
and a Thousand amiable Qualities Which di-
stinguished her from the rest of her Sex: Her
Follies, when opposed to all those Charms of
Mind and Person, seemed inconsiderable and
weak; and, though they were capable of giving
him great Uneasiness, yet they could not lessen
a Passion which every Sight of her so much
the more confirmed.
As he seared it was impossible to help loving
her, his Happiness depended upon curing her of
her romantic Notions; and, though he knew
not how to effect such a Change in her as was
necessary to complete it, yet he would not de-
spair, but comforted himself with Hopes of
what he had not Courage to attempt. Some-
times he fansied Company, .and an Acquaint-
ance with the World, would produce the Al.-
I 5 teration

<page 201>
i78 The FEM A LE Book III.
terafion he wished: Yet he dreaded to see her
exposed to Ridicule by her fantastical Behaviour,
and become the Jest of Persons who were not
possessed of half her Understanding.
While he traversed his Chamber, wholly
engrossed by these Reflections, Miss Glanville
was entertaining Sir George, of whose coming
she was informed while she was in Arabella's
Chamber.
Chap. IV.
In which our Heroine is greatly disap-
pointed.
MISS Glanville, supposing her Brother
would be glad not to be interrupted in
his Conserence with Lady Bella, did not allow
any one to acquaint them with Sir George's
Visit; and, telling the Baronet her Cousin was
indisposed, had, by these means, all his Con-
versation to herself.
Sir George, who ardently wished to see Lady
Bella, protracted his Vhit, in hopes that he
ihould have that Satisfaction before he went
away. And that fair Lady, whose Thoughts
were a little discomposed by the Despair she ap-
prehended Mr. Glanville was in, and fearful of
the Consequences, when she had sat some time
after he left her, ruminating upon what had
happened, quitted her Closet, to go and inquire
of Mifc Glanville, in what Condition his Mind
seemed
'1

<page 202>
Chap. 4.. QUIXOTE. i79
seemed to be when he went away; for flie never
doubted but that he was gone, like CoriolanuS,
to seek out for some Occasion to manisest his
Innocence.
Hearing, therefore, the Voice of that Lady,
who was talking and laughing very loud in one
of the Summer-parlours, and being terrified
with the Apprehension, that it was her Brother
with whom she was thus diverting herself, she
opened the Door of the Room precipitately;
and by her Entrance, silled Sir George with
extreme Pleasure; while her unexpected Sight
produced a quite contrary Effect on Miss Glan-
ville.
Arabella, eased of her Fear, that it was Mr.
Glanville, who, instead of dying with Despair,
was giving Occasion for that noisy Laugh of his
Sister, saluted the Baronet with great Civility j
and, turning to Miss Glanville, I must needs
chide you, said she, for the Insensibility with
which it appears you have parted with your
Brother.
Bless me, Madam, interrupted Miss Glan-
ville, what do you mean? Whither is my Brother
gone?
That, indeed, I am quite ignorant of, re-
sumed Arabella; and I suppose he himself hard-
ly knows what Course he shall take : But he has
been with you, doubtless, to take his Leave.
Take his Leave! repeated Miss Glanville .
Has he left the Castle so suddenly then, and:
gone away without me?
The Enterprize upon which he is gone, said
Arabella, would not admit of a Lady's Com-
pany: And, since he has left so considerable an
I 6 Hostage

<page 203>
i $o The F E M & LE, Book III.
Hostage with me as yourself, I expect he will
not be long before he return; and, I hope, to
the Satisfaction of . us both. . . ,
Miss Glamiille, who could not penetrate into
thp Meaning of her Cousin's Words, began to
be strangely alarmed: But, presently, supposing
she had a mind to divert herself with her Fears,
she recovered herself, and told her she would go
up to her Brother's Chamber, and look for him.
Arabella did not offer to prevent her, being
very desirous of knowing, whether he had not
left a Letter for her upon his Table, as was the
Custom in those Cases: And, while she was
gone, Sir George seized the Opportunity of say-
irig an hundred gallant Things to her, which
she received with great Indifference; the most
extravagant Compliments being what she ex-
pected from all Men: And, provided they did
not directly presume to tell her they loved her,
no Sort of Flattery or Adulation could displease
her.
In the mean time, Miss Glanville, having
found her Brother in his Chamber, repeated to
him what Lady Bella had said, as she supposed, to fright her.
1)tflBp»fMr. Glanville, hearing this, and that Sir
George was with her, hastened to them as fast
sis pofiible, that he might interrupt the foolish
Stories he did not doubt she was telling.
Upon Miss Glanville's Appearance with her
Brother, Arabella was astonished.
I apprehended, Sir, said she, that you were
feme Miles from the Castle by this time: But
your Delay and Indifference convince me, you
2 neither

<page 204>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 1S1
neither expect nor wish to find the Means of be-
ing justified in my Opinion.
Pray, Cousin, interrupted Glanville (speaking
softly to her) let us leave this Dispute to some
other Time.
No, Sir, resumed she, aloud, my Honour is
concerned in your Justification: Nor is it fit I
should submit to have the Appearance of Amity
for a Person who has not yet sufficiently cleared
himself of a Crime, with too much Reason laid
to his Charge. Did Coriolanus, think you, act
in this Manner? Ah! if he had, doubtless,
Cleopatra would never have pardoned him: Nor
will I any longer suffer you to give me repeated
Causes of Discontent.
Sir George, seeing Confusion in Mr. Glanville's
Countenance, and Rage in Arabella's, began to
think, that what he had at first took for a Jest,
was a serious Quarrel between them, at which
it was not proper he should be present; and was
preparing to go: When Arabella, stopping him
with a graceful Action—
. If, noble Stranger, said she, you are so par-
tial to the Failings of a Friend, that you will
undertake to desend any unjustifiable Action he
may be guilty of, you are at Liberty to depart:
But, if you will promise to be an unprejudiced
Hearer of the Dispute between Mr. Glanville
and myself, you shall know the Adventure
which has given Rise to it; and will be Judge
of the Reasonableness of the Commands I have
laid on him.
Though, Madam, said Sir George, (bowing
very low to her), Mr. Glanville is my Friend,
yet there is no Likelihood I shall espouse his In-
terest

<page 205>
i82 The FEMALE BooklU.
terest against yours: And a very strong Prepos-
session 1 seel in Favour of you, already per-
suades me, that I shall give Sentence on your
Side, since you have honoured me so far, as to
constitute me Judge of this Difference.
The solemn manner in which Sir George
(who began to suspect Lady Bella's peculiar
Turn) spoke this, pleased her infinitely; while
Mr. Glanville, vexed as he was, could hardly
forbear laughing: When Arabella, after a Look
of Approbation to Sir George, replied;
I find I have unwillingly engaged myself to
more than I first intended: For, to enable you
to judge clearly of the Matter in Dispute, 'tis
neceflary you should know my whole History.
Mr. Glanville, at this Word, not being able
to constrain himself, uttered a Groan, of the
fame Nature with those which are often heard in
the Pit at the Representation of a new Play.
Sir George understood him persectly well ; yet
seemed surprised: And Arabella, starting up,
Since, said stie, I have given you no new
Cause of Complaint, pray, from whence pro-
ceeds this Increase of Affliction?
I assure you, Cousin, answered. he, my Af-
fliction, if you please to term it so, increases
every Day; and I believe it will make me mad
at last: For this unaccountable Humour of
yours is not to be borne.
You do not seem, replied Arabella, to be far
from Madnese already: And if your Friend
here, upon hearing the Passages between us,
should pronounce you guilty, I shall be at a
Loss, whether I ought to treat you as a Mad-
man, or a. Criminal. Si% added slit, turning
to

<page 206>
Chap. 4, QJUIXOTE. 183
to Sir George, you will excuse me, if, for cer-
tain Reasons, I can neither give you my History
myself, nor be present at the Relation of it: One
of my Women, who is most in my Confidence,
shall acquaint ypu with all the Particulars of
my Lise: After which I expect Mr. Glanville
will abide by your Decision, as, I assure myself,
I shall be contented to do.
Saying this, she went out of the Parlour, in
order to prepare Lucy for the Recital she was to
make.
Mr. Glanville, resolving not to be present at
this new Absurdity, ran out after her; and went
into the Garden, with a strong Inclination to
hate the lovely Visionary who gave him such
perpetual Uneasiness; leaving his Sister alone
with the Baronet, who diverted herself extreme-
ly with the Thoughts of hearing her Cousin's
History; assuring the Baronet, that he might ex-
pect something very curious in it, and find Mat-
ter sufficient to laugh at; for she was the most
whimsical Woman in the World.
Sir George, who resolved to prosit by the
Knowlege of her Foible, made very little Re-
ply to Miss Glanville's Sneers; but waited pa-
tiently for the promised History, which was
much longer coining than he imagined.
Ch a p,

<page 207>
i84 the FEMALE Book III.
Chap. V.
Some curious Instructions for relating an
History.
ARABELLA, as soon as she left them,
"went up to her Apartment; and, calling
Lucy into her Closet, told her that she had
made Choice of her, since she was best ac-
quainted with her Thoughts, to relate her
History to her Cousins, and a Person of Quality
who was with them.
Sure your Ladyship jests with me, said Lucy:
How can I make a History about your Lady-
ship?
There is no Occasion, replied Arabella, for
you to make a History: There are Accidents
enough in my Lise to afford Matter for a long
one: All you have to do is to relate them as
exactly as possible. You have lived with me
from my Childhood, and are instructed in all
my Adventures; so that you must be certainly
very capable of executing the Talk I have ho-
noured you with.
Indeed, said Lucy, I must beg your Ladyship
will excuse me: I never could tell how to re-
peat a Story when I have read it; And I know
it is not such simple Girls as I can tell Histories:
It is only fit for Clerks, and such Sort of People,
that are very learned.
You are learned enough for that purpose, said
Arabella; and, if you make so much Difficulty
mi performing this Part of your Duty, pray how
came

<page 208>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. i85
came you to imagine you were fit for my Ser-
vice, and the Distinction I have favoured you
with? Did you ever hear of any Woman that
refused to relate her Lady's Story, when desired?
Therefore, if you hope to possess my Favour
and Confidence any longer, acquit yourself
handsomely of this Task, to which I have pre-
serred you.
Lucy, terrified at the Displeasure she saw in
her Lady's Countenance, begged her to tell
her what she must say.
Well! exclaimed Arabella: I am certainly
the most unfortunate Woman in the World!
Every thing happens to me in a contrary Manner
from any other Person! Here, instead of my
desiring you to soften those Parts of my History
where you have greatest Room to flatter; and
to conceal, if possible, some of those Disorders
my Bsauty has occasioned; you ask me to tell
you what you must say ; as if it was not neces-
sary you should know as well as myself, and be
able, not only to recount all my Words and
Actions, even the smallest and most inconsider-
able, but also all my Thoughts, however in-
stantaneous; relate exactly every Change of my
Countenance; number all my Smiles, Half-
smiles, Blushes, Turnings pale, Glances, Pauses,
Full-stops, Interruptions; the Rise and Falling
of my Voice; every Motion of my Eyes; and
every Gesture which I have used for these Ten
Years past; nor omit the smallest Circumstance
that relates to me.
Lord bless me! Madam, said Lucy, exces-
sively astonished, I never, till this Moment,
it seems, knew the hundredth thousandth Part
of

<page 209>
i86 The FEMALE Book III.
of what was expected from me: I am sure, if I
had, I would never have gone to Service; for I
might well know I was not fit for such Slavery.
There is no such great Slavery in doing all I
have mentioned to you, interrupted Arabella: It
requires, indeed, a good Memory, in which I
never thought you deficient; for you are
punctual to the greatest Degree of Exactness in
recounting every thing one desires to hear from
you.
Lucy>, whom this Praise soothed into good
Humour, and flattered with a Belief, that she
was able, with a little Instruction, to perform
what her Lady required, told her, if she pleased
enly to put her in a Way how to tell Her
History, she would engage, after doing k once,.
to tell it again whenever she was desired.
Arabella, being obliged to comply with this.
odd Request, for which there was no Precedent
in all the Romances her Library was stuffed
with, began to inform her in this manner:
First, said she, you must relate my Birth,
which you know is very illustrious; and, be-
cause I am willing to spare you the Trouble of
repeating Things, that are not absolutely neces-
sary, you must apologize to your Hearers for
slipping over what passed in my Infancy, and the
first Eight or Ten Years of my Lise; not failing,
however, to remark, that, from some sprightly
Sallies of Imagination, at those early Years,
those about me conceived marvellous Hopes of
my future Understanding: From thence you
must proceed to an accurate Description of my
Person.
What!

<page 210>
Chap. 5. QUIXOTE. i87
What! Madam, interrupted Lucy, must I
tell what Sort of Person you have, to People
who have seen you but a Moment ago?
Questionless you must, replied Arabella; and
herein you follow the Examples of all the 'Squires
and Maids who relate their Masters and Ladies
Histories: For, though it be to a Brother, or
near Relation, who has seen them a thousand
times, yet they never omit an exact Account of
their Persons.
Very well, Madam, said Lucy: I shall be
sure not to forget that Part of my Story. I wish
I was as persect in all the rest.
Then, Lucy, you must repeat all the Con-
versations I have ever held with you upon the
Subjects of Love and Gallantry, that your Au-
dience may be so well acquainted with my
Humour, as to know exactly, before they are
told, how I shall behave, in whatever Adven-
tures befal me.—After that, you may proceed
to tell them, how a noble Unknown saw me at
Church; how prodigiously he was struck with
my Appearance; the tumultuous Thoughts
that this first View of me occasioned in his
Mind
Indeed, Madam, interrupted Lucy again, I
can't pretend to tell his Thoughts: For how
should I know what they were? None but him-
self can tell that.
However that may be, said Arabella, I ex-
pect you should decypher all his Thoughts, as
plainly as he himself could do; otherwise my
History will be very impersect: Well, I suppose
you are at no lose about that whole Adventure,
in which you yourself bore so great a Share; so
I need

<page 211>
i88 The FEMALE Book III.
need not give you any further Instructions
concerning it: Only you .must be sure, as I
said before, not to omit the least Circum-
stance in my Behaviour, but relate every thing
I did, said, and thought, upon that Occasion.
The disguised Gardener must appear next in
your Story: Here you will of necessity be a
little deficient, since you are not able to ac-
quaint your Hearers with his true Name and
Quality; which, questionless, is very illustrious.
However, above all, I must charge you not to
mention that egregious Mistake about the Carp;
for, you know how—
Here Miss Glanville's Entrance put a Stop to
the Instructions Lucy was receiving: For she
told Arabella, that Sir George was gone.
How! returned Ihe, is he gone? Truly I
am not much obliged to him for the Indif-
serence he has shewed to hear my Story.
Why, really, Madam, said Miss Glanville,
neither of us expected you would be as good as
your Word, you were so long iiv sending your
Woman down: And my Brother persuaded Sir
George you were only in Jest; and Sir George
has carried him home to Dinner.
And is it at Sir George's, replied Arabella,
that you Brother hopes to meet with an Occa-
sion of clearing himself? He is either very in-
sensible of my Anger, or very conscious of his
own Innocence.
Miss Glanville, having nothing to fay in An-
swer to an Accusation she did not understand,
changed the Discourse: And the two Ladies
passed the rest of the Day together, with tole-
rable Good-humour on Miss Glanville's Side;
who

<page 212>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. i89
who was in great Hopes of making a Conquest
of the Baronet, before whom Arabella had
made herself ridiculous enough: But that Lady.
was far from being at ease; she had laid herself
under a Necessity of banishing Mr. Glanvil/e, if
he did not give her some convincing Proof of
his Innocence; which, as Matters stood, she
thought would be very hard for him to procure;
and, as she could not absolutely believe him
guilty, she was concerned she had gone so far.
Chap. VI.
A very Heroic Chapter.
MR. Glanville, coming home in the Even-
ing, a little elevated with the Wine,
of which he had drank too freely at Sir George's,
being told the Ladies were together, entered the
Room where they were sitting; and, beholding
Arabella, whose Pensiveness had given an in-
chanting Softness to her Face, with a Look of
extreme Admiration—
Upon my Soul, Cousin, said he, if you con-
tinue to treat me so cruelly, you'll drive me
mad. How I could adore you this V'oment,
added he, gazing passionately at her, if I
might but hope you did not hate me!
Arabella, who did not perceive the Condition
he was in, was better pleased with this Address
than any he had ever used ; and, therefore, instead
of

<page 213>
190 The FEMALE. Book III.
of chiding him, as she was wont, for the Free-
dom of his Expressions, she cast her bright Eyes
upon the Ground, with so charming a Confusion,
that Glareville, quite transported, threw himself on
his Knees before her; and, taking her Hand,
attempted to press it to his Lips: But she,
hastily withdrawing it
From whence is this new Boldness? said she.
And what is it you would implore by that pro-
strate Posture? I have told you already upon
what Conditions I will grant you my Pardon.
Clear yourself of being an Accomplice with my
designed Ravisher, and I am ready to restore
you to my Esteem.
Let me perish, Madam, returned Glanville,
if I would not die to please you, this Moment!
It is not your Death that I require, said she:
And though you should never be able to justify
yourself in my Opinion, yet you might, haply,
expiate your Crime, by a less Punishment than
Death.
What shall I do, then, my Angelic Cousin?
resumed he.
Truly, said she, the Sense of your Offence
ought so mortally to afflict you, that you should
invent some strange kind of Penance for your-
self, severe enough to prove your Penitence sin-
cere.—You know, I suppose, what the unfor-
tunate Orontes did, when he found he had
wronged his adored Thaleflris by an injurious
Suspicion.
I wish he had hanged himself, said Mr. Glan-
ville, rising up in a Passion, at seeing her again
in her Altitudes.
And

<page 214>
Chap. 6. QU I X O T E. i9i
And why, pray, Sir, said Arabella, are you
so severe upon that poor Prince; who was,
haply, infinitely more innocent than yourself.
Severe, Madam! said Glanville, searing he
had offended her: Why, to be sure, he was a
fad Scoundrel, to use his adored 7bale/iris as he
did: And I think one cannot be too severe upon
him.
But^ returned Arabella, Appearances were
against her; and he had some Shadow of Reason
for his Jealousy and Rage: Then, you know,
amidst all his Transports, he could not be pre-
vailed upon to draw his Sword against her.
What did that signify? said Glanville: I sup-
pose he scorned to draw his Sword upon a
Woman: That would have been a Shame in-
deed.
That Woman, Sir, resumed Arabella, was
not such a contemptible Antagonist as you think
her: And Men, as valiant, possibly, as Orentes
(though, questionless, he was one of the most
valiant Men in the World), have been cut in
Pieces by the Sword of that brave Amazon.
Lord bless me! said Miss Glanville, I should
be afraid to look at such a terrible Woman: I
am sure she must be a very masculine Sort of
Creature.
You are much mistaken, Miss, said Arabella:
For Thalejlris, though the most stout and cou-
rageous of her Sex, was, nevertheless, a per-
fect Beauty; and had as much Harmony and
Softness in her Looks and Person, as she had
Courage in her Heart, and Strength in her Blows.
Indeed, Madam, resumed Mils Glanville, you
can never persuade me, that a Woman who can
fight,

<page 215>
192 The FEMALE Book HI.
fight, and cut People to Pieces with their Blows,
can have any Soreness in her Person: She must
needs have very masculine Hands, that could
give such terrible Blows: And I can have no
Notion of the Harmony of a Person's Looks,
who, by what you fay, must have the Heart of
a Tyger. But, indeed, I don't think there ever
could be such a Woman.
What! Miss, interrupted Arabella: Do you
pretend to doubt, that there ever was such a
Person as Tbalejlris, Queen of the Amazons?
Does not all the World know the Adventures
of that illustrious Princess; her Afsection for the
unjust Orontes, who accused her of having a
scandalous Intrigue with Alexander, whom she
went to meet, with a very different Design, up-
on the Borders of her Kingdom; The injurious
Letter he wrote her, upon this Suspicion, made
her resolve to seek for him all over the Worlds
to give him that Death he had merited* by her
own Hand: And it was in those Rencounters
that he had with her, while she was thus in-
censed, that he forbore to desend himself against
her, though her Sword was often pointed to his
Breast.
But, Madam, interrupted Mr. GlanvilUt
pray what became of this Queen of the Ama-
.zons? Was she not killed at the Siege of Troy?
She never was at the Siege of Trav, returned
Arabella: But she assisted the Princes who be-
sieged Babylon, to recover the Liberty of Sta-
tyra and Parisatis: And it was in the opposite
Party that she met with her faithless Lover.
If he was faithless, Madam, said Mr. Glan-
viHe, he deserved to die: And I wish, with all
my

<page 216>
Chap. 6. QJJIXOTE. i93
my Soul, (lie had cut him in Pieces with that
famous Sword of hers that had done such Won-
ders.
Yet this faithless Man, resumed Arabella,
whom you seem to have such an Aversion to, gave.
so glorious a Proof of his Repentance and Sor-
row, that' the fair Queen restored him to her
Favour, and held him in much dearer Affection
than ever: For, after he was convinced of her
Innocence, he was resolved to punish himself
with a Rigour equal to the Fault he had been
guilty of; and, retiring to the Woods, abandoned
for ever the Society of Men; dwelling in a
Cave, and living upon bitter Herbs, passing the
Days and Nights in continual Tears and Sor-
row for his Crime: And here he proposed to
end his Lise, had not the fair Thahjiris found
him out in this Solitude; and, struck with the
Sincerity of his Repentance, pardoned him;
and, as I have said before, restored him to her
Favour.
And, to shew you, said Glanville, that I am
capable of doing as much for you j I will, if
you insist upon it, seek out for some Cave, and
do Penance in it, like that Orontes, provided
you will come and setch me out of it, as that
fame fair Queen did him.
I do not require so much of you, said Ara-
bella ; for I told you before, that, haply, you are
justified already in my Opinion; but yet it is
necessary, you should find out some Method of
convincing the World of y^purlnnocence; other-
wife it is not fit I should live with you upon
Terms of Friendship and Civility.
Vol. I. K
Well,

<page 217>
i94 ^FEMALE Book III.
Well, well, Madam, said Glanville, I'll
convince you of my Innocence, by bringing that
Rascal's Head to you, whom you suspect I
was inclined to assist in stealingyou away.
If you do that, resumed Arabella, doubtless
you will be justified in my Opinion, and the
World's also; and I shall have no Scruple to
treat you with as much Friendship as I did be-
fore.
My Brother is much obliged to you, Ma-
dam, interrupted Miss Glanville, for putting
him upon an Action, that would cost him his
Lise!
I have so good an Opinion of your Brother's
Valour, said Arabella, that I am persuaded he
will find no Difficulty in performing his Pro-
mise ; and I make no question but I shall see him
covered with the Spoils of that Impostor, who
would have betrayed me; and I flatter myself,
he will be in a Condition to bring me his Head,
as he bravely promises, without endangering his
own Life. „
Does your Ladyship consider, said Miss Glan-
ville, that my Brother can take away no Per-
son's Lise whatever, without endangering his
own?
I consider, Madam, said Arabella, your Bro-
ther as a Man possessed of Virtue and Courage
enough to undertake to kill all my Enemies
and Persecutors, though I had ever so many j
and I presume, he would be able to perform.
as many glorious Actions for my Service, as
either Juba, Cœsario, Artamenes, or Artabai$.
who, though not a Prince, was greater than ao^«
of them.
If

<page 218>
Chap. 6. QJJIXOTE. i9$
If those Persons you have named, said Mis*
Glanville, were Murderers, and made a Practice
of killing People, I hope my Brother will be
too wife to follow their Examples: A strange
kind of Virtue and Courage indeed, to take
away the Lives of one's Fellow-Creatures! How
did such Wretches escape the Gallows, I won-
der?
I perceive, interrupted Arabella, what kind
of Apprehensions you have: I suppose you
think, if your Brother was to kill my Enemy,
the Law would punish him for it: But pray
undeceive yourself, Miss: The Law has no
Power over Heroes; they may kill as many
Men as they please, without being called to any
Account for it; and the more Lives they take
away, the greater is their Reputation for Virtue
and Glory. . The illustrious Jrtaban, from the
Condition of»a private Man, raised himself to
the sublimest Pitch of Glory by his Valour; for
be not only would win half a dozen Battles in
a Day; but, to shew that Victory followed him
where-ever he went, he would change Parties,
and immediately the Vanquished became Con-
querors; then, returning to the Side he had
quitted, changed the Laurels of his former
Friends into Chains. He made nothing of
tumbling Kings from their Thrones, and giving
away half a dozen Crowns in a Morning; for
his Generosity was equal to his Courage; and
to this Height of Power did he raise himself
by his Sword. Beginning at first with petty
t. Conquests, and not disdaining to oppose his
Xjlorious Arm to sometimes less than a Score of
his Enemies; so, by degrees, enuring himself
K 2 to

<page 219>
196 Tbe FEMALE BookUL
to conquer inconsiderable Numbers, he came
at last to be the Terror of whole Armies, who
would fly at the Sight of his single Sword.
This is all very astonishing indeed, said Miss
Glanville: However, I must intreat you, not to
insist upon my Brother's quarrelling and fight-
ing with People, since it will be neither for
your Honour, nor his Sasety; for I am afraid,
if he was to commit Murder to please you, the
Laws would make him suffer for it; and the
World would be very free with its Censures on
your Ladyship's Reputation, for putting him
upon such shocking Crimes.
By your Discourse, Miss, replied Arabella,
one would imagine, you knew as little in what
the good Reputation of a Lady consists, as the
Sasety of a Man; for certainly the one depends
intirely upon his Sword, and the other
upon the Noise and Bustle she makes in the
World. The Blood that is shed for a Lady,
enhances the Value of her Charms; and the
more Men a Hero kills, the greater his Glory,
and, by Consequence, the more secure he is.
If to be the Cause of a great many Deaths, can
make a Lady infamous; certainly none were
ever more so, than Mandana, Cleopatra, and
Statira, the most illustrious Names in AntU
quity; for each of whom, haply, an hundred
thousand Men were killed: Yet none were ever
so unjust, as to profane the Virtue of those Di-
vine Beauties, by casting any Censures upon
them for these glorious Effects of their Charms,
and the heroic Valour of their Admirers.
I must confess, interrupted Miss Glanville,
I should not be sorry to have a Duel or Two
fought

<page 220>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. i97
fought for me in Hyde.Park; but then I would
not have any Blood shed for the World.
Glanville here interrupting his Sister with a
Laugh, Arabella, also could not forbear smiling
at the harmless Kind of Combats her Cousin
was fond of.
But to put an End to the Conversation, and
the Dispute which gave Rise to it, she obliged
Mr. Glanville to promise to fight with the Im-
postor Edward, whenever he found him; and
either take away his Lise, or force him to con-
fess, he had no Part in the Design he had me-
ditated against her.
This being agreed upon, Arabella, conduct-
ing Mils Glanville to her Chamber, retired to
her own ; and passed the NTght with much
greater Tranquillity, than she had done the
preceding; being satisfied with the Care she
had taken of her own Glory, and persuaded
that Glanville was not unfaithful; a Circum-
stance, that was of more Consequence to her
Happiness, than she was yet aware of.
Chap. VII.
In which our Heroine is suspecled of Insen-
sibility.
HI LE these things passed at the
Castle, Sir George was meditating on
the Means he should use to acquire the Esteem
©f Lady Bella, of whose Person he was a little
K 3 enamoured,


<page 221>
i98 The FEMALE. Book HI.
enamoured, but of her Fortune a great deal
more.
By the Observations he had made on her Be-
haviour, he discovered her peculiar Turn: He
was well read in Romances himself, and had
actually employed himself some Weeks in giv-
ing a new Version of the Grand Cyrus; but
rhe prodigious Length of theTafk he had under-
taken, terrified him so much, that he gave it
over: Nevertheless, he was perfectly well ac-
quainted with the chief Characters in most of
the French Romances; could tell every thing
that was borrowed from them, in all the new
Novels that came out; and, being a very accu-
rate Critic, and a mortal Hater of Dryden, ri-
diculed him for want of Invention, as it appeared
by his having recourse to these Books for ths
most shining Characters and Incidents in his
Plays. Almanzor, he would fay, was the Copy
of the famous Avtaban in Cleopatra, whose Ex-
ploits Arabella had expatiated upon to Miss
Glanville, and her Brother: His admired Cha-
racter of Mclantba in Marriage a.la-mode, was
drawn from Berijsa in the Grand Cyrus; and
the Story of Ojmyn and Bensayda, in his Con-
quest of Granada, taken from Sesoftrls and
Timerilla in that Romance.
Fraught therefore with the Knowlege of all
the Extravagances and Peculiarities in those
Books, he resolved to make his Addresses to
Arabella in the Form they prescribed; and,
not having Delicacy enough to be disgusted with
the Ridicule in her Character, served himself
with her Foible, to effect his Designs.
It

<page 222>
Chap. 7. QJJIXOTE. i99
It being necessary, in order to his better Ac-
quaintance with Arabella, to be upon very
Friendly Terms with Miss GlanvUle and her
Brother, he said a thousand gallant Things to
the one, and seemed so little offended with the
Gloom he observed upon the Countenance of
the other, who positively assured him, that
Arabella meant only to laugh at him, when she
promised him her History, that he intreated
him, with the most obliging Earnestness, to fa-
vour him with his Company at his House, where
he omitted no sort of Civility, to confirm their
Friendfliip and Intimacy; and persuaded him,
by several little and seemingly unguardtu Ex-
pressions, that he was not so great an Admirer
6f Lady Bella, as her agreeable Cousin Miss
GlanvUle.
Having thus secured a Footing in the Castle,
he furnished his Memory with all the necessary
Rules of making Love in Arabella's Taste, and
deserred his next Visit no longer than till the
following Day; but Mr. GlanvUle being in-
disposed, and not able to see Company, he knew
it would be in vain to expect to see Arabella,
since it was not to be imagined, Miss Glan~
ville could admit of a Visir, her Brother being
ill; and Lady Bella must be also necessarily en-
gaged with her.
Contenting himself, therefore, with having
inquired after the Health of the Two'Ladies,
he returned home, not a little vexed at his Dis-
appointment.
Mr. Glanville's Indisposition, increasing every
Day, grew at last dangerous enough to fill his
Sister with extreme Apprehensions. Arabella,
K 4. keeping

<page 223>
200 The F E M A L E Book III.
keeping up to her Forms, sent regularly every
Day, to inquire after his Health; but did not
offer to go into his Chamber, though Miss
Glanville was almost always there.
As she conceived his Sickness to be occasioned
by the Violence of his Passion for her, she ex-
pected some Overture should be made her by
his Sister, to engage her to make him a Visit;
such a Favour being never granted by any Lady
to a sick Lover, til] she was previously informed,
her Presence was necessary to hinder the In-
crease of his Distemper.
Miss Glanville would not have sailed to re-
present to her Cousin the Incivility and Care-
lesness of her Behaviour, in not deigning to
come and fee her Brother in his Indisposition,
had not Mr. Glanville, imputing this Neglect
to the Nicety of her Notions, which he had
upon other Occasions experienced, absolutely
forbid her to say any thing to her Cousin upon
this Subject.
Miss Glanville beirg thus forced so Silence,
by the Fear of giving her Brother Uneasiness,
Arabella was extremely disappointed to find,
that, in Five Days Illness, no Application had
been made to her, either by the sick Lover, or
his Sister, who she thought interested herself
too little in his Recovery; so that her Glory
obliging her to lay some Constraint upon her-
self, she behaved with a Coolness and Insensi-
bility, that increased Miss Glcinville's Aversion
to her, while, in reality, she was extremely
concerned for her Cousin's Illness; but not
supposing it dangerous, since they had not re-
course to the usual Remedy, of beseeching a
. Visit

<page 224>
Chap.> QJJIXOTE. 20i
Visit from the Person whose Presence was
r1 >ble to work a Cure, she resolved to wait
However, she never failed in her Respect to
Miss Glanville, whom she visited every Morn-
ing, before she went to her Brother; and also
constantly dined with her in her own Apart-
ment, inquiring always, with great Sweetness,
concerning her Brother's Health; when per-
ceiving her in Tears one Day, as she came in,
as usual, to dine with her, she was extremely
alarmed; and asked with great Precipitation,
If Mr. Glanvill e was worse?
He is so bad, Madam, returned Miss Glan-
ville, that I believe it will be necessary to send
for my Papa, for fear he should die, and he
not see him.
Die, Miss! interrupted Arabella eagerly:
No, he must not die; and shall not, if the Pity
of Arabella is powerful enough to make him
live. Let us go then, Cousin, said she, her
Eyes streaming with Tears; let us go and visit
this dear Brother, whom you lament; Haply
my Sight may repair the Evils my Rigour
has caused him; and since, as I imagine, he has
forborn, through the profound Respect he has
for me, to request the Favour of a Visit, I
will voluntarily bestow it on him, as well for
the Affection I bear you, as because I do not
wish his Death.
You do not wish his Death, Madam! said
Miss Glanville, excessively angry at a Speech,
in her Opinion, extremely insolent: Is it such
a mighty Favour, pray, not to wish the Death
of my Brother, who never injured you? I am

K 5
sure,

<page 225>
202 the F E M A L E Book III.
sure, your Behaviour has been so extremely in-
human, that I have repented a thousand times,
we ever came to the Castle.
Let us not waste the Time in idle Reproaches,
said Arabella: If my Rigour has brought your
Brother into this Condition, my Compassion
can draw him out of it: It is no more than
what al! do suffer, who are possessed of a vio-
lent Passion ; and sew Lovers ever arrive to the
Possession of their Mistresses, without being se-
veral times brought almost to their Graves,
either by their Severity, or some other Cause:
But nothing is more easy, than to work a Cure,
in these Cases; for. the very Sight of the Person
beloved sometimes does it, as it happened to
Artamenes, when the Divine Mandana con-
descended to visit him: A sew kind Words,
spoken by the fair Princess of Persia to Oroon-
dates, recalled him from the Gates of Death;
and one Line from Parisatk's Hand, which
brought a Command loLyjimachus to live, made
him not only resolve, but even able, to obey
her.—
Miss Glanvillt, quite out of Patience at this
tedious Harangue, without any Regard to Cere-
mony, flounced out of the Room; and ran to
her Brother's Chamber, followed by Arabella,
who imputed her rude Haste to a Suspicion,
that her Brother was worse.
C H a p.

<page 226>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 203
Chap. VIII.
By which we hose the Reader wilt be dif-
ferently affected.
AT their Entrance into the Room, Miss
Glanville inquired of the Physician, justr
going out, How he found her Brother? Who
replied, that his Fever was increased since last
Night; and that it would not (seeing Arabella
preparing to go to his Bedside) be proper to
disturb him.
Saying this, he bow'd, and went out; and
Miss Glanville, repeating what the Physician had
said, begged her to deser speaking to him tilt
another time.
I know^ said she, that he apprehends, the
Sight of me will cause so many tumultuous
Motions'in the Soul of his Patient, as may prove
prejudicial to him: Nevertheless, since his.
Disorder is, questionless, more in his Mind than
Body, I may prove, haply, a better Physician
than he; since I am more likely, than he, to
cure an Illness I have caused—
Saying this, she walked up to Mr. Glanville'a
Bed-fide, who, seeing her, thanked her, with a
weak Voice, for coming to fee him; assuring
her, he was very sensible of the Favour she did'
him—
You must not, said she, blufting, thank ma
too much, lest I think the Favour I have done
you, is really of more Consequence than P
imagined, since it merits so many Acknowlege-
K 6 ments:

<page 227>
204 The FEMALE Book III.
ments: Your Physician tells us, pursued she,
that your Lise is in Danger j but I persuade
myself, you will value it so much from this
Moment, that you will not protract your Cure
any longer.
Are you mad, Madam, whispered Miss Glan-
ville, who stood behind her, to tell my Bro-
ther, that the Physician says he is in Danger?
I suppose you really wish he may die, or you
would not talk so.
If, answered she, whispering again to Miss
Glanville, you are not satisfied with what I have
already done for your Brother, I will go as far
as Modesty will permit me : And gently pulling
open the Curtains;
GlanvilUf said she, with a Voice too much
raised for a sick Person's Ear, I grant to your
Sister's Solicitations, what the fair Statira did
to an Interest yet more powerful, since, as you
know, it was her own Brother, who pleaded
in Favour of the dying; Orontes: Therefore,
considering you in a Condition haply no less
dangerous, than that of that passionate Prince,
I condescend, like her, to tell you, that I do not
wish your Death; that I in treat you to live .,
and, lastly, by all the Power I have over you,
I command you to recover.
Ending these Words, she closed the Curtain,
that her transported Lover might not see her
Blushes and Confusion, which were so great,
that, to conceal them, even from Miss Glan-
viUe, she hurried out of the Room, and retired
to her own Apartment, expecting, in a little
time, to receive a Billet, under the sick Man's
Hand, importing, that, in Obedience to her
Commands.

<page 228>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 205
Commands, he was recovered, and ready to
throw himself at her Feet, to thank her for that
Lise she had bestowed upon him, and to de-
dicate the Remains of it to her Service.
Miss Glanville, who stayed behind her, in a
strange Surprize at her ridiculous Behaviour y
though she longed to know what her Brother
thought of it, finding he continued silent,
would not disturb him. The Shame he con-
ceived at hearing so absurd a Speech from a
Woman he passionately loved; and the Desire
he had, not to hear his Sister's Sentiments up-
on it; made him counterseit Sleep, to avoid
any Discourse with her upon so disagreeable a
Subject.
. That Day his Fever increased; and the next,
the Physician pronouncing him in great Dan-
ger, a Messenger was dispatched to Town, to
hasten the Coming of Sir Charles; and poor
Miss Glanville was quite inconsoleable, under
the Apprehensions of losing him.
Arabella, not to derogate from her Character,
affected great Firmness of Mind upon this Oc-
casion; she used the roost persuasive Eloquence
to moderate her Cousin's Affliction, and caused
all imaginable Care to be taken of Mr. Glan-
ville: While any one was present, her Looks
discovered only a calm and decent Sorrow;
yet when she was alone, or had only her dear
Lucy with her, she gave free Vent to her Tears;
and discovered a Grief for Mr. Glanville's Ill-
ness, little different from that she had felt for her
Father's.
As she now visited him constantly every Day,
she took an Opportunity, when she was alone
by

<page 229>
2o6 The F E M A L E Book III.
bv his Bed-side, to Aide him for his Disobedi-
ence, in not recovering, as fte had command-
ed him.
Dear Cousin, answered he faintly, Can you
imagine, Health is not my Choice? And do
you think, I would suffer these Pains, if I could
possibly ease myself of them?
. Those Pains, replied Arabella, mistaking his
Complaint, ought to have ceased, when the
Cause of them did ; and when I was no longer
i igorousr you ought no longer to have suffered:
But tell me, since you are, questionless, one
df the strangest Aden in the World, and the
hardest to be comforted; nay, and I may add^.
the most disobedient of all, that ever wore the
Fetters of Love; Tell me, I fay, what must I
do to content you?
If I live,. Cousin, said Glanville-^
Nay, interrupted Arabella, since my Empire
over you is not so absolute as I thought; and
since you think sit to reserve to yourself the
Liberty of dying, contrary to my Desire; I
think I had better resolve, not to make any
Treaty with you: However, as J have gone
thus far, I will do something more; and tell
you, since I have commanded you to live, I
will also permit you to love me, in order to
make the Lise I have bestowed on you, worthy
your Acceptance. Make me no Reply, said
she, putting her Hand on his Mouth; but be-
gin from this Moment to obey me.
Saying this, she went out of the Room—
A sew Hours after, his Fever being come to
a Height, he grew delirious, and talked very
wildly; but a favourable Crisis ensuing, he selt
into

<page 230>
Chap. 8. QU I X O T E. 207
into a sound and quiet Sleep, and continued in
it for several Hours: Upon his waking, the
Physician declared, his Fever was greatly aba-
ted; and the next Morning, pronounced him.
out of Danger—
Miss Glanville, transported with Joy, ran tc*
Lady Bella, and informed her of this good
News; but as she did not make her the Ac-
knowlegements she expected, for being the
Cause of his Recovery, she behaved with more
Reserve than Miss Glanville thought was neces-
sary : Which renewed her former Disgusts; yet,
dreading to displease her Brother, she concealed
it from the Observation of her Cousin——-.
Arabella, being desirous of completing her
Lover's Cure by some more favourable Ex-
pressions, went to his Chamber, accompanied
by Miss Glanville.
I see, said she, approaching to his Bed-side,
with an inchanting Smile, that you know how
to be obedient, when you please; and I begin
to know, by the Price you set upon your Obe-
dience, that small Favours will not content you.
Indeed, my dearest Cousin, said Glanville,
who had found her more interested in his Re-
covery than he expected, you have been very
obliging, and I will always most gratefully own
it.
I am glad, interrupted Arabella, that Gra-
titude is not baniflred from all your Family; and
that that Person in it, for whom I have the most
Sensibility, is not intirely divested of it—
I hope, said Mr. Glanville, my Sister has
given you no Cause to complain of her.
J
Indeed

<page 231>
so8 l'he FEMALE Book III.
Indeed but she fias, replied Arabella; for,
notwithstanding she is obliged to me for the
Lise of a Brother, whom questionless she loves
very well; nevertheless, she did not deign to
make me the least Acknowlegement for what I
have done in yoitr Favour: However, Glan-
ville, provided you continue to observe that
Respect and Fidelity towards me, which I have
Reason to hope for from you, your Condition
shall be never the worse for Miss Glanvilfe's un-
acknowleging Temper; and I now confirm
the Grant I Yesterday made you, and repeat
it again; That I permit you to love me, and
promise you not to be displeased at any Testi-
monies you will give me of your Passion, pro-
vided you serve me with an inviolable Fidelity.
But, Madam, returned Mr. GlanviHe, to
make my Happiness complete, you must also
promise to love me; or else what signifies the
Permission you give me to love you?
You are almost as unacknowleging as your
Sister, resumed Jrabella, blushing; and if your
Health was persectly re.established, question-
less, I should chide you for your Presumption;
but since something must be allowed to sick
Persons, whose Reason, one may suppose, is
Weakened by their Indisposition, I will pardon
your Indiscretion at this time, and counsel you
to wait patiently for what Heaven will deter-
mine in your Favour: Therefore endeavour to
merit my Affection by your Respect, Fidelity,
and Services; and hope from my Justice, what-
ever it ought to bestow—
Ending this Speech, with a Solemnity of Ac-
cent, that gave Mr. Glanville to understand,
any

<page 232>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 209
any Reply would offend her, he silently kissed
her fair Hand, which she held out to him; a
Favour, his Sickness, and the Terms upon
which they now were, gave him a Right to
expect—And, finishing her Visit for that time,
left him to his Repose; being extremely pleased
at the Prospect of his Recovery, and very well
satisfied at having so gracefully got over so
great a Difficulty, as that of giving him Per«
mission to love her: For by the Laws of Ro-
mance, when a Lady has once given her Lover
that Permission, she may lawfully allow him
to talk to her upon the Subject of his Passion,
accept all bis Gallantries, and claim an absolute
Empire over all his Actions; reserving to her-
self the Right of fixing the Time when (he may
own her Affection: And when that important
Step is taken, and his Constancy put to a sew
Years more Trial; when he has killed all his
Rivals, and rescued her from a thousand Dan-
gers; she at last condescends to reward him
with her Hand; and all her Adventures are at
an End for the future.
END of the Third Book.
THE

<page 233>
~）;
~ ~ ~ ~ ~--~------+----
~~ ~~~~）;-----

<page 234>
[ Ml ]

THE
Female Qjj ixote,
BOOK IV.
Chap. I.
In which our Heroine discovers her Know.
lege in Astronomy.
IR George, who bad never missed
a Day, during Mr. Glanville'3
Illness^ in sending to the Castle,
now he was able to see Company,
visited him very frequently; and
sometimes had the Happiness to
meet with Arabella in his Chamber: But,
knowing the Conditions of her Father's Will,
and Mr. Glanville's Pretensions, he wasobfiged
to lay so much Constrait upon himself, in the
Presence of Miss Glanville, and her Brother, that
he


<page 235>
2i2 The F E M A L E Book IV.
he hardly durst trust his Eyes, to express his Ad-
miration ofher, for Fear of alarmingthem with
any Suspicion of his Designs: However, he
did not fail to recommend himself to' her
Esteem, by a Behaviour to her full of the most
persect Respect; and very often, ere he was
"aware, uttered some of the extravagant Com-
pliments, that the Gallants in the French Ro-
mances use to their Mistresses.
If he walked with her in the Gardens, he
would observe, that the Flowers, which were
before languishing and pale, bloomed withfrelh
Beauty at her Approach; that the Sun mined
mtt wrth douMerBrightiuss, to exceed if possi-
ble, the Lustre of her Eyes; and that the Wind,
fond of kissing hereek.stial Countenance, played
with her fair Hair; and, by gentle Murmurs,
declared its Happiness—.
If Miss Glanville happened to be present,
when he talked to her in this Strain, she would
suppose Jie was ridiculing her Cousin's fan-
tastical Turn ; and when (he had an Opportu-
nity of speaking to him alone, would chide him,
with a great deal of good Humour, for giving
her so much Diversion at her Cousin's Ex-
pence.
Sir George, improving this Hint, persuaded
Miss Glanville by his Answers, that he really
laughed at Arabella; and, being now less sear-
ful of giving any Suspicion to the gay Coquet,
since she assisted him to deceive her, he applied
himself, with more Assiduity than ever, to insi-
nuate himself into Arabella'a Favour.
However, the Necessity he was under of be-
ing always of Arabella's Opinion, sometimes
drew

<page 236>
Chap. i. QJJIXOTE. 2t3
drew him into little Difficulties with MikGlan-
.ville. Knowing that young Lady was extreme-
ly fond of Scandal, he told her, as a most agree-
able Piece of News, one Afternoon when he
was there, that he had seen Miss Groves, who,
he supposed, had come into the Country upon
the same Account a« she had done a Twelve.;
month before: Her Marriage being yet a Se-
cret, the complaisant Baronet threw out an
Hint or two, concerning the Familiarity and
Correspondence there was between her and the
Gentleman to whom Ihe was really secretly
married.
Miss Glanville, making the most of this In-
telligence, said a thousand severeThings against
the unfortunate Miss Groves; which Arabella,
always benevolent and kind, could not bear.
I persuade myself, said she to her Cousin,
that you have been misinformed concerning
this Beauty, whose Misfortunes you aggravate
by your cruel Censures; and whoever has gi-
ven you the History of her Lise, has, haply,
done it with great Injustice
Why, Madam8 interrupted Miss Glanville,
do you think you are better acquainted with her
History, as you call it, who have never been
in Town, where her Follies made her so re-
ma rkabfe, than Persons who were Eye-wit-
nesses of all her ridiculous Actions?
I apprehend, said Arabella, that I, who have
had a Relation made to me of all the Passages
of fher Lise, and have been told all her most
secret Thoughts, may know as much, if not
more, than Persons who have lived in the fame
Place with her, and have not had that Advan-
tage;

<page 237>
2i4 7^ FEMALE BookIV.
tage; and I think, I know enough to vindi-
cate her from many cruel Aspersions.
Pray, Madam, returned Miss Glanville, will
your Ladyship pretend to defend her scandalous
Commerce with Mr. L-—?
I know not, Miss, said Arabella, why you
call her Intercourse with that perjured Man by
so unjust an Epithet. l(M\(s Groves be unchaste,
so was the renowned Cleopatra, whose Marriage
with Julius Cæsar is controverted to this Day.
And what Reasons, Madam, said Miss Glan-
Dille, have you for supposing, Miss Groves was
married to Mr. L . , since all the World
knows to the contrary?
Very sufficient ones, said Arabella; since it is
hardly possible to suppose, a young Lady of Mise
Groves's Quality would stain the Lustre of her
Descent by so shameful an Intrigue; and also,
since there are Examples enough to be found of
Persons, who suffered under the same unhappy
Circumstances as herself; yet were persectly
innocent, as was that great Queen I have men-
tioned; who questionless, you, Sir, are suffi-
ciently convinced, was married to that illu-
strious Conqueror; who, by betraying so great
and so fair a Queen, in great measure tarnished
the Glory of his Laurel;—»
Married, Madam ! replied Sir George: Who
presumes to fay, that fair Queen was not mar-
ried to that illustrious Conqueror?
Nay, you know, Sir, interrupted Arabella,
many People did fay, even while she was living,
that she was not married ; and have branded her
Memory with infamous Calumnies, upon Ac-
count of the Son she had by Cæsar, the brave
7 Ccesario,

<page 238>
Chap. i. QJJIXOTE. 2i5
Casario, who, under the Name of Cleomedon,
performed such Miracles of Valour in Ethiopia.
I assure you, Madam, said Sir George* I was
always a great Admirer of the famous Cleome-
don, who was certainly the greatest Hero ia the
World.
Pardon me, Sir, said Arabella; Cleomedon
was, questionless, a very valiant Man; but he»
and all the Heroes that ever were, must give
place to the unequalled Prince of Mauritania %
that illustrious, and for a long time unfortu-
nate, Lover of the Divine Cleopatra, who was
Daughter, as you questionless know, of the
great Queen we have been speaking of —
Dear Heart! said Miss Glanville, What is
all this to the Purpose f I would fain know,
whether Sic George believes, Miss Groves was
ever married to Mr. L— . . ..
Doubtless, I do, said he; for, as Lady Bella .
fays, she is in the fame unhappy Circumstance
with the great Cleopatra; and if Julius Casar
could be guilty of denying his Marriage with,
that Queen, 1 see no Reason to suppose, why.
Mr. L might not be guilty of the same
kind of Injustice.
So then, interrupted Miss Glanville, redden-
ing with Spite, you will really offer to main.;
tain, that Miss Groves was married? Ridicu-
lous! How such a Report would be laughed at
in London!
I assure you, replied Arabella, if ever I go
to London, I shall not scruple to maintain that
Opinion to every one, who will mention that
Fair.one to me; and use all my Endeavours
to confirm them in it.
Your

<page 239>
2i6 ^ FEMALE BookIV.
Your Ladyship would do well, said Miss
Glanville, to persuade People, that Miss Groves,
at fifteen, did not want to run .away with her
Writing-master.
As I am persuaded myself, said Arabella, that
Writing-master was some noble Stranger in
Disguise, who was passionately in Love with
her, I shall not suffer any body, in my Hear-
ing, to propagate such an unlikely Story; but
since he was a Person worthy of her Affection*
if she had run away with him, her Fault was
not without Example, and even Excuse: You
know what the fair Artemisa did for Alexander,
Sir, pursued she, turning to Sir George: I would
fain know your Sentiments upon the Action
of that Princess, which some have not scrupled
to condemn—
Whoever they are, Madam, said Sir George,
who condemn the fair Artemisa for what slie
did for Alexander, are Miscreants and Slan-
derers; and though that beautiful Princess has
been dead more than two thousand Years, I
would draw my Sword in Desence of her Cha-
racter, against all who should presume, in my
Presence, to cast any Censures upon it.
Since you are so courageous, said Miss Glan-.
ville, laughing excessively at this Sally, which,
she thought, was to ridicule her Cousin; it is
to be hoped, you will desend a living Lady's
Character, who may thank you for it; and
make the World believe, that her Correspond-
ence with Mr. L— was intirely innocent; and
that she never had any Design to run away
with her Writing-master.
4
Are

<page 240>
Chap. i. QJJIXOTE. 2i7
Are you resolved, Cousin, said Lady Bella,
to persist in that ridiculous Mistake, and take
a Nobleman for a Writing-master only because
his Love put him upon such a Stratagem to ob-
tain his Mistress?
Indeed, Lady Bella, said Miss Glanville, smile-
ing, you may as well persuade me, the Moon
is made of a Cream Cheese, as that any Noble-
man turned himself into a Writing.master, to
obtain Miss Groves-
Is it possible, Miss, said Arabella, that you
can offer such an Affront to my Understanding,
as to suppose, I would argue upon such a ridi-
culous System; and compare the second glo-
rious Luminary of the Heavens to so unworthy
a Resemblance? I have taken some Pains to
contemplate the heavenly Bodies; and, by
Reading and Observation, am able to compre-
hend some Part of their Excellence: Therefore
it is nor probable, I should descend to such tri-
vial Comparisons; and liken a planet, which,
haply, is not much less than our Earth, to a
thing so inconsiderable, as that you name—.
Pardon me, dear Cousin, interrupted Miss
Glanville, laughing. louder than before, if I di-
vert myself a little with the Extravagance of
your Notions. Really, I think, you have no
Reason to be angry, if I supposed you might
make a Comparison between the Moon and
a Cream Cheese; since you say, that same
Moon, which don't appear broader than your
Gardener's Face, is not much less than the
whole World: Why, certainly, I. have more
Reason to trust my own Eyes, than such whim-
sical Notions as these.
Vol. I. L Arabella,

<page 241>
2iS Tie FEMALE Book IV.
Arabella, unwilling to expose her Cousin's Ig-
norance, by a longer Dispute upon this Sub-
ject, begged her to let it drop for the present;
and, turning to Sir George, I am very glad, said
she, that having always had some Inclination to
excuse, and even defend, the Flight of Arte-
msa with Alexander, my Opinion is warranted
by that of a Person so generous as yourself: In-
deed, when we consider, that this Princess for-
sook her Brother's Dominions, and fled away
with a Lover whom she did not hate; question-
less, her Enemies accuse her, with some Ap-
pearance of Reason, of too great Imbecility.
But, Madam, replied Sir George, her Ene-
mies will not take the Pains to examine her
Reasons for this Conduct—
True, Sir, resumed Arabella; for she was in
Danger of seeing a Prince, who loved her, put to
a cruel and infamous Death upon a public Scaf-
fold i and she did not resolve to fly with him,
till all her Tears and Prayers were found in-
effectual to move the Kong her Brother to
Mercy.
Tho', replied Sir George, I am extremely
angry with the indiscreet Cepio, who discovered
Alexander to the Armenian King; yet what does
your Ladyship think of that gallant Action of
his, when he saw him upon the Scaffold, and
the Executioner ready to cutoffhis Head ? How
brave it was of him, to pass undauntedly thro'
the prodigious Number of Guards that environ-
ed the Scaffold ; and, with his drawn Sword, run
the Executioner through the Body, in the Sight
of them all! Then giving the Prince another
Sword,


<page 242>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 2i9
Sword, engage more than Two thousand Men
in his Desence!
Questionless, replied Arabella, it was a glo-
rious Action; and when I think, how the King
of Armenia was enraged to see such a Multitude
of Soldiers fly from the Swords of two Men, I
cannot chuse but divert myself with the Con-
sternation he was in: Yet that was nothing to
the horrible Despair, which tormented him af-
terwards, when he found, that Alexander, af-
ter being again taken and imprisoned, had
broken his Chains, and carried away with him
the Princess Artemija his Sister.
Chap. II.
In which a very pleasing Conversation is
left unfinished.
AS Arabella was in this Part of her Dis-
course, a Servant came to inform her,
that Sir Charles Glanville was just alighted.
Upon which, Miss Glanville flew to receive her
Father; and Arabella, walking a little flower
after her, gave Sir George an Opportunity of
holding a little longer Conversation with her.
I dare believe, Madam, said he, when you
read the Story of the unfortunate Alexander,
your fair Eyes did not refuse to shed some
Tears at the barbarous and shameful Death
he was going to suffer: Yet I assure you, me-
lancholy as his Situation was, it was also very
L 2 glorious

<page 243>
220 The FEMALE Book IV.
glorious for him, since he had the sublime
Satisfaction of dying for the Person he adored;
and had the ravishing Pleasure to know, that his
Fate would draw Tears from that lovely Prin-
cess, for whom he sacrificed his Lise: Such a
Condition, Madam, ought to be envied rather
than pitied; for, next to the Happiness of pos-
sessing the Person one adores, certainly the
Glory of dying for her is most to he coveted.
Arabella, pleasingly surprized to hear Lan-
guage so conformable to her own Ideas, looted
for a Moment upon the Baronet, with a most
inchanting Complacency in her Eyes—
It mult be consessed, Sir, fays she, that you
speak very rationally upon these Matters; and
by the Tenderness and Generosity. of your Sen-
timents, you give me cause to believe, that
your Heart is prepossefled with some Object
worthy of inspiring them.
Sir George seeming as if he struggled to sup-
press a Sigh; You are in the right, Madam,
said he, to suppose, that if my Heart be
prepossessed with any Object, it is with one,
who is capable of inspiring a very sublime Pas-
sion; and I assure you, if ever it submits to any
Fetters, they shall be imposed on me by the
fairest Person in the World—
Since Love is not voluntary, replied Ara-
bella, smiling, it may happen, that your Heart
may be surprised by a meaner Beauty, than
such a one as you describe: However, as a
Lover has always an extraordinary Partiality
for the beloved Object, 'tis probable, what
you fay may come to pass; and you may be

<page 244>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 221
in Love with the fairest Person in the World,
in your own Opinion.
They were now so near the House, that Sir
George could reply no other ways, than by a very
passionate Glance, which Arabella did not ob-
serve, being in haste to pay her Respects to her
Uncle, whom she met just going to Mr. Glan-
ville. Her Looks were directed to him. Sir
Charles saluting her with great Affection, they
all went into Mr. Glanville's Chamber, who
received his Father with the utmost Respect and
Tenderness; extremely regretting the Trouble
he had been at in taking a journey to the
Castle upon his Account; and gently blaming
bis Sister for her Precipitancy in alarming him
so soon.
Sir Charles, extremely overjoyed to find him
so well recovered, would not allow him to
blame Mise Glanville for what she had done;
but, addressing himself to his Niece, he thanked
her for the Care she had taken of Mr. Glan-
ville., in very obliging Terms.
Arabella could not help blushing at her Un-
cle's Compliment, supposing he thanked her for
having restored her Cousin to his Health.
I assure you, Sir, said she, Mr. Glanville is
less obliged to my Commands, than to the
Goodness of his Constitution, for his Recovery;
and herein he was not so obedient, as many
Persons I could name to him.
Mr. Glanville, willing to prevent the Com-
pany's Observation upon this Speech, began to
acquaint his Father with the Rife and Pro-
gress of his Distemper: But though the old
Gentleman listened with great Attention to his
L 3 Son,

<page 245>
222 The FEMALE Book IV.
Son, while he was speaking; yet not having lost
a Word of what Arabella had said, as soon as he
was done, he turned to his Niece, and asked
her, how she could be so unjust, to accuse his
Son of Disobedience, because he did not reco-
ver, when she commanded him? Why, Ma-
dam, added he, you want to carry your Power
farther than ever any Beauty did before you ;.
since you pretend to make People sick and well,
whenever you please.
Really, Sir, replied Arabella, I pretend to
no more Power, than what I presume all others
of my Sex have upon the like Occasions; and
since nothing is more common, than for a
Gentleman, though ever so sick, to recover in
Obedience to the Commands of that Person,
who has an absolute Power over his Lise, I
conceive, I have a Right to think myself in-
jured, if Mr. Glanvllle, contrary to mine, had
thought proper to die—
Since, said the old Gentleman, smiling, my
Son has so well obeyed your Commands in re-
covering his Health, I sliall tremble, lest, in
Obedience to a contrary Command of yours, he
should die, and deprive me of an Heir; a Mis-
fortune, which, if it should happen, I should
place to your Account.
I assure you, Sir, said Arabella, very gravely,
I have too great an Esteem for Mr, Glanville,
to condemn him to so severe a Punishment as
Death for light Offences: And since it is not
very probable, that he will ever commit such
Crimes against me, 3*6 can be only expiated by
bis Death; such as' Infidelity, Disobedience,

<page 246>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 223
and the like; you have no Reason to sear such
a Misfortune by my Means—
Alas! replied Sir George, you Beauties make
very nice Distinctions in these Cases; and
think, if you do not directly command your
Lovers to die, you are no-ways accountable for
their Death: And when a Lover, as it often
happens, dies through Despair of ever being able
to make himself beloved; or, being doomed to
Banishment or Silence, falls into a Fever, from
which nothing but Kindness can recover him;
and, that being denied, he patiently expires; I
fay, when these things happen, as they cer-
tainly do every Day; how can you hold your-
selves guiltless of their Deaths, which are ap-
parently occasioned, either by your Scorn or
Insensibility?
Sir Charles and Miss Glanville were ex-
tremely diverted at this Speech of Sir George's;
and Mr. Glanville, though he would have wish-
ed he had been rallying any other Person's Follies
than his Cousin's, yet could not help smiling at
the solemn Accent, in which he delivered him-
self—
Arabella, mightily pleased with his Manner of
talking, was resolved to furnish him with more
Occasions of diverting the Company at her Ex-
pence.
I see, answered she, you are one of those
Persons, who call a just Docorum, which all
Ladies, who love Glory as they ought tq do,
are obliged to preserve, by the Name of Seve-
rity: But pray, what would you have a Lady
do, whom an importunate Lover presumes to
declare his Paffion to? You know it is not per-
L 4 mitted

<page 247>
224 ^FEMALE Book IV.
tnitted us to listen to such Discourses; and
you know also, whoever is guilty of such art
Offence, merits a most rigorous Punishment:
Moreover, you find, that when a Sentence of
Banishment or Silence is pronounced upon them,
these unhappy Criminals ate so conscious of the
Justice of their Doom, that they never murmur
against their Judge who condemns them ; and
therefore, whatever are their Fates, in Conse-
quence of that Anger they have incurred, the
Ladies, thus offended, ought not to be charged
with it, as any cruel Exertion of their Power.
Such Eloquence as yours, Madam, replied
Sir George, might desend Things yet more un-
justifiable: However, you must give me leave,
as being interested in the Safety of my Sex,
still to be of Opinion, that no Man ought to
be hated, because he adores a beautiful Object,
and consecrates all his Moments to her Ser-
vice.
Questionless, resumed Arabella, he will not
be hated, while, out of the Respect and Reverence
he bears her, he carefully conceals his Passion
from her Knowlep;e; but as soon as ever he
breaks through the Bounds, which that Re-
spect prescribes him, and lets her understand
his true Sentiments, he has Reason to expect
a most rigorous Sentence, since he certainly,
by that Presumption, has greatly deserved it.
If the Ladies, replied Sir George, were more
equitable, and would make some Distinction
between those who really love them in a pas-
sionate and respectful Silence, and others who
do not seel the Power of their Charms, they
might spare themselves the Trouble of hearing
what

<page 248>
Chap. 2. QUIXOTE. 225
what so mortally offends them: But when a
Lady sees a Man every Day, who by his Looks,
Sighs, and Sollicitude to please her, by his num-
berless Services, and constant Attendance of her,
makes it evident, that his Soul is possessed with
a violent Passion for her; I fay, when a Lady
sees, and yet will not see, all this, and persists
in using a passionate Adorer with all the Indif-
serence due to a Man wholly insensible of the
Power of her Charms; what must he do in
such a mortifying Situation, but make known
his Torments to her that occasions them, in
order to prevail upon her to have some Sense
of what he does and seels hourly for her fake?
But since he gains nothing by the Discovery
of his Passion, resumed Arabella; but, on the
contrary, loses the Advantages he was before
possessed of, which were very great, since he
might see and discourse with his Mistress every
Day; and, haply, have the Honour to do her a
great many petty Services, and receive some of
her Commands; all these Advantages he loses,
when he declares he loves: And, truly, I think,
a Man who is so unwise as to hazard a certain
Happiness for a very improbable Hope, deserves
to be punished, as well for his Folly as Pre-
sumption; and, upon both these Accounts, Ba-
nishment is not too rigorous a Sentence.
L5 Chap.

<page 249>
226 The FEMALE Book IV.
Chap. III.
Definition of Love and Beauty. ■ —.
'The necessary Qualities of a Hero and
Heroine.
THOUGH, replied Mr. GkmviUe, you
are very severe in the Treatment you think
it necessary our Sex should receive from yours;
yet I wilh some of our Town Beauties were,
if not altogether of your Opinion, yet suffi-
ciently so, as to make it not a Slavery for a
Man to be in their Company; for unless one
talks of Love to these fair Coquets the whole
time one is with them, they are quite dis-
pleased, and look upon a Man who can think
any thing, but themselves, worthy his Thoughts
or Observation, with the utmost Contempt.
How often have you and I, Sir George, pursued
he, pitied the Condition of the sew Men of
Sense, who are sometimes among the Crowd of
Beaux, who attend the Two celebrated Beauties
to all Places of polite Diversion in Town? For
those Ladies think it a mortal Injury done to
their Charms, if the Men about them have
Eyes or Ears for any Object but their Faces,
or any Sound but that of their Voices: So that
the Connoisseurs in Music, who attend them to
Ranelagh, must stop their Ears, like XJlyJfes,
when the Siren Frafi sings; and the Wits, who
gallant them to the Side-box, must lay a much
greater Constraint upon themselves, in order to
resist

<page 250>
Chap. 3. QJ/IXOTE. 227
resist the Soul-moving Garrick; and appear in-
sensible, while he is upon the Stage.
Upon my Soul, added Sir George (forgetting
the Character he assumed) when I have seen
some Persons of my Acquaintance talking to
the eldest of these Ladies, while one of Con-
greve's Comedies has been acting; his Face
quite turned from the Stage, and hers over-
spread with an eternal Smile; her fine Eyes
sometimes lifted up in a beautiful Surprize, and
a little enchanting Giggle half-hid with her Fan;
in spite of their Inattention, I have been ready
to imagine, he was entertaining her with Re-
marks upon the Play, which she was judi-
cious enough to understand; and yet I have
afterwards been informed by himself, that no-
thing was less in their Thoughts; and all
that Variety in her Face, and that extreme
seeming Earnestness in his Discourse, was oc-,
casioned by the most trifling Subjects imagin-
able: He perhaps had been telling her, how
the Sight of her Squirrel, which peeped out of
her Pocket, surprised some Ladies she was
visiting; and what they said upon her Fondness
for it, when she was gone; blaming them at the
fame time for their Want of Delicacy, in not
knowing how to set a right Value upon such
pleasing Animals: Hence proceeded her Smiles,
the lifting up of her Eyes, the half.stifled
Laugh, and all the pretty Gestures that appeared
so wonderfully charming to all thofe who did
not hear their Discourse: And it is upon such
Trifles as these, or else on the inexhaustible
Subject of their Charms, that all who are am-
L 6 Vbttious

<page 251>
228 The FEMALE Book IV.
bitious of being near these Miracles, are under a
Necessity of talking.
And pray, interrupted Arabella, What Sub-
jects afford Matter for a more pleasing Variety
of Conversation, than those of Beauty and
Love? Can we speak of any Object so capable
of delighting as Beauty, or of any Passion of the
Mind more sublime and pleasing than Love?
With Submission, Madam, said Glanville, I
conceive, all that can be said, either of Beauty,
or of Love, may be comprised in a very sew
Words: All who have Eyes, and behold true
Beauty, will be ready to consess it is a very
pleasing Object; and all that can be said of it,
may be said in a very sew Words ; for when we
have run over the Catalogue of Charms, and
mentioned fine Eyes, fine Hair, delicate Com-
plexion, regular Features, and an elegant Shape,
we can only add a sew Epithets more, such as
and the like; and every thing that can be said
of Beauty is exhausted. And so likewise it is
with Love; we know that Admiration precedes
it, that Beauty kindles it, Hope keeps it alive,
and Despair puts an End to it; and that Subject
may be as soon discussed as the other, by the
judicious Use of proper Words ; such as Wounds,
Darts, Fires, Languishings, Dyings, Torture,
Rack, Jealousy, and a sew more of no Signifi-
cation, but upon this Subject.
Certainly, Sir, said Arabella, you have not
well considered what you say, since you main-
tain, that Love and Beauty are Subjects easily
and quickly discussed : Take the Pains, I beseech
you, to reflect a little upon those numerous and
Lovely,

2
long

<page 252>
Chap. 3. QUIXOTE. 229
long Conversations, which these Subjects have
given Rise to in Clelia, and the Grand Cyrus,
where the most illustrious and greatest Personages
in the World manage the Disputes; and the
agreeable Diversity of their Sentiments on those
Heads affords a most pleasing and rational En-
tertainment: You will there find, that the
greatest Conquerors, and Heroes of invincible
Valour, reason with the most exact and scru-
pulous Nicety upon Love and Beauty; the Su-
periority of fair and brown Hair controverted
by Warriors, with as much Eagerness as they
dispute for Victory in the Field; and the dif-
ferent Effects of that Passion upon different
Hearts defined with the utmost Accuracy and
Eloquence.
I must own, interrupted Sir Charles, I
should have but a mean Opinion of those
Warriors, as you call them, who could busy
themselves in talking of such Trifles; and be
apt to imagine such insignificant Fellows, who
could wrangle about the Colour of their Mif-
trefles Hair, would be the first to turn their
Backs upon the Enemy in Battle.
Is it possible, Sir, resumed Arabella, glow-
ing with Indignation, that you can entertain
such unworthy Thoughts of Heroes, who merit
the Admiration and Praise of all Ages for
their inestimable Valour, whom the Spears of
a whole Army opposed to each of their single
Swords would not oblige to fly? What think
you, Sir, pursued she, looking at Sir George, of
the injurious Words my Uncle has uttered
against those heroic Princes, whose Courage, I
believe, you are as well acquainted with as my-
self?

<page 253>
230 The FEMALE Book IV.
self? The great Oroondates, the invincible Ar-
taban, the valiant and fortunate Artamenes, the
irresistible Juba, the incomparable Cleomedon,
and an hundred other Heroes I could name, are
all injured by this unjust Assertion of my Uncle;
since certainly they were not more famous for
their noble and wonderful Actions in War, than
for the Sublimity and Constancy of their Af-
sections in Love.
Some of these Heroes you have named, re-
plied Sir George, had the Misfortune, even in
their Lives, to be very cruelly vilified: The
great Oroondates was a long time accused of
Treachery to his Divine Princess; the valiant
and unfortunate Artamenes was suspected of
Inconstancy; and the irresistible Juba re-
proached with Infidelity and Baseness, by both
his Mistress and Friend.
I never knew you was so well acquainted
with these Persons, interrupted Mr. Glanville;
and I fansy it is but very lately that you have
given yourself the Trouble to read Romances.
I am not of your Opinion, said Arabella.
Sir George, questionless, has appropriated greac
Part of his Time to the Perusal of those Books,
so capable of improving him in all useful Know-
lege; the Sublimity of Love, and the Quintes-
sence of Valour; which two Qualities, if pos-
sessed in a superlative Degree, form a true and
persect Hero, as the Persection of Beauty, Wit,
and Virtue, make a Heroine worthy to be served
by such an illustrious Personage; and I dare
say, Sir George has profited so much by the
great Examples of Fidelity and Courage he has
placed before his Eyes, that no Consideration
whatever

<page 254>
Chap. 3. QJUIXOTE. 23i
whatever could make him for one Moment
fail in his Constancy to the Divine Beauty he
adores; and, inspired by her Charms, he would
scorn to turn his Back, as my Uncle phrases it,
upon an Army of an hundred thousand Men.
Iam extremely obliged to you, Madam, said
Sir George, bowing his Head to the Ground,
to hide a Smile he could not possibly restrain,
for the good Opinion you have of my Courage
and Fidelity.
As for Sir George's Courage, Cousin, said
Mr. Glanv'ille laughing, I never disputed it:
And though it be indeed a very extraordinary
Exertion of it, to fight singly against an Army
of an hundred thousand Men; yet since you are
pleased to think it probable, I am as willing to
believe Sir George may do it as any other Man;
but, as for his Fidelity in Matters of I ove, I
greatly suspect it, since he has been charged
with some very flagrant Crimes of that Na-
ture.
How, Sir! resumed Arabella, Have you ever
been faithless then? and, after having sworn,
haply, to devote your whole Life to the Service
of some Beauty, have you ever violated your
Oaths, and been base enough to forsake her?
I have too much Complaisance, Madam,
said Sir George, to contradict Mr. Glanville,
who has been pleased positively to assert, that
I have been faithless, as you most unkindly
phrase it.
Nay, Sir, replied Arabella, this Accusation
is not of a Nature to be neglected; and though
a King should fay it, I conceive, if you are
innocent, you have a Right to contradict him,
and

<page 255>
232 the FEMALE BookIV.
and clear yourself: Do you consider how deeply
this Assertion wounds your Honour and Happi-
ness for the future? What Lady, think you,
will receive your Services, loaded as you are
with the terrible Imputation of Inconstancy?
Oh ! as for that, Madam, said Miss Glan-
ville, I believe no Lady will think the worse
of Sir George for being faithless: For my
Part, I declare nothing pleases me so much,
as gaining a Lover from another Lady; which
is a greater Compliment to one's Beauty, than
the Addrefles of a Man that never was in Love
before—
You may remember, Cousin, replied Ara-
bella, that I said once before, your Spirit and
Humour resembled a certain great Princess very
much; and I repeat it again, never was there
a greater Conformity in Tempers and Inclina-
tions.
My Daughter, said Sir Charles, is mightily
obliged to you, Lady Bella, for comparing her
to a great Princess: Undoubtedly you mean it
as a Compliment.
If you think, said Arabella, that barely com-
paring her to a Princess be a Compliment, I
must take the Liberty to differ from you: My
Cousin is not so many Degrees below a Princefe,
as that such a Comparison should be thought
extraordinary; for if her Ancestors did not
wear a Crown, they might, haply, have deserved
it; and her Beauty may one Day procure her
a Servant, whose Sword, like that of the great
Jrtaban, may win her a Sceptre; who, with a
noble Confidence, told his Princese, when the
Want of a Crown was objected to him, I wear
a

<page 256>
Chap.3. QUIXOTE. 233
a Sword, Madam, that can perform things
more difficult than what you require; and if
a Crown be all that I want to make me worthy
of you, tell me what Kingdom' in the World
you choose to regin in, and I will lay it at your
Feet.
T'hat was a Promise, replied Sir George, fit
only for the great Artaban to make: But, Ma-
dam, if you will permit me to make any Com-
parison between that renowned Warrior and
myself, I would venture to tell you, that even
the great Artaban was not exempted from the
Character of Inconstancy any more than my-
self, since, as you certainly know, he was in
Love with Three great Princesses successively.
I grant you, replied Arabella, that Artaban
did wear the Chains of Three Princesses succes-
sively: But it must also be remembred in his
Justification, that the Two First of these Beau-
ties refused his Adorations, and treated him with
Contempt, because he was not a Prince : There-
fore, recovering his Liberty, by those Disdains
they cast on him, he preserved that illustrious
Heart from Despair, to tender it with more
passionate Fidelity to the Divine Princess of the
Parthians; who, though greatly their Superior
in Quality and Beauty, did permit him to love
her. However, I must consess, I find some-
thing like Levity in the Facility he found in
breaking his Fetters so often; and when I con-
sider, that among all those great Heroes, whose
Histories I have read, none but himself ever
bore without dying, the Cruelties he experi-
enced from those Princesses, I am sometimes
tempted to accuse him myself of Inconstancy:
But

<page 257>
234 Tb* FEMALE Book IV.
But indeed every thing we read of that Prodigy
of Valour is wholly miraculous; and since the
Performance of Impossibilities was reserved for
him, I conclude this Miracle also, among many
others, was possible to him, whom nothing was
ever able to resist upon Earth. However, pur-
sued she, rising, I shall not absolutely condemn
you, till I have heard your Adventures from
your own Mouth, at a convenient Time, when
I (hall be able to judge how far you merit the
odious Appellation of Inconstancy.
Saying this, she saluted her Uncle, who had
for some time been conversing in a low Voice
with his Son, with a Grace wholly charming,
and retired to her Apartment. Miss Glanville
following her a sew Moments after (the Com-
pliment, extravagant as it was, which she had
paid her, having procured her some Good.wilt
from the vain and interested Miss Glanville,)
they conversed together with a great deal of
good Humour till Dinner-time, which, be-
cause Mr. Glanville was not absolutely reco-
vered, was served in his Chamber.
Chap. IV.
In which our Heroine is engaged in a new
Adventure.
AS Mr. Glanville took a great deal of Pains
to turn the Discourse upon Subjects, on
which the charming Arabella could expatiate,
with-

<page 258>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 235
without any Mixture of that Absurdity, which
mingled itself in a great many others; the rest
of that Day and several others, were passed
very agreeably: At the End of which, Mr.
Glanville being persectly recovered, and able to
go abroad; the Baronet proposed to take the
Diversion of Hunting; which Arabella, who
was used to it, consented to partake of; but
being informed, that Miss Glanville could not
ride, and chose to stay at Home, she would
. have kept her Company, had not Sir Charles
insisted upon the contrary.
As Sir George, and some other Gentlemen,
had invited themselves to be of the Party; Ara-
bella, on her coming down to mount her Horse,
found a great many young Gallants, ready to
offer her their Assistance upon this Occasion:
Accepting therefore, with great Politeness, this
Help from a Stranger, who was nearest her, she
mounted her Horse, giving Occasion xo every
one that was present, to admire the Grace with
which she sat and managed him. Her Shape
being as persect as any Shape amid possibly be,
her Riding-Habit discovered ull its Beauties:
Her Hat, and the white Feather waving over
Part of her fine black Hair, gave a peculiar
Charm to her lovely Face: And she appeared
with so many Advantages in this Dress and
Posture, that Mr. Glanville, forgetting all her
Absurdities, was wholly lost in the Contempla-
tion of so many Charms, as her whole Person
was adorned with.
Sir George, though he really admired Arabella,
was not so passionately in Love as Mr. Glan-
ville ; and, being a keen Sportsman, eagerly pur-
sued

<page 259>
236 the FEMALE Book IV.
sued the Game, with the rest of the Hunters;
but Mr. Glanvllit minded nothing but his Cou-
sin, and kept close by her.
After having rode a long time, Arabella, con-
ceiving it a Piece of Cruelty, not to give her
Lover an Opportunity of talking to her, as, by
his extreme Solicitude, he seemed ardently to
desire, coming to a delightful.Valley, she stop-
ped; and told Mr. Glanville, that, being weary
of the Chace, she should alight, and repose
herself a little under the Shade of those Trees
Mr. Glanville, extremely pleased at this
Proposition, dismounted; and, having helped
her to alight, seated himself by her on the
Grass.
. Arabella, expecting he would begin to talk to
her of his Passion, could not help blushing at the
Thoughts of having given him such an Oppor-
tunity; and Mr. Glanville, endeavouring Co ac-
commodate himself to her Ideas of a Lover,
expressed himself in Terms extravagant enough
to have made a reasonable Woman think he
was making a Jest of her: All which, how-
ever, Arabella was extremely pleased with; and
she observed such a just Decorum in her An-
swers, that, as the Writers of Romance phrase
it, if she did not give him any absolute Hopes
of being beloved, yet she said enough to make
him conclude she did not hate him.
They had conversed in this manner near a
Quarter of an Hour, when Arabella, perceiving
a Man at a little Distance, walking very com-
posedly, shrieked out aloud ; and, rising with the
utmost Precipitation, flew from Mr. Glanville,
and went to untie her Horse; while his Asto-
nishment

<page 260>
.Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 237
nishment being so great at her Behaviour, that
he could not, for a Moment or two, ask her
the Cause of her Fear—
Do you not see, said she, out of Breath with
the Violence of her Apprehensions, the Person
who is coming towards us? It is the fame,
who, some Months ago, attempted to carry me
away, when I was riding out with only Two
Attendants: I escaped, for that time, the.Dan-
ger that threatened me; but, questionless, he
comes now to renew his Attefnpts: Therefore
can you wonder at my Fear? . .
If it should be as you'fayi Madam, inter-
rupted Glanville, What Reason have you to
fear? Do you ridt think I am able to desend
you?''
Ah r without doubt, you are able .' to de-
fend me, answered she; and though,. if you
offer to resist the Violence he comes to use
against me, he will, haply, call Two or Three
Dozen armed Men to his Assistance, who are,
I suppose, concealed hereabouts, yet I am
not apprehensive, that you will be worsted
by them: But as it happened to the brave Juba,
and Cleomedon, while they were fighting with
some hundred Men, who wanted to carry away
their Princesses before their Faces; and were
giving Death at every Blow, in order to pre-
serve them; the Commander of these Ravifh-
ers, seeing the Two Princesses sitting, as I
was, under a Tree, ordered them to be
seized by Two of his Men, and carried away,
while the Two Princes' were lo'sirig' best Part of
their Blood in their Desence; therefore, to
prevent such an Accident happening, while
you

<page 261>
238 The FE MA LE. Book IV.
are fighting for my Rescue, I think it will
the sasest Way for me to get on Horse-
back, that I may be in a Condition to escape;
and that you may not employ your Valour to
no Purpose.
Saying this, having, with Mr. Glanville's
Assistance, loosed her Horse from the Tree, he
helped her to mount, and then remounted his
own.
Your Antagonist, said Arabella, is on Foot;
and therefore, though I prize your Lise ex-
tremely, yet I cannot dispense with myself
from telling you, that 'tis against the Laws of
Knighthood to take any Advantage of that
kind over your Enemy ; nor will I permit your
Concern for my Sasety to make you forget
what you owe to your own Reputation.
Mr. Glanville, fretting excessively at her
Folly, begged her not to make herself uneasy
about things that were never likely to hap-
pen.
The Gentleman yonder, added he, seems to
have no Designs to make any Attempt against
you: If he should, I shall know how to deal
with him: But, since he neither offers to assault
me, nor affront you, I think we ought not to
give him any Reason to imagine we suspect him,
by gazing on him thus; and letting him under-
stand by your Manner, that he is the Subject of
our Conversation: If you please, Madam, we
will endeavour to join our Company.
Arabella, while he was speaking, kept her
Eyes fixed upon his Face, with Looks which
expressed her Thoughts were labouring upon
some very important hoint: And, aster a Pause
of

<page 262>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 239
of some Moments, Is it possible, said she, with
a Tone of extreme Surprize, that I should be
so mistaken in you? Do you really want Cou-
rage enough to desend me against that Ra-
vilher?
Oh Heavens! Madam, interrupted Glan-
ville, try not my Temper thus: Courage
enough to desend you! 'Sdeath ! you will make
me mad! Who, in the Name of Wonder, is
going to molest you?
He whom you see there, replied Arabella,.
pointing to him with her Finger: For know,
cold and insensible as thou art to the Danger
which threatens me, yonder Knight is thy Ri-
val, and a Rival, haply, who deserves my Esteem
, better than thou dost; since, if he has Courage
enough to get me by Violence into his Power,
that fame Courage would make him desend
me against any Injuries I might be offered from
another: And since nothing is so contempti-
ble in the Eyes of a Woman, as a Lover who
wants Spirit to die in her Desence; know, I
can sooner pardon him, whom thou would
cowardly fly from, for the Violence which he
meditates against me, than thyself for the
Pusillanimity thou hast betrayed in my Sight.
With these Words, she galloped away from
her astonistied Lover; who, notdaring to follow
her, for sear of increasing her Suspicions of his
Cowardice, flung himself off his Horse in a vio-
lent Rage; and, forgetting that the Stranger was
observing, and now within Hearing, he sell a curs-
ing and exclaiming against the Books, that
had turned his Cousin's Brain; and railing at
his own ill Fate, that condemned him to the
4 Punilh-

<page 263>
240 The F E M A L E Book IV.
Punishment of loving her. Mr. Harvey (for it
really was he, whom an Affair of Consequence
had brought again into the Country) hearing
some of Mr. Glanviile's last Words, and observ-
ing the Gelhircs he used, concluded he had
been treated like himself by Arabella, whom he
knew again at a Distance: Therefore coming
up to Mr. Glanville, laughing—
Though I have not the Honour of knowing
you, Sir, said he, I must beg the Favour you
will inform me, if you are not disturbed at the
ridiculous Folly of the Lady I saw with you
just now? She is the most fantastical Creature
that ever lived, and, in my Opinion, fit for a
Mad.house: Pray, are you acquainted with
her?
Mr. Glanville, being in a very ill Humour,
could not brook the Freedom of this Language
against his Cousin, whose Follies he could not
bear any one should rail at but himself; and, be-
ing provoked at his Sneers, and the Interruption
he had giving to their Conversation, he looked
upon him with a disdainful Frown, and told him
in an haughty Tone, That he was very imper-
tinent to speak of a Lady of her Quality and
Merit so rudely.
Oh! Sir, 1 beg your Pardon, replied Mr.
Harvey, laughing more than before; What, I
suppose you are the Champion of this fair Lady!
But, I assure myself, if you intend to quar-
rel with every one that will laugh at her, you
will have more Business upon your Hands than
you can well manage.
Mr. Glanville, transported with Rage at this
Insolence, hit him such a Blow with the But-
End

<page 264>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 24i
End of his Whip, that it stunned him for a
Moment; but recovering himself, lie drew his
Sword, and, mad with the Affront he had re-
ceived, made a Push at Glanville; who, avoid-
ing it with great Dexterity, had recourse to his
Hanger for his Desence.
Arabella, in the mean time, who had not rid
far, concealing herself behind some Trees, saw
all the Aftions of her Lover, and intended
Ravisher; and, being possessed with an Opinion
of her Cousin's Cowardice, was extremely re-
joiced to fee him fall upon his Enemy first, snJ
that with so much Fury, that slie had no longer
any Reason to doubt his Courage: Her Suspi-
cions, therefore, being removed, her Tender-
ness for him returned; and when she saw
them engaged with their Swords (for, at that
Distance, she did not plainly perceive the Dif-
ference of their Weapons), her Apprehensions
for her Cousin were so strong, that, though she
did not doubt his Valour, she could not bear
to see him expose his Lise for her: And, with-
out making any Reflections uponthe Singularity
ofher Design, she was going to ride up to thernj
and endeavour to part them; when she saw se-
veral Men come towards them, whom she took
to be the Assistants of her Ravisher, though
they were, in reality, Haymakers; who, at a
Distance, having. seen the Beginning of their
Quarrel, had hastened to part them.
Terrified, therefore, at this Reinforcement,
.which she thought would expose her Cousin to
great Danger, she galloped, with all Speed,
after the Hunters, being directed by the Sound
of the Horn. Her Anxiety for her Couiin made
Vol. I. M her

<page 265>
242 Th* FEMALE BookIV.
her regardless of her own Danger, so that she
rode with a surprising Swiftness; and, overtak-
ing the Company, Ihe would have spoken, to
tell them of her Cousin's Situation; when her
Spirits failing her, she could only make a Sign
with her Hand, and funk down in a Swoon, in
the Arms of Sir George, who eagerly galloped
up to her; and, supporting her as well as he
was able till some others came to her Relief,
they took her off her Horse, and placed her
upon the Ground; when, by the Help of some
Water they brought from a Spring near them,
in a little time she came to herself.
Sir Charles, who, seeing her come up to them
without his Son, and by her fainting, concluded
some Misfortune had happened .to him, the
Moment she opened her Eyes, asked her eagerly,
Where he was?
Your Son, said Arabella, sighing, with a
Valour equal to that of the brave Cleomedon, is
this Moment fighting in my Desence against a
Croud of Enemies; and is, haply, shedding
the last Drop of his Blood in my Quarrel.
Shedding the last Drop of his Blood, haply!
repeated Sir Charles, excessively grieved; and,
not a little enraged at Arabella, supposing she
had introduced him into some Quarrel, It may
be happy for you, Madam; but I am sure it
will make me very miserable, if my Son comes
to any Harm.
. If it be the Will of Heaven he should fall in
this Combat, resumed Arabella, he can never
have a more glorious Destiny: And as that
Consideration will, doubtless, sweeten his last
Moments, so it ought to be your Consolation:
How-

<page 266>
Chap. 4. QUIXOTE. 243
However, I beg you'll lose no time, but baste
to his Assistance; for since he has a considerable
Number of Enemies to deal with, 'tis not im-
probable but he may be overpowered at last.
Where did you leave my Son, Madam?
cried Sir Charles, eagerly.
He is not far off, replied Arabella: And you
will, doubtless, be directed to the Place, by the
Sight of the Blood of his Enemies, which he
has spilt. Go that way, pursued she, pointing
with her Finger towards the Place where she
had left her Cousin: There you will meet with
him, amidst a Croud of Foes, which he is sa-
crificing to my Sasety, and his just Resentment.
Sir Charles^ not knowing what to think, gal-
loped away, followed by most Part of the Com-
pany; Sir George telling Lady Bella, that he
would stay to desend her against any Attempts
that might be made on her Liberty, by any of
her Ravisher's Servants, who wera, probably,
straggling about. Arabella, however, being
persectly recovered, insisted upon following her
Uncle.
There is no Question, said she, but Mr.
Glanville is victorious: I am only apprehensive
for the dangerous Wounds he may have re-.
ceived in the Combat, which will require all
our Care and Assistance.
Sir George, who wanted to engross her Com-
pany a little to himself, in vain represented to
- her, that, amidst the Horrors of a Fight so
bloody as that must certainly be, in which Mr.
Glanville and his Friends would be now en-
gaged, it would be dangerous for her to venture
her Person: Yet she would not be persuaded;
M 2 'but.

<page 267>
244 ^FEMALE BookIV.
but, having mounted her Horse, with his As-
sistance, she rode as fast as she was able after
the rest of the Company.
Chap. V.
Being a Chapter os Mistakes.
SIR Charles, who, by this Time, had got
to the Place she directed him to, but saw
no Appearance of fighting, and only a few
Haymakers in Discourse together, inquired, If
there had been any Quarrel between two Gen-
tlemen in tint Place?
One of them, at this Question, advancing,
told Sir Charles, that two Gentlemen had quar-
relled there, and were fighting with Swords;
but that they had parted them; and that one of
them, having an Horse tied to a Tree, mounted
him, and rode away: That the other, they be-
lieved, was not far off; and that there had
been no Bloodshed, they having come time
enough to prevent it.
Sir Charles was extremely satisfied with this
Account; and, giving the Haymakers some
Money for the good Office they did in parting
the two Combatants, rode up to meet Lady
Bella; and informed her, that his Son was sase.
I cannot imagine he is sase, replied she, whea
I see some os his Enemies (pointing to the Hay-
makers) still alive : It is not customary, in those
Cases, to suffer any to escape: And, question-
4 less*

<page 268>
Chap. 5. Q^J IX O T E. 245
less, my Cousin is either dead, or a Prisoner,
since all his Adversaries are not vanquished.
Why, you dream, Madam, replied Sir Charles:
Those Fellows yonder are Haymakers: What
should make them Enemies to my Son! They
were lucky enough to come in time to prevent
him and another Gentleman from doing each
other a Mischief. I cannot imagine for what
Reason my Son quarrelled with that Person they
speak of: Perhaps you can inform me.
Certainly, Sir, said Arabella, I can inform you,
since I was the Cause of their Quarrel. The
Story is too long to tell you now; and, besides,
it is so connected with the other Accidents of
my Lise, that 'tis necessary you should be ac-
quainted with my whole History, in order to
comprehend it: But, if those Persons are what
you fay, and did really part my Cousin and his
Antagonist, truly I believe they have done him
a very ill Office: For, I am persuaded, my
Cousin will never beat Rest, till, by his Rival's
Death, he has freed himself srem one, capable
of the most daring Enterprizes to get me into
his Power: And, since I cannot be in Security
while he lives, and persists in the Resolution he
has taken to persecute me, it had been better if
he had suffered all the Effects of my Cousin's
Resentment at that time, than to give him the
Trouble to hunt him through the World, in
order to sacrifice him to the Interest of his Love
and Vengeance.
Sir Charles, no less astonished than alarmed
at th.'s Discovery of his Niece's sanguinary Sen-
timents, told her, he was sorry to fee a Lady so
far forget ths Gentleness of her Sex3 as to en-
M 3 courage

<page 269>
246 The F E M A L E Book IV.
courage and incite Men to such Extremities,
upon her Account. And, for the future, added
h%; I must intreat you, Niece, to spare me the
Affliction of seeing my Son exposed to these
dangerous Quarrels: For, though his Lise is so
little regarded by you, yet it is of the utmost
Consequence to me.
Arabella, who found Matter sufficient in the
Beginning of this Speech, to be offended with
her Uncle, yet, mistaking the latter Part of it
for a pathetic Complaint of her Cruelty, re-
plied very gravely, That her Cousin's Sasety
was not so indifferent to her as he imagined:
And that she did not hate him so much, but
that his Death would affect her very sensibly.
Arabella, in speaking these Words, blushed
with Shame, as thinking they were rather too
tender: And Sir Charles, who coloured like-
wise, from a very different Motive, was open-
ing his Mouth, to tell her, that he did not
think his Son was much obliged to her for not
hating him; when Arabella, supposing he de-
signed to press her to a further Explanation of
the favourable Sentiments file selt for Mr.
Glanville, stopped him with Precipitation: Press
me no more, said file, upon this Subject': And,
as I have already spoken too much, haply, be-
fore so many Witnesses, seek not to enhance
my Confusion, by prolonging a Discourse that
at present must needs be disagreeable to me.
I shall readily agree with you, Madam, re-
plied Sir Charles, that you have spoken too
much: And, if I had thought you capable of
speaking in the manner you have done, I
would .

<page 270>
Chap. 5. QJJ IX O T E. 247
would have been more cautious in giving you
an Occasion for it.
I should imagine, Sir, said Arabella, blush-
ing with Anger, as she before did with Shame,
that you would be the last Person in the World
who could think I had spoken too much upon
this Occasion: And, since you are pleased to
tell me so, I think it fit to let you know, that I
have not, in my Opinion, transgressed the
Laws of Decency and Decorum, in what I
have said in my Cousin's Favour: And I can
produce many Examples of greater Freedom of
Speech, in Princesses, and Ladies of the highest
Quality: However, I mall learn such a Lesson
of Moderation in this respect, from your Re-
proof, that I promise you, neither yourself, or
Mr. Glanvillc, shall have any Cause, for the
future, to complain of my want of Discretion.
Sir Charles, who was very polite and good-
natured, was half angry with himself, for hav-
ing obliged his Niece to such a Submission, as
he thought'it; and, apologizing for the Rude-
ness of his Reprehension, assured her, that he
was persectly convinced of her Discretion in all
things; and did not doubt but her Conduct
would'be always agreeable to him.
'Arabella, who, from what her Uncle had
said, began to entertain Suspicions, that would
never have entered any Imagination but hers,
looked earnestly upon him for half a Moment,
as if she wished to penetrate into the most
secret Recesses of his Heart: But, fanfying she
saw something in his Looks that confirmed her
Apprehensions, she removed her Eyes from his
Face", and, fastening them on the Ground, re-
M 4 maineJ

<page 271>
248 ^FEMALE Book IV.
maired for some Moments in Confusion.— Sir
Charles, whom her apparent Distuibance made
very uneasy, proposed returning to the Castle;
telling Lady Bella he expected to find his Son
already there.
'Tis more than probable, said she, turning to
Sir George, that my Cousin is gone in Pursuit
cf.my R.ivisher; and the Interruption that has
been given to his designed Vengeance, making
him more furious than before, 'tis not likely he
will return till he has punished his Insolence by
that Death he so justly merits.
Jvlr. Glanville is already so happy in your
Opinion, said Sir George, with a very profound
Sigh, that there is no need of his rendering you
this small Service, to increase your Esteem:
put, if my Prayers are heard, the Punishment
c! your Raviflier will be reserved for a Person
less fortunate, indeed, than Mr. Glar.ville, tho*
not less devoted to your Interest, and concerned
in your Preservation.
Sir George counterseiting a Lcok of extreme
Confusion and Fear, as he ended these Wotds;
Arabella, who perfectly comprehended the
Meaning they were designed to convey, thought
Lei self obliged to take no Notice of them: And,
thetefere, without making any Reply to the
young Baronet, who ventured slowly to lift his
Eyes to her Face, in order to dircover if there
v ere any Signs of Anger.in it, she told Sir
Charles she inclined to go home: And Sir
George, with the rest of the Company, attended
them to the Castle; where, as soon as they ar-
rived, they took their Leave.

<page 272>
Chap. 5. QJJIX O T E. 249
Sir George, notwithstanding Arabellas Care
to deprive him cf an Opportunity of speaking
to her, told her, in a Whisper, having eagerly
alighted to help her off her Horse,
I am going, Madam, to find out that inso-
lent Man, who has dared to offer Violence to
the fairest Person in the World: And, if I am
so happy as to meet with him, he shall either take
my Lise, or I will put him into a Condition never
to commit any more Offences of that Nature.
Saying this, he made a low Bow; and, be-
ing desirous to prevent her Answer, remounted
his Horse, and went away with the Rest of the
Company.
Arabella, who, upon this Occasion, was to
be all Confusion, mixed with some little Re-
sentment, discovered so much Emotion in her
Looks, while Sir George was whispering to her,
that her Uncle, as he was handing her into the
House, asked her, If she was offended at any
thing Sir George had said to her?
Arabella, construing this Question as she had
done some other things her Uncle had said to
her, replied, in a reserved manner, Since my
Looks, contrary to my Intention, have betrayed
my Thoughts to you, I wi!l not scruple to con-
fess, that I have some Cause to be offended
with Sir George; and that, in two Instances
To-day, he has seemed to forget the Respect
be owes me.
Sir Charles was fired at this Account: Is it
possible, said he, that Sir George has had the
Assurance to fay any thing to offend you, and
that before my Face too? This Affront is not
to be borne.
M 5 I am

<page 273>
2 50 the F EM A L E Book IV.
I am sorry, replied Arabella, eying him heed-
fully, to see you so much concerned at it.
Don't be uneasy, interrupted Sir Charles:
There will be no bad Consequences happen
from it: But he shall hear of it, added he,
raising his Voice with Passion: I'll force him
this Night to explain himself.
You must pardon me, Sir, said Arabella,
more and more confirmed in her Notions, if I
tell you, that I am extremely ofsended at your
uncommon Zeal upon this Occasion: And also
I must assure you, that a little more Calmness
would be less liable to Suspicion.
Miss Glanville coming to meet them, Sir
Charles, who did not take much Notice of
what Arabella said, eagerly inquired for his
Son; and, hearing he was not come home,
was apprehensive of his meeting again with the
Person he had quarrelled with: But his Fears
did not last long; for Mr. Glanville came in,
having purposely avoided the Company, to
hide the Uneasiness Lady Bella's tormenting
Folly had given him.
Chap. VI.
In which the Mistakes are continued.
AS soon as Mr. Glanville appeared, the tw»
Ladies retired; Miss Glanville asking
Arabella a hundred Questions concerning their
Diversion, the Drift of which was, to know
bow Sir Gtcrge behaved to her: But that fair
Lady,

<page 274>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. 25i
Lady, whose Thoughts were wholly employed
on the strange Accidents which had happened to
her that Day, longed to be at. Liberty to indulge
her Reflections; and, complaining of extreme
Weariness, under Pretence of reposing herself
till Dinner, got quit of Miss Glanville's Com-
pany, which, at that time, she thought very
ted ious.
As soon as she was left to herself, her Imagi-
nation running over all that had happened, she
could not help consessing, that sew Women ever
met with such a Variety of Adventures in one
Day: In Danger of being carried off by Vio-
lence, by one Lover; delivered by another;
Insinuations of Love from a Third, who, she
thought, was enamoured of her Cousin; and,
what was still more surprising a Discovery, that
her Uncle was not insensible of her Charms,
but was become the Rival of his own Son.
As extravagant as this Notion was, Arabella
found Precedents in her Romances of Passions
full as strange and unjustifiable; and confirmed
herself in that Opinion, by recollecting several
Examples of unlawful Love. Why should I
not believe, said she, that my Charms can
work as powerful Effects as those of Olympia,
. Princess of Thrace, whose Brother was passion-
ately enamoured of her?
Did not the Divine Clelia inspire Maberbal
with a violent Passion for her, who, though
discovered to be her Brother, did not, never-
theless, cease to adore her? And, to bring an
Instance still nearer to my own Case, was not
the Uncle of the fair Alcyone in Love with her?
M 6 And

<page 275>
2$2 ^FEMALE BookIV.
And did he not endeavour to win her Heart by
all (he Methods in his Power?
Ah! then, pursued ihe, let vs doubt no
more of our Misfortune: And, since our fatal
Beauty has raised this impious Flame, let us
stifle it with our Rigour, and not allow an ill-
timed Pity, or Respect, to encourage a Passion
which may, one Day, call a Blemish upon
our Glory.
Arabella, having settled this Point, proceed-
ed to reflect on the Conquest she had mnde of
Sir George: She examined his Words over and
over, 2nd found them so exactly conformable to
the Language of an Oroondates or Orontes, that
she could not choose but be pleased: But, re-
collecting that it behoved her, like all other
Heroines, to be extremely troubled and per-
plexed at an Insinuation of Love, she began to
lament the cruel Necessity of parting with an
agreeable Friend; who, is he persisted in making
her acquainted with his Thoughts, would ex-
pose himself to the Treatment Persons so indis-
creet always meet with; nor was she less con-
cerned, lest, if Mr. Glanville had not already
dispatched her Ravisher, Sir George, by wander-
ing in Search of lirni, and, haply, sacrificing
him to his eager Desire of serving her, should,
by that means, lay her under an Obligation to
him, which, considering him as a Lover, would
be a great Mortification.
Sir George, however, was gone home to his
own House, with no Thoughts of pursuing
Arabella's Ravisher: And Mr. Glanvllle, being
questioned by his Father concerning his Quar-
rel,. invented some trifling Excuse for it; which
not

<page 276>
Chap. 6. QUIXOTE. 253
not agreeing with the Account the Baronet had
received from Arabella, he told his Son, that
he had concealed the Truth from him ; and that
there was more in that Affair than he had
owned. You quarrelled, added he, upon Ara-
bella's Account; and (he did not scruple to af-
firm it before all the Company.
Mr. Glanville, who had vainly flattered him-
self with an Hope, that his Cousin had not ac-
quainted the Company with her whimsical Ap-
prehensions, was extremely vexed when he
found she had exposed herself to their Ridicule,
and that it was probable even he had not escaped:
But, willing to know from her own Mouth how
far she had carried her Folly, he went up to
her Chamber ; and, being immediately admit-
ted, she began to congratulate him upon the
Conquest he had gained, as (he supposed, over
his Enemy; and thanked him very solemnly
for the Security he had procured for her.
Mr. Glanville, after assuring her, that she was
in no Danger of ever being carried away by that
Person whom she seared, proceeded to inquire
into all that had passed between her and the
Company whom she had joined, when she left
him; and Arabella, relating every Particular,
gave him the Mortification to know, that her
Folly had been sufficiently exposed: But see
touched upon her Fears for him with so much
Delicacy, and mentioned her Fainting in such
a manner, as insinuated a much greater Tender-
ness than he before had Reason to hope for;
and this Knowlege destroying all his Intentions
to quarrel with her for what she had said, he
appeared so easy and satisfied, that Arabella,
reflecting

<page 277>
e54 ^FEMALE Book IV.
reflecting upon the Misfortune his Father's new-
born Passion would probably be the Occasion of
to him, could not help sighing at the Appre-
hension; looking on him, at the fame time,
with a kind of pitying Complacency; which
did not escape Mr. Glanville's Notice.
I must know the Reason of that Sigh, Cousin,
(aid he, smiling, and taking her Hand.
If you are wise, replied Arabella, gravely,
sou will be contented to remain in the pleasing
gnorance you are at present; and not seek to
know a thing which will, haply, afford you but
little Satisfaction.
You have increased my Curiosity so much
by this Advice, resumed he, accommodating
his Looks to Arabella's, that I shall not be at
Rest till I know what it is you conceal from
me: And, since I am so much concerned in it,
even by your own Consession, I have a Right
to press you to explain yourself.
Since you are so importunate, replied Ara-
bella, I must tell you, that I will not do you
so great a Diskindness, as to explain myself;
nor will I be the first who shall acquaint you
with your Misfortune, since you will, haply,
too soon arrive at the Knowlege of it, by other
means.
Glanville, who imagined this was some new
Whim that had got into her Head, was but
little perplexed at ah Insinuation, which, had
he been ignorant of her Foible, would have
given him great Uneasiness : But, being sensible
that she expected he would press her to disclose
herself, and appear extremely concerned at her
refusing him that Satisfaction, he counterseits

<page 278>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. 255
so well, that she was at a loss how to evade the
Arguments he used to make her unfold .the
terribleMystery ; when theDinner.bellringing,
and relieving her for the present, Mr. Glanvillt
led her down to the Parlour; where Sir Cbarlti
and his Daughter attended their coming.
Chap. VII.
In which the Mistakes are not yet cleared up.
THE Baronet, who had been put into a
bad Humour by Arabella's Insinuations,
that Sir George had affronted her, appeared re-
served and uneasy; and, being resolved to
question her about it, was willing first to know
exactly what it was his Niece had been offended
at: But as he seared, if it came to his Son's
Knowlege, it would produce a Quarrel between
the young Gentlemen, that might have dan-
gerous Consequences, he was desirous of speak-
ing to her alone; and, as soon as Dinner was
over, asked her to take a Walk with him upon
the Terrace, telling her he had something to
say to her in private. Arabella, whose Fears
had been considerably increased by the Pensive-
ness which appeared in her Uncle's Looks du-
ring Dinner, and supposing he wanted a pri-
vate Conversation, only to explain himself more
clearly to her, than he had yet done, was ex-
cessively alarmed at this Request; and, casting
her Eyes down to the Ground, blushed in suen
4 . a manner

<page 279>
2 56 The FEMALE Book IV.
a manner as betrayed her Confusion; and made
Miss Glanville and her Brother believe, that she
suspected her Uncle had a Design to press her
loon to give her Hand to Mr. Glanville, which .
occasioned her apparent Disorder.
Sir Char le:, however, who had not so heed-
fully observed her Behaviour, repeated his Re-
quest; adding, with a Smile, upon her giving
him no Answer, Sure Lady Bella, you are
not afraid to be alone with your Uncle.
No, Sir, replied Arabella, giving him a
piercing.Look; I am not afraid of being alone
with my Uncle; and, as long as he pretends to
be no more than my Uncle, I shall not scruple
to hear what he has to fay to me.
Sir Charles, a little vexed at an Answer which
insinuated, as he thought, a Complaint of hfs
having pretended to more Authority ever her
than he ought, told her, he hoped she had no
Cause to believe he would displease her, by any
improper Exertion of that Power over her, with
which her Father had intrusted him: For I assure
you, added he, I would rather you should follow
my Advice as anUncle, than obey me as a Guar-
dian; and, since my Afsection for you is, per-
haps, greater than what many People have for
a Niece, my Solicitude ought to be imputed to
that Motive.
I have all the Sense I ought to have of that
Affection you honour me with, replied Ara-
bella; and since I hope it will be always what
it should be, without wishing for its Increase, I
am contented with those Testimonies I have
already received of it; and do not desire any
other.
Sir

<page 280>
Chap. 7. QUIXOTE. 257
Sir Charles., a little puzzled to understand the
Meaning of these Words, which the grave
Looks of Arabella made yet more mysteriou?,
rose from his Seat with an Air of Discontent: I
should have been glad to have spoken a Word in
private to you, Niece, said he ; but, since you
think proper to make so much Ceremony in such
a Trifle, I'll deser it till you are in a better Hu-
mour.
Miss Glanville, seeing her Father going out
of the Rcom, stepped before him: Nay, Papa,
said she, if you want to speak with my Cousin,
my Brother and I will go out, and leave you to
yourselves.
You will do me a very great Displeasure, said
Arabella; for, I am sure, my Uncle has not
. any thing of Consequence to say to me: How-
ever, added shr, seeing Miss Glanville go away,
I am resolved, I will not be left alone ; .and
therefore, Mr. Glanville, since I can pretend to
some Power over you, I command you to stay.
You may remember, Madam, said Mr. Glan-
ville, with a Smile, you refused to gratify my
Curiosity, with regard to something you hinted
to me some time ago; and, to punish you, added
he, going out of the Room, I am resolved you
shall listen to what my Father has to fay to you;
for, by your Unwillingness to hear it, I ima-
gine you suspect already what it is.
Arabella, finding she had no way to avoid
hearing what she dreaded so much, and observ-
ing her Uncle had resumed his Chair, pre-
pared to give him Audience; but, in order to>
deprive him of all Hope, that she would receive
his Discourse favcjurably, she assumed the se .<
vereft

<page 281>
258 The FEMALE Book IV.
verest Look she was capable of; and, casting
her Eyes on the Ground, with a Mixture of
Anger and Shame, waited with a kind of Fear
and Impatience for what he had to fay.
I see, Madam, said the Baronet, observing
her Confusion, that you apprehend what I am
going to say to you ; but, I beseech you, do not
sear I have any Intentions, but such as you'll
approve.
You are certainly in the right, Sir, said Ara-
bella, in the Interpretation you have put on my
Looks: I am really in Pain about the Purport
of your Discourse: And you would particu-
larly oblige me, if you would dispense with me
from hearing it.
I see, replied Sir Charles, that, out of a mis-
taken Fear, you are unwilling to hear me, in
order to avoid coming to the Explanation I de-
sire: But I tell you, once again, you have no-
thing to apprehend.
I have every thing to apprehend, Sir, resumed
Arabella, tartly, while you persist in your De-
sign of disobliging me; and you cannot give me
a greater Proof os the Badness of your Inten-
tions, than by thus forcing me to listen to Dis-
courses I ought to avoid.
Since my Word has no Weight with you,
replied Sir Charles, I'll condescend to assure you,
by the most sacred Oath, That I do not mean
to come to any Extremities with Sir George*
concerning what you already told me: All I
desire to know is, If you think you had any Rea-
son to be offended with him for any thing he
said ? And, in that Case, I cannot dispense with
myself from expostulating with him about it.
You

<page 282>
Chap. 7. QJJ IXOTE. 259
You would do me a Favour, Sir, resumed
Arabella, if you would interest yourself a little
less in what Sir George said to me: The Of-
sence was committed against me only ; and none
but myself has any Right to resent it.
'Tis enough, Niece, said Sir Charles, rising:
You acknowlege sufficient to make me resolve
to oblige him to ask Pardon for the Affront you
have received : However, I beg you may make
yourself easy; no ill Consequences will happen
from this Affair, provided my Son does not
know it: And I know you have too much Dis-
cretion to acquaint him with it.
Saying this, he went out of the Room, leav-
ing Arabella in great Confusion at what he had
said; which, in her Opinion, had amounted
almost to a plain Declaration of his Passion ; and
his Design of putting an End to Sir George's
Pretensions, whom, it was probable, he looked
upon as a more dangerous Rival than his Son,
confirmed her in the Opinion of his Resolution
to persecute her.
Full of the Reflections this Accident had oc-
casioned, she went to walk in the Garden,
where Mr. Glanville, his Sister having just left
him, joined her.
As he imagined, his Father's Design, in
speaking to her alone, was to prevail upon her
to consent to marry him before she left the Coun-
try, which was what he most earnestly wished,
he drew a bad Omen from the Discontent
which appeared in her Eyes.
Is it with me, Cousin, said he, or with what
my Father has been saying to you, that you are

<page 283>
266 the F E M A L E Book IV.
With both, replied Arabella, hastily; for if
you had staid in the Room, as I commanded you,
I should not have been exposed to the Pain of
hearing Things so disagreeable.
Since I knew what would be the Purport of
my Father's Discourse, said Mr. GlanvilU, you
ought not to be surprised I could not resolve to
give any Interruption to it, by my Presence:
And, being so much interested in the Success
of his Solicitations, I could not choose but give
him an Opportunity of speaking to you alone,
as he desired.
It seems then, resumed Arabella, you knovr
what was the Subject of his Conversation.
I believe I can guess, interrupted Mr. Glan-
ville, smiling.
Is it possible, cried Arabella, starting back in
great Surprize, that, knowing, as you fay you
do, your Father's Intentions, you would re-
solve to furnish him with an Opportunity of
disclosing them?
Can you blame me, said Mr. Glanv'ille, for
suffering him to undertake what I durst not my-
self? I know your Delicacy, or rather your Se-
verity, so well, that I am sensible, if I had
taken the Liberty to say what my Father has
said, you would have been extremely offended;
and punished me, as you have often done, with
a Banishment from your Presence: Nay, pur-
sued he, seeing Astonishment and Anger in her
Countenance, I perceive you are, at this Mo-
ment, going to pronounce some terrible Sen-
tence against me.
You are deceived, said Arabella, with a
forced Calmness; I am so far from being of-
fended

<page 284>
Chap. 7. QJJIXOTE. 26i
fended with you, that I am ready to acknow-
Jege, you merit very extraordinary Praises for
the persect Resignation you shew to the Will,
and, for your Credit, I will suppose, the Com-
mands, of your Father : But 1 would advise you
to be contented with the Reputation of being a
dutiful Son; ant!, for the future, never aspire
to that of beijig h faithful Lover.
Speaking these Words, which were wholly
unintelligible to her amazed Admirer, she left
him, and went to her ownApartmcnt, llrangely
surprised at the Indifference of Mr. Glanv'dlc;
who, as she understood what he had said, wjs
not only willing to resign her to his Father,
but also took upon him to mediate ia his be-
half.
As she was unwilling to acknowlege, even to
herself, that the Grief she selt at this Discovery,
proceeded from any Affection for her Cousin,
she imputed it to the Shame of seeing herself so
basely forsaken and neglected; and, not being
able to find a Precedent for such an Indignity
offered to the Charms of any Lady in her Ro-
mances, the Singularity of her Fate, in this
respect, seemed to demand all her Uneasi-
Chap,
.

<page 285>
262 The FEMALE Book IV.
Chap. VIII.
Which contains some necejfary Consequences
of the foregoing Mistakes.—A Soliloquy
on a Love-Letter.
WHILE Arabella passed her Time in
her Closet, in the most disagreeable
Reflections, Glanvilk was racking his Brain to
find out the Meaning of those mysterious Words
she had uttered at leaving him: He examined
them twenty times over, but could not possi-
bly penetrate into their Sense: But, supposing
at last, that they really meant nothing at all,
or were occasioned by some new Flight of her
Imagination, he went to find out his Father,
in order to know what had passed between
him and Arabella.
Sir Charles, however, was not to be found;
he had ordered his Horse to be made ready,
under Pretence of taking a little Ride after
Dinner; and, passing by Sir George's House,
alighted to pay him a Visit.
The young Baronet, being at home, received
him with great Politeness: And Sir Charlest
whose peculiar Disposition was, to be nicely te-
nacious of every thing which, he imagined,
had any Relation to the Honour of his Family,
took the first Opportunity to question him, con-
cerning the Confusion his Whisper had occa-
sioned in Lady Bella; adding, That she had
confessed, he had given her Reason to take ill
what he had said to her.

<page 286>
Chap. 8. QJJIXOTE. 363
Sir George, who was by no means willing to
quarrel with the Uncle of Arabella, received the
old Gentleman's Remonstrances with a great
deal of Calmness; and, finding Arabella had
not discovered the Purport of that Whisper
which had offended her, he told Sir Char/es,
That the Confusion he saw in her Countenance
was occasioned by his raillying her upon the
Fright she had been in upon Mr. Glanville^
Account: He added some other Particulars
that intirely taking away all Inclination in Sir
Charles to pursue the Matter any farther, they
parted upon very good Terms; Sir George pro-
mising, very soon, to return his Visit at the
Castle.
Mr. Glanville, upon his Father's Return, be-
ing impatient to know what he had said to Ara-
bella, inquired with so much Precipitation, con-
'cerning the Convetsation they had had toge-
ther, that Sir Charles, unwilling to tell him the
Truth, and not having time to consider of an
Answer, evaded his Question in such a manner,
that Mr. Glanville could not help making some
Observation upon it; and, comparing this Cir-
cumstance with what Arabella had said, tho' he
could not comprehend the Meaning that seemed
to be concealed under their Behaviour, he im-
mediately concluded, there was some Mystery,
which it concerned him to find out.
Possessed with this Opinion, he longed for
an Opportunity to talk with Arabella alone;
but he was not so happy to obtain one; forj
tho' that Fair-one presided at the Tea.table, as
usual, and also appeared at Supper, yet she so in-
dustrioufly avoided all Occasions of being alone
with

<page 287>
£64 the FEMALE Book IV.
with him, tho' but for a Moment, and ap-
peared so reserved and uneasy, that it was im-
possible for him to speak to her upon that Sub-
ject.
As soon as it was time to retire, having re-
solved to request the Favour of a sew Moments
Conversation with her, in her own Apartment;
and when he had, as was his Custom, handed
her up Stairs; instead of wishing her a good
Night, at her Chamber-door, he was going
to desire Permission to enter it with her; when
Lucy, coming to meet her Lady, whispered her
in the Ear; upon which, Arabella, turning
towards him, gave him an hasty Salute, and
hurried into her Apaitment.
G/anvil/e, no less vexed at this Disappoint-
ment, than perplexed at that Whisper, which
had caused such a visible Emotion in Arabella,
retired to his own Room, tormented with a
thousand uneasy Suspicions, for which he could
not exactly assign a Cause; and wishing impati-
ently for the next Day, in which he hoped to
procure some Explanation of what at present
greatly perplexed him.
In the mean time, Arabella, who had been
informed by Lucy, in that Whisper, who was
eager to let her know it, that a Messenger had
brought a Letter from Sir George, and, late as
it was at Night, waited for an Answer, was de-
bating with herself, whether she should open
this Billet or not: She had a strong Inclination
to see what it contained; but, searful of trans-
gressing the Laws of Romance, by indulging a
Curiosity not justifiable by Example, she re-
solved to return this Letter unopened.
Here,

<page 288>
Chap. 8. QUIXOTE. 265
Here, laid she to Lucy, give this Letter to the
Messenger that brought it, and tell him, I was
excessively offended with you, for receiving ic
from his Hands.
Lucy, taking the Letter, was going to obey
her Orders; when, recollecting herself, Ihe bid
her stay.
Since Sir George, said she to herself, is no>
declared Lover of mine, I may, without any
Offence to Decorum, see what this Letter con-
tains : To refuse receiving it, will be to acknow-
lege, that his Sentiments are not unknown to
me; and, by consequence, to lay myself under a
Necessity of banishing him: Nor is it fit, that I
should allow him to believe I am so ready to
apprehend the Meaning of every gallant Speech,
which is used to me; and to construe such In-
sinuations, as he took the Liberty to make me,
into Declarations of Love.
Allowing, therefore, the Justice of these
Reasons, she took the Letter out of Lucy's
Hand; and, being upon the Point of opening it,
a sudden Thought con trouled her Designs: She
threw it suddenly upon her Toilet i and, look-
ing very earnestly upon it,
Presumptuous Paper! said she, speaking with
great Emotion to the Letter: Bold Repository
of thy Master's daring Thoughts! Shall I not
be blamed by all, who hereafter will hear, or
read* my History, if, contrary to the Appre-
hensions I have, that thou containest a Confes-
sion that will displease me, I open thy Seal,
and become accessary to thy Writer's Guilti,
by deigning to make myself acquainted with
it? And thou, too isldisereetand unwary Friends,
Vol. L N whose

<page 289>
266 ^FEMALE BookIV.
whose Folds contain the Acknowlegement of
bis Crime! What will it advantage thee or
him, if, torn by my resenting Hand, I make
thee suffer, for the Part thou bearest in thy
Waster's Fault; and teach him, by thy Fate,
how little Kindness he has to expect from me!
Yet, to spare myself the Trouble of reading
what will, questionless, greatly displease me, I
will return thee, uninjured, into thy Master's
Hands v and, by that Moderation, make him
repent the Presumption he has been guilty of}
Chap. IX.
Containing a Love-Let ter in the Heroic
Stile; with some occasional Reasonings
by Lucy, full of Wit and Simplicity.
OUR fair Heroine, having ended the fore-
going Soliloquy, took up the Letter, and
gave it to Lucy, who had, all the time she was
speaking, observed a profound Silence, mixed
with a most eager Attention.
. Here, pursued she, carry it to the Person who
brought it; and bid him tell his Master, that*
lest I should find any thing in it, which may
offend me, I have chosen not to read it: And,
if he is wife, he will profit by my Concern foe
him, and take care how he hazards displeasing
me a Second time by an Importunity of this
kind, which I shall not so easily pardon him.
Lucy, who had taken particular Notice of
this Speech, in order to remember every Word
oi

<page 290>
Chap. g. (QUIXOTE. 267
bf it, when she repeated it again, went conning
her I^flon. to the Place where she had desired
the Servant to wait her coming: But he was
gone; such being indeed his Master's Ordersi
for .he was apprehensive, that, following the
Custom of the Ladies in Romances, Arabella
would return his Letter; and therefore, to de<.
prive her of an Opportunity of sending it back
that Night, he ordered his Man to fay, he
waited for an Answer; but, as soon as he con-
veniently could, to come away without one.
Lucy, in a great Surprize at the Servant's go-
ing away, returned to her Lady with. the Let-
ter in her Hand, telling her she must needs read
it now, since the Person who brought it,. was.
gone.
It must be consessed, said Arabella., taking
the Letter from her, with a Smile, he has fallen
upon an ingenious Device, to make me keep it
for this Night; and, since, haply, I may be
mistaken in the Contents, I have a mind to
open it-
Lucy did not fail to confirm her Lady in this
Design : And Arabella, making as if she yielded
to the Importunities of her Confidante, opened
the Letter; which she found as follows:
The unfortunate and despairing Bellmour, to
the Divine Arabella.
Madam*
SINCE it is, doubtless, not only w'ith your
Permission^ but even by your Commands,
that your Uncle, Sir Charles Glanville, comes
so pronounce the Sentence of my Death, in the
Ni De^
v

<page 291>
268 The F E M A.L E Book IV.
Denunciation of your Anger, I submit, Madam ,
without repining at the Rigour of that Doom.
you have inflicted on me. Yes, Madam, this
Criminal, who has dared to adore you, with
the most sublime and persect Passion that ever
was, acknowleges the Justice of his Punishment;
and, since it is impossible to cease loving you,.
or to live without telling you he does so, he is
going, voluntarily, to run upon that Death your
Severity makes' him wish for, and the Great-
ness of his Crime demands. Let my Death
then, O Divine Arabella, expiate the Offence
I have been guilty of! And let me hope those
fair Eyes, that have beheld me with Scorn
when alive, will not refuse to shed some Tears
upon my Tomb! And that, when you remem-
ber my Crime of loving you, you will also be
pleased to remember, that I died for that Crime;
and wish for no other Comfort.in Death, but
the Hope of your not hating, when he is no
more,
7%e unhappy Bellmour.
Arabella, who had read this Letter aloud,
sighed gently at the Conclusion of it; but poor
.Lucy, who was greatly affected at so dolorous
an Epistle, could not restrain her Tears; but
sobbed so often, and with so much Violence,
æ, at length, recalled her Lady from the Re-
verie, into which she was plunged.
What ails you i said she to her Confidante,
greatly surprised : What is »he Cause of this un-
seemly Sorrow?
Ohi Madam! cried Lucy, her Sobs making
a frequent and unpka&ng Interruption in her
Words j

<page 292>
Chap.9. QJJ IXOTE. 269
Words; I (hall break my Heart to be sure: Ne-
ver was such a sad mournful Letter in the
World: I could cry my Eyes out for the poor
Gentleman. Pray excuse me, Madam; but,
indeed, I can't help saying, You are the most
hard-heartedest Lady I ever knew in my born
Days: Why, to be sure, you don't care, if aa
hundred fine Gentlemen should die for you,
tho' their Spirits were to haunt you every Night!
Well! I would not have what your Ladyship
has to answer for, for all the World!
You are a foolish Wench! replied Arabella.,
smiling at her Simplicity: Do you think I have
any Cause to accuse myself, tho' Five thousand
Men were to die for me! 'Tis very certain, my
Beauty has produced very deplorable Effects.:
The unhappy Harvey has expiated, by his
"Death, the Violence his too desperate Passion
forced him to meditate against me: The no less
guilty,the noble U nknown, Edward, is wander*
ing about the World,. in a tormenting Despair;
and stands exposed to the Vengeance of my
Cousin, who has vowed his Death. My Charms
have made another Person, whose Character
ought to be sacred to me, forget all the Ties
of Consanguinity; and become the Rival of his
Son, whose Interest he once endeavoured to
support: And, lastly, the unfortunate Bell-
tnour consumes away in an hopeless Passion;
and, conscious of his Crime, dooms himself,
haply, with more Severity than I desire, to a
voluntary Death; in hopes, thereby, of pro-
curing my Pardon and Compassion, when he is
no more. All these, Lucy, as I said before,
are very deplorable Effects of my Beauty ; but
you.

<page 293>
zyo ^FEMALE Book IV.
you must observe, that my WiJl has no Part
in the Miseries, that unfortunate Beauty occa-
sions; and that, thoJ I could even wish myself
less fair, in order to avoid giving so much Un-
happiness to others, yet these Wishes would
not avail; and since, by a fatal Necessity, all
these Things will happen, whether I would or
no, I must comfort myself under the Uneasi-
ness, which the Sensibility of my Temper
makes me seel, by the Reflection, that, with my
own Consent, I contribute nothing to the Mis-
fortune of those who love me.
Will your Ladyship then let poor Sir George
die? said Lucy, who had listened very atten-
tively to this fine Harangue, without under-
standing what it meant.
Questionless, he must die, replied Arabella*
if he persists in his Design of loving me,
But, pray, Madam, resumed Lucy, cannot
your Ladyship command him to live, as you
did Mr. Htr-wy, and Mr. Glanville, who both.
did as you bid them?
I may command him to live, said Ara-
bella; and there is no Question but he would
obey me, if I likewise permit him to love me;
but, this last not being fit for me to do, I see
no way to prevent the fad Resolution he has.
taken.
To be sure, Madam, returned Lucy, your
Ladyship knows what you ought to do bet-
ter than I can advise your Ladyship, being that
you are more learned than me: But, for all
that, I think it's better to save Lise than to kill,.
as the Bible-Book fays; and, since J am sure
your Ladyship is a good Christian, if the Gen-
4 tlemaa

<page 294>
Chap. 9. QUIXOTE. 27i
tleman dies for the Want of a sew kind Words,
or so, I am sure you will be troubled in Mind
about it.
It must be consessed, MA Arabella, smiling,
that, tho' your Solicitations are not very elo-
quent, they are very earnest and affecting; and
1 promise you, I will think about it; and, if I
can persuade myself, I am doing no wrong
Thing, by concerning myself about his Preser-
vation, I will dispatch you To-morrow Morn-
ing, with my Orders to him, to live, or, at
least, to proceed no further in his Design of dy-
ing, till he has further Cause.
Lucy, being extremely glad she had gained
her Point, called in her Lady's other Women,
who, having assisted her to undress, left her in
her Closet, to which she always retired for au
Hour, before she went to Bed.
END of the First Volume.


<page 295>
Ad

<page 296>

<page 297>
----• —
---------~--~~~~ ~~~~-------• ！ ！！！-- - ~~~~ ~~~~ ~ ~ ！=--~~~~

<page 298>

<page 299>
ſuae
*ae
，
， ， ** **
！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！！--
- * · * * * * * *
- -
|-
- ： * · *
ºu… …
… *


<page 300>
… • • •
：æ ææ，
· · · · · · · ·：·º·：·






<page 301>

<page 302>

JUL 18 1930

<page 303>


<page 304>
