

<page 1>
..
n

<page 2>

<page 3>

<page 4>

<page 5>

<page 6>
THE MONK
ROMANCE.
By M. G. LEWIS, Esq. M. P.
IN THREE VOLUMES.—VOL. I.
Somflia, tcrrores magieos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, pertentaque.
Hohat.
Dreams, magic terrors, spells of mighty power,
Witches, and ghosts who rove at midnight hour.
» THE SECOND EDITION.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR J. BELL, OXFORD-STREET.
M.BCC.XCY1•

<page 7>
'i NEW WAK
public U#:r-AiT
281303B
ASWR, LHNOX AW
TSBtKN FOUfNUATlQNS
B 1M* L.
• 1 . -1 ..M

<page 8>
( 55 )
PREFACE.
Imitation of Horace,
Ep. 20.—B. i.
li^/lETHINKS, Oh! vain ill-judging book,
JI see thee cast a wishful look,
"*, Where reputations won and lost are
X In samous row called Paternoster.
*" Incensed to find your precious clip
Buried in unexplored port-folio,
You scorn the prudent lock and key,
And pant well bound and gilt to see
Your volume in the window set
Of Stockdale, Hookham, or Debrett.
A a G«

<page 9>
{ > )
Go then, and pass that dangerous hourn.
Whence never book can back return:
And when you find, condemned, despised,
Neglected, blanied, and criticised.
Abuse from all who read you sall,
(If haply you be read at all)
Sorely will you your folly sigh at,
And wish for me, and home, and quiet.
Assuming now a conjuror's office, I
Thus on your future fortune prophasy-:—
Soon as your novelty is o'er,
And you are young and new no more,
In some dark dirty corner thrown,
Mouldy with damps, with cobwebs drown,
Your leaves shall be the book-worm's prey ;.
Or sent to chandler-shop away,
And doomed to suffer public scandal,
Shall line the trunk, or wrap the candle:
But mould you meet with approbation,.
And some one find an inclination
To ask, by natural transition,
Respecting me and my condition-j:
That I am one, the enquirer teach,
Nor very poor, nor very rich;
Of passions strong, of hasty nature,
Of graceless form and dwarfish stature;
By few approved, and few approving;
Extreme in hating and in loving;
3 Ab-

<page 10>
( v >
Abhorring all whom I dislike,
Adoring who my saney strike;
In forming judgements never lono-,
And for the most part judging wrong j.
In friendship firm, but still believing
Others are treacherous and deceiving,
And thinking m the present æra
That friendship is a pure chimæra r
More passionate no creature living,
Proud, obstinate, and unforgiving,
But yet for those who kindness show,.
Ready through fire and smoke to go^
Again, should it be asked your page,
u Pray, what may be the author's age r*»
Your saults, no doubt, will make it clear,
I scarce have seen my twentiath year,
Which passed, kind Reader, on my word,.
While England's throne held George the Thirds
Now then your venturous course pursue:
Go, my delight L Dear book, adieu!
*
Hagwe,
Oa. 28, i794. Jfs.G.L.
»."...' '. . . '. t •"> - . ' \ 1 •
j.:- .. ;. ;. '. »'|
,,'. .. '. '-"<

<page 11>

<page 12>
TABLE of the POETRY;
Page
X refaci—Imitation of Horace
Vot. I- iii
The Gipsy's Song
Inscription in an Hermitage
Durandarte and Belerma
• 5*
- 8*
- »3J
Love and Age
Vol. II. 128
165
The Exile - -
Midnight Hymn •
*}t
The Water-King
Serenade - •
Vol HI. 17
- 3*
Alonzo the Brave and Fair Imogine • 63

<page 13>
ADVERTISEMENT.
J- HE first idea of this Romance was suggested
by the story os the Santon Barjisa, related in The
Guardian.—The Bleeding Nun is a tradition still
credited in many parts of Germany; and I have
been told, that the ruins of the castle of Latten-
Jieiny which me is supposed to haunt, may yet be
seen upon the borders of Thuringia—The Water-
King, from the third to the twelfth stanza, is the
fragment of an original Danish ballad"—And Be~
lerma and Durandarte is translated from, some,
stanzas to be found in a collection of old Spanish
poetry, which contains- also the popular song of
Gayferos and Melefwdra, mentioned in Don Quix-
ote.- 1 have now made a full avowal of all
the plagiarisms of which I am aware myself; but
I doubt not, many more may be found, of which I
am at present totally unconscious.

<page 14>
THE MONK.
. 1 .
;
. ',. .
CHAP.
I.
. .!
'
cise:
.i J
1
Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
. That his blood flows, or that his appetite
Is more to bread than stone'.
Measure for Measuri.
'i j
SCARCELY had the abbey-bell tolled
for five minutes, and- already was' the
church of the Capuchins thronged with
auditors. Do not encourage the idea, that'
the crowd was assembled either from mo-
tives of piety or thirst of information. But'
very few were influenced by those reasons;'
and in a city where superstition reigns with"
Vol.I.'' B such

<page 15>
( 2 )
such despotic sway as in Madrid, to seek for
true devotion would be a fruitless attempt.
The audience now assembled in the Ca-
puchin church was collected by various
causes, but all of them were foreign to
the ostensible motive. The women came
to show themselves, the men to fee the
women: some were attracted by curiosity
to hear an orator so celebrated; some
came, because they had no better means of
employing their time till the play began;
some, from being assured that it would be
impossible to find places in the church;
and one half of Madrid was brought thi-
ther hy expecting to meet the other half.
The only persons truly anxious to hear the
preacher, were a few antiquated devotees,
and half a dozen rival orators, determined
to find fault with and ridicule the dis-
course. As to the remainder of the au-
dience, the sermon might have been omit-
ted altogether, certainly without their being
disappointed, and very probably without
their perceiving the omission.
Whatever

<page 16>
( 3 )
Whatever was the occasion, it is at least
certain, that the Capuchin church had
never witnessed a more numerous assem-
bly. Every corner was filled, every seat
was occupied. The very statues which or-
namented the long aistes were pressed into
the service. Boys suspended themselves
upon the wings of cherubims; St. Francis
and St. Mark bore each a spectator on his
shoulders; and St. Agatha found herself
under the necessity of carrying double.
The consequence was, that, in spite of all
their hurry and expedition, our two new
comers, on entering the church, looked
round in vain for places.
However, the old woman continued to
move forwards. In vain were exclama-
tions of displeasure vented against her
from all sides: in vain was she addressed
with—" I assure you, Segnora, there are
no places here."—'' I beg, Segnora, that
you will not crowd me so intolerably !"—
"Segnora, you cannot pass this way.
Bless me! How can people be so trouble-
B 2 some!"

<page 17>
( 4 )
some!"—The old woman was obstinate,
and on she went. By dint of perseverance
and two brawny arms she made a passage
through the crowd, and managed to bustle
herself into the very body of the church, at
no great distance from the pulpit. Her
companion had followed her with timidity
and in silence, profiting by the exertions of
her conductress.
*' Holy Virgin!" exclaimed the old wo-
man in a tone of disappointment, while
she threw a glance of enquiry round her;
"Holy Virgin! what heat! what a crowd!
I wonder what can be the meaning of all
this. I believe we must return: there is
no such thing as a feat to be had, and no-
body seems kind enough to accommodate
us with theirs."
This broad hint attracted the notice of
two-cavaliers, who occupied stools on the
right hand, and were leaning their backs
against the seventh column from the pul-
pit. Both were young, and richly habited.
Hearing this appeal to their politeness pro-
. , nounced

<page 18>
C 5 >
nounced in a female voice, they interrupted
their conversation to look, at the speaker.
She had thrown up her veil in order to take
a clearer look round the cathedral. Her
hair was red, and she squinted. The cava-
liers turned round, and renewed their con-
versation.
"By all means," replied the old woman's
companion j " by all means, Leonella, let
us return home immediately; the heat is
excessive, and I am terrified at such a
crowd."
These words were pronounced in a tone
of unexampled sweetness. The cavaliers.
again broke off their discourse, but for this
time they were not contented with looking.
up:. but started involuntarily from their
feats, and turned themselves towards the
speaker.
The voice came from a female, the deli-
cacy and elegance of whose figure inspired
the youths with the most lively curiosity
to view the face to which it belonged.
This satisfaction was denied them. Hec
B 3 feature*.

<page 19>
( 6 )
features were hidden by a thick veil; but
struggling through the crowd had deranged
it sufficiently to discover a neck which for
symmetry and beauty might have vied with
the Medicean Venus. It was of the most
dazzling whiteness, and received additional
charms from being shaded by the tresses of
her long fair hair, which descended in
ringlets to her waist. Her figure was rather
below than above the middle size: it was
light and airy as that of an Hamadryad. Her
bosom was carefully veiled. Her dress was
white; it was fastened by a blue fash, and just
permitted to peep out from under it a little
foot of-the most delicate proportions. A
chaplet of large grains hung upon her arm,
and her face was coyered with a veil of
thick black gauze. Such was the female,
to whom the youngest of the cavaliers now
offered his fear, while the other thought it
necessary to pay the fame attention to her
companion.
The old lady with many expressions of
gratitude, but without much difficulty, ac-
cepted

<page 20>
cepted the offer, and seated herself: the. „
young one followed her example, but made
no other compliment than a simple ancl
graceful reverence. Don Lorenzo (such was*
the cavalier's name, whose feat she had ac-
cepted) placed himself near her; but first
he whispered a few words in his friend's
ear, who immediately took the hint, and
endeavoured to draw off" the old woman's,
attention from her lovely charge.
". You are doubtless lately arrived at
Madrid ?." said Lorenzo to his fair neigh-
bour: "It is impossible that such charms;
should have long remained unobserved;
and had not this been your first public ap-
pearance, the envy of the women and ado-
ration of the men would have rendered you
already sufficiently remarkable."
He paused, in expectation of an answer.
As his speech did not absolutely require
one,, the lady did not open her lips: After
a few moments he resumed his discourse:
"Am I wrong in supposing you to be a
stranger to Madrid?"
B4 The.

<page 21>
( 3 )
The lady hesitated; and at last, in so low
a voice as to be scarcely intelligible, she
made shift to answer,—" No, Segnor."
'' Do you intend making a stay of any
length?"
'* Yes, Segnor."
'* I should esteem myself fortunate, were
it in my power to contribute to making
your abode agreeable. I am well known
at Madrid, and my family has some interest
at court. If I can be of any service, you
cannot honour or oblige me more than by
perm i tting me to be of use to you."—" S ure*
ly," said he to himself, "she cannot answer
that by a monosyllable; now she must say
something to me."
Lorenzo was deceived, for the lady an-
swered only by a bow.
By this time he had discovered, that his
neighbour was not very convertible; but
whether her silence proceeded from pride,
discretion, timidity, or idiotism, he was still
unable to decide.
After a pause of some minutes—" It
; .. is

<page 22>
( 9 >
Is certainly from your being a stranger,!'
said he, ". and as yet unacquainted with
our customs, that you continue to wear
your veil. Permit me to remove it."
At the fame time he advanced his hand
towards the gauze j the lady raised hers to
prevent him.
"I never unveil in public, Segnor.'"
"And where is the harm* I pray you?"
interrupted her companion somewhat sharp-
ly. "Do not you see., that the other ladies
have all laid their veils aside, to do honour
no doubt to the holy place in which we
are? I have taken off mine already; and
surely, if I expose my features to general
observation, you have no cause to put your-
self in such a wonderful alarm! Blessed
Maria! Here is a fuss and a bustle about;
a chit's face! Come, come, child! Unco*
ver it! I warrant you that nobody will run.;
away with it from you—"
"Dear aunt, it is not the custom in
Mtircia—"
". Murcia, indeed! Holy St. Barbara,
B 5 what

<page 23>
( io )
what does that signify? You are always put-
ting me in mind of that villanous province.
If it is the custom in Madrid, that is all
that we ought to mind; and therefore I de-
sire you to take off your veil immediately.
Obey me this moment, Antonia, for you
know that I cannot bear contradiction."
Her niece was silent, but made no fur-
ther opposition to Don Lorenzo'-s efforts,
who, armed with the aunt's sanction, has-
tened to remove the gauze. What a
seraph's head presented itself to his ad-
miration! Yet it was rather "bewitching
than beautiful; it was not so lovely from
regularity of features, as from sweetness
and sensibility of countenance. The seve-
ral parts of her face considered separately,
many of them were far from handsome;
but, when examined together, the whole
was adorable. Her skin, though fair, Was not
entirely without freckles; her eyes were
not very large, nor their lathes particularly
long. But then her lips were of the most
xosy freshness j her fair and undulating hair,
confined

<page 24>
( » )
confined by a simple ribband, poured itsejf
below her waist in a profusion of ringlets;
her neck was full and beautiful in the
extreme j her hand and arm were form-
ed with the most perfect symmetry; her
mild blue eyes seemed an heaven of sweet- -
ness, and the crystal in which they moved .
sparkled, with alt the brilliance of dia-
monds. She appeared to be scarcely fif-
teen; an arch smile, playing round her
mouth, declared her to be possessed of
liveliness,, which excess of timidity at pre-
sent repressed.. She looked round her with
a bashful glance; and whenever her eyes ac-
cidentally met Lorenzo's, she dropped them
hastily, upon her rosary; her cheek was
immediately suffused with blulhes, and .
. she began to tell her beads; though her
manner evidently showed that slie knew,
not what she was about.
i Lorenzo ,gazed upon her with mipgled
surprise and admiration; but the. aunt
thoughc it necessary to apologize for An-
tonia's tnauvaise bonte.
'...'..' B6 f'.Tis

<page 25>
( w )
"'Tis a young creature,"said she, "who.
is totally ignorant of the world. She has
been brought up in an old castle in Mur-
cia, with no other society than her mother's,
who, God help her! has no more fense,
good soul, than is necessary to carry her
soup to her mouth. Yet she is my own
sister, both by father and mother."
"And has so little sense?" said Don
Christoval with feigned astonishment.
"How very extraordinary !**.
"Very true, Segnor. Is it not strange?
However, such is the fact; and yet only
to fee the luck of some people! A young
nobleman, of the very first quality, took
it into his head that Elvira had some pre-
tensions vo beauty.—As to pretensions, in
truth she had always enough of them; but
as to beauty!—If I had only taken half
the pains to set myself off which me did !—-
But this is neither here nor there. As I
was saying, Segnor, a young nobleman
fell in love with her, and married her un-
known tohis father. Their union remained
a secret

<page 26>
( *3 )
a secret near three years; but at last it came
to the ears of the old marquis, who, as
you may well suppose, was not much
pleased with the'intelligence. Away he
posted in all haste to Cordova, determined
to seize Elvira, and send her away to some
place or other, where she would never be
heard of more. Holy St. Paul! How he
stormed on finding that she had escaped
him, had joined her husband, and that they
had embarked together for the Indies!
He swore at us all, as if the evil spirit had
possessed him; he threw my father into
prison—as honest a pains-taking shoe-maker
as any in Cordova; and when he went
away, he had the cruelty to take from us
my sister's little boy, then scarcely two year's
old, and whom in the abruptness of her
flight she had been obliged to leave behind
her. I suppose that the poor little wretch
met, with bitter bad •treatment from him,
for in a few months after we received in-
telligence of his death.**
fcWhy,

<page 27>
( I* )
"Why,, this was a most terrible old fel-
low, Segnora!"
"Oh!: shocking! and a man so totally-
devoid of taste! Why, would you be-
lieve it, Segnor? when I attempted to pa-
cify him, he cursed me for a witch, and
wished that, to punish the count, my sister
might become as ugly as myself!. Ugly inr
deed! I like him for that."
"Ridiculous 1" cried Don Christoval.
"Doubtless the count would have thought
himself fortunate, had he been permitted,
to exchange the one sister for the other.','
"Oh! Christ! Segnor, you are really,
too polite. However, I am heartily glad
that the conde was of a different way. os'
thinking. A mighty pretty piece of busi-.
ness, to be sure, Elvira has made of it! As-,
ter broiling and stewing in the Indies for
thirteen long years, her husband dies, and 1
she returns to Spain,, without an house to
hide her head, or money to procure her
one! This Antonia was then but an infant,
. and

<page 28>
( H )
and her only remaining child. She found;
that her father-in-law-had married again,
that he was irreconcileable to the conde,.
and that his second wife had produced him
a son, who is reported to be a very fine
young man. The old marquis refused to.
see my lister or her child; but sent her
word that, on condition of never hear-
ing any more of her, he would assign
her a small pension, and she might live in
an old castle which he possessed in Mur-
cia. This had been the favourite habita-
tion of his eldest son; but, since his flight
from Spain, the old marquis could not
bear the place, but let it fall to ruin
and confusion.—My sister accepted the
proposal; slie retired to Murcia, and has
remained there till within the last month."
'« And what brings her now to Madrid ?'*
enquired Don Lorenzo, whom admiration
of the young Antonia compelled to take
a lively interest in ths talkative old wo-
man's narration.
tc Alas! Segnor, her father-in-law being
lately

<page 29>
( iS )
lately dead, the steward of his Murcian
estates has refused to pay her pension any
longer. With the design of supplicating
his son to renew it, she is now come to
Madrid; but I doubt that she might
have saved herself the trouble. You young
noblemen have always enough to do with
your money, and are not very often dis-
posed to throw it away upon old women.
I advised my sister to send Antonia with
her petition j but she would not hear of
such a thing. She is so obstinate! Well!
she will find herself the worse for not fol-
lowing my counsels: the girl has a good
pretty face, and possibly might have done
much."
"Ah, Segnora!" interrupted Don Chris-
toval, counterfeiting a passionate air; "if
a pretty face will do the business, why has
not your sister recourse to you ?'*
"Oh! Jesus! my lord, I swear you
quite overpower me with your gallantry I
But I promise you that I am too well aware
of the danger of such expeditions to trust
myself

<page 30>
( '7 )
myself in a young nobleman's power! No,,
no; I have as yet preserved my reputation
without blemish or reproach, and I always
knew how to keep the men at a proper
distance."
"Of that, Segnora, I have not the least
doubt. But permit me to ask you, Have
you then any aversion to matrimony?"
"That is an home question. I cannot
but confess, that if an amiable cavalier was
to present himself"
Here she intended to throw a tender
and significant look upon Don Christoval;
but, as she unluckily happerted to squint
most abominably, the glance fell directly
upon his companion. Lorenzo took the
compliment to himself, and answered it by
a profound bow.
"May I enquire," said he, "the name
of the marquis?'*
"The marquis de las Cisternas."
"I know him intimately well. He is
not at present in Madrid, but is expected
here daily. He is one of the best of men j
and

<page 31>
( i8 )
and is the lovely Antonia will permit me
to be her advocate with him, 1 doubt not
my being able to make a favouiable report
of her cause."
Antonia raised her blue eyes, and silently
thanked him for the offer by a smile of
inexpressible sweetness. Leonella's. satis-
faction was much more loud and audible
Indeed, as her niece was generally silent irt
her company, she thought it incumbent;
upon her to talk enough far both: this.
(he managed without difficulty, for {he very
seldom found herself deficient in words.
"Oh,Segnor!" she cried j " you will lay
our whole family under the most signal ob-
ligations! I accept your offer with all pos-
sible. gratitude, and return you a thousand;
thanks for the generosity of your proposal*
Antonia, why do you not speak, child ?.
While the cavalier says all forts of civil
things to you, you sit like a statue, and
Bever utter a syllable of thanks, either bad,.
good, or indifferentI—"
"My dear aunt, I, am very sensible:
that—"

<page 32>
( '9 )
,l Fye, niece! How often have I told
you, that you never should interrupt a
person who is speaking! When did you
ever know me do such a thing? Are these
your Murcian manners? Mercy on me! 1
shall never be able to make this girl any
thing like a person os good breeding. But
pray, Segnor," she continued, addressing
herself to Don Christoval, " inform me,
why such a crowd is assembled to-day in
this cathedral."
f* Can you possibly be ignorant, that
Ambrosio, abbot of this monastery, pro-
nounces a sermon in this church every
Thursday? All Madrid rings with his
praises. As yet he has preached but thrice;
but all who have heard him are so delighted
with his eloquence, that it is as difficult to
obtain a place at church, as at the first re-
presentation of a new comedy. His fame
certainly must have reached your ears?"
"Alas! Segnor, till yesterday I never
had the good fortune to fee Madrid; and,
at Cordova we are so little informed of
what

<page 33>
C 20 )
what is passing in the rest of the world, that
the name of Ambrosio has never been
mentioned in its precincts."
"You will find it in every one's mouth
at Madrid. He seems to have fascinated
the inhabitants; and, not having attended
his sermons myself, J am astonished at the
enthusiasm which he has excited. The
adoration paid him both by young and
old, by man and woman, is unexampled..
The grandees load him with presents \.
their wives refuse to have any other con-
fessor; and he is known through all the city
by the name of The Man of Holiness."
"Undoubtedly, Segnor, he is of noble
origin?"
"That point still remains undecided.
The late superior of the Capuchins found
him while yet an infant at the abbey-door.
All attempts to discover who had left him
there were vain, and the child himself could
give no account of his parents. He was
educated in the monastery, where he has
remained ever since. He early mowed a
strong

<page 34>
t 21 )
strong inclination for study and retirement;
and as soon as he was of a proper age, he
pronounced his vows. No one has ever
appeared to claim him, or clear up the
mystery which conceals his birth; and the
monks, who find their account in the fa-
vour which is shown to their establishment
from respect, to him, have not hesitated to
publish, that he is a present to them from
v the Virgin. In truth, the singular austerity
of his life gives some countenance to the
report. He is now thirty years old, every
hour of which period has been passed in
study, total seclusion from the world, and
mortification of the flesh. Till these last
three weeks, when he was chosen superior
of the society to which he belongs, he had
never been on the outside of the abbey-
walls. Even now he never quits them except
on Thursdays, when he delivers a discourse
in this cathedral, which all Madrid assem-
bles to hear, His'knowiedge is said to be
the most profound, his eloquence the most
persuasive. In the whole course of his life
he

<page 35>
C M )
he has never been known to transgress a
single rule of his order; the smallest stain
is not to be discovered upon his character;
and he is reported to be so strict an observer
of chastity, that he knows not in what con-
lists the difference of man and woman. The
common people therefore esteem him to be
a faint." .
"Does that make a faint?" enquired
Antonia. "Bless me! then am I one."
"Holy St. Barbara!" exclaimed Leo-
nella, "what a question! Fye, child, fye!
these are not fit subjects for young wo-
men to handle. You should not seem to
remember that there is such a thing as a
man in the world, and you ought to ima-
gine every body to be of the fame sex with
yourself. I mould like to see you give
people to understand, that you know that
a man has no breasts, and no hips, and
4K>"
Luckily for Antonia's ignorance, which
her aunt's lecture would soon have dis-
pelled, an universal murmur through the
* 3 church

<page 36>
( sj )
church announced the preacher's arrival.
Donna Leonella rose from her seat to take
a better view of him, and Antonia followed
her example.
He was a man of noble port and com-
manding presence. His stature was lofty,
and his features uncommonly handsome.
His nose was aquiline, his eyes large, black
and sparkling, ahd his dark brows almost
joined together. His complexion was of
a deep but clear brown; study and watch-
ing had entirely deprived his cheek of
colour. Tranquillity reigned upon his
smooth unwrinkled forehead; and content,
expressed upon every feature, seemed to
announce the man equally unacquainted
with cares and crimes. He bowed him-
self with humility to the audience. Still
there was a certain severity in his look and
manner that inspired universal awe, and
few could sustain the glance of his eye, at
once fiery and penetrating. Such was Am.
brosio, abbot of the Capuchin?, and fur-
named "The Man of Holiness."
Antonia,

<page 37>
( ?4 )
Antonia, while she gazed upon him
eagerly, felt a pleasure fluttering in her bo»
som which till then had been unknown to
her, and for which she in vain endeavoured
lo account. She waited with impatience
till the sermon should begin; and when
at length the friar spoke, the sound of his
voice seemed to penetrate into her - very
soul. Though no other of the spectators
felt such violenc sensations as did the young
Antonia, yet every one listened with in-
terest and emotion. They who were insen-
sible to religion's merits, were still enchant-
ed with Ambrosio's oratory. All found
their attention irresistibly attracted while he
spoke, and the most profound silence reign-
ed through the crowded aisles. Even
Lorenzo could not resist the charm: he
forgot that Antonia was seated.near him,
jand listened to the preacher with undivided
attention. .,,.; ., , r/ ,,'. ; ' ,/,-, .*
. :In language nervous, clear, and simple,
the. monk expatiated on the beauties of reli-
gion. He explained someabstttifcpartsosthe
t':."•\\ sacred

<page 38>
( H \
sacred writings in a style that carried with
it universal conviction.. His voice, at once
distinct and deep, was fraught with all the
terrors of the tempest, while he inveighed
against the vices of humanity, and de-
scribed the punishments reserved for them
ill a future state. Every hearer looked
back upon his past offences, and trembled:
the, thunder seemed to roll, whose bolt was
destined to crush him, and the abyss of
eternal destruction to open before his feet!
But when Ambrosio, changing his theme,
spoke of the excellence of an unsullied
conscience, of the glorious prospect which
eternity presented to the soul untainted
with reproach, and of the recompense
Yshich awaited it in the regions of everlast-
ing glory> his auditors felt their scattered
spirits insensibly return. They threw them-
selves :with confidence upon the mercy of
their judge; they hung with delight up-
on the consoling words of the preacher;
and while his full voice swelled into me-
lody, they were transported to those happy
Vol. I. C . regions

<page 39>
( *6 )
regions which he painted to their imagi-
nations in colours so brilliant and glow-
ing.
The discourse was of considerable length:
yet, when it concluded, the audience grieved
that it had not lasted longer. Though the
monk had ceased to speak, enthusiastic
silence still prevailed through the church.
At length the charm gradually dissolving,
the general admiration was expressed in
audible terms. As Ambrosio descended
from the pulpit, his auditors crowded round
him, loaded him with blessings, threw
themselves at his feet, and kissed the hem
of his garment. He passed on slowly, with
his hands crossed devoutly upon his bosom,
to the door opening into the abbey-chapel,
at which his monks waited to receive him.
He ascended the steps, and then, turning
towards his followers, addressed to them a
few words of gratitude and exhortation.
While he spoke, his rosary, composed of
large grains of amber, fell from his hand,
and dropped among the surrounding multi-
5 tude.

<page 40>
( 27 )
tude. It was seized eagerly, and imme-
diately divided amidst the spectators. Who-
ever became possessor of a bead, preserved
it as a sacred relique; and had it been the
chaplet of thrice-blessed St. Francis him-
self, it could not have been disputed with
greater vivacity. The abbot, smiling at
their eagerness, pronounced his benediction
and quitted the church, while humility
dwelt upon every feature. Dwelt she also
in his heart?
Antonia's eyes followed him with an-
xiety. As the door closed after him, it
seemed to her as she had lost some one
essential to her happiness. A tear stole
in silence down her cheek.
, .,,". He is separated from the world !" said
she to herself; "perhaps, I shall never
fee him morel"
As me wiped away the tear, Lorenzo
observed her action.
t
^iAre you satissied with our orator?"
said be; "or do you think that Madrid
over-rates his talents?"
..,. C 2 Antonia's

<page 41>
( *8 )
Antonia's heart was so filled with admira-
tion for the monk, that she eagerly seized
the opportunity of speaking of him: be-
sides, as she now no longer considered Lo-
jenzo as an absolute stranger, (he was less
embarrassed by her excessive timidity.
"Oh! he far exceeds.all my expecta-
tions," answered she; "till this moment
I had no idea of the powers of eloquence.
Eut when he spoke, his voice inspired me
with such interest, such esteem, I might
almost say such affection for him, that I
am myself astonished at the acuteness of
my feelings."
Lorenzo smiled at the strength of her
expressions.
"You are young, and just entering into
life," said he: ".your.heart, new to the
world, and full of warmth and sensibility,
receives its first impressions with eagerness.
Artless yourself, you suspect not others of
deceit; and viewing the world through the
medium of your own truth and innocence,
you fancy all who surround you to deserve
: J your

<page 42>
( 29 )"
your confidence and esteem. What pity*
that these gay Visions must soon be dim-
pated! What pity, that you must soon dis-'
cover the baseness of mankind, and guard
against your fellow-creatures as against your
foes I"
'' Alas \ Segnor," replied Antonia,
"the misfortunes of my parents have al-
ready placed before me but too many fad
examples of the perfidy of the world! Yec
surely in the present instance the warmth
of sympathy cannot have deceived me.""
"In the present instance, I allow that
if has nor. Ambrosio's character is per-
fectly without reproach j and a man who
has passed the whole of his life within the-
walls of a convent, cannot have found the
opportunity toi. be guilty, even were he
possessed of the inclination. But now,-
when, obliged by the duties of his situation,
he must enter occasionally into the world,
and be thrown into the way of temptation,
it-is- now that it-behoves him to show"the
brilliance of his virtue. The trial is dan-
C 3 gerous »

<page 43>
C 30 )
g'erous; he is just ac that period of life
when the passions are most vigorous, un-
bridled, and despotic; his establUhed re-
putation will mark him out to seduction as
an illustrious victim; novelty will give
additional charms to the allurements of
pleasure; and even the talents with which
nature has endowed him will contribute
to his ruin, by facilitating the means of
obtaining his object. Very few would re-
turn victorious from a contest so severe."
"Ah! surely Ambrosio will be one of
those few."
"Of that I have myself no doubt: by-
all accounts he is an exception to mankind
in general, and envy would seek in vain
for a blot upon his character."
"Segnor, you delight me by this as-
surance! It encourages me to indulge my
prepossession in his favour; and you know
not with what pain I should have repressed
the sentiment! Ah! dearest .aunt, entreat
my mother to choose him for our con-
scfibr." .:.'- u
"I entreat

<page 44>
C 3* )
"I entreat her I" replied Leonellaf *' i
promise you that I shall do no such thing.
I do not like this fame Ambrosio in the
least j. he has a look of severity about
him that made me tremble from head to'
foot. Were he my confessor, I should
never have the courage to avow one half
of my peccadilloes, and then I should be in
a rare condition! I never saw such a stern-
looking mortal, and hope that I never shall
see such another. His description of the
devil, God bless us! almost terrified me
out of my wits, and when he spoke about
siancrs he seemed as if lie was ready to cat
them."
"You are righr, Segnora," answered
Don Christoval. "Too great severity is
said to be Ambrosio's only fault. Ex-
empted himself from human feelings, he is
not sufficiently indulgent to those of others;
and though strictly just and disinterested
in his decisions, his government of the.
monks has already shown some proofs of
his inflexibility. But the crowd is nearly-
C 4 dissipated:

<page 45>
C 32 )
dissipated: will you permit us to attend
you home?"
. ." O Christ! Segnor," exclaimed Leo-
nella affecting to blush; " I would not
suffer such a thing for the universe! If I
came home attended by so gallant a ca-
valier, my sister is so scrupulous that (he
would read me an hour's lecture, and I
ihould never hear the last of it. Besides,
I rather wish you not to make your pro-
posals just at present." .
"My proposals? I assure you, Seg-
BOra" • . 1 • ;.. . :. o
"Oh! Segnor,. I believe that your as-,
surances of impatience are all very true; but
really I must desire a little respite. It
would not be quite. so delicate in me to ac-
cept your hand at first, sight." (. ;h•i
. " Accept my hand? As I hope to live,
and breathe "- -
," Oh! dear Segnor, press me no fur-
ther if you love me! I shall consider your
obedience as a proof of your affection $
you shall hear from me to morrow, and so .
farewell.

<page 46>
( 33 )
farewell. But pray, cavaliers, may I- not
enquire your names?" .'..-' "V(; .vr •.'.*'
.:,**:My friend's," replied Lorenzo,i* is;
she Cond6 d'Ossorio, and mine1 Lorenzo
de Medina/' ' b'iu '..i: . '.:.': .' .'-..:' * j
. "'Tis susficient. Well, Don Lorenzo,
I shall acquaint my sister with your oblig-
ing offer, and let you know the result with
all expedition. , Where may I send f:ta
you?" .-... '.':;.,; .;:. . . i- .. . r ;...".'.;,-,;-.<
"I am always to be found at the Me-
dina palace," . ..
. " You may depend upon hearing from
ifje.' Farewell, cavaliers. Segnor Conde,
let me 7entreat you to moderate the excess
five ardour of your passion. However, to
prove that I am not displeased with you,
and prevent your abandoning yourself to
despair,-receive this mark of my affection,
and, sometimes bestow a thought upon the
absent Leonella." , ,. , •.,./ .':
< As 'she said this, she extended a lean and
wrinkled hand; which her supposed ad-
.}'-}'-;:*i C 5 mirer

<page 47>
C 3* )
niirer kifled with such sorry grace arid con-,
straint so evident, that Lorenzo with dif-
ficulty reprefled his inclination to laugh.
Leonclla then hastened to quit theehun?h:
the lovely Antonia followed her in silence i
but when (he reached the porch, the turn-
ed involuntarily, and cast back her eyes to*
wards Lorenzo. He bowed to her, as
bidding her. farewell j she returned the
compliment, and hastily withdrew. i.,. i
'''' So, Lorenzo I" said Don Christoval
as soon as they were alone, '* you have
procured me an agreeable intrigue! To fa-
vour your designs upon Antonia, I oblig-
ingly make a few civil speeches which
mean nothing to the aunt, and at the end
of an hour f find myself upon the brink of
matrimony f' How will you reward me for
having suffered so grievously for your
sake? What can repay me for having
kissed the leathern paw of that confounded
old witch? Diavolo! She has left such a
scent' upon my lips, that I mail smell o£
'"* - ' : "*' garlick

<page 48>
( 3S )
garlick for this month to come,!- AsI -pass,
along the Prado, I shall be taken for a
walking omelet, or some large onion run-
ning to feed !." \
. '* I confess, my poor count," replied.
Lorenzo, " that your service has been at-,
tended with danger; yet am I so far from,,
supposing it to be past all endurance, that
I shall probably solicit you to carry oa.
your amour still further."
'. .". From that petition I conclude, that
the little Antonia has made some impres-
sion upon you?" t
.:*' 1 cannot express to you how much I,
am charmed with her. Since my father's
death, my uncle the duke de Medina has
signified to me his. wishes to fee me mar-
ried j I have till now eluded his hints, and
refused to understand them; but what I
l^ave seen this evening"
_-:'& Well* what have you seen this even-,
ing? Why surely,, Don Lorenzo, you
eannot be mad enough to think of mak-
ing a wife out of this grand-daughter of
C 6 * as

<page 49>
( 3*?- )
*'as honest a pains-taking shoemaker as-
any in Cordova'?" • J.»-
'" You forget, that she is also the grand-
daughter of the late marquis de las Cister-
rias. But without disputing about birth and
titles, I must assure you, that 1 never beheld4
a'woman so interesting as Antonia:'* •>'JU'^1
- "Very possibly; but you cannot- mean
to* marry her?" < -:- . C ''.'. :'i. '.''"
"Why not, my dear conde ? HM1I have
wealth enough for both of-us, and you
know that my uncle thinks libfirally uport
the subject. -From what I have seen of Ray-
mdfid de 'las Cisternas, I am certain that he
will readily acknowledge Antonia sofrits':
ifi'ece; Her birth therefore will be no ob-
jection to my offering her my hand. : I
should be a villain, could I think of her
on any dther terms than marriage; andin
truth she seems~possessed of every quality
requisite" to make'me happy in-a'wife'—
young', lovely^gentle, sensible—--" '^i1'
•."^'Sensible'r'' 'Why, she said nothing but
*.* She
Yes, and Nd.

<page 50>
"She tiicf-not say; much more, I muft
confess—burthen she always said Yes or
Nointhe right placeV* Lt ''.'.'..) - ,:»»/
""Did she To? Ohlyour moft obedi-:
ent! That is- using a right lover's argu-'
ment^ and Tdare'dispute- no longer with
so profound a''casuist.--"Suppose we ad-i'
journ to the Comedy ?''- ;«.-..' .01..
"It is out of my power. I only• ar-
rived 4ast night at Madrid, and have not
yet lVa'd an opportunity of seeing my sister.
T^ofa' know that her convent is in this
street, and I Was going thither when the
crowd which T saw thronging ihto '. this
church excited my curiosity to know what
Was the'matter. L,f shall now pursue my
first intention, 'and prBbabiy pass the even-
ing with my sister at the parlour-grate."
r '.*' Your sifter in 'a conv'fe'ht, 'fay you?
Oh ! very-true i'l'had forgotten. And Koxr
docs Donna1 Agn'es^T am amazed, Don
Lorenzo, how you could possibly think of
irrrmtrrirrg*^1 eWmirig^ a- girl within the"
walls of a cloister I" - •J ;• -"."
->r « I think

<page 51>
(-: s* >
«. J think of.it, Don Christoval? [How
can you suspect me of such barbarity?
You are conscious that she took the veil:
by her own desire, and that particular cir-
cumstances made her wish for a seclusion
from the world. I used every means in
my power to induce her to change her
resolution; the endeavour was fruitless,
and I lost a sister 1"
'? The luckier fellow you: I think, Lo-
renzo, you were a considerable gainer by
that loss; if I remember right, Donna
Agnes had a portion of ten thousand pis-
toles, half of which reverted to your lord-
ship. By St.. Jago I I wish that I had
fifty sisters in the some predicament. I
should consent to losing them every soul,
without much heartburning."
'' How, conde?" said Lorenzo in an
angry voice; " do you suppose me base
enoagh to have influenced my sister's re-
tirement? do you; suppose that the despi-
cable wish to make myself master of hee
fortune could-——".
-j i . >• "Admi-

<page 52>
*' Admirafole'l Courage, Don Lorenzo t
Now-the man is all in a blaze. God grant
that Antonia may soften that fiery temper*
or we shall certainly cut each other's throat
before the month is over! However, to
prevent such a tragical catastrophe for the-
present, 1 shall make a retreat, and leave-
you master of the field. Farewell, my
knight of Mount Ætna! Moderate that
inflammable disposition^ and remember
that, whenever it is necessary to make
love to yonder harridan, you may reckon
upon my services."
He said,and darted out of the cathedral.
". How wild-brained!" said Lorenzo.
"With so excellent an heart, what pity
that he possesses so little solidity, of judg*.
ment!" .; .,- -.. .•.,. . ,
The. night was now fast advancing*
The lamps were not yet lighted. The,,
faint beams of the rising moon scarcely,
could pierce through the gothic obscurity,
of the church. Lorenzo found himself
unable to quit the spot, The void left in.
.; his

<page 53>
(( 4* J)
his bosomTby' 'Antonia's absence,: arnd frig
sisters sacrifice Which Don Christoval had!
just recalled•'to his imagination, created'
that frieiancfebfy'oF .rrrtridi which accorded'
btft * too' well w«h:'th■e religions; glfton*
surrounding him. . He waV still . leaning
against the seventh column from the pulpit.
A soft■and tooling air breathed along the
solitary' aifles; the moon-beams darting
into •the church through painted windows,
tinged the fretted roofs Bind- massy pillars
with a thousand various . shades .of light
and colours. Universal- .silence prevailed
around•, onfyirlterVupted by the.occasional
ciosing•df'dooris in.the adjoining abbey.1
:TheidaImt;df'*he^hcmr;ahd solieude of
the place". contributed '- to > nourish:! Lo-
renzo's disposition to melancholy. He
th•rew^1hlrVsself^upcte^a seat iwhkh: stood
near*" hmV'iarid ^abarMoned .himself to the
delusions oPWs fancy. ~H&thought of'sIris!
iMori::w,rtR;A■rftohla ^top-thought ofJthe
obstacles which might• oppose^his" wisties*j
sfnd:dr thousand changing Vi.Gori6• floated
before

<page 54>
( 4i )
before his fancy, fad 'lis true, but not un-
pleasing. Sleep insensibly stole over him,
and the tranquil solemnity of his mind
when awake, for a while continued to in-
fluence his slumbers.
He still fancied himself to be in the
church of the Capuchins; but it was no
longer dark and solitary. Multitudes of
silver lamps shed splendour from the vault-
ed roofs ; accompanied by the captivating
chaunt of distant choristers, the organ's
melody swelled through the church; the
altar seemed decorated as for some distin-*
guished feast; it. was surrounded by a
brilliant company; and near it stood Anto-
nia arrayed in bridal white, and blushing
with all the charms of virgin modesty. . . i
-iHalf. .hoping, half fearing,] Lorenzo-
gazed, upon the scene before him*-Sud-r
denly the door leading to the abbey Un-
closed; and he saw, attended by a long
train of monks, the preacher advance to,
whom he had just listened with so much,
admiration. He drew npar Antonia. -. ^
"And

<page 55>
( 42 )
"And where is the bridegroom?" said
the imaginary friar.
Antonia seemed to look round the church
with anxiety. Involuntarily the youth ad-
vanced a few steps from his concealment.
She saw him; the blush of pleasure glowed
upon her cheek; with a graceful motion of
her hand she beckoned to him to advance.
He disobeyed not the command; he flew to-
wards her, and threw himself at her feec.
She retreated for a moment; then gaz-
ing upon him with unutterable delight,-
"Yes," she exclaimed, " my bridegroom!
my destined bridegroom!"" ,
She (aid, and hastened to throw herself
into his arms; but before he had time t©;
receive her, an unknown rushed between*
them: his form was gigantic; his com-
plexion was swarthy, his eyes fierce and
terrible; his mouth breathed out volumes .
of fire, and on his forehead was written iii'
legible characters—" Pride! Lust! Inhu-
manity!" ....'.'.„.
Antonia shrieked. The monster clasped
.•;.'' her

<page 56>
( 43 )
her in his arms, and, springing with bet?
upon the altar, tortured her with his odious
caresses. She endeavoured in vain to escape
from his embrace. Lorenzo flew to her
succour; but ere he had time to reach her,
a loud burst of thunder was heard. In-
stantly the cathedral seemed crumbling in-
to pieces; the monks betook themselves
to flight, shrieking fearfully j the lamps
were extinguished, the altar sunk down,
and- in its place appeared an abyss vomiting
forth, clouds of flame. Uttering a loud
and terrible cry the monster plunged into:
the gulph, and in his fall attempted to
drag Antonia with him. He strove irt
vain. Animated by supernatural' pow-
ers; (he disengaged herself from his em-
braces; but her white robe was left in his
possession. Instandy a wing of brilliant
splendour spread itself from either of Anto-
nia's arms. She darted upwards, and while"
attending cried to Lorenzo, '' Friend f
we shall meet above \" .' -U
i At the fame moment the roof of the ca-
thedral

<page 57>
( 44 )
thedra'I opened; harmonious voices pealed*
along the vaults; and the glory into which-
Antonia was received, was composed of
rays of such dazzling brightness, that Lo-
renzo was unable to sustain the gaze. His'
fight failed, and he funk upon the ground.
When he awoke he found himself ex-
tended upon the pavement of the church: it
was illuminated, and the chaunt of hymns
sounded from a distance. For a while
Lorenzo could not persuade himself that
what he had just witnessed had been a
dream, so strong an impression had it made
upon his fancy. A little recollection' con-
vinced him'of its fallacy: the lamps had
been lighted during his fleep, and the music
which he heard .was occasioned by the
monks, who were celebrating their vespers.
in the abbey-chapel." ... ••..!» .'.ot..■«; 1;
"Lorenzo rose, and prepared to bend his.
steps towards his sister's convent, his mindf
fully occupied by the singularity of his-:
dream. He already drew near the porch,
when his attention was attracted by perceiv-
L I..It ing

<page 58>
( 45 )
ang a shadow moving upon the apposite
wall. He looked curiously round, and soon,
descried a man wrapped up in his cloak,
who seemed carefully examining whether
Jus actions were observed. Very few peo-
ple are exempt from the influence of curi-
osity. The unknown seemed anxious to
conceal his business in the cathedral; and it
was this very circumstance v/hich made
Lorenzo wish to discover what he was
about,- .
-. Our hero was conscious that he had no
right to pry into the secrets of this unknown
cavalier. 1
. ...'' I will go," said Lorenzo. And Lo-
renzo stayed where he was.
The shadow thrown by the column ef-
fectually concealed him from the stranger,
who continued to advance with caution.
At length he drew a letter from beneath his
cloak, and hastily placed it beneath a colos-
sal statue of St.. Frahcis. Then retiring
with precipitation, he concealed himself
in a part of the church at a considerable
-,.,, distance

<page 59>
( 46 )
distance from that in which the image
stood.
"So !" said Lorenzo to himself; "this
is only some foolish love affair. I believe,
I may as well be gone, for I can do no
good in it."
In truth, till that moment it never came
into his head that he could do any good in
it j but he thought it necessary to make
some little execuse to himself for having
indulged his curiosity. He now made a
second attempt to retire from the church.
For this time be gained the porch without
meeting with any impediment; but it was
destined that he should pay it another visit
that night. As he descended the steps
leading into the street, a cavalier rushed
against him with such violence, that both
were nearly overturned by the concussion.
Lorenzo put his hand to his sword.
"How now, Segnor?" said hej ''what
mean you by this rudeness?"
"Ha! is it you, Medina?" replied the
new comer, whom Lorenzo by his voice
now

<page 60>
( 47 )
now recognized for Don Christoval. " You
are the luckiest fellow in the universe, not
to have left the church before my return.
In, in! my dear lad! they will be here
immediately!"
"Who will be here?"
"The old hen and all her pretty little
chickens. In, I fay; and taen you shall
know the whole history."
Lorenzo followed him into the cathe-
dral, and they concealed themselves behind
the statue of St. Francis.
"And now," said our hero, "may I
take the liberty of asking what is the mean-
ing of all this haste and rapture?"
"Oh! Lorenzo, we shall fee such a glo-
rious fight! The prioress of St. Clare and
her whole train of nuns are coming hither.
You are to know, that the pious father Am-
brosio (the Lord reward him for it!) will
upon no account move out of his own pre-
cincts. It being absolutely necessary for
every fashionable convent to have him for
its

<page 61>
( 48 )
Its confesses, the nuns are in consequence
obliged to visit him at the abbey; since,
when the mountain.will not come to Maho-
met, Mahomet mint needs go to the moun-
tain. Now the prioress of St. Clare, the bet-
ter to escape the gaze of such impure eyes
as belong to yourself and your humble ser-
vant, thinks proper to bring her holy flock
to confession in the dusk: she is to be ad-
mitted into the abbey-chapel by yon private
door. The porteress of St. Clare, who is
a worthy old foul and a particular friend oft
mine, has just assured me of their being
here in a few moments. There is news for
you, you rogue! We shall see some of the
prettiest faces in Madrid!"
'"In truth, Ohristoval, we (hall do :no
such thing. The nuns are always veiled."
"No ! no ! I know better. On entering
a place of worship, they ever take osstheif
veils, from respect to the saint to whom 'tis
dedicated. But hark, they are coming! Si-,
lence! silence! Observe,and be convinced."
"Good

<page 62>
c. 49 y
aJcfioo&i'' said Lorenzo to himself j " t
may possibly discover to whom the.Vows'
are• addressed of this mysterious stranger;"
n$carcdy had' •Don Christoval ceafed■■to
fpejak, when the.•domioa of St;Qareappears
ed, followed by a long procession of nuhSf
EacfejMpon, eacedng the church took off
her reil. The prioress crossed her hands
upon-her bosofti, and made a profound re-
verence as slrd.passed trhestatua of St. Fran*
cis, tbeJ.patrstnf.of• this cathedral. The
iwis; folio weds} {her" example, arid several
moved onwards without having satisfied Doi*
•æpiZQis bwiibfa#. j :He almost began tO•de^:
spaar dft&eingitheift»ysterycleared hp;wherf,T
in paying her respocts ?io Sf.FranciS, brifef'
tif-thehuns Hippened to dropJ•her' rosary.
A.$ she stooped•iw pidc kiiip rtie'lighr flash--'
ed fuH.io?hiijfaceJ.. At <rbe•Tame -rfltfrrieni*
fh<v:d.<?jitereRiSy) removed the sestet* crVom
bepeatlvihdlicnage, placed: it in her bosttm,'
and hastened to refyme her rank in the1
yrfmfiitilhti.yn try. i ■LiJ.v in '.;.1t c u\ »
.)fft Hai^'[j^i(4)Chj)istoVitl in a W vbfce;
YoiL I. D «heT'e

<page 63>
Q 5° )

'f here we have some little intrigue, he
doubt."
"Agnes, by heaven!" cried Lorenzo.
rtf* What, your sister? Diavolo! Thea
lbnrebody, I suppose, will have to pay for
pur peeping."
'/.And shafl pay for it without delay,"
replied the incensed brother.
- The pious procession had -now entered
the abbey; the door was already closed
upon it. The unknown immediately quit-
ted his concealment, amd hastened to leave
the ichurch: ere he could effect his inten-
tion,, he descried Medina stationed in his
passage. The strangerhastily retreated, and
drew his hat over his eyes.
M Attempt not to fly me !*' exclaimed
iLorenzo.; -"I will know who you are, and
what were she contents of that letter."
"Of that letter?" repeated the unknown.
♦'And by what title do yew a& the ques-
tion?" . . . iVi e" ,,.•nti^i HJft
"By a title of which I am now dstiamed ;,
but it becomes 'not you to queftiont roe.
.1 Either

<page 64>
( 5< )
Either reply circumstantially to my de-
mands, or answer me with your sword."
"The latter method will be the shortest."
rejoined the other, drawing his rapier;
'' come on, Segnor Bravo! I am ready."
Burning with rage, Lorenzo hastened
to the attack: the antagonists had already
exchanged several passes, before Christoval,
who at that moment had more fense than
either of them, could throw himself be-
tween their weapons.
"Hold! hold ! Medina!" he exclaimed;
"remember the consequences of shedding
blood on consecrated ground!"
The stranger immediately dropped his
sword. • -.;
.... ft Medina V he cried. "Great God, is
it possible! Lorenzo, have you quite for-
gotten Raymond de las Cisternas?" .' '. .
Lorenzo's astonistiment increased with
every succeeding moment. Raymond ad-
vanced towards him; but with a look of
suspicion he drew back his hand, which the
other was preparing to take.
*' You here, Marquis? What is the
.<.: . ,• D 2 meaning

<page 65>
C 5* )
meaning of all this? You engaged in a
clandestine correspondence with my sister,
whose asfections-——" '" "'"""
; "Have ever been, 'and still are, mine.
But this is no fit place for an explanation.
Accompany me'to my hotel, and you mail
know every thing. Who is that with
you?"
'' One whornT believe you to have seen
before," replied Don Christoval, " though
probably not at church."
"Thecpnde'd'Oflorio?"
; "Exactly so, marquis." ;j :-':;:i .
"I have nonobjection to entrusting'ybu
with my. secret, for I'am sure that J^rnay
depend upon your silence." .bK.v.-l
"Then your opinion of me! is' tester
than my > own, and therefore . V stiuf beg'
leave to decline your donfidencc.i >D& yo^'
go your own way^ and Iihall^go mine.
Marquis, where are you to be found?"; wo
".As usual, at the hotel de las Cisternas;
but. remember that I am incognito, and
that, if you wish to seeane, you must ask
for Alphonso d'Alvaradaj/V'od -oY"
1 ...)«; 1 'I "Good!

<page 66>
(, 53 )
'* LGood ! jagood! Farewell, cavaliers!"
said Don Christoval, and instantly ~de-
. " You-, marquis," said Lorenzo in the
accent of surprise; " you, Alphonso d'Al-
varada!" . i - ,. ,
V Even so, Lorenzo :• but unless you
have .already heard my ftory from, your
sister, I have-much to relate that will asto-
nUhyou. , Follow mp, therefore^ co my
hotel without delays1 - ..; .. , - f;,
Ar, this moHiejjt; the porter of the Capij-,',
chins entered the cathedral to lock up the;
doors for the nighu The two noblemen
instantly withdrew* and hastened with all
speed to the.palace de las Cilternas.
wad *lt'»T v»w
- 'rMw ix 3.': : ..y-,iK' :; "-oi,'. \ v.".'. 1
.J'.Well, Aritoniaj" said the aunt, as soon .
as she had quitted the church, " what think;
you of pur gallants,? Don-Lorenze reajly
seems a very obliging good,fortot young
man: hepaidyou someattention,and nobody.: r
D 3 knows

<page 67>
( 54 )
knows what may come of it. But as to Don
Christoval, I protest to you, he is the very
phœnix of politeness; ib gallant! so well-
bred! so sensible, and so pathetic! Well!
if ever man can prevail upon me to break
my vow never to marry, it will be that
Don Christoval. You see, niece, that every
thing turns out exactly as I told you : the
very moment that I produced myself in
Madrid, I knew that I should be surround-
ed by admirer?. When I took osf my veil,
did you see, Antonia, what an effect the
action had upon the conde? And when I
presented him my hand, did you observe
tbe sfr < f pnflrn v ill u 1 kh he ! iffid if'.**
If evu -1 'wiiuftiied i'ai u.ve, i Haui.w iu
impressed upon Don Chriltovai's counter
nance:V~', ) .—:-~—-.-w^—k ;,:'.
"Now Antonia had observed the air with
which Don Christoval had kissed this fame
hand; but as she drew conclusions from it-;
somewhat different from her aunt's, she'-'
was wife enough to hold her tongue. As:
this' is the only instance known of & wd*-
.' '' .. . '- man's

<page 68>
C\5-5 )
man's ever having done so, it was judged
worthy to be recorded here.
The old lady continued her discourse
to Antonia in the same strain, till they
gained the streeikin which was their lodg-
ing. Here a crowd collected before their
door permitted them not to approach it;
and placing themselves on the opposite
fide of the street, they endeavoured to
make out what had drawrt&lj. these people
together. After some minutes the ciowd
formed itself into a circle j and now An-
tonia'perceived in the midst of ita woman
of extraor-linavy he-ghr, v.ha \\h r!t\i !*:-
f'tlf repeatedly lound aud round, using
all sorts of extravagant gestures. Her dress
was composed ofshreds of various-coloured
silks and linens fantastically arranged, yet
not entirely without taste. Her head was
covered with a kind of turban ornamented
with vine-leaves and wild flowers. She-
seemed much sun-burnt, and her com-
plexion was of a deep olive : her eyes look-
ed fiery and strange; and.in her hand she
D 4 bore.

<page 69>
c 56 i
bore a long black rod, with which she at
intervals tiaced.a variety of singular figures
upon the ground, round about which stie
danced,in all the eccentric 3ttitudes osfoUy
and delirium. Suddenly she broke oft'her
dance, whirled herself round thrice with
rapidity, and after a moment's pause ^fhe
fung the following ballad:

'
THE GIPSY's SONG.
COME, cross my hand! My art surpasies .
All that did ever mortal know:
Come, maidens, come! My magic glasses'
Your future husband's form can {how:
.For 'tis to me the power is given
ynclosed the book of sate to see;
To read the fixed resolves of heaven,
And dive into futurity.
I guide the pale moon's silver waggon;
..,••Thc winds in magic bonds I hold;
I charm to sleep.the ciimson dragon•
"Who love;. lo watch o'er buried gold.
"'
Fenced round with spells• unhurt I renture
'Their sabbath strange where witches keep;
'' Fearless t tie sorcerer's circle enter,
And woundless tread on snakes asleep*
Lo1

<page 70>
"Lo! here are charms of mighty power!
This makes secure an husband's truth;
~And this, composed at midnight hour,
'Will force to lOve the coldest youth.
If any maid too much has granted.
Her loss this philtre will repair.
This blooms a cheek where red is wanted,
And this will make a brown girl sair.
Then silent hear, while I discover.
What I in fortune's mirror view; .;_
And each, wlje,n many a ypar is over, ^
Shall own the Gipsy's sayings true, .
"Dear auntiV 'said" Ajntonia when the
stranger had fisliQaed,." is she not mad ?'.'.
"Mad? Not she, child; she is only,
wicked*. Sfeeis;a gipsyS a'sort of vagabond,
whose sole occupation is ;to run aboyt,the
country telling lyesj and pilfering frortxtfaose
who come by their money honestly. Out
upon such vermin! If I were king of Spain.,
every one of. them should be burnt aljye,.
who was found, in my.domini.ons. after the
next three weeks."
These words were pronounced so audL
bly, that they reached the gipsy's ears. She
D 5 irome-

<page 71>
i 5» )
immediately pierced through the crowd,
and made towards the ladies. She saluted
them thrice in the eastern fashion, and thea
addressed herself to Antonia..
THE GIPSY.
"Lady, gentle lady! know,
I your future fate can show;
Give your hand, and do not fear ;.
Lady, gentle lady f hear!"
«* Dearest aunt!" said Antonia, «t indulge
me this once! let me have my fortune told
me!"
«« Nonsense, child! She will tell you
nothing but falsehoods."
"Np matter; let me at least hear what
she has to fay. Do, my dear aunt, oblige
me, I beieech you!"
«« Well, well! Antonia, since you are so
bent upon the thing——Here, good wo-
man, you shall fee the hands of both of us.
There is money for you, and now let me
hear my fortune."
As

<page 72>
( 59 )
As she said this, she drew off her glove,
And presented her hand. The gipsy looked
at it for a moment, and then made this
reply :.
THE GIPSY.
".Your fortune? You are now so oldV
ood dame, that 'tis already told:
Yet, for your money, in a trice
I.will repay you in advice..
Astonished at your childish vanity,
Your friends all tax you with insanity,
And grieve to see you use your art
To catch some youthful lover's heart.
Believe me, dame, when all is done,
Your age will still be fifty-one;
And men will rarely take an hint •
Of love from two grey eyes that squint.
Take then my counsels; lay aside
Your paint and patches, lust and pride,
And on the poor those sums bestow,
Which now are spent on useless show.
Think on your Maker, not a suitor;
Think on your past faults, not on suture;
And think Time's scythe will•quickly mow
The few red hairs, which deck your brow.
The audience rang with laughter, duf*
D 6 ing

<page 73>
ing the gipsy's address; and—".fifty-
One,—squinting eyes,—red hair,—.paint
and patches,"—&c. were bandied from
mouth to mouth. Leonclla was almost
choked with passion, and loaded her ma-'
licious adviser with the bitterest reproaches.
The swarthy prophetess for some time lis-
tened to her with a contemptuous smile:
at length (he made her a short answer,'and
then turned to Antonia.
THE GIPSY •'
"Peace, lady! What I said was true. ., -.'i
And now, my lovely maid, to you: »
Give me your hand, and let me fee
Your future doom, and heavens decree."
In imitation of Leonella, Antonia drew
off her glove, and presented her white hand
to the gipsy, who, having gazed upon it
for some time with a mingled expression
of pity and astonishment, pronounced her
oracle .in the following words:
* THE GIPSY.
"Jesus! what a palm is there!
Chaste. and gentle, young and fair,
Perfect

<page 74>
( 6i >

Perfect- mind and form possessing,
You would be some good man's blessing ;.
But, alas! this line discovers
That destruction o'er you hovers;.-
Lustful man and crafty- devil
Will combine to work your evil;
And from earth by sorrows driven,
Soon your foal must speed to heaven.
Yet your sufferings to delay,
Well remember what I say.
When you one more virtuous fee
Than belongs tq man to be,,
One, whose self no crimes assailing,
Pities not his neighbour's sailing,
Call the gipsy's words to mind:
Though he seem so good and kind.
Fair exteriors oft will hide
Hearts that swell with lust and pride.
Lovely maid, with tears I leave you»
Let not my prediction grieve.you:
Rather, with submission bending,
Calmly wait distress impending,.
And expect eternal bliss
In a better world than this.
Having said this, the gipsy again whirl-
ed herself round thrice, and then hastened
out of the street with frantic gesture. The
crowd

<page 75>
( 62 )
crowd followed her; and Elvira's door-
being now unembarrassed, Leonella entered
the house, out of humour with the gipsy,
with her niece, and with the people; in.
short, with every body but herself and her
charming cavalier. The gipsy's predic-
tions had also considerably affected Anto-
nia j but the impression soon wore off, and
in a few hours she had forgotten the ad-
venture, as totally as had it never taken
place•

<page 76>
C «* *
CHAP. IT.
Torse se tu guftasiT. una sol volta-
La millelima parte delle gioje,
Ch6 gusta un cor amato riamando,
Diresti ripentita sospirando,,
Perduto e tutto.il tempo,
Che in amarnon si spende.
Tasso*
Hadst thou but tailed once the thousandth part
Of joys, which bless the loved and loving heart,
Your words repentant and your sighs would prove^.
Lost is the time which is not past in love.
JL HE monks having attended their ab-
bot to the door of his cell, he dismissed
them wiih an air of conscious superiority,
in which humility's semblance combated
with the reality of pride.
He was no sooner alone, than he gave
free loose to the indulgence of his vanity.
When

<page 77>
C % ).
When he remembered the enthusiasm which.
his discourse had excited, his heart swelled,
with rapture, and his imagination present-
ed him with splendid visions of aggrandize-
ment. He looked round. him with.exul-
tation; and pride told him loudly, that he
was superior to the rest of his fellow-
creatures.
"Who," thought he, c« who bus my-
self has passed the ordeal of youth, yet fees.
no single stain upon his conscience? Who
else has subdued the violence of'strong pas-
sions and an impetuous temperament, and
submitted even from the dawn of life to
voluntary retirement? I seek for such1 a.
man in vain, I see no—one. but myself,
possessed of such resolution. Religion can,-.
not boast Ambrosio's equal !' How power-
ful an effect did my discourse produce up-
on its auditors! How they crowded round'
me! How they loaded me with benedic*'
tions, and pronounced me the sole, uncor-
rupted pillar- of the church! What then
now is left for me to do? Nothing; but to.
. r. .7 watch

<page 78>
( 65 )
watch as carefully over the conduct of my
brethren, as I have hitherto watched over
my own. Yet hold! May I not be tempt-
ed from those paths, which till now I have
pursued without one moment's wandering?
Am I not a man, whose nature is frail and
prone to error? I must now abandon the
solitude of my retreat; the fairest and no-
blest dames of Madrid continually present
themselves at the abbey, and will'use no;
other confessor. I must accustom my eyes
to objects of temptation, and expose my-J
self to the seduction of luxury and desire.
Should I meet, in that world which I am
constrained to ehter, some lovely semale-
lovely as yon Madona—*!"
'As he said this, he fixed his eyes uportt
a picture of the Virgin, which;was fus4
pended opposite to him ; this for. two. year&
had been the object of his increasing won-
der and adoration, tic paused, and gazed,
upon it with delight. ,
''{ Wljat beauty in that countenance !'*
he cQntinutd-after a silence of some mi-,
nutes;

<page 79>
( 66 ),
mites j " hew graceful is the turn of that
head! what sweetness, yet what majesty
in her divine eyes! how softly her cheek
reclines upon her hand! Can the rose vie
with the blusli of that cheek.? can the
lily rival the whiteness of that hand?
Oh! if such a creature existed, and existed
but for me! were I permitted to twine
round my fingers those golden ringlets, and
press with my lips the treasures of that
snowy bosom! gracious God, should>t'
then resist the temptation? Should I noC—
barter for a single embrace the rewardroSj
my. sufferings for thirty years? S'inuld I
».rt abu;.doh -Irool that I am! Wai*.
ther dp I suffer my admiration of this
picture to hurry me? Away, impure ideas!
Let me remember, that woman is for ever
lost to me. Never was mortal formed so.
perfect as this picture. But even did such
exist, the trial might be too mighty for a
common virtue: but Ambrosio's is proof
against temptation. Temptation, did I
say? To me it would be none. What
charms

<page 80>
( 67 )
charms me, when ideal and considered as
a superior being, would disgust me, be-
come woman and tainted with all the fail--
insjs of mortality. It is not the woman's
beauty that fills me with such enthusiasm:
it is the painter's skill that I admire; it is
the Divinity that I adore. Are not the pas-
sions: dead in my bosom? have I noc freed
myself from the frailiy of mankind? F ear-
ns*, Ambrosio! Take confidence in the
strength of your virtue. Enter boldly in-
to the worid, to whose failings you are su-
perior-; reflect that you are now exempted'
srom humanity's defects, and dtfy all the
a*ts of the s;ii;its .; f ci;Lncr?. 1 hey shall
know you: fox: whdt.ycu are i** *
. Here his reverie was interrupted by-
three soft, knocks at the door of his cell.'
With difficulty did the abbot awake from
hi* delirium. The knocking was-repeated.
- 'ft Who. is there?" said Ambrosio at
length.
. M It itflonly Rofkrio," replied a gentle
voiced '.'*•' '..;>'
-... . •. . *' Enter!

<page 81>
( 63 )'
: '' Enter! enter, my son!"
* The door was immediately opened, and-
Rosario appeared with a small basket in his'
band. .'
Rosario was a young novice belonging
to the monastery, who in three months in j:
tended to make his profession. ;A fort of
mystery enveloped this' youth, which ren-
dered him at once an object; Of interest and:
aWibsity. His hatred of society, his' pro-
found melancholy, his rigid observance of
the duties of. his order, and his volnn-'
tary seclusion from the world, at his age' so;
unusual, attracted the notice of the whole
fraternity. He seemed fearful of being re-
cognised, and'no one.had ever seen his face. '.
His head-was .continually .muffled up- in
hii cowl; yetfuchc of rhis features^s acci-
dent discovered, appeared the most: beauti-
ful and noble. Rosario was the only name-
by which he was,knottin,in the monastery.
No one knew from whence he came,;.and;
when questioned on the subject lie preserved
a profound silence. A stranger, whose xich.i
'.' . '.. » habit

<page 82>
( ^ )
habit and magnificent equipage declared
him to be of distinguished rank, had (en-
gaged the monks to receive a, novice,, 'and
had deposited the necessary sums. The ne.xt
day he returned witb,HoCan% and ,£rpm.
that time no mor,e had been heard of h,im-,r
The -youth .had carefully avoided -.the
company of i(he monks .^Jie^nswj^cd, their
civibtiqs fw.ij^ swee^pe^^^ut, f fjsffM?,; anr]
ejijdently' (bowed ,tbat his.).in<fiinatjop l^d
him to solitude. , To tbisgeneral .rul$th,§
supers,was the, only qxceptjpn.;} Tp,; hjrn
he /Qpked^up.iwith a.respect:,ap£fioachirig
i&l*ftæ5 rte so«sK:fe.. WPBM ,wit|h;the,
mpst attentiyeriaffid^ityj an.dijetfgertly^ejjfed
S^ry''PK^ns: to ingratiate himssjf/lin'his
savour. .In the abbot's society his; beast
seemed tq be at easie*, and, aji^air; ofg^iety
^r^ad^d/ hi? ^Ijpki ffla^ers#n^idii^wstt
Ambrosia »a( Hist side/did -not/feeJiicsel atti
tra&edi towards; the. youths ;wuhi>isri.-xlc}nd
did, he., lay aside his habitual severity*;
When he spoke to him, he insen'siblyiasL
-?juiW ** fumed

<page 83>
V,7° )
fumed a tone ninaer thai was usual to
him ; and no voice sounded so sweet to him
as did Rosario's. He repaid the'youths
attentions by instructing him in various
sciences j the novice received his lestbni
with docility; Ambrosio was every day
more charmed with the vivacity of his
genius, the simplicity of his manners, and
the rectitude of his heart: in short, he loved
him with' all the affection of a father. He
could not help sometimes indulging a de«
sire secretly to see the face of his pupil;
bat his rule of self-denial extended even to
euriosity, and prevented him from ectmmu-
nicating his wishes to the youth.
*« Pardon my intrusion, father," laid
Rosario, while he placed his basket upon
the table; "I come to you a suppliant.
Hearing that a dear friend is dangeroufly
iU, I entreat your prayers for his recovery.
If supplications ;can prevail upon heaven
to spare him, surely yours must be effi-
cacious.1'
What-

<page 84>
( 7i )
.*» Whatever depends upon me, my son,
.you know that you may command; What
is your friend's name?"
"Vincentio deHa Ronda." ./i'.o
. ",'Tis sufficient. I will not forget Mm
in my -prayers, and may our thrice-blessed
Sr. Francis deign to listen to my interces'
sion !—What have you in your basket,
Rosario?" As-
,~.'•' A few of those flowers, reverend "fa-
ther, which I have observed to be . most;
acceptable to you. Will you permit my
arranging them in your chamber f
4% Your attentions charm me, my son."
"While Rosario dispersed the contents of
his basket in small vases, placed for that
purpose in various parts of the room, the
abbot thus continued the conversation .
'"I saw you not in the church-this even-
ing, Rosario."
"Yet I was present, father; I am too
grateful for your protection to lose an op ■
portunity of witnessing your triumph."
; **;. Alas! Rosario, I 'have but little cause
to

<page 85>
( 72. >
.^©.triumph : the saint spoke by .my mouih;
tQ;him belongs all the merit.. ,J{ seems
then you were contented .with my .^is-.
course?" "[.-.'.;.. .-':.}'. .i:j.v-:T/ .'
...le, Contented;,saylyou ?. Qlhl' yp\T sur-
passed yourself! Never did I hear such
'eloquence-—save once!" - ..!,».., .r.vi . v
^,.jHere the .-novice, heaved an. i/ivolumaryi
sigh. ''M,!'..uivfe
• . V(When was,tl»tK>nceif" demanded the:
abbot.-j;; -. .: ..t,--.. -,»' t-vt:l i iU (- t'.,'i'?&
., r'' Whep .you pleached upon die, si,*id$nfi
indisposition pf?pur la,te superiors ....ju.-uC j
'"f^iremembersiit; jlRt U.^ofeitiian two
years.agot jAnd jw£i:9 you pre^nfi.^Jktfevv..
yp.tfjnptat tbg.t'.'tirn^(.RosArio."i! 3 «$»$>. «^
j..'f /His Rufc, satherij and^w^uldit^j^j
I had, ^Rpi^ed, yere; I .bel}gld: ;hat day-J^'
'^^at sufesingSj whar,j sor/ows .J^pijld. I
have escaped!" n.o':i!oH ,g.i
• or f^XSei fe^f.suffering, wpjc^,^
known to. yqu^ ;would. equally £aij[j?r v.qju.c.
»flg£5 Will.iSPfWS^;. ify^^, #*»**»
OJ form

<page 86>
( 73 )
form at Once" the torment and pleasure of
my existence! Yet in this retreat my bd-
som would feel tranquil, were it not for
the tortures of apprehension! Oh God •
oh God! how cruel is a life of fear!-P-
Father! I have given up all; I have
abandoned the world and its delights for
ever: nothing now remains, nothing now
has charms for me, but your friendship,
but your affection. If I lose that, father!
oh! if I lose that, tremble ac the effects of
my despair!"
"You apprehend the loss of my friend-
ship? How has my conduct justified this
fear? Know me better, Rosario, and think
me worthy of your confidence. What are
your sufferings? Reveal them to me,
and believe, that if'iis in my power to re-
lieve them -"
"Ah! 'tis in no one's power but yours.
Yet I must not let you know them. You
would hate me for my avowal! you would
drive me from your presence with scorn
and ignominy.
Vol. I. E "My

<page 87>
{ 74 )
.*,'*-My sotv> I conjure you! I entreat
you"
"For pity's fake, enquire no further!
I must not—I dare not—Hark! the bell
rings for vespers! Father, your benedic-
tion, and I leave you."
. As he said this, he threw himself upon
his knees, and received the blessing which
he demanded. Then pressing the abbot's (
hand to his lips, he started from the ground,
and hastily quitted the apartment. Soon
after Ambrosio descended to vespers (which
were celebrated in a small chapel belong-
ing to the abbey), silled with surprise at
the singularity of the youth's behaviour.
Vespers being over, the monks retired
to their respective cells. The abbot alone
remained in the chapel to receive the nuns
of St. Glare. He had not been long seated
in the confessional chair, before the prioress
made her appearance. Each of the nuns
was heard in her turn, while the others
waited with the domina in the adjoining
vestry.. Ambrosio listened to the confes-
sions

<page 88>
( is )
(ions with attemion, made many exhorta-
tions, enjoined penance proportioned to
each offence, and for some time every
thing went on as usual: tiil at last one"-d'f
the nuns, conspicuous from the nobleness
of her air and elegance of her figure, care-
lessly permitted a leiter to fall from her
bosom. She was :retfmng- unconscious of
her loss. Ambrofio supposed it to have
been.written by some one of her relations,
and picked it up, intending to restore it to
-^*'Stay, daughter," said he j "'you have
-let fall-*——":. - .. . ..'': ' ; r.u... ii,' , . j
At this moment, the paper being already
open, his eye involuntarily read the first
words.' He started back with surprise.
The nun had turned round'on hearing his
voice: she perceived her letter in his hand^
and, uttering a shriek of terror, flew hastily
to regain it.
',,'fHotel" said the friar in a tone of
severity.; .'* daughter, I must read this let-
ib$.$''' .'. ".'-ii • . ". -i:, ,. .'. . j
E 2 "Then

<page 89>
. «c Then I am lost!" she exclaimed,
clasping her hands together wildly.;
All colour instantly faded from her face;
(he trembled with agitation, and was
obliged to fold her arms round a pillar of
the chapel to save herself from sinking upon
the floor. In the mean while the j abbot
read the following liaes^
'* All is ready for your escape, roy dear-
est Agnes! At twelve to-morrow night I
shall expect <o find you at the garden-
door: I have obtained the key, and a iiew
hours will suffice to place you in a secure
asylum. Let no .mistaken scruples induce
you to reject the certain means of preserv-
ing yourself and the innocent -creatune
whom you nourish in your bosom. Re-
member that you had promised to be mine,
long ere you engaged yourself to the
cht.rch; that your situation will soon be
evident to the prying eyes of your com-
panions; and thai flight is the only means
of avoiding the effects of their malevolent
resentment.
v

<page 90>
I n )
resentment. Farewell, my AgneV! "my
dear and destined wife! Fail not to be-at
the garden-door ac twelve Vs1
.- ;r,: r- i . '. i '..: :!. --l:' ». >
As soon as he had sinished, Ambrosio
bent an eye stern and angry upon the im-
prudent nun.
"This letter must to the prioress," said
he, and passed her.
.His words sounded like thunder to her
ears: ihe awoke from her torpidity only
to be ^sensible of the dangers of her situa-
tion. She followed him lustily, and de-
tained him by his garment. . ''»* . »'
Hi)tf'\Stay i oh-1 stay!" site 'cried -in the
accents of despair, while the threw herself
at the friar's feet, and bathed them with
her tears. "Father, compassionate my
yowtrr! 'Look with indulgence on'- a wo-
man's weakness, and deign to conceal my
frailty! The remainder of my life shall
beempbjed in expiating this single-fault,
and. your lenity Will bring back a foul to
heaveh!" •,'m..-' »,..*,.'-. ....;..,. ...
.jo#«.-s-''.-,. E3 "Amazing

<page 91>
( ?« )
"Amazing confidence! What! shall
St. Clare's convent become the retreat of
prostitutes? Shall I suffer the church of
Christ to cherish in its bosom debauchery
and shame? Unworthy wretch! such le-
nity would make me your accomplice.
Mercy would here be criminal. . You have
abandoned yourself to a seducer's lust;
you have defiled the sacred habit by your
impurity j and still dare you think yqur-
felf deserving my compassion? Hence, nor
detain me longer. Where is the lady
prioress?" he added,. raising his voice. .<..:.'
"Hold! father, hold.4 Hear me but
for one moment! Tax me not vvitli im-
purity, nor think that I have erred from
the warmth of temperament. Long before
I took the veil, Raymond was master of
my heart: he inspired me with the purest,
the most irreproachable passion, and was
on the point of becoming my lawful hus-
band. An horrible adventure, and the
treachery of a relation, separated us from
each other. I believed him for ever.lost to
me,

<page 92>
( 79 y
me, and threw myself into a convent from'
motives of despair. Accident again united
us; I could not refuse myself the melan-
choly pleasure of mingling my tears with his.
We met nightly in the gardens of St. Clare,
and in an unguarded moment 1 violated
my vows of chastity. 1 shall soon become
a mother. Reverend Ambrosio, take com-
passion on me; take compassion on the in-
nocent being whose existence is attached
to mine. If you discover my imprudence
to the domina, both of us are lost. Th«
punishment which the laws of St. Clare
assign to unfortunates like myself, is
most severe and cruel. Worthy, worthy-
father! let not your own untainted con-
science render you unfeeling towards thole
less able to withstand temptation! Let not
mercy be the only virtue of which your
heart is unsusceptible! Pity me, most re-
verend! Restore my letter, nor doom me
to inevitable destruction!"
"Your boldness confounds me. Shall'
1 / conceal your crime—/ whom you have-
E 4 deceived

<page 93>
( 8o )
deceived by your feigned confession ?—No,
daughter, no. I will render you a more
essential service. 1 will rescue you from
perdition, in spite of yourself. Penance and
mortification shall expiate your offence, and
severity force you back to the paths of ho-
liness. What, ho! Mother St. Agatha 1"
. " Father! by all that is sacred, by all
that is most dear to you, I supplicate, J.
entreat"
"Release me. I will not hear you.
Where is the domina? Mother St. Agatha,
where are you?"
The door of the vestry opened, and the
prioress entered the chapel, followed by
her nuns. ... ..
"Cruel, cruel!" exclaimed Agnes, re-
linquishing her hold.
Wild and desperate, she threw herself
upon the ground, beating her bosom, and
rending her veil in all the delirium. of de-
spair. The nuns gazed with astonishment
upon the scene before them. The friar now
presented the fatal paper to the prioress,
informed

<page 94>
( ft j>
informed her of the manner in which he
had found it, and added, that it was her
business to decide what penance the de-
linquent merited. S
While slie perused the letter, the domina's
countenance grew inflamed with, passion.
What! such a crime committed in her con-
vent, and made known to Ambrosio, to the
idol of Madrid, to the man whom slie was
most anxious to impress with the opinion of
-die strictness and: regularity of her house i
Words were inadequate to express her
fury. She. was silent, and darted upon the
prostrate nun looks of menace and malig- .
nity.~' ?I: i\. ••1 r.:.^\. •;..."
"Away with her to the convent!" said i
she at length to some of her attendants..
Two of the oldest nuns now approach- .
ing Agnes,. raised her forcibly from the:
ground, and prepared to conduct her from <
the chapel. .:?: • . • n .
.fr What!" she exclaimed suddenly, shak- .''
in§ off their hold with distracted gestures,/
"is «dl hope then lost f Already do you •
E 5 drag;

<page 95>
drag me to punishment? Where are you,
Raymond? Oh !. save me! save me !'*
"Then casting upon the abbot a frantic look,
"Hear me!" she continued, '"'-mart'of
an hardware! Hear me, proud, stern, and
cruel! You could have saved me; you
could have fe'sto're'd me "to happiness and
virtue, bus would not; you are the de-
stroyer of my foul; you are my murderer,
%nd on you'sall the curse of -my death.: and
my tmborninfant's! Insolent in your yec-
imshaken virtue, ":you disdained the prayers
of apenhent; but God will shew mercy,
though jou shew none. And where is the
merit of your boasted virtue? What tenip.-
tations - have-'1you': vanquished? Coward!
you-have fled from it, not opposed se-
ductions 1 But the day of trial will arrive.
Oh {1 '{foeri'lwhen you yield • to impetuous
ipasiloriS"; when you feel that man is weak,
and born to errj when, shuddering, you
look'back up&n yoisl,''Cftw8si"a"nd solicit,
with terror/ th6"mercy of your God, oh!
in' that fe;drsdl' mOmerft 'thiak ;upon me!
2-' j. * think

<page 96>
C 83 )
think upon your cruelty! think upon
Agnes, and despair of pardon."
As she uttered these last words, her
strength was exhausted 1 and she funk inani-
mate upon the bosom of a nun who stood,
near her. She was immediately conveyed
from the chapel, and her companions fol-
lowed her.
Ambrofio had not listened to her re-
proaches without emotion.. A secret pang
at his heart made him. feel that he had
treated this unfortunate with too great se-
verity. He therefore detained the prioress,
and ventured to pronounce some words in
favour of the delinquent.
"- The violence of her despair," said he,
"proves that at least vice is not become
familiar to her. Perhaps, by treating her
with somewhat less rigour than is generally
practised, and mitigating in some degree,
the accustomed penance——" ,. ."-'. v»
,....** Mitigate it, father?" interrupted the
,lady prioress: " Not I, believe me. The
laws of our order are strict and soverej
E 6 they

<page 97>
( «4 )
they have fallen into disuse of late; but
the crime of Agnes shews me the necessity
of their revival. 1 go to signify my inten-
tion to the convent, and Agnes shall be
the first to feel the rigour of those laws>
•which shall be obeyed to the very letter.
Father, farewell!"
Thus faying, she hastened out of the
chapel.
"I have done my duty," said Ambroses*
to himself.
Still did he not feel perfectly satisfied by
this reflection. To dissipate the unpleasant
ideas which this scene had excited in hirst,
upon quitting the chapel he descended
into the abbey-garden. In all Madrid
there was no spot more beautiful, or bettei;
regulated. It was laid out with the most
exquisite taste; the choicest flowers adorned
it in the height of luxuriance, and, though
artfully arranged, seemed only planted by
the hand of Nature. Fountains, spring-
ing from basons of white marble, cooled
the air with perpetual showers; and the
3 walls

<page 98>
( *5 )
walls were entirely covered by jessamine,
vines, and honey-suckles. The hour now
added to the beamy of the scene. The
full moon, ranging through a blue and
cloudless iky, shed upon the trees a trem-
bliag lustre, and the waters of the fountains-
sparkled in the silver beam ; a gentle breeze
breathed the fragrance of orange-blossoms
along the alleys, and the nightingale poured
forth her melodious murmur from the shel-
ter of an artificial wilderness. Thidier the
abbot bent his steps.
In the bosom of this little grove stood a
rustic grotto^ formed in imitation of an
hermitage. The walls were constructed of
roots of trees, and the interstices filled up
with moss and ivy. Seats of turf were
placed oo either side, and a natural cascade
fell from the rock above. Buried in him-
self, the morik approached the spot. The
universal calm had communicated itself to
his bosom, and a voluptuous tranquillity
spread languor through his souL
He reached the hermitage, and was en-
.:.'.. (' tering

<page 99>
C 86 )
tering to repose himself, when he stopped
on perceiving it to be already occupied^
Extended upon one of the banks lay a man
in a melancholy posture. His head was
supported upon his arm, and he seemed
lost in meditation. The monk drew nearer,
and recognised Rosario: he watched him
in silence^ and entered not the hermitage.
After some minutes the youth raised his
eyes, and fixed them mournfully upon the
opposite wall..
"Yes," said he, with a deep and plaint-
ive sigh, "I feel all the happiness of thy
situation, all the misery of my own. Happy
were I, could I think like thee ! Could I
look like thee with disgust upon mankinds
could bury myself for ever in some impe-
netrable solitude, and forget that the world
holds beings deserving to be loved! O
God! what a blessing would misanthropy
be to me!"
v That is a singular thought, Rosario,"
said the abbot, entering the grotto.
"You

<page 100>
( 87 )
"You here, reverend father ?" cried the
novice. - .. - .» •-*» •.. ..-"-.
At the same time starting from his place
in confusion; he drew his cowl hastily over
his face. Ambrosio seated himself upon
the bank, and obliged the youth to place
himself-.b.y him.
"You must not indulge this disposition
to melancholy," said he; "What can pos-
sibly have made you view in so desirable
a light, misanthropy, of all sentiments die
most hateful r"
"The perusal of these verses, father,
which till now had escaped my observation.
The brightnesses the moon-beams permitted
my reading them; and, oh! how I envy
the feelings of the writer!"
As he said this, he pointed to a marble
tablet fixed against the opposite wall' t. on
it were engraved die following lines i v
. , s-.'.-... -. .. . . ,»"'.; vi
7 tut i: .1: % •'.! ..' Si, . • ".'
:. 8 INSCRIP.

<page 101>
( M )
INSCRIPTION IN AN HERMITAGE.
Whoe'er thou art these lines now reading,
Think not, though from the woi Id receding,
I joy roy lonely days to lead in
This desert drear,
That with remorse a conscience bleeding 'v
Hath led me here*
No thought os guilt my bosom sours.:
Free-willtd I fled from courtly bowers |
For well I saw in halls and towers,
That Lust and Pride,
The Arch-fiend's dearest darkest powers, •
In state preside..
I saw mankind with vice incrusted ;.
I saw that Honour's sword was rusted;
That few for aught but folly lusted;
That he was still deceived who trusted
In love or friend $
And hither came, .with men disgusted,
My life to end..
In this lone cave, in garments lowly,
Alike a foe to noisy folly
And brow-bent gloomy melancholy,
I wear away
My life, and in my office holy
Consume the day.
This rock my shield when storms are blowing;
The limpid streamlet yonder flowing
Supplying


<page 102>
C 89 )
I
Supplying drink; the earth bestowing
My simple food;
But few enjoy the calm I know in
This desert rude.
Content and comfort bless me more in
This grot, than e'er I felt before in
A palace; and with thoughts still soaring
To God on high,
Each night and morn with voice imploring
This wisli I sigh; . t
"Let me, O Lord! from life retire,
Unknown each guilty worldly fire,
Remorseful throb, or loose desire;
And when I die,
Let me in this belief expire,
To God I fly !»*
Stranger, if, full of youth and riot,
As yet no grief has marred thy quiet,
Thou haply throw'st a scornful eye at
The Hermit's prayer*
But if thou hast a cause to sigh at
Thy fault, or care;
If thou hast known false love's vexation.
Or hast been exiled from thy nation,
Or guilt affrights thy contemplation,
And makes thee pint i
Oh ! how must thou lament thy station, . *,
.,f... • And envy mine!
« Were

<page 103>
( 9° )
"Were it possible," said the friar, " for
man to be so totally wrapped up in him-
self as to live in absolute seclusion from
human nature, and could yet feel the con-
tented tranquillity which these lines ex-
press, I allow that the situation would be
more desirable, than to live in a workl so
pregnant with every vice and every folly.
But this never can be the cafe. This in-
scription was merely placed here for the
ornament of the grotto, and the sentiments
and the hermit are equally imaginary.
Man was born for society. However little
he may be attached to the world, he never
can wholly forget it, or bear to be wholly
forgotten by it. Disgusted at the guilt or
absurdity of mankind, the misanthrope flies
from it j he resolves to become an hermit,
and buries himself in the cavern of some
gloomy rock. While hate inflames his
bosom, possibly he may feel contented with
his situation: but when his passions begin
t» cool; when Time has mellowed his sor-
rows, and healed those wounds which he
bore with him to his solitude, think you
Ai'VV ». that

<page 104>
( 9t )
that Go at cut becomes his companion?
Ah! no, Rosario. No longer sustained by
the violence of his passions, he feels all the
monotony of his way of living, and his
heart becomes the prey of ennui and wea-
riness. He looks round, and sinds himself
alone in the universe: the love of society
revives in his bosom, and he pants to re-
torn to that world which he has abandoned1.
Nature loses all her charms in his eyes: no
one is near him to point out her beauties,
or (hare in his admiration of her excellence
and Variety. Propped upon the fragment
©f some' rock-,, he gazes upon the tumbling
.water-fall with a- vacant eye; he views
without emotion the glory of the setting
'sun.'Slowly he returns to his cell at even-
ing, for no one there is anxious for his ar-
rival: he has no comfort in his solitary,
unsavoury meal; he throws himself upon
his couch of moss despondent and dissa-
tisfied, and wakes only to pass a day as
joyless, as, monotonous as the former."
"You amaze me, father! Suppose that
circumstances condemned you to solitude)
. -.t;;:.; would

<page 105>
( n )
would not the duties of religion, and tire
consciousness of a life well spent, commu-
nicate to your heart that calm which"
:" I mould deceive myself, did I fancy
that they could. I am convinced of the
contrary, and that all my fortitude would
not prevent me from yielding to melan-
choly and disgust. After consuming the
day in study, if you knew my pleasure at
meeting my brethren in the evening 1 Af-
ter passing many a long hour in solitude,.
if I could express to you the joy which I
feel at once more beholding a £dlow-c.r,ear
ture! 'Tis in this particular that I place
xhe principal merit of a monastic inffciu*-
*ion. It secludes man from the temptation*
£>£ vice;. k procures that leisure necessary
for the proper service.of theSupFerpe; &
spares him ihe mortification-of witnessing
the crimes of the worldly, and yet permits
fcira to enjoy the blessings of society. And
do you, Rosario, do you envy an hermki'B
life? Can you be thus blind to the happi*.
ness of your situation? Reflect upon it for
a moment. This abbey is become your
asylum:
•'. :i

<page 106>
( 93 )
asylum: your regularity, your gentleness,
your talents have rendered yon the object
of universal esteem : you are secluded from
the world which you profess to hate; yet
you remain in possession of the benefits of
society, and that a society composed of the
most estimable of mankind."
"Father! father! "tis that which causes
my torment. Happy had it been for me,
had my life been passed among the vicious
and abandoned; had I never heard pro.
nounced the name of virtue. 'Tis my
unbounded adoration of religion; 'tis my
soul's exquisite sensibility of the beauty of
fair and good, that loads me with shame—»
•that hurries me to perdition. Oh! that 1
had never seen these abbey-walls 1"
"How, Rosario? When we last con.
versed, you spoke in.a different; tone. I»
my friendship then become of such little
consequence? Had you never seen these
abbey-walls, you never had seen me. Can;
that really be your wish?"
"Hid never seen you?" repeated the
novice, starting from the bank, and grasp-
ing

<page 107>
( 9+ )
ing the friar's hand with a frantic-air^*
"You] :you.! Would to God tharirght^
ning [had blasted them before you. ever
met my ej'es! Would to God that I were
never to fee you more, and could forget
th'*t I had ever seen you!" ''1•'~ •->... ^
With these 'words' he flew hastily'from
the grotto. Ambrosia remained in his for-
mer attitude, reslecting on the youth's'un-
accountable behaviour. He was'inclihed
to suspect.the derangement of his fenses:
yet the general tenour of his conduct, the
connexion of his ideas, and' calmness of
his demeanour till the moment of his quit.
ting the grotto, seemed to discountenance?
this conjecture. After a few minures Rosario
returned. He again seated himself upon the
bank: he reclined his cheek upon one hand,
fthd with' the other wiped awaythe tears
which trickled from his eyes at infcervalsi t"
The monk looked upon him with com-
panion, and forbore to interrupt his medi-
tations. Both observed for some time a
profound silence. ' The nightingale had
no'W taken her station upon an orange-tree
£'» fronting

<page 108>
( 9$ )
fronting the hermitage, and poured forth
a strain the most melancholy and melo-
dious. Rosario raised his head, and listened
to her with attention.
t( It was thus," said he, with a deep-
drawn sigh, "it was thus that, during the
last month of her unhappy life, my sister
used to sit listening to the nightingale. Poor
Matilda! she steeps in the grave, and her
broken heart throbs no more with passion."
. " You had a sister?"
.. ;♦« You fay right, that I had. Alas! I
have one no longer. She funk beneath the
weight of her sorrows in the very spring of
life." *"
"What were those sorrows?"
They will not excite your pity. You,
know not the power of those irresistible,
those fatal sentiments to which her heart
was a prey. Father, she loved unfortu-
nately. A passion for ope endowed with
every virtue, for a man—oh .! rather let me
say for a divinity—proved the bane of her
existence. His noble form, his spotless cha-(-
racter,

<page 109>
. ( 9* )
ractef/fiis various talents^ his wisdom solid,
wonderful, and glorious, might have warmed
the bosom of the most insensible. My sister
saw him, and dared to love, though she
never dared to hope."
"If herlove was so well bestowed, what for-
bad her to hope the obtaining of its objectT*
"Father, before he knew her, Julian
had already plighted his vows to a bride
most fair, most heavenly! Yet still 'my
sister loved, and for the husband's fake she
doted upon the wife. One morning (he
found means to escape from our father's
house: arrayed in humble weeds she of-
fered herself as a domestic to the consort of
her beloved, and was accepted. She was
now continually in his presence : (he strove
to ingratiate herself into his favour: (lie
succeeded. Her attentions attracted Ju-
lian's notice: the virtuous are ever grate-
ful, and he distinguished Matilda above the
rest of her companions." „
"And did not your parents seek for
her? Did they submic tamely to their loss,
nor

<page 110>

nor attempt to recover their wandering
daughter?,"
"Ere they could find her, she discover-
ed herself. Her love grew too violent for
concealment; yet shc wished not for Ju-
lian's person, she ambitioned but a share of
his heart. In an unguarded moment she
confessed her affection. What was the re-
turn? Doting upon his wife, and believing
that a look of pity bestowed upon another
was a theft from what he owed to her, he
drove Matilda from his presence: he for-
bad her ever again appearing before him.
His severity broke her heart: she returned
to her father's, and in a few months after
was carried to her grave."
f" Unhappy girl! Surely her fate was too
vere, and Julian was too cruel."
"Do you think, so, father?" cried the
novice with vivacity; "Do you think that
he was cruel?"
'' Doubtless I do, and pity her most
Cnv::1.,s

<page 111>
( j* )

*<You pity Res? you pity her? Oh!
father! father! then pity me—"
The friar started; when, after a mo-
ment's pause, Rosario added with a falter-
ing voice, " for my sufferings are still
greater. My sister had a friend, a real
friend, who pitied the acuteness of her feel-
ings, nor reproached her with her inability
to repress them. I !I have no friend 1
The whole wide world cannot furnish an
heart that is willing to participate in the
farrows of mine."
As he uttered these words, he fobbed
audibly. The friar was affected. He took
Rofario's hand, and pressed it with ten-
derness.
<c You have no friend, fay you? What
then am I? Why will you hot confide in
me, and what can you fear? My severity?
Have I ever used it with you? The dig-
nity of my habit? Rosario, I lay aside the
monk, and bid you consider me as no other
than your friend, your father. Well may
.I assume

<page 112>
( 99 )
I assume that title, for never did parent
watch over a child more fondly than I have
watched over you. From the moment in
which I first beheld you, I perceived sen-
sations in my bosom till then unknown t<j
trie; I found a delight in your society which
no one's else could afford; and when I wit-
nessed the extent of your genius and infor-
mation, I rejoiced as does a father in the
perfections of his son. Then lay aside your
fears j speak to me with openness: speak to
me, Rosorio, and fay that you will confide
in me. If my aid or my pity can allevi-
ate your distress;——"
«' Yours can ; yours only can. Ah ! fa-
thers how willingly would I unveil to you
my heart 1 how willingly would I declare
the secret which bows me down with its
weight! But oh! I fear, 1 fear"
"What, my son?"
"That you should abhor me for my
weakness; that the reward of my confi-
dence should be the loss of your esteem."
'^How shall I reassure you? Reflect:
F z upon
281303B

<page 113>
( ioo )
upon the whole of my past; conduct, upon
the paternal tenderness which I have ever
shown you. Abhor you, Rosario? It is
no longer in my power. To give up your
society would be to deprive myself of the
greatest pleasure of my life. Then reveal
to me what afflicts you, and believe me
ivhile I solemnly swear—<—-"
<e Hold!" interrupted the novice.
*' Swear that, whatever be my secret, you
will not oblige me to quit the monastery
till my noviciate shall expire."
** I promise it faithfully; and as I keep
my vows to you, may Christ keep his to
mankind! Now then explain this mystery,
and rely upon my indulgence."
"I obey you. Know then—Oh! how I
tremble to name the word! Listen to me
with pity, revered Ambrosio! Call up every
latent spark of human weakness that may
teach you compassion for mine! Father!"
continued he, throwing himself at the
.friar's feet, and pressing his hand to hi*
'lips with eagerness, while agitation 'For' a
* ."""'. moment

<page 114>
( i°* )
.TX t f
moment choked his voice; " father!*
continued he•in faltering accents,. " I am
a woman!"
The abbot started at this unexpected
avowal. Prostrate on the ground lay the
feigned Rosario, as if waiting in silence the
decision of his judge. Astonishment on the
one parr, apprehension on the other, for
some minutes chained them in the fame
LO'••'
attitudes, as they had been touched by the
rod of some magician. At length reco-
vering from his confusion, the monk quit-
ted the grotto, and sped with precipitation
towards the abbey. His action did not
escape the suppliant. She sprang from
the ground; she hastened to follow him,
overtook him, threw herself in his passage,
and embraced his knees. Ambrosio strove
in vain to disengage himself from her grasp*
1« Do not fly me !" she cried. "Leave
me not abandoned to the impulse of de-
spair! Listen* while I excuse my impru-
dence; while 1 acknowledge my sister's
F 3 story

<page 115>
story to be my own! I am Matilda j you
are her beloved."
If Ambrosio's surprise was great at her
first avowal, upon hearing her second it ex-
ceeded all bounds- Amazed, embarrassed,
and irresolute, he found himself incapable
of pronouncing a syllable, and remained in
silence gazing upon Matilda. This gave,
her opportunity to continue her explana-
tion as follows:
i;. ... . *
"Think not, Ambrosio, that I come to
rob your bride of your affections. No,.
Relieve me: Religion alone deserves you j
and far is it from Matilda's wish to draw
you from the paths of virtue. What I feel
for you is love, not licentiousness.. I sigh
to be possessor of your heart, not lust for.
the enjoyment of your person. Deign to
listen to my vindication; a few moments
.wi41 .convince you that this holy retreat, is
not polluted by my presence, and that you
may grant me your compassion without
trespassing against your vows."—She Jeate'd
V-":"' herself.

<page 116>
( m /)
herself. .Aaibrofio, scarcely conscious of
.what he did, followed her example, and she
proceeded, in her discourse :—'
"I spring from a distinguished famMy;
.ray father;was: chief of the noble house of
Villanegas-: he died while I was still an in-
fant, and left me sole heiress of his immense
possessions. Young and wealthy, I was
fought in marriage by the noblest youths of
Madrid; but no one succeeded in gaining
-my affections. I had been brought up un-
der the care of an uncle possessed of the
most solid judgment and extensive erudi-
tion: he took pleasure in communicating to
jne some portion of his knowledge. Under
his instructions my understanding acquired
more strength and justness than generally
falls to the lot of my sex: the ability of
-my preceptor being aided by natural curio*
iity, I not only made a considerable progress
in sciences universally studied, but in others
.revealed but to few* and lying under cen-
sure from the blindness of superstition. But
F 4 while

<page 117>
( ,104 )
while; my, guardian laboured to enlarge tl«f
sphere of my knowledge, he carefully ins.
culcated every moral precept: he relieved
me from the shackles of vulgar prejudice:
he pointed out the beauty of religions she
taught me to look with adoration upon, the
pure and virtuous; and, wo is me 1 I have
obeyed him but too well. . ~ v-.'vi'-^W'i
lt. With such dispositions, judge whether
I could observe .with any other sentiment
than disgust, the vice, dissipation, andigno*
ranee which disgrace our Spanish youlhvrri
rejected every offer with disdain : .myJtedrt
remained without a master, till chance com-
ducted me to the cathedral of theCapuchins.
.Oh ! surely on that day my:guardianangel
slumbered, neglectful of his charge! Thea
was it that 1 first beheld you: you supplied
-the superior's place, absent from illness/**-
You cannot but remember the lively enthri*
fiasm which your discourse created. Ohi
how 1 drank your words! how .your, ekv
quence seemed to steal me from myself! I
siif' :i scarcely

<page 118>
( i°5 )
scarcely clared ro breathe, fearing to lose a
syllable; and while you spoke, nrethought
a radiant glory beamed round your head,
and your countenance Ihone with the ma-
jesty of a god. I retired from the church,
glowing with admiration. From that mo-
ment you became the idol of my heart; the .
never-changing object of my meditations.
I enquired respecting you. The reports
which were made me of your mode of life,
.of your knowledge, piety, and self-denial,
riveted the chains imposed on me by your
eloquence. I was conscious that there was
no longer a void in my heart; that I had
found the man whom 1 had sought till then
in vain. In expectation of heaving yoh
again, every day I visited your cathedral,:
.you remained secluded within the abbey
walls, and 1 always withdrew, wretched ana
disappointed. The night was more propi-
tious to me, for then you stood before me
m my dreams; you vowed to me eternal
friendship; you Jed me through the paths
£i£ .virtue, and assisted me to support the
F 5 vexations

<page 119>
X io6 )
.?:
rexaticms of life. The morning dispelled
these pleasing visions: I awoke, and found
myself separated from you by barriers
Which appeared insurmountable. Time
seemed only to increase the strength of my
passion: I grew melancholy and despond-
ent; 1 fled from society, and my health
declined daily. At length, no longer able
to exist in this state of torture, I resolved to
assume the disguise in which you see me.
My anifiee was fortunate; I was received
Into the monastery, and succeeded in gain-
ing your esteem.
"N :w, then, I should have felt com-
pletely happy, had not my quiet been diT-
tprbed bv the fear of detection. The plea-
sure which I leceived from your society was
embittered by the idea, that perhaps I
stiould soon be deprived of it: and my
heart throbbed so rapturoufly at obtaining
the marks of your friend ship, as to convince
me that 1 never should survive its loss. I re-
solved, therefore, not to leave thediscovery
of my sex to chance—to confess the whole to
a you,

<page 120>
you, and thfow myself; entirely on your
mercy and indulgence. Ah! Ambrosio,
can I have been deceived ? Can you be less
generous than I thought you? I will not
suspect it. You will not drive a wretch to
despair j I shall still be permitted to see you,
to converse with you, to adore you! Your
virtues shall be my example through life s
and, when we expire, our bodies shall rest in
the same grave."
She ceased.-rrWhile she spoke, a thou-
sand. opposingfentiments combated in Am.
brofio's bosom. Surprise at the singularity
of thisadi'enture; confusion at her abrupt
declaration; resentment at her boldness in
ent.eiji.ng the monastery j and consciousness
ef the austerity with which it behoved him
to reply '„ such were the sentiments of whic^
he was aware: but there were others also
which did not obtain bis notice. He per-
ceived not that his vanity was flattered by
tb.e pratfes bestowed upon his eloquence ana
virtue; that he felt a secret pleature in re-
ftecting that a young and seemingly lovely
0fJi•.j F6 womaii

<page 121>
i *<>8 )
woman had' fbr'.hrS• fake abandoned the
world, and sacrificed every other passion to
that which he had inspired: still less did
he perceive, that his heart throbbed with
desire, while his hand was pressed gently
by Matilda's ivory fingers;•
By degrees he recovered from his confu-
sion: his ideas became less bewildered: he
was immediately sensible of the extreme
impropriety, should Matilda be permitted
to remain in the abbey after this avowal of
her sex. He assumed an air ttf tfewftty,
and drew away his hand. -a'
""How? lady !'"faid he, "can you really
hope for my permission to remain amongst
tis? Even were I to grant your' request,
what g »od could you derive from'1u.fc
Think you, that I ever can reply to an af-
fection, which"
"No, father, no ! I expect not to inspire
you with a love like mine: I only wish for
the liberty to be near you; to pass some
hours of the day in your society; to obtain
your compassion, your friendship, and es-
teem.

<page 122>
i *©9 )
teem. Surely my request is apt unreason^
::,*'JSut reflect, lady ! reflect only fora mo-
ment on the impropriety of my harbouring
-.a woman in the abbey, and that too a wo-
man who confesses that (he loves me. It
.must not be. The risk of your being dis-
covered is too great; and I will not expose
myself to so dangerous a temptation."
,,-,;?< Temptation, soy you? Forget that I
am a woman, and it no longer exists: coll-
ide/, me only as a friend ; as an unfortunate,
whose happiness, whose life, depends upon
v'your, protection. Fear not lest I should
jjCiV/ejj,call to your remembrance, that love
. ftbepmost impetuous, the most unbounded,
<. has induced me to disguise my sex; or that,
. -instigated by desires osfensive to y ur vows
and my own honour, I should endeavour to
fcduce.you from the path of rectitude. No,
, Ambrosio ! learn to know me better: I love
j you for your virtues: lose them, and with
them you lose my affections. 1 look upon you
)«» soint: prove to me that you are no
.M}yto more

<page 123>
more than man, and J quit you with disgust'.
Is it then from me that you fear temptation?
.from me, in whom the world's dazzling
pleasures created no other sentiment than
contempt? from me, whose attachment is
grounded on your exemption from human
frailty ? Oh! dismiss such injurious appre-
hensions! think nobler of me; think nobler
of yourself. 1 am incapable of seducing
you to error; and surely your virtue is esta-
.blistiedon .a basis too firm to be shaken by
unwarranted desires. Ambrosio! dearest
Ambrosio! drive me not from your pre-
sence; remember your promise, and au-
thorise my flay." ■• .1 w, . ^
.; «' Impossible, Matilda! yew interest com*,
tnands me to refuse your prayer* since I
tremble for you, not for myself. After
Vanquishing the impetuous ebullitions of
youth; after passing thirty years in mortifi*
cation and penance, I might safely permit
your stay, nor fear your inspiring me witty
Warmer sentiments than pity : but to your-r
fdf,remaining in theabbey can produce jioq$
'». *. but

<page 124>
< «* )
bin fatal''consequences. You will miscon-
strue my every word and action; you wild
seise every circumstance with avidity whick
encourages you to hope the return of your
asfection; insensibly, your passions will gara
a superiority over your reason j and, far
from being repressed by my presence, every
moment which we pass together will only
serve to irritate and excite them. Believe
me, unhappy woman! you possess my sh*-
.cere compassion. I am convinced that you
have hitherto acted upon the purest motives;
but though you are blind to the imprudence
of your conduct, in me it would be culpable
not to open your eyes. I feel that duty
obliges my treating you with harshness; 1
.must reject your praver!, and remove every
shadow of hope which may aid to nourish
sentiments so pernicious to your repose. Ma-
tilda, you must from hence to-morrow." .
** To-morrow, Ambrofio? to-morrow?
Gh ! surely you cannot mean it ! you can-
not resolve on driving me to despair! you
'cannot have the cruelty——" .;.-;; ffrj!
.,..'. "You

<page 125>
( U2 )
: ?You have heard my decision, apd.it
must be obeyed : the laws of our order for-
bid your stay : ic would be perjury to con-
ceal that a woman is within these walls, and
my vows will oblige me to declare your
story to the community. You must frpm
hence. I pity you, but can do no more."
He pronounced these words in a faint
and trembling voice j then, rising from his
feat, he would have hastened towards the
monastery. Uttering a loud stuiek, Ma*
tilda followed, and detained him. - fv.r;.
"Stay yet one moment, Ambrosio!
hear me yet speak one word!"
"I dare not listen. Release me: you
know my resolution." ,';.,,
, '' But one word! but one last word, and
I have done 1" . . .,
*' Leave me. Your entreaties are in
vain: you must from hence to-moirow."
'* Go then, barbarian! But this resource
is still left me." i. :m
As she said this, (he suddenly drew .a
poniard. She rent open her garment, and
rw placed

<page 126>
f "3 )
placed the weapon's point against: her
bosom.
•:*° Father, I will never.quit these walls
alive." . •. . .-;;.;
•«c Hold \ hold, Matilda! what would
ySQ'tfd?**• .•.
"You are determined, foam I: the mo-
ment that you leave me, 1 plunge this steel
in my heart."
**c Holy St. Francis! Matilda, have you
.ybiif fenses? Do you know the conse-
quences of your action? that suicide is the
greatest of crimes? that you destroy your
foul? that you lose your claim to salva-
tion? that you prepare for yourself ever-
lasting torments?"
•on*<.I'care not, I care not," she replied
passionately : " either your hand guides me
to paradise, or my own dooms me to per-
dition! Speak to me, Ambrosio J Tell me
that you will conceal my story j that I (hall
remain your friend and your companion,
er this• poniard drinks my blood." •'»
•' As (he uttered these last words, stieirfted
..• u her

<page 127>
( U4 )
her arm, and made a motion as if to flab
herself.. The friar's eyes followed with
dread the course of die dagger. She Tiad
torn open her habit, and her bosom was
half exposed. The weapon's point rested
upon her left breast: and, oh! that was
such a breast 1 Themoon-beams.darting full
upon it enabled the monk to observe its
dazzling whiteness: his eye dwelt with in-
satiable avidity upon the beauteous orb: a
iensation till .then unknown filled his heart
wuh a mixture of anxiety and ddigh*f>
raging fire (hot through every limb; the
blood boiled in his veins., and a thousand
wild wishes bewildered his imagination.
"Hold!" he cried, in an hurried, fal-
tering voice I "I can resist no longer!
Stay then, enchantress ! stay for my destruc-
tion J" , . / - ..• '£...!-. ,;
He said; and, rustling from the place,
hastened towards the monastery: he regain-
ed his cell, and threw himself upon his
couch, distracted, irresolute and.confused*
i He. foimd :ic impossible for fome time to
l >. arrange

<page 128>
c Hi )
a.range his ideas. The scene iri which he
had been engaged, had excited such a vaJ
riety of sentiments in his bosom, that'lie
was incapable of deciding which was pre-
dominant. He was irresolute what conduct
he ought to hold with the disturber of his
repose; he was conscious that prudence, re-
ligion, and propriety; necessitated his oblig-
ing her to quit the abbey: but, on the other
hand, such powerful reasons authorised her
stay, that he was but too much inclined to
consent to her remaining. He could not
avoid being flattered by Matilda's declara-
tion, and at reflecting that he had uncon-
sciously vanquished an heart which had re-
sisted the attacksof Spain's noblest cavaliers.
The manner in which he had gained her
affections was also the most satisfactory to his
vanity: he remembered the .many happy
hours which he had passed in Rosario's so-
ciety; arid dreaded that void in his heart
wIVich parting with him would occasion;
Belides•all this, he considered., that as Ma-
.UK'l:. tilda

<page 129>
( !»<S )
tilda was wealthy, her favour might be of
essential benefit to the abbey. .
'' And what do I risk," said he to himself,
"by authorizing her stay? May I not safely
credit her assertions ? Will it not be easy for
me to forget her sex, and still consider her as
my friend and my disciple? Surely her love
is as pure as she describes: had it been the
offspring of mere licentiousness, would she
so long have concealed it in her own bosom?
Would she not have employed some means
to procure its gratification? She has done
quite the contrary : she strove to keep me in
ignorance of her sex; and nothing but the
fear of detection, and my instance?, would
have compelled her to reveal the secret: she
has observed the duties of religion not less
strictly than myself: shehas made noattempt
lo rouse my slumbering passions, nor has she
ever conversed with me till this night on
the subject of love. Had she been desirous
to gain my affections, not my esteem, she
would not have concealed from me her
charms

<page 130>
( u* )
charms so carefully : at this very moment I
have never seen her face; yet certainly that
face must be lovely,and her person beautiful,
to judge by her—by what I have seen." ,;
As this last idea palled through his ima-
gination, a blush spread itself oyer his
cheek. Alarmed at the sentiments which
he was indulging, he betook himself to
prayer: he started from his couch, knelt be-
fore the beautiful Madona, and entreated
her assistance in stifling such culpable emo-
tions: he then returned to his bed, and re-
signed himself to flumber.
Heawoke heated and unrefreshed. During
his fleep, his inflamed imagination had pre-
sented him with none but the most voluptu-
ous objects. Matilda stood before him in his
dreams, and his eyes again dwelt upon her
naked breast; she repeated her protestations of
eternal love, threw her arms round his neck,
and loaded him with kisses: he returned
jthetn -f he,clasped her passionately to his bo-;
JsorniantU—-the vision was dissolved. Some-
times his dreams presented the image of his
favourite

<page 131>
( n8 )
lavourke Madona, and he fancied that he
Was kneeling before her: as he offered up
fais vows to her, the eyes of the figure seemed
to beam on him with inexpressible sweetness;
he pressed his lips to hers, and found them
warm: the animated form started from the
•canvas, embraced him affectionately, and
his fenses were unable to support delight so
exquisite. Such were the scenes on which
his thoughts were employed while fleeping;
bis unsatisfied desires placed before him the
most lustful and provoking images, and he
rioted in joys till then unknown to him..
He started from his ccuch, filled with
confusion at the remembranceof hisdreams.:
scarcely was he less ashamed when Jae re-
flected on his reasons of the former night,
which induced him to authorise Matilda's
stay. The cloud v/as now dissipated which
had obscured his judgment; he shuddered
when he beheld his arguments blazoned in
their proper colours, and found that he had
been a flave to flattery, to avarice, and self-
love. .If in one houi's conversation Mat
tilda

<page 132>
« »9 ]
tilda bad produced a change so remarkabto
in bis sentiments, what bad he mot to dreadfc
from her remaining 'in,the abbeys ' Be-/
come sensible of his danger, awakened from
his dream of confidence, be refolded to in~
fist on her departing without delay: he be-.
gan to feel ibat he was not proof against
temptation; and, that, however Matilda,
might restrain herself within the bounds of
modesty, he was. unable to contend with
those, passions from whicb be falsely thought'
himself exempted.
"Agnes 1 Agnes!" he exclaimed, while-
reflecting on his embarrassment?, "I al-
ready feel thy curse!"
He quitted his cell, determined upon dis-
missing the feigned Rofario. He appeared
at matins; but his thoughts were absent,
and he paid them but little attention: his
heart and brain were both of them filled
with worldly objects, and be prayed with-
out 'devotion. The service over, he de-
scended into the garden; he bent his steps
towards the fame spot where on the pre-
'.."' ceding

<page 133>
( 1«* )
ceding night he had made this embarrassing
discovery: he doubted not that Matilda
would seek him there. He was not deceived:
shc soon entered the hermitage, and ap-
proached the monk with a timid air. After
a few minutes, during which both were
silent, she appeared as if on the point of
speaking; but the abbot, who during this
time had been summoning up all his reso-
lution, hastily interrupted her. Though still
unconscious how extensive was its influence,
he dreaded the melodious seduction of her
voice.
. «c Seat yourself by my side, Matilda," sa4d
he, assuming a look of firmness, though care-
fuHy avoiding the least mixture of severity;
. «« listen to me patiently, and believe that, in
what I (hall say, I am not more influenced
by my own interest than by yours; believe
that I feel for you the warmest friendship,
the truest compassion ; and that you cannot
feel more grieved than I do, when I declare
to you that we must never meet again."
-•f* Ambrosio i" she cried, in a voice at
L .' once

<page 134>
'( MI )
...
''"o/nee expressive both of surprise and of sor-
row< .. . .;
". Be calm, my friend! my Rosario! still
let me call you by that name so dear to me:
our separation is unavoidable; I blush fo
own how sensibly it affects me.—But yet it
must be so; I feel myself incapable of treat-
ing you with indifference; and that very
ÆOflvictiori obliges me to insist upon your
. departure. Matilda, you must stay here no
•longer."
"Oh! where shall I now seek for probity?
»Disgusted with a perfidious world, in what
happy region does.Truth conceal herself?
Father^. Ihbped that she resided here; I
thought that your bosom had been her fa-
vourite shrine. And you too prove false?
Oh God! and you too can betray me?"
\ ..*< Matilda?"
,..:•c Yes, father, yes; 'tis with justice that
ireproach you. Oh ! where are your pro-
mises? My noviciate is not expired, and
^yet will you compel me to quit the mo-
Jiastery ? Can you have the heart to drive me
Vol. I. G from

<page 135>
( »* )
From you? and have I not received your
solemn oath to the contrary .?"
'' I will not compel you to-quit the mo-
nastery; you have received my solemn oath
to the contrary- but yet, when I throw my-
self upon your generosity, when I declare to
you the embarrassments in which your pre-
sence involves me, will you not release me
from that oath? Reflect upon the danger
os a discovery; upon the opprobrium in
which such an event would plunge me: re-
flect, that my honour and reputation are at
stake ; and that my peace of mind depends
on your compliance. As yet, my heart is
free; I shall separate from you with regret,
but not with despair. Stay here, and a few
weeks will sacrifice my happiness on the al-
tar of your charms; you are but too inter-
esting, too amiable! I should love you, I
should-dote on you! my bosom would be-
come the prey of desires, which honour and
my profession forbid me to gratify. If I re-
listed them, the impetuosity of my wishes
unsatisfied would drive me to madness: if I
yielded

<page 136>
i 123 )
'yielded to die temptation, I should sacrifice
to one moment of guilty pleasure, my repu-
tation in this world, my salvation in the
next. To you, then, I fly for defence
against myself. Preserve me from losing the
reward of thirty years of susferings! pre-
serve me from becoming the victim of re-
morse! Tour heart has already felt the
anguish of hopeless love: oh! then, if you
really value me, spare mine that anguish!
give me back my promise; fly from these
% walls. Go, and you bear with you my warm-
est prayers for your happiness, my friend-
ship, my esteem, and admiration : stay, and
you become to me the source of danger,
of sufferings, of despair. Answer me, Ma-
tilda, what is your resolve?" She was si-
lent.—" Will you not speak, Matilda?
Will you not name your choice?"
: "Cruel! cruel!" she exclaimed, wring-
ing her hands in agony; " you know too
well that you offer me no choice: you know
too well that I can have no will but yoursl"
"I was not then deceived. Matilda's
generosity equals my expectations."
G 2 « Yesj

<page 137>
: ( *-24 1
x< Yes; T will prove the truth of my
asfection by submitting to a decree which
cuts me to the very heart. Take back
your promise. I will quit the monastery
this very day. I have a relation, abbess of
a convent in Estramadura: to her will I
bend my steps, and shut myself from the
world for ever. Yet tell me, father, shall T
bear your good wishes with me to my so-
litude? Will you sometimes abstract your
attention from heavenly objects to bestow
a thought upon me?"
"Ah! Matilda, I fear that I shall think
on you but too often for my repose!"
"Then I have nothing more to wish for,
save that we may meet in heaven. Fare-
well, my friend! my Ambrosio! And yet,
methinks, I would fain bear with me some
token of your regard."
"What shall I give you?"
"Something—any thing—one of those
flowers will be sufficient." [Here she pointed
to a bush of roses, planted at the door of
the grotto.] "I will hide it in my bosom,
and,

<page 138>
C \H )
and, when I am dead, the nuns shall find it
withered upon my heart."
The friar was unable to reply: with slow
steps, and a foul heavy with affliction, he
quitted the hermitage. He approached the
bush, and stooped to pluck one of the-
rpfes. Suddenly he uttered a piercing cry,
started back hastily, and let the flower,,
which he already held, fall from his hand,
Matilda heard the shriek, and flew anxiously
towards him.
"What is the matter?" she cried. " An-
swer me, for God's fake! What has hap-
pened?"
"I have received my death," he replied,
in a faint voice: " concealed among the
rosts—a serpent—"
Here the pain of his wound became so
exquisite, that nature was unable to bear
it: his fenses abandoned him,, and he funk
inanimate into Matilda's arms,
Her distress was beyond the power of
description. She rent her hair, beat her
bosom, and, not daring to quit Ambrosio,
G 3 endea-

<page 139>
C t26 )
endeavoured by loud cries to summon the
monks to her assistance. She at length sue-
ceeded. Alarmed by her shrieks, several
of the brothers hastened to the spot, and"
the superior was conveyed back to the ab-
bey. He was immediately put to bed, and
the monk who officiated as surgeon to the
fraternity prepared to examine the wound.
By this time Ambrosio's hand had swelled
to an extraordinary size: the remedies which
had been administered to him, 'tis true,
restored him to life, but not ta his fenses:
he raved in all the horrors of delirium,
foamed at the mouth, and four of the
strongest monks were scarcely able to hold
him in his bed.
Father Pablos (such was the surgeon's
name) hastened to examine the wounded
hand. The monks surrounded the bed,,
anxioufly waiting for the decision : among
these the feigned Rosario appeared not the
most insensible to the friar's calamity: he
gazed upon the sufferer with inexpressible
anguish i and his groans, which every mo-
ment
-.

<page 140>
( r*T )
rrrent escaped from his bosom, susficiently
betrayed the violence of his affliction.
Father Pablos probed the wound. As he
drew out his instrument, its po'mt was tinged
with a greenish- hue. He shook his head
mournfully, and quitted the bed-side.
"'Tis as I feared/' said he , " there is
no hope."'
"No hopeP' exclaimed the monks with-
one voice; "fay you, no hope?"
'' From the sudden esfects, I suspected
that the abbot was stung by a cientipedo-
ro*: the venom whieh you fee upon my
instrument consirms my idea. He cannot
jive three days."'
"And can no possible remedy be found?'*'
enquired Rofaric.
it Without extracting the poison, he
cannot recover; and how to extract it is
to me still a secret. All that I can do is to
apply such' herbs to the wound as will re-
♦Tlie cientipedoro ie supposed to be a native of
Cuba, and to have been brought into Spain from that
island in the Vessel of Columbus.
G 4 lieve

<page 141>
( «8 )
Jieve the anguish: the patient vviJf be re-
stored to his fenses; but the venom wilt
corrupt the whole mass of his blood, and
in three days he will exist no longer."
Excessive was the universal grief at hear-
ing this decision.. Pablos, as he had pro-
mised, dressed the wound, and then retired,,
followed by his companions. Rosario alone
remained in the cell, the abbot, at his ur-
gent entreaty, having been committed to
his care. Ambrosio's strength. worn out
by the violence of his exertions, he bad by
this time fallen into a profound fleep. So
totally was he overcome by weariness, that
he scarcely gave any signs of life. He was
still in this situation, when the monks re-
turned to enquire whether any change had
taken place.. Pablos loosened the bandage
which concealed the wound,, more from a
principle of curiosity, than, from indulging
thehopeofdiscoveringanyfavourablesymp-
toms. What was his astonishment at find-
ing that the inflammation had totally sub-
sided ! He probed the hand; his instrument
came.

<page 142>
C J29 )
came out pure and unsullied j no traces of
the venom were perceptible; and had not
the orisice still been visible, Pablos might
.have doubted that there had ever been -a
wound.
lie communicated this intelligence to his
brethren: their delight was only equalled
by their surprise. From the latter senti-
ment, however, they were soon released, by
explaining the circumstance according to
their own ideas. They were perfectly con-
vinced that their superior was a faint, and
thought that nothing could-be more natu-
ral than for St. Francis to have operated a
miracle in his favour. This opinion was
adopted unanimously. They declared it so
loudly,, and vociferated M A miracle! a
miracle !" with such fervour, that they soon
interrupted Ambrosio's slumbers.
The monks immediately crowded round1
his bed, and expressed their satisfaction at
his wonderful recovery. He was perfectly
in his fenses, and free from every com--
plaint, except feeling weak and languid.
G $ Pablos

<page 143>
r 130 y
Pablbs gave him a strengthening medi-
cine, and advised his keeping his bed for
the two succeeding days: he then retired,
having desired his patient not to exhaust
himself by conversation, but rather to en-
deavour at taking some repose. The other
monks followed his example, and'the abbot
and Rosario were left without observers.
For some minutes Ambrosio regarded
his attendant with a look of mingled plea-
sure and apprehension.. She was seated
upon the side of the bed, her headL bend-
ing down, and, as usual, enveloped in the
cowl of her habit.
"And1 you are still here, Matilda ?**
said the friar at length; "are you not sa-
tisfiedrwith having so nearly effected my de-
struction, that nothing but a miracle could
have saved' me from the grave ? Ah ! surely
heaven sent that serpent to punish"
Matilda interrupted him by putting her
hand before his lips with an air of gaiety.
"Hush! father, hush! you must not
talk/'. :/'
"He

<page 144>
f- tin )
c* He who imposed that order, knew not
how interesting are the subjects. on which
I with to speak."
"But I know ir, and yet issue the same
positive command. I am appointed your
nurse, and you must not disobey my orders..'"''
"You are in spirits, Matilda!"
"Well may I be so; I have just received
a'pleasure unexampled through my whole-"
fife."
"What was that pleasure?"
"What I must conceal from all, but
most from you."
"But most from me? Nay then^ I'en-
treat you, Matilda"
"Hush-! father,, hush! you must not
talk. But as you do.not seem inclined t3
fleep, shall I endeavour to amuse you with
my harp?"
"How! I knew not that you understood
music."
"Oh! lam a sorry performer! Yet as.
silence is prescribed you for eight-and-forty
G 6 hours-

<page 145>
C r:32 )
hours, t may possibly entertain- you, uTiers
wearied of your own reflections. I go to
fetch my harp."
She soon returned with it.
"Now, father, what shall I sing? Will
you hear the ballad which treats of the gal-
lant Durandarte,. who died in the famous-
battle of Roncevalles?"
"What you please, Matilda."'
"Oh! call me not Matilda! Gall me
Rosario, call me your friend. Those are
the names which 1 love to hear from your
lips. Now listen."'
She then tuned her harp, and afterwards
preluded for some moments with such ex-
quisite taste as to prove her a perfect mis-
tress of the instrument. The air which (he
played was soft and plaintive. Ambrosio,.
while he listened, felt his uneasiness subside,
and a pleasing melancholy spread itself into
his bosom. Suddenly Matilda changed the
strain: with an hand bold and rapid, the
struck a few loud martial chords, and then
chanted

<page 146>
( *33 )
chanted the following ballad to an air at
once simple and melodious.:
DURANDARTE and BELERMA...
SAD and fearful is the story
Of the Roncevalles fight;
On those fatal plains of glory
Perished many a gallant knight.
There fell Durandarte: never
Verse a nobler chieftain named:;
He, before his lips for ever
Closed in silence, thus.exclaimed:
"Oh! Btlerma! Oh! my dear one,
For my pain and pleasure born,
Seven long years I ferv'd thee, fair one,.
Seven long years my fee was scorn.
"And when now thy heart, replying
To my wishes, burns like mine,
Gruel fate, my bliss denying,
Bids me every hope.resign.
"Ah !though young I fall, believe me,.
Death would never claim a sigh j
'Tis to lose thee, 'tis to leave thee,
Makes me think it hard to die 1
"Oh! my cousin Montesinos,
By that friendship firm and dear,
Which from youth has lived between us,
How my last petition hear;
"When

<page 147>
«''When my soul, these limbs soriakingi
Eager seeks a purer air,
From my breast the cold heart taking,.
Give it to Belerma's care.
"Say, I of my lands possessor
Named her with my dying'breath:
Say, my lips loped to bless her,
Ere they closed for aye in death:
"Twice a week', too, how sincerely
I adored her, cousin, say:'
Twice a week, for one who dearly
Loved her, cousin, bid her pray.
"Montesinos, now the hour
Marked by fate is near at handi
Lo! my arm has lost its power!'
Lo! I drop my trusty brand.
"Eyes, which forth beheld me going,.
Homewards ire'er shall fee me hie:
Cousin, stop those tears o'erfiowing, •
Let me on thy bosom die;
"•Tby kind hand my eye-lids closing,.
Yet one favour I implore:'
Pray thou for my soul's reposing,;
When my heart shalt throb no more. •
"So (ball Jesus, still attending,
Gracious to a Christian's vow,
Pleased accept my ghost ascending,.
And a seat in heaven allow/'
Thus.

<page 148>
( m )
*^hu9 spoke gallant Durandarte ;.
Soen his brave heart broke in twain. ,
Greatly.joyed the Moorish party,
That the gallant knight was slain.
Bitter weeping,. Montesinos
Took from him his helm and glaive?:
Bitter weeping, Montesinos
Dug his galiant cousin's grave.
To perform his promise made, he
Gut the heart from out the breast,•
That Belerma, wretched lady!
Might receive the last Bequest.
Sad was Montesinos' heart, he
Felt distress his bosom rend.
"Oh! my cousin Durandarte,
Woe is me to view thy end!
"jSweet in manners, fair in favour,
Mild in temper, fierce in fight,
Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,,
Never shall behold the light.
"Cousin, lo! my tears bedew thee ;.
How mail I thy loss survive?
Durandarte, he who slew thee,
Wherefore left he me alive .'"
While she sung, Ambrosio listened with
delight: never had he heard a voice more
harmonious; and he wondered how such
heavenly

<page 149>
C »3* )
heavenly sounds could be produced by any
but angels. But though he indii;srd the
fense of hearing, a single look, convinced
him, that lie must not trust to that cf sight..
The songstress fat at a little distance from
his bed. The attitude in which she bent
over her harp was easy and graceful r her
cowl had fallen backwarder than usual:
two coral l;ps were visible, ripe, fresh, and
melting, and a chin, in whose dimples*
seemed to lurk a thousand Cupids. Her
habit's long fleeve would have swept alone
the chords of the instrument: to prevent
this inconvenience the had drawn it above
her elbow; and by this means an arm was.
discovered, formed in the most perfect sym-
metry, the delicacy of whose skin might
have contended with snow in whiteness.
Ambrofio dared to look on her but once:
that glance sufficed to convince him, how.
dangerous was the presence of. this, sedu-
cing object. He closed his eyes, but strove
in vain to banish, her from his thoughts.
There she still moved before him, adorned
with

<page 150>
( ni >
with all those charms which his heated ima-
gination could supply. Every beauty which
he had seen appeared embellished; and,,
those still concealed fancy represented to
him in glowing colours. Still, however, his.
vows, and the necessity of keeping to them,
were present to his memory. He struggled
with desire, and shuddered when he beheld
how deep was the precipice before him.
Matilda ceased to sing. Dreading the
influence of her charms, Ambrosio remain,
ed with his eyes closed, and offered up
his prayers to Sr. Francis to assist him in
this dangerous trial! Matilda believed thas
he was fleeping: she rose from her seat, ap-
proached the bed softly, and for some mi-
nutes gazed upon him attentively.
"He fleeps !" said sheat length in a low
voice, but whose accents the abbot distin-
guished perfectly ; " now then I may gaze
upon him without offence j. I may mix my
breath with his; I may dole upon his fea-
tures, and he cannot suspect me of impurity
at\d deceit. He fea/s my seducing him to
the

<page 151>
( 13* J
the violation of his vows. Oh! the unjustf
Were it my wish to excite desire, should I
conceal my features from him so carefully?
—those features, of which I daily hear him"--
She stopped,. and was lost in her reflec-
tions..
"It was but yesterday," the continued ,-
w but a few short hours have pasted since I
was dear to him; he esteemed me, and my
heart was satisfied: now, oh 1 now, how
cruelly is my situation changed! He looks?
on me with suspicion; he bids me leave
him, leave him for ever. Oh! you, my
faint, my idol! You! holding the next
place to God in my breast, yet two days,
and my heart will be unveiled to you. Could:
you know my feeling?,. when 1 beheld your
agony! Could you know bow much your
sufferings have endeared you to me !. Bur
the time will come, when you will be conr
vinced that my passion is pure and disinte-
rested. Then you will pity me, and feet
the whole weight of these sorrows."'
As she said this* her voice was choked by
weeping,.

<page 152>
( *39 1
weeping. While she bent over Ambrosto,
a tear fell upon his eheek.
'' Ah! I have disturbed him," cried
Matilda, and retreated hastily.
Her alarm was ungrounded. None sleep
so profoundly as those who are determined
not to wake. The friar was in this predi-
cament: he still seemed buried in a repose,
which every succeeding minute rendered
him less capable of enjoying. The burn-
ing tear had communicated its warmth to
his heart.
"What affection! what purity!" said
he internally. *' Ah! since my bosom is
thus sensible of pity, what would it be if
agitated by love?"
Matilda again quitted her seat, and re-
tired to some distance from the bed. Am-
brosio ventured to open his eyes, and to
cast them upon her feaifully.. Her face
was turned from him.. She rested her head
in a melancholy posture upon her harpv
and gazed on the picture wl.ich hung op-
posite to the bed.
« Happy*

<page 153>
( MO )
"Happy, happy image!" Thus did she.
address the beautiful Madona; 'tis to
you that he offers his prayers j 'tis on you
that he gazes with admiration. I thought
you would have lightened my sorrows ; you
have only served to increase their weight;
you have made me feel, that, had I known.
him ere his vows were pronounced, Am-
brofipand happiness might have been mine..
With what pleasure he views this picture L
With what fervour he addresses his prayers
to the insensible image! Ah! may not his
sentiments be inspired by some kind and
secret genius, friend to my affection ?. May
it not be man's natural instinct which in-
forms him- ?Be silent! idle hopes!
let me not encourage an idea, which takes
from the brilliance of Ambrosio's virtue.
'Tis religion, not beauty, which attracts his.
admiration; 'tis not to the woman, but
the divinity, that he kneels. Would he but
address to me the least tender expression
which he pours forth to this Madona !.
Would he but fay, that, were he not already
affianced

<page 154>
X 141 )
.affianced to the church, he would not have
.despised Matilda! Oh! let me nourish that
fond idea.- Perhaps he may yet acknow-
ledge that he' feels for me more than pity,
and that affection like mine might well
have deserved a return. Perhaps he may
own thus much when I lie on my death-bed.
He then need not fear to infringe his vows>
and the confession of his regard will soften
the pangs of dying. Would I were sure of
this! Oh! how earnestly should I sigh for
•the moment of dissolution!"
Of this discourse the abbot loft not a
syllable; and the tone in; which she pro*
nounced these last.wouds pierced ..to his
heart.. Involuntarily he raised himself from
his pillow. t . . ,- ,',/J
"Matilda I" he said in a troubled voice;
"O h 1 my Matilda!" , .
She started at the found), and turned toj-
wards him hastily. The suddenness of her
movement made her cowl fall back from
her head; her features became visible,tp
the monk's enquiring eye.. . What .was, hi$
amazement

<page 155>
( H2 )
amazemie%t at beholding the exact: resem-
blance of his admired Madona! The fame
exquisite proportion of features, the fame
profusion of golden hair, the fame rosy lips,
heavenly eyes, and majesty of countenance
adorned Matilda! 'Uttering an exclama-
tion of surprise, Arnbrosio funk back upon
his pillow, and doubted whether the object:
before him was mortal or divine.
Matilda seemed penetrated with confu-
sion. She remained motionless in her place,
and supported herself upon herinstrumenc
Her eyes were bent upon the earth, and
her fair cheeks overspread with blushes.
On recovering herself, her first action was
to conceal her features. She then, in an
unsteady and troubled voice, ventured to
address these words to the friar:
"Accident has made you master of a
secret, which I never would have revealed
but on the bed of death: yes, Arnbrosio, in
Matilda de Vilianegas you fee the original
of your beloved Madona. Soon after I
conceived my unfortunate passion, I formed
• . . the

<page 156>
% 143 )
ifhe projects conveying to you4i|r picture;
Crowds of admirers had persuaded me that
I possessed some beauty, and I was anxious
to know what effect it would produce upon
you. I caused my portrait to be drawn by
Martin Galuppi, a celebrated Venetian at
that time resident in Madrid. The resem-
blance was striking: I sent it to the Capu-
-chin-abbey as if for sale; and the- Jew from
whom you bought it was one of my emis-
saries. You purchased it. Judge of my
rapture, when informed that you had gazed
-upon it with delight, or rather with adora-
tion; that you had suspended it in your
-cell, and that you addressed your supplica-
tions to no other faint i Will this discovery
make me still more regarded as an object
of suspicion? Rather should it convince
you how pure is my affection, and engage
you to suffer me in your society and esteem.
I heard you daily extol the praises of my
portrait. 1 was an eye witness of the trans-
ports which its beauty excited in you: yet
I forbore to use against your virtue those
arms

<page 157>
( M4 )

arms witbiwhich yourself had furnished me.
I concealed thoie features from, your sight,
which you loved unconsciously. I strove not
to excite desire by displaying my charms,
or to make myself mistress of your hear-t
through die medium-of your fenses. -Te
attract: your notice by studiously attending
to religious duties, to endear myself to you
fay convincing you that my mind was vir-
tuous and my attachment sincere, iueh was
my only aim. 1 succeeded; I became your
companion and your friend. I concealed
my sex from your knowledge; and had
you not pressed me to reveal my secret, had
I not been tormented by the fear of a dis-
covery, never had you known me for any
other than Rofario. And still are you rer
solved to drive me from you? The few
hours of life which yet remain for me, may
I not pass them in your presence? Oh!
speak, Ambrosio, and tell me that I. may
. This speech gave the abbot an oppor-
tunity of recollecting himself. He was
6 conscious
•.

<page 158>
t H5 )
conscious that, in the present-disposition of
liismind, avoiding her society was his only
refuge from the power of this enchanting
woman.
"Your declaration has so much astonish-
ed me," said he, "that I am at present inca-
pable of answering you. Do not insist upon
a.reply, Matilda; leave me to myself, I
have need to be alone."
"I obey you ; but, before I go, promise
-not to insist upon my quitting the abbey
immediately."
"Matilda, reflect upon your situation;
reflect upon the consequences of your stay:
our separation is indispensable, and we must
part."
*' But not to-day, father! Oh! in piry,
not to-day!"
"You press me too hard; but I cannot
resist that tone of supplication. Since you
insist upon it, I yield to your prayer; [
consent to your remaining here a susficient
time to prepare, in some measure, the bre-
thren for your departure: stay yet two days;
Vox. I. H but

<page 159>
( *4« )
but on the third"—(He sighed involun-
tarily)—" remember, that on the third we
must part for ever!"
She caught his hand eagerly, and pressed
it to her lips.
"On the third !" (he exclaimed with an
air of wild solemnity: "You are right, fa-
ther, you are right! On the third we must
part for ever I"
There was a dreadful expression in her
eye as she uttered these words, which pene-
trated the friar's foul with horror. Again
she kissed his hand, and then fled with ra*
pidity from the chamber.
Anxious to authorise the presence of his
dangerous guest, yet conscious that her stay,
was infringing the laws of his order, Am-
brose's bosom became the theatre of a
thousand contending passions. At length
his attachment to the feigned Rosario, aided
try the natural warmth of his temperament,
seemed likely to obtain the victory: the
success was assured, when that presumption
which formed the ground-work of his cha-
racter

<page 160>
( 147 )
racter Cairie to MatildaY assistance. The
monk reflected, that to vanquish tempta-
tion was an insinitely greater merit than to
avoid it; he thought that he ought rather
to rejoice in the opportunity given him of
proving the firmness of his virtue. St. An-
thony had withstood all seductions to lust,
then why should not he? Besides, St. An-
thony was tempted by the devil, who put
every art into practice to excite his passions;
whereas Ambrosio's danger proceeded'from
a mere mortal woman, fearful and modest,
whose apprehensions of his yielding were
not less violent than his own.
"Yes," said he, " the unfortunate shall
slay ; I have nothing to fear from her pre-
sence: even should my own prove too weak
to resist the temptation, I am secured from
danger by the innocence of Matilda."
Ambrosio was yet to learn, that, to an
heart unacquainted with her, vice is ever
most dangerous when lurking behind the
mask of virtue.
He found himself so perfectly recovered,
H 2 that,

<page 161>
{ i48 )
that, when father Pablos visited him again at
nights he entreated permission to quit his
chamber on the day following. His request
was granted. Matilda appeared no more
that evening, except in company with the
monks when they came in a body to en-
quire after the abbot's health. She seemed
fearful of conversing with him in private,
and staid but a few minutes in his room.
The friar slept well; but the dreams of the
former night were repeated, and his sensa-
tions of voluptuousness were yet more keen
and exquisite j the fame lust-exciting vi-
sions floated before his eyes j Matilda, in
all the pomp of beauty, warm, tender and
luxurious, clasped him to her bosom, and
lavished upon him the most ardent caresses.
He returned them as eagerly; and already
was on xhe point of satisfying his desires,
when the faithless form disappeared, and
lest him to all the horrois os shame and dis-
appointment.
The morning dawned. Fatigued, ha-
rassed, and exhausted by his provoking
,, ,. - dreams,

<page 162>
C 149 )
streams, he was not disposed to quit his bed:
he excused himself from appearing at ma-
tins ; it was the first morning in his life that
he had ever misled them. He rose late:
during the whole of the day he had no op-
portunity of speaking to Matilda without
witnesses; his cell was thronged by the
monks, anxious to express their concern at
his illness; and he was still occupied in re-
ceiving their compliments on his recovery,
when the bell summoned them to the re-
l'?-rc -"-..'
rectory.
Aster dinner the monks separated, and
dispersed themselves in various parts of the
garden, where the shade of trees, or retire-
ment of some grotto, presented the most
agreeable means of enjoying the siesta. The
abbot bent his steps towards the hermitage;
a glance of his eye invited Matilda to ac-
company him: she obeyed, and followed
him thither in silence: they entered the
grotto, and seated themselves: both seemed
unwilling to begin the conversation, and to
labour under the influence of mutual em-
H 3 barrassment.

<page 163>
( *5° )
barrassment. At length the abbot spoke:
he conversed only on indifferent topics, and
Matilda answered him in the same tone;
she seemed anxious to make him forget
that the person who sat by him was any
other than Rosario. Neither of them dared,
or indeed wished, to make an allusion to the
subject which was mod at the heart of
both.
Matilda's efforts to appear gay were evi-
dently forced ; her spirits were oppressed by
the weight of anxiety ; and when she spoke,
her voice was low and feeble: she seemed
desirous of finishing a conversation which
embarrassed her; and, complaining that she
was unwell, she requested Ambrofio's per-
mission to return to the abbey. He accom-
panied her to the door of her cell; and,
when arrived there, he stopped her to de-.
clare his consent to her continuing the
partner of his solitude, so, long as should
be agreeable to herself. , .
She discovered no marks of-pleasure.at.>
receiving this intelligence, though on, the;
preceding

<page 164>
( i5i )
preceding day she had been so anxious to
obtain the permission.
'' Alas, father," she said, waving her
head mournfully, " your kindness comes
too late; my doom is fixed; we must sepa-
rate for ever: yet believe that I am grate-
ful/or your generosity, for your compassion
of an unfortunate who is but too little de-
serving of it."
She put her handkerchief to her eyes;
her cowl was only half drawn over her f.ice.
Ambrosio observed that she was pale, and
her eyes funk and heavy.
** Good God !" he cried, "you are very-
ill, Matilda; I shall send father Pablos to
you instantly."
'' No, do not: I am ill, 'tis true, but he
cannot cure my malady. Farewell, father!
Remember me in your prayers to-morrow,
while I shall remember you in heaven."'
She entered her cell and closed the door.
The abbot dispatched to her the physi-
cian without losing a moment, and waited
bis reports impatiently; but father Pablos
H 4 soon

<page 165>
( »52 )
i'aon returned, and declared that his errand
had been fruitless. Rosario refused to ad-
mit him, and had positively rejected his of-
fers of assistance. The uneasiness which
this account gave Ambrosio was not trifling;
yet he determined that Matilda should have
her own way for that night; but that, if
her situation did not mend by the morning,
he would insist upon her taking the advice
of father Pablos.
He did not find himself inclined to fleep»
he opened his casement, and gazed upon the
moon-beams as they played upon the small
stream whose waters bathed the walls of the
monastery. The coolness of the night breeze,
and tranquillity of the hour, inspired the
friar's mind with sadness: he thought upon
Matilda's beauty and affection; upon the
pleasures which he might have shared with.
her, had he not been restrained by monastic
fette.iv He reflected that, unsustained by
hope, her love for him could not long exist j
that doubtless she would succeed in extin-
guishing her passion, and seek for happiness
in

<page 166>

( '53 )
in the arms of one more fortunate. He
shuddered at the void which her absence
would leave in his bosom; he looked with
disgust on the monotony of a convent, and
breathed a sigh rowards that world from
which he was for ever separated. Such
were the reflections which a loud knocking
at his door interrupted. The bell of the
church had already struck two. The abbot
hastened to enquire the cause of this dis-
turbance. He opened the door of his cell,
and a lay-brother entered, whose looks de-
clared his hurry and confusion.
"Hasten, reverend father!" said he,
«;f hasten to the young Rosario: he earnestly
requests to fee you; he lies at the point of
death."
"Gracious God! where is father Pa-
blbs? Why is he not with him? Oh! I
fear, I sear"
"Father Pablos has seen him, but his
art can do nothing. He fays that he sus-
pects the yoirth to be poisoned."
••* Poisoned? Oh ! the unfortunate! It is
H 5 then

<page 167>
{ f54 )
then as I suspected! But let me not lose a
moment; perhaps it may yet be time to
save her."
He said, and flew towards the cell of the
novice. Several monks were already in the
chamber j father Pablos was one .of themt
and held a medicine in his hand, which
he was endeavouring to persuade Rosario
to swallow. The others were employed
in admiring the patient's divine counte-
nance, which they now saw for the first
time. She looked lovelier than ever, j she
was no longer pale or languid; a bright
glow had spread itself over her cheeks; her
eyes sparkled with a serene delight, and her
countenance was expressive of confidence
and resignation. • . ;...,1j>.
"Oh! torment me no more !" was she
saying to Pablos, when the terrified abbot
rushed hastily into the cell; " my disease
is far beyond the reach of your skill, and. I
with not to be cured of it." Then per-
ceiving Ambrosio—" Ah, 'tis he!" sbecriedj
*« I see him once again before we part for
a »" i* ever 1

<page 168>
( *ss )
ever! Leave me, my brethren ; much have
1 to tell this holy man in private."
The monks retired immediately, and
Matilda and the abbot remained together.
"What have you done, imprudent wo-
man ?" exclaimed the latter, as soon as they
were left alone: " tell me; are my suspi-
cions just? Am 1 indeed to lose you?
Has your own hand been the instrument of
your destruction?"
She .smiled, and grasped his hand.
"In what have I been imprudent, father?
I have sacrificed a pebble, and saved a dia-
mond. My death preserves a life valua-
ble to the world, and more dear to me than
my own.—Yes, father, I am poisoned ; but
know, that the poison once circulated in
your veins."
K Matilda!"
"What I tell you I resolved never to
discover to you but on the bed of death;
that moment is now arrived. You cannot
have forgotten the day already, when your j
Jife was endangered by the bite of a cienti-
H 6 pedoro.


<page 169>
( i5« )
pedoro. The physician gave you over, de-
claring himself ignorant how to extract the
venom.• I knew but of one means, and he-
sitated not a moment to employ it. I was
left alone with you; you flept; I loosened
the bandage from your hand; I kissed the
wound, and drew out the poison with my
lips. The essect has been more sudden than
I expected. I feel death at my heart; yet
an hour, and I shall be in a better world."
"Almighty God !" exclaimed the abbot,
.and sunk almost lifeless upon the bed.
After a few minutes he again raised him-
self up suddenly, and gazed upon Matilda
. with all the wildness of despair.' •
"And you ha\e sacrificed yourself for
me !' You die, and die to preserve Ambro-
iio! And is there indeed no remedy, Ma-
tilda? And is there indeed no hope?
Speak to me, oh! speak to me! Tell me
that you have still the means of life 1"
"Be comforted, my only friend! Yes, I
have still the means of life in my power;
but it is a means which I dare not employ;
* it
t

<page 170>
( HI )
ic is dangerous; it is dreadful! Life would
be purchased at too dear a rate,—unless k
were permitted me to live for you."
'' Then live for me, Matilda; for me
and gratitude!"—(Hecaught her hand* and
prefled it rapturously to his lips.)—ic Re-
member our late conversations; I now con-
sent to everything. Remember in what
. lively colours you described the union of
; souls; be it ours to realize those ideas. Let
xus fer-ge,t the distinctions of sex, despise the
world's prejudices, and only consider each
other as brotheF and friend. Live then,.
Matilda, oh! live for me V • I
"Ambrofio, k must not be. When I
.thought thus, I deceived both you and my-
0 self:. either I must die at present, or expire
by the lingering torments of unsatisried'tie-
: Ære. Oh! since we last conversed together,
a dreadful veil ha3. been rent from before
my eyes. I love you no longer with thede^
yotion which is paid to. a faint; I prize you
r, no .more for the virtues of your foul; 1 lust
for the enjoyment of your person. The wo-
4 man

<page 171>
( i5« )
man reigns in my bosom, and I am become
a prey to the wildest of passions. Away with
friendship ! 'tis a cold unfeeling word : my
bosom burns with love, with unutterable
love, and love must be its return. Tremble
then, Ambrosio, tremble to succeed in your
prayers. If I live, your truth, your reputa-
tion, yourreward of a life passed in susferings,
all that you value, is irretrievably lost. I
(hall no longer be able to combat my pas-
lions, shall seize every opportunity to excite
your desires, and labour to effect: your dis-
honour and my own. No, no, Ambrosio,
I must; not live; I am convinced with every
moment that I have but one alternative; I
fed with every heart-throb, that I must en-
joy you or die."
. ''' Amazement ! Matilda ! Can it be you
who speak to me?"
He made a movement as if to quit his
feat. She uttered aloud shriek, and, raising
herself half cut of the bed, threw her arms
round the friar to detain him.
*! Oh! do not leave me! Listen to my
i.-'tti( i errors
.-

<page 172>
( MS9 D
errors with compassion: in a few hours I
(hall be no more: yet a little, and I am free
from this disgraceful passion." , .:> .
"Wretched woman, what can I say to
you? I cannot—I must not—But live,
Matilda! ohi live!" .. i: ', .- .
. .«'« You do not reflect on what you ask.
What? live to plunge myself in infamy?
to become the agent of hell? to work the
destruction both of you and ofmyscflf?
Feel this heart, father." .-.,,.... '!• -v,
She^ook his hand. Confused, embar-
rassed, and fascinated, he withdrew it nos,
and felt her heart thiob,under it.
"Feel,this heart, father! It is yet the feat
of honour, truth, and chastity: if it beats
to-morrow, it must fall a prey to the blackest
crimes. Oh! let me then die to-day 1 Let
me die while I yet deserve the tears of the
[ virtuous. Thus will I expire !"—(She re-
clined her. head.,upon his shoulder; hejr
golden hair poured, itself over his chest.)-—
"Folded in yourt arms, I (hall sink to sleep*
your hand (hall close my eyes for ever, and
tV. o y0Ur

<page 173>
( i6o )
your lips receive my dying breath. And
will you not sometimes think of me? Will
you not sometimes shed a tear upon my
tomb? Oil, yes, yes, yes! that kiss is my
assurance." , -
The hour was night. All was silence
around. The faint beams of a solitary lamp
darted upon Matilda's figure, and shed
through the chamber a dim., mysterious
light. No prying eye or curious ear was
near the lovers: nothing was heard but Ma-
tilda's melodious accents. Ambrofio was
in the full vigour of manhood ; he saw be-
fore him a young and beautiful woman, the
preserver of his life, the adorer of his per-
son; and whom affection for him had re-
duced to the brink of the grave. He fat
upon her bed; hre hand rested upon her
bosom; her head reclined voluptuously
upon his breast. Who then can wonder if
he yielded' to the temptation ?. Drunk with
desire, he pressed his lips to those which
sought them ; his kisses vied with Matilda's
in warmth and passion r he clasped her rap'-
.' ..' turously

<page 174>
( rfi )
turoufly in his arras; he forgot his vows,
his sanctity, and his fame; he remembered
nothing but the pleasure ami opportunity.
"Ambrosip.! Oh, my Ambrosio !" sighed
Matilda.
"Thine, ever thine," murmured the"
friar, and funk upon her bosom.
!'« OHO- ".'
• -;- . V ' 0 ■ • ' . 'v •
".• . it '.
.. .: t•.' - • .
i -• * *\ •
». 1 .l
.1. ...•••. .: •. • V!
r! j:;! w j ;v i • . •.•.>.•.
. ••?;.. .v ;:'..•.' • • ■ •. . ;•• •' .
'ylh: .;•..!. CHAP.

<page 175>
( 138 )
CHAP. III.
———These are the villains
Whom all the travellers do fear so much.
'' Some of them are gentlemen,
Such as the fury of ungovernM youth
Thrust from the company of awful men.
Two Gentlemen of Verona.
*
X HE marquis and Lorenzo proceeded to
the hotel in silence. The former employ-
ed himself in calling every circumstance to
his mind, which related might give Loren-
zo's the most favourable idea of his con-
nection with Agnes. The latter, justly
alarmed for the honour of his family, felt
embarrassed by the presence of the marquis:
the adventure which he had just witnessed
forbad his treating him as a friend; and
Antonia's interests being entrusted to his
mediation, he saw the impolicy of treating
him as a foe. He concluded from these
• » ^v reflections,

<page 176>
C 163 )
reflections, that profound silence would be
the wisest plan, and waited with impatience
for Don Raymond's explanation.
They arrived at the hotel de las Cisternas.
The marquis immediately conducted him
to his apartment, and began to express his
satisfaction at finding him at Madrid. Lo-
renzo interrupted him.
"Excuse me, my lord," said he with a
distant air, " if I reply somewhat coldly to
your expressions of regard. A sister's honour
is:involved in this affair,: till that is^esta-
blished, and the purport of your corresport*
dence with Agnes cleared up, 1 cannot con-
sider you as my friend. I am anxious to
hear the meaning of your conduct; and
hope that you will not delay the promised
explanation." •. •
1i 1First give me your word, that you will
listen with patience and indulgence."
;c.« I love my sister too well to judge her.
harshly; and, till this moment, I possessed,
no friend so dear to me as yourself. I will
alfo :C0ftfessi that. your having it in your
. u'q? ;.i power

<page 177>
( "i64 )
power to oblige me in a business which T
have much at heart, makes me very anxious
to find you still deserving my esteem."
"Lorenzo, you transport me f No
greater pleasure can be given me, than an
opportunity of serving the brother of
Agnes."
"Convince me that I can accept your
favours without dishonour, and there is no
man in the world to whom I am more
willing to be obliged."
*« Probably you have already heard your
fister mention the name of Alphonso d'Al-
varada ?'*
«• Never. Though I feel for Agnes art
affection truly fraternal, circumstances have
prevented us from being much together.
While yet a child, she was consigned to the
care of her aunt, who had married a Ger-
man nobleman. At his castle she remained
till two years since, when she returned to
Spain, determined upon secluding herself
from the world."
«« Good God! Lorenzo, you knew of her
intention,

<page 178>
< »«s )
intention, and yci strove not to make her
change it?"
"Marquis, you wrong me: the intelli-
gence, which I received at Naples, shocked
me extremely, and I hastened my return to
Madrid for the express purpose of prevent-
ing the sacrifice. The moment that I ar-
rived, I flew to the convent of St. Clare, in
which Agnes had chosen to perform her
noviciate. I requested to see my sister.
Conceive my surprise, when she sent me a
refusal : she declared positively that, appre-
hending my influence over her mind, she
would not trust herself in my society till
the day before that on which she was to re-
ceive the veil. I supplicated the nuns; I
insisted upen feeing Agnes; and hesitated
not to avow my suspicions, that her being
k,ept from me was against her own inclina-
tions. To free herself from the imputation
• of violence, the prioress brought me a few
'lines, written in my sister's well-known
'hand, repeating the meflage already deliver-
ed. All future attempts to obtain a mo-
ment s
..:.tM'.n^iii.;

<page 179>
C 166 )
ment's conversation with her were as fruit-
less as the first. She was inflexible, and I
was not permitted to fee her till the day
preceding that on which she entered the
cloister, never to quit it more. This inter-
view took place in the presence of our prin-
cipal relations. It was for the first time since
her childhood that I saw her, and the scene
was most asfecting : she threw herself upon
my bosom, kissed me, and wept bitterly.
By every possible argument, by tears, by
prayers, by kneeling, I strove to make her
abandon her intention. I represented to
her all the hardships of a religious life; I
painted to her imagination all the pleasures
which she was going to quit;" and besought
her to disclose to me what occasioned her
disgust to the world. At this last question
(lie turned pale, and her tears slowed yft
faster. She entreated me not to press her on'
that subject; that it sufficed me to know
that her resolution was taken, and that a
convent was the only place where she could
now hope for tranquillity. She persevered in
. '. her

<page 180>
C 167 )
her design, and made her profession. I vi*
sited her frequently at the grate; and every
moment that I passed with her made me feel
more affliction at her loss. I was shortly
after obliged to quit Madrid; I returned
but yesterday evening, and, since then, have
not had time to call at St. Clare's convent."
"Then, till I mentioned it, you never
heard the name of Alphonso d'Alvarada?"
"Pardon me: my aunt wrote me word,
that an adventurer so called had found
means to get introduced into the castle of
Lindenberg; that he had insinuated him-
self into my sister's good graces; and that
she had even consented to elope with him.
However, before the plan could be execu-
ted, the cavalier discovered, that the estates
which he believed Agnes to possess in His-
pa•niola, in reality belonged to me. This
intelligence made him change his intention;
he disappeared on the day that the elope-
ment was to have taken place; and Agnes,
in despair at his perfidy and meanness, had
resolved upon seclusion in a convent. She
added,

<page 181>
( 168 )
added, that as this adventurer had given
himself out to be a friend of mine, she wish-
ed to know whether I had any knowledge
of him. I replied in the negative. I had
then very little idea, that Alphonso d'Alva-
rada and the marquis de las Cisternas were
one and the fame person: the description
given me of the first by no means tallied
with what I knew of the latter,"
"In this I easily recognize Donna Ro-
dopha's perfidious character. Every word
of this account is stamped with marks of her
malice, of her falsehood, of her talents for
misrepresenting those whom she wishes to
injure. Forgive me, Medina, for speaking
so freely cf your relation. The mischief
which she has done me authorises my resent-
ment; and when you have heard my story,
you will be convinced that my expressions
have not been too severe."
He then begin his narrative in the fol-
lowing manner:—
HISTORY

<page 182>
( »6~9 )
. ,!' .:'...' .
HISTORY OF DON RAYMOND,
. .'.',: JI4RQUIS DE LAS CISTES.NAS.
LONG experience, my dear Lorenzo,
has convinced me how generous is your
nature: I waited not for your declaration
of ignorance respecting your sister's adven-
tures, to suppose that they had been pur-
posely concealed from you. Had they
reached your knowledge, from what mis-
fortunes should both Agnes and myself
have escaped! Fate had ordained it other-
wise. You were on your travels when I first
became acquainted with your sister; and as
our enemies took care to conceal from her
your direction, it was impossible for her to
implore by letter your protection and ad-
vice.
On leaving Salamanca, at which uni-
versity, as I have since heard, you remained
a year after I quitted it, I immediately set
Vol. I. I out

<page 183>
C 170 )
out upon my travels. My father supplied
me liberally with money; but he insisted
upon my concealing my rank, and present-
ing myself as no more than a private gentle-
man. This command was issued by the
counsels of his friend the duke of Villa
Hermofa, a nobleman for whose abilities
and knowledge of the world 1 have ever
entertained the most profound veneration.
"Believe me," said he, " my dear Ray-
mond, you will hereafter feel the benefits of
this temporary degradation. Tis true,
that as the conde de las Cisternas you
would have been received with open arms,
and your youthful vaniry might have felt
gratified by the attentions showered upon
you from all fides. At present, much will
depend upon yourself; you have excellent
recommendations, but it must be your own
business to make them of use to you: you
must lay yourself out to please; you must
labour to gain the approbation of those to
whom you are presented: they who would
9 have

<page 184>
( m )
have courted the friendiliip of the cohde
de las Cisternas will have no interest in
finding out die merits, or bearing patiently,
with the faults, of Alphonfo d'Alvaradar-
Consequently, when you find yourself really
liked, you may safely ascribe it to your good
qualities, not your rank; and the distinc-
tion shewn you will be infinitely more flit-
tering. Besides, your exalted birth would
not permit your mixing with the lower
classes of society, which will now be in,
your power, and from which, in my opi-
nion, you will derive considerable benefit.
Do not confine yourself to the illustrious
of those countries through which you pass.
Examine the manners and customs of the
multitude: enter into the cottages; and, by
observing howithe vassais of foreigners are
treated, learn to diminish the burthens,
and augment the comforts, of,your own.
According to my ideas of those advantages
which a youth destined to the possession of
power and wealth may reap from travel,
he should not consider as the least essential,
I 2 the

<page 185>
£ if ft )
the'oppoftumty of mixing with the classes
below him, and becoming an eye-witness
of the sufferings of the people."
Forgive me, Lorenzo, if I seem tediotis
in my narration: the close connexion which
now exists between us, makes me anxious
that you should know every particular re-
specting me; and in. my fear of omitting
the least circumstance which may induce
you to think favourably of your sister and
myself, I may possibly relate many which
you may think uninteresting.
I followed the duke's advice; I was
soon convinced of its wisdom. I quitted
Spain, calling myself by the assumed title
of Don Alphonfo d'Alvarada, and attended
by a single domestic of approved fidelity.
Paris was my first station. For some time
I was enchanted with it, as indeed must be
every man who is young, rich, and fond of
pleasure. Yet, among all its gaieties, I felt
that something was wanting to my heart': F
grew •sick of dissipation: I discovered that
the people among whom I lived, and whose
V:J exterior

<page 186>
( m )
exterior was so polifiied and seducing, were
at bottom frivolous,unfeeling, and insincere:.
I turned from the inhabitants of Paris with
disgust, and quitted that theatre of luxury
without heaving one sigh of regret.
I now bent my course towards Germany,
intending to visit most of the principal
courts.. Prior to this expedition, i meant
to make some little stay at Strasbourg. On.
quitting my chaise at Luneville, to take
some refreshment, I observed a splendid
equipage, attended by four domestics in
xich liveries, waiting at the door of the Sil-
ver Lion. Soon after, as I looked, out of
the window, I saw a lady of noble presence,
followed by two female attendants, step into
the carriage, which drove off immediately*
I enquired of the host who the lady was
that had just departed.
, "A German baroness, monsieur, of great
rank and fortune; she has been upon a visit
to the ducljess of Longueville,, as her ser-
vants informed .me. She is going to Stras-
bourg, w heieshe will find her husband, and
I 3 then

<page 187>
( '74 )
then both return to their caslle in Ger-
many."
I resumed my journey, intending to
reach Strasbourg that night. My hopes,
however, were frustrated by the breaking
down of my chaise: the accident happened
in the middle of a thick forest, and I was
not a little embarrassed as to the means of
proceeding. It was the depth of winter; the
rrght was already closing round us; and
Strasbourg, which was the nearest town,
.was Hill distant from us several leagues. It
seemed to me that my only alternative to
passing the night in the forest, was to take
my servant's' horse and ride on to Stras-
bourg; an undertaking at that season very
far horn agreeable. However, seeing no
other resource, I was obliged to make up my
mind to it: accordingly, I communicated
my design to the postillion, telling him
that I would fend people to assist him as
soon asl reached Strasbourg. I had not much
confidence in his honesty; but Stephano
being well armed, and the driver, to all ap-
pearance,

<page 188>
C 17* )
pearance, considerably advanced in years, I
believed I ran no risk, of losing my baggage.
Luckily, as I then thought, an opportu-
nity presented itself of pissing the night
more agreeably than I expected. On men-
tioning my design of proceeding by myself
to Strasbourg, the postillion shook his head
in disapprobation.
"It is a long way," said he; "you will
find it a disricult matter to arrive there
without a guide: besides, monsieur seems
unaccustomed to the season's severity; and
'tis possible that, unable to sustain the ex-
cessive cold" ;.
"What use is there to present me with
all these objections}" said I, impatiently in-
terrupting him: "I have no other resource";
I run still greater risk of perilling with cold
by passing the night in the forest."
"Passing the night in the forest ?" he re-
plied. "Oh, by St. Denis! we are not in
quite so bad a plight as that comes to yet. If
I am not mistaken, we are scarcely five mt
nutes walk from the cottage of my old friend
I 4 Baptiile:

<page 189>
( 176 )
Baptiste: he is a wood-cutter, and a very
honest fellow. I doubt not but he will shel-
ter you for the night with pleasure. In the
mean time, I can take the saddle-horse,
ride to Strasbourg, and be back with pro-
per people to mend your carriage by break
of day."
"And, in the name of God," said I,
"how could you leave me so long in sus-
pense? Why did you not tell me of this cot-
tage sooner? What excessive stupidity!"
"I thought, that perhaps monsieur
would not deign to accept"
"Absurd! Come, come; say no more,
but conduct us without delay to the wood-
man's cottage."
He obeyed, and we moved onwards: the
.horses contrived, with some difficulty, to drag
the shattered vehicle after us. My servant
was become almost speechless, and I began
to feel the effects of the cold myself before
we reached the wished-for cottage. It was
a small but neat building : as we drew near
it, I rejoiced at observing through the win-
dow
.

<page 190>
( m j
dow the blaze of a comfortable :fiYe. Ouf
conductor knocked at the door: it was
some time before any one answered'; the
people within seemed in doubt .whether we
should be admitted. ::"..; .'
"Come, come, friend Bapiiste !"• cried
•the driver with impatience, " what are you
about? Are you afleep? Or will you re-
fuse a night's lodging to a gentleman, whose
chaise has just broken down in the forest?"
"Ah ! is it you, honest Claude ?" replied
a man's voice from within: "wait a, mo-
ment, and the door shall be opened."
• ' ""Soon after the bolts were drawn back,;
the door was unclosed, and a man presented
himself to us with a lamp in his hand: he
gave the guide an hearty reception, and
then addressed himself to me:
"Walk in, monsieur; walk in, and wel-
come. Excuse mcfor not admitting-you
at first j but there are so many rogues about
this place that, saving your presence, I sus-
pected you to be. one."
. Thus saying, he ushered me into the
15 room

<page 191>
C 172 )
room where I had observed the fire. I was
immediately placed in an easy chair, which
stood close to the hearth. A female, whom
I supposed to be the wife of my host, rose
from her feat upon my entrance, and receiv-
ed me with a slight and distant reverence.
She made no answer to my compliment, bur,
immediately re-seating herself, continued
the work on which she had been employed.
Her husband's manners were as friendly as
hers were harsliVand repulsive.
,l I wish I could lodge you more conve-
niently, monsieur," said he, " but we cannot
boastof muchfpareroomin thishovel. How-
ever, a chamber for yourself and another for
your servant, I think, we can make shift to
supply. You must content yourself with
sorry fare; :but to what we have, believe
me, you are heartily welcome." Then,
turning to his wife—^ Why, how you fit
there, Marguerite, with as much tranquillity
as if you had nothing better to do! Stir
about, dame! stir about! Get some sup-
'per; lookout some iheets. Here,here! throw
some

<page 192>
( *79 )
some logs upon the sire, for the gentleman
seems perished with cold."
The wife threw her work hastily upon
the table, and proceeded to execute his
commands with every mark of unwilling-
ness. Her countenance bad displeased me
on the first moment of my examining it:
yet, upon the whole, her features were hand-
some unquestionably; but her skin was fal-
low, and her person thin and meagre:.a
louring gloom overspread her countenance,
and it bore such visible marks of rancour
and ill.will,, as could not escape being no-
ticed by the most inattentive observer: her
every look and action expressed discontent
and impatience; and the answers which she
gave Baptiste, when he reproached her
good-humouredly for her dissatisfied air,
were tart, sliort, and cutting. In fine, I
conceived at first sight equal disgust for her,
and prepossession in favour of her husband,
whose appearance was calculated to inspire
esteem and confidence. His countenance
was open, sincere, and friendly; his mart-
I 6 ners

<page 193>
C i*o )
ners had all the peasant's honest}', unac-
companied by his rudeness: his cheeks
were broad, full, and roddy; and in the
solidity of his person he seemed to offer an
ample apology for the leanness of his wife's.
From the wrinkles on his brow, I judged
him to be turned of sixty; but he bore his
years weh% and seemed still hearty and
strong. The wife could not be more than
thirty, but in spirits and vivacity the was
infinitely older than the husband.
However, in spite of her unwillingness,
Marguerite began to prepare the supper,
while the woodman conversed gaily on dif-
ferent subjects. The postillion, who had
been furnished with a bottle of spirits, was
now ready to set out for Strasbourg, and en-
quired whether I had any further com-
. mands.
"For Strasbourg?" interrupted Baptistej
*' you are not going thither to-night?"
"I beg your pardon; if I do not fetch
workmen to mend the chaise, how is mon-
sieur to proceed to-morrow?"
5 f! That

<page 194>
<f 181 )
<c That is true, as you fay, I had forgot-J
ten the chaise. Well, but, Claude, you>
may at least eat your supper here? That
can make you lose very little time; and
monsieur locks too kind-hearted to fend
you out with an empty stomach on such a
bitter cold night as this is."
To this I readily assented, tellingthe pos-
tillion that my reaching Strasbourg the
next day an hour or two later would be per*
fectly immaterial. He thanked me, and
then leaving the cottage with Stephano,
put up his horses in the woodman's stable.
Baptiste followed them to the door,• and
looked out with anxiety.
f< 'Tis a sharp, biting wind," said he:
f I wonder what detains my boys so long!
Monsieur, I shall shew you two of the finest
lads that ever stepped in shoe of leather: the
eldest is three-and-twenty, the second a year
younger: their equals for fense, courage,
and activity, are not to be found within fif-
ty miles of Strasbourg. Would they were
back

<page 195>
( isa )
back again! I begin to feel uneasy about
them."
Marguerite was at this time employed in.
laying the cloth.
♦« And are you equally anxious for the
return of your sons ?" said I to her.
«« Not 1," she replied peevishly; "they
are no children of mine."
"Come, come, Marguerite!" said the
husband, "do not be out of humour with
the gentleman for asking a simple question:
had you not looked so crose, he would
never have thought you old enough to havo
asonof three-and-twenty; but you see how
many years ill-temper adds to you !—Ex-
cuse my wife's rudeness,.monsieur; a little
thing puts her out; and fhe is somewhat
displeased at your not thinking her to be
under thirty.—That is the truth, is-it nor,
Marguerite? You know, monsieur, that
age is always a ticklish subject: with a.wo*,
man.—Come, come, Marguerite ! clear up
a little. If you have not sons as old, you will
'-: , some

<page 196>
( x't| )
some twenty years hence; and I hope that
we shall live to see them just such lads as
Jacques and Robert."
Marguerite clasped her hands together
passionately. .. . ..- ••vi ......
"God forbid !" said she, "God forbid!
If I thought it, I would strangle them with
my own hands."
She quitted the room hastily, and went
up stairs.
J could not help expressing to the wood-
man how much I pitied him for being chainr
ed for life to a partner of such ill-humour.
"Ah, Lord ! monsieur, every one has his
share of grievances, and Marguerite has
fallen to mine. Besides, after all, she is only
cross, and not malicious : the worst is, that
her affection for two children by a former
husband makes her play the step-mother
with my two sons; she cannot bear the sight
of them ; and, by her good will, they would
never set a foot within my door. But on
this point I always stand firm, and never
will consent to abandon the poor lads to the
world's

<page 197>
( «»4 )
world's mercy, as she has often solicited me
to do. In every thing else I let'her have
her own way ; and truly (he manages a fa-
mily rarely, that fmust fay'for her."
We were conversing in this manner,
when Out discourse was interrupted' by a
loud halloo, which rang through the
forest., li
'« My sons, 1 'KSpe!" exclaimed the
woodman, and ran to open the door.1' \->
The halloo was repeated. We now dis-
tinguished the trampling of horses; and,
soon after, a carriage attended by several
cavaliers stopped at the cottage door. One
of the horsemen enquired how far they were
still from Strasbourg. As he addressed
himself to me, I answered in the number of
miles which Claude had told me; upon
which a volley of curses was vented against
the drivers for having lost their way. The
persons in the coach were now informed cf
the distance of Strasoourg; and also that
the horses were so fatigued as to be incapa-
ble of proceeding further. Alady, whb'ap-
peared

<page 198>
( i35 )
pearcd to be the principal, expressed much
chagrin at this intelligence; but as there
was no remedy, one of the attendants ask-
ed the woodman whether he could furnish
them with lodging for the night.
He seemed much embarrassed, and re-
plied in the negative; adding, that a Spa-
nish gentleman and his servant were already
in possession of the only spare apartments
in his house. On hearing this, the gal-
lantry of my nation would not permit me
to retain those accommodations of which a
female was in want. I instantly signified to
the woodman, that I transferred my right
to the lady: he made some objections, but
I over-ruled thema and, hastening to the
carriage, opened the door, and assisted the
lady to descend. I immediately recognized
her for the same person whom I had seen at
die inn at Luneville. I took an opportu-
nity cf asking one of her attendants what
was her name?
"The baroness Lindenberg," was the
answer. . ....
I could"

<page 199>
( i86 )
I could not but remark how disferent a
reception our host had given these new-
comers and myself. His reluctance to admit
them was visibly expressed on his counte-
nance; and he prevailed on himself with
difficulty to tell the lady that the was wel-
come. I conducted her into the house, and
placed her in the arm-chair which I had
just quitted. She thanked me very gra-
ciously, and made a thousand apologies for
putting me to an inconvenience. Suddenly
the woodman's countenance cleared up.
"At last I have arranged it 1" said he,
interrupting her excuses. "I can lodge you
and your suite, madam, and you will not be
under the necessity of making this gentle-
man suffer for his politeness. We have two
spare chambers, one for the lady, the other,
monsieur, for you: my wife shall give up
hers to the two waiting-women: as for the
men servants, they must content themselves
with passing the night in a large barn, which
stands at a few yards distance from the house;
there they shall have a blazing sire, and as
good

<page 200>
( i87 )
good a supper as we can make shist to give
them."
After several expressions of gratitude on
the lady's part, and opposition on mine to
Marguerite's giving up her bed, this ar-
rangement was agreed to. As the room was
small, the baroness immediately dismissed
her male domestics. Baptiste was on the
point of conducting them to the barn which
he had mentioned, when two young men
appeared at the door of the cottage.
. "Hell and furies!" exclaimed the first,
starting back, " Robert, the house is filled
with strangers!"
"Ha! there are my sons!" cried our
host. "Why, Jacques! Robert ! whither
4re you running, boys? There is room
enough still for you."
Upon this assurance the youths return-
ed. The father presented them to the ba-
roness and myself; after which he withdrew
with our domestics, while, at the request of
the two waiting-women, Marguerite con-
ducted
i . •

<page 201>
( i88 )
ducted them to the room designed for tbeir
mistress.
The two new-comers were tall, stout,
well-made young men, hard-featured, and
very much fun-burnt. They paid their
compliments to us in few words, and ac-
knowledged Claude, who now entered the
room, as an old acquaintance. They then
threw aside their cloaks in which they were
wrapped up, took off a leathern belt to
which a large cutlass was suspended, and
Caen drawing a brace of pistols from his
girdle laid them upon a shelf.
"You travel well armed," said I. :. /
"True, monsieur," replied Robert.—
**. We left Strasbourg late this evening, and
!tis necessary.to take precautions at passing
through this forest after dark; :it'does not
bear a good repute, I promise you."
"How ?" said the baroness, "are there
robbers hereabout?"
ie So it is said, madame: for my own
part, I have travelled through the wood at
all

<page 202>
( 189 )
all hours, and never met with one of
them."
Here Marguerite returned. Her step-
sons drew her to the other end of the
room, and whispered her for some minutes.
By the looks which they cast towards us at
intervals, I conjectured them to be en*
quiring our business in the cottage.
In the mean while, the baroness ex-
pressed her apprehensions that her husband
would be suffering much anxiety upon her
account. She had intended to send on one
of her servants to inform the baron of her
delay j but the account which the young
men gave of the forest rendered this plan
impracticable. Claude relieved her from
her embarrassment: he informed her, that
he was under the necessity of reaching Stras-
bourg that night; and that, would she
trust him with a letter, she might depend
upon its being safely delivered.
"And how comes it," said I, " that you
are under no apprehension of meeting these
robbers?"
"Alas!

<page 203>
( 190 )
. " Alas! monsieur, a poor man wich a
large family must not lose certain profit be-
cause'tis attended with a little danger; and
perhaps my lord the baron may give me a
trifle for my pains: besides, I have nothing
to lole except my life, and that will not be
worth the robbers' taking."
I thought his arguments bad, and ad-
vised his waiting till the morning; but,
as the baroness did not second me, I was
obliged to give up the point. The baroness
Lindenberg, as I found afterwards, had
long been accustomed to sacrifice the in-
terests of others to her own, and her wish to
stnd Claude to Strasbourg blinded her to
the danger of the undertaking. According-
ly, it was resolved that, he should set out
without delay. The baroness wrote her let-
ter to her husband; and I sent a few lines to
my banker, apprising him that I mould not
be at Strasbourg till the next day. Claude
took our letters, and left the cottage.
The lady declared herself much fa-
tigued by her journey: besides having
, come

<page 204>
( t9t )
come from some distance, the drivers bad.
contrived to lose their way in the forest.
She now addressed herself to Marguerite,
desiring to be shewn to her chamber, and
permitted to take half an hour's repose.
One of the waiting-women was immediately
. summoned j she appeared with a light, and
the baroness followed her up stairs. The
cloth was spreading in the chamber where
I was, and Marguerite soon gave me to un-
derstand that I was in her way. Her hints
were too broad to be easily mistaken; I
therefore desired one of the young men to
conduct me to the chamber where J was to
sleep, and where I could remain till supper
was ready.
"Which chamber is it, mother?" said
Robert.
"The one with green hangings," she
replied. "1 have just been at the trouble
of getting it ready, and have put fresh
sheets upon the bed: if the gentleman
chooses to lollop and lounge upon it, he
may make it again himself, for me."
"You

<page 205>
C 192 )
"You arc out of humour, mother j
but that is no novelty. Have the goodness
to follow me, monsieur."
* He opened the door, and advanced to-
wards a narrow stair-case.
-, l' You have got no light," said Margue-
rite; "is it your own neck or the gentle-
man's that you have a mind to break?"
She crossed by me, and put a candle into
Robert's hand; having received which,
he began to ascend the stair-case. Jacques
was employed in laying the cloth, and his
back was turned towards me. Marguerite
seized the moment when we were unob-
served : .die caught my hand, and pressed
it strongly.
'' Look at the sheets!" said slie as she
passed me, and immediately resumed her
former occupation.
Startled by the abruptness of her action,
I remained as if petrified. Robert's voice
desiring me to follow him recalled me to
myself. I ascended the stair-case. My con-
ductor ushered me into a chamber where
ao

<page 206>
( '93 )
an excellent wood fire was blazing upon the
hearth. He placed the light upon the table,
enquired whether I had any further com-
mands, and, on my replying in the negative,
left me to myself. You may be certain,
that the moment when I found myself alone
was that on which 1 complied with Mar-
guerite's injunction. I took the candle
hastily, approached the bed, and turned
down the coverture. What was my astonish-
ment, my horror, at finding the sheets crim-
soned with blood!
At that moment a thousand confused
ideas passed before my imagination. The
robbers who infested the wood, Marguerite's
exclamation respecting her children, the
arms and appearance of the two young men,
and the various anecdotes which I had
heard related respecting the secret corre-
spondence which frequently exists between
banditti and postillions; all these circum-
stances flashed upon my mind, and inspired
me with doubt and apprehension. I rumi-
nated on the most probable means of afeer-
Vot. I. K taining

<page 207>
( 194 )
taimng the truth of my conjectures. Sud-
denly I was aware of some one below pacing
hastily backwards and forwards. Every
thing now appeared to me an object of sus-
picion. With precaution I drew near the
window, which, as the room had been long
shut up, was left open in spite of the cold.
I ventured to look out. The beams of the
moon permitted me to distinguish a man,
whom I had no difficulty to recognize for
my host. I watched his movements. He
walked swiftly, then stopped and seemed to
listen: he stamped upon the ground, and
beat his stomach with his arms, as if to guard
himself from the inclemency of the season:
at the least noise, isa voice was heard in the
lower part of the house, isa bat flitted past
him, or the wind rattled amidst the leafless
boughs, lie started, and looked round with
anxiety-
"Plague .take him ." said he at length
with extreme impatience; *' what can he
be about?"
He spoke in a low voice j but as he
was

<page 208>
( ^95 >'
was just below my window, I had no diffi-
culty to distinguish his words.
I now heard the steps of one approach-
ing. Baptiste went towards the found ; he
joined a man, whom his low stature and the
horn suspended from his neck declared to
be no other than my faithful Claude, whom
I had supposed to be already on his way to
Strasbourg. Expecting their discourse to
throw some light upon my situation, I has-
tened to put myself in a condition to hear it
with safety. For this purpose I extinguished
the candle, which stood upon a table near
the bed : the flame of the fire was not strong
enough to betray me, and I immediately re-
fumed my p'ace at the window.
The objects of my curiosity had sta-
tioned themselves directly under it. I sup-
pose that, during my momentary absence,
the woodman had been blaming Ctaticfefbr/1
tardiness, since when'1! returned to ike win-'
dow the•.latterwai endeavouring t•o( 'e1jicule"
his fault;'J7' V'°T/I '^^ z hj.jv/j^J b.tuI>.
.f-« H'dweW/"i*Kaf%ef ^rn^geftce•'
•>1-lw K 2 at

<page 209>
C 196 )
at present shall make up for my past de-
lay."
. "On that condition," answered Baptiste,
V I shall readily forgive you : but in truth,
as you share equally with us in our prizes,
your own interest will make you use all
possible diligence. 'Twould be a shame to
lee such a noble booty escape us. You fay
that this Spaniard is rich?"
"His servant boasted at the jnn» that the
effects in his chaise were worth above two
thousand pistoles." '......
Oh 1 how I cursed Stephano's imprudent
vanity.
"And I have been told," continued the
postillion, " that this baroness carries about
her a casketof jewels of immense valued"
4t May be fo, but 1 had rather she had
stayed away. The Spaniard was a secure,
prey, j the boys and myself could easily have;f
mastered him and his servant, and then the;
twp thousand pistoles would Ijave ,bee&.
shared between us four. Now we mustle^
iiVthe bapd• Jfc*- a,#upftc and, perhaps the
whole

<page 210>
( 197 )
whole covey may escape us. . Should our
friendshave betaken themselves to their difc
ferent posts before you reach the cavern, all
will be lost. The lady's attendants are too
numerous for us to overpower them. Unless
our associates arrive in time, we must needs
let these travellers set out to-morrow with-
out damage or hurt."
"Tis plaguy unlucky that my comrades
who drove the coach should be those unac-
quainted with our confederacy ! But never
fear,friend Baptiste: an hour will bring me
to the cavern; it is now but ten o'clock,
and by twelve you may expect the arrival.
of the band. By the bye, take care of your
wife: you know how strong is her repug-
nance to our mode of life, and she may find
means to give information to the lady's ser-
vants of our design."
"Oh! I am secure of her silence; she is
too much afraid of me,. and fond of her
children, to dare to betray my secret. Be-
sides, Jacques and Robert keep a.strict eye
over her, and she is not permitted to set a
K 3 foot

<page 211>
( »9* )
foot out of the cottage. The servants ar«
safely lodged in the barn. I Ihall endeavour
to keep all quiet till the arrival of our
friends. Were I assured of your finding"
them, the strangers should be dispatched
this instant; but as it is possible for you to
miss the banditti, I am fearful of being sum-
moned by their domestics to produce them
in the morning."
"And suppose either of the travellers
should discover your design?"
"Then we must poniard those in our
power, and take our chance about master-
ing the rest. However, to avoid running
such a risk, hasten to the cavern; the ban-
ditti never leave it before eleven, and if you
use diligence you may reach ic in time to
stop them."
"Tell Robert that I have taken his horse;
my own has broken his bridle, and escaped
into the wood. What is the watch-word?"
. " The reward of courage."
"'Tis sufficient. 1 hasten to the cavern."
"And I to rejoin my guests, lest my ab-
sence

<page 212>
( *99 )
fence should create suspicion. Farewell)
and be diligent." • • :ai
These worthy associates now separated j
the one bent his course towards the stable,
while the other returned to the house.
You may judge what must have been my
feelings during this conversation, of which
I lost not a single syllable. I dared not trust
myself to my reflections, nor did any means
present itself to escape the dangers which
threatened me. Resistance I knew to be
vain; I was unarmed, and a single man
against three. Howeve.", I resolved at least
to sell my life as dearly as I could. Dread*
ing lest Baptiste should perceive my absence,
and suspect me to have overheard t e mes-
sage with which Claude was dispatched, I
hastily re-lighted my candle and quitted the
chamber. On descending, I found the table
spread for six persons. The baroness fat by,
the fire.fide; Marguerite was employed in
dressing a sallad,and her step-sons were whis-
pering together at the further end of the
jroom. Baptiste, having the round of the gar*
K 4 den

<page 213>
( 200 )
den to make ere he could reach the cottage
door, was not yet arrived. I seated myself
quietly opposite to the baroness.
A glance upon Marguerite told her that
her hint had not been thrown away upon
me. How different did she now appear to
me! What before seemed gloom and fid-
Jcnness, I now found to be disgust at her as-
sociates and compassion for my danger. I
looked up to her as to my only resource;
yet knowing her to be watched by her hus-
band with a suspicious eye, I could place
but little reliance on the exertions of her
good will.
In spite of all my endeavours to conceal
it, my agitation was but too visibly expressed
upon my countenance. I was pale, and
both my words and actions were disordered
and embarrassed. The youne men observed
this, and enquired the cause. I attributed it
to excess of fatigue, and the vidlerit effect
produced on me by the severity os the season.
Whether they believed me or not, I will not
pretend to say; they at least ceased to em-
barrass

<page 214>
( 201 )
barrafs me with their questions. I strove to
divert my attention from the perils which
surrounded me, by conversing on different
subjects with the baroness. I talked of Ger-
many, declaring my intention of visiting ic
immediately: God knows, that I little
thought at that moment of ever seeing it!
She replied to me with greateaseand polite-
ness, professed that the pleasure of making
my acquaintance amply compensated for the
delay in her journey, and gave me a pressing
invitation to make some stay at the castle of
Lindenberg. As she spoke thus, the youths
exchanged a malicious smile, which declared
that she would be fortunate if she ever
reached that castle herself. This action did
not escape me; but I concealed the emotion'
which it excited in my .breast. I continued
to converse with the lady; but my discourse
was so frequently incoherent that, as she has .
since informed me, she began. to doubt
whether 1 was in my right fenses.. Th£ fact..
was, that while my conversation turned upon.
one. subject, my thoughts were entirely oc-
K 5. cupied i

<page 215>
( 202 )
cupied by another. I meditated upon the
means of quitting the cottage, finding my
way to the barn, and giving the domestics
information of our host's designs. I was
soon convinced how impracticable was the
attempt. Jacques and Robert watched my
every movement with an attentive eye, and
I was obliged to abandon the idea. All my
hopes now rested upon Claude's not finding
the banditti. In that cafe, according to
what I had overheard, we mould be per-
mitted to depait unhurt.
I shuddered involuntarily as Baptiste en-
tered the room. He made many apologies
for his long absence, but "he had been
detained by asfairs impossible to be de-
layed." H; then entreated permission for
his family to sup at the same table with
us, without which, respect would not autho-
rize his taking such a liberty. Oh! how
in my heart 1 cursed the hypocrite! how
I loa;hed his presence, who was on the
point of depriving me of an existence, at
that time infinitely dear! 1 had every rea-
son

<page 216>
( 203 )
son to. be satisfied with life; I had youth,
wealth, rank, and education, and the fairest
prospects presented themselves before me;
I saw those prospects on the point of closing
in the most horrible manner: yet was I
obliged to dissimulate, and to receive with
a semblance of gratitude the false civilities,
of him who held the dagger to.my bosom.
The permission which our host demanded
was easily obtained.. We seated ourselves
at the table.. The baroness and myself oc-
cupied one side ; the sons were opposite to
us,, with their, backs to the door. Baptiste
took his feat by the baroness, at the upper
end; and, the place next to him was left
for his wife. She soon entered the room,
and placed before us a plain but comforta-
ble peasant's repast. Our host thought it
necessary to apologize for the poorness of.
the supper : *' he had not been apprized of
our coming; he could only offer us such
fare as had been intended for, his own fa--
mily."
"But," added he, " should any accident:
K.6. detain.*

<page 217>
( 2°4 )
detain my noble guests longer than they at
present intend, I hope to give them a bet-
ter treatment."
The villain! I well knew the accident
to which he alluded. I shuddered at the
treatment which he taught us to expect.
My companion in danger seemed entirety
to have got rid of her chagrin at being de-
layed. She laughed, and conversed wkb
the family with infinite gaiety. I strove,
but in vain, to follow her example. My
spirits were evidently forced, and the con-
straint which I put upon myself escaped not
Baptiste's observation.
w Come, come, monsieur, cheer up !**
laid he; " you seem not quite recovered
from your fatigue. To raise your spirits,
what fay you to a glass of excellent old
wine which was left me by my father? God
rest his foul, he is in a better world! I sel-
dom produce this wine; but as I am not
honoured with such guests every day, this
is an occasion which deserves a bottle."
He then gave his wife a key, and in-
3 structed

<page 218>
( 20^ )
ftructedher whereto find the wine of which'
he spoke She seemed by no means pleased
with the commission; she took the key with
an embarrassed air, and hesitated to quit the'
table
"Did you hear me ?J' said Baptiste in an
angry tone.,'
Marguerite darted upon him a look of
mingled anger and fear, and left the cham-
ber. His eyes followed her suspiciously
till she had closed the door.
She soon returned with a bottle sealed'
with yellow wax. She placed it upon the
table,and gave the key back to her husband,
I suspected that this liquor was not pre-
sented to us without design, and I watched
Marguerite's movements with inquietude..
She was employed in rinsing some small
horn goblets. As she placed them before
Baptiste, she saw that my eye was fixed upon
her; and at the moment when she thought
herself unobserved by the banditti, she mo-
tioned to me-with her head not to taste the
liquor. She then resumed her place.
In

<page 219>
( 205 )
In the mean while our host had drawrt
the cork, and filling two of the gobies, of-
fered them to the lady and myself. She at
first made some objections; but the instances
of Baptiste were so urgent, that she was
obliged to comply. Fearing to excite sus-
picion, 1 hesitated not to take the goblet
presented to me. By its smell and colour,
I. guessed it to be champagne; but some
grains of powder floating upon the top con--
vinced me that it was not unadulterated.
However, I dared not to express my re-
pugnance to drinking ir; I lifted it to my,
lips, and seemed to be swallowing it: sud-
denly starting from my chair, I made the
best of my way towards a. vase of. water at
some distance, in which Marguerite had
been rinsing the goblets. I pretended to.
spit out the wine with disgust, and took an
opportunity, unperceived, of emptying the
liquor into the vase..
The banditti seemed alarmed at my
action. Jacques half rose from his chair,,
put his. hand into his bosom, and I disco-
vered.

<page 220>
( 207 )
vered the haft of a digger. I returned to
my feat with tranquillity, and affected not
to have observed their confusion.
'' You have not suited my taste, honest
friend," said I, addressing myself to Bap-
tiste: " I never can drink champagne
without its producing a violent illness. I
swallowed a few mouthfuls ere I was aware
of its quality, and fear that I shall suffer for
my imprudence."
Bapti-ste and Jacques exchanged looks of
distrust.
"Perhaps," said Robert, "the smett•
may be disagreeable to you?"'
He quitted his chair, and removed the
goblet. I observed, that he examined whe-.
ther it was nearly empty.
"He-must have drank sufficient," said'
he to his brother in a low voice, while he
re-feated himself.
Marguerite looked apprehensive that I
had tasted the liquor. A glance from my
eye re-assured her.
I waited with anxiety for the effects
which

<page 221>
( 208 )
which the beverage would produce upon
the lady. I doubted not but the grains
which I had observed were poisonous,,
and lamented that it had been impossi-
ble for me to warn her of the danger. But
a few minutes had elapsed, before I per-
ceived her eyes grow heavy; her head sank-
upon her shoulder, and she fell into a deep
fleep. I affected not to attend.to this cir-
cumstance, and continued my conversation
with Baptiste, with all the outward gaiety.
in my power to assume. But he no longer
answered me without constraint. He eyed
me with distrust and astonishment, and I
saw that the banditti were frequently whis-
pering among themselves. My situation
became every moment more painful: I sus-
tained the character of confidence with a
worse grace than ever. Equally afraid of
the arrival of their accomplices, and of
their suspecting my knowledge. of their
designs, I knew not how to dissipate the
distrust which the banditti evidently'enter-
tained for me. In this new dilemma the
friendly

<page 222>
( 209 )
friendly Marguerite again assisted me. She
passed behind the chairs of her step-sons,
stopped for a moment opposite to me, closed
her eyes, and reclined her head upon her
shoulder. This hint immediately dispelled
my incertitude. It told me, that I ought to
imitate the baroness, and pretend that the
liquor had taken its full effect upon me. I
did so, and in a few minutes seemed per-
fectly overcome with flumber.
"So!" cried Baptiste, as I fell back ire
my chair, "at last he fleeps! I began to
think that he had scented our design, and
that we should have been forced to dis-
patch him at all events."
«c And why not dispatch him at all
events?" enquired the ferocious Jacques .
"why leave him the possibility of betray-
ing our secret f Marguerite, give me one
of my pistols: a single touch of the trigger
will finish him at once."
. "And supposing," rejoined the father*
«c supposing that our friends should not ar-
rive to-night, a prettv figure we mould make.
when

<page 223>
( »io )
when the servants enquire for him in the
morning! No, no, Jacques ., we must wait
for our associates. If they join us, we are
strong enough to dispatch the domestics as
well as their masters, and the booty is our
Own. If Claude does not find the troop,
we must take patience, and suffer the prey
to slip through our fingers. Ah! boys,
boys, had you arrived but five minutes-
sooner, the Spaniard would have been done
for, and two thousand pistoles our own.
But you are always out of the way when
you are most wanted. You are the most
unlucky rogues"
"Well, well, father!" answered Jacques;.
w had you been of my mind, all would have
been over by this time. You, Robert,
Claude, and myself—why the strangers
were but double the number, and I warrant
you we might have mastered them. How-
ever, Claude is gone; 'tis too late to think
of it now. We must wait patiently for the
arrival of the gang; and if the travellers
escape

<page 224>
( 211 )
escape us to-night, we must lake care to
way-lay them to-morrow."
: *° .True! true!" said Baptiste; " Mar-
guerite, have you given the sleeping-
draught to the waiting-women?"
, She replied in the affirmative.
"All then is safe. Come, come, boys;
whatever falls out, we have no reason to
complain of this adventure. We run no
danger, may gain much, and can lose no-
thing." '.
At this moment I heard a trampling of
horses. Oh! how dreadful was the sound
to my ears! A cold sweat flowed down
my forehead, and I felt all the terrors of
impending death. ^ I was by no means re-
assured by hearing the compassion ue Mar-
guerite exclaim, in the accents of despair,
"Almighty God !. they are lost."
Luckily the woodman and his fonsrwere
too much occupied by the arrival of their
associates to attend to me, or the violence
of my agitation would have convinced
them that my fleep was leigned.
"Open I-

<page 225>
( 212 )
v.'"; Open! open!" exclaimed several
voices on the outside of the cottage.
"Yes! yes!" cried Baptiste joyfully j
V they are our friends, sure enough. Now
then our booty is certain, Away! lads,
away! Lead them to the barn; you know
what is to be done there."
Robert hastened to open the door of the.
cottage.
c« But first," said Jacques, taking up his.
arms, "first let me dispatch these steep*.
ers."
«' No, no, no J" replied his father : "Go
you to the barn,, where your presence is
wanted. Leave me to take care of these.
and the women above."
Jacques obeyed, and followed his bro-
ther. They seemed to converse with the
new-comers for a few minutes; after which
I heard the robbers dismount, and, as I
conjectured, bend their course towards the
barn.
"So! that is wisely done!" muttered
Baptiste i u they have quitted their horses,
that

<page 226>
( aij )
that they may fall upon the strangers by
surprise. Good! good! and now to bu-
siness."
I heard him approach a small cupboard
which was fixed up in a distant part of the
room, and unlock it. At this moment I
felt myself shaken gently.
"N »w! now!" whispered Marguerite.
1 opened my eyes. Baptiste stood with
his back towards me. No one else was in
the room save Marguerite and the fleeping
lady. she villain had taken a dagger from
the cupboard, and seemed examining whe-
ther it wasi sufficiently (harp. I had ne-
glected to furnisti myself with arms; but I
perceived this to be my only chance 6$
escaping, and resolved not to lose the op-
portunity.; I sprang from my sear, darted
suddenly upon Baptiste, and, clasping my
hands-round'his throat, pressed it so forci-
bly as to prevent his uttering a single.cry?
You may remember, that I was remarkable
at Salamanca for the power-of my arm. -If
now rendered rne; an efiential service. •SurU
prised,

<page 227>
( *I4 )
prised, terrified1, and breathless, the villalri
was by no means an equal antagonist. I
threw him upon the ground; 1 grasped
him still tighter; and while I fixed him
without motion upon the floor, Marguerite*
wresting the dagger from his hand, plunged
it repeatedly in his heart till he expired.;
No sooner was this horrible but neces-
sary act perpetrated, than Marguerite called
on me to follow her. ''•'
"Flight is our only refuge," said she,
"quick! quick! away!"
. I hesitated not to obey her; but unwilling
to leave the baroness a victim to the ven-
geance of the robbers, I raised her in my
arms Mill fleeping, and hastened after Mar-
guerite. 1 he horses of the banditti were
fastened near the door. My cqnductress
sprang upon one of them. I followed her
example, placed the baroness before me,
and spurred on my horse. Our only hope
was to, reach Strasbourg, which was .much
nearer, .ih^ the perfidious;Claude Md-afr
fored P>e., .Mafcgijerite w»as:•weU acquainted
Kh6\hq with

<page 228>
( *«5 )
with the road, and galloped on before me.
We were obliged to pass by the barn,
where the robbers were flaughtering our
domestics. The door was open: we distin-
guished the shrieks of the dying, and im-
precations of the murderers. What I felt
at that moment language is unable to de-
scribe.
Jacques heard the trampling of our
horses, as we rushed by the barn. He flew
to the door with a burning torch in his
hand, and easily recognised the fugitives.
*« Betrayed! betrayed!" he shouted to
his companions.
Instantly they left their bloody work,
and hastened to regain their horses. We
heard no more. I buried my spurs in the
sides of my courser, and Marguerite goaded
on hers with .the poniard which had al-
ready rendered us such good service. We
flew like lightning, and gained the open
plains. Already was Strasbourg's steeple in
sight, when we heard the robbers pursu-
ing us. Marguerite looked back, and dis-
tinguished

<page 229>
( <i6 )
tinguifhed our followers descending a small
hill at no great distance. It was in vain
that we urged on our horses: the noise ap-
proached nearer with every moment.
* *» We are lost !" she exclaimed; "the
villains gain upon us!"
"On! on !" replied I ; " I hear the
trampling of horses coming from the
town."
We redoubled our exertions, and were
soon aware of a numerous band of cava-
liers, who came towards us at full speed.
They were on the point of passing us.
"Stay! stay!" shrieked Marguerite;
** save us! for God's fake, save us!"
The" foremost, who seemed to act: as
guide, immediately reined-in his steed.
"'Tis me! 'tis she!" exclaimed he,
springing upon the ground: "Stop, my
lord, stop! they are safe! 'tis my mother!"
'At the fame moment Marguerite threw
herself from her horse, clasped him in her
arms, and covered him with kisses. The
other cavaliers stopped at the exclamation.
l,;,iii .j. i "The

<page 230>
( ='7 )
"«« The baroness Lindenberg!" cried ano-
ther of the strangers eagerly: "Where is
she? Is she not with you r"
He stopped on beholding her lying sense-
less in my arms. Hastily he caught her
from me. The profound steep in which she
was plunged, made him at first tremble for
her .life; but the beating of her heart soon.
re-assured him.
"God be thanked!" said he, " she ha?
•escaped unhurt.."
I interrupted hisjoy by pointing out the
brigands, who continued to approach. No
sooner had I mentioned them, than the
.greatest part of the company, which ap-
peared to be chiefly composed of soldiers,
hastened forward to meet them. The vil-
lains staid not to receive their attack. Per-
ceiving their danger, they turned the heads
of their horses, and fled into the wood,
whither they were followed by our preserv-
ers. In the mean while the stranger, whom
I guessed to be the baron Lindenberg, after
thanking me for my care of his lady, pro-
posed our returning with all speed to the
Vol. I. L town.

<page 231>
( a*8 )
itown. The baroness, on whom the effects
/6s the opiate had not ceased to operate,
was placed before him; Marguerite and
her son remounted their horses; the baron's
domestics followed, and we soon arrived at
the inn, where he had taken his apart-
ments. *
This was at the Austrian Eagle, where
my banker, whom before my quitting Paris
I had apprised of my intention to visit StraC
bourg, had prepared lodgings for me.. I
rejoiced at this circumstance. It gave me
an opportunity of cultivating the baron's
acquaintance, which I foresaw would be
of use to me in Germany. Immediately
upon our arrival, the lady was conveyed to
bed. A physician was sent for, who pre-
scribed a medicine likely to counteract the
effects of the fleepy potion; and after it had
been'poureddown her throat, sbe was com-
mitted to the care of the hostess. The baron
then addressed himself to me, and entreated
me to recount the particulars of this adven-
ture. I complied with his request instan-
taneoufly ; for, in pain respecting Stephano's
fate,
I

<page 232>
( "9 )
fate, whom I bad been compelled to aban-
don to the cruelty of the banditti, I found
it impossible for me to repose till t had some
news of him'. I received but too soon the
intelligence that my trusty servant had
perished. The soldiers who had pursued
the brigands,returned while I was employed
in relating my adventure to the baron. By
their account, I found that the robbers had
been overtaken. Guilt and true courage are
incompatible : they had thrown themselves
at the feet of their pursuers., had surrendered
themselves without striking a blow, had dis-
covered their secret retreat, made known
their signals by which the rest of the gang
might be seined, and, in shorr, had betrayed
every mark of cowardice and baseness. By
this means the whole of the band., consisting
.of near sixty persons, had been made pri-
soners, bound, and conductedtoStrasbourg.
Some of the soldiers hastened to the cottage,
One of the banditti serving them as guide.
Their first visit was to the fatal barn, where
they were fortunate enough to find two of
the baron's servants still alive, though dt.s-
ij(i; L 2 perately

<page 233>
C 220 )
pterately wounded. The rest had expired
beneath the swords of the robbers, and of
these. my unhappy Stephano was one.
Alarmed at our escape, the robbers, in
their haste to overtake us, had neglected to
visit the .cottage; in consequence, the sol-
diers found the two waiting-women unhurt,
and buried in the fame death-like flumber
which had overpowered their mistress. There-
was nobody else found in the cottage, ex-
cept z. child.not above four years old, which
the soldiers brought away with themVnW8
.were busying ourselves with conjectures re^
•specting the birth of this little unfortunate,3
when Marguerite rushed into .the room with
the baby in her arms. She fell at the feet of
the officer'who was making us this reports
and blessed him a thousand times for jthe
.preservation of her child.
When the first burst of maternal tender-
ness was over, I besought her to declare,hy'
what means she had been united to a man
whose principles seemed so totally discordant
with her own. She bent her eyes down-.
waxds* and wiped a few tears from her cheek.
•*« Gentle-

<page 234>
( m )
,f Gentlemen," said she, after a silence os'
some minutes, ". I would request a favour
of you. You have a right to know on
whom you confer an obligation j I will nor,
therefore, stifle a confession which covers me
with shame; but permit me to comprise it
in as few words as possible.
"I was born in Strasbourg, of respectable
parents ; their names I must at present con-
ceal. My father still lives, and deserves not
to be involved in my infamy. If you grant
my request, you shall be informed of my
family name. A villain made himself mas-
ter of my affections, and" to follow him f
quitted my father's house. Yet, though my
passions overpowered my virtue, I funk not
into that degeneracy of vice but too com-
monly the lot of women who make the first
false step. I loved my seducer, dearly loved
him! I was true to his bed: this baby,
and the youth who warned you, my lord
baron, of your lady's danger, are the pledges
of our affection. Even at this moment I
lament his loss, though 'tis to him that I owe
all the miseries of my existence.
L 3 "He

<page 235>
( 222 )
"He was of noble binh, but he
had squandered away his paternal inherit-
ance. His relations considered him as
a disgrace to their name, and utterly dis-
carded him. His excesses drew upon
him the indignation of the police. He was
obliged to fly from Strasbourg; and saw no
other resource from beggary than an union
with the banditti who infested the neigh-
bouring forest, and whose troop was chiefly
composed of young men of family in the
same predicament with himself. I was de-
termined not to forsake him. I followed
him to the cavern of the brigands, and
shared with him the misery inseparable from
a life of pillage. But though I was awa'e
that our existence was supported byplunder,
I knew not all the horrible circumstances
attached to my lover's profession: these he
concealed from me with the utmost care.
He was conscious that my sentiments were
not sufficiently depraved to look without
horror upon assassination. He supposed, and
with justice, that I should fly with detesta-
tion from the embraces of a murderer. Eight
years

<page 236>
( 22j j
-years of possession had not abated his love
liifine; and he cautiously removed from
.my-knowledge every.circumstance which
might lead me to suspect the crimes in
which he but too often participated. I le
succeeded perfectly. It was not till after
my seducer's death that I discovered his
hands to have been stained with the blood
of innocence.
"One fatal night he was brought back to-
the cavern, covered with wounds: he re-
ceived them in attacking an English tra-
veller, whom his companions immediately
sacrificed to their resentment. He had
only time to entreat my pardon for all the
sorrows which he had caused me: he pressed
my hand to his lips, and expired. My
grief was inexpressible. As soon as its
violence abated, I resolved to return to
Strasbourg, to throw myself, with my two
children, at my father's feet, andimplore his
.forgiveness, though I little hoped to obtain
'kit; What was my consternation when in--
formed, that no one entrusted with the
secret of their retreat was ever permitted to
.:'./',- L4 quit,

<page 237>
( '2*4 ^
quit the troop of the banditti; thit I must
give up al! hopes of ever rejoining society,
and consent instantly to accept one of
iheir band for my husband! My prayers
and remonstrances were vain. They cast
lots to decide to whose possession t should
fall. I became the property of the infamous
Baprtste. A robber, who had once been a
monk, pronounced over us a burlesque ra-
ther than a religious ceremony: I and my
children were delivered into the hands of
my new husband, and he conveyed us im-
mediately to his home. '.a.-h!
"He assured me that he had long enter-
tained for me the most ardent regard ; but
that friendship for my deceased luver.had)
obliged him to stifle his desires. He en-
deavoured to reconcile me to my fate, and
for some time treated me with respect and
gentleness. At length, finding that my aver-
sion rather increased than diminished, he
obtained those favours by violence which
I persisted to refuse him- No resource re-
mained for me but to bear my sorrows with
patience; I was conscious that I deserved
them.

<page 238>
them hv* .ftoo well. :Flight was forbrdifen.
My children were in the power of Baptiste,
and he had sworn,, that if I attempted to es-
cape, their lives should pay for it. I had had
Ipo many opportunities of witnessing the
barbarity of his nature, todoubt his fulfilling
his oath to the very letter. Sad experience
had convinced me of the horrors of my
situation. My first lover had carefully
concealed them from me ., Baptiste rather
Rejoiced in opening my eyes to the cruel-
ties of his profession, and strove to fami-
liarise me with blood and flaughter.
"My nature was licentious and warm,
but not cruel: my conduct; had been im-
prudent, but my heart was not unprincipled.
Judge, then,. what I must have felt at being
a continual witness of crimes the most hor-
rible and revolting! Judge how I must have
grieved at being united to a man, who re-;
ceived the unsuspecting guest with an air of
openness and hospitality,at.the very moment
that he meditated his destruction ! Chagrin
and discontent preyed upon my constitu-
tion j .the few charms bestowed on me. byi
nature withered away, and the dejection of

<page 239>
( «20 )
my countenance denoted the sufferings of
my heart. I was tempted a thousand times
to put an end to my existence -r but the ie-
membranceef my children held my hand*
I trembled to leave my dear boys in my
tyrant's power, and trembled yet more for
their virtue than their lives. The second
was still too young to benefit by my instruc-
tions; but in the heart of my eldest I la-
boured unceasingly to plant those principles
which might enable him to avoid the crimes
of his parents. He listened to me with
docility, or rather with eagerness. Even
at his early age, he shewed that he was not
calculated for the society of villains; and"
the only comfort which I enjoyed among
my sorrows, was to witness the dawning
virtues of my Theodore.
"Such was my situation when the pen-
sidy of Don Alphonse's postillion conduct-
ed him to the cottage. His youth, air,
and manners interested me most forcibly
in his behalf. The absence of my. hus-
band's sons gave me an opportunity which
I had long wished to find,, and I resolved to
risque every thiog to preserve the stranger.

<page 240>
( 227 )
The vigilance of Baptiste prevented me
from warning Don Alphonso of his clan-
ger. I knew that my betraying the secret
would be immediately punished with death;
and however embittered was my life by ca-
lamities, I wanted courage to sacrifice it
for the sake of preserving that of another
person. My only hope rested upon pro-
curing succour from Strasbourg. At this
I resolved to try; and should an opportu-
nity offer of warning Don Alphonso of his
danger unobserved, I was determined to
seize it with avidity. By Baptiste's orders
I went up stairs to make the stranger's bed:
I spread upon it meets in which a traveller
had been murdered but a few nights before,
ind which still were stained with blood.
I hoped that these marks would not
escape the vigilance of our guest, and that
he would collect from them the designs of
my perfidious husband. Neither was this
the only step which I took to preserve the
.stranger. Theodore was confined to his
bed by illness. I stole into his room unob-
served by my tyrant, communicated to him
my project, and he entered into it with ea-

<page 241>
( *2j )
gerness. He rose in spite.of his, makdyr
and dressed himself with all speed. I fastened'
one of the sheets round his armsr and low-
ered him from the window. He flew to
the stable, took Claude's horse, and has-
tened to Strasbourg. Had he been ac-
costed by the banditti, he was to have de-
clared himself sent upon a message by Bap-
tiste, but fortunately he reached the town
without meeting any obstacle. Immedi-
ately upon his arrival at Strasbourg, he en-
treated assistance from the magistrates bis'
story passed from mouth to mouth, and at
length came to the knowledge of my lord
the baron. Anxious for the safety of his
lady, who he knew would be upon the
road that evening, it struck him that "she
might have fallen into the power of the
robbers. He accompanied Theodore, who
guided the soldiers towards the cottage, and
arrived just in time to save us from falling
once more into the hands of our enemies."
Here I interrupted Marguerite to en*'
quire why the sleepy potion had been pre- .
sented to me. She said, that Baptiste sup-
posed me to have arms about me, and

<page 242>
{ 229 )
wished'to Incapacitate me from making'JiS*
Cstance.: it was. a precaution which he al-
ways took, since, as the travellers had no-
hopes of escaping, despair would have in-
cited them to fell their lives dearly. . .:
The baron then desired Marguerite to in-
form him what were her present plans. I:
joined him in declaring my readiness to.
shew my gratitude to her for the preserva-
tion's, my .life. . .
-.si Disgusted with a world," she replied,
",ist which I have met with nothing but mis-
fortunes, my only wish is to retire into a
.convent. But first I must provide for my
children. I find that my mother is no
more—probably driven to an untimely
grave by my desertion. My father is still
living. He is not an hard man. Perhaps,
gentlemen, in spite of my ingratitude and
imprudence, your intercessions may induce
him.to forgive me, and to take charge of;
his unfortunate grandsons. If you obtain
this boon for me, you will repay my ser-
vices a thousand-fold."
Both the baron and myself assured Mar-
guerite, that we would spare no pains to

<page 243>
( *3° )
obtain her pardon; and that, even should
iier father be inflexible, she need be under
no apprehensions respecting the fate of her
children. I engaged myself to provide for
Theodore, and the baron promised to take
the youngest under his protection. The
grateful -mother thanked us with tears for
what she called generosity, but which in fact
was no more than a proper fense of our ob-
ligations to her. She then left the room to
put her little boy to bed, whom fatigue and
'sleep had completely overpowered.
The baroness, on recovering, arrd being
informed from what dangers I had rescued
her, set no bounds to the expressions of
her grati,ude. She was joined so warmly
by her husband in pressing me to acconi*
pany them to their castle in Bavaria, that
1 found it imposfibte to resist their entrea*.
ties. During a week which we passed at
Strasoourg, the interests of Marguerite
^ere not forgotten. In our application to
3rer father we succeeded as amply as we
could wilh. The good old man had lost'
his wife. He had no children but this un*
fortunate daughter, of whom he had re*;

<page 244>
( 231 )
Ceived no news for almost fourteen years.
He was surrounded by distant relations,
who waited with impatience for his decease,
in order to get possession of his money.
When therefore Marguerite appeared again
so unexpectedly, he considered her as a gift
from Heaven. He received her and her
children with open arms, and insisted upon
their establishing themselves in his house
without delay. The disappointed cousins
were obliged to give place. The old man
would not hear of his daughter's retiring into
a convent. He said, that me was too neces-
sary to his happiness, and (he was easily
persuaded to relinquish her designs. But
no persuasions could induce Theodore to
give up the plan which I had at first marked
out for him. He had attached himself
to me most sincerely during my stay at
Strasbourg; and when I was on the point
of leaving it, he besought me with tears to
take him into my service. He set forth
all his little talents in the most favourable
colours, and tried to convince me that I
fliould find him of insinite use tome upon
the road.; I was unwilling to charge my-

<page 245>
( 23* )
self with a lad scarcely turned of thirteen,
who 1 knew could only be a burthen t9
me: however, I could not resist the entrea-
ties of this affectionate youth, who in fact
possessed a thousand estimable qualities.
"With some difficulty he persuaded his rela-
tions to let him follow me; and that per-
mission once obtained, he was dubbed with
the title of my page. Having passed a week\\
at Strasbourg, Theodore and myself set out J--
for Bavaria, in company with the baron «v
and his lady. These latter, as well as my-
self, had forced Marguerite to accept se- /
veral presents of value, both for herself and .-,
her youngest son. On leaving her, I pro-
mised his mother faithfully, that I would I-..
restore Theodore to her within the year.
I have related this adventure at length,
Lorenzo, that you might understand the
means by which "the adventurer Al-
phonse d'Alvarada got introduced into the
castle of Lindenberg."" Judge from this ^
specimen, how much faith-should be given
to your aunt's assertions,
£ND OF THE -FIRST VOLUME.

<page 246>

<page 247>

<page 248>

<page 249>

<page 250>



<page 251>


<page 252>
