-- -ſae
ſae） | . ||
| …………. ）.--|×
.


<page 1>
EX LIBRIS



<page 2>
THE LIBRARY
OF
THE UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA
IRVINE
GIFT OF
MR. WARREN STURTEWANT
s




<page 3>

<page 4>

<page 5>

<page 6>
THE CONFESSIONS
of
Jean Jacques Rousseau
IN TWO VOLUMES
VOLUME THE FIRST

<page 7>
i

<page 8>

<page 9>


<page 10>
" I ºn 'acº,
!", u , , , in

<page 11>

<page 12>
Cbc Confessions
OF
---
-
ºſcam Jacques Rousseau.
- -
2N.
NOW FIRST COMPLETELY TRANSLATED
INTO ENGLISH
2N.
WOLUME I
London:
Privately printed for Members of the Hidus Society
M - C - M - III


<page 13>
6dition de Luxe
This edition of the Aldus Classics is limited to twelve hundred
and fifty numbered and registered copies, of which this is
Number o 4 8

<page 14>
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
VOLUME ONE.
Tro PACE
PAGE
JEAN Jacouss Rousseau . . . . . . . Frontispiece
THE STEALING of THE APPLE . . . . . . . . 28
IN THE LABoratoRY . . . . . . . . . . 98
THE BURNT DRUGs . . . . . . . . . . 162
Rousseau witH MADAME DUPIN. . . . . . . . 268
Rousseau, Wol. E.

<page 15>

<page 16>
INTRODUCTION.
Among the notable books of later times—we may say,
without exaggeration, of all time—must be reckoned The
Confessions of Jean Jacques Rousseau. It deals with leading
personages and transactions of a momentous epoch, when
absolutism and feudalism were rallying for their last struggle
against the modern spirit, chiefly represented by Voltaire,
the Encyclopedists, and Rousseau himself—a struggle to
which, after many fierce intestine quarrels and sanguinary
wars throughout Europe and America, has succeeded the
prevalence of those more tolerant and rational principles by
which the statesmen of our own day are actuated.
On these matters, however, it is not our province to en-
large; nor is it necessary to furnish any detailed account of
our author's political, religious, and philosophic axioms and
systems, his paradoxes and his errors in logic: these have
been so long and so exhaustively disputed over by contend-
ing factions that little is left for even the most assiduous
gleaner in the field. The inquirer will find, in Mr. John
Morley's excellent work, the opinions of Rousseau reviewed
succinctly and impartially. The Contrat Social, the Lattres
Ecrites de la Montagne, and other treatises that once aroused
fierce controversy, may therefore be left in the repose to
which they have long been consigned, so far as the mass of
mankind is concerned, though they must always form part of
the library of the politician and the historian. One prefers
to turn to the man Rousseau as he paints himself in the re-
markable work before us.
That the task which he undertook in offering to show him-
self—as Persius puts it—Intus et in cute, to posterity, ex-
ceeded his powers, is a trite criticism; like all human enter-
prises, his purpose was only imperfectly fulfilled; but this
circumstance in no way lessens the attractive qualities of his
book, not only for the student of history or psychology, but
for the intelligent man of the world. Its startling frankness
gives it a peculiar interest wanting in most other auto-
biographies.
Many censors have elected to sit in judgment on the fail-

<page 17>
ii INTRODUCTION.
ings of this strangely constituted being, and some have pro-
nounced upon him very severe sentences. Let it be said
once for all that his faults and mistakes were generally due
to causes over which he had but little control, such as a de-
fective education, a too acute sensitiveness, which engen-
dered suspicion of his fellows, irresolution, an overstrained
sense of honour and independence, and an obstinate refusal
to take advice from those who really wished to befriend him;
nor should it be forgotten that he was afflicted during the
greater part of his life with an incurable disease.
Lord Byron had a soul near akin to Rousseau's, whose
writings naturally made a deep impression on the poet's
mind, and probably had an influence on his conduct and
modes of thought. In some stanzas of Childe Harold this
sympathy is expressed with truth and power; especially is
the weakness of the Swiss philosopher's character summed
up in the following admirable lines:
“Here the self-torturing sophist, wild Rousseau,
The apostle of affliction, É. who threw
Enchantment over passion, and from woe
Wrung overwhelming eloquence, first drew
The breath which made him wretched; yet he knew
How to make madness beautiful, and cast
O'er erring deeds and thoughts a heavenly hue
Of words, like sunbeams, dazzling as they passed
The eyes, which o'er them shed tears feelingly and fast.
“His life was one long war with self-sought foes,
Or friends by him self-banished; for his mind
Had grown Suspicion's sanctuary, and chose,
For its own cruel sacrifice, the kind,
'Gainst whom he raged with fury strange and blind.
But he was frenzied, wherefore, who may know?
Since cause might be which skill could never find;
But he was frenzied by disease or woe
To that worst pitch of all, which wears a reasoning show.”
One would rather, however, dwell on the brighter hues of
the picture than on its shadows and blemishes; let us not,
then, seek to “draw his frailties from their dread abode.”
• His greatest fault was his renunciation of a father's duty to
his offspring; but this crime he expiated by a long and bitter
repentance. *We cannot, perhaps, very readily excuse the
way in which he has occasionally treated the memory of his

<page 18>
INTRODUCTION. 111
---
mistress and benefactress. That he loved Madame de
Warens—his ‘Mamma'—deeply and sincerely is unde-
niable, notwithstanding which he now and then dwells on
her improvidence and her feminine indiscretions with an un-
necessary and unbecoming lack of delicacy that has an un-
pleasant effect on the reader, almost seeming to justify the
remark of one of his most lenient critics—that, after all,
Rousseau had the soul of a lackey. He possessed, however,
many amiable and charming qualities, both as a man and a
writer, which were evident to those amidst whom he lived,
and will be equally so to the unprejudiced reader of the Con-
fessions. He had a profound sense of justice and a real de-
sire for the improvement and advaneement of the race.
Owing to these excellences he was beloved to the last even by
persons whom he tried to repel, looking upon them as mem-
bers of a band of conspirators, bent upon destroying his do-
mestic peace and depriving him of the means of subsistence.
Those of his writings that are most nearly allied in tone
and spirit to the Confessions are the Reveries d'un Promeneur
Solitaire and La Nouvelle Heloise. His correspondence
throws much light on his life and character, as do also parts
of Emile. It is not easy in our day to realize the effect
wrought upon the public mind by the advent of La Nouvelle
Heloise. Julie and Saint-Preux became names to conjure
with; their ill-starred amours were everywhere sighed and
wept over by the tender-hearted fair; indeed, in composing
this work, Rousseau may be said to have done for Switzer-
land what the author of the Waverly Novels did for Scot-
land, turning its mountains, lakes and islands, formerly re-
garded with aversion, into a fairyland peopled with creatures
whose joys and sorrows appealed irresistibly to every breast.
Shortly after its publication began to flow that stream of
tourists and travellers which tends to make Switzerland not
only more celebrated but more opulent every year. It is
one of the few romances written in the epistolary form that
do not oppress the reader with a sense of languor and un-
reality; for its creator poured into its pages a tide of passion
unknown to his frigid and stilted predecessors, ...nd dered to
depict Nature as che really is, not as she was misrepresented
by the modish authors and artists of the age. Some persons
seem shy of owning an acquaintance with this work; indeed,

<page 19>
iv. INTRODUCTION.
it has been made the butt of ridicule by the disciples of a
decadent school. Its faults and its beauties are on the sur-
face; Rousseau's own estimate is freely expressed at the
beginning of the eleventh book of the Confessions and else-
where. It might be wished that the preface had been dif-
ferently conceived and worded; for the assertion made
therein that the book may prove dangerous has caused it to
be inscribed on a sort of Index, and good folk who never
read a line of it blush at its name. Its “sensibility,” too, is
a little overdone, and has supplied the wits with opportunities
for satire; for example, Canning, in his New Morality:-
“Sweet Sensibility, who dwells enshrined
In the fine foldings of the feeling mind. . .
Sweet child of sickly Fancy!—her of yore
From her loved France Rousseau to exile bore;
And while 'midst lakes and mountains wild he ran,
Full of himself, and shunned the haunts of man,
Taught her o'er each lone vale and Alpine steep
To lisp the story of his wrongs and weep."
As might be imagined, Voltaire had slight sympathy with
our social reformer's notions and ways of promulgating
them, and accordingly took up his wonted weapons—sar-
casm and ridicule—against poor Jean-Jacques. The quar-
rels of these two great men cannot be described in this place;
but they constitute an important chapter in the literary and
social history of the time. In the work with which we are
immediately concerned, the author seems to avoid frequent
mention of Voltaire, even where we should most expect it.
However, the state of his mind when he penned this record
of his life should be always remembered in relation to this as
well as other occurrences.
Rousseau had intended to bring his autobiography down
to a later date, but obvious causes prevented this: hence it
is believed that a summary of the chief events that marked
his closing years will not be out of place here.
On quitting the Ile de Saint-Pierre he travelled to Stras-
bourg, where he was warmly received, and thence to Paris,
arriving in that city on December 16, 1765. The Prince de
Conti provided him with a lodging in the Hotel Saint-Simon,
within the precincts of the Temple—a place of sanctuary for
those under the ban of authority. Every one was eager to

<page 20>
INTRODUCTION. V
see the illustrious proscript, who complained of being made
a daily show, “like Sancho Panza in his island of Barataria.”
During his short stay in the capital there was circulated an
ironical letter purporting to come from the Great Frederick,
but really written by Horace Walpole. This cruel, clumsy,
and ill-timed joke angered Rousseau, who ascribed it to
Voltaire. A few sentences may be quoted:
“My Dear Jean-Jacques, You have renounced Geneva, your
native place. You have caused your expulsion from Switzerland,
a country so extolled in your writings; France has issued a warrant
against you: so do you come to me . ... My states offer you
a peaceful retreat. I wish you well, and will treat you well, if you
will let me. But, if you persist in refusing my help, do not reckon
upon my telling any one that you did so. If you are bent on tor-
menting your spirit to find new misfortunes, choose whatever you
like best. I am a king, and can procure them for you at your
pleasure; and, what .# certainly never happen to you in respect
of your enemies, I will cease to persecute you as soon as you cease
to take a pride in being persecuted. %. good friend,
“FREDERick."
Early in 1766 David Hume persuaded Rousseau to go
with him to England, where the exile could find a secure
shelter. In London his appearance excited general atten-
tion. Edmund Burke had an interview with him and held
that inordinate vanity was the leading trait in his character.
Mr. Davenport, to whom he was introduced by Hume, gen-
erously offered Rousseau a home at Wootton, in Stafford-
shire, near the Peak Country; the latter, however, would
only accept the offer on condition that he should pay a rent
of £30 a year. He was accorded a pension of £100 by
George III., but declined to draw after the first annual pay-
ment. The climate and scenery of Wootton being similar
to those of his native country, he was at first delighted with
his new abode, where he lived with Therese, and devoted
his time to herborising and inditing the first six books of his
Confessions. Soon, however, his old hallucinations ac-
quired strength, and Rousseau convinced himself that ene-
mies were bent upon his capture, if not his death. In June,
1766, he wrote a violent letter to Hume, calling him “one of
the worst of men.” Literary Paris had combined with
Hume and the English Government to surround him—as he
supposed—with guards and spies; he revolved in his troubled

<page 21>
vi INTRODUCTION.
mind all the reports and rumours he had heard for months
and years; Walpole's forged letter rankled in his bosom;
and in the spring of 1767 he fled, first to Spalding, in Lin-
colnshire, and subsequently to Calais, where he landed in
May.
On his arrival in France his restless and wandering dis-
position forced him continually to change his residence, and
acquired for him the title of “Voyageur Perpetuel.” While
at Trye, in Gisors, in 1767–8, he wrote the second part of the
Confessions. He had assumed the surname of Renou, and
about this time he declared before two witnesses that Therese
was his wife—a proceeding to which he attached the sanctity
of marriage. In 1770 he took up his abode in Paris, where
he lived continuously for seven years, in a street which now
bears his name, and gained a living by copying music.
Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, the author of Paul and Virginia,
who became acquainted with him in 1772, has left some in-
teresting particulars of Rousseau's daily mode of life at this
period. Monsieur de Girardin having offered him an
asylum at Ermenonville in the spring of 1778, he and
Therese went thither to reside, but for no long time. On
the 3d of July, in the same year, this perturbed spirit at last
found rest, stricken by apoplexy. A rumor that he had
committed suicide was circulated, but the evidence of trust-
worthy witnesses, including a physician, effectually contra-
dicts this accusation. His remains, first interred in the Ile
des Peupliers, were, after the Revolution, removed to the
Pantheon. In later times the Government of Geneva made
some reparation for their harsh treatment of a famous
citizen, and erected his statue, modelled by his compatriot,
Pradier, on an island in the Rhone.
“See nations, slowly wise and meanly just,
To buried merit raise the tardy bust.”
November, 1896. S. W. ORSON.

<page 22>
THE
CONFESSIONS
OF
J. J. ROUSSEAU
BOOK I.
HAVE entered upon a performance which is without
example, whose accomplishment will have no imitator.
I mean to present my fellow-mortals with a man in all
the integrity of nature; and this man shall be myself.
I know my heart, and have studied mankind ; I a
made like any one I have been acquainted with, perhaps like
no one in existence; if not better, I at least claim originality,
and whether Nature did wisely in breaking the mould with
which she formed me, can only be determined after having
read this work.
Whenever the last trumpet shall sound, I will present my-
self before the sovereign Judge with this book in my hand,
and loudly proclaim, thus have I acted; these were my
thoughts; streh-was I. With equal freedom and veracity
have I related what was laudable or wicked, I have concealed
no crimes, added no virtues; and if I have sometimes intro--
duced superfluous ornament, it was merely to occupy a VOId \º << * ,
Göcasioned-by-defect of memory: I may have s /Y.
a1n, whic only knew to
Conscious falsehoo Such as I was,
e declared myself; sometimes vile and despicable, at
others, virtuous, generous and sublime; even as thou hast
read my inmost soul: Power eternal 1 assemble round thy
throne an innumerable throng of my fellow-mortals, let them
vs -












<page 23>
2 THE CONFESSIONS OF
J’
• *
... ſhsten to my confessions, let them blush at my depravity, let
them tremble at my sufferings; let each in his turn expose
with equal sincerity the failings, the wanderings of his heart,
and, if he dare, aver, I was better than that man.
I was born at Geneva, in 1712, son of Isaac Rousseau and
Susannah Bernard, citizens. My father's share of a moderate
competency, which was divided among fifteen children, being
very trivial, his business of a watchmaker (in which he had
the reputation of great ingenuity) was his only dependence.
My mother's circumstances were more affluent; she was
daughter of a Mons. Bernard, minister, and possessed a con-
siderable share of modesty and beauty; indeed, my father
found some difficulty in obtaining her hand.
The affection they entertained for each other was almost
as early as their existence; at eight or nine years old they
walked together every evening on the banks of the Treille,
and before they were ten, could not support the idea of
separation. A natural sympathy of soul confined those
sentiments of predilection which habit at first produced ;
born with minds susceptible of the most exquisite sensibility
and tenderness, it was only necessary to encounter similar
dispositions; that moment fortunately presented itself, and
each surrendered a willing heart.
The obstacles that opposed served only to give a decree of
vivacity to their affection, and the young lover, not being
able to obtain his mistress, was overwhelmed with sorrow and
despair. She advised him to travel—to forget her. He
consented—he travelled, but returned more passionate than
ever, and had the happiness to find her equally constant,
equally tender. After this proof of mutual affection, what
could they resolve 2—to dedicate their future lives to love 1
the resolution was ratified with a vow, on which Heaven
shed its benediction.
Fortunately, my mother's brother, Gabriel Bernard, fell in
love with one of my father's sisters; she had no objection to
the match, but made the marriage of his sister with her
brother an indispensable preliminary. Love soon removed
every obstacle, and the two weddings were celebrated the
same day: thus my uncle became the husband of my aunt,
and their children were doubly cousins german. Before a
year was expired, both had the happiness to become fathers,
but were soon after obliged to submit to a separation.

<page 24>
i. J. ROUSSEAU 3
My uncle Bernard, who was an engineer, went to serve in
the empire and Hungary, under Prince Eugene, and distin-
guished himself both at the siege and battle of Belgrade.
My father, after the birth of my only brother, set off, on
recommendation, for Constantinople, and was appointed
watchmaker to the Seraglio. During his absence, the beauty,
wit, and accomplishments” of my mother attracted a number
of admirers, among whom Mons. de la Closure, Resident of
France, was the most assiduous in his attentions. His pas-
sion must have been extremely violent, since after a period
of thirty years I have seen him affected at the very mention
of her name. My mother had a defence more powerful even
than her virtue; she tenderly loved my father, and conjured
him to return ; his inclination seconding his request, he gave
up every prospect of emolument, and hastened to Geneva.
I was the unfortunate fruit of this return, being born ten
months after, in a very weakly and infirm state; my birth
cost my mother her life, and was the first of my misfortunes.
I am ignorant how my father supported her loss at that time,
but I know he was ever after inconsolable. In me he still
thought he saw her he so tenderly lamented, but could never
forget I had been the innocent cause of his misfortune, nor
did he ever embrace me, but his sighs, the convulsive pres-
sure of his arms, witnessed that a bitter regret mingled itself
with his caresses, though, as may be supposed, they were not
*They were too brilliant for her situation, the minister, her father,
baving bestowed great pains on her education. She was taught draw-
.ng, singing, and to play on the theorbo; had learning, and wrote very
agreeable verses. The following is an extempore piece which she com-
posed in the absence of her husband and brother, in a conversation with
some person relative to them, while walking with her sister-in-law,
and their two children:
Ces deux messieurs, qui sont absens,
Nous sont chers de bien des manieres;
Ce sont nos amis, nos amans,
Ce sont nos maris et nos freres,
Etles peres deces enfans.
These absent ones, who just claim
Our hearts, by every tender name,
To whom each wish extends:
Our husbands and our brothers are,
The fathers of this blooming pair,
Our lovers and our friends.

<page 25>
4. THE CONFESSIONS OF
on this account less ardent. When he said to me, “Jean
Jacques, let us talk of your mother,” my usual reply was,
“Yes, father, but then, you know, we shall cry,” and immedi-
ately the tears started from his eyes. “Ah !” exclaimed he,
with agitation, “Give me back my wife; at least console me
for her loss; fill up, dear boy, the void she has left in my
soul. Could I love thee thus wert thou only my son P” Forty
years after this loss he expired in the arms of his second
wife, but the name of the first still vibrated on his lips, still
was her image engraved on his heart.
Such were the authors of my being : of all the gifts it had
pleased Heaven to bestow on them, a feeling heart was the
only one that descended to me; this had been the source of
their felicity, it was the foundation of all my misfortunes.
I came into the world with so few signs of life, that they
entertained but little hope of preserving me, with the seeds of
a disorder that has gathered strength with years, and from
which I am now relieved at intervals, only to suffer a different,
though more intolerable evil. I owed my preservation to one
of my father's sisters, an amiable and virtuous girl, who took
the most tender care of me; she is yet living, nursing, at the
age of four-score, a husband younger than herself, but worn
out with excessive drinking. Dear aunt I freely forgive
your having preserved my life, and only lament that it is not
in my power to bestow on the decline of your days the tender
solicitude and care you lavished on the first dawn of mine.
My nurse, Jaqueline, is likewise living, and in good health—
the hands that opened my eyes to the light of this world may
close them at my death. We suffer before we think; it is the
common lot of humanity. I experienced more than my pro-
portion of it. I have no knowledge of what passed prior to
my fifth or sixth year; I recollect nothing of learning to read,
I only remember what effect the first considerable exercise of
it produced on my mind; and from that moment I date an
uninterrupted knowledge of myself.
Every night, after supper, we read some part of a small
collection of romances which had been my mother's. My
father's design was only to improve me in reading, and he
thought these entertaining works were calculated to give me
a fondness for it; but we soon found ourselves so interested
in the adventures they contained, that we alternately read
whole nights together, and could not bear to give over until

<page 26>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 5
at the conclusion of a volume. Sometimes, in a morning, on
hearing the swallows at our window, my father, quite
ashamed of this weakness, would cry, “Come, come, let us
go to bed more a child than thou º ) lº
I soon acquired, by this dangerous customſ, not only an
extreme facility in reading and comprehending, but, for my
age, a too intimate acquaintance with the passions. An
infinity of sensations were familiar to me, without possessing
any precise idea of the objects to which they related—I had
conceived nothing—I had felt the whole. This confused
succession of emotions did not retard the future efforts of my
reason, though they added an extravagant, romantic notion
of human life, which experience and reflection have never
been able to eradicate.
My romance reading concluded with the summer of 1719,
the following winter was differently employed. My mother's
library being quite exhausted, we had recourse to that part of
her father's which had devolved to us; here we happily found
some valuable books, which was by no means extraordinary,
having been selected by a minister that truly deserved that
title, in whom learning (which was the rage of the times) was
but a secondary commendation, his taste and good sense being
most conspicuous. The history of the Church and Empire
by Le Sueur, Bossuett's Discourses on Universal History,
Plutarch's Lives, the history of Venice by Nani, Ovid's
Metamorphoses, La Bruyere, Fontenelle's World, his Dia-
logues of the Dead, and a few volumes of Moliere, were soon
ranged in my father's closet, where, during the hours he was
employed in his business, I daily read them, with an avidity
and taste uncommon, perhaps unprecedented at my age.
Plutarch presently became my greatest favorite. The
satisfaction I derived from repeated readings I gave this
author, extinguished my passion for romances, and I shortly
preferred Agesilaus, Brutus, and Aristides, to Orondates,
Artemenes, and Juba. These interesting studies, seconded
by the conversations they frequently occasioned with my
father, produced that republican spirit and love of liberty,
that haughty and invincible turn of mind, which rendered
me impatient of restraint or servitude, and became the tor-
ment of my life, as I continually found myself in situations
incompatible with these sentiments. Incessantly occupied
with Rome and Athens, conversing, if I may so express

<page 27>
6 THE CONFESSIONS OF
myself with their illustrious heroes; born the citizen of a
republic, of a father whose ruling passion was a love of his
country, I was fired with these examples; could fancy myself
a Greek or Roman, and readily give into the character of the
personage whose life Iread; transported by the recital of any
extraordinary instance of fortitude or intrepidity, animation
flashed from my eyes, and gave my voice additional strength
and energy. One day, at table, while relating the fortitude
of Scoevola, they were terrified at seeing me start from my
seat and hold my hand over a hot chafing-dish, to represent
more forcibly the action of that determined Roman.
My brother, who was seven years older than myself, was
brought up to my father's profession. The extraordinary
affection they lavished on me might be the reason he was too
much neglected : this certainly was a fault which cannot be
justified. His education and morals suffered by this neglect,
and he acquired the habits of a libertine before he arrived at
an age to be really one. My father tried what effect placing
him with a master would produce, but he still persisted in the
same ill conduct. Though I saw him so seldom that it could
hardly be said we were acquainted, I loved him tenderly, and
believe he had as strong an affection for me as a youth of his
dissipated turn of mind could be supposed capable of. One
day, I remember, when my father was correcting him severely,
I threw myself between them, embracing my brother, whom
I covered with my body, receiving the strokes designed for
him; I persisted so obstinately in my protection, that either
softened by my cries and tears, or fearing to hurt me most,
his anger subsided, and he pardoned his fault. In the end,
my brother's conduct became so bad that he suddenly dis-
appeared, and we learned some time after that he was in
Germany, but he never wrote to us, and from that day we
heard no news of him : thus I became an only son.
If this poor lad was neglected, it was quite different with
his brother, for the children of a king could not be treated
with more attentiou and tenderness than were bestowed on
my infancy, being the darling of the family; and what is
rather uncommon, though treated as a beloved, never a spoiled
child; was never permitted, while under paternal inspection,
to play in the street with other children; never had any occa-
sion to contradict or indulge those fantastical humors which
are usually attributed to nature, but are in reality the effects

<page 28>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 7
- 1
of an injudicious education. I had the faults common to my
age, was talkative, a glutton, and sometimes a liar, made no
scruple of stealing sweetmeats, fruits, or, indeed, any #|
of eatables; but never took delight in mischievous waste, i
accusing others, or tormenting harmless animals. I recollect,
indeed, that one day, while Madam Clot, a neighbor of ours,
was gone to church, I made water in her kettle: the remem-
brance even now makes me smile, for Madame Clot (though,
if you please, a good sort of creature) was one of the most
tedious grumbling old women I ever knew. Thus have I given
a brief, but faithful, history of my childish transgressions.
How could I become cruel or vicious, when I had before my
eyes only examples of mildness, and was surrounded by some
of the best people in the world? My father, my aunt, my
nurse, my relations, our friends, our neighbors, all I had any
connection with, did not obey me, it is true, but loved me
tenderly, and I returned their affection. I found so little to
excite my desires, and those I had were so seldom contra-
dicted, that I was hardly sensible of possessing any, and can
Solemnly aver I was an absolute stranger to caprice until
after I had experienced the authority of a master. J
Those hours that were not employed in reading or writing
with my father, or walking with my governess, Jaqueline, I
spent with my aunt; and whether seeing her embroider, or
hearing her sing, whether sitting or standing by her side, I
was ever happy. Her tenderness and unaffected gayety, the
charms of her figure and countenance have left such indelible
impressions on my mind, that her manner, look, and attitude
are still before my eyes; I recollect a thousand little caressing
questions; could describe her clothes, her head-dress, nor have
the two curls of fine black hair which hung on her temples,
according to the mode of that time, escaped my memory.
Though my taste, or rather passion, for music, did not
show itself until a considerable time after, I am fully per-
suaded it is to her I am indebted for it. She knew a great
number of songs, which she sung with great sweetness and
melody. The serenity and cheerfulness which were con-
spicuous in this lovely girl, banished melancholy, and made
all round her happy.
The charms of her voice had such an effect on me, that not
only several of her songs have ever since remained on my
memory, but some I have not thought of from my infancy,

<page 29>
8 THE CONFESSIONS OF
as I grow old, return upon my mind with a charm altogether
inexpressible. Would any one believe that an old dotard
like me, worn out with care and infirmity, should sometime
surprise himself weeping like a child, and in a voice queru-
lous, and broken by age, muttering out one of those airs
which were the favorites of my infancy? There is one song
in particular, whose tune I perfectly recollect, but the words
that compose the latter half of it constantly refuse every
effort to recall them, though I have a confused idea of the
rhymes. The beginning, with what I have been able to
recollect of the remainder, is as follows:
Tircis, je n'ose
Ecouter ton Chalumeau
Sous l'Ormeau ;
Car on en cause
Deja dans notre hameau.
un Berger
s'engager
sans danger,
Et toujours 1'epine est sous la rose.
I have endeavored to account for the invincible charm my
heart feels on the recollection of this fragment, but it is
altogether inexplicable. I only know, that before I get to
the end of it, I always find my voice interrupted by tender-
ness, and my eyes suffused with tears. I have a hundred
times formed the resolution of writing to Paris for the
remainder of these words, if any one should chance to know
them : but I am almost certain the pleasure I take in the
recollection would be greatly diminished was I assured any
one but my poor aunt Susan had sung them.
Such were my affections on entering this life. Thus began
to form and demonstrate itself, a heart, at once haughty and
tender, a character effeminate, yet invincible; which, fluct-
uating between weakness and courage, luxury and virtue,
has ever set me in contradiction to myself; causing absti-
nence and enjoyment, pleasure and prudence, equally to
shun me.
This course of education was interrupted by an accident,
whose consequences influenced the rest of my life. My father
had a quarrel with M. G–, who had a captain's commission
in France, and was related to several of the Council. This
G—, who was an insolent, ungenerous man, happening to

<page 30>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 9
bleed at the nose, in order to be revenged, accused my father
of having drawn his sword on him in the city, and in conse-
quence of this charge they were about to conduct him to
prison. He insisted (according to the law of this republic)
that the accuser should be confined at the same time ; and
not being able to obtain this, preferred a voluntary banish-
ment for the remainder of his life, to giving up a point by
which he must sacrifice his honor and liberty.
I remained under the tuition of my uncle Bernard, who was
at that time employed in the fortifications of Geneva. He
had lost his eldest daughter, but had a son about my own age,
and we were sent together to Bossey, to board with the Minis-
ter Lambercier. Here we were to learn Latin, with all the
insignificant trash that has obtained the name of education.
Two years spent in this village softened, in some degree,
my Roman fierceness, and again reduced me to a state of
hildhood. At Geneva, where nothing was exacted, Tſoved
reading, which was, indeed, my principal amusement; but,
at Bossey, where application was expected, I was fond of play
as a relaxation. The country was so new, so charming in
my idea, that it seemed impossible to find satiety in its enjoy-
ments, and I conceived a passion for rural life, which time
has not been able to extinguish; nor have I ever ceased
to regret the pure and tranquil pleasures I enjoyed at this
place in my childhood; the remembrance having followed
me through every age, even to that in which I am hastening
again towards it.
M. Lambercier was a worthy, sensible man, who, without
neglecting our instruction, never made our acquisitions
burthensome, or tasks tedious. What convinces me of the
rectitude of his method is, that notwithstanding my extreme
aversion to restraint, the recollection of my studies is never
attended with disgust; and, if my improvement was trivial,
it was obtained with ease, and has never escaped memory.
The simplicity of this rural life was of infinite advantage
in opening my heart to the reception of true friendship. The
sentiments I had hitherto formed on this subject were ex-
tremely elevated, but altogether imaginary. The habit of
living in this peaceful manner soon united me tenderly to
my cousin Bernard; my affection was more ardent than that
I had felt for my brother, nor has time ever been able to efface
it. He was a tall, lank, weakly boy, with a mind as mild

<page 31>
IO THE CONFESSIONS OF
as his body was feeble, and who did not wrong the good
opinion they were disposed to entertain for the son of my
guardian. Our studies, amusements, and tasks, were the
same; we were alone; each wanted a playmate; to separate
would in some measure, have been to annihilate us. Though
we had not many opportunities of demonstrating our attach-
ment to each other, it was certainly extreme; and so far from
enduring the thought of separation, we could not even form
an idea that we should ever be able to submit to it. Each of
a disposition to be won by kindness, and complaisant, when
not soured by contradiction, we agreed in every particular.
If, by the favor of those who governed us he had the ascend-
ant while in their presence, I was sure to acquire it when we
were alone, and this preserved the equilibrium so necessary
in friendship. If he hesitated in repeating his task, I
prompted him; when my exercises were finished, I helped to
write his; and, in our amusements, my disposition being
most active, ever had the lead. In a word, our characters
accorded so well, and the friendship that subsisted between
us was so cordial, that during the five years we were at Bossey
and Geneva we were inseparable: we often fought, it is true,
but there never was any occasion to separate us. No one of
our quarrels lasted more than a quarter of an hour, and never
in our lives did we make any complaint of each other. It
may be said, these remarks are frivolous; but, perhaps, a
similiar example among children can hardly be produced.
A The manner in which I passed my time at Bossey was so
agreeable to my disposition, that it only required a longer
duration absolutely to have fixed my character, which would
* Chave had only peaceable, affectionate, benevolent sentiments
ºf for its basis. I believe no individual of our kind ever pos-
S \sessed less natural vanity than myself. At intervals, by an
extraordinary effort, I arrived at sublime ideas, but presently
sunk again into my original languor. To be loved by
every one who knew me was my most ardent wish. I was
naturally mild, my cousin was equally so, and those who had
the care of us were of similiar dispositions. Everything con-
tributed to strengthen those propensities which nature had
implanted in my breast, and during the two years I was
neither the victim nor witness of any violent emotions.
I knew nothing so delightful as to see every one content,
not only with me, but all that concerned them. When

<page 32>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I I
repeating our catechism at church, nothing could give me
greater vexation, on being obliged to hesitate, than to see
Miss Lambercier's countenance express disapprobation and
uneasiness. This alone was more afflicting to me than the
shame of faltering before so many witnesses, which, notwith-
standing, was sufficiently painful; for though not over-
solicitous of praise, I was feelingly alive to shame; yet I
can truly affirm, the dread of being reprimanded by Miss
Lambercier alarmed me less than the thought of making her
uneasy.
Neither she nor her brother were deficient in a reasonable
severity, but as this was scarce ever exerted without just
cause, I was more afflicted at their disapprobation than the
punishment. Certainly the method of treating youth would
be altered if the distant effects, this indiscriminate, and fre-
quently indiscreet method produces, were more conspicuous.
I would willingly excuse myself from a further explanation,
did not the lesson this example conveys (which points out
an evil as frequent as it is pernicious) forbid my silence.
As Miss Lambercier felt a mother's affection, she some-
times exerted a mother's authority, even to inflicting on us
when we deserved it, the punishment of infants. She had
often threatened it, and this threat of a treatment entirely
new, appeared to me extremely dreadful; but I found the
reality much less terrible than the idea, and what is still
more unaccountable, this punishment increased my affection
for the person who had inflicted it. All this affection, aided
by my natural mildness, was scarcely sufficient to prevent
my seeking, by fresh offences, a return of the same chastise-
ment; for a degree of sensuality had mingled with the smart
and shame, which left more desire than fear of a repetition.
I was well convinced the same discipline from her brother
would have produced a quite contrary effect; but from a man
of his disposition this was not probable, and if I abstained
from meriting correction it was merely from a fear of offend-
ing Miss Lambercier, for benevolence, aided by the passions,
has ever maintained an empire over me which has given law
to my heart.
This event, which, though desirable, I had not endeavored
to accelerate, arrived without my fault; I should say, without
my seeking; and I profited by it with a safe conscience; but
this second, was also the last time, for Miss Lambercier, who

<page 33>
I 2 THE CONFESSIONS OF
doubtless had some reason to imagine this chastisement did
not produce the desired effect, declared it was too fatiguing,
and that she renounced it for the future. Till now we had
slept in her chamber, and during the winter,even in her bed;
but two days after another room was prepared for us, and from
that moment I had the honor (which I could very well have
dispensed with) of being treated by her as a great boy.
Who would believe this childish discipline, received at eight
years old, from the hands of a woman of thirty, should influ-
ence my propensities, my desires, my passions, for the rest
of my life, and that in quite a contrary sense from what might
naturally have been expected 2 The very incident that in-
flamed my senses, gave my desires such an extraordinary
turn, that, confined to what I had already experienced, I
sought no further, and, with blood boiling with sensuality,
almost from my birth, preserved my purity beyond the age
when the coldest constitutions lose their insensibility; long
tormented, without knowing by what, I gazed on every hand-
some woman with delight; imagination incessantly brought
their charms to my remembrance, only to transform them
into so many Miss Lamberciers.
If ever education was perfectly chaste, it was certainly that
I received; my three aunts were not only of exemplary pru-
dence, but maintained a degree of modest reserve which
women have long since thought unnecessary. My father, it
is true, loved pleasure, but his gallantry was rather of the last
than the present century, and he neverexpressed his affection
for any woman he regarded in terms a virgin could have
blushed at ; indeed, it was impossible more attention should
be paid to that regard we owe the morals of children than was
uniformly observed by every one I had any concern with.
An equal degree of reserve in this particnlar was observed at
M. Lambercier's, where a good maid-servant was discharged
for having once made use of an expression before us which
was thought to contain some degree of indelicacy. I had no
precise idea of the ultimate effect of the passions, but the
conception I had formed was extremely disgusting; I enter-
tained a particular aversion for courtesans, nor could I look
on a rake without a degree of disdain mingled with terror.
These prejudices of education, proper in themselves to re-
tard the first explosions of a combustible constitution, were
strengthened, as I have already hinted, by the effect the first

<page 34>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I3
moments of sensuality produced in me, for notwithstanding
the troublesome ebullition of my blood, I was satisfied with
the species of voluptuousness I had already been acquainted
with, and sought no further.
Thus I passed the age of puberty, with a constitution ex-
tremely ardent, without knowing or even wishing for any
other gratification of the passions than what Miss Lam-
bercier had innocently given me an idea of; and when I be-
came a man, that childish taste, instead of vanishing, only
associated with the other. This folly, joined to a natural
timidity, has always prevented my being very enterprising
with women, so that I have passed my days in languishing
in silence for those I most admired, without daring to dis-
close my wishes.
To fall at the feet of an imperious mistress, obey her man-
dates, or implore pardon, were for me the most exquisite
enjoyments, and the more my blood was inflamed by the
efforts of a lively imagination the more I acquired the appear-
ance of a whining lover.
It will be readily conceived that this mode of making love
is not attended with a rapid progress or imminent danger to
the virtue of its object; yet, though I have few favors to
boast of, I have not been excluded from enjoyment, however
imaginary. Thus the senses, in concurrence with a mind
equally timid and romantic, have preserved my moral chaste,
and feelings uncorrupted, with precisely the same inclina-
tions, which, seconded with a moderate portion of effrontery,
might have plunged me into the most unwarrantable excesses.
I have made the first, most difficult step, in the obscure and
painful maze of my Confessions. We never feel so great a
degree of repugnance in divulging what is really criminal, as
what is merely ridiculous. I am now assured of my resolu-
tion, for after what I have dared disclose, nothing can have
power to deter me. The difficulty attending these acknowl-
edgments will be readily conceived, when I declare, that
during the whole of my life, though frequently laboring
under the most violent agitation, being hurried away with
the impetuosity of a passion which (when in company with
those I loved) deprived me of the faculty of sight and hear-
ing, I could never, in the course of the most unbounded
familiarity, acquire sufficient resolution to declare my folly,
and implore the only favor that remained to bestow.

<page 35>
I4 THE CONFESSIONS OF
In thus investigating the first traces of my sensible exist-
ence, I find elements, which, though seemingly incompatible,
have united to produce a simple and uniform effect; while
others, apparently the same, have, by the concurrence of
certain circumstances, formed such different combinations,
that it would never be imagined they had any affinity; who
would believe, for example, that one of the most vigorous
springs of my soul was tempered in the identical source from
whence luxury and ease mingled with my constitution and
circulated in my veins? Before I quit this subject, I will add
a striking instance of the different effects they produced.
One day, while I was studying in a chamber contiguous to
the kitchen, the maid set some of Miss Lambercier's combs to
dry by the fire, and on coming to fetch them some time after,
was surprised to find the teeth of one of them broken off.
Who could be suspected of this mischief ? No one but my-
self had entered the room : I was questioned, but denied
having any knowledge of it. Mr. and Miss Lambercier con-
sult, exhort, threaten, but all to no purpose; I obstinately
persist in the denial; and, though this was the first time I
had been detected in a confirmed falsehood, appearances were
so strong that they overthrew all my protestations. This
affair was thought serious; the mischief, the lie, the obstinacy,
were considered equally deserving of punishment, which was
not now to be administered by Miss Lambercier. My uncle
Bernard was written to; he arrived; and my poor cousin being
charged with a crime no less serious, we were conducted to
the same execution, which was inflicted with great severity.
If finding a remedy in the evil itself, they had sought ever to
allay my depraved desires, they could not have chosen a
shorter method to accomplish their designs, and, I can assure
my readers, I was for a long time freed from the dominion of
them.
As this severity could not draw from me the expected ac-
Rnowledgment, which obstinacy brought on several repeti-
tions, and reduced me to a deplorable situation, yet I was
immovable, and resolutely determined to suffer death rather
than submit. Force, at length, was obliged to yield to the
diabolical infatuation of a child, for no better name was be-
stowed on my constancy, and I came out of this dreadful trial,
torn, it is true, but triumphant. Fifty years have expired
since this adventure—the fear of punishment is no more.

<page 36>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I5
Well, then, I aver, in the face of Heaven, I was absolutely
innocent : and, so far from breaking, or even touching the
comb, never came near the fire. It will be asked, how did
this mischief happen? I can form no conception of it, I only
know my own innocence.
Let any one figure to himself a character whose leading
traits were docility and timidity, but haughty, ardent, and
invincible, in its passions; a child, hitherto governed by the
voice of reason, treated with mildness, equity, and complais-
ance, who could not even support the idea of injustice, ex-
periencing, for the first time, so violent an instance of it,
inflicted by those he most loved and respected. What per-
version of ideas! What confusion in the heart, the brain, in
all my little being, intelligent and morall—let any one, I say,
if possible, imagine all this, for I am incapable of giving the
least idea of what passed in my mind at that period.
My reason was not sufficiently established to enable me to
put myself in the place of others, and judge how much ap-
pearences condemned me, I only beheld the rigor of a dread-
ful chastisement, inflicted for a crime I had not committed;
yet I can truly affirm, the smart I suffered, though violent,
was inconsiderable compared to what I felt from indignation,
rage, and despair. My cousin, who was almost in similar
circumstances, having been punished for an involuntary fault
as guilty of a premediated crime, became furious by my
example. Both in the same bed, we embraced each other
with convulsive transport; we were almost suffocated; and
when our young hearts found sufficient relief to breathe out
our indigination, we sat up in the bed, and with all our force,
repeated a hundred times, Carnifex | Carnifex Carnifex
Executioner, tormentor.
Even while I write this I feel my pulse quicken, and should
I live a hundred thousand years, the agitation of that mo-
ment would still be fresh in my memory. The first instance
of violence and oppression is so deeply engraved on my soul,
that every relative idea renews my emotion : the sentiment
of indignation, which in its origin had reference only to my-
self, has acquired such strength, and is at present so com-
pletely detached from personal motives, that my heart is as
much inflamed at the sight or relation of any act of injustice
(whatever may be the object, or wheresoever it may be per-
petrated) as if I was the immediate sufferer. When I read
V.

<page 37>
I6 THE CONFESSIONS OF
the history of a merciless tyrant, or the dark and the subtle
machination of a knavish designing priest, I could on the
instant set off to stab the miscreants, though I was certain to
perish in the attempt.
I have frequently fatigued myself by running after and
stoning a cock, a cow, a dog, or any animal I saw tormenting
another, only because it was conscious of possessing superior
strength. This may be natural to me, and I am inclined to
believe it is, though the lively impression of the first injustice
I became the victim of was too long and too powerfully re-
membered not to have added considerable force to it.
This occurrence terminated my infantine serenity; from
that moment I ceased to enjoy a pure unadulterated happiness,
and on a retrospection of the pleasure of my childhood, I yet
feel they ended here. We continue at Bossey some months
after this event, but were like our first parents in the Garden
of Eden after they had lost their innocence; in appearence
our situation was the same, in effect it was totally different.
Affection, respect, intimacy, confidence, no longer attached
the pupils to their guides; we beheld them no longer as
divinities, who could read the secrets of our hearts; we were
less ashamed of committing faults, more afraid of being ac-
cused of them : we learned to dissemble, to rebel, to lie : all
the vices common to our years began to corrupt our happy
innocence, mingle with our sports, and embitter our amuse-
ments. The country itself, losing those sweet and simple
charms which captivate the heart, appeared a gloomy desert,
or covered with a veil that concealed its beauties. We culti-
vated our little gardens no more : our flowers were neglected.
We no longer scratched away the mould, and broke out into
exclamations of delight,on discovering that the grain we had
sown began to shoot. We were disgusted with our situation ;
our preceptors were weary of us. In a word, my uncle wrote
for our return, and we left Mr. and Miss Lambercier without
feeling any regret at the separation.
Near thirty years passed away from my leaving Bossey,
without once recalling the place to my mind with any degree
of satisfaction; but after having passed the prime of life, as I
decline into old age (while more recent occurrences are wear-
ing out apace) I feel these remembrances revive and imprint
themselves on my heart, with a force and charm that every
day acquires fresh strength; as if, feeling life fleet from me, I

<page 38>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 17
endeavored to catch it again by its commencement. The
most trifling incident of those happy days delight me, for no
other reason than being of those days. I recall every circum-
stance of time, place, and persons; I see the maid or footman
busy in the chamber, a swallow entering the window, a fly
settling on my hand while repeating my lessons. I see the
whole economy of the apartment; on the right hand Mr. Lam-
bercier's closet, with a print representing all the popes, a
barometer, a large almanac, the windows of the house (which
stood in a hollow at the bottom of the garden) shaded by
raspberry shrubs, whose shoots sometimes found entrance; I
am sensible the reader has no occasion to know all this, but I
feel a kind of necessity for relating it. Why am I not per-
mitted to recount all the little anecdotes of that thrice happy
age, at the recollection of whose joys I ever tremble with de-
light? Five or six particularly—let us compromise the matter
—I will give up five, but then I must have one, and only
one, provided I may draw it out to its utmost length, in
order to prolong my satisfaction.
If I only sought yours, I should choose that of Miss Lam-
bercier's backside, which by an unlucky fall at the bottom of
the meadow, was exposed to the view of the King of Sardinia,
who happened to be passing by; but that of the walnut tree
on the terrace is more amusing to me, since here I was an
actor, whereas, in the above-mentioned scene I was only a
spectator; and I must confess I see nothing that should occa-
sion risibility in an accident, which, however laughable in
itself, alarmed me for a person I loved as a mother, or per-
haps something more.
Ye curious readers, whose expectations are already on the
stretch for the noble history of the terrace, listen to the
tragedy, and abstain from trembling, if you can, at the hor-
rible catastrophe l
At the outside of the courtyard door, on the left hand, was
a terrace; here they often sat after dinner; but it was subject
to one inconvenience, being too much exposed to the rays of
the sun; to obviate this defect, Mr. Lambercier had a walnut
tree set there, the planting of which was attended with great
solemnity. The two boarders were godfathers, and while the
earth was replacing round the root, each held the tree with
one hand, singing songs of triumph. In order to water it
with more effect, they formed a kind of luson around its foot:

<page 39>
I8 THE CONFESSIONS OF
myself and cousin, who were every day ardent spectators of
this watering, confirmed each other in the very natural idea
that it was nobler to plant trees on the terrace than colors
on a breach, and this glory we were resolved to procure with-
out dividing it with any one.
In pursuance of this resolution, we cut a slip off a willow,
and planted it on the terrace, at about eight or ten feet dis-
tance from the august walnut tree. We did not forget to
make a hollow round it, but the difficulty was how to procure
a supply of water, which was brought from a considerable
distance, and we not permitted to fetch it: but water was
absolutely necessary for our willow, and we made use of every
stratagem to obtain it.
For a few days everything succeeded so well that it began
to bud, and throw out small leaves, which we hourly measured
convinced (tho' now scarce a foot from the ground) it would
soon afford us a refreshing shade. This unfortunate willow,
by engrossing our whole time, rendered us incapable of appli-
cation to any other study, and the cause of our inattention
not being known, we were kept closer than before. The fatal
moment approached when water must fail, and we were al-
ready afflicted with the idea that our tree must perish with
drought. At length necessity, the parent of industry, sug-
gested an invention, by which we might save our tree from
death, and ourselves from despair; it was to make a furrow
underground, which would privately conduct a part of the
water from the walnut tree to our willow. This undertaking
was executed with ardor, but did not immediately succeed—
our descent was not skilfully planned—the water did not run,
the earth falling in and stopping up the furrow; yet, though
all went contrary, nothing discouraged us, omnia vincit labor
improbus. We made the bason deeper, to give the water a
more sensible descent; we cut the bottom of a box into nar-
row planks; increased the channel from the walnut tree to
our willow and laying a row flat at the bottom, set two others
inclining towards each other, so as to form a triangular chan-
nel; we formed a kind of grating with small sticks at the end
next the walnut tree, to prevent the earth and stones from
stopping it up, and having carefully covered our work with
well-trodden earth, in a transport of hope and fear attended
the hour of watering. After an interval, which seemed an
age of expectation, this hour arrived. Mr. Lambercier, as

<page 40>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I9
usual, assisted at the operation; we contrived to get between
him and our tree, towards which he fortunately turned his
back. They no sooner began to pour the first pail of water,
than we perceived it running to the willow ; this sight was
too much for our prudence, and we involuntarily expressed
our transport by a shout of joy. The sudden exclamation
made Mr. Lambercier turn about, though at that instant he
was delighted to observe how greedily the earth, which sur-
rounded the root of his walnut tree, imbibed the water. Sur-
prised at seeing two trenches partake of it, he shouted in his
turn, examines, perceives the roguery, and, sending instantly
for a pick axe, at one fatal blow makes two or three of our
planks fly, crying out meantime with all his strength, an
aqueduct / an aqueduct / His strokes redoubled, every one of
which made an impression on our hearts; in a moment the
planks, the channel, the bason, even our favorite willow, all
were ploughed up, nor was one word pronounced during this
terrible transaction, except the above mentioned exclamation.
An aqueduct / repeated he, while destroying all our hopes, an
aqueduct / an aqueduct /
It may be supposed this adventure had a still more melan-
choly end for the young architects; this, however, was not
the case; the affair ended here. Mr. Lambercier never re-
proached us on this account, nor was his countenance clouded
with a frown; we even heard him mention the circumstance
to his sister with loud bursts of laughter. The laugh of Mr.
Lambercier might be heard to a considerable distance. But
what is still more surprising after the first transport of sor-
row had subsided, we did not find ourselves violently afflicted;
we planted a tree in another spot, and frequently recollected
the catastrophe of the former, repeating with a significant
emphasis, an aqueduct / an aqueduct / Till then, at intervals,
I had fits of ambition, and could fancy myself Brutus or
Aristides, but this was the first visible effect of my vanity.) tº
To have constructed an aqueduct with our own hands, to have
set a slip of willow in competition with a flourishing tree,
appeared to me a supreme degree of glory ! I had a juster
conception of it at ten than Caesar entertained at thirty.
The idea of this walnut tree, with the little anecdotes it
gave rise to, have so well continued, or returned to my
memory, that the design which conveyed the most pleasing
sensations, during my journey to Geneva, in the year 1754,

<page 41>
2O THE CONFESSIONS OF
was visiting Bossey, and reviewing the monuments of my
infantine amusement, above all, the beloved walnut tree,
whose age at that time must have been verging on a third of
a century, but I was so beset with company that I could not
find a moment to accomplish my design. There is little ap-
pearance now of the occasion being renewed; but should I
ever return to that charming spot, and find my favorite
walnut tree still existing, I am convinced I should water
it with my tears.
On my return to Geneva, I passed two or three years at my
uncle's, expecting the determination of my friends respecting
my future establishment. His own son being devoted to
genius, was taught drawing, and instructed by his father in
the elements of Euclid; I partook of these instructions, but
was principally fond of drawing. Meantime, they were irreso-
lute, whether to make me a watchmaker, a lawyer, or a min-
ister. I should have preferred being a minister, as I thought
it must be a charming thing to preach, but the trifling income
which had been my mother's, and was to be divided between
my brother and myself, was too inconsiderable to defray the
expense attending the prosecution of my studies. As my
age did not render the choice very pressing, I remained with
my uncle, passing my time with very little improvement,
and paying pretty dear, though not unreasonably, for my
ard.
My uncle, like my father, was a man of pleasure, but had
not learned, like him, to abridge his amusements for the sake
of instructing his family, consequently our education was
neglected. My aunt was a devotee, who loved singing psalms
better than thinking of our improvement, so that we were
left entirely to ourselves, which liberty we never abused.
Ever inseparable, we were all the world to each other; and,
feeling no inclination to frequent the company of a number
of disorderly lads of our own age, we learned none of those
habits of libertinism to which our idle life exposed us. Per-
haps I am wrong in charging myself and cousin with idlel
at this tiffſe, , 111 Oll I_lly. - what
was extremely fortunate, so incessantly occupied with our
amusements, that we found no temptation to spend any part
of our time in the streets. We made cages, pipes, kites,
drums, houses, ships, and bows; spoiled the tools of my
good old grandfather by endeavoring to make watches in







<page 42>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 2 I
imitation of him ; but our favorite amusement was wasting
paper, in drawing, washing, coloring, etc. There came an
Italian mountebank to Geneva, called Gamber-Corta, who had
an exhibition of puppets, that he made play a kind of comedy."
We went once to see them, but could not spare time to go
again, being busily employed in making puppets of our own
and inventing comedies, which we immediately set about
making them perform, mimicking to the best of our abilities
the uncouth voice of Punch ; and, to complete the business,
my good aunt and uncle Bernard had the patience to see and
listen to our imitations; but my uncle, having one day read
an elaborate discourse to his family, we instantly gave up
our comedies, and began composing sermons.
These details, I confess, are not very amusing, but they
serve to demonstrate that the former part of our education
was well directed, since being, at such an early age, the
absolute masters of our time, we found no inclination to
abuse it; and so little in want of other companions, that we
constantly neglected every occasion of seeking them. When
taking our walks together, we observed their diversions with-
out feeling any inclination to partake of them. Friendship
so entirely occupied our hearts, that, pleased with each
other's company the simplest pastimes were sufficient to de-
light us.
We were soon remarked for being thus inseparable: and
what rendered us more conspicuous, my cousin was very tall,
myself extremely short, so that we exhibited a very whimsical
contrast. This meagre figure, small, sallow countenance,
heavy air, and supine gait, excited the ridicule of the chil-
dren, who, in the gibberish of the country, nicknamed him
Barna Bredanna, and we no sooner got out of doors than
our ears were assailed with a repetition of “Barna Bredamna.”
He bore this indignity with tolerable patience, but I was
instantly for fighting. This was what the young rogues
aimed at. I engaged accordingly, and was beat. My poor
cousin did all in his power to assist me, but he was weak, and
a single stroke brought him to the gronnd. I then became
furious, and received several smart blows, some of which were
aimed at Barna Bredanna. This quarrel so far increased the
evil, that, to avoid their insults, we could only show our-
selves in the streets while they were employed at school.
I had already become a redresser of grievances; there only

<page 43>
22 THE CONFESSIONS OF
wanted a lady in the way to be a knight-errant in form. This
defect was soon supplied; I presently had two. I frequently
went to see my father at Nion, a small city in the Vaudois
country, where he was now settled. Being universally
respected, the affection entertained for him extended to me:
and, during my visits, the question seemed to be, who should
show me most kindness. A Madame de Vulson, in particular,
loaded me with caresses; and, to complete all, her daughter
made me her gallant. I need not explain what kind of gal-
lant a boy of eleven must be to a girl of two and twenty; the
artful hussies know how to set these puppets up in front, to
conceal more serious engagements. On my part I saw no
inequality between myself and Miss Vulson, was flattered by
the circumstance, and went into it with my whole heart, or
rather my whole head, for this passion certainly reached no
further, though it transported me almost to madness, and
frequently produced scenes sufficient to make even a cynic
expire with laughter.
I have experienced two kinds of love, equally real, which
have scarce any affinity, yet each differing materially from
tender friendship. My whole life has been divided between
these affections, and I have frequently felt the power of both
at the same instant. For example, at the very time I so
publically and tyrannically claimed Miss Vulson, that I could
not suffer any other of my sex to approach her, I had short,
but passionate, assignations with a Miss Goton, who thought
proper to act the schoolmistress with me. Our meetings,
though absolutely childish, afforded me the height of happi-
ness. I felt the whole charm of mystery, and repaid Miss
Vulson in kind, when she least expected it, the use she made
of me in concealing her amours. To my great mortification,
this secret was soon discovered, and I presently lost my young
schoolmistress.
Miss Goton was, in fact, a singular personage. She was
not handsome, yet there was a certain something in her figure
which could not easily be forgotten, and this for an old fool,
I am too often convinced of. Her eyes, in particular, neither
corresponded with her age, her height, nor her manner; she
had a lofty imposing air, which agreed extremely well with
the character she assumed, but the most extraordinary part
of her composition was a mixture of forwardness and reserve
difficult to be conceived; and while she took the greatest

<page 44>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 23
liberties with me, would never permit any to be taken with
her in return, treating me precisely like a child. This makes
me suppose she had either ceased herself to be one, or was yet
sufficiently so to behold us play the danger to which this folly
exposed her.
I was so absolutely in the power of both these mistresses,
that when in the presence of either, I never thought of her
who was absent; in other respects, the effects they produced
on me bore no affinity. I could have passed my whole life
with Miss Vulson, without forming a wish to quit her; but
then, my satisfaction was attended with a pleasing serenity;
and, in numerous companies, I was particularly charmed with
her. The sprightly sallies of her wit, the arch glance of her
eye, even jealousy itself, strengthened my attachment, and I
triumphed in the preference she seemed to bestow on me,
while addressed by more powerful rivals; applause, encour-
agement, and smiles, gave animation to my happiness.
Surrounded by a throng of observers, I felt the whole force
of love—I was passionate, transported; in a tete-a-tete, I should
have been constrained, thoughtful, perhaps unhappy. If
Miss Vulson was ill, I suffered with her; would willingly
have given up my own health to establish hers (and, observe
I knew the want of it from experience); if absent, she
employed my thoughts, I felt the want of her; when present,
her caresses came with warmth and rapture to my heart,
though my senses were unaffected. The familiarities she
bestowed on me I could not have supported the idea of her
granting to another; I loved her with a brother's affection
only, but experienced all the jealousy of a lover.
With Miss Goton this passion might have acquired a degree
of fury; I should have been a Turk, a tiger, had I once
imagined she bestowed her favors on any but myself. The
pleasure I felt on approaching Miss Vulson was sufficiently
ardent, though unattended with uneasy sensations; but at
sight of Miss Goton, I felt myself bewildered—every sense
was absorbed in ecstasy. I believe it would have been
impossible to have remained long with her; I must have
been suffocated with the violence of my palpitations. I
equally dreaded giving either of them displeasure; with one
I was more complaisant; with the other, more submissive.
I would not have offended Miss Vulson for the world; but if
Miss Goton had commanded me to throw myself into the

<page 45>
24 THE CONFESSIONS OF
flames, I think I should have instantly obeyed her. Happily,
both for her and myself, our amours, or rather rendezvous,
were not of long duration: and though my connection with
Miss Vulson was less dangerous, after a continuance of some
greater length, that likewise had its catastrophe; indeed the
termination of a love affair is good for nothing, unless it
partakes of the romantic, and can furnish out at least an
exclamation.
Though my correspondence with Miss Vulson was less
animated, it was perhaps more endearing; we never separated
without tears, and it can hardly be conceived what a void I
felt in my heart. I could neither think nor speak of anything
but her. These romantic sorrows were not affected, though I
am inclined to believe they did not absolutely centre in her,
for I am persuaded (though I did not perceive it at that time)
being deprived of amusement bore a considerable share in
them.
To soften the rigor of absence, we agreed to correspond
with each other, and the pathetic expressions these letters
contained were sufficient to have split a rock. In a word, I
had the honor of her not being able to endure the pain of
separation. She came to see me at Geneva.
My head was now completely turned; and during the two
days she remained here, I was intoxicated with delight. At
her departure, I would have thrown myself into the water
after her, and absolutely rent the air with my cries. The
week following she sent me sweetmeats, gloves, etc. This
certainly would have appeared extremely gallant, had I not
been informed of her marriage at the same instant, and that
the journey I had thought proper to give myself the honor
of, was only to buy her wedding suit.
My indignation may easily be conceived; I shall not
attempt to describe it. In this heroic fury, I swore never
more to see the perfidious girl, supposing it the greatest
punishment that could be inflicted on her. This, however,
did not occasion her death, for twenty years after, while on a
visit to my father, being on the lake, I asked who those ladies
were in a boat not far from ours. “What!” said my father,
smiling, “does not your heart inform you? It is your former
flame, it is Madame Christin, or, if you please, Miss Vulson.”
I started at the almost forgotten name, and instantly ordered
the waterman to turn off, not judging it worth while to be

<page 46>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 25
perjured, however favorable the opportunity for revenge, in
renewing a dispute of twenty years past, with a woman of
forty.
Thus, before my future destination was determined, did I
fool away the most precious moments of my youth. After
deliberating a long time on the bent of my natural inclina-
tion, they resolved to dispose of me in a manner the most
repugnant to them. I was sent to Mr. Masseron, the City
Register, to learn (according to the expression of my uncle
Bernard) the thriving occupation of a scraper. This nick-
name was inconceivably displeasing to me, and I promised
myself but little satisfaction in the prospect of heaping up
money by a mean employment. The assiduity and subjection
required, completed my disgust, and I never set foot in the
office without feeling a kind of horror, which every day
gained fresh strength.
Mr. Masseron, who was not better pleased with my abilities
than I was with the employment, treated me with disdain,
incessantly upbraiding me with being a fool and blockhead,
not forgetting to repeat, that my uncle had assured him I was
a knowing one, though he could not find that I knew any-
thing. That he had promised to furnish him with a sprightly
boy, but had, in truth, sent him an ass. To conclude, I was
turned out of the registry, with the additional ignominy of
being pronounced a fool by all Mr. Masseron's clerks, and fit
only to handle a file.
My vocation thus determined, I was bound apprentice; not,
however, to a watchmaker, but to an engraver, and I had been
so completely humiliated by the contempt of the register,
that I submitted without a murmur. My master, whose name
was M. Ducommon, was a young man of a very violent and
boorish character, who contrived in a short time to tarnish all
the amiable qualities of my childhood, to stupefy a disposition
naturally sprightly, and reduce my feelings, as well as my
condition, to an absolute state of servitude. I forgot my
Latin, history, and antiquities; I could hardly recollect
whether such people as Romans ever existed. When I visited
my father, he no longer beheld his idol, nor could the ladies
recognize the gallant Jean Jacques; nay, I was so well con-
vinced that Mr. and Miss Lambercier would scarce receive me
as their pupil, that I endeavored to avoid their company,
and from that time have uever seen them. The vilest inclina-

<page 47>
26 THE CONFESSIONS OF
tions, the basest actions, succeeded my amiable amusements
and even obliterated the very remembrance of them. I must
have had, in spite of my good education, a great propensity
to degenerate, else the declension could not have followed
with such ease and rapidity, for never did so promising a
Caesar so quickly become a Laradon.
The art itself did not displease me. I had a lively taste for
drawing. There was nothing displeasing in the exercise of the
graver; and as it required no very extraordinary abilities to
attain perfection as a watchcase engraver, I hoped to arrive at
it. Perhaps I should have accomplished my design, if unrea-
sonable restraint, added to the brutality of my master, had
not rendered my business disgusting. I wasted his time, and
employed myself in engraving medals, which served me and
my companions as a kind of insignia for a new invented order
of chivalry, and though this differed very little from my
usual employ, I considered it as a relaxation. Unfortunately,
my master caught me at this contraband labor, and a severe
beating was the consequence. He reproached me at the same
time with attempting to make counterfeit money because our
medals bore the arms of the Republic, though, I can truly
aver, I had no conception of false money, and very little of
the true, knowing better how to make a Roman As than one
of our threepenny pieces.
My master's tyranny rendered insupportable that labor I
should otherwise have loved, and drove me to vices I naturally
despised, such as falsehood, idleness, and theft. Nothing
ever gave me a clearer demonstration of the difference between
filial dependence and abject slavery, than the remembrance
of the change produced in me at that period. Hitherto I had
enjoyed a reasonable liberty; this I had suddenly lost. I was
enterprising at my father's, free at Mr. Lambercier's, discreet
at my uncle's; but, with my master, I became fearful, and
from that moment my mind was vitiated. Accustomed to
live on terms of perfect equality, to be witness of no pleasures
I could not command, to see no dish I was not to partake of,
or be sensible of a desire I might not express; to be able to
bring every wish of my heart to my lips—what a transition |
—at my master's I was scarce allowed to speak, was forced to
quit the table without tasting what I most longed for, and the
room when I had nothing particular to do there; was inces-
santly confined to my work, while the liberty my master

<page 48>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 27
and his journeymen enjoyed, served only to increase the
weight of my subjection. When disputes happened to arise,
though conscious that I understood the subject better than
any of them, I dared not offer my opinion; in a word, every-
thing I saw became an object of desire, for no other reason
than because I was not permitted to enjoy anything. Fare-
well gayety, ease, those happy turns of expressions, which
formerly even made my faults escape correction. I recollect,
with pleasure, a circumstance that happened at my father's,
which even now makes me smile. Being for some fault
ordered to bed without my supper, as I was passing through
the kitchen, with my poor morsel of bread in my hand, I saw
the meat turning on the spit; my father and the rest were
round the fire; I must bow to every one as I passed. When
I had gone through this ceremony, leering with a wistful eye
at the roast meat, which looked so inviting, and smelt so
savory, I could not abstain from making that a bow like-
wise, adding in a pitiful tone, good bye, roast meat/ This
unpremeditated pleasantry put them in such good humor,
that I was permitted to stay, and partake of it. Perhaps the
same thing might have produced a similar effect at my mas-
ter's, but such a thought could never have occurred to me,
or, if it had, I should not have had courage to express it.
Thus I learned to covet, dissemble, lie, and, at length, to
steal, a propensity I never felt the least idea of before,
though since that time I have never been able entirely to divest
myself of it. Desire and inability united naturally led to this
vice, which is the reason pilfering is so common among foot-
men and apprentices, though the latter, as they grow up, and
find themselves in a situation where everything is at their
command, lose this shameful propensity. As I never experi-
enced the advantage, I never enjoyed the benefit.
Good sentiments, ill-directed, frequently lead children into
vice. Notwithstanding my continual wants and temptations,
it was more than a year before I could resolve to take even
eatables. My first theft was occasioned by complaisance, but
it was productive of others which had not so plausible an
excuse.
My master had a journeyman named Verrat, whose mother
lived in the neighborhood, and had a garden at a consider-
able distance from the house, which produced excellent
asparagus. This Verrat, who had no great plenty of money,

<page 49>
28 THE CONFESSIONS OF
took it in his head to rob her of the most early production of
her garden, and by the sale of it procure those indulgences
he could not otherwise afford himself; but not being very
nimble, he did not care to run the hazard of a surprise. After
some preliminary flattery, which I did not comprehend the
meaning of, he proposed this expedition to me, as an idea
which had that moment struck him. At first I would not
listen to the proposal; but he persisted in his solicitation, and
-- as I could never resist the attacks of flattery, at length pre-
! wailed. In pursuance of this virtuous resolution, I every
morning repaired to the garden, gathered the best of the
asparagus, and took it to the Molard where some good old
women, who guessed how I came by it, wishing to diminish
the price, made no secret of their suspicions; this produced
the desired effect, for, being alarmed, I took whatever they
offered, which being taken to Mr. Verrat, was presently meta-
morphosed into a breakfast, and divided with a companion of
his; for, though I procured it, I never partook of their good
cheer, being fully satisfied with an inconsiderable bribe.
I executed my roguery with the greatest fidelity, seeking
only to please my employer; and several days passed before
it came into my head, to rob the robber, and tithe Mr. Verrat's
harvest. I never considered the hazard I run in these expe-
ditions, not only of a torrent of abuse, but what I should have
been still more sensible of, a hearty beating; for the mis-
creant, who received the whole benefit, would certainly have
denied all knowledge of the fact, and I should only have
received a double portion of punishment for daring to accuse
him, since being only an apprentice, I stood no chance of
being believed in opposition to a journeyman. Thus, in every
situation, powerful rogues know how to save themselves at
the expense of the feeble.
This practice taught me it was not so terrible to thieve as
I had imagined: I took care to make this discovery turn to
some account, helping myself to everything within my reach,
that I conceived an inclination for. • I was not absolutely ill-
fed at my master's, and temperance was only painful to me
by comparing it with the luxury he enjoyed. The custom of
sending young people from table precisely when those
things are served up which seem most tempting, is calculated
to increase their longing, and induces them to steal what they
conceive to be so delicious. It may be supposed I was not

<page 50>

<page 51>
Sº, iſ nº of #11, 1 ºf ſº ''
* , , , , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hºw at a ~ * * * * * * * * *


<page 52>


<page 53>

<page 54>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 29
backward in this particular: in general my knavery succeeded
pretty well, though quite the reverse when I happened to be
detected.
I recollect an attempt to procure some apples, which was
attended with circumstances that make mesmile and shudder
even at this instant. The fruit was standing in the pantry,
which by a lattice at a considerable height received light
from the kitchen. One day, being alone in the house, I
climbed up to see these precious apples, which being out of
my reach, made this pantry appear the garden of Hesperides.
I fetched the spit—tried if it would reach them—it was too
short—I lengthened it with a small one which was used for
game, -my master being very fond of hunting, darted at them
several times without success; at length was more fortunate;
being transported to find I was bringing up an apple, I drew
it gently to the lattice—was going to seize it when (who can
express my grief and astonishment 1) I found it would not
pass through—it was too large. I tried every expedient to
accomplish my design, sought supporters to keep the spits in
the same position, a knife to divide the apple, and a lath to
hold it with; at length, I so far succeeded as to effect the divi-
sion, and made no doubt of drawing the pieces through; but
it was scarcely separated, (compassionate reader, sympathize
with my affliction) when both pieces fell into the pantry.
Though I lost time by this experiment, I did not lose cour-
age, but, dreading a surprise, I put off the attempt till next
day, when I hoped to be more successful, and returned to my
work as if nothing had happened, without once thinking of
what the two obvious witnesses I had left in the pantry de-
posed against me.
The next day (a fine opportunity offering) I renew the trial.
I fasten the spits together; get on the stool; take aim; am
just going to dart at my prey—unfortunately the dragon did
not sleep; the pantry door opens, my master makes his ap-
pearance, and, looking up, exclaims, “Bravo!”—The horror
of that moment returns—the pen drops from my hand.
A continual repetition of ill treatment rendered me callous;
it seemed a kind of composition for my crimes, which author-
ized me to continue them, and, instead of looking back at the
punishment, I looked forward to revenge. Being beat like a
slave, I judged I had a right to all the vices of one. I was
convinced that to rob and be punished were inseparable, and

<page 55>
3O THE CONFESSIONS OF
constituted, if I may so express myself, a kind of traffic, in
which, if I perform my part of the bargain, my master would
take care not to be deficient in his; that preliminary settled,
I applied myself to thieving with great tranquility, and
whenever this interrogatory occurred to my mind, “What
will be the consequence?” the reply was ready, “I know the
worst, I shall be beat; no matter, I was made for it.”
I love good eating; am sensual, but not greedy; I have
such a variety of inclinations to gratify, that this can never
predominate; and unless my heart is unoccupied, which very
rarely happens, I pay but little attention to my appetite; to
purloining eatables, but extended this propensity to every-
thing I wished to possess, and if I did not become a robber
in form, it was only because money never tempted me.
My master had a closet in the workshop, which he kept
locked; this I contrived to open and shut as often as I pleased,
and laid his best tools, fine drawings, impressions, in a word,
everything he wished to keep from me, under contribution.
These thefts were so far innocent, that they were always em-
ployed in his service, but I was transported at having the
trifles in my possession, and imagined I stole the art with its
productions. Besides what I have mentioned, his boxes con-
tained threads of gold and silver, a number of small jewels,
valuable medals, and money; yet, though I seldom had five
sous in my pocket, I do not recollect ever having cast a wish-
ful look at them; on the contrary, I beheld these valuables
rather with terror than with delight.
I am convinced the dread of taking money was, in a great
measure, the effect of education. There was mingled with the
idea of it the fear of infamy, a prison, punishment, and
death: had I even felt the temptation, these objects would
have made me tremble; whereas my failings appeared a
species of waggery, and, in truth, they were little else; they
could but occasion a good trimming, and this I was already
prepared for. A sheet of fine drawing paper was a greater
temptation than money sufficient to have purchased a ream.
This unreasonable caprice is connected with one of the most
striking singularities of my character, and has so far influ-
enced my conduct, that it requires a particular explanation.
* My passions are extremely violent; while under their influ-
ence, nothing can equal my impetuosity; I am an absolute
stranger to discretion, respect, fear, or decorum; rude, saucy,

<page 56>
J. J. ROUSSEAU - 3 I
violent, and intrepid: no shame can stop, no danger intimi-
date me. My mind is frequently so engrossed by a single ob-
ject, that beyond it the whole world is not worth a thought;
this is the enthusiasm of a moment, the next, perhaps, I am
plunged in a state of annihilation. Take me in my moments
of tranquility, I am indolence and timidity itself; a word to
speak, the least trifle to perform, appear an intolerable labor;
everything alarms and terrifies me; the very buzzing of a fly
will make me shudder; I am so subdued by fear and shame,
that I would gladly shield myself from mortal view.
When obliged to exert myself, I am ignorant what to do!
when forced to speak, I am at a loss for words; and if any
one looks at me, I am instantly out of countenance. If ani-
mated with my subject, I express my thoughts with ease, but,
in ordinary conversations, I can say nothing—absolutely no-
thing; and, being obliged to speak, renders them insupport-
able.
I may add, that none of my predominant inclinations centre
in those pleasures which are to be purchased: money em-
poisons my delight; I must have them unadulterated; I love
those of the table, for instance, but cannot endure the re-
straints of good company, or the intemperance of taverns; I
can enjoy them only with a friend, for alone it is equally im-
possible; my imagination is then so occupied with other
things, that I find no pleasure in eating. Women who are to
be purchased have no charms for me; my beating heart can-
not be satisfied without affection; it is the same with every
other enjoyment, if not truly disinterested, they are absolutely
insipid; in a word, I am fond of those things which are only
estimable to minds formed for the peculiar enjoyment of them.
I never thought money so desirable as it is usually imagined;
if you would enjoy you must transform it; and this trans-
formation is frequently attended with inconvenience; you
must bargain, purchase, pay dear, be badly served, and often
duped. I buy an egg, am assured it is new-laid—I find it
stale; fruit in its utmost perfection—'tis absolutely green.
I love good wine, but where shall I get it? Not at my wine
merchant's—he will poison me to a certainty. I wish to be
universally respected; how shall I compass my design 2 I
must make friends, send messages, write letters, come, go,
wait, and be frequently deceived. Money is the perpetual
source of uneasiness; I fear it more than I love good wine.

<page 57>
32 THE CONFESSIONS OF
IR thousand times, both during and since my apprentice-
ship, have I gone out to purchase some nicety, I approach
the pastry-cook's, perceive some women at the counter, and
imagine they are laughing at me. I pass a fruit shop, see
some fine pears, their appearance tempts me; but then two
or three young people are near, or a man I am acquainted
with is standing at the door; I take all that pass for persons
I have some knowledge of, and my near sight contributes to
deceive me. I am everywhere intimidated, restrained by some
obstacle, and with money in my pocket return as I went, for
want of resolution to purchase what I long for.
I should enter into the most insipid details was I to relate
the trouble, shame, repugnance, and inconvenience of all
kinds which I have experienced in parting with my money,
whether in my own person, or by the agency of others; as I
proceed, the reader will get acquainted with my disposition,
and perceive all this without my troubling him with the re-
cital.
This once comprehended, one of my apparent contradictions
will be easily accounted for, and the most sordid avarice re-
conciled with the greatest contempt of money. It is a mov-
able which I consider of so little value, that, when destitute
of it, I never wish to acquire any; and when I have a sum I
keep it by me, for want of knowing how to dispose of it to
my satisfaction; but let an agreeable and convenient oppor-
tunity present itself, and I empty my purse with the utmost
freedom; not that I would have the reader imagine I am ex-
travagant from a motive of ostentation, quite the reverse; it
was ever in subservience to my pleasures, and, instead of
glorying in expense, I endeavor to conceal it. I so well per-
ceive that money is not made to answer my purposes, that I
am almost ashamed to have any, and, still more, to make use
of it.
Had I ever possessed a moderate independence, I am con-
vinced I should have had no propensity to become avaricious.
I should have required no more, and cheerfully lived up to
my income; but my precarious situation has constantly and
necessarily kept me in fear. I love liberty, and I loathe con-
straint, dependence, and all their kindred annoyances. As
long as my purse contains money it secures my independence,
and exempts me from the trouble of seeking other money, a
trouble of which I have always had a perfect horror; and the

<page 58>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 33
dread of seeing the end of my independence, makes me pro- a .
\
portionately unwilling to part with my money. The money
that we possess is the instrument of liberty, that which we
lack and strive to obtain is the instrument of slavery. Thence
it is that I hold fast to aught that I have, and yet covet no-
thing more.
My disinterestedn is in reality only idleness, the
pleasure of possessing is not in my estimation Wörth the
trouble of acquiring: and my dissipation is only another form
of idleness; when we have an opportunity of disbursing
pleasantly we should make the best possible use of it.
I am less tempted by money than by other objects, because
between the moment of possessing the money and that of
using it to obtain the desired object there is always an inter-
val, however short; whereas to possess the thing is to enjoy
it. I see a thing and it tempts me; but if I see not the thing
itself but only the means of acquiring it, I am not tempted.
Therefore it is that I have been a pilferer, and am so even
now, in the way of mere trifles to which I take a fancy, and
which I find it easier to take than to ask for; but I never in
my life recollect having taken a farthing from any one, except
about fifteen years ago, when I stole seven francs and ten
sous. The story is worth recounting, as it exhibits a con-
currence of ignorance and stupidity I should scarcely credit,
did it relate to any but myself.
It was in Paris: I was walking with M. de Franceul at the
Palais Royal; he pulled out his watch, he looked at it, and
said to me, “Suppose we go to the opera”—“With all my
heart.” We go: he takes two box tickets, gives me one, and
enters himself with the other; I follow, find the door crowded;
and, looking in, see every one standing; judging, therefore,
that M. de Franceul might suppose me concealed by the com-
pany, I go out, ask for my ticket, and, getting the money re-
turned, leave the house, without considering, that by then I
had reached the door every one would be seated, and M. de
Franceul might readily perceive I was not there.
As nothing could be more opposite to my natural inclina-_
tion than this abominable meanness, I note it, to show there
are moments of delirium when men ought not to be judged
by their actions: this was not stealing the money, it was only-
stealing the use of it, and was the more infamous for wanting
the excuse of a temptation,
!
!

<page 59>
34 THE CONFESSIONS OF
I should never end these accounts, was I to describe all the
gradations through which I passed, during my apprentice-
ship, from the sublimity of a hero to the baseness of a villain.
Though I entered into most of the vices of my situation, I
had no relish for its pleasures; the amusements of my com-
panions were displeasing, and when too much restraint had
made my business wearisome, I had nothing to amuse me.
This renewed my taste for reading which had long been
neglected. I thus committed a fresh offence, books made me
neglect my work, and brought on additional punishment,
while inclination, strengthened by constraint, became an
unconquerable passion. La Tribu, a well-known librarian,
furnished me with all kinds; good or bad, I perused them
with avidity, and without discrimination.
It will be said; “at length, then, money became necessary”
—true; but this happened at a time when a taste for study
had deprived me both of resolution and activity; totally occu-
pied by this new inclination, I only wished to read, I robbed
no longer. This is another of my peculiarities; a mere no-
thing frequently calls me off from what I appear the most
attached to; I give in to the new idea; it becomes a passion,
and immediately every former desire is forgotten.
Reading was my new hobby; my heartbeat with impatience
to run over the new book I carried in my pocket; the first
moment I was alone, I seized the opportunity to draw it out,
and thought no longer of rummaging my master's closet. I
was even ashamed to think that I had been guilty of such
meanness; and had my amusements been more expensive, I
no longer felt an inclination to continue it. La Tribu gave me
credit, and when once I had the book in my possession, I
thought no more of the trifle I was to pay for it; as money
came it naturally passed to this woman; and when she
chanced to be pressing, nothing was so conveniently at hand
as my own effects; to steal in advance required foresight, and
robbing to pay was no temptation.
The frequent blows I received from my master, with my
private and ill-chosen studies, rendered me reserved, un-
sociable, and almost deranged my reason. Though my taste
had not preserved me from silly unmeaning books, by good
fortune I was a stranger to licentious or obscene ones; not
that La Tribu (who was very accommodating) had any scru-
ple of lending these, on the contrary, to enhance their worth

<page 60>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 35
she spoke of them with an air of mystery; this produced an
effect she had not foreseen, for both shame and disgust made
me constantly refuse them. Chance so well seconded my
bashful disposition, that I was past the age of thirty before I
saw any of those dangerous compositions.
In less than a year I had exhausted La Tribu's scanty
library, and was unhappy for want of further amusement.
My reading, though frequently bad, had worn off my childish
follies, and brought back my heart to nobler sentiments than
my condition had inspired; meantime disgusted with all
within my reach, and thinking everything charming that
was out of it, my present situation appeared extremely miser-
able. My passions began to acquire strength, I felt their
influence, without knowing whither they would conduct me.
I sometimes, indeed, thought of my former follies, but sought
no further.
At this time my imagination took a turn which helped to
calm my increasing emotions; it was, to contemplate those
situations in the books I had read, which produced the most
striking effect on my mind; to recall, combine, and apply
them to myself in such a manner, as to become one of the
personages my recollection presented, and be continually in
those fancied circumstances which were most agreeable to my
inclinations; in a word, by contriving to place myself in
these fictitious situations, the idea of my real one was in a
great measure obliterated.
This fondness for imaginary objects, and the facility with
which I could gain possession of them, completed my disgust
for everything around me, and fixed that inclination for soli-
tude which has ever since been predominant. We shall have
more than once occasion to remark the effects of a disposition,
misanthropic and melancholy in appearance, but which pro-
ceed, in fact, from a heart too affectionate, too ardent, which,
for want of similar dispositions, is constrained to content it-
self with nonentities, and be satisfied with fiction. It is suf-
ficient, at present, to have traced the origin of a propensity
which has modified my passions, set bounds to each, and by
giving too much ardor to my wishes, has ever rendered me
too indolent to obtain them.
Thus I attained my sixteenth year, uneasy, discontented
with myself and everything that surrounded me; displeased
with my occupation; without enjoying the pleasures common

<page 61>
36 THE CONFESSIONS OF
to my age, weeping without a cause, sighing I knew not why,
and fond of my chimerical ideas for want of more valuable
realities.
Every Sunday, after sermon-time, my companions came to
fetch me out, wishing me to partake of their diversions. I
would willingly have been excused, but when once engaged
in amusement, I was more animated and enterprising than
any of them; it was equally difficult to engage or restrain
me; indeed, this was ever a leading trait in my character.
In our country walks I was ever foremost, and never thought
of returning till reminded by some of my companions. I was
twice obliged to be from my master's the whole night, the
city gates having been shut before I could reach them. The
reader may imagine what treatment this procured me the
following mornings; but I was promised such a reception for
the third, that I made a firm resolution never to expose my-
self to the danger of it. Notwithstanding my determination,
I repeated this dreaded transgression, my vigilance having
been rendered useless by a cursed captain, named M. Minutoli,
who, when on guard, always shut the gate he had charge of
an hour before the usual time. I was returning home with
my two companions, and had got within half a league of the
city, when I heard them beat the tattoo; I redouble my
pace, I run with my utmost speed, I approach the bridge, see
the soldiers already at their posts, I call out to them in a suffo-
cated voice—it is too late; I am twenty paces from the guard,
the first bridge is already drawn up, and I tremble to see those
terrible horns advanced in the air which announce the fatal
and inevitable destiny, which from this moment began to
pursue me.
I threw myself on the glacis in a transport of despair, while
my companions, who only laughed at the accident, immedi-
ately determined what to do. My resolution, though different
from theirs, was equally sudden; on the spot, I swore never
to return to my master's, and the next morning, when my
companions entered the city, I bade them an eternal adieu,
conjuring them at the same time to inform my cousin Bernard
of my resolution, and the place where he might see me for the
last time.
From the commencement of my apprenticeship I had seldom
seen him; at first, indeed, we saw each other on Sundays, but
each acquiring different habits, our meetings were less fre-

<page 62>
J. J. ROUSSRAU 37
quent. I am persuaded his mother contributed greatly to-
wards this change; he was to consider himself as a person of
consequence, I was a pitiful apprentice; notwithstanding our
relationship, equality no longer subsisted between us, and it
was degrading himself to frequent my company. As he had
a natural good heart his mother's lessons did not take an
immediate effect, and for some time he continued to visit me.
Having learned my resolution, he hastened to the spot I
had appointed, not, however, to dissuade me from it, but to
render my flight agreeable, by some trifling presents, as my
own resources would not have carried me far. He gave me
among other things, a small sword, which I was very proud
of, and took with me as far as Turin, where absolute want
constrained me to dispose of it. The more I reflect on his
behavior at this critical moment, the more I am persuaded he
followed the instructions of his mother, and perhaps his
father likewise: for, had he been left to his own feelings, he
would have endeavored to retain, or have been tempted to
accompany me; on the contrary, he encouraged the design,
and when he saw me resolutely determined to pursue it, with-
out seeming much affected, left me to my fate. We never saw
or wrote to each other from that time; I cannot but regret this
loss, for his heart was essentially good, and we seemed formed
for a more lasting friendship.
Before I abandon myself to the fatality of my destiny, let
me contemplate for a moment the prospect that awaited me
had I fallen into the hands of a better master. Nothing could
have been more agreeable to my disposition, or more likely to
confer happiness, than the peaceful condition of a good arti-
ficer, in so respectable a line as engravers are considered at
Geneva. I could have obtained an easy subsistence, if not a
fortune; this would have bounded my ambition; I should
have had means to indulge in moderate pleasures, and should
have continued in my natural sphere, without meeting with
any temptation to go beyond it,' Having an imagination
sufficiently fertile to embellish with its chimeras every situ-
ation, and powerful enough to transport me from one to an-
other, it was immaterial in which I was fixed: that was best
adapted to me, which, requiring the least care or exertion,
left the mind most at liberty; and this happiness I should
have enjoyed. ZIn my native country, in the bosom of my
religion, family and friends, I should have passed a calm and

<page 63>
38 THE CONFESSIONS , ) F
peaceful life, in the uniformity of a pleasing occupation, and
among connections dear to my heart. I should have been a
good Christian, a good citizen, a good friend, a good mank I
should have relished my condition, perhaps have been an
honor to it, and after having passed a life of happy obscurity,
surrounded by my family, I should have died at peace. Soon
it may be forgotten, but while remembered it would have
been with tenderness and regret.
Instead of this—what a picture am I about to draw!—Alas!
why should I anticipate the miseries I have endured 2 The
reader will have but too much of the melancholy subject.

<page 64>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 39
BOOK II.
HE moment in which fear had instigated my flight, did
not seem more terrible than that wherein I put my design
in execution appeared delightful. To leave my relations,
my resources, while yet a child, in the midst of my appren-
ticeship, before I had learned enough of my business to obtain
a subsistence; to run on inevitable misery and danger: to
expose myself in that age of weakness and innocence to all
the temptations of vice and despair; to set out in search of
errors, misfortunes, snares, slavery, and death; to endure
more intolerable evils than those I meant to shun, was the
picture I should have drawn, the natural consequence of my
hazardous enterprise. How different was the idea I enter-
tained of it!—The independence I seemed to possess was the
sole object of my contemplation; having obtained my liberty,
I thought everything attainable: I entered with confidence
on the vast theatre of the world, which my merit was to capti-
vate: at every step I expected to find amusements, treasures,
and adventures; friends ready to serve, and mistresses eager
to please me; I had but to show myself, and the whole uni-
verse would be interested in my concerns; not but I could
have been content with something less; a charming society,
with sufficient means, might have satisfied me. My modera-
tion was such, that the sphere in which I proposed to shine
was rather circumscribed, but then it was to possess the very
quintessence of enjoyment, and myself the principal object.
A single castle, for instance, might have bounded my ambi-
tion; could I have been the favorite of the lord and lady, the
daughter's lover, the son's friend, and protector of the neigh-
bors, I might have been tolerably content, and sought no
further.
In expectation of this modest fortune, I passed a few days
in the environs of the city, with some country people of my
acquaintance, who received me with more kindness than I

<page 65>
4O THE CONFESSIONS OF
should have met with in town; they welcomed, lodged,
and fed me cheerfully; I could be said to live on charity,
these favors were not conferred with a sufficient appearance
of superiority to furnish out the idea.
I rambled about in this manner till I got to Confignon, in
Savoy, at about two leagues distance from Geneva. The
vicar was called M. de Pontverre; this name, so famous in
the history of the Republic, caught my attention; I was
curious to see what appearance the descendants of the gentle-
men of the spoon exhibited; I went, therefore, to visit this
M. de Pontverre, and was received with great civility.
He spoke of the heresy of Geneva, declaimed on the
authority of holy mother church, and then invited me to
dinner. I had little to object to arguments which had so de-
sirable a conclusion, and was inclined to believe that priests,
who gave such excellent dinners, might be as good as our
ministers. Notwithstanding M. de Pontverre's pedigree, I
certainly possessed most learning; but I rather sought to be
a good companion than an expert theologian; and his Frangi
wine, which I thought delicious, argued so powerfully on his
side, that I should have blushed at silencing so kind a host;
I, therefore, yielded him the victory, or rather declined the
contest. Any one who had observed my precaution, would
certainly have pronounced me a dissembler, though, in fact,
I was only courteous.
Flattery, or rather condescension, is not always a vice in
young people; ’tis oftener a virtue. When treated with kind-
ness, it is natural to feel an attachment for the person who
confers the obligation; we do not acquiesce because we wish
to deceive, but from dread of giving uneasiness, or because
we wish to avoid the ingratitude of rendering evil for good.
What interest had M. de Pontverre in entertaining, treating
with respect, and endeavoring to convince me? None but
mine; my young heart told me this, and I was penetrated
with gratitude and respect for the generous priest; I was
sensible of my superiority, but scorned to repay his hospi-
tality by taking advantage of it. I had no conception of
hypocrisy in this forbearance, or thought of changing my
religion, nay, so far was the idea from being familiar to me,
that I looked on it with a degree of horror which seemed to
exclude the possibility of such an event; I only wished to
avoid giving offence to those I was sensible caressed me from

<page 66>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 4. I
that motive; I wished to cultivate their good opinion, and
meantime leave them the hope of success by seeming less on
my guard than I really was. My conduct in this particular
resembled the coquetry of some very honest women, who, to
obtain their wishes, without permitting or promising any-
thing, sometimes encourage hopes they never mean to realize.
Reason, piety, and love of order, certainly demanded that
instead of being encouraged in my folly, I should have been
dissuaded from the ruin I was courting, and sent back to my
family; and this conduct any one that was actuated by
genuine virtue would have pursued; but it should be ob-
served that though M. de Pontverre was a religious man, he
was not a virtuous one, but a bigot, who knew no virtue ex-
cept worshipping images and telling his beads, in a word, a
kind of missionary, who thought the height of merit con-
sisted in writing libels against the ministers of Geneva. Far
from wishing to send me back, he endeavored to favor my
escape, and put it out of my power to return even had I been
so disposed. It was a thousand to one but he was sending
me to perish with hunger, or become a villain; but all this
was foreign to his purpose; he saw a soul snatched from
heresy, and restored to the bosom of the church: whether I
was an honest man or a knave was very immaterial, provided
I went to mass.
This ridiculous mode of thinking is not peculiar to Catho-
lics; it is the voice of every dogmatical persuasion where
merit consists in belief, and not in virtue.
“You are called by the Almighty,” said M. de Pontverre;
“go to Annecy, where you will find a good and charitable
lady, whom the bounty of the king enables to turn souls from
those errors she has happily renounced.” He spoke of a
Madam de Warrens, a new convert, to whom the priests con-
trived to send those wretches who were disposed to sell their
faith, and with these she was in a manner constrained to
share a pension of two thousand francs bestowed on her by
the King of Sardinia. I felt myself extremely humiliated at
being supposed to want the assistance of a good and charitable
lady. I had no objection to be accommodated with everything
I stood in need of, but did not wish to receive it on the footing
of charity, and to owe this obligation to a devotee was still
worse; notwithstanding my scruples the persuasions of M. de
Pontverre, the dread of perishing with hunger, the pleasures

<page 67>
42 THE CONFESSIONS OF
I promished myself from the journey, and hope of obtaining
some desirable situation, determined me; and I set out
though reluctantly, for Annecy. I could easily have reached
it in a day, but being in no great haste to arrive there, it took
me three. My head was filled with the ideas of adventures,
and I approached every country-seat I saw in my way, in ex-
pectation of having them realized. I had too much timidity
to knock at the doors, or even enter if I saw them open, but
I did what I dared—which was to sing under those windows
that I thought had the most favorable appearance; and was
very much disconcerted to find I wasted my breath to no pur-
pose, and that neither old nor young ladies were attracted by
the melody of my voice, or the wit of my poetry, though
some songs my companions had taught me I thought excel-
lent and that I sung them incomparably. At length I ar-
rived at Annecy, and saw Madam de Warrens.
As this period of my life, in a great measure, determined
my character, I could not resolve to pass it lightly over. I
was in the middle of my sixteenth year, and though I could
not be called handsome, was well made for my height; I had
a good foot, a well turned leg, and animated countenance; a
well proportioned mouth, black hair and eyebrows, and my
eyes, though small and rather too far in my head, sparkling
with vivacity, darted that innate fire which inflamed my
blood; unfortunately for me, I knew nothing of all this, never
having bestowed a single thought on my person till it was too
late to be of any service to me. The timidity common to my
age was heightened by a natural benevolence, which made
me dread the idea of giving pain. Though my mind had re-
ceived some cultivation, having seen nothing of the world, I
was an absolute stranger to polite address, and my mental
acquisitions, so far from supplying this defect, only served to
increase my embarrassment, by making me sensible of every
deficiency.
Depending little, therefore, on external appearances, I had
recourse to other expedients: I wrote a most elaborate letter,
where, mingling all the flowers of rhetoric which I had bor-
rowed from books with the phrases of an apprentice, I en-
deavored to strike the attention, and insure the good will of
Madam de Warrens. I enclosed M. de Pontverre's letter in
my own and waited on the lady with a heart palpitating with
fear and expectation. It was Palm Sunday, of the year 1728;

<page 68>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 43
I was informed she was that moment gone to church; I hasten
after her, overtake, and speak to her.—The place is yet fresh
in my memory—how can it be otherwise? often have I moist-
ened it with my tears and covered it with kisses.—Why can-
not I enclose with gold the happy spot, and render it the
object of universal veneration? Whoever wishes to honor
monuments of human salvation would only approach it on
their knees.
It was a passage at the back of the house, bordered on the
left hand by a little rivulet, which separated it from the gar-
den, and, on the right, by the court yard wall; at the end was
a private door which opened into the church of the Cordeliers.
Madam de Warrens was just passing this door; but on hear-
ing my voice, instantly turned about. What an effect did the
sight of her produce! I expected to see a devout, forbidding
old woman; M. de Pontverre's pious and worthy lady could
be no other in my conception; instead of which, I see a face
beaming with charms, fine blue eyes full of sweetness, a com-
plexion whose whiteness dazzled the sight, the form of an
enchanting neck, nothing escaped the eager eye of the young
proselyte; for that instant I was hers!—a religion preached
by such missionaries must lead to paradise!
My letter was presented with a trembling hand; she took
it with a smile—opened it, glanced an eye over M. de Pont-
verre's and again returned to mine, which she read through
and would have read again, had not the footman that instant
informed her that service was beginning—“Child,” said she,
in a tone of voice which made every nerve vibrate, “you are
wandering about at an early age—it is really a pity!”—and
without waiting for an answer, added—“Go to my house, bid
them give you something for breakfast, after mass, I will
speak to you.”
Louisa-Eleanora de Warrens was of the noble and ancient
family of La Tour de Pit, of Vevay, a city in the country of
the Vaudois. She was married very young to a M. de War-
rens, of the house of Loys, eldest son of M. de Villardin, of
Lausanne; there were no children by this marriage, which
was far from being a happy one. Some domestic uneasiness
made Madam de Warrens take the resolution of crossing the
Lake, and throwing herself at the feet of Victor Amadeus,
who was then at Evian; thus abandoning her husband,
family, and country by a giddiness similar to mine, which

<page 69>
44 THE CONFESSIONS OF
precipitation she, too, has found sufficient time and reason
to lament.
The king, who was fond of appearing a zealous promoter
of the Catholic faith, took her under his protection, and com-
plimented her with a pension of fifteen hundred livres of
Piedmont, which was a considerable appointment for a prince
who never had the character of being generous; but finding
his liberality made some conjecture he had an affection for
the lady, he sent her to Annecy escorted by a detachment of
his guards, where, under the direction of Michael Gabriel
de Bernex, titular bishop of Geneva, she abjured her former
religion at the Convent of the Visitation.
I came to Annecy just six years after this event; Madam
de Warrens was then eight-and-twenty, being born with the
century. Her beauty, consisting more in the expressive ani-
mation of the countenance, than a set of features, was in its
meridian; her manner soothing and tender; an angelic smile
played about her mouth, which was small and delicate; she
wore her hair (which was of an ash color, and uncommonly
beautiful) with an air of negligence that made her appear
still more interesting; she was short, and rather thick for her
height, though by no means disagreeably so; but there could
not be a more lovely face, a finer neck, or hands and arms
more exquisitely formed.
Her education had been derived from such a variety of
sources, that it formed an extraordinary assemblage. Like
me, she had lost her mother at her birth, and had received
instruction as it chanced to present itself; she had learned
something of her governess, something of her father, a little
of her masters, but copiously from her lovers; particularly
a M. de Tavel, who, possessing both taste and information,
endeavored to adorn with them the mind of her he loved.
These various instructions, not being properly arranged,
tended to impede each other, and she did not acquire that
degree of improvement her natural good sense was capable of
receiving; she knew something of philosophy and physic, but
not enough to eradicate the fondness she had imbibed from
her father for empiricism and alchemy; she made elixirs,
tinctures, balsams, pretended to secrets, and prepared mages-
try; while quacks and pretenders, profiting by her weakness,
destroyed her property among furnaces, drugs and minerals,
diminishing those charms and accomplishments which

<page 70>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 45
might have been the delight of the most elegant circles.
But though these interested wretches took advantage of her
ill-applied education to obscure her natural good sense, her
excellent heart retained its purity; her amiable mildness,
sensibility for the unfortunate, inexhaustible bounty, and
open, cheerful frankness, knew no variation; even at the
approach of old age, when attacked by various calamities,
rendered more cutting by indigence, the serenity of her dis-
position preserved to the end of her life the pleasing gayety
of her happiest days.
Her errors proceeded from an inexhaustible fund of activ-
ity, which demanded perpetual employment. She found no
satisfaction in the customary intrigues of her sex, but, being
formed for vast designs, sought the direction of important
enterprises and discoveries. In her place Madam de Longue-
ville would have been a mere trifler, in Madam de Longue-
ville's situation she would have governed the state. Her
talents did not accord with her fortune; what would have
gained her distinction in a more elevated sphere, became her
ruin. In enterprises which suited her disposition, she ar-
ranged the plan in her imagination, which was ever carried
of its utmost extent, and the means she employed being pro-
portioned rather to her ideas than abilities, she failed by the
mismanagement of those upon whom she depended, and was
ruined where another would scarce have been a loser. This
active disposition, which involved her in so many difficulties,
was at least productive of one benefit as it prevented her from
passing the remainder of her life in the monastic asylum she
had chosen, which she had some thought of. The simple and
uniform life of a nun, and the little cabals and gossipings of
their parlor, were not adapted to a mind vigorous and active,
which, every day forming new systems, had occasions for
liberty to attempt their completion.
The good bishop of Bernex, with less wit than Francis of
Sales, resembled him in many particulars, and Madam de
Warrens, whom he loved to call his daughter, and who was
like Madam de Chantel in several respects, might have in-
creased the resemblance by retiring like her from the world,
had she not been disgusted with the idle trifling of a convent.
It was not want of zeal prevented this amiable woman from
giving those proofs of devotion which might have been
expected from a new convert, under the immediate direction

<page 71>
46 THE CONFESSIONS OF
of a prelate. Whatever might have influenced her to change
her religion, she was certainly sincere in that she had em-
braced; she might find sufficient occasion to repent having
abjured her former faith, but no inclination to return to it.
She not only died a good Catholic, but truly lived one; nay,
I dare affirm (and I think I have had the opportunity to read
the secrets of her heart) that it was only her aversion to sing-
ularity that prevented her acting the devotee in public; in a
word, her piety was too sincere to give way to any affectation
of it. But this is not the place to enlarge on her principles:
I shall find other occasions to speak of them.
Let those who deny the existence of a sympathy of souls,
explain, if they know how, why the first glance, the first
word of Madam de Warrens inspired me, not only with a
lively attachment, but with the most unbounded confidence,
which has since known no abatement. Say this was love
(which will at least appear doubtful to those who read the
sequel of our attachment) how could this passion be attended
with sentiments which scarce ever accompany its commence-
ment, such as peace, serenity, security, and confidence. How,
when making application to an amiable and polished woman,
whose situation in life was so superior to mine, so far above
any I had yet approached, on whom, in a great measure,
depended my future fortune by the degree of interest she
might take in it; how, I say with so many reasons to depress
me, did I feel myself as free, as much at my ease, as if I had
been perfectly secure of pleasing her! Why did I not expe-
rience a moment of embarrassment, timidity or restraint?
Naturally bashful, easily confused, having seen nothing of
the world, could I, the first time, the first moment I beheld
her, adopt caressing language, and a familiar tone, as readily
as after ten years' intimacy had rendered these freedoms
natural? Is it possible to possess love, I will not say without
desires, for I certainly had them, but without inquietude,
without jealousyº Can we avoid feeling an anxious wish at
least to know whether our affection is returned? Yet such a
question never entered my imagination; I should as soon
have inquired, do I love myself; nor did she ever express a
greater degree of curiosity; there was, certainly, something
extraordinary in my attachment to this charming woman
and it will be found in the sequel, that some extravagances,
which cannot be foreseen, attended it.

<page 72>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 47
What could be done for me, was the present question, and
in order to discuss the point with greater freedom, she made
me dine with her. This was the first meal in my life where I
had experienced a want of appetite, and her woman, who
waited, observed it was the first time she had seen a traveller
of my age and appearance deficient in that particular: this
remark, which did me no injury in the opinion of her mis-
tress, fell hard on an overgrown clown, who was my fellow
guest, and devoured sufficient to have served at least six
moderate feeders. For me, I was too much charmed to think
of eating; my heart began to imbibe a delicious sensation,
which engrossed my whole being, and left no room for other
objects. *****)
Madam de Warrens wished to hear the particulars of my
little history—all the vivacity I had lost during my servitude
returned and assisted the recital. In proportion to the in-
terest this excellent woman took in my story, did she lament
the fate to which I had exposed myself; compassion was
painted on her features, and expressed by every action. She
could not exhort me to return to Geneva, being too well aware
that her words and actions were strictly scrutinized, and that
such advice would be thought high treason against Cathol-
icism, but she spoke so feelingly of the affliction I must give
tº her father, that it was easy to perceive she would have ap-
proved my returning to console him. Alas! she little thought
how powerfully this pleaded against herself; the more elo-
quently persuasive she appeared, the less could I resolve to
tear myself from her. I knew that returning to Geneva
would be putting an insuperable barrier between us, unless I
repeated the expedient which had brought me here, and it
was certainly better to preserve than expose myself to the
danger of a relapse; besides all this, my conduct was pre-
determined, I was resolved not to return. Madam de War-
rens, seeing her endeavors would be fruitless, became less
explicit, and only added, with an air of commiseration, “Poor
child! thou must go where Providence directs thee, but one
day thou wilt think of me.”—I believe she had no con-
ception at that time how fatally her prediction would be
verified.
The difficulty still remained how I was to gain a subsist-
ence? I have already observed that I knew too little of en-
graving for that to furnish my resource, and had I been more

<page 73>
48 THE CONFESSIONS OF
expert, Savoy was too poor a country to give much encourage-
ment to the arts. The above-mentioned glutton, who eat for
us as well as himself, being obliged to pause in order to gain
some relaxation from the fatigue of it, imparted a piece of
advice, which, according to him, came express from Heaven;
though to judge by its effects it appeared to have been dic-
tated from a direct contrary quarter: this was that I should
go to Turin, where, in a hospital instituted for the instruc-
tion of catechumens, I should find food, both spiritual and
temporal, be reconciled to the bosom of the church, and meet
with some charitable Christians, who would make it a point
to procure me a situation that would turn to my advantage.
“In regard to the expenses of the journey,” continued our
advisor, “his grace, my lord bishop, will not be backward,
when once madam has proposed this holy work, to offer his
charitable donation, and madam, the baroness, whose charity
is so well known,” once more addressing himself to the con-
tinuation of his meal, “will certainly contribute.”
I was by no means pleased with all these charities; I said
nothing, but my heart was ready to burst with vexation.
Madam de Warrens, who did not seem to think so highly of
this expedient as the projector pretended to do, contented
herself by saying, everyone should endeavor to promote
good actions, and that she would mention it to his lordship;
but the meddling devil, who had some private interest in this
affair, and questioned whether she would urge it to his satis-
faction, took care to acquaint the almoners with my story,
and so far influenced those good priests, that when Madam
de Warrens, who disliked the journey on my account, men-
tioned it to the bishop, she found it so far concluded on, that
he immediately put into her hands the money designed for
my little viaticum. She dared not advance anything against
it; I was approaching an age when a woman like her could
not, with any propriety, appear anxious to retain me.
My departure being thus determined by those who under-
took the management of my concerns, I had only to submit;
and I did it without much repugnance. Though Turin was
at a greater distance from Madam de Warrens' than Geneva,
yet being the capital of the country I was now in, it seemed
to have more connection with Annecy than a city under a
different government and of a contrary religion; besides, as I
undertook this journey in obedience to her, I considered my-

<page 74>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 49
self as living under her direction, which was more flattering
than barely to continue in the neighborhood; to sum up all,
the idea of a long journey coincided with my insurmountable
passion for rambling, which already began to demonstrate it-
self. To pass the mountains, to my eye appeared delightful;
how charming the reflection of elevating myself above my
companions by the whole height of the Alps! To see the
world is an almost irresistible temptation to a Genevan, ac-
cordingly I gave my consent.
He who suggested the journey was to set off in two days
with his wife. I was recommended to their care; they were
likewise made my purse-bearers, which had been augmented
by Madam de Warrens, who, not contented with these kind-
nesses, added secretly a pecuniary reinforcement, attended
with the most ample instructions, and we departed on the
Wednesday before Easter.
The day following, my father arrived at Annecy, accom-
panied by his friend, a Mr. Rival, who was likewise a watch-
maker; he was a man of sense and letters, who wrote better
verses than La Motte, and spoke almost as well; what is still
more to his praise, he was a man of the strictest integrity,
but whose taste for literature only served to make one of his
sons a comedian. Having traced me to the house of Madam
de Warrens, they contented themselves with lamenting, like
her, my fate, instead of overtaking me, which, (as they
were on horseback and I on foot) they might have accom-
plished with the greatest ease.
My uncle Bernard did the same thing, he arrived at Con-
signon, received information that I was gone to Annecy, and
immediately returned back to Geneva; thus my nearest rela-
tions seemed to have conspired with my adverse stars to con-
sign me to misery and ruin. By a similar negligence, my
brother was so entirely lost, that it was never known what
was become of him.
My father was not only a man of honor but of the strictest
probity, and endured with that magnanimity which frequent-
ly produces the most shining virtues: I may add, he was a good
father, particularly to me whom he tenderly loved; but he
likewise loved his pleasures, and since we had been separated
other connections had weakened his paternal affections. He
had married again at Nion, and though his second wife was
too old to expect children, she had relations: my father was

<page 75>
5o THE CONFESSIONS OF
united to another family, surrounded by other objects, and a
variety of cares prevented my returning to his remembrance.
He was in the decline of life and had nothing to support the
inconveniences of old age; my mother's property devolved to
me and my brother, but, during our absence, the interest of
it was enjoyed by my father: I do not mean to infer that this
consideration had an immediate effect on his conduct, but it
had an imperceptible one, and prevented him making use of
that exertion to regain me which he would otherwise have
employed; and this, I think, was the reason that having traced
me as far as Annecy, he stopped short, without proceeding
to Chambery, where he was almost certain I should be found;
and likewise accounts why, on visiting him several times
since my flight, he always received me with great kindness,
but never made any efforts to retain me.
This conduct in a father, whose affection and virtue I was
so well convinced of, has given birth to reflections on the regu-
lation of my own conduct which have greatly contributed to
preserve the integrity of my heart. It has taught me this
great lesson of morality, perhaps the only one that can have
any conspicuous influence on our actions, that we should ever
carefully avoid putting our interests in competition with our
duty, or promise ourselves felicity from the misfortunes of
others; certain that in such circumstances, however sincere
our love of virtue may be, sooner or later it will give way and
we shall imperceptibly become unjust and wicked, in fact,
however upright in our intentions.
This maxim, strongly imprinted on my mind, and reduced,
though rather too late, to practice, has given my conduct an
appearance of folly and whimsicality, not only in public, but
still more among my acquaintances: it has been said, I
affected originality, and sought to act different from other
people; the truth is, I neither endeavor to conform or be
singular, I desire only to act virtuously and avoid situations,
which, by setting my interest in opposition to that of another
person's, might inspire me with a secret, though involuntary
wish to his disadvantage.
Two years ago, My Lord Marshal would have put my name
in his will, which I took every method to prevent, assuring
him I would not for the world know myself in the will of
any one, much less in his; he gave up the idea; but insisted
in return, that I should accept an annuity on his life; this I

<page 76>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 51
consented to. It will be said, I find my account in the alter-
ation; perhaps I may; but oh, my benefactor! my father, I
am now sensible that, should I have the misfortune to sur-
vive thee, I should have everything to lose, nothing to gain.
This, in my idea, in true philosophy, the surest bulwark of
human rectitude; every day do I receive fresh conviction of
its profound solidity. I have endeavored to recommend it in
all my latter writings, but the multitude read too superficially
to have made the remark. If I survive my present under-
taking, and am able to begin another, I mean, in a continua-
tion of Emilius, to give such a lively and marking example
of this maxim as cannot fail to strike attention. But I have
made reflections enough for a traveller, it is time to continue
my journey.
It turned out more agreeable than I expected: my clownish
conductor was not so morose as he appeared to be. He was a
middle-aged man, wore his black, grizzly hair, in a queue, had
a martial air, a strong voice, was tolerably cheerful, and to
make up for not having been taught any trade, could turn his
hand to every one. Having proposed to establish some kind
of manufactory at Annecy, he had consulted Madam de
Warrens, who immediately gave into the project, and he was
now going to Turin to lay the plan before the minister and
get his approbation, for which journey he took care to be well
rewarded.
This drole had the art of ingratiating himself with the
priests, whom he ever appeared eager to serve; he adopted a
certain jargon which he had learned by frequenting their
company, and thought himself a notable preacher; he could
even repeat one passage from the Bible in Latin, and it an-
swered his purpose as well as if he had known a thousand,
for he repeated it a thousand times a day. He was seldom at
a loss for money when he knew what purse contained it; yet,
was rather artful than knavish, and when dealing out in an
affected tone his unmeaning discourses, resembled Peter the
Hermit, preaching up the crusade with a sabre at his side.
Madam Sabran, his wife, was a tolerable, good sort of
woman; more peaceable by day than by night; as I slept in
the same chamber I was frequently disturbed by her wakeful-
ness, and should have been more so had I comprehended the
cause of it; but I was in the chapter of dullness, which left
to nature the whole care of my own instruction.

<page 77>
52 THE CONFESSIONS OF
I went on gayly with my pious guide and his hopeful com-
panion, no sinister accident impeding our journey. I was in
the happiest circumstances both of mind and body that I ever
recollect having experienced; young, full of health and secu-
rity, placing unbounded confidence in myself and others; in
that short but charming moment of human life, whose expan-
sive energy carries, if I may so express myself, our being to
the utmost extent of our sensations, embellishing all nature
with an inexpressible charm, flowing from the conscious and
rising enjoyment of our existence.
My pleasing inquietudes became less wandering: I had now
an object on which imagination could fix. I looked on my-
self as the work, the pupil, the friend, almost the lover of
Madam de Warrens; the obliging things she had said, the
caresses she had bestowed on me; the tender interest she
seemed to take in everything that concerned me; those charm-
ing looks, which seemed replete with love, because they so
powerfully inspired it, every consideration flattered my ideas
during this journey, and furnished the most delicious reveries,
which, no doubt, no fear of my future condition arose to em-
bitter. In sending me to Turin, I thought they engaged to
find me an agreeable subsistence there; thus eased of every
care I passed lightly on, while young desires, enchanting
hopes, and brilliant prospects employed my mind; each object
that presented itself seemed to insure my approaching feli-
city. I imagined that every house was filled with joyous
festivity, the meadows resounded with sports and revelry, the
rivers offered refreshing baths, delicious fish wantoned in
these streams, and how delightful was it to ramble along the
flowery banks! The trees were loaded with the choicest fruits,
while their shade afforded the most charming and voluptuous
retreats to happy lovers; the mountains abounded with milk
and cream, peace and leisure, simplicity and joy, mingled
with the charm of going I knew not whither, and everything
I saw carried to my heart some new cause for rapture. The
grandeur, variety, and real beauty of the scene, in some
measure rendered the charm reasonable, in which vanity came
in for its share; to go so young to Italy, view such an extent
of country, and pursue the route of Hannibal over the Alps,
appeared a glory beyond my age; add to all this our frequent
and agreeable halts, with a good appetite and plenty to satisfy
it; for in truth it was not worth while to be sparing; at Mr.

<page 78>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 53
Sabran's table what I eat could scarce be missed.
In the whole course of my life I cannot recollect an interval
more perfectly exempt from care, than the seven or eight days
I was passing from Annecy to Turin. As we were obliged to
walk Madam Sabran's pace, it rather appeared an agreeable
jaunt than a fatiguing journey; there still remains the most
pleasing impressions of it on my mind, and the idea of a pe-
destrian excursion, particularly among the mountains, has
from this time seemed delightful.
It was only in my happiest days that I travelled on foot,
and ever with the most unbounded satisfaction; afterwards,
occupied with business and encumbered with baggage, I was
forced to act the gentleman and employ a carriage, where
care, embarrassment, and restraint, were sure to be my com-
panions, and instead of being delighted with the journey, I
only wished to arrive at the place of destination.
I was a long time at Paris, wishing to meet with two com-
panions of similar dispositions, who would each agree to ap-
propriate fifty guineas of his property and a year of his time
to making the tour of Italy on foot, with no other attendance
than a young fellow to carry our necessaries; I have met with
many who seemed enchanted with the project, but considered
it only as a visionary scheme, which served well enough to
talk of, without any design of putting it in execution. One
day, speaking with enthusiasm of this project to Diderot and
Grimm, they gave into the proposal with such warmth that I
thought the matter concluded on; but it only turned out a
journey on paper, in which Grimm thought nothing so pleas-
ing as making Diderot commit a number of impieties, and
shutting me up in the Inquisition for them, instead of him.
My regret at arriving so soon at Turin was compensated by
the pleasure of viewing a large city, and the hope of figuring
there in a conspicuous character, for my brain already began
to be intoxicated with the fumes of ambition; my present
situation appeared infinitely above that of an apprentice, and
I was far from foreseeing how soon I should be much below it.
Before I proceed, I ought to offer an excuse, or justification
to the reader for the great number of unentertaining particu-
lars I am necessitated to repeat. In pursuance of the resolu-
tion I have formed to enter on this public exhibition of myself,
it is necessary that nothing should bear the appearance of
obscurity or concealment. I should be continually under the

<page 79>
54 THE CONFESSIONS OF
eye of the reader, he should be enabled to follow me in all the
wanderings of my heart, through every intricacy of my ad-
ventures; he must find no void or chasm in my relation, nor
lose sight of me an instant, lest he should find occasion to
say, what was he doing at this time; and suspect me of not
having dared to reveal the whole. I give sufficient scope to
malignity in what I say; it is unnecssary I should furnish
still more by my scienee. silence .
My money was all gone, even that I had secretly received
from Madam de Warrens: I had been so indiscreet as to
divulge this secret, and my conductors had taken care to
profit by it. Madam Sabran found means to deprive me of
everything I had, even to a ribbon embroidered with silver,
with which Madam de Warrens had adorned the hilt of my
sword; this I regretted more than all the rest; indeed the
sword itself would have gone the same way, had I been less
obstinately bent on retaining it. They had, it is true, sup-
ported me during the journey, but left me nothing at the end
of it, and I arrived at Turin, without money, clothes, or linen,
being precisely in the situation to owe to my merit alone the
whole honor of that fortune I was about to acquire.
I took care in the first place to deliver the letters I was
charged with, and was presently conducted to the hospital of
the catechumens, to be instructed in that religion, for which,
in return, I was to receive subsistence. On entering, I passed
an iron-barred gate, which was immediately double-locked on
me; this beginning was by no means calculated to give me a
favorable opinion of my situation. I was then conducted to
a large apartment, whose furniture consisted of a wooden
altar at the farther end, on which was a large crucifix, and
round it several indifferent chairs, of the same materials. In
this hall of audience were assembled four or five ill-looking
banditti, my comrades in instruction, who would rather have
been taken for trusty servants of the devil than candidates
for the kingdom of heaven. Two of these fellows were
Sclavonians, but gave out they were African Jews, and (as
they assured me) had run through Spain and Italy, embrac-
ing the Christian faith, and being baptised wherever they
thought it worth their labor.
Soon after they opened another iron gate, which divided a
large balcony that overlooked a courtyard, and by this avenue
entered our sister catechumens, who, like me, were going to

<page 80>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 55
be regenerated, not by baptism but a solemn abjuration. A
viler set of idle, dirty, abandoned harlots, never disgraced
any persuasion; one among them, however, appeared pretty
and interesting; she might be about my own age, perhaps a
year or two older, and had a pair of roguish eyes, which fre-
quently encountered mine; this was enough to inspire me
with the desire of becoming acquainted with her, but she had
been so strongly recommended to the care of the old governess
of this respectable sisterhood, and was so narrowly watched
by the pious missionary, who labored for her conversion
with more zeal than diligence, that during the two months we
remained together in this house (where she had already been
three) I found it absolutely impossible to exchange a word
with her. She must have been extremely stupid, though she
had not the appearance of it, for never was a longer course of
instruction; the holy man could never bring her to a state of
mind fit for abjuration; meantime she became weary of her
cloister, declaring that, Christian or not, she would stay
there no longer; and they were obliged to take her at her
word, lest she should grow refractory, and insist on departing
as great a sinner as she came.
This hopeful community were assembled in honor of the
new-comer; when our guides made us a short exhortation: I
was conjured to be obedient to the grace that Heaven had be-
stowed on me; the rest were admonished to assist me with
their prayers, and give me edification by their good example.
Our virgins then retired to another apartment, and I was left
to contemplate, at leisure, that wherein I found myself.
The next morning we were again assembled for instruction:
I now began to reflect, for the first time, on the step I was
about to take, and the circumstances which had led me to it.
Irepeat, and shall perhaps repeat again, an assertion I have
already advanced, and of whose truth I every day receive
fresh conviction, which is, that if ever child received a”
reasonable and virtuous education, it was myself. Born in a
family of unexceptionable morals, every lesson I received was
replete with maxims of prudence and virtue. My father
(though fond of gallantry) not only possessed distinguished
probity, but much religion; in the world he appeared a man
of pleasure, in his family he was a Christian, and implanted
early in my mind those sentiments he felt the force of. My
three aunts were women of virtue and piety; the two eldest

<page 81>
56 THE CONFESSIONS OF
were professed devotees, and the third, who united all the
graces of wit and good sense, was, perhaps, more truly re-
ligious than either, though with less ostentation. From the
bosom of this amiable family I was transplanted to M. Lam-
bercier's, a man dedicated to the ministry, who believed the
doctrine he taught, and acted up to its precepts. He and his
sister matured by their instructions those principles of judi-
cious piety I had already imbibed, and the means employed
by these worthy people were so well adapted to the effect they
meant to produce, that so far from being fatigued, I scarce
ever listened to their admonitions without finding myself
sensibly affected, and forming resolutions to live virtuously,
from which, except in moments of forgetfulness, I seldom
swerved. At my uncle's, religion was far more tiresome,
because they made it an employment; with my master I
thought no more of it, though my sentiments continued the
same: I had no companions to vitiate my morals: I became
idle, careless, and obstinate, but my principles were not im-
paired.
I possessed as much religion, therefore, as a child could be
supposed capable of acquiring. Why should I now disguise
my thoughts? I am persuaded I had more. In my child-
hood, I was not a child; I felt, I thought as a man: as I ad-
vanced in years, I mingled with the ordinary class; in my
infancy I was distinguished from it. I shall doubtless incur
ridicule by thus modestly holding myself up for a prodigy—I
am content. Let those who find themselves disposed to it,
laugh their fill; afterward, let them find a child that at six
years old is delighted, interested, affected with romances,even
to the shedding floods of tears; I shall then feel my ridiculous
vanity, and acknowledge myself in an error.
Thus when I said we should not converse with children on
religion, if we wished them ever to possess any; when I
asserted they were incapable of communion with the Supreme
Being, even in our confined degree, I drew my conclusions
from general observation; I knew they were not applicable to
particular instances: find J. J. Rousseaus of six years old,
converse with them on religious subjects at seven, and I will
be answerable that the experiment will be attended with no
danger.
It is understood, I believe, that a child, or even a man, is
likely to be most sincere while persevering in that religion in

<page 82>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 57
whose belief he was born and educated; we frequently detract
from, seldom make any additions to it: dogmatical faith is
the effect of education. In addition to this general principle
which attached me to the religion of my forefathers, I had
that particular aversion our city entertains for Catholicism,
which is represented there as the most monstrous idolatry,
and whose clergy are painted in the blackest colors. This
sentiment was so firmly imprinted on my mind, that I never
dared to look into their churches—I could not bear to meet a
priest in his surplice, and never did I hear the bells of a pro-
cession sound without shuddering with horror; these sensa-
tions soon wore off in great cities, but frequently returned in
country parishes, which bore more similarity to the spot where
I first experienced them; meantime this dislike was singularly
contrasted by the remembrance of those caresses which priests
in the neighborhood of Geneva are fond of bestowing on the
children of that city. If the bells of the viaticum alarmed
me, the chiming for mass or vespers called me to a breakfast,
a collation, to the pleasure of regaling on fresh butter, fruits,
or milk; the good cheer of M. de Pontverre had produced a
considerable effect on me; my former abhorrence began to
diminish, and looking on popery through the medium of
amusement and good living, I easily reconciled myself to the
idea of enduring, though I never entertained but a very
transient and distant idea of making a solemn profes-
sion of it.
At this moment such a transaction appeared in all its hor-
rors; I shuddered at the engagement I had entered into, and
its inevitable consequences. The future neophytes with
which I was surrounded were not calculated to sustain my
courage by their example, and I could not help considering
the holy work I was about to perform as the action of a
villain. Though young, I was sufficiently convinced, that
whatever religion might be the true one, I was about to sell
mine; and even should I chance to chose the best, I lied to
the Holy Ghost, and merited the disdain of every good man.
The more I considered, the more I despised myself, and trem-
bled at the fate which had led me into such a predicament, as
if my present situation had not been of my own seeking.
There were moments when these compunctions were so strong
that had I found the door open but for an instant, I should
certainly have made my escape; but this was impossible, nor

<page 83>
58 THE CONFESSIONS OF
was the resolution of any long duration, being combated by
too many secret motives to stand any chance of gaining the
victory. -
My fixed determination not to return to Geneva, the shame
that would attend it, the difficulty of repassing the mountains,
at a distance from my country, without friends, and without
resources, everything concurred to make me consider my
remorse of conscience, as a too late repentance. I affected to
reproach myself for what I had done, to seek excuses for that
I intended to do, and by aggravating the errors of the past,
looked on the future as an inevitable consequence. I did not
say, nothing is yet done, and you may be innocent if you
please; but I said, tremble at the crime thou hast committed,
which hath reduced thee to the necessity of filling up the
measure of thine iniquities.
It required more resolution than was natural to my age to
revoke those expectations which I had given them reason to
entertain, break those chains with which I was enthralled,
and resolutely declare I would continue in the religion of my
forefathers, whatever might be the consequence. The affair
was already too far advanced, and spite of all my efforts they
would have made a point of bringing it to a conclusion.
The sophism which ruined me has had a similar affect on
the greater part of mankind, who lament the want of reso-
lution when the opportunity for exercising it is over. The
practice of virtue is only difficult from our own negligence;
were we always discreet, we should seldom have occasion for
any painful exertion of it; we are captivated by desires we
might readily surmount, give into temptations that might
easily be resisted, and insensibly get into embarrassing, peril-
ous situations, from which we cannot extricate ourselves but
with the utmost difficulty; intimidated by the effort, we fall
into the abyss, saying to the Almighty, why hast thou made
us such weak creatures? But, notwithstanding our vain pre-
texts, He replies, by our consciences, I formed ye too weak to
get out of the gulf, because I gave ye sufficient strength not
to have fallen into it.
I was not absolutely resolved to become a Catholic, but, as
it was not necessary to declare my intentions immediately, I
gradually accustomed myself to the idea; hoping, meantime,
that some unforeseen event would extricate me from my em-
barrassment. In order to gain time, I resolved to make the

<page 84>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 59
best defence I possibly could in favor of my own opinion;
but my vanity soon rendered this resolution unnecessary, for
on finding Ifrequently embarrassed those who had the care
of my instruction, I wished to heighten my triumph by giving
them a complete overthrow. I zealously pursued my plan, not
without the ridiculous hope of being able to convert my con-
vertors; for I was simple enough to believe, that could I con-
vince them of their errors, they would become Protestants;
they did not find, therefore, that facility in the work which
they had expected, as I differed both in regard to will and
knowledge from the opinion they had entertained of me.
Protestants, in general, are better instructed in the princi-
ples of their religion than Catholics; the reason is obvious;
the doctrine of the former requires discussion, of the latter a
blind submission; the Catholic must content himself with the
decisions of others, the Protestant must learn to decide for
himself; they were not ignorant of this, but neither my age
nor appearance promised much difficulty to men so accustomed
to disputation. They knew, likewise, that I had not received
my first communion, nor the instructions which accompany
it; but, on the other hand, they had no idea of the informa-
tion I received at M. Lambercier's, or that I had learned the
history of the church and empire almost by heart at my
father's; and though (since that time, nearly forgot, when
warmed by the dispute, very unfortunately for these gentle-
men), it again returned to my memory.
A little old priest, but tolerably venerable, held the first
conference; at which we were all convened. On the part of
my comrades, it was rather a catechism than a controversy,
and he found more pains in giving them instruction than
answering their objections; but when it came to my turn, it
was a different matter; I stopped him at every article, and
did not spare a single remark that I thought would create a
difficulty: this rendered the conference long and extremely
tiresome to the assistants. My old priest talked a great deal,
was very warm, frequently rambled from the subject, and ex-
tricated himself from difficulties by saying he was not suf-
ficiently versed in the French language.
The next day, lest my indiscreet objections should injure
the minds of those who were better disposed, I was led into
a separate chamber and put under the care of a younger priest,
a fine speaker; that is, one who was fond of long perplexed

<page 85>
6o THE CONFESSIONS OF
sentences, and proud of his own abilities, if ever doctor was.
I did not, however, suffer myself to be intimidated by his
overbearing looks: and being sensible that I could maintain
my ground, I combated his assertions, exposed his mistakes,
and laid about me in the best manner I was able. He thought
to silence me at once with St. Augustine, St. Gregory, and the
rest of the fathers, but found, to his ineffable surprise, that I
could handle these almost as dexterously as himself; not that
I had ever read them, or he either, perhaps, but I retained a
number of passages taken from my Le Sueur, and when he
bore hard on me with one citation, without standing to dis-
pute, I parried it with another, which method embarrassed
him extremely. At length, however, he got the better of me
for two very potent reasons; in the first place, he was of the
strongest side; young as I was, I thought it might be dan-
gerous to drive him to extremities, for I plainly saw the
old priest was neither satisfied with me nor my erudition. In
the next place, he had studied, I had not; this gave a degree
of method to his arguments which I could not follow; and
whenever he found himself pressed by an unforeseen objection
he put it off to the next conference, pretending I rambled
from the question in dispute. Sometimes he even rejected
all my quotations, maintaining they were false, and, offering to
fetch the book, defied me to find them. He knew he ran very
little risk, and that, with all my borrowed learning, I was not
sufficiently accustomed to books, and too poor a Latinist to
find a passage in a large volume, had I been ever so well
assured it was there. I even suspected him of having been
guilty of a perfidy with which he accused our ministers, and
that he fabricated passages sometimes in order to evade an
objection that incominoded him.
Meanwhile the hospital became every day more disagreea-
ble to me, and seeing but one way to get out of it, I endeav-
ored to hasten my abjuration with as much eagerness as I
had hitherto sought to retard it.
The two Africans had been baptised with great ceremony,
they were habited in white from head to foot to signify the
purity of their regenerated souls. My turn came a month
after; for all this time was thought necessary by my directors,
that they might have the honor of a difficult conversion, and
every dogma of their faith was recapitulated, in order to tri-
umph the more completely over my new docility.

<page 86>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 61
At length, sufficiently instructed and disposed to the will
of my masters, I was led in procession to the metropolitan
church of St. John, to make a solemn abjuration, and undergo
a ceremony made use of on these occasions, which, though
not baptism, is very similar, and serves to persuade the peo-
ple that Protestants are not Christians. I was clothed in a kind
of gray robe, decorated with white Brandenburgs. Two men,
one behind, the other before me, carried copper basins which
they kept striking with a key, and in which those who were
charitably disposed put their alms, according as they found
themselves influenced by religion or good will for the new
convert; in a word, nothing of Catholic pageantry was omitted
that could render the solemnity edifying to the populace, or
humiliating to me. The white dress might have been ser-
viceable, but as I had not the honor to be either Moor or Jew,
they did not think fit to compliment me with it.
The affair did not end here, I must now go to the Inqui-
sition to be absolved from the dreadful sin of heresy, and
return to the bosom of the church with the same ceremony
to which Henry the Fourth was subjected by his ambassador.
The air and manner of the right reverend Father Inquisitor
was by no means calculated to dissipate the secret horror that
seized my spirits on entering this holy mansion. After several
questions relative to my faith, situation, and family, he asked
me bluntly if my mother was damned? Terror repressed the
first gust of indignation; this gave me time to recollect myself,
and I answered, I hope not, for God might have enlightened her
last moments. The monk made no reply, but his silence was
attended with a look by no means expressive of approbation.
All these ceremonies ended, the very moment I flattered
myself I should be plentifully provided for, they exhorted me
to continue a good Christian, and live in obedience to the
grace I had received; then wishing me good fortune, with
rather more than twenty francs of small money in my pocket,
the produce of the above-mentioned collection, turned me out,
shut the door on me, and I saw no more of them!
Thus, in a moment, all my flattering expectations were at
an end; and nothing remained from my interested conversion
but the remembrance of having been made both a dupe and
an apostate. It is easy to imagine what a sudden revolution
was produced in my ideas, when every brilliant expectation
of making a fortune terminated by Seeing myself plunged

<page 87>
62 THE CONFESSIONS OF
in the completest misery. In the morning I was deliberating
what palace I should inhabit, before night I was reduced to
seek my lodging in the street. It may be supposed that I
gave myself up to the most violent transports of despair,
rendered more bitter by a consciousness that my own folly
had reduced me to these extremities; but the truth is, I ex-
perienced none of these disagreeable sensations. I had passed
two months in absolute confinement; this was new to me; I
was now emancipated, and the sentiment I felt most forcibly,
was joy at my recovered liberty. After a slavery which had
appeared tedious, I was again master of my time and actions,
in a great city, abundant in resources, crowded with people of
fortune, to whom my merit and talents could not fail to re-
commend me. I had sufficient time before me to expect this
good fortune, for my twenty livres seemed an inexhaustible
treasure, which I might dispose of without rendering an ac-
count of to anyone. It was the first time I had found myself
so rich, and far from giving way to melancholy reflections, I
only adopted other hopes, in which self-love was by no means
a loser. Never did I feel so great a degree of confidence and
security; I looked on my fortune as already made and was
pleased to think I should have no one but myself to thank
for the acquisition of it.
The first thing I did was to satisfy my curiosity by ramb-
ling all over the city, and I seemed to consider it as a con-
firmation of my liberty; I went to see the soldiers mount
guard, and was delighted with their military accoutrements;
I followed processions, and was pleased with the solemn music
of the priests; I next went to see the king's palace, which I
approached with awe, but seeing others enter, I followed their
example, and no one prevented me; perhaps I owed this favor
to the small parcel I carried under my arm; be that as it may,
I conceived a high opinion of my consequence from this cir-
cumstance, and already thought myself an inhabitant there.
The weather was hot; I had walked about till I was both
fatigued and hungry; wishing for some refreshment, I went
into a milk-house; they brought me some cream-cheese curds
and whey, and two slices of that excellent Piedmont bread,
which I prefer to any other: and for five or six sous I had one
of the most delicious meals I ever recollect to have made.
It was time to seek a lodging: as I already knew enough of
the Piedmontese language to make myself understood, this

<page 88>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 63
was a work of no great difficulty; and I had so much pru-
dence, that I wished to adapt it rather to the state of my
purse than the bent of my inclinations. In the course of my
inquiries, I was informed that a soldier's wife, in Po-street,
furnished lodgings to servants out of place at only one sou a
night, and finding one of her poor beds disengaged, I took
possession of it. She was young and newly married, though
she already had five or six children. Mother, children and
lodgers, all slept in the same chamber, and it continued thus
while I remained there. She was good-natured, swore like a
carman, and wore neither cap nor handkerchief; but she had
a gentle heart, was officious; and to me both kind and serv-
iceable.
For several days I gave myself up to the pleasures of inde-
pendence and curiosity; I continued wandering about the
city and its environs, examining every object that seemed
curious or new; and, indeed, most things had that appear-
ance to a young novice. I never omitted visiting the court,
and assisted regularly every morning at the king's mass. I
thought it a great honor to be in the same chapel with this
prince and his retinue; but my passion for music, which now
began to make its appearance, was a greater incentive than
the splendor of the court, which, soon seen and always the
same, presently lost its attraction. The King of Sardinia
had at that time the best music in Europe; Somis, Desjardins,
and the Bezuzzi shone there alternately; all these were not
necessary to fascinate a youth whom the sound of the most
simple instrument, provided it was just, transported with joy.
Magnificence only produced a stupid admiration, without any
violent desire to partake of it, my thoughts were principally
employed in observing whether any young princess was
present that merited my homage, and whom I could make
the heroine of a romance.
Meantime, I was on the point of beginning one; in a less
elevated sphere, it is true, but where could I have brought it
to a conclusion, I should have found pleasures a thousand
times more delicious.
Though I lived with the strictest economy, my purse in-
sensibly grew lighter. This economy was, however, less the
effect of prudence than that love of simplicity, which, even
to this day, the use of the most expensive tables has not been
able to vitiate. Nothing in my idea, either at that time or

<page 89>
64 THE CONFESSIONS OF
since, could exceed a rustic repast; give me milk, vegetables,
eggs, and brown bread, with tolerable wine and I shall always
think myself sumptuously regaled; a good appetite will fur-
nish out the rest, if the maitre d" hotel, with a number of un-
necessary footmen, do not satiate me with their important
attentions. Five or six sous would then procure me a more
agreeable meal than as many livres would have done since; I
was abstemious, therefore, for want of a temptation to be other-
wise: though I do not know but I am wrong to call this absti-
nence, for with my pears, new cheese, bread and some glasses
of Montferrat wine, which you might have cut with a knife,
I was the greatest of epicures. Notwithstanding my ex-
penses were very moderate, it was possible to see the end
of twenty livres; I was every day more convinced of this,
and, spite of the giddiness of youth, my apprehensions for
the future amounted almost to terror. All my castles in
the air were vanished, and I became sensible of the necessity
of seeking some occupation that would procure me a sub-
sistence.
Even this was a work of difficulty; I thought of my engrav-
ing, but knew too little of it to be employed as a journeyman,
nor do masters abound in Turin; I resolved, therefore, till
something better presented itself, to go from shop to shop,
offering to engrave ciphers, or coats of arms, on pieces of
plate, etc., and hoped to get employment by working at a low
price; or taking what they chose to give me. Even this ex-
pedient did not answer my expectations; almost all my appli-
cations were ineffectual, the little I procured being hardly
sufficient to produce a few scanty meals.
Walking one morning pretty early in the Contra nova, I
saw a young tradeswoman behind a counter, whose looks
were so charmingly attractive, that, notwithstanding my
timidity with the ladies, I entered the shop without hesita-
tion, offered my services as usual, and had the happiness to
have it accepted. She made me sit down and recite my little
history, pitied my forlorn situation; bade me be cheerful,
and endeavored to make me so by an assurance that every
good Christian would give me assistance; then (while she
had occasion for) she went up stairs and fetched me something
for breakfast. This seemed a promising beginning, nor was
what followed less flattering: she was satisfied with my work,
and, when I had a little recovered myself, still more with my

<page 90>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 65
discourse. She was rather elegantly dressed and notwith-
standing her gentle looks this appearance of gayety had dis-
concerted me; but her good-nature, the compassionate tone
of her voice, with her gentle and caressing manner, soon set
me at ease with myself; I saw my endeavors to please were
crowned with success, and this assurance made me succeed
the more. Though an Italian, and too pretty to be entirely
devoid of coquetry, she had so much modesty, and I so great
a share of timidity, that our adventure was not likely to be
brought to a very speedy conclusion, nor did they give us time
to make any good of it. I cannot recall the few short moments
I passed with this lovely woman without being sensible of an
inexpressible charm, and can yet say, it was there I tasted in
their utmost perfection the most delightful, as well as the
purest pleasures of love.
She was alively pleasing brunette, and the good nature that
was painted on her lovely face rendered her vivacity more in-
teresting. She was called Madam Basile: her husband, who
was considerably older than herself, consigned her, during his
absence, to the care of a clerk, too disagreeable to be thought
dangerous; but who, notwithstanding, had pretensions that
he seldom showed any signs of, except of ill-humors, a good
share of which he bestowed on me; though I was pleased to
hear him play the flute, on which he was a tolerable musician.
This second Egistus was sure to grumble whenever he saw
me go into his mistress' apartment, treating me with a degree
of disdain which she took care to repay him with interest;
seeming pleased to caress me in his presence, on purpose to
torment him. This kind of revenge, though perfectly to my
taste, would have been still more charming in a tête à tête, but
she did not proceed so far; at least, there was a difference in
the expression of her kindness. Whether she thought me too
young, that it was my place to make advances, or that she
was seriously resolved to be virtuous, she had at such times
a kind of reserve, which, though not absolutely discouraging,
kept my passion within bounds.
I did not feel the same real and tender respect for her as
I did for Madam de Warrens: I was embarrassed, agitated,
feared to look, and hardly dared to breathe in her presence,
yet to have left her would have been worse than death: How
fondly did my eyes devour whatever they could gaze on with-
out being perceived! the flowers on her gown, the point of her

<page 91>
66 THE CONFESSIONS OF
pretty foot, the interval of a round white arm that appeared
between her glove and ruffle, the least part of her neck, each
object increased the force of all the rest, and added to the in-
fatuation. Gazing thus on what was to be seen, and even
more than was to be seen, my sight became confused, my
chest seemed contracted, respiration was every moment more
painful. I had the utmost difficulty to hide my agitation, to
prevent my sighs from being heard, and this difficulty was
increased by the silence in which we were frequently plunged.
Happily, Madam Basile, busy at her work, saw nothing of
all this, or seemed not to see it: yet I sometimes observed a
kind of sympathy, especially at the frequent rising of her
handkerchief, and this dangerous sight almost mastered every
effort, but when on the point of giving way to my transports,
she spoke a few words to me with an air of tranquility, and
in an instant the agitation subsided.
I saw her several times in this manner without a word, a
gesture, or even a look, too expressive, making the least in-
telligence between us. The situation was both my torment
and delight, for hardly in the simplicity of my heart, could I
imagine the cause of my uneasiness. I should suppose these
tête à tête could not be displeasing to her, at least, she sought
frequent occasions to renew them; this was a very disinter-
ested labor, certainly, as appeared by the use she made, or
ever suffered me to make of them.
Being, one day, wearied with the clerk's discourse, she had
retired to her chamber; I made haste to finish what I had to
do in the back shop, and followed her; the door was half open,
and I entered without being perceived. She was embroider-
ing near a window on the opposite side of tile room; she
could not see me; and the carts in the streets made too much
noise for me to be heard. She was always well dressed, but
this day her attire bordered on coquetry. Her attitude was
graceful, her head leaning gently forward, discovered a small
circle of her neck; her hair,elegantly dressed, was ornamented
with flowers; her figure was universally charming, and I had
an uninterrupted opportunity to admire it. I was absolutely
in a state of ecstasy, and, involuntary, sinking on my knees,
I passionately extended my arms towards her, certain she
could not hear, and having no conception that she could see
me; but there was a chimney glass at the end of the room
that betrayed all my proceedings. I am ignorant what effect

<page 92>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 67
this transport produced on her; she did not speak; she did not
look on me; but, partly turning her head, with the movement
of her finger only, she pointed to the mat that was at her
feet—To start up, with an articulate cry of joy, and occupy
the place she had indicated, was the work of a moment; but
it will hardly be believed I dared attempt no more, not even
to speak, raise my eyes to hers, or rest an instant on her
knees, though in an attitude which seemed to render such a
support necessary. I was dumb, immovable, but far enough
from a state of tranquility; agitation, joy, gratitude, ardent
indefinite wishes, restrained by the fear of giving displeasure,
which my unpractised heart too much dreaded, were suf-
ficiently discernible. She neither appeared more tranquil, nor
less intimidated than myself—uneasy at my present situa-
tion; confounded at having brought me there, beginning to
tremble for the effects of a sign which she had made without
reflecting on the consequences, neither giving encouragement,
nor expressing disapprobation, with her eyes fixed on her
work, she endeavored to appear unconscious of everything
that passed; but all my stupidity could not hinder me from
concluding that she partook of my embarrassment, perhaps,
my transports, and was only hindered by a bashfulness like
mine, without even that supposition giving me power to sur-
mount it. Five or six years older than myself, every advance,
according to my idea, should have been made by her, and,
since she did nothing to encourage mine, I concluded they
would offend her. Even at this time, I am inclined to believe
I thought right; she certainly had wit enough to perceive
that a novice like me had occasion, not only for encourage-
ment but instruction.
I am ignorant how this animated, though dumb scene
would have ended, or how long I should have continued im-
movable in this ridiculous, though delicious, situation, had
we not been interrupted—in the height of my agitation, I
heard the kitchen door open, which joined Madam Basile's
chamber; who, being alarmed, said, with a quick voice and
action, “Get up! Here's Rosina!” Rising hastily I seized
one of her hands, which she held out to me, and gave it two
eager kisses; at the second I felt this charming hand press
gently on my lips. Never in my life did I enjoy so sweet a
moment; but the occasion I had lost returned no more, this
being the conclusion of our amours.

<page 93>
68 THE CONFESSIONS OF
This may be the reason why her image yet remains im-
printed on my heart in such charming colors, which have
even acquired fresh lustre since I became acquainted with the
world and women. Had she been mistress of the least degree
of experience, she would have taken other measures to ani-
mate so youthful a lover; but if her heart was weak, it was
virtuous; and only suffered itself to be borne away by a
powerful though involuntary inclination. This was, ap-
parently, her first infidelity, and I should, perhaps, have
found more difficulty in vanquishing her scruples than my
own; but, without proceeding so far, I experienced in her
company the most inexpressible delights. Never did I taste
with any other woman pleasures equal to those two minutes
which I passed at the feet of Madam Basile without even
daring to touch her gown. I am convinced no satisfaction
can be compared to that we feel with a virtuous woman we
esteem; all is transport!—A sign with the finger, a hand
lightly pressed against my lips, were the only favors I ever
received from Madam Basile, yet the bare remembrance of
these trifling condescensions continues to transport me.
It was in vain I watched the two following days for another
tête-à-téte; it was impossible to find an opportunity; nor
could I perceive on her part any desire to forward it; her be-
havior was not colder, but more distant than usual, and I
believe she avoided my looks for fear of not being able suf-
ficiently to govern her own. The cursed clerk was more vex-
atious than ever; he even became a wit, telling me, with a
satirical sneer, that I should unquestionably make my way
among the ladies. I trembled lest I should have been guilty
of some indiscretion, and looking at myself as already en-
gaged in an intrigue, endeavored to cover with an air of
mystery an inclination which hitherto certainly had no great
need of it; this made me more circumspect in my choice of
opportunities, and by resolving only to seize such as should
be absolutely free from the danger of a surprise, I met none.
Another romantic folly, which I could never overcome, and
which, joined to my natural timidity, tended directly to con-
tradict the clerk's predictions, is, I always loved too sincerely,
too perfectly, I may say, to find happiness easily attainable.
Never were passions at the same time more lively and pure
than mine; never was love more tender, more true, or more
disinterested; freely would I have sacrificed my own happi-

<page 94>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 69
ness to that of the object of my affection; her reputation was
dearer than my life, and I could promise myself no happiness
for which I would have exposed her peace of mind for a mo-
ment. This disposition has ever made me employ so much
care, use so many precautions, such secrecy in my adventures,
that all of them have failed; in a word, my want of success
with the women has ever proceeded from having loved them
too well.
To return to our Egistus, the fluter; it was remarkable that
in becoming more insupportable, the traitor put on the ap-
pearance of complaisance. From the first day Madam Basile
had taken me under her protection, she had endeavored to
make me serviceable in the warehouse; and finding I under-
stood arithmetic tolerably well, she proposed his teaching me
to keep the books; a proposition that was but indifferently
received by this humorist, who might, perhaps, be fearful of
being supplanted. As this failed, my whole employ, besides
what engraving I had to do, was to transcribe some bills and
accounts, to write several books over fair, and translate com-
mercial letters from Italian into French. All at once he
thought fit to accept the before rejected proposal, saying, he
would teach me book-keeping, by double-entry, and put me in
a situation to offer my services to M. Basile on his return;
but there was something so false, malicious, and ironical, in
his air and manner, that it was by no means calculated to in-
spire me with confidence. Madam Basile, replied archly,
that I was much obliged to him for his kind offer, but she
hoped fortune would be more favorable to my merits, for it
would be a great misfortune, with so much sense, that I
should only be a pitiful clerk.
She often said, she would procure me some acquaintance
that might be useful; she doubtless felt the necessity of part-
ing with me, and had prudently resolved on it. Our mute
declaration had been made on Thursday, the Sunday follow-
ing she gave a dinner. A Jacobin of good appearance was
among the guests, to whom she did me the honor to present
me. The monk treated me very affectionately, congratulated
me on my late conversion, mentioned several particulars of
my story, which plainly showed he had been made acquainted
with it, then, tapping me familiarly on the cheek, bade me
be good, to keep up my spirits, and come to see him at his
convent, where he should have more opportunity to talk with

<page 95>
7o THE CONFESSIONS OF
me. I judged him to be a person of some consequence by the
deference that was paid him; and by the paternal tone he
assumed with Madam Basile, to be her confessor. I likewise
remember that his decent familiarity was attended with an
appearance of esteem, and even respect for his fair penitent,
which then made less impression on me than at present. Had
I possessed more experience how should I have congratulated
myself on having touched the heart of a young woman re-
spected by her confessor!
The table not being large enough to accommodate all the
company, a small one was prepared, where I had the satis-
faction of dining with our agreeable clerk; but I lost nothing
with regard to attention and good cheer, for several plates
were sent to the side-table which were certainly not intended
for him.
Thus far all went well; the ladies were in good spirits,
and the gentlemen very gallant, while Madam Basile
did the honors of the table with peculiar grace. In the midst
of the dinner we heard a chaise stop at the door, and presently
some one coming up stairs—it was M. Basile. Methinks I
now see him entering, in his scarlet coat with gold buttons—
from that day I have held the color in abhorrence. M. Basile
was a tall handsome man, of good address: he entered with
a consequential look and an air of taking his family un-
awares, though none but friends were present. His wife ran
to meet him, threw her arms about his neck, and gave him a
thousand caresses, which he received with the utmost indiffer-
ence; and without making any return saluted the company
and took his place at table. They were just beginning to
speak of his journey, when casting his eye on the small table
he asked in a sharp tone, what lad that was? Madam Basile
answered ingenuously. He then inquired whether I lodged
in the house; and was answered in the negative. “Why not?”
replied he, rudely, “since he stays here all day, he might as
well remain all night too.” The monk now interfered, with
a serious and true eulogium on Madam Basile: in a few
words he made mine also, adding, that so far from blaming,
he ought to further the pious charity of his wife, since it was
evident she had not passed the bounds of discretion. The
husband answered with an air of petulance, which (restrained
by the presence of the monk) he endeavored to stifle; it was,
however, sufficient to let me understand he had already re-

<page 96>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 71
ceived information of me, and that our worthy clerk had
rendered me an ill office.
We had hardly risen from table, when the latter came in
triumph from his employer, to inform me, I must leave the
house that instant, and never more during my life dare to set
foot there. He took care to aggravate this commission by
everything that could render it cruel and insulting. I de-
parted without a word, my heart overwhelmed with sorrow,
less for being obliged to quit this amiable woman, than at the
thought of leaving her to the brutality of such a husband.
He was certainly right to wish her faithful; but though pru-
dent and well-born, she was an Italian, that is to say, tender
and vindictive; which made me think, he was extremely im-
prudent in using means the most likely in the world to draw
on himself the very evil he so much dreaded.
Such was the success of my first adventure. I walked
several times up and down the street, wishing to get a sight
of what my heart incessantly regretted; but I could only dis-
cover her husband, or the vigilant clerk, who, perceiving me,
made a sign with the ell they used in the shop, which was
more expressive than alluring: finding, therefore, that I was
so completely watched, my courage failed, and I went no
more. I wished, at least, to find out the patron she had pro-
vided me, but, unfortunately, I did not know his name. I
ranged several times round the convent, endeavoring in vain
to meet with him. At length, other events banished the de-
lightful remembrance of Madam Basile; and in a short time
I so far forgot her, that I remained as simple, as much a
novice as ever, nor did my penchant for pretty women even
receive any sensible augmentation.
Her liberality had, however, increased my little wardrobe,
though she had done this with precaution and prudence, re-
garding neatness more than decoration, and to make me com-
fortable rather than brilliant. The coat I had brought from
Geneva was yet wearable, she only added a hat and some
linen. I had no ruffles, nor would she give me any, not but I
felt a great inclination for them. She was satisfied with hav-
ing put it in my power to keep myself clean, though a charge
to do this was unnecessary while I was to appear before her.
A few days after this catastrophe, my hostess, who, as I have
already observed, was very friendly, with great satisfaction
informed me she had heard of a situation, and that a lady of

<page 97>
72 THE CONFESSIONS OF
rank desired to see me. I immediately thought myself in the
road to great adventures; that being the point to which all
my ideas tended: this, however, did not prove so brilliant as
I had conceived it. I waited on the lady with the servant
who had mentioned me: she asked a number of questions,
and my answers not displeasing her, I immediately entered
into her service; not, indeed, in the quality of favorite, but as
a footman. I was clothed like the rest of her people, the only
difference being, they wore a shoulder-knot, which I had not,
and, as there was no lace on her livery, it appeared merely a
tradesman's suit. This was the unforeseen conclusion of all
my great expectancies!
The Countess of Vercellis, with whom I now lived, was a
widow without children; her husband was a Piedmontese,
but I always believed her to be a Savoyard, as I could have
no conception that a native of Piedmont could speak such
good French, and with so pure an accent. She was a middle-
aged woman, of a noble appearance and cultivated under-
standing, being fond of French literature, in which she was
well versed. Her letters had the expression, and almost the
elegance of Madam de Savigne's; some of them might have
been taken for hers. My principal employ, which was by no
means displeasing to me, was to write from her dictating; a
cancer in the breast, from which she suffered extremely, not
permitting her to write herself.
Madam de Vercellis not only possessed a good understand-
ing, but a strong and elevated soul. I was with her during
her last illness, and saw her suffer and die, without showing
an instant of weakness, or the least effort of constraint; still
retaining her feminine manners, without entertaining an idea
that such fortitude gave her any claim to philosophy; a word
which was not yet in fashion, nor comprehended by her in the
sense it is held at present. This strength of disposition some-
times extended almost to apathy, ever appearing to feel as
little for others as herself; and when she relieved the un-
fortunate, it was rather for the sake of acting right, than from
a principle of real commiseration. I have frequently ex-
perienced this insensibility, in some measure, during the
three months I remained with her. It would have been
natural to have had an esteem for a young man of some
abilities, who was incessantly under her observation, and that
she should think, as she felt her dissolution approaching, that

<page 98>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 73
after her death he would have occasion for assistance and sup-
port: but whether she judged me unworthy of particular
attention, or that those who narrowly watched all her motions,
gave her no opportunity to think of any but themselves, she
did nothing for me.
I very well recollect that she showed some curiosity to know
my story, frequently questioning me, and appearing pleased
when I showed her the letters I wrote to Madam de Warrens,
or explained my sentiments; but as she never discovered her
own, she certainly did not take the right means to come at
them. My heart, naturally communicative, loved to display
its feelings, whenever I encountered a similar disposition;
but dry, cold interrogatories, without any sign of blame or
approbation on my answers, gave me no confidence. Not
being able to determine whether my discourse was agreeable
or displeasing, I was ever in fear, and thought less of express-
ing my ideas, than of being careful not to say anything that
might seem to my disadvantage. I have since remarked that
this dry method of questioning themselves into people's char-
acters is a common trick among women who pride themselves
on superior understanding. These imagine, that by conceal-
ing their own sentiments, they shall the more easily penetrate
into those of others; being ignorant that this method destroys
the confidence so necessary to make us reveal them. A man,
on being questioned, is immediately on his guard: and if once
he supposes that, without any interest in his concerns, you
only wish to set him a-talking, either he entertains you with
lies, is silent, or, examining every word before he utters it,
rather chooses to pass for a fool, than to be the dupe of your
curiosity. In short, it is ever a bad method to attempt to
read the hearts of others by endeavoring to conceal our own.
Madam de Vercellis never addressed a word to me which
seemed to express affection, pity, or benevolence. She inter-
rogated me coldly, and my answers were uttered with so much
timidity, that she doubtless entertained but a mean opinion
of my intellects, for latterly she never asked me any ques-
tions, nor said anything but what was absolutely necessary
for her service. She drew her judgment less from what I
really was, than from what she had made me, and by consider-
ing me as a footman prevented my appearing otherwise.
I am inclined to think I suffered at that time by the same
interested game of concealed manoeuvre, which has counter-

<page 99>
74 THE CONFESSIONS OF
acted me throughout my life, and given me a very natural
aversion for everything that has the least appearance of it.
Madam de Vercellis having no children, her nephew, the
Count de la Roque, was her heir, and paid his court assidu-
ously, as did her principal domestics, who, seeing her end
approaching, endeavored to take care of themselves; in short,
so many were busy about her, that she could hardly have
found time to think of me. At the head of her household
was a M. Lorenzy, an artful genius, with a still more artful
wife; who had so far insinuated herself into the good graces
of her mistress, that she was rather on the footing of a friend
than a servant. She had introduced a niece of hers as ladv's
maid: her name was Mademoiselle Pontal; a º
that gave herself all the airs of a waiting-woman, anti-aš.
sisted her aunt so well in besetting the countess, that she
only saw with their eyes, and acted through their hands. I
had not the happiness to please this worthy triumvirate; I
obeyed, but did not wait on them, not conceiving that my
duty to our general mistress required me to be a servant to
her servants. Besides this, I was a person that gave them
some inquietude; they saw I was not in my proper situation,
and feared the countess would discover it likewise, and by
placing me in it, decrease their portions; for such sort of peo-
ple, too greedy to be just, look on every legacy given to others
as a diminution of their own wealth; they endeavored, there-
fore, to keep me as much out of her sight as possible. She
loved to write letters, in her situation, but they contrived to
give her a distaste to it; persuading her, by the aid of the
doctor, that it was too fatiguing; and, under pretence that I
did not understand how to wait on her, they employed two
great lubberly chairmen for that purpose; in a word, they
managed the affair so well, that for eight days before she
made her will, I had not been permitted to enter the chamber.
Afterwards I went in as usual, and was even more assiduous
than any one, being afflicted at the sufferings of the unhappy
lady, whom I truly respected and beloved for the calmness
and fortitude with which she bore her illness, and often
did I shed tears of real sorrow without being perceived by
any one.
At length we lost her—I saw her expire. She had lived like
a woman of sense and virtue, her death was that of a phil-
osopher. I can truly say, she rendered the Catholic religion

<page 100>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 75
amiable to me by the serenity with which she fulfilled its dic-
tates, without any mixture of negligence or affectation. She
was naturally serious, but towards the end of her illness she
possessed a kind of gayety, too regular to be assumed, which
served as a counterpoise to the melancholy of her situation.
She only kept her bed two days, continuing to discourse
cheerfully with those about her to the very last.
She had bequeathed a year's wages to all the under ser-
vants, but, not being on the household list, I had nothing:
the Count de la Roque, however, ordered me thirty livres, and
the new coat I had on, which M. Lorenzy would certainly have
taken from me. He even promised to procure me a place;
giving me permission to wait on him as often as I pleased.
Accordingly, I went two or three times, without being able to
speak to him, and as I was easily repulsed, returned no more;
whether I did wrong will be seen hereafter.
Would I had finished what I have to say of my living at
Madam de Vercellis's. Though my situation apparently re-
mained the same, I did not leave her house as I had entered
it: I carried with me the long and painful remembrance of a
crime; an insupportable weight of remorse which yet hangs
on my conscience, and whose bitter recollection, far from
weakening, during a period of forty years, seems to gather
strength as I grow old. Who would believe, that a childish
fault should be productive of such melancholy consequences?
But it is for the more than probable effects that my heart can-
not be consoled. I have, perhaps, caused an amiable, honest,
estimable girl, who surely merited a better fate than myself,
to perish with shame and misery.
Though it is very difficult to break up housekeeping with-
out confusion, and the loss of some property; yet such was
the fidelity of the domestics, and the vigilance of M. and
Madam Lorenzy, that no article of the inventory was found
wanting; in short, nothing was missing but a pink and silver
ribbon, which had been worn, and belonged to Mademoiselle
Pontal. Though several things of more value were in my
reach, this ribbon alone tempted me, and accordingly I stole
it. As I took no great pains to conceal the bauble, it was
soon discovered; they immediately insisted on knowing from
whence I had taken it; this perplexed me—I hesitated, and
at length said, with confusion, that Marion gave it me.
Marion was a young Mauriennese, and had been cook to

<page 101>
76 THE CONFESSIONS OF
Madam de Vercellis ever since she left off giving entertain-
ments, for being sensible she had more need of good broths
than fine ragouts, she had discharged her former one. Marion
was not only pretty, but had that freshness of color only to
be found among the mountains, and, above all, an air of
modesty and sweetness, which made it impossible to see her
without affection; she was besides a good girl, virtuous, and
of such strict fidelity, that everyone was surprised at hearing
her named. They had not less confidence in me, and judged
it necessary to certify which of us was the thief. Marion was
sent for; a great number of people were present, among whom
was the Count de la Roque: she arrives; they show her the
ribbon; I accuse her boldly: she remains confused and speech-
less, casting a look on me that would have disarmed a demon,
but which my barbarous heart resisted. At length, she denied
it with firmness, but without anger, exhorting me to return
to myself, and not injure an innocent girl who had never
wronged me. With infernal impudence, I confirmed my accu-
sation, and to her face maintained she had given me the
ribbon: on which, the poor girl, bursting into tears, said these
words—“Ah, Rousseau! I thought you a good disposition—
you render me very unhappy, but I would not be in your
situation.” She continued to defend herself with as much
innocence as firmness, but without uttering the least invective
against me. Her moderation, compared to my positive tone,
did her an injury; as it did not appear natural to suppose, on
one side such diabolical assurance; on the other, such angelic
mildness. The affair could not be absolutely decided, but the
presumption was in my favor; and the Count de la Roque, in
sending us both away, contented himself with saying, “The
conscience of the guilty would revenge the innocent.” His
prediction was true, and is being daily verified.
I am ignorant what became of the victim of my calumny,
but there is little probability of her having been able to place
herself agreeably after this, as she labored under an impu-
tation cruel to her character in every respect. The theft was
a trifle, yet it was a theft, and, what was worse, employed to
seduce a boy; while the lie and obstinacy left nothing to hope
from a person in whom so many vices were united. I do not
even look on the misery and disgrace in which I plunged her
as the greatest evil: who knows, at her age, whither contempt
and disregarded innocence might have led her?—Alas! if re-

<page 102>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 77
morse for having made her unhappy is insupportable, what
must I have suffered at the thought of rendering her even
worse than myself. The cruel remembrance of this transac-
tion, sometimes so troubles and disorders me, that, in my dis-
turbed slumbers, I imagine I see this poor girl enter and
reproach me with my crime, as though I had committed it but
yesterday. While in easy tranquil circumstances, I was less
miserable on this account, but, during a troubled agitated
life, it has robbed me of the sweet consolation of persecuted
innocence, and made me wofully experience, what, I think, I
have remarked in some of my works, that remorse sleeps in
the calm sunshine of prosperity, but wakes ami e Storms
6Hadversity—rcourtnever Take Te to dischar
of this weight in the bosom of a friend; nor could the closest
intimacy ever encourage me to it, even with Madam de
Warrens: all I could do, was to own I had to accuse myself
of an atrocious crime, but never said in what it consisted.
The weight, therefore, has remained heavy on my conscience
to this day; and I can truly own the desire of relieving
myself, in some measure, from it, contributed greatly to the
resolution of writing my Confessions.
I have proceeded truly in that I have just made, and it will
certainly be thought I have not sought to palliate the turpi-
tude of my offence; but I should not fulfill the purpose of this
undertaking, did I not, at the same time, divulge my in-
terior disposition, and excuse myself as far as is conformable
with truth.
Never was wickedness further from my thoughts, than in
that cruel moment; and when I accused the unhappy girl, it
is strange, but strictly true, that my friendship for her was the
immediate cause of it. She was present to my thoughts; I
formed my excuse from the first object that presented itself:
I accused her with doing what I meant to have done, and as I
designed to have given her the ribbon, asserted she had given
it to me. When she appeared, my heart was agonized, but
the presence of so many people was more powerful than my
compunction. I did not fear punishment, but I dreaded
shame: I dreaded it more than death, more than the crime,
more than all the world. I would have buried, hid myself in
the centre of the earth: invincible shame bore down every
other sentiment; shame alone caused all my impudence, and
in proportion as I became criminal, the fear of discovery

<page 103>
78 THE CONFESSIONS OF
rendered me intrepid. I felt no dread but that of being de-
tected, of being publicly, and to my face, declared a thief, liar,
and calumniator; an unconquerable fear of this overcame
every other sensation. Had Ibeen left to myself, I should in-
fallibly have declared the truth. Or if M. de la Rogue had
taken me aside, and said—“Do not injure this poor girl; if you
are guilty own it,”—I am convinced I should instantly have
thrown myself at his feet; but they intimidated, instead of
encouraging me. I .###". "...# OF
rather, was yet in it. It is also just to make some allowance
for my age. In youth, dark, premeditated villainy is more
criminal than in a riper age, but weaknesses are much less so;
my fault was truly nothing more; and I am less afflicted at
the deed itself than for its consequences. It had one good
effect, however, in preserving me through the rest of my life
from any criminal action, from the terrible impression that
has remained from the only one I ever committed; and I think
my aversion for lying proceeds in a great measure from regret
at having been guilty of so black a one. If it is a crime that
can be expiated, as I dare believe, forty years of uprightness
and honor on various difficult occasions, with the many mis-
fortunes that have overwhelmed my latter years, may have
completed it. Poor Marion has found so many avengers in
this world, that however great my offence towards her, I do
not fear to bear the guilt with me. Thus have I disclosed
what I had to say on this painful subject; may I be permitted
never to mention it again.

<page 104>
J. J. ROSSRAU 79
BOOK III.
EAVING the service of Madam de Vercellis nearly as I
had entered it, I returned to my former hostess, and re-
mained there five or six weeks; during which time health,
youth, and laziness, frequently rendered my temperamentim-
portunate. I was restless, absent, and thoughtful: I wept and
sighed for a happiness I had no idea of, though at the same
time highly sensible of some deficiency. This situation is
indescribable, few men can even form any conception of it,
because, in general, they have prevented that plenitude of
life, at once tormenting and delicious. My thoughts were
incessantly occupied with girls and women, but in a manner
peculiar to myself: these ideas kept my senses in a perpetual
and disagreeable activity, though, fortunately, they did not
point out the means of deliverance. I would have given my
life to have met with a Miss Goton, but the time was past in
which the play of infancy predominated; increase of years
had introduced shame, the inseparable companion of a con-
scious deviation from rectitude, which so confirmed my
natural timidity as to render it invincible; and never, either
at that time or since, could I prevail on myself to offer a prop-
osition favorable to my wishes (unless in a manner con-
strained to it by previous advances) even with those whose
scruples I had no cause to dread.
My stay at Madam de Vercellis's had procured me some
acquaintance, which I thought might be serviceable to me,
and therefore wished to retain. Among others, I sometimes
visited a Savoyard abbe, M. Gaime, who was tutor to the
Count of Melarede's children. He was young, and not much
known, but possessed an excellent cultivated understanding,
with great probity, and was, altogether, one of the best men
I ever knew. He was incapable of doing me the service I then

<page 105>
8O THE CONFESSIONS OF
stood most in need of, not having sufficient interest to procure
me a situation, but from him I reaped advantages far more
precious, which have been useful to me through life, lessons
of pure morality, and maxims of Sound judgment.
In the successive order of my inclinations and ideas, I had
ever been too high or too low. Achilles or Thersites; some-
times a hero, at others a villain. M. Gaime took pains to
make me properly acquainted with myself, without sparing or
giving me too much discouragement. He spoke in advan-
tageous terms of my disposition and talents, adding, that he
foresaw obstacles which would prevent my profiting by them;
thus, according to him, they were to serve less as steps by
which I should mount to fortune, than as resources which
might enable me to exist without one. He gave me a true
picture of human life, of which, hitherto, I had formed but a
very erroneous idea, teaching me, that a man of understand-
ing, though destined to experience adverse fortune, might, by
skilful management, arrive at happiness; that there was no
true felicity without virtue, which was practicable in every
situation. He greatly diminished my admiration of grandeur,
by proving that those in a superior situation are neither better
nor happier than those they command. One of his maxims
has frequently returned to my memory: it was, that if we
could truly read the hearts of others we should feel more incli-
nation to descend thani rise: this reflection, the truth of which
is striking without extravagance, I have found of great
utility, in the various exigences of my life, as it tended to
make me satisfied with my condition. He gave me the first
just conception of relative duties, which my high-flown im-
agination had ever pictured in extremes, making me sensible
that the enthusiasm of sublime virtues is of little use in
society; that while endeavoring to rise too high we are in
danger of falling; and that a virtuousand uniform discharge of
little duties requires as great a degree of fortitude as actions
which are called heroic, and would at the same time procure
more honor and happiness. That it was infinitely more de-
sirable to possess the lasting esteem of those about us, than
at intervals to attract admiration.
In properly arranging the various duties between man and
man, it was necessary to ascend to principles; the step I had
recently taken, and of which my present situation was the
consequence, naturally led us to speak of religion. It will

<page 106>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 8I
easily be conceived that the honest M. Gaime was, in a great
measure, the original of the Savoyard Vicar; prudence only
obliging him to deliver his sentiments, on certain points,
with more caution and reserve, and explain himself with less
freedom; but his sentiments and councils were the same, not
even excepting his advice to return to my country; all was
precisely as I have since given it to the public. Dwelling no
longer, therefore, on conversations which everyone may see
the substance of, I shall only add, that these wise instruc-
tions (though they did not produce an immediate effect) were
as so many seeds of virtue and religion in my heart which
were never rooted out, and only required the fostering cares
of friendship to bring to maturity.
Though my conversation was not very sincere, I was affected
by his discourses, and far from being weary, was pleased with
them on account of their clearness and simplicity, but above
all because his heart seemed interested in what he said. My
disposition is naturally tender, I have ever been less attached
to people for the good they have really done me than for that
they designed to do, and my feelings in this particular have
seldom misled me: thus I truly esteemed M. Gaime. I was
in a manner his second disciple, which even at that time was
of inestimable service in turning me from a propensity to vice
into which my idleness was leading me. --
- One day, when ITéâst expected—it, I was sent for by the
Count de la Roque. Having frequently called at his house,
without being able to speak with him, I grew weary, and sup-
posing he had either forgot me or retained some unfavorable
impression of me, returned no more: but I was mistaken in
both these conjectures. He had more than once witnessed the
pleasure I took in fulfilling my duty to his aunt: he had even
mentioned it to her, and afterwards spoke of it, when I no
longer thought of it myself.
He received me graciously, saying that instead of amusing
me with useless promises, he had sought to place me to ad-
vantage; that he had succeeded, and would put me in a way
to better my situation, but the rest must depend on myself.
That the family into which he should introduce me being both
powerful and esteemed, I should need no other patrons; and
though at first on the footing of a servant, I might he assured,
that if my conduct and sentiments were found above that
station, I should not long remain in it. The end of this dis-

<page 107>
82 THE CONFESSIONS OF
course cruelly disappointed the brilliant hopes the beginning
had inspired. “What! forever a footman P’’ said I to myself,
with a bitterness which confidence presently effaced, for I
felt myself too superior to that situation to fear long re-
maining there.
He took me to the Count de Gauvon, Master of the Horse
to the Queen, and Chief of the illustrious House of Solar.
The air of dignity conspicuous in this respectable old man,
rendered the affability with which he received me yet more
interesting. He questioned me with evident interest, and I
replied with sincerity. He then told the Count de la Roque,
that my features were agreeable, and promised intellect, which
he believed I was not deficient in; but that was not enough,
and time must show the rest; after which, turning to me, he
said, “Child, almost all situations are attended with difficul-
ties in the beginning; yours, however, shall not have too
great a portion of them; be prudent, and endeavor to please
everyone, that will be almost your only employment; for the
rest fear nothing, you shall be taken care of.” Immediately
after he went to the Marchioness de Breil, his daughter-in-law,
to whom he presented me, and then to the Abbé de Gauvon,
his son. I was elated with this beginning, as I knew enough
of the world already to conclude, that so much ceremony is
not generally used at the reception of a footman. In fact, I
was not treated like one. I dined at the steward's table; did
not wear a livery; and the Count de Favria (a giddy youth)
having commanded me to get behind his coach, his grand-
father ordered that I should get behind no coach, nor follow
any one out of the house. Meantime, I waited at table, and
did, within doors, the business of a footman; but I did it, as
it were, of my own free will, without being appointed to any
particular service; and except writing some letters, which
were dictated to me, and cutting out some ornaments for the
Count de Favria, I was almost the absolute master of my
time. This trial of my discretion, which I did not then per-
ceive, was certainly very dangerous, and not very humane;
for in this state of idleness I might have contracted vices
which I should not otherwise have given into. Fortunately,
it did not produce that effect; my memory retained the lessons
of M. Gaime, they had made an impression on my heart, and
I sometimes escaped from the house of my patron to obtain a
repetition of them. I believe those who saw me going out,

<page 108>
J. J. ROUSEAU 83
apparently by stealth, had no conception of my business.
Nothing could be more prudent than the advice he gave me
respecting my conduct. My beginning was admirable; so
much attention, assiduity, and zeal, had charmed everyone.
The Abbé Gaime advised me to moderate this first ardor, lest
I should relax, and that relaxation should be considered as
neglect. “Your setting out,” said he, “is the rule of what
will be expected of you; endeavor gradually to increase your
attentions, but be cautious how you diminish them.”
As they paid but little attention to my trifling talents, and
supposed I possessed no more than nature had given me, there
was no appearance(notwithstanding the promises of Count de
Gauvon) of my meeting with any particular consideration.
Some objects of more consequence had intervened. The Mar-
quis de Breil, son of the Count de Gauvon, was then ambas-
sador at Vienna; some circumstances had occurred at that
court which for some weeks kept the family in continual
agitation, and left then no time to think of me. Meantime
I had relaxed but little in my attentions, though one object
in the family did me both good and harm, making me more
secure from exterior dissipation, but less attentive to my duty.
Mademoiselle de Breil was about my own age, tolerably
handsome, and very fair complexioned, with black hair, which
notwithstanding, gave her features that air of softness so
natural to the flaxen, and which my heart could never resist.
The court dress, so favorable to youth, showed her fine neck
and shape to advantage, and the mourning, which was then
worn, seemed to add to her beauty. It will be said, a domestic
should not take notice of these things; I was certainly to
blame, yet I perceived all this, nor was I the only one; the
maitre d" hatel and valet de chambre spoke of her sometimes at
table with a vulgarity that pained me extremely. My head,
however, was not sufficiently turned to allow of my being
entirely in love; I did not forget myself, or my situation. I
loved to see Mademoiselle de Breil; to hear her utter anything
that marked wit, sense, or good humor: my ambition, confined
to a desire of waiting on her, never exceeded its just rights.
At table I was ever attentive to make the most of them; if
her footman quitted her chair, I instantly supplied his place;
in default of this, I stood facing her, seeking in her eyes
what she was about to ask for, and watching the moment to
change her plate. What would I not have given to hear her

<page 109>
84 THE CONFESSIONS OF
command, to have her look at, or speak the smallest word to
me! but no, I had the mortification to be beneath her regard;
she did not even perceive I was there. Her brother, who fre-
quently spoke to me while at table, having one day said
something which I did not consider obliging, I made him so
arch and well-turned an answer, that it drew her attention;
she cast her eyes upon me, and this glance was sufficient to
fill me with transport. The next day, a second occasion pre-
sented itself, which I fortunately made use of. A great dinner
was given; and I saw, with astonishment, for the first time,
the matre d" hotel waiting at table, with a sword by his side,
and hat on his head. By chance, the discourse turned on the
motto of the house of Solar, which was, with the arms, worked
in the tapestry: Tel fiert qui ne tue pas. As the Piedmontese
are not in general very perfect in the French language, they
found fault with the orthography, saying, that in the word
fiert there should be no t. The old Count de Gauvon was
going to reply, when happening to cast his eyes on me, he
perceived I smiled without daring to say anything; he imme-
diately ordered me to speak my opinion. I then said, I did
not think the t superfluous, fiert being an old French word,
not derived from the noun ferus, proud, threatening; but from
the verb ſerit, he strikes, he wounds; the motto, therefore,
did not appear to mean, some threat, but, Some strike who do
not kill. The whole company fixed their eyes on me, then
on each other, without speaking a word; never was a greater
degree of astonishment; but what most flattered me, was an
air of satisfaction which I perceived on the countenance
of Mademoiselle de Breil. This scornful lady deigned to cast
on me a second look at least as valuable as the former, and
turning to her grandfather, appeared to wait with impatience
for the praise that was due to me, and which he fully bestowed,
with such apparent satisfaction,that it was eagerly chorussed
by the whole table. This interval was short, but delightful
in many respects; it was one of those moments so rarely met
with, which place things in their natural order, and revenge
depressed merit for the injuries of fortune. Some minutes
after Mademoiselle de Breil again raised her eyes, desiring
me with a voice of timid affability to give her some drink. It
will easily be supposed I did not let her wait, but advancing
towards her, I was seized with such a trembling, that having
filled the glass too full, I spilled some of the water on her plate,

<page 110>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 85
and even on herself. Her brother asked me, giddily, why I
trembled thus? This question increased my confusion, while
the face of Mademoiselle de Breil was suffused with a crimson
blush.
Here ended the romance; where it may be remarked (as
with Madam Basile, and others in the continuation of my
life) that I was not fortunate in the conclusion of my amours.
In vain I placed myself in the antechamber of Madam de
Breil, I could not obtain one mark of attention from her
daughter; she went in and out without looking at me, nor
had I the confidence to raise my eyes to her; I was even so
foolishly stupid, that one day, on dropping her glove as she
passed, instead of seizing and covering it with kisses, as I
would gladly have done, I did not dare to quit my place, but
suffered it to be taken up by a great booby of a footman, whom
I could willingly have knocked down for his officiousness.
To complete my timidity, I perceived I had not the good for-
tune to please Madam de Breil; she not only never ordered,
but even rejected, my services; and having twice found me in
her antechamber, asked me, dryly, “If I had nothing to
do?” I was obliged, therefore, to renounce this dear ante-
chamber; at first it caused me some uneasiness, but other
things intervening, I presently thought no more of it.
The disdain of Madam de Breil was fully compensated by
the kindness of her father-in-law, who at length began to
think of me. The evening after the entertainment, I have
already mentioned, he had a conversation with Ine that lasted
half an hour, which appeared to satisfy him, and absolutely
enchanted me. This good man had less sense than Madam
de Vercellis, but possessed more feeling; I therefore succeeded
much better with him. He bade me attach myself to his son,
the Abbé Gauvon, who had an esteem for me, which, if I took
care to cultivate, might be serviceable in furnishing me with
what was necessary to complete their views for my future
establishment. The next morning I flew to M. the Abbé.
who did not receive me as a servant, but made me sit by his
fireside, and questioned me with great affability. He soon
found that my education, which had attempted many things,
had completed none; but observing that I understood some-
thing of Latin, he undertook to teach me more, and appointed
me to attend him every morning. Thus, by one of the whim-
sicalities which have marked the whole course of my life, at

<page 111>
86 THE CONFESSIONS OF
once above and below my natural situation, I was pupil and
footman in the same house: and though in servitude, had a
preceptor whose birth entitled him to supply that place only
to the children of kings.
The Abbé de Gauvon was a younger son, and designed by
his family for a bishopric, for which reason his studies had
been pursued further than is usual with people of quality.
He had been sent to the university of Sienna, where he had
resided some years, and from whence he had brought a good
portion of cruscantism, designing to be that at Turin which
the Abbé de Dangeau was formerly at Paris. Being disgusted
with theology, he gave in to the belle-lettres, which is very
frequent in Italy, with those who have entered the career of
prelacy. He had studied the poets, and wrote tolerable Latin
and Italian verses; in a word, his taste was calculated to form
mine, and give some order to that chaos of insignificant trash
with which my brain was encumbered; but whether my prat-
ing had misled him, or that he could not support the trouble
of teaching the elementary parts of Latin, he put me at first
too high; and I had scarcely translated a few fables of Phoe-
drus before he put me into Virgil, where I could hardly under-
stand anything. It will be seen hereafter that I was destined
frequently to learn Latin, but never to attain it. I labored
with assiduity, and the abbé bestowed his attention with a
degree of kindness, the remembrance of which, even at this
time, both interests and softens me. I passed the greater
part of the morning with him as much for my own instruc-
tion as his service; not that he ever permitted me to perform
any menial office, but to copy, or write from his dictating;
and my employment of secretary was more useful than that
of scholar, and by this means I not only learned the Italian
in its utmost purity, but also acquired a taste for literature,
and some discernment of composition, which could not have
been at La Tribu's, and which was useful to me when I
afterwards wrote alone.
At this period of my life, without being romantic, I might
reasonably have indulged the hope of preferment. The abbé,
thoroughly pleased with me, expressed his satisfaction to
everyone, while his father had such a singular affection for
me, that I was assured by the Count de Favria, that he had
spoken of me to the king; even Madam de Breil had laid
aside her disdainful looks; in short I was a general favorite,

<page 112>
J. J. ROSSEAU 87
which gave great jealousy to the other servants, who seeing
me honored by the instructions of their master's son, were
persuaded I should not remain their equal.
As far as I could judge by some words dropped at random,
and which I reflected on afterwards, it appeared to me, that
the House of Solar, wishing to run the career of embassies,
and hoping perhaps in time to arrive at the ministry, wished
to provide themselves with a person of merit and talents,
who depending entirely on them, might obtain their con-
fidence, and be of essential service. This project of the Count
de Gauvon was judicious, magnanimous, and truly worthy of
a powerful nobleman, equally provident and generous; but
besides my not seeing, at that time, its full extent, it was far
too rational for my brain, and required too much confinement.
My ridiculous ambition sought for fortune in the midst of
brilliant adventures, and not finding one woman in all this
scheme, it appeared tedious, painful and melancholy; though
I should rather have thought it more honorable on this
account, as the species of merit generally patronized by
women is certainly less worthy that I was supposed to
possess.
Everything succeeded to my wish: I had obtained, almost
forced, the esteem of all; the trial was over, and I was
universally considered as a young man with flattering pros-
pects, who was not at present in his proper sphere, but was
expected soon to reach it; but my place was not assigned
me by man, and I was to reach it by very difficult paths. I
now come to one of those characteristic traits, which are so
natural to me, and which, indeed, the reader might have
observed without this reflection.
There were at Turin several new converts of my own stamp,
whom I neither liked nor wish to see; but I had met with
some Genevese who were not of this description, and among
others a M. Mussard, nicknamed Wryneck, a miniature
painter, and a distant relation. This M. Mussard, having
learned my situation at the Count de Gauvon's, came to see
me, with another Genevese, named Bacle, who had been my
comrade during my apprenticeship. This Bacle was a very
sprightly, amusing young fellow, full of lively sallies, which
at his time of life appeared extremely agreeable. At once,
then, behold me delighted with M. Bacle; charmed to such a
degree that I found it impossible to quit him. He was

<page 113>
88 THE CONFESSIONS OF
shortly to depart for Geneva; what a loss had I to sustain! I
felt the whole force of it, and resolving to make the best use
of this precious interval, I determined not to leave him, or,
rather,he never quitted me, for my head was not yet sufficient-
ly turned to think of quitting the house without leave, but it
was soon perceived that he engrossed my whole time, and he
was accordingly forbid the house. This so incensed me, that
forgetting everything but my friend Bacle, I went neither to
the abbé nor the count, and was no longer to be found at
home. I paid no attention to repeated reprimands, and at
length was threatened with dismissal. This threat was my
ruin, as it suggested the idea that it was not absolutely
necessary that Bacle should depart alone. From that moment
I could think of no other pleasure, no other situation or
happiness than taking this journey. To render the felicity
still more complete, at the end of it (though at an immense
distance) I pictured to myself Madam de Warrens; for as to
returning to Geneva, it never entered into my imagination.
The hills, fields, brooks and villages, incessantly succeeded
each other with new charms, and this delightful jaunt seemed
worthy to absorb my whole existence. Memory recalled, with
inexpressible pleasure, how charming the country had ap-
peared in coming to Turin; what then must it be, when, to
the pleasure of independence, should be added the company
of a good-humored comrade of my own age and disposition,
without any constraint or obligation, but free to go or stay as
we pleased? Would it not be madness to sacrifice the prospect
of so much felicity to projects of ambition, slow and difficult
in their execution, and uncertain in their event? But even
supposing them realized, and in their utmost splendor, they
were not worth one quarter of an hour of the sweet pleasure
and liberty of youth.
Full of these wise conclusions, I conducted myself so im-
properly, that (not indeed without some trouble) I got myself
dismissed; for on my return one night the maitre de hôtel gave
me warning on the part of the count. This was exactly what
I wanted; for feeling, spite of myself, the extravagance of my
conduct, I wished to excuse it by the addition of injustice and
ingratitude, by throwing the blame on others, and sheltering
myself under the idea of necessity.
I was told the Count de Favria wished to speak with me the
next morning before my departure; but, being sensible that

<page 114>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 89
my head was so far turned as to render it possible for me to
disobey the injunction, the maitre de hôtel declined paying the
money designed me, and which certainly I had very ill
earned, till after this visit; for my kind patrons being un-
willing to place me in the situation of a footman, I had not
any fixed wages.
The Count de Favria, though young and giddy, talked to
me on this occasion in the most sensible and serious manner:
I might add, if it would not be thought vain, with the utmost
tenderness. He reminded me, in the most flattering terms, of
the cares of his uncle, and intentions of his grandfather; after
having drawn in lively colors what I was sacrificing to ruin,
he offered to make my peace, without stipulating any con-
ditions, but that I should no more see the worthless fellow
who had seduced me.
It was so apparent that he did not say all this of himself,
that notwithstanding my blind stupidity, I powerfully felt the
kindness of my good old master, but the dear journey was too
firmly printed on my imagination for any consideration to
balance the charm. Bereft of understanding, firm to my pur-
pose, I hardened myself against conviction, and arrogantly
answered, that as they had thought fit to give me warning, I
had resolved to take it, and conceived it was now too late to
retract, since, whatever might happen to me, I was fully re-
solved not to be driven a second time from the same house.
The count, justly irritated, bestowed on me some names which
I deserved, and putting me out of his apartment by the
shoulders, shut the door on me. I departed triumphant, as if
I had gained the greatest victory, and fearful of sustaining a
second combat even had the ingratitude to leave the house
without thanking the abbé for his kindness.
To form a just conception of my delirium at that moment,
the excess to which my heart is subject to be heated by the
most trifling incidents, and the ardor with which my imagin-
ation seizes on the most attractive objects should be conceived.
At these times, plans the most ridiculous, childish, and void
of sense, flatter my favorite idea, and persuade me that it is
reasonable to sacrifice everything to the possession of it.
Would it be believed, that when near nineteen, any one could
be so stupid as to build his hopes of future subsistence on an
empty phial? For example:
The Abbé de Gauvon had made me a present, some weeks

<page 115>
90 THE CONFESSIONS OF
before, of a very pretty heron fountain, with which I was
highly delighted. Playing with this toy, and speaking of
our departure, the sage Bacle and myself thought it might be
of infinite advantage, and enable us to lengthen our journey.
What in the world was so curious as a heron fountain? This
idea was the foundation on which we built our future fortune:
we were to assemble the country people in every village we
might pass through, and delight them with the sight of it,
when feasting and good cheer would be sure to pour on us
abundantly; for we were both firmly persuaded, that pro-
visions could cost nothing to those who grew and gathered
them, and if they did not stuff travellers, it was downright
ill-nature.
We pictured in all parts entertainments and wed-
dings, reckoning that without any expense but wind from our
lungs, and the water of our fountain, we should be maintained
through Piedmont, Savoy, France, and indeed, all the world
over. There was no end to our projected travels, and we
immediately directed our course northward, rather for the
pleasure of crossing the Alps, than from a supposed neces-
sity of being obliged to stop at any place.
Such was the plan on which I set out, abandoning without re-
gret, my preceptors, studies, and hopes, with the almost certain
attainment of a fortune, to lead the life of a real vagabond.
Farewell to the capital; adieu to the court, ambition, love, the
fair, and all the great adventures into which hope had led me
during the preceeding year! I departed with my fountain and
my friend Bacle, a purse lightly furnished, but a heart
over-flowing with pleasure, and only thinking how to
enjoy the extensive felicity which I supposed my project
encircled.
This extravagant journey was performed almost as agree-
ably as I had expected, though not exactly on the same plan;
not but our fountain highly amused the hostess and servants
for some minutes at all the ale-houses where we halted, yet
we found it equally necessary to pay on our departure; but
that gave us no concern, as we never thought of depending
on it entirely until our money should be expended. An
accident spared us that trouble, our fountain was broken near
Bramant, and in good time, for we both felt (though without
daring to own it to each other) that we began to be weary of
it. This misfortune rendered us gayer than ever; we laughed

<page 116>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 9 I
heartily at our giddiness in having forgotten that our clothes
and shoes would wear out, or trusting to renew them by the
play of our fountain. We continued our journey as merrily
as we had begun it, only drawing faster towards that ter-
mination where our drained purses made it necessary for us
to arrive. -
At Chambery I became pensive; not for the folly I had
committed, for never did any one think less of the past, but
on account of the reception I should meet with from Madam
de Warrens; for I looked on her house as my paternal home.
I had written her an account of my reception at the Count de
Gauvon's; she knew my expectancies, and, in congratulating
me on my good fortune, had added some wise lessons on the
return I ought to make for the kindness with which they
treated me. She looked on my fortune as already made, if
not destroyed by my own negligence; what then would she
say on my arrival? for it never entered my mind that she
might shut the door against me, but I dreaded the uneasiness
I might give her; I dreaded her reproaches, to me more
wounding than want; I resolved to bear all in silence, and,
if possible to appease her. I now saw nothing but Madam
de Warrens in the whole universe, and to live in disgrace with
Her was impossible.
I was most concerned about my companion, whom I did not
wish to offend, and feared I should not easily get rid of. I
prefaced this separation by an affected coldness during the
last day's journey. The drole understood me perfectly; in
fact, he was rather giddy than deficient in point of sense—I
expected he would have been hurt at my inconstancy, but I
was quite mistaken; nothing affected my friend Bacle, for
hardly had we set foot in town, on our arrival in Annecy, be-
fore he said, “You are now at home—embraced—bade me
adieu-turned on his heel, and disappeared; nor have I ever
heard of him since.
How did my heart beat as I approached the habitation of
Madam de Warrens! my legs trembled under me, my eyes
were clouded with a mist, I neither saw, heard, nor recollected
any one, and was obliged frequently to stop that I might draw
breath, and recall my bewildered senses. Was it fear of not
obtaining that succor I stood in need of, which agitated me to
this degree? At the age I then was, does the fear of perish-
ing with hunger give such alarms? No: I declare with as

<page 117>
92 THE CONFESSIONS OF
much truth as pride, that it was not in the power of interest
or indigence, at any period of my life, to expand or contract
my heart. In the course of a painful life, memorable for its
vicissitudes, frequently destitute of an asylum, and without
bread, I have contemplated, with equal indifference, both opu-
lence and misery. In want I might have begged or stolen, as
others have done, but never could feel distress at being re-
duced to such necessities. Few men have grieved more than
myself, few have shed so many tears; yet never did poverty,
or the fear of falling into it, make me heave a sigh or moisten
my eyelids. My soul, in despite of fortune, has only been
sensible of real good and evil, which did not depend on her;
and frequently, when in possession of everything that could
make life pleasing, I have been the most miserable of
mortals.
-The first glance of Madam de Warrens banished all my
fears—my heart leaped at the sound of her voice; I threw my-
self at her feet, and in transports of the most lively joy,
pressed my lips upon her hand. I am ignorant whether she
had received any recent information of me. I discovered but
little surprise on her countenance, and no sorrow. “Poor
child!” said she, in an affectionate tone, “art thou here
again? I knew you were too young for this journey; I am
very glad, however, that it did not turn out so bad as I appre-
hended.” She then made me recount my history; it was not
long, and I did it faithfully: suppressing only some trifling
circumstances, but on the whole neither sparing nor excusing
myself.
The question was, where I could lodge: she consulted her
maid on this point—I hardly dared to breathe during the delib-
eration; but when I heard I was to sleep in the house, I could
scarce contain my joy; and saw the little bundle I brought
with me carried into my destined apartment with much the
same sensations as St. Preux saw his chaise put up at Madam
de Wolmar's. To complete all, I had the satisfaction to find
that this favor was not to be transitory; for at a moment when
they thought me attentive to something else, I heard Madam
de Warrens say, “They may talk as they please, but since
Providence has sent him back, I am determined not to aban-
don him.”
Behold me, then, established at her house; not, however,
that I date the happiest days of my life from this period, but

<page 118>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 93
this served to prepare me for them. Though that sensibility
of heart, which enables us truly to enjoy our being, is the
work of Nature, and perhaps a mere effect of organization, yet
it requires situations to unfold itself, and without a certain
concurrence of favorable circumstances, a man born with the
most acute sensibility may go out of the world without ever
having been acquainted with his own temperament. This
was my case till that time, and such perhaps it might have
remained had I never known Madam de Warrens, or even
having known her, had I not remained with her long enough
to contract that pleasing habit of affectionate sentiments with
which she inspired me. I dare affirm, that those who only
love, do not feel the most charming sensations we are capable
of:I am acquainted with another sentiment, less impetuous, but
a thousand times more delightful; sometimes joined with love,
but frequently separated from it. This feeling is not simply
friendship; it is more enchanting, more tender; nor do I
imagine it can exist between persons of the same sex; at least
I have been truly a friend, if ever a man was, and yet never
experienced it in that kind. This distinction is not suffi-
ciently clear, but will become so hereafter: sentiments are
only distinguishable by their effects.
Madam de Warrens inhabited an old house, but large
enough to have a handsome spare apartment, which she made
her drawing-room. I now occupied this chamber, which was
in the passage I have beforementioned as the place of our first
meeting. Beyond the brook and gardens was a prospect of
the country, which was by no means uninteresting to the
young inhabitant, being the first time, since my residence at
Bossey, that I had seen anything before my windows but
walls, roofs, or the dirty street. How pleasing then was this
novelty! it helped to increase the tenderness of my disposi-
tion, for I looked on this charming landscape as the gift of my
dear patroness, who I could almost fancy had placed it there on
purpose for me. Peaceably seated, my eyes pursued her amidst
the flowers and the verdure; her charms seemed to me con-
founded with those of the spring; my heart, till now con-
tracted, here found means to expand itself, and my sighs ex-
haled freely in this charming retreat.
The magnificence I had been accustomed to at Turin
was not to be found at Madam de Warrens, but in lieu of it
there was neatness, regularity, and a patriarchal abundance,

<page 119>
94 THE CONFESSIONS OF
which is seldom attached to pompous ostentation. She had
very little plate, no china, no game in her kitchen, or foreign
wines in her cellar, but both were well furnished, and at
every one's service; and her coffee, though served in earthen-
ware cups, was excellent. Whoever came to her house was
invited to dine there, and never did laborer, messenger, or
traveller, depart without refreshment. Her family consisted of
a pretty chambermaid from Fribourg, named Merceret; a valet
from her own country called Claude Anet (of whom I shall
speak hereafter), a cook, and two hired chairmen when she
visited, which seldom happened. This was a great deal to be
done out of two thousand livres a year; yet, with good man-
agement, it might have been sufficient in a country where
land is extremely good, and money very scarce. Unfortu-
nately, economy was never her favorite virtue; she contracted
debts—paid them—thus her money passed from hand to hand
like a weaver's shuttle, and quickly disappeared.
The arrangement of her housekeeping was exactly what I
should have chosen, and I shared it with satisfaction. I was
least pleased with the necessity of remaining too long at
table. Madam de Warrens was so much incommoded with
the first smell of soup or meat, as almost to occasion fainting;
from this she slowly recovered, talking meantime, and never
attempting to eat for the first half hour. I could have dined
thrice in the time, and had ever finished my meal long before
she began; I then ate again for company; and though by this
means I usually dined twice, felt no inconvenience from it.
In short, I was perfectly at my ease, and the happier as my
situation required no care. Not being at this time instructed
in the state of her finances, I supposed her means were ade-
quate to her expense; and though I afterwards found the same
abundance, yet when instructed in her real situation, finding
her pension ever anticipated, prevented me from enjoying
the same tranquility. Foresight with me has always em-
bittered enjoyment; in vain I saw the approach of misfortunes,
I was never the more likely to avoid them.
From the first moment of our meeting, the softest familiarity
was established between us, and in the same degree it contin-
ued during the rest of her life. Child was my name, Mamma
was hers, and child and mamma we have ever continued,
even after a number of years had almost effaced the apparent
difference of age between us. I think those names convey an

<page 120>
J. J. ROSSEAU 95
exact idea of our behavior, the simplicity of our manners, and
above all, the similarity of our dispositions. To me she was
the tenderest of mothers, ever preferring my welfare to her
own pleasure; and if my own satisfaction found some interest
in my attachment to her, it was not to change its nature, but
only to render it more exquisite, and infatuate me with the
charm of having a mother young and handsome, whom I
was delighted to caress: I say literally, to caress, for never
did it enter into her imagination to deny me the tenderest
maternal kisses and endearments, or into my heart to abuse
them. It will be said, at length our connection was of a
different kind: I confess it; but have patience, that will come
in its turn.
The sudden sight of her, on our first interview, was the only
truly passionate moment she ever inspired me with; and even
that was principally the work of surprise. With her I had
neither transports nor desires, but remained in a ravishing
calm, sensible of a happiness I could not define, and thus
could I have passed my whole life, or even eternity, without
feeling an instant of uneasiness.
She was the only person with whom I never experienced
that want of conversation, which to me is so painful to en-
dure. Our föte-à-tétes were rather an inexhaustible chat than
conversation, which could only conclude from interruption.
So far from finding discourse difficult, I rather thought it a
hardship to be silent; unless, when contemplating her pro-
jects, she sunk into a reverie; when I silently let her medi-
tate, and gazing on her, was the happiest of men. I had an-
other singular fancy, which was that without pretending to
the favor of a tête-à-tête, I was perpetually seeking occasion to
form them, enjoying such opportunities with rapture;andwhen
importunate visitors broke in upon us, no matter whether it
was man or woman, I went out murmuring, not being able to
remain a secondary object in her company; then, counting the
minutes in her antechamber, I used to curse these eternal
visitors, thinking it inconceivable how they could find so
much to say, because I had still more.
If ever I felt the full force of my attachment, it was when I
did not see her. When in her presence, I was only content;
when absent, my uneasiness reached almost to melancholy,
and a wish to live with her gave me emotions of tenderness
even to tears. Never shall I forget one great holiday, while

<page 121>
96 THE CONFESSIONS OF
she was at vespers, when I took a walk out of the city, my
heart full of her image, and the ardent wish to pass my life
with her. I could easily enough see that at present this was
impossible; that the happiness I enjoyed would be of short
duration, and this idea gave to my contemplations a tincture
of melancholy, which, however, was not gloomy, but tem-
pered with a flattering hope. The ringing of bells, which ever
particularly affects me, the singing of birds, the fineness of
the day, the beauty of the landscape, the scattered country
houses, among which in idea I placed our future dwelling, al-
together struck me with an impression so lively, tender, mel-
ancholy, and powerful, that I saw myself in ecstasy trans-
ported into that happy time and abode, where my heart, pos-
sessing all the felicity it could desire, might taste it with
raptures inexpressible.
I never recollect to have enjoyed the future with such force
of illusions as at that time; and what has particularly struck
me in the recollection of this reverie, is that when realized,
I found my situation exactly as I had imagined it. If
ever waking dream had an appearance of a prophetic
vision, it was assuredly this; I was only deceived in its
imaginary duration, for days, years, and life itself,
passed ideally in perfect tranquility, while the reality lasted
but a moment. Alas! my most durable happiness was but as
a dream, which I had no sooner had a glimpse of, than I in-
stantly awoke.
I know not when I should have done, if I was to enter into
a detail of all the follies that affection for my dear Madam de
Warrens made me commit. When absent from her, how often
have I kissed the bed on a supposition that she had slept
there; the curtains and all the furniture of my chamber, on
recollecting they were hers, and that her charming hands had
touched them; nay, the floor itself, when I considered she had
walked there. Sometimes even in her presence, extravagancies
escaped me, which only the most violent passions seemed
capable of inspiring; in a word, there was but one
essential difference to distinguish me from an absolute
lover, and that particular renders my situation almost in-
conceivable.
I had returned from Italy, not absolutely as I went there,
but as no one of my age, perhaps, ever did before, being
equally unacquainted with women. My ardent constitution

<page 122>
J. J. ROUSEAU 97
had found resources in those means by which youth of my
disposition sometimes preserve their purity at the expense of
health, vigor, and frequently of life itself. My local situation
should likewise be considered—living with a pretty woman,
cherishing her image in the bottom of my heart, seeing her
during the whole day, at night surrounded with objects that
recalled her incessantly to my remembrance, and sleeping in
the bed where I knew she had slept. What a situation! Who
can read this without supposing me on the brink of the grave?
But quite the contrary; that which might have ruined me,
acted as a preservative, at least for a time. Intoxicated with
the charm of living with her, with the ardent desire of pass-
ing my life there, absent or present I saw in her a tender
mother, an amiable sister, a respected friend, but nothing
more; meantime, her image filled my heart, and left room for
no other object. The extreme tenderness with which she in-
spired me excluded every other woman from my consideration,
and preserved me from the whole sex: in a word, I was vir-
tuous, because I loved her. Let these particulars, which I re-
count but indifferently, be considered, and then let any one
judge what kind of attachment I had for her: for my part, all
I can say, is, that if it hitherto appears extraordinary, it will
appear much more so in the sequel.
My time passed in the most agreeable manner, though oc-
cupied in a way which was by no means calculated to please
me; such as having projects to digest, bills to write fair, re-
ceipts to transcribe, herbs to pick, drugs to pound, or distilla-
tions to attend; and in the midst of all this, came crowds of
travellers, beggars, and visitors of all denominations. Some
times it was necessary to converse at the same time with a
soldier, an apothecary, a prebendary, a fine lady, and a lay
brother. I grumbled, swore, and wished all this troublesome
medley at the devil, while she seemed to enjoy it, laughing at
my chagrin till the tears ran down her cheeks. What excited
her mirth still more, was to see that my anger was increased
by not being able myself to refrain from laughter. These
little intervals, in which I enjoyed the pleasure of grumbling,
were charming; and if, during the dispute, another impor-
tunate visitor arrived, she would add to her amusement by
maliciously prolonging the visit, meantime casting glances at
me for which I could almost have beat her; nor could she
without difficulty refrain from laughter on seeing my con-
strained politeness, though every moment glancing at her the

<page 123>
98 THE CONFESSIONS OF
look of a fury, while, even in spite of myself, I thought the
scene truly diverting.
All this, without being pleasing in itself, contributed to
amuse, because it made up a part of a life which I thought de-
lightful. Nothing that was performed around me, nothing
that I was CLliged to do, suited my taste, but everything
suited my heart; and I believe, at length, I should have liked
the study of medicine, had not my natural distaste to it per-
petually engaged us in whimsical scenes, that prevented my
thinking of it in a serious light. It was, perhaps, the first
time that this art produced mirth. I pretended to distinguish
a physical book by its smell, and what was more diverting,
was seldom mistaken. Madam de Warrens made me taste
the most nauseous drugs; in vain Iran, or endeavored to de-
fend myself; spite of resistance or wry faces, spite of my
struggles, or even of my teeth, when I saw her charming
fingers approach my lips, I was obliged to give up the con-
test.
When shut up in an apartment with all her medical ap-
paratus, any one who had heard us running and shouting
amidst peals of laughter would rather have imagined we had
been acting a farce than preparing opiates or elixirs.
My time, however, was notentirely passed in these fooleries;
in the apartment which I occupied I found a few books: there
was the Spectator, Puffendorf, St. Everemond, and the Hen-
riade. Though I had not my old passion for books, yet I
amused myself with reading a part of them. The Spectator
was particularly pleasing and serviceable to me. The Abbé
de Gauvon had taught me to read less eagerly, and with a
greater degree of attention, which rendered my studies more
serviceable. I accustomed myself to reflect on elocution and
the elegance of composition; exercising myself in discerning
pure French from my provincial idiom. For example, I cor-
rected an orthographical fault (which I had in common with
all Genevese) by these two lines of the Henriade:
Soit qu'un ancient respect pour le sang de leurs maitres,
Parlát encore pour lui dans le coeur de ces traitres
I was struck with the word parlát, and found a t was neces-
sary to form the third person of the subjunctive, whereas I
had always written and pronounced it parla, as in the present
of the indicative.

<page 124>


<page 125>
* : * * : x , ,
*** * * *
* R - - - -
**
* * * * : . .”



<page 126>


<page 127>
（-- - ----

<page 128>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 99
Sometimes my studies were the subject of conversation with
Madam de Warrens; sometimes I read to her, in which I
found great satisfaction; and as I endeavored to read well, it
was extremely serviceable to me. I have already observed
that her mind was cultivated; her understanding was at this
time in its meridian. Several people of learning having been
assiduous to ingratiate themselves, had taught her to distin-
guish works of merit; but her taste (if I may so express my-
self) was rather Protestant; ever speaking warmly of Bayle,
and highly esteeming St. Evremond, though long since almost
forgotten in France: but this did not prevent her having a
taste for literature, or expressing her thoughts with elegance.
She had been brought up with polite company, and coming
young to Savoy, by associating with people of the best fashion,
had lost the affected manners of her own country, where the
ladies mistake wit for sense, and only speak in epigram.
Though she had seen the court but superficially, that glance
was sufficient to give her a competent idea of it; and notwith-
standing secret jealousies and the murmurs excited by her
conduct and running in debt, she ever preserved friends there,
and never lost her pension. She knew the world, and was
useful. This was her favorite theme in our conversations, and
was directly opposite to my chimerical ideas, though the kind
of instruction I particularly had occasion for. We read
Bruyere together; he pleased her more than Rochefoucault,
who is a dull, melancholy author, particularly to youth, who
are not fond of contemplating man as he really is. In moral-
izing she sometimes bewildered herself by the length of her
discourse; but by kissing her lips or hand from time to time
I was easily consoled, and never found them wearisome.
This life was too delightful to be lasting; I felt this, and the
uneasiness that thought gave me was the only thing that dis-
turbed my enjoyment. Even in playfulness she studied my
disposition, observed and interrogated me, forming projects
for my future fortune, which I could readily have dispensed
with. Happily it was not sufficient to know my disposition,
inclinations and talents; it was likewise necessary to find a
situation in which they would be useful, and this was not the
work of a day. Even the prejudices this good woman had
conceived in favor of my merit put off the time of calling it
into action, by rendering her more difficult in the choice of
means; thus (thanks to the good opinion she entertained of

<page 129>
IOO THE CONFESSIONS OF
me), everything answered to my wish; but a change soon
happened which put a period to my tranquility.
A relation of Madam de Warrens, named M. d’Aubonne,
came to see her; a man of great understanding and intrigue,
being, like her, fond of projects, though careful not to ruin
himself by them. He had offered Cardinal Fleury a very
compact plan for a lottery, which, however, had not been
approved of, and he was now going to propose it to the court
of Turin, where it was accepted and put into execution. He
remained some time at Annecy, where he fell in love with the
Intendant's lady, who was very amiable, much to my taste
and the only person I saw with pleasure at the house of
Madam de Warrens. M. d’Aubonne saw me, I was strongly
recommended by his relation; he promised, therefore, to ques-
tion and see what I was fit for, and, if he found me capable to
seek me a situation. Madam de Warrens sent me to him two
or three mornings, under pretense of messages, without ac-
quainting me with her real intention. He spoke to me gayly,
on various subjects, without any appearance of observation;
his familiarity presently set me talking, which by his cheer-
ful and jesting manner he encouraged without restraint—I
was absolutely charmed with him. The result of his observa-
tions was, that notwithstanding the animation of my counte-
nance, and promising exterior, if not absolutely silly, I was a
lad of very little sense, and without ideas of learning; in fine,
very ignorant in all respects, and if I could arrive at being
curate of some village, it was the utmost honor I ought ever
to aspire to. Such was the account he gave of me to Madam
de Warrens. This was not the first time such an opinion had
been formed of me, neither was it the last; the judgment of
M. Masseron having been repeatedly confirmed.
The cause of these opinions is too much connected with my
character not to need a particular explanation; for it will not
be supposed that I can in conscience subscribe to them; and
with all possible impartiality, whatever M. Masseron, M.
d’Aubonne and many others may have said, I cannot help
thinking them mistaken.
Two things very opposite, unife in me, and in a manner
which I cannot myself conceive. My disposition is extremely
ardent, my passions lively and impetuous, yet my ideas are
produced slowly, with great embarrassment and after much
afterthought. It might be said my heart and understanding

<page 130>
J. J. ROUSSEAU IOI
do not belong to the same individual. A sentiment takes
possession of my soul with the rapidity of lightning, but in-
stead of iluminating, it dazzles and confounds me; I feel all,
but see nothing; I am warm, but stupid; to think I must be
cool. What is astonishing, my conception is clear and pene-
trating, if not hurried: I can make excellent impromptus at
leisure, but on the instant, could never say or do anything
worth notice. I could hold a tolerable conversation by the
post, as they say the Spaniards play at chess, and when I read
that anecdote of a duke of Savoy, who turned himself round,
while on a journey, to cry out à votre gorge, marchand de
Paris/ I said, “Here is a trait of my character!”
This slowness of thought, joined to vivacity of feeling, I am
not only sensible of in conversation, but even alone. When I
write, my ideas are arranged with the utmost difficulty.
They glance on my imagination and ferment till they discom-
pose, heat, and bring on a palpitation; during this state of
agitation, I see nothing properly, cannot write a single word,
and must wait till it is over. Insensibly the agitation sub-
sides, the chaos acquires form, and each circumstance takes
its proper place. Have you never seen an opera in Italy?
where during the change of scene everything is in confusion,
the decorations are intermingled, and any one would suppose
that all would be overthrown; yet by little and little, every-
thing is arranged, nothing appears wanting, and we feel sur-
prised to see the tumult succeeded by the most delightful
spectacle. This is a resemblance of what passes in my
brain when I attempt to write; had I always waited till that
confusion was past, and then pointed, in their natural
beauties, the objects that had presented themselves, few
authors would have surpassed me.
Thence arises the extreme difficulty I find in writing; my
manuscripts, blotted, scratched, and scarcely legible, attest
the trouble they cost me; nor is there one of them but I have
been obliged to transcribe four or five times before it went to
press. Never could I do anything when placed at a table, pen
in hand; it must be walking among the rocks, or in the
woods; it is at night in my bed, during my wakeful hours,
that I compose; it may be judged how slowly, particularly for
a man who has not the advantage of verbal memory, and
never in his life could retain by heart six verses. Some of my
periods I have turned and returned in my head five or six

<page 131>
IO2 THE CONFESSIONS OF
nights before they were fit to be put to paper: thus it is that
I succeed better in works that require laborious attention,
than those that appear more trivial, such as letters, in which
I could never succeed, and being obliged to write one is to me
a serious punishment; nor can I express my thoughts on the
most trivial subjects without it costing me hours of fatigue.
If I write immediately what strikes me, my letter is a long,
confused, unconnected string of expressions, which, when
read, can hardly be understood.
It is not only painful to me to give language to my ideas
but even to receive them. I have studied mankind, and think
myself a tolerable observer, yet I know nothing from what I
see, but all from what I remember, nor have I understanding
except in my recollections. From all that is said, from all
that passes in my presence, I feel nothing, conceive nothing,
the exterior sign being all that strikes me; afterwards it re-
turns to my remembrance; I recollect the place, the time, the
manner, the look, and gesture, not a circumstance escapes me;
it is then, from what has been done or said, that I imagine
what has been thought, and I have rarely found myself
mistaken.
So little master of my understanding when alone, let any
one judge what I must be in conversation, where to speak
with any degree of ease you must think of a thousand things
at the same time: the bare idea that I should forget something
material would be sufficient to intimidate me. Nor can I
comprehend how people can have the confidence to converse
in large companies, where each word must pass in review be-
fore so many, and where it would be requisite to know their
several characters and histories to avoid saying what might
give offence. In this particular, those who frequent the world
would have a great advantage, as they know better where to be
silent, and can speak with greater confidence; yet even they
sometimes let fall absurdities; in what predicament then must
he be who drops as it were from the clouds? it is almost im-
ssible he should speak ten minutes with impunity.
In a tête-à-tête there is a still worse inconvenience; that is, the
necessity of talking perpetually, at least, the necessity of an-
swering when spoken to, and keeping up the conversation
when the other is silent. This insupportable constraint is
alone sufficient to disgust me with variety, for I cannot form
an idea of a greater torment than being obliged to speak con-

<page 132>
J. J. ROUSSEAU IO3
tinually without time for recollection. I know not whether it
proceeds from my mortal hatred of all constraint; but if I am
obliged to speak, I infallibly talk nonsense. What is still
worse, instead of learning how to be silent when I have ab-
solutely nothing to say, it is generally at such times that I
have a violent inclination: and endeavoring to pay my debt
of conversation as speedily as possible, I hastily gabble a
number of words without ideas, happy when they only chance
to mean nothing; thus endeavoring to conquer or hide my in-
capacity, I rarely fail to show it.
I think I have said enough to show that, though not a fool,
I have frequently passed for one, even among people capable
of judging; this was the more vexatious, as my physiognomy
and eyes promised otherwise, and expectation being frus-
trated, my stupidity appeared the more shocking. This de-
tail, which a particular occasion gave birth to, will not be
useless in the sequel, being a key to many of my actions
which might otherwise appear unaccountable; and have been
attributed to a savage humor I do not possess. I love society
as much as any man, was I not certain to exhibit myself in it,
not only disadvantageously, but totally different from what I
really am. The plan I have adopted of writing and retire-
ment, is what exactly suits me. Had I been present, my
worth would never have been known, no one would even have
suspected it; thus it was with Madam Dupin, a woman of
sense, in whose house I lived for several years; indeed, she has
often since owned it to me: though on the whole this rule
may be subject to some exceptions. I shall now return to my
history.
The estimate of my talents thus fixed, the situation I was
capable of promised, the question only remained how to ren-
der her capable of fulfilling my destined vocation. The prin-
ciple difficulty was, I did not know Latin enough for a priest.
Madam de Warrens determined to have me taught for some
time at the seminary, and accordingly spoke of it to the
Superior, who was a Lazarist, called M. Gras, a good-
natured little fellow, half blind, meagre, gray-haired, insen-
sible, and the least pedantic of any Lazarist I ever knew;
which, in fact, is saying no great matter.
He frequently visited Madam de Warrens, who entertained,
caressed, and made much of him, letting him sometimes lace
her stays, an office he was willing enough to perform. While

<page 133>
IO4 THE CONFESSIONS OF
thus employed, she would run about the room, this way or
that, as occasion happened to call her. Drawn by the lace,
Monsieur the Superior followed, grumbling, repeating at every
moment, ‘‘Pray, madam, do stand still;” the whole form-
ing a scene truly diverting.
M. Gras willingly assented to the project of Madam de
Warrens, and, for a very moderate pension, charged himself
with the care of instructing me. The consent of the bishop
( A was all that remained necessary, who not only granted it, but
s * offered to pay the pension, permitting me to retain the secu-
** lar habit till they could judge by a trial what success they
`--— might have in my improvement.
What a change! but I was obliged to submit; though I went
to the seminary with about the same spirits as if they had
been taking me to execution. What a melancholy abode!
especially for one who left the house of a pretty woman. I
carried one book with me, that I had borrowed of Madam de
Warrens, and found it a capital resourceſ it will not be easily
conjectured what kind of book this was—it was a music
book. Among the talents she had cultivated, music was not
forgotten; she had a tolerable good voice, sang agreeably, and
played on the harpsichord. She had taken the pains to give
me some lessons in singing, though before I was very unin-
formed in that respect, hardly knowing the music of our
psalms. Eight or ten interrupted lessons, far from putting
me in a condition to improve myself, did not teach me half
the notes; notwithstanding, I had such a passion for the art,
that I determined to exercise myself alone. The book I took
was not of the most easy kind; it was the cantatas of Cleram-
bault. It may be conceived with what attention and perse-
verance I studied, when I inform my reader, that without
Rnowing anything of transposition or quantity, I contrived to
sing, with tolerable correctness, the first recitative and air
in the cantata of Alpheus and Arethusa; it is true this air
is So justly set, that it is only necessary to recite the verses
in their just measure to catch the music.
There was at the seminary a curst Lazarist, who by under-
taking to teach me Latin made me detest it. His hair was
coarse, black and greasy, his face like those formed in ginger-
bread, he had the voice of a buffalo, the countenance of an
owl, and the bristles of a boar in lieu of a beard; his smile was
sardonic, and his limbs played like those of a puppet moved

<page 134>
J. J. ROUSSEAU IO5
by wires. I have forgotten his odious name, but the remem-
brance of his frightful precise countenance remains with me,
though hardly can I recollect it without trembling; especially
when I call to mind our meeting in the gallery, when he
graciously advanced his filthy square cap as a sign for me to
enter his apartment, which appeared more dismal in my
apprehension than a dungeon. Let any one judge the con-
trast between my present master and the elegant Abbé de
Gauvon.
Had I remained two months at the mercy of this monster, I
am certain my head could not have sustained it; but the good
M. Gras, perceiving I was melancholy, grew thin, and did
not eat my victuals, guessed the cause of my uneasiness
(which indeed was not very difficult) and taking me from
the claws of this beast, by another yet more striking contrast,
placed me with the gentlest of men, a young Faucigneran
abbé, named M. Gatier, who studied at the seminary, and out
of complaisance for M. Gras, and humanity to myself, spared
some time from the prosecution of his own studies in order to
direct mine. Never did I see a more pleasing countenance
than that of M. Gatier. He was fair complexioned, his beard
rather inclined to red; his behavior like that of the generality
of his countrymen (who under a coarseness of countenance
conceal much understanding), marked in him a truly sensible
and affectionate soul. In his large blue eyes there was a mix-
ture of softness, tenderness, and melancholy, which made it
impossible to see him without feeling one's self interested.
From the looks and manner of this young abbé he might have
been supposed to have foreseen his destiny, and that he was
born to be unhappy.
His disposition did not belie his physiognomy: full of
patience and complaisance, he rather appeared to study with
than to instruct me. So much was not necessary to make me
love him, his predecessor having rendered that very easy; yet,
notwithstanding all the time he bestowed on me, notwith-
standing our mutual good inclinations, and that his plan of
teaching was excellent, with much labor, I made little prog-
ress. It is very singular, that with a clear conception I could
never learn much from masters except my father and M. Lam-
bercier; the little I know besides I have learned alone, as will
be seen hereafter. My spirit, impatient of every species of
constraint, cannot submit to the law of the moment; even the

<page 135>
IO6 THE CONFESSIONS OF
fear of not learning prevents my being attentive, and a dread
of wearying those who teach, makes me feign to understand
them; thus they proceed faster than I can comprehend, and
the conclusion is I learn nothing. My understanding must
take its own time and cannot submit to that of another.
The time of ordination being arrived, M. Gatier returned to
his province as deacon, leaving me with gratitude, attach-
ment, and sorrow for his loss. The vows I made for him were
no more answered than those I offered for myself. Some years
after, I learned, that being vicar of a parish, a young girl was
with child by him, being the only one (though he possessed a
very tender heart) with whom he was ever in love. This was
a dreadful scandal in a diocese severely governed, where the
priests(being under good regulation)ought never to have chil-
dren—except by married women. Having infringed this pol-
itic law, he was put in prison, defamed, and driven from his
benefice. I know not whether it was ever after in his power
to re-establish his affairs; but the remembrance of his misfor-
tunes, which were deeply engraven on my heart, struck me
when I wrote Emilius, and uniting M. Gatier with M. Gaime,
I formed from these two worthy priests the character of the
Savoyard Vicar, and flatter myself the imitation has not
dishonored the originals.
While I was at the seminary, M. d’Aubonne was obliged to
quit Annecy, Moultou being displeased that he made love to
his wife, which was acting like a dog in the manger, for
though Madam Moultou was extremely amiable, he lived very
ill with her, treating her with such brutality that a separation
was talked of. Moultou, by repeated oppressions, at length
procured a dismissal from his employment: he was a disagree-
able man; a mole could not be blacker, nor an owl more
knavish. It is said the provincials revenge themselves on
their enemies by songs; M. d’Aubonne revenged himself on
his by a comedy, which he sent to Madam de Warrens, who
showed it to me. I was pleased with it, and immediately con-
ceived the idea of writing one, to try whether I was so silly as
the author had pronounced me. This project was not executed
till I went to Chambery, where I wrote The Lover of Himself.
Thus when I said in the preface to that piece, “it was written
at eighteen,” I cut off a few years.
Nearly about this time an event happened, not very impor-
tant in itself, but whose consequence affected me, and made a

<page 136>
J. J. ROSSEAU I of
noise in tile world when I had forgotten it. Once a week I was
permitted to go out; it is not necessary to say what use I
made of this liberty. Being one Sunday at Madam de War-
rens', a building belonging to the Cordeliers, which joined her
house, took fire; this building which contained their oven,
being full of dry fagots, blazed violently and greatly endan-
gered the house; for the wind happening to drive the flames
that way, it was covered with them. The furniture, therefore,
was hastily got out and carried into the garden which fronted
the windows, on the other side the before-mentioned brook. I
was so alarmed that I threw indiscriminately everything that
came to hand out of the window, even to a large stone mortar,
which at another time I should have found it difficult to re-
move, and should have thrown a handsome looking-glass
after it had not some one prevented me. The good bishop,
who that day was visiting Madam de Warrens, did not re-
main idle; he took her into the garden, where they went to
prayers with the rest that were assembled there, and where
sometime afterwards, I found them on their knees, and
presently joined them. While the good man was at his de-
votions, the wind changed, so suddenly and critically, that
the flames which had covered the house and began to enter
the windows, were carried to the other side of the court, and
the house received no damage. Two years after, Monsieur de
Berner being dead, the Antoines, his former brethren, began
to collect anecdotes which might serve as arguments of his
beatification; at the desire of Father Baudet, I joined to these
an attestation of what I have just related, in doing which,
though I attested no more than the truth, I certainly acted ill,
as it tended to make an indifferent occurrence pass for a
miracle. I had seen the bishop in prayer, and had likewise
seen the wind change during the prayer, and even much to
the purpose, all this I could certify truly; but that one of these
facts was the cause of the other, I ought not to have attested,
because it is what I could not possibly be assured of. Thus
much I may say, that as far as I can recollect what my ideas
were at that time, I was sincerely, and in good earnest a
Catholic. Love of the marvellous is natural to the human
heart; my veneration for the virtuous prelate, and secret
pride in having, perhaps, contributed to the event in ques-
tion, all helped to seduce me; and certainly, if this miracle
was the effect of ardent prayer, I had a right to claim a
share of the merits.

<page 137>
IO8 THE CONFESSIONS OF
More than thirty years after, when I published the Lettres
de la Montagne, M. Feron (I know not by what means) dis-
covered this attestation, and made use of it in his paper. I
must confess the discovery was very critically timed, and
appeared very diverting, even to me.
I was destined to be the outcast of every condition; for not-
withstanding M. Gatier gave the most favorable account he
possibly could of my studies, they plainly saw the improve-
ment I received bore no proportion to the pains taken to
instruct me, which was no encouragement to continue them:
the bishop and superior, therefore, were disheartened, and I was
sent back to Madam de Warrens, as a subject not even fit to
make a priest of; but as they allowed, at the same time, that
I was a tolerably good lad, and far from being vicious, this
account counterbalanced the former, and determined her
not to abandon me. -
I carried back in triumph the dear music book, which had
been so useful to me, the air of Alpheus and Arethusa being
almost all I had learned at the seminary. My predilection for
this art started the idea of making a musician of me. A
convenient opportunity offered; once a week, at least, she had
a concert at her house, and the music-master from the cathe-
dral, who directed this little band, came frequently to see her.
This was a Parisian, named M. le Maitre, a good composer,
very lively, gay, young, well made, of little understanding,
but, upon the whole, a good sort of man. Madam de Warrens
made us acquainted; I attached myself to him, and he seemed
not displeased with me. A pension was talked of, and agreed
on; in short, I went home with him, and passed the winter the
more agreeably at his chambers, as they were not above
twenty paces distant from Madam de Warrens', where we
frequently supped together. It may easily be supposed that
this situation, ever gay, aud singing with the musicians and
children of the choir, was more pleasing to me than the
seminary and fathers of St. Lazarus. This life, though
free, was regular; here I learned to prize independence, but
never to abuse it. For six whole months I never once went
out except to see Madam de Warrens, or to church, nor had I
any inclination to it. This interval is one of those in which
I enjoyed the greatest satisfaction, and which I have ever
recollected with pleasure. Among the various situations I
have been placed in, some were marked with such an idea of

<page 138>
J. J. ROUSSEAU Io9
virtuous satisfaction, that the bare remembrance affects me as
if they were yet present. Ivividly recollect the time, the place,
the persons, and even the temperature of the air, while the
lively idea of a certain local impression peculiar to those
times, transports me back again to the very spot; for example,
all that was repeated at our meetings, all that was sung in the
choir, everything that passed there; the beautiful and noble
habits of the canons, the chasubles of the priests, the mitres
of the singers, the persons of the musicians; an old lame car-
penter who played the counter-bass, a little fair abbé who
performed on the violin, the ragged cassock which M. le
Maitre, after taking off his sword, used to put over his secular
habit, and the fine surplice with which he covered the rags of
the former, when he went to the choir; the pride with which I
held my little flute to my lips, and seated myself in the
orchestra, to assist in a recitative which M. le Maitre had
composed on purpose for me; the good dinner that afterwards
awaited us, and the good appetites we carried to it. This con-
course of objects, strongly retraced in my memory, has
charmed me a hundred time as much, or perhaps more, than
ever the reality had done. I have always preserved an affec-
tion for a certain air of the Conditor alme Syderum, because
one Sunday in Advent I heard that hymn sung on the steps
of the cathedral, (according to the custom of that place) as I
lay in bed before daybreak. Mademoiselle Merceret, Madam
de Warrens' chambermaid, knew something of music; I shall
never forget a little piece that M. le Maitre made me sing
with her, and which her mistress listened to with great sat-
isfaction. In a word, every particular, even down to the ser-
vant Perrine, whom the boys of the choir took such delight
in teasing. The remembrance of these times of happiness
and innocence frequently returning to my mind, both ravish
and affect me.
Ilived at Annecy during a year without the least reproach,
giving universal satisfaction. Since my departure from Turin
I had been guilty of no folly, committed none while under
the eye of Madam de Warrens. She was my conductor, and
ever led me right; my attachment for her became my only
passion, and what proves it was not a giddy one, my heart
and understanding were in unison. It is true that a single
sentiment, absorbing all my faculties, put me out of a capac-
ity of learning even music: but this was not my fault, since

<page 139>
I IO THE CONFESSIONS OF
to the strongest inclination, I added the utmost assiduity. I
was attentive and thoughtful; what could I do? Nothing
was wanting towards my progress that depended on me;
meantime, it only required a subject that might inspire me
to occasion the commission of new follies: that subject pre-
sented itself, chance arranged it, and (as will be seen here-
after) my inconsiderate head gave in to it.
One evening, in the month of February, when it was very
cold, being all sat round the fire, we heard some one knock
at the street door. Perrine took a light, went down and opened
it: a young man entering, came upstairs, presented himself with
an easy air, and making M. Maitre a short, but well-turned
compliment, announced himself as a French musician, con-
strained by the state of his finances to take this liberty. The
heart of the good Le Maitre leaped at the name of a French
musician, for he passionately loved both his country and pro-
fession; he therefore offered the young traveller his serviceand
use of his apartment, which he appeared to stand much in
need of, and which he accepted without much ceremony. I
observed him while he was chatting and warming himself
before supper; he was short and thick, having some fault in
his shape, though without any particular deformity; he had
(if I may so express myself) an appearance of being hunch-
backed, with flat shoulders, and I think he limped. He wore
a black coat, rather worn than old, which hung in tatters, a
very fine but dirty shirt, frayed ruffles; a pair of splatterdashes
so large that he could have put both legs into either of them,
and, to secure himself from the snow, a little hat, only fit to
be carried under his arm. With this whimsical equipage, he
had, however, something elegant in his manners and conver-
sation; his countenance was expressive and agreeable, and
he spoke with facility if not with modesty; in short, every-
thing about him bore the mark of a young debauchée, who
did not crave assistance like a beggar, but as a thoughtless
madcap. He told us his name was Venture de Villeneuve,
that he came from Paris, had lost his way, and seeming to
forget that he had announced himself for a musician, added
that he was going to Grenoble to see a relation that was a
member of Parliament.
During supper we talked of music, on which subject he
spoke well: he knew all the great virtuosi, all the celebrated
works, all the actors, actresses, pretty women, and powerful

<page 140>
J. J. ROUSSEAU III
lords; in short nothing was mentioned but what he seemed
thoroughly acquainted with. Though no sooner was any
topic started, than by some drollery, which set every one a-
laughing, he made them forget what had been said. This
was on a Saturday; the next day there was to be music at the
cathedral: M. le Maitre asked if he would sing there—
“Very willingly.”—“What part would he chose 2''—“The
counter-tenor:” and immediately began speaking of other
things. Before he went to church they offered him his part to
peruse, but he did not even look at it. This Gasconade sur-
prised Le Maitre—“You’ll see,” said he, whispering to me,
“that he does not know a single note.”—I replied: “I am
very much afraid of him.” I followed them into the church;
but was extremely uneasy, and when they began, my heart
beat violently, so much was I interested in his behalf.
I was presently out of pain: he sung his two recitatives
with all imaginable taste and judgment; and what was yet
more, with a very agreeable voice. I never enjoyed a more
pleasing surprise. After mass, M. Venture received the
highest compliments from the canons and musicians, which he
answered jokingly, though with great grace. M. le Maitre
embraced him heartily; I did the same; he saw I was rejoiced
at his success, and appeared pleased at my satisfaction.
It will easily be surmised, that after having been delighted
with M. Bacle, who had little to attract my admiration, I
should be infatuated with M. Venture, who had education,
wit, talents, and a knowledge of the world, and might be
called an agreeable rake. This was exactly what happened,
and would, I believe, have happened to any other young man
in my place; especially supposing him possessed of better
judgment to distinguish merit, and more propensity to be
engaged by it; for Venture doubtless possessed a considerable
share, and one in particular, very rare at his age, namely, that
of never being in haste to display his talents. It is true, he
boasted of many things he did not understand, but of those he
knew (which were very numerous) he said nothing, patiently
waiting some occasion to display them, which he then did
with ease, though without forwardness, and thus gave them
more effect. As there was ever some intermission between
the proofs of his various abilities, it was impossible to conjec-
ture whether he had ever discovered all his talents. Playful
giddy, inexhaustible, seducing in conversation, ever smiling,

<page 141>
II 2 THE CONFESSIONS OF
but never laughing, and repeating the rudest things in the
most elegant manner. Even the most modest women were
astonished at what they endured from him: it was in vain for
them to determine to be angry; they could not assume the
appearance of it. It was extraordinary that with so many
agreeable talents, in a country where they are so well under-
stood, and so much admired, he so long remained only a
11111S1C1311.
My attachment to M. Venture, more reasonable in its cause,
was also less extravagant in its effects, though more lively and
durable than that I had conceived for M. Bacle. I loved to
see him, to hear him, all his actions appeared charming,
everything he said was an oracle to me, but the enchantment
did not extend far enough to disable me from quitting him. I
spoke of him with transport to Madam de Warrens, Le Maitre
likewise spoke in his praise, and she consented we should
bring him to her house. This interview did not succeed; he
thought her affected, she found him a libertine, and, alarmed
that I had formed such an ill acquaintance, not only forbade
me bringing him there again,but likewise painted so strongly
the danger Iran with this young man, that I became a little
more circumspect in giving in to the attachment; and very
happily, both for my manners and wits, we were soon
separated.
M. le Maitre, like most of his profession, loved good wine;
at table he was moderate, but when busy in his closet he must
drink. His maid was so well acquainted with this humor that
no sooner had he prepared his paper to compose, and taken
his violoncello, than the bottle and glass arrived, and was re-
plenished from time to time: thus, without being ever abso-
lutely intoxicated, he was usually in a state of elevation.
This was really unfortunate, for he had a good heart, and was
so playful that Madam de Warrens used to call him the kitten.
Unhappily, he loved his profession, labored much and drank
proportionately, which injured his health, and at length soured
his temper. Sometimes he was gloomy and easily offended,
though incapable of rudeness, or giving offence to any one,
for never did he utter a harsh word, even to the boys of the
choir: on the other hand, he would not suffer another to offend
him, which was but just: the misfortune was, having little
understanding, he did not properly discriminate, and was
often angry without cause.

<page 142>
J. J. ROUSSEAU II.3
The Chapter of Geneva, where so many princes and bishops
formerly thought it an honor to be seated, though in exile it
lost its ancient splendor, retained (without any diminution) its
pride. To be admitted, you must either be a gentleman or
Doctor of Sorbonne. If there is a pardonable pride, after that
derived from personal merit, it is doubtless that arising from
birth, though, in general, priests having laymen in their ser-
vice treat them with sufficient haughtiness, and thus the
canons behaved to poor Le Maitre. The chanter, in particular,
who was called the Abbé de Vidonne, in other respects a well-
behaved man, but too full of his nobility, did not always show
him the attention his talents merited. M. le Maitre could not
bear these indignities patiently; and this year, during passion
week, they had a more serious dispute than ordinary. At an
institution dinner that the bishop gave the canons, and to
which Le Maitre was always invited, the abbé failed in some
formality, adding, at the same time, some harsh words, which
the other could not digest; he instantly formed the resolution
to quit them the following night; nor could any consideration
make him give up his design, though Madam de Warrens
(whom he went to take leave of) spared no pains to appease
him. He could not relinquish the pleasure of leaving his
tyrants embarrassed for the Easter feast, at which time he
knew they stood in greatest need of him. He was most con-
cerned about his music, which he wished to take with him;
but this could not easily be accomplished, as it filled a large
case, and was very heavy, and could not be carried under
the arm.
Madam de Warrens did what I should have done in her
situation; and indeed, what I should yet do: after many use-
less efforts to retain him, seeing he was resolved to depart,
whatever might be the event, she formed the resolution to give
him every possible assistance. I must confess Le Maitre de-
served it of her, for he was (if I may use the expression) dedi-
cated to her service, in whatever appertained to either his art
or knowledge, and the readiness with which he obliged gave a
double value to his complaisance: thus she only paid back, on
an essential occasion, the many favors he had been long confer-
ring on her; though I should observe, she possessed a soul
that, to fulfill such duties, had no occasion to be reminded of
previous obligations. Accordingly she ordered me to follow
Le Maitre to Lyons, and to continue with him as long as he

<page 143>
II.4 THE CONFESSIONS OF
might have occasion for my services. She has since avowed,
that a desire of detaching me from Venture had a great hand
in this arrangement. She consulted Claude Anet about the
conveyance of the above-mentioned case. He advised, that
instead of hiring a beast at Annecy, which would infallibly
discover us, it would be better, at night, to take it to some
neighboring village, and there hire an ass to carry it to
Seyssel, which being in the French dominions, we should
have nothing to fear. This plan was adopted; we departed the
same night at seven, and Madam de Warrens, under pretense
of paying my expenses, increased the purse of poor Le Maitre
by an addition that was very acceptable. Claude Anet, the
gardiner, and myself, carried the case to the first village, then
hired an ass, and the same night reached Seyssel.
I think I have already remarked that there are times in
which I am so unlike myself that I might be taken for a man
of a direct opposite disposition; I shall now give an example
of this. M. Reydelet, curate of Seyssel, was canon of St.
Peter's, consequently known to M. le Maitre, and one of the
people from whom he should have taken most pains to conceal
himself; my advice, on the contrary, was to present ourselves
to him, and, under some pretext, entreat entertainment as if
we visited him by consent of the chapter. Le Maitre adopted
the idea, which seemed to give his revenge the appearance of
satire and waggery; in short, we went boldly to Reydelet, who
received us very kindly. Le Maitre told him he was going to
Bellay by desire of the bishop, that he might superintend the
music during the Easter holidays, and that he proposed re-
turning that way in a few days. To support this tale, I told
a hundred others, so naturally that M. Reydelet thought me
a very agreeable youth, and treated me with great friendship
and civility. We were well regaled and well lodged: M. Rey-
deletscarcely knew how to make enough of us; and we parted
the best friends in the world, with a promise to stop longer on
our return. We found it difficult to refrain from laughter, or
wait till we were alone to give free vent to our mirth: indeed,
even now, the bare recollection of it forces a smile, for never
was waggery better or more fortunately maintained. This
would have made us merry during the remainder of our jour-
ney, if M. le Maitre (who did not cease drinking) had not been
two or three times attacked with a complaint that he after-
wards became very subject to, and which resembled an epi-

<page 144>
J. J. ROUSSEAU II5
lepsy. These fits threw me into the most fearful embarrass-
ments, from which I resolved to extricate myself with the
first opportunity.
According to the information given to M. Reydelet, we
passed our Easter holidays at Bellay, and though not expected
there, were received by the music-master, and welcomed by
every one with great pleasure. M. le Maitre was of consider-
able note in his profession, and, indeed, merited that distinc-
tion. The music-master of Bellay (who was fond of his own
works) endeavored to obtain the approbation of so good a
judge; for besides being a connoisseur, M. le Maitre was equit-
able, neither a jealous, ill-natured critic, nor a servile flatterer.
He was so superior to the generality of country music-masters
and they were so sensible of it, that they treated him rather
as their chief than a brother musician.
Having passed four or five days very agreeably at Bellay, we
departed, and continuing our journey without meeting with
any accidents, except those I have just spoken of, arrived at
Lyons, and were lodged at Notre Dame de Pitie. While we
waited for the arrival of the before-mentioned case (which by
the assistance of another lie, and the care of our good patron,
M. Reydelet, we had embarked on the Rhone) M. le Maitre
went to visit his acquaintance, and among others Father Cato,
a Cordelier, who will be spoken of hereafter, and the Abbé
Dortan, Count of Lyons, both of whom received him well, but
afterwards betrayed him, as will be seen presently; indeed,
his good fortune terminated with M. Reydelet.
Two days after our arrival at Lyons, as we passed a little
street not far from our inn, Le Maitre was attacked by one of
his fits; but it was now so violent as to give me the utmost
alarm. I screamed with terror, called for help, and naming
our inn, entreated someone to bear him to it, then (while the
people were assembled, and busy round a man that had fallen
senseless in the street) he was abandoned by the only friend
on whom he could have any reasonable dependence; I seized
the instant when no one heeded me, turned the corner of the
street and disappeared. Thanks to Heaven, I have made my
third painful confession; if many such remained, I should
certainly abandon the work I have undertaken.
Of all the incidents I have yet related, a few traces are re-
maining in the places where I have lived; but what I have to
relate in the following book is almost entirely unknown; these

<page 145>
II 6 THE CONFESSIONS OF
are the greatest extravagancies of my life, and it is happy they
had not worse conclusions. My head, (if I may use the
simile) screwed up to the pitch of an instrument it did not
naturally accord with, had lost its diapason; in time it returned
to it again, when I discontinued my follies, or at least gave in
to those more consonant to my disposition. This epocha of
my youth I am least able to recollect, nothing having passed
sufficiently interesting to influence my heart, to make me
clearly retrace the remembrance. In so many successive
changes, it is difficult not to make some transpositions of time
or place. I write absolutely from memory, without notes or
materials to help my recollection. Some events are as fresh in
my idea as if they had recently happened, but there are certain
chasms which I cannot fill up but by the aid of recital, as con-
fused as the remaining traces of those to which they refer. It
is possible, therefore, that I may have erred in trifles, and
perhaps shall again, but in every matter of importance I can
answer that the account is faithfully exact, and with the same
veracity the reader may depend I shall be careful to con-
tinue it.
My resolution was soon taken after quitting Le Maitre; I set
out immediately for Annecy. The cause and mystery of our
departure had interested me for the security of our retreat:
this interest, which entirely employed my thoughts for some
days, had banished every other idea; but no sooner was I se-
cure and in tranquility, than my predominant sentiment re-
gained its place. Nothing flattered, nothing tempted me, I
had no wish but to return to Madam de Warrens; the tender-
ness and truth of my attachment to her had rooted from my
heart every imaginable project, and all the follies of ambition,
I conceived no happiness but living near her, nor could I take
a step without feeling that the distance between us was in-
creased. I returned, therefore, as soon as possible, with such
speed, and with my spirits in such a state of agitation, that
though I recall with pleasure all my other travels, I have not
the least recollection of this, only remembering my leaving
Lyons and reaching Annecy. Let any one judge whether this
last event can have slipped my memory, when informed that
on my arrival I found Madam de Warrens was not there, hav-
ing set out for Paris.
I was never well informed of the motives of this journey. I
am certain she would have told me had I asked her, but never

<page 146>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 117
was man less curious to learn the secrets of his friend. My
heart is ever so entirely filled with the present, or with past
pleasures, which become a principal part of my enjoyment,
that there is not a chink or corner for curiosity to enter. All
that I conceive from what I heard of it, is, that in the revolu-
tion caused at Turin by the abdication of the King of Sardinia,
she feared being forgotten, and was willing by favor of the
intrigues of M. d’Aubonne to seek the same advantage in
the court of France, where she has often told me she should
have preferred it, as the multiplicity of business there prevents
your conduct from being so closely inspected. If this was her
business, it is astonishing that on her return she was not ill
received; be that as it will, she continued to enjoy her allow-
ance without any interruption. Many people imagined she
was charged with some secret commission, either by the
bishop, who then had business at the court of France, where
he himself was soon after obliged to go, or some one yet more
powerful, who knew how to insure her a gracious reception at
her return. If this was the case, it is certain the ambassadress
was not ill chosen, since being young and handsome, she had
all the necessary qualifications to succeed in a negotiation.

<page 147>
II.8 THE CONFESSIONS OF
BOOK IV.
ET anyone judgemy surprise and grief at not finding heron
my arrival. I now felt regret at having abandoned M. le
Maitre, and my uneasiness increased when I learned the
misfortunes that had befallen him. His box of music, contain-
ing all his fortune, that precious box, preserved with so much
care and fatigue, had been seized on at Lyons by means of
Count Dortan, who had received information from the Chapter
of our having absconded with it. In vain did Le Maitre reclaim
his property, his means of existence, the labor of his life; his
right to the music in question was at least subject to litiga-
tion, but even that liberty was not allowed him, the affair
being instantly decided on the principal of superior strength.
Thus poor Le Maitre lost the fruit of his talents, the labor of
his youth, and principal dependence for the support of old
age.
Nothing was wanting to render the news I had received
truly afflicting, but I was at an age when even the greatest
calamities are to be sustained; accordingly I soon found con-
solation. I expected shortly to hear news of Madam de
Warrens, though I was ignorant of the address, and she
1<new nothing of my return. As to my desertion of Le Maitre
(all things considered) I did not find it so very culpable. I
had been serviceable to him at his retreat; it was not in
my power to give him any further assistance. Had I re-
mained with him in France it would not have cured his com-
plaint. I could not have saved his music, and should only
have doubled his expense: in this point of view I then saw my
conduct; I see it otherwise now. It frequently happens that a
villainous action does not torment us at the instant we commit
it, but on recollection, and sometimes even after a number
of years have elapsed, for the remembrance of crimes is not
to be extinguished.

<page 148>
J. J. ROSSEA-C II9
The only means I had to obtain news of Madam de Warrens
was to remain at Annecy. Where should I seek her in Paris?
or how bear the expense of such a journey 2 Sooner or later
there was no place where I could be so certain to hear of her
as that I was now at; this consideration determined me to re-
main there, though my conduct was very indifferent. I did
not go to the bishop, who had already befriended me, and
might continue to do so; my patroness was not present, and I
feared his reprimands on the subject of our flight; neither did I
go to the seminary, M. Gras was no longer there; in short, I went
to none of my acquaintances. I should gladly have visited the
intendant's lady, but did not dare; I did worse, I sought out
M. Venture, whom (notwithstanding my enthusiasm) I had
never thought of since my departure. I found him quite gay,
in high spirits, and the universal favorite of the ladies of
Annecy.
This success completed my infatuation; I saw nothing but
M. Venture; he almost made me forget even Madam de
Warrens. That I might profit more at ease by his instruc-
tions and example, I proposed to share his lodgings, to which
he readily consented. It was at a shoemaker's; a pleasant,
jovial fellow, who, in his county dialect, called his wife no-
thing but trollop; an appellation which she certainly merited.
Venture took care to augment their differences, though
under an appearance of doing the direct contrary, throwing
out in a distant manner, and provincial accents, hints that pro-
duced the utmost effect, and furnished such scenes as were
sufficient to make any one die with laughter. Thus the morn-
ings passed without our thinking of them; at two or three
o'clock we took some refreshment. Venture then went to his
various engagements, where he supped, while I walked alone,
meditating on his great merit, coveting and admiring his rare
talents, and cursing my own unlucky stars, that did not call
me to so happy a life. How little did I then know of myself!
mine had been a thousand times more delightful, had I not
been such a fool, or known better how to enjoy it.
Madam de Warrens had taken no one with her but Anet:
Merceret, the chambermaid, whom I have before mentioned,
still remained in the house. Merceret was something older
than myself, not pretty, but tolerably agreeable; good-natured,
free from malice, having no fault to my knowledge but being
a little refractory with her mistress. I often went to see her;

<page 149>
I2O THE CONFESSIONS OF
she was an old acquaintance, who recalled to my remembrance
one more beloved, and this made her dear to me. She had
several friends, and among others one Mademoiselle Giraud,
a Genevese, who, for the punishment of my sins, took it in her
head to have an inclination for me, always pressing Merceret,
when she returned her visits, to bring me with her. As I liked
Merceret, I felt no disinclination to accompany her; besides I
met there with some young people whose company pleased
me. For Mademoiselle Giraud, who offered every kind of
enticement, nothing could increase the aversion I had for her.
When she drew near me, with her dried black snout, smeared
with Spanish snuff, it was with the utmost difficulty that I
could refrain from expressing my distaste; but, being pleased
with her visitors, I took patience. Among these were two
girls who (either to pay their court to Mademoiselle Giraud
or myself) paid me every possible attention. I conceived
this to be only friendship; but have since thought it de-
pended only on myself to have discovered something more,
though I did not even think of it at the time.
There was another reason for my stupidity. Seamstresses,
chambermaids, or milliners, never tempted me; I sighed for
ladies! Every one has his peculiar taste, this has ever been
mine; being in this particular of a different opinion from
Horace. Yet it is not vanity of riches or rank that attracts
me; it is a well-preserved complexion, fine hands, elegance
of ornaments, an air of delicacy and neatness throughout
the whole person; more in taste, in the manner of express-
ing themselves, a finer or better made gown, a well-turned
ankle, small foot, ribbons, lace, and well-dressed hair; I
even prefer those who have less natural beauty, provided
they are elegantly decorated. I freely confess this prefer-
ence is very ridiculous; yet my heart gives in to it spite of
my understanding. Well, even this advantage presented
itself, and it only depended on my own resolution to have
seized the opportunity.
How do I love, from time to time, to return to those mo-
ments of my youth, which were so charmingly delightful; so
short, so scarce, and enjoyed at so cheap a rate!—how fondly
do I wish to dwell on them! Even yet the remembrance of
these scenes warms my heart with a chaste rapture, which
appears necessary to reanimate my drooping courage, and
enable me to sustain the weariness of my latter days.

<page 150>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I2 I
The appearance of Aurora seemed so delightful one morn-
ing that, putting on my clothes, I hastened into the country,
to see the rising of the sun. I enjoyed that pleasure in its
utmost extent; it was one week after midsummer; the earth
was covered with verdure and flowers, the nightingales,
whose soft warblings were almost concluded, seemed to vie
with each other, and in concert with birds of various kinds
to bid adieu to spring, and hail the approach of a beautiful
summer's day: one of those lovely days that are no longer
to be enjoyed at my age, and which have never been seen on
the melancholy soil I now inhabit.
I had rambled insensibly, to a considerable distance from
the town—the heat augmented–I was walking in the shade
along a valley, by the side of a brook, I heard behind me the
steps of horses, and the voice of some females who, thoughthey
seemed embarrassed, did not laugh the less heartily on that
account. I turn round, hear myself called by name, and
approaching, find two young people of my acquaintance,
Mademoiseile de G– and Mademoiselle Galley, who, not
being very excellent horsewomen, could not make their
horses cross the rivulet.
Mademoiselle de G– was a young lady of Berne, very
amiable; who, having been sent from that country for some
youthful folly, had imitated Madam de Warrens, at whose
house I had sometimes seen her; but not having, like her, a
pension, she had been fortunate in this attachment to Made-
moiselle Galley, who had prevailed on her mother to engage her
young friend as a companion, till she could be otherwise pro-
vided for. Mademoiselle Galley was one year younger than
her friend, handsomer, more delicate, more ingenious, and to
complete all, extremely well made. They loved each other
tenderly, and the good disposition of both could not fail to
render their union durable, if some lover did not derange it.
They informed me they were going to Toune, an old castle be-
longing to Madam Galley, and implored my assistance to
make their horses cross the stream, not being able to compass
it themselves. I would have given each a cut or two with the
whip, but they feared I might be kicked, and themselves
thrown; I therefore had recourse to another expedient, I took
hold of Mademoiselle Galley's horse and led him through the
brook, the water reaching half-way up my legs. The other
followed without any difficulty. This done, I would have paid

<page 151>
I 2.2 THE CONFESSIONS OF
my compliments to the ladies, and walked off like a great
booby as I was, but after whispering each other, Mademoiselle
de G– said, “No, no, you must not think to escape thus;
you have got wet in our service, and we ought in conscience
to take care and dry you. If you please you must go with us,
you are now our prisoner.” My heart began to beat—I looked
at Mademoiselle Galley—“Yes, yes,” added she, laughing at
my fearful look, “our prisoner of war; come, get up behind
her, we shall give a good account of you.” But, madem-
oiselle,” continued I, “I have not the honor to be acquainted
with your mother; what will she say on my arrival?” “Her
mother,” replied Mademoiselle de G– is not at Toune,
we are alone, we shall return at night, and you shall come
back with us.
The stroke of electricity has not a more instantaneous effect
than these words produced on me. Leaping behind Madem-
oiselle de G–, I trembled with joy, and when it became
necessary to clasp her in order to hold myself on, my heart
beat so violently that she perceived it, and told me hers beat
also from a fear of falling. In my present posture, I might
naturally have considered this an invitation to satisfy my-
self of the truth of her assertion, yet I did not dare, and
during the whole way my arm served as a girdle (a very
close one, I must confess), without being a moment dis-
placed. Some women that may read this would be for giv-
ing me a box on the ear, and, truly, I deserved it.
The gayety of the journey, and the chat of these girls, so
enlivened me, that during the whole time we passed together
we never ceased talking a moment. They had set me so thor-
oughly at ease, that my tongue spoke as fast as my eyes,
though not exactly the same things. Some minutes, indeed,
when I was left alone with either, the conversation became
a little embarrassed, but neither of them was absent long
enough to allow time for explaining the cause.
Arrived at Toune, and myself well dried, we breakfasted to-
gether; after which it was necessary to settle the important
business of preparing dinner. The young ladies cooked, kiss-
ing from time time the farmer's children, while the poor
scullion looked on grumbling. Provisions had been sent for
from town, and there was everything necessary for a good din-
ner, but unhappily they had forgotten wine; this forgetfulness
was by no means astonishing to girls who seldom drank any,

<page 152>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I 23
but I was sorry for the omission, as I had reckoned on its
help, thinking it might add to my confidence. They were
sorry likewise, and perhaps from the same motive; though I
have no reason to say this, for their lively and charming
gayety was innocence itself; besides, there were two of them,
what could they expect from me? they went everywhere
about the neighborhood to seek for wine, but none could be
procured, so pure and sober are the peasants in those parts.
As they were expressing their concern, I begged them not to
give themselves any uneasiness on my account, for while
with them I had no occasion for wine to intoxicate me. This
was the only gallantry I ventured at during the whole of
the day, and I believe the sly rogues saw well enough that
I said nothing but the truth.
We dined in the kitchen; the two friends were seated on the
benches, one on each side the long table, and their guest
at the end, between them, on a three-legged stool. What a
dinner! how charming the remembrance! While we can en-
joy, at so small an expense, such pure, such true delights,
why should we be solicitous for others? Never did those petite
soupes, so celebrated in Paris, equal this; I do not only say for
real pleasure and gayety, but even for sensuality.
After dinner, we were economical; instead of drinking the
coffee we had reserved at breakfast, we kept it for an afternoon
collation, with cream, and some cake they had brought with
them. To keep our appetites in play, we went into the
orchard, meaning to finish our dessert with cherries. I got
into a tree, throwing them down bunches, from which they
returned the stones through the branches. One time, Madem-
oiselle Galley, holding out her apron, and drawing back her
head, stood so fair, and I took such good aim, that I
dropped a bunch into her bosom. On her laughing, I said
to myself, “Why are not my lips cherries 2 How gladly
would I throw them there likewise.”
Thus the day passed with the greatest freedom, yet with
the utmost decency; not a single equivocal word, not one
attempt at double-meaning pleasantry; yet this delicacy was
not affected, we only performed the parts our hearts dictated;
in short, my modesty, some will say my folly, was such that
the greatest familiarity that escaped me was once kissing the
hand of Mademoiselle Galley; it is true, the attending cir-
cumstances helped to stamp a value on this trifling favor;

<page 153>
1 24 THE CONFESSIONS OF
we were alone, I was embarrassed, her eyes were fixed on the
ground, and my lips, instead of uttering words, were pressed
on her hand, which she drew gently back after the salute,
without any appearance of displeasure. I know not what I
should have said to her, but her friend entered, and at that
moment I thought her ugly.
At length, they bethought themselves, that they must re-
turn to town before night; even now we had but just time to
reach it by daylight; and we hastened our departure in the
same order we came. Had I pleased myself, I should cer-
tainly have reversed this order, for the glance of Mademoiselle
Galley had reached my heart, but I dared not mention it, and
the proposal could not reasonably come from her. On the way,
we expressed our sorrow that the day was over, but far from
complaining of the shortness of its duration, we were con-
scious of having prolonged it by every possible amusement.
I quitted them in nearly the same spot where I had taken
them up. With what regret did we part! With what pleasure
did we form projects to renew our meeting! Delightful hours,
which we passed innocently together, ye were worth ages of
familiarity! The sweet remembrance of those days cost those
amiable girls nothing; the tender union which reigned among
us equalled more lively pleasures, with which it could not
have existed. We loved each other without shame or mystery,
and wished to continue our reciprocal affection. There is a
species of enjoyment connected with innocence of manners
which is superior to any other, because it has no interval; for
myself, the remembrance of such a day touches me nearer,
delights me more, and returns with greater rapture to my heart
than any other pleasure I ever tasted. I hardly knew what I
wished with those charming girls. I do not say, that had the
arrangement been in my power, I should have divided my heart
between them; I certainly felt some degree of preference:
though I should have been happy to have had Mademoiselle
de G–, for a mistress, I think, by choice, I should have
liked her better as a confidante; be that as it may, I felt on
leaving them as though I could not live without either.
Who would have thought that I should never see them more;
and that here our ephemeral amours must end ?
Those who read this will not fail to laugh at my gallant-
ries, and remark, that after very promising preliminaries, my
most forward adventures concluded by a kiss of the hand:

<page 154>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I25
yet be not mistaken, reader, in your estimate of my enjoy-
ments; I have, perhaps, tasted more real pleasure in my
amours, which concluded by a kiss of the hand, than you
will ever have in yours, which, at least, begin there.
Venture, who had gone to bed late the night before, came in
Soon after me. I did not now see him with my usual satisfac-
tion, and took care not to inform him how I had passed the
day. The ladies had spoken of him slightingly, and appeared
discontented at finding me in such bad hands; this hurt him
in my esteem; besides, whatever diverted my ideas from them
was at this time disagreeable. However, he soon brought me
back to him and myself, by speaking of the situation of my
affairs, which was too critical to last; for, though I spent very
little, my slender finances were almost exhausted. I was with-
out resource; no news of Madam de Warrens; not knowing
what would become of me, and feeling a cruel pang at heart
to see the friend of Mademoiselle Galley reduced to beggary.
I now learned from Venture that he had spoken of me to
the Judge Major, and would take me next day to dine with
him; that he was a man who by means of his friends might
render me essential service. In other respects he was a desir-
able acquaintance, being a man of wit and letters, of agree-
able conversation, one who possessed talents and loved them
in others. After this discourse (mingling the most serious
concerns with the most trifling frivolity) he showed me a
pretty couplet, which came from Paris, on an air in one of
Mouret's operas, which was then playing. Monsieur Simon
(the judge major) was so pleased with this couplet, that he de-
termined to make another in answer to it, on the same air.
He had desired Venture to write one, and he wished me to
make a third, that, as he expressed it, they might see coup-
lets start up next day like incidents in a comic romance.
In the night (not being able to sleep) I composed a couplet,
as my first essay in poetry. It was passable; better, or at
least composed with more taste, than it would have been the
preceding night, the subject being tenderness, to which my
heart was now entirely disposed. In the morning I showed
my performance to Venture, who, being pleased with the
couplet, put it in his pocket, without informing me whether
he had made his. We dined with M. Simon, who treated us
very politely. The conversation was agreeable; indeed it
could not be otherwise between two men of natural good

<page 155>
I26 THE CONFESSIONS OF
sense, improved by reading. For me, I acted my proper
part, which was to listen without attempting to join in the
conversation. Neither of them mentioned the couplet nor
do I know that it ever passed for mine.
M. Simon appeared satisfied with my behavior; indeed, it
was almost all he saw of me at this interview. We had often
met at Madam de Warrens, but he had never paid much at-
tention to me; it is from this dinner, therefore, that I date
our acquaintance, which, though of no use in regard to the
object I then had in view, was afterwards productive of ad-
vantages which make me recollect it with pleasure.
I should be wrong not to give some account of this person,
since from his office of magistrate, and the reputation of wit
on which he piqued himself, no idea could be formed of it.
The judge major, Simon, certainly was not two feet high; his
legs spare, straight, and tolerably long, would have added
something to his stature had they been vertical, but they
stood in the direction of an open pair of compasses. His body
was not only short, but thin, being in every respect of most
inconceivable smallness—when naked he must have appeared
like a grasshopper. His head was of the common size, to
which appertained a well-formed face, a noble look, and toler-
ably fine eyes; in short, it appeared a borrowed head, stuck on
a miserable stump. He might very well have dispensed with
dress, for his large wig alone covered him from head to foot.
He had two voices, perfectly different, which intermingled
perpetually in his conversation, forming at first a diverting,
but afterwards a very disagreeable contrast. One grave and
sonorous, was, if I may hazard the expression, the voice of his
head: the other, clear, sharp, and piercing, the voice of his
body. When he paid particular attention, and spoke
leisurely, so as to preserve his breath, he could continue his
deep tone; but if he was the least animated, or attempted a
lively accent, his voice sounded like the whistling of a key,
and it was with the utmost difficulty that he could return to
the bass.
With the figure I have just described, and which is by no
means overcharged, M. Simon was gallant, ever entertaining
the ladies with soft tales, and carrying the decoration of his
person even to foppery. Willing to make use of every ad-
vantage he, during the morning, gave audience in bed, for
when a handsome head was discovered on the pillow no one

<page 156>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 127
could have imagined what belonged to it. This circum-
stance gave birth to scenes, which I am certain are yet re-
membered by all Annecy.
One morning, when he expected to give audience in bed, or
rather on the bed,having on a handsome night-cap ornamented
with rose-colored ribbon, a countryman arriving knocked at the
door; the maid happened to be out; the judge, therefore, hearing
the knock repeated, cried “Comein,” and, as he spoke rather
loud, it was in his shrill tone. The man entered, looked about,
endeavoring to discoverwhence the female voice proceeded and
at length seeing a handsome head-dress set off with ribbons,
was about to leave the room, making the supposed lady a hun-
dred apologies. M. Simon, in a rage, screamed the more; and
the countryman, yet more confirmed in his opinion, conceiving
Himself to be insulted, began railing in his turn, saying that,
“Apparently, she was nothing better than a common street-
walker, and that the judge major should be ashamed of setting
such ill examples.” The enraged magistrate, having no other
weapon than the jordan under his bed, was just going to
throw it at the poor fellow's head as his servant returned.
This dwarf, ill-used by nature as to his person, was recom-
pensed by possessing an understanding naturally agreeable,
and which he had been careful to cultivate. Though he was
esteemed a good lawyer, he did not like his profession, de-
lighting more in the finer parts of literature, which he studied
with success: above all, he possessed that superficial bril-
liancy, the art of pleasing in conversation, even with the
ladies. He knew by heart a number of little stories, which
he perfectly well knew how to make the most of; relating
with an air of secrecy, and as an anecdote of yesterday, what
happened sixty years before. He understood music, and
could sing agreeably; in short, for a magistrate, he had many
pleasing talents. By flattering the ladies of Annecy, he be-
came fashionable among them, appearing continually in their
train. He even pretended to favors, at which they were much
amused. A Madam D'Epigny used to say “The greatest
favor he could aspire to, was to kiss a lady on her knees.”
As he was well read, and spoke fluently, his conversation
was both amusing and instructive. When I afterwards took
a taste for study, I cultivated his acquaintance, and found my
account in it: when at Chambery, I frequently went from
thence to see him. His praises increased my emulation, to

<page 157>
I28 THE CONFESSIONS OF
which he added some good advice respecting the prosecution
of my studies, which I found useful. Unhappily, this weakly
body contained a very feeling soul. Some years after, he was
chagrined by I know not what unlucky affair, but it cost him
his life. This was really unfortunate, for he was a good little
man, whom at a first acquaintance one laughed at, but after-
wards loved. Though our situations in life were very little
connected with each other, as I received some useful lessons
from him, I thought gratitude demanded that I should dedi-
cate a few sentences to his memory.
As soon as I found myself at liberty, I ran into the street
where Mademoiselle Galley lived, flattering myself that I
should see some one go in or out, or at least open a window,
but I was mistaken, not even a cat appeared, the house re-
maining as close all the time as if it had been uninhabited.
The street was small and lonely, any one loitering about was,
consequently, more likely to be noticed; from time to time
people passed in and out of the neighborhood; I was much
embarrassed, thinking my person might be known, and the
cause that brought me there conjectured; this idea tortured
me, for I have ever preferred the honor and happiness of
those I love to my own pleasures.
At length, weary of playing the Spanish lover, and having
no guitar, I determined to write to Mademoiselle de G—.
I should have preferred writing to her friend, but did not dare
take that liberty, as it appeared more proper to begin with
her to whom I owed the acquaintance, and with whom I was
most familiar. Having written my letter, I took it to Madem-
oiselle Giraud, as the young ladies had agreed at parting,
they having furnished me with this expedient. Mademoiselle
Giraud was a quilter, and sometimes worked at Madam
Galley's, which procured her free admission to the house. I
must confess, I was not thoroughly satisfied with this mes-
senger, but was cautious of starting difficulties, fearing that
if I objected to her no other might be named, and it was im-
possible to intimate that she had an inclination to me herself.
I even felt humiliated that she should think I could imagine
ner of the same sex as those young ladies: in a word, I
accepted her agency rather than none, and availed myself of
it at all events.
At the very first word, Giraud discovered me. I must own
this was not a difficult matter, for if sending a letter to young

<page 158>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I29
girls had not spoken sufficiently plain, my foolish embarrassed
air would have betrayed me. It will easily be supposed that
the employment gave her little satisfaction, she undertook it,
however, and performed it faithfully. The next morning I
ran to her house and found an answer ready for me. How did
I hurry away that I might have an opportunity to read and
kiss it alone! though this need not been told, but the plan
adopted by Mademoiselle Giraud (and in which I found more
delicacy and moderation than I had expected) should. She
had sense enough to conclude that her thirty-seven years,
hare's eyes, daubed nose, shrill voice, and black skin, stood
no chance against two elegant young girls, in all the height
and bloom of beauty; she resolved, therefore, neither to be-
tray nor assist them, choosing rather to lose me entirely
than entertain me for them.
As Merceret had not heard from her mistress for some time,
she thought of returning to Fribourg, and the persuasions of
Giraud determined her; nay more, she intimated it was proper
someone should conduct her to her father's and proposed me.
As I happened to be agreeable to little Merceret, she approved
the idea, and the same day they mentioned it to me as a fixed
point. Finding nothing displeasing in the manner they had
disposed of me, I consented, thinking it could not be above a
week's journey at most; but Giraud, who had arranged the
whole affair, thought otherwise. It was necessary to avow
the state of my finances, and the conclusion was, that Mer-
ceret should defray my expenses; but to retrench on one hand
what was expended on the other, I advised that her little
baggage should be sent on before, and that we should pro-
ceed by easy journeys on foot.
I am sorry to have so many girls in love with me, but as
there is nothing to be very vain of in the success of these
amours, I think I may tell the truth without scruple. Mer-
ceret, younger and less artful than Giraud, never made meso
many advances, but she imitated my manners, my actions, re-
peated my words, and showed me all those little attentions I
ought to have had for her. Being very timorous, she took
great care that we should both sleep in the same chamber;
a circumstance that usually produces some consequences be-
tween a lad of twenty and a girl of twenty-five.
For once, however, it went no further; my simplicity being
such, that though Merceret was by no means a disagreeable

<page 159>
I 30 THE CONFESSIONS OF
girl, an idea of gallantry never entered my head, and even if
it had, I was too great a novice to have profited by it. I
could not imagine how two young persons could bring them-
selves to sleep together, thinking that such familiarity must
require an age of preparation. If poor Merceret paid my ex-
penses in hopes of any return, she was terribly cheated, for
we arrived at Fribourg exactly as we had quitted Annecy.
I passed through Geneva without visiting any one. While
going over the bridges, I found myself so affected that I could
scarcely proceed. Never could I see the walls of that city,
never could I enterit, without feeling my heart sink from ex-
cess of tenderness, at the same time that the image of liberty
elevated my soul. The ideas of equality, union, and gentle-
ness of manners, touched me even to tears, and inspired me
with a lively regret at having forfeited all these advantages.
What an error was I in! but yet how natural! I imagined I
saw all this in my native country, because I bore it in my
heart.
It was necessary to pass through Nion: could I do this
without seeing my good father? Had I resolved on doing so,
I must afterwards have died with regret. I left Merceret at
the inn, and ventured to his house. How wrong was I to fear
him! On seeing me, his soul gave way to the parental ten-
derness with which it was filled. What tears were mingled
with our embraces! He thought I was returned to him: I re-
lated my history, and informed him of my resolution. He
opposed it feebly, mentioning the dangers to which I exposed
myself, and telling me the shortest follies were best, but
did not attempt to keep me by force, in which particular I
think he acted right; but it is certain he did not do everything
in his power to detain me, even by fair means. Whether after
the step I had taken, he thought I ought not to return, or was
puzzled at my age to know what to do with me—I have since
found that he conceived a very unjust opinion of my travelling
companion. My step-mother, a good woman, a little coax-
ingly put on an appearance of wishing me to stay to supper;
I did not, however, comply, but told them X proposed remain-
ing longer with them on my return; leaving as a deposit my
little packet, that had come by water, and would have been
an incumbrance, had I taken it with me. I continued my
journey the next morning, well satisfied that I had seen my
father, and had taken courage to do my duty.

<page 160>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I3 I
We arrived without any accident at Fribourg. Towards
the conclusion of the journey, the politeness of Mademoiselle
Merceret rather diminished, and, after our arrival, she treated
me even with coldness. Her father, who was not in the
best circumstances, did not show me much attention, and I
was obliged to lodge at an ale-house. I went to see them
the next morning, and received an invitation to dine there,
which I accepted. We separated without tears at night; I re-
turned to my paltry lodging, and departed the second day
after my arrival, almost without knowing whither to go to.
This was a circumstance of my life in which Providence
offered me precisely what was necessary to make my days
pass happily. Merceret was a good girl, neither witty, hand-
some, nor ugly; not very lively, but tolerably rational, except
while under the influence of some little humors, which usually
evaporated in tears, without any violent outbreak of temper.
She had a real inclination for me; I might have married her
without difficulty, and followed her father's business. My
taste for music would have made me love her; I should have
settled at Fribourg, a small town, not pretty, but inhabited by
very worthy people—I should certainly have missed great
pleasures, but should have lived in peace to my last hour, and
I must know best what I should have gained by such a step.
I did not return to Nion, but to Lausanne, wishing to
gratify myself with a view of that beautiful lake which is
seen there in its utmost extent. The greater part of my
secret motives have not been so reasonable. Distant expec-
tation has rarely strength enough to influence my actions;
the uncertainty of the future ever making me regard pro-
jects whose execution requires a length of time as deceitful
1ures. I give in to visionary scenes of hope as well as
others, provided they cost nothing, but if attended with any
trouble, I have done with them. The smallest, the most
trifling pleasure that is conveniently within my reach,
tempts me more than all the joys of paradise. I must ex-
cept, however, those pleasures which are necessarily followed
by pain; I only love those enjoyments which are unadulter-
ated, which can never be the case where we are conscious
they must be followed by repentance.
It was necessary I should arrive at some place, and the
nearest was best; for having lost my way on the road, I found
myself in the evening at Moudon, where I spent all that re-

<page 161>
I32 THE CONFESSIONS OF
mained of my little stock except ten creuzers, which served
to purchase my next day's dinner. Arriving in the evening
at Lausanne, I went into an ale-house, without a penny in
my pocket to pay for my lodging, or knowing what would
become of me. I found myself extremely hungry—setting,
therefore, a good face on the matter, I ordered supper,
made my meal, went to bed without thought and slept with
great composure. In the morning, having breakfasted and
reckoned with my host, I offered to leave my waistcoat in
pledge for seven batz, which was the amount of my expenses.
The honest man refused this, saying, thank Heaven, he had
never stripped any one, and would not now begin for seven
batz, adding I should keep my waistcoat and pay him when
I could. I was affected with this unexpected kindness, but
felt it less than I ought to have done, or have since experi-
enced on the remembrance of it. I did not fail sending him
his money, with thanks, by one I could depend on. Fifteen
years after, passing Lausanne, on my return from Italy, I
felt a sensible regret at having forgotten the name of the
landlord and house. I wished to see him, and should have
felt real pleasure in recalling to his memory that worthy ac-
tion. Services which doubtless have been much more im-
portant, but rendered with ostentation, have not appeared to
me so worthy of gratitude as the simple unaffected human-
ity of this honest man.
As I approached Lausanne, I thought of my distress, and
the means of extricating myself, without appearing in want
to my step-mother. I compared myself, in this walking
pilgrimage, to my friend Venture, on his arrival at Annecy,
and was so warmed with the idea, that without recollecting
that I had neither his gentility nor his talents, I determined
to act the part of little Venture at Lausanne, to teach music,
which I did not understand, and say I came from Paris,
where I had never been.
In consequence of this noble project (as there was no com-
pany where I could introduce myself without expense, and not
choosing to venture among professional people), I inquired
for some little inn, where I could lodge cheap, and was directed
to one named Perrotet, who took in boarders. This Perrotet,
who was one of the best men in the world, received me very
kindly, and after having heard my feigned story and profes-
sion, promised to speak of me, and endeavored to procure me

<page 162>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I 33
scholars, saying he should not expect any money till I had
earned it. His price for board, though moderate in itself, was
a great deal to me; he advised me, therefore, to begin with
half board, which consisted of good soup only for dinner, but
a plentiful supper at night. I closed with this proposition,
and the poor Perrotet trusted me with great cheerfulness,
sparing, meantime, no trouble to be useful to me.
Having found so many good people in my youth, why do I
find so few in my age? Is their race extinct 2 No; but I do
not seek them in the same situation I did formerly, among the
commonality, where violent passions predominate only at in-
tervals, and where nature speaks her genuine sentiments.
In more elevated stations they are entirely smothere d, and
under the mask of sentiment, only interest or vanity is heard.
Having written to my father from Lausanne, he sent my
packet and some excellent advice, of which I should have
profited better. I have already observed that I have moments
of inconceivable delirium, in which I am entirely out of my-
self. The adventure I am about to relate is an instance of
this: to comprehend how completely my brain was turned,
and to what degree I had Venturised (if I may be allowed the
expression), the many extravagances I ran into at the same
time should be considered. Behold me, then, a singing master,
without knowing how to note a common song; for if the five
or six months passed with Le Maitre had improved me, they
could not be supposed sufficient to qualify me for such an un-
dertaking; besides, being taught by a master was enough (as
I have before observed) to make me learn ill. Being a Parisian
from Geneva, and a Catholic in a Protestant country, I
thought I should change my name with my religion and
country, still approaching as near as possible to the great
model I had in view. He called himself Venture de Ville-
neuve. I changed, by anagram, the name Rousseau into that
of Vaussore, calling myself Monsieur Vaussore de Villeneuve.
Venture was a good composer, though he had not said so;
without knowing anything of the art, I boasted of my skill to
every one. This was not all: being presented to Monsieur de
Freytorens, professor of law, who loved music, and who
gave concerts at his house, nothing would do but I must
give him a proof of my talents, and accordingly I set about
composing a piece for his concerts, as boldly as if I had really
understood the science. I had the constancy to labor a fort-

<page 163>
I34 THE CONFESSIONS OF
night at this curious business, to copy it fair, write out the
different parts, and distribute them with as much assurance
as if they had been masterpieces of harmony; in short (what
will hardly be believed, though strictly true), I tacked a
very pretty minuet to the end of it, that was commonly
played about the streets, and which many may remember
from these words, so well known at that time:
Quel caprice/
Quel injustice/
Quio, tu Clarice
Trahiriot tes feux? &’c.
Venture had taught me this air with the bass, set to other
words, by the help of which I had retained it: thus at the end
of my composition, I put this minuet and bass, suppressing
the words, and uttering it for my own as confidently as if I
had been speaking to the inhabitants of the moon. They as-
sembled to perform my piece; I explain to each the move-
ment, taste of execution, and references to his part—I was
fully occupied. They were five or six minutes preparing,
which were for me so many ages: at length, everything is
adjusted, myself in a conspicuous situation, a fine roll of
paper in my hand, gravely preparing to beat time. I gave
four or five strokes with my paper, attending with “take
care!” they begin—No, never since French operas existed
was there such a confused discord! The minuet, however,
presently put all the company in good humor; hardly was it
begun, before I heard bursts of laughter from all parts,
every one congratulated me on my pretty taste for music,
declaring this minuet would make me spoken of, and that I
merited the loudest praise. It is not necessary to describe
my uneasiness, or to own how much I deserved it.
Next day, one of the musicians, named Lutold, came to see
me and was kind enough to congratulate me on my success.
The profound conviction of my folly, shame, regret, and the
state of despair to which I was reduced, with the impossibility
of concealing the cruel agitation of my heart, made me open
it to him; giving, therefore, a loose to my tears, not con-
tent with owning my ignorance, I told all, conjuring him to
secrecy; he kept his word, as every one will suppose. The
same evening, all Lausanne knew who I was, but what is re-
markable, no one seemed to know, not even the good Per-

<page 164>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I35
rotet, who (notwithstanding what had happened) continued
to lodge and board me.
I led a melancholy life here; the consequences of such an
essay had not rendered Lausanne a very agreeable residence.
Scholars did not present themselves in crowds, not a single
female, and not a person of the city. I had only two or
three great dunces, as stupid as I was ignorant, who fatigued
me to death, and in my hands were not likely to edify much.
At length, I was sent for to a house, where a little serpent
of a girl amused herself by showing me a parcel of music that
I could not read a note of, and which she had the malice to
sing before her master, to teach him how it should be exe-
cuted; for I was so unable to read an air at first sight, that in
the charming concert I have just described, I could not pos-
sibly follow the execution a moment, or know whether they
played truly what lay before them,and I myself had composed.
In the midst of so many humiliating circumstances, I had
the pleasing consolation, from time to time, of receiving
letters from my two charming friends. I have ever found the
utmost consolatory virtue in the fair; when in disgrace, no-
thing softens my affliction more than to be sensible that an
amiable woman is interested for me. This correspondence
ceased soon after, and was never renewed: indeed it was my
own fault, for in changing situations I neglected sending my
address, and forced by necessity to think perpetually of my-
self, I soon forgot them.
It is a long time since I mentioned Madam de Warrens, but
it should not be supposed I had forgotten her; never was she
a moment absent from my thoughts. I anxiously wished to
find her, not merely because she was necessary to my subsist-
ence, but because she was infinitely more necessary to my
heart. My attachment to her (though lively and tender, as it
really was) did not prevent my loving others, but then it was
not in the same manner. All equally claimed my tenderness
for their charms, but it was those charms alone I loved, my
passion would not have survived them, while Madam de
Warrens might have become old or ugly without my loving
her the less tenderly. My heart had entirely transmitted to
herself the homage it first paid to her beauty, and whatever
change she might experience, while she remained herself, my
sentiments could not change. I was sensible how much
gratitude I owed to her, but in truth, I never thought of it,

<page 165>
I36 THE CONFESSIONS OF
and whether she served me or not,it would ever have been the
same thing. I loved her neither from duty, interest, nor con-
venience; I loved her because I was born to love her. Dur-
ing my attachment to another, I own this affection was in
some measure deranged; I did not think so frequently of her,
but still with the same pleasure, and never, in love or other-
wise, did I think of her without feeling that I could expect
no true happiness in life while in a state of separation.
Though in so long a time I had received no news from
Madam de Warrens, I never imagined I had entirely lost her,
or that she could have forgotten me. I said to myself, she will
know sooner or later that I am wandering about, and will
find some means to inform me of her situation: I am certain
I shall find her. In the meantime, it was a pleasure to live
in her native country, to walk in the streets where she had
walked, and before the houses that she had lived in; yet all
this was the work of conjecture, for one of my foolish pecu-
liarities was, not daring to inquire after her, or even pro-
nounce her name without the most absolute necessity. It
seemed in speaking of her that I declared all I felt, that my
lips revealed the secrets of my heart, and in some degree in-
jured the object of my affection. I believe fear was likewise
mingled with this idea; I dreaded to hear ill of her. Her
management had been much spoken of, and some little of
her conduct in other respects; fearing, therefore, that some-
thing might be said which I did not wish to hear, I preferred
being silent on the subject.
As my scholars did not take up much of my time, and the
town where she was born was not above four leagues from
Lausanne, I made it a walk of three or four days; during
which time a most pleasant emotion never left me. A view of
the lake of Geneva and its admirable banks, had ever, in my
idea, a particular attraction which I cannot describe; not
arising merely from the beauty of the prospect, but something
else, I know not why, more interesting, which affects and sof-
tens me. Every time I have approached the Vaudois country I
have experienced an impression composed of the remembrance
of Madam de Warrens, who was born there; of my father, who
1ived there; of Miss Vulson, who had been my first love, and
of several pleasant journeys I had made there in my child-
hood, mingled with some nameless charm, more powerfully
attractive than all the rest. When that ardent desire for a

<page 166>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I37
life of happiness and tranquility (which ever follows me, and
for which I was born) inflames my mind, 'tis ever to the
country of Vaud, near the lake, in those charming plains,
that imagination leads me. An orchard on the banks of that
lake, and no other, is absolutely necessary; a firm friend, an
amiable woman, a cow, and a little boat; nor could I enjoy
perfect happiness on earth without these concomitants. I
laugh at the simplicity with which I have several times
gone into that country for the sole purpose of seeking this
imaginary happiness when I was ever surprised to find the
inhabitants, particularly the women, of a quite different
disposition to what I sought. How strange did this appear
to me! The country and people who inhabit it, were never,
in my idea, formed for each other.
Walking along these beautiful banks, on my way to Vevay,
I gave myself up to the soft melancholy; my heart rushed
with ardor into a thousand innocent felicities; melting to
tenderness, I sighed and wept like a child. How often, stop-
ping to weep more at my ease, and seated on a large stone,
did I amuse myself with seeing my tears drop into the water.
On my arrival at Vevay, I lodged at the Key, and during
the two days I remained there, without any acquaintance,
conceived a love for that city, which has followed me through
all my travels, and was finally the cause that I fixed on this
spot, in the novel I afterwards wrote, for the residence of
my hero and heroines. I would say to any one who has
taste and feeling, go to Vevay, visit the surrounding coun-
try, examine the prospects, go on the lake and then say,
whether nature has not designed this country for a Julia, a
Clara, and a St. Preux; but do not seek them there. I now
return to my story.
Giving myself out for a Catholic, I followed without mys-
tery or scruple the religion I had embraced. On a Sunday, if
the weather was fine, I went to hear mass at Assans, a place
two leagues distant from Lausanne, and generally in company
with other Catholics, particularly a Parisian embroiderer,
whose name I have forgotten. Not such a Parisian as myself,
but a real native of Paris, an arch-Parisian from his maker,
yet honest as a peasant. He loved his country so well, that
he would not doubt my being his countryman, for fear he
should not have so much occasion to speak of it. The lieu-
tenant-governor, M. de Crouzas, had a gardener, who was

<page 167>
138 THE CONFESSIONS OF
likewise from Paris, but not so complaisant; he thought
the glory of his country concerned, when any one claimed
that honor who was not really entitled to it; he put ques-
tions to me, therefore, with an air and tone, as if certain to
detect me in a falsehood, and once, smiling malignantly,
asked what was remarkable in the Marcheneuſ? It may be
supposed I asked the question; but I have since passed
twenty years at Paris, and certainly know that city, yet was
the same question repeated at this day, I should be equally
embarrassed to answer it, and from this embarrassment it
might be concluded I had never been there: thus, even when
we meet with truths, we are subject to build our opinions on
circumstances, which may easily deceive us.
I formed no ideas, while at Lausanne, that were worth
recollecting, nor can I say exactly how long I remained
there; I only know that not finding sufficient to subsist on,
I went from thence to Neutchatel, where I passed the win-
ter. Here I succeeded better, I got some scholars, and
saved enough to pay my good friend Perrotet, who had
faithfully sent my baggage, though at that time I was con-
siderably in his debt.
By continuing to teach music, I insensibly gained some
knowledge of it. The life I led was sufficiently agreeable, and
any reasonable man might have been satisfied, but my un-
settled heart demanded something more. On Sundays, or
whenever I had leisure, I wandered, sighing and thoughtful,
about the adjoining woods, and when once out of the city
never returned before night. One day, being at Boudry, I
went to dine at a public-house, where I saw a man with a long
beard, dressed in a violet-colored Grecian habit, with a fur
cap, and whose air and manner were rather noble. This per-
son found some difficulty in making himself understood,
speaking only an unintelligible jargon, which bore more
resemblance to Italian than any other language. I under-
stood almost all he said, and I was the only person present
who could do so, for he was obliged to make his request
known to the landlord and others about him by signs. On
my speaking a few words in Italian, which he perfectly un-
derstood, he got up and embraced me with rapture; a connec-
tion was soon formed, and from that moment, I became his
interpreter. His dinner was excellent, mine rather worse than
indifferent, he gave me an invitation to dine with him, which

<page 168>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I 39
I accepted without much ceremony. Drinking and chatting
soon rendered us familiar, and by the end of the repast we
had all the disposition in the world to become inseparable
companions. He informed me he was a Greek prelate, and
Archimandrite of Jerusalem; that he had undertaken to make
a gathering in Europe for the re-establishment of the Holy
Sepulchre, and showed me some very fine patents from the
czarina, the emperor, and several other sovereigns. He was
tolerably content with what he had collected hitherto, though
he had experienced inconceivable difficulties in Germany; for
not understanding a word of German, Latin, or French, he had
been obliged to have recourse to his Greek, Turkish Lingua
Franca, which did not procure him much in the country he
was travelling through; his proposal, therefore, to me was,
that I should accompany him in the quality of secretary and
interpreter. In spite of my violet-colored coat, which accorded
well enough with the proposed employment, he guessed from
my meagre appearance, that I should easily begained; and he
was not mistaken. The bargain was soon made, I demanded
nothing, and he promised liberally; thus, without any secu-
rity or knowledge of the person I was about to serve, I gave
myself up entirely to his conduct, and the next day behold
me on an expedition to Jerusalem.
We began our expedition unsuccessfully by the canton of
Fribourg. Episcopal dignity would not suffer him to play
the beggar, or solicit help from private individuals; but we
presented his commission to the Senate, who gave him a trifl-
ing sum. From thence we went to Berne, where we lodged at
the Falcon, then a good inn, and frequented by respectable
company; the public table being well supplied and numer-
ously attended. I had fared indifferently so long, that I was
glad to make myself amends, therefore took care to profit
by the present occasion. My lord, the Archimandrite, was
himself an excellent companion, loved good cheer, was gay,
spoke well for those who understood him, and knew perfect-
ly well how to make the most of his Grecian erudition. One
day, at dessert while cracking nuts, he cut his finger pretty
deeply, and as it bled freely showed it to the company, say-
ing with a laugh, “Mirate, signori; questo e sangue Pelasgo.”
At Berne, I was not useless to him, nor was my perform-
ance so bad as I had feared: I certainly spoke better and with
more confidence than I could have done for myself. Matters

<page 169>
I4O THE CONFESSIONS OF
were not conducted here with the same simplicity as at Fri-
bourg; long and frequent conferences were necessary with the
Premiers of the State, and the examination of his titles was
not the work of a day; at length, everything being adjusted,
he was admitted to an audience by the Senate; I entered with
him as interpreter, and was ordered to speak. I expected
nothing less, for it never entered my mind, that after such
long and frequent conferences with the members, it was ne-
cessary to address the assembly collectively, as if nothing had
been said. Judge my embarrassment!—a man so bashful to
speak, not only in public, but before the whole of the Senate
of Berne! to speak impromptu, without a single moment for
recollection; it was enough to annihilate me—I was not even
intimidated. I described distinctly and clearly the commis-
sion of the Archimandrite; extolled the piety of those princes
who had contributed, and to heighten that of their excellencies
by emulation, added that less could not be expected from their
well-known munificence; then, endeavoring to prove that this
good work was equally interesting to all Christians, without
distinction of sect; and concluded by promising the benedic-
tion of Heaven to all those who took partin it. I will not say
that my discourse was the cause of our success, but it was
certainly well received; and on our quitting the Archimandrite
was gratified by a very genteel present, to which some very
handsome compliments were added on the understanding of
his secretary; these I had the agreeable office of interpret-
ing; but could not take courage to render them literally.
This was the only time in my life that I spoke in public,
and before a sovereign; and the only time, perhaps, that I
spoke boldly and well. What difference in the disposition of
the same person. Three years ago, having been to see my
old friend, M. Roguin, at Yverdon, I received a deputation
to thank me for some books I had presented to the library
of that city; the Swiss are great speakers; these gentlemen,
accordingly, made me a long harangue, which I thought my-
self obliged in honor to answer, but so embarrassed myself in
the attempt, that my head became confused, I stopped short,
and was laughed at. Though naturally timid, I have some-
times acted with confidence in my youth, but never in my
advanced age: the more I have seen of the world the less I
have been able to adopt its manners.
On leaving Berne, we went to Soleurre: the Archimandrite

<page 170>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I41
designing to re-enter Germany, and return through Hun-
gary or Poland to his own country. This would have been
a prodigious tour; but as the contents of his purse rather
increased than diminished during his journey, he was in no
haste to return. For me, who was almost as much pleased
on horseback as on foot, I would have desired no better
than to have travelled thus during my whole life; but it was
pre-ordained that my journey should soon end.
The first thing we did after our arrival at Soleurre, was to
pay our respects to the French ambassador there. Unfortun-
ately for my bishop, this chanced to be the Marquis de Bonac,
who had been ambassador at the Porte, and was acquaint-
ed with every particular relative to the Holy Sepulchre.
The Archimandrite had an audience that lasted about a quar-
ter of an hour, to which I was not admitted, as the ambassa-
dor spoke French and Italian at least as well as myself. On
my Grecian's retiring, I was prepared to follow him, but was
detained: it was now my turn. Having called myself a Parisi-
an, as such, I was under the jurisdiction of his excellency:
he therefore asked me who I was 2 exhorting me to tell the
truth; this I promised to do, but entreated a private audi-
ence, which was immediately granted. The ambassador took
me to his closet, and shut the door; there, throwing myself at
his feet, I kept my word, nor should I have said less, had I
promised nothing, for a continual wish to unbosom myself,
puts my heart perpetually upon my lips. After having dis-
closed myself without reserve to the musician Lutold, there
was no occasion to attempt acting the mysterious with the
Marquis de Bonac, who was so well pleased with my little his-
tory, and the ingenuousness with which I had related it, that
he led me to the ambassadress, and presented me, with an
abridgment of my recital. Madam de Bonac received me
kindly, saying, I must not be suffered to follow that Greek
monk. It was accordingly resolved that I should remain at
their hotel till something better could be done for me. I
wished to bid adieuto my poor Archimandrite,for whom I had
conceived an attachment, but was not permitted; they sent
him word that I was to be detained there, and in quarter of an
hour after, I saw my little bundle arrive. M. de la Martiniere,
secretary of the embassy, had in a manner the care of me;
while following him to the chamber appropriated to my use,
he said, “This apartment was occupied under the Count de

<page 171>
I42 THE CONFESSIONS OF
Luc, by a celebrated man of the same name as yourself; it is
in your power to succeed him in every respect, and cause it to
be said hereafter, Rousseau the First, Rousseau the Second.”
This similarity which I did not then expect, would have been
less flattering to my wishes could I have foreseen at what
price I should one day purchase the distinction.
What M. de la Martiniere had said excited my curiosity; I
read the works of the person whose chamber I occupied, and
on the strength of the compliment that had been paid me
(imagining I had a taste for poetry) made my first essay in a
cantata in praise of Madam de Bonac. This inclination was
not permanent, though from time to time I have composed
tolerable verses. I think it is a good exercise to teach ele-
gant turns of expression, and to write well in prose, but
could never find attractions enough in French poetry to give
entirely in to it.
M. de la Martiniere wished to see my style, and asked me to
write the detail I had before made the ambassador; according-
ly I wrote him a long letter, which I have since been informed
was preserved by M. de Marianne, who had long been attach-
ed to the Marquis de Bonac, and has since succeeded M. de
Martiniere as secretary to the embassy of M. de Courtellies.
The experience I began to acquire tended to moderate my
romantic projects; for example, I did not fall in love with
Madam de Bonac, but also felt I did not stand much chance of
succeeding in the service of her husband. M. de la Martiniere
was already in the only place that could have satisfied my
ambition, and M. de Marianne in expectancy: thus my utmost
hopes could only aspire to the office of under secretary, which
did not infinitely tempt me: this was thereason that when con-
sulted on thesituation I should like to be placed in, I expressed
a great desire to go to Paris. The ambassador readily gave in
to the idea, which at least tended to disembarrass him of me.
M. de Mervilleux interpreting secretary to the embassy, said,
that his friend, M. Godard, a Swiss colonel, in the service of
France, wanted a person to be with his nephew, who had en-
tered very young into the service, and made no doubt that I
should suit him. On this idea, so lightly formed, my depar-
ture was determined; and I, who saw a long journey to per-
form with Paris at the end of it, was enraptured with the
project. They gave me several letters, a hundred livres to
defray the expenses of my journey, accompanied with some
good advice, and thus equipped I departed.

<page 172>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I43
I was a fortnight making the journey, which I may reckon
among the happiest days of my life. I was young, in perfect
health, with plenty of money, and the most brilliant hopes,
add to this, I was on foot, and alone. It may appear strange,
I should mention the latter circumstance as advantageous, if
my peculiarity of temper is not already familiar to the reader.
I was continually occupied with a variety of pleasing chime-
ras, and never did the warmth of my imagination produce
more magnificent ones. When offered an empty place in a
carriage, or any person accosted me on the road, how vexed
was I to see that fortune overthrown, whose edifice, while
walking, I had taken such pains to rear.
For once my ideas were all martial: I was going to live
with a military man; nay, to become one, for it was concluded
I should begin with being a cadet. I already fancied myself
in regimentals, with a fine white feather nodding on my hat,
and my heart was inflamed by the noble idea. I had some
smattering of geometry and fortification; my uncle was an
engineer; I was in a manner a soldier by inheritance. My
short sight, indeed, presented some little obstacle, but did
not by any means discourage me, as I reckoned to supply that
defect by coolness and intrepidity. I had read, too, that
Marshal Schomberg was remarkably shortsighted, and why
might not Marshal Rousseau be the same? My imagination
was so warm by these follies, that it presented nothing but
troops, ramparts, gabions, batteries, and myself in the midst
of fire and smoke, an eyeglass in hand, commanding with
the utmost tranquility. Notwithstanding, when the coun-
try presented a delightful prospect, when I saw charm-
ing groves and rivulets, the pleasing sight made me
sigh with regret, and feel, in the midst of all this glory,
that my heart was not formed for such havoc; and soon
without knowing how, I found my thoughts wandering
among my dear sheepfolds, renouncing forever the labor
of Mars.
How much did Paris disappoint the idea I had formed of it!
The exterior decorations I had seen at Turin, the beauty of the
streets, the symmetry and regularity of the houses, contrib-
uted to this disappointment, since I concluded that Paris must
be infinitely superior. I had figured to myself a splendid city,
beautiful as large, of the most commanding aspect, whose
street were ranges of magnificient palaces,composed of marble

<page 173>
I44 THE CONFESSIONS OF
and gold. On entering the faubourg St. Marceau, I saw noth-
ing but dirty stinking streets, filthy black houses, an air of
slovenliness and poverty, beggars, carters, butchers, cries of
diet-drink and old hats. This struck me so forcibly, that all
I have since seen of real magnificence in Paris could never
erase this first impression, which has ever given mea particular
disgust to residing in that capital; and I may say, the whole
time I remained there afterwards, was employed in seeking re-
sources which might enable me to live at a distance from it.
This is the consequence of too lively imagination, which ex-
aggerates even beyond the voice of fame, and ever expects
more than is told. I have heard Paris so flatteringly described,
that I pictured it like the ancient Babylon, which, perhaps,
had I seen, I might have found equally faulty, and unlike that
idea the account had conveyed. The same thing happened at
the Opera-house, to which I hastened the day after my arrival!
I was sensible of the same deficiency at Versailles! and some
time after on viewing the sea. I am convinced this would
ever be the consequence of a too flattering description of any
object; for it is impossible for man, and difficult even for
nature herself, to surpass the riches of my imagination.
By the reception I met with from all those to whom my
letters were addressed, I thought my fortune was certainly
made. The person who received me the least kindly was
M. de Surbeck, to whom I had the warmest recommenda-
tion. He had retired from the service, and lived philo-
sophically at Bagneux, where I waited on him several times
without his offering me even a glass of water. I was better
received by Madam de Merveilleux, sister-in-law to the in-
terpreter, and by his nephew, who was an officer in the
guards. The mother and son not only received me kindly,
but offered me the use of their table, which favor I frequent-
1y accepted during my stay at Paris.
Madam de Merveilleux appeared to have been handsome;
Her hair was of a fine black, which, according to the old mode,
she wore curled on the temples. She still retained (what do
not perish with a set of features) the beauties of an amiable
mind. She appeared satisfied with mine, and did all she could
to render me service; but no one seconded her endeavors,
and I was presently undeceived in the great interest they had
seemed to take in my affairs. I must, however, do the French
nation the justice to say, they do not so exhaust themselves

<page 174>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I45
with protestations, as some have represented, and that those
they make are usually sincere; but they have a manner of
appearing interested in your affairs, which is more deceiving
than words. The gross compliments of the Swiss can only
impose upon fools; the manners of the French are more seduc-
ing, and at the same time so simple, that you are persuaded
they do not express all they mean to do for you, in order that
you may be the more agreeably surprised. I will say more;
they are not false in their protestations, being naturally
zealous to oblige, humane, benevolent, and even (whatever
may be said to the contrary) more sincere than any other
nation; but they are too flighty: in effect they feel the sen-
timents they profess for you, but that sentiment flies off as
instantaneously as it was formed. In speaking to you,
their whole attention is employed on you alone, when
absent you are forgotten. Nothing is permanent in their
hearts, all is the work of the moment.
Thus I was greatly flattered, but received little service.
Colonel Godard for whose nephew I was recommended, proved
to be an avaricious old wretch, who, on seeing my distress
(though he was immensely rich), wished to have my services
for nothing, meaning to place me with his nephew, rather as a
valet without wages than a tutor. He represented that as I
was to be continually engaged with him, I should be excused
from duty, and might live on my cadet's allowance; that is to
say, on the pay of a soldier: hardly would he consent to give
me a uniform, thinking the clothing of the army might serve.
Madam de Merveilleux, provoked at his proposals, persuaded
me not to accept them; herson was of the same opinion; some-
thing else was to be thought on, but no situation was pro-
cured. Meantime, I began to be necessitated; for the hundred
livres with which I had commenced my journey could not
last much longer; happily, I received a small remittance from
the ambassador, which was very serviceable, nor do I think he
would have abandoned me had I possessed more patience; but
languishing, waiting, soliciting, are to me impossible: I was
disheartened, displeased, and thus all my brilliant expecta-
tions came once more to nothing. I had not all this time for-
gotten my dear Madam de Warrens, but how was I to find
her? Where should I seek her?—Madam de Merveilleux, who
knew my story, assisted me in the search, but for a long time
unavailingly; at length, she informed me that Madam de

<page 175>
I46 THE CONFESSIONS OF
Warrens had set out from Paris about two months before, but
it was not known whether for Savoy or Turin, and that
some conjectured she was gone to Switzerland. Nothing
further was necessary to fix my determination to follow her,
certain that wherever she might be, I stood more chance of
finding her at those places than I could possibly do at Paris.
Before my departure, I exercised my new poetical talent
in an epistle to Colonel Godard, whom I ridiculed to the ut-
most of my abilities. I showed this scribble to Madam de
Merveilleux, who, instead of discouraging me, as she ought
to have done, laughed heartily at my sarcasms, as well as
her son, who, I believe, did not like M. Godard; indeed, it
must be confessed, he was a man not calculated to obtain
affection. I was tempted to send him my verses, and they
encouraged me in it; accordingly I made them up in a par-
cel directed to him, and there being no post then at Paris by
which I could conveniently send this, I put it in my pocket,
and sent it to him from Auxerre, as I passed through that
place. I laugh, even yet, sometimes, at the grimaces I fancy
he made on reading this panegyric, where he was certainly
drawn to the life; it began thus:
Tu croyois, vieux Penard, qu'une folle manie
D' elever ton neveu m'inspireroit l' envie.
This little piece, which, it is true, was but indifferently
written, did not want for salt, and announced a turn for
satire; it is, notwithstanding, the only satirical writing that
ever came from my pen. I have too little hatred in my
heart to take advantage of such a talent; but I believe it
may be judged from those controversies, in which from
time to time I have been engaged in my own defence, that
had I been of a vindictive disposition, my adversaries
would rarely have had the laughter on their side.
What I most regret, is not having kept a journal of my
travels, being conscious that a number of interesting details
have slipped my memory; for never did I exist so completely,
never live so thoroughly, never was so much myself, if I dare
use the expression, as in those journeys made on foot. Walk-
ing animates and enlivens my spirits; I can hardly think
when in a state of inactivity; my body must be exercised to
make my judgmemt active. The view of a fine country, a
succession of agreeable prospects, a free air, a good appetite,

<page 176>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I47
and the health I gained by walking; the freedom of inns, and
the distance from everything that can make me recollect the
dependence of my situation, conspire to free my soul, and
give boldness to my thoughts, throwing me, in a manner, into
the immensity of beings, where I combine, choose and appro-
priate them to my fancy, without constraint or fear. I dis-
pose of all nature as I please; my heart wandering from ob-
ject to object, approximates and unites with those that
please it, is surrounded by charming images, and becomes
intoxicated with delicious sensations. If, attempting to
render these permanent, I am amused in describing to my-
self, what glow of coloring, what energy of expression, do
I give them!—It has been said, that all these are to be
found in my works, though written in the decline of life.
Oh! had those of my early youth been seen, those made dur-
ing my travels, composed, but never written!—Why did I
not write them? will be asked; and why should I have writ-
ten them? I may answer. Why deprive myself of the actual
charm of my enjoyments to inform others what I enjoyed 2
What to me were readers, the public, or all the world,
while I was mounting the empyrean. Besides, did I carry
pens, paper and ink with me? Had I recollected all these,
not a thought would have occurred worth preserving. I do
not foresee when I shall have ideas; they come when they
please, and not when I call for them; either they avoid me
altogether, or rushing in crowds, overwhelm me with
their force and number. Ten volumes a day would not
suffice barely to enumerate my thoughts; how then should I
find time to write them 2 In stopping, I thought of nothing
but a hearty dinner; on departing, of nothing but a charm-
ing walk; I felt that a new paradise awaited me at the
door, and eagerly leaped forward to enjoy it.
Never did I experience this so feelingly as in the peram-
bulation I am now describing. On coming to Paris, I had
confined myself to ideas which related to the situation I ex-
pected to occupy there. I had rushed into the career I was
about to run, and should have completed it with tolerable
eclat, but it was not that my heart adhered to. Some real
beings obscured my imagined ones—Colonel Godard and
his nephew could not keep pace with a hero of my disposi-
tion. Thank Heaven, I was soon delivered from all these
obstacles, and could enter at pleasure into the wilderness of

<page 177>
148 THE CONFESSIONS OF
chimeras, for that alone remained before me, and I wandered
in it so completely that I several times lost my way; but this
was no misfortune, I would not have shortened it, for, feeling
with regret, as I approached Lyons, that I must again return
to the material world, I should have been glad never to have
arrived there.
One day, among others, having purposely gone out of my
way to take a nearer view of a spot that appeared delight-
ful, I was so charmed with it, and wandered round it so
often, that at length I completely lost myself, and after sev-
eral hours' useless walking, weary, fainting with hunger
and thirst, I entered a peasant's hut, which had not indeed
a very promising appearance, but was the only one I could
discover near me. I thought it was here, as at Geneva, or
in Switzerland, where the inhabitants, living at ease, have
it in their power to exercise hospitality. I entreated the
countryman to give me some dinner, offering to pay for
it: on which he presented me with some skimmed milk and
coarse barley-bread, saying it was all he had. I drank the
milk with pleasure, and ate the bread, chaff and all; but it
was not very restorative to a man sinking with fatigue.
The countryman, who watched me narrowly, judged the
truth of my story by my appetite, and presently (after hav-
ing said that he plainly saw I was an honest, good-natured
young man, and did not come to betray him) opened a little
trap door by the side of his kitchen, went down, and returned
a moment after with a good brown loaf of pure wheat, the
remains of a well-flavored ham, and a bottle of wine, the
sight of which rejoiced my heart more than all the rest: he
then prepared a good thick omelet, and I made such a din-
ner as none but a walking traveller ever enjoyed.
When I again offered to pay, his inquietude and fears re-
turned; he not only would have no money, but refused it with
the most evident emotion; and what made this scene more
amusing, I could not imagine the motive of his fear. At
length, he pronounced tremblingly those terrible words,
“Commissioners,” and “Cellar-rats,” which he explained by
giving me to understand that he concealed his wine because
of the excise, and his bread on account of the tax imposed on
it; adding, he should be an undone man, if it was suspected
he was not almost perishing with want. What he said to me
on this subject (of which I had not the smallest idea) made an

<page 178>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I49
impression on my mind that can never be effaced, sowing
seeds of that inextinguishable hatred which has since grown
up in my heart against the vexations these unhappy people
suffer, and against their oppressors. This man, though in
easy circumstances, dare not eat the bread gained by the sweat
of his brow, and could only escape destruction by exhibiting
an outward appearance of misery!—I left his cottage with as
much indignation as concern, deploring the fate of those beau-
tiful countries, where nature has been prodigal of her gifts,
only that they may become the prey of barbarous exactors.
The incident which I have just related, is the only one I
flave a distinct remembrance of during this journey: I recol-
lect, indeed, that on approaching Lyons, I wished to prolong
it by going to see the banks of the Lignon; for among the
romances I had read with my father, Astrea was not for-
gotten, and returned more frequently to my thoughts than
any other. Stopping for some refreshment (while chatting
with my hostess), I inquired the way to Forez, and was in-
formed that country was an excellent place for mechanics, as
there were many forges, and much iron work done there.
This eulogium instantly calmed my romantic curiosity, for
I felt no inclination to seek Dianas and Sylvanders among a
generation of blacksmiths. The good woman who encour-
aged me with this piece of information certainly thought I
was a journeyman locksmith.
I had some view in going to Lyons: on my arrival, I went
to the Chasattes, to see Mademoiselle du Chatelet, a friend of
Madam de Warrens, for whom I had brought a letter when I
came there with M. le Maitre, so that it was an acquaint-
ance already formed. Mademoiselle du Chatelet informed me
her friend had passed through Lyons, but could not tell
whether she had gone on to Piedmont, being uncertain at
her departure whether it would not be necessary to stop in
Savoy; but if I choose, she would immediately write for infor-
mation, and thought my best plan would be to remain at
Lyons till she received it. I accepted this offer; but did not tell
Mademoiselle du Chatelet how much I was pressed for an
answer, and that my exhausted purse would not permit me to
wait long. It was not an appearance of coolness that withheld
me, on the contrary, I was very kindly received, treated on
the footing of equality, and this took from me the resolution
of explaining my circumstances, for I could not bear to de-
scend from a companion to a miserable beggar.

<page 179>
I 50 THE CONFESSIONS OF
I seem to have retained a very connecting remembrance of
that part of my life contained in this book; yet I think I re-
member, about the same period, another journey to Lyons,
(the particulars of which I cannot recollect) where I found
myself much straitened, and a confused remembrance of
the extremities to which I was reduced does not contribute
to recall the idea agreeably. Had I been like many others,
had I possessed the talent of borrowing and running in debt
at every ale-house I came to, I might have fared better; but
in that my incapacity equalled my repugnance, and to
demonstrate the prevalence of both, it will be sufficient to
say, that though I have passed almost my whole life in in-
different circumstances, and frequently have been near
wanting bread, I was never once asked for money by a
creditor without having it in my power to pay it instantly; I
could never bear to contract clamorous debts, and have ever
preferred suffering to owing.
Being reduced to pass my nights in the streets, may cer-
tainly be called suffering, and this was several times the case
at Lyons, having preferred buying bread with the few pence
I had remaining, to bestowing them on a lodging; as I was
convinced there was less danger of dying for want of sleep
than of hunger. What is astonishing, while in this unhappy
situation, I took no care for the future, was neither uneasy
nor melancholy, but patiently waited an answer to Mademoi-
selle du Chatelet's letter, and lying in the open air, stretched
on the earth, or on a bench, slept as soundly as if reposing on
a bed of roses. I remember, particularly, to have passed a
most delightful night at some distance from the city, in a road
which had the Rhone, or Soane, I cannot recollect which, on
the one side, and a range of raised gardens, with terraces, on
the other. It had been a very hot day, the evening was de-
lightful, the dew moistened the fading grass, no wind was
stirring, the air was fresh without chillness, the setting sun
had tinged the clouds with a beautiful crimson, which was
again reflected by the water, and the trees that bordered the
terrace were filled with nightingales who were continually
answering each other's songs. I walked along in a kind of
ecstasy, giving up my heart and senses to the enjoyment of
so many delights, and sighing only from a regret of enjoying
them alone. Absorbed in this pleasing reverie, I lengthened
my walk till it grew very late, without perceiving I was tired;

<page 180>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I5I
at length, however, I discovered it, and threw myself on the
step of a kind of niche, or false door, in the terrace wall. How
charming was the couch! the trees formed a stately canopy,
a nightingale sat directly over me, and with his soft notes
lulled me to rest: how pleasing my repose; my awaking more
so. It was broad day; on opening my eyes I saw the water,
the verdure, and the admirable landscape before me. I arose,
shook off the remains of drowsiness, and finding I was hun-
gry, retook the way to the city, resolving, with inexpressible
gayety, to spend the two pieces of six blancs I had yet re-
maining in a good breakfast. I found myself so cheerful
that I went all the way singing; I even remember I sang a
cantata of Batistin's called the Baths of Thomery, which I
knew by heart. May a blessing light on the good Batistin
and his good cantata, which procured me a better breakfast
than I had expected, and a still better dinner which I did
not expect at all! In the midst of my singing, I heard some
one behind me, and turning round perceived an Antonine,
who followed after and seemed to listen with pleasure to my
song. At length accosting me, he asked, If I understood
music. I answered, “A little,” but in a manner to have it
understood I knew a great deal, and as he continued ques-
tioning of me, related a part of my story. He asked me, If
I had ever copied music? I replied, “Often,” which was
true: I had learned most by copying. “Well,” continued
he, “come with me, I can employ you for a few days, dur-
ing which time you shall want for nothing; provided you
consent not to quit my room.” I acquiesced very willingly,
and followed him.
This Antonine was called M. Rotichon; he loved music,
understood it, and sang in some little concerts with his
friends; thus far all was innocent and right, but apparently
this taste had become a furor, part of which he was obliged
to conceal. He conducted me into a chamber, where I found
a great quantity of music: he gave me some to copy, parti-
cularly the cantata he had heard me singing, and which he
was shortly to sing himself.
I remained here three or four days, copying all the time I
did not eat, for never in my life was I so hungry, or better
fed. M. Rolichon brought my provisions himself from the
kitchen, and it appeared that these good priests lived well,
at least if every one fared as I did. In my life, I never took

<page 181>
I52 THE CONFESSIONS OF
such pleasure in eating, and it must be owned this good
cheer came very opportunely, for I was almost exhausted. I
worked as heartily as I ate, which is saying a great deal;
'tis true I was not as correct as diligent, for some days after,
meeting M. Rolichon in the street, he informed me there
were so many omissions, repetitions, and transpositions, in
the parts I had copied, that they could not be performed. It
must be owned, that in choosing the profession of music, I
hit on that I was least calculated for; yet my voice was good
and I copied neatly; but the fatigue of long works bewilders
me so much, that I spend more time in altering and scratch-
ing out than in pricking down, and if I do not employ the
strictest attention in comparing the several parts, they are
sure to fail in the execution. Thus, through endeavoring
to do well, my performance was very faulty; for aiming at
expedition, I did all amiss. This did not prevent M. Roli-
chon from treating me well to the last, and giving me half-
a-crown at my departure, which I certainly did not deserve,
and which completely set me up, for a few days after I re-
ceived news from Madam de Warrens, who was at Chambery,
with money to defray the expenses of my journey to her,
which I performed with rapture. Since then my finances
have frequently been very low, but never at such an ebb as
to reduce me to fasting, and I mark this period with a heart
fully alive to the bounty of Providence, as the last of my
life in which I sustained poverty and hunger.
I remained at Lyons seven or eight days to wait for some
little commissions with which Madam deVarrens had charged
Mademoiselle du Chatelet, who during this interval I visited
more assiduously than before, having the pleasure of talking
with her of her friend, and being no longer disturbed by the
cruel remembrance of my situation, or painful endeavors to
conceal it. Mademoiselle du Chatelet was neither young nor
handsome, but did not want for elegance; she was easy and
obliging, while her understanding gave price to her famili-
arity. She had a taste for that kind of moral observation
which leads to the knowledge of mankind, and from her
originated that study in myself. She was fond of the
works of Le Sage, particularly Gil Blas, which she lent me,
and recommended to my perusal. I read this performance
with pleasure, but my judgment was not yet ripe enough
to relish that sort of reading. I liked romances which
abounded with high-flown sentiments.

<page 182>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I53
Thus did I pass my time at the grate of Mademoiselle du
Chatelet, with as much profit as pleasure. It is certain that
the interesting and sensible conversation of a deserving
woman is more proper to form the understanding of a young
man than all the pedantic philosophy of books. I got ac-
quainted at the Chasattes with some other boarders and
their friends, and among the rest, with a young person of
fourteen, called Mademoiselle Serre, whom I did not much
notice at that time, though I was in love with her eight or
nine years afterwards, and with great reason, for she was a
most charming girl.
I was fully occupied with the idea of seeing Madam de
Warrens, and this gave some respite to my chimeras, for
finding happiness in real objects I was the less inclined to
seek it in nonentities. I had not only found her, but also
by her means, and near her, an agreeable situation, having
sent me word that she had procured one that would suit me,
and by which I should not be obliged to quit her. I ex-
hausted all my conjectures in guessing what this occupation
could be, but I must have possessed the art of divination to
have hit it on the right. I had money sufficient to make my
journey agreeable: Mademoiselle du Chatelet persuaded me to
hire a horse, but this I could not consent to, and I was certain-
ly right, for by so doing I should have lost the pleasure of
the last pedestrian expedition I ever made; for I cannot give
that name to those excursions I have frequently taken about
my own neighborhood, while I lived at Motiers.
It is very singular that my imagination never rises so high
as when my situation is least agreeable or cheerful. When
everything smiles around me, I am least amused; my heart
cannot confine itself to realities, cannot embellish, but must
create. Real objects strike me as they really are, my imagi-
nation can only decorate ideal ones. If I would paint the
spring, it must be in winter; if describe a beautiful land-
scape, it must be while surrounded with walls; and I have
said a hundred times, that were I confined in the Bastile, I
could draw the most enchanting picture of liberty. On my
departure from Lyons, I saw nothing but an agreeable fu-
ture, the content I now with reason enjoyed was as great as
my discontent had been at leaving Paris, notwithstanding, I
had not during this journey any of those delightful reveries
I then enjoyed. My mind was serene, and that was all; I drew

<page 183>
I54 THE CONFESSIONS OF
near the excellent friend I was going to see, my heart over-
flowing with tenderness, enjoying in advance, but without
intoxication, the pleasure of living near her; I had always
expected this, and it was as if nothing new had happened.
Meantime, I was anxious about the employment Madam de
Warrens had procured me, as if that alone had been material.
My ideas were calm and peaceable, not ravishing and celes-
tial; every object struck my sight in its natural form; I ob-
served the surrounding landscape, remarked the trees, the
thouses, the springs, deliberated on the cross-roads, was fearful
of losing myself, yet did not do so; in a word, I was no longer
in the empyrean, but precisely where I found myself, or
sometimes perhaps at the end of my journey, never farther.
I am in recounting my travels, as I was in making them,
loath to arrive at the conclusion. My heartbeat with joy as
I approached my dear Madam de Warrens, but I went no
faster on that account. I love to walk at my ease, and stop
at leisure; a strolling life is necessary to me: travelling on
foot, in a fine country, with fine weather, and having an
agreeable object to terminate my journey, is the manner of
1iving of all others most suited to my taste.
It is already understood what I mean by a fine country;
never can a flat one, though ever so beautiful, appear such in
my eyes: I must have torrents, fir trees, black woods, moun-
tains to climb or descend, and rugged roads with precipices on
either side to alarm me. I experienced this pleasure in its
utmost extent as I approached Chambery, not far from a
mountain which is called Pas de l' Echelle. Above the main
road, which is hewn through the rock, a small river runs and
rushes into fearful chasms, which it appears to have been
ruillions of ages in forming. The road has been hedged by a
parapet to prevent accidents, which enabled me to contem-
plate the whole descent, and gain vertigoes at pleasure; for a
great part of my amusement in these steep rocks, is, they
cause a giddiness and swimming in my head, which I am
particularly fond of, provided I am in safety; leaning, there-
fore, over the parapet, I remained whole hours, catching,
from time to time, a glance of the froth and blue water,
whose rushing caught my ear, mingled with the cries of
ravens, and other birds of prey that flew from rock to rock,
and bush to bush, at six hundred feet below me. In places
where the slope was tolerably regular, and clear enough

<page 184>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I55
from bushes to let stones roll freely, I went a considerable
way to gather them, bringing those I could but just carry,
which I piled on the parapet, and then threw down one after
the other, being transported at seeing them roll, rebound,
and fly into a thousand pieces, before they reached the bot-
tom of the precipice.
Near Chambery I enjoyed an equal pleasing spectacle,
though of a different kind; the road passing near the foot of
the most charming cascade I ever saw. The water, which is
very rapid, shoots from the top of an excessively steep moun-
tain, falling at such a distance from its base that you may
walk between the cascade and the rock without any incon-
venience; but if not particularly careful it is easy to be de-
ceived as I was, for the water, falling from such an immense
height, separates, and descends in a rain as fine as dust, and
on approaching too near this cloud, without perceiving it,
you may be wet through in an instant.
At length I arrived at Madam de Warrens'; she was not
alone, the intendant-general was with her. Without speak-
ing a word to me, she caught my hand, and presenting me to
him with that natural grace which charmed all hearts, said:
“This, sir, is the poor young man I mentioned; deign to pro-
tect him as long as he deserves it, and I shall feel no concern
for the remainder of his life.” Then added, addressing her-
self to me, “Child, you now belong to the king, thank Mon-
sieur the Intendant, who furnishes you with the means of
existence.” I stared without answering, without knowing
what to think of all this; rising ambition almost turned my
head; I was already prepared to act the intendant myself.
My fortune, however, was not so brilliant as I had imagined,
but it was sufficient to maintain me, which, as I was situated,
was a capital acquisition. I shall now explain the nature
of my employment.
King Victor Amadeus, judging by the event of preceding
wars, and the situation of the ancient patrimony of his
fathers, that he should not long be able to maintain it,
wished to drain it beforehand. Resolving, therefore, to tax
the nobility, he ordered a general survey of the whole coun-
try, in order that it might be rendered more equal and pro-
ductive. This scheme, which was begun under the father,
was completed by the son: two or three hundred men, part
surveyors, who were called geometricians, and part writers,

<page 185>
I 56 THE CONFESSIONS OF
who were called secretaries, were employed in this work:
among those of the latter description Madam de Warrens
had got me appointed. This post, without being very lucra-
tive, furnished the means of living eligibly in that country;
the misfortune was, this employment could not be of any
great duration, but it put me in train to procure something
better, as by this means she hoped to insure the particular
protection of the intendant, who might find me some more
settled occupation before this was concluded.
I entered on my new employment a few days after my ar-
rival, and as there was no great difficulty in the business,
soon understood it; thus, after four or five years of unsettled
1ife, folly, and suffering, since my departure from Geneva, I
began, for the first time, to gain my bread with credit.
These long details of my early youth must have appeared
trifling, and I am sorry for it: though born a man, in a vari-
ety of instances, I was long a child, and am so yet in many
particulars. I did not promise the public a great personage:
I promised to describe myself as I am, and to know me in
my advanced age it was necessary to have known me in my
youth. As, in general, objects that are present make less
impression on me than the bare remembrance of them (my
ideas being all from recollection), the first traits which were
engraven on my mind have distinctly remained: those which
have since been imprinted there, have rather combined with
the former than effaced them. There is a certain, yet varied
succession of affections and ideas, which continue to regu-
late those that follow them, and this progression must be
known in order to judge rightly of those they have influ-
enced. I have studied to develop the first causes, the better
to show the concatenation of effects. I would be able by
some means to render my soul transparent to the eyes of the
reader, and for this purpose endeavor to show it in every
possible point of view, to give him every insight, and act in
such a manner, that not a motion should escape him, as by
this means he may form a judgment of the principles that
produce them.
Did I take upon myself to decide, and say to the reader,
“Such is my character,” he might think that if I did not
endeavor to deceive him, I at least deceived myself; but in
recounting simply all that has happened to me, all my
actions, thoughts, and feelings, I cannot lead him into an

<page 186>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 157
error, unless I do it wilfully, which by this means I could
not easily effect, since it is his province to compare the ele-
ments, and judge of the being they compose: thus the result
must be his work, and if he is then deceived the error will be
his own. It is not sufficient for this purpose that my re-
citals should be merely faithful, they must also be minute;
it is not for me to judge of the importance of facts, I ought
to declare them simply as they are, and leave the estimate
that is to be formed of them to him. I have adhered to this
principle hitherto, with the most scrupulous exactitude,
and shall not depart from it in the continuation; but theim-
pressions of age are less lively than those of youth; I began
by delineating the latter: should I recollect the rest with the
same precision, the reader, may, perhaps, become weary and
impatient, but I shall not be dissatisfied with my labor. I
have but one thing to apprehend in this undertaking: I do
not dread saying too much, or advancing falsities, but I am
fearful of not saying enough, or concealing truths.

<page 187>
158 THE CONFESSIONS OF
t BOOK V.
T was, I believe, in 1732, that I arrived at Chambery, as
already related, and began my employment of registering
land for the king. I was almost twenty-one, my mind well
enough formed for my age, with respect to sense, but very
deficient in point of judgment, and needing every instruction
from those into whose hands I fell, to make me conduct my-
self with propriety; for a few years' experience had not been
able to cure me radically of my romantic ideas; and notwith-
standing the ills I had sustained, I knew as little of the world,
or mankind, as if I had never purchased instruction. I slept
at home, that is, at the house of Madam de Warrens; but it
was not as at Annecy: here were no gardens, no brook, no
landscape; the house was dark and dismal, and my apartment
the most gloomy of the whole. The prospect a dead wall, an
alley instead of a street, confined air, bad light, small rooms,
iron bars, rats, and a rotten floor; an assemblage of circum-
stances that do not constitute a very agreeable habitation;
but I was in the same house with my best friend, incessantly
near her, at my desk, or in chamber, so that I could not per-
ceive the gloominess of my own, or have time to think of it.
It may appear whimsical that she should reside at Cham-
bery on purpose to live in this disagreeable house; but it was
a trait of contrivance which I ought not to pass over in
silence. She had no great inclination for a journey to Turin,
fearing that after the recent revolutions, and the agitation in
which the court yet was, she should not be very favorably
received there; but her affairs seemed to demand her presence,
as she feared being forgotten or ill-treated, particularly as the
Count de Saint-Laurent, Intendent-general of the Finances,
was not in her interest. He had an old house in Chambery,
ill-built, and standing in so disagreeable a situation that it was
always untenanted; she hired, and settled in this house, a plan

<page 188>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I59
that succeeded much better than a journey to Turin would
have done, for her pension was not suppressed, and the Count
de Saint-Laurent was ever after one of her best friends.
Her household was much on the old footing; her faithful
Claude Anet still remained with her. He was, as I have
before mentioned, a peasant of Moutru, who in his childhood
had gathered herbs in Jura for the purpose of making Swiss
tea; she had taken him into her service for his knowledge of
drugs, finding it convenient to have a herbalist among her
domestics. Passionately fond of the study of plants, he
became a real botanist, and had he not died young, might
have acquired as much fame in that science as he deserved for
being an honest man. Serious even to gravity, and older than
myself, he was to me a kind of tutor, commanding respect,and
preserving me from a number of follies, for I dared not forget
myself before him. He commanded it likewise from his mis-
tress, who knew his understanding, uprightness, and inviola-
ble attachment to herself, and returned it. Claude Anet was
of an uncommon temper. I never encountered a similar dis-
position: he was slow, deliberate, and circumspect in his con-
duct; cold in his manner; laconic and sententious in his dis-
course; yet of an impetuosity in his passions, which (though
careful to conceal) preyed upon him inwardly, and urged
Him to the only folly he ever committed; that folly, indeed was
terrible, it was poisoning himself. This tragic scene passed
soon after my arrival, and opened my eyes to the intimacy
that subsisted between Claude Anet and his mistress, for
had not the information come from her, I should never have
suspected it; yet, surely, if attachment, fidelity, and zeal,
could merit such a recompense, it was due to him, and what
further proves him worthy such a distinction, he never once
abused her confidence. They seldom disputed, and their dis-
agreements ever ended amicably; one, indeed, was not so
fortunate; his mistress, in a passion, said something affront-
ing, which not being able to digest, he consulted only with
despair, and finding a bottle of laudanum at hand, drank it
off; then went peaceably to bed, expecting to awake no more.
Madam de Warrens herself was uneasy, agitated, wandering
about the house, and happily, finding the phial empty.guessed
the rest. Her screams, while flying to his assistance, alarmed
me; she confessed all, implored my help, and was fortunate
enough, after repeated efforts, to make him throw up the

<page 189>
I60 TIHE CONFESSIONS OF
laudanum. Witness of this scene, I could not but wonder at
my stupidity in never having suspected the connection; but
Claude Anet was so discreet, that a more penetrating ob-
server might have been deceived. Their reconciliation
affected me, and added respect to the esteem I before felt
for him. From this time I became, in some measure, his
pupil, nor did I find myself the worse for his instruction.
I could not learn, without pain, that she lived in greater
intimacy with another than with myself: it was a situation I
had not even thought of, but (which was very natural) it hurt
me to see another in possession of it. Nevertheless, instead
of feeling any aversion to the person who had this advantage
over me, I found the attachment I felt for her actually ex-
tend to him. I desired her happiness above all things, and
since he was concerned in her plan of felicity, I was content
he should be happy likewise. Meantime he perfectly entered
into the views of his mistress; conceived a sincere friendship
for me, and without affecting the authority his situation
might have entitled him to, he naturally possessed that
which his superior judgment gave him over mine. I dared
do nothing he disproved of, but he was sure to disapprove
only what merited disapprobation: thus we lived in an union
which rendered us mutually happy, and which death alone
could dissolve.
One proof of the excellence of this amiable woman's char-
acter, is, that all those who loved her, loved each other; even
jealousy and rivalship submitting to the more powerful senti-
ment with which she inspired them, and I never saw any of
those who surrounded her entertain the least ill will among
themselves. Let the reader pause a moment on this encomium,
and if he can recollect any other woman who deserves it, let
him attach himself to her, if he would obtain happiness.
From my arrival at Chambery to my departure for Paris,
1741, included an interval of eight or nine years, during
which time I have few adventures to relate; my life being as
simple as it was agreeable. This uniformity was precisely
what was most wanting to complete the formation of my
character, which continual troubles had prevented from ac-
quiring any degree of stability. It was during this pleasing
interval, that my unconnected, unfinished education, gained
consistence, and made me what I have unalterably remained
amid the storms with which I have since been surrounded.

<page 190>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 16I
The progress was slow, almost imperceptible, and attended
by few memorable circumstances; yet it deserves to be fol-
lowed and investigated.
At first, I was wholly occupied with my business, the con-
straint of a desk left little opportunity for other thoughts, the
small portion of time I was at liberty was passed with my
dear Madam deVarrens, and not having leisure to read, I felt
no inclination for it; but when my business (by daily repeti-
tion) became familiar, and my mind was less occupied, study
again became necessary, and (as my desires were ever irri-
tated by any difficulty that opposed the indulgence of them)
might once more have become a passion, as at my master’s,
had not other inclinations interposed and diverted it.
Though our occupation did not demand a very profound
skill in arithmetic, it sometimes required enough to puzzle me.
To conquer this difficulty, I purchased books which treated
on that science, and learned well, for I now studied alone.
Practical arithmetic extends further than is usually supposed
if you would attain exact precision. There are operations of
extreme length in which I have sometimes seen good geome-
tricians lose themselves. Reflection, assisted by practice,
gives clear ideas, and enables you to devise shorter methods,
these inventions flatter our self-complacency, while their ex-
actitude satisfies our understanding, and renders a study
pleasant, which is, of itself, heavy and unentertaining. At
length I became so expert as not to be puzzled by any ques-
tion that was solvable by arithmetical calculation; and even
now, while everything I formerly knew fades daily on my
memory, this acquirement, in a great measure remains,
through an interval of thirty years. A few days ago, in a
journey Imade to Davenport, being with my host at an arith-
metical lesson given his children, I did (with pleasure, and
without errors) a most complicated work. While setting down
my figures, methought I was still at Chambery, still in my
days of happiness—how far had I to look back for them!
The colored plans of our geometricians had given me a taste
for drawing: accordingly I bought colors, and began by at-
tempting flowers and landscapes. It was unfortunate that I
had not talents for this art, for my inclination was much
disposed to it, and while surrounded with crayons, pencils,
and colors, I could have passed whole months without wish-
ing to leave them. This amusement engaged me so much

<page 191>
I62 THE CONFESSIONS OF
that they were obliged to force me from it; and thus it is with
every inclination I give into, it continues to augment, till at
length it becomes so powerful, that I lose sight of everything
except the favorite amusement. Years have not been able to
cure me of that fault, nay, have not even diminished it; for
while I am writing this, behold me, like an old dotard, infatu-
ated with another, to me useless study, which I do not un-
derstand, and which even those who have devoted their
youthful days to the acquisition of, are constrained to aban-
don, at the age I am beginning with it.
At that time, the study I am now speaking of would have
been well placed, the opportunity was good, and I had some
temptation to profit by it; for the satisfaction I saw in the
eyes of Anet, when he came home loaded with new discovered
plants, set me two or three times on the point of going to
herbalize with him, and I am almost certain that had I gone
once, I should have been caught, and perhaps at this day
might have been an excellent botanist, for I know no study
more congenial to my natural inclination, than that of plants;
the life I have led for these ten years past, in the country,
being little more than a continual herbalizing, though I must
confess, without object, and without improvement; but at
the time I am now speaking of I had no inclination for bot-
any, nay, I even despised, and was disgusted at the idea,
considering it only as a fit study for an apothecary. Madam
de Warrens was fond of it merely for this purpose, seeking
none but common plants to use in her medical preparations;
thus botany, chemistry, and anatomy were confounded in my
idea under the general denomination of medicine, and served
to furnish me with pleasant sarcasms the whole day, which
procured me, from time to time, a box on the ear, applied by
Madam de Warrens. Besides this, a very contrary taste
grew up with me, and by degrees absorbed all others; this
was music. I was certainly born for that science, I loved it
from my infancy, and it was the only inclination I have con-
stantly adhered to; but it is astonishing that what nature
seemed to have designed me for should have cost so much
pains to learn, and that I should acquire it so slowly, that
after a whole life spent in the practice of this art, I could
never attain to sing with any certainty at sight. What ren-
dered the study of music more agreeable to me at that time,
was, being able to practise it with Madam de Warrens. In

<page 192>
- - - -



<page 193>
* * *
at a *-
* * * *
! he
* * * *
5ur ºt
r: tº sº tº
- * - * -
**, º - -
*** - - , , , . . .
- -
.* * * - -
* * * * * : * * * * * *, * , -
= r
* * - * * * - - * --
. . . . .
- -
*
*
-- I - -
* * *
- * -->
, - .
* * * * * * * * : * , , ;
- . * * *
a .
* * * -
-
* -
- , - .
--
- *
* . . .
- -
* - - -

<page 194>


<page 195>

<page 196>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 163
other respects our tastes were widely different: this was a
point of coincidence, which I loved to avail myself of. She
had no more objection to this than myself. I knew at that
time almost as much of it as she did, and after two or three
efforts, we could make shift to decipher an air. Sometimes,
when I saw her busy at her furnace, I have said, “Here now
is a charming duet, which seems made for the very purpose of
spoiling your drugs;” her answer would be, “If you make me
burn them, I'll make you eat them:” thus disputing, I drew
her to the harpsichord; the furnace was presently forgotten,
the extract of juniper or wormwood calcined (which I cannot
recollect without transport), and these scenes usually ended
by her smearing my face with the remains of them.
It may easily be conjectured that I had plenty of employ-
ment to fill up my leisure hours; one amusement, however,
found room, that was well worth all the rest.
We lived in such a confined dungeon, that it was necessary
sometimes to breathe the open air; Anet, therefore, engaged
Madam de Warrens to hire a garden in the suburbs, both for
this purpose and the convenience of rearing plants, etc.; to
this garden was added a summer-house, which was furnished
in the customary manner; we sometimes dined, and I fre-
quently slept, there. Insensibly I became attached to this
little retreat, decorated it with books and prints, spending
part of my time in ornamenting it during the absence of
Madam de Warrens, that I might surprise her the more
agreeably on her return. Sometimes I quitted this dear
friend, that I might enjoy the uninterrupted pleasure of
thinking on her; this was a caprice I can neither excuse nor
fully explain, Ionly know this really was the case, and there-
fore I avow it. I remember Madam de Luxembourg told
me one day in raillery, of a man who used to leave his mis-
tress that he might enjoy the satisfaction of writing to her;
I answered, I could have been this man; I might have added,
That I had done the very same.
I did not, however, find it necessary to leave Madam de
Warrens that I might love her the more ardently, for I was
ever as perfectly free with her as when alone; an advantage I
never enjoyed with any other person, man or woman, however
I might be attached to them; but she was so often surrounded
by company who were far from pleasing me, that spite and
weariness drove me to this asylum, where I could indulge the

<page 197>
I64 THE CONFESSIONS OF
idea, without danger of being interrupted by impertinence.
Thus, my time being divided between business, pleasure,
and instruction, my life passed in the most absolute serenity.
Europe was not equally tranquil: France and the emperor
had mutually declared war, the King of Sardinia had entered
into the quarrel, and a French army had filed off into Pied-
mont to awe the Milanese. Our division passed through
Chambery, and, among others, the regiment of Champaigne,
whose colonel was the Duke de la Trimouille, to whom I was
presented. He promised many things, but doubtless never
more thought of me. Our little garden was exactly at the
end of the suburb by which the troops entered, so that I could
fully satisfy my curiosity in seeing them pass, and I became
as anxious for the success of the war as if it had nearly con-
cerned me. Till now I had never troubled myself about
politics, for the first time I began reading the gazettes, but
with so much partiality on the side of France, that my heart
beat with rapture on its most trifling advantages, and I was
as much afflicted on a reverse of fortune, as if I had been
particularly concerned.
Had this folly been transient, I should not, perhaps, have
mentioned it, but it took such root in my heart (without any
reasonable cause) that when I afterwards acted the anti-despot
and proud republican at Paris, in spite of myself, I felt a
secret predilection for the nation I declared servile, and for
that government I affected to oppose. The pleasantest of all
was that, ashamed of an inclination so contrary to my pro-
fessed maxims, I dared not own it to any one, but rallied the
French on their defeats, while my heart was more wounded
than their own. I am certainly the first man, that, living with
a people who treated him well, and whom he almost adored,
put on, even in their own country, a borrowed air of despising
them; yet my original inclination is so powerful, constant,
disinterested, and invincible, that even since my quitting that
kingdom, since its government, magistrates, and authors,
have outvied each other in rancor against me, since it has be-
come fashionable to load me with injustice and abuse, I have
not been able to get rid of this folly, but notwithstanding
their ill-treatment, love them in spite of myself.
I long sought the cause of this partiality, but was never
able to find any, except in the occasion that gave it birth. A
rising taste for literature attached me to French books, to

<page 198>
J. J. ROUSSRAU I65
their authors, and their country: at the very moment the
French troops were passing Chambery, I was reading Bran-
tome's Celebrated Captains; my head was full of the Clissons,
Bay-yards, Lautrecs Colignys, Montmorencys, and Trimouille,
and I loved their descendants as the heirs of their merit and
courage. In each regiment that passed by methought I saw
those famous black bands who had formerly done so many
noble exploits in Piedmont; in fine, I applied to these all the
ideas I had gathered from books; my reading continued,
which, still drawn from the same nation, nourished my affec-
tion for that country, till, at length, it became a blind passion,
which nothing could overcome. I have had occasion to re-
mark several times in the course of my travels, that this im-
pression was not peculiar to me for France, but was more or
less active in every country, for that part of the nation who
were fond of literature, and cultivated learning, and it was
this consideration that balanced in my mind the general
hatred which the conceited air of the French is so apt to in-
spire. Their romances, more than their men, attract the
women of all countries, and the celebrated dramatic pieces
of France create a fondness in youth for their theaters; the
reputation which that of Paris in particular has acquired,
draws to it crowds of strangers, who return enthusiasts to
their own country: in short, the excellence of their litera-
ture captivates the senses, and in the unfortunate war just
ended, I have seen their authors and philosophers maintain
the glory of France, so tarnished by its warriors.
I was, therefore, an ardent Frenchman; this rendered me a
a politician, and I attended in the public square, amid a
throng of news-mongers, the arrival of the post, and, sillier
than the ass in the fable, was very uneasy to know whose
packsaddle I should next have the honor to carry, for it was
then supposed we should belong to France, and that Savoy
would be exchanged for Milan. I must confess, however,
that I experienced some uneasiness, for had this war termi-
nated unfortunately for the allies, the pension of Madam de
Warrens would have been in a dangerous situation; never-
theless, I had great confidence in my good friends, the
French, and for once (in spite of the surprise of M. de
Broglio) my confidence was not ill-founded—thanks to the
King of Sardinia, whom I had never thought of.
While we were fighting in Italy, they were singing in

<page 199>
I66 THE CONFESSIONS OF
France: the operas of Rameau began to make a noise there,
and once more raise the credit of his theoretic works, which,
from their obscurity, were within the compass of very few
understandings. By chance I heard of his Treatise on Har-
mony, and had no rest till I purchased it. By another chance
I fell sick; my illness was inflammatary, short and violent,
but my convalescence was tedious, for I was unable to go
abroad for a whole month. During this time I eagerly ran
over my Treatise on Harmony, but it was so long, so
diffuse, and so badly disposed, that I found it would require
a considerable time to unravel it: accordingly I suspended
my inclination, and recreated my sight with music.
The cantatas of Bernier were what I principally exercised
myself with. These were never out of my mind; I learned
four or five by heart, and among the rest, The Sleeping
Cupids, which I have never seen since that time, though I
still retain it almost entirely; as well as Cupzd Stung by a Bee,
a very pretty cantata by Clerambault, which I learned about
the same time.
To complete me, there arrived a young organist from
Waldoste, called the Abbé Palais, a good musician and an
agreeable companion, who performed very well on the harpsi-
chord; I got acquainted with him, and we soon became in-
separable. He had been brought up by an Italian monk,
who was a capital organist. He explained to me his princi-
ples of music, which I compared with Rameau, my head was
filled with accompaniments, concords and harmony, but as it
was necessary to accustom the ear to all this, I proposed to
Madam de Warrens having a little concert once a month,
to which she consented.
Behold me then so full of this concert, that night or day I
could think of nothing else, and it actually employed a great
part of my time to select the music, assemble the musicians,
look to the instruments, and write out the several parts.
Madam de Warrens sang; Father Cato (whom I have before
mentioned, and shall have occasion to speak of again) sang
likewise; a dancing-master named Roche, and his son, played
on the violin; Canavas, a Piedmontese musician (who was
employed like myself in the survey, and has since married at
Paris), played on the violoncello; the Abbé Palais performed
on the harpsichord, and I had the honor to conduct the whole.
It may be supposed all this was charming; I cannot say it

<page 200>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 167
equalled my concert at Monsieur de Treforen’s, but cer-
tainly it was not far behind it.
This little concert, given by Madam de Warrens, the new
convert, who lived (it was expressed) on the king's charity,
made the whole tribe of devotees murmur, but was a very
agreeable amusement to several worthy people, at the head of
whom it would not be easily surmised that I should place a
monk; yet, though a monk, a man of considerable merit, and
even of a very amiable disposition, whose subsequent misfor-
tunes gave me the most lively concern, and whose idea, at-
tached to that of my happy days, is yet dear to my memory.
I speak of Father Cato, a Cordelier, who, in conjunction with
the Count d'Ortan, had caused the music of poor Le Maitre to
be seized at Lyons; which action was far from being the
brightest trait in his history. He was a Bachelor of Sorbonne,
had lived long in Paris among the great world, and was par-
ticularly caressed by the Marquis d'Antremont, then Ambas-
sador from Sardinia. He was tall and well made; full faced,
with very fine eyes, and black hair, which formed natural
curls on each side of his forehead. His manner was at once
noble, open, and modest; he presented himself with ease and
good manners, having neither the hypocritical nor impudent
behavior of a monk, or the forward assurance of a fashion-
able coxcomb, but the manners of a well-bred man, who, with-
out blushing for his habit, set a value on himself, and ever
felt in his proper situation when in good cornpany. Though
Father Cato was not deeply studied for a doctor, he was much
so for a man of the world, and not being compelled to show
his talents, he brought them forward so advantageously that
they appeared greater than they really were. Having lived
much in the world, he had rather attached himself to agree-
able acquirements than to solid learning; had sense, made
verses, spoke well, sang better, and aided his good voice by
playing on the organ and harpsichord. So many pleasing qual-
ities were not necessary to make his company sought after,
and, accordingly, it was very much so, but this did not make
him neglect the duties of his function: he was chosen (in
spite of his jealous competitors) Definitor of his Province, or,
according to them, one of the greatest pillars of their order.
Father Cato became acquainted with Madam de Warrens
at the Marquis of Antremont's; he had heard of her concerts,
wished to assist at them, and by his company rendered our

<page 201>
I68 THE CONFESSIONS OF
meetings truly agreeable. We were soon attached to each
other by our mutual taste for music, which in both was a most
lively passion, with this difference, that he was really a musi-
cian, and myself a bungler. Sometimes assisted by Canavas
and the Abbé Palais, we had music in his apartment, or on
holidays at his organ, and frequently dined with him; for,
what was very astonishing in a monk, he was generous, pro-
fuse, and loved good cheer, without the least tincture of
greediness. After our concerts, he always used to stay to sup-
per, and these evenings passed with the greatest gayety and
good-humor; we conversed with the utmost freedom, and
sang duets; I was perfectly at my ease, had sallies of wit
and merriment; Father Cato was charming, Madam de War-
rens adorable, and the Abbé Palais, with his rough voice,
was the butt of the company. Pleasing moments of sportive
youth, how long since have ye fled!
As I shall have no more occasion to speak of poor Father
Cato, I will here conclude in a few words his melancholy his-
tory. His brother monks, jealous, or rather exasperated to
discover in him a merit and elegance of manners which fav-
ored nothing of monastic stupidity, conceived the most vio-
lent hatred to him, because he was not as despicable as them-
selves; the chiefs, therefore, combined against this worthy
man, and set on the envious rabble of monks, who other-
wise would not have dared to hazard the attack. He received
a thousand indignities; they degraded him from his office, took
away the apartment which he had furnished with elegant sim-
plicity, and, at length, banished him, I know not whither: in
short, these wretches overwhelmed him with so many evils,
that his honest and proud soul sank under the pressure, and,
after having been the delight of the most amiable societies, he
died of grief, on a wretched bed, hid in some cell or dun-
geon, lamented by all worthy people of his acquaintance,
who could find no fault in him, except his being a monk.
Accustomed to this manner of life for some time, I became
so entirely attached to music that I could think of nothing
else. I went to my business with disgust, the necessary con-
finement and assiduity appeared an insupportable punish-
ment, which I at length wished to relinquish, that I might give
myself up without reserve to my favorite amusement. It
will be readily believed that this folly met with some opposi-
tion; to give up a creditable employment and fixed salary to

<page 202>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I69
run after uncertain scholars was too giddy a plan to be ap-
proved of by Madam de Warrens, and even supposing my
future success should prove as great as I flattered myself, it
was fixing very humble limits to my ambition to think of re-
ducing myself for life to the condition of a music-master.
She, who formed for me the brightest projects, and no longer
trusted implicitly to the judgment of M. d’Aubonne, seeing
with concern that I was so seriously occupied with a talent
which she thought frivolous, frequently repeated to me that
provincial proverb, which does not hold quite so good in Paris,
Oui bien chante et bien dance, fait un metier qui peu avance.*
On the other hand, she saw me hurried away by this irresist.
ible passion, my taste for music having become a furor, and
it was much to be feared that my employment, suffering by
my distraction, might draw on me a discharge, which would
be worse than a voluntary resignation. I represented to her;
that this employment could not last long, that it was neces-
sary I should have some permanent means of subsistence,
and that it would be much better to complete by practice the
acquisition of that art to which my inclination led me than
to make fresh essays, which possibly might not succeed,
since by this means, having passed the age most proper for
improvement, I might be left without a single resource for
gaining a livelihood: in short, I extorted her consent more
by importunity and caresses than by any satisfactory rea-
sons. Proud of my success, I immediately ran to thank M.
Coccelli, Director-General of the Survey, as though I had
performed the most heroic action, and quitted my employ-
ment without cause, reason, or pretext, with as much pleas-
ure as I had accepted it two years before.
This step, ridiculous as it may appear, procured me a kind
of consideration, which I found extremely useful. Some sup-
posed I had resources which I did not possess; others, seeing
me totally given up to music, judged of my abilities by the
sacrifice I had made, and concluded that with such a passion
for the art, I must possessit in a superior degree. In a nation
of blind men, those with one eye are kings. I passed here
for an excellent master, because all the rest were very bad
ones. Possessing taste in singing, and being favored by my
age and figure, I soon procured more scholars than were
*He who can sweetly sing and featly dance,
His interests right little shall advance.

<page 203>
17o THE CONFESSIONS OF
sufficient to compensate for the losses of my secretary's pay.
It is certain, that had it been reasonable to consider the
pleasure of my situation only, it was impossible to pass more
speedily from one extreme to the other. At our measuring,
I was confined eight hours in the day to the most unentertain-
ing employment, with yet more disagreeable company. Shut
up in a melancholy counting-house, empoisoned by the smell
and respiration of a number of clowns, the major part of whom
were ill-combed and very dirty, what with attention, bad air,
constraint and weariness, I was sometimes so far overcome as
to occasion a vertigo. Instead of this, behold me admitted
into the fashionable world, sought after in the first houses,
and everywhere received with an air of satisfaction; amiable
and gay young ladies awaiting my arrival, and welcoming
me with pleasure; I see nothing but charming objects, smell
nothing but roses and orange flowers; singing, chatting,
laughter, and amusements, perpetually succeed each other.
It must be allowed, that reckoning all these advantages, no
hesitation was necessary in the choice; in fact, I was so
content with mine, that I never once repented it; nor do I
even now, when, free from the irrational motives that influ-
enced me at that time, I weigh in the scale of reason every
action of my life.
This is, perhaps, the only time that, listening to inclina-
tion, I was not deceived in my expectations. The easy access,
obliging temper, and free humor of this country, rendered a
commerce with the world agreeable, and the inclination I then
felt for it, proves to me, that if I have a dislike for society, it
is more their fault than mine. It is a pity the Savoyards are
not rich: though, perhaps, it would be a still greater pity if
they were so, for altogether they are the best, the most soci-
able people that I know, and if there is a little city in the
world where the pleasures of life are experienced in an agree-
able and friendly commerce, it is at Chambery. The gentry
of the province who assemble there have only sufficient
wealth to live and not enough to spoil them; they cannot
give way to ambition, but follow, through necessity, the
counsel of Cyneas, devoting their youth to a military employ-
ment, and returning home to grow old in peace; an arrange-
ment over which honor and reason equally preside. The
women are handsome, yet do not stand in need of beauty,
since they possess all those qualifications which enhance its

<page 204>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 171
value and even supply the want of it. It is remarkable, that
being obliged by my profession to see a number of young girls,
I do not recollect one at Chambery but what was charming:
it will be said I was disposed to find them so, and perhaps
there may be some truth in the surmise. I cannot remember my
young scholars without pleasure. Why, in naming the most
amiable, cannot I recall them and myself also to that happy
age in which our moments, pleasing as innocent, were passed
with such happiness together? The first was Mademoiselle
de Mallarede, my neighbor, and sister to a pupil of Monsieur
Gaime. She was a fine clear brunette, lively and graceful,
without giddiness; thin as girls of that age usually are;
but her bright eyes, fine shape, and easy air, rendered her
sufficiently pleasing with that degree of plumpness which
would have given a heightening to her charms. I went there
of mornings, when she was usually in her dishabille, her hair
carelessly turned up, and, on my arrival, ornamented with a
flower, which was taken off at my departure for her hair to
be dressed. There is nothing I fear so much as a pretty
woman in an elegant dishabille; I should dread them a hun-
dred times less in full dress. Mademoiselle de Menthon,
whom I attended in the afternoon, was ever so. She made
an equally pleasing, but quite different impression on me.
Her hair was flaxen, her person delicate, she was very timid
and extremely fair, had a clear voice, capable of just modu-
lation, but which she had not courage to employ to its full ex-
tent. She had the mark of a scald on her bosom, which a
scanty piece of blue chenille did not entirely cover, this scar
sometimes drew my attention, though not absolutely on its
own account. Mademoiselle des Challes, another of my neigh-
bors, was a woman grown, tall, well-formed, jolly, very
pleasing though not a beauty, and might be quoted for her
gracefulness, equal temper, and good humor. Her sister,
Madam de Charly, the handsomest woman of Chambery,
did not learn music, but I taught her daughter, who was yet
young, but whose growing beauty promised to equal her
mother's, if she had not unfortunately been a little red-haired.
I had likewise among my scholars a little French lady, whose
name I have forgotten, but who merits a place in my list of
preferences. She had adopted the slow drawling tone of the
nuns, in which voice she would utter some very keen things,
which did not in the least appear to correspond with her

<page 205>
172 THE CONFESSIONS OF
manner; but she was indolent, and could not generally take
pains to show her wit, that being a favor she did not grant to
every one. After a month or two of negligent attendance, this
was an expedient she devised to make me more assiduous, for
I could not easily persuade myself to be so. When with my
scholars, I was fond enough of teaching, but could not bear
the idea of being obliged to attend at a particular hour; con-
straint and subjection in every shape are to me insupporta-
ble, and alone sufficient to make me hate even pleasure itself.
I had some scholars likewise among the tradespeople, and,
among others, one who was the indirect cause of a change of
relationship, which (as I have promised to declare all) I must
relate in its place. She was the daughter of a grocer, and
was called Mademoiselle de Larnage, a perfect model for a
Grecian statue, and whom I should quote for the handsomest
girl I have ever seen, if true beauty could exist without life or
soul. Her indolence, reserve, and insensibility were incon-
ceivable; it was equally impossible to please or make her an
gry, and I am convinced that had any one formed a design
apon her virtue, he might have succeeded, not through her
inclination, but from her stupidity. Her mother, who would
run no risk of this, did not leave her a single moment. In
having her taught to sing and providing a young master, she
had hoped to enliven her, but it all proved ineffectual. While
the master was admiring the daughter, the mother was ad-
miring the master, but this was equally lost labor. Madam
de Larnage added to her natural vivacity that portion of
sprightliness which should have belonged to the daughter.
She was a little, ugly, lively trollop, with small twinkling
ferret eyes, and marked with smallpox. On my arrival in the
morning, I always found my coffee and cream ready, and the
mother never failed to welcome me with a kiss on the lips,
which I would willingly have returned the daughter, to see
how she would have received it. All this was done with
such an air of carelessness and simplicity, that even when
M. de Larnage was present, her kisses and caresses were
not omitted. He was a good quiet fellow, the true original
of his daughter; nor did his wife endeavor to deceive him, be-
cause there was absolutely no occasion for it.
I received all these caresses with my usual stupidity, tak-
ing them only for marks of pure friendship, though they were
Sometimes troublesome; for the lively Madam Lard was dis-

<page 206>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I73
pleased, if, during the day, I passed the shop without call-
ing; it became necessary, therefore (when I had no time to
spare), to go out of my way through another street, well
knowing it was not so easy to quit her house as to enter it.
Madam Lard thought so much of me, that I could not avoid
thinking something of her. Her attentions affected me
greatly, and I spoke of them to Madam de Warrens, without
supposing any mystery in the matter, but had there been one
I should equally have divulged it, for to have kept a secret
of any kind from her would have been impossible. My heart
lay as open to Madam de Warrens as to Heaven. She did
not understand the matter quite so simply as I had done,
but saw advances where I only discovered friendship. She
concluded that Madam Lard would make a point of not leav-
ing me as great a fool as she found me, and, some way or
other, contrive to make herself understood; but exclusive of
the consideration that it was not just, that another should
undertake the instruction of her pupil, she had motives more
worthy of her, wishing to guard me against the snares to
which my youth and inexperience exposed me. Meantime, a
more dangerous temptation offered which I likewise escaped,
but which proved to her that such a succession of dangers
required every preservative she could possibly apply.
The Countess of Menthon, mother to one of my scholars, was
a woman of great wit, and reckoned to possess, at least, an
equal share of mischief, having (as was reported) caused a
number of quarrels, and, among others, one that terminated
fatally for the house of D'Antremont. Madam deVarrens had
seen enough of her to know her character: for having (very
innocently) pleased some person to whom Madam de Menthon
had pretensions, she found her guilty of the crime of this pref-
erence, though Madam de Warrens had neither sought after
nor accepted it, and from that moment endeavored to play
her rival a number of ill turns, none of which succeeded. I
shall relate one of the most whimsical, by way of specimen.
They were together in the country, with several gentle-
men of the neighborhood, and among the rest the lover in
question. Madam de Menthon took an opportunity to say to
one of these gentlemen, that Madam de Warrens was a
prude, that she dressed ill, and particularly that she covered
her neck like a tradeswoman. “O, for that matter,” re-
plied the person she was speaking to (who was fond of a

<page 207>
I74 THE CONFESSIONS OF
joke), “she has good reason, for I know she is marked with
a great ugly rat on her bosom, so naturally, that it even ap-
pears to be running.” Hatred, as well as love, renders its
votaries credulous. Madam de Menthon resolved to make
use of this discovery, and one day, while Madam de War-
rens was at cards with this lady's ungrateful favorite, she
contrived, in passing behind her rival, almost to overset the
chair she sat on, and at the same instant, very dexterously
displaced her handkerchief; but instead of this hideous rat,
the gentleman beheld a far different object, which it was not
more easy to forget than to obtain a sight of, and which by
no means answered the intentions of the lady.
I was not calculated to engross the attention of Madam de
Menthon, who loved to be surrounded by brilliant company;
notwithstanding she bestowed some attention on me, not for
the sake of my person, which she certainly did not regard,
but for the reputation of wit which I had acquired, and which
might have rendered me convenient to her predominant in-
clination. She had a very lively passion for ridicule, and
loved to write songs and lampoons on those who displeased
her: had she found me possessed of sufficient talents to aid
the fabrication of her verses, and complaisance enough to do
so, we should presently have turned Chambery upside down;
these libels would have been traced to their source, Madam
de Menthon would have saved herself by sacrificing me, and
I should have been cooped up in prison, perhaps, for the rest
of my life, as a recompense for having figured away as the
Apollo of the ladies. Fortunately, nothing of this kind hap-
pened; Madam de Menthon made me stay for dinner two or
three days, to chat with me, and soon found I was too dull for
her purpose. I felt this myself, and was humiliated at the
discovery, envying the talents of my friend Venture; though
I should rather have been obliged to my stupidity for keeping
me out of the reach of danger. I remained, therefore, Madam
de Menthon's daughter's singing-master, and nothing more!
but I lived happily, and was ever well received at Chambery,
which was a thousand times more desirable than passing for
a wit with her, and for a serpent with everybody else.
However this might be, Madam de Warrens conceived it
necessary to guard me from the perils of youth by treating me
as a man: this she immediately set about, but in the most
extraordinary manner that any woman, in similar circum-

<page 208>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I75
stances, ever devised. I all at once observed that her manner
was graver, and her discourse more moral than usual. To
the playful gayety with which she used to intermingle her
instructions suddenly succeeded an uniformity of manner,
neither familiar nor severe, but which seemed to prepare me
for some explanation. After having vainly racked my brain
for the reason of this change, I mentioned it to her; this she
had expected and immediately proposed a walk to our garden
the next day. Accordingly we went there the next morning;
she had contrived that we should remain alone the whole day,
which she employed in preparing me for those favors she
meant to bestow; not as another woman would have done, by
toying and folly, but by discourses full of sentiment and rea-
son, rather tending to instruct than seduce, and which spoke
more to my heart than to my senses. Meantime, however
excellent and to the purpose these discourses might be, and
though far enough from coldness or melancholy, I did not
listen to them with all the attention they merited, nor fix
them in my memory as I should have done at any other time.
That air of preparation which she had adopted gave me a
degree of inquietude; while she spoke (in spite of myself) I
was thoughtful and absent, attending less to what she said
than curious to know what she aimed at; and no sooner had
I comprehended her design (which I could not easily do)
than the novelty of the idea, which, during all the years I
had passed with her, had never once entered my imagination,
took such entire possession of me that I was no longer capa-
ble of minding what she said! I only thought of her; I heard
her no longer.
Thinking to render young minds attentive to reason by pro-
posing some highly interesting object as the result of it, is
an error instructors frequently run into, and one which I have
not avoided in my Emilius. The young pupil, struck with
the object presented to him, is occupied only with that, and
leaping lightly over your preliminary discourses, lights at
once on the point, to which, in his idea, you lead him too
tediously. To render him attentive, he must be prevented
from seeing the whole of your design; and, in this particular,
Madam de Warrens did not act with sufficient precaution.
By a singularity which adhered to her systematic disposi-
tion, she took the vain precaution of proposing conditions;
but the moment I knew the purchase, I no longer even heard

<page 209>
176 THE CONFESSIONS OF
them, but immediately consented to everything; and I doubt
whether there is a man on the whole earth who would have
been sincere or courageous enough to dispute terms, or one
single woman who would have pardoned such a dispute. By
a continuation of the same whimsicality, she attached a
number of the gravest formalities to the acquisition of her
favors, and gave me eight days to think of them, which I
assured her I had no need of, though that assurance was far
from a truth: for to complete this assemblage of singular-
ities, I was very glad to have this intermission; so much had
the novelty of these ideas struck me, and such disorder did
I feel in mine, that it required time to arrange them.
It will be supposed, that these eight days appeared to me
as many ages; on the contrary, I should have been very glad
had the time been lengthened. I find it difficult to describe
the state I found myself in; it was a strange chaos of fear
and impatience, dreading what I desired, and studying some
civil pretext to evade my happiness.
Let the warmth of my constitution be remembered, my age,
and my heart intoxicated with love; let my tender attachment
to her be supposed, which, far from having diminished, had
daily gained additional strength; let it be considered that I
was only happy when with her, that my heart was full, not
only of her bounty, of her amiable disposition, but of her
shape, of her person, of herself; in a word, conceive me united
to her by every affinity that could possibly render her dear;
nor let it be supposed, that, being ten or twelve years older
than myself, she began to grow an old woman, or was so in
my opinion. From the time the first sight of her had made
such an impression on me, she had really altered very little,
and, in my mind, not at all. To me she was ever charming,
and was still thought so by everyone. She had got some-
thing jollier, but had the same fine eyes, the same clear
complexion, the same features, the same beautiful light hair,
the same gayety, and even the same voice, whose youthful
and silvery sound made so lively an impression on my heart,
that, even to this day, I cannot hear a young woman's voice,
that is at all harmonious, without emotion. It will be seen,
that in a more advanced age, the bare idea of some trifling
favors I had to expect from the person I loved, inflamed me
so far, that I could not support, with any degree of patience,
the time necessary to traverse the short space that separated

<page 210>
J. J. ROUSSE.A 177
us; how then, by what miracle, when in the flower of my
youth, had I so little impatience for a happiness I had never
tasted but in idea? How could I see the moment advancing
with more pain than pleasure? Why, instead of transports
that should have intoxicated me with their deliciousness,
did I experience only fears and repugnance? I have no
doubt that if I could have avoided this happiness with any
degree of decency, I should have relinquished it with all my
heart. I have promised a number of extravagancies in the
history of my attachment to her; this certainly is one that
no idea could be formed of.
The reader (already disgusted) supposes, that being in the
situation I have before described with Claude Anet, she was
already degraded in my opinion by this participation of her
favors, and that a sentiment of disesteem weakened those
she had before inspired me with; but he is mistaken. 'Tis
true that this participation gave me a cruel uneasiness, as
well from a very natural sentiment of delicacy, as because it
appeared unworthy both of her and myself; but as to my sen-
timents for her, they were still the same, and I can solemnly
aver, that I never loved her more tenderly than when I felt
so little propensity to avail myself of her condescension. I
was too well acquainted with the chastity of her heart and
the iciness of her constitution, to suppose a moment that the
gratification of the senses had any influence over her; I was
well convinced that her only motive was to guard me from
dangers, which appeared otherwise inevitable, by this extra-
ordinary favor, which she did not consider in the same light
that women usually do; as will presently be explained.
The habit of living a long time innocently together, far
from weakening the first sentiments I felt for her, had con-
tributed to strengthen them, giving a more lively, a more
tender, but at the same time a less sensual, turn to my affec-
tion. Having ever accustomed myself to call her Mama (as
formerly observed) and enjoying the familiarity of a son, it
became natural to consider myself as such, and I am in-
clined to think this was the true reason of that insensibility
with a person I so tenderly loved; for I can perfectly recol-
lect that my emotions on first seeing her, though not more
lively, were more voluptuous: At Annecy I was intoxicated,
at Chambery I possessed my reason. I always loved her as
passionately as possible, but I now loved her more for her-

<page 211>
178 THE CONFESSIONS OF
self and less on my own account; or, at least, I rather sought
for happiness than pleasure in her company. She was more
to me than a sister, a mother, a friend, or even than a mis-
tress, and for this very reason she was not a mistress; in a
word, I loved her too much to desire her.
This day, more dreaded than hoped for, at length arrived.
I have before observed, that I promised everything that was
required of me, and I kept my word: my heart confirmed my
engagements without desiring the fruits, though at length I
obtained them. Was I happy? No: I felt I know not what in-
vincible sadness which empoisoned my happiness, it seemed
that I had committed an incest, and two or three times, press-
ing her eagerly in my arms, I deluged her bosom with my
tears. On her part, as she had never sought pleasure, she
had not the stings of remorse.
I repeat it, all her failings were the effect of her errors,
never of her passions. She was well born, her heart was
pure, her manners noble, her desires regular and virtuous,
her taste delicate; she seemed formed for that elegant purity
of manners which she ever loved, but never practised, be-
cause instead of listening to the dictates of her heart, she
followed those of her reason, which led her astray: for when
once corrupted by false principles it will ever run counter to
its natural sentiments. Unhappily, she piqued herself on
philosophy, and the morals she drew from thence clouded
the genuine purity of her heart.
M. Tavel, her first lover, was also her instructor in this
philosophy, and the principles he instilled into her mind were
such as tended to seduce her. Finding her cold and im-
pregnable on the side of her passions, and firmly attached to
her husband and her duty, he attacked her by sophisms, en-
deavoring to prove that the list of duties she thought so
sacred, was but a sort of catechism, fit only for children.
That the kind of infidelity she thought so terrible, was, in
itself, absolutely indifferent; that all the morality of conju-
gal faith consisted in opinion, the contentment of husbands
being the only reasonable rule of duty in wives; consequently
that concealed infidelities, doing no injury, could be no crime;
in a word, he persuaded her that the sin consisted only in
the scandal, that woman being really virtuous who took care
to appear so. Thus the deceiver obtained his end in the sub-
verting the reason of a girl; whose heart he found it impos-

<page 212>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I79
sible to corrupt, and received his punishment in a devouring
jealousy, being persuaded she would treat him as he had
prevailed on her to treat her husband.
I don’t know whether he was mistaken in this respect: the
Minister Perret passed for his successor; all I know, is, that
the coldness of temperament which it might have been sup-
posed would have kept her from embracing this system, in the
end prevented her from renouncing it. She could not con-
ceive how so much importance should be given to what
seemed to have none for her: nor could she honor with the
name of virtue, an abstinence which would have cost her little.
She did not, therefore, give in to this false principle on
her own account, but for the sake of others; and that from
another maxim almost as false as the former, but more con-
sonant to the generosity of her disposition.
She was persuaded that nothing could attach a man so truly
to any woman as an unbounded freedom, and though she
was only susceptible of friendship, this friendship was so ten-
der, that she made use of every means which depended on
her to secure the objects of it, and, which is very extraordi-
nary, almost always succeeded: for she was so truly amiable,
that an increase of intimacy was sure to discover additional
reasons to love and respect her. Another thing worthy of re-
mark is, that after her first folly, she only favored the unfor-
tunate. Lovers in a more brilliant station lost their labor
with her, but the man who at first attracted her pity, must
have possessed very few good qualities if in the end he did not
obtain her affection. Even when she made an unworthy
choice, far from proceeding from base inclinations (which were
strangers to her noble heart) it was the effect of a disposi-
tion too generous, humane, compassionate, and sensible,
which she did not always govern with sufficient discernment.
If some false principles misled her, how many admirable
ones did she not possess, which never forsook her! By how
many virtues did she atone for her failings! if we can call by
that name errors in which the senses had so little share. The
man who in one particular deceived her so completely,
had given her excellent instructions in a thousand others;
and her passions, being far from turbulent, permitted her
to follow the dictates. She ever acted wisely when her
sophisms did not intervene, and her designs were laudable
even in her failings. False principles might lead her to do

<page 213>
I8O THE CONFESSIONS OF
ill, but she never did anything which she conceived to be
wrong. She abhorred lying and duplicity, was just, equitable,
humane, disinterested, true to her word, her friends, and those
duties which she conceived to be such; incapable of hatred or
revenge, and noteven conceiving there was a merit in pardon-
ing; in fine (to return to those qualities which were less ex-
cusable), though she did not properly value, she never made
a vile commerce of her favors; she lavished, but never sold
them, though continually reduced to expedients for a sub-
sistence: and I dare assert, that if Socrates could esteem
Aspasia, he would have respected Madam de Warrens.
I am well aware that ascribing sensibility of heart with
coldness of temperament to the same person, I shall gener-
ally, and with great appearance of reason, be accused of a
contradiction. Perhaps Nature sported or blundered, and
this combination ought not to have existed; I only know it
did exist. All those who know Madam de Warrens (a great
number of whom are yet living) have had opportunities of
knowing this was a fact; I dare even aver she had but one
pleasure in the world, which was serving those she loved.
Let every one argue on the point as he pleases, and gravely
prove that this cannot be; my business is to declare the
truth, and not to enforce a belief of it.
I became acquainted with the particulars I have just related,
in those conversations which succeeded our union, and alone
rendered it delicious. She was right when she concluded her
complaisance would be useful to me; I derived great advant-
ages from it in point of useful instruction. Hitherto she had
used me as a child, she now began to treat me as a man, and
entertain me with accounts of herself. Everything she said
was so interesting, and I was so sensibly touched with it, that,
reasoning with myself, I applied these confidential relations
to my own improvement and received more instruction from
them than from her teaching. When we truly feel that the
heart speaks, our own opens to receive its instructions, nor
can all the pompous morality of a pedagogue have half the
effect that is produced by the tender, affectionate, and artless
conversation of a sensible woman on him who loves her.
The intimacy in which I lived with Madam de Warrens,
having placed me more advantageously in her opinion than
formerly, she began to think (notwithstanding my awkward
manner) that I deserved cultivation for the polite world, and

<page 214>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I8I
that if I could one day show myself there in an eligible situa-
tion, I should soon be able to make my way. In consequence
of this idea, she set about forming not only my judgment,
but my address, endeavoring to render me amiable, as well
as estimable; and if it is true that success in this world is
consistent with strict virtue (which, for my part, I do not
believe), I am certain there is no other road than that she
had taken, and wished to point out to me. For Madam de
Warrens knew mankind, and understood exquisitely well
the art of treating all ranks, without falsehood, and without
imprudence, neither deceiving nor provoking them; but this
art was rather in her disposition than her precepts, she knew
better how to practise than explain it, and I was of all the
world the least calculated to become master of such an at-
tainment; accordingly, the means employed for this purpose
were nearly lost labor, as well as the pains she took to pro-
cure me a fencing and a dancing master.
Though very well made, I could never learn to dance a
minuet; for being plagued with corns, I had acquired a habit
of walking on my heels, which Roche, the dancing master,
could never break me of. It was still worse at the fencing-
school, where, after three months' practice, I made but very
little progress, and could never attempt fencing with any but
my master. My wrist was not supple enough, nor my arm
sufficiently firm to retain the foil, whenever he chose to make
it fly out of my hand. Add to this, I had a mortal aversion
both to the art itself and to the person who undertook to
teach it to me, nor should I ever have imagined, that anyone
could have been so proud of the science of sending men out
of the world. To bring this vast genius within the compass
of my comprehension, he explained himself by comparisons
drawn from music, which he understood nothing of. He
found striking analogies between a hit in quarte or tierce with
the intervals of music which bears those names: when he
made a feint he cried out, “take care of this diesis,” because
anciently they called the diesis a feint: and when he had
made the foil fly from my hand, he would add, with a sneer,
that this was a pause: in a word, I never in my life saw a
more insupportable pedant.
I made, therefore, but little progressin my exercises, which
I presently quitted from pure disgust; but I succeeded bet-
ter in an art of a thousand times more value, namely, that

<page 215>
I82 THE CONFESSIONS OF
of being content with my situation, and not desiring one
more brilliant, for which I began to be persuaded that Na-
ture had not designed me. Given up to the endeavor of
rendering Madam de Warrens happy, I was ever best pleased
when in her company, and, notwithstanding my fondness
for music, began to grudge the time I employed in giving
lessons to my scholars.
I am ignorant whether Anet perceived the full extent of our
union; but I am inclined to think he was no stranger to it.
He was a young man of great penetration, and still greater
discretion; who never belied his sentiments, but did not al-
ways speak them: without giving me the least hint that he
was acquainted with our intimacy, he appeared by his con-
duct to be so; nor did this moderation proceed from baseness
of soul, but, having entered entirely into the principles of
his mistress, he could not reasonably disapprove of the nat-
ural consequences of them. Though as young as herself, he
was so grave and thoughtful, that he looked on us as two chil-
dren who required indulgence, and we regarded him as a
respectable man, whose esteem we had to preserve. It was
not until after she was unfaithful to Anet, that I learned the
strength of her attachment to him. She was fully sensible
that I only thought, felt, or lived for her; she let me see,
therefore, how much she loved Anet, that I might love him
likewise, and dwell less on her friendship, than on her esteem,
for him, because this was the sentiment that I could most
fully partake of. How often has she affected our hearts and
made us embrace with tears, by assuring us that we were
both necessary to her happiness! Let not women read this
with an ill-natured smile; with the temperament she pos-
sessed, this necessity was not equivocal, it was only that of
the heart.
Thus there was established, among us three, a union with-
out example, perhaps, on the face of the earth. All our
wishes, our cares, our very hearts, were for each other, and
absolutely confined to this little circle. The habit of living
together, and living exclusively from the rest of the world,
became so strong, that if at our repasts one of the three was
wanting, or a fourth person came in, everything seemed de-
ranged; and, notwithstanding our particular attachments,
even our tāte-à-tête were less agreeable than our reunion.
What banished every species of constraint from our little

<page 216>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 183
community, was a lively reciprocal confidence, and dulness
or insipidity could find no place among us, because we were
always fully employed. Madam de Warrens always project-
ing, always busy, left us no time for idleness, though, indeed,
we had each sufficient employment on our own account. It
is my maxim, that idleness is as much the pest of society as
of solitude. Nothing more contracts the mind, or engenders
more tales, mischief, gossiping, and lies, than for people to
be eternally shut up in the same apartment together, and re-
duced, from the want of employment, to the necessity of an
incessant chat. When every one is busy (unless you have
really something to say), you may continue silent; but if you
have nothing to do, you must absolutely speak continually,
and this, in my mind, is the most burdensome and the most
dangerous constraint. I will go further, and maintain, that
to render company harmless, as well as agreeable, it is neces-
sary, not only that they should have something to do, but
something that requires a degree of attention.
Knitting, for instance, is absolutely as bad as doing no-
thing; you must take as much pains to amuse a woman whose
fingers are thus employed, as if she sat with her arms crossed;
but let her embroider, and it is a different matter; she is
then so far busied, that a few intervals of silence may be
borne with. What is most disgusting and ridiculous, dur-
ing these intermissions of conversation, is to see, perhaps, a
dozen over-grown fellows, get up, sit down again, walk
backwards and forwards, turn on their heels, play with the
chimney ornaments, and rack their brains to maintain an in-
exhaustible chain of words: what a charming occupation!
Such people, wherever they go, must be troublesome both to
others and themselves. When I was at Motiers, I used to
employ myself in making laces with my neighbors, and were
I again to mix with the world, I would always carry a cup-
and-ball in my pocket; I should sometimes play with it the
whole day, that I might not be constrained to speak when I
had nothing to discourse about; and I am persuaded, that if
every one would do the same, mankind would be less mis-
chievous, their company would become more rational, and,
in my opinion, a vast deal more agreeable; in a word, let
wits laugh if they please, but I maintain, that the only
practical lesson of morality within the reach of the present
age, is that of the cup-and-ball.

<page 217>
184 THE CONFESSIONS OF
At Chambery they did not give us the trouble of studying
expedients to avoid weariness, when by ourselves, for a troop
of important visitors gave us too much by their company,
to feel any when alone. The annoyance they formerly gave
me had not diminished; all the difference was, that I now
found less opportunity to abandon myself to my dissatisfac-
tion. Poor Madam de Warrens had not lost her old predilec-
tion for schemes and systems; on the contrary, the more she
felt the pressure of her domestic necessities, the more she
endeavored to extricate herself from them by visionary pro-
jects; and, in proportion to the decrease of her present re-
sources, she contrived to enlarge, in idea, those of the future.
Increase of years only strengthened this folly: as she lost
her relish for the pleasures of the world and youth, she re-
placed it by an additional fondness for secrets and projects;
her house was never clear of quacks, contrivers of new man-
ufactures, alchemists, projects of all kinds and of all de-
scriptions, whose discourses began by a distribution of mil-
lions and concluded by giving you to understand that they
were in want of a crown-piece. No one went from her
empty-handed; and what astonished me most was, how she
could so long support such profusion, without exhausting
the source or wearying her creditors.
Her principal project at the time I am now speaking of was
that of establishing a Royal Physical Garden at Chambery,
with a Demonstrator attached to it; it will be unnecessary to
add for whom this office was designed. The situation of this
city, in the midst of the Alps, was extremely favorable to
botany, and as Madam de Warrens was always for helping
out one project with another, a College of Pharmacy was to
be added, which really would have been a very useful foun-
dation in so poor a country, where apothecaries are almost the
only medical practitioners. The retreat of the chief physician,
Grossi, to Chambery, on the demise of King Victor, seemed
to favor this idea, or perhaps, first suggest it; however this
may be, by flattery and attention she set about managing
Grossi, who, in fact, was not very manageable, being the
most caustic and brutal, for a man who had any pretensions
to the quality of a gentleman, that ever I knew. The reader
may judge for himself by two or three traits of character,
which I shall add by way of specimen.
He assisted one day at a consultation with some other doc-

<page 218>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 185
tors, and among the rest, a young gentleman from Annecy,
who was physician in ordinary to the sick person. This
young man, being but indifferently taught for a doctor, was
bold enough to differ in opinion from M. Grossi, who only an-
swered him by asking him when he should return, which way
he meant to take, and what conveyance he should make use
of 2 The other, having satisfied Grossi in these particulars,
asked him if there was anything he could serve him in 2
“Nothing, nothing,” answered he, “only I shall place my-
self at a window in your way, that I may have the pleasure
of seeing an ass ride on horseback.” His avarice equalled
his riches and want of feeling. One of his friends wanted to
borrow some money of him, on good security. “My friend,”
answered he, shaking him by the arm, and grinding his
teeth, “Should St. Peter descend from heaven to borrow
ten pistoles of me, and offer the Trinity as securities, I
would not lend them.” One day, being invited to dinner
with Count Picon, Governor of Savoy, who was very relig-
ious, he arrived before it was ready, and found his excel-
lency busy with his devotions, who proposed to him the
same employment; not knowing how to refuse, he knelt
down with a frightful grimace, but had hardly recited two
Ave-Marias, when, not being able to contain himself any
longer, he rose hastily, snatched his hat and cane, and with-
out speaking a word, was making toward the door; Count
Picon ran after him, crying, “Monsieur Grossil Monsieur
Grossil stop, there's a most excellent ortolan on the spit for
you.” “Monsieur le Count,” replied the other, turning his
head, “though you should give me a roasted angel, I would
not stay.” Such was M. Grossi, whom Madam de Warrens
undertook and succeeded in civilizing. Though his time was
very much occupied, he accustomed himself to come fre-
quently to her house, conceived a friendship for Anet, seemed
to think him intelligent, spoke of him with esteem, and, what
would not have been expected of such a brute, affected to
treat him with respect, wishing to efface the impressions of
the past; for though Anet was no longer on the footing of a
domestic, it was known that he had been one, and nothing
less than the countenance and example of the chief physician
was necessary to set an example of respect which would not
otherwise have been paid him. Thus Claude Anet, with a
black coat, a well-dressed wig, a grave, decent behavior, a

<page 219>
I86 THE CONFESSIONS OF
circumspect conduct, and a tolerable knowledge in medical
and botanical matters, might reasonably have hoped to fill,
with universal satisfaction, the place of public demonstra-
tor, had the proposed establishment taken place. Grossi
highly approved the plan, and only waited an opportunity
to propose it to the administration, whenever a return of
peace should permit them to think of useful institutions, and
enable them to spare the necessary pecuniary supplies.
But this project, whose execution would probably have
plunged me into botanical studies, for which I am inclined to
think Nature designed me, failed through one of those unex-
pected strokes which frequently overthrow the best concerted
plans. I was destined to become an example of human mis-
ery; and it might be said that Providence, who called me by
degrees to these extraordinary trials, disconcerted every op-
portunity that could prevent my encountering them.
In an excursion which Anet made to the top of the moun-
tain to seek for genipi, a scarce plant that grows only on the
Alps, and which Monsieur Grossi had occasion for, unfortun-
ately he heated himself so much, that he was seized with a
pleurisy, which the genipi could not relieve, though said to
be specific in that disorder; and, notwithstanding all the art
of Grossi (who certainly was very skillful), and all the care of
his good mistress and myself, he died the fifth day of his dis-
order, in the most cruel agonies. During his illness he had
no exhortations but mine, bestowed with such transports of
grief and zeal, that had he been in a state to understand
them, they must have been some consolation to him. Thus I
1ost the firmest friend I ever had; a man estimable and extra-
ordinary; in whom Nature supplied the defects of education,
and who (though in a state of servitude) possessed all the
virtues necessary to form a great man, which, perhaps, he
would have shown himself, and been acknowledged, had he
lived to fill the situation he seemed so perfectly adapted to.
The next day I spoke of him to Madam de Warrens with the
most sincere and lively affection; when, suddenly, in the
midst of our conversation, the vile, ungrateful thought oc-
curred, that I should inherit his wardrobe, and particularly a
handsome black coat, which I thought very becoming. As I
thought this, I consequently uttered it; for when with her, to
think and to speak was the same thing. Nothing could have
made her feel more forcibly the loss she had sustained, than

<page 220>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 187
this unworthy and odious observation; disinterestedness and
greatness of soul being qualities that poor Anet had emi-
nently possessed. The generous Madam de Warrens turned
from me, and (without any reply) burst into tears. Dear and
precious tears! your reprehension was fully felt; ye ran into
my very heart, washing from thence even the smallest traces
of such despicable and unworthy sentiments, never to return.
This loss caused Madam de Warrens as much inconvenience
as sorrow, since from this moment her affairs were still more
deranged. Anet was extremely exact, and kept everything
in order; his vigilance was universally feared, and this set
some bounds to that profusion they were too apt to run into;
even Madam de Warrens, to avoid his censure, kept her dis-
sipation within bounds; his attachment was not sufficient,
she wished to preserve his esteem, and avoid the just re-
monstrances he sometimes took the liberty to make her, by
representing that she squandered the property of others as
well as her own. I thought as he did, nay, I even some-
times expressed myself to the same effect, but had not an
equal ascendancy over her, and my advice did not make the
same impression. On his decease, I was obliged to occupy
his place, for which I had as little inclination as abilities,
and therefore filled it ill. I was not sufficiently careful, and
so very timid, that though I, frequently found fault to my-
self, I saw ill-management without taking courage to oppose
it; besides, though I acquired an equal share of respect, I
had not the same authority. , I saw the disorder that pre-
vailed, trembled at it, sometimes complained, but was never
attended to. I was too young and lively to have any pre-
tensions to the exercise of reason, and when I would have
acted the reformer, Madam de Warrens calling me her little
Mentor, with two or three playful slaps on the cheek, re-
duced me to my natural thoughtlessness. Notwithstanding,
an idea of the certain distress in which her ill-regulated ex-
penses, sooner or later, must necessarily plunge her, made
a stronger impression on me since I had become the inspector
of her household, and had a better opportunity of calculating
the inequality that subsisted between her income and her ex-
penses. I even date from this period the beginning of that
inclination to avarice which I have ever since been sensible
of. I was never foolishly prodigal, except by intervals; but
till then I was never concerned whether I had much or little

<page 221>
I88 THE CONFESSIONS OF
money. I now began to pay more attention to this circum-
stance, taking care of my purse, and becoming mean from a
laudable motive; for I only sought to insure Madam de War-
rens some resources against that catastrophe which I dreaded
the approach of. I feared her creditors would seize her pension
or that it might be discontinued and she reduced to want,
when I foolishly imagined that the trifle I could save might
be of essential service to her; but to accomplish this, it was nec-
essary I should conceal what I meant to make a reserve of;
for it would have been an awkward circumstance, while she
was perpetually driven to expedients, to have her know that
I hoarded money. Accordingly, I sought out some hiding-
place, where I laid up a few louis, resolving to augment this
stock from time to time, till a convenient opportunity to lay
it at her feet; but I was so incautious in the choice of my
repositories, that she always discovered them, and, to con-
vince me that she did so, changed the louis I had concealed
for a larger sum in different pieces of coin. Ashamed of these
discoveries, I brought back to the common purse my little
treasure, which she never failed to lay out in clothes, or
other things for my use, such as a silver hilted sword, watch,
etc. Being convinced that I should never succeed in accu-
mulating money, and that what I could save would furnish
but a very slender resource against the misfortune I dreaded,
made me wish to place myself in such a situation that I
might be enabled to provide for her, whenever she might
chance to be reduced to want. Unhappily, seeking these re-
sources on the side of my inclinations, I foolishly deter-
mined to consider music as my principal dependence; and
ideas of harmony rising in my brain, I imagined, that if
placed in a proper situation to profit by them, I should ac-
quire celebrity, and presently become a modern Orpheus,
whose mystic sounds would attract all the riches of Peru.
As I began to read music tolerably well, the question was,
how I should learn composition ? The difficulty lay in meet-
ing with a good master, for, with the assistance of my Rameau
alone, I despaired of ever being able to accomplish it; and,
since the departure of M. le Maitre, there was nobody in
Savoy who understood anything of the principles of har-
mony.
I am now about to relate another of those inconsequences,
which my life is full of, and which have so frequently carried

<page 222>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 189
me directly from my designs, even when I thought myself
immediately within reach of them. Venture had spoken to
me in very high terms of the Abbé Blanchard, who had
taught him composition; a deserving man, possessed of great
talents, who was music-master to the cathedral at Besancon,
and is now in that capacity at the Chapel of Versailles. I
therefore determined to go to Besancon, and take some lessons
from the Abbé Blanchard, and the idea appeared so rational
to me, that I soon made Madam de Warrens of the same
opinion, who immediately set about the preparations for my
journey, in the same style of profusion with which all her
plans were executed. Thus this project for preventing a
bankruptcy, and repairing in future the waste of dissipation,
began by causing her to expend eight hundred livres; her
ruin being accelerated that I might be put in a condition to
prevent it. Foolish as this conduct may appear, the illusion
was complete on my part, and even on hers, for I was per-
suaded I should labor for her emolument, and she thought
she was highly promoting mine.
I expected to find Venture still at Annecy, and promised
myself to obtain a recommendatory letter from him to the
Abbé Blanchard; but he had left that place, and I was obliged
to content myself in the room of it, with a mass in four parts
of his composition, which he had left with me. With this
slender recommendation I set out for Besancon by the way
of Geneva, where I saw my relations; and through Nion,
where I saw my father, who received me in his usual manner,
and promised to forward my portmanteau, which, as I trav-
elled on horseback, came after me. I arrived at Besancon,
and was kindly received by the Abbé Blanchard, who
promised me his instruction, and offered his services in any
other particular. We had just set about our music, when I
received a letter from my father, informing me that my port-
manteau had been seized and confiscated at Rousses, a French
barrier on the side of Switzerland. Alarmed at the news, I
employed the acquaintance I had formed at Besancon, to learn
the motive of this confiscation. Being certain there was no-
thing contraband among my baggage, I could not conceive on
what pretext it could have been seized on; at length, how-
ever, I learned the rights of the story, which (as it is a very
curious one) must not be omitted.
I became acquainted at Chambery with a very worthy old

<page 223>
I 90 THE CONFESSIONS OF
man, from Lyons, named Monsieur Duvivier, who had been
employed at the Visa, under the regency, and for want of
other business, now assisted at the Survey. He had lived in
the polite world, possessed talents, was good-humored, and
understood music. As we both wrote in the same chamber,
we preferred each other's acquaintance to that of the unlicked
cubs that surrounded us. He had some correspondents at
Paris, who furnished him with those little nothings, those
daily novelties, which circulate one knows not why, and die
one cares not when, without any one thinking of them longer
than they are heard. As I sometimes took him to dine with
Madam de Warrens, he in some measure treated me with
respect, and (wishing to render himself agreeable) endeavored
to make me fond of these trifles, for which I naturally had
such a distaste, that I never in my life read any of them.
Unhappily one of these cursed papers happened to be in the
waistcoat pocket of a new suit, which I had only worn two
or three times to prevent its being seized by the commis-
sioners of the customs. This paper contained an insipid
Jansenist parody on that beautiful scene in Racine's Mithrid-
ates: I had not read ten lines of it, but by forgetfulness left it
in my pocket, and this caused all my necessaries to be con-
fiscated. The commissioners at the head of the inventory of
my portmanteau, set a most pompous verbal process, in which
it was taken for granted that this most terrible writing came
from Geneva for the sole purpose of being printed and dis-
tributed in France, and then ran into holy invectives against
the enemies of God and the Church, and praised the pious
vigilance of those who had prevented the execution of these
most infernal machinations. They doubtless found also that
my spirits smelt of heresy, for on the strength of this dread-
ful paper, they were all seized, and from that time I never
received any account of my unfortunate portmanteau. The
revenue officers whom I applied to for this purpose required
so many instructions, informations, certificates, memorials,
etc., etc., that, lost a thousand times in the perplexing laby-
rinth, I was glad to abandon them entirely. I feel a real
regret for not having preserved this verbal process from the
office of Rousses, for it was a piece calculated to hold a dis-
tinguished rank in the collection which is to accompany this
Work.
The loss of my necessities immediately brought me back to

<page 224>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I91
Chambery, without having learned anything of the Abbé
Blanchard. Reasoning with myself on the events of this jour.
ney, and seeing that misfortunes attended all my enterprises,
I resolved to attach myself entirely to Madam de Warrens, to
share her fortune, and distress myself no longer about future
events, which I could not regulate. She received me as if I
had brought back treasures, replaced by degrees my little
wardrobe, and though this misfortune fell heavy enough on
us both, it was forgotten almost as suddenly as it arrived.
Though this mischance had rather dampened my musical
ardor, I did not leave off studying my Rameau, and, by re-
peated efforts, was at length able to understand it, and to
make some little attempts at composition, the success of
which encouraged me to proceed. The Count de Bellegrade,
son of the Marquis of Antremont, had returned from Dresden
after the death of King Augustus. Having long resided at
Paris, he was fond of music, and particularly that of Rameau.
His brother, the Count of Nangis, played on the violin; the
Countess la Tour, their sister, sung tolerably: this rendered
music the fashion at Chambery, and a kind of public concert
was established there, the direction of which was at first de-
signed for me, but they soon discovered I was not competent
to the undertaking, and it was otherwise arranged. Notwith-
standing this, I continued writing a number of little pieces, in
my own way, and, among others, a cantata, which gained
great approbation; it could not, indeed, be called a finished
piece, but the airs were written in a style of novelty, and pro-
duced a good effect, which was not expected from me. These
gentlemen could not believe that, reading music so indiffer-
ently, it was possible I should compose any that was passable,
and made no doubt that I had taken to myself the credit of
some other person’s labors. Monsieur de Nangis, wishing to
be assured of this, called on me one morning with a cantata
of Clerambault's which he had transposed, as he said, to suit
His voice, and to which another bass was necessary, the trans-
position having rendered that of Clerambault impracticable.
I answered, it required considerable labor, and could not be
done on the spot. Being convinced I only sought an excuse,
he pressed me to write at least the bass to a recitative: I did
so, not well, doubtless, because to attempt anything with suc-
cess I must have both time and freedom, but I did it at least
according to rule, and he being present, could not doubt but I

<page 225>
I92 THE CONFESSIONS OF
understood the elements of composition. I did not, there-
fore, lose my scholars, though it hurt my pride that there
should be a concert at Chambery in which I was not necessary.
About this time, peace being concluded, the French army
repassed the Alps. Several officers came to visit Madam de
Warrens, and among others the Count de Lautrec, Colonel of
the regiment of Orleans, since Plenipotentiary of Geneva, and
afterwards Marshal of France, to whom she presented me. On
her recommendation, he appeared to interest himself greatly
in my behalf, promising a great deal, which he never remem-
bered till the last year of his life, when I no longer stood in
need of his assistance. The young Marquis of Sennecterre,
whose father was then ambassador at Turin, passed through
Chambery at the same time, and dined one day at M. de
Menthon's, when I happened to be among the guests. After
dinner, the discourse turned on music, which the marquis
understood extremely well. The opera of Jephtha was then
new; he mentioned this piece, it was brought him, and he
made me tremble by proposing to execute it between us. He
opened the book at that celebrated double chorus,
La Terra, l’Enfer, le Ciel meme,
Tout tremble devant le Seigneur/*
He said, “How many parts will you take? I will do these
six.” I had not yet been accustomed to this trait of French
vivacity, and though acquainted with divisions, could not
comprehend how one man could undertake to perform six, or
even two parts at the same time. Nothing has cost me more
trouble in music than to skip lightly from one part to another,
and have the eye at once on a whole division. By the manner
in which I evaded this trial, he must have been inclined to
believe I did not understand music, and perhaps it was to
satisfy himself in this particular that he proposed my noting
a song for Mademoiselle de Menthon, in such a manner that
I could not avoid it. He sang this song, and I wrote from
his voice, without giving him much trouble to repeat it.
When finished he read my performance, and said (which was
very true) that it was very correctly noted. He had observed
my embarrassment, and now seemed to enhance the merit of
this little success. In reality, I then understood music very
well, and only wanted that quickness at first sight which I
*The Earth, and Hell, and Heaven itself, tremble before the Lord!

<page 226>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I93
possess in no one particular, and which is only to be acquired
in this art by long and constant practice. Be that as it may,
I was fully sensible of his kindness in endeavoring to efface
from the minds of others, and even from my own, the em-
barrassment I had experienced on this occasion. Twelve or
fifteen years afterwards, meeting this gentleman at several
houses in Paris, I was tempted to make him recollect this
anecdote, and show him I still remembered it; but he had
lost his sight since that time; I feared to give him pain by
recalling to his memory how useful it formerly had been to
him, and was therefore silent on that subject.
I now touch on the moment that binds my past existence
to the present, some friendships of that period, prolonged to
the present time, being very dear to me, have frequently
made me regret that happy obscurity, when those who called
themselves my friends were really so; loved me for myself,
through pure good will, and not from the vanity of being
acquainted with a conspicuous character, perhaps for the
secret purpose of finding more occasions to injure him.
From this time I date my first acquaintance with my old
friend Gauffecourt, who, notwithstanding every effort to dis-
unite us, has still remained so.--Still remained so!—No, alas!
I have just lost him!—but his affection terminated only with
his life—death alone could put a period to our friendship.
Monsieur de Gauffecourt was one of the most amiable men
that ever existed; it was impossible to see him without affec-
tion, or to live with him without feeling a sincere attachment.
In my life I never saw features more expressive of goodness
and serenity, or that marked more feeling, more understand-
ing, or inspired greater confidence. However reserved one
might be, it was impossible even at first sight to avoid being
as free with him as if he had been an acquaintance of twenty
years; for myself, who find so much difficulty to be at ease
among new faces, I was familiar with him in a moment. His
manner, accent, and conversation, perfectly suited his fea-
tures: the sound of his voice was clear, full and musical;
it was an agreeable and expressive bass, which satisfied the
ear, and sounded full upon the heart. It was impossible to
possess a more equal and pleasing vivacity, or more real and
unaffected gracefulness, more natural talents, or cultivated
with greater taste; join to all these good qualities an affection-
ate heart, but loving rather too diffusively, and bestowing his

<page 227>
I94 THE CONFESSIONS OF
favors with too little caution; serving his friends with zeal,
or rather making himself the friend of every one he could
serve, yet contriving very dexterously to manage his own
affairs, while warmly pursuing the interests of others.
Gauffecourt was the son of a clock-maker, and would have
been a clock-maker himself had not his person and desert
called him to a superior situation. He became acquainted
with M. de la Closure, the French Resident at Geneva, who
conceived a friendship for him, and procured him some con-
nections at Paris, which were useful, and through whose in-
fluence he obtained the privilege of furnishing the salts of
Valais, which was worth twenty thousand livres a year. This
very amply satisfied his wishes with respect to fortune, but
with regard to women he was more difficult; he had to provide
for his own happiness, and did what he supposed most condu-
cive to it. What renders his character most remarkable, and
does him the greatest honor, is, that though connected with
all conditions, he was universally esteemed and sought after
without being envied or hated by any one, and I really believe
he passed through life without a single enemy.—Happy man!
He went every year to the baths of Aix, where the best
company from the neighboring countries resorted, and being
on terms of friendship with all the nobility of Savoy, came
from Aix to Chambery to see the young Count de Bellegarde
and his father the Marquis of Antremont. It was here
Madam de Warrens introduced me to him, and this acquaint-
ance, which appeared at that time to end in nothing, after
many years had elapsed, was renewed on an occasion which
I should relate, when it became a real friendship. I appre-
hend I am sufficiently authorized in speaking of a man to
whom I was so firmly attached, but I had no personal inter-
est in what concerned him; he was so truly amiable, and born
with so many natural good qualities that, for the honor of
human nature, I should think it necessary to preserve his
memory. This man, estimable as he certainly was, had,
like other mortals, some failings, as will be seen hereafter;
perhaps had it not been so, he would have been less amiable,
since, to render him as interesting as possible, it was neces-
sary he should sometinues act in such a manner as to re-
quire a small portion of indulgence.
Another connection of the same time, that is not yet extin-
guished, and continues to flatter me with the idea of temporal

<page 228>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I95
happiness, which it is so difficult to obliterate from the hu-
man heart, is Monsieur de Conzie, a Savoyard gentleman,
then young and amiable, who had a fancy to learn music, or
rather to be acquainted with the person who taught it.
With great understanding and taste for polite acquirements,
M. de Conzie possessed a mildness of disposition which ren-
dered him extremely attractive, and my temper being some-
what similar, when it found a counterpart, our friendship
was soon formed. The seeds of literature and philosophy,
which began to ferment in my brain, and only waited for
culture and emulation to spring up, found in him exactly
what was wanting to render them prolific. M. de Conzie
had no great inclination to music, and even this was useful
to me, for the hours destined for lessons were passed anyhow
rather than musically; we breakfasted, chatted, and read
11ew publications, but not a word of music.
The correspondence between Voltaire and the Prince Royal
of Prussia, then made a noise in the world, and these cele-
brated men were frequently the subject of our conversation,
one of whom recently seated on a throne, already indicated
what he would prove himself hereafter, while the other, as
imuch disgraced as he is now admired, made us sincerely
lament the misfortunes that seemed to pursue him, and which
are so frequently the appendage of superior talents. The
Prince of Prussia had not been happy in his youth, and it
appeared that Voltaire was formed never to be so. The inter-
est we took in both parties extended to all that concerned
them, and nothing that Voltaire wrote escaped us. The in-
clination I felt for these performances inspired me with a
desire to write elegantly, and caused me to endeavor to imi-
tate the colorings of that author, with whom I was so much
enchanted. Some time after, his philosophical letters
(though certainly not his best work) greatly augmented my
fondness for study; it was a rising inclination, which, from
that time, has never been extinguished.
But the moment was not yet arrived when I should give
into it entirely; my rambling disposition (rather contracted
than eradicated) being kept alive by our manner of living
at Madam de Warrens, which was too unsettled for one of my
solitary temper. The crowd of strangers who daily swarmed
about her from all parts, and the certainty I was in that these
people sought only to dupe her, each in his particular mode,

<page 229>
196 THE CONFESSIONS OF
rendered home disagreeable. Since I had succeeded Anet in
the confidence of his mistress, I had strictly examined her
circumstances, and saw their evil tendency with horror. I
had remonstrated a hundred times, prayed, argued, conjured,
but all to no purpose. I had thrown myself at her feet, and
strongly represented the catastrophe that threatened her, had
earnestly entreated that she would reform her expenses, and
begin with myself, representing that it was better to suffer
something while she was yet young, than by multiplying
her debts and creditors, expose her old age to vexation and
misery.
Sensible of the sincerity of my zeal, she was frequently
affected, and would then make the finest promises in the
world: but only let an artful schemer arrive, and in an in-
stant all her good resolutions were forgotten. After a thou-
sand proofs of the inefficacy of my remonstrances, what re-
mained but to turn away my eyes from the ruin I could not
prevent; and fly myself from the door I could not guard! I
made therefore little journeys to Geneva and Lyons, which
diverted my mind in some measure from this secret uneasi-
ness, though it increased the cause by these additional ex-
penses. I can truly aver that I should have acquiesed with
pleasure in every retrenchment, had Madam de Warrens
really profited by it, but being persuaded that what I might
refuse myself would be distributed among a set of interested
villains, I took advantage of her easiness to partake with
them, and, like the dog returning from the shambles, car-
ried off a portion of that morsel which I could not protect.
Pretences were not wanting for all these journeys; even
Madam de Warrens would alone have supplied me with more
than were necessary, having plenty of connections, nego-
tiations, affairs, and commissions, which she wished to
have executed by some trusty hand. In these cases she
usually applied to me; I was always willing to go, and con-
sequently found occasions enough to furnish out a rambling
kind of life. These excursions procured me some good
connections, which have since been agreeable or useful to
me. Among others, I met at Lyons, with M. Perrichon,
whose friendship I accuse myself with not having sufficient-
ly cultivated, considering the kindness he had for me; and
that of the good Parisot, which I shall speak of in its place,
at Glenoble, that of Madam Deybens and Madam la Presi-

<page 230>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I97
dente de Bardonanche, a woman of great understanding, and
who would have entertained a friendship for me had it been
in my power to have seen her oftener; at Geneva, that of
M. de Closure, the French Resident, who often spoke to me
of my mother, the remembrance of whom neither death nor
time had erased from his heart; likewise those of the two
Barillots, the father, who was very amiable, a good com-
panion, and one of the most worthy men I ever met, calling
me his grandson. During the troubles of the republic, these
two citizens took contrary sides, the son siding with the
people, the father with the magistrates. When they took
up arms in 1737, I was at Geneva, and saw the father and
son quit the same house armed, the one going to the town-
house, the other to his quarters, almost certain to meet face
to face in the course of two hours, and prepared to give or
receive death from each other. This unnatural sight made
so lively an impression on me, that I solemnly vowed never
to interfere in any civil war, nor assist in deciding our inter-
nal dispute by arms, either personally or by my influ-
ence, should I ever enter into my rights as a citizen. I can
bring proofs of having kept this oath on a very delicate oc-
casion, and it will be confessed (at least I should suppose
so) that this moderation was of some worth.
But I had not yet arrived at that fermentation of patriot-
ism which the first sight of Geneva in arms has since excited
in my heart, as may be conjectured by a very grave fact
that will not tell to my advantage, which I forgot to put in
its proper place, but which ought not to be omitted.
My uncle Bernard died at Carolina, where he had been em-
ployed some years in the building of Charles Town, which
he had formed the plan of. My poor cousin, too, died in the
Prussian service; thus my aunt lost, nearly at the same per-
iod, her son and husband. These losses reanimated in some
measure her affection for the nearest relative she had re-
maining, which was myself. When I went to Geneva, I
reckoned her house my home, and amused myself with rum-
maging and turning over the books and papers my uncle had
left. Among them I found some curious ones, and some let-
ters which they certainly little thought of. My aunt, who
set no store by these dusty papers, would willingly have
given the whole to me, but I contented myself with two or
three books, with notes written by the Minister Bernard, my

<page 231>
I98 THE CONFESSIONS OF
grandfather, and among the rest, the posthumous works of
Rohault in quarto, the margins of which were full of excel-
lent commentaries, which gave me an inclination to the
mathematics. This book remained among those of Madam
de Warrens, and I have since lamented that I did not pre-
serve it. To these I added five or six memorials in manu-
Script, and a printed one, composed by the famous Micheli
Ducret, a man of considerable talents, being both learned
and enlightened, but too much, perhaps, inclined to sedition,
for which he was cruelly treated by the magistrates of Gen-
eva, and lately died in the fortress of Arberg, where he had
been confined many years, for being, as it was said, con-
cerned in the conspiracy of Berne.
This memorial was a judicious critique on the extensive but
ridiculous plan of fortification, which had been adopted at
Geneva, though censured by every person of judgment in
the art, who was unacquainted with the secret motives of
the council, in the execution of this magnificent enterprise.
Monsieur de Micheli, who had been excluded from the com-
mittee of fortification for having condemned this plan,
thought that, as a citizen, and a member of the two hundred,
he might give his advice, at large, and therefore, did so in
this memorial, which he was imprudent enough to have
printed, though he never published it, having only those
copies struck off which were meant for the two hundred, and
which were all intercepted at the post-house by order of the
Senate.”
I found this memorial among my uncle's papers, with
the answer he had been ordered to make to it, and took
both. This was soon after I had left my place at the survey,
and I yet remained on good terms with the Counsellor de
Coccelli, who had the management of it. Some time after,
the director of the custom-house entreated me to stand god-
father to his child, with Madam Coccelli, who was to be god-
mother: proud of being placed on such terms of equality
with the counsellor, I wished to assume importance, and
show myself worthy of that honor.
Full of this idea, I thought I could do nothing better than
show him Micheli’s memorial, which was really a scarce piece,
and would prove I was connected with people of consequence
*The grand council of Geneva in December, 1728, pronounced this paper highly
disrespectful to the councils, and injurious to the committee of fortification.

<page 232>
J. J. ROUSSEAU I99
in Geneva, who were intrusted with the secrets of the state,
yet by a kind of reserve which I should find it difficult to ac-
count for, I did not show him my uncle's answer, perhaps,
because it was manuscript, and nothing less than print was
worthy to approach the counsellor. He understood, however,
so well the importance of this paper, which I had the folly to
put into his hands, that I could never after get it into my pos-
session, and being convinced that every effort for that purpose
would be ineffectual, I made a merit of my forbearance, trans-
forming the theft into a present. I made no doubt that this
writing (more curious, however, than useful) answered his
purpose at the court of Turin, where probably he took care to
be reimbursed in some way or other for the expense which
the acquisition of it might be supposed to have cost him.
Happily, of all future contingencies, the least probable, is,
that ever the King of Sardina should beseige Geneva, but as
that event is not absolutely impossible, I shall ever reproach
my foolish vanity with having been the means of pointing
out the greatest defects of that city to its most ancient
enemy.
I passed three or four years in this manner, between
music, magistery, projects, and journeys, floating incessantly
from one object to another, and wishing to fix though I knew
not on what, but insensibly inclining towards study. I was
acquainted with men of letters, I had heard them speak of
literature, and sometimes mingled in the conversation, yet
rather adopted the jargon of books, than the knowledge they
contained. In my excursions to Geneva, I frequently called
on my good old friend Monsieur Simon, who greatly pro-
moted my rising emulation by fresh news from the republic
of letters, extracted from Baillet on Colomies. I frequently
saw too, at Chambery, a Dominican professor of physic, a
good kind of friar, whose name I have forgotten, who often
made little chemical experiments which greatly amused me.
In imitation of him, I attempted to make some sympathetic
ink, and having for that purpose more than half filled a bot-
tle with quicklime, orpiment, and water, the effervescence
immediately became extremely violent; I ran to unstop the
bottle, but had not time to effect it, for, during the attempt,
it burst in my face like a bomb, and I swallowed so much of
the orpiment and lime, that it nearly cost me my life. I re-
mained blind for six weeks, and by the event of this expe-

<page 233>
2OO THE CONFESSIONS OF
riment learned to meddle no more with experimental chem-
istry while the elements were unknown to me.
This adventure happened very unluckily for my health,
which, for some time past, had been visibly on the decline.
This was rather extraordinary, as I was guilty of no kind
of excess; nor could it have been expected from my make,
for my chest, being well formed and rather capacious,
seemed to give my lungs full liberty to play; yet I was short
breathed, felt a very sensible oppression, sighed involunta-
rily, had palpitations of the heart, and spitting of blood, ac-
companied with a lingering fever, which I have never since
entirely overcome. How is it possible to fall into such a
state in the flower of one's age, without any inward decay,
or without having done anything to destroy health 2
It is sometimes said, “the sword wears the scabbard,” this
was truly the case with me: the violence of my passions both
kept me alive and hastened my dissolution. What passions?
will be asked: mere nothings: the most trivial objects in
nature, but which affected me as forcibly as if the acquisi-
tion of a Helen, or the throne of the universe were at stake.
My senses, for instance, were at ease with one woman, but
my heart never was, and the necessities of love consumed me
in the very bosom of happiness. I had a tender, respected and
lovely friend, but I sighed for a mistress; my prolific fancy
painted her as such, and gave her a thousand forms, for had
I conceived that my endearments had been lavished on
Madam de Warrens, they would not have been less tender,
though infinitely more tranquil. But is it possible for man
to taste, in their utmost extent, the delights of love? I
cannot tell, but I am persuaded my frail existence would
have sunk under the weight of them.
I was, therefore, dying for love without an object, and this
state, perhaps, is, of all others, the most dangerous. I was
likewise uneasy, tormented at the bad state of poor Madam
de Warrens' circumstances, and the imprudence of her con-
duct, which could not fail to bring them, in a short time, to
total ruin. My tortured imagination (which ever paints
misfortunes in the extremity) continually beheld this in its
utmost excess, and in all the horror of its consequences.
I already saw myself forced by want to quit her—to
whom I had consecrated my future life, and without whom
I could not hope for happiness: thus was my soul con-

<page 234>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 2OI
tinually agitated, and hopes and fears devoured me alter-
nately.
Music was a passion less turbulent, but not less consum-
ing, from the ardor with which I attached myself to it, by
the obstinate study of the obscure books of Rameau; by an
invincible resolution to charge my memory with rules it
could not contain; by continual application, and by long and
immense compilations which I frequently passed whole
nights in copying: but why dwell on these particularly, while
every folly that took possession of my wandering brain, the
most transient ideas of a single day, a journey, a concert, a
supper, a walk, a novel to read, a play to see, things in the
world the least premeditated in my pleasures or occupation
became for me the most violent passions, which by their
ridiculous impetuosity conveyed the most serious torments;
even the imaginary misfortunes of Cleveland, read with
avidity and frequent interruption, have, I am persuaded,
disordered me more than my own.
There was a Genevese, named Bagueret, who had been em-
ployed under Peter the Great, of the court of Russia, one of
the most worthless, senseless fellows I ever met with; full of
projects as foolish as himself, which were to rain down mil-
lions on those who took part in them. This man, having
come to Chambery on account of some suit depending before
the senate, immediately got acquainted with Madam de War-
rens, and with great reason on his side, since for those
imaginary treasures that cost him nothing, and which he be-
stowed with the utmost prodigality, he gained, in exchange,
the unfortunate crown pieces one by one out of her pocket. I
did not like him, and he plainly perceived this, for with me it
is not a very difficult discovery, nor did he spare any sort of
meanness to gain my good will, and among other things pro-
posed teaching me to play at chess, which game he understood
something of. I made an attempt, though almost against my
inclination, and after several efforts, having learned the march,
my progress was so rapid, that before the end of the first
sitting I gave him the rook, which in the beginning he had
given me. Nothing more was necessary; behold me fascinated
with chess! I buy a board, with the rest of the apparatus,
and shutting myself up in my chamber, pass whole days and
nights in studying all the varieties of the game, being deter-
mined by playing alone, without end or relaxation, to drive

<page 235>
2O2 THE CONFESSIONS OF
them into my head, right or wrong. After incredible efforts,
during two or three months passed in this curious employ-
ment, I go to the coffee-house, thin, sallow, and almost
stupid; I seat myself, and again attack M. Bagueret: he beats
me, once, twice, twenty times; so many combinations were
fermenting in my head, and my imagination was so stupe-
fied, that all appeared confusion. I tried to exercise myself
with Philidor's or Stamma's book of instructions, but I was
still equally perplexed, and, after having exhausted myself
with fatigue, was further to seek than ever, and whether I
abandoned my chess for a time, or resolved to surmount every
difficulty by unremitted practice, it was the same thing. I
could never advance one step beyond the improvement of
the first sitting, nay, I am convinced that had I studied it a
thousand ages, I should have ended by being able to give
Bagueret the rook and nothing more.
It will be said my time was well employed, and not a little
of it passed in this occupation, nor did I quit my first essay
till unable to persist in it, for on leaving my apartment I
had the appearance of a corpse, and had I continued this
course much longer I should certainly have been one.
Any one will allow that it would have been extraordinary,
especially in the ardor of youth, that such a head should
suffer the body to enjoy continued health; the alteration of
mine had an effect on my temper, moderating the ardor of my
chimerical fancies, for as I grew weaker they became more
tranquil, and I even lost, in some measure, my rage for trav-
elling. I was not seized with heaviness, but melancholy;
vapors succeeded passions, languor became sorrow: I wept
and sighed without cause, and felt my life ebbing away be-
fore I had enjoyed it. I only trembled to think of the situ-
ation in which I should leave my dear Madam de Warrens;
and I can truly say, that quitting her, and leaving her in these
melancholy circumstances, was my only concern. At length
I fell quite ill, and was nursed by her as never mother nursed
a child. The care she took of me was of real utility to her
affairs, since it diverted her mind from schemes, and kept
projectors at a distance. How pleasing would death have
been at that time, when, if I had not tasted many of the
pleasures of life, I had felt but few of its misfortunes. My
tranquil soul would have taken her flight, without having ex-
perienced those cruel ideas of the injustice of mankind which

<page 236>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 2O3
embitters both life and death. I should have enjoyed the
sweet consolation that I still survived in the dearer part of
myself: in the situation I then was, it could hardly be called
death; and had I been divested of my uneasiness on her ac-
count, it would have appeared but a gentle sleep; yet even
these disquietudes had such an affectionate and tender turn,
that their bitterness was tempered by a pleasing sensibility.
I said to her, “You are the depository of my whole being,
act so that I may be happy.” Two or three times, when my
disorder was most violent, I crept to her apartment to give
her my advice respecting her future conduct; and I dare
affirm these admonitions were both wise and equitable, in
which the interest I took in her future concerns was strongly
marked. As if tears had been both nourishment and medi-
cine, I found myself the better for those I shed with her,
while seated on her bed-side, and holding her hands between
mine. The hours crept insensibly away in these nocturnal
discourses; I returned to my chamber better than I had
quitted it, being content and calmed by the promises she
made, and the hopes with which she had inspired me: I slept
on them with my heart at peace, and fully resigned to the dis-
pensations of Providence. God grant, that after having had
so many reasons to hate life, after being agitated with so
many storms, after it has even become a burden, that death,
which must terminate all, may be no more terrible than it
would have been at that moment!
By inconceivable care and vigilance, she saved my life; and
I am convinced she alone could have done this. I have little
faith in the skill of physicians, but depend greatly on the
assistance of real friends, and am persuaded that being easy
in those particulars on which our happiness depends, is more
salutary than any other application. If there is a sensation
in life peculiarly delightful, we experienced it in being re-
stored to each other; our mutual attachment did not in-
crease, for that was impossible, but it became, I know not
how, more exquisitely tender, fresh softness being added to
its former simplicity. I became in a manner her work; we
got into the habit, though without design, of being continu-
ally with each other, and enjoying, in some measure, our
whole existence together, feeling reciprocally that we were
not only necessary, but entirely sufficient for each other's
happiness. Accustomed to think of no subject foreign to

<page 237>
2O4 THE CONFESSIONS OF
ourselves, our happiness and all our desires were confined to
that pleasing and singular union, which, perhaps, had no
equal, which is not, as I have before observed, love, but a
sentiment inexpressibly more intimate, neither depending
on the senses, age, nor figure, but an assemblage of every
endearing sensation that composes our rational existence and
which can cease only with our being.
How was it that this delightful crisis did not secure our
mutual felicity for the remainder of her life and mine P I
have the consoling conviction that it was not my fault; nay,
I am persuaded, she did not wilfully destroy it; the invinci-
ble peculiarity of my disposition was doomed soon to regain
its empire; but this fatal return was not suddenly accom-
plished, there was, thank Heaven, a short but precious in-
terval, that did not conclude by my fault, and which I can-
not reproach myself with having employed amiss.
Though recovered from my dangerous illness, I did not re-
gain my strength; my stomach was weak, some remains of
the fever kept me in a languishing condition, and the only
inclination I was sensible of, was to end my days near one
so truly dear to me; to confirm her in those good resolu-
tions she had formed; to convince her in what consisted the
real charms of a happy life, and, as far as depended on me,
to render hers so; but I foresaw that in a gloomy, melan-
choly house, the continual solitude of our tele-à-têtes would
at length become too dull and monotonous: a remedy pre-
sented itself: Madam de Warrens had prescribed milk for
me, and insisted that I should take it in the country; I
consented, provided she would accompany me; nothing more
was necessary to gain her compliance, and whither we
should go was all that remained to be determined on. Our
garden (which I have before mentioned) was not properly in
the country, being surrounded by houses and other gardens,
and possessing none of those attractions so desirable in a rural
retreat; besides, after the death of Anet, we had given up this
place from economical principles, feeling no longer a desire to
rear plants, and other views making us not regret the loss of
that little retreat. Improving the distaste I found she began to
imbibe for the town, I proposed to abandon it entirely, and
settle ourselves in an agreeable solitude, in some small house,
distant enough from the city to avoid the perpetual intrusion
of her hangers-on. She followed my advice, and this plan,

<page 238>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 2O5
which her good angel and mine suggested, might fully have
secured our happiness and tranquility till death had divided
us—but this was not the state we were appointed to; Madam
de Warrens was destined to endure all the sorrows of in-
digence and poverty, after having passed the former part
of her life in abundance, that she might learn to quit it
with the less regret; and myself, by an assemblage of mis-
fortunes of all kinds, was to become a striking example to
those who, inspired with a love of justice and the public
good, and trusting too implicitly to their own innocence,
shall openly dare to assert truth to mankind, unsupported
by cabals, or without having previously formed parties to
protect them,
An unhappy fear furnished some objections to our plan:
she did not dare to quit her ill-contrived house, for fear of
displeasing the proprietor. “Your proposed retirement is
charming,” said she, “and much to my taste, but we are
necessitated to remain here, for, on quitting this dungeon, I
hazard losing the very means of life, and when these fail
us in the woods, we must again return to seek them in the
city. That we may have the least possible cause for being
reduced to this necessity, let us not leave this house entirely,
but pay a small pension to the Count of Saint-Laurent, that
he may continue mine. Let us seek some little habitation,
far enough from the town to be at peace, yet near enough to
return when it may appear convenient.”
This mode was finally adopted; and after some small search,
we fixed at Charmettes, on an estate belonging to M. de Con-
zie, at a very small distance from Chambery; but as retired
and solitary as if it had been a hundred leagues off. The
spot we had concluded on was a valley between two tolera-
bly high hills, which ran north and south; at the bottom,
among the trees and pebbles, ran a rivulet, and above the
declivity, on either side, were scattered a number of houses,
forming altogether a beautiful retreat for those who love a
peaceful romantic asylum. After having examined two or
three of these houses, we chose that which we thought the
most pleasing, which was the property of agentleman of the
army, called M. Noiret. This house was in good condition,
before it a garden, forming a terrace; below that on the
declivity an orchard, and on the ascent, behind the house, a
vineyard: a little wood of chestnut trees opposite; a fountain

<page 239>
2O6 THE CONFESSIONS OF
just by, and higher up the hill, meadows for the cattle; in
short, all that could be thought necessary for the country
retirement we proposed to establish. To the best of my re-
membrance, we took possession of it toward the latter end of
the summer of 1736. I was delighted on going to sleep
there—“Oh!” said I, to this dear friend, embracing her
with tears of tenderness and delight, “this is the abode of
happiness and innocence; if we do not find them here to-
gether it will be in vain to seek them elsewhere,”

<page 240>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 2O7
BOOK VI.
Hoc erat in votis: Modus agri non ita magnus
Płortus ubi, et tecto vicinus aquae ſons;
Et paufulum sylvae super his foret.
CANNOT add, auctius acque di meliès fecere; but no mat-
ter, the former is enough for my purpose; I had no oc-
casion to have any property there, it was sufficient that
I enjoyed it; for I have long since both said and felt, that
the proprietor and possessor are two very different people,
even leaving husbands and lovers out of the question.
At this moment began the short happiness of my life, those
peaceful and rapid moments, which have given me a right to
say, I have lived. Precious and ever-regretted moments! Ah!
recommence your delightful course; pass more slowly through
my memory, if possible, than you actually did in your fugi-
tive succession. How shall I prolong, according to my incli-
nation, this recital at once so pleasing and simple 2 How shall
I continue to relate the same occurrences, without wearying
my readers with the repetition, any more than I was satia-
ted with the enjoyment? Again, if all this consisted of facts,
actions, or words, I could somehow or other convey an idea
of it; but how shall I describe what was neither said nor done,
nor even thought, but enjoyed, felt, without being able to
particularize any other object of my happiness than the bare
idea 2 I rose with the sun, and was happy; I walked, and was
happy; I saw Madam de Warrens, and was happy; I quitted
her, and still was happy!—Whether I rambled through the
woods,over the hills, or strolled along the valley; read, was

<page 241>
2O8 THE CONFESSIONS OF
idle, worked in the garden, or gathered fruits, happiness con-
tinually accompanied me; it was fixed on no particular object,
it was within me, nor could I depart from it a single moment.
Nothing that passed during that charming epocha, nothing
that I did, said, or thought, has escaped my memory. The
time that preceded or followed it, I only recollect by inter-
vals, unequally and confused; but here I remember all as
distinctly as if it existed at this moment. Imagination, which
in my youth was perpetually anticipating the future, but
now takes a retrograde course, makes some amends by these
charming recollections for the deprivation of hope, which I
have lost forever. I no longer see anything in the future
that can tempt my wishes, it is a recollection of the past
alone that can flatter me, and the remembrance of the period
I am now describing is so true and lively, that it sometimes
makes me happy, even in spite of my misfortunes.
Of these recollections I shall relate one example, which
may give some idea of their force and precision. The first
day we went to sleep at Charmettes, the way being up-hill,
and Madam de Warrens rather heavy, she was carried in a
chair, while I followed on foot. Fearing the chairmen
would be fatigued, she got out about half-way, designing to
walk the rest of it. As we passed along, she saw something
blue in the hedge, and said, “There's some periwinkle in
flower yet!” I had never seen any before, nor did I stop to
examine this: my sight is too short to distinguish plants on
the ground, and I only cast a look at this as I passed: an in-
terval of near thirty years had elapsed before I saw any more
periwinkle, at least before I observed it, when being at Cres-
sier in 1764, with my friend, M. du Peyrou, we went up a
small mountain, on the summit of which there is a level
spot, called, with reason, Belle-vue; I was then beginning to
herbalize;—walking and looking among the bushes, I ex-
claimed with rapture, “Ah, there's some periwinkle!” Du
Peyrou, who perceived my transport, was ignorant of the
cause, but will some day be informed, I hope, on reading
this. The reader may judge by this impression, made by
so small an incident, what an effect must have been pro-
duced by every occurrence of that time.
Meantime, the air of the country did not restore my health;
I was languishing and became more so; I could not endure
milk, and was obliged to discontinue the use of it. Water was

<page 242>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 209
at this time the fashionable remedy for every complaint; ac-
cordingly I entered on a course of it, and so indiscreetly,
that it almost released me, not only from my illness but also
from my life. The water I drank was rather hard and diffi-
cult to pass, as water from mountains generally is; in short,
I managed so well, that in the course of two months I totally
ruined my stomach, which until that time had been very
good, and no longer digesting anything properly, had no
reason to expect a cure. At this time an accident happened,
as singular in itself as in its subsequent consequences, which
can only terminate with my existence.
One morning, being no worse than usual, while putting up
the leaf of a small table, I felt a sudden and almost incon-
ceivable revolution throughout my whole frame. I know not
how to describe it better than as a kind of tempest, which
suddenly rose in my blood, and spreadin a moment over every
part of my body. My arteries began beating so violently that
I not only felt their motion, but even heard it, particularly
that of the carotids, attended by a loud noise in my ears, which
was of three, or rather four, distinct kinds. For instance, first
a grave hollow buzzing; then a more distinct murmur, like
the running of water; then an extremely sharp hissing, at-
tended by the beating I before mentioned, and whose throbs
I could easily count, without feeling my pulse, or putting a
hand to any part of my body. This internal tumult was so
violent that it has injured my auricular organs, and rendered
me, from that time, not entirely deaf, but hard of hearing.
My surprise and fear may easily be conceived; imagining it
was the stroke of death, I went to bed, and the physician be-
ing sent for, trembling with apprehension, I related my case,
judging it past all cure. I believe the doctor was of the same
opinion; however he performed his office, running over a long
string of causes and effects beyond my comprehension, after
which, in consequence of this sublime theory, he set about, in
anima vili, the experimental part of his art, but the means he
was pleased to adopt in order to effect a cure were so trouble-
some, disgusting, and followed by so little effect, that I soon
discontinued it, and after some weeks, finding I was neither
better nor worse, left my bed, and returned to my usual
method of living; but the beating of my arteries and the
buzzing in my ears has never quitted me a moment during
the thirty years' time which has elapsed since that time.

<page 243>
2 IO THE CONFESSIONS OF
Till now, I had been a great sleeper, but a total privation
of repose, with other alarming symptoms which have ac-
companied it, even to this time, persuaded me I had but a
short time to live. This idea tranquillized me for a time: I be-
came less anxious about a cure, and being persuaded I could
not prolong life, determined to employ the remainder of it
as usefully as possible. This was practicable by a particular
indulgence of Nature, which, in this melancholy state, ex-
empted me from sufferings which it might have been sup-
posed I should have experienced. I was incommoded by the
noise, but felt no pain, nor was it accompanied by any hab-
itual inconvenience, except nocturnal wakefulness, and at
all times a shortness of breath, which is not violent enough
to be called an asthma, out was troublesome when I at-
tempted to run, or use any degree of exertion.
This accident, which seemed to threaten the dissolution of
my body, only killed my passions, and I have reason to thank
Heaven for the happy effect produced by it on my soul. I
can truly say, I only began to live when I considered my-
self as entering the grave; for, estimating at their real value
those things I was quitting, I began to employ myself on
nobler objects, namely by anticipating those I hoped short-
ly to have the contemplation of, and which I had hitherto
too much neglected. I had often made light of religion, but
was never totally devoid of it; consequently, it cost me less
pain to employ my thoughts on that subject, which is gen-
erally thought melancholy, though highly pleasing to those
who make it an object of hope and consolation; Madam de
Warrens, therefore, was more useful to me on this occasion
than all the theologians in the world would have been.
She, who brought everything into a system, had not failed
to do as much by religion; and this system was composed of
ideas that bore no affinity to each other. Some were extreme-
ly good, and others very ridiculous, being made up of senti-
ments proceeding from her disposition, and prejudices de-
rived from education. Men, in general, make God like them-
selves; the virtuous make Him good, and the profligate make
Him wicked; ill-tempered and bilious devotees see nothing
but hell, because they would willingly damn all mankind;
while loving and gentle souls disbelieve it altogether; and
one of the astonishments I could never overcome, is to see
the good Fenelon speak of it in his Telemachus as if he

<page 244>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 2II
really gave credit to it; but I hope he lied in that particular,
for however strict he might be in regard to truth, a bishop
absolutely must lie sometimes. Madam de Warrens spoke
truth with me, and that soul, made up without gall, who
could not imagine a revengeful and ever angry God, saw
only clemency and forgiveness, where devotees bestowed in-
flexible justice, and eternal punishment.
She frequently said there would be no justice in the
Supreme Being should He be strictly just to us; because,
not having bestowed what was necessary to render us essen-
tially good, it would be requiring more than he had given.
The most whimsical idea was, that not believing in hell, she
was firmly persuaded of the reality of purgatory. This arose
from her not knowing what to do with the wicked, being
loathed to damn them utterly, nor yet caring to place them
with the good till they had become so; and we must really
allow, that both in this world and the next, the wicked are
very troublesome company.
It is clearly seen that the doctrine of original sin and the
redemption of mankind is destroyed by this system; conse-
quently that the basis of the Christian dispensation, as gen-
erally received, is shaken, and that the Catholic faith cannot
subsist with these principles; Madam de Warrens, notwith-
standing, was a good Catholic, or at least pretended to be one,
and certainly desired to become such, but it appeared to her
that the Scriptures were too literally and harshly explained,
supposing that all we read of everlasting torments were fig-
urative threatenings, and the death of Jesus Christ an exam-
ple of charity, truly divine, which should teach mankind to
love God and each other; in a word, faithful to the religion
she had embraced, she acquiesced in all its professions of
faith, but on a discussion of each particular article, it was
plain she thought diametrically opposite to that church
whose doctrines she professed to believe. In these cases she
exhibited simplicity of art, a frankness more eloquent than
sophistry, which frequently embarrassed her confessor; for
she disguised nothing from him. “I am a good Catholic,”
she would say, “and will ever remain so; I adopt with all
the powers of my soul the decisions of our holy Mother
Church; I am not mistress of my faith, but I am of my will,
which I submit to you without reserve; I will endeavor to
believe all,—what can you require more ?”

<page 245>
2 I2 THE CONFESSIONS OF
Had there been no Christian morality established, I am
persuaded she would have lived as if regulated by its princi-
ples, so perfectly did they seem to accord with her disposi-
tion. She did everything that was required; and she would
have done the same had there been no such requisition: but
all this morality was subordinate to the principles of M.
Tavel, or rather she pretended to see nothing in religion that
contradicted them; thus she would have favored twenty
lovers in a day, without any idea of a crime, her conscience
being no more moved in that particular than her passions.
I know that a number of devotees are not more scrupulous,
but the difference is, they are seduced by constitution, she
was blinded by her sophisms. In the midst of conversations
the most affecting, I might say the most edifying, she would
touch on this subject, without any change of air or manner,
and without being sensible of any contradiction in her opin-
ions; so much was she persuaded that our restrictions on
that head are merely political, and that any person of sense
might interpret, apply, or make exceptions to them, with-
out any danger of offending the Almighty.
Though I was far enough from being of the same opinion
in this particular, I confess I dared not combat hers; indeed,
as I was situated, it would have been putting myself in rather
awkward circumstances, since I could only have sought to es-
tablish my opinion for others, myself being an exception. Be-
sides, Ientertained but little hopes of making her alter hers,
which never had any great influence on her conduct, and at
the time I am speaking of none; but I have promised faith-
fully to describe her principles, and I will perform my en-
gagement—I now return to myself.
Finding in her all those ideas I had occasion for to secure
me from the fears of death and its future consequences, I
drew confidence and security from this source; my attach-
ment became warmer than ever, and I would willingly have
transmitted to her my whole existence, which seemed ready
to abandon me. From this redoubled attachment, a persua-
sion that I had but a short time to live, and profound secu-
rity on my future state, arose an habitual and even pleasing
serenity, which, calming every passion that extends our
hopes and fears, made me enjoy without inquietude or con-
cern the few days which I imagined remained for me. What
contributed to render them still more agreeable was an en-

<page 246>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 2 I 3
deavor to encourage her rising taste for the country, by
every amusement I could possibly devise, wishing to attach
her to her garden, poultry, pigeons, and cows: I amused
myself with them and these little occupations, which em-
ployed my time without injuring my tranquillity, were more
serviceable than a milk diet, or all the remedies bestowed on
my poor shattered machine, even to effecting the utmost
possible re-establishment of it.
The vintage and gathering in our fruit employed the re-
mainder of the year; we became more and more attached to a
rustic life, and the society of our honest neighbors. We saw
the approach of winter with regret, and returned to the city
as if going into exile. To me this return was particularly
gloomy, who never expected to see the return of spring, and
thought I took an everlasting leave of Charmettes. I did
not quit it without kissing the very earth and trees, casting
back many a wishful look as I went towards Chambery.
Having left my scholars for so long a time, and lost my
relish for the amusements of the town, I seldom went out,
conversing only with Madam de Warrens and a Monsieur
Salomon, who had lately become our physician. He was an
honest man, of good understanding, a great Cartesian, spoke
tolerably well on the system of the world, and his agreeable
and instructive conversations were more serviceable than
his prescriptions. I could never bear that foolish trivial
mode of conversation which is so generally adopted; but use-
ful instructive discourse has always given me great pleasure,
nor was I ever backward to join in it. I was much pleased
with that of M. Salomon; it appeared to me, that when in his
company, I anticipated the acquisition of that sublime knowl-
edge which my soul would enjoy when freed from its mortal
fetters. The inclination I had for him extended to the subjects
which he treated on, and I began to look after books which
might better enable me to understand his discourse. Those
which mingled devotion with science were most agreeable to
me, particularly Port Royal's Oratory, and I began to read or
rather to devour them. One fell into my hands written by
Father Lami, called Entretiens sur les Sciences, which was a
kind of introduction to the knowledge of those books it
treated of. I read it over a hundred times, and resolved to
make this my guide; in short, I found (notwithstanding my
ill state of health) that I was irresistibly drawn towards

<page 247>
2I4 THE CONFESSIONS OF
study, and though looking on each day as the last of my life,
read with as much avidity as if certain I was to live forever.
I was assured that reading would injure me; but on the
contrary, I am rather inclined to think it was serviceable, not
only to my soul, but also to my body; for this application,
which soon became delightful, diverted my thoughts from my
disorders, and I soon found myself much less affected by
them. It is certain, however, that nothing gave me abso-
lute ease, but having no longer any acute pain, I became
accustomed to languishment and wakefulness; to thinking
instead of acting; in short, I looked on the gradual and slow
decay of my body as inevitably progressive and only to be
terminated by death.
This opinion not only detached me from all the vain cares
of life, but delivered me from the importunity of medicine, to
which hitherto, I had been forced to submit, though con-
trary to my inclination. Salomon, convinced that his drugs
were unavailing, spared me the disagreeable task of taking
them, and contented himself with amusing the grief of my
poor Madam de Warrens by some of those harmless prepa-
rations, which serve to flatter the hopes of the patient and
keep up the credit of the doctor. I discontinued the strict
regimen I had latterly observed, resumed the use of wine,
and lived in every respect like a man in perfect health, as far
as my strength would permit, only being careful to run into
no excess; I even began to go out and visit my acquaint-
ance, particularly M. de Conzie, whose conversation was ex-
tremely pleasing to me. Whether it struck me as heroic to
study to my last hour, or that some hopes of life yet lin-
gered in the bottom of my heart, I cannot tell, but the ap-
parent certainty of death, far from relaxing my inclination
for improvement, seemed to animate it, and I hastened to ac-
quire knowledge for the other world, as if convinced I should
only possess that portion I could carry with me. I took a
liking to the shop of a bookseller, whose name was Bouchard,
which was frequented by some men of letters, and as the
spring (whose return I had never expected to see again) was
approaching, furnished myself with some books for Char-
mettes, in case I should have the happiness to return there.
I had that happiness, and enjoyed it to the utmost extent.
The rapture with which I saw the trees putout their first bud,
is inexpressible! The return of spring seemed to me like ris-

<page 248>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 215
ing from the grave into paradise. The snow was hardly off
the ground when we left our dungeon and returned to
Charmettes, to enjoy the first warblings of the nightingale.
I now thought no more of dying, and it is really singular,
that from this time I never experienced any dangerous ill-
ness in the country. I have suffered greatly, but never kept
my bed, and have often said to those about me, on finding
myself worse than ordinary, “Should you see me at the
point of death, carry me under the shade of an oak, and I
promise you I shall recover.”
Though weak, I resumed my country occupations, as far
as my strength would permit, and conceived a real grief at not
being able to manage our garden without help; for I could
not take five or six strokes with the spade without being out
of breath and overcome with perspiration; when I stooped
the beating redoubled, and the blood flew with such violence
to my head, that I was instantly obliged to stand upright.
Being therefore confined to less fatiguing employments, I
busied myself about the dove-house, and was so pleased with
it that I sometimes passed several hours there without feeling
a moment's weariness. The pigeon is very timid and difficult
to tame, yet I inspired mine with so much confidence that
they followed me everywhere, letting me catch them at
pleasure, nor could I appear in the garden without having
two or three on my arms or head in an instant, and notwith-
standing the pleasure I took in them, their company became
so troublesome that I was obliged to lessen the familiarity.
I have ever taken great pleasure in taming animals, particu-
larly those that are wild and fearful. It appeared delightful
to me, to inspire them with a confidence which I took care
never to abuse, wishing them to love me freely.
I have already mentioned that I purchased some books: I
did not forget to read them, but in a manner more proper to
fatigue than instruct me. I imagined that to read a book
profitably, it was necessary to be acquainted with every
branch of knowlege it even mentioned; far from thinking that
the author did not do this himself, but drew assistance from
other books, as he might see occasion. Full of this silly
idea, I was stopped every moment, obliged to run from one
book to another, and sometimes, before I could reach the
tenth page of what I was studying, found it necessary to turn
over a whole library. I was so attached to this ridiculous

<page 249>
216 THE CONFESSIONS OF
method, that I lost a prodigious deal of time, and had be-
wildered my head to such a degree, that I was hardly capa-
ble of doing, seeing or comprehending anything. I fortunate-
ly perceived, at length, that I was in the wrong road, which
would entangle me in an inextricable labyrinth, and quitted
it before I was irrevocably lost.
When a person has any real taste for the sciences, the first
thing he perceives in the pursuit of them is that connection
by which they mutually attract, assist, and enlighten each
other, and that it is impossible to attain one without the as-
sistance of the rest. Though the human understanding can-
not grasp all, and one must ever be regarded as the principal
object, yet if the rest are totally neglected, the favorite study
is generally obscure; I was convinced that my resolution to
improve was good and useful in itself, but that it was neces-
sary I should change my method; I, therefore, had recourse
to the encyclopaedia. I began by a distribution of the gen-
eral mass of human knowledge into its various branches,
but soon discovered that I must pursue a contrary course,
that I must take each separately, and trace it to that point
where it united with the rest: thus I returned to the general
synthetical method, but returned thither with a conviction
that I was going right. Meditation supplied the want of
knowledge, and a very natural reflection gave strength to my
resolutions, which was, that whether I lived or died, I had no
time to lose; for having learned but little before the age of
five-and-twenty, and then resolving to learn everything, was
engaging to employ the future time profitably. I was igno-
rant at what point accident or death might put a period to
my endeavors, and resolved at all events to acquire with the
utmost expedition some idea of every species of knowledge,
as well to try my natural disposition, as to judge for myself
what most deserved cultivation.
In the execution of my plan, I experienced another advan-
tage which I had never thought of; this was,spending a great
deal of time profitably. Nature certainly never meant me for
study, since attentive application fatigues me so much, that I
find it impossible to employ myself half an hour together
intently on any one subject; particularly while following an-
other person's ideas, for it has frequently happened that I
have pursued my own for a much longer period with suc-
cess. After reading a few pages of an author with close

<page 250>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 217
application, my understanding is bewildered, and should I
obstinately continue, I tire myself to no purpose, a stupe-
faction seizes me, and I am no longer conscious of what I
read; but in a succession of various subjects, one relieves me
from the fatigue of the other, and without finding respite
necessary, I can follow them with pleasure.
I took advantage of this observation in the plan of my
studies, taking care to intermingle them in such a manner
that I was never weary: it is true that domestic and rural
concerns furnished many pleasing relaxations; but as my
eagerness for improvement increased, I contrived to find op-
portunities for my studies, frequently employing myself
about two things at the same time, without reflecting that
both were consequently neglected.
In relating so many trifling details, which delight me, but
frequently tire my reader, I make use of the caution to sup-
press a great number, though, perhaps, he would have no
idea of this, if I did not take care to inform him of it: for
example, I recollect with pleasure all the different methods
I adopted for the distribution of my time, in such a manner
as to produce the utmost profit and pleasure. I may say,
that the portion of my life which I passed in this retirement,
though in continual ill-health, was that in which I was
least idle and least wearied. Two or three months were thus
employed in discovering the bent of my genius; meantime,
I enjoyed, in the finest season of the year, and in a spot it
rendered delightful, the charms of a life whose worth I was
so highly sensible of, in such a society, as free as it was
charming; if a union so perfect, and the extensive knowl-
edge I purposed to acquire, can be called society. It seemed
to me as if I already possessed the improvements I was only
in pursuit of: or rather better, since the pleasure of learning
constituted a great part of my happiness.
I must pass over these particulars, which were to me the
height of enjoyment, but are too trivial to bear repeating: in-
deed, true happiness is indescribable, it is only to be felt, and
this consciousness of felicity is proportionately more, the less
able we are to describe it; because it does not absolutely result
from a concourse of favorable incidents, but is an affection of
the mind itself. I am frequently guilty of repetitions, but
should be infinitely more so, did I repeat the same thing as
often as it recurs with pleasure to my mind. When at length

<page 251>
2 I 8 THE CONFESSIONS OF
my variable mode of life was reduced to a more uniform
course, the following was neally the distribution of time which
I adopted: I rose every morning before the sun, and passed
through a neighboring orchard into a pleasant path, which,
running by a vineyard, led towards Chambery. While walk-
ing, I offered up my prayers, not by a vain motion of the lips,
but a sincere elevation of my heart, to the Great Author of
delightful nature, whose beauties were so charmingly spread
out before me! I never love to pray in a chamber; it seems to
me that the walls and all the little workmanship of man inter-
posed between God and myself: I love to contemplate Him in
his works, which elevate my soul, and raise my thoughts to
Him. My prayers were pure, I can affirm it, and therefore
worthy to be heard:—I asked for myself and her from whom
my thoughts were never divided, only an innocent and quiet
life, exempt from vice, sorrow and want; I prayed that we
might die the death of the just, and partake of their lothere-
after: for the rest, it was rather admiration and contemplation
than request, being satisfied that the best means to obtain
what is necessary from the Giver of every perfect good, is
rather to deserve than to solicit. Returning from my walk,
I lengthened the way by taking a roundabout path, still con-
templating with earnestness and delight the beautiful scenes
with which I was surrounded, those only objects that never
fatigue either the eye or the heart. As I approached our
habitation, I looked forward to see if Madam de Warrens was
stirring, and when I perceived her shutters open, I even ran
with joy towards the house: if they were yet shut I went into
the garden to wait their opening, amusing myself, meantime,
by a retrospection of what I had read the preceding even-
ing, or in gardening. The moment the shutter drew back I
hastened to embrace her, frequently half asleep; and this
salute, pure as it was affectionate, even from its innocence,
possessed a charm which the senses can never bestow. We
usually breakfasted on milk-coffee; this was the time of day
when we had most leisure, and when we chatted with the
greatest freedom. These sittings, which were usually pretty
long, have given me a fondness for breakfasts, and I infinite-
ly prefer those of England, or Switzerland, which are con-
sidered as a meal, at which all the family assemble, than those
of France, where they breakfast alone in their several apart-
ments, or more frequently have none at all. After an hour or

<page 252>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 2 IQ
two passed in discourse, I went to my study till dinner; be-
ginning with some philosophical work, such as the logic of
Port-Royal, Locke's Essays, Mallebranche, Leibtnitz, Des-
cartes, etc. I soon found that these authors perpetually con-
tradict each other, and formed the chimerical project of recon-
ciling them, which cost me much labor and loss of time, be-
wildering my head without any profit. At length (renouncing
this idea) I adopted one infinitely more profitable, to which
I attribute all the progress I have since made, notwithstand-
ing the defects of my capacity; for ’tis certain I had very
little for study. On reading each author, I acquired a habit
of following all his ideas, without suffering my own or those
of any other writer to interfere with them, or entering into
any dispute on their utility. I said to myself, “I will begin
by laying up a stock of ideas, true or false, but clearly con-
ceived, till my understanding shall be sufficiently furnished
to enable me to compare and make choice of those that are
most estimable.” I am sensible this method is not without
its inconveniences, but it succeeded in furnishing me with a
fund of instruction. Having passed some years in thinking
after others, without reflection, and almost without reason-
ing, I found myself possessed of sufficient materials to set
about thinking on my own account, and when journeys of
business deprived me of the opportunities of consulting
books, I amused myself with recollecting and comparing
what I had read, weighing every opinion on the balance of
reason, and frequently judging my masters. Though it was
late before I began to exercise my judicial faculties, I have
not discovered that they had lost their vigor, and on pub-
lishing my own ideas, have never been accused of being a
servile disciple or of swearing in verba magistri.
From these studies I passed to the elements of geometry,
for I never went further, forcing my weak memory to retain
them by going the same ground a hundred and a hundred
times over. I did not admire Euclid, who rather seeks a
chain of demonstration than a connection of ideas: I preferred
the geometry of Father Lama, who from that time became
one of my favorite authors, and whose works I yet read with
pleasure. Algebra followed, and Father Lama was still my
guide: when I made some progress, I perused Father Rey-
naud's Science of Calculation, and then his Analysis Dem-
onstrated; but I never went far enough thoroughly to under-

<page 253>
22O THE CONFESSIONS OF
stand the application of algebra to geometry. I was not
pleased with this method of performing operations by rule
without knowing what I was about: resolving geometrical
problems by the help of equations seemed like playing a tune
by turning round a handle. The first time I found by calcu-
lation that the square of a binocular figure was composed of
the square of each of its parts, and double the product of
one by the other; though convinced that my multiplication
was right, I could not be satisfied till I had made and exam-
ined the figure: not but I admire algebra when applied to
abstract quantities, but when used to demonstrate dimen-
sions, I wished to see the operation, and unless explained by
lines, could not rightly comprehend it.
After this came Latin: it was my most painful study, and
in which I never made great progress. I began by Port-
Royal's Rudiments, but without success; I lost myself in a
crowd of rules; and in studying the last forgot all that pre-
ceded it. A study of words is not calculated for a man with-
out memory, and it was principally an endeavor to make my
memory more retentive, that urged me obstinately to per-
sist in this study, which at length I was obliged to relin-
quish. As I understood enough to read an easy author by
the aid of a dictionary, I followed that method, and found
it succeed tolerably well. I likewise applied myself to trans-
lation, not by writing, but mentally, and by exercise and
perseverance attained to read Latin authors easily, but have
11ever been able to speak or write that language, which has
frequently embarrassed me when I have found myself (I
know not by what means) enrolled among men of letters.
Another inconvenience that arose from this manner of
learning is, that I never understood prosody, much less the
rules of versification; yet, anxious to understand the harmony
of the language, both in prose and verse, I have made many
efforts to obtain it, but am convinced, that without a mas-
ter it is almost impossible. Having learned the composition
of the hexameter, which is the easiest of all verses, I had
the patience to measure out the greater part of Virgil into
feet and quantity, and whenever I was dubious whether a
syllable was long or short, immediately consulted my Virgil.
It may easily be conceived that I ran into many errors in
consequence of those licenses permitted by the rules of ver-
sification; and it is certain, that if there is an advantage in

<page 254>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 221
studying alone,there are also great inconveniences and incon-
ceivable labor, as I have experienced more than any one.
At twelve I quitted my books, and if dinner was not ready,
paid my friends, the pigeons, a visit, or worked in the garden
till it was, and when I heard myself called, ran very willingly,
and with a good appetite to partake of it, for it is very re-
markable, that let me be ever so indisposed my appetite never
fails. We dined very agreeably, chatting till Madam de War-
rens could eat. Two or three times a week, when it was fine,
we drank our coffee in a cool shady arbor behind the house,
that I had decorated with hops, and which was very refresh-
ing during the heat; we usually passed an hour in viewing
our flowers and vegetables, or in conversation relative to our
manner of life, which greatly increased the pleasure of it. I
had another little family at the end of the garden; these were
several hives of bees, which I never failed to visit once a day,
and was frequently accompanied by Madam de Warrens. I
was greatly interested in their labor, and amused myself see-
ing them return to the hives, their little thighs so loaded with
the precious store that they could hardly walk. At first, curi-
osity made me indiscreet, and they stung me several times,
but afterwards, we were so well acquainted, that let me ap-
proach as near as I would, they never molested me, though
the hives were full and the bees ready to swarm. At these
times I have been surrounded, having them on my hands and
face without apprehending any danger. All animals are dis-
trustful of man, and with reason, but when once assured he
does not mean to injure them, their confidence becomes so
great that he must be worse than a barbarian who abuses it.
After this I returned to my books; but my afternoon em-
ployment ought rather to bear the name of recreation and
amusement, than labor or study. I have never been able to
bear application after dinner, and in general any kind of at-
tention is painful to me during the heat of the day. I em-
ployed myself, 'tis true, but without restraint or rule, and
read without studying. What I most attended to at these
times, was history and geography, and as these did not re-
quire intense application, made as much progress in them as
my weak memory would permit. I had an inclination to study
Father Petau, and launched into the gloom of chronology,
but was disgusted at the critical part, which I found had
neither bottom nor banks; this made me prefer the more

<page 255>
222 THE CONFESSIONS OF
exact measurement of time by the course of the celestial
bodies. I should even have contracted a fondness for astron-
omy, had I been in possession of instruments, but was ob-
liged to content myself with some of the elements of that art,
learned from books, and a few rude observations made with a
telescope, sufficient only to give me a general idea of the situ-
ation of the heavenly bodies; for my short sight is insufficient
to distinguish the stars without the help of a glass.
I recollect an adventure on this subject, the remembrance
of which has often diverted me. I had bought a celestial
planisphere to study the constellations by, and, having fixed
it on a frame, when the nights were fine and the sky clear, I
went into the garden; and fixing the frame on four sticks,
something higher than myself, which I drove into the ground,
turned the planisphere downwards, and contrived to light it
by means of a candle (which I put in a pail to prevent the
wind from blowing it out) and then placed in the centre of the
above-mentioned four supporters; this done, I examined the
stars with my glass, and from time to time referring to my
planisphere, endeavored to distinguish the various constella-
tions. I think I have before observed that our garden was on
a terrace, and lay open to the road. One night, some country
people passing very late, saw me in a most grotesque habit,
busily employed in these observations: the light, which struck
directly on the planisphere, proceeding from a cause they
could not divine (the candle being concealed by the sides of
the pail), the four stakes supporting a large paper, marked
over with various uncouth figures, with the motion of the
telescope, which they saw turning backwards and forwards,
gave the whole an air of conjuration that struck them with
horror and amazement. My figure was by no means calculated
to dispel their fears; a flapped hat put on over my nightcap,
and a short cloak about my shoulder (which Madam de
Warrens had obliged me to put on) presented in their idea
the image of a real sorcerer. Being near midnight, they
made no doubt but this was the beginning of some diabolical
assembly, and having no curiosity to pry further into these
mysteries, they fled with all possible speed, awakened their
neighbors, and described this most dreadful vision. The story
spread so fast that the next day the whole neighborhood was
informed that a nocturnal assembly of witches was held in
the garden that belonged to Monsieur Noiret, and I am

<page 256>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 223
ignorant what might have been the consequence of this ru-
mor if one of the countrymen who had been witness to my
conjurations had not the same day carried his complaint to
two Jesuits, who frequently came to visit us, and who, with-
out knowing the foundation of the story, undeceived and
satisfied them. These Jesuits told us the whole affair, and I
acquainted them with the cause of it, which altogether fur-
nished us with a hearty laugh. However, I resolved for the
future to make my observations without light, and consult
my planisphere in the house. Those who have read Vene-
tian magic, in the Letters from the Mountain, may find that
I long since had the reputation of being a conjurer.
Such was the life I led at Charmettes when I had no rural
employments, for they ever had the preference, and in those
that did not exceed my strength, I worked like a peasant; but
my extreme weakness left me little except the will; besides, as
I have before observed, I wished to do two things at once, and
therefore did neither well. I obstinately persisted in forcing
my memory to retain a great deal by heart, and for that pur-
pose, I always carried some book with me, which, while at
work, I studied with inconceivable labor. I was continually
repeating something, and am really amazed that the fatigue
of these vain and continual efforts did not render me entirely
stupid. I must have learned and relearned the Eclogues of
Virgil twenty times over, though at this time I cannot recol-
lect a single line of them. I have lost or spoiled a great num-
ber of books by a custom I had of carrying them with me into
the dove-house, the garden, orchard or vineyard, when, being
busy about something else, I laid my book at the foot of a
tree, on the hedge, or the first place that came to hand, and
frequently left them there, finding them a fortnight after,
perhaps, rotted to pieces, or eaten by the ants or snails; and
this ardor for learning became so far a madness that it ren-
dered me almost stupid, and I was perpetually muttering
some passage or other to myself.
The writings of Port-Royal, and those of the Oratory, be-
ing what I most read, had made me half a Jansenist, and,
notwithstanding all my confidence, their harsh theology
sometimes alarmed me. A dread of hell, which till then I
had never much apprehended, by little and little disturbed
my security, and had not Madam de Warrens tranquillized
my soul, would at length have been too much for me. My

<page 257>
224 THE CONFESSIONS OF
confessor, who was hers likewise, contributed all in his
power to keep up my hopes. This was a Jesuit, named
Father Hemet; a good and wise old man, whose memory I
shall ever hold in veneration. Though a Jesuit, he had the
simplicity of a child, and his manners, less relaxed than
gentle, were precisely what was necessary to balance the
melancholy impressions made on me by Jansenism. This good
man and his companion, Father Coppier, came frequently to
visit us at Charmette, though the road was very rough and
tedious for men of their age. These visits were very com-
fortable to me, which may the Almighty return to their
souls, for they were so old that I cannot suppose them yet liv-
ing. I sometimes went to see them at Chambery, became ac-
quainted at their convent, and had free access to the library.
The remembrance of that happy time is so connected with the
idea of those Jesuits, that I love one on account of the other,
and though I have ever thought their doctrines dangerous,
could never find myself in a disposition to hate them cordially.
I should like to know whether there ever passed such child-
ish notions in the hearts of other men as sometimes do in
mine. In the midst of my studies, and of a life as innocent as
man could lead, notwithstanding every persuasion to the con-
trary, the dread of hell frequently tormented me. I asked my-
self, “What state am I in? Should I die at this instant, must
I be damned?” According to my Jansenists the matter was
indubitable, but according to my conscience it appeared quite
the contrary: terrified and floating in this cruel uncertainty,
I had recourse to the most laughable expedient to resolve my
doubts, for which I would willingly shut up any man as a
lunatic should I see him practise the same folly. One day,
meditating on this melancholy subject, I exercised myself
in throwing stones at the trunks of trees, with my usual dex-
terity, that is to say, without hitting any of them. In the
height of this charming exercise, it entered my mind to make
a kind of prognostic, that might calm my inquietude; I said,
“I will throw this stone at the tree facing me; if I hit my
mark, I will consider it as a sign of salvation; if I miss, as a
token of damnation.” While I said this, I threw the stone
with a trembling hand and beating breast but so happily
that it struck the body of the tree, which truly was not a
difficult matter, for I had taken care to choose one that was
very large and very near me. From that moment I never

<page 258>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 225
doubted my salvation: I know not on recollecting this trait,
whether I ought to laugh or shudder at myself. Ye great
geniuses, who surely laugh at my folly, congratulate your-
selves on your superior wisdom, but insult not my unhappi-
ness, for I swear to you that I feel it most sensibly.
These troubles, these alarms, inseparable, perhaps, from
devotion, were only at intervals; in general, I was tranquil,
and the impression made on my soul by the idea of approach-
ing death, was less that of melancholy than a peaceful lan-
guor, which even had its pleasures. I have found among my
old papers a kind of congratulation and exhortation which I
made to myself on dying at an age when I had the courage
to meet death with serenity, without having experienced any
great evils, either of body or mind. How much justice was
there in the thought! A preconception of what I had to
suffer made me fear to live, and it seemed that I dreaded the
fate which must attend my future days. I have never been
so near wisdom as during this period, when I felt no great
remorse for the past, nor tormenting fear for the future; the
reigning sentiment of my soul being the enjoyment of the
present. Serious people usually possess a lively sensuality,
which makes them highly enjoy those innocent pleasures
that are allowed them. Worldlings (I know not why) impute
this to them as a crime: or rather, I well know the cause of
this imputation, it is because they envy others the enjoyment
of those simple and pure delights which they have lost the
relish of. I had these inclinations, and found it charming to
gratify them in security of conscience. My yet inexperienced
heart gave in to all with the calm happiness of a child, or
rather (if I dare use the expression) with the raptures of an
angel; for in reality these pure delights are as serene as those
of paradise. Dinners on the grass at Montagnole, suppers
in our arbor, gathering in the fruits, the vintage, a social
meeting with our neighbors; all these were so many holi-
days, in which Madam de Warrens took as much pleasure as
myself. Solitary walks afforded yet purer pleasure, because
in them our hearts expanded with greater freedom: one par-
ticularly remains in my memory; it was on a St. Louis' day,
whose name Madam de Warrens bore: we set out together
early and unattended, after having heard a mass at break of
day in a chapel adjoining our house, from a Carmelite, who
attended for that purpose. As I proposed walking over the

<page 259>
226 THE CONFESSIONS OF
hills opposite our dwelling, which we had not yet visited,
we sent our provisions on before; the excursion being to last
the whole day. Madam de Warrens, though rather corpulent,
did not walk ill, and we rambled from hill to hill and wood
to wood, sometimes in the sun, but oftener in the shade,
resting from time to time, and regardless how the hours
stole away; speaking of ourselves, of our union, of the gen-
tleness of our fate, and offering up prayers for its duration,
which were never heard. Everything conspired to augment
our happiness: it had rained for several days previous to
this, there was no dust, the brooks were full and rapid, a
gentle breeze agitated the leaves, the air was pure, the hori-
zon free from clouds, serenity reigned in the sky as in our
hearts. Our dinner was prepared at a peasant's house, and
shared with him and his family, whose benedictions we re-
ceived. These poor Savoyards are the worthiest of people!
After dinner we regained the shade, and while I was picking
up bits of dried sticks, to boil our coffee, Madam de Warrens
amused herself with herbalizing among the bushes, and with
the flowers I had gathered for her in my way. She made me
remark in their construction a thousand natural beauties,
which greatly amused me, and which ought to have given me
a taste for botany; but the time was not yet come, and my at-
tention was arrested by too many other studies. Besides this,
an idea struck me, which diverted my thoughts from flowers
and plants: the situation of my mind at that moment, all that
we had said or done that day, every object that had struck me,
brought to my remembrance the kind of waking dream I had
at Annecy seven or eight years before, and which I have given
an account of in its place. The similarity was so striking
that it affected me even to tears: in a transport of tenderness
I embraced Madam de Warrens. “My dearest friend,” said I,
“this day has long since been promised me: I can see no-
thing beyond it: my happiness, by your means, is at its
height; may it never decrease; may it continue as long as I
am sensible of its value—then it can only finish with my life.”
Thus happily passed my days, and the more happily as I
perceived nothing that could disturb or bring them to a con-
clusion; not that the cause of my former uneasiness had abso-
lutely ceased, but I saw it take another course, which I direct-
ed with my utmost care to useful objects, that the remedy
might accompany the evil. Madam deWarrens naturally loved

<page 260>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 227
the country, and this taste did not cool while with me. By
little and little she contracted a fondness for rustic employ-
ments, wished to make the most of her land, and had in that
particular a knowledge which she practised with pleasure.
Not satisfied with what belonged to the house,she hired first a
field, then a meadow, transferring her enterprising humor to
the objects of agriculture, and instead of remaining unem-
ployed in the house, was in the way of becoming a complete
farmer. I was not greatly pleased to see this passion increase,
and endeavored all I could to oppose it; for I was certain she
would be deceived, and that her liberal extravagant disposi-
tion would infallibly carry her expenses beyond her profits;
however, I consoled myself by thinking the produce could
not be useless, and would at least help her to live. Of all the
projects she could form, this appeared the least ruinous:
without regarding it, therefore, in the light she did, as a
profitable scheme, I considered it as a perpetual employment,
which would keep her from more ruinous enterprises, and
out of the reach of impostors. With this idea, I ardently
wished to recover my health and strength, that I might su-
perintend her affairs, overlook her laborers, or, rather, be
the principal one myself. The exercise this naturally obliged
me to take, with the relaxation it procured me from books
and study, was serviceable to my health.
The winter following, Barillot returning from Italy,brought
me some books; and among others, the Bontempt and la Car-
fella per Musica, of Father Banchieri; these gave me a taste
for the history of music and for the theoretical researches of
that pleasing art. Barillot remained some time with us, and
as I had been of age some months, I determined to go to
Geneva the following spring, and demand my mother's in-
heritance, or at least that part which belonged to me, till it
could be ascertained what had become of my brother. This
plan was executed as it had been resolved: I went to Gen-
eva; my father met me there, for he had occasionally visited
Geneva a long time since, without its being particularly
noticed, though the decree that had been pronounced against
him had never been reversed; but being esteemed for his
courage, and respected for his probity, the situation of his
affairs was pretended to be forgotten; or perhaps, the mag-
istrates, employed with the great project that broke out
some little time after, were not willing to alarm the citizens

<page 261>
228 THE CONFESSIONS OF
by recalling to their memory, at an improper time, this in-
stance of their former partiality.
I apprehended that I should meet with difficulties, on ac-
count of having changed my religion, but none occurred; the
1aws of Geneva being less harsh in that particular than those
of Berne, where, whoever changes his religion, not only loses
his freedom, but his property. My rights, however, were not
disputed, but I found my patrimony, I know not how, reduced
to very little, and though it was known almost to a certainty
that my brother was dead, yet, as there was no legal proof,
I could not lay claim to his share, which I left without re-
gret to my father, who enjoyed it as long as he lived. No
sooner were the necessary formalities adjusted, and I had
received my money, some of which I expended in books,
than I flew with the remainder to Madam de Warrens; my
heart beat with joy during the journey, and the moment in
which I gave the money into her hands, was to me a thou-
sand times more delightful than that which gave it into
mine. She received this with a simplicity common to great
souls, who, doing similar actions without effort, see them
without admiration; indeed it was almost all expended for
my use, for it would have been employed in the same man-
ner had it come from any other quarter.
My health was not yet re-established; I decayed visibly, was
pale as death, and reduced to an absolute skeleton; the beat-
ing of my arteries was extreme, my palpitations were frequent:
I was sensible of a continual oppression, and my weakness
became at length so great, that I could scarcely move or step
without danger of suffocation, stoop without vertigoes, or
lift even the smallest weight, which reduced me to the most
tormenting inaction for a man so naturally stirring as myself.
It is certain my disorder was in a great measure hypo-
chondriacal. The vapors is a malady common to people in
fortunate situations: the tears I frequently shed, without
reason; the lively alarms I felt on the falling of a leaf, or the
fluttering of a bird; inequality of humor in the calm of a most
pleasing life; lassitude which made me weary even of
happiness, and carried sensibility to extravagance, were an
instance of this. We are so little formed for felicity, that when
the soul and body do not suffer together, they must neces-
sarily endure separate inconveniences, the good state of the
one being almost always injurious to the happiness of the

<page 262>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 229
other. Had all the pleasure of life courted me, my weak-
ened frame would not have permitted the enjoyment of them,
without my being able to particularize the real seat of my
complaint; yet in the decline of life; after having encountered
very serious and real evils, my body seemed to regain its
strength, as if on purpose to encounter additional misfor-
tunes; and, at the moment I write this, though infirm, near
sixty, and overwhelmed with every kind of sorrow, I feel more
ability to suffer than I ever possessed for enjoyment when in
the very flower of my age, and in the bosom of real happiness.
To complete me, I had mingled a little physiology among
my other readings: I set about studying anatomy, and con-
sidering the multitude, movement, and wonderful construc-
tion of the various parts that composed the human machine;
my apprehensions were instantly increased, I expected to feel
mine deranged twenty times a day, and far from being sur-
prised to find myself dying, was astonished that Iyet existed!
I could not read the description of any malady without think-
ing it mine, and, had I not been already indisposed, I am cer-
tain I should have become so from this study. Finding in
every disease symptoms similar to mine, I fancied I had them
all, and, at length, gained one more troublesome than any I
yet suffered, which I had thought myself delivered from;
this was, a violent inclination to seek a cure; which it is very
difficult to suppress, when once a person begins reading
physical books. By searching, reflecting, and comparing, I
became persuaded that the foundation of my complaint was
a polypus at the heart, and Doctor Salomon appeared to co-
incide with the idea. Reasonably this opinion should have
confirmed my former resolution of considering myself past
cure; this, however, was not the case; on the contrary, I ex-
erted every power of my understanding in search of a remedy
for a polypus, resolving to undertake this marvellous cure.
In a journey which Anet had made to Montpelier, to see
the physical garden there, and visit Monsieur Sauvages, the
demonstrator, he had been informed that Monsieur Fizes
had cured a polypus similar to that I fancied myself afflicted
with: Madam de Warrens, recollecting this circumstance,
mentioned it to me, and nothing more was necessary to in-
spire me with a desire to consult Monsieur Fizes. The hope
of recovery gave me courage and strength to undertake the
journey; the money from Geneva furnished the means;

<page 263>
23O THE CONFESSIONS OF
Madam de Warrens, far from dissuading, entreated me to
go: behold me, therefore, without further ceremony, set out
for Montpelier!—but it was not necessary to go so far to
find the cure I was in search of.
Finding the motion of the horse too fatiguing, I had hired
a chaise at Grenoble, and on entering Moirans, five or six
other chaises arrived in a rank after mine. The greater part
of these were in the train of a new married lady called Madam
du Colombier; with her was a Madam de Larnage, not so
young or handsome as the former, yet not less amiable. The
bride was to stop at Romans, but the other lady was to pur-
sue her route as far as Saint-Andiol, near the bridge du St.
Esprit. With my natural timidity it will not be conjectured that
I was very ready at forming an acquaintance with these fine
ladies, and the company that attended them;but travelling the
same road, lodging at the same inns, and being obliged to eat at
the same table, the acquaintance seemed unavoidable, as any
backwardness on my part would have got me the character of
a very unsociable being: it was formed then, and even sooner
than I desired, for all this bustle was by no means convenient
to a person in ill health, particularly to one of my humor.
Curiosity renders these vixens extremely insinuating; they
accomplish their design of becoming acquainted with a man
by endeavoring to turn his brain, and this was precisely what
happened to me. Madam du Colombier was too much sur-
rounded by her young gallants to have any opportunity of
paying much attention to me; besides, it was not worth while,
as we were to separate in so short a time; but Madam de
Larnage (less attended to than her young friend) had to pro-
vide herself for the remainder of the journey; behold me,
then, attacked by Madam de Larnage, and adieu to poor Jean
Jacques, or rather farewell to fever, vapors, and polypus; all
completely vanished when in her presence. The ill state of
my health was the first subject of our conversation; they saw
I was indisposed, knew I was going to Montpelier, but my
air and manner certainly did not exhibit the appearance of a
libertine, since it was clear by what followed they did not sus-
pect I was going there for a reason that carries many that
road.
In the morning they sent to inquire after my health and
invite me to take chocolate with them, and when I made my
appearance asked how I had passed the night. Once(accord-

<page 264>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 231
ing to my praiseworthy custom of speaking without thought,
I replied, “I did not know,” which answer naturally made
them conclude I was a fool: but, on questioning me further, the
examination turned out so far to my advantage, that I rather
rose in their opinion, and I once heard Madam du Colombier
say to her friend, “He is amiable, but not sufficiently ac-
quainted with the world.” These words were a great encour
agement, and assisted me in rendering myself agreeable.
As we became more familiar, it was natural to give each
other some little account of whence we came and who we
were: this embarrassed me greatly, for I was sensible that
in good company and among women of spirit, the very name
of a new convert would utterly undo me. I know not by what
whimsicallity I resolved to pass for an Englishman; however,
in consequence of that determination I gave myself out for a
Jacobite, and was readily believed. They called me Monsieur
Dudding, which was the name I assumed with my new char-
acter, and a cursed Marquis Torignan, who was one of the
company, an invalid like myself, and both old and ill-tem-
pered, took it in his head to begin a long conversation with
me. He spoke of King James, of the Pretender, and the old
court of St. Germain's; I sat on thorns the whole time, for I
was totally unacquainted with all these except what little I
had picked up in the account of Earl Hamilton, and from
the gazettes; however, I made such fortunate use of the
little I did know as to extricate myself from this dilemma,
happy in not being questioned on the English language,
which I did not know a single word of.
The company were all very agreeable; we looked forward
to the moment of separation with regret, and therefore made
snails' journeys. We arrived one Sunday at St. Marcelein's;
Madam de Larnage would go to mass; I accompanied her, and
had nearly ruined all my affairs, for by my modest reserved
countenance during the service, she concluded me a bigot,
and conceived a very indifferent opinion of me, as I learned
from her own account two days after. It required a great
deal of gallantry on my part to efface this ill impression, or
rather Madam de Larnage (who was not easily disheartened)
determined to risk the first advances, and see how I should
behave. She made several, but far from being presuming on
my figure, I thought she was making sport of me: full of
this ridiculous idea there was no folly I was not guilty of.

<page 265>
232 THE CONFESSIONS OF
Madam de Larnage persisted in such caressing behavior,
that a much wiser man than myself could hardly have taken
it seriously. The more obvious her advances were, the more
I was confirmed in my mistake, and what increased my tor-
ment, I found I was really in love with her. I frequently said
to myself, and sometimes to her, sighing, “Ah! why is not
all this real 2 then should I be the most fortunate of men.”
I am inclined to think my stupidity did but increase her
resolution, and make her determined to get the better of it.
We left Madam du Colombier at Romans; after which
Madam de Larnage, the Marquis de Torignan, and myself
continued our route slowly, and in the most agreeable man-
ner. The marquis, though indisposed, and rather ill-humored,
was an agreeable companion, but was not best pleased at
seeing the lady bestow all her attentions on me, while he
passed unregarded; for Madam de Larnage took so little care
to conceal her inclination, that he perceived it sooner than
I did, and his sarcasms must have given me that confidence I
could not presume to take from the kindness of the lady, if
by a surmise, which no one but myself could have blunder-
ed on, I had not imagined they perfectly understood each
other, and were agreed to turn my passion into ridicule.
This foolish idea completed my stupidity, making me act
the most ridiculous part, while, had I listened to the feelings
of my heart, I might have been performing one far more
brilliant. I am astonished that Madam de Larnage was not
disgusted at my folly, and did not discard me with disdain;
but she plainly perceived there was more bashfulness than
indifference in my composition.
We arrived at Valence to dinner, and according to our
usual custom passed the remainder of the day there. We
lodged out of the city, at the St. James, an inn I shall never
forget. After dinner, Madam de Larnage proposed a walk;
she knew the marquis was no walker, consequently, this was
an excellent plan for a tête-à-tête, which she was pre-deter-
mined to make the most of. While we were walking round
the city by the side of the moats, I entered on a long history
of my complaint, to which she answered in so tender an ac-
cent, frequently pressing my arm, which she held to her
heart, that it required all my stupidity not to be convinced
of the sincerity of her attachment. I have already observed
that she was amiable; love rendered her charming, adding

<page 266>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 233
all the loveliness of youth: and she managed her advances
with so much art, that they were sufficient to have seduced
the most insensible: I was, therefore, in very uneasy cir-
cumstances, and frequently on the point of making a declar-
ation; but the dread of offending her, and the still greater
of being laughed at, ridiculed, made table-talk, and compli-
mented on my enterprise by the satirical marquis, had such
unconquerable power over me, that, though ashamed of my
ridiculous bashfulness, I could not take courage to surmount
it. I had ended the history of my complaints, which I felt the
ridiculousness of at this time; and not knowing how to look,
or what to say, continued silent, giving the finest opportunity
in the world for that ridicule I so much dreaded. Happily,
Madam de Larnage took a more favorable resolution, and
suddenly interrupted this silence by throwing her arms
round my neck, while, at the same instant, her lips spoke too
plainly on mine to be any longer misunderstood. This was
reposing that confidence in me the want of which has almost
always prevented me from appearing myself: for once I was
at ease, my heart, eyes and tongue, spoke freely what I felt;
never did I make better reparation for my mistakes, and if
this little conquest had cost Madam de Larnage some diffi-
culties, I have reason to believe she did not regret them.
Was I to live a hundred years, I should never forget this
charming woman. I say charming, for though neither young
nor beautiful, she was neither old nor ugly, having nothing
in her appearance that could prevent her wit and accomplish-
ments from producing all their effects. It was possible to see
her without falling in love, but those she favored could not
fail to adore her; which proves, in my opinion, that she was
not generally so prodigal of her favors. It is true, her in-
clination for me was so sudden and lively, that it scarce ap-
pears excusable; though from the short, but charming
interval I passed with her, I have reason to think her heart
was more influenced than her passions.
Our good intelligence did not escape the penetration of the
marquis; not that he discontinued his usual raillery; on the
contrary, he treated me as a sighing, hopeless swain, languish-
ing under the rigors of his mistress; not a word, smile, or
look escaped him by which I could imagine he suspected my
happiness; and I should have thought him completely de-
ceived, had not Madam de Larnage, who was more clear-

<page 267>
234 THE CONFESSIONS OF
sighted than myself, assured me of the contrary; but he was a
well-bred man, and it was impossible to behave with more at-
tention or greater civility, than he constantly paid me (not-
withstanding his satirical sallies), especially after my success,
which, as he was unacquainted with my stupidity, he perhaps
gave me the honor of achieving. It has already been seen
that he was mistaken in this particular; but no matter, I
profited by his error, for being conscious that the laugh was
on my side, I took all his sallies in good part, and some-
times parried them with tolerable success; for, proud of the
reputation of wit which Madam de Larnage had thought fit
to discover in me, I no longer appeared the same man.
We were both in a country and season of plenty, and had
everywhere excellent cheer, thanks to the good cares of the
marquis; though I would willingly have relinquished this ad-
vantage to have been more satisfied with the situation of
our chambers; but he always sent his footman on to provide
them; and whether of his own accord, or by the order of his
master, the rogue always took care that the marquis' chamber
should be close by Madam de Larnage's, while mine was at
the further end of the house: but that made no great differ-
ence, or perhaps it rendered our rendezvous the more charm-
ing; this happiness lasted four or five days, during which time
I was intoxicated with delight, which I tasted pure and se-
rene without any alloy; an advantage I could never boast be-
fore; and, I may add, it is owing to Madam de Larnage that I
did not gooutof the world without having tasted real pleasure.
If the sentiment I felt for her was not precisely love, it was
at least a very tender return of what she testified for me; our
meetings were so delightful, that they possessed all the
sweets of love; without that kind of delirium which affects
the brain, and even tends to diminish our happiness. I never
experienced true love but once in my life, and that was not
with Madam de Larnage, neither did I feel that affection for
her which I had been sensible of, and yet continued to pos-
sess, for Madam de Warrens; but for this very reason, our
tête-à-têtes were a hundred times more delightful. When
with Madam de Warrens, my felicity was always disturbed
by a secret sadness, a compunction of heart, which I found
it impossible to surmount. Instead of being delighted at the
acquisition of so much happiness, I could not help reproach-
ing myself for contributing to render her I loved unworthy:

<page 268>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 235
on the contrary, with Madam de Larnage, I was proud of
my happiness, and gave in to it without repugnance, while
my triumph redoubled every other charm.
I do not recollect exactly where wequitted the marquis, who
resided in this country, but I know we were alone on our
arrival at Montelimar, where Madam de Larnage made her
chambermaid get into my chaise, and accommodate me with
a seat in hers. It will easily be believed, that travelling in
this manner was by no means displeasing to me, and that I
should be very much puzzled to give any account of the coun-
try we passed through. She had some business at Monte-
limar, which detained her there two or three days; during
this time she quitted me but one quarter of an hour, for a
visit she could not avoid, which embarrassed her with a num-
ber of invitations she had no inclination to accept, and there-
fore excused herself by pleading some indisposition; though
she took care this should not prevent our walking together
every day, in the most charming country, and under the finest
sky imaginable. Oh! these three days! what reason have I
to regret them! Never did such happiness return again.
The amours of a journey cannot be very durable: it was
necessary we should part, and I must confess it was al-
most time; not that I was weary of my happiness, but I
might as well have been. We endeavored to comfort each
other for the pain of parting, by forming plans for our re-
union; and it was concluded, that after staying five or six
weeks at Montpelier (which would give Madam de Larnage
time to prepare for my reception in such a manner as to
prevent scandal) I should return to Saint-Andiol, and spend
the winter under her direction. She gave me ample instruc-
tion on what it was necessary I should know, on what it
would be proper to say; and how I should conduct myself.
She spoke much and earnestly on the care of my health,
conjured me to consult skilful physicians, and be attentive
and exact in following their prescriptions whatever they
might happen to be. I believe her concern was sincere, for
she loved me, and gave proofs of her affection less equivocal
than the prodigality of her favors; for judging by my mode
of travelling, that I was not in very affluent circumstances
(though not rich herself), on our parting, she would have
had me share the contents of her purse, which she had
brought pretty well furnished from Grenoble, and it was

<page 269>
236 THE CONFESSIONS OF
with great difficulty I could make her put up with a denial.
In a word, we parted; my heart full of her idea, and leaving
in hers (if I am not mistaken) a firm attachment to me.
While pursuing the remainder of my journey, remembrance
ran over everything that had passed from the commencement
of it, and I was well satisfied at finding myself alone in a
comfortable chaise, where I could ruminate at ease on the
pleasures I had enjoyed, and those which awaited my return.
I only thought of Saint-Andiol; of the life I was to lead there;
I saw nothing but Madam de Larnage, or what related to her;
the whole universe besides was nothing to me—even Madam
de Warrens was forgotten!—I set about combining all the de-
tails by which Madam de Larnage had endeavored to give me
in advance an idea of her house, of the neighborhood, of her
connections, and manner of life, finding everything charming.
She had a daughter, whom she had often described in the
warmest terms of maternal affection: this daughter was fifteen
lively, charming, and of an amiable disposition. Madam de
Larnage promised me her friendship; I had not forgotten that
promise, and was curious to know how Mademoiselle de Lar-
nage would treat her mother'sbon ami. These were the sub-
jects of my reveries from the bridge of St. Esprit to Remou-
lin: I had been advised to visit the Pont-du-Gard; hitherto I
had seen none of the remaining monuments of Roman magni-
ficence, and I expected to find this worthy the hands by
which it was constructed; for once, the reality surpassed my
expectation; this was the only time in my life it ever did so,
and the Romans alone could have produced that effect. The
view of this noble and sublime work, struck me the more
forcibly, from being in the midst of a desert, where silence
and solitude render the majestic edifice more striking, and
admiration more lively, for though called a bridge it is no-
thing more than an aqueduct. One cannot help exclaiming,
what strength could have transported these enormous stones
so far from any quarry? And what motive could have united
the labors of so many millions of men, in a place that no
one inhabited? I remained here whole hours, in the most
ravishing contemplation, and returned pensive and thought-
ful to my inn. This reverie was by no means favorable to
Madam de Larnage; she had taken care to forewarn me
against the girls of Montpelier, but not against the Pont-du-
Gard—it is impossible to provide for every contingency.

<page 270>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 237
On my arrival at Nismes, I went to see the amphitheatre,
which is a far more magnificent work than even the Pont-du-
Gard, yet it made a much less impression on me, perhaps,
because my admiration had been already exhausted on the
former object; or that the situation of the latter,in the midst
of a city, was less proper to excite it. This vast and superb
circus is surrounded by small dirty houses, while yet smaller
and dirtier fill up the area, in such a manner that the whole
produces an unequal and confused effect, in which regret and
indignation stifle pleasure and surprise. The amphitheatre
at Verona is a vast deal smaller, and less beautiful than that at
Nismes, but preserved with all possible care and neatness,
by which means alone it made a much stronger and more
agreeable impression on me. The French pay no regard to
these things, respect no monument of antiquity; ever eager
to undertake, they never finish, nor preserve anything that
is already finished to their hands.
I was so much better, and had gained such an appetite by
exercise, that I stopped a whole day at Pont-du-Lunel, for
the sake of good entertainment and company, this being de-
servedly esteemed at that time the best inn in Europe; for
those who kept it, knowing how to make its fortunate situ-
ation turn to advantage, took care to provide both abun-
dance and variety. It was really curious to find in a lonely
country-house, a table every day furnished with sea and
fresh-water fish, excellent game, and choice wines, served
up with all the attention and care, which are only to be ex-
pected among the great or opulent, and all this for thirty-
five sous each person: but the Pont-du-Lunel did not long
remain on this footing, for the proprietor, presuming too
much on its reputation, at length lost it entirely.
During this journey, I really forgot my complaints, but
recollected them again on my arrival at Montpelier. My
vapors were absolutely gone, but every other complaint re-
mained, and though custom had rendered them less trouble-
some, they were still sufficient to make any one who had been
suddenly seized with them, suppose himself attacked by some
mortal disease. In effect they were rather alarming than pain-
ful, and made the mind suffer more than the body, though it
apparently threatened the latter with destruction. While my
attention was called off by the vivacity of my passions, I paid
no attention to my health; but as my complaints were not

<page 271>
238 THE CONFESSIONS OF
altogether imaginary, I thought of them seriously when the
tumult had subsided. Recollecting the salutary advice of
Madam de Larnage, and the cause of my journey, I consult-
ed the most famous practitioners, particularly Monsieur
Fizes; and through superabundance of precaution boarded at
a doctor's who was an Irishman, and named Fitz-Morris.
This person boarded a number of young gentlemen who
were studying physic; and what rendered his house very
commodious for an invalid, he contented himself with a
moderate pension for provisions, lodging, etc., and took
nothing of his boarders for attendance as a physician. He
even undertook to execute the orders of M. Fizes, and en-
deavored to re-establish my health. He certainly acquitted
himself very well in this employment; as to regimen, indi-
gestions were not to be gained at his table; and though I am
not much hurt at privations of that kind, the objects of com-
parison were so near, that I could not help thinking with
myself sometimes, that M. de Torignan was a much better
provider than M. Fitz-Morris; notwithstanding, as there was
no danger of dying with hunger, and all the youths were
gay and good-humored, I believe this manner of living was
really serviceable, and prevented my falling into those lan-
guors I had latterly been so subject to. I passed the morning
in taking medicines, particularly, I know not what kind of
waters, but believe they were those of Vals, and in writing
to Madam de Larnage: for the correspondence was regularly
lcept up, and Rousseau kindly undertook to receive these
letters for his good friend Dudding. At noon I took a walk
to the Canourgue, with some of our young boarders, who
were all very good lads; after this we assembled for dinner;
when this was over, an affair of importance employed the
greater part of us till night; this was going a little way out of
town to take our afternoon's collation, and make up two or
three parties at mall, or mallet. As I had neither strength nor
skill, I did not play myself but I betted on the game, and, in-
terested for the success of my wager, followed the players and
their balls over rough and stony roads, procuring by this
means both an agreeable and salutary exercise. We took our
afternoon's refreshment at an inn out of the city. I need not
observe that these meetings were extremely merry, but
should not omit that they were equally innocent, though the
girls of the house were very pretty. M. Fitz-Morris (who

<page 272>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 239
was a great mall player himself) was our president; and I
must observe, notwithstanding the imputation of wildness
that is generally bestowed on students, that I found more
virtuous dispositions among these youths than could easily
be found among an equal number of men: they were rather
noisy than fond of wine, and more merry than libertine.
I accustomed myself so much to this mode of life, and it
accorded so entirely with my humor, that I should have
been very well content with a continuance of it. Several of
my fellow-boarders were Irish, from whom I endeavored to
learn some English words, as a precaution for Saint-Andiol.
The time now drew near for my departure; every letter
Madam de Larnage wrote, she entreated me not to delay it,
and at length I prepared to obey her.
I was convinced that the physicians (who understood noth-
ing of my disorder) looked on my complaint as imaginary,
and treated me accordingly, with their waters and whey.
In this respect physicians and philosophers differ widely
from theologians; admitting the truth only of what they
can explain, and making their knowledge the measure of
possibilities. These gentlemen understood nothing of my
illness, therefore concluded I could not be ill; and who
would presume to doubt the profound skill of a physician 2
I plainly saw they only meant to amuse, and make me swal-
low my money; and judging their substitute at Saint-Andiol
would do me quite as much service, and be infinitely more
agreeable, I resolved to give her the preference; full, there-
fore, of this wise resolution, I quitted Montpelier.
I set off towards the end of November, after a stay of six
weeks or two months in that city, where I left a dozen louis,
without either my health or understanding being the better
for it, except from a short course of anatomy begun under
M. Fitz-Morris, which I was soon obliged to abandon, from
the horrid stench of the bodies he dissected, which I found
it impossible to endure.
Not thoroughly satisfied in my own mind on the rectitude
of this expedition, as I advanced towards the Bridge of St.
Esprit (which was equally the road to Saint-Andiol and to
Chambery) I began to reflect on Madam de Warrens, the re-
membrance of whose letters, though less frequent than those
from Madam de Larnage, awakened in my heart a remorse
that passion had stifled in the first part of my journey, but

<page 273>
24O THE CONFESSIONS OF
which became so lively on my return, that, setting just esti-
mate on the love of pleasure, I found myself in such a situ-
ation of mind that I could listen wholly to the voice of rea-
son. Besides, in continuing to act the part of an adventurer,
I might be less fortunate than I had been in the beginning;
for it was only necessary that in all Saint-Andiol there should
be one person who had been in England, or who knew the
English or anything of their language, to prove me an im-
postor. The family of Madam de Larnage might not be
pleased with me, and would, perhaps, treat me unpolitely;
her daughter too made me uneasy, for, spite of myself, I
thought more of her than was necessary. I trembled lest I
should fall in love with this girl, and that very fear had already
half done the business. Was I going, in return for the moth-
er's kindness, to seek the ruin of the daughter? To sow dis-
sension, dishonor, scandal, and hell itself, in her family 2 The
very idea struck me with horror, and I took the firmest reso-
lution to combat and vanquish this unhappy attachment,
should I be so unfortunate as to experience it. But why ex-
pose myself to this danger? How miserable must the situa-
tion be to live with the mother, whom I should be weary of,
and sigh for the daughter, without daring to make known
my affection! What necessity was there to seek this situa-
tion, and expose myself to misfortunes, affronts and remorse,
for the sake of pleasures whose greatest charm was already
exhausted 2 For I was sensible this attachment had lost its
first vivacity. With these thoughts were mingled reflections
relative to my situation and duty to that good and gener-
ous friend, who already loaded with debts, would become
more so from the foolish expenses I was running into, and
whom I was deceiving so unworthily. This reproach at
length became so keen that it triumphed over every tempta-
tion, and on approaching the bridge of St. Esprit I formed the
resolution to burn my whole magazine of letters from Saint-
Andiol, and continue my journey right forward to Chambery.
I executed this resolution courageously, with some sighs
I confess, but with the heart-felt satisfaction, which I en-
joyed for the first time in my life, of saying, “Imerit my own
esteem, and know how to prefer duty to pleasure.” This
was the first real obligation I owed my books, since these
had taught me to reflect and compare. After the virtuous
principles I had so lately adopted, after all the rules of wis-

<page 274>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 24I
dom and honor I had proposed to myself, and felt so proud
to follow, the shame of possessing so little stability, and
contradicting so egregiously my own maxims, triumphed
over the allurements of pleasure. Perhaps, after all, pride
had as much share in my resolution as virtue; but if this
pride is not virtue itself, its effects are so similar that we are
pardonable in deceiving ourselves.
One advantage resulting from good actions is that they ele-
vate the soul to a disposition of attempting still better; for
such is human weakness, that we must place among our good
deeds an abstinence from those crimes we are tempted to com-
mit. No sooner was my resolution confirmed than I became
another man, or rather, I became what I was before I had
erred, and saw in its true colors what the intoxication of the
moment had either concealed or disguised. Full of worthy
sentiments and wise resolutions, I continued my journey, in-
tending to regulate my future conduct by the laws of virtue,
and dedicate myself without reserve to that best of friends, to
whom Ivowed as much fidelity in future as I felt real attach-
ment. The sincerity of this return to virtue appeared to prom-
ise a better destiny; but mine, alas! was fixed, and already
begun: even at the very moment when my heart, full of
good and virtuous sentiments, was contemplating only inno-
cence and happiness through life, I touched on the fatal period
that was to draw after it the long chain of my misfortunes!
My impatience to arrive at Chambery had made me use
more diligence than I meant to do. I had sent a letter from
Valence, mentioning the day and hour I should arrive, but I
had gained half a day on this calculation, which time I
passed at Chaparillan, that I might arrive exactly at the
time I mentioned. I wished to enjoy to its full extent the
pleasure of seeing her, and preferred deferring this happi-
ness a little, that expectancy might increase the value of it.
This precaution had always succeeded; hitherto my arrival
had caused a little holiday; I expected no less this time, and
these preparations, so dear to me, would have been well
worth the trouble of contriving them.
I arrived then exactly at the hour, and while at a consider-
able distance, looked forward with an expectancy of seeing
her on the road to meet me. The beating of my heart in-
creased as I drew near the house; at length I arrived, quite
out of breath; for I had left my chaise in the town. I see no

<page 275>
242 THE CONFESSIONS OF
one in the garden, at the door, or at the windows; I am seized
with terror, fearful that some accident has happened. I en-
ter; all is quiet; the laborers are eating their luncheon in the
kitchen, and far from observing any preparation, the servants
seem surprised to see me, not knowing I was expected. I
go up-stairs, at length see her!—that dear friend! so ten-
derly, truly, and entirely beloved. I instantly ran towards
her, and threw myself at her feet. “Ah! child!” said she,
“art thou returned then!” embracing me at the same time.
“Have you had a good journey 2 How do you do?” This
reception amused me for some moments. I then asked,
whether she had received my letter? she answered, “Yes.”
“I should have thought not,” replied I; and the informa-
tion concluded there. A young man was with her at this
time. I recollected having seen him in the house before my
departure, but at present he seemed established there; in
short, he was so; I found my place already supplied!
This young man came from the country of Vaud; his
father, named Vintzenried, was keeper of the prison, or, as
he expressed himself, Captain of the Castle of Chillon. This
son of the captain was a journeyman peruke-maker, and
gained his living in that capacity when he first presented
himself to Madam de Warrens, who received him kindly, as
she did all comers, particularly those from her own country.
He was a tall, fair, silly youth; well enough made, with an
unmeaning face, and a mind of the same description, speak-
ing always like the beau in a comedy, and mingling the
manners and customs of his former situation with a long his-
tory of his gallantry and success; naming, according to his
account, not above half the marchionesses who had favored
him, and pretending never to have dressed the head of a
pretty woman, without having likewise decorated her hus-
band's; vain, foolish, ignorant and insolent; such was the
worthy substitute taken in my absence, and the companion
offered me on my return!
O! if souls disengaged from their terrestrial bonds, yet view
from the bosom of eternal light what passes here below, par-
don, dear and respectable shade, that I show no more favor
to your failings than my own, but equally unveil both. I
ought and will be just to you as to myself; but how much
less will you lose by this resolution than I shall! How much
do your amiable and gentle disposition, your inexhaustible
º

<page 276>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 243
goodness of heart, your frankness and other amiable virtues,
compensate for your foibles, if a subversion of reason alone
can be called such. You had errors, but not vices; your
conduct was reprehensible, but your heart was ever pure.
The new-comer had shown himself zealous and exact in all
her little commissions, which were ever numerous, and he
diligently overlooked the laborers. As noisy and insolent as
I was quiet and forbearing, he was seen or rather heard at the
plough, in the hay-loft, wood-house, stable, farm-yard, at the
same instant. He neglected the gardening, this labor being
too peaceful and moderate; his chief pleasure was to load or
drive the cart, to saw or cleave wood; he was never seen with-
out a hatchet or pick-axe in his hand, running, knocking
and hallooing with all his might. I know not how many
men's labor he performed, but he certainly made noise
enough for ten or a dozen at least. All this bustle imposed
on poor Madam de Warrens; she thought this young man a
treasure, and, willing to attach him to herself, employed the
means she imagined necessary for that purpose, not forget-
ting what she most depended on, the surrender of her person.
Those who have thus far read this work should be able to
form some judgment of my heart; its sentiments were the
most constant and sincere, particularly those which had
brought me back to Chambery; what a sudden and complete
overthrow was this to my whole being! but to judge fully of
this, the reader must place himself for a moment in my situ-
ation. I saw all the future felicity I had promised myself
vanish in a moment; all the charming ideas I had indulged
so affectionately, disappear entirely; and I, who even from
childhood had not been able to consider my existence for a
moment as separate from hers, for the first time saw myself
utterly alone. This moment was dreadful, and those that
succeeded it were ever gloomy. I was yet young, but the
pleasing sentiments of enjoyment and hope, which enliven
youth, were extinguished. From that hour my existence
seemed half annihilated. I contemplated in advance the
melancholy remains of an insipid life, and if at any time an
image of happiness glanced through my mind, it was not
that which appeared natural to me, and I felt that even
should I obtain it I must still be wretched.
I was so dull of apprehension, and my confidence in her
was so great, that, notwithstanding the familiar tone of the

<page 277>
244 THE CONFESSIONS OF
new-comer, which I looked on as an effect of the easy dispo-
sition of Madam de Warrens, which rendered her free with
everyone, I never should have suspected his real situation
had not she herself informed me of it; but she hastened to
make this avowal with a freedom calculated to inflame me
with resentment, could my heart have turned to that point.
Speaking of this connection as quite immaterial with respect
to herself, she reproached me with negligence in the care of
the family, and mentioned my frequent absence, as though
she had been in haste to supply my place. “Ah!” said I,
my heart bursting with the most poignant grief, “what do
you dare to inform me of 2 Is this the reward of an attach-
ment like mine? Have you so many times preserved my life,
for the sole purpose of taking from me all that could render
it desirable? Your infidelity will bring me to the grave, but
you will regret my loss!” She answered with a tranquillity
sufficient to distract me, that I talked like a child; that peo-
ple did not die from such slight causes; that our friendship
need be no less sincere, nor we any less intimate, for that
her tender attachment to me could neither diminish nor
end but with herself; in a word she gave me to understand
that my happiness need not suffer any decrease from the
good fortune of this new favorite.
Never did the purity, truth and force of my attachment to
her appear more evident; never did I feel the sincerity and
honesty of my soul more forcibly, than at that moment. I
threw myself at her feet, embracing her knees with torrents
of tears. “No, madam,” replied I, with the most violent
agitation, “I love you too much to disgrace you thus far,
and too truly to share you; the regret that accompanied the
first acquisition of your favors has continued to increase
with my affection. I cannot preserve them by so violent an
augmentation of it. You shall ever have my adoration:
be worthy of it; to me that is more necessary than all you
can bestow. It is to you, O my dearest friend! that I resign
my rights; it is to the union of our hearts that I sacrifice
my pleasure; rather would I perish a thousand times than
thus degrade her I love.”
I preserved this resolution with a constancy worthy, I may
say, of the sentiment that gave it birth. From this moment
I saw this beloved woman but with the eyes of a real son. It
should be remarked here, that this resolve did not meet her

<page 278>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 245
private approbation, as I too well perceived; yet she never
employed the least art to make me renounce it either by in-
sinuating proposals, caresses, or any of those means which
women so well know how to employ without exposing them-
selves to violent censure, and which seldom fail to succeed.
Reduced to seek a fate independent of hers, and not able to
devise one, I passed to the other extreme, placing my hap-
piness so absolutely in her, that I became almost regardless
of myself. The ardent desire to see her happy, at any rate,
absorbed all my affections; it was in vain she endeavored to
separate her felicity from mine, I felt I had a part in it, spite
of every impediment.
Thus those virtues whose seeds in my heart begun to
spring up with my misfortunes: they had been cultivated by
study, and only waited the fermentation of adversity to be-
come prolific. The first-fruit of this disinterested disposi-
tion was to put from my heart every sentiment of hatred and
envy against him who had supplanted me. I even sincerely
wished to attach myself to this young man; to form and ed-
ucate him; to make him sensible of his happiness, and, if
possible, render him worthy of it; in a word, to do for him
what Anet had formerly done for me. But the similarity of
dispositions was wanting. More insinuating and enlightened
than Anet, I possessed neither his coolness, fortitude, nor
commanding strength of character, which I must have had
in order to succeed. Neither did the young man possess
those qualities which Anet found in me; such as gentleness,
gratitude, and above all, the knowledge of a want of his in-
structions, and an ardent desire to render them useful. All
these were wanting; the person I wished to improve, saw in
me nothing but an importunate, chattering pedant: while on
the contrary he admired his own importance in the house,
measuring the services he thought he rendered by the noise
he made, and looking on his saws, hatchets, and pick-axes,
as infinitely more useful than all my old books: and, per-
haps, in this particular, he might not be altogether blam-
able; but he gave himself a number of airs sufficient to make
anyone die with laughter. With the peasants he assumed
the airs of a country gentleman; presently he did as much
with me, and at length with Madam de Warrens herself.
His name, Vintzenried, did not appear noble enough, he
therefore changed it to that of Monsieur de Courtilles, and

<page 279>
246 THE CONFESSIONS OF
by the latter appellation he was known at Chambery,
and in Maurienne, where he married.
At length this illustrious personage gave himself such airs
of consequence, that he was everything in the house, and my-
self nothing. When I had the misfortune to displease him,
he scolded Madam de Warrens, and a fear of exposing her
to his brutality rendered me subservient to all his whims, so
that every time he cleaved wood (an office which he per-
formed with singular pride) it was necessary I should be an
idle spectator and admirer of his prowess. This lad was not,
however, of a bad disposition; he loved Madam de Warrens,
indeed it was impossible to do otherwise; nor had he any
aversion even to me, and when he happened to be out of his
airs would listen to our admonitions, and frankly own he
was a fool; yet notwithstanding these acknowledgements
his follies continued in the same proportion. His knowledge
was so contracted, and his inclinations so mean, that it was
useless to reason, and almost impossible to be pleased with
him. Not content with a most charming woman, he amused
himself with an old red-haired, toothless waiting-maid,
whose unwelcome service Madam de Warrens had the pa-
tience to endure, though it was absolutely disgusting. I
soon perceived this new inclination, and was exasperated at
it; but I saw something else, which affected me yet more,
and made a deeper impression on me than anything had
hitherto done; this was a visible coldness in the behavior of
Madam de Warrens towards me.
The privation I had imposed on myself, and which she
affected to approve, is one of those affronts which women
scarcely ever forgive. Take the most sensible, the most
philosophic female, one the least attached to pleasure, and
slighting her favors, if within your reach, will be found the
most unpardonable crime, even though she may care nothing
for the man. This rule is certainly without exception;
since a sympathy so natural and ardent was impaired in her,
by an abstinence founded only on virtue, attachment and
esteem, I no longer found with her that union of hearts
which constituted all the happiness of mine; she seldom
sought me but when we had occasion to complain of this
new-comer, for when they were agreed, I enjoyed but little
of her confidence, and, at length, was scarcely ever consulted
in her affairs. She seemed pleased, indeed, with my com-

<page 280>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 247
pany, but had I passed whole days without seeing her she
would hardly have missed me.
Insensibly, I found myself desolate and alone in that
house where I had formerly been the very soul; where, if
I may so express myself, I had enjoyed a double life, and by
degrees, I accustomed myself to disregard everything that
passed, and even those who dwelt there. To avoid contin-
ual mortifications, I shut myself up with my books, or else
wept and sighed unnoticed in the woods. This life soon
became insupportable; I felt that the presence of a woman
so dear to me, while estranged from her heart, increased my
unhappiness, and was persuaded, that, ceasing to see her, I
should feel myself less cruelly separated.
I resolved, therefore, to quit the house, mentioned it to her,
and she, far from opposing my resolution, approved it. She
had an acquaintance at Grenoble, called Madam de Dey-
bens, whose husband was on terms of friendship with Mon-
sieur Malby, chief Provost of Lyons. M. Deybens proposed
my educating M. Malby's children; I accepted this offer,
and departed for Lyons without causing, and almost with-
out feeling, the least regret at a separation, the bare idea
of which, a few months before, would have given us both
the most excruciating torments.
I had almost as much knowledge as was necessary for a
tutor, and flattered myself that my method would be unex-
ceptionable; but the year I passed at M. Malby's was suffi-
cient to undeceive me in that particular. The natural gen-
tleness of my disposition seemed calculated for the employ-
ment, if hastiness had not been mingled with it. While
things went favorably, and I saw the pains (which I did
not spare) succeed, I was an angel; but a devil when they
went contrary. If my pupils did not understand me, I was
hasty, and when they showed any symptoms of an untoward
disposition, I was so provoked that I could have killed them;
which behavior was not likely to render them either good
or wise. I had two under my care, and they were of very
different tempers. St. Marie, who was between eight and
nine years old, had a good person and quick apprehension,
was giddy, lively, playful and mischievous; but his mischief
was ever good-humored. The younger one, named Condillac,
appeared stupid and fretful, was headstrong as a mule, and
seemed incapable of instruction. It may be supposed that

<page 281>
248 THE CONFESSIONS OF
between both I did not want employment, yet with patience
and temper I might have succeeded; but wanting both, I
did nothing worth mentioning, and my pupils profited very
little. I could only make use of three means, which are
very weak, and often pernicious with children; namely, sen-
timent, reasoning, passion. I sometimes exerted myself so
much with Ste. Marie, that I could not refrain from tears,
and wished to excite similar sensations in him; as if it was
reasonable to suppose a child could be susceptible to such
emotions. Sometimes I exhausted myself in reasoning, as
if persuaded he could comprehend me; and as he frequently
formed very subtle arguments, concluded he must be rea-
sonable, because he bid fair to be so good a logician.
The little Condillac was still more embarrassing; for he
neither understood, answered, nor was concerned at any-
thing; he was of an obstinacy beyond belief, and was never
nappier than when he had succeeded in putting me in a rage;
then, indeed, he was the philosopher, and I the child. I
was conscious of all my faults, studied the tempers of my
pupils, and became acquainted with them; but where was
the use of seeing the evil, without being able to apply a
remedy ? My penetration was unavailing, since it never pre-
vented any mischief; and everything I undertook failed, be-
cause all I did to effect my designs was precisely what I
ought not to have done.
I was not more fortunate in what had only reference to
myself, than in what concerned my pupils. Madam Deybens,
in recommending me to her friend Madam de Malby, had
requested her to form my manners, and endeavor to give me
an air of the world. She took some pains on this account,
wishing to teach me how to do the honors of the house; but
I was so awkward, bashful, and stupid, that she found it
necessary to stop there. This, however, did not prevent me
from falling in love with her, according to my usual custom;
I even behaved in such a manner, that she could not avoid
observing it; but I never durst declare my passion; and as
the lady never seemed in a humor to make advances, I soon
became weary of my sighs and ogling, being convinced
they answered no manner of purpose.
I had quite lost my inclination for little thieveries while
with Madam de Warrens; indeed, as everything belonged to
me, there was nothing to steal; besides, the elevated notions

<page 282>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 249
I had imbibed ought to have rendered me in future above
such meanness, and generally speaking they certainly did so;
but this rather proceeded from my having learned to con-
quer temptations, than having succeeded in rooting out the
propensity, and I should even now greatly dread stealing,
as in my infancy, were Iyet subject to the same inclinations.
I had a proof of this at M. Malby's, when, though surrounded
by a number of little things that I could easily have pilfered,
and which appeared no temptation, I took it into my head to
covert some white Arbois wine, some glasses of which I had
drank at table, and thought delicious. It happened to be
rather thick, and as I fancied myself an excellent finer of
wine, I mentioned my skill, and this was accordingly
trusted to my care, but in attempting to mend, I spoiled it,
though to the sight only, for it remained equally agreeable
to the taste. Profiting by this opportunity, I furnished my-
self from time to time with a few bottles to drink in my own
apartment; but unluckily, I could never drink without eat-
ing; the difficulty lay therefore, in procuring bread. It was
impossible to make a reserve of this article, and to have it
brought by the footman was discovering myself, and in-
sulting the master of the house; I could not bear to pur-
chase it myself; how could a fine gentleman, with a sword
at his side, enter a baker's shop to buy a small loaf of bread?
—it was utterly impossible. At length. I recollected the
thoughtless saying of a great princess, who, on being in-
formed that the country people had no bread, replied,
“Then let them eat pastry!”. Yet even this resource was at-
tended with a difficulty. I sometimes went out alone for
this very purpose, running over the whole city, and passing
thirty pastry cook's shops, without daring to enter any one
of them. In the first place, it was necessary there should be
only one person in the shop, and that person's physiognomy
must be so encouraging as to give me confidence to pass the
threshold; but when once the dear little cake was procured,
and I shut up in my chamber with that and a bottle of wine,
taken cautiously from the bottom of a cupboard, how much
did I enjoy drinking my wine, and reading a few pages of a
novel; for when I have no company I always wish to read
while eating; it seems a substitute for society, and I dis-
patch alternately a page and a morsel; ’tis indeed, as if my
book dined with me.

<page 283>
25O THE CONFESSIONS OF
I was neither dissolute nor sottish, never in my whole life
having been intoxicated with liquor; my little thefts were
not very indiscreet, yet they were discovered; the bottles
betrayed me, and though no notice was taken of it, I had no
longer the management of the cellar. In all this Monsieur
Malby conducted himself with prudence and politeness, be-
ing really a very deserving man, who, under a manner as
harsh as his employment, concealed a real gentleness of dis-
position and uncommon goodness of heart: he was judicious,
equitable, and (what would not be expected from an officer
of the Marechausse) very humane.
Sensible of his indulgence, I became greatly attached to
him, which made my stay at Lyons longer than it would
otherwise have been; but at length, disgusted with an em-
ployment which I was not calculated for, and a situation of
great confinement, consequently disagreeable to me, after a
year's trial, during which time I spared no pains to fulfill my
engagement, I determined to quit my pupils; being con-
vinced I should never succeed in educating them properly.
Monsieur Malby saw this as clearly as myself, though I am
inclined to think he would never have dismissed me had I
not spared him the trouble, which was an excess of conde-
scension in this particular, that I certainly cannot justify.
What rendered my situation yet more insupportable was
the comparison I was continually drawing between the life
I now led and that which I had quitted; the remembrance
of my dear Charmettes, my garden, trees, fountain and or-
chard, but, above all, the company of her who was born to
give life and soul to every other enjoyment. On calling to
mind our pleasures and innocent life, I was seized with
such oppressions and heaviness of heart, as deprived me of
the power of performing anything as it should be. A hun-
dred times was I tempted instantly to set off on foot to my
dear Madam de Warrens, being persuaded that could I once
more see her, I should be content to die that moment: in
fine, I could no longer resist the tender emotions which re-
called me back to her, whatever it might cost me. I ac-
cused myself of not having been sufficiently patient, com-
plaisant and kind; concluding I might yet live happily
with her on the terms of tender friendship, and by showing
more for her than I had hitherto done. I formed the finest
projects in the world, burned to execute them, left all, re-

<page 284>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 251
nounced everything, departed, fled, and arriving in all the
transports of my early youth, found myself once more at
her feet. Alas! I should have died there with joy, had I
found in her reception, in her embrace, or in her heart, one-
quarter of what I had formerly found there, and which I
yet found the undiminished warmth of.
Fearful illusions of transitory things, how often dost thou
torment us in vain! She received me with that excellence
of heart which could only die with her; but I sought the
influence there which could never be recalled, and had
hardly been half an hour with her before I was once more
convinced that my former happiness had vanished forever,
and that I was in the same melancholy situation which I
had been obliged to fly from; yet without being able to ac-
cuse any person with my unhappiness, for Courtilles really
was not to blame, appearing to see my return with more
pleasure than dissatisfaction. But how could I bear to be a
secondary person with her to whom I had been everything,
and who could never cease being such to me? How could I
live an alien in that house where I had been the child? The
sight of every object that had been witness to my former
happiness, rendered the comparison yet more distressing; I
should have suffered less in any other habitation, for this in-
cessantly recalled such pleasing remembrances, that it was
irritating the recollection of my loss.
Consumed with vain regrets, given up to the most gloomy
melancholy, I resumed the custom of remaining alone, ex-
cept at meals; shut up with my books, I sought to give some
useful diversion to my ideas, and feeling the imminent dan-
ger of want, which I had so long dreaded, I sought means to
prepare for and receive it, when Madam de Warrens should
have no other resource. I had placed her household on a
footing not to become worse; but since my departure every-
thing had been altered. He who now managed her affairs
was a spendthrift, and wished to make a great appearance;
such as keeping a good horse with elegant trappings; loved
to appear gay in the eyes of the neighbors, and was perpet-
ually undertaking something he did not understand. Her
pension was taken up in advance, her rent was in arrears,
debts of every kind continued to accumulate; I could plainly
foresee that her pension would be seized, and perhaps sup-
pressed; in short, I expected nothing but ruin and misfor-

<page 285>
252 THE CONFESSIONS OF
tune, and the moment appeared to approach so rapidly that
I already felt all its horrors.
My closet was my only amusement, and after a tedious
search for remedies for the sufferings of my mind, I deter-
mined to seek some against the evil of distressing circum-
stances, which I daily expected would fall upon us, and
returning to my old chimeras, behold me once more building
castles in the air to relieve this dear friend from the cruel
extremities into which I saw her ready to fall. I did not
believe myself wise enough to shine in the republic of let-
ters, or to stand any chance of making a fortune by that
means; a new idea, therefore, inspired me with that confi-
fidence, which the mediocrity of my talents could not impart.
In ceasing to teach music I had not abandoned the
thoughts of it; on the contrary, I had studied the theory
sufficiently to consider myself well informed on the subject.
When reflecting on the trouble it had costme to read music,
and the great difficulty I yet experienced in singing at sight,
I began to think the fault might as well arise from the man-
ner of noting as from my own dulness, being sensible it was
an art which most people find difficult to understand. By
examining the formation of the signs, I was convinced they
were frequently very ill devised. I had before thought of
marking the gamut by figures, to prevent the trouble of hav-
ing lines to draw, on noting the plainest air; but had been
stopped by the difficulty of the octaves, and by the distinc-
tion of measure and quantity: this idea returned again to my
mind, and on a careful revision of it, I found the difficulties
by no means insurmountable. I pursued it successfully, and
was at length able to note any music whatever by figures,
with the greatest exactitude and simplicity. From this mo-
ment I supposed my fortune made, and in the ardor of
sharing it with her to whom I owed everything, thought
only of going to Paris, not doubting that on presenting my
project to the Academy, it would be adopted with rapture.
I had brought some money from Lyons; I augmented this
stock by the sale of my books, and in the course of a fort.
night my resolution was both formed and executed: in short,
full of the magnificent ideas it had inspired, and which were
common to me on every occasion, I departed from Savoy with
my new system of music, as I had formerly done from Turin
with my heron-fountain.

<page 286>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 253
Such have been the errors and faults of my youth; I have
related the history of them with a fidelity which my heart
approves; if my riper years were dignified with some vir-
tues, I should have related them with the same frankness;
it was my intention to have done this, but I must forego this
pleasing task and stophere. Time, which renders justice to
the characters of most men, may withdraw the veil; and
should my memory reach posterity, they may one day dis-
cover what I had to say—they will then understand why I
am now silent.

<page 287>
254 THE CONFESSIONS OF
BOOK VII.
FTER two years' silence and patience, and notwith-
standing my resolutions, I again take up my pen.
Reader, suspend your judgment as to the reasons
which force me to such a step: of these you can be no judge
until you shall have read my book.
My peaceful youth has been seen to pass away calmly and
agreeably without any great disappointments or remarkable
prosperity. This mediocrity was mostly owing to my ar-
dent yet feeble nature, less promptin undertaking than easy
to discourage; quitting repose for violent agitations, but
returning to it from lassitude and inclinations, and which,
placing me in an idle and tranquil state for which alone I
felt I was born, at a distance from the paths of great vir-
tues and still further from those of great vices, never per-
mitted me to arrive at anything great, either good or bad.
What a different account will I soon have to give of myself!
Fate, which for thirty years forced my inclinations, for
thirty others has seemed to oppose them; and this contin-
ued opposition, between my situation and inclinations, will
appear to have been the source of enormous faults, unheard-
of misfortunes, and every virtue except that fortitude which
alone can do honor to adversity.
The history of the first part of my life was written from
memory, and is consequently full of errors. As I am obliged
to write the second part from memory also, the errors in it
will probably be still more numerous. The agreeable re-
membrance of the finest portion of my years, passed with so
much tranquillity and innocence, has left in my heart a
thousand charming impressions which I love incessantly to
call to my recollection. It will soon appear how different
from these those of the rest of my life have been. To recall
them to my mind would be to renew their bitterness. Far
*

<page 288>
J. J. KOUSSEAU 255
from increasing that of my situation by these sorrowful re-
flections, I repel them as much as possible, and in this en-
deavor often succeed so well as to be unable to find them at
will. This facility of forgetting my misfortunes is a con-
solation which Heaven has reserved to me in the midst of
those which fate has one day to accumulate upon my head.
My memory, which presents to me no objects but such as
are agreeable, is the happy counterpoise of my terrified im-
agination, by which I foresee nothing but a cruel futurity.
All the papers I had collected to aid my recollection, and
guide me in this undertaking, are no longer in my posses-
sion, nor can I ever again hope to regain them.
I have but one faithful guide on which I can depend: thisis
the chain of the sentiments by which the succession of my ex-
istence has been marked, and by these the events which have
been either the cause or the effect of the manner of it. I
easily forget my misfortunes, but I cannot forget my faults,
and still less my virtuous sentiments. The remembrance of
these is too dear to me ever to suffer them to be effaced from
my mind. I may omit facts, transpose events, and fall into
some errors of dates; but I cannot be deceived in what I have
felt, nor in that which from sentiment I have done; and to re-
late this is the chief end of my present work. The real object
of my confessions is to communicate an exact knowledge of
what I interiorly am and have been in every situation of my
life. I have promised the history of my mind, and to write
it faithfully I have no need of other memoirs: to enter into
my own heart, as I have hitherto done, will alone be sufficient.
There is, however, and very happily, an interval of six or
seven years, relative to which I have exact references, in a
collection of letters copied from the originals, in the hands
of M. du Peyrou. This collection, which concludes in 1760,
comprehends the whole time of my residence at the hermit-
age, and my great quarrel with those who called themselves
my friends; that memorable epocha of my life, and the
source of all my other misfortunes. With respect to more
recent original letters which may remain in my possession,
and are but few in number, instead of transcribing them at
the end of this collection, too voluminous to enable me to
deceive the vigilance of my Arguses, I will copy them into
the work whenever they appear to furnish any explanation,
be this either for or against myself; for I am not under the
*

<page 289>
256 THE CONFESSIONS OF
least apprehension lest the reader should forget I make my
confession, and be induced to believe I make my apology;
but he cannot expect I shall conceal the truth when it testi-
fies in my favor.
The second part, it is likewise to be remembered, contains
nothing in common with the first, except truth; nor has any
other advantage over it, but the importance of the facts; in
everything else, it is inferior to the former. I wrote the first
with pleasure, with satisfaction, and at my ease, at Wootton,
or in the castle Trie: everything I had to recollect was a
new enjoyment. I returned to my closet with an increased
pleasure, and, without constraint, gave that turn to my de-
scriptions which most flattered my imagination.
At present my head and memory are become so weak as to
render me almost incapable of every kind of application: my
present undertaking is the result of constraint, and a heart full
of sorrow. I have nothing to treat of but misfortunes, treach-
eries, perfidies, and circumstances equally afflicting. I would
give the world, could I bury in the obscurity of time, every
thing I have to say, and which, in spite of myself, I am
obliged to relate. I am, at the same time, under the necessi-
ty of being mysterious and subtle, of endeavoring to impose
and of descending to things the most foreign to my nature.
The ceiling under which I write has eyes; the walls of my
chamber have ears. Surrounded by spies and by vigilantand
malevolent inspectors, disturbed, and my attention diverted,
I hastily commit to paper a few broken sentences, which I
have scarcely time to read, and still less to correct. I know
that, notwithstanding the barriers which are multiplied
around me, my enemies are afraid truth should escape by
some little opening. What means can I take to introduce it
to the world? This, however, I attempt with but few hopes
of success. The reader will judge whether or not such a situ-
ation furnishes the means of agreeable descriptions, or of giv-
ing them a seductive coloring! I therefore inform such as may
undertake to read this work, that nothing can secure them
from weariness in the prosecution of their task, unless it be the
desire of becoming more fully acquainted with a man whom
they already know, and a sincere love of justice and truth.
In my first part I brought down my narrative to my depar-
ture with infinite regret from Paris, leaving my heart at
Charmettes, and, there building my last castle in the air, in-

<page 290>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 257
tending some day to return to the feet of mamma, restored
to herself, with the treasures I should have acquired, and de-
pending upon my system of music as upon a certain fortune.
I made some stay at Lyons to visitmy acquaintance, procure
letters of recommendation to Paris, and to sell my books of
geometry which I had brought with me. I was well received
by all whom I knew. M. and Madam de Malby seemed
pleased to see me again, and several times invited me to din-
ner. At their house I became acquainted with the Abbé de
Malby, as I had already done with the Abbé de Condillac, both
of whom were on a visit to their brother. The Abbé de Malby
gave meletters to Paris; among others, one to M. de Fonten-
elle, and another to the Comte de Caylus. These were very
agreeable acquaintances, especially the first, to whose friend-
ship for me his death only put a period, and from whom, in
our private conversations, I received advice which I ought
to have more exactly followed.
I likewise saw M. Bordes, with whom I had been long
acquainted, and who had frequently obliged me with the
greatest cordiality and the most real pleasure. He it was
who enabled me to sell my books; and he also gave me
from himself good recommendations to Paris. I again saw
the intendant for whose acquaintance I was indebted to M.
Bordes, and who introduced me to the Duke de Richelieu,
who was then passing through Lyons. M. Pallu presented
me. The Duke received me well, and invited me to come
and see him at Paris; I did so several times; although this
great acquaintance, of which I shall frequently have occa-
sion to speak, was never of the most trifling utility to me.
I visited the musician David, who, in one of my former
journeys, and in my distress, had rendered me service. He
had either lent or given me a cap and a pair of stockings,
which I have never returned, nor has he ever asked me for
them, although we have since that time frequently seen each
other. I, however, made him a present, something like an
equivalent. I would say more upon this subject, were what
I have owned in question; but I have to speak of what I have
done, which, unfortunately, is far from being the same thing.
I also saw the noble and generous Perrichon, and not with-
out feeling the effects of his accustomed munificence; for he
made me the same present he had previously done to the ele-
gant Bernard, by paying for my place in the diligence. I

<page 291>
258 THE CONFESSIONS OF
visited the surgeon Parisot, the best and most benevolent of
men; as also his beloved Godefroi, who had lived with him
ten years, and whose merit chiefly consisted in her gentle
manners and goodness of heart. It was impossible to see
this woman without pleasure, or to leave her without regret.
Nothing better shows the inclinations of a man, than the na-
ture of his attachments.” Those who had once seen the gentle
Godefroi, immediately knew the good and amiable Parisot.
I was much obliged to all these good people, but I after-
wards neglected them all; not from ingratitude, but from that
invincible indolence which so often assumes its appearance.
The remembrance of their services has never been effaced
from my mind, nor the impression they made from my heart;
but I could more easily have proved my gratitude, than as-
siduously have shown them the exterior of that sentiment.
Exactitude in correspondence is what I never could observe;
the moment I began to relax, the shame and embarrassment
of repairing my fault made me aggravate it, and I entirely
desist from writing; I have, therefore, been silent, and ap-
peared to forget them. Parisot and Perrichon took not the
least notice of my negligence, and I ever found them the
same. But, twenty years afterwards it will be seen, in M.
Bordes, to what a degree the self-love of a wit can make him
carry his vengeance when he feels himself neglected.
Before I leave Lyons, I must not forget an amiable person,
whom I again saw with more pleasure than ever, and who
left in my heart the most tender remembrance. This was
Mademoiselle Serre, of whom I have spoken in my first part;
I renewed my acquaintance with her whilst I was at M. de
Malby's.
Being this time more at leisure, I saw her more frequently,
and she made the most sensible impressions on my heart. I
had some reason to believe her own was not unfavorable to
my pretensions; but she honored me with her confidence so
far as to remove from meall temptation to allure her partiality.
• Unless he be deceived in his choice, or that she, to whom he attaches himself,
changes her character by an extraordinary concurrence of causes, which is not
absolutely impossible. Were this consequence to be admitted without modifica-
tion, Socrates must be judged of by his wife Xantippe, and Dion by his friend
Calippus, which would be the most false and iniquitous judgment ever made.
However, let no injurious application be here made to my wife. She is weak and
more easily deceived than I at first imagined, but by her pure and excellent charac-
ter she is worthy of all my esteem.

<page 292>
J. J. ROUSSRAU 259
She had no fortune, and in this respect exactly resembled
myself; our situations were too similar to permit us to become
united; and with the views I then had, I was far from think-
ing of marriage. She gave me to understand that a young
merchant, one M. Geneve, seemed to wish to obtain her hand.
I saw him once or twice at her lodgings; he appeared to me to
be an honest man, and this was his general character. Per-
suaded she would be happy with him, I was desirous he
should marry her, which he afterwards did; and that I might
not disturb their innocent love, I hastened my departure;
offering up, for the happiness of that charming woman,
prayers, which, here below were not long heard. Alas! her
time was very short, for I afterwards heard she died in the
second or third year after her marriage. My mind, during
the journey, was wholly absorbed in tender regret. I felt,
and since that time, when these circumstances have been
present to my recollection, have frequently done the same;
that although the sacrifices made to virtue and our duty may
sometimes be painful, we are well rewarded by the agreeable
remembrance they leave deeply engraven in our hearts.
I this time saw Paris in as favorable a point of view as it had
appeared to mein an unfavorable one at my first journey; not
that my ideas of its brilliancy arose from the splendor of
my lodgings; for in consequence of an address given me by
M. Bordes, I resided at the Hotel St. Quentin, Rue des Cor-
dier, near the Sorbonne; a vile street, a miserable hotel, and
a wretched apartment: but nevertheless a house in which
several men of merit, such as Gresset, Bordes, Abbé Malby,
Condillac, and several others, of whom unfortunately I found
not one, had taken up their quarters; but I there met with
M. Bonnefond, a man unacquainted with the world, lame,
litigious, and who affected to be a purist. To him I owe the
acquaintance of M. Roguin, at present the oldest friend I
have and by whose means I became acquainted with Diderot,
of whom I shall soon have occassion to say a good deal.
I arrived at Paris in the autumn of 1741, with fifteen louis
in my purse, and with my comedy of Narcissus and my mu-
sical project in my pocket. These composed my whole
stock; consequently I had not much time to lose before I at-
tempted to turn the latter to some advantage. I therefore
immediately thought of making use of my recommendations.
A young man who arrives at Paris, with a tolerable figure,

<page 293>
26O THE CONFESSIONS OF
and announces himself by his talents, is sure to be well re-
ceived. This was my good fortune, which procured me some
pleasure without leading to anything solid. Of all the per-
sons to whom I was recommended, three only were useful
to me. M. Damesin, a gentleman of Savoy, at that time
equerry, and I believe favorite, of the Princess of Carignan;
M. de Boze, Secretary of the Academy of Inscriptions, and
keeper of the medals of the king's cabinet; and Father Cas-
tel, a Jesuit, author of the Clavecin oculaire.*
All these recommendations, except that to M. Damesin,
were given me by the Abbé de Malby.
M. Damesin provided me with that which was most need-
ful, by means of two persons with whom he brought me ac-
quainted. One was M. Gase, president a mortier of the par-
liament of Bordeaux, and who played very well upon the
violin; the other, the Abbé de Leon, who then lodged in the
Sorbonne, a young nobleman; extremely amiable, who died
in the flower of his age, after having, for a few moments,
made a figure in the world under the name of the Chevalier
de Rohan. Both these gentlemen had an inclination to
learn composition. In this I gave them lessons for a few
months, by which means my decreasing purse received some
little aid. The Abbé Leon conceived a friendship for me, and
wished me to become his secretary; but he was far from be-
ing rich, and all the salary he could offer me was eight hun-
dred livres, which, with infinite regret, I refused; since it
was insufficient to defray the expenses of my lodging, food,
and clothing.
I was well received by M. de Boze. He had a thirst for
Knowledge, of which he possessed not a little, but was some-
what pedantic. Madam de Boze much resembled him; she was
lively and affected. I sometimes dined with them, and it is
impossible to be more awkward than I was in her presence.
Her easy manner intimidated me, and rendered mine more
remarkable. When she presented me a plate, I modestly
put forward my fork to take one of the least bits of what
she offered me, which made her give the plate to her ser-
vant, turning her head aside that I might not see her laugh.
She had not the least suspicion that in the head of the rustic
with whom she was so diverted there was some small por-
• Ocular harpsichord.

<page 294>
J. J. RoussEAU 26 I
tion of wit. M. de Boze presented me to M. de Reaumur,
his friend, who came to dine with him every Friday, the day
on which the Academy of Sciences met. He mentioned to
him my project, and the desire I had of having it examined
by the academy. M. de Reaumur consented to make the
proposal, and his offer was accepted. On the day appointed
I was introduced and presented by M. de Reaumur, and on
the same day, August 22d, 1742, I had the honor to read to
the academy the memoir I had prepared for that purpose.
Although this illustrious assembly might certainly well be
expected to inspire me with awe, I was less intimidated on
this occasion than I had been in the presence of Madam de
Boze, and I got tolerably well through my reading and the
answers I was obliged to give. The memoir was well re-
ceived, and acquired me some compliments by which I was
equally surprised and flattered, imagining that before such
an assembly, whoever was not a member of it could not have
common-sense. The persons appointed to examine my system
were M. Mairan, M. Hellot, and M. de Fouchy, all three men
of merit, but not one of them understood music, at least not
enough of composition to enable them to judge of my project.
During my conference with these gentlemen, I was con- .
vinced with no less certainty than surprise, that if men of
learning have sometimes fewer prejudices than others, they
more tenaciously retain those they have. However weak or
false most of their objections were, and although I answered
them with great timidity, and I confess, in bad terms, yet
with decisive reasoils, I never once made myself understood,
or gave them any explanation in the least satisfactory. I was
constantly surprised at the facility with which, by the aid of
a few sonorous phrases, they refuted, without having com-
prehended me. They had learned, I know not where, that
a monk of the name of Souhaitti had formerly invented a
mode of noting the gamut by ciphers: a sufficient proof that
my system was not new. This might, perhaps, be the case;
for although I had never heard of Father Souhaitti, and not-
withstanding his manner of writing the seven notes without
attending to the octaves was not, under any point of view,
worthy of entering into competition with my simple and
commodious invention for easily noting by ciphers every pos-
sible kind of music, keys, rests, octaves, measure, time, and
length of note; things on which Souhaitti had never thought.

<page 295>
262 THE CONFESSIONS OF
it was nevertheless true, that with respect to the elementary
expression of the seven notes, he was the first inventor.
But besides their giving to this primitive invention more
importance than was due to it, they went still further, and,
whenever they spoke of the fundamental principles of the
system, talked nonsense. The greatest advantage of my
Scheme was to supersede transpositions and keys, so that
the same piece of music was noted and transposed at will by
means of the change of a single initial letter at the head of
the air. These gentlemen had heard from the music-masters
of Paris that the method of executing by transposition was
a bad one; and on this authority converted the most evident
advantage of my system into an invincible objection against
it, and affirmed that my mode of notation was good for vocal
music, but bad for instrumental; instead of concluding as
they ought to have done, that it was good for vocal, and still
better for instrumental. On their report the academy
granted me a certificate full of fine compliments, amidst
which it appeared that in reality it judged my system to be
neither new nor useful. I did not think proper to orna-
ment with such a paper the work entitled Dissertation sur
la musique moderne,” by which I appealed to the public.
I had reason to remark on this occasion that, even with a
narrow understanding, the sole but profound knowledge of a
thing is preferable for the purpose of judging of it, to all the
lights resulting from a cultivation of the sciences, when to
these a particular study of that in question has not been
joined. The only solid objection to my system was made by
Rameau. I had scarcely explained it to him before he dis-
covered its weak part. “Your signs,” said he, “are very
good, inasmuch as they clearly and simply determine the
length of notes, exactly represent intervals, and show the
simple in the double note, which the common notation does
not do; but they are objectionable on account of their re-
quiring an operation of the mind, which cannot always ac-
company the rapidity of execution. The position of our
notes,” continued he, “is described to the eye without the
concurrence of this operation. If two notes, one very high
and the other very low, be joined by a series of intermediate
ones, I see at the first glance the progress from one to the
• Dissertation on modern music.

<page 296>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 263
other by conjoined degrees; but in your system, to perceive
this series, I must necessarily run over your ciphers one
after the other; the glance of the eye is here useless.” The
objection appeared to me insurmountable, and I instantly
assented to it. Although it be simple and striking, nothing
can suggest it but great knowledge and practice of the art,
and it is by no means astonishing that not one of the acade-
micians should have thought of it. But what creates much
surprise is, that these men of great learning, and who are
supposed to possess so much knowledge, should so little
know that each ought to confine his judgment to that which
relates to the study with which he has been conversant.
My frequent visits to the literati appointed to examine my
system and the other academicians gave mean opportunity of
becoming acquainted with the most distinguished men of let-
ters in Paris, and by this means the acquaintance that would
have been the consequence of my sudden admission amongst
them, which afterwards came to pass, was already established.
With respect to the present moment, absorbed in my new sys-
tem of music, I obstinately adhered to my intention of effect-
ing a revolution in the art, and by that means of acquiring a
celebrity which, in the fine arts, is in Paris mostly accom-
panied by fortune. Ishut myself in my chamber and labored
three or four months with inexpressible ardor, in forming into
a work for the public eye, the memoir I had read before the
academy. The difficulty was to find a bookseller to take my
manuscript; and this on account of the necessary expenses
for new characters, and because booksellers give not their
money by handfuls to young authors; although to me it
seemed but just my work should render me the bread I had
eaten while employed in its composition.
Bonnefond introduced me to Quillau the father, with whom
I agreed to divide the profits, without reckoning the privilege,
of which I paid the whole expense. Such were the future pro-
ceedings of this Quillau that I lost the expenses of my privi-
lege, never having received a farthing from that edition;
which, probably, had but very middling success, although the
Abbé des Fontaines promised to give it celebrity, and, not-
withstanding the other journalists, had spoken of it very
favorably.
The greatest obstacle to making the experiment of my sys-
tem was the fear, in case of its not being received, of losing

<page 297>
264 THE CONFESSIONS OF
the time necessary to learn it. To this I answered, that my
notes rendered the ideas so clear, that to learn music by means
of the ordinary characters, time would be gained by beginning
with mine. To prove this by experience, I taught music
gratis to a young American lady, Mademoiselle des Roulins,
with whom M. Roguin had brought me acquainted. In three
months she read every kind of music, by means of my nota-
tion, and sung at sight better than I did myself, any piece that
was not too difficult. This success was convincing, but not
known; any other person would have filled the journals with
the detail, but with some talents for discovering useful things,
I never have posssssed that of setting them off to advantage.
Thus was my airy castle again overthrown; but this time I
was thirty years of age, and in Paris, where it is impossible to
live for a trifle. The resolution I took upon this occasion will
astonish none but those by whom the first part of these me-
moirs has not been read with attention. I had just made
great and fruitless efforts, and was in need of relaxation. In-
stead of sinking with despair I gave myself up quietly to my
indolence and to the care of Providence; and the better to wait
for its assistance with patience, Ilay down a frugal plan for the
slow expenditure of a few louis, which still remained in my
possession, regulating the expense of my supine pleasures
without retrenching it; going to the coffee-house but every
other day, and to the theatre but twice a week. With respect
to the expenses of girls of easy virtue, I had no retrenchment
to make; never having in the whole course of my life applied
so much as a farthing to that use except once, of which I shall
soon have occasion to speak. The security, voluptuousness,
and confidence with which I gave myself up to this indolent
and solitary life, which I had not the means of continuing for
three months, is one of the singularities of my life, and the
oddities of my disposition. The extreme desire I had, the
public should think of me was precisely what discouraged me
from showing myself; and the necessity of paying visits ren-
dered them to such a degree insupportable, that Iceased vis-
iting the academicians and other men of letters, with whom
I had cultivated an acquaintance. Marivaux, the Abbé Malby,
and Fontenelle, were almost the only persons whom I some-
times went to see. To the first I showed my comedy of Narcis-
sus. He was pleased with it, and had the goodness to make in
it some improvements. Diderot, younger than these, was

<page 298>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 265
:
º
º
s:
º
jº
.
.
:
º
.
much about my own age. He was fond of music, and knew
it theoretically; we conversed together, and he communicated
to me some of his literary projects. This soon formed betwixt
us a more intimate connection, which lasted fifteen years, and
which probably would still exist were not I, unfortunately,
and by his own fault, of the same profession with himself.
It would be impossible to imagine in what manner I em-
ployed this short and precious interval which still remained
to me, before circumstances forced me to beg my bread:—in
learning by memory passages from the poets which I had
learned and forgotten a hundred times. Every morning at
ten o’clock, I went to walk in the Luxembourg with a Virgil
and a Rousseau in my pocket, and there, until the hour of
dinner, I passed away the time in restoring to my memory a
sacred ode or a bucolic, without being discouraged by for-
getting, by the study of the morning, what I had learned
the evening before. I recollected that after the defeat of
Nicias at Syracuse the captive Athenians obtained a liveli-
hood by reciting the poems of Homer. The use I made of
this erudition to ward off misery was to exercise my happy
memory by learning all the poets by rote.
I had another expedient, not less solid, in the game of chess,
to which I regularly dedicated, at Maugis, the evenings on
which I did not go to the theatre. I became acquainted with
M. de Legal, M. Husson, Philidor, and all the great chess
players of the day, without making the least improvement in
the game. However, I had no doubt but, in the end, I should
become superior to them all, and this, in my own opinion, was
a sufficient resource. The same manner of reasoning served
me in every folly to which I felt myself inclined. I said to my-
self: whoever excels in anything is sure to acquire a distin-
guished reception in society. Let us therefore excel, no mat-
ter in what, I shall certainly be sought after; opportunities
will present themselves, and my own merit will do the rest.
This childishness was not the sophism of my reason; it was
that of my indolence. Dismayed at the great and rapid efforts
which would have been necessary to call forth my endeavors, I
strove to flatter my idleness, and by arguments suitable to the
purpose, veiled from my own eyes the shame of such a state.
I thus calmly waited for the moment when I was to be with-
out money; and had not Father Castel, whom I sometimes
went to see in my way to the coffee-house, roused me from

<page 299>
266 THE CONFESSIONS OF
my lethargy, I believe I should have seen myself reduced to
my last farthing without the least emotion. Father Castel
was a madman, but a good man upon the whole; he was sorry
to see me thus impoverish myself to no purpose. “Since
musicians and the learned,” said he, “do not sing by your
scale, change the string, and apply to the women. You will
perhaps succeed better with them. I have spoken of you to
Madam de Beuzenval; go to her from me; she is a goodwo-
man who will be glad to see the countryman of her son and
husband. You will find at her house Madam de Broglie, her
daughter, who is a woman of wit. Madam Dupin is another
to whom I also have mentioned you; carry her your work;
she is desirous of seeing you, and will receive you well. No.
thing is done in Paris without the women. They are the
curves, of which the wise are the asymptotes; they inces.
santly approach each other, but never touch.”
After having from day to day delayed these very disagree-
able steps, I at length took courage, and called upon Madam
de Beuzenval. She received me with kindness; and Madam
de Broglio entering the chamber, she said to her: “Daughter,
this is M. Rousseau, of whom Father Castel has spoken to
us.” Madam de Broglie complimented me upon my work,
and going to her harpsichord proved to me she had already
given it some attention. Perceiving it to be about one
o'clock, I prepared to take my leave. Madam de Beuzenval
said to me: “You are at a great distance from the quarter of
the town in which you reside; stay and dine here.” I did not
want asking a second time. A quarter of an hour afterwards,
I understood, by a word, that the dinner to which she had
invited me was that of her servants’ hall. Madam de Beu-
zenval was a very good kind of woman, but of a confined
understanding, and too full of her illustrious Polish nobil-
ity: she had no idea of the respect due to talents. On this
occasion, likewise, she judged me by my manner rather than
by my dress, which, although very plain, was very neat, and
by no means announced a man to dine with servants. I had
too long forgotten the way to the place where they eat to be
inclined to take it again. Without suffering my anger to ap-
pear, I told Madam de Beuzenval that I had an affair of a
trifling nature which I had just recollected obliged me to
return home, and I immediately prepared to depart. Madam
de Broglie approached her mother, and whispered in her eat

<page 300>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 267
a few words which had their effect. Madam de Beuzenval
rose to prevent me from going, and said, “I expect that you
will do us the honor to dine with us.” In this case I thought
to show pride would be a mark of folly, and I determined to
stay. The goodness of Madam de Broglie had besides made
an impression upon me, and rendered her interesting in my
eyes. I was very glad to dine with her, and hoped, that
when she knew me better, she would not regret having pro-
cured me that honor. The President de Lamoignon, very in-
timate in the family, dined there also. He, as well as Mad-
am de Broglie, was a master of all the modish and fashion-
able small talk jargon of Paris. Poor Jean Jacques was
unable to make a figure in this way. I had sense enough not
to pretend to it, and was silent. Happy would it have been
for me, had I always possessed the same wisdom; I should
not be in the abyss into which I am now fallen. I was vexed
at my own stupidity, and at being unable to justify to
Madam de Broglie what she had done in my favor.
After dinner I thought of my ordinary resource. I had in
my pocket an epistle in verse, written to Parisot during my
residence at Lyons. This fragment was not without some fire,
which I increased by my manner of reading, and made them
all three shed tears. Whether it was vanity, or really the
truth, I thought the eyes of Madam de Broglie seemed to say
to her mother: “Well, mamma, was I wrong in telling you
this man was fitter to dine with us than with your women?”
Until then my heart had been rather burdened, but after this
revenge I felt myself satisfied. Madam de Broglie, carrying
her favorable opinion of me rather too far, thought I should
immediately acquire fame in Paris, and become a favorite
with fine ladies. To guide my inexperience she gave me
the confessions of the Count de “This book,” said
she, ‘‘ is a Mentor, of which you will stand in need in the
great world. You will do well by sometimes consulting it.”
I kept the book upwards of twenty years with a sentiment
of gratitude to her from whose hand I had received it, al-
though I frequently laughed at the opinion the lady seemed
to have of my merit in gallantry. From the moment I had
read the work, I was desirous of acquiring the friendship of
the author. My inclination led me right; he is the only real
friend I ever possessed amongst men of letters.”
I have so long been of the same opinion, and so perfectly convinced of its be-

<page 301>
268 THE CONFESSIONS OF
From this time I thought I might depend on the services
of Madam the Baroness, of Beuzenval, and the Marchioness
of Broglie, and that they would not long leave me without
resource. In this I was not deceived. But I must now speak
of my first visit to Madam Dupin, which produced more
lasting consequences.
Madam Dupin was, as every one in Paris knows, the daugh-
ter of Samuel Bernard and Madam Fontaine. There were
three sisters, who might be called the three graces. Madam
de la Touche who played a little prank, and went to Eng-
land with the Duke of Kingston. Madam Darby, the eldest
of the three; the friend, the only sincere friend of the Prince
of Conti; an adorable woman, as well by her sweetness and
the goodness of her charming character, as by her agreeable
wit and incessant cheerfulness. Lastly, Madam Dupin, more
beautiful than either of her sisters, and the only one who
has not been reproached with some levity of conduct.
She was the reward of the hospitality of M. Dupin, to
whom her mother gave her in marriage with the place of
farmer general and an immense fortune, in return for the good
reception he had given her in his province. When I saw her
for the first time, she was still one of the finest women in
Paris. She received me at her toilette, her arms were un-
covered, her hair dishevelled, and her combing-cloth ill-
arranged. This scene was new to me; it was too powerful
for my poor head, I became confused, my senses wandered;
in short, I was violently smitten by Madam Dupin.
My confusion was not prejudicial to me; she did not per-
ceive it. She kindly received the book and the author; spoke
with information of my plan, sung, accompanied herself on
the harpsichord, kept me to dinner, and placed me at table by
her side. Less than this would have turned my brain; I be-
came mad. She permitted me to visit her, and I abused the
permission. I went to see her almost every day, and dined
with her twice or thrice a week. I burned with inclination to
speak, but never dared attempt it. Several circumstances in-
creased my natural timidity. Permission to visit in an opulent
family was a door open to fortune, and in my situation I was
unwilling to run the risk of shutting it against myself.
ing well founded, that since my return to Paris I confided to him the manuscript
of my confessions. The suspicious J. J. never suspected perfidy and falsehood
untll he had been their victim.

<page 302>


<page 303>
• ' ' ' ' . . . . . * . ."
- * : * * * º,
… . . . . * * * -
-- * * : * - - iº
: * : * * * 1, .
- - - - * - -
* :* . . . . - • * -
- * - - -
* * . . - * . . * -
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
* . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Roºsed tº lºng ºf ſº, ºr "
- ‘. .
i - * .
-
. . .
* : * ~ *
- * * * *
* * * * * * * * **** * * * *** ***, are
:* - ;: w - - - - - -
** > . . .
* - a -t =
* . . . ;: . . . . . .
* . . . . . - - - - -
; : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
-
-- : : - * , , , , , º, º 1 - . .
- - * -
* * * * - * . . * * . . . . . . . . . . - - - -
* * - - * * * * 1. - -
º - * :- -
*** * * . . . \\ * - . * - a
, , , - - : . . . . . . . . . ... . . . .
- . . . ; * * * * * * * * * * * * * * . .
* , * * *... * ...i . . . . . . . . -
- - * * * ' ' . . . . . . . . . . . . .
* - - . *** -- - º, * * * * * * * * : * * º
* . . . . . . . . . . . *:1:1, nº l, ..., *** ...at “t ". . . .
• * * * . . . . . . . . . . ** * : * ~ *.*
* - - - - - - - - , , - - - - -, * * * * * **, the tº ºr -º
- º - … • , ; , eº - ºvel º - w an . . .s.
* * * * * * * *
T














<page 304>


<page 305>

<page 306>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 269
Madam Dupin, amiable as she was, was serious and unani-
mated; I found nothing in her manners sufficiently alluring to
embolden me. Her house, at that time, as brilliant as any
other in Paris, was frequented by societies the less numerous,
as the persons by whom they were composed were chosen on
account of some distinguished merit. She was fond of seeing
every one who had claims to a marked superiority; the great
men of letters, and fine women. No person was seen in her
circle but dukes, ambassadors, and blue ribbons. The Princess
of Rohan, the Countess of Forcalquier, Madam de Mirepoix,
Madam de Brignole, and Lady Hervey, passed for her inti-
mate friends. The Abbés de Fontenelle, de Saint Pierre, and
Sallier, M. de Fourmont, M. de Bernis, M. de Buffon, and
M. de Voltaire, were of her circle and her dinners. If her
reserved manner did not attract many young people, her
society inspired the greater awe, as it was composed of
graver persons, and the poor Jean-Jacques had no reason to
flatter himself he should be able to take a distinguished part
in the midst of such superior talents. I therefore had not
courage to speak; but no longer able to contain myself, I
took a resolution to write. For the first two days she said not
a word to me upon the subject. On the third day, she re-
turned me my letter, accompanying it with a few exhortations
which froze my blood. I attempted to speak, but my words
expired upon my lips; my sudden passion was extinguished
with my hopes, and after a declaration in form I continued
to live with her upon the same terms as before, without so
much as speaking to her even by the language of the eyes.
I thought my folly was forgotten, but I was deceived. M.de
Francueil,son to M. Dupin, and son-in-law to Madam Dupin,
was much the same with herself and me. He had wit, a good
person, and might have pretensions. This was said to be the
case, and probably proceeded from his mother-in-law's hav-
ing given him an ugly wife of a mild disposition, with whom,
as well as with her husband, she lived upon the best of terms.
M. de Francueil was fond of talents in others, and cultivated
those he possessed. Music, which he understood very well, was
a means of producing a connection between us. I frequently
saw him, and he soon gained my friendship. He, however,
suddenly gave me to understand that Madam Dupin thought
my visits too frequent, and begged me to discontinue them.
Such a compliment would have been proper when she returned

<page 307>
27o THE CONFESSIONS OF
my letter; but eight or ten days afterwards, and without any
new cause, it appeared to me ill-timed. This rendered my sit-
uation the more singular, as M. and Madam de Francueil still
continued to give me the same good reception as before.
I however made the intervals between my visits longer,
and I should entirely have ceased calling on them, had
not Madam Dupin, by another unexpected caprice, sent to de-
sire I would for a few days take care of her son, who chang-
ing his preceptor, remained alone during that interval. I
passed eight days in such torments as nothing but the pleas-
ure of obeying Madam Dupin could render supportable: I
would not have undertaken to pass eight other days like them
had Madam Dupin given me herself for the recompense.
M. de Francueil conceived a friendship for me, and I studied
with him. We began together a course of chemistry at Rou-
elles. That I might be nearer at hand, I left my hotel at
Quentin, and went to lodge at the Tennis Court, Rue Ver-
delet, which leads into the Rue Platiere, where M. Dupin
lived. There, in consequence of a cold neglected, I contract-
ed an inflammation of the lungs that had liked to have car-
ried me off. In my younger days I frequently suffered from
inflammatory disorders, pleurisies, and especially quinsies, to
which I was very subject, and which frequently brought me
near enough to death to familiarize me to its image.
During my convalescence I had leisure to reflect upon my
situation, and to lament my timidity, weakness and indolence;
these, notwithstanding the fire with which I found myself in-
flamed, left me to languish in an inactivity of mind, continu-
ally on the verge of misery. The evening preceding the day
on which I was taken ill, I went to an opera by Royer; the
name I have forgotten. Notwithstanding my prejudice in
favor of the talents of others, which has ever made me dis-
trustful of my own, I still thought the music feeble, and de-
void of animation and invention. I sometimes had the vanity
to flatter myself: I think I could do better than that. But
the terrible idea I had formed of the composition of an opera,
and the importance I heard men of the profession affix to
such an undertaking, instantly discouraged me, and made
me blush at having so much as thought of it. Besides, where
was I to find a person to write the words, and one who
would give himself the trouble of turning the poetry to my
liking 2 These ideas of music and the opera had possession

<page 308>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 27 I
of my mind during my illness, and in the delirium of my
fever I composed songs, duets, and choruses. I am cer-
tain I composed two or three little pieces, di prima inten-
2ione, perhaps worthy of the admiration of masters, could
they have heard them executed. Oh, could an account be
taken of the dreams of a man in a fever, what great and
sublime things would sometimes proceed from his delirium!
These subjects of music and opera still engaged my atten-
tion during my convalescence, but my ideas were less ener-
getic. Long and frequent meditations, and which were often
involuntary, and made such an impression upon my mind that
I resolved to attempt both words and music. This was not the
first time I had undertaken so difficult a task. Whilst I was
at Chambery I had composed an opera entitled Iphis and An-
axaréte, which I had the good sense to throw into the fire.
At Lyons I had composed another, entitled La Decouverte du
Nouveau Monde,” which, after having read it to M.Bordes, the
Abbés Malby, Trublet, and others, had met the same fate, not-
withstanding I had set the prologue and the first act to music,
and although David, after examining the composition, had
told me there were passages in it worthy of Buononcini.
Before I began the work I took time to consider of my plan.
In a heroic ballet I proposed three different subjects, in three
acts, detached from each other, set to music of a different
character, taking for each subject the amours of a poet. I en-
titled this opera Les Muses Galantes. My first act, in music
strongly characterized, was Tasso; the second in tender har-
mony, Ovid; and the third, entitled Anacreon, was to partake
of the gayety of the dithyrambus. I tried my skill on the
first act, and applied to it with an ardor which, for the first
time, made me feel the delightful sensation produced by the
creative power of composition. One evening, as I entered the
opera, feeling myself strongly incited and overpowered by my
ideas, I put my money again into my pocket, returned to my
apartment, locked the door, and, having close drawn all the
curtains, that every ray of light might be excluded, I went
to bed, abandoning myself entirely to this musical and poet-
ical aestrum, and in seven or eight hours rapidly composed
the greatest part of an act. I can truly say my love for the
Princess of Ferrara (for I was Tasso for the moment) and
my noble and lofty sentiment with respect to her unjust
•The Discovery of the New World.

<page 309>
272 THE CONFESSIONS OF
brother, procured me a night a hundred times more deli-
cious than one passed in the arms of the princess would
have been. In the morning but a very little of what I had
done remained in my head, but this little, almost effaced by
sleep and lassitude, still sufficiently evinced the energy of
the pieces of which it was the scattered remains.
I this time did not proceed far with my undertaking, be-
ing interrupted by other affairs. Whilst I attached myself to
the family of Dupin, Madam de Beuzenval and Madam de
Broglie, whom I continued to visit, had not forgotten me.
The Count de Montaigu, captain in the guards, had just
been appointed ambassador to Venice. He was an ambassa-
dor made by Barjac, to whom he assidously paid his court.
His brother, the Chevalier de Montaigu, gentilhomme de la
manche to the dauphin, was acquainted with these ladies,
and with the Abbé Alary of the French academy, whom I
sometimes visited. Madam de Broglie having heard the am-
bassador was seeking a secretary, proposed me to him. A
conference was opened between us. I asked a salary of fifty
guineas, a trifle for an employment which required me to
make some appearance. The ambassador was unwilling to
give more than a thousand livres, leaving me to make the
journey at my own expense. The proposal was ridiculous.
We could not agree, and M. de Francueil, who used all his
efforts to prevent my departure, prevailed.
I stayed, and M. de Montaigu set out on his journey, tak-
ing with him another secretary, one M. Follau, who had been
recommended to him by the office of foreign affairs. They
no sooner arrived at Venice than they quarrelled. Follau
perceiving he had to do with a madman, left him there, and
M. de Montaigu having nobody with him, except a young
abbé of the name of Binis, who wrote under the secretary,
and was unfit to succeed him, had recourse to me. The chev-
alier, his brother, a man of wit, by giving me to understand
there were advantages annexed to the place of secretary, pre-
vailed upon me to accept the thousand livres. I was paid twen-
ty louisin advance for my journey,and immediately departed.
At Lyons I would most willingly have taken the road to
Mount Cenis, to see my poor mamma. But I went down the
Rhone, and embarked at Toulon, as well on account of the
war, and from a motive of economy, as to obtain a passport
from M. de Mirepoix, who then commanded in Provence, and

<page 310>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 273
to whom I was recommended. M. de Montaigu not being
able to do without me, wrote letter after letter, desiring I
would hasten my journey; this, however, an accident con-
siderably prolonged.
It was at the time of the plague at Messina, and the Eng-
lish fleet had anchored there, and visited the Felucca, on
board of which I was, and this circumstance subjected us,
on our arrival, after a long and difficult voyage, to a quar-
antine of one-and-twenty days.
The passengers had the choice of performing it on board
or in the Lazaretto, which we were told was not yet fur-
nished. They all chose the Felucca. The insupportable heat,
the closeness of the vessel, the impossibility of walking in
it, and the vermin with which it swarmed, made me at all
risks prefer the Lazaretto. I was therefore conducted to a
large building of two stories, quite empty, in which I found
neither window, bed, table, nor chair, not so much as even
a joint-stool or bundle of straw. My night sack and my
two trunks being brought me, I was shut in by great doors
with huge locks, and remained at full liberty to walk at my
ease from chamber to chamber and story to story, every-
where finding the same solitude and nakedness.
This, however, did not induce me to repent that I had pre-
ferred the Lazaretto to the Felucca; and, like another Rob-
inson Crusoe, I began to arrange myself for my one-and
twenty days, just as I should have done for my whole life.
In the first place, I had the amusement of destroying the
vermin I had caught in the Felucca. As soon as I had got
clear of these, by means of changing my clothes and linen,
I proceeded to furnish the chamber I had chosen. I made
a good mattress with my waistcoats and shirts; my napkins
I converted, by sewing them together, into sheets; my robe
de chambre into a counterpane; and my cloak into a pillow.
I made myself a seat with one of my trunks laid flat, and a
table with the other. I took out some writing paper and an
inkstand, and distributed, in the manner of a library, a
dozen books which I had with me. In a word, I so well ar-
ranged my few movables, that except curtains and windows,
I was almost as commodiously lodged in this Lazeretto, ab-
solutely empty as it was, as I had been at the Tennis Court
in the Rue Verdelet. My dinners were served with no
small degree of pomp; they were escorted by two grenadiers

<page 311>
274 THE CONFESSIONS OF
with bayonets fixed; the staircase was my dining-room, the
landing-place my table, and the steps served me for a seat;
and as soon as my dinner was served up a little bell was
rung to inform me I might sit down to table.
Between my repasts, when I did not either read or write
or work at the furnishing of my apartment, I went to walk in
the burying-ground of the Protestants, which served me as a
courtyard. From this place I ascended to a lanthorn which
looked into the harbor, and from which I could see the ships
come in and go out. In this manner I passed fourteen days,
and should have thus passed the whole time of the quarantine
without the least weariness had not M. Joinville, envoy from
France, to whom I found means to send a letter, vinegared,
perfumed, and half burnt, procured eight days of the time
to be taken off: these I went and spent at his house, where
I confess I found myself better lodged than in the Lazaret-
to. He was extremely civil to me. Dupont, his secretary,
was a good creature: he introduced me, as well at Genoa as
in the country, to several families, the company of which I
found very entertaining and agreeable; and I formed with
him an acquaintance and a correspondence which we kept up
for a considerable length of time. I continued my journey,
very agreeably, through Lombardy. I saw Milan, Verona,
Brescie, and Padua, and at length arrived at Venice, where
I was impatiently expected by the ambassador.
I found there piles of despatches, from the court and from
other ambassadors, the ciphered part of which he had not been
able to read, although he had all the ciphers necessary for that
purpose, never having been employed in any office, nor even
seen the cipher of a minister. I was at first apprehensive of
meeting with some embarrassment; but I found nothing
could be more easy, and in less than a week I had deciphered
the whole, which certainly was not worth the trouble; for
not to mention the little activity required in the embassy of
Venice, it was not to such a man as M. de Montaigu that
government would confide a negotiation of even the most
trifling importance. Until my arrival he had been much em-
barrassed, neither knowing how to dictate nor to write legi-
bly. I was very useful to him, of which he was sensible; and
he treated me well. To this he was also induced by another
motive. Since the time of M. de Froulay, his predecessor,
whose head became deranged, the consul from France, M. le

<page 312>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 275
Blond, had been charged with the affairs of the embassy, and
after the arrival of M. de Montaigu, continued to manage
them until he had put him into the track. M. de Montaigu,
hurt at this discharge of his duty by another, although he
himself was incapable of it, became disgusted with the con-
sul, and as soon as I arrived deprived him of the functions
of secretary to the embassy to give them to me. They were
inseparable from the title, and he told me to take it. As long
as I remained with him he never sent any person except my-
self under this title to the senate, or to conference, and
upon the whole it was natural enough he should prefer hav-
ing for secretary to the embassy a man attached to him, to
a consul or a clerk of office named by the court.
This rendered my situation very agreeable, and prevented
his gentlemen, who were Italians, as well as his pages, and
most of his suite from disputing precedence with me in his
house. I made an advantageous use of the authority annexed
to the title he had conferred upon me, by maintaining his
right of protection, that is, the freedom of his neighborhood,
against the attempts several times made to infringe it; a privi-
lege which his Venetian officers took no care to defend. But
I never permitted banditti to take refuge there, although this
would have produced me advantages of which his excellency
would not have disdained to partake. He thought proper,
however, to claim a part of those of the secretaryship, which
is called the chancery. It was in time of war, and there were
many passports issued. For each of these passports a sequin
was paid to the secretary who made it out and countersigned
it. All my predecessors had been paid this sequin by French-
men and others without distinction. I thought this unjust,
and although I was not a Frenchman, I abolished it in favor
of the French; but I so rigorously demanded my right from
persons of every other nation, that the Marquis de Scotti,
brother to the favorite of the Queen of Spain, having asked
for a passport without taking notice of the sequin, I sent to
demand it; a boldness which the vindictive Italian did not for-
get. As soon as the new regulation I had made, relative to
passports, was known, none but pretended Frenchmen, who
in a gibberish the most mispronounced, called themselves
Provencals, Picards, or Burgundians, came to demand them.
My ear being very fine, I was not thus made a dupe, and I
am almost persuaded that not a single Italian ever cheated

<page 313>
276 THE CONFESSIONS OF
me of my sequin, and that not one Frenchman ever paid it.
I was foolish enough to tell M. de Montaigu, who was ignor-
ant of everything that passed, what I had done. The word
sequin made him open his ears, and without giving me his
opinion of the abolition of that tax upon the French, he pre-
tended I ought to account with him for the others, promising
me at the same time equivalent advantages. More filled with
indignation at this meanness, than concern for my own in-
terest, I rejected his proposal. He insisted, and I grew warm.
“No, sir,” said I, with some heat, “your excellency may keep
what belongs to you, but do not take from me that which is
mine; I will not suffer you to touch a penny of the perquisites
arising from passports. Perceiving he could gain nothing
by these means he had recourse to others, and blushed not to
tell me that since I had appropriated to myself the profits of
the chancery, it was but just I should pay the expenses. I
was unwilling to dispute upon this subject, and from that
time I furnished at my own expense, ink, paper, wax, wax-
candle, tape, and even a new seal, for which he never reim-
bursed me to the amount of a farthing. This, however, did
not prevent my giving a small part of the produce of the pass-
ports to the Abbé de Binis, a good creature, and who was far
from pretending to have the least right to any such thing. If
he was obliging to me my politeness to him was an equiva-
lent, and we always lived together on the best of terms.
On the first trial I made of his talents in my official func-
tions, I found him less troublesome than I expected he would
Inave been, considering he was a man without experience, in
the service of an ambassador who possessed no more than
himself, and whose ignorance and obstinacy constantly coun-
teracted everything with which common-sense and some in-
formation inspired me for his service and that of the king.
The next thing the ambassador did was to connect himself
with the Marquis Mari, ambassador from Spain, an ingenious
and artful man, who, had he wished so to do, might haveled
him by the nose, yet on account of the union of the interests
of the two crowns he generally gave him good advice,
which might have been of essential service, had not the other,
by joining his own opinion, counteracted it in the execution.
The only business they had to conduct in concert with each
other was to engage the Venetians to maintain their neutral-
ity. These did not neglect to give the strongest assurances

<page 314>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 277
of their fidelity to their engagement at the same time that
they publicly furnished ammunition to the Austrian troops,
and even recruits under pretense of desertion. M. de Mon-
taigu, who I believe wished to render himself agreeable to
the republic, failed not on his part, notwithstanding my
representation to make me assure the government in all my
despatches, that the Venetians would never violate an arti-
cle of the neutrality. The obstimacy and stupidity of this
poor wretch made me write and act extravagantly: I was
obliged to be the agent of his folly, because he would have
it so, but he sometimes rendered my employment insuppor-
table and the functions of it almost impracticable. For ex-
ample, he insisted on the greatest part of his despatches to
the king, and of those to the minister, being written in ci-
pher, although neither of them contained anything that re-
quired that precaution. I represented to him that between
the Friday, the day the despatches from the court arrived,
and Saturday, on which ours were sent off, there was not
sufficient time to write so much in cipher, and carry on the
considerable correspondence with which I was charged for
the same courier. He found an admirable expedient, which
was to prepare on Thursday the answer to the despatches
we were expected to receive on the next day. This appeared
to him so happily imagined, that notwithstanding all I could
say on the impossibility of the thing, and the absurdity of at-
tempting its execution, I was obliged to comply during the
whole time I afterwards remained with him, after having
made notes of the few loose words he spoke to me in the
course of the week, and of some tiivial circumstances which
I collected by hurrying from place to place. Provided with
these materials I never once failed carrying to him on the
Thursday morning a rough draft of the despatches which
were to be sent off on Saturday, excepting the few addi-
tions and corrections I hastily made in answer to the letters
which arrived on the Friday, and to which ours served for
answer. He had another custom, diverting enough and
which made his correspondance ridiculous beyond imagina-
tion. He sent back all information to its respective source,
instead of making it follow its course. To M. Amelot he
transmitted the news of the court; to M. Maurepas, that of
Paris; to M. d’ Havrincourt, the news from Sweden; to M.
de Chetardie, that from Petersbourg; and sometimes to each

<page 315>
278 THE CONFESSIONS OF
of those the news they had respectively sent to him, and
which I was employed to dress up in terms different from
those in which it was conveyed to us. As he read nothing of
what I laid before him, except the despatches for the court,
and signed those to other ambassadors without reading them,
this left me more at liberty to give what turn I thought
proper to the latter, and in these therefore I made the arti-
cles of information cross each other. But it was impossible
for me to do the same by despatches of importance; and I
thought myself happy when M. de Montaigu did not take it
into his head to cram into them an impromptu of a few lines
after his manner. This obliged me to return, and hastily
transcribe the whole despatch decorated with his new non-
sense, and honor it with the cipher, without which he would
have refused his signature. I was frequently almost tempted,
for the sake of his reputation, to cipher something different
from what he had written, but feeling that nothing could
authorize such a deception, I left him to answer for his own
folly, satisfying myself with having spoken to him with
freedom, and discharged at my own peril the duties of my
station. This is what I always did with an uprightness, a
zeal and courage, which merited on his part a very different
recompense from that which in the end I received from him.
It was time I should once be what Heaven, which had en-
dowed me with a happy disposition, what the education that
had been given me by the best of women, and that I had
given myself, had prepared me for, and I became so. Left to
my own reflections, without a friend or advice, without ex-
perience, and in a foreign country, in the service of a for-
eign nation, surrounded by a crowd of knaves, who, for their
own interest, and to avoid the scandal of good example, en-
deavored to prevail upon me to imitate them; far from yield-
ing to their solicitations, I served France well, to which I
owed nothing, and the ambassador still better, as it was
right and just I should do to the utmost of my power. Irre-
proachable in a post, sufficiently exposed to censure, I mer-
ited and obtained the esteem of the republic, that of all the
ambassadors with whom we were in correspondence, and the
affection of the French who resided at Venice, not even excep-
ting the consul, whom with regret I supplanted in the func-
tions which I knew belonged to him, and which occasioned
me more embarrassment than they afforded me satisfaction.

<page 316>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 279
M. de Montaigu, confiding without reserve to the Marquis
Mari, who did not thoroughly understand his duty, neglected
it to such a degree that without me the French who were at
Venice would not have perceived that an ambassador from
their nation resided there. Always put off without being
heard when they stood in need of his protection, they became
disgusted and no longer appeared in his company or at his
table, to which indeed he never invited them. I frequently
did from myself what it was his duty to have done; I render-
ed to the French, who applied to me, all the services in my
power. In any other country I should have done more, but,
on account of my employment, not being able to see persons
in place, I was often obliged to apply to the consul, and the
consul, who was settled in the country with his family, had
many persons to oblige, which prevented him from acting as
he otherwise would have done. However, perceiving him
unwilling and afraid to speak, Iventured hazardous measures,
which sometimes succeeded. I recollect one which still makes
me laugh. No person would suspect it was to me, the lovers
of the theatre at Paris, owe Coralline and her sister Camille,
nothing however, can be more true. Veronese, their father,
had engaged himself with his children in the Italian compa-
ny, and after having received two thousand livres for the
expenses of his journey, instead of setting out for France,
quietly continued at Venice, and accepted an engagement in
the theatre of Saint Luke,” to which Coralline, a child as
she still was, drew great numbers of people. The Duke de
Greves, as first gentleman of the chamber, wrote to the am-
bassador to claim the father and the daughter. M. de Mon-
taigu when he gave me the letter, confined his instructions
to saying, voye2 cela, examine and pay attention to this. I
went to M. Blond to beg he would speak to the patrician, to
whom the theatre belonged, and who, I believe, was named
Zustinian, that he might discharge Veronese, who had en-
gaged in the name of the king. Le Blond, to whom the
commission was not very agreeable, executed it badly.
Zustinian answered vaguely, and Veronese was not dis-
charged. I was piqued at this. It was during the carnival,
and having taken the bahute and a mask, I set out for the
palace Zustinian. Those who saw my gondola arrive with the
*I have my doubts whether or not, it was not St. Samuel; proper names abso-
lutely escape my memory.

<page 317>
28O THE CONFESSIONS OF
livery of the ambassador, were lost in astonishment. Venice
had never seen such a thing. I entered, and caused myself to
be announced by the name of Una Siora Masehcra. As soon
as I was introduced I took off my mask and told my name.
The senator turned pale and appeared stupefied with sur-
prise. “Sir,” said I to him in Venetian, “it is with much
regret I importune your excellency with this visit; but you
have in your theatre of Saint Luke, a man of the name of
Veronese, who is engaged in theservice of the king, and whom
you have been requested, but in vain, to give up: I come to
claim him in the name of his majesty.” My short harangue
was effectual. I had no sooner left the palace than Zustinian
ran to communicate the adventure to the state inquisitors,
by whom he was severely reprehended. Veronese was dis-
charged the same day. I sent him word that if he did not
set off within a week I would have him arrested. He did not
wait for my giving him this intimation a second time.
On another occasion I relieved from difficulty solely by my
own means, and almost without the assistance of any other
person, the captain of a merchant-ship. This was one Captain
Olivet, from Marseilles; the name of the vessel I have forgot-
ten. His men had quarreled with the Sclavonians in the ser-
vice of the republic, some violence had been committed, and
the vessel was under so severe an embargo that nobody except
the master was suffered to go on board or leave it without
permission. He applied to the ambassador, who would hear
nothing he had to say. He afterwards went to the consul,
who told him it was not an affair of commerce, and that he
could not interfere in it. Not knowing what further steps
to take he applied to me. I told M. de Montaigu he ought to
permit me to lay before the senate a memoir on the subject.
I do not recollect whether or not he consented, or that I pre-
sented the memoir; but I perfectly remember that if I did it
was ineffectual, and the embargo still continuing, I took an-
other method, which succeeded. I inserted a relation of the
affairs in one of our letters to M. de Maurepas, though I had
difficulty in prevailing upon M. de Montaigue to suffer the
article to pass.
I knew that our despatches, although their contents were
insignificant, were opened at Venice. Of this I had a proof
by finding the articles they contained, verbatim in the gazette,
a treachery of which I had in vain attempted to prevail upon

<page 318>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 28I
the ambassador to complain. My object in speaking of the
affair in the letter was to turn the curiosity of the ministers
of the republic to advantage, to inspire them with some appre-
hensions, and to induce the state to release the vessel: for had
it been necessary to this effect to wait for an answer from the
court, the captain would have been ruined before it could
have arrived. I did still more, I went alongside the vessel to
make inquiries of the ship's company. I took with me the
Abbé Patizel, chancellor of the consulship, who would rather
have been excused, so much were these poor creatures afraid
of displeasing the Senate. As I could not go on board, on
account of the order from the states, I remained in my gon-
dola, and there took the depositions successively, interroga-
ting each of the mariners, and directing my questions in such
a manner as to produce answers which might be to their ad-
vantage. I wished to prevail upon Patizel to put the ques-
tions and take depositions himself, which in fact was more
his business than mine; but to this he would not consent;
he never once opened his mouth and refused to sign the de-
positions after me. This step, somewhat bold, was however,
successful, and the vessel was released long before an ans-
wer came from the minister. The captain wished to make
me a present; but without being angry with him on that ac-
count, I tapped him on the shoulder, saying, “Captain Olivet,
can you imagine that he who does not receive from the French
his perquisite for passports, which he found his established
right, is a man likely to sell them the king's protection ?”
He, however, insisted on giving me a dinner on board
his vessel, which I accepted, and took with me the secretary
to the Spanish embassy, M. Carrio, a man of wit and amia-
ble manners, to partake of it: he has since been secretary to
the Spanish embassy at Paris and chargé des affaires. I
had formed an intimate connection with him after the ex-
ample of our ambassadors.
Happy should I have been, if, when in the most disinter-
ested manner I did all the service I could, I had known how
to introduce sufficient order into all these little details, that I
might not have served others at my own expense. But in
employments similar to that I held, in which the most trifling
faults are of consequence, my whole attention was engaged
in avoiding all such mistakes as might be detrimental to my
service. I conducted, till the last moment, everything rela-



<page 319>
282 THE CONFESSIONS OF
tive to my immediate duty, with the greatest order and exact-
ness. Excepting a few errors which a forced precipitation
made me commit in ciphering, and of which the clerks of M.
Amelot once complained, neither the ambassador nor any
other person had ever the least reason to reproach me with
negligence in any one of my functions. This is remarkable
in a man so negligent as I am. But my memory sometimes
failed me, and I was not sufficiently careful in the private
affairs with which I was charged; however, a love of justice
always made me take the loss on myself, and this volunta-
rily, before anybody thought of complaining. I will mention
but one circumstance of this nature; it relates to my depart-
ure from Venice, and I afterwards felt the effects of it in Paris.
Our cook, whose name was Rousselot, had brought from
France an old note for two hundred livres, which a hair-
dresser, a friend of his, had received from a noble Venetian
of the name of Zanetto Nani, who had had wigs of him to
that amount. Rousselot brought me the note, begging I
would endeavor to obtain payment of some part of it, by way
of accommodation. I knew, and he knew it also, that the
constant custom of noble Venetians was, when once returned
to their country, never to pay the debts they had contracted
abroad. When means are taken to force them to payment,
the wretched creditor finds so many delays, and incurs such
enormous expenses, that he becomes disgusted and concludes
by giving up his debtor accepting the most trifling composi-
tion. I begged M. le Blond to speak to Zanetto. The Vene-
tian acknowledged the note, but did not agree to payment.
After a long dispute he at length promised three sequins; but
when Le Blond carried him the note even these were not
ready, and it was necessary to wait. In this interval hap-
pened my quarrel with the ambassador and I quitted his ser-
vice. I had left the papers of the embassy in the greatest
order, but the note .P Rousselot was not to be found. M. le
Blond assured me he had given it me back. I knew him to
be too honest a man to have the least doubt of the matter;
but it was impossible for me to recollect what I had done with
it. As Zanetto had acknowledged the debt, I desired M. le
Blond to endeavor to obtain from him the three sequins on
giving him a receipt for the amount, or to prevail upon him
to renew the note by way of duplicate. Zanetto, knowing the
note to be lost, would not agree to either. I offered Rousse-

<page 320>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 283
lot the three sequins from my own purse, as a discharge of
the debt. He refused them, and said I might settle the
matter with the creditor at Paris, of whom he gave me the
address. The hair-dresser, having been informed of what
had passed, would either have his note or the whole sum for
which it was given. What, in my indignation, would I have
given to have found this vexatious paper! I paid the two
hundred livres, and that in my greatest distress. In this
manner the loss of the note produced to the creditor the pay-
ment of the whole sum, whereas had it, unfortunately for
him, been found, he would have had some difficulty in re-
covering even the ten crowns, which his excellency, Zanet-
to Nani, had promised to pay.
The talents I thought I felt in myself for my employment
made me discharge the functions of it with satisfaction, and
except the society of my friend de Carrio, that of the virtu-
ous Altuna, of whom I shall soon have an occasion to speak,
the innocent recreations of the place Saint Mark, of the
theatre, and of a few visits which we, for the most part,
made together, my only pleasure was in the duties of my sta-
tion. Although these were not considerable, especially with
the aid of the Abbé de Binis, yet as the correspondence was
very extensive and there was a war, I was a good deal em-
ployed. I applied to business the greatest part of every morn-
ing, and on the days previous to the departure of the courier,
in the evenings, and sometimes till midnight. The rest of
my time I gave to the study of the political professions I
had entered upon, and in which I hoped, from my success-
ful beginning, to be advantageously employed. In fact I
was in favor with every one; the ambassador himself spoke
highly of my services, and never complained of anything I
did for him; his dissatisfaction proceeded from my having
insisted on quitting him, in consequence of the useless com-
plaints I had frequently made on several occasions. The am-
bassadors and ministers of the king with whom we were in
correspondence complimented him on the merit of his secre-
tary, in a manner by which he ought to have been flattered,
but which in his poor head produced quite a contrary effect.
He received one in particular relative to an affair of impor-
tance, for which he never pardoned me.
He was so incapable of bearing the least constraint, that on
the Saturday, the day of the despatches for most of the courts

<page 321>
284 THE CONFESSIONS OF
he could not contain himself, and wait till the business was
done before he went out, and incessantly pressing me to
hasten the despatches to the king and ministers, he signed
them with precipitation, and immediately went I know not
where, leaving most of the other letters without signing; this
obliged me, when these contained nothing but news, to con-
vert them into journals; but when affairs which related to
the king were in question it was necessary somebody should
sign, and I did it. This once happened relative to some im-
portant advice we had just received from M. Vincent, chargé
des affaires from the king, at Vienna. The Prince Lobkowitz
was then marching to Naples, and Count Gages had just
made the most memorable retreat, the finest military man-
oeuvre of the whole century, of which Europe has not suffici-
ently spoken. The despatch informed us that a man, whose
person M. Vincent described, had set out from Vienna, and
was to pass by Venice, in his way into Abruzzo, where he was
secretly to stir up the people at the approach of the Austrians.
In the absence of M. le Comte de Montaigu, who did not
give himself the least concern about anything, I forwarded
this advice to the Marquis de 1' Hopital, so apropos, that it
is perhaps to the poor Jean Jacques, so abused and laughed
at, that the house of Bourbon owes the preservation of the
the kingdom of Naples.
The Marquis de l'Hopital, when he thanked his colleague,
as it was proper he should do, spoke to him of his secretary,
and mentioned the service he had just rendered to the com-
mon cause. The Comte de Montaigu, who in that affair had
to reproach himself with negligence, thought he perceived in
the compliment paid him by M. de l’Hopital, something like
a reproach, and spoke of it to me with signs of ill-humor. I
found it necessary to act in the same manner with the Count
de Castellane, ambassador at Constantinople, as I had done
with the Marquis de l’Hopital, although in things of less im-
portance. As there was no other conveyance to Constanti-
nople than by couriers, sent from time to time by the senate
to its Bailli, advice of their departure was given to the am-
bassador of France, that he might write by them to his col-
league, if he thought proper so to do. This advice was com-
monly sent a day or two beforehand; but M. de Montaigu was
held in so little respect, that merely for the sake of form he
was sent to, a couple of hours before the couriers set off. This

<page 322>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 285
frequently obliged me to write the despatch in his absence.
M. de Castellane, in his answer made honorable mention of
me; M. de Jonville, at Genoa, did the same, and these in-
stances of their regard and esteem became new grievances.
I acknowledge I did not neglect any opportunity of making
myself known; but I never sought one improperly, and in
serving well I thought I had a right to aspire to the natural
return for essential services; the esteem of those capable of
judging of, and rewarding them. I will not say whether or
not my exactness in discharging the duties of my employ-
ment was a just subject of complaint from the ambassador;
but I cannot refrain from declaring that it was the sole
grievance he ever mentioned previous to our separation.
His house, which he had never put on a good footing, was
constantly filled with rabble; the French were ill-treated in
it, and the ascendancy was given to the Italians; of these
even, the more honest part, they who had long been in the
service of the embassy, were indecently discharged, his first
gentleman in particular, whom he had taken from the Comte
de Froulay, and who, if I remember right, was called Comte
de Peati, or something very like that name. The second
gentleman, chosen by M. de Montaigu, was an outlaw high-
wayman from Mantua, called Dominic Vitali, to whom the
ambassador intrusted the care of his house, and who had
by means of flattery and sordid economy, obtained his con-
fidence, and became his favorite to the great prejudice of the
few honest people he still had about him, and of the secretary
who was at their head. The countenance of an upright man
always gives inquietude to knaves. Nothing more was nec-
essary to make Vitali conceive a hatred against me: but for
this sentiment there was still another cause which rendered
it more cruel. Of this I must give an account, that I may
be condemned if I am found in the wrong.
The ambassador had, according to custom, a box at each
of the theaters. Every day at dinner he named the theater
to which it was his intention to go: I chose after him, and
the gentlemen disposed of the other boxes. When I went
out I took the key of the box I had chosen. One day, Vitali
not being in the way, I ordered the footman who attended
on me, to bring me the key to a house which I named to
him. Vitali, instead of sending the key, said he had dis-
posed of it. I was the more enraged at this as the footman

<page 323>
286 THE CONFESSIONS OF
delivered his message in public. In the evening vital;
wished to make me some apology, to which however I
would not listen. “To-morrow, sir,” said I to him, “you
will come at such an hour and apologize to me in the house
where I received the affront, and in the presence of the per-
sons who were witnesses to it; or after to-morrow, what-
ever may be the consequences, either you or I will leave the
house.” This firmness intimidated him. He came to the
house at the hour appointed, and made me a public apology,
with a meanness worthy of himself. But he afterwards took
his measures at leisure, and at the same time that he cringed
to me in public, he secretly acted in so vile a manner, that al-
though unable to prevail on the ambassador to give me my
dismission, he laid me under the necessity of resolving to
leave him.
A wretch like him, certainly, could not know me, but he
knew enough of my character to make it serviceable to his
purposes. He knew I was mild to an excess, and patient in
bearing involuntary wrongs; but haughty and impatient when
insulted with premeditated offences; loving decency and dig-
nity in things in which these were requisite, and not more
exact in requiring the respect due to myself, than attentive in
rendering that which I owed to others. In this he undertook
to disgust me, and in this he succeeded. He turned the house
upside down, and destroyed the order and subordination I had
endeavored to establish in it. A house without a woman
stands in need of rather a severe dicipline to preserve that
modesty which is inseparable from dignity. He soon con-
verted ours into a place of filthy debauch and scandalous
licentiousness, the haunt of knaves and debauchees. He pro-
cured for second gentleman to his excellency, in the place of
him whom he got discharged, another pimp like himself, who
kept a house of ill-fame, at the Cross of Malta; and the in-
decency of these two rascals was equalled by nothing but
their insolence. Except the bed-chamber of the ambassador,
which, however, was not in very good order, there was
not a corner in the whole house supportable to an modest
111a11.
As his excellency did not sup, the gentleman and myself
had a private table, at which the Abbé Binis and the pages
also eat. In the most paltry ale-house people are served
with more cleanliness and decency, have cleaner linen, and

<page 324>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 287
a table better supplied. We had but one little and very
filthy candle, pewter plates, and iron forks.
I could have overlooked what passed in secret, but I was
deprived of my gondola. I was the only secretary to an am-
bassador, who was obliged to hire one or go on foot, and the
livery of his excellency no longer accompanied me, except
when I went to the senate. Besides, everything which passed
in the house was known in the city. All those who were in
the service of the other ambassadors loudly exclaimed; Domi-
nic, the only cause of all, exclaimed louder than anybody,
well knowing the indecency with which we were treated was
more affecting to me than to any other person. Though I
was the only one in the house who said nothing of the matter
abroad, I complained loudly of it to the ambassador, as well
as of himself, who, secretly excited by the wretch, entirely
devoted to his will, daily made me suffer some new affront.
Obliged to spend a good deal to keep up a footing with those
in the same situation with myself, and to make an appear-
ance proper to my employment, I could not touch a farthing
of my salary, and when I asked him for money, he spoke of
his esteem for me, and his confidence, as if either of these
could have filled my purse, and provided for everything.
These two banditti at length quite turned the head of their
master, who naturally had not a good one, and ruined him by
a continual traffic, and by bargains, of which he was the dupe,
whilst they persuaded him they were greatly in his favor.
They persuaded him to take upon the Brenta, a Palazzo, at
twice the rent it was worth, and divided the surplus with the
proprietor. The apartments were inlaid with mosaic, and or-
namented with columns and pilasters, in the taste of the
country. M. de Montaigu, had all these superbly masked by
fir wainscoting, for no other reason than because at Paris
apartments were thus fitted up. It was for a similar reason
that he only, of all the ambassadors who were at Venice, took
from his pages their swords, and from his footmen their
canes. Such was the man, who, perhaps from the same motive
took a dislike to me on account of my serving him faithfully.
I patiently endured his disdain, his brutality, and ill-treat-
ment, as long as, perceiving them accompanied by ill-humor,
I thought they had in them no portion of hatred; but the mo-
ment I saw the design formed of depriving me of the honor I
merited by my faithful services, I resolved to resign my em-

<page 325>
288 THE CONFESSIONS OF
ployment. The first mark I received of his ill will was rela-
tive to a dinner he was to give to the Duke of Modena and
his family, who were at Venice, and at which he signified to
me I should not be present. I answered, piqued, but not
angry, that having the honor daily to dine at his table, if
the Duke of Modena, when he came, required I should not
appear at it, my duty as well as the dignity of his excel-
lency would not suffer me to consent to such a request.
“How,” said he passionately, “my secretary, who is not a
gentleman, pretends to dine with a sovereign when my gen-
tlemen do not!” “Yes, sir,” replied I, “the post with
which your excellency has honored me, as long as I dis-
charge the functions of it, so far ennobles me that my rank
is superior to that of your gentlemen or of the persons call-
ing themselves such; and I am admitted where they can-
not appear. You cannot but know that on the day on which
you shall make your public entry, I am called to the cere-
mony by etiquette; and by an immemorial custom, to fol-
low you in a dress of ceremony, and afterwards to dine with
you at the palace of St. Mark; and I know not why a man who
has a right and is to eat in public with the doge and the senate
of Venice should not eat in private with the Duke of Mode-
na.” Though this argument was unanswerable, it did notcon-
vince the ambassador; but we had no occasion to renew the
dispute, as the Duke of Modena did not come to dine with him.
From that moment he did everything in his power to make
things disagreeable to me; and endeavored unjustly to de-
prive me of my rights, by taking from me the pecuniary ad-
vantages annexed to my employment, to give them to his
dear Vitali; and I am convinced that had he dared to send him
to the senate, in my place, he would have done it. He com-
monly employed the Abbé Binis in his closet, to write his
private letters: he made use of him to write to M. de Maure-
pas an account of the affair of Captain Olivet, in which, far
from taking the least notice of me, the only person who gave
himself any concern about the matter, he deprived me of
the honor of the depositions, of which he sent him a dupli-
cate, for the purpose of attributing them to Patizel, who had
not opened his mouth. He wished to mortify me, and please
his favorite; but had no desire to dismiss me his service.
He perceived it would be more difficult to find me a success-
or, than M. Follau, who had already made him known to the

<page 326>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 289
world. An Italian secretary was absolutely necessary to
him, on account of the answers from the senate; one who
could write all his despatches, and conduct his affairs,
wibout his giving himself the least trouble about anything;
a person who, to the merit of serving him well, could join
the baseness of being the toad-eater of his gentlemen, with-
out honor, merit, or principles. He wished to retain, and
humble me, by keeping me far from my country, and his
own, without money to return to either, and in which he
would, perhaps, had succeeded, had he began with more
moderation: but Vitali, who had other views, and wished to
force me to extremities, carried his point. The moment I
perceived, I lost all my trouble, that the ambassador im-
puted to me my services as so many crimes, instead of be-
ing satisfied with them; that with him I had nothing to ex-
pect, but things disagreeable at home, and injustice abroad;
and that, in the general disesteem into which he was fallen,
his ill offices might be prejudicial to me, without the possi-
bility of my being served by his good ones; I took my resolu-
tion, and asked him for my dismission, leaving him sufficient
time to provide himself with another secretary. Without
answering yes or no, he continued to treat me in the same
manner, as if nothing had been said. Perceiving things to
remain in the same state, and that he took no measures to pro-
cure himself a new secretary, I wrote to his brother, and, ex-
plaining to him my motives, begged he would obtain my dis-
mission from his excellency, adding that whether I received
it or not, I could not possibly remain with him. I waited a
long time without any answer, and began to be embarrassed:
but at length the ambassador received a letter from his
brother, which must have remonstrated with him in very
plain terms; for although he was extremely subject to fero-
cious rage, I never saw him so violent as on this occasion.
After torrents of unsufferable reproaches, not knowing what
more to say, he accused me of having sold his ciphers. I
burst into a loud laughter, and asked him, in a sneering
manner, if he thought there was in Venice a man who
would be fool enough to give half a crown for them all. He
threatened to call his servants to throw me out of the win-
dow. Until then I had been very composed; but on this
threat, anger and indignation seized me in my turn. I
sprang to the door, and after having turned a button which

<page 327>
29O. THE CONFESSIONS OF
fastened it within: “No, count,” said I, returning to him
with a grave step, “Your servants shall have nothing to do
with this affair; please to let it be settled between ourselves.”
My action and manner instantly made him calm; fear and
surprise were marked in his countenance. The moment
I saw his fury abated, I bid him adieu in a very few
words, and without waiting for his answer, went to the
door, opened it, and passed slowly across the antechamber,
through the midst of his people, who rose according to cus-
tom, and who, I am of opinion, would rather have lent their
assistance against him than me. Without going back to my
apartment, I descended the stairs, and immediately went
out of the palace never more to enter it.
I hastened immediately to M. le Blond and related to him
what had happened. Knowing the man, he was but little sur-
prised. He kept me to dinner. This dinner, although with-
out preparation, was splendid. All the French of consequence
who were at Venice, partook of it. The ambassador had not
a single person. The consul related my case to the company.
The cry was general, and by no means in favor of his ex-
cellency. He had not settled my account, nor paid me a far-
thing, and being reduced to the few louis I had in my pocket,
I was extremely embarrassed about my return to France.
Every purse was opened to me. I took twenty sequins from
that of M. le Blond, and as many from that of M. St. Cyr,
with whom, next to M. le Blond, I was the most intimately
connected. I returned thanks to the rest; and, till my depart-
ure, went to lodge at the house of the chancellor of the con-
sulship, to prove to the public, the nation was not an accom-
plice in the injustice of the ambassador.
His excellency, furious at seeing me taken notice of in my
misfortune, at the same time that, notwithstanding his being
an ambassador, nobody went near his house, quite lost his
senses and behaved like a madman. He forgot himself so far
as to present a memoir to the senate to get me arrested. On
being informed of this by the Abbé de Binis, I resolved to
remain a fortnight longer, instead of setting off the next day
as I had intended. My conduct had been known and ap-
proved of by everybody; I was universally esteemed. The
senate did not deign to return an answer to the extravagant
memoir of the ambassador, but sent me word I might re-
main in Venice as long as I thought proper, without making

<page 328>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 29I
myself uneasy about the attempts of a madman. I continued
to see my friends: I went to take leave of the ambassador
from Spain, who received me well, and of the Comte de Fino-
chietti, minister from Naples, whom I did not find at home.
I wrote him a letter and received from his excellency the
most polite and obliging answer. At length. I took my de-
parture, leaving behind me, notwithstanding my embarrass-
ment, no other debts than the two sums I had borrowed,
and of which I have just spoken; and an account of fifty
crowns with a shopkeeper, of the name of Morandi, which
Carrio promised to pay, and which I have never reimbursed
him, although we have frequently met since that time; but
with respect to the two sums of money, I returned them
very exactly the moment I had it in my power.
I cannot take leave of Venice without saying something of
the celebrated amusements of that city,or at least of the little
part of them of which I partook during my residence there.
It has been seen how little in my youth I ran after the pleas-
ures of that age, or those that are so called. My inclinations
did not change at Venice, but my occupations, which more-
over would have prevented this, rendered more agreeable to
me the simple recreations I permitted myself. The first and
most pleasing of all was the society of men of merit. M. le
Blond, de St. Cyr, Carrio Altuna, and a Forlinian gentle-
man, whose name I am very sorry to have forgotten, and
whom I never call to my recollection without emotion: he was
the man of all I ever knew whose heart most resembled my
own. We were connected with two or three Englishmen of
great wit and information, and, like ourselves, passionately
fond of music. All these gentlemen had their wives, female
friends, or mistresses: the latter were most of them women
of talents, at whose apartments there were balls and con-
certs. There was but little play; a lively turn, talents, and
the theatres rendered this amusement incipid. Play is the
resource of none but men whose time hangs heavy on their
hands. I had brought with me from Paris the prejudice of
that city against Italian music; but I had also received from
nature a sensibility and niceness of distinction which preju-
dice cannot withstand. I soon contracted that passion for
Italian music with which it inspires all those who are cap-
able of feeling its excellence. In listening to barcaroles, I
found I had not yet known what singing was, and I soon be-

<page 329>
292 THE CONFESSIONS OF
came so fond of the opera that, tired of babbling, eating, and
playing in the boxes when I wished to listen, I frequently
withdrew from the company to another part of the theater.
There, quite alone, shut up in my box, I abandoned myself,
notwithstanding the length of the representation, to the
pleasure of enjoying it at ease unto the conclusion. One
evening at the theatre of Saint Chrysostom, I fell into a more
profound sleep than I should have done in my bed. The
loud and brilliant airs did not disturb my repose. But who
can explain the delicious sensations given me by the soft
harmony of the angelic music, by which I was charmed from
sleep; what an awaking ! what ravishment what ecstasy,
when at the same instant I opened my ears and eyes | My
first idea was to believe I was in paradise. The ravishing air,
which I still recollect and shall never forget, began with these
words:
Conser vami la bella,
Che si m'accende il cor.
I was desirous of having it; I had and kept it for a time; but
it was not the same thing upon paper as in my head. The
notes were the same but the thing was different. This divine
composition can never be executed but in my mind, in the
same manner as it was the evening on which it woke me
from sleep.
A kind of music far superior, in my opinion, to that of
operas, and which in all Italy has not its equal, nor perhaps
in the whole world, is that of the stuole. The scuole are houses
of charity, established for the education of young girls with-
out fortune, to whom the republic afterwards gives a portion
either in marriage or for the cloister. Amongst talents culti-
vated in these young girls, music is in the first rank. Every
Sunday at the church of each of the four stuole, during ves-
pers, motettos or anthems with full choruses, accompanied by
a great orchestra, and composed and directed by the best mas-
ters in Italy, are sung in the galleries by girls only; not one
of whom is more than twenty years of age. I have not an idea
of anything so voluptuous and affecting as this music; the
richness of the art, the exquisite taste of the vocal part, the
excellence of the voices, the justness of the execution, every-
thing in these delightful concerts concurs to produce an im-
pression which certainly is not the mode, but from which I am
of opinion no heart is secure. Carrio and I never failed being

<page 330>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 293
present at these vespers of the Mendicanti, and we were not
alone. The church was always full of the lovers of the art,
and even the actors of the opera came there toform their tastes
after these excellent models. What vexed me was the iron
grate, which suffered nothing to escape but sounds, and con-
cealed from me the angels of which they were worthy. I
talked of nothing else. One day I spoke of it at Le Blond's;
“If you are so desirous,” said he, “to see those little girls, it
will be an easy matter to satisfy your wishes. I am one of the
administrators of the house, I will give you a collation with
them.” I did not let him rest until he had fulfilled his prom-
ise. In entering the saloon, which contained these beauties I
so much sighed to see, I felt a trembling of love which I had
never before experienced. M. le Blond presented to me one
after the other, these celebrated female singers, of whom the
namesand voices were all with which I was acquainted. Come,
Sophia,--she was horrid. Come, Cattina, ---she had but one
eye. Come, Bettina, --the small-pox had entirely disfigured
her. Scarcely one of them was without some striking defect.
Le Blond laughed at my surprise; however, two or three of
them appeared tolerable; thesenever sung but in the choruses;
I was almost in despair. During the collation we endeavored
to excite them, and they soon became enlivened; ugliness
does not exclude the graces, and I found they possessed
them. I said to myself, they cannot sing in this manner
without intelligence and sensibility, they must have both; in
fine, my manner of seeing them changed to such a degree that I
left the house almost in love with each of these ugly faces.
I had scarcely courage enough to return to vespers. But after
having seen the girls, the danger was lessened. I still found
their singing delightful;and their voices so much embellished
their persons that, in spite of my eyes, I obstinately continued
to think them beautiful.
Music in Italy is accompanied with so trifling an expense,
that it is not worth while for such as have a taste for it to deny
themselves the pleasure it affords. I hired a harpsichord,
and, for half a crown, I had at my apartment four or five
symphonists, with whom I practised once a week in ex-
ecuting such airs, etc., as had given me most pleasure at the
opera. I also had some symphonies performed from my
Muses Galantes. Whether these pleased the performers, or
the ballet-master of St. John Chrysostom wished to flatter

<page 331>
2.94 THE CONFESSIONS OF
me, he desired to have two of them; and I had afterwards
the pleasure of hearing these executed by that admirable
orchestra. They were danced to by a little Bettina, pretty
and amiable, and kept by a Spaniard, M. Fagoaga, a friend
of ours with whom we often went to spend the evening. But
apropos of girls of easy virtue: it is not in Venice that a man
abstains from them. Have you nothing to confess, some-
body will ask me, upon this subject? Yes: I have something
to say upon it, and I will proceed to the confession with the
same ingenuousness with which I have made my former ones.
I always had a disinclination to girls of pleasure, but at
Venice those were all I had within my reach; most of the
houses being shut against me on account of my place. The
daughters of M. le Blond were very amiable, but difficult of
access; and I had too much respect for the father and mother
ever once to have the least desire for them.
I should have had a much stronger inclination to a young
lady named Mademoiselle pe Cataneo, daughter to the agent
from the King of Prussia, but Carrio was in love with her :
there was even between them some question of marriage. He
was in easy circumstances, and I had no fortune: his salary
was a hundred louis (guineas) a year, and mine amounted to
no more than a thousand livres (about forty pounds sterling):
and, besides my being unwilling to oppose a friend, I knew
that in all places, and especially at Venice, with a purse so ill
furnished as mine was, gallantry was out of the question. I
had not lost the pernicious custom of deceiving my wants.
Too busily employed forcibly to feel those proceeding from
the climate, I lived upwards of a year in that city as chastely
as I had done in Paris, and at the end of eighteen months I
quitted it without having approached the sex, except twice
by means of the singular opportunities of which I am going
to speak.
The first was procured me by that honest gentleman, Vitali,
some time after the formal apology I obliged him to make me.
The conversation at the table turned on the amusements of
Venice. These gentlemen reproached me with my indifference
with regard to the most delightful of them all; at the same
time extolling the gracefulness and elegant manners of the
women of easy virtue of Venice; and adding that they were
superior to all others of the same description in any other
part of the world. “Dominic,” said I, “must make an acquain-

<page 332>
J. J. RoussEAU 295
ance with the most amiable of them all,” he offered to take me
to her apartments, and assured me I should be pleased with
her. I laughed at this obliging offer: and Count Piati, a man
in years and venerable, observed to me, with more candor than
I should have expected from an Italian, that he thought me
too prudent to suffer myself to be taken to such a place by my
enemy. In fact I had no inclination to do it: but notwith-
standing this, by an incoherence I cannot myself comprehend,
I at length was prevailed upon to go, contrary to my inclina-
tion, the sentiment of my heart, my reason, and even my will;
solely from weakness, and being ashamed to show an appear-
ance to the least mistrust;and besides, as the expression of the
country is, per nonparer troppo cogliono.” The Padoana whom
we went to visit was pretty, she was even handsome, but her
beauty was not of that kind that pleased me. Dominic left
me with her, I sent for Sorbetti, and asked her to sing. In
about half an hour I wished to take my leave, after having put
a ducaton the table, but this by a singular scruple she refused
until she had deserved it, and I from as singular a folly con-
sented to remove her doubts. I returned to the palace so
fully persuaded that I should feel the consequences of this
step, that the first thing I did was to send for the king's
surgeon to ask him for ptisans. Nothing can equal the un-
easiness of mind I suffered for three weeks, without its being
justified by any real inconvenience or apparent sign. I could
not believe it was possible to withdraw with impunity from
the arms of the padoana. The surgeon himself had the
greatest difficulty in removing my apprehensions; nor could
he do this by any other means than by persuading me I was
formed in such a manner as not to be easily infected: and
although in the experiment I exposed myself less than
any other man would have done, my health in that respect
never having suffered the least inconvenience, in my opinion
a proof the surgeon was right. However, this has never made
me imprudent, and if in fact I have received such an advantage
from nature I can safely assert I have never abused it.
My second adventure, although likewise with a common
girl, was of a nature very different, as well in its origin as in
its effects; I have already said that Captain Olivet gave me a
dinner on board his vessel, and that I took with me the secre-
tary of the Spanish embassy. I expected a salute of cannon.
fMot to appear too great a blockhead.

<page 333>
296 THE CONFESSIONS OF
The ship's company was drawn up to receive us, but not so
much as a priming was burnt, at which I was mortified, on
account of Carrio, whom I perceived to be rather piqued at the
neglect. A salute of cannon was given on board merchant-
ships to people of less consequence than we were; I besides
thought I deserved some distinguished mark of respect from
the captain. I could not conceal my thoughts, because this at
all times was impossible to me, and although the dinner was
a very good one, and Olivet did the honors of it perfectly well,
I began it in an ill humor, eating but little, and speaking still
less. At the first health, at least, I expected a volley;-noth-
ing. Carrio, who read what passed within, me, laughed at
hearing me grumble like a child. Before dinner was half over
I saw a gondola approach the vessel. “Bless me, sir,” said
the captain, “take care of yourself, the enemy approaches.”
I asked him what he meant, and he answered jocosely. The
gondola made the ship's side, and I observed a gay young
damsel come on board very lightly, and coquettishly dressed,
and who at three steps was in the cabin, seated by my side,
before I had time to perceive a cover was laid for her. She was
equally charming and lively, a brunette, not more than twenty
years of age. She spoke nothing but Italian, and her accent
alone was sufficient to turn my head. As she eat and chat-
tered she cast her eyes upon me; steadfastly looked atme for
a moment, and then exclaimed, “Good Virgin! Ah, my dear
Bremond, what an age it is since I saw thee!” Then she threw
herself into my arms, sealed her lips to mine, and pressed
me almost to strangling. Her large black eyes, like those of
the beauties of the East, darted fiery shafts into my heart,
and although the surprise at first stupefied my senses, volup-
tuousness made a rapid progress within, and this to such a
degree that the beautiful seducer herself was, notwithstand-
ing the spectators, obliged to restrain my ardor, for I was
intoxicated, or rather become furious. When she perceived
she had made the impression she desired, she became more
moderate in her caresses, but not in her vivacity, and when
she thought proper to explain to us the real or false cause of
all her petulance, she said I resembled M. de Bremond,
director of the customs of Tuscany, to such a degree as to
be mistaken for him; that she had turned this M. de Bre-
mond's head, and would do it again; that she had quitted
him because he was a fool; that she took me in his place;

<page 334>
J. J. ROUSSRAU 297
that she would love me because it pleased her so to do, for
which reason I must love her as long as it was agreeable to
her, and when she thought proper to send me about my bus-
iness, I must be patient as her dear Bremond had been.
What was said was done. She took possession of me as of a
man that belonged to her, gave me her gloves to keep, her
fan, her cinda, and her coif, and ordered me to go here or
there, to do this or that, and I instantly obeyed her. She told
me to go and send away her gondola, because she chose to
make use of mine, and I immediately sent it away; she bid me
to move from my place, and pray Carrio to sit down in it, be-
cause she had something to say to him; and I did as she de-
sired. They chatted a good while together, but spoke low,
and I did not interrupt them. She called me, and I approached
her. “Hark thee, Zanetto,” said she to me, “I will not be
loved in the French manner; this indeed will not be well. In
the first moment of lassitude, get thee gone: but stay not by
the way, I caution thee.” After dinner we went to see the
glass manufactory at Murano. She bought a great number of
little curiosities; for which she left me to pay without the
least ceremony. But she everywhere gave away little trink-
ets to a much greater amount than of the things we had pur-
chased. By the indifference with which she threw away
her morey, I perceived she annexed to it but little value.
When she insisted upon a payment, I am of opinion it was
more from a motive of vanity than avarice. She was flat-
tered by the price her admirers set upon her favors.
In the evening we conducted her to her apartments. As
we conversed together, I perceived a couple of pistols upon
her toilette. “Ah! Ah!” said I, taking one of them up, “this
is a patch-box of a new construction: may I ask what is its
use ? I know you have other arms which give more fire than
those upcn your table.” After a few pleasantries of the
same kind, she said to us, with an ingenuousness which ren-
dered her still more charming, “When I am complaisant to
persons whom I do not love, I make them pay for the weari-
ness they cause me; nothing can be more just; but if I suffer
their caresses, I will not bear their insults; nor miss the first
who shall be wanting to me in respect.”
At taking leave of her, I made another appointment for the
next day. I did not make her wait. I found her in vestito di
conſidenza, in an undress more than wanton, unknown to

<page 335>
298 THE CONFESSIONS OF
northern countries, and which I will not amuse myself in
describing, although I recollect it perfectly well. I shall only
remark that her ruffles and collar were edged with silk net-
work ornamented with rose-colored pompons. This, in my
eyes, much enlivened a beautiful complexion. I afterwards
found it to be the mode at Venice, and the effect is so charming
that I am surprised it has never been introduced in France.
I had no idea of the transports which awaited me. I have
spoken of Madam de Larnage with the transport which the
remembrance of her still sometimes gives me; but how old,
ugly and cold she appeared, compared with my Zulietta! Do
not attempt to form to yourself an idea of the charms and
graces of this enchanting girl, you will be far too short of
truth. Young virgins in cloisters are not so fresh: the beau-
ties of the seraglio are less animated: the houris of paradise
less engaging. Never was so sweet an enjoyment offered to
the heart and senses of a mortal. Ah! had I at least been
capable of fully tasting of it for a single moment! I had
tasted of it, but without a charm. I enfeebled all its de-
lights: I destroyed them as at will. No; Nature has not
made me capable of enjoyment. She has infused into my
wretched head the poison of that ineffable happiness, the
desire of which she first placed in my heart.
If there be a circumstance in my life, which describes my
nature, it is that which I am going to relate. The forcible
manner in which I at this moment recollect the object of
my book, will here make me hold in contempt the false del-
icacy which would prevent me from fulfilling it. Whoever
you may be who are desirous of knowing a man, have the
courage to read the two or three following pages, and you
will become fully acquainted with J. J. Rousseau.
I entered the chamber of a woman of easy virtue, as the
sanctuary of love and beauty: and in her person, I thought I
saw the divinity. I should have been inclined to think that
without respect and esteem it was impossible to feel any-
thing like that which she made me experience. Scarcely had
I, in her first familiarities, discovered the force of her
charms and caresses, before I wished, for fear of losing the
fruit of them, to gather it beforehand. Suddenly, instead of
the flame which consumed me, I felt a mortal cold run
through all my veins; my legs failed me; and ready to faint
away, I sat down and wept like a child.

<page 336>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 299
Who would guess the cause of my tears, and what, at this
moment, passed within me? I said to myself: the object in
my power is the masterpiece of love; her wit and person
equally approach perfection; she is as good and generous as
she is amiable and beautiful. Yet she is a miserable prosti-
tute, abandoned to the public. The captain of a merchant-
ship disposed of her at will; she has thrown herself into my
arms, although she knows I have nothing; and my merit
with which she cannot be acquainted, can be to her no in-
ducement. In this there is something inconceivable. Either
my heart deceives me, fascinates my senses, and makes me
the dupe of an unworthy slut, or some secret defect, of which
I am ignorant, destroys the effect of her charms, and renders
her odious in the eyes of those by whom her charms would
otherwise be disputed. I endeavored, by an extraordinary
effort of mind, to discover this defect, but it did not so much
as strike me that even the consequences to be apprehended,
might possibly have some influence. The clearness of her
skin, the brilliancy of her complexion, her white teeth, sweet
breath, and the appearance of neatness about her person, so
far removed from me this idea, that, still in doubt relative
to my situation after the affair of the padoana, I rather ap-
prehended I was not sufficiently in health for her: and I am
firmly persuaded I was not deceived in my opinion. These re-
flections, so apropos, agitated me to such a degree as to make
me shed tears. Zuliette, to whom the scene was quite novel,
was struck speechless for a moment. But having made a turn
in her chamber, and passing before her glass, she compre-
hended, and my eyes confirmed her opinion, that disgust
had no part in what had happened. It was not difficult for
her to recover me and dispel this shamefacedness.
But, at the moment in which I was ready to faint upon a
bosom, which for the first time seemed to suffer the impression
of the hand and lips of a man, I perceived she had a with-
ered teton. I struck my forehead: I examined, and thought I
perceived this teton was not formed like the other. I immedi-
ately began to consider how it was possible to have such a
defect, and persuaded of its proceeding from some great nat-
ural vice, I was clearly convinced, that, instead of the most
charming person of whom I could form to myself an idea, I
had in my arms a species of a monster, the refuse of nature,
of men and of love. I carried my stupidity so far as to speak

<page 337>
3OO THE CONFESSIONS OF
to her of the discovery I had made. She, at first, took what
I said jocosely; and in her frolicsome humor, did and said
things which made me die of love. But perceiving an inqui-
etude I could not conceal, she at length reddened, adjusted
her dress, raised herself up, and without saying a word,
went and placed herself at a window. I attempted to place
myself by her side: she withdrew to a sofa, rose from it the
next moment, and fanning herself as she walked about the
chamber, said to me in a reserved and disdainful tone of
voice, “Zanetto, lascia le donne, e studia la matematica.”:
Before I took leave I requested her to appoint another ren-
dezvous for the next day, which she postponed for three days,
adding, with a satirical smile, that I must needs be in want
of repose. I was very ill at ease during the interval; my
heart was full of her charms and graces; I felt my extrava-
gance, and reproached myself with it, regretting the loss of
the moments I had so ill employed, and which, had I chosen,
I might have rendered more agreeable than any in my whole
life; waiting with the most burning impatience for the mo-
ment in which I might repair the loss, and yet, notwithstand-
ing all my reasoning upon what I had discovered, anxious to
reconcile the perfections of this adorable girl with the indig-
nity of her situation. I ran, I flew to her apartment at the
hour appointed. I know not whether or not her ardor would
have been more satisfied with this visit, her pride at least
would have been flattered by it, and I already rejoiced at
the idea of my convincing her, in every respect,that I knew
how to repair the wrongs I had done. She spared me this
justification. The gondolier whom I had sent to her apart-
ment brought me for answer that she had set off, the even-
ing before, for Florence. If I had not felt all the love I had
for her person when this was in my possession, I felt it in
the most cruel manner on losing her. Amiable and charm-
ing as she was in my eyes, I could not console myself for the
loss of her; but this I have never been able to do relative
to the contemptuous idea which at her departure she must
have had of me.
These are my two narratives. The eighteen months I passed
at Venice furnished me with no other of the same kind, except
a simple prospect at most. Carrio was a gallant. Tired of
visiting girls engaged to others, he took a fancy to have one
*Leave women and study the mathematics.

<page 338>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 3OI
to himself, and, as we were inseparable, he proposed to me an
arrangement common enough at Venice, which was to keep
one girl for us both. To this I consented. The question was,
to find one who was safe. He was so industrious in his re-
searches that he found out a little girl from eleven to twelve
years of age, whom her infamous mother was endeavoring to
sell, and I went with Carrio to see her. The sight of the child
moved me to the most lively compassion. She was fair and
as gentle as a lamb. Nobody would have taken her for an
Italian. Living is very cheap in Venice; we gave a little
money to the mother, and provided for the subsistence of
her daughter. She had a voice, and to procure her some re-
source we gave her a spinnet, and a singing-master. All
these expenses did not cost each of us more than two sequins
a month, and we contrived to save a much greater sum in
other matters; but as we were obliged to wait until she be-
came of a riper age, this was sowing a long time before we
could possibly reap. However, satisfied with passing our
evenings, chatting and innocently playing with the child,
we perhaps enjoyed greater pleasure than if we had re-
ceived the last favors. So true is it that men are more at-
tached to women by a certain pleasure they have in living
with them, than by any kind of libertinism. My heart be-
came insensibly attached to the little Anzoletta, but my at-
tachment was paternal, in which the senses had so little
share, that in proportion as the former increased, to have
connected it with the latter would have been less possible;
and I felt I should have experienced, at approaching this
little creature when become nubile, the same horror with
which the abominable crime of incest would have inspired
me. I perceived the sentiments of Carrio take, unobserved
by himself, exactly the same turn. We thus prepared for our-
selves, without intending it, pleasure not less delicious, but
very different from that of which we first had an idea; and
I am fully persuaded that however beautiful the poor child
might have become, far from being the corrupters of her in-
nocence we should have been the protectors of it. The cir
cumstance which shortly afterwards befell me deprived me
of the happiness of taking a part in this good work, and
my only merit in the affair was the inclination of my heart.
I will now return to my journey.
My first intentions after leaving M. de Montaigu, was to re-

<page 339>
3O2 THE CONFESSIONS OF
tire to Geneva, until time and more favorable circumstances
should have removed the obstacles which prevented my union
with my poor mamma; but the quarrel between me and M.
de Montaigu being become public, and he having had the
folly to write about it to the court, I resolved to go there to
give an account of my conduct and complain of that of a mad-
man. I communicated my intention, from Venice, to M. du
Theil, charged per interim with foreign affairs after the
death of M. Amelot. I set off assoon as my letter, and took
my route through Bergamo, Como, and Domo D'Oscela, and
crossing Saint Plomb. At Sion, M. de Chaignon, charge des
affaires from France, showed me great civility; at Geneva
M. de la Closure treated me with the same polite attention.
I there renewed my acquaintance with M. de Gauffecourt,
from whom I had some money to receive. I had passed
through Nion without going to see my father: not that this
was a matter of indifference to me, but because I was unwill-
ing to appear before my mother-in-law, after the disaster
which had befallen me, certain of being condemned by her
without being heard. The bookseller, Du Villard, an old
friend of my father's, reproached me severely with this neg-
lect. I gave him my reasons for it, and to repair my fault,
without exposing myself to meet my mother-in-law, I took a
chaise and we went together to Nion and stopped at a public
house. Du Villard went to fetch my father, who came run-
ning to embrace me. We supped together, and, after pass-
ing an evening very agreeable to the wishes of my heart, I re-
turned the next morning to Geneva with Du Villard, for
whom I have ever since retained a sentiment of gratitude in
return for the service he did me on this occasion.
Lyons was a little out of my direct road, but I was deter-
mined to pass through that city in order to convince myself
of a knavish trick played me by M. de Montaigu. I had sent
me from Paris a little box containing a waistcoat, embroidered
with gold, a few pairs of ruffles, and six pairs of white silk
stockings; nothing more. Upon a proposition made me by
M. de Montaigu, I ordered this box to be added to his bag-
gage. In the apothecary's bill he offered me in payment of my
salary, and which he wrote out himself, he stated the weight
of this box, which he called a bale, at eleven hundred pounds,
and charged me with the carriage of it at an enormous rate.
By the cares of M. Boy de la Tour, to whom I was recom-

<page 340>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 303
mended by M. Roquin, his uncle, it was proved from the reg-
isters of the customs of Lyons and Marseilles, that the said
bale weighed no more than forty-five pounds, and had paid
carriage according to that weight. I joined this authentic
extract to the memoir of M. de Montaigu, and provided with
these papers and others containing stronger facts, I returned
to Paris, very impatient to make use of them. During the
whole of this long journey I had little adventures; at Como,
in Valais, and elsewhere. I there saw many curious things,
amongst others the Boroma islands, which are worthy of be-
ing described. But I am pressed by time, and surrounded by
spies. I am obliged to write in haste, and very imperfectly,
a work which requires the leisure and tranquility I do not
enjoy. If ever providence in its goodness grants me days
more calm, I shall destine them to new modelling this work,
should I be able to do it, or at least to giving a supplement,
of which I perceive it stands in the greatest need.*
The news of my quarrel had reached Paris before me and
on my arrival I found the people in all the offices, and the
public in general, scandalized at the follies of the ambassador.
Notwithstanding this, the public talk at Venice, and the un-
answerable proof I exhibited, I could not obtain even the
shadow of justice. Far from obtaining satisfaction or repa-
ration, I was left at the discretion of the ambassador for my
salary, and this for no other reason than because, not being
a Frenchman, I had no right to national protection, and that
it was a private affair between him and myself. Every-
body agreed I was insulted, injured, and unfortunate; that
the ambassador was mad, cruel, and iniquitous, and that the
whole of the affair dishonored him forever. But what of
this! He was the ambassador, and I was nothing more than
the secretary.
Order, or that which is so called, was in opposition to my
obtaining justice, and of this the least shadow was not
granted me. I supposed that, by loudly complaining, and
by publicly treating this madman in the manner he deserved,
I should at length be told to hold my tongue; this was what
I wished for, and I was fully determined not to obey until
I had obtained redress. But at that time there was no min-
ister for foreign affairs. I was suffered to exclaim, nay, even
encouraged to do it, and joined with; but the affair still re-
I have given up this project.

<page 341>
3O4 THE CONFESSIONS OF
mained in the same state, until, tired of being in the right
without obtaining justice, my courage at length failed me,
and let the whole drop.
The only person by whom I was ill received, and from whom
I should have least expected such an injustice, was Madam
de Beuzenval. Full of the perogatives of rank and nobility,
she could not conceive it was possible an ambassador could
ever be in the wrong with respect to his secretary. The recep-
tion she gave me was conformable to this prejudice. I was
so piqued at it that, immediately after leaving her, I wrote her
perhaps one of the strongest and most violent letters that ever
came from my pen, and since that time I never once returned
to her house. I was better received by Father Castel; but, in
the midst of his jesuitical wheedling I perceived him faith-
fully to follow one of the great maxims of his society, which
is to sacrifice the weak to the powerful. The strong convic-
tion I felt of the justice of my cause, and my natural great-
ness of mind did not suffer me patiently to endure this par-
tiality. I ceased visiting Father Castel, and on that account,
going to the college of the Jesuits, where I knew nobody
but himself. Besides the intriguing and tyrannical spirit of
his brethren, so different from the cordiality of the good
Father Hemet, gave me such a disgust for their conversa-
tion that I have never since been acquainted with, nor seen
any one of them except Father Berthier, whom I saw twice
or thrice at M. Dupin's, in conjunction with whom he
labored with all his might at the refutation of Montesquieu.
That I may not return to the subject, I will conclude what
I have to say of M. de Montaigu. I had told him in our
quarrels that a secretary was not what he wanted, but an
attorney's clerk. He took the hint, and the person whom he
procured to succeed me was a real attorney, who in less than
a year robbed him of twenty or thirty thousand livres. He
discharged him, and sent him to prison, dismissed his gentle-
man with disgrace, and, in wretchedness, got himself every-
where into quarrels, received affronts which a footman would
not have put up with, and, after numerous follies, was re-
called, and sent from the capital. It is very probable that
among the reprimands he received at court, his affair with me
was not forgotten. At least, a little time after his return he
sent his maitre d’ hotel, to settle my account, and give me
some money. I was in want of it at that moment; my debts

<page 342>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 305
at Venice, debts of honor, if ever there were any, lay heavy
upon my mind. I made use of the means which offered to
discharge them, as well as the note of Zanetto Nani. I re-
ceived what was offered me, paid all my debts, and remained
as before, without a farthing in my pocket, but relieved from
a weight which had become insupportable. From that time
I never heard speak of M. de Montaigu until his death, with
which I became acquainted by means of the Gazette. The
peace of God be with that poor man! He was as fit for the
functions of an ambassador as in my infancy I had been for
those of Grapignan.* However, it was in his power to have
honorably supported himself by my services, and rapidly to
have advanced me in a career to which the Comte de Gau-
von had destined me in my youth, and of the functions of
which I had in a more advanced age rendered myself capable.
The justice and inutility of my complaints, left in my mind
seeds of indignation against our foolish civil institutions, by
which the welfare of the public and real justice are always
sacrificed to I know not what appearance of order, and which
does nothing more than add the sanction of public authori-
ty to the oppression of the weak, and the iniquity of the
powerful. Two things prevented these seeds from putting
forth at that time as they afterwards did: one was, myself
being in question in the affair, and private interest, whence
nothing great or noble ever proceeded, could not draw from
my heart the divine soarings, which the most pure love, only
of that which is just and sublime, can produce. The other
was the charm of friendship which tempered and calmed my
wrath by the ascendancy of a more pleasing sentiment. I
had become acquainted at Venice with a Biscayan, a friend
of my friend Carrio's, and worthy of being that of every
honest man. This amiable young man, born with every tal-
ent and virtue, had just made the tour of Italy to gain a taste
for the fine arts, and, imagining he had nothing more to ac-
quire, intended to return by the most direct road to his own
country. I told him the arts were nothing more than a relax-
ation to a genius like his, fit to cultivate the sciences; and
to give him a taste for these, I advised him to make a jour-
ney to Paris and reside there for six months. He took my
advice, and went to Paris. He was there and expected me
I have not been able to find this word in any dictionary, nor does any French-
man of letters of my acquaintance know what it means.—T.

<page 343>
306 THE CONFESSIONS OF
when I arrived. His lodging was too considerable for him,
and he offered me the half of it, which I instantly accepted.
I found him absorbed in the study of the sublimest sciences.
Nothing was above his reach. He digested everything with a
prodigious rapidity. How cordially did he thank me for hav-
ing procured him this food for his mind, which was tor-
mented by a thirst after knowledge, without his being
aware of it! What a treasure of light and virtue I found in
the vigorous mind of this young man! I felt he was the
friend I wanted. We soon became intimate. Our tastes were
not the same, and we constantly disputed. Both opinionated,
we never could agree about anything. Nevertheless we
could not separate; and, notwithstanding our reciprocal
and incessant contradiction, we neither of us wished the
other to be different from what he was.
Ignacio Emanuel de Altuna was one of those rare beings
whom only Spain produces, and of whom she produces too
few for her glory. He had not the violent national passions
common in his own country. The idea of vengeance could no
more enter his head, than the desire of it could proceed from
his heart. His mind was too great to be vindictive, and I
have frequently heard him say, with the greatest coolness,
that no mortal could offend him. He was gallant, without
being tender. He played with women as with so many pretty
children. He amused himself with the mistresses of his
friends, but I never knew him to have one of his own, nor
the least desire for it. The emanations from the virtue with
which his heart was stored, never permitted the fire of the
passions to excite sensual desires.
After his travels he married, died young, and left chil-
dren; and, I am as convinced as of my existence, that his
wife was the first and only woman with whom he ever tasted
of the pleasures of love.
Externally he was devout, like a Spaniard, but in his heart
he had the piety of an angel. Except myself, he is the only
man I ever saw whose principles were not intolerant. He
never in his life asked any person his opinion in matters of
religion. It was not of the least consequence to him whether
his friend was a Jew, a Protestant, a Turk, a Bigot, or an
Atheist, provided he was an honest man. Obstinate and
headstrong in matters of indifference, but the moment religion
was in question, even the moral part, he collected himself, was

<page 344>
J. J. RoussRAU 307
silent, or simply said: “I am charged with the care of myself
only.” It is astonishing so much elevation of mind should be
compatible with a spirit of detail carried to minuteness. He
previously divided the employment of the day by hours,
quarters and minutes; and so scrupulously adhered to this
distribution,that had the clock struck while he was reading a
phrase, he would have shut his book without finishing it.
His portions of time thus laid out, were some of them set
apart to studies of one kind, and others to those of another:
he had some for reflection, conversation, divine service, the
reading of Locke, for his rosary, for visits, music and paint-
ing; and neither pleasure, temptation, nor complaisance,
could interrupt this order: a duty he might have had to dis-
charge was the only thing that could have done it. When he
gave me a list of his distribution, that I might conform mysekf
thereto, I first laughed, and then shed tears of admiration.
He never constrained anybody nor suffered constraint: he
was rather rough with people, who from politeness, attempt-
ed to put it upon him. He was passionate without being sullen.
I have often seen him warm, but never saw him really angry
with any person. Nothing could be more cheerful than his
temper: he knew how to pass and receive a joke; raillery was
one of his distinguished talents, and with which he possessed
that of pointed wit and repartee. When he was animated, he
was noisy and heard at a great distance; but whilst he
loudly inveighed, a smile was spread over his countenance,
and in the midst of his warmth he used some diverting ex-
pression which made all his hearers break out into a loud
laugh. He had no more of the Spanish complexion than of
the phlegm of that country. His skin was white, his cheeks
finely colored, and his hair of a light chestnut. He was tall
and well made; his body was well formed for the residence
of his mind.
This wise-hearted as well as wise-headed man, knew man-
Kind, and was my friend; this was my only answer to such
as are not so. We were so intimately united, that our inten-
tion was to pass our days together. In a few years I was to
go to Ascoytia to live with him at his estate; every part of
the project was arranged the eve of his departure; nothing
was left undetermined, except that which depends not upon
men in the best concerted plans, posterior events. My disas-
ters, his marriage, and finally, his death, separated us for

<page 345>
303 THE CONFESSIONS OF
ever. Some men would be tempted to say, that nothing suc-
ceeds except the dark conspiracies of the wicked, and that the
innocent intentions of the good are seldom or never accom-
plished. I had felt the inconvenience of dependence, and
took a resolution never again to expose myself to it; having
seen the projects of ambition, which circumstances had in-
duced me to form, overturned in their birth. Discouraged
in the career I had so well begun, from which, however, I
had just been expelled, I resolved never more to attach my-
self to any person, but to remain in an independent state,
turning my talents to the best advantage: of these I at
length began to feel the extent, and that I had hitherto had
too modest an opinion of them. I again took up my opera,
which I had laid aside to go to Venice; and that I might be
less interrupted after the departure of Altuna, I returned to
my old hotel St. Quentin; which, in a solitary part of the
town, and not far from the Luxembourg, was more proper
for my purpose than noisy Rue St. Honoré.
There the only consolation which Heaven suffered me to
taste in my misery, and the only one which rendered it sup-
portable, awaited me. This was not a trancient acquaint-
ance; I must enter into some detail relative to the manner
in which it was made.
We had a new landlady from Orleans; she took for a
needlewoman a girl from her own country, of between
twenty-two and twenty-three years of age, and who, as well
as the hostess, ate at our table. This girl, named Théresa
le Vasseur, was of a good family; her father was an officer
in the mint of Orleans, and her mother a shopkeeper; they
had many children. The function of the mint of Orleans be-
ing suppressed, the father found himself without employ-
ment; and the mother having suffered losses, was reduced
to narrow circumstances. She quitted her business and
came to Paris with her husband and daughter, who, by her
industry, maintained all the three.
The first time I saw this girl at table, I was struck with her
modesty; and still more so with her lively yet charming look,
which, with respect to the impression it made upon me, was
never equalled. Beside M. de Bonnefond, the company was
composed of several Irish priests, Gascons and others of
much the same description. Our hostess herself had not
made the best possible use of her time, and I was the only per-

<page 346>
J. J. ROUSSEAU 309
son at the table who spoke and behaved with decency. Al-
lurements were thrown out to the young girl. I took her
part, and the joke was then turned against me. Had I had
no natural inclination to the poor girl, compassion and con-
tradiction would have produced it in me: I was always a
great friend to decency in manners and conversation, especi-
ally in the fair sex. I openly declared myself her champion,
and perceived she was not insensible of my attention; her
looks, animated by the gratitude she dared not express by
words, were for this reason still more penetrating.
She was very timid, and I was as much so as herself. The
connection which this disposition common to both seemed to
remove to a distance, was however rapidly formed. Our
landlady perceiving its progress, became furious, and her
brutality forwarded my affair with the young girl, who,
having no person in the house except myself to give her the
least support, was sorry to see me go from home, and sighed
for the return of her protector. The affinity our hearts bore
to each other, and the similarity of our dispositions, had
soon their ordinary effect. She thought she saw in me an
honest man, and in this she was not deceived. I thought I
perceived in her a woman of great sensibility, simple in her
manners, and devoid of all coquetry:-I was no more de-
ceived in her than she in me. I began by declaring to her
that I would never either abandon or marry her. Love, es-
teem, artless sincerity were the ministers of my triumph,
and it was because her heart was tender and virtuous, that
I was happy without being presuming.
The apprehensions she was under of my not finding in her
that for which I sought, retarded my happiness more than
every other circumstance. I perceived her disconcerted and
confused before she yielded her consent, wishing to be
understood and not daring to explain herself. Far from sus-
pecting the real cause of her embarrassment, I falsely im-
agined it to proceed from another motive, a supposition
highly insulting to her morals, and thinking she gave me to
understand my health might be exposed to danger, I fell into
so perplexed a state that, although it was no restraint upon
me, it poisoned my happiness during several days. As we
did not understand each other, our conversations upon this
subject were so many enigmas more than ridiculous. She was
upon the point of believing I was absolutely mad; and I on my

<page 347>
3IO THE CONFESSIONS OF
part was as near not knowing what else to think of her. At
last we came to an explanation; she confessed to me with
tears the only fault of the kind of her whole life, immediately
after she became nubile; the fruit of her ignorance and the
address of her seducer. The moment I comprehended what
she meant, I gave a shout of joy. “A Hymen!” exclaimed .
I; “sought for at Paris, and at twenty years of age! Ah my
Théresa! I am happy in possessing thee, virtuous and healthy
as thou art, and in not finding that for which I never sought.”
At first amusement was my only object; I perceived I had
gone further and had given myself a companion. A little in-
timate connection with this excellent girl, and a few reflec-
tions upon my situation, made me discover that, while think-
ing of nothing more than my pleasures, I had done a great
deal towards my happiness. In the place of extinguishedam-
bition, a life of sentiment, which had entire possession of my
heart, was necessary to me. In a word, I wanted a successor
to mamma: since I was never again to live with her, it was
necessary some person should live with her pupil, and a per-
son, too, in whom I might find that simplicity and docility
of mind and heart which she had found in me. It was, more-
over, necessary that the happiness of domestic life should in-
demnify me for the splendid career I had just renounced.
When I was quite alone there was a void in my heart, which
wanted nothing more than another heart to fill it up. Fate
had deprived me of this, or at least in part alienated me from
that for which by nature I was formed. From that moment
I was alone, for there never was for me the least thing in-
termediate between everything and nothing. I found in
Théresa the supplement of which I stood in need; by means
of her I lived as happily as I possibly could do, according to
the course of events.
I at first attempted to improve her mind. In this my pains
were useless. Her mind is as nature formed it: it was not sus-
ceptible of cultivation. I do not blush in acknowledging she
never knew how to read well, although she writes tolerably.
When I went to lodge in the Rue Neuve des Petits Champs,
opposite to my windows at the Hotel de Ponchartrain, there
was a sun-dial, on which for a whole month I used all my
efforts to teach her to know the hours; yet, she scarcely
knows them at present. She never could enumerate the
twelve months of the year in order, and cannot distinguish

<page 348>
J. J. ROUSSEAU. 3II
one numeral from another, notwithstanding all the trouble I
took endeavoring to teach them to her. She neither knows
how to count money, nor to reckon the price of anything.
The word which when she speaks, presents itself to her
mind, is frequently opposite to that of which she means to
make use. I formerly made a dictionary of her phrases, to
amuse M. de Luxembourg, and her qui pro quos often be-
came celebrated among those with whom I was most inti-
mate. But this person, so confined in her intellects, and, if
the world pleases, so stupid, can give excellent advice in cases
of difficulty. In Switzerland, in England and in France, she
frequently saw what I had not myself perceived; she has
often given me the best advice I could possibly follow ; she
has rescued me from dangers into which I had blindly precipi-
ated myself, and in the presence of princes and the great, her
sentiments, good sense, answers, and conduct have acquired
her universal esteem, and myself the most sincere congratu-
lations on her merit. With persons whom we love, sentiment
fortifies the mind as well as the heart; and they who are thus
attached, have little need of searching for ideas elsewhere.
(END OF VOLUME ONE.)

<page 349>

<page 350>

<page 351>
-



<page 352>

<page 353>
DATE
DUE
TNOWEST387
MAR–H 5.
H995–
EU-5T
88
EB 21 1385*It'ſ
MAR 25
fººt
A ºf Bo
|q10
JUN 22
UN 1919
REIT JU
i _ 2 - AAF
III.33U
|EC'ſ FEE
1 7 1993
FFF;"|
MAR 2
9 1993
ſºf-2
RE!'ſ M
R 1 & 149
JANH
—HHH!





<page 354>
||||||||||||

<page 355>
№ººººººººººººººººººººººººººººººººººººººººaeae . . . .|×№aeae


<page 356>
