

<page 1>
LIBRARY,
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
DAVIS
-- - -|-|-|---◄-） ----
****** • • • • •••******* --， -，==
ISAAC Foot COLLECrow


<page 2>

<page 3>
•■^^^^（1）

<page 4>

<page 5>

<page 6>
• ， ، ، ، ، ، ، ، ، ،
*s

<page 7>
º
- º
"... /
ºw e_^//z.
ºve.
id:
Ekº
ſº
º:
#ſº
sº
º


<page 8>
M E M O I R S of * * * *.
Commonly known by the Name of
GEORGE PSALMANAZAR;
A
Reputed Native of F ORMO S.A.
Written by himſelf -
In order to be publiſhed after his Death.
contain in a
An Account of his Education, Travels, Adventures,
Connections, Literary Produćtions, and pretended
Converſion from Heatheniſm to Chriſtianity; which
laſt proved the Occaſion of his being brought over
into this Kingdom, and paſſing for a Proſelyte, and
a Member of the Church of England.)
L O N D O N :
PRINTED F or T H E EXE cut R IX.
(sold by R. Davis, in Picadilly; J. Newbery, in St.
Paul’s Church-Yard; L. DAvis, and C. Rey Meks
in Holborn.)
MDCCLXIV.
LIBRARY,
UNIVERSITY OF CALTFORNTA
DAVIS


<page 9>
AD)
º:
tº
tº #:
Will
:::::::
iſ
ºf
# iſ
§IE
it aff
T, i.
* †
im
º
Ilmi
º
is:
#ſ.
s:
ki, DC
§ {
ſº
“...]
wº-

<page 10>
A DV E R T IS E M E N T.
The following ſheets are printed for the
benefit of Mr. Pſalmanazar's executrix;
who thought it right to prefix his LAst
WILL AND Test AMENT, as the beſt
introdućtion to them. Mr. Pſalmanazar's
firſt intimation of giving this public ac-
count of himſelf, may be found under
the article Formoſa, in the CoMPLETE
SYSTEM of GE oc RAPHY “, in which
he aſſiſted as a writer +. Where he was
born, and who were his parents, do not
yet appear for certain; even in theſe
poſthumous memoirs he has endeavoured
to keep them inviolable ſecrets. From
circumſtances however there is little reaſon
to doubt, but that he was a native of
France: indeed he ſpoke the French lan-
guage ſo well, beyond what is uſual when
attained by grammar or travel only, that
we do not queſtion to ſay, He was a French-
man. His pronunciation had a ſpice of the
Gaſcoin accent, and in that provincial
* Vol. ii. p. 251. This work was publiſhed in 1747.
t Mem. p. 339.
- P dialeót

<page 11>
( ii )
dialect he was ſo maſterly, that none but
thoſe born in the country could equal, none
though born there could excel him: for
notwithſtanding it may be eſteemed but a
patois, orjargon, yet foreigners finditimprac-
ticable to be ſpoken with propriety, and with
that fluency and vivacity peculiar to thoſe
people: and from this we preſume, that
ſome part of Languedoc may lay claim to
his birth. The reverend Mr. Villette, who
was intimately acquainted with him for
upwards of four and twenty years, (and
had many opportunities to obſerve him,
and to know him well) has communicated
theſe conjećtures, which the judicious reader,
perhaps, will ſee ſufficiently confirmed from
ſeveral paſſages in the memoirs themſelves.

<page 12>
THE LAST WILL AND TESTA:
MENT OF ME A POOR SINFUL
AND worTHLESS CREATURE.
COMMONLY KNOWN BY THE
ASSUMED NAME OF GEORGE
PSALMANAZAR -
Thy ever bleſſed and unerring Will, Oh
moſt gracious, though. offended God be
done by me and all the world, whether
for life or death. . . . . * *
Into thy all-merciful hands I commit my
ſoul, as unto a moſt gracious Father, who,
though juſtly provoked by my paſt vain
and wicked life, but more eſpecially ſo
during the youthful ſallies of a raſh and
unthinking part of it, has yet been gra-
ciouſly pleaſed, by thy undeſerved grace
and mercy, to preſerve me from the reign-
ing errors and herefies, and the more de-
plorable apoſtacy and infidelity of the pre-
ſent age, and enabled me to take a conſtant
- B and
*
-

<page 13>
( 2 )
and ſtedfaſt hold on the only author of our
ſalvation, thy ever adorable and divine Son
Jeſus Chriſt, our powerful and meritorious
Redeemer, from whoſe alone, and all-
powerful interceſſion and merits (and not
from any the leaſt inherent righteouſneſs of
my own, which I heartily abhor as filthy
rags in thine all purer eyes) I hope and
beg for pardon and reconciliation, and for
a happy reſurreótion unto that bleſſed im-
mortality to which we are redeemed by
his moſt precious and ineſtimable blood.
I likewiſe bleſs and adore thy infinite good-
neſs for preſerving me from innumerable
dangers of body and ſoul, to which this
wretched life, but more particularly by my
own youthful raſhneſs and inconſideration,
might have expoſed me, had not thy Di-
vine Providence interpoſed in ſuch a won-
derful manner, as juſtly challenges my
deepeſt admiration and acknowledgment:
particularly I am bound to bleſs thee for ſo
timely nipping that ambition and vain-
glory, which had hurried me through ſuch
ſcenes of impiety and hypocriſy, and as the
moſt effectual antidote againſt it, next to
thy divine grace, haſt brought me not only
to

<page 14>
( 3 )
}
to prefer, but to delight in a ſtate of ob:
ſcurity and lowneſs of circumſtances, as
the ſureſt harbour of peace and ſafety; by
which, though the little I have left in my
poſſeſſion be dwindled to ſo little value as
to be but a poor acknowledgment for the
ſervices which I have received from my
friend hereafter named, to whom I can do
no leſs than bequeath it all, yet I hope the
will may be accepted for the deed, and that
the Divine Providence will ſupply to her
what is wanting in me. And now, O Fa-
ther of Mercies, 1 beſeech thee for thy dear
Son's ſake, ſo to direčt me by thy grace
through all the future concerns of this life,
that when, where, or in what manner ſo-
ever it ſhall pleaſe thee to call me out of
it, I may be found ready and willing to re-
turn my ſoul, worthleſs as it is of itſelf, to
thee who gaveſt it; and my death, as well
as my latter end, may be ſuch as may tend
all poſſible ways to thy glory, the edification
of thy church, and my own eternal com-
fort. And in hopes there is nothing in this
my laſt will that is not agreeable to thine,
I leave it to be executed after my death
by my worthy and pious friend Sarah Re-
B 2 walling,

<page 15>
( 4 )
walling, of this pariſh of St. Luke, in Mid-
dleſex, in the manner hereafter mentioned,
V12. " . .
I deſire that my body, when or where-
ever I die, may be kept ſo long above
ground, as decency or conveniency will
permit, and afterwards conveyed to the
common burying-ground, and there in-
terred in ſome obſcure corner of it, with-
out any further ceremony or formality than
is uſed to the bodies of the deceaſed pen-
ſioners where I happen to die, and about
the ſame time of the day, and that the
whole may be performed in the loweſt
and cheapeſt manner. And it is my ear-
neſt requeſt, that my body be not in-
cloſed in any kind of coffin, but only de-
cently laid in what is called a ſhell of the
loweſt value, and without lid or other co-
vering which may hinder the natural earth
from covering it all around.
The books relating to the Univerſal Hi-
ſtory, and belonging to the Proprietors,
are to be returned to them according to the
true liſt of them, which will be found in
a blue paper in my account book. All the
reſt being my own property, together with
all
#:
#:
#.
#:
$1.
Wº:
º

<page 16>
( 3 ) -
all my houſhold goods, wearing apparel,
and whatever money ſhall be found due to
me after my deceaſe, I give and bequeath
to my friend Sarah Rewalling above named,
together, with ſuch manuſcripts as I had
written at different times, and deſigned to
be made public, if they ſhall be deemed
worthy of it, they conſiſting of fundry eſ-
ſays on ſome difficult parts of the Old
Teſtament, and chiefly written for the uſe
of a young Clergyman in the country, and
ſo unhappily acquainted with that kind of
learning, that he was likely to become the
but of his ſceptical pariſhioners, but being,
by this means, furniſhed with proper ma-
terials, was enabled to turn the tables upon
them.
But the principal manuſcript I thought my-
ſelf in duty bound to leave behind, is a
faithful narrative of my education, and the
ſallies of my wretched youthful years, and
the various ways by which I was in ſome
meaſure unavoidably led into the baſe and
ſhameful impoſture of paſſing upon the
world for a native of Formoſa, and a con-
vert to Chriſtianity, and backing it with a
fićtitious account of that iſland, and of my
B 3 own.

<page 17>
( 6 )
own travels, converſion, &c. all or moſt of
it hatched in my own brain, without re-
gard to truth and honeſty. It is true, I
have long fince diſclaimed even publicly
all but the ſhame and guilt of that vile im-
poſition, yet as long as I knew there were
ſtill two editions of that ſcandalous romance
remaining in England, beſides the ſeveral
verſions it had abroad, I thought it incum-
bent upon me to undeceive the world, by
unravelling that whole myſtery of iniquity
in a poſthumous work, which would be
leſs liable to ſuſpicion, as the author would
be far out of the influence of any finiſter
motives that might induce him to deviate
from the truth. All that I ſhall add con-
cerning it is, that it was began above twenty-
five years ago with that view, and no other,
during a long receſs in the country, ac-
companied with a threatening diſeaſe, and
ſince then continued in my moſt ſerious
hours, as any thing new preſented itſelf;
ſo that it hath little elſe to recommend it-
ſelf but its plainneſs and fincerity, except
here and there ſome uſeful obſervations and
innuendoes on thoſe branches of learning in
which I had been concerned, and particu-
--- - . larly

<page 18>
( 7 )
larly with ſuch excellent improvements as
might be made in the method of learning
of Hebrew, and in the producing a more
perfeót body of Univerſal Hiſtory, and more
anſwerable to its title than that which hath
already paſſed a ſecond edition. And theſe,
I thought, might be more deſerving a place
in that narrative, as the uſefulneſs of them
would in a great meaſure make amends
for the ſmall charge of the whole. If it
therefore ſhall be judged worth printing, I
defire it may be ſold to the higheſt bidder,
in order to pay my arrears for my lodgings,
and to defray my funeral; and I further re-
queſt that it be printed in the plain and
undiſguiſed manner in which I have writ-
ten it, and without alteration or embelliſh-
ment. I hope the whole is written in the
true, fincere ſpirit of a perſon awakened by
a miracle of mercy, unto a deep ſenſe of
his folly, guilt, and danger, and is deſirous,
above all things, to give God the whole
glory of ſo gracious a change, and to ſhew
the various ſteps by which hisDivine Provi-
dencebrought it about. The whole of the ac-
Count contains fourteen pagesofPreface, and
B 4 about

<page 19>
( 8 )
about ninety-three more of the ſaid relation,
written in my own hand with a proper title,
and will be found in the deep drawer on the
right hand of my white cabinet. How-
ever, if the obſcurity I have lived in, dur-, .
ing ſuch a ſeries of years, ſhould make,
it needleſs to revive a thing in all likeli-
hood ſo long ſince forgot, I cannot but wiſh,
that ſo much of it was publiſhed in ſome
weekly paper, as might inform the world,
eſpecially thoſe who have ſtill by them the
above-mentioned fabulous account of the
Iſland of Formoſa, &c. that I have long
ſince owned both in converſation and in
print, that it was no other than a mere
forgery of my own deviſing, a ſcandalous
impoſition on the puclic, and ſuch, as I
think myſelf bound to beg God and the
world pardon for writing, and have been
long ſince, as I am to this day, and ſhall
be as long as I live, heartily ſorry for, and
aſhamed of. - -
Theſe I do hereby ſolemnly declare and
teſtify to be my laſt Will and Teſtament;
and in witneſs thereof have thereto ſet my
name, on the 23d day of April, in the
year
It
M2.
, "I C.
il
7:
my
Clic
bleſ
hº
[...in
Tw
ºl

<page 20>
( 9 )
|
year of our Lord 1752, O.S. and in the
73d year of my age.
G. Pſalmanazar.
The laſt Will and Teſtament of G. Pſal-
manazar, of Ironmonger-Row, in the Pa-
riſh of St. Luke, Middleſex, whenever it
ſhall pleaſe God to take him out of this
world unto himſelf.
January 1, 1762, being the day of the
Circumciſion of our divine Lord, then,
bleſſed be God, quite ſound in my mind,
though weak in my body, I do ratify and
confirm the above particulars of my laſt
Will made.

<page 21>
====
* *

<page 22>
P R E F A C E
As the deſign of my leaving the follow-
ing Memoirs, is at once to undeceive the
world with reſpect to that vile and ro-
mantic account I formerly gave of myſelf,
and of the iſland of Formoſa, and to make
all the amends in my power for that ſhame-
ful impoſition on the public, by leaving
behind me this faithful narrative of my-
ſelf, and of the remarkable accidents of
my wretched life that led me to it, as well
as of thoſe that deterred me from perfiſting
in it; it will not be improper here to pre-
miſe ſome of the chief motives that deter-
mined me to write the following ſheets, to
be printed after my death.
The religious education I had happily re-
ceived during my tender years, had made
ſo ſtrong an impreſſion upon my mind,
that, though it did not prove ſufficient to
preſerve me from being unwarily and gra-
dually hurried, by my own ſtrong paſſion,
- * ". - into

<page 23>
( 12 )
into that ſcandalous piece of forgery; yet
it never failed of making me condemn
myſelf, in my more ſerious hours, for every
ſtep I took towards it; but more particu-
larly for the laſt and moſt vile ſcene of all,
my pretended converſion from Heatheniſm
to Chriſtianity, and the abominable means I
was forced to uſe in order to make it gain
credit in the world; ſo that I laboured ever
after under frequent and bitter remorſes
and ſtings of conſcience, at the refle&tion
of the great load of guilt into which I had
ſuffered my youthful and unthinking vanity
to hurry me.
And ſo much the more deep was my
ſenſe of it, as I found my unhappy condi-
tion become ſo very difficult, and in ſome
meaſure deſperate, ſeeing nothing could
effectually extricate me from it but a pub-
lic acknowledgment of one of the vileſt
and moſt odious impoſtures that youth
and raſhneſs could be guilty of, which I
could not poſſibly have made, without ex-
poſing myſelf to ſhame and danger, and
my friends to the deepeſt mortification and
diſpleaſure, and turning their undeſerved
- Caſº,

<page 24>
( 13 ) -
. -
care and concern for me into the juſteſt
abhorrence and deteſtation of me.
Under theſe pungent reflections, which
were, however, but too often ſmothered
by various carnal confiderations, and the
violent hurry of my paſſions, I was not
without ſome hopes that the ſame divine
goodneſs, which had not ſuffered me to
harden into an utter inſenſibility of my
guilt, might, in his own good time, enable
me to ſurmount all the dreadful difficulties
which my carnal mind laid in my way,
and finiſh that good work which my re-
morſe gave me cauſe to hope was begun
by his undeſerved grace in me. I was not,
however, without ſome apprehenfiens from
a ſenſe of my extreme guilt, left that, which
I cheriſhed under the notion of hope, ſhould
prove only a vain and ill-grounded pre-
ſumption, at leaſt I began to fear I had
reaſon to think it ſo, whilſt I continued
ina&ive, and depended merely on a few
faint wiſhes and prayers, inſtead of mak-
ing ſome ſtrong reſolutions and efforts,
which might aſſure me of the divine grace
co-operating with them.
In

<page 25>
( 14 )
In this fluétuating and wretched uncer-
tainty I continued ſome years, not knowing
which way to begin or go about the ar-
duous and dreaded taſk, when a grievous
and lingering fit of illneſs did, in ſome
meaſure, hurry me to it, and made me
determine immediately to ſet pen to paper,
and employ all the time my diſtemper
would allow me, to undo as much as was
in my power all the miſchief I had done,
by leaving behind me a faithful account of
everything I could recolle&t, and that had
been inſtrumental to ſo fatal and long a train
of miſcarriages, in order to ſet the whole
impoſture in ſo true a light, that no part
of the ſhame may fall on the guiltleſs, but
on the guilty; and that is chiefly on my-
ſelf. -
I ſet about it accordingly, and if I did
not begin ſo neceſſary and laudable a work,
till driven as it were to it by pain and fick-
neſs, by the fear of death, and of the divine
diſpleaſure, I hope it will be ſo far from
leſſening the credit of the following narra-
tive, that it will rather add weight to it,
ſeeing no time or circumſtances can be
In Ore

<page 26>
( ; ; )
}
more apt to inſpire a man with the deepeſt
feriouſneſs and fincerity, than thoſe I was
in, when I wrote the moſt confiderable and
mortifying part of it.
I ſhall therefore only add, that my di-
ſtemper was a lingering every-other-day
ague, which laſted me about fix weeks,
and that being then in a ſweet place of re-
tirement in the country, at a very good
friend’s houſe, and taken ſufficient care of
in all other reſpects, I had all the time and
opportunity I could wiſh for, joined with
the propereſt diſpoſition of mind for ſuch.
a taſk, ſo that through God's bleſfing I was
enabled to bring down the ſhameful ac-
count of my former unfortunate life through
the moſt ſhocking and impious ſcenes of it,
to my arrival into England without any in-
terruption, and I hope in God with that
ſincerity and ſeriouſneſs as ſuch a relation
could require, and my bad ſtate of health
could inſpire me with, ſtill taking care be-
fore all things to implore the divine aſſiſtance
of the great ſearcher of all hearts every time
I ſat down to write, that he would direct
me to go through the arduous taſk with
ſuch

<page 27>
( 16 )
ſuch a due regard to truth, whatever ſhame
refle&ted on me, as might in all reſpects re-
dound to his glory, and entitle me to his
pardon and mercy; and to him I give all
the praiſe, for having enabled me not only
to go on ſo far with the wiſhed for work
during my retreat there, but to reſume it
ſince at proper times, till I had brought it
to the deſired concluſion. .
For being, ſoon after my recovery, obliged
to return to London, and engaged in a work,
which neceſſarily took up too much of my
etime and thoughts, to permit me to go on
with this, in the ſame regular manner I had
done in the country (though ſtill reſolved
by God's aſſiſtance to go through with it)
I determined to ſet apart an hour at leaſt
every Wedneſday and Friday to reviſe what
I had wrote, and to continue the narrative
as my memory ſerved; not doubting but the
ſolemnity of the faſt, joined to the prayers
and other meditations I had appropriated
for theſe two days, in the method of de-
votion I was through God's bleſfing entered
into, would prove effectual means to ob-
tain that ſpirit of fincerity and ſeriouſneſs
- which

<page 28>
( 17 )
which I earneſtly wiſhed might go through
the remainder, as I was conſcious it had
done in the former part, whilſt I laboured
under my illneſs.
I went on accordingly for ſome time with
it, till the other buſineſs I had in hand, and
ſome other avocations, as well as ſometimes
an indiſpoſition of the mind, unhinged me
from my method oftener than I wiſhed;
for at ſuch times I found myſelf ſo unfit to
purſue it, that I plainly ſaw it was better
to diſcontinue it till I could recover my for-
mer frame. This occaſioned ſometimes an
intermiſſion of two or more weeks as to
the writing part, though the matter was
ſtill ſo preſſing on my mind, that it only
gave me an opportunity, either of recol-
lečting ſome things I had omitted, or of
gathering freſh materials for the ſequel.
But as my aim was only to give an ac-
count of what either chiefly hurried me on
through ſuch a long train of the moſt un-
accountable follies and vanities, or of what
brought me to a ſenſe and abhorrence of
them, I have omitted a great number of
the former, as rather apt to diſguſt than
entertain or inform a ſober reader, and
C COIl-

<page 29>
( 18 )
confined myſelf to the latter, as the inore
likely to prove inſtructive and uſeful to
him. And I ſhall not be very ſolicitous
what judgment thoſe will paſs on this nar-
rative, who are ſtrangers to religion and the
various ways of the Divine Providence in
reclaiming finners, firſt by drivin g, and then
drawing thern to himſelf, provided I can
acquit myſelf to my own conſcience that I
have taken all poſſible care to write it with
that ſincerity and faithfulneſs that I would
wiſh it to be done at my laſt moments,
and with no other view than that of mak-
ing ſuch a full and ample acknowledgment
of my great folly and guilt, as my con-
ſcience told me I ought to do for having
ſo long and ſo ſhamefully impoſed upon the
world, as well as of God's fingular good-
neſs which inſpired me with the deſign, and
hath enabled me to go through it in the
manner I have done.
The reaſons of my not chufing to have
it publiſhed during my life, beſides thoſe
already hinted, will be ſeen in the ſequel,
and I hope will be thought ſolid and ſatis-
fačtory, eſpecially as it hath given me an
bpportunity of continuing the latter (and
aS

<page 30>
( 19 )
as I hope in God) the much better part of
my life, and of adding to it ſeveral uſeful
particulars, which the reader will find
there ; ſuch as my eaſy and expeditious
method of ſtudying, and attaining to a
fuller knowledge of the Hebrew tongue;
ſundry-curious and inſtructive obſervations
relating to ſome of the works I have been
engaged in, in the learned way, particularly
in that long and laborious one of the Uni-
verſal Hiſtory, of the deſign, beginning,
and purſuit, together with the difficulties,
miſcarriages, faults, and other matters re-
lating to both editions of it; and I have
been the better able to give ſuch an account
of the whole as may be of uſe to the public,
eſpecially to the purchaſers, as I have been
concerned in it from the beginning.
The reader will likewiſe find the latter
part of this narrative interſperſed with man
other particular accidents which have hap-
pily contributed not only to keep me ſteady
in my reſolutions and change of life, but
which have likewiſe inſenſibly led me into
a more regular way of thinking and ačting;
and, as true repentance begins in the change
of the heart, and ends at the reformation
- C 2 of

<page 31>
( 20 )
of the finner's life, I may humbly hope that
I have not been negligent in finding out
and uſing the moſt effectual helps and
means, nor failed of the divine bleſſing on
them, which are promiſed to all fincere pe-
nitents. Though the fear I was in, left too
particular an account of them ſhould be
deemed, by the cenſorious, as oſtentatious
and phariſaical, hath obliged me to con-
ceal a great number of them, which might
perhaps have otherwiſe proved very en-
couraging to people in my condition; not
doubting but to thoſe who are fincere in
their repentance and reſolutions, the ſame
Divine Providence will ſuppeditate all the
neceſſary helps and directions as their caſe
requires, even as it hath graciouſly done to
II].C.
All I would add by way of encourage-
ment to perſons in my unhappy circum-
ſtances (and worſe or more dangerous no
man could hardly be in than I was) is not
to let the greatneſs of their guilt, or the
difficulties of the duties of repentance, de-
ter, but rather invite him to the throne of
mercy, through the merits of our Divine
Redeemer; for how dark and gloomy ſo-
- CVer

<page 32>
( 21 )
ever the proſpect of ſo extraordinary a
change may appear at firſt, as every thing
doth to thoſe that are fled from the broad
fun-ſhine into ſome dark place; yet thoſe
thick and diſcouraging miſts will gradually
diſappear, and every objećt that at firſt raiſed
our fears will grow more hopeful and com-
fortable, when we call to mind that there
is mercy ſufficient in God, merits enough
in Chriſt, power more than ſufficient in
the Divine Spirit, room enough in heaven,
ſcope enough in the evangelical promiſes,
and the moſt endearing invitations in the
Goſpel, to bring the greateſt finners to God
of infinite mercy and compaſſion; ſo that
there can be thenceforth no condemnation
to them that, with faith and repentance, ap-
ply to him for pardon and grace through
the merits of his ever-bleſſed Son, and uſe
all proper means and helps to render him-
ſelf a fit objećt of it.
We muſt not however ſuppoſe that the
bleſſed effects of ſuch a repentance will be
ſo ſoon felt by us as we could wiſh, or that
the duties of ſelf-denial, ſelf-abhorrence,
faſting, ſolitude, meditation, ſelf-exami-
nation, &c. will become eaſy and delight-
C 3 ful

<page 33>
( 22 )
ful as ſoon as we are entered into a reli-
‘gious regimen: we muſt, on the contrary,
exped them to appear difficult and gloomy
at the beginning, in order to excite our
faith and reliance on the Divine aſſiſtance,
which draws us not with an irreſiſtible force,
but with the cords of men, and the bands
of love (Hoſ. xi. 4.) We muſt likewiſe
exped to meet with frequent foils and
backſlidings in order to make us more dili-
gent and watchful, more ſenſible of our own
weakneſs, and more intent on that help
which comes from above. By this means,
we ſhall likewiſe be happily preſerved from
... that pride and preſumption, which is but too
apt to infinuate itſelf into the minds of new
converts; for experience plainly ſhews, that
thoſe two dangerous vices will be apt to
ſpring, not only out of our fins and paſſions,
but likewiſe out of our very virtues and
graces, if not duly kept down, by the ſenſe
or experience of our own infirmities and
impotence.
It was an excellent caution of a pious
clergyman: “Don’t preſume; you are not
“yet come to a ſtate of Chriſtian perfec-
“tion: don't deſpair; you are in the way
* to

<page 34>
- ( 23 )
“to it.” So that whatever difficulties or
diſcouragements we may meet with in our
progreſs, how ſhort ſoever we may come
of our duty, or whatever frailties, or even
vices we may ſtill be prone to, which may
either divert or retard our ſpeed, we may
ſtill comfort ourſelves with the hopes, that
we are in a way of growing better, and
that the uſe of thoſe means hath not only
preſerved us in a great meaſure from grow-
ing a great deal worſe, but enabled us to
riſe after every fall, if it hath not ſometimes
made even thoſe falls rebound to a greater
heighth of grace, by teaching us, from every
ſuch ſtep, to tread more ſure for the fu-
ture; and what a comfortable proſpect
muſt this yield to a man, that hath made
any progreſs in this happy way, to ſee God's
(trength magnified in his own weakneſs,
eſpecially when he adds thereto this bliſs-
ful confideration, that the ſame all-merito-
rious blood which was ſhed to expiate all
his wilful, if truly repented, tranſgreſſions,
will much more effectually atone for all his
involuntary defečts. : `
Thus much I thought incumbent on me
to ſay on this head, becauſe whatever our
C 4 free-

<page 35>
( 24 )
freethinkers may boaſt of the ſufficient
power of reaſon to reclaim a man from a
long vicious courſe, from the prevalency of
evil habits and conſtitutional vices, what-
ever powerful influence they may aſcribe
to the notion of eternal rectitude, &c. to
reduce a man that hath defleóted ſo wide
and far from it, without any of thoſe ſu-
pernatural helps above-mentioned; yet I
am well aſſured, that the former, without
the latter, would have proved (to me at
leaſt, if not to any man in my condition)
rather a determent than an effectual means;
for what hopes or likelihood could there
be that a wretch, who had, by his impe-
tuous paſſion, been hurried into the com-
miſſion of ſuch a ſeries of impieties againſt
his own reaſon and conſcience, ſhould ever
be able to extricate himſelf from ſuch a ſla-
viſh ſtate by his own baſe natural power
What efficacious help could he expect
from his own reaſoning faculties, which,
however cried up by others, he had found,
by ſad experience, ſo weak and impotent,
that the moſt they could do for him, was
to make him condemn himſelf, without
being able to reëtify or reſiſt the violent
- impulſes

<page 36>
( 25 )
impulſes of his predominant vice Had,
indeed, his knowledge of mankind fur-
niſhed him with any remarkable inſtance
of the prevalency of reaſon above a favourite
vice, it might have given him ſome encou-
ragement; but when he ſees, on the con-
trary, that theſe ſtrenuous deſpiſers of all
ſupernatural helps, equally enſlaved to ſome
favourite paſſion, and only differing from
him perhaps in degree; the moſt he could
expect his reaſon to do for him, would be
to keep his own under ſome reſtraint and
decorum, till time and indulgence had quite
exhauſted them. - -
But what poor encouragement is this to
one in my dangerous caſe? how inconfider-
able the change or remorſe what poor ſa-
tisfaction to the world for ſo vile an impo-
ſition, and what likelihood that it would
procure a pardon from an offended God,
or calm the ſtings of a wounded conſcience?
And how much happier was it for me that
I was direéted to look up for and depend
on a ſuperior affiſtance, and inſtead of truſt-
ing to ſuch a broken reed of my reaſon and
ſtrength, to apply myſelf to that Supreme
Being, whoſe grace alone could work ſuch
aſı

<page 37>
( 26 )
an extraordinary change in the heart, give
an effectual bleſſing on my weak efforts,
and keep me ſteady in thoſe reſolutions
which he had inſpired me with, as well as
in the uſe of thoſe means he hath provided
and preſcribed to us ! -
I gladly repeat it, that nothing leſs than
the hopes of his promiſed grace could have
induced me to endeavour after it, and no-
thing but a full reliance on the merits of a
Divine Interceſſor could have invited me to
cry to him for pardon and acceptance; and,
on the other hand, nothing but the obtain-
ing it could have ſupported me under my
doubts and fears, my difficulties and diſ.
couragements, nor enabled me to perſevere
in, and nothing leſs than the continuance
and increaſe of it could have brought a work
of ſuch extraordinary and undeſerved mercy
to perfeótion.
I cannot therefore but think it the greateſt
injury that can be done, to perſons who have
unhappilyºwerved from the paths of vir-
tue and religion, to make them depend
ſolely on the ſtrength of their rational
faculties for an effectual change, and to in-
ſpire them with a diſregard for the more
power-
Tº

<page 38>
( 27 )
powerful means and motives which the
Goſpel offers to them, and which, upon
experience, will be found the only ones that
can bring it about. And may what I have
here ſaid inſpire every awakened ſinner,
(who hath tried in vain the ſucceſs of the
former) with the more comfortable hope
and ſtedfaſt confidence, in the never-failing
efficacy of the latter. º. º
Having ſaid thus much on the ſubjećt of
the divine grace offered to us in the Goſpel,
it will doubtleſs be expected that I ſhould
give ſome farther account of my private be-
lief ſo far as relates to the controverſy be-
tween the church of Rome, in which I was
educated, and that of England, in the com-
munion of which I have lived, ever fince
my coming into England. And here I
muſt confeſs, to my very great ſhame, that
though I did for ſeveral years profeſs myſelf
a zealous member of the latter, yet the pre-
judices of my education, and the general
courſe of my ſtudies, did ſtill ſtrongly in-
cline me in favour of the former ; inſomuch
that neither the many books of controverſy
I had read on that ſubjećt, nor my frequent
diſputes with prieſts and others of that com-
- Iſluſh1Oil

<page 39>
( 28 )
munion (in which, however, I had ſtill was
nity enough to give the preference to my
arguments againſt it) could fix my waver.
ing mind, much leſs could I be induced to
think it ſo corrupt and dangerous, antichriſ.
tian and idolatrous as it was with ſo much
warmth maintained to be by moſt prote-
ſtant writers and preachers; inſomuch that
this uncharitable zeal of theirs made me
ftill more doubtful whether the reaſons they
urged were ſufficient to juſtify their ſepara-
tion from it.
I was indeed ſincerely perſuaded, from all
that I had read or heard, that the church of
England was by far the beſt and ſafeſt of
all the proteſtant churches; but that it was
really more ſo than that of Rome, I was far
enough from being ſatisfied in my mind;
ſo that there was almoſt as little ſincerity in
my pretended zeal for and conſtant com—
munion with it, than in my pretended con-
verſion to it: the truth of it is, that I was
too young and heedleſs, vain and conceited,
to lie open to convićtion, and that I read
and heard the arguments on both ſides,
rather to fill my head than to reëtify my
heart, or fix my belief; ſo that I muſt con-
feſs

<page 40>
( 29 ) -
feſs that I acted at that time a very ſhame-
ful and infincere part, in the preference I
ſo ſtrenuouſly gave to the one above the
other, which, though ever ſo juſtly de-
ſerved, did not appear then in that light
to me.
In this careleſs, though impious and abo-
minable, ſuſpence I continued ſome years
(which, upon the whole, was but of a
piece with the other and more flagrant
part of my impoſture) till I came to read
a treatiſe, intituled, THE CASE stat ED
BET W E E N A NOBLEMAN OF THE CHURCH
of ROME, AND A GENT LEMAN of THE
cHURCH of ENGLAND, in which I thought
I found the controverſy fully and clearly
decided in favour of the latter. And I
gave the heed to the arguments on both
fides, not only as they appeared to me to
be ſtated with the greateſt clearneſs and
impartiality, but as I had been long ac-
quainted with Mr. Charles Leſley, the re-
ºuted author of that book, who was uni-
verſally allowed to be one of the learnedeſt
men in that controverſy, and had moreover
given the ſtrongeſt proofs of his probity
and ſincerity, as well as of his capacity and
unbiaſſed

<page 41>
( 30 )
unbiaſſed judgment; of all which I was fo
fully appriſed, that no book that I had
read did ever contribute ſo much, if not
to fix my wavering mind, yet at leaſt to
make me think more ſeriouſly on the ſub-
jećt, and to give myſelf up to a freſh and
more cloſe application to that controverſy,
and the reading of all the beſt authors who
had, or ſhould afterwards write on either
fide; for I doubted not but we ſhould ſoon
hear of one or more anſwers from ſome of
the beſt pens from that ſide, againſt it.
However, though I never could learn of
any that was made to it, it did not divert
me from my purpoſe. And indeed I found
myſelf ſo ſtrongly prepoſſeſſed in favour of
the author, that I had reaſon to fear leſt the
impreſſion which his book had made upon
my mind, ſhould be owing to that, rather
than to the validity of his arguments, until
I had read over afreſh all that had been
urged in favour of the oppoſite fide. But
here again, though I went over them with
the greateſt attention and fincerity, I found
the diſpute ſo ſtrangely managed, and clog-
ged with ſuch elaborate learning and ſo-
phiſtry, ſuch controverted quotations from
the

<page 42>
( 31 )
the Scriptures and ancient fathers, ſuch un-
chriſtian charges of forgery, and perverting
the ſenſe of thoſe authors, and other un-
charitable language, as rather bewildered
than convinced my mind; ſo that the only
fruit I reaped from all my reading (beſides
a ſtrong prejudice againſt thoſe of the Ro-
miſh ſide, whom I obſerved to deal moſt in
that unfair way of diſputing) was, that there
could be no ſafety in truſting to my own
judgment in a matter of ſuch vaſt concern;
and that it was next to impoſſible for men,
frail as we are, and warped by our own
paſſions and prejudices, to wade through
ſuch ſtormy ſeas of controverſy, without an
extraordinary aſſiſtance from the fountain
of all light and truth. I have accordingly
made it my conſtant care ever ſince, that
is, for above theſe twenty-five years, to ap-
ply myſelf fervently, and to depend wholly
upon that divine guide for a deliverance
from all errors of faith and practice, and
for ſuch an increaſe of his light and grace
as may confirm me in the belief of all his
ſaving truths, obedience to all his commands,
ſincere communion with his holy catholic
church, and a tender and charitable concern
- for

<page 43>
( 3.2 )
for all thoſe who have ſwerved from it. To
theſe petitions (which I conſtantly offered
up to God, not only morning and night for
a long ſeries of years, but in a more copious
and fuller form, ſuitable to my own exi-
gence, on more ſolemn, that is, on faſt
and feſtival days) I hope is owing, that in-
ward ſatisfaction which I have ſince been
bleſſed with, in my more ſteady and ſincere
communion with the church of England, and
in the preference I now give it to all other
churches; and, as I hope in God, without
the leaſt breach of charity to any of the
reſt. And indeed by all that I have read,
or been able to judge, I have been more
and more convinced that theirs and ours are
all in an imperfeót ſtate, though ſome more
than others, and that they are like to con-
tinue ſo till the riſing again of the ſun of
righteouſneſs upon us, whoſe brightneſs will
then enlighten at once both hemiſpheres,
and who will then not only reform what-
ever is amiſsin his myſtical body, but bring
the Jews, Turks, and Heathen into it; till
then we can only in charity bewail what-
ever errors we ſee in them, either in faith
or pračice, and pray to God to reform them
!
1Il

<page 44>
( 33 )
in his own good time, and to be merciful
to thoſe whoſe hearts are fincere towards
him, whatever involuntary miſtakes they
may labour under. -
Infallibility in the church were a bleſſing as
much to be wiſhed for in this uncertain
ſtate, as it is falſely challenged by the church
of Rome; but ſince reaſon and experi-
ence ſhew it to be denied to us, and many
ſincere members of that church do pri-
vately bewail the errors that are crept into
it, though loath to own them a ſufficient
cauſe for our ſeparation from it, it highly
becomes us all to make the beſt uſe of that
guide which God hath given us, viz. his
divine revealed Will and Word, without
breaking the bond of Charity with thoſe
who interpret it in a different way from
us: for though, in that reſpect, we may
juſtly enough acknowledge in the words of
our church's confeſſion, that “we have” all,
more or leſs, “erred and ſtrayed like loſt
“ſheep,” and that perhaps chiefly through
out “following too much the devices and
“ deſires of our hearts;” yet as God is the
only judge how far every man is faulty
in that reſpect, ſhould we not be very
D. careful

<page 45>
( 34 )
careful to paſs ſuch a favourable judgment
on them, as may entitle us to the ſame in-
dulgence from the judge of all hearts?
Should it not at leaſt (ſeeing we are all
alike fallible, and ſtand in need of the ſame
charitable allowance) make us exceeding
fearful how we do, by our anathemas and
other unchriſtian denunciations againſt thoſe
that differ from us, expoſe ourſelves to the
ſame ſevere ſentence, and meet with the
ſame meaſure at the laſt day, as we have
ſo freely dealt unto them? This unchari-
table condemning ſpirit, which hath ſo long
reigned among Chriſtians of all denomina-
tions, I have long fince looked upon as the
moſt dangerous error a man can fall into,
as it is indeed the moſt open violation of
the grand charaćteriſtic of the Goſpel.
I have been ready to ſhudder when I have
heard ſome of our preachers inveigh, in
that uncharitable way, againſt their Fellow-
chriſtians, or even againſt our modern Free-
thinkers and Deiſts. Some of them I have
heard and read, who could not ſpeak or
write of them without ridicule and deriſion,
inſtead of that pity and concern which is
due to perſons in that dangerous ſtate; and,
for
7.

<page 46>
( 35 ) -
for that reaſon, have always thought them
the moſt unfit to teach others, who had all'
the true ſpirit of Chriſtianity to ſeek, and
can allow themſelves to exult and droll
over the errors and frailties of their fellow-
creatures, which even common humanity
forbids us to think of or mention without
the utmoſt ſeriouſneſs and compaſſion.
This uncharitable and untimely zeal, even
in controverſies of the higheſt nature, doth
ftill more miſchief in another way, by mag-
nifying and aggravating the differences be-
tween the contending ſides, which ſerves
only to render them the more irreconcile-
able; whereas a true chriſtian ſpirit will,
from a ſenſe of its own infirmity, rather
chuſe to excuſe and palliate them, and will
be extremely careful to ſoften and ſmooth
every thing that is offered in the oppoſition,
in order to render it leſs irkſome and inef-
feótual. . . •
Had our divine Lawgiver deſigned that we
ſhould have all agreed, in the main points
of religion, or had he ſeen any thing ſo.
ſinful and dangerous in our diſagreement
about it, his infinite wiſdom and goodneſs
would, doubtleſs, either have given us
D 2 greater

<page 47>
( 36 ),
greater helps and brighter faculties, or would
have taken care to have his revelation made.
- ſo plain and obvious, that none but the wil-
ful and perverſe,could have erred from it.
In either of which caſes, where would there
have been any room for that charitable and
forbearing ſpirit which is the peculiar cha-
raēteriſtic of Chriſt's true diſciples, and is ſo:
acceptable to him? not towards thoſe that
agreed with us from the ſame motives we
agreed with them ; nor yet much leſs to-
wards thoſe that differ from us, when it.
would have plainly appeared, that not their:
infirmity or ignorance, but their pride and
perveſeneſs made them do ſo. May we
not therefore ſafely conclude, that God ſuf-
fers us to continue in this imperfeót and
uncertain ſtate, and unavoidable diverſity of
opinions, in order to give us an opportunity,
of exerciſing a virtue, which is of all others.
the moſt exalted and moſt acceptable to:
him, as being the neareſt to its divine ori-
ginal. ; : +
God, who is emphatically ſtiled, love, and,
hath been beyond all poſſible conception.
diffuſive of it to us, hath, at the ſame time,
aſſured us, that the beſt returns we can make
to

<page 48>
( 37 ) ,
to him for it, or he expects from us, is to
make our own as extenſive as we can to all
that bear his divine image: herein there-
fore is this moſt excellent virtue, this cha-
ritable ſpirit diſplayed in a manner moſt
nearly reſembling his own, when (inſtead
of treating thoſe that differ from us with
contempt, ſourneſs, or impatience, which
is baſe and ſelfiſh, or with ill language,
opprobrious names, unjuſt reflections,curſes,
and anathemas, which is truly diabolical)
we think and look upon them with the
ſame candor, benevolence, and compaſ-
ſionate concern, as we ſhould wiſh to be
ſhewn to us were their caſe our own;
when we make the moſt charitable allow-
ances for their infirmities and miſtakes,
and are ready to aſcribe their errors to the
weakneſs of their underſtanding, wrong
education, or any thing rather than to the
perverſeneſs of their will; when, by our
behaviour, our prayers, and good wiſhes,
we ſtrive to convince them that all our en-
deavours to reclaim them from their errors,
do really ſpring from our tender ſenſe of
their danger, and from ſuch a fincere and
diſintereſted concern for their ſpiritual wel-
- D 3 fare,

<page 49>
( 38 )
fare, as no oppoſition or obſtinacy on their
part ſhall be able to leſſen in the leaſt, be-
cauſe that being a duty enjoined by God,
we cannot in any caſe diſpenſe with it,
without danger of incurring his diſpleaſure;
and laſtly, when we can, in ſpight of all
their obſtinacy or untowardneſs, make them
ſenſible, by our words and deportment, that
we wiſh their happineſs as heartily as ever;
and that, after having tried our beſt efforts
in vain, we heartily recommend them ſtill
to that merciful God, whoſe equity and
goodneſs will acquit and approve every man
who conſcientiouſly ſeeks for, and endea-
vours after the beſt light, and is ready to
obey it as far as he is able to obſerve it.
Could we once make this the aim and re-
ſult of all our religious differences and diſ-
putes, they would, inſtead of a bane, prove
a ſtrong cement and ſupport to Chriſtianity;
we might then differ one from another
without breach of charity, as friends love
one another, though of different tempers,
complexions, &c. Our unbelievers would
be ſo far from taking an advantage from
them to cry it down, that they muſt be
forced to admire and eſteem it for the bleſ-
' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ſed

<page 50>
( 39 )
fed effects it produced in mens hearts and
lives, how wide ſoever their judgments
differed in other caſes; whereas, whilſt we
make them the ſad occaſion of faction and
ſtrife, of ſelfiſhneſs and malignity, or of
unreaſonable impoſitions on the faith and
practice, of ſlander, hatred, perſecution, &c.
it can hardly be expected that our ſceptics
and infidels will be candid or ingenuous
enough to perceive, or at leaſt to own, that
all this unchriſtian behaviour is diametri-
cally oppoſite to the Goſpel.
It is indeed much to be wiſhed, that ſome
of the ancient fathers had not mingled ſo
much of this antichriſtian ſpirit with their
otherwiſe pious and learned writings, and
had not done, as the great St. Jerome owns
himſelf, in his epiſtle to Pammachius; to
have done againſt Jovinian, that he had leſs
regarded what was exactly to have been
urged againſt him, than what might be laid
as a charge againſt him. How much of our
now reigning ſcepticiſm and infidelity may
have been owing to ſuch an unchriſtian ſpi-
rit, propagated and improved as it hath
been in ſubſequent ages, and how much
ſuch uncharitable writers and preachers of
T) 4 Con-

<page 51>
( 4o )
controverſy will have to anſwer for it at the
laſt day, I will not preſume to determine;
but thus much I may venture to infer from
it, that thoſe Boanerges did chuſe the moſt
unlikely means of recommending Chriſti-
anity to the unbelieving part of the world,
(if ſuch was their real deſign) when they
ſtrove to propagate it in a way ſo diametri-
cally oppoſite to the meek and benevolent
ſpirit of its divine author. . . .
This ſingle confideration, joined to the ſenſe
had of the weakneſs of our underſtanding
and incapacity of judging in matters of ſo
high a nature, hath long ago made me very
careful of condemning or cenſuring any
church or ſect for holding any tenets which
my conſcience could not readily join in.
We may indeed expoſe ourſelves to a ſe-
verer judgment, by paſſing too raſh or un-
charitable a one on others, but can never
run the ſame riſk by the moſt candid and
favourable allowance we can make for them.
And, after all, what have we to do to
judge thoſe that differ from us, fince both
they and we muſt ſtand accountable to
him only who is the unerring judge of all
hearts? - --
... * * * . I can-

<page 52>
( 41 )
n
I cannot forbear adding, that the almoſt
unſurmountable difficulties I have found to
come to the bottom of the greater part of
our diſputed points, and the little certainty
or ſatisfaction I have reaped from reading
of moſt controverfies, clogged and diſguiſed
as they are with ſophiſtry and endleſs ſub-
tilities, and managed with ſo little appear-
ance of impartiality and charity, have made
me ſuch a Pyrrhonian in polemic divinity,
that I have not dared to allow myſelf the
liberty of cenſuring thoſe who held what
I thought an error in faith or practice, or
even to pronounce it to be ſuch, though I
have been wanting in neither zeal nor cou-
rage to oppoſe any ſuch on all proper occa-
ſions, and to give the beſt reaſon I could
for my diſſenting from them; and I much
queſtion whether, in the imperfect and un-
certain ſtate we are in, reaſon or religion
will permit us, much leſs require of us, to
proceed farther; and whether a more po-
fitive or categorical declaration doth not ar-
gue ſomething worſe than prepoſſeſſion and
narrowneſs of mind, and will not be liable
to be condemned as an unchriſtian warp of
the will.
- - - - The

<page 53>
( 4.2 )
The tranſubſtantiation of the church of
Rome, is a doćtrine that appears the moſt
ſhocking to ſenſe and reaſon. That of abſo-
lute predeſtination among the greater part of
the reformed churches, appears not only
the moſt oppoſite to the divine attributes of
love, goodneſs, juſtice, &c. but to ſtrike
at the root of the Chriſtian religion, which
is founded on the love of God; for how
is it poſſible for a man to look upon ſo ar-
bitrary a being as that doćtrine repreſents
him, but with the utmoſt awe and dread,
even though he was ever ſo fully perſuaded
that himſelf was one of the predeſtinate
and how much more ſo the more he is re-
moved from ſuch a perſuaſion? Neverthe-
leſs, as I have all poſſible reaſon to believe
that there are myriads of men of learning
and probity who behold thoſe two doc-
trines in a quite different light, and not :
only hold them as neceſſary articles of their
faith, but are ready to condemn all that do
not, why ſhould I be ſo partial to my own
judgment, as to think it more infallible
than theirs, or venture to paſs the ſame
uncharitable ſentence on them for believing
which I blame them in my conſcience for
pro-

<page 54>
( 43 }
pronouncing againſt me for not believing
them º
With what juſtice can I charge the former
with idolatry for worſhipping what they
fincerely believe to be the real body of our
divine and adorable Redeemer ? Or how
can I tax the latter with impiety for pro-
feſſing a doćtrine, which I ought in charity
to think they would abhor, did it appear
to them as derogatory of God's goodneſs
and juſtice, as it doth to me, eſpecially as
the belief of both is founded on their im-
plicit belief, (and conſequently, and at the
worſt, on a miſtaken interpretation) of the
Holy Scripture ? -
Is it not therefore more ſafe and more chriſ-
tian for me to content myſelf with giving
my reaſons in the ſtrongeſt manner I am
able, for my diſſent from them, than to
charge them, even in thought, with wil-
fully perverting the word of God, and with
, all the guilt and infamy of impoſing damn-
able errors, under pain of damnation? It
may be indeed truly ſaid, that this kind of
retaliation is what not only reigns too much
in moſt chriſtian churches, even to this day,
but hath proved the frequent occaſion
- - of
_*

<page 55>
( 44 )
of the moſt horrid perſecutions and anti-
chriſtian cruelties: But is it not therefore
the more to be avoided and abhorred by all
true Chriſtians for the miſchief it hath done,
and is ſtill able to do, to the Goſpel, and for
the ſcandal it refle&ts on the beſt religion in
the world 2
Ought it not to be a matter of the deepeſt
grief and concern to a good Chriſtian, to
ſee the moſt gracious deſigns of heaven to-
wards mankind thus miſerably obſtructed
and fruſtrated, and ſo great a part of man-
kind deprived of the ineſtimable benefits of
it, by an untimely zeal, the moſt oppoſite to
the ſpirit of our meek and divine Redeemer,
and the moſt condemned, both by his pre-
cepts and example Doth not right reaſon
itſelf, as well as our natural ſelf-love, tell
every man how careful he ought to be not
to be miſtaken in a matter of ſuch infinite
concern ? And ſuppoſe we have ever ſo
much reaſon to think thoſe that differ from
us are really ſo, muſt we therefore take upon
us to cenſure and condemn, to anathema-
tize and perſecute them, whom reaſon and
charity ſhould rather incline us to pity and
pray for, whether their error be wilful or
- invo-

<page 56>
( 45 )
involuntary, which can only be known to
God f : . . . . . . . . -
I have choſen to inſtance in the doćtrines
of tranſubſtantiation and predeſtination, as
they appear the moſt ſhocking and anti-
ſcriptural to every one, except thoſe who
believe them; nevertheleſs, from a ſenſe of
my fallibility, as well as of the weakneſs
of human reaſon, I ſhould be very fearful
of pronouncing them abſolutely falſe (much
leſs to call them anti-chriſtian, damnable,
&c.) their appearing ſo to me is a ſufficient
reaſon for my declaring my diſſent from
them, but doth not authorize me to pro-
nounce thoſe that believe them to be guilty.
before God for ſo doing. . . . . .
Were I to indulge myſelf in the liberty
of cenſuring or condemning any chriſtian.
church, for any thing either in their faith
or practice, it would be that uncharitable
authority they aſſume of condemning, as
hereticks, &c. all thoſe who cannot believe
as they do. - -
And yet I own it highly neceſſary that there
ſhould be, in every particular church (fince
it is not given to us in this imperfeót ſtate
to be thus happily united in our belief)
2.

<page 57>
( 46 )
a ſtated rule of faith, a ſummary of what is
to be principally believed and practiſed by
all its members; but then care ſhould be
taken not to multiply thoſe articles be-
yond what is abſolutely neceſſary, nor yet
to impoſe them with any ſuch damnatory
clauſes againſt recuſants as are commonly
uſed by moſt churches, to the great detri-
ment and diſcredit of Chriſtianity, and the
intimidating and bewildering the ſincere
and well-meaning Chriſtians, who are inca-
pable of judging of the merit of thoſe con-
troverſies, and being commonly by far the
moſt numerous, are entitled to a more cha-
ritable and tender regard than to be obliged
blindly to believe and ačt as their church
preſcribes, or be liable to be reſcinded from
1t. * * * * * * * -
Even in thoſe articles wherein our church
is obliged to declare its diffent from any of
the tenets of others, methinks they might
and ſhould in charity content themſelves
with giving their reaſons, in the plaineſt
and conciſeſt manner, for their diſſent, and
with ſuch impartial candor and tenderneſs
as ſhould rather inſpire its members with
pity and concern for, than prejudice and
hatred

<page 58>
( 47 )
hatred againſt, thoſe that differ from them :
and, above all things, they ſhould all be ex-
ceedingly fearful of charging their antago-
niſts, and their tenets, with a greater de-
gree of guilt and danger than is confiſtent
with truth, and with that ſpirit which con-
demns and abhors all miſrepreſentation
and opprobrious language as the moſt de-
ſtructive, next to ill offices or perſecution,
of all errors that a Chriſtian can fall into.
It is plainly the want of this meek chriſtian
ſpirit, that makes men to intermix ſo much
deadly acrimony in all their diſputes and
differences, as ſerves only to deſtroy the
ſmall ſparks of charity that are left among
us. But where the love of Chriſt unites
our hearts in the bonds of peace and mu-
tual benevolence, no difference in religion,
however greatly miſrepreſented or aggra-
wated by untimely zeal, will ever be able
to diſſolve the tye, or create the leaſt diſ-
agreement or indifference in their affec-
tions. -
There are many things in the Greek, and
Roman church, in that ofGeneva, and Augſ-
burgh, &c. which my conſcience will not
permit me to join with ; but which I, at
the

<page 59>
( 48 )
the ſame time, firmly hope and believe will
not be laid to their charge by the merciful
ſearcher of all hearts, who rather pities than
puniſhes the involuntary errors of his frail
creatures: and were there none better to
be found in the chriſtan world than thoſe,
I ſhould think myſelf obliged to join com-
munion with that which appeared to me
the freeſt from them, rather than to ſtand
by myſelf, and be deprived of the benefit of
church-fellowſhip, provided nothing was
impoſed upon me by it that my conſcience
thought finful. I look upon them all (ex-
cepting ſuch as deny the fundamental arti-
cles of Chriſtianity, eſpecially the merits and
mediation of our divine Redeemer) as ſo
many branches of Chriſt's church; and
tho’ ſome are more corrupted than others,
yet all united into one body, of which he
himſelf is the ſupreme head and governor,
and is acknowledged by them as ſuch.
However, Iown that the church of Eng-
land hath, in all reſpects, appeared to-me,
ever fince I have made myſelf more ſe-
riouſly acquainted with its faith and prac-
tice, the beſt reformed and freeſt from every
thing that could reſtrain me from her com-,
munion,

<page 60>
( 49 )
fſ
munion, eſpecially as I am a layman : for
with reſpect to her clergy, I think ſome of
the injunctions ſhe lays them under to be
ſuch as I could by no means ſubmit to,
and which the more conſcientious among
them would, I believe, be glad to be freed
from, if it could be done conſiſtently with
the honour, and ſafety of its eſtabliſhment.
I am far from intending by this to caſt any
blemiſh on the reverend order, or on the
firſt reformers; but as it hath given ſo
much occaſion for cavil and diſreſpectful
reflečtions againſt both, I could heartily
wiſh to ſee it effectually removed. In other
reſpects I have long fince had a vaſt eſteem
and regard for her liturgy, ſacraments, or-
dination, and other ordinances, that it hath
been, and is ſtill, a matter of regret to me,
whenever buſineſs or any other impediment
hath deprived me of the benefit of them.
Her epiſcopacy, though ſo much diſre-
garded by other proteſtant churches, and
cried down, as invalid, by that of Rome,
hath long ago been looked upon by me,
not only as a fingular bleſſing, but as a ne—
ceſſary conſtituent of a church, the divine
inſtitution of which hath been, in my opi-
E nion,

<page 61>
( so )
tion, as fully proved againſt the former,
ãs the validity of its ordination hath againſt
the latter; and all I have to wiſh for her
ſake, is, that ſhe was as happy in the choice,
appointment, and promotion of her prelates;
and that the Congès Delire were ſomething
more than a phraſe without meaning:
however, that needs not to debar us, in this
imperfeót ſtate, from enjoying the benefits
of their ſacred function to very good pur-
poſes; nor diſcourage us from wiſhing and
praying for a reformation of thoſe abuſes
which worldly politicians have introduced
into it. -
Moſt people indeed, who look upon the
evil to lie in human nature itſelf, have little
hopes to ſee any amendment to it, tillwe have
a new heaven and a new earth, eſpecially
as thoſe in whoſe power the remedy is, are
moſt intereſted to ſuppreſs it: But a good
Chriſtian will look higher up than thoſe at
the helm for ſo deſirable a change, ſince,
as I believe, we have much more reaſon to
hope for it from the interpoſition of heaven,
than any of the neighbouring churches which
labour under the ſame difficulties. As for
thoſe countries abroad, which have ſecula-
rized

<page 62>
( 51 )
rized their biſhopricks, &c, they will hardly
charge our church with abuſing hers worſe
than they have done theirs; ſo that, upon
the whole, it appears in all reſpects to ſtand
upon a better and more hopeful foot than
any other I know, with all its imperfeótions
and defects. - -
I cannot diſmiſs this point without taking
ſome notice of a charge which ſome of our
preſent Methodiſts have laid to it, viz. its
having departed from ſome of its ancient
doćtrines, particularly thoſe of predeſtina-
tion and free-grace, or imputed righteouſ-
neſs. With reſpect to the former, it doth
not appear that the compilers of the ſe-
venteenth article ever deſigned to impoſe
the belief of it as neceſſary to ſalvation,
but only to define the term of predeſtina-
tion, as ſtrenuouſly maintained by the re-
formed churches of Geneva, Switzerland,
Holland, &c. leaving it to the option of
every one either to aſſent or diſſent from it:
much leſs do they ſeem to have inſiſted
upon the belief of it in that full and exten-
five ſenſe (and including abſolute reproba-
tion) in which the Supralapſarians explain
it, which doćtrine is now juſtly reječted by
E 2 moſt

<page 63>
( 52 )
moſt divines and members of this church.
Mr. Whitefield's charge of innovation is
therefore unjuſt ; and it is well known, that
he did not think otherwiſe of it, till he was
perſuaded into that opinion upon his going
to preach in America: however, could it
be ſuppoſed that the firſt reformers feally
deſigned it in that ſupralapſarian ſenſe, I
ſhould have commended any ſynod who
ſhould have fince then ordered it to have
been erazed, ſeeing the truth of a chriſtian
doćtrine is not founded on the opinion or .
authority of any men, but on the evidence
of Holy Writ.
With reſpect to the other charge, viz. in-
herent and imputed righteouſneſs, it muſt
be owned, that our ſermons and books of
devotion ſeem rather to run ſo much in
commendation of good works, as to lead
people to lay a greater ſtreſs on the former
than on the latter, and to confide more on
their good deeds than on the merits of
Chriſt, which is certainly a dangerous mi-
ſtake, fince our hope of acceptance and ſal-
vation muſt be chiefly founded upon the
latter, without which our beſt duties could
never be acceptable from ſuch frail and
- ſinful
|

<page 64>
( 53 )
finful creatures to a God of infinite holi-
neſs. -
It were therefore to be wiſhed, that our
preachers and divines would take ſome more
care to caution their hearers and readers,
whenever they infiſt on the neceſſity of good
works, againſt their putting their chief de-
pendence on them, and to remind them
that the alone merits and interceſſion of
our divine Redeemer can give them their
ſaving efficacy. But though this laſt point
is not ſo frequently inculcated and inſiſted
upon as could be wiſhed, yet that it is al-
ways underſtood and implied, is certain, be-
cauſe it always was, and is ſtill acknow-
ledged to be a fundamental article of the
church of England; ſo that it is unjuſt to
charge it with having departed from it;
and yet this is the common cry of theſe
modern enthuſiaſts, who are every where
denouncing damnation againſt all thoſe who
inſiſt on or put any dependence on inherent
righteouſneſs; but how unjuſtly and falſely,
let the apoſtle St. Paul inform them, who
expreſly tells us (I Corinth. iii. 11—13.)
that ſuch men ſhall be ſaved, though with
great difficulty; or, as he expreſſes it, ſo
E 3 as

<page 65>
( 54 )
as by fire, though not one of their works
ſhould ſtand the fiery trial ; for how pre-
carious ſoever the ſuperſtrućture be, whilſt
Chriſt is the foundation, he cannot but be
ſafe that builds his hopes upon it, whatever
ſtraw, ſtubble, or other traſh he may in-
termix with it.
However, I do not doubt but this falſe
alarm of the Methodiſts hath proved of
ſome uſe to many Chriſtians, as I own it
hath to me, and hath awakened them into
a better and humbler opinion of their inhe-
rent righteouſneſs, than they perhaps had
before. As to my own particular, tho’ I al-
ways depended ſolely on the merits of a cru-
cified Redeemer for pardon and acceptance,
and looked upon all our beſt ſervices to be
deſtitute of the leaſt worth, but what they
receive from him; yet I have been warned,
by this late outcry, to put leſs ſtreſs and
confidence in them, and to look upon them
rather as the evidence of our ſincerity and
falvation, than as the means or foundation
of it, rather,as our qualification for heaven.
(on which account we may ſafely wiſh, en-
deavour, and pray that we may more and
more abound in them) than as things car
- pable

<page 66>
( 55 )
pable to give us any title to it, which no-
thing can do but the imputed righteouſneſs.
of Chriſt.
Thus much I thought incumbent on me to
declare concerning my notions of religion
in general, of the church of England in
particular, and my reaſon for preferring her
communion to all other. I hope they are
all agreeable to the word of God, and that
I have taken all poſſible care and pains to
have them chiefly founded on that, by fre-
quently reading and conſulting the ſacred
volumes in their original, and uſing all pro-
per helps, as commentators, paraphraſts,
books of controverſy, &c. in order to come
at their true meaning. But above all, my
chief dependence hath been upon the guid-
ance and affiſtance of God's Holy Spirit,
which, for a great number of years, I have
never failed daily to implore, as I was truly
ſenſible, how poor and inſignificant all other
helps would be without it,towards the bring-
ing us through the vaſt mazes of contro-
verſy, which reign all over Chriſtendom, to
the wiſhed-for haven and ſalvation, to
which I earneſtly pray to God to bring
every fincere ſoul, that longs and ſtrives for
E 4 lts -

<page 67>
( 56 )
it. I firmly rely on the ſame divine good-
neſs to whom I owe ſo many mercies, and
ſo wonderful a change, that if there be yet
any thing erroneous or amiſs, either in my
belief and pračtice, he will, in his own time,
and by his all-ſufficient light and grace,
enable me to reëtify it, that I may have
nothing left to do but to acknowledge and
adore his infinite and undeſerved mercies to
me, and particularly for having enabled me
to ſee ſo much of my own weakneſs and
inſufficiency, unworthineſs and miſery, as
to put my whole truſt and confidence in his
all-powerful grace and unbounded goodneſs,
through the infinite merits of our bleſſed
Redeemer.
Before I conclude this Preface, it will be
likewiſe neceſſary for me to give ſome ac-
count of that vaſt quantity of laudanum I
have been known to take for above theſe
forty years, and my motives for ſo doing,
in order to undeceive ſuch perſons as may
have conceived too favourable an opinion
of that dangerous drug, from anything they
may have heard me ſay, heard at ſecond-
hand, or may have obſerved of the ſmall
viſible

<page 68>
( 57 )
viſible hurt I have received from it, during
ſo long and conſtant a uſe of it.
And firſt of all, as to the true occaſion of
my taking it, whatever pretence I may here-
tofore have made for it, ſuch as its eaſing
the pain of the gout, (which diſtemper,
though I heretofore pretended to be often
troubled with, yet I never was, nor had the
leaſt ſymptom or tendency to in my conſti-
tution) or of its being a great help to ſtudy,
a reviver of the ſpirits, and the like, which
qualities it in ſome meaſure hath ; yet my
motive for taking it at firſt, and continuing
it ſo long, was no other than my vanity
and ſenſeleſs affectation of fingularity; and
as that was then my predominant paſſion,
ſo I indulged it in this and many other ſuch
extravagant ways, at any hazard, as the
following ſheets will more fully ſhew. .
Secondly, as to the quantity, though it
never came up to that vaſt exceſs as I did
then pretend; yet I own that I frequently
took ſuch large doſes, by way of oſtenta-
tion, as muſt have proved detrimental, if
not quite fatal, to any man that had had a
leſs ſtrong and happy conſtitution than I
was bleſſed with; and I have been very
often

<page 69>
- ( 58 )
often ſurpriſed to find that I received ſo
little prejudice from it. And this it was
that emboldened me to take ſuch large and
dangerous draughts of it, without the leaſt
neceſſity or motive for it, but to be taken
notice and talked of; inſomuch that I con-
tinued it during ſuch a number of years, that
I was become a perfeót ſlave to, and could
not be eaſy without it, tho' I had for ſome
time been ſenſible of the ill conſequences
attending the conſtant uſe of it, eſpecially
as often as I indulged my vanity with a
larger doſe than uſual.
Thirdly, As to my vain pretence of having
found an effectual way of ſtripping the
opium of all its pernicious qualities, though
it was true in part, and I had fallen upon
a preparation of it (which was a kind of ſafe
and uſeful improvement on that which Dr.
Jones gives usin his Mystery of opium)
by the help of ſome acids, particularly the
juice of Seville oranges, which, mixed with
ſome alcalies, raiſed a kind of ferment in
the infuſion, by which ſome of the moſt
viſcous and narcotic parts were either ſcum-
med off, or made to ſubſide; yet ſo far
was it from being ſo inoffenſive and benefi-
cial,

<page 70>
( 59 )
cial, as I gave it out, that I had frequent
occaſion to obſerve ſome of its ill effects in
thoſe whom I unadviſedly perſuaded to uſe
it in ſome proper caſes, as I thought, ſo
that I was obliged to leave off preſcribing it
to others; though, as to myſelf, I was a
long while before I found any inconvenience
in taking it, even in that large quantity;
and I have great reaſon ſtill to think it
leſs dangerous by far than either that of
Dr. Sydenham's, or any infuſion exhibited
by the apothecaries and common diſpen-
ſaries. -
However, when I began to feel the incon-
venient effects of it, which was not till a
good number of years uſing it, I thought it
high time to leſſen the uſual doſe (which
was then about ten or twelve tea ſpoonfuls
morning and night, and very often more)
as faſt as I conveniently could, and in about
fix month's time had reduced myſelf to half
an ounce per day, and ſomewhat weaker
than the common Sydenham. I ſtill conti-
nued decreaſing; but ſuch was my fooliſh
vanity, that, to conceal my redućtion, Iadded
ſome other bitter tinéture, eſpecially that of
hierapicra, or ſome other ſuch correótive,
among

<page 71>
( 60 )
among it, to appear as ſtill taking my uſual
quantity.
On the other hand, I found that this re-
dućtion, gradual as it was, could not be
continued without ſome affecting and diſ-
couraging inconveniences; ſuch as a great
laſtitude and uneaſineſs of the mind, an in-
dolence and incapacity for ſtudy, a diſlike to
every thing I read or wrote, to ſolitude and
application; all which made me apprehen-
five, that if I did not ſlacken it, and go more
warily on with it, I might bring myſelf into
a greater evil than that which I endeavoured
to ſhun, and fling myſelf at length into a
kind of habitual torpor and ina&tivity, which
might prove at leaſt as detrimental to me:
to prevent which, I was forced to take a
new method, and to inlarge or leſſen my
doſe, according to the ſtate of health I was
in, ſometimes according as the weather was
more or leſs enlivening, or according as the
courſe of my ſtudies required a greater or
leſſer degree of application. All this, how-
ever, was rather owing to my own natural
indolence and want of reſolution to go
on in ſpight of all thoſe inconveniences,
than to any danger there really was in the
caſe,

<page 72>
( 61 )
caſe, as I happily found reaſon afterwards
to think ; for when the Divine Providence
was pleaſed to bleſs me with a contrary turn
of mind, and to make me deteſt and abhor
all my former follies, and this among the
reſt, to ſuch a degree, as to reſolve, by his
aſſiſtance, upon a thorough change, I then
found both the taſk, and all the inconve-
niences attending it, to grow more and more
eaſy; and as this reſolution was founded
upon a much better principle than my former
ones were, ſo it was attended with ſuch a
bleſſing at my laſt ſtay at Oxford, anno -
from July to the latter end of September, by
which time I had made a conſiderable pro-
greſs in my reduction, that I had quite com-
pleted the conqueſt, and lived ſome weeks
there without taking one drop, or even
wiſhing for it, although neither, then nor
ſince was I without ſome employment which
required a pretty cloſe application.
In this pleafing ſtate, as I juſtly thought it,
I continued for ſome months, when the
ſeverity of the enſuing winter overturned all
my meaſures, and forced me, though much
againſt my will, to have recourſe to it
again: neither could I think of any ſafer or
more

<page 73>
( 6.2 )
more effectual remedy againſt that chilneſs
of my blood, and lowneſs of ſpirits, which
I laboured under through the exceſſive cold-
neſs of the ſeaſon. I reſolved, however, to
reſume it in the ſmalleſt quantity that I
could find would anſwer my end; that is,
what was, as near as I could judge, equiva-
lent to ten or twelve drops of Sydenham's,
and with full intention to leave it off as ſoon
as the warm weather returned, and had ac-
cordingly reduced myſelf to about half that
quantity, though not without ſome diffi-
culty, on account of a work I was ſtill en-
gaged in, and the neceſſity we were under
to keep time with the printers and publiſhers.
Finding it at length ſo neceſſary and pleaſant,
as well as ſafe and harmleſs, I reſolved to
continue it, and have done ſo to this pre-
ſent time; that is, for ſeven or eight years,
without the leaſt inconvenience from it.
On the contrary, I have reaſon to think that
even that ſmall quantity, though ſcarce equi-
valent to twelve drops of Sydenham's, hath
been of ſome ſervice to me to prevent that
decay of ſpirits which old age, (being now
drawing near my ſeventieth) a ſedentary
life, and cloſe ſtudy, might otherwiſe proba-
bly

<page 74>
( 63 )
bly have brought upon me: and it is to this
ſmall doſe, which I take every night in a
pint of very ſmall punch, as ſoon as I leave
off writing, that I attribute, next to the
bleſfing of God, that good ſhare of health
I have hitherto enjoyed, and my having
been able, for ſo many years, to go through
the fatigues and applications of ſtudy, from
ſeven in the morning to ſeven at night, pre-
ſerving ſtill a good appetite and digeſtion, a
clear head, and tolerable flow of ſpirits, and
enjoying a ſound ſleep of fix or ſeven hours,
without indulging myſelf in any other li-
quors than tea all the day, and the above-
mentioned quantity of punch, or ſomething
equivalent to it at night; and as I have not
opportunity for much exerciſe, I take care
to live on the plaineſt diet at noon, and to
obſerve the old adage at night,
Ut fis nočje levis, ſit tibi cana brevis.
Toſleepeaſyat night, let your ſupper be light.
ME-

<page 75>

<page 76>
M E M O I R S,
O F
GE OR G E PSA LM A NAZAR.
I cannot better begin this melancholy ac-
count of my former life, vile and abo-
minable as it hath been, and blended with
ſuch mixture of the moſt unaccountable
pride, folly, and ſtupid villainy, in oppo-
fition to reaſon, religion, and all checks of
conſcience, till almoſt to the thirtieth year
of my age, than by humbly acknowledging
the infinite mercy of God, not only in pre-
ſerving me ſo long from the many evils
and diſaſters which my own wicked raſh-
neſs muſt elſe unavoidably have precipitated
me into, as the ſequel will ſufficiently ſhow;
but much more ſo in that gradual and vi-
ſible change which his grace wrought in
me, by enabling me frequently to retro-
ſpect with ſhame and remorſe on a life ſo
baſely ſpent, to ſend up the moſt fervent
wiſhes to heaven that I might at length
break off from ſo ſhameful and wicked a
courſe of the vileſt and moſt ſcandalous
F im-

<page 77>
( 66 )
impoſture, that a wild and abandoned
youth could be guilty of, and that I
might but be bleſſed with ſuch a ſteady
reſolution as at once publickly to diſclaim
all the lies and forgeries I had formerly
publiſhed in that monſtrous romance, and
at any rate or risk to take the ſhame to my
ſelf, and make a free confeſſion of the
whole impoſture. But I had not only my
pride to combat, but the diſpleaſure which
ſuch a declaration would give to all my
friends, who being very honeſt and religi-
ous, could not but have taken it much at
heart, and, perhaps, been expoſed to the
cenſure of the world for their charitable
opinion of me; to ſay nothing of the ab-
horrence they muſt have conceived againſt
ſo deteſtable a cheat. As theſe therefore .
were ſuch powerful determents to a man
wholly deſtitute of any laudable way of
living, I could not expect that my earneſt
wiſhes would be ſpeedily anſwered ; and
my only hope was, that the ſame gracious
God, who had thus effectually awaked me
to a ſenſe of my guilt and danger, would
alſo in his own time hear thoſe prayers
which himſelf had inſpired me to make,
^ - eſpe-

<page 78>
- ( 67 )
eſpecially, as upon a retroſpection of my
paſt follies, I was apt to comfort myſelf
with the thoughts, that the violence of my
favourite paſſion, pride, could never have
hurried me ſo irreſiſtibly through ſuch
ſcenes of folly and danger, if there had
not been ſome ſad flaw in my underſtand-
ing, ſome unavoidable degree of madneſs
in my temper, which might in ſome mea-
ſure extenuate, if not wholly excuſe, the
atrocious guilt it had involved me in ;
and the hope that it might ſtill be placed
to that account, by a merciful Judge of all
our thoughts and intents, of our frail and
corrupt nature, joined to the ſtedfaſt con-
fidence I had in the promiſes of the
Goſpel, and in the infinite merits of a
divine Saviour, preſerved me from de-
ſpairing of mercy and pardon, of ſucceſs
and bleſfing on thoſe happy beginnings, if
cloſely and earneſtly purſued.
But as ſuch a hope, without a ſincere defire
of doing one's part, to the beſt of one's
power, and according to the degree of aſ-
ſiſtance given from above, would rather
deſerve the name of raſh and ſhameful
F. 2 pre-

<page 79>
( 68 )
ſumption; ſo the next ſtep I took, at leaſt
in view, was to ſet about making all poſſi-
ble reparation to God and his church,
and to the world, and my own conſci-
ence, for the ſcandal which ſuch a vile
piece of hypocriſy muſt have given to all,
eſpecially to good men, and in ſpite of all
reluctance from pride and ſelf-love, which
the greater it was, would the more natu-
rally lead one to the throne of mercy for
a proportionable ſupply of Divine grace,
and patiently to wait for it in God's own
proper time. I had not continued many
months in this hopeful diſpoſition, before
I perceived all thoſe difficulties and diſ-
couragements to vaniſh by degrees, but
more eſpecially at the approach of a ſe-
vere diſeaſe, though lingering, and the
apprehenſions of death, which laſt, as it
did not appear to be ſo near at hand,
gave me room to hope I might have time
ſufficient granted me in mercy, to go
through this faithful narrative, and unde-
ceive the world; ſo that if the Divine
Providence did think fit to drive me to
the writing of it by his afflićting hand, I
hope it will rather add weight to the cre-
- dit

<page 80>
( 69 )
dit of it, ſeeing no time is fitter than this
to inſpire a man with the deepeſt ſeriouſ-
neſs and ſincerity. But as to me, I ſtill
more rely on the aſſiſtance of that ſpirit of
truth, to whoſe ſpecial grace I am bound
to aſcribe the abhorring ſenſe I had al-
ready conceived againſt my former guilt,
as well as the earneſt defire and reſolution
of tranſmitting to the world ſuch an ac-
count of my paſt guilty life, as might
wholly contradićt and explode that falſe
and impious one, which I had been induced
to publiſh in the days of my abominable
folly and vanity. Under that Divine Guide
therefore I ſet myſelf immediately about
it, and carried on daily, and with as much
application as my diſeaſe (a very violent
ague and fever) would permit, not doubt-
ing but the fincerity which I reſolved, by
God's aſſiſtance, ſhould reign through the
whole, would make ſome amends for the
lowneſs of ſtile, and other imperfeótions,
which, conſidering my weakly condition
both of mind and body, were in ſome
meaſure unavoidable. Thus far I thought
neceſſary to appriſe the reader concerning
the (happy, I hope I have reaſon to call
F 3 it)

<page 81>
( 7o )
it) occaſion of my writing the following
account, which in the name, and under
the direétion of that ſame God of truth,
I now hope to live to ſee finiſhed, in or-
der to be printed, if thought worthy of it,
after my death ; and I ſhall only add, that
I am at this preſent time of writing (April
22, 1728) at a friend's houſe in the coun-
try, free from all ſtudy and buſineſs, or
any other impediment, but what is cauſed
by my diſtemper, and ſhall dedicate all the
time I have to ſpare in the writing of it.
But here I hope I ſhall be excuſed from
giving an account either of my real country ,
or family, or any thing that might caſt a
refle&tion upon either, it being but too
common, though unjuſt, to cenſure them
for the crimes of private perſons, for
which reaſon I think myſelf obliged, out of
reſpect to them, to conceal both. Out of
Europe I was not born, nor educated, nor
ever travelled; but continued in ſome of
the ſouthern parts of it till about the ſix-
teenth year of my age, when neceſſity
obliged me in ſome meaſure to remove into
more northern ones, though never farther
northward than the Rhine in Germany,
Qſ

<page 82>
( 71 )
or Yorkſhire in England. And this I pur-
poſely mention, becauſe I have been here-
tofore ſuſpected to be a German, Swede
or Dane by ſome ; by others, an Engliſh
or Scotchman, as their fancy lead them,
though I never ſaw Germany till I was
ſixteen, nor England till about two or
three years after. As for my parents and
relations they were Roman Catholics, and
moſt of them very zealous in their way,
and ſtrongly biaſed againſt all Proteſtants.
My father was of an ancient, but decayed
family, and had been obliged to leave my
mother before I was five years old, and to
live near five hundred miles from her,
whilſt ſhe was left to live and breed me
up upon her ſmall fortune, without re-
ceiving any aſſiſtance from him, his miſ-
fortunes having put it quite out of his power
to contribute any thing; ſo that I was
wholly left to her care. However, nei-
ther that, nor the narrowneſs of her cir-
cumſtances, hindered her from giving me
the beſt education ſhe could, being then
her only ſurviving child. She was a pious
good woman in her way, and though I
was no ſmall favourite of hers, was yet
- F 4 kept

<page 83>
( 72 )
kept with due ſtričineſs whilſt I ſaid with
her, which was however but a ſhort time,
and do not remember that I had then any
the leaſt vicious inclination, nor in all like-
lihood might have had, had I ſtill conti-
nued under her wing ; whereas through
the miſmanagement of thoſe firſt perſons to
whoſe tuition I was next committed, ſuch
a wrong foundation was laid, and ſo ſtrong
a biaſs given me to vanity and ſelf-conceit,
as proved the unhappy ſource of all my ſad
miſcarriages ſince.
One general remark here I cannot avoid
makingconcerning the ſchools of the Roman
Catholics, viz. that all their ſtudents muſt
learn to read, and even pray, in Latin,
before they are capable of underſtanding
one word of it; for this doth but inure
them to read and pray without any atten-
tion, even when they are afterwards capa-
ble of underſtanding what they read and
pray for, This ill-timed method had been
complained of by many a one who have
ſince felt the ſad effects of it, as well as
the almoſt inſurmountable difficulty of
maſtering a defeót ſo early contraćted and
ſo deeply rooted, as it were, in our nature,
and

<page 84>
( 73 )
and none hath had more reaſon to bewail
it than I.
But what did me in particular the moſt
hurt, in my education abroad, was the
great admiration which my more than com-
mon readineſs at learning whatever came
in my way had gained me, and the im–
prudent fondneſs and partiality which my
maſters ſhewed to me on that account. I
was hardly turned of ſix years when I was
ſent to a free-ſchool taught by two Franciſ-
can monks, the eldeſt of whom perceiving
my uncommon genius for languages, for
till then I had only learned to read all ſorts
of print and writings, and was beſides
very careleſs about writing a tolerable
hand, took it into his head to put me to
the Latin form, though my mother and
all my friends thought me much too young
for it, eſpecially as I was to be ranked
and claſſed among other boys of twice
my years, and who had already been at it
a year or two, and ſome more; however
he depended ſo much on his judgment,
about my genius and application, that he
doubted not, he ſaid, but to ſee me out-
top all the reſt in leſs than a year or two.
Hø

<page 85>
( 74 )
He was not miſtaken, and though it put
me to great difficulties and hard ſtudy to
reach them, I began to feel ſuch emotions
of vanity at the quick progreſs I made,
and the commendations he gave me upon
it, that I reſted not ſatisfied till I had
gained the firſt rank in the form, as well
as in his affeótion, for as he ſpared nei-
ther careſſes nor encouragement to me, I
ſoon became ſenſible both by his behaviour,
as well as by the deference which the
other boys paid to me, how much I was
got in his favour. -
Our ſchool was often viſited by prieſts,
monks, gentlemen, and other perſons that
paſſed through our city, and though we
had in it ſeveral boys whoſe parents were
in a much higher ſtation, yet I was al-
ways ſingled out as the flower of the flock,
and as the moſt ready to anſwer ſuch
ueſtions as were ſuitable to our form. Our
monk had likewiſe, by way of animating
us, cauſed ſome curious nicknacks to be
made by the nuns of a neighbouring mo-
naſtery, which they were to wear hanging
to their button-holes, by a fine ribon, who
held the firſt ſeats. Theſe were of ſeveral
ſizes,

<page 86>
( 75 )
fizes, and one of them much larger than
the reſt was for the foremoſt in rank.
We were to be entitled to theſe accord-
ing to our merit, and this laſt fell to my
lot from the firſt exerciſe, and ſo proud
was I become of this bauble, that I ne-
ver loſt it for one ſingle day; for I had
ſuch a ready and retentive memory, and
quick apprehenſion, as by the help of a
moderate application, made it impoſſible
for my ſchool-fellows to wreſt it from me.
This mark of diſtinčtion did moreover en-
title me to be head monitor and marſhal
of that whole ſchool. All which filled me
with ſuch vanity and ambition to excel,
that I could not brook any ſuperiority or
preference, and our monk was but too
fond of indulging, and even encouragin
me in it, though to my no ſmall detri-
ment, as he might eaſily perceive that it
had given me ſuch a ſtrong bias to pride,
as a prudent man would have rather choſen
to nip in the bud, eſpecially as he eaſily
perceived that it created no ſmall envy in my
ſchool-fellows, and a kind of diſſatisfaction
in ſome of their parents and relations.
He

<page 87>
( 76 )
He tried once indeed to thwart his par-
tiality to me, by giving our form a new
kind of exerciſe, the price of which to
the beſt performer was to be a fine piece
of nun's work, which he adjudged to an-
other, whom all the ſchool knew to be a
dunce, but in point of quality the head of
us all. Had he given it to ſome others of
our form, who were greater proficients in
learning, I might have thought they had
ſucceeded better in their performance than
I at that time ; and though it would have
been a great mortification to me, it might
have only made me double my diligence ;
but here the preference was ſo flagrant and
viſible, that I could not forbear expreſſing
a defire to know wherein he had outdone
me, and a ſuſpicion that he had been aſ-
ſiſted underhand by ſome monk or ſome-
body elſe. When the good father found
that I took the matter ſo to heart, and,
in ſome meaſure, threaten to bid adieu, if
not to the Latin, at leaſt to his ſchool;
(and I believe I ſhould really have done it,
ſo highly I reſented what I called the in-.
juſtice done me) he thought fit to pacify
me by aſſuring me, that my competitor
had,

<page 88>
( 77 )
1.
had, upon this occaſion, ſo far excelled
himſelf, that he could not forbear aſſign-
ing him the prize by way of encourage-
ment, though my performance was far
enough from being inferior to his; and ſo,
to put an end to the contention, immedi-
ately ſent for another piece of the ſame
curious work, and gave it to me, not with-
out ſome great encomium on my uncom- .
mon diligence and progreſs, and other to-
kens of his fingular regard, which ſent me
home ſo ſatisfied and full of myſelf, that,
alas for me ! every thing ſeemed to contri-
bute to ſwell my growing pride, and
make me forget myſelf.
Many other ſuch inſtances of his partial
fondneſs I could name, which all tended
to make me ſtill more aſſuming and arro-
gant; one however I cannot paſs by, which
ſhall ſerve as a ſpecimen : as I never was
guilty of a fault at ſchool, ſo let me do
what I would out of it, I was never pu-
niſhed for it, as the other boys were, but
had, perhaps, a ſoft reprimand or ſome
eaſy taſk aſſigned me by way of penance,
for I cannot call to mind that I ever had a
blow or croſs word from him. One day
1ſl

<page 89>
( 78 )
in particular, ſome ſtrangers, who viſited
us after dinner, obtained us a diſcharge for
the reſt of the day. We were no ſooner
got out but I told my ſchool-fellows, that
we ought to go and procure the ſame re-
leaſe to the girls of another ſchool. Ac-
cordingly we went and broke into the
houſe, and drove the miſtreſs and ſcho-
lars out, and then locked the doors, that
they might not be obliged to come in a-
gain, and ſent her the key at night. On
the next day a ſevere complaint was brought
againſt us for the aſſault, and I charged
as the ringleader of the reſt, upon which
a ſuitable puniſhment was promiſed, and
ſoon after put in execution, in which I
not only expected to have a ſhare, but to
be the firſt called down to it, and yet by
what partial motive I know not, I had no
other puniſhment than a ſeeming ſevere
reprimand, and ſome eaſy task, whilſt all
the reſt were forced to ſubmit to the di-
ſcipline of the ſchool. This partiality they
loudly complained of, not only to him, but
to their friends; but their reſentment upon
it only gave me new matter for triumph,
as it did to them new cauſe for envy,
which

<page 90>
( 79 )
which yet they dared not vent in any other
way than words. -
Thus I went on learning of Latin apace,
I could tranſlate out of it, write and ſpeak
it with great readineſs, as far as I had been
taught, which was thought ſurpriſing, con-
fidering I had hardly attained my ninth
year, and been but two years under his
care. The misfortune was, that he made
us only converſant with common ſchool-
books, and but with few of any of the old
claſſics either in proſe or verſe, ſo that I
was quite unacquainted with their ſtile till
I came into better hands, as I ſoon after
did ; for our good father being ſhortly af-
ter choſen head, or, as they ſtile it,
guardian of another convent, about twenty-
four miles from this, and in an archiepiſ-
copal city, where was alſo a college of
Jeſuits for the education of youth, he ea-
fily prevailed upon my mother to let me
go with him thither, and to board at the
monaſtery under his eye, whilſt I went on
with my ſtudies at the college, where he
alſo promiſed to recommend me to the care
of thoſe fathers. He likewiſe promiſed
her that he would, in the evening, make
Ine
*

<page 91>
( 8o )
me repeat and explain what I had learned
in the day, and by that means puſh me
ſo forward in my learning that I ſhould
out-top all my age, all which proved ſuch
powerful perſuaſives to my mother, that
ſhe eaſily agreed to it, eſpecially as he
took four or five more youths with him to
be on the ſame foot with me both at
the college and in the convent. We ſet
out accordingly with him for the place,
and when I was introduced into the Je-
ſuits college, there was no ſmall ſtrife what
claſs I ſhould be admitted into at firſt. Here
it will be neceſſary to acquaint the reader
that the Jeſuits diſtinguiſh their forms,
or, as they more properly ſtile them,
claſſes, each of them being kept in a ſe-
parate apartment, as follows, viz.
1. The vith, or loweſt, where they begin
to learn the Latin Grammar.
2. vth, where they perfeót themſelves in
that, and begin to learn ſome Latin books,
and to make ſome wretched Latin.
3. ivth, where they read Tacitus, Cicero's
Epiſtles, Ovid, and ſome other eaſy Ro-
Iman

<page 92>
( 81 )
man authors, and begin to make better
Latin. 2 - -
4. iiid, where they read Curtius, Cicero's
ſpeeches, Virgil, and make pretty good
Latin, and learn to make Latin verſes.
They likewiſe begin here to learn the
Greek Grammar. , • *
5. Humanity. In this claſs they read Ho-
race, Cicero, Terence, make good verſes,
and compoſe ſome ſet ſpeeches on a ſubjećt
given, and if they have a genius for it,
make ſome conſiderable progreſs in the
Greek tongue, though they only read ho-
milies of the fathers, and make verſions
out of Latin into Greek. They likewiſe
make ſome ſet ſpeeches, or poetical works,
before a full audience.
6. Rhetoric. Here Homer and other
Greek poets, Demoſthenes and other
Greek authors, are read; together with
Cicero de Oratore, Horace's Satyres, and
de Arte poetica. Themes are compoſed on
given ſubjećts, as much as can be, in the
Ciceronian ſtile and method; and likewiſe
poems in imitation of the Greek and Latin
poets, and other books, compiled by ſome
of the ſociety for the uſe of this claſs, as
G there

<page 93>
( 82 )
there are others for every claſs elſe, and
every branch of learning that is taught
in them, the greateſt part of which is to
be learned by heart by the ſcholars, as
well as ſeveral other perſons, out of the
claſſic authors, in order to exerciſe their
memory, as is pretended, but rather ſerves
to clog it with a deal of unintelligible
ſtuff, which being ſooner forgot than
learned, ſerves to little purpoſe, except it
be to take up ſo much of their time, to the
neglect of more uſeful things, and more
adapted to their capacities; to which I
may ſafely add another great inconveni-
ency, viz. that theſe leſſons being to be
repeated to the decurions or monitors, be-
fore the regent comes in, and an account
to be given to him who hath, or who hath
not learned them duely, in order to be
commended or reproved, both the ſcholar
and the monitor are in ſuch haſte to go
through the drudgery, that thoſe are moſt
approved of who can repeat theirs with
the greateſt ſpeed, or rather with precipi-
tation, by which ſuch an habit is formed
of ſpeaking and reading with ſuch mon-
ſtrous quickneſs, as will require a great
deal

<page 94>
- ( 83 )
deal of trouble and pains, to break one's
felf off afterwards, if ever it is really rec-
tified, and this I found long ſince to my
loſs, and no ſmall grief.
7. The laſt is philoſophy, which they di-
vide into logic, phyſics, metaphyſics, and
morality, each of which takes them
a quarter of a year in learning, or, at
leaſt, in expounding. Every ſcholar is
obliged to ſpend a year at leaſt in each
of the claſſes; and if, at the year's end,
when they are all to be ſeparately examined,
any be found tardy, either through dul-
neſs or negligence, they are condemned to
go through the ſame ſtudies another year,
whilſt the reſt, who are found worthy,
are promoted to the next claſs in rank.
When I came therefore to be acquainted
with the particular ſtudies and books of
each claſs, and came to refle&t on my be-
ing ſuch a ſtranger to the claſſics, I begged
of my old maſter that I might be offered
only as candidate for the third claſs, where
they began to be taught, and this I ſhould
have looked upon as a favour, confidering
that it was then Midſummer, and that I
G 2 WàS

<page 95>
( 84 )
was herded as a beginner into a claſs where
the reſt had already ſtudied fix months;
ſo that I thought I ſhould have ſtill enough
to do to overtake them before the year
was out. But the good father would by
no means agree to it, but inſiſted upon my
being examined as a candidate to huma-
nity. This, I complained, was putting a
double hardſhip upon me, being an utter
ſtranger to the every author that was read in
this as well as in the other below it, and
having, at moſt, but ſeven months to maſter
them all; he ſo far engaged, though a-
gainſt my will, for my overcoming all thoſe
difficulties by my genius and application,
that I was obliged to undergo the exami-
nation of a candidate for humanity: and
though my repugnance made me leſs ſoli-
citous how I went through it, as I was ſo
defirous to be ſent down to the claſs be-
low it, yet whether the old monk's inte-
reſt prevailed, or my own merit gained it,
I was readily admitted into the claſs of
humanity, and found it a very hard tug
to keep up my credit under thoſe diſad-
vantages I laboured under. I wondered
indeed how my old maſter could be guilty
- of

<page 96>
( 85 )
of ſuch a neglect, and often preſſed him
to give me his aſſiſtance, which he trying
to comply with, gave me but too fair an
opportunity of diſcovering the true cauſe
of it, viz, his being as unacquainted with
them as I was. This therefore proved a
very difficult claſs to me; and what was
ſtill more diſcouraging to me was, that
our regent, ſo they call the perſon that
teaches in every claſs, inſtead of making
any kind allowance for my tender years,
for my being entered ſo late, and under
ſuch diſadvantages, often charged me with
neglect and indolence, and, in a jocoſe
manner, threatened to leave me inter ma-
mentes, that is, inſtead of raiſing to the next
claſs, to leave me in this for another year.
And though I was ſenſible that would have
been more for my advantage, yet the ſhame
of it was what I could not have brooked;
and I thought it a mortification more than
ſufficient to be ranked among the middle-
moſt of his claſs, who had till then been
uſed to be at the head. But this he did
rather to ſpur me on than to diſpirit me,
that I might the more eaſily be admitted
into the claſs of rhetoric againſt the time
G 3 of

<page 97>
( 86 )
of the yearly examination. This grand
ceremony is performed a little before the
Chriſtmas holidays, and when the ſcholars
have learned their doom, that is, whe-
ther to go up or to ſtay in the old claſs,
they break up for ten or twelve days, and
go to their reſpective homes. There were
at this time four or five of my own townſ-
boys, all of them not only much older,
but who had been at the college ſeveral
years before me, and bore a kind of envy
againſt me for being admitted at once into
the ſame claſs with them, and would have
been glad to have left me behind in it,
This confideration, joined to the diſplea-
ſure ſuch a piece of news would have
been, not only to my old maſter, but
much more ſo to my mother, made me
ſo much the more diligent againſt the time
of trial, and the more eaſily forego the
advantage of another year's humanity: for
the pride and pleaſure of keeping pace
with, and following them into rhetoric.
Accordingly, I exerted myſelf ſo well,
and gave ſuch ſatisfaction at my examina-
tion, that I was nominated, as well as
they, for that higher claſs. But tho' this
gave

<page 98>
( 87 )
gave me no ſmall joy, and made me go
home with a lighter heart, yet I have had
ſince ſufficient reaſon to wiſh it had proved
otherwiſe; for our next regent, (the Je-
ſuits cuſtoms is to change them every year,
and to ſend new ones out of other colleges)
proved a perſon every way almoſt unquali-
fied for that high claſs, ſo that we rather
went backwards than forward under him.
He eſſayed at firſt to expound ſome of the
Greek poets and orators by the help of
the Latin verſions annexed to them, in
doing which he ſo far betrayed his igno-
rance of that tongue, that every one of us
ſoon became ſenſible of it, which obliged
him to ſet it quite aſide. He was not
much happier in the Latin ones, though
better acquainted with them, and took at
length ſuch a diſguſt to the college method,
that he may juſtly be ſaid to have diverted
himſelf with teaching us things quite op-
poſite to it, and altogether foreign to our
claſs, but which ſuited his genius better.
It will not be amiſs to obſerve here, that
the three main qualifications that procure
admiſſion into that ſociety, are quality, or
high rank, learning and riches. Our good
- G 4 regent

<page 99>
( 88 )
regent was one of the laſt ſort, being the
ſon of an overgrown citizen or tradeſ.
man, who brought-money enough into
the fraternity to make amends for his want
of learning; and as this college was but an
obſcure one, in compariſon to thoſe which
they have in their great univerſities, he
might be thought perhaps good enough to
teach here; at leaſt, if he was not fit to do
ſo here, he could be much leſs ſo any where
elſe. He complied however ſo far with
the rules of the college, and of our claſs,
as to oblige us now and then to make
verſes, themes, verſions, and ſuch low ex-
erciſes; but I ſoon found that he did not
give himſelf the trouble of looking them
over, or even, for form’s ſake, of com-
mending or diſcommending our perform-
ances according to their merit. As he was
of a facetious temper, he would often ſo far
indulge his vein, as to entertain us for a
whole hour with ſtories, which were nei-
ther calculated to improve our minds, nor
to make us in love with our books. At
length, quite tired, as he ſeemed, with the
drudgery of the college, he took it into his
head to teach us heraldry, geography, and
*- fortification,

<page 100>
( 89 )
fortification, inſtead of the proper leſſons
of our claſs; ſo that we were forced, in
ſome meaſure, to exchange books for
maps, coats of arms, plans of cities,
caſtles, &c. and, at length, to dabble with
him in clay and dirt, in order to make a
variety of fortifications, with all their ap-
purtenances and proper colours; and theſe
he took no ſmall pride in ſhewing to ſtran-
gers, but with this ſalvo, that this was our
and his employment only between the
ſchool hours, tho' we were but too ſenſi-
ble that they took up likewiſe all our
fehool-time, ſo that ſome days we did no-
thing elſe but that, to the neglect of every
other branch of learning that was proper
for our claſs. At length, after having tri-
fled away near two thirds of the year, to
our no ſmall detriment, and to my great
regret, who was ſo far behind-hand in my
my learning, I was timely relieved, as I
thought, by a letter from my mother, in-
forming me, that the rector of a ſmall con-
vent of Dominicans in our neighbourhood,
was going to teach philoſophy to as many
young gentlemen as he could get, and in-
viting me to make one of the number,
I

<page 101>
( 9o )
I readily agreed to it, the convent being
but a pleaſant walk out of my native city;
and though I found I muſt take my leave
of the claſſics if I went, yet I thought the
learning of philoſophy would be both more
creditable and uſeful, than the poor ſtuff
which our Jeſuit taught us; though had
I been then as well acquainted with the
ſubtleties of Tho. Aquinas (or rather
Ariſtotle, for that is the philoſophy which
the Dominicans teach) as I became after-
wards, ... I doubt whether I ſhould ever
have been one of his diſciples, at leaſt by
my conſent. However, I left the college
without any further ceremony, and having
acquainted four or five of our claſs that
were my townſboys with my deſign, they
ſoon followed me, and at our coming to the
rečtor, we found that he had already about
twenty more, ſome, from a great univerſity
about fixty miles off, others, from the
neighbouring towns, ſeveral of them mere
dunces and ruſtics, with no other educa-
tion than a little ſmattering of the Latin
tongue, and not above five or fix tolera-
bly qualified for the ſtudy we were en-
gaging in. As for me,, whatever my old
- Franciſcan

<page 102>
( 91 ),
Franciſcan maſter might depend upon as
to the ſtrength of my genius and cloſeneſs
of application, for acquiring theſe branches
of learning I was ſtill wanting in, yet the
diſcouragements which I had already en-
countered through his miſmanagement, in
placing me in too high a form, as well as
the time we had trifled away in the claſs
of rhetoric, had much abated my thirſt
after learning; and the much greater diſ-
appointment I met with under this new
pretended teacher of philoſophy, quite com-
pleated my misfortune, by turning it into
a downright careleſſneſs and indifference a-
bout it. For tho' I was naturally quick
enough, and aſſiduous at whatever I could
gain the maſtery of, and applauſe for ſo
doing, yet, whenever the caſe proved other-
wiſe, no youth could be more naturally
lazy and ſupine than I; ſo that I cannot
but think, on the ſtrićteſt recolle&tion I can
make, that theſe many diſcouragements ſo
cloſely following one another, were ra-
ther the cauſe of that deplorable indolence
I fince contračted for all laudable applica-
tion to ſtudy, than my own natural tem-
per and genius, which, had it been rightly
- directed

<page 103>
( 92 )
direéted and encouraged by proper motives,
and eſpecially if kept under ſome ſtrićt diſ-
cipline, might have eaſily been enabled to
have overcome the greateſt difficulties in
almoſt every branch of learning: but to re-
turn to our Dominican rector.
He began as uſual with logic, and diſplay-
ed a pretty good talent at explaining it to
as many of us as had a genius for it; for
as to the reſt, which were near two-thirds
of his ſchool, both he and we could eaſily
perceive that he was only wronging them
of their time and money, though little
did I think how ſoon that was to be my
caſe : for though I took his logic with ſuch
ſurpriſing quickneſs and delight, as to have
but one competitor, and was become a
great favourite of his, by the free and hu-
morous way in which I uſed to put, now
and then, ſome puzzling queſtions to him;
yet when we came to the ſecond branch,
which was Ariſtotle's phyſics,with Aquinas's
comments, I found it ſuch an unintelligible
jargon, and him ſo little qualified to ex-
plain it to us, that I became quite tired
with it; for ſome of us, eſpecially my
competitor and I, expected at leaſt that he
- would

<page 104>
( 93 )
would have made every point as clear and
evident to us, as he had before in logical
lečtures, and have anſwered ſuch objec-
tions as we were able to raiſe againſt ei-
ther the doćtrines, or his expoſitions; but,
to our great ſurprize, we found that he
had undertaken to expound what himſelf
did not underſtand, and that Aquinas's
ſubtilities and diſtinétions were as much
above his reach as above ours. Thus, for
inſtance, Ariſtotle's account of the materia
prima, together with his ſubtile commen-
tator's expoſitions on it, in which our
rector ſpent above a fortnight, including
the rubs we threw into his way, appeared
to us ſuch an unintelligible heap of ſtuff,
that, at our taking leave of it, to paſs
to another point, we made ourſelves very
merry about it, and owned ourſelves as
much in the dark as when he began it;
inſomuch, that he was forced to own he
never could thoroughly comprehend it,
and only delivered it to us on the autho-
rity of that philoſopher, and of his many
eminent diſciples of the Dominican order,
ſuch as Albertus Magnus, Aquinas, &c. &c.
I have fince, upon running over his leſſons
, InCſC

<page 105>
( 94 )
more carefully, found reaſon to doubt whe-
ther a much abler head than his, would
not have been as much at a loſs to have
beat it into any man's brain, that would
not be ſatisfied with words without a
meaning. However, as I plainly perceiv-
ed that his chief view was to get our mo-
ney, without troubling himſelf whether our
progreſs was anſwerable, I contračted by
degrees ſuch a habit of indolence and liſtleſſ-
neſs to all he ſaid (eſpecially as he had got
a ſingular knack at extricating himſelf,
when cloſely preſſed, by ſome facetious
joke or merry ſtory) that I wrote his lec-
tures, and heard his expoſitions, without
any attention, or offering any objection,
unleſs it was in the jocund way, and to
enliven our drooping ſpirits, and without
troubling myſelf whether what he ſaid or
anſwered was right or wrong.
I know not whether it was not owing to
his perceiving this liſtleſſneſs in us, that he
began to raiſe our expectation and hopes
that his metaphyſics, which was ſoon to
follow, would prove more delightful to us.
We did indeed expect it, from the nature of
the ſubječts it treats of, and were not a little
impa-

<page 106>
( 95 )
impatient to have this quarter finiſhed, that
we might enter into a more entertaining
field: but when we found ourſelves no leſs
diſappointed in this, it only damped our
ſpirits the more, and gave me a ſtill
greater diſlike to the jargon of the ſchool,
ſo that by that time we entered into the
laſt quarter, when ethics were to be the
new ſubječt of his leótures, and might
have otherwiſe proved more uſeful and en-
tertaining to us, if it had been handled by
a more proper perſon, we were grown ſo
tired and out of conceit with him, that we
reaped no more benefit from it than we.
had from the reſt; and inſtead of diverting
ourſelves with repetitions and diſputes a-
bout his leſſons, as we uſed to do at firſt,
we ſtudied to forget every ſubject he had
diſcuſſed to us, as ſoon as we were got
out of his fight. Thus having murdered,
as I may ſay, another year, we were diſ-
miſſed, not without great applauſe and
compliments to ſome of us, on account of
our parts and proficiency. But if I may
judge of the reſt by myſelf, to whom he
was always pleaſed to allow the firſt rank,
I am ſure his praiſes were ill beſtowed as
to

<page 107>
( 96 )
to any benefit we had reaped from his
pains and ours: however, I was by that
time become ſo great a favourite to him,
that he afterwards left no means nor ca-
reſſes untried to induce me to enter into
their order, and I believe, in the mind I
then was in, he might eaſily have prevail-
ed, had not my mother ſtrenuouſly op-
poſed it. I was ſenſible of my deficiency
in all the branches of learning I had hi-
therto gone through, by the miſcondućt of
thoſe under whom I had learned, and
could eaſily ſee what dunces both my old
Franciſcan maſter and this Dominican rec-
tor were, though they paſſed for able men;
and where could I better conceal my own
defeóts and ignorance than under a monk-
iſh habit, which would, at leaſt, give
one the reputation of learning? But this I
had taken care to conceal from her, partly
out of pride, and partly to prevent her
taking it to heart, and our rector had ad-
dreſs enough to make her believe I was a
prodigy, confidering how young I ſtill was,
and to perſuade her to ſend me to the
next univerſity, and to learn theology
there, promiſing to give me ſuch a recom-
mendation

<page 108>
, ( 97 )
mendation to the Dominicans who taught
it there, as well as the Jeſuits, that no
pains ſhould be ſpared to make me ſhine
in the world. She eaſily conſented to it,
and he gave me a certificate directed to the
prior of their convent at that great city,
teſtifying that I had gone thro' a courſe
of philoſophy, and was fit to be admitted
a ſtudent in theology, to which he tacked
ſome farther commendations; all which
could be of no ſervice to me, unleſs I re-
ſolved to go and learn under the Domini-
cans, for the Jeſuits would hardly have
admitted me to that claſs, before I had
gone a new courſe through their philoſo-
phy. It had been, indeed, much better
for me to have choſen the latter, conſider-
ing the little proficiency I had made in it;
but my pride, and the fear of diſobliging
my mother, determined me to the for-
mer, and I offered myſelf accordingly, and
was readily admitted a ſtudent under two
very reverend rectors, the one for the
morning, and the other for the afternoon;
both very grave and learned, indeed, in their
way; but, upon my firſt admittance, the
ſchool appeared to me like a new world,
H where

<page 109>
( 98 )
where I was looked upon as a little raw
ſtrippling, too young quite, in all appear-
ance, to herd among the reſt of the ſtu-
dents, ſome of whom were twice my age,
and none by many years ſo young as I.
What was ſtill more diſcouraging was, that
here was no diſtinčtion made between thoſe
who had already ſtudied near two years
(for the whole courſe of theology laſts two
whole years) and thoſe who were but
newly admitted. The ſame lečtures were
read and expounded to all alike, and in the
uſual courſe, ſo that thoſe who came not
at the very beginning, had no other chance,
but at the end, to put middle and both
ends together as well as they could, which
made the old ſtanders aſſume ſuch an over-
bearing air over the new ones, as was alto-
gether mortifying, at leaſt it proved ſo to me,
who never had, till then, ſeen my ſchool-
fellows ſo much above me.
I may fairly date the completion of my
ruin from the time of my coming to this
populous place, on more accounts than one:
for firſt, the city was a noble, great one,
full of gentry and nobility, of coaches, and
all kinds of grandeur, all which did greatly
- - - - affect
*s

<page 110>
( 99 ) -
affect me, who had never ſeen ſo much
by far of the beau monde, neither in my
native city, nor in the archiepiſcopal one,
where I had ſtudied under the Jeſuits.
2dly, I had been already cloyed with
Aquinas's philoſophy, when I had no ſuch
bright tempting objećts dancing before my
eyes, what likelihood could there be that
fuch a ſchool as this, ſhould reconcile me
to the more refined and unintelligible ſub-
tilities of his theology, eſpecially confider-
ing the diſadvantages we late comers were
forced to labour under, and the high ſtate
which our two rectors took upon them
for here was no room for obječting, or even
deſiring a point or a term to be explained,
and we had nothing to do but to write
what they dićtated, and take their expoſi-
tions for ſound doćtrine. Even thoſe who
had ſtudied longeſt under them, and were
looked upon as the brighteſt, were not in-
dulged to ſtart a difficulty, though the oc-
caſion was ever ſo fair; all which damped
my ſpirits, who had never been uſed to
ſuch a reſtraint, and had, moreover, the
mortification to ſee myſelf placed in the
loweſt rank, who had, till then, been
H 2 * : moſtly

<page 111>
( 100 )
moſtly at the head, that I grew by degrees
quite out of conceit both with myſelf and
with the ſchool. What added ſtill more
to my diſcontentedneſs was, that I boarded
at ſome near relations in one of the ſuburbs
of the city, and at a great diſtance from
the convent, and theſe commonly dined ſo
late, that I muſt either take up with an
irregular meal, or come near an hour after
the reſt to the ſchool. I did indeed pre-
fer the firſt for ſome time, but grew by
degrees weary of it, as the ſtudy I was
upon grew leſs engaging to me; ſo that
though I took up as little time as I could
at my dinner, yet one half hour, at leaſt,
was loſt by it, and our rector had dićtated
ſome pages of matter to the reſt, which,
after ſchool was over, I uſed to copy out
of the manuſcripts of ſome of my ſchool-
fellows. Our reótor having more than
once obſerved what irregular hours I kept,
was ſo kind as to give me a civil repri-
mand, and not expe&ting, perhaps, a re-
ply to it, was going on with his leóture,
but I had been ſo little uſed to make anſwers
to it in dumb ſhow, as I obſerved many
of his hearers were forced to do, that I
bluntly

<page 112>
( 101 )
bluntly told him the occaſion, aſſuring
him, that I had not influence enough in
the family to prevail on them to alter their
hours.
The good father not approving of my ex-
cuſe, which plainly ſhewed that I could
not forego my dinner for his leſſons, and
might be an ill precedent to ſome of the
reſt, ſeemed rather inclined to lay the fault
on my being better pleaſed with thoſe late
hours of dining, or elſe he thought I might
eaſily perſuade my relations to alter their
method on my account. But whether ſo
or not, he infifted, and reaſonably enough,
that I ſhould conform to the ſchool-hours,
whatever inconveniency it might put me
as to my dinner. I was ſenſible of the
juſtneſs of his reproof, and after having
been often at high words with my relati-
ons (for they were fully paid for my board)
to no purpoſe, and tried to conform to the
ſchool-hours for ſome time, I grew weary
of it, and having nobody to controul me,
which proved my greateſt misfortune, I
quite forſook the afternoon le&tures, and
ſpent that time in ſauntring about the city
and country adjacent, viewing the build-
H 3 ings,

<page 113>
( 102 ) .
ings, and ſometimes taking plans and viſ-
toes of ſuch places as pleaſed me, but
without any other deſign than to divert
myſelf. I was, however, ſurpriſed ſoon
after, to find myſelf interrogated by our
morning profeſſor, about the reaſon of my
not coming to the afternoon lečtures.
Whether my quondam maſter of philoſo-
phy had wrote any thing particularly con-
cerning his expectation of getting me into
their order or not, I knew not, but I was
in a genteel manner given to underſtand by
this, that I ought to look on it as a fin-
gular favour that they ſo far concerned
themſelves about me. What anſwer I
made him, befides my thanking him for
his care, I cannot recolle&t; but though we
parted good friends, I ſoon after forſook
his ledure alſo, and from that time minded
little elſe but my own pleaſures, which,
though altogether of the innocent kind,
ſometimes with the fair ſex, at other times
in viewing the curioſities of the place, or
making ſolitary excurſions, and the like :
yet were not without ſome pungent remorſe,
as they tended to little elſe but to inure
me to a habit of indolence and careleſs
- inačti-

<page 114>
( 103 - )
inactivity. At ſome intervals, indeed, I
tried to read over all my manuſcripts both
in philoſophy and theology, but ſtill ſo diſ-
guſted with them, that I never had the pa-
tience to go through them. -
I had before this ſent ſome complaining
letters to my mother, as well as meſſages
by word of mouth by ſome of my townſ-
men, who had been witneſſes of the bad
hours we kept, and to whom I had re-
lated the inconveniency it had put to, with
relation to my ſtudies; and ſhe, good wo-
man, thinking that I took it more to heart
than I did, ſent me a ſmall ſupply to con-
vey me to Avignon, where I was to meet
an old rich counſellor of our town, who
was gone to ſpend ſome time in that famed
city. He had no children of his own, but
ſome nephews, one of which he deſigned
to breed up a ſcholar under me, in conſi-
deration of which I was to lodge and board
with the uncle, till I could better provide
for myſelf. As this was likely to be a kind
of change for the better for me, as well
as an eaſement to my mother, whoſe ſtrait
circumſtances could hardly permit her to
be at ſuch expence for my education, I
H 4 made

<page 115>
( 104 )
made no delay to go down to Avignon,
where I found the old gentleman ready to
receive me, and, a day or two after, en-
tered into my new office of tutor to his
nephew, who had already made ſome pro-
greſs in the Latin Grammar. I had not
been long there before I got acquainted
with a young abbé, or candidate for prieſtly
orders, a countryman of mine, and an in-
genious young man, of ſome learning; and
he finding that I had ſtudied philoſophy
and theology under the Dominicans, in-
troduced me to one of their profeſſors in
this city, by whom I was courteouſly re-
ceived, and ſoon after admitted to be one
of his diſciples. This father, who was a
man of ſingular modeſty and humanity,
and was reputed a ſaint, paid me an un-
common regard upon my firſt admiſſion
to his le&tures, and made an apology to
the reſt of his ſcholars for recapitulating
ſome of his former leſſons and expoſitions,
in gratiam, as he was pleaſed to word it,
chariſimi noſtri novi diſcipuli, that I might
the better underſtand what he was then,
and afterwards, to deliver to us. This
great condeſcenſion, which had not been
ſhewed

<page 116>
( 105 )
ſhewed to me by either of the profeſſors
of the laſt univerſity, and which I fince
underſtood was not uſual among them, did
highly oblige me, and I would have been
glad to have made ſuch a proficiency
under him, as might have, in ſome mea-
ſure, anſwered his fingular kindneſs to me,
which he ſtill continued to expreſs all the
time I went to hear him, but my misfor-
tune was, that I was ſtill ſo unacquainted
as well as diſguſted at the ſubtilities of the
ſchool, and met with ſuch crampt diſtinc-
tions and technical terms I was ſtill a
ſtranger to, and was aſhamed to aſk the
meaning of from any of the ſcholars, who
were far enough from thinking me ſo great
a novice to the language of the Thomiſts,
that I began again, in ſpite of all his ca-
reſſes, and my own eager deſires, to de-
ſpair of ever becoming a theologian; and
theſe difficulties added to the lazy and
unthinking habit I had ſo long indulged,
made me at length forbear going any more
to hear him. * -
I have already hinted that my mother's cir-
cumſtances were too narrow for the expence
I had already put her to, and my father
- WaS

<page 117>
( 106 )
was ſtill more unable to give her any aſſiſt-
ance in it, though he was not a little.
pleaſed at the great progreſs he was told I
had made for my years. Her hopes and
mine were, indeed, that I might by that
means introduce myſelf as a tutor into ſome
good family, and ſave her all farther charges.
But I had been ſo far neglected in the o-
ther parts of my education, had ſo little
addreſs or politeneſs, and knew ſo little
of the world, that I could not look upon
myſelf as fit for ſuch an employment a-
mong perſons above the common rank,
and my pride would not let me aim at any
thing below it; ſo that inſtead of trying
as I might, and ought to have done, I was
rather become careleſs and indifferent a-
bout it, and I was indeed both too young
and too naturally unfit for it. Notwith-
ſtanding which, ſome of my acquaintance,
unknown or undeſired, got me into a mid-
dling family, where I was upon ſomewhat
better terms than with my old counſellor;
but the overgrown youth, who was put
under my care, and was much older, and
taller by the head and ſhoulders than I,
had, by that time, contraćted ſuch an in-
dolence,

<page 118>
( 107 )
lence, or rather averſeneſs, both to the
Latin tongue, and to other laudable ſtudies,
that had I been ever ſo diligent in teach-
ing him, it would have been to little pur-
poſe, becauſe, as I ſoon found, he wanted
parts as well as inclination for ſtudy; ſo
that we ſpent more of our time in play-
ing on the violin and flute than at our
books. His mother, who heard us at it
longer and oftner than ſhe thought was
conſiſtent with the progreſs ſhe expected
him to make under me, complained more
than once of it to me; upon which I
made no difficulty to tell her, that a greater
degree of application would rather confirm
him in his averſeneſs, than reconcile him
to his ſtudy, as he had ſo ſmall a capacity
for it. I left this ſoon after for a better
place with a perſon of diſtinétion, who in-
truſted two ſons of his to my care, both
very young, and ſpoiled by the mother,
that the eldeſt, above ſeven years of age,
could but juſt read, and neither of them
inclined to learn. I tried what I could to
bring them to it, but to little purpoſe, ex-
cept a little hiſtory, which the eldeſt took
more freely to, but the mother's indul-
gence

<page 119>
( 108 )
gence was not the only obſtacle, and as
ſhe was a ſprightly lady, and her ſpouſe
ſomewhat heavy, though not old, I ſoon
found by her behaviour, and her parting
beds with him ſoon after my coming,
that ſhe would have been better pleaſed I
had transferred my care from them to her;
and as I was naturally fond of ingratiating
myſelf with the ſex, I indulged her in all
her little foibles, but without having the
leaſt defign of going farther than a bare
complaiſance, in order to gain her eſteem
and admiration, rather than her affection,
and to ſatisfy my own vanity, rather than
cheriſh a dangerous paſſion for her. This
made me to take frequent occaſions to re-
commend myſelf by falſe merit, fince I
had no real one that could do it, by pre-
tending to more virtue and religion than I
had, and to palliate the low circumſtances
of my parents by ſome vain excuſes, and
pretences, all which I did with ſo little
caution, and in ſo aukward a manner, as
made me appear rather more deſpicable in
her eyes, confidering the mean appearance
I made, and which was owing chiefly to
my own negligence and bad occonomy.
- All

<page 120>
( 109 )
All theſe diſadvantages, however, might
have been eaſily overlooked, and I might
have been readily ſuffered to indulgemy own
prevailing paſſion, if I could but have
ſhewed more concern for hers.
It is not my deſign to dwell on ſuch ſcenes
as theſe, much leſs to aſcribe my neglect
and overlooking the ſeveral diſtant offers
made by ſo agreeable a perſon to my own
virtue. I might more juſtly impute it to
my natural ſheepiſh baſhfulneſs, and un-
experienced youth; however, after a fix.
month's ſtay, and ſome viſible proofs that
it was not in my power to conquer it, I
perceived a ſtrange coldneſs to ſucceed,
which made methink it would not be long
before I was diſcharged. She was ſoon
after viſited by ſome relations, who per-
ſuaded her to go and ſpend ſome part of
the ſummer with them about twenty miles
off. They, eſpecially the gentlemen, af-
fe&ted the air of libertines, and all of them
expreſſed a fingular contempt for the ſu-
perſtitions of the church of Rome, by
which I gueſſed them to be concealed Pro-
teſtants, of whom there were great num-
bers in Languedoc, Provence, Dauphinee,
and

<page 121>
( 1 16 )
and I have had ſince reaſon to think, that
my young lady was ſo likewiſe, by her light
behaviour at church, and on other occaſi-
ons. I had ſome ſmall diſputes with them,
being then very zealous for that church,
but they knowing that I had ſtudied divi-
nity, and fearing, I ſuppoſe, leſt too ea-
ger an oppoſition to what I urged againſt
them ſhould cauſe a diſcovery, they de-
clined entering the liſt with me any far-
ther, and I then found, for the firſt time,
that the Proteſtants had more to ſay for
themſelves than I had ever imagined ; for
the divinity we were taught at the ſchools
ſeldom meddled with the controverſies be-
tween us and the Proteſtants, ſo that
had it not been for fear, thoſe gentlemen,
I found, might eaſily have foiled me, not-
withſtanding all my theology. The lady
was preparing for her journey, and was to
take her ſons with her, yet kept me in
ſuſpenſe whether I was to accompany her,
or ſtay with her huſband, or be diſcharged.
I have had reaſon to think ſince, that ſhe
had an end in it; but finding my behavi-
our ſtill aukward and unpromiſing, not-
withſtanding ſome freſh eſſays, which I
- } did

<page 122>
( 1 1 I )
did not then ſo well comprehend, ſhe left
it to her huſband, who was a perſon that
cared for nothing but his bottle, and left
her to do as ſhe pleaſed in every thing elſe,
to acquaint me with the news that they
ſhould have no farther occaſion for me.
I was more grieved than ſurpriſed at it,
which, ſhe perceiving, occaſioned one
more ſnare to be laid by means of the
chambermaid, which proving ſtill unſuc-
ceſsful, and this was the very night before
they were to ſet out, I was deſpiſed and
laughed at, and given to underſtand, that
I might thank myſelf if the lady and I
went different ways.
I have already hinted that virtue and reli-
gion had little or no ſhare in my diſap-
pointing her, but rather a vanity of being
thought more chaſte than I really was,
which kept me ſo indeed, as to the aët,
not only on this, but many other ren-
counters, though in heart and thought
few men were more ſtrangers to that vir-
tue than I, even at thoſe tender years; and
though religion, which, in all my fooliſh
extravagancies, I never once loſt fight of,
held ſtill ſome check on my mind, yet
- 1ſt

<page 123>
( 1 12 )
it could hardly turn even the ſcale againſt
any favourite paſſion of mine, farther than
to make me condemn myſelf after having
yielded to it; ſo that it was rather the fear
of a repulſe, or ſome other or worſe con-
ſequence that kept me from ſhewing an
equal ardor for her, whatever opinion my
different behaviour might give her of me.
The company and ſhe were no ſooner
gone than I took the road to Avignon,
where I heard that my old counſellor was
gone home, with his nephews, to my no
ſmall grief, eſpecially as my pockets were
then low ; the widow where we had
boarded very poor, and I had ſo few
acquaintance in that city; however, I ven-
tured to ſtay with her till I could write to
my mother for a freſh ſupply, or till ſome-
thing better fell in my way, though I had
little reaſon to expect any ſucceſs from ei-
ther; being by this time become very
ſhabby in cloaths and linnen, and more
indolent and ina&tive than ever. To ward .
off, as much as poſſible, the pungent mor-
tification of my preſent circumſtances, I
had recourſe to my old ſtratagem, of cloath-
ing myſelf with ſome falſe merit for want
of

<page 124>
( 113 )
of a great one, and of pretending to be a
ſufferer for religion for a too great attach-
ment to the church, and laying moſt of
the blame on my own father, as uſing
me the more ſeverely on that account; all
which, though abominably falſe in every
reſpect, yet being too eaſily liſtened to by
ſome of my acquaintance, eſpecially among
the friars, did gain me ſo much pity and
admiration, as ſoothed my vanity for the
preſent, though it did not anſwer the
main end I propoſed, its introducing me
into ſome new family as a tutor, and at
the ſame time accounting, in ſome tolera-
ble meaſure, for the mean appearance I
then made. -
I was about the ſame time informed that
the famed fair of Baucaire, a city in Lan-
guedoc, on the Rhone, and one of the
largeſt fairs in Europe, was at hand, and
that among the great concourſe at it, I
might meet with ſome of my own townſ-
men, from whom I might get a freſh ſup-
ply. I went accordingly, and found there
ſeveral merchants of my acquaintance, who
furniſhed me with as much money for the
preſent, as would juſt ſerve, but, on the
I Inext

<page 125>
( 114 )
next day, when I expeded to have re-
ceived a much larger ſum, I only met
with a ſevere reprimand for my mean ap-
pearance, and for not having made a better
uſe of the opportunities I had had of diſ-
charging my mother from all future ex-
pences on my account. I excuſed it as
well as I could to them, they being no
ſtrangers to the great poverty, not to ſay
univerſal miſery, that then reigned at A-
vignon, where the ſtreets abounded with
people, who, from living very comforta-
bly, and ſome of them richly, on the filk
manufacture of the place, were, on the decay.
of it, reduced to the loweſt degree of beg-
gary. They told me, that though that was
too truly the caſe of the tradeſmen, yet
the prieſts and monks lived in as much
plenty as ever, and a lad of my parts and
learning might eaſily have found means to
have recommended himſelf to ſome of
them, inſtead of appearing in ſuch a guiſe
as I did, and which they ſaid made them
apprehenſive I had taken up ſome ill
courſes. This cenſure, which was no leſs
unjuſt than ſevere, if they ſpoke what they
thought, did cut me to the heart; for no
youth

<page 126>
( 1 I 5 )
youth could be more free from the vices
of drinking, gaming, intriguing, &c. than
I was. Happy it would have been for
me if I could have as eaſily diſculpated
myſelf from thoſe of indolence, vanity,
and bad a conomy; for theſe were the
true ſources of my misfortunes, inſomuch
that I am perſuaded, if they had ſupplied
me with as great a ſum, as I could in
reaſon have deſired, I ſhould have been
induced to have laid out the greateſt part
of it in ſuch curious nicknacks and trifles
as that fair affords, eſpecially of the muſi-
cal kind; for I had already, in that ſhort
interval, agreed for a good number of
them ; but whether they had ſet any body
to watch my motions, and gueſſed at the
prepoſterous uſe I ſhould make of what
money they might lend me, or whatever
other reaſon they might have, they abſo-
lutely refuſed to let me have even ſo much
as would bring me back to Avignon; ſo
that one may eaſily imagine the diſmal
plight I was in all the way thither, to ſay
nothing of that mortification I ſhould meet
with among my acquaintance there at my
ill ſucceſs, I found, however, a plauſible
I 2 excuſe

<page 127>
( 1 16 )
excuſe for it, by pretending that I was
come a day or two too late, and that the
merchants were, by that time, ſo ſhort of
caſh that they could not ſupply me, but
that they would remit me what I wanted
ſoon after their return home. I likewiſe
told my old landlady, to whom I was
hardly indebted for a quarter of a year's
board and lodging, that I expected two of
them to be there ſhortly at an approaching
fair, which was ačtually true, and ſhe
knew and dealt with one of them for ſome
fort of goods, ſo that had I had the pa-
tience to have ſtaid till then, my mother,
who had expreſſed no ſmall reſentment at
their ungenerous refuſal, would not have
failed ſending me a freſh ſupply by them;
whereas, hearing that I had left the place,
ſhe ſent only what would pay the poor wo-
man, whilſt I, unknown to her, or any one
elſe, had taken a reſolution to return home,
bare as I was of money and cloaths.
I lately took notice of my ſhameful pre-
tence of being a kind of ſufferer for reli-
gion, to ſome of my acquaintance, and
tho' vanity and my then ill plight was my
only incentive to it, I began now to think
- * it

<page 128>
( 117 )
it might be made a means of facilitating
my long journey homewards ; I went ac-
cordingly and furniſhed myſelf with a kind
of paſs, or certificate, at a proper office,
ſignifying that I was a young ſtudent in
theology, of Iriſh extraćt, and that I had
left the country for the ſake of religion,
by which is commonly implied the Ro-
man Catholic, and that I was then going
on a pilgrimage to Rome. This abſurd
and falſe aſſertion coſt me ſince many a
ſhameful lye to make it paſs for current,
eſpecially as often as I met with any per-
ſons who had any tolerable knowledge of
Iriſh affairs, to which I was an utter
ſtranger. I did, indeed, know ſeveral
Engliſh and Iriſh, who had followed king
James's fortune, and were well reſpected
in France, Italy, &c. but my vanity could
not be ſatisfied with the credit of paſſing
for the ſon of ſome one of them; I wanted
to have it thought my own voluntary ačt,
that I forſook that country and my parents,
and fortune, for the ſake of religion. Had
the ſecretary, from whom I had procured
that certificate, been ever ſo little diffident,
my very name, which had nothing of Iriſh
I 3 Or

<page 129>
( 118 )
or Engliſh, but which my pride would not
let me forego, becauſe it had ſomething
of quality in it, would eaſily have diſco-
wered the roguery of the pretence; and
this I mention to ſhew my raſhneſs and
ignorance, of which I ſhall give a fur-
ther inſtance, in the method I took
immediately after obtaining the paſs, to
equip myſelf in a pilgrim's garb; for I was
not in a condition to purchaſe one, tho’
it conſiſted only of a long ſtaff handſomely
turned, and a ſhort leathern or oil-cloth
cloak, not unlike what the women call a
pelerine. However, I had obſerved ſuch a
one in a chapel belonging to a pariſh-
church, and dedicated to a miraculous ſaint,
which, I ſuppoſe, had been ſet up there as
a monument of gratitude by ſome wan-
dering pilgrim come to the end of his jour-
ney. The chapel was never without a
number of devotees, who prayed and burnt
tapers before the image of the ſaint; but
this did not deter me from venturing in,
and taking both ſtaff and cloak away at
noon-day; had I been examined about it,
I was only furniſhed with a juvenile pre-
tence, that I looked upon it to be ſet up
there

<page 130>
( 119 )
there to accommodate ſueh pilgrims as
could not otherwiſe provide themſelves with
it. How far ſuch a poor excuſe might have
gone I know not, neither did I trouble
my head about it; however, I eſcaped
without ſuch an enquiry, and carried it off
unmoleſted, and made what haſte I could
to ſome private corner, where I threw the
cloak over my ſhoulders, and walked with
a ſanétified gravity with the ſtaff in my
hand, till 1 was got out of the city.
Being thus accoutred, and furniſhed with
a paſs to my mind, I began at all proper
places to beg my way in a fluent Latin;
accoſting only clergymen, or perſons
of figure, by whom I could be under-
ſtood, and was moſt likely to be relieved;
and I found them moſtly ſo generous and
credulous, that had I had the leaſt propen-
fity to provide for hereafter, I might eaſily
have ſaved a good deal of money, and put
myſelf into a much more creditable garb,
before I had gone through a ſcore or two
of miles; but ſuch was my vanity and ex-
travagance, that as ſoon as I had got what
I thought a ſufficient viaticum, I begged
no more, but viewed every thing worth
I 4 - ſeeing,

<page 131>
( 120 )
ſeeing, then retired to ſome inn, where
I ſpent my money as freely as I got it,
not without ſome ſuch aukward tokens of
generoſity, as better ſuited with my vanity
than my preſent circumſtances. The nearer
I drew to my native place, the more irre-
ſolute I grew, whether I ſhould pay a vi-
fit to my mother, or continue my journey
to Rome; the concern I knew ſhe muſt
be in about me, ſtrongly inclined me to
the former, but my uncommon mean garb,
which was become only more ſcandalous
by the length of the journey, made me ſo
aſhamed to be ſeen either by her, or any
of my friends, that I fully reſolved on the
latter. I had, in order to it, wheeled a-
bout to the left, to leave the place at ſome
twenty or thirty miles diſtance, and was
got into a ſmall town where I little ex-
pećted to be known, when venturing on
the Sunday into the church, at the time of
high maſs, I was ſurpriſed to ſee ſome
perſons, eſpecially two or three gentle-
women, whoſe chief reſidence was at
my native city, but who it ſeems were
ſpending part of the ſummer at that place,
and who, in ſpight of my being thus
.* tranſ-

<page 132>
( 121 )
tranſmogrified, did eaſily recall me to mind,
and gave me to underſtand they did. I
was ſo ſhocked at it, that I left the church
at the moſt ſolemn part of the ſervice,
when they were moſt intent on their de-
votions, not caring to ſtand an examen
from them, and made the beſt of my way
through private paths, to avoid being caught
if purſued... Whether I was ſo I know
not, but the fight of them made ſuch a
ſtrong impreſſion on my mind, and raiſed
ſuch an earneſt deſire in me of ſeeing
once more that beloved city, eſpecially
conſidering that it was now impoſſible to
conceal either my way of travelling, or
mean appearance from my friends, that as
ſoon as I thought myſelf out of the reach
of a purſuit, I took the direét road home-
ward, with an intent to go and ſatisfy my
poor anxious mother, before ſhe got the
intelligence from other hands, and conſult
with her, whether I ſhould purſue my
journey to Rome, or get into any other
way ſhe liked better, And I only took care
to enter the city in the dusk of the even-
ing, and got to her houſe unperceived by
any but thoſe of the family,
My

<page 133>
( 122 )
My poor mother was glad to ſee me, tho’
ſorry to behold the mean garb I was in,
and failed not, though with her uſual ten-
derneſs, to chide me, for having made ſo
bad an uſe of the opportunities, ſhe ſup-
poſed I had had, of puſhing my fortune,
which, ſhe knew as well as I, was but too
much owing to my indolence. Much
more reaſon would ſhe have had to chide
me, had ſhe known how much of my
time I had trifled away during the laſt
year and half I had been abſent from her;
but that I concealed from her, and the
good woman was ſometimes inclined to
think, that my too great eagerneſs after
my ſtudies had made me neglečt every
thing elſe. But I was greatly ſurpriſed
at the end of two or three days, during
which I had kept as much from fight as
I could, to hear her propoſe to me, fince
I had found out ſo cheap, ſafe, and eaſy
a way of travelling, to go and pay a viſit
to my father, who then lived ſome hun-
dreds of miles from her, and try what I
could get him to do for me ; and I had
the more reaſon to wonder at her propo-
ſal, becauſe ſhe knew, as well as I, that a
tradeſ-

<page 134>
( 123 )
tradeſman of our town, who had been
with him about two or three years before,
had brought us a very indifferent account
of his circumſtances. This made me ſu-
ſpect that a couſin of mine, and a great fa-
vourite of hers, whoſe fortune was in no
wiſe ſuitable to his high ſpirit, had put
that ſtrange proječt in her head, that I
might be far enough out of the way of
obſtructing her kindneſs to him. Whe-
ther there was any real foundation for my
ſuſpicion, I cannot ſay, but the ſurprize
ſhe obſerved me to be in at her propoſal,
made ſuch an impreſſion upon her, that
ſhe forgot nothing that could aſſure me of
her maternal and unalterable tenderneſs,
alledging that ſhe only wanted to be bet-
ter ſatisfied of the condition my father was
in, than ſhe was from the report of the
tradeſman above mentioned, and adding,
that in caſe I found it not to my liking,
and him as tender as I might expect, ſhe
charged me expreſsly to leave him, and
come back to her as ſoon as poſſible, and
by no means to ſtay longer than a year
from her, unleſs I could convince her that
it was very much to my advantage.
Being

<page 135>
( 124 )
Being thus far ſatisfied of her maternal af.
feótion, I eaſily conſented to take the
journey, having by that time contraćted
an inclination to ramble and ſee new coun-
tries, and as it was a long and dangerous
one, we thought it improper to alter my
dreſs, the meaneſs of which would rather
be a ſafeguard; however, ſhe thought fit
to ſew up a ſmall quantity of gold to my
cloaths, which, ſhe ſaid, would ſerve to buy
me ſome better ones, when I came near
the end of my journey. My ſtaff and
cloak, with the addition of a long looſe
gown, made of a light kind of black buck-
ram to cover the reſt from duſt, were ſent
by a man to a place on the road, about
four miles off; and very early in the morn-
ing I took a ſorrowful leave of my mo-
ther, and ſhe of me, and ſhe repeated
her charge to me to return to her, if I did
not find things to my ſatisfaction. When
I came to the place where my pilgrim's
dreſs waited for me, I put it on, and went
on not without a heavy heart, tho' with-
out the leaſt doubt of my mother's con-
ſtant affection. My direét rout was thro'
the firſt great univerſity where I had be-
gan

<page 136>
w ( 125 )
gan to ſtudy theology, ſo that I was forced
to wheel about to avoid it, for fear of being
known. All the reſt of the way I was an
utter ſtranger to, and I met frequently with
ſome objećts that made me ſhrink, tho' it
was a confiderable high road; now and then
at ſome lonely place lay the carcaſe of a man
rotting and ſtinking on the ground by the
way-ſide, with a rope about his neck,
which was faſtened to a poſt about two
or three yards diſtance, and theſe were the
bodies of highwaymen, or rather of ſol-
diers, ſailors, mariners, or even galley-
flaves, diſbanded after the peace of Reſ-
wick, who, having neither home nor occu-
pation, uſed to infeſt the roads in troops,
plunder towns and villages, and when ta-
ken were hanged at the county-town by
dozens, or even ſcores ſometimes, after
which their bodies were thus expoſed a-
long the highway in terrorem. At other
places one met with croſſes, either of wood
or ſtone, the higheſt not above two or
three feet, with inſcriptions to this pur-
port; “pray for the ſoul of A. B. or of a
“ſtranger that was found murdered on this
“ ſpot.” Theſe deterring objects made me
- willing

<page 137>
( 126 )
willing to aſſociate myſelf to ſome fel-
low-travellers whom I met on the ſame
road; but ſuch was my vanity, that I never
renewed the pilgrim's trade of begging
whilſt any of my money laſted, but was
rather laviſh of it on ſome of them, tho’
I know not how ſoon I might feel the
want of it; and I had not reſumed it long
before I met with ſuch a mortification as
made me heartily repent of my folly. I
was to go through the celebrated city of
Lyons, abounding with the fineſt buildings
and other curioſities, which I was very de-
ſirous to ſee ; and when I came to one of
the gates, was asked by an officer, in a li-
very like our beadles, whether I wanted a
viaticum? Not knowing the conſequence of .
his queſtion, I anſwered in the affirmative,
and was bid immediately to follow him. I
was ſurpriſed at the length of the way he
led me, and obſerved ſeveral fine churches,
palaces, ſquares, &c. which I ſtood ſtill
to admire, but was not ſuffered to do ſo
long ; and at length, after about an hour
and half's good walking, was told, that
that was the oppoſite gate at which I was
to

<page 138>
( 127 )
to go out and purſue my journey; he then
clapped a couple of pence into my hand,
and told me, that I muſt not venture back
into the city under ſome ſevere puniſh-
ment, and left me quite aſtoniſhed and
unable to reply. As ſoon as I had reco-
vered myſelf, I began to refle&t on my ex-
travagance and diſappointment in a moſt
lively manner, but thought it beſt, how-
ever, to follow his advice, rather than ex-
poſe myſelf to ſome ſhameful treatment,
if I attempted to return. What increaſed
my concern was, the fear of finding the
ſame method obſerved in every great city
I came to, but, happily for me, it proved
otherwiſe, and I not only went through
them all without moleſtation, but ſtaid
in ſome of them long enough to view
every thing worth ſeeing, and to converſe
with men of learning and piety, from
whom I received ſome tokens of their
generoſity.
The misfortune was, that my raſhneſs and
vanity would not ſuffer me to keep within
due bounds, but I muſt ſet myſelf off to
the higheſt advantage, by pretending to
greater merit and learning than was confiſt-
ent

<page 139>
( 128 )
ent even with common prudence, as it ex-
poſed me to the continual danger of a ſhame-
ful diſcovery. I took notice heretofore
how little progreſs I had made in the
Greek tongue, rather through the igno-
rance and neglect of ſome of my teachers,
than want of capacity or application, but
now I pretended to be not only maſter of
it, but likewiſe in ſome meaſure of the
Hebrew, though I knew not a ſingle let-
ter of the latter, and had only ſeen ſome
Hebrew books belonging to the Jews of
Avignon, by which I juſt could diſtinguiſh
that from other charaćters; the truth is,
that neither that nor any of the oriental
tongues, nor even the Greek, were much
ſtudied by the clergy; ſo I was not under
any great danger on that account, though
I own I have been ſometimes foiled at
the latter, becauſe I commonly addreſſed
myſelf to the prieſts, among whom I met,
now and then, with one who underſtood
it. I muſt alſo acknowledge that I found
the generality of them very charitable,
and ſome of them even generous, though
it the more redounds to my ſhame, ſeeing
neither the meanneſs of my garb, of
which

<page 140>
- ( 129 )
which yet I was not a little aſhamed, nor
the mortifying accidents that had happened
to me could prevail upon me to ſave a ſhil-
ling towards buying any thing better. I
had indeed ſome hopes to do ſo, as I.
came nearer to my father, but here I was
again juſtly diſappointed ; the two or three
laſt provinces I was to paſs through, hav-
ing been greatly impoveriſhed, and even
laid waſte by the late war, ſo that I found
the clergy here leſs rich and generous, and
ſo great poverty reigned among the laity,
that I had much ado to get ſufficient ſub-
ſiſtance among them. I ſhould likewiſe
obſerve here, that every town, or even
village I came through, had a number of
Lutherans and Calviniſts, who were ſtill
in a worſe condition, inſomuch that their
miniſters were obliged to keep ſome poor
inn or alehouſe for ſubſiſtance; ſo that
by that time I had reached my father I
was quite pennyleſs and threadbare. I pre-
ſently, however, made myſelf known to
him, though to his great ſurpriſe, not only
on that account, but as it was ſuch an un-
expected viſit, of which he had not had the
leaſt notice given him, nor did at all
K dream

<page 141>
( 13c )
dream of. The city where I met him be-
ing about three or four miles from his
houſe, he clapped a ſmall piece in my hand,
and direéted me to a houſe where I might
get ſome refreſhment, and towards night
condućted me to his own home, which
I was not a little ſurpriſed to find even
meaner than our townſman had deſcribed
to my mother and me. Here he bid me
a freſh and moſt tender welcome, and ex-
preſſed ſuch a viſible concern that he was
not able to give me at leaſt as good enter-
tainment as I had been uſed to with my
mother, that I was hardly able to make
him a proper anſwer. -
And indeed the difference I found between
the two places, the fork)rn condition I ſaw
myſelf in, the mean figure I made in an
obſcure kind of village, my being now not
only out of the way of any improvement,
but in danger of loſing what I had got,
afforded me ſuch a diſmal proſpe&t, that I
could not eaſily conceal my uneaſineſs,
and, in a little time, a more than ordinary
deſire of returning to my old home, fince
this new one was in every reſpect ſo little
inviting to me. He found it no leſs diffi-
- - cult

<page 142>
( 131 )
cult to conceal his diſlike of my returning
to my mother, and tried all he could to
diſſuade me from it. He adviſed me to
try my fortune at two or three neighbour-
ing cities or univerſities, and I complied
with his deſire, but found much greater
diſcouragements than I could expect: firſt,
the Jeſuits were the teachers in all of them,
and I had ſtudied with the Dominicans,
between whom and them there never was
a right underſtanding, but rather quite the
contrary. I was got into a new country,
(Germany) where the pronunciation of the
Latin differed ſo much from that I had
been uſed to, that though no one could
ſpeak it more fluently than I, I neither
could underſtand them, nor make myſelf
underſtood by them, without the greateſt
difficulty. The country had been ſo ruin-
ed by the war, that thoſe few mendi-
cant ſcholars that remained in thoſe uni-
verſities *, might be rather ſaid to ſtarve than
to
* Moſt of the univerſities of Germany have a number of
theſe mendicant ſtudents, who, as ſoon as the ſchool-hours
are over, go along the ſtreets from houſe to houſe, fing-
ing ſome pious Latin verſes to excite people's charity,
and, in ſome opulent cities, get enough to live well and
** K. z. corn -

<page 143>
( 132 )
to ſubſiſt. My youth and ignorance of the
German tongue, as well as my foreign
ronunciation of the Latin and Greek,
would likewiſe have diſqualified me for
being a tutor in any family, had there
been any in a condition to have maintained
one ; ſo that after all my efforts, which I
rather tried out of obedience to my fa-
ther, than any likely hopes I could have
of ſucceſs, I returned to him re infečia,
all which only ſerved to revive my defires of
returning to my mother. But he being
ſtill as averſe to it as ever, bethought him-
ſelf of a new way to diſſuade me from it,
and with ſo much art at the ſame time,
that I could not diſcover his aim. He
had ſeen the greateſt part of Europe, and
comfortably, and to buy all the books that are neceſſary
for them, by which means ſome of them become very
learned men, and get to good preferment; but as it was
quite otherwiſe in theſe, and, indeed, every city along the
Rhine, quite down below the great city of Cologn (where
the French forces had cauſed ſuch dreadful delapidations
as could not be ſeen without horror); theſe univerſities
had been long fince forſaken by all thoſe mendicant ſtu-
dents, who could no longer find means of ſubſiſting
them. And this I afterwards obſerved to be the caſe in
every place where the French troops had been, as I may
have further occaſion to ſhew in the ſequel,
could

<page 144>
( 133 )
could give an extraordinary account of it;
he underſtood ſeveral of its languages,
particularly the Italian, French, Spaniſh
and German, and expatiated much on the
advantages he had gained by travelling;
and expreſſed, at ſome diſtance, a défire
that I ſhould viſit ſeveral of thoſe coun-
tries I had not yet ſeen, particularly thoſe
of Holland, Flanders, and Brabant, which
he highly commended for their opulence,
and the great number of learned men they
produced, and expatiated much on their
hoſpitality, generoſity, and fondneſs for men
of parts and genius, and how greatly I
might be admired and promoted there on
account of my learning, knowledge of
languages and ſciences, and for having al-
ready travelled through ſo many conſider-
able parts of the world, all which he ſaid
was the more ſurpriſing, as I was ſtill ſo
very young, for I was then hardly full ſix-
teen years old. He could not indeed
have found a more effectual way than
that of ſoothing my vanity, to make me
give wholly into his views, and as to the
objećtion of the want of money, confi-
dering how well acquainted I was with the
K 3 way

<page 145>
( 134 )
way of travelling at free-coſt, he ſaid I
could not but promiſe myſelf much better
ſucceſs through thoſe countries, where the
peoples generoſity was equal to their known
opulence.
I was now (unknown to him) to think of
ſome more cunning, ſafe, and effectual
way of travelling than that I had followed
in my two former journies; and ſince I
found that my paſſing for an Iriſhman
and a ſufferer for religion, did not only
expoſe me to the danger of being diſco-
vered, but came ſhort of the merit and
admiration I had expe&ted from it, I re-
ſolved on a new projećt, which, though,
equally hazardous, I had not ſenſe enough
to foreſee, and tho' ſtill more diſhoneſt,
I had not virtue enough to deter me from.
I ſay, unknown to my father, for I had
carefully concealed all the vile indireét
pretences I had already uſed, and much
more was I now obliged to do ſo, know-
ing him to be ſo upright and religious a
man, that I ſhould not only have incurred
his utmoſt anger, but that he would like-
wiſe have taken all poſſible means to have
deterred me from, or diſappointed me in
- - It,

<page 146>
( 135 )
it. I recolle&ted, that whilſt I was learn-
ing humanity, rhetoric and geography with
the Jeſuits, I had heard them ſpeak of the
Eaſt-Indies, China, Japan, &c. and ex-
patiate much in praiſe of thoſe countries,
and the ingenuity of the inhabitants. The
idea they had given us of them was indeed
too general and imperfect, at leaſt what I
remembered of it, was by far too ſhort
and confuſed, for a perſon of the leaſt pru-
dence or forecaſt to have built ſuch a wild
projećt upon, becauſe all the notion they
had given us of it, was only from their
maps and comments upon them, for
they made uſe of geographical books.
However, I was raſh enough to think,
that what I wanted of a right knowledge
of them, I might make up by the ſtrength
of a pregnant invention, in which I flat-
tered myſelf I might ſucceed the more
eaſily, as I ſuppoſed they were ſo little
known by the generality of Europeans,
that they were only looked upon, in the
lump, to be Antipodes to them in almoſt
every reſpect, as religion, manners, dreſs,
&c. This was my crude notion of the
matter, which I thought afforded a vaſt
K 4 - ſcope

<page 147>
( 136 )
icope to a fertile fancy to work upon, and
I had no miſtruſt of myſelf on that head.
I had likewiſe heard that their way of writ-
ing differed very much from ours, but
how, and in what, I was altogether igno-
rant, or had quite forgot it, and ſo took
it into my head, that like the Hebrew, and
other oriental tongues I had heard of, they
muſt write from the right to the left, and
on this puerile ſuppoſition, I ſet about ex-
cogitating of an alphabet that might an-
ſwer my purpoſe. Another thing that
ſhewed my inconſiderate folly was, that
tho' I could not but know that the Greeks
and Hebrews had particular names for
their letters, it never came once into my
head to imitate them in that, as I had in
the figures, powers, &c. of ſome of the
lctters on a ſuppoſition, that as they might
flow originally from the ſame fountain, ſo
they might be reaſonably imagined to re-
tain ſtill ſome kind of reſemblance. The
truth is, my time was ſhort, and know-
ledge in what I went about ſo very ſmall
and confuſed, and what I did was by ſtealth,
and fear of being deteåted by my father;
that I was ſoon after made ſenſible of my
want

<page 148>
( 137 )
want of forecaſt, when I came to con-
verſe with proper judges, and found the
neceſſity not only of inventing names for
the letters, but to make ſeveral amend-
ments to my wild ſcheme, as I became
better acquainted with thoſe Eaſtern coun-
tries. - *
However, conſidering my tender years,
ſmall experience, and other ſuch diſad-
vantages, I have had fince no ſmall cauſe
to wonder how 1 could excogitate not only
ſuch an alphabet, and names of letters,
but likewiſe many other particulars e-
qually difficult, ſuch as a confiderable piece
of a new language and grammar, a new
diviſion of the year into twenty months,
a new religion, &c. and all out of my
own head, in order to ſtuff them into
that moſt abominable romance which I
publiſhed ſoon after my coming into Eng-
land, and which occaſioned ſuch variety of
opinions concerning it, and its ſhameleſs
author; ſome thinking it above the capa-
city of ſuch a young fellow to invent, and
others believing it the reſult of long thought
and contrivance. Alas, for me, my fancy
was but too fertile and ready for all ſuch
things,

<page 149>
( 138 )
things, when I ſet about them, and when
any queſtion has been ſtarted on a ſudden,
about matters I was ever ſo unprepared
for, I ſeldom found myſelf at a loſs for
a quick anſwer, which, if ſatisfactory, I
ſtored up in my retentive memory. But
to return to my alphabet, as ſoon as I had
finiſhed it to my mind, I began to inure
my hand to write it with ſome readineſs,
that it might upon occaſion appear natural
to me, which I found the more difficult,
as I never was expert at my pen, and was
quite unuſed to this backward way of
writing; and this obliged me to alter the
form of ſome of them, for the more eaſy
tracing them with the pen, and to con-
trive ſome abreviations and joining of let-
ters, and other ſuch improvements for ex-
pedition, which done, I thought myſelf
ſufficiently prepared for paſſing for a Japaneſe
converted to Chriſtianity. The only difficulty
was, how to reconcile this new and vile
aſſumption with my Avignon certificate,
which was not to be done but by copy-
ing it anew, and altering it where I ſaw
fit, and clapping the ſeal from the origi-
nal one to the counterfeit; but though I
WaS

<page 150>
( 139 )
was ready enough at wording it to my
mind, I wrote ſo indifferent a hand, that
it could never paſs for that of a ſecretary
of a vice-legate, and to have had it done
by a better penman was too difficult and
hazardous for me to venture. At length
I thought it ſafeſt to truſt to my copying
it as well as I could, with its flouriſhes and
ornaments, though I did it in ſuch a coarſe
and clumſy manner, that it would hardly
have paſſed for a tolerable counterfeit.
There was likewiſe another danger of a diſ-
covery from the different marks and make
of the German and Avignon paper, but
that never came then in my head; ſo that
having made what alterations I thought
proper in the tenor of the paſs, and clap-
ping the old ſeal to it, I made no difficulty
to truſt the reſt to fortune, and took a
melancholy leave of my poor father, who
ſhed abundance of tears over me, and
wiſhed me all poſſible bleſſings and ſuc-
ceſs, not dreaming how little this new pro-
jećt of mine deſerved of either; and when
I was got at ſome diſtance from him, I
put on my old pilgrim's habit, and began
my journey with a kind of heavy heart,
- accord-

<page 151>
( 140 ) .
according to the rout he had penned down
for me, and which was quite oppoſite to
that which would have brought me to my
own home. I had, indeed, taken care to
write to my anxious mother, and to ac-
quaint her with what had paſſed between
my father and me, and with my deſire of
taking a tour into the Low Countries be-
fore I returned to her, but I had afterwards
reaſon to fear, that the melancholy ſtyle
in which it was worded, did rather increaſe
than mitigate her concern for her now
really worthleſs ſon; for, from that time,
neither ſhe, nor yet my father, ever heard
of me more, nor I of them, and, in all
likelihood, both of them have bewailed
my loſs at a much greater rate than I de-
ſerved, if it did not prove the means of
ſhortening their days.
The reader may ſee by all this, what a
raſh and abandoned fellow I was, how
loſt to all ſenſe of religion, nature and rea-
ſon, and how I expoſed myſelf to ſo many
dangers, over head and ears, to indulge a fa-
vourite paſſion, and without the leaſt proſpect
of reaping any benefit from it, or even aim-
ing at it. However, this is nothing in
COIIl-

<page 152>
( 141 )
pariſon of what is to follow, and it is ra-
ther a wonder that ſo bad a beginning, ſo
ill concerted, and worſe followed, hath
not had a more dreadful ending, and I.
can only aſcribe it to the undeſerved mercy
of God, that it did not end in my total
ruin of body and ſoul. And I muſt deſire
the reader to bear ſtill in mind the confi-
deration of my tender years, and the diſ-
advantages of my wrong education, if he
intends to read what is to follow with any
tolerable patience, at leaſt till he comes to
ſome more agreeable ſcenes: In the mean
time, as I am now entering into One of the
blackeſt ſhame and guilt, I fincerely pro-
teſt, that it is the fartheſt from my heart
to aggravate or extenuate either, in order.
to render the following account more ſur-
prizing or agreeable, but to relate the whole
with the ſame fincerity, as I ſhould be
willing to do it, or wiſh it to have been
done, at my laſt moments. And I hope I
ſhall be the more readily believed, as I do
not deſign to have it printed till after my
death, when all finiſter views will be quite
taken away, and nothing be able to yield
any ſatisfaction on the other ſide of the
grave,

<page 153>
( 142 )
grave, but the conſciouſneſs of its ſincerity,
eſpecially confidering that I ſhall leave nei-
ther children nor relations to reap any be-
nefit from this narrative. But to return to
my propoſed rout:
I was at firſt to viſit all the conſiderable
cities on both fides of the Rhine, as they
lay in my way to that of Cologn, whither
. I pretended to go on a religious pilgrimage
to the three kings, whoſe remains are ſaid
to be there interred in the cathedral *, to
which there is a great reſort of devotees
almoſt all the year: for the Germans are
equally fond of pilgrims that come to any
of their great ſaints, as the Italians are of
thoſe that come to Rome of Loretto, or
* Thoſe were the wiſe men that came to worſhip our
Infant Saviour, and are, by the church of Rome, ſtiled
kings, and pretended to have been only three, whom they
call Gaſpar, Melchior and Balthazar; the legend adds, that
upon their being warned not to return to Jeruſalem, they
took the way to Cologn, and died, and were buried
there. Their heads are expoſed in a ſtately ſhrine be-
hind the great altar every Wedneſday, and they ſhew you
the gate by the Rhine-ſide, at which it is pretended they
came in by, and which hath been ſince walled. This
Cathedral doth likewiſe contain a number of other relicks,
and miraculous pićtures to feed the devotion of the vulgar,
and bring a conſtant concourſe of people thither.
the

<page 154>
( 143 )
the Spaniards to thoſe that go to St. Jago
de Compoſtella; ſo that I did not doubt of
meeting with a kind reception wherever I
came. . I ſhall not take up the reader's
time in deſcribing the places I came
through, that being much better done in
books of travels; but only obſerve, that I
found them all in a moſt diſmal plight,
moſt of the fine buildings ruinated, noble
palaces with only the bare walls, half de-
moliſhed, cathedrals, and other ſtately
churches, built of the fineſt marble and
other coſtly ſtones finely carved, battered
half down, and nothing left fit for divine
ſervice but the choir or chancel, which in
many places were quite unroofed, and only
thatched with ſtraw. All the reſt appear-
ed in a ſtill more woeful condition, where-
ever the conquering arms of Lewis XIV.
had penetrated, for this was but a few
years after the peace of Reſwick, ſo that
they had not had time to recover them-
ſelves from theſe dreadful ravages.
An accident happened to me before I had
gone far, which, had I been leſs raſh and
inconfiderate, might have deterred me
from purſuing my ſham pilgrimage farther.
- - It

<page 155>
( 144 )
It was at the city of Landau, garriſon-
ed by the French, and commanded by
an old experienced officer, and was then a
very ſtrong place, and the laſt town they
had in Alſace. The familiarity I was ob-
ſerved to carry on with ſome of the infe-
rior officers and ſoldiers of the garriſon,
who were pleaſed with the whimſical ac-
count I gave of myſelf and my pretended
country, made me ſuſpected of being a
ſpy, and as ſuch I was accordingly con-
dućted by a file of muſqueteers to the go-
vernor, who, not being ſatisfied with my
account, ordered me to be ſent to gaol,
where I was at firſt confined in a noiſome
place for ſome hours, but afterwards ad-
mitted to the liberty of the priſon till the
next day, when I was condućted in the
ſame manner out of the city, and forbid,
under the ſevereſt penalties, to return into
it *. This dreadful eſcape might, one
would
* In that fabulous account I gave of myſelf, prefixed to
the hiſtory of Formoſa, I pretended to have been ſeized
here for taking a plan of the fortifications of the place,
which was abſolutely falſe; for though I had done ſo more
than once in my native country, where I could give no
umbrage, I was not ſo ſtupid as to do ſo in this ; neither
Waş

<page 156>
( 145 )
would think, have opened my eyes to ſee
the folly and danger of my ill-concerted
ſcheme, as well as reminded me of my
promiſe of returning to my poor anxious
mother, if I did not think fit to ſtay with
my father. But my religion and prudence .
were much of a piece, juſt ſufficient to
make me apply myſelf to heaven in time
of danger, which was no ſooner blown
over, but I as quickly forgot what I owed
to either, except that I looked on myſelf
as obliged to aſſiſt at the church offices,
ſuch as maſs, veſpers, &c. as often as
opportunity offered, which I continued do-
ing till a more wicked and abominable
projećt made me leave it off. Theſe par-
ticulars may perhaps be thought too tri-
fling to my readers to be worthy inſerting,
but to me they appear in a quite other
light, and do but too plainly ſhew how
naturally one miſcarriage draws on a worſe,
was it conſiſtent with my ſcheme to pretend to any ſkill in
drawing and fortifications. However, as to the governor
of the place it is moſt likely that my youth and fimplicity
moved his pity more than any credit he could give to what
I ſaid for myſelf; for excepting my making a longer ſtay in
it than is uſual for pilgrims, there had been nothing ſaid
or done by me that could give the jealouſy of my being a
ſpy.
- L where

<page 157>
( 146 )
where religion and reaſon have unhappily
loſt their influence, or yielded it to a predo-
minant and ungovernable paſſion, and how
eaſily the indulging of it will, by de-
grees, come to quench all remorſe and
convićtion, and unleſs the Divine Grace
interpoſes, hurry a man into utter perdi-
tion. And as no man hath more ſenſibly
felt the ſad effects of the one, as well as
the bleſſed ones of the other, what can I
do leſs than acknowledge and adore that
divine and undeſerved mercy, to which a-
lone I owe ſo great, and I hope effectual,
deliverance And what cauſe have I not
to be, to the higheſt degree, thankful that
I had ſuch early impreſſions of religion
inculcated into my mind, and which tho’
ſuppreſſed and ſmothered for a long time,
by the violence of a favourite vice, did
yet, in God’s own time, bring me into a
ſenſe and abhorrence of my paſt follies,
and, in ſome meaſure, drove me from the
moſt dreadful danger into the arms of a
merciful and forgiving Saviour, and that
in ſo wonderful and unhoped for a manner,
that it was impoſſible for me to attribute
the

<page 158>
( 147 )
the bleſſed change to any thing but to a
ſupernatural grace and mercy? -
I ſhall, however, in the ſequel, be more
ſuccinét, eſpecially in my account of what
happened to me from Landau, to the fa-
tal time in which I was unwarily drawn
into the moſt abandoned piece of impoſ.
ture, that of my pretended converſion to
Chriſtianity by Dr. James, then chaplain
to a Scotch regiment garriſoned at Sluys;
for to mention all thoſe particulars would
not only appear a moſt ſtupid and tedious,
but an almoſt incredible ſeries of the moſt
unaccountable follies and diſaſters that any
raſh youth could fall into. It will be ſuf-
ficient to ſay, that I travelled ſeveral hun-
dred leagues through Germany, Brabant
and Flanders, under the notion of a Japa-
neſe converted to Chriſtianity by ſome
jeſuit miſſionaries, and brought to Avig-
non, by them to be farther inſtructed, as
well as to avoid the dreadful puniſhment
inflićted on all that turn Chriſtians in the
dominions of the emperor of Japan. In
purſuance of which ſhameful pretence, I
kept up an outward form or religion, was
frequent at church, and was ſometimes
L 2 affeóted

<page 159>
( 148 )
affected with thoſe duties, and, at other times,
pinched with a tranſient remorſe and ſhame
at the conſciouſneſs of the wicked part I was
then acting. My fluency in the Latintongue,
and ſmattering of other branches of learn-
ing, eſpecially logic, philoſophy and the-
ology, of which my tenacious memory ſtill
preſerved ſome of the moſt curious parts,
joined to the flagrant account I gave of
myſelf, procured me, indeed, more re-
gard and a greater ſhare of beneficence,
than was commonly ſhewed to other tra-
vellers or pilgrims, but my careleſſneſs and
extravagance not ſuffering me to lay out
any money in dreſs, or even linnen, to
keep me clean and decent, I, by degrees,
made ſo diſmal and ſhabby an appearance,
that I outdid the very common beggars,
and this misfortune brought on worſe upon
me. For firſt, it gave ſuch an ill face and
diſcredit to all my pretences, as all my
learning could not counterbalance; and
2dly, when I came into ſome confiderable
cities, which I was deſirous to ſee, and
where they have hoſpitals for pilgrims and
ſtrangers, with ſuitable accommodations.
according to their rank, appearance, or re-
commendation,
-

<page 160>
( 149 )
commendation, I ſhewed, in vain, my
counterfeit paſs, which, if I had been in a
better trim, would, from the advantageous
manner in which I had dreſſed it, have
procured a much better reception; thoſe
who attend on ſuch occaſions would ſel-
dom give themſelves the trouble of read-
ing it, though I begged of them ſo to do,
but, taking it for granted, that I was one
of the loweſt rank, or deſerving to be
treated as ſuch, did generally herd me a-
mong the meaneſt, by which I ſaw my-
ſelf in a ſhort time covered with rags and
vermine, and infected with a moſt virulent
itch. This diſmal plight, one would have
thought ſufficient, to rouſe me from my
ſenſeleſs lethargy, and make me follow the
example of the returning prodigal, eſpe-
cially, as I found, to my great mortification,
that all my fair ſhew of learning, made me
appear now only the more deſpicable in
the eyes of the ſoberer part ; for how could
even thoſe, who gave any credit to what
I told them, forbear ſuppoſing that I muſt
have been guilty of ſome great enormity,
or elſe the Jeſuits, by whom I pretended
to have been brought out of Japan into
L 3 Avignon,

<page 161>
( 150 )
Avignon, would never have given me up
to ſo ſhameful a vagabond life; and no
doubt but the far greater part believed it all
a forgery, though they did not think it
worth the while to have me called to an
account for it. Thus did I find my affairs
grow from bad to worſe, inſomuch that I
was often pinched with want, and glad
would I have been to have returned home
to my mother; but the thought of my pre-
ſent condition would not permit me to
think of it, and, perhaps, I could have
preferred any death to ſo great a morti-
fication as it would have been both to her
and me. I have, however, had reaſon to
think it a mercy that I had ſuch an inve-
terate itch, added to all my other misfor-
tunes, for I perceived that in ſeveral great
cities of Brabant and Flanders, there are a
ſort of procureſſes, who wander about the
ſtreets under the charaćter of Begines *,
- * . . . and
* The true Begines are a good ſort of unmarried wo-
men, who dedicate themſelves to works of charity; but
inſtead of being cloiſtered up like the nuns, vifit the houſes
of the poorer ſort, and procure them all proper relief
from the charitable rich. They likewiſe extend their
rare to the ſick, lame, priſoners and ſtrangers, and are
- known

<page 162>
( 151 )
and pick up all the likely fellows they
meet with, in order to make a lewd trade
of them; and I being then very young,
ſanguine, and likely in perſon, have now
and then been invited and led by them in
a ſeeming hoſpitable manner, to ſome cha-
ritable ladies to receive, as was pretended,
ſome token of their generoſity, but, in
reality, to return a leſs commendable one
to the benefactreſs. But my diſtemper,
whether or no it was imagined to be of a
worſe kind than it was, proved ſuch a
diſguſtful bar, that I never was put to the
trial, otherwiſe I am ſure neither my vir-
tue nor prudence would have been proof
againſt it; for though I was then abſolutely
innocent of any criminal commerce with
any of the ſex, yet, circumſtanced as I
was, I have reaſon to believe I ſhould eaſily
have yielded at any hazard, and this fur-
ther conſideration made me ſtill more weary
of my wretchedneſs.
known by a particular plain dreſs, not unlike that of the
nuns. But there are alſo many vile women, who, under *
the cloak of that dreſs and charaćter, carry on the trade
of procureſſes, and are but too commonly encouraged
and ſupported in it, by the profligate rich and great,
L 4 I

<page 163>
( 152 )
I was at length come to the celebrated city
of Liege, and ſtayed ſome time there, to
view all the curioſities of the place, and at
night took up my lodging at the hoſpital,
where we were likewiſe allowed ſome kind
of ſupper. There I was informed that an
officer was arrived at one of the ſuburbs
belonging to the Dutch, who inliſted peo-
ple into the Dutch ſervice, and gave good
encouragement to ſuch vagrants as appear-
ed fit to carry a muſket. I had no great
hopes that I ſhould paſs muſter with him,
being both too young and ſhort, as I
thought, for his purpoſe: however, I re-
ſolved to try, and ſoon perſuaded half a
dozen of my fellow ragamuffians to follow
me; but as nobody could have a greater
averſion than I to a ſoldier's life, by what
I had ſeen at my native place, where was
always kept a ſtrong garriſon, I began to
wiſh I might meet with a repulſe. The
reſt were preſently inliſted by the pretend-
ed officer, for he only bought them to ſell
them again; but when he came to me,
and had heard my patched up ſtory, in-
ſtead of ſeeming diſcouraged from taking
ſuch a raw and tender boy, he really, to
my

<page 164>
( 153 )
my great ſurprize, ſhewed me an uncom-
mon regard, tho' I made the worſt figure
of any of his recruits; and I could by no
means conceive the reaſon of it till near a
month after, during which time we were
well entertained at an inn, wanting for
neither vićtuals nor drink. He ſoon ob-
ſerved me to be averſe to ſtrong liquors,
and indulged me in it. At length, having
ſold away all his recruits but me, he began
to tell me that he had too great a regard
for me, to ſend me with them to carry a
brown muſket, and that he deſigned ſome-
thing better for me, and more ſuitable to
my education; but that he muſt firſt try
to get me cured of the ſcabious diſeaſe,
which by that time had ſpread itſelf all
over my ſkin. Accordingly he tried all
proper medicines, got me phyſicked, a-
nointed, blooded, bathed, &c. but with-
out ſucceſs. Being at length obliged to
return to his then home, he got me hand-
ſomely equipt, and took me to Aix-la-
Chapelle, where I found he kept a grand
coffee-houſe, and billiards, and other games,
in the moſt handſome part of the city,
over againſt the town-hall, and here I
- WaS

<page 165>
( 154 )
was to wait on the cuſtomers, and to
teach a boy of his to read, &c.
I had reaſon to believe that my new-
maſter had conceived hopes that I
ſhould bring a good number of cuſtomers
to his houſe; and, as for myſelf, I ex-
pećted to find no ſmall ſatisfaction in be-
ing ſeen, and ſuffered to diſplay my parts
among them. But we found ourſelves
both diſappointed, in a great meaſure, be-
cauſe, tho' it was then the heighth of the
ſeaſon for drinking the waters, and the
town was full of people; yet the greateſt
part of them were ſeldom to be ſeen any
where but at the pump, and the walks about
it, and theſe were at another and diſtant
part of the town ; ſo that there was hard-
ly any reſorted to his coffee-houſe, except
gentlemen that came thither to ſpend an
hour or two at billiards, backgammon, baſ-
ſet, or ſome other game, and theſe were
men of little or no taſte for learning, ex-
cept two or three French refugees, who
appeared to me to be profeſſed gameſters.
Theſe, and now and then ſome German
gentlemen, that dropped in by chance,
would condeſcend to divert themſelves
with

<page 166>
( 155 )
with my company, queſtion me about
variety of things, and hold an argument
with me about ſome curious or inſtructing
fubjećt, and at their going away commonly
left ſome marks of their generoſity, which,
however, my maſter gave me to underſtand,
I was to be contented with ſuch a ſhare of
as he ſhould pleaſe to allow me.
Beſides his coffee-houſe, he furniſhed the
balls, and other places of that reſort, with
lemonade, orgeat, and other cooling li-
quors proper for the ſeaſon, as well as
with variety of drams for ſuch as liked
them. And here it was that I beheld the
beau monde in ſuch extraordinary ſplen-
dor, as was like to have been of the moſt
fatal conſequence to me, and to have drove
me to the moſt deſperate piece of folly and
madneſs that a man in his ſenſes could
have been guilty of, and which I ſhall
forbear mentioning, merely for the ill im-
preſſion it might be apt to make on ſome
weak and ſceptical minds ; but which,
while I live, I ſhall never forget, nor ceaſe
bleſfing the divine mercy which kept me
back from it. And it was well for me
that I was ſent thither but once more, tho’
another

<page 167>
( 156 )
another man he kept, much older and
fitter for the buſineſs, was obliged to give
daily attendance there ; and I can only
think that my cuticular diſeaſe, which diſ-
played itſelf too viſibly in my hands, was
the cauſe why I was ſo ſeldom ſent thi-
ther.
Before the ſeaſon was over, my maſter,
who had other irons in the fire, was
obliged to go to Spa, ſome German
leagues from Aix-la-Chapelle, for a fort-
night, during which time a great noble-
man, at leaſt one who paſſed for ſuch
there, had run himſelf pretty deep in his
debt, by ſome grand entertainments he
had given on ſeveral occaſions; and it was
now whiſpered about, that he was juſt on
the point of diſappearing. My miſtreſs,
upon the firſt hint of it, told me I muſt
immediately ſet out and fetch her huſband.
The time was ſo ſhort, and the way ſo .
long and difficult, conſidering that I was to
go on foot, that there was ſcarcely any
probability of my reaching the place time
enough, and much leſs ſo, confidering I
was a ſtranger to the road and to the lan-
guage, that I would have willingly ex-
cuſed

<page 168>
( 157 )
cuſed myſelf from it, and have perſuaded
her to have diſpatched a man and horſe to
him, but ſhe was a haughty dame, and
above being adviſed, ſo that I was forced
to comply, though without any hopes of
getting there time enough, in which caſe
it would be of no ſervice to him, eſpeci-
ally if I ſhould chance to loſe my way,
of which there was ſo much the more
danger, as it was very intricate, and I
knew not a ſtep of it, nor how to be in-
formed about it, for want of the German
tongue. And indeed, though I took all
the care I could, I found before I was got
half way to the place, that it would be
impoſſible for me to avoid being ſo often
out, through the various windings and
turnings, and croſs-roads I frequently met
with, that I deſpaired of reaching it in
double the time. The anxiety and fear
I was in was ſo great, about the reception
I ſhould meet with, both from him, and
her for my ſucceeding ſo ill, that I began
to think of preventing it, by giving them
both the ſlip. My heart, however, heſi-
tated a good while, and upbraided me
with the ingratitude and injuſtice I was
going

<page 169>
( . 158 )
going to be guilty of, as likewiſe with the
danger I might incur, ſhould I be caught
afterwards by him ; for in ſuch a caſe, I
muſt have expe&ted nothing leſs than the
higheſt marks of his reſentment. But
when I conſidered, on the other hand, that
all my care and diligence could not bring
me to him time enough, and that I ſhould
be ill treated for that which I could not
avoid, I preferred a diſtant danger to one
ſeemingly at hand ; and being then juſt
going to croſs a high road, which I was
told led to the city of Cologn, immediately
took to it, with a reſolution to return to
my father, and then to my mother, by the
ſame way I had formerly gone. This laſt
confideration was then ſtrong with me,
as it revived in my mind the concern and
grief they muſt be in about me, eſpecially
my poor mother, who had heard nothing
from me ſince that melancholy letter I
ſent to her upon leaving my father. The
thoughts of ſeeing again two ſuch dear pa-
rents, had ſo enlivened me, that it had in a
great meaſure effaced all other reflec-
tions, particularly the remorſe of my in-
gratitude to my late maſter. But here I
WaS

<page 170>
( 159 )
was again diſappointed, not only of that
happineſs, but even from the very proſ-
pećt and hopes of it, and that juſtly too,
and by my own ſtupid folly. And fince the
Divine Providence had ſo wonderfully de-
livered me from the dangers and miſeries
of a ſoldier's life, by inſpiring my maſter
with ſentiments, whether of gain or pity, or
both, and I had made ſuch ungrateful re-
turns, both to God and him, it was but
juſt I ſhould plunge myſelf into the mi-
ſery and danger I was ſo unworthy to
eſcape.
I had already paſſed through Cologn, and
Bon the reſidence of the eleētor of Co-
logn, and got to another city of his elec-
torate likewiſe on the Rhine, when upon
my entering it at one of the gates, I was
accoſted by a perſon genteely dreſſed, who,
among ſeveral other queſtions, aſked me
if I was willing to enter into that elector's
ſervice, and uſed ſome of the uſual topicks
to induce me to it. I was ſurpriſed at
his queſtion, and readily enough anſwered
in the negative, but was ſoon after per-
ſuaded by him to accept his offer, tho’
without the leaſt force or circumvention,
and

<page 171>
( 160 )
and merely by my own weakneſs and ſtu-
pidity, or rather ſome judicial fatality, for
nothing leſs than that I ſhould think
could have made me alter the laudable
reſolution I had taken, or ſo eaſily ſet
aſide the thoughts of reviſiting and reviv-
ing two ſuch dear and afflićted parents
once more, after I was got ſo far in the
way to it; but this was not the only
misfortune that attended this raſh and
unnatural action, which rather proved the
fatal ſource of new ſcenes of miſeries and
wickedneſs.
The liberty that is commonly granted to
ſoldiers to ſwear, game, drink, whore,
&c. is very great among the Germans,
and much more among the French; theſe
laſt may be juſtly affirmed to be the moſt
profligate of any I ever have known or
read of. There is no crime or lewdneſs
they will not commit, no oaths or curſes
ſo terrible they will not delight in. They
ſeem deſtitute of all ſenſe of religion and
ſhamefacedneſs, and ſo wholly careleſs a-
bout a future ſtate, that I have ſeen many
of them go to the gallows for deſertion
with as much unconcern, and ſome of them
with

<page 172>
( 161 )
with a ſeeming jocundity, as if they were
mounting the guard; and not one of them
did I ever obſerve to ſhew the leaſt ſign or
repentance, fear of death, or concern about
another life. Thoſe we had in this regi-
ment were, if poſſible, ſtill worſe, being
moſtly deſerters from the French ſervice,
and to the laſt degree profligate: and if there
was any one among them that was more
ſoberly or religiouſly inclined, he was ſure
to become the objećt of their ſcorn and
contempt, and to be baited like ſome
wicked or monſtrous creature, a vaſt num-
ber of which we had in this regiment; and
theſe, coming to be intermixed with a
number of raw young German recruits,
taken ſome from the plough and cart, others
from their trades, and ſome even from the
Univerſities, did debauch them into all
manner of wickedneſs. This was the un-
happy herd I was now got among, and
whoſe company and example compleated
my ruin, by extinguiſhing thoſe few faint
traces of religion I had left. I was indeed
neither inclined to drinking nor gaming,
and was not hardened enough in impu-
dence to follow them in their lewdneſs;
M but

<page 173>
( 162 )
but was bad enough, nevertheleſs, to in-
dulge myſelf, in order to appear as vile
and abandoned as they, in a ſhameful
habit of uttering ſuch new and faſhionable
oaths, and monſtrous curſes, as I had
lately rather heard with horror, than learn-
ed, at Aix-la-Chapelle; and as I was ſtill
as ambitious as ever to paſs for a Japoneſe,
choſe to profeſs myſelf an unconverted or
heatheniſh one, rather than what I had
then pretended to be, a convert to Chri-
ſtianity. My vanity ſoon made me begin
to make an aukward jeſt and ridicule of the
moſt ſolemn and ſacred truths of the Goſ-
pel, and to take a brutiſh delight at the
ſurprize which the more ſober people of
the town. I converſed with, expreſſed at
my blaſphemous and prophane expreſſions
and objećtions, as well as in the pleaſure I
obſerved this gave to my fellow-ſoldiers, or
rather fellow-brutes.
As the former had obſerved me to be, in
all other reſpects, a ſober young fellow,
given to no vice ; and found me likewiſe
maſter of ſome ſenſe and learning, they
began to expreſs an uncommon compaſſion
for me, and, believing me a heathen in-
deed,

<page 174>
( 163 )
º
deed, propoſed to me to enter the liſts with
ſome of their learned prieſts or monks,
who, they doubted not, would eaſily con-
vince me of my error and danger; tho’
they themſelves had not been able to do
it. It can hardly be doubted, but ſuch a
vain abandoned fellow as I was, would
readily accept the offer. To have declin-
ed, would have betrayed a diffidence I was
not capable of; ſo that I pleaſed myſelf
with having a fair opportunity of diſplay-
ing my parts and learning againſt my an-
tagoniſts, and either to ſtand proof againſt
all their arguments, or yield myſelf con-
vinced by them, according as I ſhould
find it ſuit beſt with my vanity or intereſt;
for if I found it worth my while to chuſe
the latter, I thought I ſhould appear to
the world as a convert of uncommon ſize,
and gain no ſmall applauſe by it. There
was but one thing could make me heſi-
tate about it, viz. the horrid guilt I ſhould
plunge myſelf into by ſuch a vile piece of
hypocriſy, and I own it made ſome im-
preſſion upon my mind; but it proved
ſhort-lived, and my own ſanguine temper
ſoon got the maſtery of it, and I at length
M 2 - COIl-
*...*,

<page 175>
( 164 )
conſented to be introduced to a Capuchin
of that city, who was eſteemed a man of
great piety as well as learning, and who
had been appriſed before of the intended
viſit, and the purport of it.
When we came to the monaſtery, we
found the good old capuchin fitting on a
bench, in an outward room of it, facing
the gate, with a luſty young woman
kneeling before him, barking like a dog,
and making a great many other antick
noiſes and poſtures; upon which I was
told that ſhe was poſſeſſed, and that the
good father was exorcifing the evil ſpirit
out of her. Whether ſhe was then ſent
for on purpoſe, or came by accident, I
know not ; but I remembred to have
ſeen her at ſome proceſſions, and once or
twice at church, in the ſame unaccount-
able attitudes; and, as I was then weak
enough to think it a real poſſeſſion, from
her extravagant actions and words, I be-
gan to fear, ſo great is the power of guilt
on ſome occaſions, that the devil might
either expoſe me for the vile part I was
then acting, or perhaps do me ſome other
and worſe miſchief, as he had formerly
- done

<page 176>
( 165 )
-
done to thoſe vagabond exorciſts of whom
we read Aëts xix. 16. to avoid which I
withdrew as ſoon as I decently could, as
if to leave him to go on with his exorciſm.
Whether he took it in this ſenſe or not, I
know not ; but at our next meeting, when
ſhe was out of the way, he took occaſion
from thence to prove the truth of the
Chriſtian religion in general, and of the
church of Rome in particular; and that her
prieſts alone have the power of caſting out
devils. I told him, with a ſmile, that it
would be time enough to inſiſt on the mi-
racle, or enquire into the realityof it, when
it was aétually performed; to which he
replied, with an air of great pity and ſe-
riouſneſs, that God did frequently permit
ſuch poor creatures to be tormented for
ſome time, before he vouchſafed them a
deliverance; but that tho’ exorciſms and
prayers would not avail till then, yet they
were obliged in charity to make uſe of
them, in hopes that they would one time
or other prove ſucceſsful. -
As we came to enter into other arguments,
I found that the good old Capuchin was
better provided for a controverſy againſt
- M 3 Pro-

<page 177>
( 166 )
Proteſtants than againſt heathens, which
gave me no ſmall advantage againſt him;
and this I took with ſuch an aſſuming air,
and lightneſs of mind, that could not but
be diſpleaſing to him ; this was ſo na-
tural to me, that I never could forbear diſ-
playing it upon all ſuch occaſions, and no
wonder if it gave them great cauſe to
think me either not ſerious enough for
the momentouſneſs of the diſpute, or per-
haps rather that I was nothing leſs than
what I pretended to be. I cannot indeed
recolle&t, that any thing like this laſt was
their real judgment of me, from anything
that dropped from them, though it was
but too viſible to be the caſe, if their cha-
rity did not blind their judgment in my
favour; however, I could ſee plainly e-
nough from their uneaſineſs, that they were
not likely to be very forward in repeat-
ing our conferences, and I was vain e-
nough to impute it to my being an over-
match for them in the diſpute. And it
was in the ſame vain boaſting ſtrain, that
I affirmed in that fabulous account I gave
of myſelf in England, that I was diſcharg-
ed out of that ſervice for being a heathen,
and

<page 178>
( 167 )
and for refuſing to yield to the arguments
of thoſe who had attempted to convert me.
The aſſumption was abſolutely falſe, and
I was diſcharged by order of the colonel,
becauſe I was not only below the ſtandard,
but alſo too tender for the fatigues of a ſol- .
dier's life. And indeed I cannot expreſs
the miſeries we underwent in the ſervice
of that prince, who was then ſo eminently
poor, that great numbers of his troops pe-
riſhed for want of cloaths, fewel, and e-
ven of bread; and had I not been treated
with greater care and tenderneſs than moſt
of the reſt were, muſt inevitably have pe-
riſhed in a very hard winter at Bon,
where, beſides the want of all other ne-
ceſſaries, the greateſt part of the garriſon
were quartered in barracks open to all
winds and weather, and forced to lie on
the bare boards.
Being thus happily diſcharged from ſo
dreadful a ſlavery, it was natural for me to
think once more of returning to my long-
wiſhed-for home, at any rate, and at all
hazards; but here likewiſe my ill fate had
laid an unexpected obſtacle, which it was
not in my power to remove; for my late
M 4 captain,

<page 179>
( 168 )
captain, a ſordid wretch, who had been
raiſed to his poſt from that of a common
centinel, by the baſeſt means, had taken
thoſe cloaths I had brought from Aix-la-
Chapelle under his care, and, as he pre-
tended, to prevent my ſelling them, and
ſpending the money; but upon my being
diſcharged, refuſed to reſtore them to me,
though he ſtripped me of my ammunition
ones, and had the conſcience to ſend me
away in the heart of a ſevere winter, with
a bare looſe old frock of blue linnen, and
without waiſtcoat or ſhoes to my feet, for
thoſe he gave me were ſo worn out that
my feet touched the ground, ſo that I could
never have travelled far before the hardneſs
of the weather would have made an end
of me. This made me reſolve to go back
to Cologn, and try how far my diſmal
plight and fluent tongue would work upon
peoples charity; but it being then war-
time, I was ſtopped, as is uſual in garri-
ſoned cities, at the gate, and condućted
to the main guard, to give an account of
myſelf to the officer then on duty. I did
ſo, and lighted on a perſon, who was
really a gentleman, and took ſuch liking
- - tg
|-

<page 180>
( 169 )
to me, that I liſted myſelf in his company,
and was preſently after ſupplied with
cloaths fitter for the ſeaſon. I paſſed to
him for a Japoneſe and a heathen, and was
entered in his company under the name
of Salmanazar, which, fince my coming
into England, I altered, by the addition of
a letter or two, to make it ſomewhat
different from that mentioned in the book
of Kings, but whether my new captain
believed what I told him or not, I be-
came no ſmall favourite of his. He was
a man of good ſenſe, ſpoke Latin and
French well, and had ſome good ſcholars
in his company, one or two of them of
the church of Rome, whereas the regi-
ment conſiſted moſtly of Lutherans, it be-
longing to the duke of Mecklenburg, but
was then in the Dutch pay, and garriſoned
at Cologn.
That great city is, perhaps, one of the
moſt ſuperſtitious in all Germany; every
ſtreet and every houſe hath the ſtatue or
image of ſome ſaint or other, to which
they light candles at night, but moſtly to
that of the Virgin Mary. Our Lutherans,
in ſpight of all prohibitions from the ma-
giſtracy,

<page 181>
( 17o )
giſtracy, could not forbear ſhewing their
diſlike and contempt to theſe, and many
other ſuperſtitious cuſtoms they beheld,
and were ſometimes puniſhed for it. Yet
did not this deter me from taking pride
in outdoing them, though I was ſo far from
having the ſame laudable pretence for it,
that in my heart I condemned them for
their untimely zeal, and myſelf for my
impious vanity. We had likewiſe ſeveral
looſe gentlemen brought up in ſome of the
beſt univerſities, who had been prevailed
upon to exchange their gowns and books
for a musket; ſome of them were Proteſt-
ants, others Papiſts, and with theſe our
chief officers delighted to ſet me on diſ-
puting, by which I had gained their ill
will ſo far, as I generally proved too hard
for them, that they had ſtigmatized me
with the titles of heathen, infidel unbap-
tized, and the like; but theſe, inſtead of
giving me any uneaſineſs or remorſe, ra-
ther ſoothed my pride, and made me now
and then, upon a proper occaſion, take de-
light to remind them that I could give
better reaſons for my being ſo, than they
could for themſelves. My captain think-
*
ing

<page 182>
( 171 )
ing that our chaplain, who had been
brought up a regular clergyman in the
Lutheran way, might ſucceed better
with me, propoſed a conference to
him ; but he being a baſhful young
gentleman, modeſtly declined it, and con-
tented himſelf with expoſing the folly and ,
abſurdity of the heatheniſh religion in
ſome of his ſermons, where he had a
large field to expatiate on, without the
danger of oppoſition. I was afterwards
introduced to two others, one who ſerved
the Lutheran meeting at Cologn (for they
tolerate Proteſtant meetings in time of
war for the uſe of the garriſon, though
they ſhut them up in time of peace) and
the other a man of great learning, at a
ſmall diſtance from the city. Our diſputes
proved but of ſhort duration, I always
attacking them upon ſuch points, as I
knew they were the leaſt able to defend,
but by Scripture, which I pretended not
to believe, but urged even thoſe very
points, ſuch as the Trinity, Conſubſtanti-
ation, &c. as arguments againſt it; and
this, as well as my vain and aſſuming be-
haviour, might eaſily raiſe a diſlike, if not
- more

<page 183>
( 172 )
more likely, a miſtruſt of me. One thing
I had occaſion to obſerve, that where
Papiſts and Proteſtants are ſo intermin-
gled, their guides are better ſtored with
arguments againſt each other, than a-
gainſt the common enemies of the Chriſtian
faith.
From Cologn we were ordered into Hol-
land by the next ſpring, and began to
encamp as ſoon as the campaign began.
The Lutherans and Calviniſts had prayers
morning and night at the head of every
regiment, and a ſermon on Sundays, and
I was vain enough to go from one to the
other to obſerve their method of devotion,
and finging of pſalms and hymns, at which
they both behaved with great ſeriouſneſs:
but as for me, after liſtening awhile to
them, I was commonly driven by my raſh-
neſs and vanity to turn my back to them,
and turning my face to the riſing or ſet-
ting ſun, to make ſome aukward ſhew
of worſhip, or praying to it, and was no
leſs pleaſed to be taken notice of for ſo
doing. This vain fit grew up to ſuch a
height, that I made me a little book
with figures of the ſun, moon and ſtars,
º, and

<page 184>
( 173 )
and ſuch other imagery as my phrenſy
ſuggeſted to me, and filled the reſt with
a kind of gibberiſh proſe and verſe, writ-
ten in my invented charaćter, and which
I muttered or chanted as often as the hu-
mour took me. r
I have often juſtly wondered at the fingu-
lar goodneſs of God to ſuch a vile aban-
doned wretch as I was become by this
time, that in neither regiment, in which
I had continued, as I remember, about .
two years, during which a ſharp and ſe-
vere war was carried on with equal fierce-
neſs, it never was my lot to be com-
manded to a ſiege, battle, party, ſkirmiſh,
or place of danger, in which I might have
been ſuddenly cut off in the midſt of a
moſt impious career; or, what is equally
ſurpriſing, that the apprehenſion of ſo
dreadful an end, ſhould not have deterred
me from ſo ſenſeleſs and wicked a courſe,
and made me feel the monſtrous ſtupidity
of running ſuch deſperate hazards of body
and ſoul, for the ſake of a little popular
admiration at the beſt ; but, inſtead of
which, I have more frequently met with
mortification and contempt. But I was
ſtill

<page 185>
( 174 )
ſtill very young, to the beſt of my remem-
brance not above eighteen, if quite ſo
much ; my mind miſguided by a wrong
education, as I have before obſerved ;
conſcious of my own want of any real
merit, and yet fond to exceſs for any
kind of pretence to it; and ſo deſirous of
being admired and taken notice of, that,
rather than have foregone that favourite
paſſion, I would have choſen to indulge it,
I verily believe at that time, at the hazard
and expence of being looked upon as the
very vileſt fellow that ever lived. As for
thoſe impreſſions of religion which I had
ſo ſtrongly imbibed in my youth, they
gradually loſt their influence in proportion
to my giving way to that deſtructive paſ-
ſion, and, at the beſt, were more in my
head than in my heart, till it pleaſed the
divine grace to tranſplant them thither, as
the propereſt ſoil for their frućtifying; but
this bleſſing did not come down to me till
after ſeveral years, and a variety of ſcenes
of impiety and guilt. I ſhall paſs by the
other occurrences of my ſoldier's life, to
come to that fatal one which proved the
ſource

<page 186>
( 175 )
ſource of new and more horrid offences
againſt God and man.
The laſt garriſon I came to was at Sluys,
where was a French and a Scotch regi-
ment in the Dutch pay. There I ſoon be-
came acquainted with ſeveral of the French
officers, whoſe language I perfeótly under-
ſtood ; but as I was wholly unacquainted
with the Scotch and Engliſh, and few of
them could ſpeak Latin, I could not be ſo
converſant with them. I found moſt of
thoſe French gentlemen very ſuperficial,
and did not a little indulge my vanity in
ridiculing their tenets, whether they were
Papiſts or Proteſtants, for there was a mix-
ture of them, and had occaſion to obſerve
(tho' to my ſhame, had I had the leaſt
ſenſe of the vile part I played) that, tho’
the greater number of them were given to
ſuch flagrant vices as are but too common
among gentlemen of that profeſſion; yet
they all appeared ſo firmly attached to the
tenets of their particular churches, that
they expreſſed much more uneaſineſs at
thoſe ſarcaſms I uſed to throw out,
than they did at the moſt dreadful oaths
they commonly ſwore, or any vices that
reigned

<page 187>
( 176 )
reigned among them. And as I ſtill kept
myſelf untainted from the latter, and had
long ago broke myſelf of that horrid one
of ſwearing, which I had taken up on my
firſt entrance into the ſoldier's life (not ſo
much indeed out of a principle of religion,
as from an ambition I had of paſſing for a
moral heathen) I frequently uſed to ob-
ſerve to them the unreaſonableneſs of their
untimely zeal, which made them ſo
readily condemn me for what they called
my irreligious ſarcaſms, which yet were
but agreeable to my notions and belief,
whilſt they indulged themſelves in vices,
ſuch as duelling, wenching, ſwearing,
and drinking, which were not only incom-
patible with theirs, but ſuch as, bad as
they thought me, I could not on any con-
fideration be guilty of. Theſe kinds of ſe-
vere rebukes ought, I ſay, to have filled
me with the deepeſt ſenſe of my own
more vile and abominable inconſiſtency;
but as that did not ſo openly appear, the
applauſes I received from the ſober part,
and even from ſome of the miniſters,
for ſo ſtrenuouſly pleading the cauſe of
virtue, made me quite blind to my more
odious

<page 188>
( 177 )
edious vices; ſo that as long as the cha-
raćter or ſhadow of moral virtue procured
me ſo much regard and eſteem, I never
troubled myſelf about the want of the real
ſubſtance. f
Brigadier Lauder, a Scottiſh gentleman,
well reſpected, and colonel of a regiment
in that garriſon, was then governor, and,
unhappily for me, conceived a curioſity
of ſeeing me at his own houſe, where
were aſſembled ſeveral officers, beſides the
miniſter of the French church, and Mr.
Innes, chaplain to the Scottiſh regiment;
and after dinner I was admitted to have a
kind of conference with them. I own,
indeed, that the account I gave of it in
that publiſhed romance of mine, was far
enough from candid or impartial, with re-
ſpečt to the French miniſter, who was the
chief manager in the diſpute, my uſual
vanity having made me relate it too much
to his diſadvantage, and Mr. Innes, be-
tween whom and that gentleman there
was a great miſunderſtanding, added ſome
other particulars, equally miſrepreſented and
mortifying; but, abating that, the reſt is
the trueſt part I can call to mind in that
N forged

<page 189>
( 178 )
forged narrative of myſelf. However,
Mr. Innes, ſince dubbed doćtor by one of
the Scotch Univerſities, and a near rela-
tion to the governor, would not loſe ſo
fair an opportunity of triumphing over his
rival, and finding that I had nonpluſſed
him at almoſt every argument, but more
particularly againſt that of abſolute predeſti-
nation, took occaſion to inform me that it
was a doćtrine as much condemned by ſome,
as it was ſtrenuouſly aſſerted by other
churches, and that conſequently Chriſti-
anity, he would undertake to prove, was
not to be charged with it. He had a
much ſmoother and leſs overbearing way
of ſpeaking than the other gentleman,
and kindly invited me to his lodgings,
where we might, at our leiſure, diſcuſs
that or any other points in diſpute, not
doubting but a perſon of my ſenſe, learn-
ing, and ſeeming candor (as he was pleaſed
to compliment my vanity) would eaſily
yield to convićtion, when the point was
once cleared to my ſatisfaction, as he did
not doubt he ſhould ſhortly do.
I readily accepted of his invitation, by
which I found he deſigned to exclude the
French

<page 190>
( 179 )
French miniſter from having any ſhare in
our future conferences, but did not then
ſuſpect his farther drift, which was, if he
could, at any rate, or by any means,
make a convert of me, to recommend
himſelf to the then worthy biſhop of Lon-
don, a perſon, he knew, of ſuch ſingular
candor, as not to be over ſuſpicious, and
too generous not to encourage what he
thought a charitable, worthy action; ſo
that, as I eaſily found afterwards, the
hopes of procuring ſome preferment to
himſelf, rather than any regard or con-
cern for me, was the main ſpring of all.
his pretended zeal for my converſion. I am
ſorry that I ſhall be obliged, in the ſequel, to
relate ſeveral very harſh truths concerning
his behaviour on this ſcandalous occaſion,
though I will be ſtill careful to mention,
no more of it than is barely neceſſary to
ſet the matter in a true light, and rather
conceal than expoſe ſuch parts of it, as
have not an immediate relation to the ſub-
jećt I am upon; much leſs will I go a-
bout to aggravate his faults, in order to
extenuate my own. If he ſhould be ſtill
alive when theſe memoirs ſhall be publiſhed,
N 2 it

<page 191>
( 180 )
will not be the firſt thing that has been
publiſhed with truth and juſtice to his diſ-,
advantage, and may all contribute to in-,
ſpire him with a true remorſe and fincere,
repentance: if dead, it can neither hurt.
him, nor any that belong to him *. He
*The dodor is long fince dead, and, I am ſorry to ſay,
hath left a charaćter behind him that reflects no great cre-
dit to his cloth, and may eaſily, among thoſe that knew
him, juſtify what I have already ſaid, and ſhall be farther
obliged to mention in the ſequel; he was not many years
older than I when I firſt came acquainted with him, and
I ſoon perceived him to be a man of no ſmall ambition,
though he was ſo far from having any of the generous
diſpoſition which is moſtly known to accompany it, that he
was no leſs a ſlave to avarice: witneſs his arrogating to
himſelf the credit as well as advantage of that excellent
treatiſe, intituled, A Modeſt Enquiry after Moral Virtue,
for which he obtained from the preſent biſhop of London
a very good living in Eſſex; but which the real and wor-
thy author, a poor epiſcopal clergyman in Scotland, ſince
obliged him publickly to diſown and diſclaim in print, as
well as to compromiſe with him for the profit of the edi-
tion. This, together with his malverſation in ſundry re-
ſpeas in the pariſh of St. Margaret, Weſtminſter, ſtill freſh
in people's memory, obliged him to retire to his new
living, where, I am told, he lived very private, and, I
hope, made the beſt uſe of his ſolitude. As therefore he
had long ago loſt his charaćter among all that knew him,
or had heard of his ſhameful actions, I thought myſelf
leſs obliged to treat it with that tenderneſs that I ſhould
have done, had he taken more care to conceal his vile
aćtions from the world. - * *
- * - Was,

<page 192>
( 181 )
was, however, intent upon his purſuit,
and ſo aſſiduous, in ſending for me, that
iſome of the Dutch miniſters thought fit
likewiſe to do the ſame, and more parti-
cularly, as I, found afterwards, to recons
cile me to their favourite article of pre-
deſtination, by expounding it to me agr
cording to what they call the infralapſarian
ſyſtem, which is indeed leſs dreadful and
antiſcriptural; but Mr. Innes eaſily diſ-
fuaded me from going amongſt them, that
he might have me wholly to himſelf, and
ſeldom failed at our parting to clap a ſmall
piece of Dutch filver into my hand, which
proved an effectual bait to me, who was
fill ſo bad, an oeconomiſt of my poor'ſol-
dier's pay, and then wanted ſeveral neceſ-
ſaries, with which this ſuppliedime. ºf
By this time I began not to be a little tired
with a ſoldier's life, the place was very
cold and bleak, the duty hard, cand: the
pay ſo ſmall, that even they who could
make the moſt of it, could but juſt make
ſhift to live on the plaineſt things; ſo that all
things confidered, there was no likelihood
I ſhould make any long oppoſition to his
arguments, eſpecially as he took care to
; *... . . . . N 3 back

<page 193>
( 182 )
bäck them with very large promiſes of get-
ting my diſcharge, and bringing me into
England, where he made me hope to
meet with the greateſt encouragement, and
I own that the proſpect of ſuch a change
of life made ſo great an impreſſion upon
me, that he rather found me more for-
ward to anſwer his deſign than was con-
fiſtent with prudence, and too ready to be
wholly direéted by him. As ſoon as I
had given him this aſſurance, he wrote a
long letter to the biſhop of London, wherein
he told me he had ſaid ſo many things
in my favour, that he doubted not of my
foon being ſent for by, and meeting
with the kindeſt reception from him,
However, the wiſhed-for anſwer not com-
ing till ſix or ſeven weeks afterwards,
gave me, an opportunity of ſeeing farther
into his temper, than I had been able to
do; his meſſages to me, were gradually
leſs frequent, our interviews more cold, as
well as our parting, when he likewiſe
with-held his hand from making me the
uſual preſents. This latter I indeed ſup-
poſed might be owing to his caſh running
lower than uſual; but I have ſeen ſo many
- * ~ * - inſtances

<page 194>
( 183 ).
inſtances of his nigardneſs, that I have
more reaſon to impute it to that, and
partly to his deſpairing of the ſucceſs
of his letter; for whilſt he was in hopes
of it, he had taken care to introduce me to
ſome learned gentlemen, miniſters and o-
thers, under pretence of examining whe-
ther I was capable of giving a ſatisfactory
account of my pretended converſion, and
had obtained from ſome of them very ad-
vantageous certificates in my favour, which
he took no ſmall pride to ſhew to the
brigadier and to his other acquaintance;
but upon the unexpected delay of the an-
ſwer, he behaved with more coldneſs and
indifference, till a jealous thought ſtarted
in his mind, left that ſhould encourage
ſome of theſe miniſters, who had expreſſed
themſelves in my favour, to take the bu-
fineſs out of his hand, and rob him of
the credit of his new convert. This ſuſ:
picion made him all at once alter his be-
haviour, and reſolve to baptize me with
ſuch haſte and ſo little warning, that my
ſurprize gave me no time to confider what
an abominable piece of irreligion I had
engaged myſelf in, though I muſt confeſs,
N 4 to

<page 195>
( 184. )
to my ſhame; that had he given me more
time to think upon it, yet I have but too
much reaſon to think, his fair promiſes and
deluſive proſpects would eaſily have ſwal-
lowed up all my ſcruples and reludance,
upon his firſt renewal of them.
This, and ſome other parts of his beha-
viour, had already convinced me that a
charitable deſign of converting a ſoul was
the fartheſt from his thoughts, and that
he was ſo far from believing me to be
what I pretended, that he had ſome time
before taken a moſt effečtual way to con-
vince himſelf of the contrary, beyond all
poſſibility of doubting. His ſtratagem, if
I may ſo call it, was to make me tranſlate
a paſſage in Cicero de naturá deorum, of
ſome length, into my (pretended) For-
moſan language, and give it to him in
writing; and this I eaſily did, by means
of that unhappy readineſs I had at invent-
ing of characters, languages, &c. But,
after he had made me conſtrue it, and
deſired me to write another verſion of it
on another paper, his propoſal, and the
manner of his exacting it, threw me into
ſuch viſible confuſion, having had ſo little
* * time

<page 196>
( 185 )
time to excogitate, the firſt, and leſs to
commit it to memory, that there were not
above one half of the words in the ſecond
that were in the firſt. His deſiring me to
conſtrue this likewiſe, confuſed me ſtill
more; eſpecially, when he ſhewed me the
palpable difference. The ſerious air he aſ-
ſumed upon it, made me expe&t nothing
elſe than a total rupture, and his expoſing
the impoſture in the manner I was conſci-
ous it deſerved... I was however agreeably
(and, to my ſhame, I ought to add) de-
ceived; and he finding, by this unexpećt-
ed trial, what a memory and readineſs I
bad, and how qualified I was to carry on
ſuch a cheat, began to clear his brow, and
calm the diſorder he had thrown me into,
by a more chearful and friendly look; but
did not forget, at the ſame time, to give
me to underſtand, tho' at a great diſtance,
that I ought to take care to be better pro-
vided for the future. I promiſed to take
his advice, and did ſo in part; but was
become too indolent to go thro' the fatigue
of forming a whole language, at leaſt till I
was convinced that it would ſtand me in
ſome ſtead; though, by what I have tried
" ' ". . . . ſince

<page 197>
( 186 )
fince I came into England, I cannot ſay
but I could have compaſſed it with leſs
difficulty than can be conceived, had I
been capable of applying cloſely to it.
However, his continuing his affiduity and
ſeeming regard for me, at leaſt till the
delay of the biſhop's anſwer, which made
him ſuſpend it for ten or twelve days, gave
me but too much reaſon to think, that he
had not one jot more of conſcience or re-
ligion than I, tho' older; and a learned di-
vine, ſince he made no ſcruple not only
to join in, but to encourage and purſue ſo
vile a cheat. But if he had no more re-
ligion, he had at leaſt more worldly pru-
dence than I, in that he laid the founda-
tion for ſome confiderable preferment for
himſelf, whilſt I, like the ſtupid abandon-
doned wretch I had been hitherto, looked
no farther than a little vain ſatisfaction for
the preſent, or, at moſt, a deliverance
from the ſoldier's life. For by that time I
could ſee ſo far thro' all his artifices, and
different behaviours, that I did not much
depend on any of his other promiſes. And
he ſoon after gave me cauſe to think my-
ſelf not miſtaken in him. For when, upon
his

<page 198>
( 187 )
his bringing me into England, he got him-
ſelf into the poſt of chaplain-general of the
Engliſh forces in Portugal, by the intereſt
of the good biſhop Compton, he not only
left me to ſhift for myſelf, and to bear
the brunt of all objećtions, but was guilty
of ſuch other vile actions, as eaſily con-
vinced me that he was a more real convert
to Spinoziſm, than I was to him; for I
obſerved him often reading that au-
thor's poſthumous works, tho' he was an
utter ſtranger to his ſober way of living.
I had likewiſe a greater opinion of his
parts and learning, than I have ſince found
cauſe for, which made me conclude, that
I had no reaſon to be more ſcrupulous than
he, and this in a great meaſure quelled all
my ſlight and tranſitory qualms, at leaſt
till it came to the ſolemn puſh.
I have already hinted, that his fear of being
ſupplanted by ſome other miniſter, made
him reſolve to haſten the impious cere-
mony, for ſo I thought it, whatever he
did; but of this he had appriſed me only
in general terms, and without fixing any
time for it, or mentioning how he deſign-
ed to perform it, probably that I might
- think

<page 199>
( 188 )
think the leſs upon it. Accordingly ſome
days paſſed without my ſeeing him, or at
leaſt hearing any thing about it, when one
afternoon he ſent his man to my lodgings,
to acquaint me that he had fixed that
evening about ſix of the clock for it, and
to deſire me to be ready againſt the time,
As I had hardly three hours to conſider of
it, one, may eaſily imagine the ſurpriſe and
hurry, the confuſion and dread, it threw
me into; and, indeed, I was ſo divided
between the fear of bringing upon myſelf
ſome heavy judgment for ſo impious a pro-
phanation of that divine inſtitution, and
the thoughts, if I ſubmitted to it, of be-
having with ſome proper decency under all
thoſe tumults with which my mind was
then agitated, that I began to wiſh I might
have reſolution enough to avoid it, when
the dreaded time was come. But that not
only failed me, when I ſaw the governor
and ſeveral other officers and gentlemen
going to the chapel, where the mock cerer
mony was to be diſpatched; but the devil,
I believe, did then find a way of salming
my conſcience for the preſent, by putting
it into my head that it being to be per-
* . . . . . t formed

<page 200>
( 189 )
Rormed by a heretic, for ſuch I then
judged, if not all the Proteſtant miniſters,
at leaſt ſuch a one as I now knew my un-
godly guide to be, it could be indeed no
ſacrament, nor a repetition of it. And
this confuſed diſtinčtion I then called to
mind from what I had learned at the
ſchools, tho’ I was far enough from being
ſatisfied that it was right. What ſalvo he
had for himſelf, I can only gueſs; but, as
far as I could perceive, he went thro’ the
ceremony with a very compoſed counte-
nance and preſence of mind, and ſeeming
devotion; and tho’ he only had his Engliſh
common-prayer book before him, yet he
read the office all in a good Latin off-hand,
as the ſaying is, and without any heſita-
tion or ſoleciſm, as thoſe obſerved who
heard him with greater attention than
I was then capable of For tho' I was a
perfect maſter of the Latin, and he pro-
nounced it, as moſt of his countrymen do,
in a very intelligible manner; yet ſuch was
my confuſion and hurry of ſpirits, that I
ſcarcely knew or could mind one word he
ſaid. "And a much greater one, I dare
affirm, I ſhould have been in, had Î been
- either

<page 201>
( 150 )
either able to attend to the ſolemnity of the
office, or had been made acquainted with
it before. - But I was an utter ſtranger to
every part of it; and it is my opinion, that
he choſe I ſhould be ſo, for he never once
ſhewed, much leſs explained, the leaſt
part of it in any of the meetings I gave
him at his lodgings. All I could recolle&
of the whole, was that I kept up ſo much
preſence of mind, as to appear demure
and ſerious all the while, which I thought
very long, and that I was very glad when
it was over, and much more ſo that my
abominable hypocriſy had not been detect-
ed, or rather puniſhed, by ſome ſevere
The name he gave me was that of George
Lauder, which was that of the governor,
whom he had prevailed upon to paſs for
my godfather; and it was accordingly en-
tered into the muſter-roll, inſtead of that
of Salmanazar, which I had till then an-
ſwered to. This new name and ſurname,
joined to ſome congratulations then given
me, and a preſent of a piſtole from the
governor, made me, for ſome time, for-
get the heavy guilt I had plunged myſelf
- into.

<page 202>
( 191 )
into. But this calm proved but ſhort,
and the delay of the biſhop's anſwer, and
much more Mr. Innes's coldneſs and in-
difference, after he had once made ſure
of me, ſoon brought me to repent of my
wicked compliance, as I then judged it,
though not ſo much from a ſenſe of reli-
gion, as becauſe I did not look upon my
vanity and ambition ſufficiently recom-
penſed for the atrocious guilt I had con-
tracted; and this the reader will the better
judge by what follows.
The long expected letter came at length;
it was full of commendations to Mr. Innes
for his zeal, beſides a very kind invitation
to me from that worthy prelate, to come
over into England. I was by that time
ſo weary of a ſoldier's life, that I ſhould
have readily come upon a leſs promiſing
proſpect than that which he now began
again to feed my ſanguine hopes with.
Some things he talked to me quite incon-
ſiſtent with what, as I before hinted, he
knew of me, and which of courſe could
be no temptations to me, unleſs I was baſe
enough to add ſtill more weight to my
guilt; of this kind in particular was what
he

<page 203>
( 192 )
he mentioned to me of a deſign of ſend-
ing me to Oxford, to teach the Formoſan
language to a ſet of gentlemen, who were
afterwards to go with me to convert thoſe
people to Chriſtianity, which, if he be-
lieved any thing of, he muſt needs de-
pend upon my inventing ſuch a language,
and involving myſelf in ſtill deeper guilt;
and yet I own, to my ſhame, though I
knew not with what view he could men-
tion ſuch a propoſal, nor looked upon it but
with dread, yet I could not forbear being
much elevated with it, though I was ſtill
in hopes that I might find ſome pretence
for ſetting it aſide, and being made uſeful
there in ſome other and more ſuitable way.
How I might have behaved in ſuch a caſe
I know not, only I have reaſon to queſ-
tion whether I ſhould have had integrity
and reſolution to have confeſſed the truth,
rather than to have involved myſelf in a
ſtill more ſhameful impoſture; but, as I
obſerved before, I knew him too well to
rely on any of his fluent and diſingenuous
promiſes. - - -
The

<page 204>
( 193 )
The governor, at his requeſt, got me diſ-
charged, or rather gave my captain ano-
ther man in my room, whilſt Mr. Innes
took care to procure a certificate ſigned by
that gentleman and a number of other
officers of the garriſon, and even by ſeve-
ral miniſters, much more in my commen-
dation than I could poſſibly deſerve; after
which, having got all things in order for
our departure, we ſet out for Rotterdam,
where he introduced me to ſome perſons
of conſideration for piety and learning,
particularly the celebrated Mr. Baſnage, au-
thor of the Continuation of the Jewiſh
Hiſtory, and likewiſe to ſome of the mi-
niſters and gentlemen of the Engliſh
church, and to ſome of the French Pro-
teſtants there; among whom I was ſo
much careſſed, that I begun to look upon
myſelf in a very agreeable and advan-
tageous light. There were, however, two
things that mortified me not a little, viz.
the mean appearance I made in ſome caſt-
off cloaths, with which Mr. Innes had
ſupplied me upon my leaving off my regi-
mental ones, but which were both too big
and too long for me, and the ſhrewd queſ-
- O tions

<page 205>
( 194 )
tions put to me by ſeveral gentlemen, which
convinced me that they did not give all the
credit I could have wiſhed, to the ac-
count I gave of myſelf and country. For as
to any real remorſe or concern for the ſhame-
ful part I was ačting, I found it fit lighter
on my mind, in proportion to the many
things I met with that flattered my vanity.
The more effectually therefore to remove
theſe two obſtacles to it, I fell upon one of
the moſt whimſical expedients that could
come into a crazed brain, viz. that of liv-
ing upon. raw fleſh, roots and herbs; and
it is ſurpriſing how ſoon I habituated my-
felf to this new, and, till now, ſtrange
food, without receiving the leaſt pre-
judice in my health; but I was bleſſed
with a good conſtitution, and I took care
to uſe a good deal of pepper, or other
ſpices, for a concoëter, whilſt my vanity,
and the people's ſurprize at my diet, ſerved
me for a reliſhing ſauce.
We embarked at the Brill for England in
the packet-boat, and in our paſſage had
fuch a dreadful ſtorm, that as many paſ-
ſengers, and among them Mr. Innes, got
into the long boat, as it could well con-
tain.

<page 206>
( 195 )
tain. They all ſhewed an uncommon
dread in their looks, whilſt I, who ſtaid
behind, beheld them with a kind of ſtu-
pid unconcern, rather than agenerous pity,
every moment in danger of meeting with
that dreadful end they had endeavoured
to avoid; yet, terrible as the fight was,
it hardly raiſed in me one ſerious reſolu-
tion againſt the more dangerous defign I
was unhappily embarked in, or the more
dreadful ſhipwreck I had expoſed myſelf to,
that of the ſoul; or if any ſuch thoughts
came then into my mind, they were ſoon
diſpelled at our landing at Harwich, and
at the pleaſing proſpect with which Mr.
Innes had flattered my ambition and va-
nity. At my arrival at London, Mr.
Innes, and ſome worthy clergymen of his
acquaintance, introduced me to the biſhop
of London, by whom I was received with
great humanity, and got ſoon after a good
number of friends among the clergy and ,
laity, moſt of them perſons of piety and
worth. But I had a much greater number
of oppoſers to combat with, who put me
under a neceſſity of having my ſenſes and
memory about me more than ever, to avoid
O 2 a fatal

<page 207>
( 196 )
a fatal detection; for I had been ſo negligent,
notwithſtanding Mr. Irines'sicaution of be-
ing prepared, againſt exigencies, with a lan-
guage and a prudent readineſs at reading
and writing my new invented charaćter,
ithat had I been attacked on that fide, §
muſt have been infallibly, foiled; but they
took a contrary way, and though they
judged rightly of me in the main, yet I
can ſafely affirm, that they have been very
far from being candid, or even juſt in the
account of the diſcoveries they pretended
to have made to my diſadvantage ; parti-
cularly Drs. Halley, Mead and Woodward ;
and as I had then ſeveral zealous patrons
of great candor and integrity, who made
it their buſineſs to ſearch into the bottom
of thoſe reports, they found ſo much ſo-
phiſtry and diſingenuity in them, that I
cannot but obſerve here, that the too viſi-
ble eagerneſs of theſe gentlemen to ex-
poſe me, at any rate, for a cheat, ſerved
only to make the more ſerious and candid
part think the better of me, and to look
upon me as a kind of confeſſor, eſpeci-
ally as the three gentlemen abovementioned,
but more particularly the firſt, were known
. . . a Q to

<page 208>
( 197 )
to be no great admirers of the Chriſtian
revelation, to which my patiefs thought
I had given ſo ample a teſtimony. My
complexion,” indeed, which was very
fair, appeared an unanſwerable objectičn
againſt me; there being but few ſuch to
be met with in thoſe hot climates, eſpecia
ally that of Forthóſa, which lies under the
tropic; but by the help of what I had
read or heard of ſome of thoſe couns
tries, f fooh hatched a lucky diſtinétion
between thoſe whoſe bufineſs expoſes theid
to the heat of the fun, and thoſe who
keep altogether at home, in cool ſhades,
or apartments' underground, and ſcarcé
ever feel the leaſt degree of the reigning
heat. And this: diſtinétion indeed is not
only very reaſonable, but was afterwards
confirmed by perſons of caridor and ex=
perience, who had been in thoſe countries,
and affirmed that they had ſeen perſons as
fair as any northern Europeans, tho’ not
in ſo great a number, that lived bhder the
rays of a vertical ſun. tº º º
On the other hand, my oppoſers were as
much at a loſs how to find out my 'real
country, either by myridiom, or my pro-
i i O 3 nunci-
-
*** *
--

<page 209>
( 198 )
nunciation of the Latin, French, Italian,
or any other language I was maſter of,
For though this may appear, an eaſy thing
to be done, by thoſe who are acquainted
with the European languages, and the dif-
ferent pronunciations peculiar to every na-
tion, yet both my idiom and pronuncia-
tion were ſo mixed and blended, and I
may ſay deſignedly ſo, by the many lan-
guages I had learned, and nations I had
been converſant with, that it was impoſſi-
ble for the moſt curious judge to diſcover
in it any thing like an uniform likeneſs to
any other European one they knew of,
Dr. Mead, indeed, took upon him to be
very poſitive from both, that I was of ei-
ther German or Dutch extraćt; he could.
not have pitched upon a more unlikely
one, ſeeing the Dutch idiom and language
were the only one I was the leaſt acquainted
with, and accordingly ſome of my friends,
who were better judges of ſuch matters,
and could plainly ſee that mine was more
oppoſite to them than to any other, did
freely cenſure him for it, and tell him he
tnight as well have affirmed me to be an
Ethiopian from my complexion, as a Ger-
* . Iſláſ!
- . . . . . . ;

<page 210>
- { 199 )
man from my pronunciation. But the
truth was, I knew enough of all of them
to blend my diſcourſe more or leſs with
any of them, as either to put people up-
on the wrong ſcent, whilſt I kept every
one from getting into the right one ; for
I can ſafely ſay that I never met with,
nor heard of any one, that ever gueſſed
right, or any thing near it, with reſpect
to my native country. . . . . .
I might here add ſeveral viſible advan-
tages which my, friends might juſtly
take in my defence, and among them
a great number of ſcandalous falſhoods
diſperſed abroad from what quarter I
know not. of which thoſe, who were
better acquainted with me, knew me to be
wholly innocent, as well as crimes. I
was naturally averſe to, ſuch as drinking,
gaming, &c., for, bating my vain-glori-
ous foible, which, though I could not
overcome, I took ſuch care to conceal
from them by the moſt oppoſite behavi-,
our, my converſation was ſuch as the
moſt cenſorious could not have blamed,
but which my friends highly admired in
me. The plainneſs of my dreſs and diet,
O 4 the

<page 211>
( 200 )
the little trouble I gave myſelf about
worldly wealth, preferment, or even ac-
quiring or ſecuring a bare competency, a
good-natured and charitable diſpoſition,
viſibly natural to me, my averſeneſs to
drinking, lewd women, &c. and a great
reſervedneſs to ſuch of the fair ſex as had
either loſt their reputation, though they
lived ſtill in credit and ſplendor, and even to
thoſe who betrayed too ſmall a regard for
their charaćter, the converſation of whom
I profeſſedly avoided, though againſt my
own intereſt, not indeed ſo much from a
principle of virtue, as an affectation of it;
theſe, together with the warmth I natu-
rally expreſſed for religion, and the real
delight I took in the public offices of it,
appeared ſuch convincing proofs of my
fincerity, that thoſe of my friends, to
whom I was moſt intimately known,
were the moſt impatient, and diſpleaſed
to have it called in queſtion; for who
could imagine, as they ofteå urged, that
a youth of ſo much ſenſe and learning
for his years, ſo ſeemingly free from am-
bition and other vices, could be abandon-
ed enough to be guilty of ſuch abomi-
*
nable -

<page 212>
( 261 ) -
nable an impoſture and impiety, for the ſake
of a little plain, homely food and ray-
ment, beyond which he neither makes
* effort, or ſeems to have the leaſt
I am aware that what I have ſaid in the laſt
paragraph, will ſo far carry the face of my
once favourite vanity, that it will be cen-
ſured by ſeveral of my readers as a rank
piece of oſtentation, rather than a ſincere
acknowledgment of my guilt; tho' a more
candid one, who joins both parts of it to-
gether, will rather ſee, that the diſplay of
the one, is only the greater aggravation of
the other. But as neither was the motive
of what f have there ſaid, but rather to do
juſtice to thoſe friends of mine who ſo
kindly took my part on that account,
I had much rather undergo cenſure a-
. myſelf, than to have omitted any
thing that can vindicate their charaćter,
and convince the world that the zeal they
expreſſed for me, was really the effect of
a moſt candid and charitable conſtrućtion
on a life ſo ſeemingly innocent and diſin-
tereſted, and not owing to any raſh or
blind prepoſſeſſion, or to an unreaſonable
oppo-

<page 213>
( 202 )
oppoſition againſt my cenſurers, much leſs
to diſhoneſt connivance with any views
or deſigns of mine; when I am very ſure,
that if they had had any weigrºunded
ſuſpicion of my being what I was, an im-
poſtor, they would have been the firſt
who would not only have expoſed me
to the world, but would have become
my moſt irreconcileable enemies. And I
thought" myſelf the more obliged, in
juſtice as well as gratitude, to ſay thus
much in their vindication; becauſe ſome
of them, men of probity and learning,
undertook to be my advocates in print,
and not only complained of thoſe aſper-
ſons ſo freely and unjuſtly caſt upon me,
but even challenged my accuſers, in ſe-
veral advertiſements publiſhed in the Lon=
donGazzette, to prove any of them againſt
me, or to produce any one ſolid proof or
objećtion againſt the account I had given
of myſelf. Notwithſtanding, which cha-
ritable efforts on my behalf, and the can-
did vindication they printed ſome months
after, both they and I had the mortifica-
tion to find (and I have had ſince great
reaſon to bleſs God for it) that my fabu-
" ' " " ' ' ' ' ' lous

<page 214>
( 293 ) !
lous account was as much diſcredited by
the greateſt part of the world as ever,
which proved an effectual means, in time,
to bring me, thro' his mercy, to a deeper
ſenſe of my folly and impiety, than I could
have been, if that had gained a more ge-
neral credit, , , , , * - - - - ,
There was likewiſe a variety of judgments
formed about me, by thoſe who thought
me a cheat. Thoſe of the church of Rome
believed I was bribed to that impoſture by
ſome Engliſh miniſters, on purpoſe to ex-
poſe their church. The Proteſtants in
Holland were much of the ſame mind;
but added, that I was farther hired to
explode their doćtrine of predeſtination,
and cry up the epiſcopacy of the church
of England, in derogation of their Preſby-
terian government. Here ſome repreſented
me as a jeſuit or prieſt in diſguiſe, others as
a tool of the nonjurors, becauſe Mr. Innes
had introduced me among a ſet of them,
particularly the famed Mr. Leſley, of
whoſe writings, as well as inſtructive and
facetious company, I was very fond; and
I may add, that their converſation had.
not a little biaſed me to their principles,
- . . . . . . . - eſpecially

<page 215>
- - ( 264 )
eſpecially as I found them ſo conformable
to the ſchool divinity I had learned be.
yond ſea, tho' it never affected me ſo far
as to go to any of their meetings. How-
ever, the reader may ſee, by what I have
ſaid hitherto, that all theſe various opinions
were but random ſhots, and without any
foundation. And indeed my caſe was ſo
intricate and perplexing, that it was next
to impoſſible for the ableſt heads to have
gueſſed what my motives were, or for
what, or by whom, I was induced thus to .
nkind." And rºm fully
impoſe upon mank - - - - - -
perſuaded, that my being wholly innocent
of any ſuch vile deſigns, either againſt
the church or ſtate, or of being employed
by the enemies of either, was the cauſe of
my diſappointment turning ſo much to my
advantage, which might otherwiſe have
been attended with a more fatal, and
fhameful cataſtrophe; and that the merci-
ful judge of all hearts, knowing mine to
be actuated only by mere youthful folly
and vanity, without any other dangerous
or guilty deſign, than the indulging a wild
and phrantic paſſion (which was grown
too powerful for me to reſiſt, with that
- little

<page 216>
( 205 )
little ſhare of reaſon and experience I was
then maſter of, and with theſe diſadvant-
ages and temptations I laboured under)
did, in his great pity, prevent my going
on and periſhing under ſuch a load of un-
repented guilt, and I accordingly deſire to
be ever thankful for that great and unde-
ſerved inſtance of his divine mercy and
goodneſs. And, next to my humble ac-
knowledgment of it, I do think myſelf
bound to declare thus ſolemnly, that I
never was fet upon, nor direétly or indi-
rečtly inticed, by any ſet of men for any
private ends, to act the part I did, except
what I have lately related of Mr. Innes's
encouragements and promiſes to me, in
which I am very well ſatisfied he had no
other ends to ſerve, but that of his own
private intereſt and advancement. -
I am far enough however from refle&ing
upon, or bearing any reſentment againſt
thoſe who looked upon me as a tool of
fome deſigning ſet of men, engaged in
forme private deſign. It was not natural
to ſuppoſe that ſuch a young, and, in all
appearance, as well as reality, raw and
unexperienced fellow, could of his own
* , head
w

<page 217>
( 266 )
head have imbarked in ſuch an impoſ.
ture, and carried it on ſo long, and with
ſuch boldneſs and ſucceſs, as to have pro-
cured to himſelf ſo many zealous patrons
among men of character for learning and
probity, unleſs he had been privately ſet
upon, inſtructed, and ſupported in it, by
ſome deſigning perſons of more years,
diſcretion, and abilities, tho' from what
quarter was not eaſy to gueſs, either from
my behaviour, writings, or any view they
could perceive me in purſuit of. As for
thoſe who took me for a jeſuit, prieſt, or
emiſſary from Rome, they were certainly
the wideſt from the mark. The gentle-
men of that church were always my moſt
ſtrenuous oppoſers, and not without cauſe,
as they could be very ſure that whatever
deſign or errand I might be embarked in,
it could not be in favour of it; and had
my fabulous account met with that credit
which it muſt be ſuppoſed was expected,
it muſt have done their cauſe more diſ-
ſervice than any private deſign I might
carry on could have done good. Beſides,
it was viſible I ſhunned their company as
much as poſſible, tho' my motive for :
thc

<page 218>
( 207 )
the conſciouſneſs of my own guilt, WaS
not ſo apparent. I never converſed with
any of them, but in the jarring and con-
troverſial way; and, tho' at that time
much againſt my conſcience, was a ſtre-
nuous oppoſer of their particular doćtrines,
both in converſation and writing. I never
once entered into any of their chapels,
(nor have fince, all the time I have been
in England) neither did I ſhew the leaſt
favour or partiality towards them. . This
was indeed rather looked upon as an arti-
fice, ſaid to be very uſual and common
amongſt them, it being urged as an ob-
ſervation of a long ſtanding, that thoſe
diſguiſed emiſſaries affected to appear the
moſt outrageous enemies of that cauſe they
were privately carrying on. Whether the
fact be true or not, I can only ſay, that I
never knew of any ſuch but by hearſay;
neither am I any farther concerned about
it, than to ſay, that I was the fartheſt from
being one of that ſort, and that whatever
I have ſaid or written againſt that church,
was only with a view of gaining credit to
myſelf, without any view of ferving or
hurting it, or indeed caring which of the
tWO

<page 219>
as
two was likely to be the reſult. For tho'
all the arguments I had heard or read a-
gainſt it, and in which I was not a little
verſed, had not yet been able to wipe off
the prejudices of my education, which I
had imbibed under the jeſuits and domi-
nicans, of its being, if not the only ſaving
church as they affirm it to be, yet, at leaſt,
of its not being ſo bad and corrupt, ſo dan-
gerous and damnable a one as ſome Prote-
ſtants, with more zeal than charity, have
repreſented it, under the odious titles of
Anti-chriſt, whore of Babylon, &c. never-
theleſs, my youth and inconfiderate vanity
would not ſuffer me to enquire whether or
no, or how far, I incurred a guilt in my
oppoſing and expoſing it.
It was likewiſe from the ſame ſhameful
motive of vanity that I pretended, from
my own knowledge, not only to confirm
butaggravatetheblack accountwhichauthors
had publiſhed againſt the jeſuits and other
miſſionaries, eſpecially with regard to their
boaſted converſions and ſucceſs in the Eaſt-
Indies, and more particularly concerning
the cauſe of the perſecution raiſed againſt
the Chriſtians in Japan; when all that I
* knew

<page 220>
( 209 )
knew of it was only from reading or
hear-ſay. And as to the Jeſuits, though I
was then and am ſtill ſenſible that ſome
of their maxims, tenets, and politics, do
juſtly deſerve to be condemned ; yet I
was far enough from having ſuch diſad-
vantageous notions of that ſociety, as the
world ſeems generally to have of it, and
much leſs from any thing I had ever ob-
ſerved among them, conſidering how
young I was when I left them, and how
cloſe and recluſe they keep themſelves
from the reſt of the world. But whe-
ther they deſerve the diſadvantageous cha-
raćter they have, or not, which is beſt
known to him, to whom both they and
every man is to give an account at the
laſt great day, it is incumbent upon me
thus far to do them juſtice, as to own, that
thoſe reflexions I have caſt upon their
miſſionaries in China and Japan, had no
other foundation than common report,
without any enquiry whether that was
true or falſe; ſo far was I from having any
juſt or real reaſon for confirming or ag-
gravating it. As for the reſt of the prieſts
of that church, as far as I was capable of
P judging

<page 221>
( 210 )
judging of them, in thoſe juvenile days in
which I was more intimately converſant
with ſeveral of them, I can only ſay,
with the common voice, that there are
good and bad among them, though per-
haps to a much higher degree than I have
had occaſion to obſerve of thoſe of any.
other church. One thing I can truly ſay,
however, to their praiſe, that they gene-
rally take greater care to inſtruct their
youth in matters of religion, and to oblige
them all to aſſiſt at their catechetical lec-
tures on Sundays in the afternoon. The
misfortune was, that we had no books to
learn them by heart beforehand, but the
prieſt was forced by repetitions to incul-
cate them in our memories; whence it
followed, that thoſe who were wanting
either in attention or memory, went a-
way little the better for the pains he took
with them. As for me, I never failed
coming, becauſe my memory being very
tenacious, and my apprehenſions pretty
quick, I could carry an anſwer of any
length at once or twice repeating, ſo that
I was moſtly the firſt interrogated, and re-
ceived no ſmall commendations from our
- - - inſtructors,
*- *
2 * * *,
ºr ~ *

<page 222>
( 211 )
inſtructors, eſpecially as I was one of the
youngeſt, and was as ready at thoſe an-
ſwers on the next meeting, as if I had
thought on nothing elſe all that time.
And as this uſed to make me to be much
admired by the numerous audience, ſo it
of courſe failed not to feed me with ſe-
cret pride, and a natural fondneſs for all
ſuch occaſions of ſhewing my talents.
The ſame happened to me on my coming
firſt into England, when Dr. Innes, proud
of his pretended proſelyte, introduced me
into the company of all the learned di-
vines of his acquaintance, that they might
hear me deſcant on the grounds of my
converſion ; and I was by that time ſo
well verſed in that kind of learning, more
from the books I occaſionally read on that
ſubječt, than from any pains he had taken
to inſtruct me, that I believe few people
of my years, notwithſtanding I had mur-
dered ſo much of my time, could have
ſaid more in defence of the Chriſtian re-
ligion; all which was ſufficiently acknow-
ledged with no ſmall commendations and
congratulations, both by all that heard me,
and by thoſe who have firſt read theſe ar-
P 2 guments

<page 223>
( 212 )
guments in the fićtitious book above-
mentioned; for that ſyſtem of religion, and
defence of Chriſtianity, was what I had
moſtly extracted out of Limborch, and
ſome other divines, without Dr. Innes's
help, or even knowledge, though what
follows there, with reſpect to Church go-
vernment, was wholly his, as may be ea-
fily perceived from the difference of ſtyle
and method. However, when all theſe
kinds of converſations were ended, my
doćtor failed not to ſpur my pride ſtill far-
ther on, by telling me what thoſe gentle-
men ſaid in my commendation, which,
whether or not exaggerated by him, gave
me ſuch an extraordinary notion of my
parts, that I was proud of every opportunity
of ſhewing myſelf in all companies and
public places, without any other view than
that of feeding my natural vanity, whilſt
he was privately purſuing what appeared
to him more weighty, the advancing of
his fortune, to which end he ſtrove to in-
troduce me, and himſelf by my means, to
all the great men in church and ſtate,
which he found no hard matter to do,
becauſe, ere I had been in London three
months,

<page 224>
( 213 )
months, I had been ſo cried up for a pro-
digy, that they were all exceedingly de-
ſirous of ſeeing and converſing with me;
and not only the domeſtic, but even the
foreign papers, had helped to blaze forth
many things in my praiſe, for which there
was not any foundation. Thus I remem-
ber a remarkable article from London,
printed in the Dutch and French papers,
that the young Japaner had been preſented
to the archbiſhop of Canterbury, who
admired him chiefly for his readineſs in
ſpeaking a great variety of languages.
Whereas I cannot call to mind that I ſpoke
any but the Latin, which his grace having
either forgot, or being unuſed to my fo–
reign pronunciation, was forced to have
interpreted to him, by Dr. Innes, in Engliſh.
So that I found I needed not to be very
ſolicitous to blow my own trumpet,
when the common cry, and the public
papers, did it beyond my expectation for
me. I had indeed a fluency of the Latin,
and a ſmattering of ſeveral modern lan-
guages, as well as a great readineſs in learn-
ing them, had I applied myſelf to them;
but I boaſted of more knowledge in them
P3 by

<page 225>
( 214 )
by far than I had, eſpecially in the oriental
ones; tho' at that time quite ignorant of
them. -
I had not been two months in London be-
fore the doćtor perſuaded me to tranſlate
the church catechiſm into my pretended
Formoſan language; and I, tho' much a-
gainſt my will, was forced, by his over-
bearing command, not only to perform the
odious taſk, but to preſent it afterwards to
the biſhop of London, who received and
rewarded it with his uſual candor and ge-
neroſity, and laid it up among his other
curious manuſcripts, tho' it rather deſerved
to have been condemned to the flames.
However, the doćtor had his own views to
ſerve, one of which was to confirm me in
the good opinion of that worthy prelate,
and of as many other gentlemen as ſhould
either ſee or hear of it. And another, to
make me exert my talents in inventing and
familiariſing myſelf to this pretended For-
moſan language and charaćter, for fear my
want of it ſhould cauſe ſome unexpected
diſcovery, at leaſt before he had got the
preferment he was in purſuit of. When I
had finiſhed the pretended verſion, he not
º - only

<page 226>
( 215 )
only examined it himſelf carefully, but got
other perſons to do the ſame, who all
found the language ſo regular and gram-
matical, as well as different from all others
they knew, both with reſpect to the words
and idiom, that they gave it as their opi-
nion, that it muſt be a real language, and
could be no counterfeit, much leſs have
been invented by ſuch a ſtripling as I; and
hence ſome of thoſe of my oppoſers, who
thought me a Romiſh prieſt in diſguiſe,
imagined that I had been aſſiſted in, or
taught it, by ſome of the fraternity be-
yond ſea. I ſhould have obſerved, that I
had taken care to write it in one column
in Roman chara&ter, with an interlineal
Latin verſion in Italick, and in my invent-
ed character on the oppoſite column.
As he found me to ſucceed ſo well in this
vile piece of invention, he ſoon after pre-
vailed upon me to write the hiſtory of
Formoſa, and got ſeveral of his and my
acquaintance to back the motion, as a
thing which would bring much credit and
profit to me, and be very acceptable to the
public. One might have imagined, that a taſk
ſo arduous and dangerous would have ſtart-
P 4 led

<page 227>
( 216 )
ed with myſelf to give ſuch a deſcription
led ſuch a raw young fellow as I was, be-
ing then ſcarce twenty years old, and ſo
very great a ſtranger to theſe countries. I
had indeed got ſome imperfeół notions
from a few books that had fallen in my
way, as well as from converſation with
thoſe who had either been in thoſe parts,
or had read more about them than I,
but was forced to hatch many things out,
of my own fertile fancy, to ſupply the
defects of my knowledge. One thing
I found a great help and relief from, that
the accounts we then had of that iſland
from Candidus, a Dutch miniſter, who
had reſided there, and from the reſt of the
writers who had in ſome meaſure copied
him, were ſtuffed with ſuch monſtrous
abſurdities and contradićtions, and that the
place upon the whole was ſo very un-
known to the Europeans, even to thoſe
who had been in China, Japan, and other
parts of that country, that I might the
more eaſily make whatever I ſhould ſay
of it, to paſs current with the generality
of the world. So that without much he-
ſitation I undertook the work, and reſolv-
of
a

<page 228>
( 217 )
of it as ſhould be wholly new and ſurpriz-
ing, and ſhould in moſt particulars claſh
with all the accounts other writers had
given of it; particularly that it belonged to
Japan, contrary to what all other writers
and travellers have affirmed of its being
ſubjećt to China. And this I was left to
hammer out of my own brain, without
any other aſſiſtance than that of Varenius's
deſcription of Japan, which Dr. Innes put
into my hands, to get what I could out of
it. All this while both he and the book-
ſellers were ſo earneſt for my diſpatching
it out of hand, whilſt the town was hot
in expectation of it, that I was ſcarcely
, allowed two months to write the whole,
notwithſtanding the many avocations I had
by frequent viſitors, and invitations abroad.
So that it is no wonder the thing came
out ſo crude, imperfeót, and abſurd, and
more ſo would it have been, had not
the perſon, who engliſhed it from my
Latin, aſſiſted me to correót many more
and greater improbabilities, which I had
not had time to diſcover : but he like-
wiſe was hurried on by the bookſellers,
and had the fewer opportunities of con-
ſulting

<page 229>
( 218 )
ſu'ting me on that head. Beſides, there
was one maxim I could never be prevailed
upon to depart from, viz. that whatever
I had once affirmed in converſation, tho’
to ever ſo few people, and tho’ ever ſo
improbable, or even abſurd, ſhould never
be amended or contradićted in the narra-
tive. Thus having once, inadvertently
in converſation, made the yearly number
of ſacrificed infants to amount eighteen
thouſand, I could never be perſuaded to
leſſen it, though I had been often made
ſenſible of the impoſſibility of ſo ſmall an
iſland loſing ſo many males every year,
without becoming at length quite depopu-
lated, ſuppoſing the inhabitants to have
been ſo ſtupid as to comply with, or the
prieſts inhuman enough to have exacted
ſuch a number of human vićtims. I muſt
moreover obſerve here, that my friends
found ſtill a much weightier objećtion a-
gainſt my account, viz. how ſuch a ſtrip-
ling as I muſt be when I left that coun-
try (for being then but near twenty years
of age I could not be ſuppoſed to have
been above fifteen or fixteen, upon my
pretended coming away) could give ſuch
- a large

<page 230>
( 219 |
a large and particular acount of it, as
could hardly have been xpe&ted from a
man of twice my age. Many of them
were hence inclined to inpute what was
ſo liable to objećtion in my narrative to
my want of years and experience, which
might make me the more iable to miſtake.
This, though a very candid excuſe for
me, I was not inclined tº admit of, and
therefore, to abate the wonder, was forced,
by Dr. Innes's advice, to aſſume three
years more than I had, and to pretend I
was nineteen years when I came away,
and between twenty-two and twenty-three
at the writing of the book; more than that
had I pretended to be, ny face, air, and
behaviour would have given me the lye,
for in that only reſpect did I appear what
I really was, a raw, yourg, hot-headed and
inconfiderate ſtripling. However, theſe
monſtroſities, as I may juſtly call them,
which gave me ſo much trouble to vindi-
cate afterwards, both in company and in
a new preface to the ſecond edition of that
vile romance, have really, ſince I came to
be in a better mind, proved no ſmall com-
fort to me, fince they have been an effec-
tual

<page 231>
220 )
|
tual means of dſcrediting the whole rela-
tion, and ſaved he the trouble and ſhame
of doing it in rint, eſpecially during the
life of many of my worthy friends, who,
from a real priniple of candor and charity,
had publicly engaged in my quarrel, and
to whom ſº open acknowledgment
muſt have giventhe greateſt mortification;
ſo that though I was come by that time
to abhor the impoſture, yet I contented
myſelf with owning it only to ſome of my
moſt intimate frinds; and in other com-
pany, when queſtioned about it, with
turning the ſubpét in ſuch manner as
ſhould give themto underſtand, that I was
aſhamed to enterfarther into it.
The firſt edition had not been long pub-
liſhed before it was all ſold, and a new
one demanded, with ſuch alterations and
vindication of the old one as might moſt
likely promote the ſale, and ſatisfy at
once the curioſity bf the public, and the
avarice of the proprietor; for, as to me,
I had only the ſmall ſum of ten guineas
for the copy of the frſt, and twelve more
for the improvements in the ſecond, be-
fides ſuch preſents as were made me by
* - the

<page 232>
( 221
the generous few to whom I preſented
them. But before I ventured on the ſe-
cond, I was ſent by the good biſhop of
London, and my other friends, to Oxford,
to purſue ſuch ſtudies as I was fit for, or
inclined to, whilſt my oppoſers and advo-
cates were diſputing here about the merit
or demerit of the firſt. And when I.
came to the univerſity, Ifound many learned
and worthy friends as warmly engaged
for, as others were againſt me; and
with this ſeeming advantage on my fide,
at which I have had frequent occaſion to
bluſh, that the former were men of the
beſt charaćter for candor and probity, as
well as learning and parts, and whom, for
that very reaſon, I forbear, as I ought, to
name, their partiality for me being the
mere effect of too extenſive a charity and
generoſity, and which only expoſed them
to the ſarcaſms and ridicule of my oppo-
In entS.
However that be, I had a convenient a-
partment aſſigned me in one of the moſt
confiderable colleges by the worthy head of
it, a man in high reputation for his writ-
ings and univerſal skill in all polite litera-
ture,

<page 233>
( 22.2 )
f
ture, and eſteemed one of the moſt ac-
compliſhed gentlemen of his age. I was
not, indeed, immatriculated, for reaſons
ſcarce worth troubling the world with, but
had all the other advantages of learning
which that college or the univerſity could
afford me, either by acceſs to the public
and private libraries, or by acquaintance
with ſome of the learned in ſeveral other
colleges as well as our own, and in this
laſt I had, moreover, a very worthy and
learned tutor aſſigned me, who not only
gave me leave to aſſiſt at all the leótures:
he read to his other pupils, ſome of whom
were gentlemen of high birth and for-
tune, and greatly advanced in learning,
but allowed, and even invited me to make
ſuch objećtions as my mind ſuggeſted to
me, or even to chuſe the ſubjećt of our.
entertainment, whether the Newtonian phi-
loſophy, logic, poetry, or divinity; which
laſt was, of all others, my favourite one,
as well as in a great meaſure his, for he
took orders ſoon after I left Oxford.
As to the mathematics, in which he was
alſo well ſkilled, though I had a great
opinion of that ſtudy, yet could I never
be

<page 234>
( 223 )
be prevailed to go over the threſhold; and
the needleſs demonſtrations, as I then
, thought them, to many of Euclid's propo-
ſitions, which appeared to me ſelf-evi-
dent, ſuch as that the lines that are drawn
through a circle, are longer or ſhorter ac-
cording to their nearneſs or diſtance from
the centre, and others of the like nature,
ſeemed to me rather trifling than ſerious
or uſeful, and I could never have the pa-
tience to be better informed. Hiſtory,
eſpecially ancient chronology, &c. ap-
peared ſo dark, intricate and liable to ſuch
unſurmountable difficulties, that I never x-
pećted to meet with any ſatisfaction in
them, worth the time and pains they
would coſt to learn, ſo that I was a long
while before I could be induced to read
Scripture hiſtory, neither did I begin to
be converſant in it till I came to have a taſte
for the Hebrew tongue, which was not till
many years after, and that by mere accident,
as I ſhall ſhew in the ſequel. Church
muſic, which was then in great perfeótionby
the encouragement which the worthy dean
of Chriſt-Church gave it, as well as by
ſeveral of his excellent compoſitions in
that

<page 235>
( 224 )
that kind, was the main thing that capti-
vated my vain roving fancy, and took up
moſt of my ſpare hours, though I was
not a little aſhamed to ſee what drunken,
idle ragamuffians compoſed almoſt every
choir there, and with what indolence, to
call it by no worſe a name, they performed
their parts, except on ſome more ſolemn
occaſions than ordinary, as when the bi-
ſhop, or ſome perſons of diſtinétion, ap-
peared at the Divine worſhip. The even-
ing I commonly ſpent with ſome ſelect
company, but without drinking to exceſs,
or even to a degree of exhilaration, which
I neither wanted nor was inclined to, and
at the uſual hour of nine retired to my
apartment. But here to make a ſhew, at
leaſt, of retrieving the time I waſted a-
broad in the day-time in company, mu-
ſic, &c. I uſed to light a candle, and let
it burn the greateſt part of the night in
my ſtudy, to make my neighbours believe
I was plying of my books; and ſleeping
in my eaſy chair, left the bed often for a
whole week as I found it, to the great ſur-
prize of my bed-maker, who could hardly
imagine how I could live with ſo little
ſleep,

<page 236>
( 225 )
ſleep, and without the uſual benefit of bed
refreſhment. Had I not been bleſſed with
a ſtrong conſtitution, ſeaſoned moreover by
two years fatigues in the army, and by my
living moderate and low, I might perhaps
have felt the ſad effects of ſuch an irregu-
larity, and I don't know but my appre-
henſion of it might be one main motive
that induced me to make a ſhew of it, in
order to give it the greater merit; for I
began to pretend to have ſwelled legs and
feet, and a gouty kind of diſtemper, which,
my friends failed not to attribute to that,
and earneſtly intreated me to ſubmit to
more regular hours and method of reſt.
They likewiſe prevailed upon me to go
and drink ſome medicinal waters at a ſmall
diſtance from the city, it being then the
ſeaſon, and a good deal of company of
both ſexes reſorting to it; but as I knew
myſelf to ſtand in no need of any of thoſe
helps, I went thither only twice or thrice,
rather for the ſake of the company, diver-
fion, and muſic; but as my pretended
lameneſs gave me a kind of gravity, which
I was not willing to part with, not know-
ing how to keep up to the one without the
Q_ other,

<page 237>
( 226 )
other, I went ſtill limping about like an
old gouty fellow, though no man could
enjoy a better ſhare of health and flow
of ſpirits than I did all the time I ſtaid
there. . . . . . . .
It were a ſhame for me to tell how idly I
ſpent moſt of my time, and how little
progreſs I made in ſuch a place, company,
and among ſuch noble libraries, and learned
acquaintance; for, excepting thoſe lec-
tures which I heard from my tutor, moſt
of what I got was by converſation, but
little or nothing by reading, except in books
of controverſy, almoſt the only ones that
could captivate my roving mind. Howe-
ver, it was during my ſhort abode here,
(ſcarcely fix months) that I employed my
leiſure hours in correcting and revifing my
romance of Formoſa, and wrote the beſt
anſwer I could to the obječtions that had
been made to the firſt edition, in a ſecond
preface, which, all things confidered, met
with much greater approbation than it de-
ſerved, from thoſe few intimates I had
ſhewed it to; after which, taking my leave
of all my friends there, I ſet out for London,
where I ſoon after publiſhed that ſecond
edi-

<page 238>
( 227 ) -
*
edition. At my coming to my old kºdgings
in Pall-Mall, where Dr. Innes and I had for-
merly lodged, I was told that he was gone
over chaplain-general to the Engliſh forces in
Portugal. I had no reaſon to regret his ab-
ſence, for he had, before I went to Oxford,
been guilty of ſuch notorious and barefaced
immoralities, as well in this as in a former
lodging in the Strand, both thoſe of ſober
and reputable families, that his chara&ier
had greatly ſuffered by it, and he went a-
way, juſt time enough to ſave himſelf the
mortification of being ſhamefully turned
out of this laſt, as he had been out of the
former. Had I been, indeed, a real con-
vert from heatheniſm to Chriſtianity, it
might have been truly ſaid, of him, what
our Divine Maſter ſaid of the Phariſees,
compaſſing ſea and land to gain a proſe-
lyte, and making him ten times more
wicked than themſelves; and he hath been
more than once ſeverely reproved by his
acquaintance, for the ſcandalous example
he gave to me in particular, who was
admired by them for the contrary virtues.
The truth is, he had an almoſt inſurmount-
able propenſity to wine and women, and
Q 2 when

<page 239>
( 228 )
when fraught with the former, fell immo-
derately foul on the latter, whether maids
or married, not ſcrupling to uſe even vio-
lence; which I particularly mention, be-
cauſe his behaviour in theſe, and ſeveral
other reſpe&ts, to ſay nothing of what I
have hinted in a former note, gave me but
too much cauſe to think that he had no real
regard to religion, either natural or re-
vealed; ſo that had I not been happily
reſtrained by Divine Grace, his example
would not have failed to have extinguiſhed
all ſenſe of remorſe which accompanied every
indireét ačtion I did, and confirmed me
in downright infidelity, in which caſe I
might never have been ſo happily made
ſenſible of the error of my ways, as I have
ſince been, nor ever repented of them, till
it had been too late. I have therefore
great reaſon to acknowledge it the greateſt
mercy that could befal me, that I was ſo
well grounded in the principles and evi-
dence of the Chriſtian religion, that nei-
ther the converſation of the then free-
thinkers, as they loved to ſtile themſelves,
and by many of whom I was ſeverely at-
tacked, nor the writings of a Hobbs, Spinoſa,
t Toland,

<page 240>
( 229 )
Toland, Collins, Tindal, &c. againſt the
truth of Divine revelation, could appear to
me in any other light than as the vain ef-
forts of a dangerous ſet of men to over-
turn a religion, the beſt founded, and moſt
judiciouſly calculated to promote the peace
and happineſs of mankind, both tempo-
ral and eternal; I muſt own, that the ſo-
phiſtry which perpetually runs thro' their
writings, like the warp through the woof,
gave me but too much cauſe to ſuſpect
their fincerity, and that the inveteracy they
ſhew againſt the nobleſt ſyſtem of mora-
lity that ever could be thought of, to .
which all their united force could never
ſubſtitute any thing better, or near ſo good,
is but a ſorry proof of their pretended love
to truth, and to the good of mankind, eſ.
pecially when I confidered how fully and
frequently their writings have been an-
ſwered and exploded by better hands, with-
out any other viſible effect than that of
their trumping up the ſame old trite argu-
ments in ſome new dreſs, and claiming a
freſh vićtory from them. -
Q. 3 I hope

<page 241>
( 230 ) . >
I hope that what I have now wrote will
not be deemed by the candid at leaſt, as
deſigned to proclaim my own praiſe, ſee-
ing it rather aggravates my guilt that I
could act ſuch a notorious piece of hypo-
criſy, contrary to the ſtrongeſt convićtions
I then felt, that it was impious and of-
fenſive to God. What I chiefly men-
tion it here for, is only to obſerve, that
it was that very convićtion (which his
good providence would not ſuffer to be
quite extinguiſhed in me, though he per-
mitted it to be ſo long kept under by the
impetuoſity of my wild and ungovernable
vanity) that did at length co-operate with
his grace to work in me an utter abhor-
rence both againſt that vile and dangerous
paſſion, and the ſtill viler crimes it had
involved me in : for if ſincerity is one
of the moſt eſſential virtues of the goſpel,
how abominable muſt ſuch a long-wind-
ed and multifarious diffimulation appear to
a guilty perſon, when brought to a deep
ſenſe of it, however light it might ſeem to
him in the more youthful and inconſiderate
part of his life Tºoſe only who have
felt can judge of the ſnart and horror of it,
under

<page 242>
( 231 )
under which nothing could well ſupport
them but a ſure reliance on the death and
merits of a Divine Saviour, and a ſincere
repentance for, and deteſtation of it. For
as ſuch a happy change can only be the
work of Divine Grace, ſo it gives one a
moral and comfortable aſſurance of pardon
and acceptance at the throne of infinite
mercy, through the efficacious interceſ-
ſion of our common Redeemer and eternal
High Prieſt. - -
But though I occaſionally mention it here,
I would not have it inferred from thence,
that I began ſo ſoon to give way to ſo ſa-
lutary a remorſe. I was too young, vain,
raſh and thoughtleſs to be any other way
influenced by it, than as it put me upon
finding out the moſt ſenſeleſs excuſes and
palliatives, ſuch as every one may eaſily
gueſs at, that hath been, like me, a ſlave
to youthful paſſions. So that above half
a ſcore or a dozen years were miſ-ſpent in
a courſe of the moſt ſhameful idleneſs, va-
nity and extravagance; ſome ſort of gal-
lantry with the fair ſex, with many of
whom, even perſons of fortune and cha-
račter of ſenſe, wit, and learning, I was
Q-4 become

<page 243>
( 232 )
become a great favourite, and might, if I
could have overcome my natural ſheepiſh-
neſs and fear of a repulſe, have been more
ſucceſsful either by way of matrimony or
intrigue; which I have fince the more
wondered at, confidering my great pro-
penſity to women was as ſtrong as
my vanity, and the opportunities ſo many
and inviting, and I ſo little ſcrupulous a-
bout the danger or guilt of them; yet I may
truly ſay, that hardly any man who might
have enjoyed ſo great a variety, ever in-
dulged himſelf in ſo few inſtances of the
unlawful kind as I have done. This I
am far from hinting by way of pretence
to a greater degree of virtue, of which
no man could then have a leſs ſhare than I;
for in thoſe few, wherein I was unhap-
pily engaged, but eſpecially one wherein
my affection was captivated to an immo-
derate degree, no man purſued them with
more eagerneſs and exceſs than I did. But
I am far enough from being inclined to
entertain my reader with a detail of my
ſad irregularities and follies, either in this
or other reſpećts, which I have long
ſince looked back upon with ſhame and
ſorrow,

<page 244>
( 233 )
ſorrow ; only, with regard to ſuch kind of
unlawful amours, I cannot recal to mind
my ſtrong and vehement bias for them,
without thankfully acknowledging that
there muſt have been ſome ſecret provi-
dence that kept me from giving ſuch way
as I might otherwiſe have done to the
ruin of my health, circumſtances, &c.
or my being unwarily drawn into ſome
unhappy marriage, or other ſnares, into
which I have obſerved many a one leſs
raſh, extravagant, and inconſiderate than I,
have ſo unhappily fallen into.
I was led into this ſenſe of God's divine
providence towards me, by ſome (I may
ſay) unavoidable obſervations on his gra-
cious diſpenſations, in which it was im-
poſſible for me to be miſtaken : one was,
my meeting with an almoſt conſtant diſ-
appointment in my moſt pleaſing proſpects,
my moſt ſanguine expectations and favou-
rite projećts, whenever the end propoſed
was the ſatisfaction of my predominant
paſſion, or the means to attain it were
ſuch as my conſcience condemned as un-
lawful; ſo that I ſeldom failed of reaping
ſome pungent ſhame, mortification or diſ-
grace,

<page 245>
( 234 )
grace, where I expected approbation and
applauſe, or with loſſes and poverty, where
I looked for profit or gain. On the other
hand, whenever I chearfully entered into
any laudable method of living that offered
itſelf, or rather, which the ſame good
Providence threw in my way, I always
met with ſurpriſing ſucceſs, and with ſuch
credit and approbation as made me ample
amends for the ſtruggles my pride made
againſt it on account of its meanneſs. I
ſhall take the liberty of giving a fignal
inſtance, becauſe it hath an immediate
conneétion with the impoſture I was ſtill
firiving to carry on, and conſequently de-
ſerves to be expoſed. -
I had been about five or ſix years in Eng-
land, and lived in ſuch an extravagant and
careleſs manner (if not in expences, which
were rather moderate than laviſh, had I
been in any laudable way of gaining a
competency, but which for want of that
often run me into debt, without any viſi-
ble way of extricating myſelf) when a plau-
fible way was offered to me, by one Pat-
tenden, of getting money, and credit too,
by a white ſort of Japan which he had
- - found

<page 246>
( 235 )
found out, and was then, in vain, endea-
vouring to recommend to the world, tho’
it was really a curious ſort of work. His
propoſal was, that I ſhould father, and
introduce it, under the notion of my hav-
ing learned and brought the art from
Formoſa; on which condition, and my
putting now and then a hand to the
painting, he offered me a confiderable
ſhare in the profit. I readily agreed to his
propoſal, not only on account of the pro-
fit we ſuppoſed it would bring, but much
more ſo as it would yield a kind of
convincing proof to the fabulous account
I had given of myſelf. We accordingly
advertiſed it under the name of White
Formoſan Work ; and it was viewed and
greatly admired by the curious for its fine
whiteneſs, ſmoothneſs, and hardneſs, and
for the beauty of the other colours painted
upon it: notwithſtanding which, and all
the extravagant encomiums we gave it,
by far beyond what it really deſerved, and
our care and artifice to conceal its real
faults, for ſome it had, we could never
make it ſucceed ſo as to be gainers by it.
And though our diſappointment might be
owing

<page 247>
( 236 )
owing, in ſome meaſure, to the vaſt high
price he rated it at, contrary to my opi-
nion, yet I have cauſe to bleſs God it ſo
happily miſcarried, and was forced to quit
it; for had the projećt ſucceeded accord-
ing to my ſanguine hopes, it would have
hardened me only the more irretrievably in
my vile impoſture and ſelf-conceit, but its
being ſo unaccountably blaſted, in ſpite of
all our endeavours to puſh it forward, did
not a little contribute to inſpire me with
a diſlike to all ſuch unlawful and diſhoneſt
ways of getting of money, though this
was not the immediate reſult of my diſap-
pointment; on the contrary, I grieved at it,
and at ſome other of the like nature, for
ſome years, till the frequency of them made
me ſee clearly into the true cauſe of them,
and fully perſuaded me that nothing but an
honeſt and fincere intention, followed by
the uſe of right and lawful means, could be
attended with ſucceſs; for I attempted fince
then ſeveral other means of getting of mo-
ney, which, though not equally odious as
this, were ſtill blameable in me, by rea-
ſon of my incapacity for them, ſuch as the
practifing
-

<page 248>
( 237 )
practiſing a kind of empyrical phyſic, teach-
ing of ſome modern languages, &c. of
which I neither was a ſufficient maſter,
nor capable of a competent application to
make myſelf ſo. However, as I was hap-
pily diſappointed in them all, and as I had
reaſon to think juſtly too, it ſet me, at
length, on a more honeſt and laudable
ſcent; and it was not long before Provi-
dence threw That in my way, which nei-
ther my pride nor my reluctance to a cloſe
application, would have ſuffered me to
have ſought after, or even thought of: for
a counſellor of Lincoln’s-Inn, who brought
up his three ſons and a daughter under his
own eye, and had a better opinion of me
by far than I deſerved, ſent for me, and
propoſed to me the inſtructing his ſons in
the Latin tongue, and ſuch other branches
of learning, as I ſhould think them capa-
ble of, at his own chambers. I readily ac-
cepted the offer, notwithſtanding the ſalary
was rather too ſmall for the charge, as I
was to attend them twice a day, and ſpend,
at leaſt, three hours with them every day,
and lived at ſome diſtance from him. I
was, in about a year's time, honourably
diſcharged,

<page 249>
( 238 )
diſcharged, upon his ſending them to be
farther educated beyond ſea.
Soon after this I was recommended to be
tutor to a young gentleman, about eight
miles from London: his father, who was
an officer in the army, had kept him for ſe-
veral years at ſome conſiderable ſchools to
little purpoſe, for when I came to him,
he could hardly tranſlate one line out of
the plaineſt Latin authors, which he at-
tributing rather to the remiſſneſs of his for-
mer maſters, than to his want of genius,
reſolved to give him a home education.
I found him, however, ſo unacquainted
with every grammar rule, and ſo averſe to
begin afreſh with it, he being then near
fifteen years of age, that I was obliged to
acquaint his father with the little hopes I
had of him in the literary way, and pro-
poſed the teaching him ſome other branches
of learning, for which he ſhewed a rea-
dier genius, and particularly fortification,
which, as I formerly hinted, I had learned
from our indolent Jeſuit, and of which I
was become a pretty good maſter, by con-
verſation in the army, by ſeeing a good
number of conſiderable fortreſſes in ſeveral
parts

<page 250>
( 239 )
parts of Europe, and more particularly by
reading Vauban, Cohorn, and other emi-
nent authors on the ſubjećt. My propoſal
was readily agreed to both by father and ſon,
and the latter made a confiderable progreſs
in it in a little time, inſomuch that we
had not only gone through all the theory
of it, and he could take any plan of a
place, but had likewiſe made a model in
clay of a large fortified city, in which I
had contrived to have a ſpecimen of every
thing that related to the art of fortifying,
both in the regular and irregular way, en-
gineering, &c. and which, when finiſhed,
was not a little admired, not only as a no-
velty, but likewiſe as a compleat piece of
fortification. The misfortune was, that
my ſalary was neither anſwerable, as I
thought, to the pains I took with my pu-
pil (whom I ſtill made, at proper times,
apply himſelf to Latin, and other branches
of literature) but likewiſe, through the ex-
travagance of the father, very ill paid;
which made me ſo much the more uneaſy,
, as I had contraćted ſome debts which I
ſhould have been glad then to have paid
with it. This, at length, determined me
- before

<page 251>
º ( 240 )
before the year was quite out, to accept
of an offer, which not only appeared
more advantageous, but likewiſe more ſuit-
able to my vanity, though it ſo far diſo-
bliged the gentleman's father, that he
made no ſcruple to refuſe paying me what
was ſtill due to me, and to let me go
from him with viſible tokens of his re-
ſentment. -
This happened juſt after the rebellion was
broke out in Lancaſhire and Scotland, anno
1715, on which account new troops were
raiſed every where, and he became ſo
confiderable and fluſh of money, that I
might have made my own terms to have
ſtaid with him. But, by that time, ſome
of my friends had prevailed upon the ma-
jor of a regiment of dragoons, to make
me the offer of being clerk to the regi-
ment, and as I knew him to be by far a
much finer, and more generous gentleman
of the two, nothing could diſſuade me
from accepting it. He could not, how-
ever, prevail on the other captains to make
me clerk to their troops, that being, as .
they ſaid, a perquiſite belonging to the
quarter-maſter; but it did not hinder
him.
-
--
-
|
.

<page 252>
( 241 )
him from retaining me to this, and mak-
ing ſuch additions to the common ſalary
out of his own pocket, as made it near
an equivalent, and the friendſhip and
regard he ſhewed me, made me be looked
upon as a fit companion to the reſt of the
officers, ſeveral of whom having had a
liberal education at ſome of the univer-
ſities, it was not long before we came in-
to a kind of intimacy; there was, beſides,
another thing, which procured me no ſmall
eſteem among them, viz. my becoming
very ſoon acquainted with the clergy and
other gentlemen in every place we came
to, eſpecially with the learned and curious,
by which means I could introduce ſuch of
our officers to them as were men of me-
rit or charaćter, as the moſt part of them
were. But what added ſtill more weight
to the reſt was, that my friend, the ma-
jor, who had often heard me called by the
familiar nick-name of Sir George, in ſome
of the families where he had become ac-
quainted with me, after the peace of U-
trecht, took it into his head not only to
continue the ſame ſtile to me, but even
to give it out, that I had been knighted by
R queen

<page 253>
- ( 242 )
queen Anne. This laſt I was indeed wholly
ignorant of, for a long while, and denied
it as often as the queſtion was put to me,
but was, however, ſo fond of the fea-
ther in the fool's cap, that rather than fore-
go it, I uſed to lay a ſtronger claim to it,
under pretence of my birth and family,
for I ſtill paſſed current for a Formoſan,
and was as proud as ever of being thought
•ſo, as it procured me ſuch an acceſs a-
mong perſons of rank and learning, which
I likewiſe made a means of bringing our
officers and them into a familiar and agree-
able acquaintance, who might otherwiſe
have been more than ordinarily ſhy of
each other at that critical juncture. I
might add, that as I was likewiſe a greater
favourite of the fair ſex, than any of the
red coats, whom they could not but look
upon with ſome dread at that time, I
had frequent invitations from them, even
thoſe of rank and fortune, whoſe curioſity
would not permit them to ſuffer ſo great
a ſtranger as I was to come, -or even to
paſs ſo near them, without having the
pleaſure of ſeeing and converſing with
him, and informing themſelves in all the
particulars

<page 254>
( 243 )
particulars that related to him. And as I
always took care to behave in ſuch a man-
her as might gain their eſteem, as well as
admiration, ſo I could the more eaſily in-
troduce ſuch of our gentlemen as bore an
unexceptionable charaćter to them, by
which means we had the ſatisfaction of
ſpending many a pleaſant day in their com-
pany in the moſt innocent and agreeable
manner, particularly in Lancaſhire, and,
after the ſuppreſſion of the rebellion, where
we continued quarters, at Wigan, War-
rington and Mancheſter, in which laſt I
had, moreover, the opportunity of fre-
quently viſiting a noble library belonging
to the collegiate church, and well furniſhed
with all manner of books that could be
purchaſed with money : for it is endowed
with Iool. per ann. to ſupply it with new
ones as they come out, and yet, when I
was there, they had above: 5ool. in bank,
and ſcarce knew how to lay it out, in-
ſomuch that they were thinking of pur-
chafing of ſome of the moſt curious ma-
nuſcripts. This, I could not but obſerve to
them, was ill judged, conſidering the ſitu-
ation of it, chiefly among tradeſmen, who
"- R 2 have

<page 255>
- ( 244 )
have neither taſte nor knowledge of ſuch
valuable pieces, and the few learned men
in that neighbourhood that could reap any
benefit from them, and rather adviſed them
to lay out that income in purchaſing ſuch
valuable modern books, as were yearly
publiſhed both in England and out of it,
and which, I thought, would better anſwer
the intention of the noble donor. They
ſeemed to acquieſce in what I ſaid; but
whether they followed my advice or not,
I never enquired ſince. -
Theſe allurements, ſo ſoothing to my na-
tural vanity, and our often moving from
ane county to another, made me ſtay
longer in the regiment than I ought in rea-
fon or conſcience (had I been capable of
liſtening to either) to have done, confidering
that I was of no ſervice, but only a dead
weight to my friend the major, who, be-
ing moreover as bad an oeconomiſt as my-
ſelf, would have been glad enough to have
been rid of me, though he never, either in
word or carriage, gave me the leaſt hint of
it, but rather the contrary; yet ſome of
thoſe friends of mine, who had recom-
mended me to him at firſt, had more than
- On CC
-

<page 256>
( 245 )
once adviſed me to eaſe him of ſo expen-
five a load; yet ſo pleaſed was I with this
wandering and idle kind of life, which gave
me an opportunity of travelling through,
and ſeeing, ſo many countries I ſhould
otherwiſe never have been able to ſee, that
I could not prevail upon myſelf to leave
the regiment, till it was ordered into Ireland,
and then marched as far as Briſtol with
them, and ſaw them embarked for that
kingdom : ſo that I had been, from firſt
to laſt, ſomewhat above two years in this
wandering kind of amuſing life, without
reaping any other advantage than the ſee-
ing variety of places and people, and con-
verſing here and there with ſome learned
men and books, though nothing ſo much
with the latter as I might have done, if
my indolence, vanity and the variety of
obječts which danced before my eyes, had
not diverted me from it. t -
Upon my return from Briſtol, I was at no
ſmall loſs how to diſpoſe of myſelf for
ſome time, and having had time to rumi-
nate upon my miſ-ſpent time and idle life,
was eaſily induced, by ſome of my friends,
to alter my courſe, and, if poſſible, to get
R 3 into

<page 257>
( 246 )
into a way of earning a competency by my
own induſtry, rather than live at other peo-
ple's coſt, or, which was much worſe, on
their charity, which I could not now but
look upon myſelf as a moſt unworthy ob-
ject of ; and, as I had a little ſmattering of
painting and drawing, and had I been
capable of a proper application, might,
with aſſiſtance, have attained to a conſi-
derable proficiency in it, having a ſtrong
genius for, and no indifferent judgment in
it. However, to go the neareſt and eaſieſt
way to work, I reſolved on that of fan
painting, which required leſs time and
pains to learn ; and had the profit been
any thing anſwerable to my aſſiduity, I
could have been contented to have drudg-
ed on with it ſtill. But that buſineſs
was then at ſo low and contemptible an
ebb, that, though I lived with a good fa-
mily almoſt gratis, and was early and late
at work, yet I found it impoſſible to get a
bare competency by it; notwithſtanding
the encouragement ſeveral of my friends
and acquaintance gave me. This, how-
ever, brought me acquainted with a worthy
clergyman; who, thinking the employ-
Inent

<page 258>
( 247 )
ment too mean for a man of my education
and parts, and that I might beſtow my
time to much better purpoſe in ſome kind
of laudable ſtudy, particularly that of di-
vinity, which I had always been moſt fond
of and converſant in, engaged to raiſe a
ſubſcription among his acquaintance, by
which I might be enabled to follow my
ſtudies with more eaſe. He did it accord-
ingly, to the amount of between twenty and
thirty pounds per ann, which, with the
help of a ſmall addition I got to it, by per-
fe&ting of a young gentleman in the Latin
tongue and ſome other branches of learn-
ing, made it a comfortable competency,
eſpecially as I was become, by this time,
a better q=conomiſt, and had fallen into a
more frugal way of living. -
But all this while this ſubſcription did lie
ſomewhat heavy on my conſcience, and at
ſome particular times gave me no ſmall unea-
fineſs, inaſmuch as it was founded on a belief.
of my being a Formoſan, and a real con-
vert to the church of England, which thoſe
pious ſubſcribers had not any doubt of, that
I could find, even to their dying day; for
whenever I waited on them, I always met
- R 4 - with
w

<page 259>
( 248 )
with the kindeſt reception and civil treat-
ment that could be wiſhed. This uneaſi-
neſs ſtill increaſed, as I now and then het
with ſome people at their houſes, whoſe
behaviour and objećtions, though not in
plain terms, gave me but too much reaſon
to think they had not the ſame charitable
opinion of me; and this put me upon va-
rious indirect means to prevent my friends
being prevailed upon by them to withdraw
theirbenevolence. This made me often wiſh
and pray, that I might but fall into ſome
more honeſt way of living without it, and
free myſelf by it from that aggravated re-
morſe, with which I was forced to receive
it. But though I was fully perſuaded of
the guilt, yet I was not ſenſibly enough af-
feóted with it to make an open confeſſion
of it, and how unworthy I was of their
charitable opinion and aſſiſtance; and con-
tented myſelf with making ſome reſolutions
of giving up the latter, at leaſt, as ſoon as
I could get myſelf into a way of living
without it.
I became, at length, providentially I may
ſay, acquainted with a perſon who was
concerned in various branches relating to
- the

<page 260>
( 249 )
N
the printing trade, and in very good cir-
cumſtances. He was, moreover, a very
generous and good-natured gentleman, and
I became, in a little time, ſo great a fa-
vourite, that he could ſcarce paſs a day
without ſeeing and conſulting me about
ſome of his affairs; and by his means I
came at laſt to tranſlate books, and to get.
a comfortable living by it. It was then I
began to perceive, with no ſmall joy, how
God bleſſed my endeavours in propor-
tion to my diligence and honeſty, which
made ſo lively an impreſſion on my mind,
that I reſolved never to be concerned in
any works, that were either prophane, he-
retical, or of a trifling nature or ill ten-
dency, and have accordingly refuſed them
whenever they have been offered to me.
From tranſlating of other people's works,
I came at length to print ſome of my own,
and with the ſame laudable view, and have
found ſtill more credit and comfort in it,
and more cauſe to bleſs the Divine mer-
cy, for the wonderful and undeſerved
ſucceſs I have ſince met with. But of
theſe I ſhall ſpeak in a more proper
place; in the mean time I ſhall only ob-
ſerve

<page 261>
( 25o )
ſerve here, that my charitable friends, dying
one after another, as my buſineſs increaſed,
. I never applied to the ſurvivors for a conti-
nuance of their benevolence, but declined
it where it was offered, as being then able
to live without it: and I can only add,
that though I once looked upon theſe ſub-
ſcriptions as no leſs unworthily beſtowed
upon, than baſely received by me, yet I
have had the comfort to obſerve ſince, that
they proved the happy means of freeing me
from a more laborious and unprofitable life,
and of enabling me to follow thoſe ſtudies
with more eaſe and chearfulneſs, which
fitted me, in time, for thoſe more arduous
and beneficial taſks, which I have been fince
engaged in ; ſeeing it was during the greater
part of that time, that I applied myſelf to
the Hebrew tongue, and to the more cloſe
ſtudy of the ſacred books; by which means
I had an opportunity of making a large
colle&tion of critical and other remarks,
which, though deſigned then only for my
own information, came at length to have
a place in one of thoſe works I ſhall ſpeak
of in the ſequel, where they have fince met
with the approbation of the public, both in
England

<page 262>
( 251 )
England and abroad; though even under
thoſe encouragements, and with thoſe op-
portunities I had, I muſt own, to my ſhame,
that I was ſtill far enough from ſuch a lau-
dable application, as might have turned
them to better advantage ; and that I ſtill
miſ-ſpent a great deal of my time in a looſe,
careleſs manner, and that it was not till
after a year or two that I diſengaged myſelf
from company, eſpecially of the fair ſex,
though, one perſon excepted, rather trifling
than culpable, to follow my books more
cloſely. I ſhall therefore ſkip all the for-
mer part of my time, from the twentieth
to the thirty-ſecond year of my age, as a
ſad blank to every thing that was good or
laudable, and fraught with a diſmal variety
of folly, indiſcretion and other miſcarriages,
which would rather diſguſt than inform,
or even divert a ſober reader, to come to a
more hopeful and inſtructive period; and
only obſerve, before-hand, that it was no
ſmall happineſs to me, (which, to whatſo-
ever owing, I ought at leaſt to attribute to
my own diſcretion) that the many learned
and pious perſons I was formerly, and con-
tinued ſtill, acquainted with, (for it was
- with

<page 263>
( 252 )
with ſuch that I moſtly choſe to converſe)
were never acquainted with, nor, as I
could perceive, ever ſuſpected me of being
guilty of ſuch a ſhameful, idle and ſcanda-
lous way of living, but believed that I
ſpent moſt of my time to better purpoſe;
elſe it is not to be doubted but I had been
diſcarded and ſhunned by them. In which
caſe I ſhould have entirely loſt the moſt ef-
feótual means of coming into a better way
of thinking, which their converſation, ex-
ample, and the many good books which
they lent me, did at length happily bring
me to, and been left, like a weather-cock,
expoſed to all winds: for though I could
talk, and, at ſome ſerious intervals, think as
ſeriouſly as they of religion and its moſt
important duties, and even comply with
them in ſuch a manner, as ſeemed very
delightful and edifying to them; yet was
my roving heart ſo far from joining fin-
cerely, or being affected with them, that I
could eaſily forego them, to indulge any
new riſing ſatisfaction, though ever ſo op-
poſite. And indeed, ſuch a frequent va-
riety did offer itſelf naturally in my way,
as I was in no way able to reſiſt.
Thus,
*.
-

<page 264>
( 253 )
Thus, for inſtance, it was natural for thoſe
intimates to introduce or renew ſome old
ſubjećt or topic relating to my pretended
country, travels, converſion, or other ro-
mantic part of my life, which, however
irkſome it was then become to me to repeat,
and as it were to confirm anew; yet there was
no way for me to avoid it, unleſs I had at
once acknowledged the whole relation to
have been a notorious and ſhameful impoſ-
ture; and what a deadly wound muſt have
ſuch an unexpected confeſſion given to my
natural vanity? and what a mortification
would it have been, to ſuch fincere honeſt
people, to hear it from my own mouth
ſo that, could I even have had courage
enough to forego the former, as I have
more than once thought and even reſolved
to do, yet how could I find it in my heart
to give ſo ſenſible a diſpleaſure to perſons
that had ſhewn ſo much friendſhip and
zeal for me to ſay nothing of the dreadful
apprehenſions of the conſequence of their
charitable opinion being thereby turned in-
to a juſt abhorrence and deteſtation. This
was the ſad dilemma I found myſelf in
when I came to reflect ſeriouſly on my
caſe,

<page 265>
( 254 )
caſe, and which made me conclude it, all
things conſidered, altogether impoſſible for
me to extricate myſelf out of, without ſome
miraculous power to aſſiſt me to overcome
a paſſion, which had hitherto eluded all
the oppoſition which my reaſon and ex-
perience had been able to raiſe againſt
it. But what glimpſe of hope of any ſuch
Divine help could ſuch a wretch have, who,
with his eyes open to the guilt and dan-
ger, had brought himſelf into ſuch a dan-
gerous ſtate But God's mercy, which is
over all his works, is not to be judged of
by us according to our narrow apprehen-
fions, but according to the gracious ma-
nifeſtation he has given us of it in his
goſpel; and as that aſſurance gave me good
grounds to hope, ſo that hope inſpired me
with a deſign to uſe all proper means to
obtain it, and leave the iſſue of it to his
Divine Providence. To him, therefore, I
thankfully give all the praiſe for his unde-
ſerved and ſingular bleſſing on thoſe means
which himſelf directed me to, and what
the chiefeſt of them were I have alrea-
dy mentioned, and ſhall take notice of
ſome others in the ſequel, in hopes they
may

<page 266>
( 255 )
may prove of ſervice to ſuch as may ſtand
in the ſame need of them as I did then,
However, I muſt own, that the reſolution
had ſomething awful and deterring, when
I confidered it in its full extent, to exchange
the delights of variety and multiplicity of
company (which had been ſo delightful
and inſmaring to me till then, that no mo-
tive or obſtacle could keep me from it) for
ſolitude and retirement; their bewitching
flatteries and commendations, whether for
a falſe merit I had aſſumed, or for ſome
valuable things they fancied in me, for a
cloſer recollection and abhorrence of my
own vileneſs; to ſpending of ſo much pre-
cious time in the gaities and guilty vanities
of life, for a more cloſe application and
ſearch after the propereſt and moſt effectual
means of redeeming that invaluable jewel,
and the parcelling and beſtowing it to the
moſt beneficial purpoſes; to retrench not
only all unneceſſary and unlawful expences,
but even ſome of the common and neceſ-
ſary ones, in order to make ſome amends
for paſt extravagancies, by ſupplying the
wants of thoſe many obječts, that uſed to
paſs by unobſerved and unpitied by me.
- Theſe, .

<page 267>
( 256 )
Theſe, and other ſuch like indiſpenſable
preparatives, to the deſired thorough
change, ſeemed to carry ſuch unſurmount-
able difficulties with them, that neither
my ſmall ſhare of reaſon nor philoſophy
could have ſupported me to any tolerable
degree in the reſolutions I was daily ſtriving
to make after it. And indeed, nothing ſo
effeótually did it, as the confideration that
that Divine Providence, which had inſpired
me with that defire, would not fail of com-
pleating it, if I was not wanting to myſelf;
for that at once ſet me upon trying ſome-
times one, ſometimes another, of thoſe
duties, with ſucceſs enough at leaſt to en-
courage me to proceed.
And here I was again providentially helped
by a worthy clergyman at Braintree in Eſſex;
who, good man, had a much better opi-
nion of me than I deſerved, and preſented
me with that excellent book called Reform-
ed devotions, and recommended by the
late reverend Dr. Hicks. This excellent
book, though then unknown to me, and
diſreliſhed by ſome weak Chriſtians, is ſo
well known to all the true devout ones,
that I need ſay no more in commendation
of

<page 268>
( 257 )
of it, than that it proved of ſuch vaſt be-,
nefit to me, that I can never ſufficiently
admire it, or the piety of the compiler and
reformer; for the many opportunities and
invitations it gives one of frequent and cloſer
intercourſe with God, and of meditating,
in the moſt exalted manner, on his various
works, infinite mercies, and on all the ſub-
lime truths and duties of Chriſtianity, did
ſo effectually reconcile me to that ſolitude
and retirement I had formerly been ſo averſe
to, and afforded me a moſt noble refreſh-
ment ſeveral times a day, from my cloſe
application to other ſtudies I was then pur-
ſuing, ſome of which being of the dry,
othersof the complex kind, might have gone.
but ſluggiſhly on without it. The late
pious Mr. Nelſon's Method of Devotion.
falling likewiſe, ſoon after, into my hands,
in order to be conveyed, by my means, to
a young gentlewoman lately recovered from
a ſtate of deſpondency, I had the curioſity
to run through it, and found in it ſuch ex-
cellent, yet eaſy rules for the conquering of
our natural vices, and recovering the con-
trary virtues to them, that I made it one
S of

<page 269>
( 259 )
of my daily monitors, and with no ſmall
ſucceſs.
But that which gave me the greateſt help, --
was the learned and pious Mr. Law's Se-
rious Call to Devotion. This truly valu-
able treatiſe I accidentally found on a cler-
gyman's table, who, nevertheleſs, ſoon
took it out of my hand, and gave ſuch a
chara&ter of it, as might have diſcouraged
me from looking farther into it, had not.
the place I had opened given me a quite
different notion of it. However, as I
could not prevail upon him to lend it
me, I went and bought me one, and read
it over and over, from beginning to end,
with greater eagerneſs and ſatisfaction than
any I had ever met with on that ſubječt. I
was particularly much taken with the au-
thor's motives, as well as his method for the
right uſe of our time, money, talents, &c.
not to mention that his variety of charaćters
and reaſonings upon them, which are a
continued appeal to the moſt unbiaſed and
ſoundeſt judgement, which admit of neither
cavil or objećtion, ſoon opened to me a
much better way of applying them to ad-
vantage, than any I had hitherto, or could
- indeed

<page 270>
(, 259 . ).
indeed have fallen into, without ſuch an
excellent guide. The direétions he gives
for the obtaining of thoſe Chriſtian virtues,
which he there recommends as the proper
ſubjećt for the ſeveral hours of prayer in
the day, may indeed appear to have ſome-
thing too technical (fince it is no other than
a daily renewing of thoſe very deſires, till,
themſelves become the virtues we want).
from which too much of the ſucceſs may,
by the light and thoughtleſs, be aſcribed to
the method, and too little to the grace
of God accompanying it. For may not,
ſome will be apt to ſay, an honeſt heathen
or deiſt, by the ſame method, raiſe him-
ſelf up into a habit of ſobriety, chaſtity, &c.
without any ſuch application to, or parti-
cular aſſiſtance from, the Supreme Being 2
yet let any ſerious perſon try the efficacy of
it againſt any of his favourite, eſpecially his
conſtitutional vices, and he will find, at
length, that he hath been only trying to
waſh a Blackmoor white, and muſt do ſo
to the end of the chapter, without the
intervention of Divine grace. As for me
I ſhall always, I hope, look upon the de-
fire itſelf, as well as the ſucceſs of the
* * S 2 II]CanS

<page 271>
( 260 .)
means uſed for the obtaining any virtue, to
be alike the work of God in the ſoul,
let theſe be ſuch as Mr. Law directs, or
any other, which Providence puts into
our hands. -
I had long before this, however, began to
conſecrate part of my time to the ſtudy
of the ſacred books, tho’ not in that re-
gular and uniform manner as I happily
fell into after reading the excellent directory
above mentioned, and had made a pretty
colle&tion of criticiſms, and other obſer-
vations upon them, ſuch as occurred on
my reading of the various commentators
on them; and now it was that I became
ſenſible, indeed, of my own want of know-
ledge of the original Hebrew, and to be-
wail the loſs of ſeveral opportunities I had
miſſed of gaining a more perfeót know-
ledge in that ſacred and uſeful tongue.
For I had been ſo diſcouraged from the
purſuit of it, by the difficulties I met with
at the very threſhold, that is; in the gram-
mars, that I never had the patience to go
thro' one of them, but contented myſelf
with the interliniary verſions of Pagninus,
Arias Montanus, and other Interpreters;
* - chufing

<page 272>
( 261 )
chufing rather to rely on their honeſty and
ſkill, than to be at the trouble of becoming
a proper judge of either. It was not in-
deed poſſible for me to go on long in this
groping way, before their various inter-
pretations of the text, (eſpecially thoſe of
ſome bold critics, which ſeemed calculated
to unhinge, rather than confirm our belief,
by exploding ſeveral, till then, acknowled-
ged facts and doćtrines, or interpreting
them in their own artful way) ſet me again
upon making ſome freſh efforts, for attain-
ing a more perfect knowledge of the
original, which were however ſoon damped
by every freſh difficulty I met with in the
common way of learning it, till I providen-
tially ſtumbled, as it were, on the following
eaſy method. - º
I was then hammering at an exercitation
on the 34th Pſalm, printed at the end of
the grammar that goes under the name of
Bellarmine; in which I found at almoſt -
every word ſome exceptions to the gram-
mar rules, and ſuch reaſons aſſigned for.
them as ſtill carried one farther from the
point in view; when a poor man came and
offered me a pocket Hebrew pſalter, with
S 3 Leuſden's

<page 273>
( 26.2 )
Leuſden's Latin verſion, over againſt each
page. Igreedily boughtit, andfindingthever-
ſion much more eaſy and natural than thoſe
literal ones of Pagninus and Montanus,
quickly went through every verſe in the
book, without troubling myſelf about
grammar, or any thing but the true mean-
ing of every word as they occurred. So
that by the time I had given it a ſecond
reading, my memory being the beſt faculty
I could boaſt of, I had by that very rote,
as I may call it, not only gained a confide-
rable copia verborum, but by obſervation
on the flexion of nouns, verbs, &c. got a
tolerable inſight into the declenſions, con-
jugations, and other parts of the grammar
and ſyntax; and, whenever any difficulty
or doubt occurred, could eaſily turn to my
Bellarmine or even Buxſtorf, the moſt diſ-
couraging of all; becauſe, having then but
one point in view, I could, without per-
plexing my mind with any more than that,
either ſatisfy myſelf about it, or at the
worſt poſtpone it, till a further reading and
obſervation brought me to it: I became ſo
fond of this method, that having gone
through a third reading of it, with little or
no
*

<page 274>
( 263 )
no obſtacle, and in a very little time, I re-
ſolved thenceforth to confine myſelf to the
pſalmsofeachday, as they are readat church,
and to begin with the hiſtorical books.
Here, inſtead of perplexing myſelf with
ſuch Bibles as had the ſervile letters printed
in a different kind of charaćter, to diſtin-
guiſh them from the radicals, Ipitched upon
the firſt edition of that of Munſter, which
is far inferior to the ſecond, and, by the
help of his verſion on the oppoſite column,
though often at ſeveral lines diſtance from
the original, had hardly gone through fix
or eight chapters of the firſt book of Samuel,
before the eaſe I found in it invited me to
go back to Genefis, and take every chapter
in its courſe. I reſolved at firſt to run them
over once, without taking notice of his
notes, becauſe the greateſt part of them
were either of the Maſſoretic or of the
Cabbaliſtical kind, and would rather clog
than aſſiſt; and even in theſe of the gram-
matical ſort he lays all along ſo great a ſtreſs
on the punétuation for the true meaning
and import of each word, as made his ver-
fion the leſs to be depended upon. For
S 4 though

<page 275>
( 264 )
though I always did and do ſtill look upon
the points to be of fingular help to learners,
and conſequently on the method propoſed
by ſome moderns of teaching the Hebrew
without them, as wild, intricate, and in
ſome caſes dangerous, yet from all I had
been able to gather from the learned au-
thors who have wrote on the controverſy,
I was ſo far from thinking them of the
ſame authority with the text, they plainly
appeared of too modern a date to be uſed
in any other ſhape than as an expeditious
help; and as ſuch I ſtill made uſe of them,
without confining myſelf to them any far-
ther than they were ſupported by the dia-
lečt, by the ancient paraphraſes and ver-
ſions, and other ſuch critical helps, but made
no ſcruple to depart from them whenever
a ſmall change of them could afford one a
clearer or better ſenſe. And for that I
ſhall refer the reader to what I have fince
wrote on that ſo much controverted ſubjećt
in the Jewiſh hiſtory, which makes the
ſeventh chapterof the Univerſal Hiſtory, and
eſpecially in the folio edition, where I had
more room to expatiate upon it than in
the očtavo one, in which our being confined
to

<page 276>
>
( 265 )
to reduce the whole within the compaſs of
twenty volumes, obliged us to be a little
more conciſe. I muſt therefore here own
with pleaſure, that all that I there advanced
hath been ſo well received, and looked
upon as ſo well grounded, that it hath not,
that I know of, been ſince cenſured or con-
tradićted; and that though the controverſy
in favour of the antiquity and authority of
the points hath been of late revived with
no ſmall warmth, I have met with nothing
in it, nor heard from either thoſe I converſe
or correſpond with, any thing that could
give me cauſe to alter my mind. I ſhall
only beg leave to add, that my looking on
the Hebrew points, both vowel and gra-
matical only in that view, enabled me to
make many uſeful diſcoveries in the ſacred
books, which have been highly approved
by thoſe who have fince read them in the
hiſtory abovementioned.
But to return to my firſt reading of the origi-
nal books, I ran with eaſe through the Penta-
euch, Joſhua, Judges, &c.except the few po-
etical parts which occur in it, ſuch as Exod.
xv, paſſ, Deut. xxxii, Judges v. 1 Sa-
muel

<page 277>
( 266 ),
muel ii. 1–10. where the ſtile is not only
fwoln and figurative, but where the conſtruc-
tion is harſh, irregular, and to appearance
truncated, and ſeveral terms which occur no
where elſe; ſo that finding them too hard
for me to ſurmount, with all the application
I had, I poſtponed them to a future read-
ing. I found likewiſe pretty near the ſame.
difficulty in the Proverbs, Eccleſiaſtes, and
the Song of Solomon, and much more ſtill
in Job; and therefore contented myſelf with
catching as much as I could at one
curſory reading, and leaving the reſt for
hereafter; yet did not this diſcourage me
from going through all the Prophets in
courſe, though it proved an arduous taſk,
and I went but ſlowly on, becauſe in theſe I
endeavoured to make myſelf as much maſ.
ter of their meaning and ſtile, as well as of
the new words and phraſes peculiar to
them: and as I ſpent generally ſome hours
a day on that ſtudy, I had quickly gone
through all the ſacred books of the Old
Teſtament, excepting thoſe chapters in Da-
niel, Ezra, &c. which are in the Chaldee,
and where I contented myſelf at this firſt
reading, with examining as well as I was
able,

<page 278>
( 267 ) -
>
able, the difference between that and the
Hebrew. And here I own I found ſuch a
diſparity between them, ſuch a noble ſim-
plicity, and yet maſculine energy in the
latter, and ſuch an apparent ſoftneſs and
effeminacy in the former, not unlike what is
juſtly obſerved between Latin and Italian,
that I believe nothing could have tempted me
to become more acquainted with it, had it
not been for the vaſt helps which the
Chaldee paraphraſe affords us, not only in
fixing the meaning of many obſcure words
and expreſſions, but, what is ſtill more va-
luable, in diſcovering the ſentiments of the
ancient Jews concerning many pregnant
prophecies of the Meſſiah, from which
the Talmudic writers have fince departed
out of diſlike to him.
When I came to the ſecond reading of Ge-
neſis, by which time I had likewiſe ran
through the Pſalms five or fix times, and
was got again into the hiſtorical ſtile, I
found myſelf ſo unclogged, ſo acquainted
with the grammar and ſyntax, and maſter
of ſuch a vaſt number of words, that I began
to think I might begin to read the Latin
into Hebrew; that is, by hiding the Hebrew
- 1 column

<page 279>
( 268 )
column with my hand, try how I could
make my own agree to it. This I found
however too hard and tedious, except in
ſome eaſy places or chapters, and I found
myſelf not only at a loſs for the words, but
moſtly in the conjugating and ſyntax, and
though it might in all likelihood have
quitted coſt, had I proceeded regularly in
that method, yet I found it too tedious, as it
took me above twice the time, ſo that I
contented myſelf with only trying it now
and then, when the humour took, or the
ſubjećt invited me to it. At other leiſure
times, I uſed likewiſe to exerciſe myſelf in
conjugating of verbs by dint of memory
and obſervation, and then to compare it with
thoſe in the grammar, by which I ſoon
found out wherein I was deficient, and this
I thought more expeditious, diverting, and
effectual, than the dull method of begin-
ners, who, by dint of hammering, learn
them by heart, ſcarcely knowing what
they are about. One thing however I found
would be a great help, viz. in all dubious
words, as the Hebrew is ſo figurative and
ſcanty, to have recourſe to the Lexicon, in
order to find out the primitive ſenſe of them
from

<page 280>
:
( 269. )
from the more remote, which it was eaſy.
to do by the parallel texts there pointed at,
where they occurred. This method duely
attended to, opens a ſpacious inſight into
the true meaning of the ſacred books. Thus,
I found for inſtance in the words nºn-nnn.
on's mn Geneſis i. 2. the ſpirit of God’
moved upon the face of the waters, com-
pared with the motion of the eagle in ſtir-
ring her young ones to flight, Deut. xxxii.
1 I. that the verb Frin in the former in its
primitive ſenſe, is not ſtºch a motion as
our verſion expreſſes, nor a brooding like
that of the hen over her eggs, as ſome other
tranſlations intimate, but a lively agitation,
ſuch as much better explains the action of
the ſpirit of God upon the face of the
waters. This method, which I preferred
to the conſulting that variety of verſions we
have, which rather confound than fix the
ſenſe, inabled me in my very ſecond going
through the ſacred books, to make a pretty
large colle&tion of ſuch kind of criticiſms,
and obſervations, as have been ſince of ſingu-
laruſe to me in the progreſs of my ſtudy, and
in ſome of thoſe works in which I have been
ſince engaged, though I little thought then
- that

<page 281>
( azo )
either they, or thoſe which I made out of
other authors that came in my way, would
ever come into public view.
I had by this time made ſo great a profi-
ciency in the Hebrew, tongue that I could
have talked it pretty fluently, had I been as
well acquainted with the pronunciation of
it. But as that could not be attained from
grammars, which differed almoſt as much
in the rules they gave for it, as the native
languages of their authors differed from
each other, I thought it might be more eaſily
attained by converſing with the Jews them-
ſelves, going to their ſynagogues, and hear-
ing the Scriptures read by their chazans or
miniſters, who, I ſuppoſed, were perfeót
maſters of it. But here, to my great
ſurpriſe, I found that they not only greatly
differed among themſelves, that is, the nor-
thern from the ſouthern, or German, Poliſh,
Hungarian, &c. from the Spaniſh, Portu-
gueſe, Italian, &c. but that every one of
them pronounced it after the ſame manner as
they did the languages of the countries where
they had been brought up, and, as it plainly
appeared to me, none of them right. And .
this was farther confirmed to me by con-
- verſing

<page 282>
( 271 )
verfing with ſome Morocco Jews, whoſe
native language being the Arabic, made me
think they bid faireſt for having retained
the antient pronunciation in a greater degree
at leaſt of purity; for ſome of them whom
I met with by chance in the Portugueſe
ſynagogue, made a mere ridicule of their
way of reading and pronouncing it. And
it was by converſing with ſome of theſe,
who were beſides well acquainted with
the Hebrew, that I took my rules for a
more genuine way of ſpeaking it; and it
was no ſmall pleaſure to me to find, that I
could be very readily underſtood by all the
ſouthern Jews, though I could not ſo eaſily
underſtand them, on account of their not
ſufficiently diſtinguiſhing between the
ſounding of ſundry conſonants, aſpirations,
gutturals, &c. which ſeemed to me to have
originally differed very greatly; ſuch as the
tº and tº and p the ap and n the vri and R.
the to n and x &c. but between which
they do not make any diſtinčtion, nor in-
deed can, for want of having been taught it
in their youth. In the ſame manner do
they murder it, when they go about to
write it in European charaćters, witneſs that
Spaniſh dialogue of the famed R. Netto,
- intituled

<page 283>
( 272 )
intituled nº vs eſh dath, the legal fire,
but which he ſpells, after his Spaniſh man-
ner of pronouncing, es dat. However, after
I had once been fully appriſed of all the .
defeóts of their reading, which ſeveral of
them I have converſed with have had thein-
genuity to own as ſuch, Icould eaſily enough
underſtand both their lećtures.of the Old Teſ.
tament and their prayers. But as to the nor-
thern Jews, I own I never could con-
verſe with them in that tongue, without an
interpreter, or ſome go-between, who, by
the help of travelling into other parts, had
learned the way to accomodate their ſpeech
to both ways of pronouncing, ſo much
wider and uncooth is theirs to that of the
ſouthern; and this was no ſmall grief to
me, becauſe I always found the northern
more learned and communicative, as well.
as more fluent and ready at ſpeaking that
ſacred tongue; though that confideration
was never ſufficient to induce me to be at
the pains to accuſtom myſelf to their way.
Thus much I thought might be neceſſary
to ſay with reſpect to the pronunciation of
the Hebrew, to which I ſhall only add, that
my method for learning and preſerving it
WaS

<page 284>
}
( 273 )
was by reading it aloud to myſelf, and
with the ſame exactneſs, as if I had been
reading it to an aſſembly. - *
But what contributed moſt to this extraor-
dinary readineſs of ſpeaking it, was a me-
thod I fell into at proper times, when I
found myſelf inclined to cloſe thinking,
to cloath my ideas in that, inſtead of any
other language, or, as one may more pro-
perly word it, to think in Hebrew rather,
than in Engliſh, or any other language I
was uſed to. The Pſalter, which at my
firſt ſetting up for this ſtudy, I had read
over for ſome time, at leaſt three or four
times a month, and afterwards conſtantly
went through once a month ever fince,
was become ſo familiar to me, that I had
got it by heart; and as that contains moſt
of the radical words, as well as idioms,
which are moſt in uſe, I ſeldom, was at
a loſs for either in theſe my ſoliloquies, or,
if I was, I immediately endeavoured to
call to mind where I had read any, thing.
like it, either in that or any other of the
ſacred books, and by turning to it, if I
could not readily recover it by dint of
memory, ſeldom failed of fixing it there
- T indelibly.

<page 285>
( 274 )
indelibly. By this means I ſoon acquired
not only a ſurpriſing fluency in it, but
could ſpeak it in the pure and elegant
ftile of the ſacred writers, and now and
then, upon occaſion, raiſe it to the lofty
ſtrain of the poetical books. This I was
the more admired for, becauſe it was what
few, if any, of the learned among the
Jews could do, who commonly marred
their own by an heterogeneous mixture of
the corrupt Talmudic and Rabbinic words
and idioms, 'to which I was then in a
great meaſure a ſtranger, nor could ever
be reconciled to after I became more ac-
quainted with them. One may, indeed,
obſerve almoſt the ſame difference between'
the former and the latter, ſome few of
theſe excepted, as there is between the
Latin of the Auguſtin age, and that which
was in vogue after the inundation of the
northern barbarians into the Roman em-
pire, as the reader may ſee by what I have
ſaid of it in my Hiſtory of the Jews from
their Diſperſion after the deſtruction of
Jeruſalem to this time. - -
By what I have ſaid hitherto of my me-
thod of learning Hebrew, any one may
- º - ſee

<page 286>
}
( 275 )
ſee how eaſily men at years of maturity
may come to as perfeót knowledge of it,
as the thing will admit of, and without
the diſcouraging ſlavery of beginning at the
grammar, and may even make that a
pleaſing relaxation from other ſtudies; and
it is with a view of leſſening, if not al-
together removing thoſe fancied difficul-
ties and diſcouragements which have been
the cauſe of that ſacred tongue being ſo
much, and, I may add, ſo ſhamefully
neglected, by the clergy eſpecially, that I
have ventured to write ſo far on that ſub-
jećt from my own experience; for, let them
think of or palliate it as they will, ſuch
a neglečt muſt of neceſſity be condemned,
by all who ſeriouſly conſider how impoſ-
fible it is to come at a true knowledge,
not only of the Old, but I will be bold to
ſay of the New Teſtament, without a ſuf-
ficient knowledge of the Hebrew : the
firſt ſeems to me ſelf-evident, and with re-
ſpect to the ſecond, or New Teſtament,
I need only obſerve, that the writers of it,
though inſpired, and endowed with the
gift of tongues, did viſibly adhere ſtill to
the Hebrew idiom in which they had been
T 2 brought

<page 287>
( 276 )
brought up, St. Paul himſelf not excepted.
Hence, the vaſt quantity of Hebraiſms
that occur more or leſs in the Goſpels,
Aćts, and in the Epiſtles, and which ne-
ver can be rightly underſtood or explained,
but by having recourſe to the Hebrew
idiom ; but this hath been ſo fully diſ-
played by much better pens, that I ſhal
ſay no more on the ſubjećt.
I have often wiſhed, indeed, that we
had ſome more inviting helps to that ſtudy
than we have, and ſuch as might more
effectually contribute to overcome the a-
-
verſion, or indifference, which our young
clergy ſeem to have for it. And in order
to contribute ſomething more than a bare
wiſh towards it, I had once gone a good
way in compoſing a tragi-comic piece,
intituled, David and Michol, in Hebrew,
verſe, wherein. I introduced this young
princeſs, acknowledging with a ſuitable
reluctancy and ſhame to her confident, her
new born affection for the young ſhep-
herd, after ſhe had ſeen him unperceived
from behind a curtain in her father's pa-
vilion, and heard ſome of theſe inimita-
ble ſtrains with which he was wont to
- enliven
-

<page 288>
>
~
( 277 )
enliven that deſponding monarch in his
moſt melancholy hours. The diſtreſs a-
rifing from the apprehended rivalſhip of her
eldeſt fiſter, who was ſoon after promiſed
as a reward to that brave youth, for kill-
ing the vapouring champion of the Phi-
liſtines and Morabs, being repreſented here
as having already ſettled her affections on
Adriel the Meholathite, to whom Saul ac-
tually gave her ſoon after, contrary to his
promiſe (1 Sam. xviii. 19.) the different
fears and emotions of the two fiſters, the
means by which they came to underſtand
each other's caſe and inclinations, the ſin-
gular affection of Jonathan towards David,
and the kind offices he did him with Saul,
in order to procure him his beloved Mi-
chol, inſtead of her fiſter; all theſe, I ſay,
are repreſented in divers affecting ſcenes,
to which the energy of the Hebrew gives
no ſmall beauty and pathos. The Epi-
ſodes, the moſt confiderable of which con-
ſiſt of ſeveral interviews and conferences
between the prophet Samuel and young
David, as when he acquainted him with
Saul's utter rejećtion, and his being choſen
by God to ſucceed him in the Iſraelitiſh
T 3 king-
s

<page 289>
( 278 )
kingdom, David's ſurpriſe, ſcruples and
fears, his dread of entertaining even the
moſt diſtant hope of a crown, which he
could not obtain but by the moſt unnatural
and blackeſt treaſon againſt his father-in-
law, and his moſt generous friend Jonathan,
and the arguments by which the prophet
endeavours to ſatisfy his ſcrupulous mind,
that he ſhall enjoy the promiſed crown,
without the leaſt ſtain to his loyalty, and at
length prevails on him to ſuffer himſelf to
be anointed king; theſe, and ſome others
of leſs importance, are not improper inter-
ludes to bring the piece to its happy cata-
ſtrophe, his marrying the kind and beloved
Michol, and being juſtly raiſed to the
command of the Iſraelitiſh army. To this
I had added a literal verſion, which I
deſigned to have illuſtrated with critical
notes; but ſome avocations obliged me to
fet it aſide for a conſiderable number of
years, and when I came to give it a freſh
reading, I found it to fall ſo ſhort of the
elegance and loftineſs of the ſacred poets,
with whom I was become by that time
much better acquainted, and a much greater
admirer of, that I was quite diſcouraged from
improving
*

<page 290>
( 279 )
improving or even finiſhing, eſpecially when
I conſidered the little likelihood there was of
its meeting with encouragement anſwerable
to the pains and coſt, at a time when one
might obſerve the ſtudy of that tongue to
dwindle more and more viſibly into con-
tempt, among thoſe whoſe duty and buſi-
neſs it ought to have been to cultivate and
promote it.
The ſame mortifying confideration made
me likewiſe ſet aſide a deſign I had formed,
of compiling ſome ſcriptural Hebrew Dia-
logues, in imitation of the Latin ones of
Caſtalio, and a ſet of others on more com-
mon ſubjećts, like thoſe of Corderius, tho’
not ſo puerile, for the encouragement and
diverſion of young beginners; and a third
between a Jew, and a Chriſtian, on the
moſt material points of controverſy between
us, together with a collection and expoſi-
tion of a great number of texts, both in
the Old, and New Teſtament, plainly
foretelling the future reſtoration of the
twelve tribes of Iſrael, to their own Land,
and their embracing. Chriſtian religion
at the ſecond coming of Chriſt, towards
T 4 the

<page 291>
( 28o )
the cloſe of the fixth, or in the beginning
of the ſeventh millenary of the world;
for though that doćtrine is, as the Jews at
Rome ſaid of Chriſtianity, every where
ſpoken againſt, (A&ts, cap. ult. v. 22.) I
never found it to be ſo but by men who,
like theſe Jews had never rightly confi-
dered it; whilſt thoſe who really have,
(among whom I have known ſeveral emi-
ment divines of the church of England, and
ſome among the Diſſenters who were
thoroughly ſatisfied with it) contented them-
ſelves with owning their belief of it to
their intimate friends, without daring to
preach or promote it, for fear of being re-
fleóted or ridiculed for it. But I have had
frequent occaſion to obſerve ſince (vide Jual
un Heſtor, fol. edit. vol. i. p. 613, &c. 8vo.
edit. vol. iii. p. 39. and above all, ſee the
concluſion of their hiſtory, from the diſper-
fion to this preſent time) that the Chriſ-
tians denying that doćtrine, is one of the
moſt effectual means not only of hardening
the Jews in their unbelief, but of unhing-
ing one of the greateſt evidences of the
Chriſtian faith, ſince it cannot be proved
in any ſenſe, that any of thoſe glorious pro-
phecies
-
i

<page 292>
( 281 ) -
phecies concerning the happy ſtate of the
Jews under the Meſſiah, which are ſcat-
tered through the Old and New Teſta-
ment, have been fulfilled; but that, on the
contrary, they have for the moſt part been
hated, perſecuted and miſerable, in moſt
countries in the world, ever ſince the death
of Chriſt. However, as I had little en-
couragement to hope that ſuch a ſubjećt,
written in Hebrew, how beneficial ſoever
it might have proved, at leaſt to young be-,
ginners, eſpecially by the help of the Latin
verſion, would reliſh with the preſent age,
I likewiſe poſtponed it for ſome happier
time, which is not yet come, if ever I ſhould
live to ſee it. . w
I therefore contented myſelf with preparing
for the preſs anew edition of the Pſalms, with
Leuſden's Latin verſion over againſt it, and
ſome critical and other notes for the uſe of
the learners, interſperſed here and there,
with others of a more curious nature, on
ſeveral defficient places of that book, and
moſt of them new. To this I deſigned a
preface, that ſhould give an account of the
method by which I had, chiefly by the
means of the pſalms, attained to my know-
- ledge

<page 293>
( 282 )
ledge of the Hebrew tongue, in the man-
ner I have lately related. I deſigned to
add ſome further direétions than thoſe I
have mentioned, with reſpect to the more
eaſy attaining a readineſs of underſtanding
and ſpeaking it, one of which was, in the
frequent reading to change the third into the
ſecond perſon at proper places, and ſo turn-
ing the pſalm into a kind of prayer, which,
by raiſing the attention, imprints the words
more in the mind, as well as familiarizes
the conjugating of the verbs, &c. and this
I found a great help to my progreſs, and
was approved by ſome judges, upon which
I acquainted Mr. Palmer, of Bartholomew's
Cloſe, one of the beſt printers then in Eng-
land, with my deſign, and was ſurpriſed
one day on my coming to talk further
about it, to hear that the reverend Dr.
W had been there juſt before, to treat
with him about printing a new edition of
it, ſaid to have been compiled by Dr. Hare,
fince biſhop of Chicheſter, who pretended
to have found out the true metre of the
Pſalms, and by means of that to have made
a great number of conſiderable diſcoveries
and emendations in the original. I knew
but

<page 294>
( 283 ) -
but too well how many excellent critics
had already ſplit upon that fatal rock, and
who, inſtead of correóting, had quite marred
the Hebrew, by diſtorting, tranſpoſing and
altering it at pleaſure, in order to bring it
to their model, to expect any thing ſolid
or ſatisfactory from that quarter, conſider-
ing eſpecially the charaćter of the author.
Nor was I miſtaken, though this performance
did not appear in print till ſeven or eight
years after, and then to my great ſurpriſe.
For Mr. Palmer had amuſed me with the
belief that the deſign was ſet aſide, either
on account of its being found impracticable,
or at leaſt too difficult and dangerous; for
that, upon his applying to Dr. W- to
enquire further about it, he had received
ſuch evaſive anſwers, as plainly convinced
him, that the author did not deſign to go
on with it, which ſtill confirmed me more
in my old opinion, that all attempts to recover
the antient metre of the ſacred poetical
books, were fruitleſs and loſt labour. It
appeared however, as I ſhall ſhow here-
after, that Mr. Palmer impoſed upon me,
and that he knew that the deſign was car-
ried on in another printing-houſe, though
- - - with

<page 295>
( 284 )
with ſuch privacy, that I never heard or
dreamed of it, though I had been long ac-
quainted with Mr. Bowyer, who was em-
ployed in the printing of it. So far from
it was I, that I began to think Mr. Palmer
had only invented that ſtory to divert
me from printing my propoſed edition, in
order to ſet me upon another work, in which
he was more immediately concerned, and
expected greater credit, as well as preſent
profit from. This was his hiſtory of print-
ing, which he had long promiſed to the
world, but for which he was not at all
qualified. However, he deſigned to have
added a ſecond part, relating to the pračtical
art, which was more ſuited to his genius,
and in which he deſigned to have given a
full account of all that relates to that branch,
from the letter-founding to the moſt ele-
gant way of printing, impoſing, bind-
ing, &c. in which he had made confide-
rable improvements of his own, beſides
thoſe he had taken from foreign authors;
but this ſecond part, though but then as it
were in embryo, met with ſuch early and
ſtrenuous oppoſition from the reſpective
bodies of letterfounders, printers, and book-
binders,

<page 296>
( 285 )
binders, under an ill-grounded apprehenſion,
that the diſcovery of the myſtery of thoſe
arts, eſpecially the two firſt, would render
them cheap and contemptible (whereas the
very reverſe would have been the caſe, they
appearing indeed the more curious and
worthy our admiration, the better they are
known) that he was forced to ſet it aſide.
But as to the firſt part, viz. the hiſtory of
printing, he met with the greateſt en-
couragement, not only from them, but
from a very great number of the learned,
who all engaged to ſubſcribe largely to it,
particularly the late earls of Pembroke and
Oxford, and the famous doćtor Mead,
whoſe libraries were to furniſh him with
the nobleſt materials for the compiling of it,
and did ſo accordingly,
The misfortune was, that Mr. Palmer,
knowing himſelf unequal to the taſk, had
turned it over to one Papiat, a broken Iriſh
bookſeller then in London, of whom he
had a great opinion, though ſtill more un-
qualified for it than he, and only aimed at
getting money from him, without ever
doing any thing towards it, except amuſing
him with fair promiſes for near three quar-
- terS

<page 297>
( 286 )
ters of a year. He had ſo long dallied with
him that they were come within three
months of the time in which Mr. Palmer
had engaged to produce a compleat plan,
and a number or two of the firſt part, by way
of ſpecimen of the work, viz. the inven-
tion and improvement of it by John Fauſt
at Mentz; and theſe were to be ſhewn at a
grand meeting of learned men, of which
Dr. Mead was preſident that year, and
being his ſingular friend and patron, was to
have promoted a large ſubſcription and pay-
ment, which Mr. Palmer ſtood in great
need of at that time. Whereas Papiathad got
nothing ready but a few looſe and imperfeót
extraćts out of Chevalier la Caille, and ſome ,
other French authors on the ſubjećt, but.
which could be of little or no uſe, becauſe
he frequently miſtook them, and left blanks
for the words he did not underſtand.
Theſe however, ſuch as they were, Mr.
Palmer brought to me, and earneſtly preſſed
me that I would ſet aſide all other things I
might be then about, and try to produce
the expected plan and ſpecimen by the time
promiſed, ſince he muſt be ruined both in
credit and pocket, if he diſappointed his
2 : friends

<page 298>
( 287 ) -
friends of it. It was well for him and me,’
that the ſubjećt lay within ſo ſmall a com-
paſs as the conſulting of about twelve or
fourteen principal authors, and the con-
troverſy between Mentz and Harlem univer-
ſally decided in favour of the former, ſo that
I eaſily fell upon a proper plan of the work,
which I divided into three parts, the firſt
which was, to give an account of the inven-
tion of the art, and its firſt eſſays by Fauſt
at Mentz, and of its improvement by
fuſile or metal types, varniſh, ink, &c. by
his ſon-in-law; Peter Schoeffer. The
fecond was to contain its propagation
and further improvement, through moſt
part of Europe, under the moſt celebrated
printers; and the third an account of its in-
trodućtion and progreſs into England. This,
together with above one half of the firſt
part, were happily finiſhed, and produced by
the time appointed, and met with more
approbation and encouragement from his
friends than I feared it would, being con-
ſcious how much better it might have
turned out, would time have permitted it.
And this I chiefly mention, not ſo much to:
excuſe the defects of ſuch a horrid perfor-
- - , ; Inance,

<page 299>
( 288 )
'Pine.
mance, as becauſe it hath given me ſince
frequent occaſion to obſerve how many
much more conſiderable works have been
ſpoiled, both at home and abroad, through
the impatience of the ſubſcribers; though
this is far enough from being the only, or
even the greateſt inconvenience that attends
moſt of thoſe kinds of ſubſcriptions.
As to Mr. Palmer, his circumſtances were
by this time ſounaccountably low and unfor-
tunate, conſidering the largeneſs and ſucceſs
of his buſineſs, and that he was himſelf a
ſober induſtrious man, and free from all
extravagance, that he could not extricate
himſelf by any other way, but by a ſtatute
of bankrupt, which cauſed his hiſtory to
go ſluggiſhly on; ſo that notwithſtanding all
the care and kind aſſiſtance of his good
friend Dr. Mead, a ſtubborn diſtemper,
which his misfortunes brought upon him,
carried him off before the third part of it
was finiſhed. This defect, however, was
happily ſupplied by the late noble earl of
Pembroke, who being informed by Mr.
Pain the engraver, Mr. Palmer's brother-
in-law, what condition the remainder was
left in, and that I was the perſon who had
- wrote

<page 300>
( 289 )
wrote the former parts, ſent for me, and,
with his uſual generoſity, enjoined me to
compleat the work, according to the plan;
and not only defrayed all the charges of
it, even of the paper and printing, but
furniſhed me with all neceſſºry materials
out of his own library; and, when the work
was finiſhed, his lordſhip reſerved only ſome
few copies to himſelf, and gave the re-
mainder of the impreſſion to Mr. Palmer's
widow, not without ſome farther tokens of
his liberality. . - .
Before I leave this ſubjećt, I muſt, in juſtice
to that noble peer, give an inſtance or two
of his generofity and fingular integrity.
At my firſt coming into England, I had had
the honour to be introduced to him, and
to dine with him and other great perſons
in his company, and had received no ſmall
tokens of his regard, till he conceived a
juſt diſguſt at one abſurd fact I had affirmed
in my fabulous hiſtory of Formoſa, viz.
the Greek tongue being taught there as a
learned language, which monſtrous abſur-
dity ſufficiently ſhewed my ignorance and
indiſcretion at the time of my writing it,
and from that time his lordſhip gave me up
for

<page 301>
* ( 290 ) .
for what I was, an impoſtor, and I ſaw him
no more, till above twenty-eight years after,
when Mr. Pine brought me to him, in or-.
der to finiſh the book abovementioned. At
my firſt coming into his preſence, his lord-
ſhip preſently knew me again, and reminded
me of my having been often with him, and
of the reaſon of his taking a diſlike to me;
upon which I readily owned the juſtneſs of
the charge, and of his reſentment, which I
begged his lordſhiptolook upon as the effect
of a raſh inconfiderate piece of youthful
vanity, which I had long fince diſclaimed,
and condemned myſelf for, and affured
him, that I had ſince then, I thanked God,
fallen into ſo laudable a way of living, as I
doubted not his lordſhip, if he knew of
it, would not but approve of Mr. Pine
confirmed what I had ſaid; and his lord-
ſhip with his uſual affability and condeſcen-
fion, highly congratulated and commended
me for it, and was pleaſed to expreſs a
more than ordinary pleaſure at it, exhort-
ing me to continue in the ſame good mind
and way, and aſſuring me of his friend-
ſhip and encouragement; and from that
time I cannot ſufficiently acknowledge his
- - . CXtreme
-
t

<page 302>
( 291 )
extreme benevolence and condeſcenſion,
in not only furniſhing me with all the
books and other helps I wanted, but in his
generouſly rewarding me for what I did ;
and when I was forced afterwards to ac-
quaint him that I was a perſon concerned
in the writing of the Univerſal Hiſtory,
became a ſubſcriber and encourager of it,
as I ſhall preſently have occaſion to ſhew.
It was a little before Mr. Palmer's death,
that this work, the projećt of which had
been formed by Mr. Crockat, and the ex-
cellent plan by the late famed Mr. Sale,
met with an unexpected ſtop, by an un-
happy quarrel between the proprietors and
the authors, at the head of whom was Mr.
Sale abovementioned, when I was recom-
mended to the former as a proper perſon
to ſupply the place of ſome of the latter,
who had abſolutely declined being farther
concerned in it. This rupture happened
ſoon after the publication of the third
number, anno 1730, when Mr. Pal-
mer brought me the three printed num-
bers from the proprietors, and defired,
if after having read them and the plan, I
had a mind to engage myſelf in the work,
U 2 I ſhould

<page 303>
( 292 )
I ſhould give them and the reſt of the authors
a meeting at a place and day appointed,
which I accordingly did, and after having
informed myſelf with their terms, method,
and other previous particulars, readily un-
dertook to write the Jewiſh hiſtory, in
which I was the moſt verſed, and for which
I knew myſelf already provided with a
conſiderable quantity and variety of mate-
rials, which I had been collecting for my
private uſe for ſeveral years; and as I have
been one of the chief perſons concerned as
an author, not only in the firſt, but alſo in
the ſecond edition, and ſo was perfeótly
acquainted with every ſtep taken in the
progreſs of the work, the encouragements
and difficulties it hath met with, as well as
with the merit and demerit of every part
of it, I ſhall make no difficulty to inſert
here a faithful and impartial account of the
whole, at leaſt ſo far as it may be of ſervice
to the public, and prove a means of making
any future editions more compleat, by
pointing out the many falſe ſteps which I
found were impoſſible for us to avoid in
the two former.
And

<page 304>
( 293 )
And here I muſt obſerve, in the firſt place,
that though the deſign was publicly pre-
tended to be carried on by a ſociety of
learned gentlemen, yet in fact Mr. Sale
was to be the ſole condućtor of it, by the
aſſiſtance of ſuch ammanuenſes as he ſhould
think fit to employ in the work. And
though, in point of learning, no man might
be better qualified than he, for ſuch an ar-
duous and extenſive undertaking, yet his
known ſtrait circumſtances obliged him
to have ſo many other irons in the fire (to
ſay nothing of his natural indolence, the ſad.
effects of which, not only the proprietors
of this work, but many others of that pro-
feſſion have ſufficiently felt) that it was im-
poſſible for him to give it that attention
which a work of that nature deſerved, much
leſs the diſpatch he had engaged with them
for, viz. the publiſhing twenty ſheets
per month. Accordingly upon enquiry
I could not find that he ever wrote
more than the firſt number; which, though
puffed up with the ſpecious pretence of a
ſecond edition, every reader verſed on the
ſubjećts treated in it, might eaſily know
where he had got all his materials ready
U 3 gathered

<page 305>
( 294 ). ~
gathered to his hand; yet ſo long was he
in publiſhing it, that his delay occaſioned
the firſt miſunderſtanding between him and
the proprietors, which was however fol-
lowed by a greater. -
The ſecond and third numbers, which ap-
peared afterwards to have been written by his
two ammanuenſes, till then unknown to the
partners, came out indeed more regularly ;
but the proprietors, who had already paid
Mr. Sale for them, were not a little ſurpriſed
when the two young authors (whom I
forbear naming, becauſe they are both alive
and make a good figure, the one in a high
poſt, and the other in the commonwealth of
learning) came and demanded the money for
theircopy. The propietors did indeed produce
his receipts for much greater ſums than the
three numbers could amount to, but though
they knew that he was not in a capacity to
pay them, they refuſed to make a ſecond
diſburſement for what they had more than
payed for, whilſt the ſufferers, on the other
hand, refuſed to go on further with the
work, till they were ſatisfied for what they
had done. The partners ſtiffly refuſing to
comply, the reſult was, that one of them,
- - - In Ot

<page 306>
- ( 295 )
not only quite declined all further meddling
in the work, but vented his reſentment
by crying it down, and all the perſons con-
cerned in it, authors as well as proprietors.
Mr. Sale was ſtill more outrageous againſt
them, of whom the latter had taken a note
of 72 pounds, payable on demand, for
money overpaid, and the embezzlement of a
confiderable number of books, which they
had furniſhed him to carry on the defign.
This note was probably taken with a view of
keeping himinawe, but neither that nor their
threats could contain him within bounds,
ſo that he became a moſt inveterate enemy
to the deſign, and did all he could to diſ.
credit and obſtrućt it. . . .
This was the hopeleſs ſituation of the work
at my firſt being invited to it, and againſt
which I cannot forbear mentioning an-
other diſcouragement, viz. the freedom
which the authors of the foregoing part had
taken in reflecting, as often as they had op-
portunity, againſt the Moſaic account, eſpe-
cially in the hiſtory of the antient Canaan-
ites, where God is recorded to have treated
them with ſuch ſeverity in favour of the
Iſraelites, and where they made no diffi-
U 4 culty

<page 307>
( 296 )
culty to reflečt upon that partiality, as incon-
fiſtent with the divine juſtice and goodneſs
towards a favourite nation, who are there
repreſented as by far the worſe of the two:
for, as I took the liberty to obſerve to them,
beſides that all the objećtions againſt the
divine condućt in this particular have been
ſo often and ſo effectually anſwered by
learned divines, that there can be no juſtifi-
able reaſon given for reviving them here,
this manner of treating Moſes's writings
is far below the regard that ſuch an antient
and celebrated author may challenge, ab-
ſtraćtedly even from his being acknowledged
an inſpired penman, by Jews, Turks and
Chriſtians. And therefore added, I will
never engage in the work, unleſs you will
allow me to follow the oppoſite tract, and,
inſtead of reflećting, to vindicate both his
character and writings, as often as occaſion
offers, either from the works of our beſt
divines, or from ſundry new obſervations I
have had opportunity to make on the books
of that divine lawgiver. I much queſtion,
if they had not been at ſuch a nonplus for
a hand to go immediately upon the Jewiſh
hiſtory, whether they would have ever
- - yielded

<page 308>
( 297 )
yielded to theſe terms, ſuch was their
opinion of Mr. Sale, whom they knew had
no great regard for the Old Teſtament, and
who had long ago inſpired one, if not both of
his ammanuenſes with a moſt outrageous
zeal againſt it. However, I got them with
ſome trouble to acquieſce, and let me take
my own way, only Mr. Provoſt, then one
of the partners, begged it as a favour of me,
that I would not be righteous over much.
I gave them ſoon after good cauſe to be
ſatisfied with my advice and condućt, and
the unexpected encouragement which the
work met with, after the regular publica-
tion of two or three numbers of the Jewiſh
hiſtory (to ſay nothing of the commenda-
tions, given to it in print, by two ſuch
learned perſons as Dr. Chapman, chaplain
to his grace of Canterbury, and Dr. Pearce,
rector of St. Martin's in the fields) raiſed it
into ſuch reputation and vogue, that they
no longer doubted of its ſucceſs; inſo-
much that they began now to enlarge the
edition from 750 to 10oo. And this I
mention with pleaſure, becauſe the great
call there was for it from that time, to what
they had found before, when the numbers
- * > . were

<page 309>
( 298. )
were returned to them by dozens from
other bookſellers, plainly ſhewed how few
encouragers it would have met with among
the freethinkers and unbelievers, to what
it did among thoſe of a different, and I may
add, of a better way of thinking. There
was indeed one main objećtion made, viz.
my claſhing with thoſe who had gone be-
fore me; and I remember more particularly,
that the late earl of Pembroke (who, as I
lately hinted, was an encourager of the
work, and to whom I was obliged to ex-
cuſe my not waiting ſo often on him as he
deſired, in order to finiſh the third part of
Mr. Palmer's hiſtory above mentioned, by
acquainting his lordſhip that much of my
time was taken up with the Univerſal Hiſ-
tory, in which I was engaged) expreſſed
ne ſmall diſlike at this contraſt, or, as he
was pleaſed to call it, chequer-work between
the Jewiſh hiſtory, and ſome of the num-
bers that preceded it; the one expreſſing
all along an unaccountable diſregard for the
Moſaic writings, whilſt the other took all
proper occaſion to vindicate them, in a
manner which he was pleaſed to call ſo
very laudable and juſt; upon which I was
- - forced

<page 310>
( 299 )
*
forced to acquaint his lordſhip, that the
former part had been printed ſome time
before I was concerned in the work, and
written by perſons in a very different way
of thinking from me, and which I had
publicly diſallowed; but as they had ſince
declined the work, the proprietors had left
me wholly at my liberty to take my own
way, which I was fully determined to pur-
ſue to the end, ſo that there would be no
more ſuch contradićtions to be found in the
ſequel, becauſe all that related to the Jewiſh
nation down to their diſperſion at the de-
ſtrućtion of Jeruſalem, or even from that
to the preſent time, if we were encouraged
to continue it, would fall to my ſhare;
and that thoſe who were to write the hiſto-
ries of the Aſſyrians, Medes, Perſians, and
other nations which had any connection
with the Jewiſh, ſhould be obliged to fol-
low the ſame tract, and acknowledge the
divine authority of the Old Teſtament.
This his lordſhip highly approved, and as to
the remaining difficulty, viz. the reconciling
what was already printed, and he thought
paſt remedying, I told his lordſhip, that the
greateſt part of theſe early numbers having
, been

<page 311>
( 3oo )
been miſlaid, and ſo bandied about and
waſted that there would be ſpeedily a ne-
ceſſity of reprinting them, I would engage
to reviſe and correct them, ſo as to make the
whole uniform, which was ſoon after done
accordingly. But when, for the credit of
the work, I propoſed to the proprietors the
calling in of the old numbers, and giving
the purchaſers the new ones in lieu of
them, the greater part of them lent a deaf
ear to it, alledging, that they were ſo much
out of pocket already, that they could not
afford to deſtroy ſo great a number of copies
for the ſake of uniformity, and that the
work muſt take its chance without it.
This was not the only inſtance in which
they ſtood in their own light; I ſhall beg
leave to add one or two more. Before
the ninth number of the firſt volume had
been publiſhed, they had received ſeveral
letters from the learned both at home and
abroad, directed to the authors, particu-
larly two from Holland, the one from a
perſon who tranſlated our hiſtory into
French, and the other into Dutch, and
publiſhed them there regularly every month,
as we did here. Theſe, among other com-
mendations

<page 312>
( 301 )
mendations and encouragements, deſired us
to ſend them the ſheets as faſt as printed
here, for the better diſpatch of their ver-
fion, and keeping time with us; offering
to make any reaſonable ſatisfaction for it,
and to promote the credit and ſale of the
Engliſh original on the other fide the water.
The Dutch tranſlator in particular, who
was a man of learning and charaćter, ac-
quainted us, not without a handſome and
modeſt apology, with ſome alterations and
deviations he had taken the liberty to make
from our printed copy, in the three or four
firſt numbers, and deſired us above all
things to ſettle a correſpondence with him,
that we might freely communicate our
thoughts to one another, promiſing to ſend
us, at the concluſion of each volume a copy,
of his verſion, with the alterations marked
in the margin, and the ſentiments of the
learned beyond ſea; about the work which
he accordingly did at the cloſe of his firſt
volume, though we had not been able to
prevail upon the proprietors to ſend them
the ſheets in the manner above deſired, and
were not willing to do it without their con-
ſent, they being all apprehenſive that theſe
verſions

<page 313>
( 302 )
verſions would hinder the ſale of the Engliſh
original there. We tried in vain to con-
vince them of the contrary, by ſhewing
them that it would rather forward it,
by making it more known and famed
abroad; for that not only the Engliſh there,
but likewiſe thoſe who underſtood that lan-
guage, would ſtill chuſe to read it in the
original rather than in a verſion. I like-
wiſe tried to make them ſenſible how ne-
ceſſary and uſeful ſuch a correſpondence
would be to us, and how much it would in all
likelihood contribute to the credit and re-
putation of the work, and what need we
ſtood in to uſe all proper helps, in a work
of ſo arduous and extenſive a nature. The
only thing they would agree to, was that
we might, if we thought fit, ſtill correſpond
with them, (and that they knew we
could do without their leave) but as to
the ſending the ſheets as ſoon as printed,
they abſolutely refuſed; ſo that we were
forced to put an end to the one for want of
being able to comply with the other.
The next inſtance I ſhall give is ſtill of
a more ſordid nature. They were obliged
to furniſh us with all neceſſary books
for

<page 314>
* (, 303 )
* for the work, and on my firſt going upon
the Jewiſh hiſtory, I ſent them, a liſt of
ſuch as were really wanted, though ſome
and value, ſuch as the Thalmuds, Polyglott,
Opera Criticorum,' &c, and was ſurpriſed
at the difficulties they made, and obječtions
they raiſed againſt both the number and
charge of them, alledging on the one hand
the vaſt number of them that had been for-
merly embezzled and loſt, which they pre-
tended to amount to near 200l. and on the
other, the vaſt expence they had already
been at, and the little returns made for it
in the four firſt numbers; ſo that if I would
not diſpenſe with a good number of the
deareſt ſort, they were afraid they muſt
deſiſt from proceeding farther. It was well
for them, as well as me, that I had then a
free acceſstoSion College library, by an order
from the preſident and ſome of the heads
of that ſociety, and which I had made uſe
of for ſome years, whenever I ſtood in
need of it; ſo that I readily engaged to
ſtrike out all thoſe that I ſhould find there,
provided they would promiſe to find me all
the reſt. By which means, as well as by the
* - kind

<page 315>
( 304 )
kind aſſiſtance of my good friend the re-
verend Mr. Reading, the late worthy library-
keeper, who having the goodneſs to bring
me all the books I called for, without
the trouble of my looking out for them
in their reſpective ſhelves, to my writ-
ing deſk at the farther end of the li-
brary, I could with eaſe conſult all my au-
thors, make what extracts I wanted out of
them, after which he took the pains of
returning them to their proper places. . .
Now as this ſaved the bookſellers the buy-
ing of near, if not more than Iool, worth
of books, and me a great deal of trouble,
(for Mr. Reading did moſt frequently
enquire of me what part of a book I de-
figned to conſult, and being well acquainted
with moſt of them, brought them to me
opened at the very place I wanted, which
enabled me to make more diſpatch, and to
keep up to the time of publication) I in-
fifted at one of our meetings, and I thought
juſtly too, that they ſhould, by way of
acknowledgement, preſenteither the library,
or the worthy keeper of it, with a ſet of
volumes, as ſoon as they come out, which,
I told them, might likewiſe be a means of
recommending

<page 316>
( 305 ),
recommending the work to thoſe divines
and others that frequented that place.
They all ſeemed readily to agree to the
propoſal, and I acquainted Mr. Reading,
who was not a little pleaſed with it, and
told me, that, for his part, he was very
ready to do all he could to promote our
deſign, without any ſuch view, though he
ſaid that he ſhould be glad to ſee it pre-
ſented to the library, as it was a work
which he much approved as far as we had
gone, the chronology excepted, to which
he thought that of the learned Uſher vaſtly
preferable. I told him I was wholly of
his opinion, and was ſorry Mr. Sale had
ever fixed upon this, but that it was done
before I was concerned in the work, and
could not now be retrieved, at leaſt in this
firſt edition, but by the readers making up
the difference either in their mind or with
the pen. I added, that I had reaſon to
believe, that if the work came ever to be
reprinted, we ſhould exchange it for that
of Archbiſhop Uſher, as we have actually
done. However, as ſoon as the firſt part
of the Jewiſh hiſtory was printed off, I
took a little receſs among ſome of my
- - X friends

<page 317>
( 306 )
friends in Hampſhire, where I compleated
my next taſk, viz. the hiſtory of the Celtes
and the Scythians, and as I had the
free uſe of ſeveral libraries there, I ſaved
the proprietors the charge of buying
thoſe books I was ſure to find in any of
them, and as ſoon as I found by the public
papers, that the firſt volume was publiſhed,
wrote a letter to put them in mind of their
promiſe of preſenting one of them to Sion
College library; but I was much ſurpriſed
at my coming to town, to find that they
had abſolutely reſolved againſt it, on pre-
tence that it might hinder many clergymen
from buying it, if they could have the
reading of it there. I tried in vain to fore-
warn them that I ſhould want moſt of the
ſame ſcarce and chargeable books, beſides
a number of others, for the writing the
ſecond part of the Jewiſh hiſtory, in a
ſubſequent volume, in which caſe they
could not expect that I ſhould again have
recourſe to my good friend Mr. Reading,
but muſt of neceſſity be at the expence of
buying them; they choſe to run the hazard
of it, and I took care not to ſpare them in
one of them, when it came to the point.
From
*
s

<page 318>
º ( 307 )
From theſe few inſtances, the reader may
eaſily gueſs that the then partners were not
quite ſo ſolicitous for the credit of the
work, as might have been wiſhed, con-
ſidering how well it took by this time.
But I muſt in juſtice to them acquaint him,
that (beſides the great difficulties they la-
boured under to procure proper hands to
go on with it, and for which I refer him
to what I have ſaid in the dedication and
preface to the laſt volume of the folio edi-
tion) they had met with many unexpećted
and confiderable loſſes; ſome of the newly
engaged authors, for inſtance took up pretty
round ſums before-hand, and never wrote
a line of the part they had undertaken;
others, even among the old ones, wrote
theirs in ſuch a careleſs manner as not
to be fit to appear in print, when they
came to be examined by the reſt, and
yet were paid the ſame to the full as if their
copy had paſſed muſter, though the whole
was to be done again de novo, and the re-
tarding of the work was an additional loſs
to the proprietors. I will add, that I have
ſince known near twenty ſheets of the be-
ginning of the Byzantine hiſtory, done by
X 2 a ju-

<page 319>
( 308 )
a judicious hand, and printed off, yet con-
demned to waſte paper chiefly becauſe it
was ſpun to too great a length, which was
ſtill a much greater loſs. The truth is,
that the author of the Roman hiſtory, hav-
ing wire-drawn it to above three times the
length it was to have been, there was an
abſolute neceſſity of curtailing that of the
Conſtantinopolitan emperors, to prevent
the work ſwelling into an enormous bulk;
and he himſelf hath abridged it in ſuch a
manner as hath quite marred it, ſince the
reader will find moſt reigns contained in
as many ſhort paragraphs as they would
have required ſheets, which is ſo much the
greater loſs to the public, inaſmuch as
the Roman hiſtory being ſo well known,
and written by ſo many hands, was the
fitteſt to have been thus epitomiſed ;
whereas the Byzantine, though equally
curious and inſtructive, is ſo little known,
that it ought to have been written in a
more copious manner, eſpecially as it
abounds with the moſt intereſting incidents
to the church as well as the ſtate. So that
the author hath done in both reſpects
the

<page 320>
( 309 )
the very reverſe of what he ought to have
done.
The reader may, from the inſtances above
mentioned, ſuppoſe perhaps, that we the au-
thors kept conſtantly to our meetings and ex-
amining each part in a body, as we uſed to
do at firſt ſetting out, a method of the
greateſt conſequence towards the carrying on
ſuch a work, and which the proprietors
were not wanting in generoſity to promote;
but we ſoon found the new comers ſo averſe
to continue it, or ſubmit the review of
their copy to the old ones, that they either
abſented themſelves from our meetings, or
elſe condeſcended only to anſwer ſuch
queſtions as were aſked them by the old
ones concerning their fixing any point of
hiſtory, which had a connection with that
of another nation; as the Macedonians and
Greeks, for inſtance, done by two or three
hands, to prevent our claſhing with each
other about uncertain or controvertéd facts;
in every reſpect, they inſiſted on going on
each in his own way, as they were, they
told us, ſufficiently acquainted with the
ſubjećt they had in hand. By this means
it was that they indulged themſelves in the
X 3 liberty

<page 321>
( 31o )
liberty of going beyond their bounds, and
ſwelling each part to double the bulk agreed
on, by often repeating the ſame common
fačts in each ſeparate hiſtory, which we
had agreed ſhould be related at length but
in its proper place, whilſt every other occa-
fion that offered for freſh mention of them,
was to be only referred to that, either as
promiſcua to follow in the ſequel, or as a
reference to what hath already been ſaid.
For we had from the beginning agreed
upon this method, that nothing ſhould be
related at length concerning the hiſtory of
any nation or country, but what was tranſ-
aćted within the boundaries of it; and that
the wars, conqueſts, &c. which were car-
ried on abroad, ſhould be mentioned chiefly
in the hiſtory of thoſe countries where they
were made; to do otherwiſe, would be, as
was hinted at the beginning of the firſt vo-
lume, treating thoſe conquered nations
with the ſame arbitrary contempt and neg-
lečt as their conquerors had formerly done."
Thus, for inſtance, it was reſolved that
Alexander’s hiſtory ſhould be confined to
Macedonia, and his other conqueſts re-
-ferred

<page 322>
( 3 II )
ferred to that of thoſe nations he ſubdued;
that that of the Romans, ſhould be con-
fined within the limits of Italy, and their
new lawleſs acquiſitions referred to the
hiſtory of the Gauls, Germans, Spaniards,
Carthaginians, &c. that were to follow.
This would at once have effectually cut off
all needleſs repetitions, with which the
work hath been ſwelled beyond its de-
ſigned length, without docking the hiſtory
of any nation, as we have been ſince forced
to do, to avoid falling into the ſame fault
in which the writers of the ſeveral Greek
hiſtories have fallen, where the reader may
ſee the ſame facts related over and over
in the hiſtories of the Macedonians,
Athenians, Spartans, &c. not without ſome
viſible and unjuſtifiable variations, all which
might eaſily have been avoided, had the au-
thors kept within the rules abovementioned.
But no one hath ſhewn a greater diſregard
to them, than the author of the Roman
hiſtory, who hath ſwallowed up all the
unhappy nations that fell into thoſe con-
querors clutches without diſtinétion, and
expatiated with the ſame diffuſeneſs on their
hiſtory without, as he hath in that within
X 4 their
-

<page 323>
( 312 )
their territories, which though ſome of
our readers have approved of, as it gives a
more connected hiſtory of that nation, a
thing ſo much the leſs needful in a work
of this extenſive nature, as we have it
written in a body by ſo many different
hands, yet hath been highly diſliked by the
far greater, and I may add the more judi-
cious part of them, as contrary to our plan
and engagements to the public, and to the
nature of an Univerſal Hiſtory, wherein
that of every nation, ſhould be found fully
diſplayed, and every fact confined to its pro-
per ſcene of a&tion. It was to the neglect
of attending to, or rather keeping up to this
original deſign, that we muſt aſcribe two
confiderable defects in the work, againſt
which our readers have juſtly complained.
The one, that ſome hiſtories, as for inſtance,
that of the Carthaginians, had been fraught
with an unneceſſary repetition of all their
wars with the Romans, or which had been
already fully related in the Roman hiſtory,
to the ſwelling of the work beyond its
due limits; the other, that to avoid that
inconveniency and charge to the purchaſers,
thoſe of the Gauls, Germans and Spaniards
afº

<page 324>
( 313 )
are truncated, and their wars with, and
redućtion by the Romans are barely referred
to what hath been ſaid in the Roman hiſ.
ſtory, where they are ſcattered and ſo inter-
ſperſed with that of other nations, that it
cannot be called a regular and compleat
hiſtory of them. And what is this but
abſorbing all theſe brave nations by the
lump, into that of their tyrannic conquerors;
and how could I, to whoſe lot the hiſtory of
thoſe three ancient nations fell, avoid it by
any other way, but that of recapitulating all
afreſh, in the moſt compendious manner I
could, to avoid ſwelling the work and re-
ferring the reader to the volume and page
of the Roman hiſtory, where the facts are
mentioned at length. And there was by
that time the more cauſe to abridge all
theſe needleſs repetitions, becauſe the pur-
chaſers, and after them the bookſellers, had
juſtly complained, how vaſtly the work was
already ſwelled beyond the bounds to which
we had promiſed to confine it. But this was
not ſo readily complied with by the reſt,
who having finiſhed each their reſpective
hiſtories, according to the plan and me-
thod agreed upon, and mentioned above,
and
º

<page 325>
( 314 )
and either did not dream that the writer of the
Roman hiſtory would go contrary, or when
they found he had, did reſent it too much
to ſuffer their own to be truncated on
his account, infifted upon their being
printed at full length, and with all their repe-
titions. And this the bookſellers were forced
to ſubmit to, for fear not only of diſoblig-
ing the authors, but likewiſe of retarding
the regular publication of the volumes,
But what will eaſily convince the reader,
as it hath me long fince, how much more
earneſt the writer of the Roman hiſtory
was to promote his own ignoble intereſt,
at the expence of the proprietors as well as
the credit of the work, is, that when he
came afterwards to write the ſecond part
of the hiſtory of the Perſians, he hath re-
peated at length all their wars with the
eaſtern emperors, together with all the other
fačts and incidents that paſſed between
them, at full length, inſtead of referring to
what he had formerly ſaid in the Byzan-
tine hiſtory; for this plainly ſhews that the
dulcis odor lucri, more effectually influenced
him than all the complaints of the propri-
etors and purchaſers, which laſt were be-
- come

<page 326>
( 315 )
* come ſo rife that we thought it neceſſary to
publiſh ſomething by way of excuſe for
this exceſs of bulk, and at the ſame time
to make the beſt appology we could for
that and other deviations from our original
plan, without diſcovering the cauſes they
were owing to, which would have rather
helped to diſcredit the work in the eye of
the world, which did not dream how little
unanimity there was in our proceedings,
and how impoſſible it was for the beſt in-
clined of us to keep ſuch ſelfiſh ſpirits as
were then employed, within the bounds
preſcribed. I ſhall now give a farther in-
ſtance of it, and ſuch a pregnant one, as will
convince the reader that ſuch a work as
this could never be carried on fairly, and
according to our promiſe, notwithſtanding all
our care and precaution, even in the ſecond
impreſſion of the work; how much leſs .
poſſible muſt it have been, to have done
ſo in the firſt.
But there was ſtill a greater inconvenience
reſulting from theſe repetitions, and the
monſtrous bulk of the Roman hiſtory, and
by that time the ſeventh volume was
finiſhed,

<page 327>
( 316 )
finiſhed, the public began to think we de-
ſigned to ſpin the work to nine or ten, for
there were ſtill a great number of ancient
kingdoms and countries to be deſcribed, ac-
cording to our original deſign, ſuch as the
Mohammedan hiſtory, and other nations
interwoven with it, conſiſting of above
twenty articles in Mr. Sale's plan, moſt of
them of ſuch hard names as few readers
were acquainted with, beſides the kingdoms
of the great Mogul and other parts of India,
thoſe of Siam, China, Japan, Tartary,
Ruſſia both in Europe and Aſia, the
Turkiſh empire in both, and the whole
country of America; all which could hardly
be contained in leſs than two volumes at
the leaſt. However, by that time the
ſeventh volume was publiſhed, the pro-
prietors met with ſo little encouragement
to go on from the purchaſers, and were al-
ready ſuch confiderable loſers, that they
thought fit to ſtop there, and leave the
work thus maimed and imperfect; but
what not only determined, but in ſome
meaſure forced them to it, was their having
the mortification ſoon after, to ſee their
property invaded by three different pyratical
bookſellers

<page 328>
( 317 )
bookſellers of Dublin, who, as they were not
at any other charge than printing and paper,
both which are much cheaper in Ireland
than here, could well enough afford it to
the public for half the price that ours ſold
for at London, and unknown to each other
reprinted the work there word for word,
two of them in folio and the third in oc-
tavo, and when each of them came to un-
derſtand that the like pyracy had been
committed by -the other two, fell foul
againſt each other in their advertiſements,
in ſuch language and opprobrious names as
all three juſtly deſerved. As therefore ſuch
a piece of flagrant injuſtice could not but
greatly affect the original proprietors, who
were already ſo confiderably loſers, it
could not be expected that they ſhould
run the manifeſt hazard of throwing away
more money in purſuit of their plan.
We were therefore obliged to frame an-
other kind of excuſe for their dropping
it, viz. that thoſe countries and kingdoms
not ſpoken of in the foregoing volumes,
being of later diſcovery, ſuch as India,
China, &c. in Aſia, a great part of Africa,
and the new American world, they would
be

<page 329>
( 318 )
be more properly deſcribed, and their hiſto-
ries begun and continued in the modern
part, which they were however no farther
reſolved to go on with, than as they found
a probability of its meeting more encour-
agement than the old had hitherto done.
So that they had now time to think on
ſome proper means of ſuppreſſing the three
pyrated impreſſions as far as poſſible, by
expoſing them to the public as they juſtly
deſerved, and propoſing to give the world
a new and more correót edition of the
whole in oétavo, together with additions
of ſuch material points as had been omitted
in the former.
When this ſecond impreſſion came to be
reſolved on, both the authors and proprie-
tors, ſenſible of the many miſcarriages of
the former, for want of our following our
firſt plan, did unanimouſly agree among
other things, that every one of us in the
reviſing, correcting, and improving each
our reſpective parts, ſhould oblige ourſelves,
ſo far to ſtick cloſe to it for the future,
that all the unneceſſary repetitions ſhould
be reſcinded, and every hiſtorical fact be
confined to the hiſtory of that country in
- which

<page 330>
- ( 319 )
which it was tranſačted, and no where
mentioned at length but there; as the con-
queſt of Sicily in the hiſtory of that Iſland,
of Carthage in that of the Republic, of
the Spaniards, Gauls, &c. in that of thoſe
nations, which was the only way of mak-
ing every one of them compleat, and at the
ſame time ſhorten the work, by the avoid-
ing all needleſs repetitions. And this we
not only promiſed, but bound ourſelves in
writing to perform; however to make the
point ſtill more ſure, as I had reaſon to
doubt an unanimous compliance to the
agreement from one quarter, I further pro-
poſed that no part ſhould go to the preſs,
till it had been examined and approved by
the reſt. This was accordingly oppoſed by
the party I ſuſpected under ſeveral ſpecious
pretences, ſuch as taking up too much time,
as we lived at ſome diſtance from each
other, the danger of miſlaying or loſing
ſome of the copy, and having now and
then ſome alteration in controverted points,
all which might retard if not hinder the
work; upon which the proprietors thought
fit to give it up, and to depend upon our
honour for the exact performance of our
agreement.

<page 331>
( 320 )
agreement. However, as he hath hardly
in one ſingle inſtance kept up to it, but
hath reprinted, not only his own Roman
hiſtory, but ſeveral other parts done for-
merly by other hands, and now com-
mitted to his care by the bookſellers,
almoſt verbatim from the firſt edition, to
the no ſmall trouble of, and damage to the
other authors who had filled up theſe un-
neceſſary chaſms in their reſpe&tive parts,
which he ſhould have ſtruck out of his
own, and have been fince obliged to eraſe
all thoſe additions; he hath ſufficiently
convinced every one of us what his views
were in ſo ſtrenuouſly oppoſing my propo-
ſal, and conſequently how impoſſible it is
for ſuch a deſign as this to be rightly ex-
ecuted, unleſs the whole care and reviſal
be left to one fingle perſon of ability equal
to it. The thing is now paſt all remedy
with reſpect to this ſecond edition, though
it may be eaſily reëtified in every re-
ſpect in a future one, if any ſuch may ever
find encouragement. But the wrong done
to the public in this ſecond, is the more
conſiderable, through the unfairneſs of the
author above mentioned, in as much as,
though

<page 332>
- ( 321 )
though he is the only one concerned, that
hath not complied with our articles, he has
by his ſubdulous artifice had the far greater
ſhare in the work committed to him.
And I think I have the greater right to
complain of his breach of promiſe, and the
diſcredit he hath broughtonusandthe work,
as I can make it appear that neither in the
firſt nor ſecond edition, I have ever departed
from our original plan, in any of thoſe parts
I have been engaged in, nor inſerted any
thing in them except by way of promiffum
or reference, that properly belonged to an-
other. And for the truth of this I ſhall
only appeal to theſe parts, a liſt of which I
ſhall, in juſtice to my own character, now
give to the reader. - . . . . . . . .
1. The Jewiſh hiſtory, from Abraham, to
the Babyloniſh captivity. - . . . . . "
2. The hiſtory of the Celtes and Scythians.
3. The ancient hiſtory of Greece, or the
fabulous and heroic times. . . . . -
4. The ſequel of the Jewiſh hiſtory, from
the return from Babylon, to the deſtruction
of Jeruſalem by Titus. . . . . . . . .
5. The hiſtory of the ancient Empires of
Nice and Trebizon. . . -- - - - -
“Y 6. The

<page 333>
(, 322 ) .
6. The hiſtory of the ancient Spaniards.
7. Of the Gauls. -
8. Of the ancient Germans. . . -
In the ſecond edition, wherein we endea-
voured to ſupply all the material omiſfions
in the firſt, the following parts came to
my ſhare, viz.
1. The ſequel of the Theban, and Corin-
thian hiſtory. . . -
2. The Retreat of Xenophon.
3. The continuation of the Jewiſh hiſtory,
from the deſtruction of Jeruſalem by Titus,
to this preſent time. -
I muſt here obſerve with reſpect to the laſt
of theſe, that it had been promiſed in our
plan from the very beginning, but had been
deferred, as more properly belonging to the
modern hiſtory; upon which ſeveral of our
ſubſcribers and correſpondents complained
of the omiffion, as it is a ſubjećt not only
curious and inſtructive, but likewiſe little
known, and therefore much wanted; upon
which we had agreed to ſatisfy their de-
mand, and to have inſerted it at the end
of the ſecond part of the Jewiſh or the
Roman hiſtory, and I had accordingly pre-
pared it for the preſs againſt that time, and
* * * - beſtowed

<page 334>
( 323 )
beſtowed full fix months in the writing of
it, beſides what I had ſpent before in col-
lečting ſuch curious materials as fell in my
way; ſo that the copy, which will make
about fifteen or ſixteen ſheets of the očtavo
edition, hath been a good while in the
hands of the proprietors, and as I had
reaſon to expect, would have been printed
before now in the fifteenth or fixteenth
volume, of which I had appriſed ſeveral of
my correſpondents, as well as thoſe of my
acquaintance who enquired after it. But to
my ſurpriſe, the proprietors have ſince de-
termined to poſtpone it till the Modern
Hiſtory comes out, as it brings the hiſtory of
the Jewiſh nation down to the preſent time,
which no other in the work doth, and can
have no place in the Antient. But the real
cauſe was the want of room, the work
being like to ſwell beyond the number of
volumes promiſed in their propoſals.
The truth is they being in ſome meaſure
obliged to include it within the compaſs of
twenty, or at moſt twenty-one volumes,
, in order to ſuppreſs the pyratical Iriſh edi-
tion (which was promiſed to be contained
Y 2 within

<page 335>
( 324 )
within that number, though without any
probability (or perhaps deſign) of their ſo
doing, if one may gueſs by the bulk
of each of thoſe volumes that have
been publiſhed) there was a neceſſity of
reducing matters within a narrower com-
paſs. And this upon a ſtrićt computation
might have been eaſily done, notwithſtand-
ing the ſeveral additions that were to be
made to the work, had all the needleſs
repetitions been reſcinded, the ſtyle made
more conciſe, and a great number of ſuper-
fluous facts, circumſtances, diſquiſitions,
and controverſies, moſt of them uſeleſs and
incompatible with the nature of ſo ex-
tenſive a work, been ſtruck out of both
the text and notes, as we had agreed ſhould
be done by every one in his reſpective
parts, and hath been actually done by all
but one, and him the perſon who had the
largeſt ſhare in the reviſing and contračting
of the work; ſo that through his neglect
and noncompliance, the work hath ſwelled
not only much beyond our computation,
but would have done much more ſo, had
not the proprietors from a laudable deſire
of keeping up as much as could poſſibly
be

<page 336>
( 325 )
be done to the firſt propoſals, not only
generouſly thrown in five or fix ſheets ex-
traordinary into every volume, but likewiſe
enlarged every page both in the length
and number of the lines, by which each
volume from the fourth downwards, may
be juſtly ſaid to contain between fix or
ſeven ſheets more of matter than was origi-
nally propoſed, or than the third or fourth
contained. And this I am bound to men-
tion in juſtice to them, becauſe though
they were confiderable loſers by the firſt
edition, they yet choſe to put themſelves to
this extraordinary expence, rather than in-
cur the charge of impoſing upon the public,
by the unexpected addition of three or four
volumes; more than they had engaged to
compriſe the whole work in. However, I
cannot but be ſorry that theſe conſiderations
ſhould be looked upon as a ſufficinet pretext
for their ſuppreſſing that ſequel of the
Jewiſh hiſtory I have been ſpeaking of,
contrary to the original, plan,of the work,
and the expectation of ſo many of its en-
couragers. And I do purpoſely take notice
of it, that in caſe I can not prevail upon
.them to print it at the end of the work,
- - - - - - Y 3 and

<page 337>
( 326 )
|
and leave it at the option of ſubſcribers,
either to buy or leave it, the public may
know where the fault lies, and that my
friends may not lay it at my door.
Thus much may ſuffice for the hiſtory of
this work, and to account for the great
imperfeótions of the firſt edition, and for
the ſecond not turning out better than it
hath; and I doubt not, when the reader
confiders all theſe things he will be apt
rather to wonder, as I have often done,
that it is come out ſo well as it is. I have
no intention, muchleſs anycauſe to refle&t on
the proprietors of the work, eſpecially thoſe
who are become ſo ſince the deaths or failure
of moſt of the old ones. They have ſpared
neither pains nor coſt towards its improve-
ment, nor been wanting in generoſity to
the authors. They never once diſputed
with me about the price I ſet upon my la-
bour, nor refuſed to ſupply me with ſuch
ſums as Idrew upon them for. This is indeed
more than I can or ought to ſay of the old
fet of them, ſome of whom often put us
to great difficulties by their ſordidneſs and
mutual jealoufies and miſunderſtandings, all
which I with pleaſure obſerved to vaniſh
- upon

<page 338>
( 327 )
upon the coming in of this new ſet. It is
true that as far as related to me, they always
found me diligent and punétual; I performed
the parts I undertook to the beſt of my abi-
lity, and being content with a moderate
gain, could beſtow the more time and labour
upon them, and always took care to have
them finiſhed at the time required; and ſo
wholly, and I may add cofdially, was I in-
tent upon the work in general, that I would
neverengage in any other whilſt that laſted.
And this they were ſo far ſatisfied of, and
ſo entirely relied on me, that whether in
town or country, I have been allowed to
drawn upon Mr. Millar, for ſome ſcores of
pounds before hand, which were punétu-
ally anſwered by him, though neither he
hor any of the partners, ever ſaw any of
my copy till it went to the preſs; and when
printed off paid the ſurplus with uncom-
mon generoſity, for I always took care to
keep within compaſs. This may look like
vanity for me to ſay of myſelf, but as it
will not be made public fill after my death,
when I ſhall be out of the way of reaping
any ſatiſaćtion from it, but the conſciouſ-
neſs of having afted an honeſt part; and
Y 4 35

<page 339>
( 328 )
as this hath been my conſtant method with
all the bookſellers with whom I have been.
concerned, and for this I dare appeal to all.
who have employed me, I am the leſs ſcru-
pulous about any finiſter conſtruction a
cenſorious reader may put upon it; thoſe
who have known me and my converſation.
for much above theſe twenty years, will
I hope paſs a more candid judgment upon
it..., , , …: ** *** 2: ... -- "
However, with reſped to the management
of the partners about this ſecond edition,
I cannot but obſerve that they were guilty
of two fatal errors. The firſt in com-
mitting ſo great a, ſhare of the work, as
well as the reviſal of the whole to a man,
who they had all reaſon, to believe, aimed
chiefly at gain and diſpatch, and to agree
with him by the lump as they did, which
•.
would only prove a temptation to him
to hurry it off as faſt as he could, and as he
accordingly did, to their no ſmall mortifica-
tion, as well as hurt to themſelves and the
work. I might add, that as he was and
owned himſelf quite unacquainted, with
the eaſtern languages, he was the moſt
unqualified for ſeveral parts that fell to
2 * . his

<page 340>
( 329 )
his lot of any and if care had not
been taken would have committed ſuch
miſtakes in the very ſpelling of pro-
per names, as would quite have diſ-
- credited it. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ;-
The other was their engaging to publiſh
a volume monthly, and beginning to pub-
liſh before they had a ſufficient number
ready rinted before hand, to have enabled
them to keep up to their time; the want
of which precaution hath fince obliged
them to have ſeveral volumes on the anvill
at different preſſes at once, and to be diſ.
patched with ſuch precipitation that the
compoſitors have overlooked many litteral
errors which had been corrected by the
authors, and which is ſtill worſe, this hath
likewiſe made it impoſſible for us to make
the proper and neceſſary references from
one volume to the other as they were printed
at the ſame time, and not regularly one after
another, as they ſhould have done, ſo that
in ſome cafes we could hardly refer to
the volume much leſs to the page; but
the reader will find many inſtances of this
*- : . . . . . *::: ; ; ; ; ; I ſhall
ra

<page 341>
( 330 ) .
I ſhall now give ſome few uſeful hints
how this work may be made compleat in
a future edition by one ſingle hand, if
equal to the taſk; firſt, let whoever under-
takes it read it all over again attentively
and regularly, one volume after another,
and as he reads, common-place every thing,
perſon, fact, &c. as if he deſigned it for a
compleat and copious index. Let him not
depend upon that general one which is
ready made to his hand, at the end of the
work, and where all theſe needleſs repeti-
tions, inconſiſtences, and contradićtions may
be artfully omitted or concealed, but
either make a full and exact one de novo,
or at leaſt conſult the printed one upon
every point he reads over, and mark down
every ſuch omiſſion or concealment; though
were it my caſe I ſhould rather prefer the
former, becauſe there will be the leſs labour
loſt, as it will ſtand ready for ſuch when the
work comes to be reprinted, and he will have
afterwards nothing to do but add the printed
pages to every article as they come in
courſe, only if it ſhould be deemed too full,
he may ſtrike out afterwards ſuch as ap-
pear of leſs moment. But he will find
-
this

<page 342>
( 331 )
this fingular benefit by ſuch an exačt com-
mon-placing of every thing, that it will
diſcover to him at once every needleſs re-
petition, every inconſiſtency and contra-
dićtion as he reads-on, which he may at
the ſame time mark down in the margin
of the book, in order to correčt them on
the 'ſecond reading. He may then ſet
down likewiſe in the margin, the volume
and page where the ſame thing is told be-
fore, where it is differently related or ſet
in a different light, and in caſes that admit
a diſpute, by conſulting the original au-
thors, be able to judge which is right or
moſt probable. Thus for inſtance, when
he finds the very ſame facts related in the
biſtories of Sicily, Rome and Carthage, he
will eaſily know where they ought to have
been ſet down' at length, namely, where
the ſcene of action happened, and where
only to be referred to it, viz. in the other
two. So that whatever either the Romans
or Carthaginians tranſacted in Sicily, ſhould
be only promiſed or referred to. in their
hiſtory, and only related at full-length in
that of the Sicilians, and ſo of the reſt.
He will likewiſe by ſuch an index find
** Out

<page 343>
( 332 )
out where any facts or tranſačtions have
been differently related or repreſented by
each of their writers, who muſt of courſe
be ſuppoſed, and will upon trial be found
to claſh often, for want of frequently con-
ferring with each other, or duly conſult-
ing and examining, or perhaps ſometimes
of rightly underſtanding the original authors
they pretend to follow. . . . . . . . . . . ...,
By this means he will likewiſe be able to
diſcover many facts related in one place,
which more properly belong to, , or might
be more conveniently, transferred to an-
other, and place them ſo accordingly in
his marginal notes. ... By that time he hath
common-placed the whole ſet of volumes,
He will be likewiſe able to diſcover every
‘material omiſſion underſevery article, either
from his own memory and reading, or by
turning to the index of ſuch books as treat
of the ſame ſubjećt, and be able to ſupply
severy ſuch defečt from them. . Thus in
the articles of nations, as Jews, Egyptians,
Romans, &c. or of cities, as Jeruſalem,
;Alexandria, Rome, &c., if he finds any
...thing material, which not being in his
fgommon-place book, makes him conclude
::: 3 1t

<page 344>
( 333 )
it was omitted in the work, he will like-
wiſe eaſily ſupply from thoſe authors and
their indexes, and the ſame may be done
by the articles of names of kingdoms,
provinces, monarchs, &c. by furniſhing
himſelf with the beſt modern, authors who
have wrote of them, and ſupplying each
with every thing he finds wanting in his
own common-place book, as well as ex-
change ſome leſs material trifles that are
in this, for more momentous ones he will
find in them, all which may be done with
little trouble, and he will ſtill reſerve to
himſelf the liberty of the difference in con-
troverted points he will meet with among
thoſe moderns, by having recouſer to the
original ones; for he muſt make it a ſtand-
ing-rule to himſelf, not to rely: on the for-
mer which are more copious than exact,
without conſulting the latter, and where
thoſe differ among themſelves as they often
do, to uſe all proper helps either to recon-
cile them, or to chuſe the more probable
fide. . . . . . . . . . . . . º
This would have been the method I ſhould
have taken, had I had any ſhare in the
reviſing any other but my own particu-
* * * * * - lar

<page 345>
( 334. )
lar parts in the work; tho' I muſt ſtill have
thought it too much for any one to have
reviſed the whole, and ſhould have thought
it neceſſary to have imparted the above
mentioned rules to the reſt, in order to have
enabled them to have reëtified every miſtake,
contraſt, and jarring, between their parts.
For as I knew that all the hopes of the
proprietors, was in a ſecond, and more
correót edition, to reimburſe the loſſes they
had ſuſtained by the firſt; I had their con-
fent to compoſe the index to each of the
volumes, (the firſt excepted, which was
done by the ſame hand that wrote the
Roman hiſtory, and juſtly condemned for
its unneceſſary length and verbofity) by
which I could obſerve as I read along, and
marked in the margin of the leaves, every
needleſs repetition, ſuperfluity, contrariety,
omiſſion, tranſpoſition, &c. that would be
neceſſary to make the next impreſſion
more compleat, eſpecially when I came to
make the general one to the whole; and
was the better inabled by it, to reſcind and
alter what I found amiſs or ſuperfluous in
thoſe parts that came more immediately
under my care, though I have had ſince
reaſon

<page 346>
( 335 )
reaſon to think I have gone too far in it,
and out of complaiſance to the proprietors,
who complained that my Jewiſh hiſtory.
was too diffuſe for a work of this nature,
have been prevailed on to ſtrike out in
this ſecond edition many curious things,
which I have fince found had been very
well liked and approved of in the firſt.
But without ſuch reſciſions it was impoſ-
ble to bring the whole within the com-
paſs propoſed, eſpecially as they were ſo
much negle&ted in ſeveral other parts of
the work, which would at leaſt as conve-
niently admit of them, ſuch as the Dyna-
ſtes of the Egyptians, the hiſtory of Perſia
from the oriental writers, and many other
ſuch fabulous abſurdities. However, I can-
not accuſe myſelf of having ſuppreſſed any
thing that was of moment in that hiſtory;
though ſeveral perhaps, and to my no ſmall
regret, which would have been acceptable
to the curious in that kind of learning. As
for all the other parts within my province,
I have rather enlarged and improved them
with new proofs, obſervations and curious
additions, as may be eaſily found by com-
paring the two editions together.
With

<page 347>
- ( 336 )
&ſº
With relation to the defiderata in both
editions, I cannot forbear taking notice that
the ancient hiſtory of the northern nations,
ſuch as Moſcovy, Poland, Sweden, Den-
mark, Norway, &c. hath been altogether
omitted except ſome few hints that, have
been given in that of the Scythians and
Celtes, intimating only that the former
were originally deſcended from the latter.
It is indeed commonly believed that theſe
remote nations have no records of their
ancient times, but I had a ſingular oppor-
tunity of being convinced of the contrary,
by a learned gentleman who was a pro-
feſſor of hiſtory, &c. in the univerſity of
Abbo in Norway, but came to London
moſtly every ſummer as an agent from the
king of Sweden, and among other new
books, uſed to buy ſeveral ſetts of the Uni-
verſal Hiſtory for that Prince, for count
Coningſegg, and other great perſons in that
-:
kingdom. This gentleman having ex-
preſſed a defire to Mr. Symons his book-
feller, and one of the proprietors, of con-
verfing with one of the authors, particu-
larly with that of the Jewiſh hiſtory, we
ſoon came acquainted together, and upon

<page 348>
( 337 ) .
my enquiring of him after ſuch records or
monuments of thoſe northern nations on
which one might compile their ancient hiſ.
tory, gave me ſuch a ſatisfactory account,
as made me perſuade Mr. Symon, and the
other partners, to engage him to undertake
it, which he, with ſome difficulty, agreed to
do, notwithſtanding his other avocations.
I had the pleaſure of ſeeing him every
time he came to London, and to hear
how well he proceeded in the work; and
accordingly in about three years he brought
a large and elaborate account of all the
northern nations and countries, their origin,
ancient ſettlements, hiſtory, &c. with
many curious obſervations on their geogra-
phy, natural hiſtory, and the whole backed
with ſuch good authorities and proofs, as
one would hardly have expe&ted from ſuch
barren climes, and was recommended by
ſeveral of the moſt learned men in Swe-
den and Norway, who had the peruſal,
or even contributed to ſome part or other
of it. -
This chapter, which, according to our ori-
ginal plan, was to have preceded the ir-
ruption of the Huns, Goths, Vandals, Suevi
Z and -

<page 349>
( 338 )
and into the ſouthern parts of Europe,
would have given a much better and clearer
account of theſe barbarous nations, than
that which hath been given in the hiſtory
of their new ſettlements in Hungary,
Italy, France, Spain, &c. The misfortune
was, that it proved too bulky (though no-
thing could be ſaid to be ſuperfluous or
impertinent in it) it being computed to
amount to above ſeventy folio ſheets, for
which they could not find room, our work
being already ſwolen vaſtly beyond its bulk;
ſo that Dr. Sidenius, that was the learned
author's name, had the mortification of
having that curious part refuſed by the
proprietors, and returned upon his hands,
the old ones, as Meſs. Symon and Batley,
being dead, and the reſt, except Mr. Oſ-
borne in Grays-Inn, being gone off, and the
new ones not looking upon themſelves
concerned in the agreement. And this I
mention with no ſmall regret, becauſe it
was a confiderable loſs to the learned world,
as well as to the author, and ſuch as I much
fear will hardly be ever recovered.
In the interval between the concluſion of
the firſt, and the reſolution of printing the
ſecond,

<page 350>
( 339 )
ſecond, I was invited into a ſhare of the
new Syſtem of Geography, in which though
the Public found juſt fault with the extra-
vagant length of that which related to
Great Britain and Ireland, I yet found the
authors concerned in it, ſo well qualified
for the work, ſo communicative and punc-
tual in their regular meetings once a fort-
night, that I readily came into it, and found
with pleaſure the work carried on with
more unanimity, exactneſs, and to the ſatiſ-
faction of the proprietors, as well as of
the public. The parts I did in that work
were thoſe that follow. 1. Spain, Portugal
and the iſlands belonging to them. 2. Italy,
Savoy, Piedmont, and the iſlands of Sicily,
Sardinia, Corſica, &c. 3. Muſcovy both
in Europe and Aſia. 4. Turky in Afia.
5. In Afia, China, Japan, Jetzo, and the
iſlands along thoſe coaſts, particularly that
of Formoſa, which part I choſe, that I
might take occaſion publickly to acknow-
ledge, as it were by a third hand, the falſ-
hood and impoſture of my former account
of that iſland. 6. In Africa, the king-
doms of Egypt, Abyſſinia, Lybia, Barbary,
Tripoli, Tunis, Morocco, Fez, with an
Z 2 aCCOunt

<page 351>
( 340 )
account of the Mediterranean Sea, and the
famed river of Sanaga. 7. The Azores ,
iſlands. 8. In America, the countries of
Braſil, Magellan, Terra del Fuego, Canada,
Louiſiana, and the Bahamas and Bermudas
iſlands. And by the time I had concluded
theſe laſt, I was called upon to prepare my
reſpective parts of the Univerſal Hiſtory,
for the ſecond impreſſion mentioned above.
I have however found ſufficient reaſon to
complain of the wrong management of
this work in ſeveral reſpects, though other-
wiſe carried on with greater exačtneſs and
unanimity than that of the Univerſal Hiſ-
tory, and I ſhall now take the liberty of
mentioning ſome of the moſt conſiderable
ones, becauſe they have been the cauſe of
ſome unavoidable errors and blunders, not
only in the two above mentioned works,
but in moſt others that have been publiſhed
in the ſame or near the ſame way. The
firſt is the authors being tied to produce
ſuch a number of ſheets in ſo ſhort a time . .
as is almoſt incompatible with their deſire,
if any ſuch they have, of performing their
reſpective parts with any exactneſs; for,
though the publiſhers ſeldom fail of ac-
. . quainting

<page 352>
( 341 )
quainting the public that the work is either
already, or pretty near finiſhed and ready
for the preſs, ſo that there is no danger of
its meeting with any delay or impediment,
yet that is ſeldom if ever the caſe, and
with reſpect to the works I am ſpeaking
of, I found it quite the reverſe, and that
they have frequently been ſent to the preſs,
under the promiſe of being regularly pub-
liſhed, by ſuch a number of ſheetsevery week
or month, when ſcarcely a fourth part of it
was written. So that, to prevent the retard-
ing of the work, they have been obliged to
call in for new helps, whom they have
obliged to engage to perform their part in
leſs than half the time, that it would have
reaſonably required; confidering that they
not only had it all to begin and go through
in that ſhort ſpace, as was the caſe in this
new Syſtem of Geography, but that ſome of
them were likewiſe engaged in ſome other
work, between which and this, they were
forced to divide their time and diligence,
though either of them did more than re-
quire it all; and how could it be poſſible
for either to be performed as it ought?
Z 3 Another

<page 353>
( 342 )
Another miſmanagement from the be-
ginning was, the interlarding every fourth
or fifth number with a ſet of maps which
indeed gave ſome breathing time to the
authors, but then it confined them to re-
ceive all their directions concerning the
limits, ſituation, longitude, latitude, diſ-
tances, &c. from thoſe maps, which being
ſuch as the engraver rather than the au-
thors had made choice of, as the moſt au-
thentic in his opinion, were not always ſo
judiciouſly choſen as could have been
wiſhed. This made many errors remedi-
leſs and irretrievable, becauſe the greateſt
part of thoſe maps had been publiſhed in
ſuch numbers, ſeveral months before the
authors were called upon to begin the
geography of thoſe countries. This I
often complained of to the proprietors
from the beginning, both as a great over-
fight and a hardſhip upon the authors, who,
inſtead of being allowed to direct the en-
graver in the choice or compiling of them,
were obliged to follow him implicitly, and
often contrary to their own opinion and
liking, in thoſe which he had thought fit
to pitch upon for our guide. Thus in the
map

<page 354>
( 343 )
map of Japan, for inſtance, the land of
Jetzo is affirmed to be the ſame with Cum-
ſchatta, though contrary to fact, it not
being ſo much as part of it. I might add
likewiſe, that thoſe maps confined us to the
orthography of places, though very often
erroneous, or being of foreign extract, con-
veyed a wrong ſound of the name to an
Engliſh ear.
But the moſt confiderable miſmanagement
was in the choice of ſuch printers as bore
indeed the greateſt ſway and intereſt, and
who conſequently had ſuch a glut of buſi-
neſs, that every thing was diſpatched with
the utmoſt hurry and precipitation, inorder to
keep up to their time. This never failed.
cauſing a great deal of confuſion and in-
correótneſs in the printing, particularly in
the 6thography of proper names, and giv-
ing the authors a great deal of trouble in
correóting the proofs, which, however, was
but too often of no ſervice, through the
hurry the compoſitors were in, which made
them overlook and often neglect thoſe cor-
rečtions. It frequently happened likewiſe,
that they required ſuch a quick diſpatch of
the author, in correčting the ſheets, that
Z 4 they

<page 355>
( 344 )
they had not time enough to read them
over with that carefulneſs they would
otherwiſe have done; ſo that they them-
ſelves could not avoid overlooking even
ſome material errors in the ſpelling, but
moſt chiefly in the numbers and figures.
As for me, it being my conſtant rule not
to be engaged in two works at once, I
never would let a proof go out of my
hands, without a ſecond, and, in ſome caſes,
a third reading, but I have often found
that I might as well have ſaved myſelf that
labour, ſince the correótors or compoſitors
had not time enough left to make the pro-
per emendations, and ſometimes have
ſent the ſheet to the preſs before the proof
hath been returned. *
To prevent this unfair dealing, as I may
juſtly call it, or at leaſt to lay the blame at
the right door, I had taken a method
of inſiſting upon having two proofs, of each
ſheet, ſent me from the preſs; under pre-
tence of keeping one of them by me, to
refer to when it was requiſite, but in fact
by correóting both proofs alike in the mar-
gin, to be able to produce that which I
kept by me, againſt both the compoſitor,
- and
.."
-
--

<page 356>
( 345 )
and correótor, when ever they were guilty
of any ſuch neglect. But as ſoon as my
deſign was found out by them, ſome plau-
ſible excuſes were made, for not continu-
ing to ſend duplicates, and I was forced to
give up that point, unleſs I had a mind to
diſoblige the very maſter printers, who
were ſome of the richeſt, and bore the
greateſt ſway with the proprietors, and had
already deprived us, under the pretence of
diſpatch, of the privelege of reviſing our
copy, after our firſt correction. This laſt
indeed was denied us, on account of the
unreaſonable trouble, which one of the
authors too frequently gave them, in thoſe
reviſes at the firſt ſetting out; who did
often require three or four of them,
and every one loaded with new, and
moſtly needleſs alterations, which took up
ſo much of the compoſitors time that they
were obliged to complain of it. This was,
though true with reſpect to one author,
but a poor pretence for depriving the reſt
of the liberty of one fingle reviſe, which they
chiefly inſiſted on, not ſo much to make
any neceſſary alterations, as only to be
ſatisfied that none of their corrections were
OWCT-

<page 357>
( 346 )
overlooked. However, the point was over-
ruled by the printers; and that material
check being taken off from the compoſitors,
the literal errors multiplied ſo faſt upon us,
eſpecially in the words and quotations out
of the eaſtern languages, that we were
obliged to take notice only of ſuch as were
of the greateſt moment in the table of
errata of the firſt edition, and to curtail as
many of thoſe foreign words as we could
in the ſecond, eſpecially thoſe of the Arabic,
Hebrew, and Syriac kind.
Theſe are ſome of the principal cauſes of
that incorreótneſs which commonly, I had
almoſt ſaid unavoidably, happen in theſe
kinds of works, let an author be ever ſo
deſirous and careful to avoid them, unleſs
he hath ſo great a ſway over the printers,
that they dare not refuſe him the liberty of
reviſing his own work as often as he ſees
it needful. And the leaſt that he can inſiſt
on, for his own credit and ſatisfačtion, is a
reviſal of every proof after it hath been
correóted by him.
I did take occaſion to mention a little higher
the wrong information which Mr. Palmer
gave me concerning Biſhop Hare's Metrical
Pſalter,
|

<page 358>
( 347 )
Pſalter, which was, unknown to me, put into
Mr. Bowyer's hands to print, whilſt I was
writing the firſt part of the Jewiſh hiſtory,
and as there had elapſed ſeveral years be-
tween the time, in which Mr. Palmer was
applied to by Dr. Waſhburn, and that of
my becoming in courſe to write on the ſub-
ject of the Hebrew poetry, which had
confirmed me in the opinion that the
biſhop's deſign wasquite ſet aſide; I made no
difficulty to affirm after the generality of the
learned writers on that ſubjećt, that themetre
of the Hebrew Pſalms and other poetical
pieces in the Old Teſtament, was looked
upon as irretrievably loſt, notwithſtanding
the efforts of ſome, and the pretences of
others, who vainly imagined they had or
were in the way of recovering it. I backed
my opinion with ſome new arguments
which had occurred to me during my fruit-
leſs ſearch after it, and which appeared to
me to carry no ſmall force. This part,
which was contained in the ninth number
of the firſt volume, was ſcarcely publiſhed,
before the biſhop's Pſalter came out. It
may be eaſily imagined that my curioſity
would not permit me to be long without
examining

<page 359>
( 348 )
examining that performance, which ſeemed
to overthrow all that I had ſaid on that ſub-
jećt, and ſadly was I vexed that my part
was publiſhed before I had ſeen this un-
expected piece. Had I dreamed of any
ſuch being ſo near coming out, I would
doubtleſs have ſuppreſſed mine till I had
thereby examined it. What ſurpriſed me
moſt, and made me entertain ſome higher
notion of that enterprize, was the long inter-
val which had paſſed between the time of
its being finiſhed and offered to Mr. Pal-
mer, and that of its being publiſhed, which
I reckon to have been about ſix or ſeven
years, and which I therefore ſuppoſed the
biſhop and his learned friend Dr. W-,
had ſpent in the reviſing and poliſhing it;
but, upon ſtrićter enquiry, I found the
cauſe of that delay to have been of a
different nature, and was as follows.
His lordſhip had excepted againſt Mr. Pal-
mer's Hebrew types, which were of
Athias's font, and a little battered, and in-
ſiſted upon his having a new ſett from Mr.
Caſlon, which greatly exceeded it in beauty.
But Mr. Palmer was ſo deep in debt
to him, that he knew not well how to
- procure

<page 360>
( 349 )
ocure it from him without ready money,
which he was not able to ſpare. The
biſhop likewiſe inſiſted upon having ſome
Roman and Italic types caſt with ſome
diſtinguiſhing mark, to direét his readers to
the Hebrew letters they were defigned to
anſwer, and theſe required a new ſett of
punches and matrices before they could be
caſt, and that would have delayed the work,
which Mr. Palmer was in haſte to go
about, that he might the ſooner finger ſome
of his lordſhip's money. This put him
upon ſuch an unfair ſtratagem, which
when diſcovered, quite diſguſted his
lordſhip againſt him, viz. repreſenting
Mr. Caſlon as an idle, dilatory work-
man, who would in all probability make
them wait ſeveral years for thoſe few types,
if ever he finiſhed them. That he was in-
deed the only artiſt that could ſupply him
with thoſe types, but that he hated work,
and was not to be depended upon, and
therefore adviſed his lordſhip to make
ſhift with ſome ſort which he could ſubſti-
tute, and would anſwer the ſame purpoſe,
rather than run the riſk of ſtaying ſo long,
and being perhaps diſappointed. The
biſhop

<page 361>
( 35o )
biſhop, however, being reſolved, if poſſible,
to have the defired types, ſent for Mr.
Bowyer, and aſked him whether he knew a
letter founder that could caſt him ſuch a
ſett out of hand, who immediately recom-
mended Mr. Caſlon; and, being told what
a ſad and diſadvantageous chara&ter he had
heard of him, Mr. Bowyer not only aſſured
his lordſhip that it was a very falſe and un-
juſt one, and engaged to get the above-
mentioned types caſt by him, and a new
font of his Hebrew ones, in as ſhort
a time as the thing could poſſibly be
done. Mr. Caſlon was accordingly ſent for
by his lordſhip, and having made him
ſenſible of the time the new ones would
require to be made ready for uſe, did pro-
duce them according to his promiſe, and
the book was ſoon after put to the preſs;
and this it was that had ſo long retarded its
publication.
I was not long without it, and muſt own
that his preface, in which his lordſhip con-
futed, with uncommon learningand keeneſs,
all the ſyſtems that hitherto appeared in
, public, raiſed my expediation to a high de-
gree. For if the metre of the ſacred book
could

<page 362>
( 351 )
could but be ſuppoſed to come up to the
loftineſs and dignity of the thoughts and
expreſſions, (and who could ever have
doubted of it, that conſiders how much
greater genius the latter requires than the
former?) it muſt I thought have greatly ex-
celled that of Homer and Virgil. But
how great was my ſurpriſe, when upon
reading on I found that his lordſhip had
reduced it to a poor low, crawlinghumdrum,
bitony of trochaics and iambics, or vice
verſ, as the reader pleaſed, and into which
he might with eaſe, and with much leſs
than half the variations, maiming and diſ-
tortion of the text, have reduced any com-
mon proſe out of any language How
much more ſtill to find in almoſt every
line, words, and ſometimes whole verſes
mutilated, ſtretched out or lopped off,
tranſpoſed or exchanged ad libitum, in
order to bring them to his ill contrived
ſtandard! To hear a learned prelate, with all
the ſeeming gravity imaginable, affirm that
the Hebrew poetry, (which by the way
was arrived to ſuch prodigious heights,
with reſpect to the grandeur and loftineſs
of its figures and imagery, even ſo early as
Moſes's
*

<page 363>
( 352 )
Moſes's time) was even ſo low as in David's
time, ſo crude, imperfect and vague, as
not to have ſo much as a determinate dif-
ference between long and ſhort ſyllables,
eſpecially confidering to what a heighth of
perfeótion that monarch had improved the
art of muſic; and, what is ſtill more ſur-
priſing than all the reſt, to ſee his lordſhip,
in conſequence of this his low conceit of the
Hebrew poetry, take ſuch pains to marr,
deface, and deſtroy ſome of the moſt ſur-
priſing, lofty and complicated figures and
alluſions in that ſacred book, and ſuch as
far excel all that is to be met with in the
Greek and Latin poets. But for theſe I
muſt refer the reader to what I have ob-
ſerved of the Hebrew poetry, and on
that abſurd performance, in the Univerſal
Hiſtory (ſee vol. iv. of folio edition p. 710
& ſeq. and notes, and in the oétavo one,
vol. x. p. 202 & ſeq. and note (E). The
occaſion of my being obliged to make thoſe
animadverſions on it, was as follows.
I was ſo ſhocked at the freedom which
that prelate took to depreciate, muti-
late and vilify ſo ſublime a ſet of the
nobleſt and moſt divine poems, that I
thought
t

<page 364>
( 353 )
thought myſelf obliged to write againſt
him, and to expoſe, as they deſerved, all:
his unfair criticiſms on it, all his forced.
emendations, and, above all, the abſurdity.
of his new-diſcovered metre; but withal,
in ſuch a reſpectful manner, as was due to
a perſon of his charaćter. And in order.
to that, retired for three months into
Surry and Hampſhire, where I had an op-
portunity to conſult, upon proper occaſions,
ſome of my friends, who were no ſtran-
gers to that kind of learning. I found
the taſk the leſs difficult, as I preſently fell
in among ſome of them, who not only
condemned his performance, but had raiſed
already ſome very material objećtions
againſt it, which they readily communi-
cated to me as ſoon as they were appriſed
of my deſign. One of them among the
reſt had (by way of expoſing his lord-
ſhip's contemptible metre), reduced the
Engliſh Lord's Prayer, Creed, Ten Com-
mandments, and the Te Deum, into the
ſame crawling meaſure; whilſt I, who .
wholly confined myſelf to the Hebrew,
had already done the ſame by the firſt
chapter of Geneſis, and the laſt chapter of
- A a Mala-

<page 365>
( 354 )
Malachi, both which I had likewiſe
turned into the ſame dull verſe, without
half the deviations from the text, which
his lordſhip had been forced to make in al-
moſt every Pſalm. Some of his very
pretended emeridations proved ſuch, that
the frequency of them direéted me to
the diſcovery of a more elegant metre than
he had ever dreamed of, and which con-
vinced me, as they have fince many more
Hebraiſts, that there was in the metre of
the Pſalms, not only a real and ſettled
diſtinétion between the long and the
ſhort ſyllables, but that two of the latter
were equivalent, in the conſtituting of a
foot or verſe, to one of the former; ſo
that they had at leaſt three different kinds
of feet, viz, long monoſyllables, biſyl-
lables, confiſting of two long, and triſylla-
bles, conſiſting of two ſhort and one long,
or vice verſa ; but which in the metre an-
{wered to a ſpondee, or two long ſyllables,
Of this I gave ſo many. inſtances, as
made me think, contrary to what I had
done till then, that the Hebrew metre was
not ſo irrecoverably loſt as I had imagined,
and that a little more application than I
- had

<page 366>
( 355 ).
had time then, or have had ſince to beſtow
upon it, might go near to recover moſt, if
not all, the various kinds of it. . . . . .
However, as ſoon as I had finiſhed what I,
and ſome of my friends, as well as I;
thought a ſufficient confutation of the
biſhop's performance, and in the ſame, tho’
not ſo florid and elegant a Latin, I ſent to
deſire one of my bookſellers to enquire of
Mr. Bowyer, whether the new types, caſt
for his lordſhip, were ſtill in his poſ-
ſeſſion ? and whether I might be permitted
the uſe of them, in the anſwer I had pre-
pared for the preſs I was anſwered in the
affirmative ; but, one bookſeller took it
into his head to aſk at the ſame time, what
number of copies his lordſhip had cauſed
to be printed of his Pſalter? and was an-
ſwered only five hundred; one half of which
had been preſented by his Lordſhip to
his learned friends, both in and out of
England, and moſt of the reſt were ſtill
unſold, there being but few among the
learned, that were curious in ſuch matters;
the performance having been diſapproved
by all that had ſeen it. This news ſo cooled
the bookſellers eagerneſs after my anſwer,
A a 2 that,

<page 367>
( 356 )
that, upon my coming to town, and their
acquainting me with the ſtate of the caſe,
I was quite diſcouraged from printing it.
For they concluded from what Mr. Bowyer
had ſaid, that it would be dangerous to print
above three hundred of mine, the charge
of which being dedućted, the profit,
upon a ſuppoſition that they were all ſold,
would be ſo ſmall, that they could not af-
ford me above two or three guineas for my
copy (which would have made about ſeven
or eight ſheets of a middling octavo) with-
out being loſers. This was their way of
computing the matter, againſt which hav-
ing nothing to objećt, I locked up the pa-
pers in my cabinet, where they have lain
ever ſince. They did indeed offer me better
terms, and to print a greater number of
copies, if I would be at the trouble of print-
ing it in Engliſh, which they thought would
be more univerſally read, out of diſlike to
the biſhop; but, beſides that I cared not
to be at the pains of Engliſhing it, I thought
it below the ſubječt to print it in any other
language, but that in which his was wrote,
and ſo wholly declined it.
I lodged then with the curate of the
- - pariſh,
i

<page 368>
( 357 )
pariſh *, who, upon my coming from
Hampſhire, told me the following ſtory,
which I give on his authority, for I
never enquired farther into it—That his
rečtor, the reverend Dr. Nichols, acquaint-
ed the biſhop, that he had a gentleman in
his pariſh, who deſigned ſhortly to publiſh a
confutation of his Hebrew metre. Thebiſhop
aſked whether he was equal to the taſk? and
was anſwered, that he was thought ſo by all
that knew him, and that he was the perſon
who had wrote the Jewiſh hiſtory, wherein
he had given a greater character of the He-
brew poetry than his lordſhip ſeemed to
do in his book, and that he was one of the
perſons concerned in the writing of the
Univerſal Hiſtory. The biſhop then aſked his
name, and being told that he called himſelf
Pſalmanazar, expreſſed himſelf with ſome
warmth to the company, that there was
never a Jew of them all that underſtood
any thing of Hebrew, much leſs of the
ſacred poetry; and being told that I was no
Jew, but in all appearance an honeſt and
ſtrićt churchman, who would doubtleſs
uſe his lordſhip with the reſpect due to
* St. Luke's, Old-ſtreet.
his

<page 369>
( .358 )
his charaćter; he appeared a little better ſa-
tisfied, and willing to ſuſpend his judgment,
till he ſaw what I had to ſay againſt him.
And here I cannot forbear making an ob-
fervation, or two, on his lordſhip's ſpeech,
taking the ſtory for true, which I am the
more inclined to believe to be ſo, becauſe
he was always known to have a ſingular
contempt of the Jews, ſo far as related to
their knowledge of the Hebrew tongue.
The one is, that his mean opinion of them
muſt be owing to his ſmall acquaintance
with them; otherwiſe he might have found
in London ſeveral of them very learned in
that tongue, (beſides a much greater num-
ber abroad, eſpecially among the northern
ones) and who, bating their different
interpretations of thoſe main prophecies
which relate to the Meſſiah, could have
diſplayed to him a much greater and
deeper ſkill in that ſacred tongue, than he
appears to have had, by any thing one can
find in his book. The other is, how his
lordſhip came to take Salmanazar for a
Jewiſh, inſtead of an Aſſyrian name; for as
the monarch ſo called, was one of thoſe
monarchs who carried away part of Iſrael
captives

<page 370>
( 359 )
captives into Aſſyria; a Jew would as ſoon
call a ſon of his Beelzebub, as Salmanazar,
or Nabuchadnezzar.
However, the abovementioned ſtory, as
well as the expectation which my friends
in Hampſhire, Surry, and London, were
in, to ſee my anſwer to him, gave me no
ſmall regret, leſt my not publiſhing it
ſhould be interpreted in favour of his per-
formance, or as my yielding the point to
him, as not being able to confute him.
And could I have afforded it, I would have
run the hazard of printing it at my own
charge; for I was above doing it by ſub-
ſcription, it being ſo ſmall a thing as a
pamphlet of at moſt eight octavo ſheets;
and much more loth was I, all the above
things conſidered, to let a work ſeemingly
calculated to depreciate the excellence of
the ſacred poetry of the Old Teſtament, to
go uncenſured; eſpecially as I had ſo many
ſtrong objećtions ready levelled againſt it.
At length a thought came into my mind,
as I was then preparing new materials for
the ſecond part of the Jewiſh hiſtory, to
reſume that ſubjećt there. And this I
thought, I was ſo much better intitled to
do,

<page 371>
( 360 )
do, if it were but in defence of what I
had ſaid in the firſt part in praiſe of the
Hebrew poetry, and which was, in moſt
caſes, quite oppoſite to the charaćter,
which his lordſhip gave of it in his book.
The colle&ting, and compleating of the
canon of the ſacred books by Ezra, and
other inſpired writers, and their appointing
of the proper leſſons, pſalms, &c. for the
divine worſhip, gave me a fair opportunity
for it, which I was the more ready to take,
as I knew that it would be read by many
more people in ſuch a work as that, than
in a Latin pamphlet, and would of courſe
more effectually expoſe the abſurdity of his
retended new-found metre, as well as the
unſeemly freedom he hath given himſelf
in altering and mutilating the ſacred text
for the ſake of it. I therefore reſolved to
take notice, in juſtice to his lordſhip, of all
juſt, laudable, and uſeful diſcoveries he had
made on that ſubječt in the text, and to
throw the main part of my obječtions
againſt the reſt of his book in a long note,
in the moſt ſuccinét and impartial manner I
could, in hopes that the ſetting both forth,
as it were, in one view, might probably
excite

<page 372>
( 361 )
excite ſome who had more learning and
leiſure than I, to follow the hints there given,
as the moſt likely means for compleating
the deſired diſcovery, to which his lordſhip
had in a great meaſure opened the way,
though he had ſo unhappily miſcarried in
the end. The difficulty was how to con-
tract my materials ſo as not to over-ſwell
that part of the work, as it muſt have done
if I had brought everything into it, which I
had wrote on that ſubjećt, and this obliged
me to ſtrike off near two thirds of them,
and to confine myſelf to the moſt material
points, ſuch as would moſt effectually an-
ſwer the two main ends I had in view,
viz. the exploding the biſhop's new
metre, and giving the curious reader, that
would go about it, a clue to find out the
original one of the ſacred books; for as to
what I deſigned to have ſaid in praiſe of the
Hebrew poetry, had the ſubject been printed
ſeparately, it was the leſs neceſſary here, as
I had already expatiated ſo much upon it
in the firſt volume. Some of the pro-
prietors and authors were indeed againſt
my deſign, not only as it would ſwell the
chapter beyond its length, but likewiſe as
the

<page 373>
( 36.2 )
the ſubjećt in queſtion appeared to them,
foreign to the reſt of its contents; but
I had the pleaſure not only to carry my
point againſt them, but likewiſe to have
the performance commended by ſeveral
learned men as well as by all my
friends; inſomuch that upon my conſult-
ing ſeveral of them, whether I might
not in the ſecond or octavo edition (in
which we were obliged to contraćt our
materials, in order to reduce the whole
within the propoſed limits) either wholly
omit or content myſelf with a ſhort men-
tion of what I had done more at large in
the folio; they adviſed me by no means to
curtail the main ſubjećt, though I might,
they thought, eraze here and there an ex-
planatory or critical note, which I readily
complied with.
Soon after I had concluded my laſt part of
the Ancient Hiſtory, the proprietors and
authors had ſome meetings together to
conſult upon the going on with the Mo-
dern, and ſeveral plans were propoſed by
different perſons of learning and capacity.
The misfortune was, that this part likewiſe
was to be confined within the compaſs of
twenty

<page 374>
( 363 )
twenty volumes, of the ſame bulk with
the Ancient, and theſe gentlemen differed
ſo much in the proportion they allowed to
each reſpective country or kingdom, that
we could ſee but little likelihood of mak-
ing any tolerable computation, either of
what the whole might reaſonably amount
to, or of what number of ſheets might be
properly allowed to each hiſtory. As for
me, the more I confidered the great ex-
tent of the work, and the number of em-
pires and kingdoms which had not ſo
much as been touched upon in the Ancient
part, ſuch as Turkey, India, the great
Mogul, Tartary, China, Japan, &c. the
greateſt part of Africa, and the whole tract
of America, to ſay nothing of Ruſſia and
ſeveral other northern countries in Europe;
the more I was perſuaded of the impoſ-
fibility of reducing the whole within ſo
ſmall a number of volumes, unleſs it was
done rather by way of epitome, than of
compleat, though ever ſo ſuccinct, a hiſ-
tory. But though this appeared ſtill more
viſible by the ſmall number of ſheets which
theſe plans, however different, allotted to
moſt parts of the work, and muſt have
received

<page 375>
( 364 )
received by almoſt every reader, at the
firſt view, yet the proprietors who had
their particular reaſons for fixing upon that
number of volumes, would by no means
conſent to have it exceeded. This how-
ever occaſioned ſome demur, during which
ſome of the beſt judges in this kingdom,
and out of it, were conſulted, as well as
about the propereſt method of beginning
and purſuing this modern part.
F I N I S.

<page 376>

<page 377>

<page 378>

<page 379>
THIS BOOK IS DUE ON THE LAST DATE
STAMPED BELOW
RENEWED BOOKS ARE SUBJECT TO IMMEDIATE
RECALL
U C D LIBRARY
DUE JUN 30 1991
JUN 12 1991 ºf
LIBRARY, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, DAVIS
Book Slip-25m-6,'66 (G3855sq)458






<page 380>
-----
NQ 474669
CT788
Psalmanazar, C. p83
Memoirs of George A3
Psalmanazar.
LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
DAVIS
--- -
- - -- −
=
-


<page 381>


<page 382>
