
<page 1>
JOHN FOWLER, 
 
 JOHN BIRD, 
 Bookbinder, 
 
 52, Hattou Garden. 
 
 LONHON. 
 
 

<page 2>
CASE 
 
 B 
 

<page 3>

<page 4>
CHRISTMAS STORIES. 
 

<page 5>

<page 6>
CHRISTMAS STORIES. 
 
 CONTAIKINC 
 
 JOHN WILDGOOSE THE POACHER, 
 THE SMUGGLER, 
 
 AND 
 
 GOOD-NATURE, OR PARISH MATTERS. 
 
 SECOND EDITION. 
 
 OXFORD, 
 
 PRINTED BY W. BAXTER, 
 
 FOR J. FARKKR; AND C. AND J. RIVINGTON, T. PA0I/S 
 CHURCH YARD, AND WATKRLOO PLACE, LONDON* 
 
 1827. 
 

<page 7>

<page 8>
\ 
 
 THE 
 
 HISTORY 
 
 JOHN WILDGOOSE. 
 
 
 B 
 
 916899 
 

<page 9>
ADVERTISEMENT. 
 
 THE Author of the following Tale has, for some tinre, 
 wished to put together a little Tract on the evil and danger 
 of poaching ; an offence which so often leads on to the 
 most immoral habits, and the most heinous crimes. It 
 seemed that his object might be answered by the aid of 
 narrative and dialogue, more effectually than by a regular 
 and continued discourse. If it should be thought, in any 
 degree, worthy of standing on the same shelf with " Trim- 
 " mer's Instructive Tales," and the " Cheap Repository 
 " Tracts," the ambition of the Author will be gratified. 
 
 Jan. 27, 1821. 
 

<page 10>

 

<page 11>

<page 12>
THE 
 HISTORY 
 
 OF 
 
 JOHN WILDGOOSE. 
 
 THOMAS WILDGOOSE was an honest and 
 Jiard-working man, in one of the midland counties. 
 He had long been attached to Susan Jenkins, a well- 
 behaved young woman of the same village; but from 
 prudence and a proper independence of mind, he 
 determined not to take a wife until he had a house 
 to bring her to, as well as some prospect of providing 
 for a family without being a burden He* ilhf* 'fanners, 
 who were already complaining of tfie pressure of the 
 poor-rates. 
 
 In consequence of his good character he was never 
 out of work; and though his wages were not high, 
 yet he almost every week contrived to put by some- 
 thing, which he deposited in a bank for savings, lately 
 established in the neighbouring market town. His 
 weekly deposits were not very large sums, yet " many 
 a little makes a mickle." This was helped out by a 
 legacy of thirty pounds from an uncle; so that in a 
 few years he was enabled to purchase a cottage with 
 a small garden, and had still something over for a 
 B2 
 

<page 13>
4 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 few articles of furniture. Susan, meanwhile, had 
 gone on steadily in service, always making a point of 
 putting by some part of her wages ; so that when 
 they married, they were comparatively rich. For 
 some time after his marriage Wildgoose continued to 
 work for his old master; and Susan, by field work in 
 ihe hay-making and harvest, and by taking in sewing 
 at Other times of the year, was able to earn a good deal 
 towards maintaining their children. The wants of 
 an increasing family, however, led him to consider 
 how he might enlarge his means of subsistence: and 
 the success of an old acquaintance in the adjoining 
 village, determined him to endeavour to purchase a 
 horse and cart, and commence business as a higler. 
 
 A higler's business is liable to so many chances, 
 and takes a man so much from home, that perhaps 
 he would have acted more wisely if he had stuck to 
 work. We cannot however blame him for endea- 
 vouring^tp, better his circumstances in an honest way. 
 -' ( Thougli fce-bccaiionally met with some losses from bad 
 . ,c(ebt%yefc r upor4,the;;whole he did pretty well, 
 ; . ; f ; ''One "day in" "November, as he was returning home 
 from market rather late in the evening, and was 
 walking quietly by the side of the cart, he was sud- 
 denly startled by a rattling noise behind him; and 
 turning round, saw the True Blue stage driving furi- 
 ously along the road, and the Opposjtion coach a short 
 distance behind. Wildgoose immediately went to his 
 horse's head, and drew his cart as close as he could to 
 the hedge ; but just at that moment the Opposition 
 coach had got up with the other, and in endeavouring 
 to pass it, one of the leaders knocked poor Wildgoose ' 
 

<page 14>
The History of John Wildgoose. 5 
 
 down, and the wheels went over him. The unfeel- 
 ing coachmen were too eager in the race to attend to 
 the mischief which they had occasioned ; and the poor 
 man was left lying in the road, until two neighbour- 
 ing farmers, returning from market, found him, and 
 brought him home, mpre dead than alive, in his own 
 cart. At first some faint expectations were enter- 
 tained of his recovery; but soon it was found that the 
 injury which he had sustained was too serious to ad- 
 mit of hope. 
 
 Mr. Hooker, the clergyman of the parish, came to 
 visit him frequently, for the purpose both of assisting 
 his devotions, and of comforting his poor wife; and 
 on one of these occasions he took an opportunity of 
 asking him, in as kind a manner as possible, whether 
 he had settled his worldly affairs. This certainly had 
 not occurred to Wildgoose: when, however, Mr. 
 Hooker explained to him, that if he died without a 
 will, his house and garden would all go to his eldest 
 son, subject to dower to his wife; and that in strict- 
 ness of law his household furniture, shop-goods, and 
 cart and horse, would be to be divided in three parts, 
 one to his wife, and two between his children ; he 
 saw the propriety of arranging these matters while he 
 was able. Mr. Smith the attorney was accordingly 
 sent for. Poor Wildgoose, who had reason to have 
 full confidence in the good sense and judgment of his 
 wife, and in her impartial affection to her children, 
 felt that he could not do better than leave every thing 
 to her, at the same time constituting her sole execu- 
 trix. He knew that she would consider herself as a 
 trustee for the children, felt sure that she would not 
 
 B3 
 

<page 15>
6 The Hist or ij of John Wildgoose. 
 
 marry again, and thought it best not to fetter her by 
 any minute directions. Mr. Smith prepared the will 
 accordingly; and as three witnesses are necessary to 
 a will bequeathing a freehold, their good neighbour 
 Simpson the tailor was called in, who together with 
 Mr. Hooker and Mr. Smith attested Wildgoose's ex- 
 ecution of the will. When this was done, the poor 
 man felt his mind relieved; and endeavoured more and 
 more to detach his thoughts from all earthly cares, 
 and to fix them on subjects connected with those un- 
 seen things which are eternal. The next day he re- 
 ceived the sacrament, which he had been in the habit of 
 receiving frequently during his life; and before the 
 end of the week he died. 
 
 Poor Susan had been for some time preparing for 
 this sad event; but still, when it actually happened, it 
 seemed to come upon her by surprise. She felt quite 
 stunned by the blow. At first, she could attend to, 
 could think of, nothing but her own loss, her own sad 
 and desolate condition. She was however soon en- 
 abled to turn for support to that Being, who bids the 
 widow to trust in him, and who promises to protect 
 the fatherless children. Her mind found a comfort 
 in prayer; and the sort of strain and oppression which 
 she felt through her whole frame was soon relieved 
 by a flood of tears. The necessity of acting forced her 
 to rouse and exert herself. Her husband had desired 
 to be buried in as plain and simple a manner as pos- 
 sible; and she felt that she shewed him more real re- 
 spect by complying with this direction, than by spend- 
 ing in useless shew that money which was wanted to. 
 provide necessaries for the children. 
 

<page 16>
The History of John Wildgoose. 7 
 
 Thomas had been one of the singers. The band 
 accordingly met, and shewed their respect to his me* 
 mory by singing the funeral psalm, after the conclu- 
 sion of the beautiful and impressive lesson in the 
 burial service. Poor Susan, who was naturally a 
 strong-minded woman, had been able so far to exert 
 herself as to attend the last sad ceremony, but had 
 nearly sunk while the psalm was singing. She felt> 
 however, the ground of consolation suggested to her 
 by the service. When the clergyman read, " Blessed 
 are the dead which die in the Lord," and again, 
 when he spoke of " the souls of the faithful after 
 they are delivered from the burden of the flesh being 
 in joy and felicity with the Lord," she felt an humble 
 trust that these words were applicable to her dear 
 departed husband. Deep therefore and acute as her 
 sorrow was, she endeavoured to comply with the ad- 
 monition of the holy apostle St. Paul, " not to be 
 sorry as one without hope." 
 
 She had little time, however, for the indulgence of 
 
 grief. The circumstances of her family made it 
 
 absolutely necessary for her to consider by what 
 
 means she should provide for them. One of her first 
 
 cares was to administer to the will. Mr. Hooker 
 
 told her that she was liable to a heavy penalty if she 
 
 neglected this; and that though the penalty was 
 
 seldom levied, she was hardly complete executrix 
 
 until it was done. The next thing to be considered 
 
 was, how she could get a living without being a 
 
 burden to the parish. Once she had some thoughts 
 
 of carry on thehigling business herself; but the being 
 
 taken so much from her home and children, and 
 
 B 4- 
 

<page 17>
8 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 several other circumstances, convinced her that this 
 plan was not advisable. She therefore determined to 
 sell the horse and cart, and set up a shop, for which 
 there was a fair opening in the village, without doing 
 injury to any of her neighbours. 
 
 It went to her heart to part with the horse, which 
 had been her dear husband's fellow-traveller in so 
 many journeys, and of which he had taken such good 
 care; but prudence forbad her to give way to feelings 
 of this nature. She therefore endeavoured to find 
 for him a kind master, and got quite as good a price 
 as she could expect. The cart too sold for as much 
 as it was worth ; and with the money which was thus 
 produced, she was enabled to open her shop with a 
 good supply of articles purchased at the ready 
 money price. One plan, which she very early 
 adopted, may be worth the attention of those who are 
 engaged in the same business. She soon contrived 
 to learn, what was the usual rate of profit, which the 
 shops in the neighbourhood made upon the articles 
 which they sold. They all sold upon credit, and of 
 course lost a good deal t)y bad debts. Mrs. Wild- 
 goose would gladly have sold nothing but for ready 
 money ; but as she soon found that this was out of the 
 question, partly because some of the poor were irregu- 
 larly paid by their employers, and partly from other 
 causes, she adopted the following plan. In general she 
 gave the same credit as the other shops, and thought 
 it fair to make the same profit, but always gladly 
 gave up half the profit to a ready money customer. 
 
 Three of her children were able to make them- 
 selves of use. John, the eldest, who was now eleven 
 

<page 18>
The History of John Wildgoose. 9 
 
 years old, was employed by a farmer at seven* 
 pence per day. Mary, the next, assisted in washing 
 and mending, and in taking care of little Sarah while 
 her mother was in the shop ; and Sam could earn 
 two shillings a week, sometimes by pig-keeping, 
 and sometimes by jingling a sheep-bell, to keep the 
 birds from the corn. 
 
 And here 1 must just mention by the bye a scrape 
 that little Sam once got into. He was sitting on the 
 watch, under a hedge close to the public road, when 
 a flight of pigeons settled on the wheat. Up jumped 
 Sam, and, all at once, began hallooing as loud as his 
 lungs would let him, and making the most alarming 
 noise with his bell. He succeeded in driving off the 
 plunderers; but, unluckily, the suddenness of thenoise 
 close by the road so frightened the horse of a gen- 
 tleman who was riding by, that he turned short 
 round, and threw his rider into the dirt. The gen- 
 tleman was not much hurt, but a good deal out of 
 temper ; and vented his anger by giving a few cuts 
 with his whip to the boy, who caused his disaster. 
 Poor Sam meant no harm ; but perhaps he deserved 
 some punishment, as his thoughtlessness in making a 
 sudden noise so near the public road, might have 
 been the occasion of a broken limb, or even a more 
 serious accident. 
 
 Notwithstanding a few occasional rubs and griev- 
 ances, the family for some time got on pretty well ; 
 but there was something in the character of her 
 eldest son, which gave Mrs. Wildgoose much uneasi- 
 ness. He had, I am afraid, been rather spoilt from 
 his infancy. Both father and mother were so fond ol 
 ; B 5 
 

<page 19>
10 The History of Jo tin Wildgoose. 
 
 their first child, that they humoured him in every 
 thing. Whatever he cried for he was almost sure to 
 have, and this mistaken indulgence made him, from 
 very early years, selfish, and wilful. Care and dili- 
 gence afterwards, prospered by the grace of God, 
 may certainly correct the effects of early spoiling ; 
 but, though they had so many other good qualities, 
 the parents of John Wildgoose had not been suf- 
 ficiently aware of the necessity of paying attention to 
 the forming of his temper and principles. For a 
 few years he was sent to the day school, and learnt to 
 read tolerably well ; but when he was between eight 
 and nine years old, he was taken to work; and 
 employed, sometimes by the farmers, sometimes to go 
 on errands for his father. He felt his father's death 
 a good deal, and for some time seemed anxious to do 
 what he could to assist his mother. He stuck to his 
 work, and regularly brought his earnings home; and 
 was kind to his brother and sisters. Soon, however, 
 the wilfulness of his character began again to shew 
 itself, and gained strength by being no longer checked 
 by the authority of a father. His mother was 
 grieved to find that he would often go his own way 
 instead of complying with her wishes. One of his 
 principal faults at this time was a neglect of the 
 Lord's day. He seldom came to church ; and when 
 he did happen to come, was inattentive to every part 
 of the service. Mr. Hooker several times endea- 
 voured to persuade him to come to the Sunday 
 school; he told him that one principal use of such 
 schools was the enabling those boys, who were 
 engaged in labour during the week, to keep up and 
 

<page 20>
The History of John Wildgoose. \\ 
 
 to improve the learning which they had acquired at 
 the day school before they went to work; but he 
 would not be persuaded. In spring he was bird's 
 nesting; in summer he was lying on the grass, or 
 bathing in the river ; in autumn he was nutting, and, 
 I am sorry to say, was sometimes guilty of making an 
 inroad on a neighbour's orchard ; and in winter he 
 was engaged in sliding on the ice, hunting squirrels, 
 or some other diversion. Both his mother and Mr. 
 Hooker lamented this, and in the kindest manner 
 endeavoured to make him sensible of the folly of his 
 conduct. He received their admonitions in sullen 
 silence ; and instead of feeling, as he ought to have 
 felt, that their advice proceeded from a regard for his 
 welfare, seemed to think that it was meant to answer 
 some object of their own. 
 
 When he was just past seventeen, he unluckily 
 struck up a close intimacy with a young man in the 
 village, a few years older than himself. His name 
 was William Atkins, but he was usually called Black 
 Will. Atkins was a lively fellow, with a good deal 
 of coarse humour. He was one of those men who 
 neither fear God nor regard man, and who take 
 pleasure in turning religion and every thing serious 
 into ridicule. With him young Wildgoose passed 
 many of his leisure hours ; and sometimes on a 
 Sunday evening they used to join a party of idlers at 
 the Fighting Cocks, a lone public house, about a 
 quarter of a mile from the village. 
 
 Mrs. Wildgoose saw the intimacy which her son 
 had formed with great pain, and repeatedly cautioned 
 him against it. "Jack," she one day said to him, 
 B 6 
 

<page 21>
13 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 " I do wish from my heart that you would not keep 
 company with that Will Atkins. I am sure no good 
 can come of it." < c Why, mother," answered Jack, 
 " \vhat harm is there in poor Will ? He is a good- 
 humoured fellow, that loves a joke; and, Pm sure, 
 he's always very kind and friendly to me." " As 
 pleasant as you may find him," replied his mother, 
 te you know that he bears but a middling character." 
 " Yes/' said the son, " but I shall take care not to 
 be hurt by that/' "Don't be too sure," rejoined she; 
 te the Good Book tells us, that evil communications 
 corrupt good manners, that he that toucheth pitch shall be 
 defiled therewith^ and that the companion of fools shall 
 be destroyed." Jack never liked any thing approach- 
 ing to a lecture; and sulkily saying, "I think, 
 mother, Pm old enough now to judge for myself," 
 left the house. 
 
 Black Will, among other qualifications, possessed 
 that of being an experienced poacher; and it was not 
 long before he let John Wildgoose into the art and 
 mystery of this species of marauding. He used to 
 tell hipi stories of his dexterity in eluding . the keepers, 
 of his skill in entrapping the game, of the fine sums 
 of money he made by it, and of the jolly parties 
 which that money enabled them to have at the Fight- 
 ing Cocks. Jack was amused with his stories, and 
 began very soon to think that he should like to have 
 a share in these adventures. As a boy he was always 
 fond of bird's nesting, and bat fowling, and was eager 
 to try his hand upon game of a higher description. 
 Will was ready enough to lead him on. The next 
 autumn he gave him a few wires, taught him how to 
 

<page 22>
The History of John Wildgoose. 13 
 
 set them in the most likely places, and how to make 
 more. Young Wildgoose was at this time employed 
 in keeping sheep, and was with them early and late. 
 His friend instructed him to set his wires in the even- 
 ing, and when he returned to his flock in the morning, 
 to go round and see how they had succeeded. 
 When he found a hare, he directly hid it in a ditch, 
 or some snug place, till dark, and then carried it 
 to Atkins, who used to meet him for this purpose 
 near the Fighting Cocks. Secretly as he managed 
 this, he did not escape, the vigilant eye of Sir John's 
 keeper; but besides that he felt for the young man's 
 mother, and therefore was unwilling to expose him, 
 he thought that he should do his master and the 
 public more service by discovering the receiver of 
 the hares, than by proceeding against the catcher of 
 them. He had seen the direction which young 
 Wildgoose usually took when he left his sheep, and 
 contrived one night to station himself so, that he 
 witnessed his meeting with Atkins, and saw the latter 
 directly carry the booty into the public house. Ste- 
 phen Tomkins the landlord was a keen, knowing 
 kind of person. Though he sold a good deal of 
 beer, yet -he chose to say that he could not get his 
 bread by keeping to his regular business, and had 
 many other ways of earning a few shillings. Among 
 the rest, he kept a horse and cart, with which he 
 travelled every week as a higler, either to the county 
 town, or wherever else suited his purpose. The 
 game-keeper had long suspected him of carrying 
 game, but had never been able actually to catch him. 
 

<page 23>
14 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 What he now saw, added to some private information 
 which he had received, satisfied him that his suspi- 
 cions were just. Early next morning therefore he 
 applied for a warrant to search for game, and waited 
 with the constable and two other men at the turn of 
 the road, before you come to the turnpike at the 
 entrance of the town. About the hour they reck- 
 oned upon, Tomkins's cart made its appearance, and 
 they sallied out from the hovel where they had con- 
 cealed themselves. Tomkins, upon being desired to 
 stop, at first looked a little frightened, but soon con- 
 trived to put a good face upon the business. When 
 they shewed him their warrant, he pretended to be 
 surprised, and affronted that they should s'uspect 
 such a man as him of any thing improper ; at the 
 same time asserting with many oaths, that he had 
 nothing in his cart but a few fowls and the butter which 
 he had collected from the dairymen. The keepers, 
 however, insisted upon searching ; and were so long 
 before they succeeded, that they almost thought that 
 he had got some hint of their intentions. At last, how- 
 ever, quite at the bottom of the cart, under butter 
 baskets, fowls, and other commodities of the same 
 nature, they discovered first one hare, then a second, 
 then a third. As it was market day, the magistrates 
 were holding their usual petty sessions. The keepers 
 immediately carried Stephen Tomkins and the hares 
 into the justice room. The regular steps having 
 been gone through, and the witnesses sworn and 
 examined, Tomkins had not a word to say in his 
 defence. Mr. Hale, therefore, who acted as chair- 
 

<page 24>
The History of John Wildgoose* 16 
 
 man of the bench, proceeded to conviction, and 
 addressed him in the following words. 
 
 " Stephen Tomkins, you have been convicted 
 upon the clearest evidence of having game in your 
 possession in your higler's cart, by which offence you 
 have incurred the penalty of 1 5. ; that is, 5^. for 
 each head of game, half to the informer and half to 
 the poor of the parish a . The law does not give us 
 the power of mitigating this penalty; and even if it 
 did, we probably should not feel that there was any 
 cause for mitigation. The offence of which you are 
 convicted is one, the effects of which are very mis- 
 chievous. It has been said, that if there were no re- 
 ceivers of stolen goods there would be no thieves: 
 and it may be said, with equal truth, that there 
 would be few poachers if there were no clandestine 
 receivers of game. Such men ^as you encourage 
 thoughtless young men in this manner to break the 
 laws of their country, and to take to a course of life 
 which often brings them to an untimely end. We 
 hope that this conviction will be a warning to you, 
 and will induce you to desist from such practices." 
 
 Tomkins said, that it was very hard that he should 
 have to pay so heavy a fine, only for having a few 
 hares in his cart ; and did not see how he was more 
 to blame than the poulterer, to whom he was going 
 to send them, or than the gentlemen who bought 
 them of the poulterers. Mr. Hale replied, that he 
 and his brother justices sat there to execute the laws, 
 and had not time to discuss the propriety of them, or 
 the cases of other offenders who were not before them. 
 
 a See Note [A.] 
 

<page 25>
16 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 t( As for you, Mr. Tomkins," lie continued, " for 
 the reasons which I have given, I do not think your 
 punishment at all too severe: at all events, it is the 
 punishment prescribed by law, which we are bound 
 to inflict. As for those other persons to whom you 
 allude, a poulterer exposing game for sale, and a 
 gentleman or other person buying it h 9 are liable to 
 the same penalty, and if they should be brought be- 
 fore us with sufficient evidence against them, it would 
 be our duty to convict them. Perhaps I might also 
 feel it right to give them the same admonition that I 
 have given you. I might feel it right to hint to them, 
 as I have done to you, that they are encouraging 
 poor men to break the laws by poaching, and that 
 they are in one point of view more to blame than the 
 poachers themselves. A poacher often pleads dis- 
 tress and poverty. This is no excuse for him, but 
 can certainly often be pleaded with truth. Now, 
 certainly, a poor, uneducated man, who breaks the 
 laws through distress though mind, I again say, 
 that that is no excuse for him must in one point of 
 view at least, be considered as less blameable than he 
 who knowingly breaks them for the purpose of mere 
 gain, or, than he who violates them for the sake of 
 gratifying his appetite or his vanity, by seeing game 
 upon his table." 
 
 Tomkins had nothing more to say, excepting that 
 he had not the money by him, and wanted a little 
 time to raise it. The justices therefore- allowed him 
 to defer the payment till that day fortnight. 
 
 b See Note [B.] 
 

<page 26>
The History of John Wildgoose. 17 
 
 When the culprit returned into the market-place, 
 he pretended to make light of the affair ; and calling 
 at the Red Lion for a pot of ale with some gin in it, 
 drank " good luck to poaching," and affected to 
 laugh at the magistrates. Fifteen pounds, however, 
 was really a heavy pull upon Tomkins's purse, and 
 whatever he might pretend, it weighed upon his mind 
 a good deal. 
 
 When he got back to his own house, he was loud 
 in expressing his ill humour against Mr. Hale, and 
 the whole bench of justices ; and uttered against them 
 the most dreadful curses. " Come, come, Stephen," 
 said old Truman, his father-in-law, who was quietly 
 sitting in the chimney-corner, " come, come, you are 
 going a little too far ; I am sorry for many reasons 
 that you have got into this scrape, and don't wonder 
 at your being vexecf ; but what right have you to cry 
 out so against Mr. Hale ?" " Right !" said Tom- 
 kins, " right enough, I think. Why, hasn't he fined 
 me fifteen pounds ?" " Yes ; but could he do other- 
 wise ? Every magistrate, you know, is sworn to exe- 
 cute the laws to the best of his judgment. If, after 
 such clear evidence, he had let you off, he would 
 have broken his oath, and have acted ill towards the 
 public at large, and unjustly towards those who are 
 entitled to receive the money. Besides, Stephen, 
 you don't suppose, because a magistrate punishes you 
 as an offender, that he bears any ill will to you as a 
 man. Excepting on licensing-day, he probably 
 never saw you before, and never thought about you 
 one way or the other." Well then," said Tom- 
 kins, " I hate him for being a magistrate at all."*- 
 

<page 27>
18 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 " Now there you're wrong again," said the old man : 
 " Pm sure we all ought to be very thankful to those 
 gentlemen, who will undertake such a troublesome 
 office, especially as they get nothing by it. There 
 are few people in these days that will work without 
 pay. The judges get some thousands a year, and a 
 pension when they are too old for service. I do not 
 wish them one farthing less, for they deserve richly all 
 they get, and are, generally speaking, an honour to 
 the country. The attorneys too, if you have any 
 dealings with them, come pretty quick upon you with 
 their three-and-fourpences, and their six-and-eight- 
 pences; and the counsellors seldom open their 
 mouths under a guinea or two. Though here again I 
 must say, that I don't think either of these sorts of 
 lawyers overpaid, when you consider how many years 
 most of them work before they get any thing, (many, 
 I believe, never get any thing at all.) The gentle- 
 men, however, who act as justices, give their time 
 and attention for nothing, and run the risk of giving 
 ^offence to many of their neighbours into the bargain. 
 No one, I'm sure, "will undertake the office, who 
 values his own ease, and quiet, and comfort, at a 
 higher rate than the being of use to his neighbours 
 and the public."--" I wish," said Tomkins peevishly, 
 " there were no such things as laws or magistrates in 
 the world." " Like enough, like enough," replied 
 Truman, "men are apt to quarrel with the laws 
 when the laws are too hard for 'em. Yon don't often 
 look into the Bible, Stephen, but that would tell you, 
 that the magistrate bearetk not the sword in vain, but 
 is an avenger to execute wrath upon every soul that 
 

<page 28>
The History of John Wildgoose. 19 
 
 doeth evil. It is, therefore, natural for a man, who 
 has done evil, or who means to do evil, to wish that 
 there was no such check upon him. But those who, 
 instead of doing evil, wish to lead quiet and peaceable 
 lives in an honest way, are glad to have the laws to 
 protect them from evil-doers, and are thankful to 
 those who duly execute them." 
 
 Tomkins did not much like Truman's lecture, and 
 instead of being benefited by it, retained in his heart 
 all his ill-will against Mr. Hale. In this he was not 
 only very wrong, but, I am disposed to think, more 
 unreasonable than the generality of men who may be 
 in the same unlucky circumstances with himself. For 
 men/who are convicted upon sufficient evidence, have 
 generally the sense to see that the magistrate who 
 convicts them, merely does his bounden duty. Tom- 
 kins put common sense and reason out of the question, 
 and determined to do something by way of revenge. 
 Mr. Hale's house was situated about seven miles off. 
 It stood at the extremity of a rather extensive pad- 
 dock, at the other end of which was a large fish 
 pond, well stored with jack and perch. Tomkins 
 knew the pond well, and took it into his head, that he 
 would make it refund part of his fifteen pounds. He 
 communicated his plan to Will Atkins, young Wild- 
 goose, and Mike Simmons, who readily entered into 
 it. They heard that Mr. Hale was from home for a 
 few days, and determined to execute their plan with- 
 out delay. They accordingly furnished themselves 
 with a large net, and in the dusk of the evening 
 proceeded to a barn, at a little distance from Mr. 
 Hale's grounds. Here they concealed themselves till 
 

<page 29>
20 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 towards twelve o'clock at night. They then got over 
 the pales, and were just beginning to open their net, 
 when they were alarmed by the sound of horses 
 coming swiftly along the road. They thought them- 
 selves safe from the owner of the pond, but were of 
 course afraid of being seen at that time of night by 
 any one else, and crouched down to avoid observation. 
 In this they did not succeed. It was a cloudy night, 
 but still the moon gave some light, and the horsemen, 
 who proved to be Mr. Hale, (who had been unex- 
 pectedly called home,) his brother the Captain, and a 
 servant, caught a glimpse of them. The gentlemen 
 directly gave their horses to the servant, aqd jumping 
 over the pales hastened towards the pond. The 
 plunderers immediately ran off, and three of them were 
 soon lost in the plantations. Wildgoose, however, 
 iri the hurry set his foot in a drain, threw himself 
 down, and was taken. 
 
 When told his name and place of abode, Mr. 
 Hale said, that "he remembered his father as an 
 honest and industrious man :" indeed the sad accident 
 by which he lost his life, had made his name known 
 throughout the neighbourhood. And then address- 
 ing himself to his prisoner, " Young man, " said he, 
 " I respected your father, and have heard that your 
 mother bears an excellent character ; I am therefore 
 heartily sorry to find that their son has taken to such 
 bad practices. It is well for you that I did not come 
 up a little later, after you had carried your scheme 
 into execution. Had that been the case, you might 
 have been transported." " Transported !" said Wild- 
 goose in astonishment, " what, transported for taking 
 

<page 30>
The History of John Wildgoose. 21 
 
 a few fish !'' "Yes, transported," replied the magi- 
 strate ; " if a man steals fish from a pond in any 
 inclosed ground, he is, upon conviction before one 
 Justice, to be sentenced to pay five pounds : but if 
 he enters into any park, or paddock, or garden, 
 adjoining to a house, and steals fish from any river, 
 or pond in it, he is liable to be indicted at the As- 
 sizes, and transported Jor seven years c . The law 
 often finds it necessary to protect, by a severe penalty, 
 property that is much exposed; and when a man is 
 daring enough to carry on his depredations in the very 
 homestead of his neighbour, he requires a severe 
 punishment. In the present case, though your 
 intention is sufficiently clear, I have no wish, and do 
 not feel bound, to prosecute you. Nor shall I (as I 
 might do) sue you for the trespass. Go home to 
 your mother, and never again allow yourself to be 
 led by bad advisers into the like crime." 
 
 Jack had told his mother that he was going to a 
 friend at a distance, and should not return home that 
 night. This made her sadly anxious ; but she knew 
 by experience that persuasion was lost upon him. 
 When he returned home in the morning, she was 
 confirmed in the suspicion that something was 
 wrong. From his intimacy with Will Atkins she 
 concluded he had been upon some poaching scheme ; 
 and determined, as she could do nothing herself, to 
 try what effect Mr. Hooker could produce upon her 
 son. It was not long before a good opportunity 
 offered. Just as Jack left Mr. Hale's paddock, 
 
 c See Note [C.] 
 

<page 31>
22 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 a heavy rain had come on, which soon soaked his 
 clothes. Wet as he was, he got into a shed, partly 
 for shelter, and partly to fill up the time, till his 
 mother was up in the morning to let him in. The 
 consequence was, that he caught a severe cold, 
 attended with so much fever and head-ache, that he 
 was unfit to go to work. Mr. Hooker called, and 
 having kindly enquired after his health, began giving 
 some hints on the subject of poaching. Jack sulkily 
 answered, that " no one had a right to consider him 
 as a poacher, until he was caught." Mr. Hooker, 
 however, who had had some communication with 
 Sir John's keeper, soon let him know that he had 
 good ground for what he said ; and endeavoured to 
 make him sensible of the criminality and danger of 
 his conduct. Jack would not acknowledge that 
 poaching was wrong. Stealing he knew was dis- 
 graceful and sinful. To carry off a sheep, or to rob 
 a henroost, deserved, he allowed, to be severely 
 punished ; " but," said he, " I cannot see the harm of 
 poaching : animals that run wild by nature, belong to 
 nobody, and any body that can has a right to catch 
 them . I don't know why it is more wrong to kill a 
 partridge than it is to kill a crow or a sparrow ; or 
 why catching a hare is worse than knocking down a 
 squirrel." tl The laws of the land," said Mr. Hooker, 
 cc have made a difference between those animals, and 
 it is the duty of every man to obey the laws of the 
 country in which he lives." " Not," answered Jack, 
 " if the laws are hard or unfair." l< Our duty," 
 replied Mr. Hooker, "is to obey the laws as we find 
 them. If every one were at liberty to reject such laws 
 

<page 32>
The History of John Wildgoose. $3 
 
 as he disliked, we might almost as well have no laws 
 at all. The thief would cast off the laws against 
 stealing; the drunkard those against drunkenness; 
 and of course the poacher would have no laws against 
 poaching. The Scriptures teach us to submit ourselves 
 to every ordinance of man , why ? for the Lord's 
 sake : as a matter of religious duty. They bid us to 
 be subject not only for wrath, for fear of punishment, 
 butjfor conscience sake. They teach us to obey magi- 
 strates : to be dutiful to the king as supreme, and to 
 magistrates as to them that are sent by him for the 
 punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that 
 do well. Remember, therefore, that quiet obedience 
 to the laws of the land is a Christian duty. We are 
 to obey the laws, whether we approve of them or not: 
 but perhaps, after- all, the laws against poaching are 
 not so unreasonable as you take them to be. Upon 
 what do the hares, and pheasants, and partridges 
 feed?" "Why, upon a number of things; chiefly 
 upon the grass and corn, and such like ; and a deal of 
 mischief they do." " Well then, being supported by 
 the produce of the land, they ought in some way lo 
 belong to the land ; but as from their wildness they 
 move about from place to place, it is for the law to 
 say in what manner they shall belong to it ; and the 
 law does this by making a certain property in land 
 the principal qualification for killing game. Per- 
 haps I may think that some alteration in the qua- 
 lification might be an advantage; but I am not a 
 lawgiver, Jack, any more than you; and as I said 
 before, we are to obey the laws as we find them." 
 " It's very well," said Jack, sulkily, " for a gentleman 
 

<page 33>
24 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 like you to talk about obedience to the laws, but I 
 don't know what good the laws do to such a poor 
 fellow as 1 am." Mr. Hooker did not immediately 
 notice this, but, seeming to change the conversation, 
 said, " By the bye, John, I was sorry to hear of your 
 quarrel with Tom Nutman, the blacksmith at Ration. 
 I'm told that he threatens to break every bone in 
 your skin. Are you not afraid of meeting him?" 
 " Afraid,'* said Jack, "let him touch me if he dare." 
 " Why, do you think that he is prevented by any 
 sense of religion from putting his threat in execution?" 
 " Religion ! he has no more religion than a dog." 
 " Oh ! then you think that he is afraid of you, and 
 that you are more than a match for him ?" (( Why 
 no, I can't say that: he's much the strongest man 
 of the two, and is a noted prize fighter." (( Then 
 why should he not dare to touch you ?" " Because 
 he knows, that if he should strike me, I should get a 
 warrant against him, and have him off to prison 
 before he was a day older." " Oh ! that is what you 
 mean, is it? it seems then that the law is of some use 
 to you, poor as you are. And as you say that he is 
 not influenced by the fear of God, what is there that 
 prevents his coming to-morrow, with half a dozen of 
 the Ration men, carrying off every thing in your 
 mother's shop, and breaking your head if you said a 
 word against it ? The laws of the land certainly, 
 which he knows would severely punish his wrong 
 doing." John was forced to acknowledge, that even 
 the poor had an interest in the protection afforded 
 by the law to persons and property. 
 
 " But," continued Mr. Hooker, " poaching is 
 

<page 34>
'* *~7 " 
 
 The History of John Wildgoose. 25 
 
 positively wrong, not only as it is a breach of the 
 laws, but on many other accounts. It is plainly con- 
 trary to the great rule of doing as you would be done 
 by. You would not like, if the law gave you a right 
 to any particular thing, to have any man come and 
 take that thing from you: and so, when the pro- 
 prietor of an estate and manor, like Sir John, is at 
 much expence and trouble in order to preserve the 
 game, which the law gives him a right to preserve, 
 it is clearly wrong, and in opposition to the great 
 rule which I have mentioned, for any man to invade 
 that right. Besides, poaching is apt to bring a man 
 into bad company, which is always most dangerous. 
 The habit of being out at nights makes him familiar 
 with deeds which shun the light ; and too often, if 
 he is disappointed of his game, the poacher makes 
 up for it by taking poultry, or any thing else he can. 
 lay his hands on. We hear too every day, how 
 poaching leads on to deeds of violence, and even of 
 bloodshed, in the conflicts which it occasions with 
 the men, whose duty it is to protect the game. In 
 short, John, poaching is wrong in itself; it leads a 
 man into a lawless way of life, and frequently is the 
 beginning of all kinds of wickedness." 
 
 Young Wildgoose felt that there was much truth 
 in what Mr. Hooker said; and though the pride, or 
 stubbornness of hie character would not allow him to 
 acknowledge it at the time, yet when he came to 
 reflect on it after the clergyman was gone, he pretty 
 much determined within himself that he would give 
 up the sinful and dangerous practice into which he 
 had been drawn. Perhaps some private reason came 
 c 
 

<page 35>
26 The History of John Wildg.oose. 
 
 in aid of his good resolution. He stuck to his work ; 
 kept away from the Fighting Cocks; and avoided the 
 company of Will Atkins and his old associates. 
 His mother observed the alteration in his conduct 
 with heartfelt pleasure. From the odd temper of her 
 son, she thought it might be prudent not to say 
 much about it: but she was particularly kind in her 
 manner to him, and did all that she could to make 
 his home comfortable. Young Wildgoose felt this 
 as he ought, and for some time every thing went on 
 well. 
 
 Unhappily one evening in November, as John was 
 returning from his work, he accidentally fell in with 
 his old companion Atkins : " Why, Jack/' cried he, 
 " what have you been doing with yourself? We 
 never see thee among us now ; and many a merry 
 night have we had. What has made thee so shy of 
 late?" Wildgoose told him that he was going to turn 
 over a new leaf, and had given up poaching. 
 <c Well, now, I'm sorry for that; but still that's no 
 reason why you shouldn't now and then join a friend 
 or two over a pot of beer; so come along with me to 
 Tomkins's. He'll be quite glad to see thee again." 
 John refused with some steadiness, but Atkins 
 said so much, with a sort of good-humoured raillery, 
 that at last he gave way. In one pot of ale he 
 thought there could be no harm. 
 
 At the Fighting Cocks they found four or five of 
 Will Atkins's particular friends sitting round the 
 fire. They had not been drinking much, seemed 
 sociable and friendly, and talked about any thing 
 that came uppermost. Wildgoose soon went beyond 
 

<page 36>
The History of John Wildgoose. 27 
 
 the quantity, to which he had stinted himself; when 
 all at once Atkins called out, " Come now, Jack, do 
 tell us what could possess you to give up sporting. 
 You used to take as much pleasure in it as any 
 gentleman in the land." John was taken by surprise, 
 and did not well know what to answer. At length 
 he fairly acknowledged that he gave it up in conse-^ 
 quence of what Mr. Hooker had said to him. 
 " Well now, that is too bad," said Will, I thought 
 that you had been a lad of too much spirit to be 
 talked over by a parson. I concluded that you had 
 some real good reason, and never should have 
 guessed that you had nothing more to say for yourself 
 than that." John replied, that Mr. Hooker spoke very 
 kindly to him ; and that in what he said, he seemed 
 to have both sense and Scripture on his side. 
 t( Scripture !" exclaimed Bob Fowler, "why sure 
 enough Jack Wildgoose is turned methodist." They 
 all laughed heartily at the joke, and went on for 
 some time bantering Wildgoose upon his being 
 so straight-laced. Jack never could stand being 
 laughed at. He had not resolution enough to hold 
 fast his integrity, when his integrity exposed him to 
 ridicule. He did not remember the words of the 
 prophet, Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be 
 afraid of their revilings : nor those of our Saviour, 
 Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words 
 that is, ashamed of being religious, of being a Chris- 
 tian in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him 
 shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he cometh in 
 his glory with his holy angels. In short, Atkins and 
 his comrades plied Jack Wildgoose so successfully 
 c2 
 

<page 37>
28 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 with ale and bantering, that he gave up his good 
 resolutions, and agreed to accompany them on a 
 scheme which they had already planned for making 
 an attack upon Sir John's preserve. They sat 
 drinking till past twelve o'clock at night, and then 
 repaired by different roads to the scene of action. 
 
 It so happened, that the keepers had received some 
 information, which had carried them to the opposite 
 side of the manor. The gang, therefore, carried on 
 their operations for some time without interruption ; 
 and when their firing had drawn the keepers towards 
 them, one of the party, who had been posted on the 
 look-out, contrived to give them a signal, so that they 
 got away without difficulty. They returned to their 
 rendezvous loaded with pheasants, for which Tomkins 
 paid them a good price, with some gin into the 
 bargain, They gave Wildgoose more than his fair 
 share of the money by way of encouragement ; and 
 agreed to meet again on the following Thursday. 
 
 On that day they determined to try their luck 
 in the wood which covers the north side of the hill, 
 just at the outside of Sir John's park. The party 
 consisted of Black Will, Bob Fowler, John Wild- 
 goose, Tom Cade, and one more. Will and Bob 
 were provided with guns ; the rest had bludgeons, in 
 order to assist them, in case of any interruption from 
 the keepers. Atkins and Cade entered the wood 
 from the park, and the three others a little lower 
 down. Atkins had just fired at a pheasant, when 
 one of the under keepers jumped up out of the ditch, 
 and calling out, " Holloa ! what are you at there ?" 
 ran to Atkins, and collared him. Tom, who was at a 
 

<page 38>
The History of John Wildgoose. 29 
 
 small distance behind a tree, immediately came to his 
 friend's assistance, and a well aimed blow of his 
 bludgeon laid the assailant at their feet. At this 
 moment the head keeper and several of Sir John's 
 men came up, and secured Tom. The other poachers 
 were brought by the noise to the field of battle, and 
 attempted to rescue their comrade ; but as Fowler 
 was aiming a blow at the man who had hold of him, 
 one of Sir John's garden men struck him on the 
 right arm, just above the elbow, with such tremendous 
 force, that the bone was broken. The poachers, 
 who before had begun to find that the keepers were 
 too many for them, immediately ran, leaving Bob 
 wounded, and Tom a prisoner. The former, in 
 consequence of the hurt which he had received, was 
 allowed to return to his family ; but Tom was carried 
 off to a magistrate, and then to gaol, in order to 
 take his trial at the ensuing Quarter Sessions. The 
 other three, when they found themselves safe from 
 pursuit, slackened their pace. Will first broke 
 silence, by exclaiming, " A pretty business we have 
 made of it to-night. Well, we can't always manage 
 as we did last week ; but I hate to go home empty- 
 handed." They were now passing through the 
 orchard at the back of Farmer Dobson's house, when 
 Will spied some turkeys, which had imprudently 
 chosen to roost in the trees, instead of going into the 
 poultry house. The opportunity was tempting ; and 
 for want of other game, Will twitched two of them 
 from their branch, and carried them off so quietly, 
 that the farmer's dog did not utter a single bark. 
 Wildgoose was a good deal shocked at this. In the 
 c3 
 

<page 39>
30 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 pursuit of game, though illegal, he tbought there was 
 something spirited and manly; but revolted at the 
 idea of stealing. What Mr. Hooker had said on the 
 tendency of poaching to lead on to other crimes 
 occurred to him. He ventured to remonstrate; bu 
 Will answered, '* Why, what's the harm? The old 
 fellow is rich enough, and can well spare a turkey or 
 two. If I had left them, they would only have 
 bought a little more finery for his daughters." John 
 still persisted that stealing was dishonourable, but 
 his comrade replied, " Come, come,' let's have no 
 more preaching; in our way of life a man must not 
 mind trifles. To tell you the truth, I have done as 
 much by a sheep before now; only then, to be sure, 
 I had a litlle bit of a grudge against the farmer, and 
 I knew he could easily afford it." Wildgoose was 
 more and more staggered. He saw how easily a 
 man, who was in the habit of breaking the laws in 
 one instance, could go on to break them in another, 
 but gave up arguing the point with his companion. 
 
 Fowler contrived to get home with his broken arm 
 before the morning. When the surgeon arrived, he 
 found that the fracture was a bad one ; and the worse 
 from the severe bruise with which it was accompanied. 
 On the Saturday morning, his wife, who had four small 
 children, went to the overseer for relief. "And so 
 you think," said he, " Nanny, that because your 
 husband has thrown himself out of work, by his own 
 misconduct, he is to be supported out of the pockets 
 of the farmers ? We have enough to do to pay rents 
 and taxes, and provide for our own families, without 
 having to provide for the families of poachers. If 
 

<page 40>
The History of John Wildgoose. 3i 
 
 your husband had met with an accident in an honest 
 way, I'm sure, 1 for one should have been for giving 
 him all possible assistance; and no farmer in the 
 parish would have said a word against it : but it is 
 very hard that we should be expected to pay for his 
 bad deeds." Nanny Fowler felt the truth of what he 
 said, but replied, " that still they must not starve." 
 " It is true," answered the overseer, " the law does 
 say that nobody shall starve; but you must not 
 expect much more from me than is just necessary to 
 keep you from starving. I'm sorry, Nanny, for you 
 and your children, but when the father of a family 
 breaks the laws, he must expect his family to suffer 
 for it as well as hi 01 self.- It is in the nature of things 
 thai it should be so. You shall have from the parish 
 just what is necessary ; but even that you shaH receive 
 by way of loan d , and if your husband recovers the use 
 of his arm, we shall compel him to repay it in the 
 summer. If his arm never gets well again, which I 
 fear may possibly be the case, we can't expect to get 
 the money back;. but we shall not maintain him in 
 idleness. We shall set him to do what he can ; 
 and if he earns but a little, and is kept but just from 
 starving, he- will have no one to blame but himself." 
 The bad success of the last expedition, and the loss 
 of strength which they had sustained, kept the gang 
 of plunderers comparatively quiet. Jack Wildgoose, 
 however, and Black Will, again took to their old 
 practice of wiring hares 6 ; and contrived to dispose of 
 a considerable number. The keepers were aware of 
 
 d See Note [D.] e See Note [E.J 
 

<page 41>
32 The History of John Wild goose. 
 
 it, but somehow could never manage to come upon 
 them exactly at the right time. One Sunday morn- 
 ing, when Jack had gone round to examine into the 
 state of his snares, and had just taken up a hare with 
 the wire round its neck, Stokes the under-keeper, 
 who had been concealed on the other side of the 
 hedge, suddenly started up, and caught him in the 
 fact. An information against him was immediately 
 laid by one of Stokes's fellow-servants; a summons 
 was procured ; and John Wildgoose appeared at the 
 Justice meeting, which took place next day. 
 
 The information having been read, and Wildgoose 
 having pleaded not guilty, the keeper was sworn, and 
 began to give his evidence. Being asked at what 
 hour in the morning the transaction took place, he 
 replied, *' A little after seven : for I had heard the 
 great clock at Sir John's strike a few minutes before." 
 " That's false, however," said a voice from the crowd, 
 which was assembled in the Justice room. " Come 
 forward there," said one of the Justices ; when who 
 should make his appearance but Black Will. The 
 magistrate told him not to interrupt the witness, but 
 that if he had any thing to say, he should state 
 it upon oath when the keeper's evidence had been 
 gone through. This was soon done; and then 
 Atkins being sworn, and desired to state what he 
 knew of the business, replied, " I know but littJe 
 about it ; but this I can say, before seven on Sunday 
 morning Jack Wildgoose and I started together to 
 see a friend at Holiybourn, which your Worship 
 may perhaps know is about six miles off. We went 
 to church there, and did not get back till the after- 
 

<page 42>
The History of John Wildgoose. 33 
 
 noon. So how Jack can have been wiring hares after 
 seven I don't very well know." The Justices looked 
 surprised, as the under-keeper had the character of 
 being an honest, truth-telling man. Wildgoose 
 himself said nothing. Mr. Hale, who acted as chair- 
 man, was beginning to put some questions to Stokes, 
 in the hope of finding something either to confirm or 
 to weaken his testimony, when an elderly man in a 
 smock frock came to the bar> and said, " I should 
 be as glad as any one to have the young man got oflf, 
 both for his own sake, and for the sake of his good 
 mother ; but I cannot stand by in silence, and hear a 
 man take such an audacious false oath as that sworn 
 by Will Atkins. Why you know, Will," continued 
 he, " that you skulked by the Fighting Cocks soon 
 after seven ; I was afraid that you were about no 
 good, and if the gentlemen won't believe me, I can 
 name another who saw you as well as 1." This was 
 old Truman, who had got a lift in Tomkins's cart for 
 the sake of hearing the proceedings, but without the 
 most distant thought of taking any part in them 
 himself. His high respect for the name of God, and 
 his general love of truth, compelled him to speak 
 against his own wishes. 
 
 The fact was this. Atkins, who had gone to meet 
 Wildgoose on the Sunday morning, in order to 
 receive from him the hares which he had snared, 
 heard that he had been detected, and almost immedi- 
 ately determined to try the chance of setting up an 
 alibi. For himself, as he had not the fear of God 
 before his eyes, he cared not whether what he swore 
 was false or true, so that it answered his purpose. 
 c5 
 

<page 43>
34 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 He therefore had directed Wildgoose, though with- 
 out telling him his intention, to keep close at home, 
 and let no one see him ; and had hastened himself to 
 get out of the village, unobserved as he thought by 
 any one. 
 
 When Truman spoke, Black Will turned pale 
 with vexation and rage, and darted at the old man a 
 look, which said that he longed to strike him to the 
 earth. When Truman, however, had repeated his 
 statement upon oath, Atkins endeavoured to get out 
 of the scrape as well as he could, and stammered out 
 something about mistaking the hour. Mr. Hale the 
 chairman gave him a most serious reprimand. He 
 told him, that " the deliberately calling upon the God 
 of truth to bear witness to a falsehood, was daring the 
 Almighty to his face. That, as the property, the 
 good name, and even the lives of men depended in 
 great measure upon preserving the proper respect for 
 an oath, the man who wilfully took a false oath 
 deserved to be banished out of all civilized society ; 
 he added, that he hoped Sir John would indict him 
 for perjury." He then proceeded to convict Wild- 
 goose. " The penalty," said he, " for using engines 
 for the destruction of game, on other days, is, as you 
 know well enough, five pounds. But as your offence 
 was committed on the Lord's Day, the penalty is any 
 sum that we think fit, provided it is not more than 
 20^. nor less than 10^. In compassion to your 
 mother we will fix the lower sum. This it is our 
 duty to sentence you to pay. If you cannot pay it, 
 and have not goods which we can distrain, you 
 must go to prison." Wildgoose answered, " that as 
 

<page 44>
The History of John Wildgoose. 35 
 
 for the penalty, he neither could nor would pay it : 
 that he had no goods, as he was only a sort of a 
 lodger in his mother's house, and that he had as soon 
 go to prison as not. He knew that there he should 
 have plenty to eat and little to do." In this last 
 supposition he was mistaken, as the magistrates had, 
 though with some difficulty, contrived to find work 
 enough to keep the prisoners continually employed. 
 The parish constable, under whose care Wildgoose 
 was, said, that of his own certain knowledge he was 
 able to confirm the truth of his statement as to his 
 having no goods to distrain. The commitment 
 therefore was made out, and Jack was sent off to the 
 county gaol. 
 
 Lightly as he had talked of going to prison, yet he felt 
 a good deal when actually on his way thither; and 
 when he saw the high walls, the grated windows, the 
 narrow cells, still more when he heard the clank of 
 the fetters of some of his fellow-prisoners, who were 
 confined for heinous offences, his soul sank within 
 him. He was shocked too and mortified at being 
 required to put on that token of disgrace, a prison 
 dress. He did not, however, remain there long. 
 His poor mother was thunderstruck at hearing that 
 her son was really sent to prison, and lost no time in 
 endeavouring to get money enough to pay the fine in 
 order to procure his freedom. She had hardly any 
 money in the house ; but her neighbours were ready 
 to lend her what they had by them ; and four 
 pounds, being the whole of her savings in service, 
 were eagerly and freely given by Lucy Wilmot^ a 
 c 6 
 

<page 45>
36 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 well-behaved young woman, to whom Jack Wild- 
 goose had for some time been attached. 
 
 Mrs. Wildgoose could not bear to be in debt ; and 
 as she never was able to do much more than just 
 maintain her family, she knew that she must deny 
 herself and her children every little indulgence in 
 order to repay her kind neighbours. But she 
 thought that any thing was belter than suffering her 
 son to remain in prison, in the society, it might be, of 
 depraved and abandoned characters. 
 
 The penalty having been paid, Jack was immedi- 
 ately set at liberty. He felt a little abashed at first 
 coming home; but the kind manner of his mother, 
 who, though her heart was full of grief, would not 
 utter the least reproach, relieved him. Jack soon 
 observed in a variety of little things a change in his 
 mother's manner of living. She had been accustomed , 
 for instance, to give her children a bit of meat baked 
 with a pudding OK Sundays. When, instead of this, 
 nothing made its appearance but some potatoes and 
 dripping, with bread and cheese, the girls looked 
 disconcerted, and Sam cried out, " Why, mother, 
 what's become of the meat and pudding? This is no 
 better than a working-day's dinner." Mrs. Wild- 
 goose told them, that she could not at present afford 
 to give them a better, and they should be thankful for 
 what they had. John knew well enough the meaning 
 of this, and, to do him justice, felt a good deal. 
 Often did he now wish that he had in his pocket 
 again those many shillings and sixpences, which he 
 had uselessly spent at the Fighting Cocks. 
 

<page 46>
The History of John Wildgoose. 37 
 
 His mother, who had always been pleased with his 
 attachment to Lucy Wilmot, thought it but fair lo tell 
 him one day how generously she had contributed to 
 his enlargement. John was much overcome, and 
 took the first opportunity of warmly thanking Lucy 
 for her kindness to him. Lucy was vexed at his 
 knowing it, and was a good deal confused ; but there 
 was something in her manner, which encouraged him 
 to express his hopes of being some day united to her. 
 Lucy was a frank, ingenuous, open-hearted girl, and 
 did not pretend to deny the regard that she felt for 
 him; "but, John," said she, "I can never consent 
 to marry a poacher ; I should not think it right to 
 unite myself to a man who lives in the habit of 
 breaking the laws. I could not bear to have for a 
 husband, the companion of nightly plunderers, 
 drunkards, and sabbath-breakers. Besides, I should 
 never have a moment's peace. The thoughts of fines, 
 and imprisonments, and fightings with game-keepers, 
 and all sorts of terrible things, would never be out of 
 my head. Instead of your coming home to me at 
 night, I should expeat to hear of your being taken 
 up, or wounded, or being forced to fly the country. 
 No, John ; I donH pretend to deny the kindness I 
 feel for you. We were play-fellows when chil- 
 dren; were always good friends as we were 
 growing up; and perhaps I might now use a 
 stronger term of regard ; but I never will I never 
 can marry a poacher." Wildgoose promised again 
 and again, that he would give it up. " So you said 
 before, John, Nobody could promise fairer than you 
 did; and for a little while I hoped you would keep 
 

<page 47>
38 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 your promise. But you know how little came of it 
 after all." John promised that this time he would be 
 more steady. Lucy replied, " As yet, John, we are 
 both much too young to think of settling. If I know 
 my own heart, I think that I shall never love any 
 man but you : but I will never become your wife, 
 until you have shewn, by the experience of a year or 
 two, that you have firmness enough to keep to your 
 present resolution." 
 
 Wildgoose's spirit was a little up at Lucy's not 
 choosing to trust him at- once. He was deeply 
 gratified by her acknowledgment that she was 
 attached to him ; but at the same time felt something 
 like pique and ill-humour, at what he called her want 
 of confidence in him. He was doubly resolved, 
 however, to prove by his conduct that she had no 
 reason to doubt his steadiness. 
 
 Every thing now seemed going on well. John 
 passed his days in honest labour, and spent his 
 evenings at home. He saw Lucy frequently; but 
 soon after Christmas she was obliged to return to her 
 place, which was in the family of a respectable 
 gentleman, at some distance. 
 
 Towards the latter end of the second week in 
 January, Wildgoose happened to be passing the 
 public house, when Atkins and two or three others 
 came running out, and eagerly asked him whether he 
 had heard the news. " News !" said John, " what 
 news do you mean ?" " News in which you are very 
 nearly concerned," said Mike Simmons ; " but we 
 .can't tell you here; come in with us into the house." 
 To enter the door of the Fighting Cocks was 
 

<page 48>
The History of John Wildgoose. 39 
 
 rather contrary to Wildgoose's resolution; but his 
 desire to hear news, in which he was so greatly 
 interested, got the better of his scruples. He there- 
 fore went in, and found two or three other men, of 
 no very good character, sitting round the fire, with 
 their beer on the table. Jack felt bound to call for 
 some too, and asked to hear their news. " And sad 
 news it is/' said Will ; <c the Quarter Sessions are just 
 over ; and would you believe it ! they have sen- 
 tenced poor Tom Cade to transportation. 11 Wild- 
 goose did not happen to have heard of the law, 
 by which such nightly depredators, if armed in any 
 way, are made liable to that punishment f , and 
 expressed some surprise. " Yes, they have con- 
 demned him to transportation," exclaimed the whole 
 party ; *' transportation ! only for trying to shoot a 
 pheasant or two." " Now there you mistake the 
 matter," said old Truman, (who, as he lodged with 
 his son-in-law, was present at more of these conversa- 
 tions than he wished,) "you mistake the matter 
 altogether. The law does not transport a man 
 merely for killing a pheasant, but for going out at 
 night armed, and prepared for deeds of violence 
 against those whose duty it is to protect the game. 
 The law gives every man a right to take care of his 
 property. It gives the owner of a manor and land a 
 sort of property in the game on his manor and land, 
 and a right to appoint persons to preserve it. If 
 lawless men choose to go, where they have no right 
 to be at all, prepared to beat, wound, and perhaps to 
 kill, the men, whose duty it is to protect the game, 
 
 f See Note [F.] 
 

<page 49>
40 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 they deserve to be trounced pretty tightly. Besides, 
 you must remember, when a man is taken to in this 
 way, he can't be punished at all without a fair trial by 
 a jury ; while in common game cases the justice is 
 both judge and jury too. To be sure," added he, 
 " if a man thinks himself wronged by a justice's 
 judgment, he has always a right to appeal against it." 
 Having said this, old Truman, who did not much like 
 the company, and had no hopes of reforming them, 
 went to bed. 
 
 " For all the old man's fine talking," cried Atkins, 
 fi{ I say it is very hard and cruel usage of poor Tom : 
 and I never suffer a friend to be wronged without 
 being revenged. Sir John's pheasants, at all rates, 
 shall pay for it, and I would advise the keepers not 
 to put themselves in harm's way." *' Let's go 
 to-night," said Tim Nesbit, " there will be a fine 
 moon; and besides, I understand Sir John comes 
 home to-morrow from Wales, and then we shan't 
 have so good a chance." This was agreed upon, and 
 Tim began singing the poacher's song ; 
 
 Oh ! 'tis a merry mooney night, 
 To catch the little hares O ! 
 
 They sat on drinking, though not so as to get 
 intoxicated, till they thought the time suited their 
 purpose. When preparing to start, Atkins said to 
 Wildgoose, who had taken a good deal more beer 
 than of late he had been accustomed to, " You'll go 
 with us, Jack ?" Wildgoose replied, that he had given 
 up poaching for good and all, and should go quietly 
 home. " Now don't ye be shy," said Maurice Croft, 
 

<page 50>
The History of John Wildgoose. 41 
 
 u come along, like a hearty fellow as you used to be." 
 John still continued firm, and said that he should go 
 back to his mother. " Aye, let Johnny go and be 
 tied to his mother's apron strings; that's a good 
 Johnny," cried Tim Nesbit, " I always thought him 
 a chicken-hearted fellow. Why, did'nt Bob tell you 
 that he was turned methodist? You can't expect 
 a fellow like that to be true to his friends, or to have 
 any spirit about him." " When a man has, as you 
 may say, lost a limb in the service," said Bob 
 Fowler, who was sitting by the fire with his arm in 
 a sling, " it's all fair that he should be a little back- 
 ward, but I can't bear that a stout young fellow like 
 that should turn coward." Wildgoose felt mortified, 
 and vexed, and angered ; and his anger was upon the 
 point of so far getting the better, as to make him still 
 more determined upon avoiding their company; 
 when Atkins, who had not joined in the cry against 
 him, pretended to take his part. te Jack's as stout- 
 hearted a fellow as any of you, 1 ' said he, " and he'll 
 shew it to-night. I know he'll go with us, if it's only 
 to pleasure me, that have always been his friend, 
 and run the risk of the pillory to get him off; and 
 just to prove to you once for all that he's no coward."" 
 " Come, Jack, I know you'll come with us this once, 
 and we won't plague you again about it. What has 
 been said now, was all said in joke, so you mus'nt be 
 angry. You know you need'nt carry a gun if you 
 do'nt like it, but you shall just come and see the sport. 
 No harm can come of it : as we shall be five of us, 
 you may be sure the keepers will be wise enough to 
 keep their distance." 
 

<page 51>
42 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 Wildgoose, at last, suffered himself to be per- 
 suaded. He thought that Lucy would not hear of it; 
 and that at all events it should be the last time. 
 Away they went, and were soon at the outside of Sir 
 John's preserve. It was a still serene night. The 
 moon shone brightly, and the hoar frost' sparkled 
 like diamonds on the twigs and few dead leaves. 
 
 Atkins, who on these occasions always took a sort 
 of lead, turned to his companions, and said, " Now, 
 remember, my boys, we don't come here to be taken, 
 and sent out of the country like poor Tom. For my 
 part I don't think the keepers will come near us ; 
 but if they do, we must stand true to each other, and 
 send them home again as wise as they came." They 
 entered the wood, and dispersing themselves so as to 
 be at no great distance from each other, began their 
 attack upon the sleeping pheasants. They had not 
 fired many shots before the game-keeper, who was 
 going his rounds, was brought to the spot. As he 
 was getting over the hedge, one of the stakes of 
 which he had taken hold broke short off, and let him 
 fall back into the ditch. The noise gave the alarm to 
 the poachers, and they most of them concealed 
 themselves behind large trees, or the inequalities of 
 ground in an old gravel pit. Michael Simmons was 
 not so quick as the rest. The keeper got sight of, 
 and soon contrived to seize him, exclaiming., 
 " So ho ! my lad ! you must go along with me." He 
 hardly uttered the words, when Maurice Croft came 
 to the rescue of his comrade. The keeper, who was 
 a powerful man, still kept hold of him, and warded 
 off a blow or two which Maurice aimed, as well as he 
 

<page 52>
The History of John Wildgoose. 43 
 
 could, when he found himself suddenly seized by two 
 men from behind, and borne to the ground. " Blind 
 his eyes, that he may'nt see too much of us," said 
 Black Will; "tie his hands behind him, and make 
 him fast to this young oak tree ; he shall then have 
 the amusement of hearing whabpretty work we make 
 among his pheasants." 
 
 These orders were immediately obeyed. His gun 
 was given to Wildgoose, who was growing more and 
 more eager in the sport. A handkerchief was 
 placed over his eyes, and he was bonnd to the tree so 
 tightly, as to occasion a considerable degree of pain. 
 The gang went gaily to work again, and the keeper 
 had the mortification of hearing the pheasants fall on 
 all sides of him. 
 
 His trusty fellow-servant, Stokes, however, was 
 not idle. He inhabited a cottage in the park. The 
 first shot that was fired had made him rub his eyes 
 and raise his head from the pillow : and the second 
 made him jump out of bed. From the number of 
 shots he judged that the poachers were in force; and 
 accordingly called up the two garden-men, the stable 
 servants, and a labourer .or two, who were kept in 
 pay for such occasions. They hastened altogether to 
 the scene of action, armed, some with guns, and the 
 rest with stout bludgeons. The marauders soon got 
 together, and appeared disposed to face them : but 
 when a few blows had been struck, they found them- 
 selves so decidedly outnumbered, that they turned 
 about and ran off in different directions. Some of 
 Sir John's men hastened to unbind the game-keeper, 
 while others went in pursuit. Stokes, as it happened^ 
 

<page 53>
44 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 followed Wildgoose, and having nearly come up 
 with him, called upon him to surrender. Wildgoose 
 turned short round, presented his gun, and bad him 
 keep off, or he would fire. He was determined not 
 to be taken : and upon recognizing Stokes, he saw 
 in him the occasion of his imprisonment, and of the 
 difficulties which the payment of the fine had 
 occasioned to his mother. He ought rather to have 
 felt that he himself was the only cause of these evils, 
 and that Stokes had merely done his duty. He had 
 no time for reflection however; and his angry feel- 
 ings of hostility, together with the desire to escape, so 
 got the better of him, that upon Stokes's advancing 
 to take hold of him, he fired. Stokes uttered a 
 cry exclaimed, " I'm a dead man !" and fell life- 
 less upon the ground. 
 
 Upon hearing the report of the gun, the keeper 
 and his men quitted the pursuit of the other poachers, 
 and hurried to the spot. For a moment or two 
 Wildgoose stood motionless with horror at what he 
 had done ; but when he saw the men coming towards 
 him, he endeavoured to provide for his safety by 
 flight. Some difficulty which he found in clearing a 
 hedge, enabled three of them to get up with him. 
 He defended himself for a short time with the butt 
 end of the fowling piece, but was at length over- 
 powered and taken. 
 
 During the remainder of the night he was guarded 
 at the keeper's house; and next morning was carried 
 before a magistrate, who having taken the evidence 
 of Sir John's men, committed him to the county gaol 
 in order to take his trial at the Assizes. 
 

<page 54>
The History of John Wildgoose. 45 
 
 Every body was sorry for poor Stokes/ who was as 
 honest and civil a fellow as any in the neighbourhood. 
 All too felt Tor his widow, who with three small 
 children were thus suddenly deprived of a kind 
 husband, on whose industry and good character she 
 depended for subsistence. 
 
 When the dreadful intelligence reached Wild- 
 goose's mother, she stood like a statue. She shed 
 no tears; she uttered no lamentations; she stirred 
 neither hand nor foot. At last, uttering a faint 
 scream, she dropped senseless on the floor. Her 
 eldest daughter, and a neighbour who had been 
 called in, got her to bed, and it was long before she 
 came to herself. At first she had but an indistinct 
 recollection of what had happened, and felt as if 
 awaking from a horrible dream. In proportion as 
 her senses returned, she felt that it was no dream, 
 but a sad reality. Her first impulse was to go to 
 her son ; but when she attempted to get up, she was 
 unable to stand, and fell back upon the bed. A 
 violent fever came on, attended with almost constant 
 delirium, and the doctor had great apprehensions for 
 her life. 
 
 The country house of the gentleman, in whose 
 family Lucy Wilmot lived as house-maid, was at a 
 considerable distance ; and she had now accompanied 
 her master and mistress to London. It so happene'd 
 that the sad news did not reach her till a few days 
 before the Assizes. When she had a little recovered 
 from the first dreadful shock, she immediately 
 determined to hasten to poor Wildgoose, in order to 
 give him whatever comfort or assistance his awful 
 

<page 55>
4-6 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 situation would admit of. She requested therefore 
 her mistress to allow her a short leave of absence ; 
 borrowed a few pounds of the house-keeper, placed 
 herself on the top of a stage, and next morning 
 reached the county town. With an aching heart, 
 and trembling steps, she hurried to the gaol. The 
 gaoler, who, like most of his brethren of the present 
 day, was a kind 'and humane man, having asked her 
 a few questions, conducted her into his own parlour, 
 and promised to bring Wildgoose to her: adding, 
 that though his duty did not permit him to leave 
 them alone together, yet that they might depend 
 upon his not repeating any thing of what might pass 
 between them. Poor Lucy's heart sickened at the 
 heavy creaking of the door which led to the prisoners' 
 day room ; and she was nearly fainting when she 
 heard footsteps approaching the little parlour where 
 she was sitting. When Wildgoose entered, she 
 started up, and without speaking, eagerly tried to 
 take his hand. He, however, uttering a deep groan, 
 clasped both his hands to his face, and turning his 
 head away, burst into a convulsive fit of sobbing. 
 Lucy still held her hand stretched towards him, 
 when he at last said in a smothered voice, < Oh ! 
 Lucy, don't try to shake hands with me; the hand of 
 such a good girl as you are must not be touched by 
 the hand of a murderer." He then sank on a bench, 
 and in spite of all his efforts to command himself, 
 gave way to an agony of grief. Lucy could hardly 
 stand ; she had, however, been internally seeking 
 strength from Him, who alone can give it, and by his 
 aid was supported. Her ardent wish too, to be of 
 

<page 56>
The History of John Wildgoose. 47 
 
 use, led her to exert herself to the utmost. When, 
 after some minutes, Wildgoose became a little more 
 composed, she spoke to him of taking steps for his 
 defence at his trial ; and said that she was provided 
 with money in order to secure the assistance of a 
 lawyer. At first he would not hear of it. He said 
 that it would be of no use, and that he deserved to 
 suffer. Lucy herself, from what she had heard, 
 hardly indulged any hope of his acquittal ; but still 
 urged him to make use of what assistance he could, 
 both that he might have longer space for repentance, 
 and also for the sake of his mother. <J Oh, my 
 mother ! my dear, dear mother !" exclaimed Wild- 
 goose, striking his hand to his forehead, and giving 
 way to the expression of the most piercing anguish. 
 Several minutes passed before he could at all compose 
 himself, but when he was a little calmed, he at last 
 consented that Lucy should take whatever steps she 
 thought expedient. With a voice almost stifled with 
 emotion, Wildgoose then asked Lucy if she had 
 heard any thing of the poor woman who had been 
 deprived by his rashness of a tender husband. Lucy 
 replied that she had not. " Alas !" said he, " what 
 is done cannot be undone, nothing can make up to 
 her for her loss ; but if my life should be spared, how 
 gladly would I work night and day, to keep her and 
 her poor children from want." 
 
 The gaoler now hinted to them that his duty 
 required his attendance in another part of the gaol. 
 The prisoner was therefore reconducted to his ward; 
 and Lucy was just leaving the parlour, when a 
 gentleman, entered. From his dress and appearance 
 
 

<page 57>
48 The History of John Wildgoose* 
 
 she guessed him to be the chaplain of the gaol ; and 
 having ascertained by a timid and respectful enquiry 
 that her conjecture was well founded, she implored 
 him in the most earnest and pathetic manner to use 
 his best offices in preparing Wildgoose for whatever 
 might be the event of his trial. The chaplain 
 answered, that he had already had many very serious 
 conversations with the prisoner, about whom she 
 seemed to be so much interested, and that he trusted 
 that he was properly affected by his awful situation ; 
 " He appears," said he, " never to have been entirely 
 without some impressions of religion, though his 
 conduct was not sufficiently governed by it; and 
 dreadful as is the crime with which he is charged, yet 
 it has not the additional guilt of premeditation. I 
 never dare to build much upon a profession of repent- 
 ance occasioned by the near prospect of death ; but 
 as far as I can judge, his repentance is deep and 
 sincere. He is full of shame and sorrow for having 
 lived in such neglect of God and his laws, and for 
 having paid no better attention to serious religion. 
 The anguish which he feels from this last fatal deed 
 is heart-breaking; and it becomes doubly acute, 
 when he thinks of the desolate condition of her whom 
 his hand has made a widow. His only hope of 
 forgiveness is founded on God's mercy in Christ." 
 " May I understand then, Sir," said Lucy, in an 
 eager though tremulous voice, " that you think that 
 if if if he should suffer for the crime, his eternal 
 interests are safe?" 6t I dare not say so; it is not for 
 one sinful and erring mortal to pronounce confidently 
 on the final state of another. The mercy of God is 
 

<page 58>
The History of John Wildgoose. 49 
 
 extended to all truly penitent sinners, through the 
 atonement of Christ. I hope that the faith and 
 the repentance of your friend are sincere; but, 
 generally speaking, repentance under such circum- 
 stances must be attended with much of fear and 
 doubts. As I said before, I hope that the penitence 
 of this poor young man is such, that it would, if his 
 life should be spared, shew itself to have been real, by 
 producing the fruits of a holy life ; but I presume not 
 to speak with confidence. Let us both pray to God 
 to perfect his repentance, and to increase and 
 strengthen his faith." Many aspirations to this effect 
 had already been fervently offered up by Lucy, 
 and she renewed them with redoubled earnestness. 
 
 Lucy was allowed to see Wildgoose frequently. 
 When the anxious time of trial came, she secured 
 him the assistance of an able lawyer, who exerted 
 himself in his defence. It was however all in vain. 
 The facts of the case were so clear, and the evidence 
 so strong, that the jury without hesitation returned a 
 verdict of guilty. The Judge, after a short preface, 
 in which he emphatically introduced the words of 
 Scripture, whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall 
 his blood be shed, proceeded to pronounce the awful 
 sentence of the law. He did this in the most feeling 
 and impressive manner, and many of the audience 
 were in tears. When he concluded in the solemn 
 words, " The Lord have mercy on your soul," the 
 prisoner, who during the trial had maintained a 
 steady but melancholy composure, seemed torn and 
 
 See Note [G]. To which I particularly request attention. 
 D 
 

<page 59>
50 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 agitated by conflicting emotions. After half uttering 
 a deep and smothered groan, however, he in some 
 measure recovered himself, and was removed from the 
 bar. Lucy, it may easily be imagined, could not 
 bear to be present at the trial, but waited in painful 
 and breathless suspense at her lodgings. She 
 thought that she was prepared for the worst, and had 
 in fact never allowed herself to encourage any hope; 
 but when the tidings of the sentence reached her, she 
 felt a sudden mist before her eyes, and fell lifeless on 
 the ground. The woman of the house kindly gave 
 her every assistance; but it was long before she came 
 to herself. At length she opened her eyes, and 
 wildly looking round her, exclaimed, " Where is he ? 
 where is he? they have not torn him from me?" 
 Again her eyes closed ; and she lost the sense of her 
 misery in another swoon. When she was a little 
 recovered, the people with whom she lodged endea- 
 voured to prevail on her to go to bed. She was, 
 however, steady in her refusal; and as soon as her 
 limbs were able to support her, hastened to the 
 prison. 
 
 She now found Wildgoose heavily ironed, and 
 additional measures taken for securing him. They 
 grasped each other's hand in silent agony, and were 
 long unable to speak. At length Wildgoose exerted 
 himself so far as to give her a message to his mother 
 and family, and Lucy employed the little time she 
 was allowed to remain with him, in suggesting such 
 religious consolation as seemed most adapted to his 
 situation. The next day, which was Sunday, she 
 received the Sacrament with him. Wildgoose was 
 
 ;: *:..- * :'' 
 

<page 60>
The History of John Wildgoose. 51 
 
 calm beyond her expectations; and behaved through- 
 out with a seriousness and fervour of devotion, which 
 gave her more comfort than she had yet experienced. 
 I must spare both myself and the reader the pain 
 of speaking of the awful scene of the day following. 
 It is distressing even to think, or to speak of an 
 execution. How is it possible that such numbers 
 sometimes, I fear, even women can seem to take 
 pleasure in going to witness the last pangs of a fellow- 
 creature, who is condemned to forfeit his life to the 
 offended laws of his country ! I would have every one 
 pray for, and feel for, the criminal, but on no account 
 seek to gratify curiosity, by actually witnessing his 
 death. 
 
 The following paper was handed about, as the last 
 dying speech of John Wildgoose. 
 
 " I acknowledge the justice of the sentence by 
 which I suffer; and would have all young men take 
 warning from my example. I attribute my crime and 
 punishment, in the first place, to my neglect of the 
 Lord's Day ; and in the second, to my keeping bad 
 company. Had I been regular in going to church, 
 and attentive to my religious duties, I should, under 
 the blessing of God, have preserved and increased the 
 good impressions, which I had received from my 
 parents. These impressions, however, I suffered 
 to wither away. By keeping bad company I was led 
 into poaching, in which I at first thought there was 
 not much harm. When by a kind friend I was con- 
 vinced that it was wrong, the want of firmness in 
 religion prevented me from giving it up. Poaching 
 made rrie the companion of sabbath-breakers, swearers, 
 
 D2 
 

<page 61>
% 52 The History of John Wildgoose. 
 
 drunkards, and thieves ; and at last led me on to the 
 dreadful crime of murder. May God support and 
 comfort the poor woman whom my hand has robbed 
 of a husband, and the dear and excellent parent, 
 whom the same rash action has deprived of a son; 
 may He make my sad fate productive of good to 
 all who hear of it; and may He have mercy on my 
 own soul through Jesus Christ!" 
 
 As soon as Lucy had recovered her strength 
 sufficiently to enable her to travel, she went to her 
 native village, where she found that Mrs. Wildgoose 
 had passed the crisis of her disorder, and was 
 beginning to recover. Her two daughters were most 
 attentive to her; but Lucy obtained permission to 
 assist them in nursing, and to take her turn in sitting 
 up by her bed-side during the night. When the 
 poor woman's Ijealth was in some degree reestablished, 
 Lucy felt it right to return to her kind mistress ; but 
 her cheerfulness and good spirits had entirely 
 forsaken her, and a settled melancholy seemed to 
 have taken possession of her soul. Her only com- 
 fort is in prayer, and the consolations of religion. 
 
 After a confinement to her bed of several weeks, 
 Susan Wildgoose was at length able to move about 
 her house ; and the wants of herself and family forced 
 her to return to her former occupations: but she 
 hardly spoke to any one ; she served her customers in 
 silence; and it is evident that the deep affliction 
 under which she continually labours, will shortly 
 bring her to the grave. Her daughters and sur- 
 viving son have youth and health on their side; but 
 their behaviour and appearance are totally changed : 
 

<page 62>
The History of John Wildgoose. 53 
 
 and instead of being merry and light-hearted, they 
 have become pensive and serious. Time will wear 
 away much of the acuteness of their grief, but it is 
 probable that, as long as they live, they will never be 
 free from the most painful and distressing recollection, 
 that they have had a brother who was executed as a 
 murderer. 
 

<page 63>

<page 64>
NOTES. 
 
 The following Extracts from Acts of Parliament 
 are much abridged. 
 
 If any higler, carrier, inn-keeper, &c. shall have in 
 his possession, or shall buy, sell, or offer for sale, any 
 hare, pheasant, partridge, or grouse, every such higler, 
 &c. unless such game be sent by syme person qualified, 
 shall forfeit for every hare> pheasant, &c. the sum of 
 five pounds, half to the informer, and half to the poor. 
 5 Ann. c. 14. s. 2. 
 
 [B.] 
 
 If any person whatsoever, whether qualified or not 
 qualified to kill game, shall buy any hare, pheasant, 
 partridge, or grouse, he shall, on conviction before 
 one justice, forfeit 51. half to the informer and half to 
 the poor. 58 G. III. c. 75. s. 1. 
 
 Any person may recover the said penalty by inform- 
 ation, or may sue for and recover the whole for his 
 own use, in any court of record, wherein the plantiff if 
 he recovers shall have double costs. Sect. 3. 
 
 [C.] 
 
 If any person shall enter any park or paddock, fenced 
 in and inclosed, or into any garden, orchard, or yard, 
 adjoining or belonging to any dwelling house, and shall 
 
 D4 
 

<page 65>
36 Notes. 
 
 steal- any fish kept in any water therein; or shall be 
 assisting therein; or shall receive or buy any such fish, 
 knowing the same to be stolen ; and at the Assizes be 
 convicted of such offence, he shall be transported for 
 seven years. 5 G. III. c. 14. s. 1,2. 
 
 And if any person shall take or destroy, or attempt 
 to take or destroy, any fish, in any other inclosed 
 ground, being private property, without the consent 
 of the owner, he shall upon conviction by one justice 
 forfeit 51. to the owner of the pond or fishery, and, in 
 default of payment, shall be committed to the house 
 of correction for any time not exceeding six months. 
 Sect. 3, 4. 
 
 [D.] 
 
 Whenever it shall appear to the justices, or to the 
 overseers, to whom application shall be made for relief 
 of any poor person, that he might, but for his extrava- 
 gance, neglect, or wilful misconduct, have been able to 
 maintain himself, or to support his family, it shall be 
 lawful for the overseers (by the direction of the jus- 
 tices, &c.) to advance money to the person applying, 
 by way of loan only, and take his receipt for, and 
 engagement to repay, (without stamp;) upon default 
 of payment, two justices may commit him for not 
 exceeding three calendar months. 59 G. III. cap. 12. 
 sect. 29. 
 
 [E.] 
 
 If any person shall knowingly and wilfully kill, 
 take, or destroy any hare, or use any gun, dog, snare, 
 net, or other engine, with intent to kill, take, or destroy 
 any hare in the night, (or in the day time, upon a 
 Sunday or Christmas-day,) he shall on conviction, on 
 

<page 66>
Notes. 67 
 
 oath of one witness, before one justice, forfeit for the 
 first offence not exceeding 20/. nor less than IQl. and 
 for the second not exceeding 30/. nor less than 20/. 
 
 [F-] 
 
 If any person or persons, having entered into any 
 park, wood, plantation, or other open or inclosed 
 ground, with intent illegally to take, or kill, game, or 
 rabbits, or to aid and assist in so doing, shall be found 
 at night armed with any gun, fire arms, bludgeon, or 
 any other offensive weapon, such person being lawfully 
 convicted, shall be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanour, 
 and shall be sentenced to transportation for seven years, 
 or such other punishment as may be inflicted on per- 
 sons guilty of misdemeanour ; and if any such offender 
 shall return before the expiration of such term, he shall 
 be sentenced to transportation for life. 57 G. III. 
 cap. 90. sect. 1. 
 
 [G.] 
 
 Extracts from Stonhouse's " Sick Man's Friend" on 
 
 a Death-bed Repentance. 
 
 Bishop Burnet, in his excellent book entitled the 
 Pastoral Care, (page 173, of the fourth edition,) says, 
 " A clergyman ought to give no encouragement to men, 
 who have led a bad course of life, to hope much from 
 a death-bed repentance; yet he is to set them to im- 
 plore the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, and to do 
 all they can to obtain his favour. But unless the sick- 
 toess has been of long continuance, and that the per- 
 son's repentance, patience, and piety, have been very 
 extraordinary during the course of it, he must be sure 
 to give him no positive ground of hope, but leave him 
 to the mercies of God. For there cannot be any 
 
 D5 
 

<page 67>
6S Notes. 
 
 greater treachery to souls that is more fatal and per- 
 nicious than the giving quick and easy hopes, upon so 
 short, so forced, and so imperfect a repentance. It 
 not only makes those persons perish securely them- 
 selves, but it leads all about them to destruction, when 
 they see one, of whose bad life and late repentance 
 they have been the witnesses, put so soon in hopes, nay 
 by some unfaithful guides made sure of salvation. 
 This must make them go on very secure in their sins, 
 when they see how small a measure of repentance sets 
 all right at last; all the order and justice of a nation 
 would be presently dissolved, should the bowlings of 
 criminals and their promises work on juries, judges, 
 and princes. So the hopes that are given to death-bed 
 penitents must be the most effectual means to root out 
 the sense of religion from the minds of all who see it. 
 Therefore, though no dying man is to be driven to de- 
 spair, and left to die obstinate in his sins, yet, if we 
 love the souls of our people, if we set a due value on 
 the blood of Christ, and if we are touched with any 
 sense of the honour or interests of religion, we must 
 not say any thing that may encourage others, who are 
 but too apt of themselves, to put all off to the last 
 hour. We can give them no hopes from the nature of 
 the Gospel covenant; yet, after all, the best thing a 
 dying man can do is to repent. If he recover, that may 
 be the seed and beginning of a new life, and a new 
 nature in him: nor do we know the measure of the 
 riches of God's grace and mercy." 
 
 " When," says Dr. Assheton, page 45 and 46 of his 
 Death-bed Repentance, " you visit sick beds, and hear 
 a poor dying creature lamenting his sins with tears, 
 and most earnestly begging pardon for the sake of 
 Jesus Christ; when you observe how passionately he 
 

<page 68>
Notes. 69 
 
 resolves, that if God will but spare him, he will be- 
 come a new man, and never be guilty of such extrava- 
 gance; what do you say or do in such a case ? Nay, 
 what must such a wicked man do, who having lived 
 in sin, shall thus happen to be surprised by death ? 
 Dare you be so uncharitable as to declare that he is past 
 hope, that there is no remedy, but that he will cer- 
 tainly be damned ? I answer, that I dare not presume 
 to limit God, whose mercies are infinite. In such a 
 case I will not censure him, but admonish and instruct 
 him to the best of. my judgment and abilities. I 
 will exhort the dying sinner to remember his sins, 
 to bewail them, to beg pardon for them, to form 
 firm resolutions of amendment, and (when there is 
 occasion) to make restitution; and having prayed ear- 
 nestly for him, and recommended him to God's mercy,' 
 do I then say such a one will be damned? No, I dare 
 not. But do I say he shall be saved ? No, I cannot. 
 What then do I resolve? What do I determine in this 
 matter? I will be silent, and determine nothing; for as 
 I dare not flatter him into a false and groundless pre- 
 sumption, so neither would I sink him into the horror 
 of despair. I say, I will determine nothing; I will 
 judge nothing before the time. However, I must be 
 so faithful to my ministerial office as to admonish this 
 dying sinner, that the Gospel (by the laws of which, 
 we are to be judged) expressly declares, that " without 
 holiness no man shall see the Lord," and that Christ 
 is the author of eternal salvation unto them (and to 
 them only) who obey him. Heb. v. 9. When there- 
 fore the sick man has been vicious and extravagant all 
 his life long, if God accepts his dying resolutions, it is 
 more than he has promised, and it is more than he has 
 given his ministers power to preach and declare." 
 
 D6 
 

<page 69>
60 Notes. 
 
 Repentance is a change of heart from an evil to a 
 good disposition ; no man can justly be called a true 
 penitent, till his heart be thus changed, and whenever 
 that change is made, repentance is certainly complete. 
 
 Now there is reason to conclude, God will consider 
 that life as amended, which would have been amended 
 if he had spared it. Repentance in the sight of man 
 cannot be known but by its fruits. The only way 
 man can judge is by the rule Christ himself has given 
 us, " by their fruits ye shall know them." Matt. vii. 
 20. 
 
 But God (our great Creator) sees the fruit in the 
 blossom or in the seed. He (and He only} knows those 
 resolutions which are fixed; those conversions which 
 would be lasting ; and will receive such as are quali- 
 fied by holy desires for works of righteousness, without 
 exacting from them those outward duties, which the 
 shortness of their lives hindered them from performing. 
 All, therefore, a minister can do, is to recommend 
 a death-bed penitent to the mercies of God. But it is 
 impossible for him to pronounce what will be his stats 
 in another world. 
 

<page 70>
'**$ 
 
 THE 
 
 SMUGGLER. 
 
 ' ' 
 

<page 71>
ADVERTISEMENT. 
 
 IT is possible that in the following little Tale there may 
 be several inaccuracies with regard to the habits an,d 
 manners both of seamen, and of smugglers. The residence 
 of the author in an inland county must be his apology. 
 
 The similarity in some respects of the offence of 
 smuggling, to the illegal pursuit which forms the subject of 
 the preceding Tale written two years ago must be the 
 author's excuse for the recurrence of similar sentiments and 
 expressions. 
 
 Jan. 1823. 
 

<page 72>
THE 
 
 SMUGGLER. 
 
 IT was the latter end of the month of November, 
 when Mary Waldron, having carefully put her two 
 children to bed, sat down with an aching head and a 
 heavy heart, to wait for the return of her husband. 
 
 He had sailed from Folkestone in a stiff half- 
 decked vessel, in company with eight or ten of his 
 sea-faring companions, and then told his wife that she 
 might expect him back on the day following. But 
 that day and another had passed away, and he was 
 still absent. 
 
 The night was dark and tempestuous. The wind 
 howled mournfully round the house; the rain beat 
 hard against the windows ; and whenever the storm 
 seemed lulled for a moment, the continued roar of the 
 waves, as they broke on the shingly beach, came hea- 
 vily on her ear. She tried to occupy herself in 
 mending one of her husband's fishing jackets; 
 hut her hands 'and the jacket were constantly in her 
 lap, and it was with difficulty that from time to time 
 she was able in some degree to rouse herself. 
 
 At length, wearied out with watching and anxiety, 
 and her candle having nearly burnt to the socket, 
 she lay down on the bed in her clothes, and was just 
 

<page 73>
64 The Smuggler. 
 
 falling into an unquiet slumber, when she was waked 
 by a knocking at the door. She hurried clown stairs, 
 and let in her husband, who was accompanied by 
 a short stout-built ill-looking man, in a rough 
 seaman's jacket, from one of the pockets of which 
 peeped forth the butt end of a pistol. Both were wet 
 and tired, and both seemed sullen, and out of temper. 
 At their first entrance, Mary eagerly cried out, 
 '" Oh ! James, I am so glad to have you home again. 
 I have passed a sad wearisome time since you went." 
 But Waldron received his wife's greeting coldly, and 
 almost in silence. He walked up to the fire place, 
 and, stooping over the embers, began drawing them 
 together, at the same time telling his wife to get a 
 bit or two of wood, and then to warm a little beer. 
 His companion had under his arm a large bundle, 
 tied round with a piece of sail-cloth. At least 
 we've got that safe," said James, placing it in one of 
 the chairs: and he then ordered his wife to put it 
 under the bed for the night, and to carry it early in 
 the morning, before it was quite light, to Mrs. 
 Hawker's shop, near the church. " I," added he, 
 " shall be glad to lie in bed a bit, after being up 
 three nights running." When they had finished 
 their beer, the stranger withdrew ; and Mary, after 
 littering a fervent prayer for all who are in peril 
 by land or by water, and for the bringing back to the 
 right way of those who have strayed from it, retired 
 to rest. 
 
 Early the next morning, Mary, in compliance with 
 her husband's directions, carried the sail-cloth 
 bundle to Mrs. Hawker, who received it with one of 
 

<page 74>
The Smuggler. 65 
 
 her most gracious smiles, while her little black eyes 
 sparkled with satisfaction. She immediately took it 
 into a back parlour, and then returning to the shop, 
 pressed Mary Waldron to take a glass of something 
 comfortable. This Mary declined, and immediately 
 hastened home, carrying with her a loaf for her 
 husband's breakfast. 
 
 She found him still asleep, and the eldest of the 
 two children trying to keep his little sister quiet, that 
 she might not disturb him. At length, towards 
 eleven o'clock, he got up, and the refreshment of 
 a night's rest, a comfortable breakfast, and the active 
 though quiet assiduity of his wife, seemed to have 
 restored him to good humour. " We'd a roughish 
 time of it last night," said he. " Yes, indeed," 
 replied Mary; " and I wish, my dear James, you did 
 but know a hundredth part of what I have suffered 
 since you took to your present way of life." " Why 
 should you be more uneasy now," said James, " than 
 when I was nothing but a fisherman ? We were then 
 often out night after night, and sometimes in rough 
 weather too." " To be sure, I used now and then to. 
 be a little anxious," said Mary, " but you were 
 seldom out when it blew hard, and besides" she 
 hesitated a little " besides don't now be angry 
 with me, James, for saying it -I felt then that you 
 were trying to get your living in a lawful and honest 
 way. Now when you are absent, my thoughts run 
 upon all horrible things. I do not think so much of 
 the perils of the wind and the waves, though that 
 is bad enough, as of the chance of your being taken 
 as a smuggler, or of your doing some dreadful deed 
 

<page 75>
66 The Smuggler. 
 
 in order to escape. They tell me, that the preventive- 
 service men keep a sharp look out." 
 
 '* A pretty deal too sharp/' said Waldron, " I can 
 tell you ; if it had not been for them, we should have 
 been back to Folkestone the night before last. We 
 were to have landed our tubs just beyond Dimchurch, 
 and had made a signal for the men to be ready with 
 the horses to meet us. There was a thickish fog at 
 the time ; but still, these fellows somehow got sight 
 of us, and pulled off in their boat, just as we were 
 nearing the land. Jack Spraggon, the man that was 
 here last night, proposed sinking them ; but, though 
 they deserved it, I was not quite bloody-minded 
 enough for that. We had nothing else to do, 
 therefore, but to put about, and as the wind blew off 
 shore, we soon by the help of the fog gave them the 
 slip. As it was of no use to think of landing then, 
 we stood right out to sea. The wind soon after 
 chopped about, and freshened to a gale. When we 
 were nearly off Folkestone, a Dane merchantman had 
 managed to run aground at some distance from 
 the shore. The king's men I must say that for 
 them are always ready enough to help any ship in 
 distress, and dashed away to take the poor fellows off 
 the wreck. And while they were busy at this job, 
 two of our boats came out to us, and put us and part 
 of our cargo on shore in East Weare Bay just 
 under the red and white cliff there, under the signal 
 house. As ill luck would have it, one of the men on 
 the look out saw us, and gave the alarm. We soon 
 knocked him down ; but the rest of them got together 
 so fast, that we were forced to run for it, leaving our 
 

<page 76>
The Smuggler. 67 
 
 tubs behind. I kept hold, however, of my bale of 
 silk, and Jack and I scrambled up one of the winding 
 paths in the cliff, and got clear off." 
 
 " Oh ! James," said Mary, " how many risks do 
 you run since you've taken to this free-trading, as you 
 call it." 
 
 " Nonsense," replied Waldron, <c a seaman's wife 
 must never talk of danger." 
 
 " I feel," replied Mary, " as if I could almost 
 consent to your braving any danger in a good cause; 
 but the cause that you are now engaged in is not a 
 good one." 
 
 " Not a good one ! Why where's the harm, I 
 should like to know, in buying in France a little 
 brandy, or a few silks, or cambric, or laces, or what 
 not, and selling them cheap in England, without 
 going through all the trouble and expense of the 
 custom-house ?" 
 
 66 There must be harm," said Mary, a in constant 
 opposition to the laws of the land ; there must be 
 harm in living with such wicked men, as you now 
 keep company with." 
 
 " Why, to be sure," replied Waldron, <c the con- 
 sciences of some of our free-traders arenot over- 
 scrupulous, but there are indifferent characters in 
 all professions ; and as for breaking the laws, I don't 
 see much harm in that I'm sure the laws do me no 
 good." 
 
 " And what else but the laws," said Mary, " pro- 
 tect your house from plunder, and your wife and 
 children from violence, when you are far away? But 
 

<page 77>
68 The Smuggler. 
 
 I don't pretend to argue the matter, nor is it neces- 
 sary that I should; you know the word of God." 
 
 " Come, come," retorted James, with a good deal 
 of quickness and ill humour, " don't be trying to 
 come over me with your lecturing and cant." 
 
 " Oh ! my dear, dear James," said Mary, with 
 much earnestness, " if you love me, do not let me 
 again hear you call the mention of the word of God 
 by the name of cant. You used formerly to keep 
 your church, and you still sometimes read your 
 Bible: surely the evil men with whom you have 
 associated lately have not taught you to deny the 
 authority of the Scriptures?" 
 
 " Why no," said James, " it's not quite so bad as 
 that; but what do the Scriptures say about the laws, 
 or about smuggling?" 
 
 " Why, in one place the Scriptures tell us to 
 submit to the powers that be, that is, to the laws and 
 constitution of the country, not only from fear of 
 punishment, but for conscience sake, and from a sense 
 of the advantage derived from them by society. In 
 another place they bid us to submit to every ordinance 
 of man for the Lord's sake. And with respect to 
 smuggling, they command us to render tribute to 
 whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom. There- 
 fore, whenever you smuggle goods into the country 
 without paying duty at the custom-house, you di- 
 rectly fly in the face of this injunction of the Scrip- 
 tures. And at the same time that the smuggler thus 
 breaks the laws of God and the laws of his country, 
 he also injures the regular trader by underselling 
 

<page 78>
The Smuggler. 69 
 
 him ; for, of course, the man, who conscientiously 
 pays duty, cannot sell so cheap as he who pays no 
 duty at all." 
 
 " And that puts me in mind," said Waldron, who 
 wished to put an end to the conversation, " that I 
 shall want a couple of pounds before night. Do, 
 Mary, just step up to Mrs. Hawker's, and ask her 
 to let me have them on account of the silk." Mary 
 was always ready to comply with the wishes of her 
 husband, and putting on her cloak, went to Mrs. 
 Hawker's house. H> JVr 
 
 She found her in her back parlour, shewing the 
 silks to two smartly dressed young ladies. The 
 eldest appeared to be about nineteen, the other two 
 or three years younger. The countenances of both 
 were expressive of good humour and liveliness, with- 
 out much indication of thought or reflection. Each 
 had selected a sufficient quantity of silk for a gown, 
 and they were in the act of cheapening their pur- 
 chases, when Mary came in. " No, indeed now," 
 Mrs. Hawker, " you must take off a shilling a yard. 
 We really could get it as cheap in London, and, 
 after all, the English silk they make now is quite as 
 good." " That may be true," said Mrs: Hawker, 
 " but you must consider, my dear young ladies, the 
 difficulty I have in getting it, and the risk the poor 
 fellows run." ' Yes, indeed," said Mary, with a 
 sigh, " it is the blood of men that you are buying." 
 
 The young ladies, who had not before seen Mary, 
 as she was waiting near the door, turned round, and 
 were just going to ask her what she meant, when one 
 or two loud authoritative raps were heard at the 
 

<page 79>
70 The Smuggler. 
 
 outer door. At the same moment the maid servant 
 came running in with every symptom of alarm, say- 
 ing, in a suppressed voice, " Mistress, Mistress, 
 make haste, the custom-house officers are here." 
 Mrs. Hawker's countenance changed, but she was 
 too much used to such occurrences to lose her 
 presence of mind. " There, ladies, pop the silks 
 under your pelisses there quick." The knocking 
 was repeated more loudly than before. " Who's 
 there," said Mrs. Hawker, in a shrill tone. A man's 
 voice replied, " Let us in, we must come in directly." 
 " Coming, sir, coming immediately:" then in the same 
 breath turning to the young ladies, " Stay, that will 
 not do. If they find you here, they, perhaps, will 
 search you. There, run into that back pantry, and 
 keep the door tight." Molly, meanwhile, had run 
 off with the bale of silk to a hiding-place prepared 
 for such occasions, and Mrs. Hawker hastened to 
 the door. 
 
 Before the officers had time to express their anger 
 at being kept waiting, she put on one of her best 
 smiles, and addressed them with, *' Mr. Scroggins, 
 is it you ? Well now, I'm so sorry that you've had 
 to wait; but the girl was down at the farther end of 
 the garden, and I happened to be busy with my 
 needle up stairs, and did not come down the first 
 moment, as I did not know but that she was in the 
 house. But pray come in I'm so sorry that I made 
 you wait." 
 
 This speech gave their wrath a little time to cool: 
 but Scroggins answered gravely, " Mrs. Hawker, 
 we are come upon rather an unpleasant piece of 
 

<page 80>
The Smuggler. 71 
 
 business. We have had ' information that a sus- 
 picious looking parcel was brought to your house 
 this morning." 
 
 "What, to my house!" said Mrs. Hawker; 
 " well ! what will people say next. I'm sure I should 
 ' never have thought of such a thing; but pray satisfy 
 yourselves search wherever you please." 
 
 The officers looked about the shop and the back 
 parlour, and went up stairs. The place where the 
 silk was concealed was, however, so well contrived, 
 as to escape their observation; and Mrs. Hawker put 
 on the appearance of innocence so completely, that 
 the men began to think that they really had been 
 misinformed. The young ladies trembled with appre- 
 hension when they heard them come into the kitchen, 
 and still more, when, as they passed the pantry, one 
 of the men called out, " What door is that?" " O," 
 said Mrs. Hawker, " that is a sort of out building, 
 but it let in so much cold wind to the kitchen, that 
 we had it nailed up before Michaelmas ; but, I dare 
 say, we can get it open, if you wish to see it;* I'm 
 sure I want no concealment; run, Molly, run down 
 to Mr. Bellows, the blacksmith you know where he 
 lives near the pier." " Why, I believe, we need 
 not give you that trouble," said Scroggins ; " I must 
 say that you have been very ready to let us search 
 every where : and, to tell you the truth, we are just 
 now rather in a hurry, and, it would be some time 
 before Bellows with his lame leg could hobble 
 here." 
 
 " Well, as you please," said Mrs. Hawker, " it's 
 all one to me I only hope that another time, Mr. 
 

<page 81>
72 The Smuggler. 
 
 Scroggins, you will not be quite so ready to believe 
 idle stories that people make against their neigh- 
 bours." The officers wished her good day, and 
 walked off. 
 
 She watched them to a considerable distance before 
 she ventured to release her prisoners from their con- * 
 finement. They had been sadly frightened, but 
 could not help laughing when they got out, though 
 the eldest of them had greased the bottom of her 
 pelisse against a flitch of bacon, which was lying on 
 the bricks under the dresser; and the feathers of her 
 sister were not improved by the intercourse which 
 had taken place between them and a bunch of 
 tallow candles, which were suspended from the low 
 ceiling. 
 
 Having directed the silks which they had purchased 
 to be wrapped up in a few yards of Manchester cotton 
 and sent after them, and having put half a dozen pair 
 of French gloves in their reticules, they set out on 
 their return to Sandgate, where their father, Admiral 
 Mowbray, had passed the greatest part of the 
 autumn. 
 
 Before descending the hill, they stopped, as in 
 their walks back from Folkestone they generally did, 
 to-contemplate the scene before them, which though, 
 perhaps, not remarkably striking, has something of 
 a pleasing character. Immediately beneath them 
 was Sandgate, sheltered from the east and north by 
 a range of sand hills of no great height, but present- 
 ing considerable variety of form. From the top of 
 this range a nearly level tract of country stretched 
 along to the foot of the chalk ridge, the line of which 
 

<page 82>
The Smuggler. 73 
 
 is here relieved by several singular conical hills, 
 which stand forward as detached outworks of "the 
 principal rampart of chalk. Close under them on 
 the left was the castle, the grey tints and roughnesses 
 of which have been smoothed and polished away by 
 modern trowels, till it has acquired the appearance of 
 a cluster of Martello towers. Beyond Sandgate were 
 some traces of the unfinished works, once destined to 
 protect the commencement of the military canal, 
 and the sea, now nearly at high water, almost break- 
 ing over the road. The middle distance was formed 
 by the town of Hythe, with its church on the bold 
 rising ground to the north, its lancet-shaped east 
 window peeping through the trees; and far to the 
 left ran the long line of low land terminating in 
 Dunge Ness. The fishing boats of Hythe and 
 Romney, with a revenue cutter and three or four 
 brigs, gave animation to the near sea view ; while, 
 at a considerable distance, a couple of Indiamen were 
 majestically making their way down the channel. 
 
 After admiring the prospect, the two sisters were 
 slowly descending the hill, when they heard behind 
 them the footsteps of two persons, who seemed to be 
 rapidly approaching. Their imaginations were filled 
 with the idea of custom-house officers, and they im- 
 mediately concluded thaAhey were pursued. They 
 therefore walked on as fast as they could, being 
 apprehensive that if they raw they should confirm the 
 suspicions of their pursuers. The same apprehension 
 prevented them from looking back. The strangers, 
 however, continued to gain upon them, but when almost 
 ready to sink with alarm, the young ladies found that 
 

<page 83>
74 The Smuggler. 
 
 their fears were groundless. They were overtaken 
 and passed by a remarkably well-made active man, 
 with a stout bludgeon in his hand, in company with 
 a woman of a slight and elegant form, who contrived to 
 keep pace with him, though she had a child in her arms. 
 
 They were in earnest conversation ; the woman 
 appearing to be using entreaties, to which the man 
 refused to listen. Just after they had passed them, 
 they heard the man say in a voice, at once expressive 
 of determination and of an agitated state of feeling, 
 " Come there's no use in trying to persuade me ; 
 I've told you that I must be in the marsh to-night. 
 Do you go home and mind the children, I shall not 
 be absent long, and shall, most likely, get back to 
 you before to-morrow night." He then seemed to 
 make an effort, disengaged himself from his com- 
 panion, and went on with a hurried step. 
 
 The poor woman gazed after him for some time, 
 and then turned back with an expression of anxiety 
 and woe, which went to the hearts of the two sisters. 
 Their compassion and benevolence prompted them 
 to endeavour to offer some consolation, but delicacy 
 prevented them from intruding on the sorrows of a 
 perfect stranger. Upon looking at her more atten- 
 tively, they recognized the same woman whom they 
 had seen, not long before, at Mrs. Hawker's, and by 
 whose remark upon their smuggling purchases they 
 had been surprised and shocked. They could not 
 resist bringing it to her recollection, and asking her 
 what she meant. Poor Mary immediately burst into 
 a flood of tears ; the violence of her grief affected and 
 alarmed the young ladies ; and while they were trying 
 

<page 84>
The Smuggler. 75 
 
 to soothe both her and her child, the eldest of the 
 young ladies exclaimed, " Surely you are but no, 
 it is not likely: you cannot be the Mary Allen, who, 
 about ten years since lived as house- maid with Mrs. 
 Stanwick in Hertfordshire?" 
 
 Surprise and a sensation of pleasure checked the 
 current of Mary's sorrow. " Yes, indeed, I am/' 
 said she; " and is it possible that you young ladies 
 are my dear mistress's nieces, who used so often to 
 be staying with her when your father, the Admiral, 
 was at sea ? Oh ! how kind you were to me, and how 
 fond I used to be of you both ! But then you were 
 both little girls, and I could venture to talk to you 
 with freedom." 
 
 "And so you may now," said Emily Mowbray; 
 "you seem to be in some affliction. Before we knew 
 who you were, we longed to comfort you ; and now 
 that we find that you are an old acquaintance, we 
 shall have double pleasure in being of any use to 
 you." 
 
 The circumstance of having, in early youth, been 
 inmates of the same house, and in habits of frequent 
 and kindly intercourse, leaves generally a lasting im- 
 pression upon the heart. This is often felt by school- 
 fellows, who, when they meet, after having been long 
 separated, have a peculiar frankness and warmth of 
 feeling towards each other, which is seldom produced 
 by an acquaintance contracted in maturer years. 
 And something of the same warmth and disposition 
 to freedom of communication is occasionally produced 
 in children children of the gentler sex particularly 
 towards the tried and valued servants of the families, 
 
 E2 
 

<page 85>
76 The Smuggler. 
 
 in which many of their earliest and happiest days have 
 been passed. 
 
 This species of feeling now glowed in full vigour 
 in the bosoms of the two sisters, and of Mary 
 Waldron. Mary had met with sympathizing friends 
 when she most wan ted them; and the Miss Mowbrays 
 found the interest, which had been excited by wit- 
 nessing her grief, increased to a tenfold degree by this 
 unexpected recognition* They pressed her to accom- 
 pany them to their father's lodging house. The child 
 however, which she had left at home under the care 
 of a neighbour, made this impossible. They there- 
 fore turned back, and walked slowly with her towards 
 Folkestone, Caroline Mowbray having relieved her, 
 by taking the child out of her arms. 
 
 During their walk, Mary told them, that nine 
 years before she had accompanied her mistress to 
 Hastings. They passed the winter there, and during 
 that time, she became acquainted with James Waldron, 
 who frequently came to the house with fish. Every 
 body spoke well of him, as a sober, industrious, 
 good-tempered man ; and she became his wife when 
 Mrs. Stanwick returned into Hertfordshire. For 
 about six years they lived happily together at 
 Hastings; they then removed to Folkestone, where 
 a small house had been left to Waldron by a 
 relation. Here he continued for some time to follow 
 his old occupation, but unhappily became acquainted 
 with some notorious smugglers, and was persuaded 
 occasionally to accompany them in their expeditions 
 to the French coast. He was led on step by step, 
 till smuggling had become his principal employment. 
 

<page 86>
The Smuggler. 77 
 
 " From the time that he took to the smuggling line," 
 continued poor Mary, " my happiness has been at an 
 end. He used to be the kindest of husbands and of 
 fathers. Now he is seldom at home, and when he is, 
 is generally out of temper. Now and then he will 
 play with his children a little, but more frequently 
 complains of their being troublesome. He used to be 
 sobriety itself, but latterly has taken to drinking 
 spirits. His very countenance is changed; it used 
 to be frank and open, but now is apt to have a 
 downcast anxious look, like that of a man who has 
 some sad burden on his mind. And oh ! how many 
 fears do I have for him ! Sometimes I think he 
 will be lost at sea, for they are out in all weathers; 
 and sometimes I tremble lest he should be taken 
 on shore, or that to prevent himself from being taken, 
 he should do some dreadful deed that should bring 
 him to the gallows." 
 
 " I now too well understand," said Emily Mow- 
 bray, " what you meant by what you said to us at 
 Mrs. Hawker's." 
 
 " I should not have said it," answered Mary, " had 
 I known who I was speaking to but still it was 
 nothing but the truth. Little do ladies, who in the 
 lightness of their hearts come to purchase the smug- 
 gled silks, and the gloves, and the cambrics, little do 
 they think what a sad business they are encouraging; 
 that they aVe in fact buying men's blood. And oh! 
 my 'dear, dear young ladies, would to heaven that 
 were all I tremble to think how not only the lives, 
 but the souls, of these poor fellows the soul of" 
 but here her voice failed, she clapped her hands to 
 
 E3 
 

<page 87>
78 The Smuggler. 
 
 V , 
 
 her fac,e, and burst into an agony of grief. The two 
 sisters soothed her as well as they could, and when 
 she seemed tolerably composed again, turned their 
 steps towards Sandgate. 
 
 The Admiral had been a little uneasy at their long- 
 absence. " Well ! girls," he exclaimed upon seeing 
 them, " where have you been all this time?" " Why, 
 papa?" f< Wei!, you must not stop to tell me now, 
 but make haste to get ready for dinner. Your 
 cousin Harry Stan wick has promised to dine with 
 us. We can seldom catch him, you know; but 1 
 told him, that coming to us was not being off duty, as 
 he is as handy here as at the castle, in case any of 
 these smuggling fellows should require to be looked 
 after." 
 
 The young ladies hurried to their rooms, and when 
 they came down stairs, 'found their cousin already 
 arrived. The Admiral was eagerly trying to get 
 from him some of the particulars of his saving the 
 poor shipwrecked Danes. " We had some difficulty," 
 said Lieutenant Stanwick, " in launching our ,boat. 
 The first time, when we had just got her into the 
 water, a heavy wave knocked her clean over. Upon 
 a second attempt we got her afloat, and were just 
 beginning to use our oars, when she was swamped 
 again, and two of the men were nearly lost in trying 
 to get back to the shore. My brave fellows, however, 
 would not give it up: they could not bear, they said, 
 to leave fellow-creatures to perish almost within hale 
 of the land. At the third trial we succeeded. We 
 got under the lee of the ship, and found her fast 
 a-ground, her main-mast and mizen-mast blown 
 

<page 88>
The Smuggler. 79 
 
 away, and a tremendous sea breaking over her. 
 Several of the crew had been already washed off the 
 deck. I never shall forget the joy the poor fellows 
 expressed, when we got them into our boat. There 
 was a black man particularly, whom they had brought 
 with them from the West Indies, and who seemed 
 quite overpowered with gratitude. We brought them 
 all safely on shore, and weary and buffeted as they 
 were, the preventive-service men gave them up their 
 beds, and the greatest part of their rations'." 
 
 During dinner the Admiral was continually asking 
 for some particulars respecting the shipwreck, and it 
 was with delight, mixed with a sort of trepidation, 
 that the sisters heard the different instances of intre- 
 pidity and considerate kindness of these rough 
 seamen. Emily Mowbray especially, every now and 
 then, could not help betraying, by the animation of 
 her eyes and the glow on her countenance, the deep 
 interest she felt in the display of these qualities in 
 their commander, anxious as he seemed to be in 
 his narrative to keep himself in the back ground. 
 
 When the servants had withdrawn, the Admiral 
 turned to his daughters, to enquire what had become 
 of them all the morning. " Why to tell you the 
 truth, papa," said Emily, " we had a little business 
 in Folkestone." " Some smuggling transaction, I 
 dare say," replied the Admiral; " but why did that 
 detain you so long?" 
 
 The young ladies felt, that in prudence the less 
 they said the better, but still they were so full of their 
 
 a Founded on fact. 
 E 4 
 

<page 89>
80 The Smuggler. 
 
 morning's adventure with the custom-house officers, 
 that they could not help telling it. " And could 
 there, papa, have been really any danger of their 
 searching us?" 
 
 " They would not have dared," said Henry eagerly, 
 his dark eyes flashing fire, and his face becoming 
 crimson; but almost immediately both his manner 
 and his countenance changed " But I don't know 
 perhaps they would." 
 
 " Yes, indeed," said the Admiral ; " from what 
 little I have seen or heard of these custom-house 
 officers, they are well enough disposed to be civil 
 where they have no ground of suspicion ; but where 
 persons choose to place themselves in suspicious cir- 
 cumstances, they are bound to do their duty. I own 
 I am quite astonished that any lady, with the slightest 
 sense of propriety or delicacy of feeling, can expose 
 herself to the possibility of being placed in so un- 
 pleasant a predicament." 
 
 " Why do you speak of ladies only, papa? I'm 
 sure gentlemen smuggle as much as we do." 
 
 " I am afraid that some do/' said the Admiral, 
 " but it is generally in your service. I am quite 
 hurt for the credit of the class of society with which 
 I associate, when I hear of any gentleman or lady 
 taking advantage of the confidence, which is reposed 
 in them as such, for the purpose of evading the laws 
 of their country. And for what? for the sake of 
 saving a few pounds; or for the gratification of some 
 foolish vanity. I have sometimes fallen in with men, 
 who would have shot me through the head if I had 
 barely hinted the possibility of their telling a lie, who 
 

<page 90>

 
 
 

<page 91>


<page 92>
The Smuggler. 81 
 
 would yet be guilty of the most paltry falsehood and 
 equivocation for the sake of deceiving a custom-house 
 officer ; who, after all, allowed himself to be deceived, 
 only because he trusted that, being gentlemen, they 
 would not condescend to lie. No, my dear girls, 
 don't let me hear of your smuggling again." 
 
 The two sisters in the course of the morning had 
 received a lesson against smuggling, which had not 
 been lost upon them; but still the spirit of Emily 
 rose at this attack, and she replied, " What, not 
 smuggle at all ? Why it is one of the chief amuse- 
 ments of coming to the sea coast." 
 
 " I wonder what pleasure you can find in it," said 
 her father. 
 
 " Why, in the first place, the things are so much 
 better and prettier than we can get in England ; and 
 then the little difficulties which we have to surmount, 
 and the contrivances and concealment which we have 
 to manage, produce a sort of excitement, somewhat 
 similar to that, which I imagine men to derive from 
 the sports of the field. And, after all, what is the 
 harm of smuggling? It is no offence in itself, and is 
 merely made an offence by the arbitrary enactments 
 of human laws." 
 
 " And ought you not, my dear Emily, to pay 
 obedience to the laws, under the protection of which 
 you live? I might take higher ground, and refer you 
 to the express words of Scripture. You know the 
 passage to which I allude. The poorest man in the 
 country is protected by the laws, but if he is not 
 sufficiently aware of the benefits which he derives 
 from them, some little allowance may be made for 
 E 5 
 

<page 93>
82 The Smuggler. 
 
 him on the plea of ignorance, want of education, and 
 the many wants and privations which he actually 
 encounters. No such excuse, however, can be made 
 for you, possessed as you are not only of all the 
 necessaries, but of many of the superfluities, of life. 
 In' the enjoyment of all these comforts and luxuries 
 in the rank and station which you hold in society 
 you are protected by the laws of your country, and 
 surely those laws have a just claim to your obedi- 
 ence." 
 
 " There is, I acknowledge," replied Emily, " much 
 force in what you say; but I am sure, that you 
 must-think the laws against smuggling are much too 
 severe.'' 
 
 " The severity of laws is occasioned by the bold- 
 ness of those who break them : when more lenient 
 methods are found ineffectual, recourse is had to 
 stronger and harsher measures. Smuggling, as you 
 know, consists either in evading the payment of the 
 legal duties, or in purchasing articles which are 
 prohibited altogether. The evading of the payment 
 of duties is clearly the same as robbing the public of 
 so much of its revenue a . A poor man, who steals 
 
 Pray, Mr. Brag well, what should you think of a man, 
 who would dip his hand into a bag, and take out a few guineas ? 
 
 Bragwell. Think! why I think that he should be hanged, to be 
 sure. 
 
 Worthy. But suppose that bag stood in the king's treasury ? 
 
 Bragwell. In the king's treasury ! worse and worse ! what, rob the 
 king's treasury ! Well, I hope the robber will be taken up and executed, 
 for I suppose we shall all be taxed to pay the damage. 
 
 Worthy. Very true. If one man takes money out of the treasury, 
 

<page 94>
The 'Smuggler. 83 
 
 from distress, is punished, and justly punished, for 
 no distress can justify doing wrong; but, I must say, 
 that I think a well-educated person, who is guilty of 
 wilfully plundering the public by smuggling, is a 
 more guilty person than he is." 
 
 " Well ; but you can't say that we defraud the 
 revenue, when we buy silks, or gloves, or lace, upon 
 which we can pay no duty, even if we wished it P> 
 
 " These articles are absolutely prohibited by law, 
 and you break the laws by purchasing them." 
 
 " But if the English can't make these things so 
 well as the French, I don't see why I am obliged to 
 buy inferior articles when I can get better I am 
 sure that I have heard you say yourself, that all 
 matters of trade and manufacture should be suffered 
 to find their own level, with as few restrictions as 
 possible." 
 
 " This doctrine may be generally true ; but there 
 
 others must be obliged to pay the more into it ; but what think you if 
 the fellow should be found to have stopped some money in its way to the 
 treasury, instead of taking it out of the bag after it got there 1 
 
 Bragwell. Guilty, Mr. Worthy ; it is all the same, in my opinion. 
 If I was a juryman, I should say, Guilty, death. 
 
 Worthy. Hark ye, Mr. Bragwell, he that deals in smuggled brandy 
 is the man who takes to himself the king's money in its way to the 
 treasury, arid he as much robs the government, as if he dipped his 
 hands into a bag of guineas in the treasury-chamber. It conies to the 
 same thing exactly." 
 
 From the Cheap Repository Tract, called "The Two Wealthy 
 Farmers :" a story, which, while it abounds in most useful moral and 
 religious instruction, displays an insight into human nature, a talent for 
 lively description, and a turn for quiet humour, which have seldom been 
 surpassed. 
 
 E 6 
 

<page 95>
84 The Smuggler. 
 
 are many circumstances of a local or of a temporary 
 nature, which may make restrictions expedient. 
 However, you and I Emily are not legislators. Our 
 business is to obey the laws of our country, even if' 
 they should happen to be not quite consistent with 
 our own notions of political oeconomy. But I must 
 just add one or two observations upon the articles 
 which you ladies are the most fond of smuggling. 
 The prohibition of French and Italian silks was 
 intended for the encouragement of our home manu- 
 facturers ; especially the silk weavers in Spitalfields. 
 You have often heard of the distress and poverty of 
 those poor people. By buying foreign silk in pre- 
 ference to British, you, to a certain degree, add to 
 that distress, and rob them of the encouragement, 
 which they are entitled to by law. Of late, I believe, 
 that branch of our manufactures has been in a 
 flourishing state, and that the silk weavers are not 
 only fully employed, but that they manufacture silks 
 quite equal to those from abroad. If so, the ladies 
 who smuggle them have no inducement but the 
 pleasure of doing what is forbidden. The French 
 and Italians you know, have advantages in the pro- 
 duction of the raw material, which we have not ; and 
 it seems reasonable to give our own countrymen 
 some protection to countervail those advantages. 
 So again with respect to gloves, and lace. One of 
 the principal difficulties which in these times we have 
 to contend with, is the difficulty of finding employ- 
 ment for our overflowing population. Glove-making 
 and lace-making furnish employment for our poor 
 women j employment the more desirable, inasmuch 
 

<page 96>
The Smuggler. 85 
 
 as they follow it at their own homes. If you knew 
 how eagerly multitudes of your own sex catch at any 
 employment, by which they can earn but a few 
 shillings a week, both your patriotism and your be- 
 nevolence would render you unwilling to deprive 
 them of it. For you, Emily, with your warm and 
 affectionate heart, are not one of those who would 
 annihilate all distinctions of kindred and country, in 
 a vague idea of universal benevolence. 
 
 " But, after all," continued the Admiral, " per- 
 haps my principal objection to your smuggling is the 
 encouragement, which you thereby give to the poor 
 fellows, who follow this dangerous and illegal occu- 
 pation. The habit of living in constant opposition 
 to the laws is not only criminal in itself, but has a 
 most injurious effect upon the whole of a man's 
 character. I have just given you credit for some 
 feelings of patriotism, but you know that these 
 feelings seldom exist in the breast of a smuggler. 
 We have Buonaparte's testimony, that, during 
 the war, they were constantly employed in trai- 
 torously giving intelligence to the enemy; and in 
 assisting the escape of the French prisoners of war. 
 This is bad enough; but we all know how frequently 
 they are guilty of crimes of a still higher description, 
 of the dreadful crime of murder itself. And are you 
 lady-smugglers quite sure that you are clear of all 
 participation in this accumulated guilt? The receiver 
 of stolen goods is deemed by the law the accessary 
 of the thief: and is not the purchaser of smuggled 
 goods in some degree an accessary of the smugglers? 
 Besides, if you knew the distress and misery which 
 

<page 97>
86 The Smuggler. 
 
 smuggling often occasions to the families of those 
 engaged in it, you could not, I think, encourage it." 
 
 The sisters felt the force of this latter argument 
 more deeply than their father was aware of. They 
 were both silent. At length Emily said, " Come, 
 cousin Henry, cannot you put in a word to help 
 us?" 
 
 " To help you?" replied he; " no indeed:" and 
 then added gravely, " But 1 am sure, that my dear 
 cousins will not continue smuggling, while I and my 
 brave fellows are daily hazarding our lives for its 
 prevention." 
 
 Emily looked down, while her face and neck be- 
 came scarlet, and a long pause ensued. The Admiral 
 felt that enough had been said, and was endeavour- 
 ing to change the conversation to some other subject, 
 when a servant opened the door, and said to Henry, 
 " You are wanted, if you please, Sir." 
 
 He went out, and returning in a few minutes, said 
 to his uncle, " 1 must be off directly. A large 
 smuggling lugger has been for some time hovering 
 off the coast, and we have reason to believe, that 
 they mean to land their cargo to-night in Romney 
 Marsh, in spite of us. One of my brother officers 
 has sent me word, that a number of men from a 
 considerable distance inland are getting together 
 with their led horses, and that he apprehends that 
 they will muster one or two hundred. We, of course, 
 must join forces to be a match for them; so good 
 night." 
 
 He affectionately shook hands with the Admiral 
 and the two sisters, and went out. The door had 
 

<page 98>
The Smuggler. 87 
 
 hardly closed, when he came back, and a second 
 time, taking Emily's hand, said, " You are not angry 
 with me for what I said?" " Angry, oh no!" He 
 pressed her hand in his, and disappeared. 
 
 In less than five minutes, he was in his boat. 
 Two of his men waited on the beach to shove him 
 off', and then jumping in, they pulled stoutly to the 
 westward. The moon shone brightly, the water 
 sparkled on their oars, arjd the clean white sides 
 of the boat were reflected brilliantly on the waves. 
 
 They had passed Hithe, and were nearly off 
 Dimchurch, when they saw the lugger at some dis- 
 tance from them getting under weigh. By the as- 
 sistance of her sweeps, and that of a favourable 
 breeze which had just sprung up, she was soon out 
 of sight. Five boats had just completed their second 
 trip, and were beginning to land the remainder of 
 her cargo. 
 
 The beach presented an animated scene of activity 
 and bustle. Several horsemen, each with one or 
 more led horses, were gal lopping down the beach, 
 making the pebbles fly around them in all directions. 
 One of their light carts was disappearing behind the 
 mound of earth, which at high water forms a sort 
 of barrier against s the sea ; a second was labouring 
 up the steep bank of shingles ; and two others were 
 just quitting the water's edge. A considerable 
 number of men on foot, each with a tub slung r at his 
 back, were hurrying from the shore. The men in 
 the boats were clearing them of the remainder of 
 their cargo as fast as possible ; while others were 
 

<page 99>
88 The Smuggler. 
 
 loading with tubs the horses which had just reached 
 them. 
 
 At some distance to the right, Lieutenant Stan- 
 wick, to his surprise and indignation, discovered a 
 pretty strong party of king's men in a state of inac- 
 tion, and apparently uncertain what to do. The fact 
 was, that the smugglers had posted behind the sea 
 bank,, which served as a breastwork, two strong 
 parties of sixty or seventy men each, one on each 
 side of the passage leading to the sea. These parties, 
 being well provided \vith fire-arms, rendered any 
 attempt to approach the carrying party extremely 
 hazardous. Stanwick made his men pull right for 
 -the shore; but the moment the boat touched the 
 ground, they were received with a volley of musketry, 
 discharged by an invisible enemy. The balls whistled 
 over their heads, but from the lowness of their position 
 not a man was touched. 
 
 They immediately leaped on shore, and advanced 
 rapidly towards the spot from which the fire pro- 
 ceeded. A second volley more destructive than the 
 first arrested their progress. Three of their number 
 fell; one killed on the spot, and two dangerously 
 wounded. Stanwick himself received a bullet in his 
 left arm, which shattered the bone a little above the 
 elbow. 
 
 The men for a moment hesitated, and seemed 
 almost disposed to retreat. Their commander, how- 
 ever, having contrived to support his arm in the 
 breast of his jacket, again pressed forward, calling to 
 his men, " Come, my lads, don't let us be beat by a 
 

<page 100>
The Smuggler. 89 
 
 parcel of smugglers !" At the same moment they 
 were joined by the other party of seamen, and both 
 uniting together, soon came to close quarters with 
 the motley, but resolute, band of men, who were op- 
 posed to them. 
 
 The vigour of their attack made the smugglers 
 give ground; but as they were almost immediately 
 supported by the party from the other side of the 
 road, the Combat was renewed. The seaman fought 
 with the most determined gallantry, but were so 
 greatly outnumbered, that they were in some danger 
 of being overpowered, when they heard the trampling 
 of horses rapidly approaching, and saw the glittering 
 of arms in the moon-light. The alarm had been 
 given at the barracks, and a troop of dragoons had 
 been immediately ordered out, who had been di- 
 rected by the firing to the scene of action. The 
 smugglers, who, by this time, had nearly secured 
 the whole of their cargo, commenced a hasty retreat, 
 leaving three of their number killed. 
 
 For a short distance, they kept the public road ; 
 then turning suddenly to the right, crossed a broad 
 ditch by means of a light wooden bridge, or pontoon, 
 which was ready prepared for that purpose; and 
 continued their flight across the marsh. The cavalry 
 came up in time to make prisoners of two of the 
 gang, who having been slightly wounded, had not 
 kept up with the rest : but they found the bridge 
 removed. 
 
 The three foremost of the dragoons, without 
 hesitation, spurred their horses at the ditch. One of 
 them swerved to the left ; another came against the 
 

<page 101>
90 The Smuggler. 
 
 opposite bank and fell back upon his rider, who 
 extricated himself with difficulty from his perilous 
 situation. The third leaped short, and came into the 
 ditch on his legs: he floundered on for a short way 
 in the mud, the dragoon preserving his seat as 
 steadily as if he had been on parade, until a low 
 place in the bank enabled him to scramble back to 
 his companions. The moon was now setting, and 
 farther pursuit appeared to be not only useless, but 
 dangerous. 
 
 The excitement occasioned by the short but 
 vigorous conflict having ceased, Henry Stanwick 
 found his strength beginning to fail. Exhausted by 
 pain and fatigue, and faint from the loss of blood, he 
 sunk down on the sea bank. One of his men, 
 however, quickly contrived to tap one of the kegs, 
 which had been dropped in the confusion, and gave 
 him a small quantity of brandy, by which he was a 
 good deal revived. As his men were anxiously 
 proffering assistance, " Never mind me," said he, " I 
 am only hurt in the arm, and shall do well enough; 
 but there's a poor fellow there, who stands much 
 more in need of assistance than I do." At the same 
 time, he pointed to a man in a seaman's jacket, who 
 was lying on the ground at a short distance from him. 
 His hat was off, he had received a severe gash in the 
 forehead, and a pistol ball had passed through the 
 upper part of his body near the right shoulder. An 
 old musket which appeared to have been' recently 
 discharged, and the stock of which was broken, was 
 lying near him. When Stanwick's men approached 
 him, he was hardly able to articulate. They, 
 

<page 102>
The Smuggler. 91 
 
 however, made out, that he wished to be conveyed to 
 Folkestone. 
 
 They accordingly carried him carefully down the 
 beach, and placed him in the boat, in the easiest 
 posture they could. Henry Stanwick was able to get 
 on board without much assistance. 
 
 They rowed slowly back to Sandgate, and 
 having landed their Lieutenant, proceeded on to 
 Folkestone. 
 
 It was not without difficulty that the wounded man 
 was lifted from the boat; and then, some of his 
 brother townsmen having taken a door off the hinges, 
 and gently laid him on it, set off with slow and heavy 
 steps towards his house. As Waldron had told his 
 wife not to expect him till the next day, she had gone 
 to bed, and was quietly asleep with her children. 
 Hannah Reeves, a poor woman who lived near the 
 pier, had kindly gone forward to prepare Mary 
 for what she had to go through, and knocked 
 gently at her door. She started up in her bed 
 immediately, for the anxious state in which she had 
 been living had accustomed her to awake at the 
 slightest noise. Having put on a few clothes, and 
 struck a light, she hurried down stairs. In the 
 countenance and manner of her kind-hearted neigh- 
 bour, she immediately saw that she had some sad 
 intelligence to communicate; but when she heard 
 that her husband had been brought to Folkestone 
 severely wounded, her eyes grew dizzy, her head 
 swam, and she would have fallen to the ground had 
 not Hannah supported her. 
 
 It was no time, however, for giving way to grief, 
 
 XV ...-.;. ' .' 
 

<page 103>
9 The Smuggler. 
 
 and, by a strong effort, she almost immediately 
 roused herself. Understanding that there might be 
 some difficulty in getting her husband up the narrow 
 winding staircase, she set to work, with the assistance 
 of Hannah Reeves, to bring the mattress on which 
 she slept into a little back room, the floor of which 
 was boarded. She made it as comfortable as she 
 could, and had hardly completed her preparations, 
 when the heavy tread of a number of men was heard 
 approaching the door. Mary was unable to speak, 
 but silently assisted in placing her unhappy husband 
 on the bed, that she had got ready for him. The 
 rough weather-beaten countenances of the men who 
 had brought him, were softened to an expression of 
 mournful sympathy ; the eyes of several of them were 
 filled with tears. As soon as they found they could 
 be of no farther use, they quietly withdrew. 
 
 Waldron had hardly shewn any signs of life, 
 excepting by uttering now and then a deep and 
 heavy groan : but when the men were gone, he 
 contrived to raise himself a little in the bed ; and 
 taking the hand of his wife, who was hanging over 
 him in speechless agony, said in a voice, almost 
 inarticulate from weakness and emotion, " Oh ! 
 Mary, why did I not listen to your advice! I might 
 have earned my bread in an honest way, and been 
 happy with you and the children ; but I listened to 
 the persuasion of evil men, and now, smuggling has 
 brought me to this." Fie would have said more, but 
 the effort which he had made was too much for 
 him he sank down on the bed, and after one or two 
 deep but feeble groans, expired. 
 

<page 104>
The Smuggler. 93 
 
 Mary did not immediately perceive what had 
 happened ; but when the dreadful reality burst upon 
 her, the shock was too powerful for her frame, 
 exhausted as it was by anxiety and grief. While 
 there was an immediate call for exertion while there 
 was any thing to be done for her husband the 
 exertion had roused and supported her. That sup- 
 port was now at an end, and she fell senseless on the 
 floor. 
 
 Hannah Reeves was up stairs with the children, 
 one of them having begun to cry, and she had 
 succeeded in quieting and lulling it asleep. Upon 
 returning to the back room, she found Mary Wal- 
 dron extended motionless by the side of her husband. 
 Gently raising her up, she endeavoured to restore 
 her to herself by throwing cold water in her face, 
 applying burnt feathers to her nostrils, and making 
 use of such other remedies, as either she, or two 
 or three neighbours, who had come in to her 
 assistance, could think of. For a long time their 
 endeavours were ineffectual. At length a slight 
 convulsive tremor seemed to pass over her. Her lips, 
 which had been deadly pale, began to assume some- 
 thing of their natural colour, and after one or two 
 deep and long drawn sighs, she appeared to breathe 
 with some degree of freedom. The first care of her 
 kind attentive neighbours was, to remove her from 
 the sad object which was stretched out by her 
 side. With difficulty they got her up stairs, and 
 undressing her, laid her in the same bed with her 
 children. 
 
 Hannah Reeves was anxiously watching over her, 
 

<page 105>
94 The Smuggler. 
 
 when she opened her eyes, and said in a faint voice, 
 61 What, is it you, Hannah ? What brings you here 
 so early in the morning ? But I suppose it is time for 
 me to think of getting up. Oh ! Hannah, I have 
 had such a dreadful dream ! But it is all over now, 
 I am so glad that you woke me." And then after 
 a little pause, added, " How soon do you think 
 James will be home again? He told me that he 
 should come back before night." Poor Hannah 
 turned away her head, and seemed to busy herself 
 in another part of the room, and Mary again fell into 
 an unquiet slumber. 
 
 Henry Stan wick had been landed near the castle 
 at Sandgate, supported by one of his men, he was 
 slowly ascending the beach, when he was met by the 
 Admiral muffled up in a sea cloak. He had heard 
 of the engagement with the smugglers, and of his 
 nephew's wounds. " C6me along, Harry, with me," 
 said he, " we must nurse you at my house. I have 
 no doubt that you would be taken very good care of 
 here: but still there are some little comforts, which 
 perhaps can be furnished, better at a private house; 
 and we must allow that the women understand these 
 matters better than we do." Henry yielded to his 
 uncle's persuasions. He found his two cousins ready 
 to receive him, with looks expressive of tender 
 affection, mixed with deep anxiety. They had been 
 busily occupied in preparing his room. As the 
 surgeon was expected every moment, they were fear- 
 ful of altering the position of the wounded arm until 
 his arrival. 
 
 In the interval Lieutenant Stanwick, though 
 

<page 106>
The Smuggler. 95 
 
 suffering a good deal of pain, shortly mentioned a 
 few particulars of the conflict ; adding, " I cannot 
 help longing to hear what becomes of the poor fellow, 
 that we brought away in our boat. He wished to be 
 carried to Folkestone, and" " To Folkestone !" ex- 
 claimed Emily, " I hope it is not poor Mary's 
 husband !" " He did not mention his name," said 
 Henry ; " indeed he could hardly speak at all, but 
 he was a remarkably well-made active looking fellow, 
 and I wafc vexed to my heart at his having engaged 
 in such a service." The sisters could not help having 
 some misgivings, but they had a nearer cause for 
 anxiety in the severe wound of a relation so deservedly 
 dear to them. , 
 
 When the surgeon arrived, he found the bone of 
 the arm so much injured, that immediate amputation 
 was necessary. The operation was successfully per- 
 formed, but was followed by a considerable degree 
 of fever, during which the two sisters nursed him 
 with unremitting assiduity. 
 
 The fourth day after the amputation Henry seemed 
 much better, and both he and the Admiral begged 
 them not to continue to keep themselves such close 
 prisoners, but to resume their usual exercise. They 
 were the more ready to comply, as they were very 
 anxious to go themselves to Folkestone, to enquire 
 after Mary Waldron. They found out the house ; 
 but upon approaching it, observed a degree of bustle, 
 and saw several men in sailors' jackets most of them 
 with some symbol of mourning about their dress 
 issuing from the door. Presently the coffin was 
 brought out,- the men raised it on their shoulders; 
 

<page 107>
96 The Smuggler. 
 
 the bkck pall was thrown over it; and with measured 
 steps they moved towards the church-yard, while the 
 solemn toll of the bell, being heard at shorter in- 
 tervals, announced the near approach of the corpse 
 to its last mansion. 
 
 The sisters waited at some little distance, till the 
 melancholy procession had passed on; and then 
 going up to the door of one of the neighbouring 
 cottages, enquired with feelings of deep interest after 
 poor Mary. 
 
 She, they found, was perfectly insensible to all that 
 was passing. The morning after her husband had 
 been brought home, she for sometime appeared to 
 retain no trace of what had happened. The circum- 
 stance of her being not in her own bed, and the 
 manner of Hannah Reeves, who was unable to 
 control her feelings, by degrees brought back to her 
 recollection the dreadful calamity which had befallen 
 her. She uttered one piercing cry of woe, and then 
 a deadly stupor took possession of her whole frame. 
 From this she had at last been roused, but it was suc- 
 ceeded by a wild delirium, and a burning fever, 
 which no skill or attention had been able in the 
 slightest degree to mitigate. 
 
 The sisters went to this house of mourning. The 
 children had been removed to the cottage of a neigh- 
 bour, but Hannah Reeves came down to them. She 
 had hardly ever quitted the bedside of the sufferer, 
 and attended her with that watchful kindness, which 
 the poor so often shew to each other when in distress. 
 The Miss Mowbrays begged Hannah to let nothing 
 be omitted which might contribute to the recovery 
 

<page 108>
The Smuggler. 97 
 
 of poor Mary, at the same time mentioning their 
 intention to take every expense upon themselves. 
 They did not know Hannah, but there was some- 
 thing in her manner which told them that any hint 
 of remuneration to her would be misplaced. 
 
 Upon their return to Sandgate they found sitting 
 with the Admiral the captain of the troop of dra- 
 goons, which had come to the assistance of the 
 seamen. From him they understood, that of the two 
 smugglers who had been taken, one was a Folkestone 
 man of the name of Spraggon, a man of notoriously 
 bad character, and who had behaved in the engage- 
 ment with the king's men with a boldness bordering 
 on ferocity. The other prisoner was a labourer be- 
 longing to a village just above the marsh, who had 
 long been in the practice of assisting in running 
 smuggled goods. He received high pay five, eight, 
 ten shillings a night sometimes even more. Money 
 obtained by breaking the laws seldom does a man 
 any good. And, in fact, when he came to deduct 
 the sum which he might have earned by more 
 creditable work for a man who had been out all 
 night could not work the day following and also 
 the money which went in drink and other expenses- 
 it was generally found that little came home to his 
 family. His earnings of all descriptions, however, 
 were now put an end to. He and Spraggon were 
 convicted at the next assizes of the murder of the 
 seaman; and two days after were executed. 
 
 It was long before Mary Waldron shewed any 
 signs of returning health. The fever, however, 
 gradually gave way, but it left her in a state of the 
 

<page 109>
98 The Smuggler, 
 
 most deplorable weakness. Emily and Caroline 
 called at the house very frequently during the whole 
 progress of her illness, supplying abundantly what- 
 ever they thought likely to contribute to her recovery, 
 or to her comfort in her present state of suffering. 
 But from the time that her reason and recollection 
 began to return, their walks to Folkestone became 
 almost daily. In the gentlest and kindest manner 
 they said and did all they could, to comfort her, and to 
 assist in directing her thoughts to the only unfailing 
 source of consolation to that Being, who invites the 
 widow to trust in him, and promises to protect and 
 provide for the fatherless children. 
 
 From such considerations as these, and from that 
 aid which was granted from above in answer to her 
 humble and fervent supplication, Mary recovered a 
 degree of calm composure almost sooner than the 
 sisters had anticipated. 
 
 Once, when speaking of her future means of sub- 
 sistence, they hinted the idea of making up, with the 
 assistance of their friends, an annual sum, which 
 would be sufficient to keep her from want. But 
 Mary would not hear of this. (t If it please God/' 
 said she, " to restore me to health, I have no doubt, 
 but that by taking in washing and needle work, I 
 shall be able to get bread for myself and my poor 
 children; and as long as I am able to work for 
 myself, I could not bear to be a burden to any one." 
 " But it would be no burden to its at all/' said 
 Emily. " Of that," replied Mary, " I am well 
 assureti, from the kindness which you have already 
 shewn me ; but I feel that 1 could not be so happy 
 

<page 110>
The Smuggler. 99 
 
 if I depended for my livelihood, under Providence, 
 upon any one but myself." 
 
 In their walks to Folkestone they were often ac- 
 companied by their cousin Harry, who in con- 
 sequence of his wound had been relieved from the 
 painful service in which he had been employed, and 
 appointed first lieutenant to a frigate, which was 
 destined to the Mediterranean, but was not to sail for 
 some months. , 
 
 One day, as they were approaching Mary's house, 
 the two little children came running out, with much 
 glee and animation in their eyes, to thank them for 
 their nice new frocks. The sisters knew not what 
 they meant. Upon entering the house, Mary ex- 
 pressed her acknowledgments for what they had 
 sent the children, as well as for the gown and other 
 clothing which she had received herself. They 
 looked surprised, and said that they had sent nothing. 
 The colour of Henry's face soon told Mary who had 
 been her benefactor. 
 
 In their walk they had passed by Mrs. Hawker's 
 shop, and found the windows shtJt up. They asked 
 Mary the meaning of this. She told them, that some 
 time before, the officers had made a large seizure of 
 smuggled goods in her house, and had sued her for 
 the penalties, which amounted to so large a sum, that 
 she was utterly ruined. 
 
 It is hardly necessary to say, that the Miss 
 Mowbrays had never visited her house since their 
 purchase of the silks. The many crimes and ca- 
 lamities which a single day had witnessed, had given 
 them a sufficient lesson upon the evils of engaging 
 
 F2 
 

<page 111>
100 The Smuggler. 
 
 in illicit traffic; and neither the stump of Henry 
 Stanwick's arm, nor the sight of the widowed Mary 
 and her fatherless children, were needed to make them 
 resolve, that they would never again be guilty of 
 smuggling. 
 

<page 112>
GOOD-NATURE, 
 
 OR 
 
 PARISH MATTERS. 
 

<page 113>

 
 * * -.* *-**' >** t * Vr * ^ -, ' 
 

<page 114>

 GOOD-NATURE, 
 
 PARISH MATTERS. 
 
 MR. STANLEY had just reached the last stile in 
 the footpath leading to Inglewood parsonage, when 
 his progress was for a moment interrupted by two 
 persons, who were talking so earnestly, that they did 
 not see him. 
 
 One of them was a short fat man, in the dress of 
 a farmer. His round and rosy face seemed to be 
 full of good cheer and good humour; but bore no 
 great signs of intelligence. He was speaking to an 
 untidy looking woman, whose manner was expressive 
 of a sort of low familiarity, not however unmixed 
 with symptoms of servility and cringing. 
 
 " Never mind, Nanny," said the farmer, " never 
 mind neighbour Oldacre is, I must needs say, a 
 little hard upon the poor but never mind ; I shall 
 take to the books in a fortnight's time, and then 
 things will be better." " But you know, master,'* 
 said the woman, " if you could but manage that 
 little job for us, we should hardly trouble the parish 
 at all." " Well, I'll do what I can," answered the 
 F 4 
 

<page 115>
104 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 farmer ; " my being a parish-officer, will help." 
 The woman was going to reply, but happening to 
 see Mr. Stanley, she drew back from the stile, and 
 allowed him to pass on. 
 
 Trifling as the occurrence was, Mr. Stanley hap- 
 pened to mention it to his friend at the parsonage, 
 as they were sitting together after dinner. Upon 
 his describing the figure and face of the farmer, 
 " Yes," said Mr. Hooker, with a smile, " that must 
 have been my parishioner, Farmer Barton. He is, 
 as you describe him, a good-humoured looking fellow, 
 and it has always been the height of his ambition to 
 be reckoned a good-natured man." 
 
 " I cannot much blame him for that," replied 
 Stanley ; " good-nature is a most amiable quality, and 
 I heartily wish there was more of it in the world than 
 there is." 
 
 " In that wish I cordially agree with you," said 
 Mr. Hooker; " if by good-nature you mean a 
 genuine spirit of kindness or Christian benevolence, 
 which prompts a man to do whatever good he can 
 to the bodies and souls of all within his reach. The 
 good-nature, however, of Farmer Barton is not ex- 
 actly of this description. It springs from a love of 
 low popularity, from a wish to gain by whatever 
 means the good will and good word of all descrip- 
 tions of people. This wish leads him to assent to 
 whatever is said, and to accede to almost every re- 
 quest, unless it immediately touches his pocket. To 
 that indeed his good-nature does not always extend. 
 In his fear of being thought ill-natured, he very 
 often loses sight of duty, and his dread of offending 
 

<page 116>
Good-nature^ or parish matters. 105 
 
 or of contradicting those who happen to be present) 
 makes him not unfrequently forget what is due to 
 those who are absent" 
 
 The conversation was interrupted by the entrance 
 of the servant, who came to tell his master that 
 Farmer Barton wished to speak with him. " Pray 
 shew him in," said Mr. Hooker : " but I am unable 
 to guess what his business can be." 
 
 The farmer came in, and, upon Mr. Hooker's 
 asking him what he wanted, replied, " Why, it is 
 only to get you to put your hand to this bit of 
 paper/' " Let us look at it," said Mr. Hooker ; 
 and then casting his eye over it, added, " This I see 
 is an application to the magistrates, to set up a new 
 public house in the village, and a recommendation 
 of Robert Fowler as a fit man to keep it. " Yes, 
 Sir," replied the farmer ; " poor Bob since s he got 
 the hurt in his arm has never been able to do the 
 work of another man, and he and Nanny have 
 begged me and some of the neighbours to help him 
 to set up a public house, as a means of keeping him 
 off the parish." 
 
 " And do you, Farmer Barton, honestly think," 
 said Mr. Hooker, " that we want a public house 
 here ? You know that there is hardly any thorough- 
 fare through the village; and even if there was, we 
 are but two miles from a market town, where there 
 are inns and ale-houses in abundance." 
 
 " Why I can't say there is any particular want of 
 it," said Barton. " But Fowler's family is likely to 
 be a heavy burden to the parish." 
 
 (t The parish, 1 am satisfied," rejoined Mr. 
 
 F5 
 

<page 117>
106 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 Hooker, " would be no- gainer in the end. Don't 
 you suppose that many of the labouring men would 
 often, after their day's work, go to the ale-house, 
 instead of going home ; and spend there, some part 
 of the money which ought to find food and clothes 
 for their wives and families? A country ale-house 
 is too often found to be attended with raggedness and 
 hunger in the women and children ; and I know that 
 this is the opinion of the poor women themselves* 
 Besides, don't you remember, what drunkenness and 
 quarrelling we used to have before Tomkins's house 
 was put down?" 
 
 Why, I must say, that the men have been more 
 quiet and sober of late." 
 
 " As clergyman of this parish," said Mr. Hooker, 
 " I shall never assist in setting forward a measure, 
 which I think would be hurtful to my parishioners: 
 and I must own, that I am surprised to see that so 
 many sensible and respectable men have signed their 
 names to this recommendation." 
 
 " Why a man don't like to seem ill-natured" said 
 the farmer. 
 
 " We must not," replied Mr. Hooker, " for the 
 sake of assisting one man or one family, do that 
 which would be prejudicial to the whole parish. And 
 besides, I thought that Fowler was one of the most 
 drunken, idle fellows in the village." 
 
 " Why to be sure," said the farmer, " he does like 
 drink better than work." 
 
 " And yet you and your brother farmers are here 
 ready to certify that he is of good fame, sober life 
 and conversation, and a fit and proper person to be 
 

<page 118>
Good-nature^ or parish matters. 107 
 
 intrusted with a licence ! Do you not see that you 
 have all set your hands to a direct falsehood ?" 
 
 Barton looked foolish, but added, " Why one 
 don't like to refuse such a thing and when others do 
 it, it would look so ill-natured" 
 
 66 And so, for fear of being thought ill-natured, 
 you can not only set your name to a lie, but give a 
 helping hand to a measure, which by your own ac- 
 knowledgment would be likely to increase the poverty 
 as well as the immorality of many of your poor 
 neighbours. Indeed, indeed, Mr. Barton, an English 
 farmer ought to have had more manliness of character 
 than this comes to." 
 
 " But then poor Bob is such a good-tempered 
 fellow; and besides, you know, he is half disabled 
 for work !" 
 
 " Yes, he received his hurt in the very act of 
 breaking the laws of the land by poaching, and I do 
 not think that a reason for putting him in a situation 
 in some respects above that of the generality of 
 cottagers." 
 
 Farmer Barton found that he was not likely to 
 succeed in the object of his visit; and saying witfi a 
 smile, " Well, Sir, I did not think you had been so 
 hard-hearted," quitted the room. 
 
 " There ! Stanley," said Mr. Hooker, " that's the 
 way of the world. Most of the men who have signed 
 that certificate are, as times go, decent and respectable 
 men, and would, I doubt not, pretty much agree with 
 me as to the probability that both poverty and im- 
 morality would be increased by the establishment of 
 an ale-house in the village ; but yet for the sake of 
 F 6 
 

<page 119>
108 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 being good-natured to an individual, they set forward 
 a measure, which they think will be generally perni- 
 cious; and set their hands to a lie, rather than refuse 
 an unreasonable request. Their 'good-nature, to be 
 sure, is not confined to Fowler as its only object. 
 Some of them, probably, wish to be good-natured to 
 a brother farmer, who is the owner of the house ; and 
 some think that they shall do a kindness to the 
 brewer, who will supply it with beer." 
 
 " But what," replied Stanley, " shall you do in 
 this business ?" 
 
 " Why, I don't very well know," said Mr. Hooker. 
 " You have been acquainted with me long enough 
 to be assured, that I would suffer my hand to be cut 
 off, rather than set it to a palpable falsehood ; and 
 that I would never take any active step in assisting a 
 measure which in my opinion will be hurtful to my 
 parishioners. But perhaps something of the same 
 sort of weakness which I blame in others, may prevent 
 me from ' taking any active measures against it. I 
 am not fond of going into public, or of encountering 
 the bustle of the justice-room. Perhaps 1 shall be 
 passive, and try to quiet my own conscience by saying, 
 that things must take their course: that it not is for 
 me to come forward in opposition to the declared 
 wish of most of the respectable part of my pa- 
 rishioners. 11 
 
 " But surely the magistrates will not set up a new 
 public house without the signature of the clergyman 
 to the certificate?'' 
 
 " The new Act requires the signature either of the 
 clergyman, or that of the majority of the parish-of- 
 

<page 120>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 109 
 
 ficers, together with four reputable and substantial 
 householders; or that of eight respectable and sub- 
 stantial householders. Fowler's certificate has all the 
 parish-officers but one, and other names in abundance, 
 and good-nature will prevent any one from saying that 
 some of those names are neither respectable nor 
 substantial. The magistrates will see that the re- 
 quirements of the Act are complied with, and they 
 will perhaps feel like me; they will be unwilling to 
 incur the odium of opposing the wishes of all those 
 respectable and substantial personages, and thus good- 
 nature may induce them to sign the licence/' 
 
 " At all events," said Stanley, " you will be able 
 to keep Fowler in order by the penalties of the new 
 Act. The old system of absolutely forfeiting the 
 recognizance was too severe to be acted on." 
 
 " Perhaps," said Mr. Hooker, " now and then, in 
 some flagrant case, by which some individual is 
 personally injured, these provisions may be called 
 into play. But how seldom do you hear in the 
 country at least of penalties being enforced from a 
 sense of public duty? Good-nature is always against 
 it; and the man who from the purest motives en- 
 deavoured to enforce them, would be sure to have 
 all the host of the good-natured arrayed against him." 
 
 Two days after was the licensing day : the good- 
 natured Barton having undertaken the patronage of 
 Fowler's application, set out in good time to advocate 
 it at the justice-meeting. He had got about three 
 quarters of a mile from the village, in his way to 
 Chippingden the market town, when he was over- 
 taken by Mr. Bentley, one of the magistrates. 
 

<page 121>
110 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 " You have a dreadful road here, Farmer Barton,'* 
 said Mr. Bentley. " Who is your surveyor?" 
 
 " Why, I am at present/' replied Barton, " and 
 as we are a little behind hand with the duty, I am 
 afraid that I shall have to go on for another year." 
 
 " Then why do you suffer the road to continue in 
 this state ? The ruts are so deep, that it really is 
 hardly safe." 
 
 " It is all occasioned by that high hedge," answered 
 the farmer, " which keeps off both sun and wind. 
 And besides, from there being no trunk or tunnel in 
 that gate-way, the water of the ditch is thrown into 
 the road. To be sure it was pretty dirty in the 
 winter, for all we buried so many stones in it." 
 "Then why was not the hedge cut, and a tunnel 
 made in the gateway to carry off the water ?" said 
 Mr. Bentley. 
 
 " I did once give Farmer Dobson a hint about 
 it," answered Barton, " but he says, that the hedge 
 is not above nine years' growth, and that he shall 
 have better poles by leaving it a few years longer." 
 
 " But you know very well," replied the magistrate, 
 " that your warrant empowers you to require him to 
 cut it, and if he refuses, to do it yourself at his 
 expence." 
 
 " I know that well enough," said Barton, " but 
 that would be so ill-natured and unneighbourly, that 
 I could not bear to think of it." 
 
 " And so," rejoined Mr. Bentley, " the necks and 
 limbs of his Majesty's subjects are to be endangered, 
 and the whole neighbourhood put to inconvenience, 
 for the credit of your good-nature f A man in a 
 

<page 122>
Good-nature, or parish matters. Ill 
 
 public office, Mr. Barton, should always execute the 
 duties of that office with as much civility and kind- 
 ness as possible; but he must never neglect his public 
 duty, for the sake of gratifying any private individual 
 whatever. And look ! what business has this dung- 
 hill here? your warrant tells you that nothing should 
 be laid within fifteen feet of the middle of the road- 
 and this dunghill is so close, that the road is ruined 
 by the moisture proceeding from it. And see how 
 the farmer has cut the road to pieces by drawing out 
 his dung in the wet weather." 
 
 " To be sure, what you say is true, but the field 
 won't be ready for the dung till the spring." 
 
 " Another sacrifice of the interests of the public 
 to private convenience ! And here again you'll think 
 and call me a troublesome fellow, Mr. Barton but 
 why do you suffer these heaps of stones to be so 
 forward in the road ? They are absolutely dan- 
 gerous." 
 
 " Why the men who work on the road like to 
 have them handy" 
 
 " As they are paid by the day it can make no 
 difference to them, and even if it did, you must not 
 endanger the safety of travellers from a good-natured 
 wish to humour your workmen I suppose the same 
 reason induces you to allow them to put in the stones 
 without breaking them ?" 
 
 Barton acknowledged that it was. Mr. Bentley 
 charged him again not to let his good-nature make 
 him forget his duty to the public " But," added he 
 laughing, "perhaps I must confess that it is some 
 feeling of the same sort, which keeps me from fining 
 

<page 123>
112 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 you five pounds, as I might and ought to do, for 
 these neglects of your duty as surveyor." 
 
 They now reached the town, and happening to use 
 the same inn, rode into the yard together. Fowler 
 and his wife, who were already there, augured well 
 from this circumstance and Mr. Bentley was hardly 
 off his horse, when Nanny accosted him in a wheed- 
 ling tone, with, " I hope, Sir, you'll be so kind as to 
 stand our friend about this licence." 
 
 " We shall see about that presently," said Mr. 
 Bentley, as he walked off, wishing to cut short ap- 
 plications of this nature till he got into the justice- 
 room. He found his way stopped, however, by two 
 or three poor women from the village near which 
 he resided. " Well !" said he, " and what brings 
 you all to Chippingden ?" 
 
 " Why, Sir, we want a little of your kindness/' 
 
 " My kindness! why can you find none of my 
 kindness at home?" 
 
 " O yes, Sir, you are always ready to assist a poor 
 person yourself, but we want you to stand our 
 friend, and order us a little more relief from the 
 farmers.'? ,BM 
 
 " That, my good woman, is quite a different story. 
 As a magistrate I must not be a friend to any one 
 person more than to another ; but must endeavour 
 to act without favour or affection either to rich or 
 poor. With respect to parochial relief, our business 
 is to consider, as well as we are able, what the laws 
 require and allow, and to act accordingly. Poor 
 people often apply to us in great distress, and the 
 relief which we can order seems but very little. 
 

<page 124>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 113 
 
 If we listened to our own feelings, our own good- 
 nature as you would call it, we should often be glad 
 to order much more, but we must not indulge such 
 feelings at another man's expense we must not be 
 good-natured with other people's money." 
 
 " But, Sir," said Betty Horseman, " I only wanted 
 about a shilling a week more, and I'm sure that can't 
 hurt the farmers." 
 
 " Whether it is much or little," said Mr. Bentley, 
 " we cannot order more, than the law, in our opinion, 
 appears to require. Knowingly to order more than 
 that, is to rob those out of whose pockets the poor 
 rates are paid. You would not wish me, Betty, to 
 help you in picking a man's pocket." 
 
 " But it is so little that I ask for," said Betty, 
 still harping upon the same string. 
 
 " We may not pick a man's pocket of sixpence, 
 any more than of a hundred pounds. Your appli- 
 cation shall be heard presently, Betty, and we will 
 give it the best attention we can. If we think that 
 you ought to have more, we will order it. But you 
 must remember, that if you have a shilling a week 
 more, every family in the like circumstances will 
 expect the same, which will make your shilling a week 
 a pretty round sum. In short, I am always glad as far 
 as I can to help a poor person out of my own pocket, 
 but must consider well before I help him out of the 
 pockets of other people." 
 
 Mr. Bentley now joined his brother magistrates in the 
 justice-room. The licensing business came on first? 
 and the licenses to the old established houses having- 
 been renewed, the applications for new houses were 
 

<page 125>
114 Good-nature ', or parish matters. 
 
 taken into consideration. Fowler produced his cer- 
 tificate. 
 
 " This certificate," said Mr. Hale the chairman, 
 " has not the clergyman's name; how happens that?" 
 
 Farmer Barton was at Fowler's elbow, and imme- 
 diately answered, " Mr. Hooker has laid down a rule 
 not to set his hand to an application of this sort, and 
 could not break through it but I'm sure he has no 
 objection." 
 
 " And besides," said one of the justices, " if my 
 memory does not deceive me, there was a man 
 of that name in your parish who was a noted 
 poacher." 
 
 " Why, I must confess," said the farmer, "that some 
 time back the poor man was led by distress to go out 
 once or twice; but he has, long ago, given it up, and 
 is now quite an altered character. When a man has 
 seen his fault, and turned over a new leaf, I am sure, 
 gentlemen, that you are too good-natured to bring it 
 up against him."" 
 
 The justices still hesitated; but Barton and two or 
 three of the farmers of the village represented to 
 them that there always used to be a public house; 
 that it was in many respects inconvenient to be without 
 one; and that in this instance, it would give occu- 
 pation and maintenance to a poor family. At 
 length the magistrates said, that in general they were 
 not disposed to increase the number of ale-houses, 
 hut that they would give way to the declared wish of 
 almost all the leading men in the parish. In a case 
 of doubt, they naturally leant to the side of good- 
 nature. Accordingly the license was granted. 
 

<page 126>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 115 
 
 Fowler was overjoyed at his success, and after 
 making his acknowledgments, set off, first to the 
 carpenter, and then to the painter, to give directions 
 for a sign and its appendages. After these matters 
 of business, he could not think of returning without 
 drinking the health of the magistrates at the Red Lioir. 
 
 Several friends dropped in to congratulate him; 
 and when he thought about going home, he was not 
 quite able to walk straight. The butcher's boy, who 
 had made one of the party at the Red Lion, offered 
 to give him a lift in his cart. They set off in high 
 glee, and the exalted state of their spirits induced 
 them to urge on the horse. Though the night was 
 dark and the horse sometimes swerved to one side of the 
 road and sometimes to the other, yet the light colour of 
 the road served for a guide, and they felt that as long 
 as they kept to that they were safe. They were mis- 
 taken, however. They were within a mile of Ingle- 
 wood, and had got the horse almost into a gallop, 
 when all at once the wheel came upon one of the 
 heaps of stones, which had been shot down in the quar- 
 tering, and the cart was overturned. Peter, the 
 butcher's boy, called out that he was killed; but 
 having got up and shaken himself, and found that 
 he had received no sort of injury, he burst into a loud 
 fit of laughter. 
 
 Poor Fowler, however, lay groaning in the road, 
 unable to stir. He was severely bruised, and both 
 the bones of his right leg were broken. Peter 
 scratched his head, and was quite at a loss what to do, 
 when luckily Farmer Barton and one of his neigh- 
 bours came to the spot, in their way back from 
 

<page 127>
116 Good-nature^ or parish matters. 
 
 \ 
 
 market. They extricated the horse, which, having 
 put his foot in the deep rut, had fallen with the cart, 
 and then raised the cart without difficulty. It was 
 not, however, so easy a matter to get Fowler into 
 it. He cried out from pain every time that they took 
 hold of him, and sometimes begged that they would 
 leave him to die where he was. At last, however, 
 they succeeded, and at a slow pace he was conveyed 
 to his humble cottage, which was soon to assume the 
 dignity and importance of a public house. 
 
 His wife helped to get him to bed, though not 
 without reproaching him with some asperity for 
 staying so long at the Red Lion after he had sent her 
 home. Having taken as much care of him, as in her 
 opinion he deserved, she hastened down stairs to 
 comfort herself with some tea, of which two or three 
 of her neighbours, who had been brought to the house 
 by the tidings of the accident, were invited to par- 
 take. The condolences and lamentations were soon 
 over, and they fell into the usual train of village 
 gossip. The hardness of the times, of course, was 
 one of the topics of conversation. " Well, Hannah," 
 said one of the party, " and what did you get from 
 the justices ?" 
 
 " Oh ! there's rib use in a poor person's going to 
 them," SLiidl Hannah, " they're all for the farmers." 
 
 " I wonder to hear you say that," said Nanny, 
 who was naturally disposed to be in good humour 
 with the magistrates, who had just granted a licence 
 to her husband ; " I wonder to hear you say that, 
 for as I was going out of the room, I fell in with two 
 or three overseers, who were saying just the contrary. 
 
 

<page 128>
Good-nature^ or parish matters. 117 
 
 They were complaining that the justices were ready 
 to hear all the idle stories of the poor about wanting 
 relief, and that they were much too apt to order 
 some little addition. In fact, they said, that they 
 were all in favour of the poor; and the farmers could 
 not stand it." 
 
 " If the poor complain that they were in favour 
 of the farmers, and the farmers that they favoured 
 the poor," said an old man sitting in the chimney 
 corner, " I dare say they pretty nearly did the thing 
 that was right between both parties." 
 
 "Well," said Hannah, "if I was a justice, I 
 could'nt bear that the poor should think me ill-na- 
 tured. Be it how it would, I'd take care to have 
 their good word, even if I did now and then order a 
 trifle more than was quite right." 
 
 " What should you say, Hannah," said the same 
 old man, "of a justice who acted contrary to law for 
 the sake of a sum of money?" 
 
 " What! a bribe! Why I'd have him turned out 
 before he was a day older." 
 
 " And is not acting contrary to law for the sake 
 of any one's good will, or good word, pretty much 
 the same as doing so for a bribe? A magistrate 
 is sworn to do justice, according to law, to the best 
 of his knowledge." 
 
 All the women, however, consoled themselves with 
 the near approach of the time, when the poor would 
 have to apply for their weekly allowances to Farmer 
 Barton instead of Farmer Oldacre; it being the 
 custom of the parish that the overseers should divide 
 the year between them, each taking the trouble of the 
 office for six months. 
 

<page 129>
118 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 " Yes, indeed," said Hannah Bolt, " it will be a 
 happy day for us poor creatures, when Mr. Barton 
 takes the books ; Farmer Oldacre was always a hard 
 man to the poor." 
 
 " Farmer Oldacre a hard man to the poor !" said 
 old John Truman, who came in at the moment 
 from the sick man's room " Farmer Oldacre a 
 hard man to the poor ! I'm sure you are an un- 
 grateful woman for saying so; as I should be an 
 ungrateful man, if I allowed you to say it without 
 taking you to task. I've worked for him now these 
 seventeen years, and a better or a kinder master cannot 
 be. Did'nt I see you, Hannah, day after day, when 
 your little boy was ill, going to his house, sometimes 
 for a little milk, sometimes for a little made wine, 
 and did he ever refuse you? did he ever refuse any 
 poor person, who was really in want, any thing that 
 he was able to give?" 
 
 " I can't say but that he's ready enough to help 
 a poor body with any thing he has himself; but then 
 if one asks him for a little more parish relief, he's so 
 terrible particular, and asks so many questions, that 
 it's quite unpleasant, and perhaps we can get nothing 
 after all." 
 
 " In short," said John, " you mean to say that he 
 is liberal and kind in giving from his own pocket, 
 but careful and cautious how he makes free with the 
 pockets of other people. And then again who em- 
 ploys so many men as Farmer Oldacre ? I'm sure I 
 have often known him in the winter try to find out 
 jobs for the sake of keeping the men at work; and 
 after all 1 believe, that he feels the change of times 
 

<page 130>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 119 
 
 as much as any man, and that he and his family 
 allow themselves little beyond bare necessaries. And 
 even with respect to parish relief, I believe that the 
 old men and women, who are really past work, are 
 better off when Farmer Oldacre has the books, than 
 at any other time." 
 
 " But then," answered Hannah, " Farmer Barton 
 is so good-natured when we go to him. He says that 
 a shilling or two cannot signify to the farmers, and is 
 not worth thinking about." 
 
 " I believe it would be better for all parties," 
 replied Truman, " if the able-bodied poor thought 
 less of running to the parish, and more of depending, 
 under God's blessing, on themselves. When I was 
 young, a man would have been ashamed of begging 
 for parish relief. Indeed, the law was, that those 
 who were relieved were to be marked by a badge. 
 I know that I contrived to bring up a family of seven 
 children without being beholden to any body. For 
 a few years it was certainly hard work, but God 
 helped us on." 
 
 " But wages," said Nanny Fowler, " were better 
 in those days." 
 
 " Compared with what they would buy, perhaps 
 they were, but their being low now is, I take it, 
 partly owing to the poor rates." 
 
 " Why how can you make that out?" cried the 
 whole party. 
 
 " In the first place, can you tell me, why wheat is 
 so cheap just at present?*" It was, you know, ten 
 shillings the bushel, and indeed sometimes a great 
 deal more it is now less than five." 
 

<page 131>
120 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 *fe& Why it's cheap to be sure, because there is such 
 plenty of it." 
 
 " And is it not the over-plenty of labourers, that 
 makes labour cheap? I remember this village when 
 there were not more than fifty labourers' families, 
 each with a cottage to itself; now there are upwards 
 of eighty families, and sometimes two crammed to- 
 gether in one house. I have read in the newspapers, 
 that the people throughout England have increased 
 in the last twenty years thirty-two in every hundred 
 that is, where there were but ten, there are now 
 more than thirteen." 
 
 " But what has that to do with tliQ poor rates ?" 
 
 " Why do not you think that the poor rates are 
 an encouragement to early marriages ?" 
 
 And what then/' said Hannah; " did not the 
 Almighty say, Increase and multiply?" 
 
 " The command to increase and multiply and re- 
 plenish the earth, was given rfrst, when there were 
 upon the face of the whole earth no men and women 
 at all, excepting the first pair : and again, when all 
 mankind had been destroyed, with the exception of 
 the family of Noah. The world was pretty well 
 empty of inhabitants then, and wanted replenishing. 
 But the case is different in an old inhabited country, 
 which is already so replenished so full and over- 
 full that the people stand in each other's way." 
 
 " But surely, John, you are not for preventing 
 marriages ?" 
 
 " Heaven forbid !" said the old man, wiping a 
 tear of thankfulness from his eye; " Heaven forbid ! 
 It is to marriage that I owe the greater part of the 
 

<page 132>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 happiness that I have enjoyed in this life; and mar- 
 riage, I trust, has assisted in preparing me, through 
 divine grace and the merits of my Redeemer, for 
 happiness in the life to come. I know too who it is 
 that has said, Marriage is honourable in all. No, 
 no, I am no enemy to marriage, I am its warmest 
 friend. But then, as the Prayer-Book telis us, there 
 are two ways of engaging in marriage. Men may 
 either enter upon it reverently, discreetly, advisedly, 
 and in the fear of God ; or else they may engage in 
 it unadvisedly, lightly, and wantonly, * like brute 
 beasts that have no understanding.' I am afraid that 
 now-a-days young people are more apt to engage in 
 marriage after the latter manner, than after the 
 former. When I was young, men generally did not 
 like to marry I'm sure I did not till they had 
 secured a bit of a cottage to put a wife in, and a few 
 articles of furniture, and perhaps a few pounds to 
 begin the world with. Now boys and girls marry 
 without thought and reflection, without sixpence 
 beforehand, and trust to the parish for every thing 
 house, goods, clothes, and the maintenance of their 
 children. As for the parish finding houses for all 
 that wish to marry, it's what can't be done. No, no, 
 I don't want to prevent their marrying, I only want 
 them to wait a very few years, that they may have a 
 better chance of happiness when they marry. We 
 all know, that when want comes in at the door, love is 
 very apt to fly out at the window ; and parish pay is 
 but a poor dependence after all. 
 
 " And why should they not wait? Those, who are 
 better off in the world, are for the most part forced 
 o 
 

<page 133>
122 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 to wait a good number of years. The sons of the 
 farmers, of the tradesmen, and of the gentlemen, 
 generally wait, I think, till they are nearer thirty 
 than five and twenty. Look at Squire Bentley's 
 family : there's his eldest son that is the counsellor, 
 who, as they say, has been for some years engaged to 
 one of Mr. Hale's daughters ; he is now, I take it, 
 upwards of thirty, but he waits till they have a better 
 chance of maintaining a family. There's his second 
 son, who is to be a physician; and the third in the 
 army; both I dare say would be glad enough to 
 marry, if they could marry with any sort of prudence. 
 It is because the poor think that the parish must find 
 every thing, that they marry without thought or 
 care; and then the numbers of the people increase 
 till there are more hands than work ; and that makes 
 wages so low. 
 
 " There's another way in which the poor rates 
 keep down the price of labour. A man is out of 
 work. He goes round to the farmers; but they all 
 say that they don't want him : they have hands more 
 than enough already. He then goes to the overseer 
 for employment. Now the parish if bound by law 
 to find work for him at all, about which there seems 
 to be some doubt is only bound to pay him enough 
 to keep him from starving, and for that may require 
 a full day's work. The farmers of course know this; 
 and as in these times it is natural for them to wish to 
 get hands at as low a rate as possible, one of them 
 tells this man that be will give him a trifle more than 
 the parish, though still a mere trifle, and turns off 
 one of his regular workmen to make way for him ; 
 

<page 134>
Good-nature , or parish matters. 123 
 
 and so it may go on, till all are brought down to the 
 same low key. Or perhaps the farmers will pay all 
 the labourers, either in whole, or in part, out of the 
 poor rates. This I take to be a very bad plan for the 
 farmers in the end ; for as men will seldom do more 
 work than they are paid for, the work will not be 
 done so well or so cheerfully; and besides, it sadly 
 breaks the spirit of the labourers. In short, 1 wisli, 
 as 1 said before, that the poor depended less upon 
 parish pay, and more upon themselves." 
 
 " But, John," said Hannah, " you are not for 
 knocking up the poor laws altogether ?" 
 
 t( By no means," answered John : " I am in one 
 sense a poor man myself; and I am glad that there is 
 such a provision for those, who can do nothing for 
 themselves, and for those who are thrown back by a 
 severe sickness, or by some accident. For myself, I 
 hope that, by the blessing of God, I shall never be 
 forced to stoop to ask for parish relief. As my wife 
 and I contrived, to bring up a family without any 
 help from an overseer, so when our children were 
 old enough to get out, and take care of themselves, 
 we began to think of putting by a trifle against old 
 age. The savings bank notion has given us a lift, 
 and I think that I have that there, which will keep 
 me from being a burden to any one. As times are 
 now, a man with a large family can't help going to 
 the parish, and no one can blame him for it I only 
 wish that times were such as to enable him, with 
 industry and prudence, to look for maintenance to 
 no one but himself and God Almighty." 
 
 By the time that old Truman had finished this 
 
 G2 
 

<page 135>
124 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 dissertation on the poor laws, the surgeon had arrived. 
 He examined Fowler's leg, and found the fracture to 
 be as bad a one as well could be. It was attended 
 too with a considerable degree of fever, which was 
 increased by the heated state of the blood, occasioned 
 by excessive drinking. 
 
 The next day he was delirious, and the fever had 
 increased so much, that but slight hopes were enter- 
 tained of his recovery. He remained for some days 
 in this state, hanging between life and death, till at 
 length the fever abated. The delirium too was at an 
 end ; but it left him in a state of the most deplorable 
 weakness. 
 
 Nanny Fowler never had bestowed one serious 
 thought upon a future life ; but some of her neigh- 
 bours told her, that with her husband in such a 
 dangerous condition, she ought to desire the parson 
 to come and see him. This she accordingly did. 
 
 Mr. Hooker, at his two or three first visits, found 
 both body and mind so weakened, that he did little 
 more than pray by him. Neither Fowler nor his 
 wife entered much into the meaning or spirit of his 
 prayers, but still they were flattered and pleased by 
 the attention of their pastor. 
 
 For many years Fowler had hardly set foot in 
 church, excepting once to attend the funeral of a 
 relation, and twice as godfather to the children of 
 two of his friends. Though he had not shewn any 
 positive disrespect to Mr. Hooker to his face, yet he 
 was in the habit of laughing at him behind his back, 
 and of trying to turn whatever he did or said in the 
 execution of his sacred office and indeed his office 
 

<page 136>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 125 
 
 itself into ridicule. In this, according to the opinion 
 of his thoughtless and profligate companions, he suc- 
 ceeded tolerably well; for he had a turn for low- 
 humour; and it is sometimes found, the more sacred 
 any thing is, the greater is the effect of representing 
 it in a ludicrous point of view, to those who are un- 
 restrained by any sense of decency or of religion. 
 From Mr. Hooker he had never received any thing 
 but tokens of kindness, but he disliked him, because 
 he knew that he disapproved of his manner of going 
 on, and still more, for one or two admonitions which 
 he had received from him. He now felt ashamed of 
 his former disrespectful behaviour towards his worthy 
 minister. 
 
 The fever having entirely left him, Mr. Hooker 
 determined to take advantage of the opportunity 
 which this accident afforded, for the purpose of 
 endeavouring to bring Fowler to some proper sense 
 of religion. He accordingly often talked to him in 
 the most serious manner, trying both to inform his 
 understanding, and to affect his heart. 
 
 One day when he called, he found Barton sitting 
 by the bed side. The farmer immediately got up to 
 go away : Fowler, however, begged him to stay ; and 
 Mr. Hooker was not without hopes, that what he 
 said might not be entirely lost upon Barton, of 
 whose religious sentiments he had but an unfavour- 
 able opinion. 
 
 After making use of the prayers in the Visitation 
 Office, he represented to Fowler the folly of living 
 without God in the world; the hateful nature of sin; 
 
 G 3 
 

<page 137>
126 Good-nature^ or parish matters. 
 
 and the awful consequences of continuing in sin 
 without repentance. He spoke of the great atone- 
 ment, but told him that the benefits even of that 
 would be lost to those who continued hardened and 
 impenitent. He added a few words upon the par- 
 ticular vice of drunkenness, upon its tendency to lead 
 on to almost all other sins without exception, and 
 upon its dreadful punishment in the world to come, 
 since drunkards can not inherit the kingdom of God. 
 
 Fowler appeared to be attentive, and to feel what 
 was said, and Barton looked every now and then a 
 little uneasy. His uneasiness was occasioned, not by 
 the slightest degree of apprehension for his own re- 
 ligious interests, but by the wound which his good- 
 nature received, at hearing such strong things said. 
 The farmer accompanied Mr. Hooker down stairs; 
 but the moment he had quitted the house, exclaimed, 
 " I wish, Nanny, you would not let the parson come 
 to your husband any more. I'm sure it's enough to 
 make a man ill to hear him talk." " Why, what's 
 the matter?'* said Nanny, " what's the matter?" 
 
 (< Why, he has been talking about his soul, and 
 getting drunk, and heaven, and hell, and I know not 
 what besides ; I'm sure, I thought it very ill-natured 
 of him. It's bad enough for poor Bob to have 
 broken his leg, without being troubled with such 
 melancholy thoughts. And what's the use of it? 
 There's no chance of his dying this bout, and there 
 can be no occasion for his making himself uneasy 
 with these church-yard thoughts yet." 
 
 " Surely you are not in earnest, neighbour," said 
 

<page 138>
Good-nature,, or parish matters. 127 
 
 :+ . I 
 
 Farmer Oldacre, who had called in to enquire how 
 the broken leg was going on ; " you cannot really 
 mean what you say." 
 
 " Yes, but I do though," replied Barton, " and I 
 say again, it was very ill-natured of Mr. Hooker." 
 
 " I always thought," said Oldacre, " that you 
 professed and called yourself a Christian." 
 
 " As good a Christian as yourself," rejoined Bar- 
 ton, with some quickness; " aye, or as Mr. Hooker 
 either, though, perhaps, I mayn't talk so much about 
 it as some people." 
 
 " Well, don't be angry," said Oldacre calmly, 
 " but just listen to me for two minutes. If a Chris- 
 tian, you of course acknowledge the Scriptures to be 
 the word of God?" 
 
 To be, sure I do." 
 
 " Well you know the whole parish knows 
 that poor Bob Fowler was leading a most ungodly 
 and wicked life." 
 
 " No, I do not know it; poor Bob was nobody's 
 enemy but his own ; and if he did get drunk now 
 and then, what was that to any body else? I don't 
 call that being wicked," 
 
 " And what do you call being wicked?" 
 
 " Why, I call a man wicked, when he robs and 
 steals, or commits murder, or let me see let me 
 see when he takes a false oath before a justice or 
 when he slanders his neighbours." 
 
 " These, certainly," answered Oldacre, " are in- 
 stances of great, wickedness ; but you seem to confine 
 the word wickedness almost entirely to offences, by 
 which men are injured: now I call a man wicked, 
 G 1 
 

<page 139>
128 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 when he lives in the wilful and habitual neglect of 
 any part of his duty ; and since the Scriptures tell us, 
 that the first and chief part of our duty is our duty 
 towards God, I particularly call a man wicked when 
 he lives in the open neglect of that duty when he 
 leads, in short, an ungodly life. 5 ' 
 
 Barton made no answer, but seemed to be waiting 
 to hear what was to come next. 
 
 " Now as for poor Bob Fowler, you know very 
 well that he never went to church, never thought of 
 keeping holy the Lord's day, that he was in the 
 constant habit of profane swearing, that he never 
 spoke of religion but to laugh at it, and that instead 
 of having God in all his thoughts, he lived in a total 
 forgetfulness both of him and of his laws. Now the 
 Scriptures tell us, over and over again, that the 
 wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the people 
 that forget God. If these words of Scripture be 
 true- and you acknowledge yourself that they are so 
 Fowler was certainly in a dangerous state. Now, 
 neighbour, suppose you were to see a blind man 
 walking right on to the brink of a pit, and ready to 
 fall into it, should you think it ill-natured to tell him 
 of his danger? And is it ill-natured of Mr. Hooker, 
 to try to save a man from falling into the pit of de- 
 struction ?" 
 
 " But why should he do it at such a time when 
 Bob has a broken leg to vex him ?" 
 
 " I know," replied Oldacre, " that Mr. Hooker 
 did sometimes speak to him when he was in health; 
 but Fowler was either sulky, or turned it into joke : 
 he was one of those, who sit in the seat of the scornful ; 
 

<page 140>
Good-nature^ or parish matters. 129 
 
 it was like casting pearls before swine, which turn 
 again and rend you. His present confinement offers 
 an opportunity for giving him some notions of reli- 
 gion ; and our good minister, who is always on the 
 watch for opportunities of being of use, most likely 
 felt, that if this opportunity was not taken advantage 
 of, he might never have another." 
 
 " But is it not enough to drive a man to despair," 
 said Barton, " to talk to him about death and judg- 
 ment, and future punishment?" 
 
 " It is rather the best way to save a man from 
 despair. Mr. Hooker speaks to him of future 
 misery, in order that he may escape it. I dare say 
 that he tells him, as he tells us in church, that if he 
 will but repent of and forsake his sins, full forgiveness 
 is offered, through the mediation of the Redeemer. 
 A man who wilfully goes on in a worldly, ungodly 
 course of life, has certainly nothing before him but a 
 fearful looking for of judgment andjiery indignation. 
 Surely it is not ill-natured^ but rather the kindest 
 thing that can be done for such a man, to try to per- 
 suade him to flee from the wrath to come, by changing 
 his course of life by the aid of God's grace, and by 
 seeking for God's mercy through Christ, before the 
 gates of mercy are closed for ever." m a 97tfa ol^rt o? 
 
 There was a pause of some minutes. Barton, 
 however, did not like to give up his notions of 
 ill-nature, and returned to the charge. " Still, I 
 must say, neighbour Oldacre, that the parson speaks 
 of these things much too plainly and too strongly; 
 and, to tell you the truth, that is the reason why 1 so 
 seldom go to hear him in church. It would not look 
 
 G5 
 

<page 141>
130 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 well, you know, for a man like me never to go to 
 church at all, so I drop in sometimes when there is 
 no sermon. I like to be good-humoured and pleasant, 
 and don't like to think of these melancholy subjects 
 until I've occasion." 
 
 Oldacre found that he was impenetrable by any 
 thing that he could say, and was not inclined to re- 
 sume the conversation, and went up stairs to Fowler 
 to ask him how he was. 
 
 Barton quitted the house, but the door was hardly 
 closed, when his good-nature was put to a fresh trial 
 of a different description. He was met by a stranger, 
 who, having asked him whether his name was Barton, 
 and received his answer that it was, put into his 
 hands a paper, which he found was a notice to him 
 as surveyor, that a certain part of the road in the 
 parish had been indicted at the Quarter Sessions 
 which were just over, and a true bill found. 
 
 The fact was this. A gentleman, who was going 
 to the Sessions on business, had occasion to travel 
 along the road, the bad state of which Mr. Bentley 
 had pointed out to Farmer Barton. One of his 
 coach-horses shyed at a heap of dung lying close to 
 the road side, the coachman whipped him, the horses 
 sprang forward, but in crossing the deep ruts, one of 
 the fore springs of the carriage snapped, and the near 
 horse was thrown down, and cut both his knees. 
 The gentleman proceeded slowly to Chippingden; 
 and while his servants were getting the spring made 
 safe for the remainder of his journey, had the worst 
 part of the road measured, and then travelling on to 
 ..Sessions in the full heat of his anger and vexation, 
 

<page 142>
Good-nature^ or parish matters. 131 
 
 preferred a bill of indictment against the parish of 
 Ingle wood. 
 
 This Farmer Barton thoiight the most ill-natured 
 proceeding that ever was known ; and in the first 
 warmth of his indignation said, that there should be 
 no putting ojff] but that the parish should try it out at 
 the following Sessions. He was still surveyor, for he 
 had so entirely neglected calling out the statute-duty, 
 and indeed every part of his office, that he was 
 ashamed to attend the justice meeting, which was 
 held for the purpose of appointing new surveyors ; 
 and felt pretty sure, that his non-attendance would not 
 be taken notice of. The magistrates, every now and 
 then, threatened stoutly, and talked of fining the 
 absentees, but they would not be so ill-natured as to 
 carry their threats into execution; and the comfort 
 and convenience of the public, and the real interests 
 of the several parishes themselves, were sacrificed for 
 the credit of their good-nature. 
 
 Fowler's leg, meanwhile, continued to mend, and 
 he was able to get down stairs, and attend to his new 
 business. What Mr. Hooker had said to him, pro- 
 duced considerable effect upon his mind and conduct. 
 But though he left off drinking himself, yet from his 
 former habits and character he could not be expected 
 to possess much authority over those who resorted to 
 his house. Many of the poor never entered the 
 public house at all; many went to it now and then 
 for a pot of beer to drink in a quiet family way at 
 home; but a few of the married men, and several of 
 the young ones, spent there many of their evenings, 
 and most of their money. 
 
 G6 
 

<page 143>
132 Good-nature^ or parish matters. 
 
 Many little disturbances consequently took place 
 in the village. One evening in particular, Tim 
 Nesbit came from the public house so drunk, and 
 was so noisy and troublesome, that some of the 
 neighbours talked of having him fined, or set in the 
 stocks. " Surely you wouldn't be so ill-natured as 
 that comes to," said Barton. " When a man robs 
 and steals, punish him to the utmost; but drunken- 
 ness is a good-natured fault, and the drunken man is 
 nobody's enemy but his own." 
 
 " Nobody's enemy but his own !" said old Truman, 
 who happened to be standing by, " I think a drunken 
 man the enemy of every body. He is ready to quarrel 
 with every body that comes in his way, and to do all 
 sorts of mischief." 
 
 " Yes," replied Barton, " but when a man don't 
 know what he is doing, he has a right to be ex- 
 cused." 
 
 '* Now I say just the contrary," answered Truman. 
 " When a man chooses to throw away his reason, 
 and to bring himself down to a level with a beast, he 
 must take the consequences. Drunkenness, instead 
 of being an excuse for any fault, is an aggravation, 
 and the law of the land says the same. I heartily 
 wish that the laws against tippling and drunkenness a 
 were more frequently put in execution." 
 
 a If any person (with a few particular exceptions) shall continue 
 drinkhig or tippling in a public house, he shall forfeit three shillings 
 and fourpence to the use of the poor, or be set in the stocks for four 
 hours. 
 
 Any person convicted of drunkenness shall for the first offence forfeit 
 five shillings to the use of the poor, or be set in the stocks for six hours. 
 

<page 144>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 133 
 
 " These laws," replied Barton, "cannot, generally 
 speaking, be put in force, unless some one will in- 
 form, and that would be so ill-natured. And besides, 
 every one hates and cries out against the very name 
 of an informer." 
 
 " I grant you," said Truman, " that when a man 
 turns informer from spite or for the sake of getting 
 money or from a view to private interest of any 
 sort he may perhaps deserve to be disliked. But a 
 man who, after fair notice, informs against an offender 
 from a sense of public duty with a view to check a 
 bad practice which is hurtful both to society and to 
 those who are guilty of it or from a sincere zeal for 
 the interests of morality and religion, is a benefactor 
 to the community. The lawless and profligate, who 
 would be glad to get rid of all the restraints of every 
 sort, will of course try to run him down; but he 
 ought not to mind that, and he certainly deserves 
 the thanks of all the friends of good order and 
 morality." 
 
 Not only was the quiet of the village of Inglewood 
 sometimes disturbed by drunken rows, but many 
 little acts of mischief were committed, not from any 
 particular spite, but in the mere wantonness of 
 drunkenness. The farmers too found some of their 
 men less disposed to work than formerly, and more 
 disposed to be saucy; and they saw the wives and 
 children of some few growing more and more ragged 
 and miserable. They consoled themselves by abusing 
 
 Upon a second conviction the offender shall be bound, with two sure- 
 ties, to be thenceforth of good behaviour. 
 

<page 145>
154 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 the justices for consenting to the establishment of the 
 alehouse, and by blaming their minister for not taking 
 more active measures to prevent it; and said for 
 themselves, that they would never have set their 
 hands to the certificate, if at the time they had not 
 felt sure that the licence would not be granted. 
 
 Fowlers friends, however, determined to make it 
 as good a thing for him as they could. His accident, 
 and long confinement in consequence of it, had 
 thrown him back, and they wished, they said, to give 
 him a start. They resolved to have some pastime in 
 the village, and tried to make up a purse for two 
 prize fighters, who resided in the neighbourhood. 
 Barton entered zealously into the scheme, and took 
 care to have the fame of the projected amusement 
 spread through the adjoining villages. Having occa- 
 sion to call on Mr. Hooker on other business, he 
 said that he hoped that he did not object to what was 
 going forward. Mr. Hooker replied, that " he dis- 
 approved of it most decidedly." 
 
 Barton's good-nature was immediately up in arms. 
 " Surely, Sir, it's very hard that the poor may not 
 have a little amusement now arid then. Our only 
 object is, to give them a day's pleasure, and at the 
 same time to give a little help to Fowler in his busi- 
 ness, after his sad accident, which has thrown him 
 back so unluckily." 
 
 " Nobody," said Mr. Hooker, " can be more 
 friendly than I am to the amusements of the poor, 
 provided they are innocent, and do not, almost neces- 
 sarily, lead to immorality and sin. You know, Mr. 
 Barton, as well as I do, that the pastime, as you call 
 

<page 146>

<page 147>

<page 148>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 135 
 
 it, which you propose, will be attended with a great 
 deal of drunkenness. Your avowed object is, that 
 Fowler should sell as much beer and spirits as pos- 
 sible. I need not te^ you, that drunkenness is not 
 only a great sin in itself, but that it also leads to sins 
 of every description. You know very well too, that 
 on occasions of this sort, there is generally a great 
 deal of swearing, a great deal of improper language, 
 and, perhaps, a great deal of quarrelling. With 
 respect to prize-fighting, sensible men have enter- 
 tained different sentiments. My own opinion is, 
 that it is a positive offence against the laws both of 
 God and man ; that it is a most disgusting exhibi- 
 tion ; and surely a most improper sight for the women 
 and children, who, in a village, will be spectators of 
 it. I think also, that if one of the combatants should 
 be killed, as is frequently the case, all those who 
 have promoted the battle are parties in the guilt of 
 manslaughter. 
 
 " Do not say that I am an enemy to the amuse- 
 ments of the poor. I like to have them enjoy them- 
 selves at proper times, and in a proper manner. I 
 can take pleasure in seeing them engaged in a game 
 at cricket, at foot-ball, at quoits, or any other manly 
 exercise, provided they engage in it without swearing, 
 or drunkenness, or other vice; but of the amuse- 
 ment now proposed in the village, I disapprove most 
 decidedly." 
 
 The disapprobation of the clergyman, however, 
 was not attended to. Barton talked of the parson's 
 ill-nature in grudging the poor a little enjoyment, 
 and said it was all of a piece with his finding fault 
 

<page 149>
136 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 with the poor boys for going to play on a Sunday, 
 instead of going to church or the Sunday school. 
 
 The promised day at length arrived. The village 
 was filled with a motley concourse from all the 
 country round, and the fight took place. The men 
 weVe equally matched, and fought with skill and 
 courage. Both got severely bruised ; but one of 
 them received an unfortunate blow under the ear. 
 He fell into the arms of his second, and it was soon 
 discovered that the blow was mortal he never spoke 
 again. This sad accident threw a damp over the 
 amusement of the day, and many repented of the 
 good-nature which had led them to promote the 
 pastime. 
 
 We will not, however, dwell upon this melancholy 
 event, but proceed to the result of the indictment of 
 the roads of the parish of Inglewood. 
 
 January came, and the Quarter Sessions. Both 
 parties wished to have the indictment tried at once, 
 and came prepared the prosecutor with witnesses to 
 prove that the road was very bad and unsafe and 
 Barton with several good-natured men, who were 
 ready to swear, that it was as good a road as they 
 wished to travel. The parish, however, was beat; 
 and it being proved that frequent representations had 
 been made of the bad state of the road in question, 
 Inglewood was sentenced to pay a fine of fifty pounds, 
 together with all costs, which amounted to forty 
 more. 
 
 Farmer Barton hardly knew which was most 
 ill-natured, the prosecutor, the jury, or the bench of 
 magistrates. Perhaps he was most out of humour 
 

<page 150>
Good-nature^ or parish matters. 137 
 
 with ike jury ; for consisting, as it did principally, 
 of farmers, they might, he thought, have put their 
 oaths and their consciences a little on one side, where 
 brother farmers were concerned. However, there 
 was no help for it, and the money was to be found 
 before the Easter Sessions. 
 
 He returned to Inglewood to console himself with 
 the popularity, which he acquired in the exercise of 
 the office of overseer. His good-nature led him to 
 accede to almost every application, but his good- 
 nature arose rather from his " fear of offending the 
 importunate, than his desire of making the deserving 
 happy b ." The industrious and the modest remained 
 contented with their former pittance ; but the forward, 
 and the impudent, and the clamorous, were con- 
 tinually urging their claims for more relief, and 
 seldom urged them in vain. 
 
 " I hope, Farmer Barton," said one woman, " you 
 will give me a little more allowance: when bread, 
 and candles, and soap are paid for, there's hardly 
 any thing left for tea and sugar." " Why I suppose 
 then I must give you a trifle more the parish can't 
 miss it." One petitioner he manfully refused, and 
 told her she must be content with what she had. 
 " And how am I to buy snuff out of that ?" The 
 overseer relented: he loved a pinch of snuff himself. 
 Farmer Oldacre would gladly have filled a deserving 
 old woman's snuffbox at his own expense, but not at 
 the expense of the parish. 
 
 The liberal allowances granted by Barton, of 
 
 * Goldsmith. c Fact, 
 

<page 151>
138 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 course, required frequent rates, which it was not 
 very convenient to the farmers to pay. Those, how- 
 ever, who happened to have money by them, paid, 
 and allowed themselves the satisfaction of grumbling. 
 Those who had it not, begged for time, and kept 
 their grumbling to themselves. Barton's good-nature 
 did not permit him to be very pressing. The conse- 
 quence was, that, as he was neither disposed, nor 
 perhaps able, to advance the money from his own 
 pocket, fresh rates became necessary, and those who 
 could pay made up for the deficiencies of those who 
 could not. 
 
 Farmer Oldacre was one of the former description; 
 and though he often told his brother overseer, that 
 he was bound in law to levy and expend one rate 
 before he applied for another; yet when his own 
 pocket seemed to be concerned, he would not be 
 peremptory. 
 
 Another of those who were always ready with their 
 money, and were consequently entitled to the privi- 
 lege of grumbling, was Richard Sterling. 
 
 Richard occupied five or six acres of land, kept 
 three cows, and got on pretty well by supplying his 
 neighbours with milk. " What, another rate, Master 
 Barton ! why it seems but t'other day that I paid the 
 last." " It can't be helped, Richard; the poor 
 must be provided for." " I know they must," 
 answered Sterling, " and as for those who cannot 
 keep themselves, and are come to poverty without 
 any fault of their own, I should not grudge it them 
 if they had more;^-but there are some who might as 
 well help to support me, as I to support them. 
 

<page 152>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 139 
 
 Pray, what may you give to Tim Nesbit?" " Why 
 perhaps the matter of three and sixpence a week." 
 " Three and sixpence a week? that comes I think 
 to about nine pounds twelve a-year. Tim and I 
 were born in the same year; when we grew up we 
 worked fbr the same master ; we married much about 
 the same time, and our families are of the same size. 
 The only difference between us was, that while I 
 tried to put by what I could spare, Tim, whether 
 single or married, always carried good part of his 
 earnings to the ale-house. Now is it not a little hard 
 that I must now be forced to help to maintain him, 
 because he chose to squander away his money ? He 
 might at this present time have been every bit as well 
 off in the world as I am ; but because he chose to be 
 careless and a spendthrift, I am forced to take bread, 
 as it were, from my own children, and give it to his b ." 
 
 One day, when Barton was going towards his 
 house, he was overtaken by Ralph the butcher's lad, 
 who accosted him with, " Mr. Barton, I want you to 
 do me a kindness." " What is it?" said Barton. 
 u Why, you must know, that I have some thoughts 
 of marrying, and want the parish just to run me up a 
 bit of a house. Master will give carriage, and I can 
 manage a good deal of the labour myself, so that it 
 will cost the parish a mere trifle." 
 
 " You going to be married !" said Barton laughing, 
 " why, how old are you ?" <c Old enough in all con- 
 science, I shall be nineteen come February." " It 
 might be as well to wait a few years longer," answered 
 
 b See a lively dialogue to this purpose in that excellent little publica- 
 tion, the Cottagers' Monthly Visitor. 
 

<page 153>
140 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 Barton; "however, I cant't wonder at you; and 
 we'll see what can be done." 
 
 He accordingly mentioned the subject to his 
 brother overseer, whom he found in the field near 
 his house. " I must say," replied Oldacre, " that I 
 am no friend to these early marriages in any class of 
 society. Young men and women or rather I 
 should say, boys and girls take it into their heads 
 to marry, before they can be supposed really to know 
 their own minds. They are struck by something 
 in the outward appearance, or taken by some whim 
 and fancy, and become partners for life, before they 
 have become acquainted with each other's temper 
 or character, and before they have considered how to 
 provide for a family. The consequence too often is, 
 that the marriage turns out unhappily. Among the 
 poor especially, who look to the parish for every 
 thing, these early marriages produce a habit of 
 dependence, which lowers their character and spirit 
 for life." 
 
 41 What you say, is much about the truth," replied 
 Barton, "but these young people are bent upon 
 marrying, and then, you know, there's no stopping 
 them. Of course they must have a place to be in, 
 and I suppose we may as well run him up a bit of a 
 cottage at once." 
 
 " It is a serious thing," said Oldacre, " for farmers 
 at rack-rent to begin building houses for their 
 poor; but I am against it, for the sake of the poor 
 themselves." 
 
 " Now I'm sure you must be wrong in that opi- 
 nion," said Barton. 
 

<page 154>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 141 
 
 " Do just tell me," answered his brother overseer, 
 " have we already labourers enough to do all the 
 work of the parish ?" 
 
 " Enough, and much more than enough. You 
 know how puzzled we are to find employment for 
 them in the winter. Indeed, excepting just in hay- 
 making and harvest, we have always some men to 
 be paid for their work out of the rates." 
 
 " Then is not increasing the number a bad thing 
 for the poor themselves, if they already stand in each 
 other's way? And do you not see, that building cottages 
 is just the way to increase them ? If you build twenty 
 cottages, you would have them filled in a week's time. 
 We have of late been forced to double some families, 
 but that must be so uncomfortable in every way, that 
 people do not like to marry upon such a prospect. 
 But there are plenty of young men and women quite 
 ready to hasten to the altar, if they could be sure of a 
 roof to themselves to shelter them at night". .This of 
 course would make a lasting addition to the poor rates, 
 would throw a heavy burden on the land, and render 
 it still more difficult for the poor to find work. 
 
 " The cottages that we have I wish to see as 
 comfortable as possible, and would have the poor 
 people who inhabit them take a pride in keeping 
 them neat and clean, and their gardens in nice 
 order; but I am not for increasing the number of 
 them. Such increase, I am persuaded, would be 
 against the interest of the poor themselves." 
 
 Mr. Stanley, during a former visit to Inglewood, had 
 often fallen in with Mr. Oldacre in his walks, and got 
 c Townsend. 
 

<page 155>
142 Good-nature, or parish matters. 
 
 into conversation with him: he happened to come up 
 at the moment, and catching the last words that had 
 fallen from the farmer, said to him, " I suspect, Mr. 
 Oldacre, that you are not very friendly to the system 
 of the poor laws." 
 
 " I will not by any means say that," replied Old- 
 acre; "I believe that in every state of society, in 
 a populous and old-inhabited country especially, 
 there always will, and must, be poor. As the Scrip- 
 ture says, The poor shall never cease out of the land. 
 I am glad, therefore, that provision is made by law 
 for those who are unable to help themselves. Private 
 charity, in many places, does a great deal; and if 
 there were no poor-laws, would do a great deal more. 
 But if all were left to be provided for by private cha- 
 rity, the kind-hearted would be oppressed by claims, 
 and often give more than they could afford, while the 
 selfish and covetous would contribute nothing. It 
 is right that these latter should be forced to take 
 their share of the burden. In many places again, if 
 there was nothing but voluntary benevolence to trust 
 to, multitudes would starve, and no civilized country 
 ought to suffer that, if it can help it. Indeed, I wish 
 that we were able to give a larger measure of paro- 
 chial relief to the aged and infirm, who are reduced 
 to want through no fault of their own. But then, I 
 must say, though I shall be thought ill-natured for 
 saying so, that I cannot help seeing that the poor- 
 laws whether from bad management, or from the 
 peculiar circumstances of the times, I will not pre- 
 tend to say have in many ways done no good to 
 the character and the habits of several among the poor." 
 

<page 156>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 143 
 
 " I know," said Mr. Stanley, " that many sensible 
 men entertain the same opinion ; but, perhaps, you 
 can give me a few instances which may make your 
 meaning more clear. 11 
 
 " Many of the poor," replied Oldacre, " have not 
 been hurt by them, but still preserve the steady, 
 manly, independent character, which becomes an 
 Englishman. But too frequently dependence on 
 parish rates has produced very pernicious conse- 
 qu'ences. 
 
 " The connection between a farmer and his la- 
 bourers you will say, that I speak like a farmer, in 
 mentioning thatjirst ought to be advantageous to 
 both not merely as a contract, by which the em- 
 ployer is to receive so much work, and the workman 
 so much money; but as it tends to produce an inter- 
 change between them of kind offices and kind feelings. 
 By many of the labourers this is still felt as it ought 
 to be felt, and they take a pride and a pleasure in 
 working year after year for the same master, and try 
 to obtain his approbation by industry and good con- 
 duct. Some of them, however, have no notion of 
 fixing themselves. They care little whether their 
 employer is pleased with them or not, and upon the 
 slightest affront as they call it, or the slightest differ- 
 ence about wages, they are off directly. If one wont 
 employ them, another must; or, at all events, they 
 must be employed by the parish. 
 
 " Again ; the natural affection which subsists be- 
 tween parent and child, is strengthened and increased 
 in both as is the case indeed with brute animals 
 by the dependence of the children on their parents 
 

<page 157>
144 Good-nature -, or parish matters. 
 
 for subsistence. But now this dependence is, in 
 many instances, removed from the parent to the 
 overseer. On the other hand, when the parents 
 grow old and infirm, the children often might do 
 much to assist them, and if left to themselves would 
 delight in doing so. But under the present system, 
 if they do it at all, they do it by stealth ; for why, 
 say they, should we favour the parish ? If they happen 
 to have a little matter of money left them, they are 
 tempted for the same reason to conceal it. Here 
 again they ask, why should they favour the parish? 
 and they will not feel, that the receiving of parish 
 relief, when they have any thing of their own, is a 
 fraud upon the parish, an act of dishonesty. ;iy.-ofti 
 " Few virtues are more useful in any condition of 
 life than frugality and foresight. Upon these, how- 
 ever, the poor laws have certainly made a sad inroad : 
 unmarried men, or those, who though married have 
 no families, or whose children have got out, while 
 they continue in full health and vigour, might often 
 contrive to lay by something against old age. But 
 this few of them think of doing, for, why should they 
 favour the parish ? The parish must provide for 
 them at any rate, and so they may as well spend 
 their money as fast as they get it. The future 
 satisfaction of living on their own means, instead of 
 on parish pay, is not sufficient to stand against the 
 temptation of present pleasure. Savings banks are 
 an excellent institution, but when once a man has quar- 
 tered himself as a pauper upon the parish, he will not 
 make use of them. Why should he put money into 
 the bank in order to favour the parish? I shall tire 
 

<page 158>
Good-nature, or parish matters. 145 
 
 you, Sir, I fear," continued the farmer, " but you 
 must let me mention one thing more. Beneficence 
 is, we know, twice blessed; it blesses him that gives, 
 and him that takes; but parish relief comes sadly 
 in the way of beneficence. When men are forced to 
 pay so much to the poor through the hands of the 
 overseer, they have neither the inclination, nor, in 
 fact, the power, to give so largely in the way of 
 voluntary charity. 
 
 " Many other instances I could give of the un- 
 favourable effect which the poor laws have had upon 
 the characters, and consequently upon the happiness, 
 of the poor f . I do not blame the poor: many, 
 who would otherwise keep off the parish, are driven 
 to it by the low rate of wages, which has been occa- 
 sioned, I suppose, partly by an over-supply of hands, 
 and partly by irregularities in our currency. 
 
 66 As I said before, I am glad that a legal provision 
 is made for the poor, but I wish that more than half the 
 money we now pay in rates was paid in wages, and that 
 wages were such that a man in health, and with a good 
 character, might always be pretty well able to pro- 
 vide for a moderate-sized family by his own exertions. 
 The parish pay should be kept chiefly for unforeseen 
 calamities, for the orphan and for the widow. We 
 should then be able to give them a better allowance. 
 Now there are $o many claimants, that we cannot 
 give muck to any, and the able bodied and strong are 
 
 f See the eloquent and forcible Pamphlets of Townsend, Bickeno. 
 and Jerram , and particularly the judicious and well-arranged Sermon 
 on "the Immoral Effect of the Poor-Laws," by Dr. Richards of 
 Hampton. 
 

<page 159>
146 Good-nature ', or parish matters. 
 
 the means of lessening the pittance of the sick and the 
 helpless." 
 
 Lady-day was now approaching, and with it the 
 time when Barton was to go out of office. His good- 
 nature had lavished so much of the public money 
 upon clamorous applicants, that many parish bills 
 were still unpaid. The fine too imposed upon the 
 inhabitants of Inglewood upon the indictment of the 
 road, and the legal costs attending it, were also now 
 to be cleared off, so that altogether a very con- 
 siderable sum was to be made up. It was well 
 known, that many of the rates were much in arrear ; 
 and the farmers who had hitherto paid with some 
 degree of punctuality, grumbled more and more at 
 the neglect of the acting overseer in not levying them. 
 Most of them expressed their determination to pay 
 no more, till all arrears were cleared up. One large 
 farm was about to change its occupier, and the in- 
 coming tenant declared as he had a good right to 
 declare that he would have nothing to do with the 
 debts of the parish incurred before his coming into 
 it. Strong hints also were thrown out, that Barton 
 should take the consequences of his own neglect upon 
 himself, and should make up all deficiencies out of 
 his own pocket. These threats answered the pur- 
 pose of alarming Barton, whose good-nature, great 
 as it was, had never been able to stifle his regard for 
 his own interest. He accordingly set actively to work 
 to collect the arrears. 
 
 Those who had been unable to pay one rate, were 
 not likely to pay four, which had now become due, 
 together with the heavy addition occasioned by the 
 

<page 160>
Good-nature., or parish matters. 14-7 
 
 indictment. Some of the defaulters blamed the 
 overseer, for having let it run on so long; and all 
 found fault with him* for having brought so serious 
 an expense upon the parish by his neglect about the 
 roads. 
 
 All, I should not say ; for the poor widow 
 Wildgoose uttered not a word of reproach or com- 
 plaint against any one, but when asked for her arrears 
 of rates, passively replied that she had no money, and 
 that the parish must take her goods. 
 
 She had never held up her head since the death 
 of her eldest son. When she first set up her shop, 
 she dealt a good deal for ready money, of course 
 selling to ready-money customers at a much lower 
 rate. From the time of her son's death, however, 
 her activity and attention to business had deserted 
 her. She suffered many of the poor to run deeply 
 in her debt, and if she hinted any thing about pay- 
 ment, they pretended to be affronted, and took all 
 their ready money to the other shops. Farmer 
 Barton, too, thought that it would be good-natured 
 to give the poor widow the credit of his custom and 
 protection, and had almost all his shop-goods and 
 grocery from her house. Unfortunately, however, 
 neither his good-nature, of which he had so much 
 nor his sense of justice, of which he had but little 
 ever led him to recollect to pay her. She was too 
 much depressed too meek-spirited to urge, or even 
 to ask for, payment, and the consequence was, that 
 she was just approaching to utter ruin, which was of 
 course likely to be accelerated by her goods being 
 distrained for poor rates. Her surviving children 
 H 2 
 

<page 161>
148 Good-nature^ or parish matters. 
 
 were in service in creditable places, and would have 
 helped her in a moment ; but she could not bear to 
 tell them of her difficulties. Now, however, one of 
 her neighbours contrived to let them know the 
 situation, in which their mother was. Immediately 
 they made up out of their wages a sum sufficient not 
 only to pay off her arrears, but to give her a trifle 
 for her present wants. And soon after she received 
 by the post a blank cover addressed to her, inclosing 
 a five pound note. She had no guess who could 
 have sent it, but it was soon discovered that it came 
 from Lucy Wilmot, a young woman to whom her 
 eldest son had been attached. Her second son Sam 
 lived with a kind-hearted lawyer in London, who, 
 upon hearing of the distress of the poor widow and 
 its cause, not only sent her some assistance in money, 
 but promised to take an early opportunity of looking 
 into her affairs, and of taking measures for compelling 
 those of her debtors who were able, to pay what they 
 owed her. 
 
 Of the other defaulters, some contrived to procure 
 the necessary money; some were summoned before 
 the magistrates, and then; finding that they had no 
 remedy, found a friend to advance the money; 
 ngainst others warrants of distress were issued. 
 
 No case excited more commiseration than that of 
 Michael Fielding. Michael had been a remarkably 
 industrious and prudent labourer, and had managed 
 to save a considerable sum of money. He married a 
 young woman of similar character, and being natu- 
 rally anxious to get forward in the world, they had 
 ventured, seven or eight years before, to take a small 
 

<page 162>
Good-nature^ or parish matters. 149 
 
 farm. The rent was moderate when they took their 
 lease, but they had felt the change of times severely. 
 The property was ifi the hands of trustees, who did 
 not feel justified in making a diminution of rent; and 
 consequently poor Michael, every year, saw his 
 means growing less, while his family grew larger. 
 He was at work early and late, his wife gave all the 
 help she could in the farm, and mended the children's 
 clothes as long as they would hold together; and 
 the hardearned bread, upon which the family lived, 
 was so coarse, that many of the labourers in the 
 village would have turned from it in disdain. Michael 
 was naturally of a cheerful disposition, and not apt 
 to murmur or complain; sometimes, however, he 
 could hardly suppress a sigh, when he thought of his 
 own children, and of the hard fare to which they 
 were accustomed, and saw in the parish-books the 
 large sums that were given by the good-nature of 
 Barton to idle and worthless characters g . Now and 
 then he had ventured gently to remonstrate upon the 
 hardship of being obliged to contribute so large a 
 portion of his limited means towards the maintenance 
 of men, who had begun the world with the same ad- 
 vantages with hiiriself, and who, but for their own 
 improvidence, might have lived without being a 
 burden to any one. The comparative smallness of 
 his farm, however, and his former situation in life, 
 prevented his remonstrance from being of much weight. 
 He was now nearly insolvent. Several persons, to 
 whom his character was known, would have been 
 
 8 Town send. 
 H3 
 

<page 163>
Good-nature ', or parish matters. 
 
 happy to have assisted him, but he was too high- 
 minded to acquaint them with his difficulties. All 
 the money, that by his utmost exertion he could 
 scrape together, was just gone for rent, and he had 
 nothing at all left to meet the demand for the arrears 
 of rates, and for his portion of the expenses of the 
 indictment. Barton, in spite of his good-nature, felt 
 obliged to distrain. This brought other creditors 
 upon poor Michael, and he was obliged to sell off 
 every thing. 
 
 Barton, however, was enabled to make up his ac- 
 counts, and had got them passed at the vestry, 
 though there certainly was among his brother farmers 
 a little grumbling. Barton defended himself as well 
 as he could, and added, that at all events he had 
 got the good-word of the poor; that he always had 
 borne, and always hoped to bear, the character of a 
 good-natured man. Farmer Oldacre could not suffer 
 this to pass without observation. He had been a 
 little irritated by some things which he had witnessed 
 at the vestry, and felt deeply for poor Michael, who 
 had formerly worked upon his farm, and whom he 
 had always loved and respected. " Come, come, 
 neighbour Barton, " said he, " let us hear no more 
 of. your good-nature^ for which we all have to pay so 
 dear. Your wish to obtain the good-word of the 
 poor has not really benefitted ihem, and has done 
 serious injury to the rest of your neighbours. Your 
 good-nature about the licence has increased the im- 
 morality and J the poverty of the parish ; and your 
 good-nature to the road-workmen has given Fowler 
 a broken leg; your goodnature to farmer Dobson, 
 

<page 164>
Good-nature^ or parish matters. 151 
 
 in not making him cut his hedge, and do his statute- 
 duty, has cost us, ninety pounds; and your good- 
 nature as overseer has made the parish less able to 
 pay that sum, and has helped to complete the ruin 
 of two or three deserving families. And if I may 
 venture here to mention so serious a consideration 
 your good-nature would have allowed a sinner to go 
 on towards eternal destruction without warning, and, 
 for the sake of avoiding uneasiness of mind here, 
 would have suffered him to incur everlasting punish- 
 ment hereafter. 
 
 " Farmer Barton I value brotherly-kindness most 
 highly. I know that the love of our neighbour, and 
 a readiness to do him good offices, is the second great 
 commandment both of the Law and of the Gospel. 
 But I hope that I shall ever be on my guard against 
 that love of low popularity, that weak fear of giving 
 offence, that sacrifice of public principle to private 
 considerations, which, under the engaging name of 
 good-nature, often lead to forgetfulness of duty both 
 towards God and man, and do as much harm in the 
 world as positive dishonesty." 
 
 on wa i* { s : ; 
 
 , u.> i?iifi !Lr ^v^jl^ 
 
 >rf * w 
 
 

<page 165>

 
 
 , s a 
 
 -.I PJ 
 
 ; d ^on ' ofi .891*13 
 
 rijiw 
 
 ULI bj> Jbi* . .Is ,901^5? 
 
 '.jito 
 
 ndnw jjj 
 
 ,_>ivr wo* 
 
 3D 
 
 "*' "* 
 

<page 166>
NOTES. 
 
 DR. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN is well known 
 as the friend of the poor and of liberty, and as one 
 of the founders of American independence. The 
 following observations will, with many persons, have 
 additional weight, as coming from his pen. 
 
 Extract from Observations written in Pennsylvania 
 in 1751. 
 
 2. When families can be easily supported, more persons 
 marry, and earlier in life. 
 
 3. In cities, where all trades, occupations, and offices 
 are full, many delay marrying till they can see how to bear 
 the charges of a family ; which charges are greater in cities, 
 as luxury is more common : many live single during life, 
 and continue servants to families, journeymen to trades, &c. 
 Hence cities do not, by natural generation, supply them- 
 selves with inhabitants; the deaths are more than the 
 births. 
 
 4. In countries full settled, the case must be nearly the 
 same, all lands being occupied and improved to the height ; 
 those who cannot get land, must labour for others that have 
 it ; when labourers are plenty, their wages will be low ; by 
 low wages a family is supported with difficulty ; this diffi- 
 culty deters many from marriage, who therefore long con- 
 tinue servants and single. Only, as the cities take supplies. 
 

<page 167>
154 Notes. 
 
 of people from the country, and thereby make a little more 
 room in the country, marriage is a little more encouraged 
 there, and the births exceed the deaths. 
 
 CM'| WfH' r ^cfe 
 
 _ 
 ^fiflr. Franklins Letter on the Labouring Poor. 
 
 Dated April, 1768. 
 
 Sir, 
 
 Vi^UJ 1 HAVE met with much invective in the papers, for 
 these two years past, against the hard-heartedness of the 
 rich, and much complaint of the great oppressions suffered 
 in this country by the labouring poor. Will you admit a 
 word or two on the other side of the question ? I do not 
 propose to be an advocate for oppression or oppressors; 
 but when I see that the poor are, by such writings, exas- 
 perated against the rich, and excited to insurrections, by 
 which much mischief is done, and some lose their lives, I 
 could wish the true state of things were better understood ; 
 the poor not made by these busy writers more uneasy and 
 unhappy than their situation subjects them to be, and the 
 nation not brought into disrepute among foreigners, by 
 public groundless accusations of ourselves, as if the rich in 
 England had no compassion for the'poor, and Englishmen 
 wanted common humanity. 
 
 In justice, then, to this country, give me leave to remark, 
 that the condition of the poor here is by far the best in 
 Europe; for that, except in England and her American 
 colonies, there is not in any country in the known world 
 (not even in Scotland* or Ireland) a provision by law to 
 enforce a support of the poor. Every where else necessity 
 reduces to beggary. This law was not made by the poor. 
 
 This, I believe, is inaccurate. 
 

<page 168>
Notes. 155 
 
 The legislators were men of fortune. By that act they 
 voluntarily subjected their own estates, and the estates of 
 all others, to the payment of a tax for the support of the 
 poor, encumbering those estates with a kind of rent charge 
 for that purpose, whereby the poor are vested with an 
 inheritance, as it were, in all the estates of the rich. I 
 wish they were benefitted by this generous provision, in any 
 degree equal to the good intention with which it was made, 
 and is continued; but I fear the giving mankind a dependence 
 on any thing for support, in age or sickness, besides industry 
 and frugality during health, tends to flatter our natural in- 
 dolence, to encourage idleness and prodigality, and thereby 
 to promote and increase poverty, the very evil it was 
 intended to cure; thus multiplying beggars, instead of 
 diminishing them. 
 
 Besides this tax, which the rich in England have sub- 
 jected themselves to in behalf of the poor, amounting in some 
 places to five or six shillings in the pound of their annual 
 income, they have, by donations and subscriptions, erected 
 numerous schools in various parts of the kingdom, for educat- 
 ing, gratis, the children of the poor in reading and writing; 
 and in many of these schools the children are also fed and 
 clothed; they have erected hospitals at an immense ex- 
 pence, for the reception and cure of the sick, the lame, the 
 wounded, and the insane poor, for lying-in women, and 
 deserted children. They are also continually contributing 
 towards making up losses occasioned by fire, by storms, or 
 by floods ; and to relieve the poor in severe seasons of frost, 
 in time of scarcity, &c. in which benevolent and charitable 
 contributions no nation exceeds us. Surely there is some 
 gratitude clue for so many instances of goodness. 
 
 Add to this all the laws made to discourage foreign 
 manufactures, by laying heavy duties on them, or totally 
 prohibiting them ; whereby the rich are obliged to pay 
 

<page 169>
156 Nates. 
 
 much higher prices for what they wear and consume than 
 if the trade was open. There are so many laws for the 
 support of our labouring poor made by the rich, and con- 
 tinued at their expence : all the difference of price between 
 our own and foreign commodities, being so much given by 
 our rich to our poor ; who would indeed be enabled by it to 
 get by degrees above poverty, if they did not, as too gene- 
 rally they do, consider every increase of wages only as 
 something that enables them to drink more and work less; 
 so that their distress in sickness, age, or times of scarcity, 
 continues to he the same as if such laws had never been 
 made in their favour. 
 
 Much malignant censure have some writers bestowed 
 upon the rich for their luxury and expensive living, while 
 the poor are starving, not considering that what the rich 
 expend, the labouring poor receive in payment for their la- 
 bour. It may seem a paradox if I should assert, that our 
 labouring poor do, in every year, receive the whole revenue 
 of the nation ; I mean not only the public revenue, but also 
 the revenue or clear income of all private estates, or a sum 
 equivalent to the whole. In support of this position, I rea- 
 son thus : The rich do not work for one another ; their 
 habitations, furniture, clothing, carriages, food, ornaments, 
 and every thing, in short, that they or their families use 
 and consume, is the work or produce of the labouring poor, 
 who are, and must be, continually paid for their labour in 
 producing the same. In these payments the revenues of 
 private estates are expended; for most people live up to 
 their incomes. In clothing, or provision for troops, in arms, 
 ammunition, ships, tents, carriages, &c. &c. (every parti- 
 cular the produce of labour,) much of the public revenue is 
 expended. The pay of officers, civil and military, and of 
 the private soldiers and sailors, requires the rest ; and they 
 spend that also in paying for what is produced by the la- 
 

<page 170>
iA/" -A -*utvff jj 
 
 bouring poor. T allow that some estates may increase by 
 the owners spending less than their income; but then I 
 conceive,, that other estates do at the same time diminish, 
 by the owners spending more than their incomes ; so that 
 when the enriched want to buy more land, they easily find 
 lands in the hands of the impoverished, whose necessities 
 oblige them to sell ; and thus this difference is equalled, f 
 allow also, that part of the expense of the rich is in foreign 
 produce, or manufactures, for producing which the labour- 
 ing poor of other nations must be paid : but then, I say, 
 we must first pay our own labouring poor for an equal 
 quantity of our manufactures or produce, to exchange for 
 those foreign productions, or we must pay for them in 
 money, which money not being a natural produce to our 
 country, must first be purchased from abroad, by sending 
 out its value in the produce or manufactures of this coun- 
 try, for which manufactures our labouring poor are to be 
 paid. And, indeed, if we did not export more than we im- 
 port, we could have no money at all. I allow farther, that 
 there are middle men, who make a profit, and even get 
 estates, by purchasing the labour of the poor, and selling it 
 at advanced prices to the rich ; but then they cannot enjoy 
 that profit, or the increase of estates, 'but by spending them 
 in employing and paying our labouring poor, in some shape 
 or other, for the products of industry. Even beggars, pen- 
 sioners, hospitals, &c. all that are supported by charity, 
 spend their incomes in the same manner. So that finally, 
 as I said at first, our labouring poor receive annually the 
 whole of the clear revenues of the nation, and from us they 
 can have no more. 
 
 If it be said that their wages are too low, and that they 
 ought to be better paid for their labour, I heartily wish that 
 any means could be fallen upon to do it consistent with 
 their interest and happiness ; but as the cheapness of other 
 

<page 171>
<Notes. 
 
 things is owing to the plenty of those things,~so the cheap- 
 ness of labour is in most cases owing to the multitude of la- 
 bourers, and to their underworking one another in order to 
 obtain employment. How is this to be remedied ? A law 
 might be made to raise their wages; but if our manufactures 
 are too dear, they will not vend abroad, and all that part of 
 employment will fail, unless, by fighting and conquering, 
 we compel other nations to buy our goods, whether they will 
 or no, which some have been mad enough at times to pro- 
 pose. Among ourselves, unless we give our working people 
 less employment, how can we, for what they do, pay them 
 higher than we do ? Out of what fund is the additional price 
 of labour to be paid, when all our present incomes are, as it 
 were, mortgaged to them? Should they get higher wages, 
 would that make them less poor, if in consequence they 
 worked fewer days of the week proportion ably ? I have said , 
 a law might be made to raise their wages ; but I doubt 
 much, whether it could be executed to any purpose, unless 
 another law, now indeed almost obsolete, could at the same 
 time be revived and enforced > a law, I mean, that I have 
 often heard and repeated, but few have ever duly considered, 
 Six days skalt thou labour. This is as positive a part of 
 the Commandment, as that which says, The seventh day 
 thou shalt rest : but we remember well to observe the in- 
 dulgent part, and never think of the other. Saint Monday^ 
 is generally as duly kept by our working people as Sun- 
 day: the only difference is, that instead of employing it 
 cheaply at church, they are wasting it expensively at the 
 ale-house. 
 
 I am, Sir, your's, &c. 
 
 b This applies not so much to farmers' workmen as to manufacturers' 
 labourers. 
 

<page 172>
Notes. 159 
 
 q&ttt ; , r^W sebif J * * 
 
 Extract from Dr. Franklin's remarks on Luxury, 
 
 Idleness, and Industry. 
 
 WlrfA V^ttoflwr :v*lqms.0i*l<fc 
 
 Some of those who grow rich will be prudent, live within 
 bounds, and preserve what they have gained for their pos- 
 terity : others, fond of shewing their wealth, will be extra- 
 vagant, and ruin themselves. Laws cannot prevent this ; 
 and perhaps it is not always an evil to the public. A shil- 
 ling spent idly by a fool, may be picked up by a wiser per- 
 son, who knows better what to do with it. It is therefore 
 not lost. A vain silly fellow builds a fine house, furnishes 
 it richly, lives in it expensively, and in a few years ruins 
 himself: but the masons, carpenters, smiths, and other ho- 
 nest tradesmen, have been by his employ assisted in 
 maintaining and raising their families ; the farmer has been 
 paid for his labour, and encouraged, and the estate is now 
 in better hands. In some cases, indeed, certain modes of 
 luxury may be a public evil, in the same manner as it is a 
 private one. >^ Jj<3v 
 
 ^no3 ilab TOVi ovfid wsl Jird tbaussqsi biws bi^arf urafto 
 
 1o Jtjsq svhitgoq as.* 91 aidT .tuodal woM S\fo a\Ji* w?4 
 
 .. k t avm. iYt ^S8 ilairfw s&d* BS jfaaxnkusnnaQD odj 
 
 THE END. 
 
 i >ma& ,i'odio sib lointdj I 
 dc ^Iqoeq gnhhflw IUQ j$ Jqesl 
 
 ^ 
 
 "'' J 5ft ( 9<fX*> 
 
 , P1UNTEH, OXFORn, 
 

<page 173>

<page 174>

<page 175>
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 
 BERKELEY 
 
 Return to desk from which borrowed. 
 This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 
 
 5YJan549W 
 
 :i 
 
 APR 1 '69 '11 AM 
 
 D LQ 
 
 1957 
 
 LD 21-100m-7,'52(A2528sl6)476 
 

<page 176>


<page 177>

 

<page 178>
