
<page 1>

<page 2>

<page 3>

<page 4>

 
 Intra Muros 
 
 By 
 
 REBECCA 
 
 RUTER 
 
 SPRINGER 
 
 DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING CO. 
 ELGIN, ILLINOIS 
 
 OF CALIF. LIBRARY, LOS ANGELES
<page 5>

 
 COPYRIGHT, 1898, 
 
 BY DAVID C. COOK PUBLISHING Co. 
 ELGIN, ILLINOIS.
<page 6>

 
 AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 
 
 The pages of this little volume contain no fancy sketch, 
 written to while away an idle hour ; but are the true, though 
 greatly condensed, record of an experience during days when 
 life hung in the balance between Time and Eternity, witli 
 the scales dipping decidedly toward the Eternity side. 
 
 I am painfully aware of the fact that I can never paint for 
 others the scenes as they appeared to me during those wonder- 
 ful days. If I can only dimly show the close linking of the 
 two lives the mortal with the divine as they then appeared 
 to me, I may be able to partly tear the veil from the death 
 we so dread, and show it to be only an open door into a new 
 and beautiful phase of the life we now live. 
 
 If any of the scenes depicted should seem irreverent in 
 view of our religious training here, I can only say, " I give 
 it as it came to me." In those strange, happy hours the close 
 blending of the two lives, so wrapped about with the Father's 
 watchful care and tender love; the reunion of friends, with 
 the dear earth-ties unchanged; the satisfied desires, the glad 
 surprises and the divine joys, all intensified and illumined by 
 the reverence and love and adoration that all hearts gave to 
 the blessed Trinity, appeared to me the most perfect revela- 
 tion of that " blessed life " of which here we so fondly dream. 
 With the hope that it may comfort and uplift some who read, 
 even as it then did, and as its memory ever will do, for me, 
 I submit this imperfect sketch of a most perfect vision. 
 
 R. R. S. 
 
 2133003
<page 7>

 
 " Shall we stop at that poor line, the 
 grave, which all our Christianity is always 
 trying to wipe out and make nothing of, 
 and which we always insist on widening 
 into a great gulf? Shall we not stretch 
 our thought beyond, and feel the life-blood 
 of this holy church, this living body of 
 Christ, pulsing out into the saints who are 
 living there, and coming back throbbing 
 with tidings of their glorious and sympa- 
 thetic life?" 
 
 Rt. Rev. Phillips Brooks, D. D.
<page 8>

 
 CHAPTER I. 
 
 When the holy angels meet us, 
 
 As we go to join their band, 
 Shall we know the friends that greet us, 
 
 In the glorious spirit-land? 
 Shall we see the same eyes shining 
 
 On us, as in days of yore? 
 Shall we feel their dear arms twining 
 
 Fondly 'round us as before? 
 
 Shall we know each other there? 
 
 [Rev. R. Lowry. 
 
 I WAS many hundred miles away from home and 
 friends, and had been very ill for many weeks. I was 
 entirely among strangers, and my only attendant, though 
 of a kindly disposition, knew nothing whatever of the duties 
 of the sick room; hence I had none of the many delicate at- 
 tentions that keep up an invalid's failing strength. I had 
 taken no nourishment of any kind for nearly three weeks, 
 scarcely even water, and was greatly reduced in both flesh 
 and strength, and consciousness seemed at times to wholly 
 desert me. I had an unutterable longing for the presence of 
 my dear distant ones; for the gentle touch of beloved hands, 
 and whispered words of love and courage; but they never 
 came they could not. Responsible duties, that I felt must 
 not be neglected, kept these dear ones much of the time in 
 distant scenes, and I would not recall them. 
 
 I lay in a large, comfortable room, on the second floor
<page 9>

 
 8 INTRA MUROS 
 
 of a house in Kentville. The bed stood in a recess at one 
 end of the apartment, and from this recess a large stained- 
 glass window opened upon a veranda fronting on the street. 
 During much of my illness I lay with my face to this win- 
 dow, and my back to the room; and I remember thinking 
 how easy it would be to pass through the window to the 
 veranda, if one so desired. When the longing for the loved 
 distant faces and voices became more than I could bear, I 
 prayed that the dear Christ would help me to realize his 
 blessed presence; and that since the beloved ones of earth 
 could not minister to me, I might feel the influence of the 
 other dear ones who are "all ministering spirits." Especially 
 did I ask to be sustained should I indeed be called to pass 
 through the dark waters alone. It was no idle prayer, and 
 the response came swiftly, speedily. All anxieties and cares 
 slipped away from me, as a worn-out garment, and peace, 
 Christ's peace, enfolded me. I was willing to wait God's 
 time for the coming of those so dear to me, and said to 
 myself, more than once, "If not here, it will be there; there 
 is no fear of disappointment there." In those wonderful 
 days of agonized suffering, and great peace, I felt that I had 
 truly found, as never before, the refuge of " the Everlasting 
 Arms." They lifted me ; they upbore me ; they enfolded me ; 
 and I rested in them, as a tired child upon its mother's 
 bosom. One morning, dark and cold and stormy, after a 
 day and night of intense suffering, I seemed to be standing 
 on the floor by the bed, in front of the stained-glass window.
<page 10>

 
 INTRA MUROS 9 
 
 Some one was standing by me, and, when I looked up, I 
 saw it was my husband's favorite brother, who " crossed the 
 flood " many years ago, 
 
 "My dear brother Frank!" I cried out joyously, "how 
 good of you to come!" 
 
 " It was a great joy to me that I could do so, little sister," 
 he said gently. " Shall we go now?" and he drew me toward 
 the window. 
 
 I turned my head and looked back into the room that 
 somehow I felt I was about to leave forever. It was in its 
 usual good order : a cheery, pretty room. The attendant sat 
 by the stove at the farther end, comfortably reading a news- 
 paper; and on the bed, turned toward the window, lay a 
 white, still form, with the shadow of a smile on the poor, 
 worn face. My brother drew me gently, and I yielded, 
 passing with him through the window, out on the veranda, 
 and from thence, in some unaccountable way, down to the 
 street. There I paused and said earnestly: 
 
 " I cannot leave Will and our dear boy." 
 
 " They are not here, dear, but hundreds of miles away," 
 he answered. 
 
 " Yes, I know, but they will be here. Oh, Frank, they 
 will need me let me stay!" I pleaded. 
 
 " Would it not be better if I brought you back a little 
 later after they come?" he said, with a kind smile. 
 
 " Would you surely do so?" I asked. 
 
 " Most certainly, if you desire it. You are worn out with
<page 11>

 
 10 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 the long suffering, and a little rest will give you new 
 strength." 
 
 I felt that he was right, said so in a few words, and we 
 started slowly up the street. He had drawn my hand within 
 his arm, and endeavored to interest me, as we walked. But 
 my heart clung to the dear ones whom I felt I was not to 
 see again on earth, and several times I stopped and looked 
 wistfully back the way we had come. He was very patient 
 and gentle with me, waiting always till I was ready to 
 proceed again; but at last my hesitation became so great 
 that he said pleasantly: 
 
 " You are so weak I think I had better carry you ;" and 
 without waiting for a reply, he stooped and lifted me in his 
 arms, as though I had been a little child; and, like a child, 
 I yielded, resting my head upon his shoulder, and laying 
 my arm about his neck. I felt so safe, so content, to be thus 
 in his care. It seemed so sweet, after the long, lonely 
 struggle, to have some one assume the responsibility of caring 
 thus tenderly for me. 
 
 He walked on with firm, swift steps, and I think I must 
 have slept ; for the next I knew, I was sitting in a sheltered 
 nook, made by flowering shrubs, upon the softest and most 
 beautiful turf of grass, thickly studded with fragrant flowers, 
 many of them the flowers I had known and loved on earth. 
 1 remember noticing heliotrope, violets, lilies of the valley, 
 and mignonette, with many others of like nature wholly un- 
 familiar to me. But even in that first moment I observed
<page 12>

 
 INTRA MUROS 11 
 
 how perfect in its way was every plant and flower. For 
 instance, the heliotrope, which with us often runs into long, 
 fagged sprays, there grew upon short, smooth stems, and each 
 leaf was perfect and smooth and glossy, instead of being 
 rough and coarse-looking; and the flowers peeped up from 
 the deep grass, so like velvet, with sweet, happy faces, as 
 though inviting the admiration one could not withhold. 
 
 And what a scene was that on which I looked as I rested 
 upon this soft, fragrant cushion, secluded and yet not hidden ! 
 Away, away far beyond the limit of my vision, I well 
 knew stretched this wonderful sward of perfect grass 
 and flowers; and out of it grew equally wonderful trees, 
 whose drooping branches were laden with exquisite blos- 
 soms and fruits of many kinds. I found myself thinking of 
 St. John's vision in the Isle of Patmos, and " the tree of life " 
 that grew in the midst of the garden, bearing " twelve man- 
 ner of fruits, and whose leaves were for the healing of the 
 nations." Beneath the trees, in many happy groups, were 
 little children, laughing and playing, running hither and 
 thither in their joy, and catching in their tiny hands the 
 bright-winged birds that flitted in and out among them, as 
 though sharing in their sports, as they doubtless were. All 
 through the grounds, older people were walking, sometimes 
 in groups, sometimes by twos, sometimes alone, but all with 
 an air of peacefulness and happiness that made itself felt by 
 even me, a stranger. All were in spotless white, though 
 many wore about them or carried in their hands clusters of
<page 13>

 
 12 INTRA MLROS 
 
 beautiful flowers. As I looked upon their happy faces and 
 their spotless robes, again I thought, " These are they who 
 have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood 
 of the Lamb." 
 
 Look where I would, I saw, half hidden by the trees, 
 elegant and beautiful houses of strangely attractive architec- 
 ture, that I felt must be the homes of the happy inhabitants 
 of this enchanted place. I caught glimpses of sparkling 
 fountains in many directions, and close to my retreat flowed 
 a river, with placid breast and water clear as crystal. The 
 walks that ran in many directions through the grounds ap- 
 peared to me to be, and I afterward found were, of pearl, 
 spotless and pure, bordered on either side by narrow streams 
 of pellucid water, running over stones of gold. The one 
 thought that fastened itself upon me as I looked, breathless 
 and speechless, upon this scene, was " Purity, purity!" No 
 shadow of dust ; no taint of decay on fruit or flower ; every- 
 thing perfect, everything pure. The grass and flowers looked 
 as though fresh-washed by summer showers, and not a single 
 blade was any color but the brightest green. The air was 
 soft and balmy, though invigorating; and instead of sun- 
 light there was a golden and rosy glory everywhere; some- 
 thing like the afterglow of a Southern sunset in midsummer. 
 
 As I drew in my breath with a short, quick gasp of de- 
 light, I heard my brother, who was standing beside me, say 
 softly, "Well?" and, looking up, I discovered that he was 
 watching me with keen enjoyment. I had, in my great sur-
<page 14>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 13 
 
 prise and delight, wholly forgotten his presence. Recalled to 
 myself by his question, I faltered: 
 
 " Oh, Frank, that I " when such an overpowering sense 
 of God's goodness and my own unworthiness swept over 
 me that I dropped my face into my hands, and burst into 
 uncontrollable and very human weeping. 
 
 " Ah!" said my brother, in a tone of self-reproach, " I am 
 inconsiderate." And lifting me gently to my feet, he said, 
 " Come, I want to show you the river." 
 
 When we reached the brink of the river, but a few steps 
 distant, I found that the lovely sward ran even to the 
 water's edge, and in some places I saw the flowers blooming 
 placidly down in the depths, among the many-colored pebbles 
 with which the entire bed of the river was lined. 
 
 " I want you to see these beautiful stones," said my 
 brother, stepping into the water and urging me to do the 
 same. 
 
 I drew back timidly, saying, " I fear it is cold." 
 
 " Not in the least," he said, with a reassuring smile. 
 " Come." 
 
 " Just as I am?" I said, glancing down at my lovely robe, 
 which, to my great joy, I found was similar to those of the 
 dwellers in that happy place. 
 
 " Just as you are," with another reassuring smile. 
 
 Thus encouraged, I, too, stepped into the " gently flowing 
 river," and to my great surprise found the water, in both 
 temperature and density, almost identical with the air.
<page 15>

 
 14 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 Deeper and deeper grew the stream as we passed on, until I 
 felt the soft, sweet ripples playing about my throat. As I 
 stopped, my brother said, " A little farther still." 
 
 " It will go over my head," I expostulated. 
 
 "Well, and what then?" 
 
 " I cannot breathe under the water I will suffocate." 
 
 An amused twinkle came into his eyes, though he said 
 soberly enough, " We do not do those things here." 
 
 I realized the absurdity of my position, and with a happy 
 laugh said, " All right; come on," and plunged headlong into 
 the bright water, which soon bubbled and rippled several 
 feet above my head. To my surprise and delight, I found I 
 could not only breathe, but laugh and talk, see and hear, as 
 naturally under the water as above it. I sat down in the 
 midst of the many-colored pebbles, and filled my hands with 
 them, as a child would have done. My brother lay down 
 upon them, as he would have done on the green sward, and 
 laughed and talked joyously with me. 
 
 " Do this," he said, rubbing his hands over his face, and 
 running his fingers through his dark hair. 
 
 I did as he told me, and the sensation was delightful. I 
 threw back my loose sleeves and rubbed my arms, then my 
 throat, and again thrust my fingers through my long, loose 
 hair, thinking at the time what a tangle it would be in when 
 I left the water. Then the thought came, as we at last 
 arose to return, " What are we to do for towels?" for the 
 earth-thoughts still clung to me ; and I wondered, too, if the
<page 16>

 
 INTRA MUROS 15 
 
 lovely robe was not entirely spoiled. But behold, as we 
 neared the shore and my head once more emerged from the 
 water, the moment the air struck my face and hair I realized 
 that I would need no towel or brush. My flesh, my hair, 
 and even my beautiful garments, were soft and dry as before 
 the water touched them. The material out of which my 
 robe was fashioned was unlike anything that I had ever 
 seen. It was soft and light and shone with a faint luster, 
 reminding me more of silk crepe than anything I could recall, 
 only infinitely more beautiful. It fell about me in soft, 
 graceful folds, which the water seemed to have rendered even 
 more lustrous than before. 
 
 "What marvelous water! What wonderful air!" I said 
 to my brother, as we again stepped upon the flowery sward 
 " Are all the rivers here like this one?" 
 
 " Not just the same, but similar," he replied. 
 
 We walked on a few steps, and then I turned and looked 
 back at the shining river flowing on tranquilly. " Frank, 
 what has that water done for me ?" I said. " I feel as though 
 I could fly." 
 
 He looked at me with earnest, tender eyes, as he answered 
 gently, " It has washed away the last of the earth-life, and 
 fitted you for the new life upon which you have entered." 
 
 " It is divine!" I whispered. 
 
 " Yes, it is divine," he said.
<page 17>

<page 18>

 
 CHAPTER II. 
 
 O City of Peace! in thy palaces fair 
 
 Loved faces and forms we can see; 
 And sweet voices float to us thro' the calm air 
 
 That whisper, " We're watching for thee!" 
 
 WE walked on for some distance in silence, my heart 
 wrestling with the thoughts of the new, strange life, 
 my eyes drinking in fresh beauty at every step. The 
 houses, as we approached and passed them, seemed wondrous- 
 ly beautiful to me. They were built of the finest marbles, 
 encircled by broad verandas, the roofs or domes supported by 
 massive or delicate pillars or columns; and winding steps led 
 down to the pearl and golden walks. The style of the 
 architecture was unlike anything I had ever seen, and the 
 flowers and vines that grew luxuriantly everywhere surpassed 
 in beauty even those of my brightest dreams. Happy faces 
 looked out from these columned walls, and happy voices rang 
 upon the clear air, from many a celestial home. 
 
 " Frank, where are we going?" at length I asked. 
 
 " Home, little sister," he answered tenderly. 
 
 " Home? Have we a home, my brother? Is it anything 
 like these?" I asked, with a wild desire in my heart to cry 
 out for joy. 
 
 " Come and see," was his only answer, as he turned into 
 a side path leading toward an exquisitely beautiful house 
 whose columns of very light gray marble shone through the 
 
 17
<page 19>

 
 18 INTRA MUROS 
 
 green of the overhanging trees with most inviting beauty. 
 Before I could join him, I heard a well-remembered voice 
 saying close beside me: 
 
 " I just had to be the first to bid you welcome!" and look- 
 ing around, I saw the dearly-beloved face of my old-time 
 friend, Mrs. Wickham. 
 
 " Oh ! Oh !" I cried, as we met in a warm embrace. 
 
 " You will forgive me, Col. Sprague," she said a moment 
 later, giving her hand cordially to my brother. " It seems 
 unpardonable to intercept you thus, in almost the first hour, 
 but I heard that she was coming, and I could not wait. But 
 now that I have looked upon her face, and heard her dear 
 voice, I will be patient till I can have her for a long, long 
 talk." 
 
 " You must come in and see her now," said my brother 
 cordially. 
 
 " Do, do come!" I urged. 
 
 " No, dear friends, not now. You know, dear little Blos- 
 som," (the old pet name for me years ago) " we have all 
 eternity before us! But you will bring her to me soon, Col. 
 Sprague?" she said. 
 
 " Just as soon as I may, dear madam," he replied, with 
 an expressive look into her eyes. 
 
 " Yes, I understand," she said softly, with a sympathetic 
 glance at me. Then with a warm hand-clasp, and the part- 
 ing injunction, " Come very soon," she passed swiftly out 
 of my sight.
<page 20>

 
 INTRA MUROS W 
 
 "Blessed woman!" I said, "what a joy to meet her 
 
 again 
 
 " Her home is not far away ; you can often see her. She 
 is indeed a lovely woman. Now, come, little sister, I long 
 to give you welcome to our home," saying which, he took my 
 hand and led me up the low steps on to the broad veranda, 
 with its beautiful inlaid floor of rare and costly marbles, and 
 its massive columns of gray, between which, vines covered 
 with rich, glossy leaves of green were intermingled with 
 flowers of exquisite color and delicate perfume hanging in 
 heavy festoons. We paused a moment here, that I might see 
 the charming view presented on every side. 
 
 " It is heavenly!" I said. 
 
 " It is heavenly," he answered. " It could not be other- 
 wise." 
 
 I Smiled my acknowledgment of this truth my heart was 
 too full for words. 
 
 " The entire house, both below and above, is surrounded 
 by these broad verandas. But come within." 
 
 He led me through a doorway, between the marble 
 columns, into a large reception hall, whose inlaid floor, 
 mullioned window, and broad, low stairway at the 
 far end, at once held my fancy. Before I could 
 speak, my brother turned to me, and, taking both my hands, 
 said : 
 
 " Welcome, a thousand welcomes, dearest sister, to your 
 heavenly home!"
<page 21>

 
 20 INTRA MUROS 
 
 " Is this beautiful place indeed to be my home?" I asked, 
 as well as my emotion would allow. 
 
 " Yes, dear," he replied. " I built it for you and my 
 brother, and I assure you it has been a labor of love." 
 
 " It is your home, and I am to stay with you?" I said, a 
 little confused. 
 
 " No, it is your home, and I am to stay with you till my 
 brother comes." 
 
 "Always, dear brother, always!" I cried, clinging to his 
 arm. 
 
 He smiled and said, "We will enjoy the present; we 
 never will be far apart again. But come, I am eager to 
 show you all." 
 
 Turning to the left, he led me, still through the beautiful 
 marble columns that everywhere seemed substituted for door- 
 ways, into a large, oblong room, upon whose threshold I 
 stopped in wondering delight. The entire walls and floor 
 of the room were still of that exquisite light gray marble, 
 polished to the greatest luster ; but over walls and floors were 
 strewn exquisite, long-stemmed roses, of every variety and 
 color, from the deepest crimson to the most delicate shades 
 of pink and yellow. 
 
 " Come inside," said my brother. 
 
 " I do not wish to crush those perfect flowers," I 
 answered. 
 
 " Well, then, suppose we gather some of them." 
 
 I stooped to take one from the floor close to my feet, when
<page 22>

 
 INTRA MUROS 21 
 
 lo! I found it was imbedded in the marble. I tried another 
 with the same astonishing result, then turning to my brother, 
 I said: 
 
 " What does it mean ? You surely do not tell me that 
 none of these are natural flowers?" 
 
 He nodded his head with a pleased smile, then said : " This 
 room has a history. Come in and sit with me here upon 
 this window-seat, where you can see the whole room, and let 
 me tell you about it." I did as he desired, and he continued : 
 " One day as I was busily working upon the house, a com- 
 pany of young people, boys and girls, came to the door, and 
 asked if they might enter. I gladly gave assent, and then 
 one of them said : 
 
 " ' Is this house really for Mr. and Mrs. Sprague?' 
 ' It is,' I answered. 
 
 " ' We used to know and love them. They are our 
 friends, and the friends of our parents, and we want to know 
 if we may not do something to help you make it beautiful ?' 
 
 " ' Indeed you may,' I said, touched by the request. ' What 
 can you do?' 
 
 " We were here at the time, and looking about, one of 
 them asked, ' May we beautify this room?' 
 
 " ' Undoubtedly,' I said, wondering what they would 
 try to do. 
 
 " At once the girls, all of whom had immense bunches of 
 roses in their hands, began to throw the flowers broadcast 
 over the floor and against the walls. Wherever they struck
<page 23>

 
 22 INTRA MUROS 
 
 the walls, they, to even my surprise, remained, as though in 
 some way permanently attached. When the roses had all 
 been scattered, the room looked just as it does now, only 
 the flowers were really fresh-gathered roses. Then the boys 
 each produced a small case of delicate tools, and in a moment 
 all, boys and girls, were down upon the marble floor and 
 busy at work. How they did it I do not know it is one 
 of the celestial arts, taught to those of highly artistic tastes 
 but they embedded each living flower just where and as it 
 had fallen, in the marble, and preserved it as you see before 
 you. They came several times before the work was com- 
 pleted, for the flowers do not wither here, nor fade, but were 
 always fresh and perfect. And such a merry, happy com- 
 pany of young people, I never saw before. They laughed 
 and chatted and sang, as they worked ; and I could not help 
 wishing more than once that the friends whom they had left 
 mourning for them might look in upon this happy group, 
 and see how little cause they had for sorrow. At last when 
 all was complete, they called me to see their work, and I 
 was not chary of my praises either for the beauty of the 
 work or for their skill in performing it. Then, saying they 
 would be sure to return when either of you came, they went 
 away together, to do something of the kind elsewhere, I 
 doubt not." 
 
 Happy tears had been dropping upon my hands, clasped 
 idly in my lap, during much of this narrative, and now I 
 asked half-brokenly, for I was greatly touched:
<page 24>

 
 INTRA MUROS 23 
 
 "Who were these lovely people, Frank? Do you know 
 them?" 
 
 " Of course, I know them now ; but they were all 
 strangers to me till they came here that first morning, except 
 Lulu Sprague." 
 
 "Who are they?" 
 
 " There were three Marys Mary Green, Mary Bates, 
 Mary Chalmers; Lulu Sprague and Mae Camden. These 
 were the girls, each lovely and beautiful. The boys, all 
 manly, fine fellows, were Carroll Ashland, Stanley and 
 David Chalmers." 
 
 " Precious children!" I said. " How little I thought my 
 love for them, in the olden days, would ever bring to me 
 this added happiness here! How little we know of the 
 links binding the two worlds!" 
 
 " Ah, yes!" said my brother, " that is just it. How little 
 we know! If only we could realize while we are yet 
 mortals, that day by day we are building for eternity, how 
 different our lives in many ways would be! Every gentle 
 word, every generous thought, every unselfish deed, will 
 become a pillar of eternal beauty in the life to come. We 
 cannot be selfish and unloving in one life, and generous and 
 loving in the next; the two lives are too closely blended 
 one but a continuation of the other. But come now to the 
 library." 
 
 Rising, we crossed the room that henceforward was to 
 hold for me such tender associations, and entered the library.
<page 25>

 
 24 IXTRA MVROS 
 
 It was a glorious apartment the walls lined from ceiling 
 to floor with rare and costly books. A large, stained-glass 
 window opened upon the front veranda, and two large bow- 
 windows, not far apart, were in the back of the room. A 
 semicircular row of shelves, supported by very delicate 
 pillars of gray marble, about six feet high, extended some 
 fifteen feet into the spacious main room and cut it into two 
 sections lengthwise, each with one of the bowed windows in 
 the back, leaving still a large space beyond the dividing line, 
 where the two sections united again into one. The concave 
 side of the semicircle of shelves was toward the entrance of 
 the room ; and close to it, not far removed from the bowed 
 window, stood a beautiful writing-desk, with everything 
 ready for use; and upon it was a chaste golden bowl, filled 
 with scarlet carnations, of whose spicy odor I had been dimly 
 conscious for some time. 
 
 " My brother's desk," said Frank. 
 
 " And his favorite flowers," I added. 
 
 " Yes, that follows. Here we never forget the tastes and 
 preferences of those we love." 
 
 It is not to be supposed that these details were at once 
 noticed by me, but they unfolded to me gradually as we 
 lingered, talking together. My first sensation upon entering 
 the room was genuine surprise at the sight of the books, and 
 my first words were: 
 
 " Why, have we books in heaven ?" 
 
 "Why not?" asked my brother. "What strange ideas
<page 26>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 25 
 
 we mortals have of the pleasures and duties of this blessed 
 life! We seem to think that death of the body means an 
 entire change to the soul. But that is not the case, by any 
 means. We bring to this life the same tastes, the same 
 desires, the same knowledge, we had before death. If these 
 were not sufficiently pure and good to form a part of this 
 life, then we ourselves may not enter. What would be the 
 use of our ofttimes long lives, given to the pursuit of certain 
 worthy and legitimate knowledge, if at death it all counts 
 as nothing, and we begin this life on a wholly different line 
 of thought and study ? No, no ; would that all could under- 
 stand, as I said before, that we are building for eternity 
 during our earthly life! The purer the thoughts, the nobler 
 the ambitions, the loftier the aspirations, the higher the rank 
 we take among the hosts of heaven ; the more earnestly we 
 follow the studies and duties in our life of probation, the 
 better fitted we shall be to carry them forward, on and on 
 to completion and perfection here." 
 
 " But the books who writes them? Are any of them 
 books we knew and loved below?" 
 
 " Undoubtedly, many of them; all, indeed, that in any 
 way helped to elevate the human mind or immortal soul. 
 Then, many of the rarest minds in the earth-life, upon 
 entering on this higher life, gain such elevated and extended 
 views of the subjects that have been with them lifelong 
 studies, that, pursuing them with zest, they write out for the 
 benefit of those less gifted, the higher, stronger views they
<page 27>

 
 26 INTRA MUROS 
 
 have themselves acquired, thus remaining leaders and 
 teachers in this rarer life, as they were while yet in the 
 world. Is it to be expected that the great soul who has so 
 recently joined our ranks, whose ' Changed Life ' and ' Pax 
 Vobiscum ' uplifted so many lives while on earth, should 
 lay his pen aside when his clear brain and great heart have 
 read the mystery of the higher knowledge? Not so. When 
 he has conned his lessons well, he will write them out for the 
 benefit of others, less gifted, who must follow. Leaders 
 there must always be, in this divine life, as in the former life 
 leaders and teachers in many varied lines of thought. But 
 all this knowledge will come to you simply and naturally 
 as you grow into the new life."
<page 28>

 
 CHAPTER III. 
 
 When I shall meet with those that I have loved, 
 Clasp in my arms the dear ones long removed, 
 And find how faithful Thou to me hast proved, 
 I shall be satisfied. 
 
 [Horatius Bonar. 
 
 AFTER a short rest in this lovely room among the 
 books, my brother took me through all the remaining 
 rooms of the house ; each perfect and beautiful in its 
 way, and each distinctly and imperishably photographed upon 
 my memory. Of only one other will I speak at this time. 
 As he drew aside the gauzy gray draperies, lined with the 
 most delicate shade of amber, which hung before the 
 columned doorway of a lovely room on the second floor 
 of the house, he said : 
 
 " Your own special place for rest and study." 
 The entire second story of the house, indoors, instead of 
 being finished in gray marble, as was the first floor, was 
 finished with inlaid woods of fine, satiny texture and rare 
 polish ; and the room we now entered was exquisite both in 
 design and finish. It was oblong in shape, with a large 
 bowed window at one end, similar to those in the library, a 
 portion of which was directly beneath this room. Within 
 this window, on one side, stood a writing desk of solid ivory, 
 with silver appointments; and opposite was a case of well- 
 filled bookshelves of the same material. Among the books 
 
 27
<page 29>

 
 28 INTRA MUROS 
 
 I found afterward many of my favorite authors. Rich rugs, 
 silver-gray in color, lay scattered over the floor, and all the 
 hangings in the room were of the same delicate hue and 
 texture as those at the entrance. The framework of the 
 furniture was of ivory; the upholstering of chairs and otto- 
 mans of silver-gray cloth, with the finish of finest satin ; and 
 the pillows and covering of the dainty couch were of the 
 same. A large bowl of wrought silver stood upon the table 
 near the front window, filled with pink and yellow roses, 
 whose fragrance filled the air; and several rarely graceful 
 vases also were filled with roses. The entire apartment was 
 beautiful beyond description ; but I had seen it many times 
 before I was fully able to comprehend its perfect complete- 
 ness. Only one picture hung upon the walls, and that was a 
 life-size portrait of the Christ, just opposite the couch. It 
 was not an artist's conception of the human Christ, bowed 
 under the weight of the sins of the world, nor yet the thorn- 
 crowned head of the crucified Savior of mankind; but the 
 likeness of the living Master, of Christ the victorious, of 
 Christ the crowned. The wonderful eyes looked directly 
 and tenderly into your own, and the lips seemed to pro- 
 nounce the benediction of peace. The ineffable beauty of 
 the divine face seemed to illumine the room with a holy 
 light, and I fell upon my knees and pressed my lips to the 
 sandaled feet so truthfully portrayed upon the canvas, while 
 my heart cried, " Master, beloved Master and Savior!" It 
 was long before I could fix my attention on anything else;
<page 30>

 
 INTRA MUROS 29 
 
 my whole being was full of adoration and thanksgiving for 
 the great love that had guided me into this haven of rest, 
 this wonderful home of peace and joy. 
 
 After some time spent in this delightful place, we passed 
 through the open window on to the marble terrace. A 
 stairway of artistically finished marble wound gracefully 
 down from this terrace to the lawn beneath the trees, no 
 pathway of any kind approaching at its foot only the 
 flowery turf. The fruit-laden branches of the trees hung 
 within easy reach from the terrace, and I noticed as I stood 
 there that morning seven varieties. One kind resembled our 
 fine Bartlett pear, only much larger, and infinitely more 
 delicious to the taste, as I soon found. Another variety was 
 in clusters, the fruit also pear-shaped, but smaller than the 
 former, and of a consistency and flavor similar to the finest 
 frozen cream. A third, something like a banana in shape, 
 they called bread-fruit; it was not unlike our dainty finger- 
 rolls to the taste. It seemed to me at the time, and really 
 proved to be so, that in variety and excellence, food for the 
 most elegant repast was here provided without labor or 
 care. My brother gathered some of the different varieties 
 and bade me try them. I did so with much relish and re- 
 freshment. Once the rich juice from the pearlike fruit 
 (whose distinctive name I have forgotten, if indeed I ever 
 knew it,) ran out profusely over my hands and the front of 
 my dress " Oh !" I cried, " I have ruined my dress, 
 If earl"
<page 31>

 
 30 INTRA MUROS 
 
 My brother laughed genially, as he said, " Show me the 
 stains." 
 
 To my amazement not a spot could I find. 
 
 " Look at your hands," he said. 
 
 I found them clean and fresh, as though just from the 
 bath. 
 
 " What does it mean ? My hands were covered with the 
 thick juice of the fruit." 
 
 " Simply," he answered, " that no impurity can remain 
 for an instant in this air. Nothing decays, nothing tarnishes, 
 or in any way disfigures or mars the universal purity or 
 beauty of the place. As fast as the fruit ripens and falls, all 
 that is not immediately gathered at once evaporates, not even 
 the seed remaining." 
 
 I had noticed that no fruit lay beneath the trees this, 
 then, was the reason for it. 
 
 " ' And there shall in no wise enter into it anything that 
 de&eth,' " I quoted thoughtfully. 
 
 " Yes, even so," he answered ; H even so." 
 
 We descended the step* and again entered the " flower- 
 room." As I stood once mor admiring the inlaid roses, 
 my brother a^ked : 
 
 N Whom, of all the friends you have in heven, do you 
 most wish to see?" 
 
 " My father and mother," I answered quickly. 
 
 He smiled so significantly that I hastily turned, and there, 
 advancing up the long room to meet me, I saw my dear
<page 32>

 
 INTRA MUROS 31 
 
 father and mother, and with them my youngest sister. With 
 a cry of joy, I flew into my father's outstretched arms, and 
 heard, with a thrill of joy, his dear, familiar " My precious 
 little daughter!" 
 
 " At last ! at last !" I cried, clinging to him. " At last I 
 have you again!" 
 
 "At last!" he echoed, with a deep-drawn breath of joy. 
 Then he resigned me to my dear mother, and we were soon 
 clasped in each other's embrace. 
 
 "My precious mother!" "My dear, dear child!" we 
 cried simultaneously; and my sister enfolding us both in her 
 arms, exclaimed with a happy laugh, " I can not wait! I 
 will not be left outside!" and disengaging one arm, I threw 
 it about her into the happy circle of our united love. 
 
 Oh, what an hour was that! I did not dream that even 
 heaven could hold such joy. After a time my brother, who 
 had shared our joy, said: 
 
 " Now, I can safely leave you for a few hours to this 
 blessed reunion, for I have other work before me." 
 
 " Yes," said my father, " you must go. We will with 
 joy take charge of our dear child." 
 
 " Then for a brief while good-by," said my brother kindly. 
 " Do not forget that rest, especially to one but recently 
 entered upon the new life, is not only one of the pleasures, 
 but one of the duties of heaven." 
 
 " Yes, we will see that she does not forget that," said my 
 father, with a kindly smile and glance.
<page 33>

<page 34>

 
 CHAPTER IV. 
 
 O joys that are gone, will you ever return 
 
 To gladden our hearts as of yore? 
 Will we find you awaiting us, some happy morn, 
 
 When we drift to Eternity's shore? 
 Will dear eyes meet our own, as in days that are past? 
 
 Will we thrill at the touch of a hand? 
 O joys that are gone, will we find you at last 
 
 Ou the shores of that wonderful land? 
 
 SOON after my brother's departure my mother said, 
 grasping my hand : 
 
 " Come, I am eager to have you in our own home;" 
 and we all passed out of the rear entrance, walked a few 
 hundred yards across the soft turf, and entered a lovely 
 home, somewhat similar to our own, yet still unlike it in 
 many details. It also was built of marble, but darker than 
 that of my brother's home. Every room spoke of modest re- 
 finement and cultivated taste, and the home air about it was 
 at once delightfully perceptible. My father's study was on 
 the second floor, and the first thing I noticed on entering 
 was the luxuriant branches and flowers of an old-fashioned 
 hundred-leafed rose tree, that covered the window by his 
 desk. 
 
 " Ah !" I cried, " I can almost imagine myself in your old 
 study at home, when I look at that window." 
 
 " Is it not a reminder?" he said, laughing happily. " I 
 
 83
<page 35>

 
 34 INTRA MUROS 
 
 almost think sometimes it is the same dear old bush, trans- 
 planted here." 
 
 " And it is still your favorite flower?" I queried. 
 
 He nodded his head, and said, smiling: 
 
 " I see you remember still the childhood days." And he 
 patted my cheek as I gathered a rose and fastened it upon his 
 breast. 
 
 " It seems to me this ought to be your home, dear ; it is 
 our father's home," said my sister wistfully. 
 
 " Nay," my father quickly interposed. " Col. Sprague is 
 her legitimate guardian and instructor. It is a wise and 
 admirable arrangement. He is in every way the most suit- 
 able instructor she could possibly have. Our Father never 
 errs." 
 
 " Is not my brother's a lovely character?" I asked. 
 
 " Lovely indeed ; and he stands very near to the Master. 
 Few have a clearer knowledge of the Divine Will, hence 
 few are better fitted for instructors. But I, too, have duties 
 that call me for a time away. How blessed to know there 
 can never again be long separations! You will have two 
 homes now, dear child your own and ours." 
 
 " Yes, yes !" I saki. " I shall be here, I suspect, almost 
 as much as there." 
 
 At this moment a swift messenger approached my father 
 and spoke a few low words. 
 
 " Yes, I shall go at once," he replied, and, waving his hand 
 in adieu, departed with the angelic guide.
<page 36>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 35 
 
 " Where do my father's duties mostly lie ?" I asked my 
 mother. 
 
 " He is called usually to those who enter life with little 
 preparation that which on earth we call death-bed repent- 
 ance. You know what wonderful success he always had in 
 winning souls to Christ; and these poor spirits need to be 
 taught from the very beginning. They enter the spirit-life in 
 its lowest phase, and it is your father's pleasant duty to lead 
 them upward step by step. He is devoted to his work and 
 greatly beloved by those he thus helps. He often allows me 
 to accompany him and labor with him, and that is such 
 a pleasure to me! And do you know " with an indescrib- 
 able look of happiness " I forget nothing now!" 
 
 It had been her great burden, for some years before her 
 death, that memory failed her sadly, and I could understand 
 and sympathize with her present delight. 
 
 "Dear heart!" I cried, folding my arms tenderly about 
 her, " then it is like the early years of your married lif 
 again ?" 
 
 " Precisely," she answered joyously. 
 
 A little later my sister drew me tenderly aside and whis- 
 pered, " Tell me of my boy, of my precious son. I often see 
 him; but we are not permitted to know as much always of 
 the earthly life as we once believed we should. The Father's 
 tender wisdom metes out to us the knowledge he sees is best, 
 and we are content to wait his time for more. All you can 
 tell would not be denied me. Is he surely, surely coming to
<page 37>

 
 36 INTRA MUROS 
 
 me sometime? Shall I held him again in my arms, my 
 darling boy?" 
 
 " I am sure yes, I am sure you will. Your memory is 
 very precious to him." 
 
 Then I told her all I could recall of the son with whom 
 she had parted while he was but a child now grown to 
 man's estate, honored and loved, with home and wife and son 
 to comfort and bless him. 
 
 " Then I can wait," she said, " if he is sure to come to 
 me at last, when his earthly work is done, bringing his wife 
 and son. How I shall love them, too!" 
 
 At this moment I felt myself encircled by tender arms, and 
 a hand was gently laid on my eyes. 
 
 " Who is it ?" some one whispered softly. 
 "Oh, I know the voice, the touch! dearest, dearest 
 Nell!" I cried, and, turning quickly, threw my arms about 
 the neck of my only brother. 
 
 He gathered me a moment warmly to his heart, then in his 
 old-time playful way lifted me quite off my feet in his strong 
 arms, saying: 
 
 " She has not grown an inch ; and is not, I believe, a day 
 older than when we last parted! Is she, Joe?" turning to 
 our sister. 
 
 " It does not seem so," said my sister, " but I thought she 
 would never come." 
 
 " Trust her for that !" he said. " But come, now ; they 
 have had you long enough for the first visit; the rest of us
<page 38>

 
 INTRA MUROS 37 
 
 want you for awhile. Come with us, Jodie. Mother, I may 
 have them both for a little time, may I not? or will you 
 come, too?" turning to our mother with a caressing 
 touch. 
 
 " I cannot go, dear boy ; I must be here when your father 
 returns. Take your sisters ; it is a blessed sight to see you all 
 again together." 
 
 " Come then," he said ; and, each taking one of my hands, 
 we went out together. 
 
 " Halt!" he suddenly called, in his old-time military 
 fashion, after a short walk, and we stopped abruptly in 
 front of a dainty house built of the finest polished woods. It 
 was beautiful both in architecture and finish. 
 
 " How lovely !" I cried ; and with a bow of charming 
 humility he said: 
 
 " The home of your humble servant. Enter." 
 
 I paused a moment on the wide veranda to examine a 
 vine, wreathed about the graceful columns of highly-polished 
 wood, and my brother laughingly said to my sister: 
 
 " She is the same old Sis! We will not get much good out 
 of her until she has learned the name of every flower, vine 
 and plant in heaven." 
 
 " Yes, you will," I said, shaking my head at his happy- 
 face, " but I mean to utilize you whenever I can ; I have so 
 much to learn." 
 
 " So you shall, dear," he answered gently. " But come in." 
 
 Stepping inside a lovely vestibule, out of which opened,
<page 39>

 
 38 INTRA MUROS 
 
 from every side, spacious rooms, he called softly " Alma !" 
 At once from one of these, a fair woman approached us. 
 
 " My dear child !" I said, " it does not seem possible ! You 
 were but a child when I last saw you." 
 
 " She is still her father's girl," said my brother, with a 
 fond look. " She and Carrie, whom you never saw, make a 
 blessed home for me. Where is your sister, daughter?" 
 
 " She is at the great music-hall. She has a very rich voice 
 that she is cultivating," Alma said, turning to me. " We 
 were going to find our aunt when she returned," she added. 
 
 " True, true," said my brother; " but come." 
 
 Then they showed me the lovely home, perfect and charm- 
 ing in every detail. When we came out upon a side veranda, 
 I saw we were so near an adjoining house that we could 
 easily step from one veranda to the other. 
 
 "There!" said my brother, lightly lifting me over the 
 intervening space. " There is some one here you will wish 
 to see." Before I could question him, he led me through the 
 columned doorway, saying, " People in heaven are never 
 4 not at home ' to their friends." 
 
 The house we entered was almost identical in construction 
 and finish with that of my brother Nell, and, as we entered, 
 three persons came eagerly forward to greet me. 
 
 " Dear Aunt Gray!" I cried. " My dear Mary my dear 
 Martin ! What a joy to meet you again !" 
 
 " And here," said my aunt reverently. 
 
 " Yes, here," I answered in like tone.
<page 40>

 
 INTRA MUROS 39 
 
 It was my father's sister, always a favorite aunt, with her 
 son and his wife. How we did talk and cling to one 
 another, and ask and answer questions! 
 
 " Pallas is also here, and Will, but they have gone with 
 Carrie to the music hall," said Martin. 
 
 " Martin, can you sing here?" I asked. He always was 
 trying to sing on earth, but could not master a tune. 
 
 " A little," he answered, with his old genial laugh and 
 shrug; " we can do almost anything here that we really try 
 to do." 
 
 " You should hear him now, cousin, when he tries to 
 sing," said his wife, with a little touch of pride in her voice. 
 " You would not know it was Martin. But is it not nice 
 to have Dr. Nell so near us? We are almost one household, 
 you see. All felt that we must be together." 
 
 " It is indeed," I answered, " although you no longer need 
 him in his professional capacity." 
 
 " No, thanks to the Father ; but we need him quite as 
 much in many other ways." 
 
 " I rather think I am the one to be grateful," said my 
 brother. " But, sister, I promised Frank that you should go 
 to your own room awhile; he thought it wise that you 
 should be alone for a time. Shall we go now?" 
 
 " I am ready," I answered, " though these delightful re- 
 unions leave no desire for rest." 
 
 " How blessed," said my aunt, " that there is no limit here 
 to our mutual enjoyment ! We have nothing to dread, noth-
<page 41>

 
 40 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 ing to fear. We know at parting that we shall meet again. 
 We shall often see each other, my child." 
 
 Then my brother went with me to my own home, and, 
 with a loving embrace, left me at the door of my room. 
 
 Once within, I lay down upon my couch to think over the 
 events of this wonderful day; but, looking upward at the 
 divine face above me, I forgot all else, and, Christ's peace en- 
 folding me like a mantle, I became " as one whom his 
 mother comforteth." While I lay in this blissful rest, my 
 brother Frank returned, and, without rousing me, bore me in 
 his strong arms again to earth. I did not know, when he 
 left us in our home, upon what mission he was going, though 
 my father knew it was to return to my dear husband and 
 accompany him upon his sad journey to his dead wife; to 
 comfort and sustain and strengthen him in those first lonely 
 hours of sorrow. They deemed it best, for wise reasons, that 
 I should wait awhile before returning, and taste the blessed- 
 ness of the new life, thus gaining strength for the trial 
 before me.
<page 42>

 
 CHAPTER V. 
 
 Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for 
 them who shall be heirs of salvation? Heb. 1: 14. 
 
 How oft do they their silver bowers leave, 
 
 To come to succor us that succor want! 
 How oft do they with golden pinions cleave 
 
 The flitting skyes, like flying pursuivant, 
 
 Against fowle feendes to ayd us militant! 
 They for us fight, they watch, and dewly ward. 
 
 And their bright squadrons round about us plant, 
 And all for love, and nothing for reward; 
 O why should heavenly God to men have such regard! 
 
 [Edmund Spenser. 
 
 WHEN I aroused from my sleep it was in the gray 
 light of earth's morning, and I was standing on the 
 doorstep of the house in Kentville that my brother 
 and I had left together, some thirty-six hours before, reck- 
 oned by earth-time. 1 shuddered a little with a strange 
 chill when I saw where we were, and turned quickly to my 
 brother Frank, who stood beside me. He put his arm about 
 me, and with a reassuring smile, said: 
 
 " For their sakes be brave and strong, and try to make 
 them understand your blessed change." 
 
 I did not try to answer, though I took heart, and entered 
 with him into the house. Everything was very quiet no 
 one seemed astir. My brother softly opened a door im- 
 mediately to the right of the entrance, and motioned me 
 
 41
<page 43>

 
 42 INTRA MUROS 
 
 to enter. I did so, and he closed it behind me, remaining 
 himself outside. 
 
 Something stood in the center of the room, and I soon 
 discovered that it was a pall. It was a great relief to me to 
 see that it was not black, but a soft shade of gray. Someone 
 was kneeling beside it, and as I slowly approached I saw it 
 was my dear son. He was kneeling upon one knee, with his 
 elbow resting on the other knee, and his face buried in his 
 hand. One arm was thrown across the casket, as though 
 he were taking a last embrace of his " little mother." I saw 
 that the form within the casket lay as though peacefully 
 sleeping, and was clad in silver gray, with soft white folds 
 about the neck and breast. I was grateful that they had 
 remembered my wishes so well. 
 
 I put my arms about the neck of my darling son, and drew 
 his head gently against my breast, resting my cheek upon his 
 bowed head. Then I whispered, " Dearest, I am here be- 
 side you living, breathing, strong and well. Will you not 
 turn to me, instead of to that lifeless form in the casket? It 
 is only the worn-out tenement I am your living mother." 
 
 He lifted his head as though listening; then, laying his 
 hand tenderly against the white face in the casket he whis- 
 pered, " Poor, dear little mother!" and again dropped his 
 face into both hands, while his form shook with convulsive 
 sobs. 
 
 As I strove to comfort him, the door opened and his lovely 
 girl-wife entered. I turned to meet her as she came slowly
<page 44>

 
 INTRA MUROS 43 
 
 towards us. Midway in the room we met, and, taking both 
 her hands tenderly in mine, I whispered, " Comfort him, 
 darling girl, as only you can ; he needs human love." 
 
 She paused a moment irresolutely, looking directly into 
 my eyes, then passed on and knelt beside him, laying her up- 
 turned face against his shoulder. I saw his arm steal around 
 her and draw her closely to him, then I passed from the 
 room, feeling comforted that they were together. 
 
 Outside the door I paused an instant, then, slowly ascend- 
 ing the stairs, I entered the once familiar room, whose door 
 was standing ajar. All remained as when I had left it, save 
 that no still form lay upon the white bed. As I expected, I 
 found my precious husband in this room. He sat near the 
 bay window, his arm resting upon the table, and his eyes 
 bent sorrowfully upon the floor. My heart's best friend sat 
 near him and seemed trying to comfort him. When I 
 entered the room our brother Frank arose from a chair close 
 beside hm and passed out, with a sympathetic look at me. 
 I went at once to my dear husband, put my arms about him, 
 and whispered : 
 
 " Darling! darling, I am here!" 
 
 He stirred restlessly without changing his position. 
 
 Virginia said, as though continuing a conversation, " I 
 am sure she would say you left nothing undone that could 
 possibly be done for her." 
 
 " She is right," I whispered. 
 
 " Still she -was alone at the last," he moaned.
<page 45>

 
 44 INTRA MUROS 
 
 " Yes, dear, but who could know it was the last ? She 
 sank so suddenly under the pain. What can I say to com- 
 fort you? Oh, Will, come home with us! She would want 
 you to, I am sure." 
 
 He shook his head sadly, while the tears were in his eyes, 
 as he said : " Work is my only salvation. I must go back in 
 a very few days." 
 
 She said no more, and he leaned back wearily in his easy- 
 chair. I crept more closely to him and suddenly his arms 
 closed about me. I whispered, " There, dear, do you not see 
 that I am really with you ?" 
 
 He was very still, and the room was very quiet but for the 
 ticking of my little clock still standing upon the dressing- 
 case. Presently I knew by his regular breathing that he had 
 found a short respite from his sorrow. I slipped gently 
 from his arms and went to my friend, kneeling beside her, 
 and folding my arms about her. 
 
 "Virginia, Virginia! You know I am not dead! Why 
 do you grieve?" 
 
 She looked over at the worn face of the man before her, 
 then dropped her face into her hand, whispering, as though 
 she had heard me and would answer : 
 
 " Oh, Bertha darling, how could you leave him?" 
 
 " I am here, dearest! Do realize that I am here!" 
 
 She did not heed me, but sat absorbed in sorrowful 
 thought. 
 
 A few minutes later a stranger entered the room, and in
<page 46>

 
 INTRA MUROS 45 
 
 a low voice said something about its being " near train time," 
 and brought my husband his hat. He arose and gave his arm 
 to Virginia, and, our son and his wife meeting them at the 
 door, they started to descend the stairs. Just then my hus- 
 band paused and cast one sorrowful glance around the room, 
 his face white with pain. Our dear daughter stepped quickly 
 to him, and, placing both arms about his neck, drew his face 
 down to hers. ("God bless her in all things!" I softly 
 prayed.) An instant they stood thus, then stifling his emo- 
 tion, they all passed down the stairs into the room I had 
 first entered. 
 
 I kept very close to my dear husband, and never for a 
 single instant left him through all the solemn and impressive 
 services; through the sad journey to our old home; the last 
 rites at the grave; the after-meeting with friends; and his 
 final return to the weary routine of labor. How thankful 
 I was that I had been permitted to taste, during that wonder- 
 ful day in heaven, the joys of the blessed life! How else 
 could 1 ever have passed calmly through those trying scenes, 
 and witnessed the sorrow of those so dear to my heart? I 
 recognize the wisdom and mercy of the Father in having 
 so ordered it. 
 
 I soon found that my husband was right; work was his 
 great refugt. During the day the routine of labor kept brain 
 and hands busy, leaving the heart but little opportunity to 
 indulge its sorrow. Night was his trying time. Kind 
 friends would stay with him till bedtime; after that he was
<page 47>

 
 46 INTRJ MUROS 
 
 alone. He would turn restlessly on his pillow, and often 
 arise and go into the adjoining room that had formerly been 
 mine, and gaze upon the vacant bed with tearful eyes. It 
 took all my powers to in any degree soothe and quiet him. 
 After a time my brother Frank and I arranged to spend 
 alternate nights with him, that he might never be alone, and 
 especially were we with him upon hi? journeys. We found 
 to our great joy that our influence over him was hourly 
 growing stronger, and we were able to guide and help him 
 in many ways. 
 
 One night as I was silently watching beside him while he 
 slept, many months after he was alone, I became conscious 
 that evil threatened him. He was sleeping very peacefully, 
 and I knew his dreams were happy ones by the smile upon 
 his dear face. I passed into the hall of the hotel where he 
 was staying, and found it dense with smoke. I hastened 
 back to him and called, and tried to shake him, but he slept 
 on peacefully. Then I called with all my strength, " Will !" 
 close to his ear. 
 
 Instantly he started up and said, " Yes, dear, I am com- 
 ing!" just as he used to do when I called at night. Then in 
 a moment he sank back with a sigh upon his pillow, murmur- 
 ing, " What a vivid dream ! I never heard her voice more 
 distinctly in life." 
 
 " Will!" I again called, pulling him by the hand with all 
 my strength, " rise quickly! Your life is in danger!" 
 
 In an instant he was out of bed, upon his feet, and hurried-
<page 48>

 
 INTRA MUROS 47 
 
 ly drawing on his clothes. " I am sure I cannot tell why I 
 am doing this," he muttered to himself. " I only feel that 
 I must! That surely was her voice I heard." 
 
 "Hurry! Hurry!" I urged. 
 
 He opened the door and met, not only the smoke, but 
 tongues of flame. 
 
 " Do not try the stairway come !" and I drew him past 
 the stairway, and through a narrow entrance to a second 
 hall beyond, and down a second flight of stairs, filled with 
 smoke, but as yet no flame. Another flight still below these, 
 then into the open air, where he staggered, faint and ex- 
 hausted, on to the sidewalk, and was quickly helped by 
 friends into a place of safety. 
 
 " I am sure I cannot tell what wakened me," he afterward 
 said to a friend. " I dreamed I heard my wife calling me, 
 and before I knew it I was dressing myself." 
 
 " You did hear her, I have no doubt," she said. " Are 
 they not ' all ministering spirits, sent forth to do service for 
 the sake of them that shall inherit salvation'? What love- 
 lier service could she do than to thus save the life of one so 
 dear to her, whose earth-work was not yet done? Yes, you 
 did hear her call you in time to escape. Thank God for such 
 ministrations." 
 
 " Yes, it must be so," he answered, with a happy look. 
 " Thank God indeed." 
 
 After this he yielded much more readily to our influence, 
 and thus began to enjoy, while yet upon earth, the reunion
<page 49>

 
 48 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 that so surely awaited us in the blessed life. I often went 
 also to the home of our dear children, but there was so much 
 to make them happy that they did not need me as their 
 father did. Sometimes in hours of great physical prostration, 
 especially during the absence of his wife, I found that I 
 could quiet the overwrought nerves of my dear son, and 
 lead his tired mind to restful thoughts; but with youth and 
 strength and love to support him, the time had not yet come 
 when my ministrations were essential.
<page 50>

 
 CHAPTER VI. 
 
 Mauy friends that traveled with me 
 
 Reached Heaven's portal long ago; 
 One by one they left me battling 
 
 With the dark and crafty foe. 
 They are watching at the portal, 
 
 They are waiting at the door; 
 Waiting only for my coming 
 
 The beloved ones gone before. 
 
 [Mrs. H. M. Reasoner. 
 
 THE first time I returned to the dear heavenly home 
 after my long delay on earth, as I approached the 
 entrance, in the company of my brother Frank, we 
 saw a tall young man standing close by the open gate, looking 
 wistfully the way we came. As we drew near, he said in an 
 almost pathetic voice: 
 
 " Is my mother coming?" 
 
 A closer scrutiny revealed his identity, and I exclaimed 
 with joy, extending both hands to him, " My dear Carroll!" 
 
 He smiled a bright welcome as he extended his hands, 
 but said wistfully, " I so hoped my mother would return 
 with you, aunt, when you came back. Did you see her ?" 
 
 " Once only, for a brief moment. She is very happy and 
 bears her years well. She will come to you now before long, 
 but then you know it will be forever." 
 
 " Yes, I know," he answered brightly. " I will be patient. 
 But," he added confidentially, " I so want her to see the 
 
 49
<page 51>

 
 50 INTRA MUROS 
 
 lovely home I myself am building for her. Will you come 
 and see it?" 
 
 " Of course I will, gladly." 
 
 "Now?" 
 
 " Yes, if I may " ; looking at my brother for his sanction. 
 
 He nodded his head pleasantly as he said : " That is right, 
 Carroll. Have her help you in every way you can. I will 
 leave you two together, and you will bring her to me later?" 
 
 " Indeed, yes," said my nephew; and we went away hap- 
 pily together. 
 
 " Where is this wonderful house, Carroll ?" 
 
 " Not very far beyond Mrs. Wickham's," he said. 
 
 We soon reached it, and I was truly charmed with it in 
 every way. It was fashioned much like my brother Nell's 
 home, and was, like it, built of polished woods. It was only 
 partly finished, and was most artistically done. Although 
 uncompleted, I was struck with the fact that everything 
 was perfect so far as finished. There was no debris any- 
 where; no chips, no shavings, no dust. The wood seemed 
 to have been perfectly prepared elsewhere where, I have no 
 idea. The pieces were made to fit accurately, like the parts of 
 a great puzzle. It required much skill and artistic taste to 
 properly adjust each to its place. This, my nephew, who 
 even in the earthly life was quite a mechanical genius, 
 seemed to have no difficulty in doing, and the house was 
 slowly growing into beauty and symmetry. After showing 
 me all over the house, he at last drew aside the hangings
<page 52>

 
 INTRA MUROS 51 
 
 before an entrance, beyond which were two rooms, not only 
 entirely finished, but beautifully furnished as well. 
 
 " I finished and furnished these rooms complete, so that if 
 mother came before the house was ready, she could occupy 
 them at once. You know there is no noise from workmen 
 here ; no hammering, no unwelcome sounds." 
 
 I thought at once of the Temple of Jerusalem, where, 
 during its erection, there was " neither hammer, nor axe, 
 nor any tool of iron heard in the house." 
 
 " It is very beautiful, my dear boy," I said enthusiastically. 
 " It will give her great joy to know you did it for her. 
 But what is this a fireplace?" pausing before, a lovely open 
 chimne", wherein wood was piled ready to be lighted. " Is 
 it ever cold enough here for fires?" 
 
 " It is never cold," he answered, " but the fire here never 
 sends out unneeded warmth. We have its cheer and beauty 
 and glow, without any of its discomforts. You remember 
 my mother loves to sit by an open fire; so I have arranged 
 this for her." 
 
 " It is charming! But you did not make the stained- 
 glass windows also?" 
 
 " No, I have a friend who has been taught that art, and 
 we exchange work. He helps me with the windows, and 1 
 in turn help him with his fine woodwork and inlaying. 1 
 arn going to make a ' flower room ' for my mother similar 
 to yours, only of lilies and violets, which will retain their 
 perfume always."
<page 53>

 
 52 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 " How lovely! I want to thank you, dear Carroll, for 
 your share in our ' flower room.' It is the most exquisite 
 work I ever saw; and it is doubly so when I remember 
 whose hands fashioned it." 
 
 " It was a labor of love with us all," he said simply. 
 
 " That is what enhances its beauty for me," I said. " But 
 sit here by me now, and tell me about yourself. Do you 
 spend all your time at this delightful work?" 
 
 " Oh, no, indeed ! Perhaps what we used to call two or 
 three hours daily. Much of my time is still spent with my 
 
 Grandfather R . I do not know what I should have 
 
 done when I first came here, but for him. I was so ignorant 
 about this life, and came so suddenly." 
 
 " Yes, dear boy, I know," I said sympathetically. 
 
 " He met me at the very entrance, and took me at once 
 home, where he and grandma did everything possible to 
 instruct and help me. But I was, I am still, far below what 
 I ought to be. I would give a year out of this blessed life \ 
 I would even go back to the old life for an entire year if I 
 only could go to my old friends, or better, into every Sun- 
 day-school in the world, and beseech the girls and boys to 
 try to understand and profit by the instruction there re- 
 ceived. Why, I used to go to Sunday-school, Sunday after 
 Sunday, help sing the hymns, and read the lesson, and listen 
 to all that was said ; and I really enjoyed every moment of 
 the time. Sometimes I would feel a great longing after a 
 better life, but there seemed to be no one to especially guide
<page 54>

 
 INTRA MUROS 53 
 
 or help me, and, the greater part of the time, what I heard 
 one Sunday was never once spoken of or even thought of 
 till another Sunday came, so that the impression made was 
 very transient. Why do not boys and girls talk more to- 
 gether about what they hear at Sunday-school? We were 
 all ready enough to talk about a show of any kind, after it 
 was over, but seldom of the Sunday-school, when together 
 socially. Why do not teachers take more interest in the 
 daily lives of their scholars? Why is there so little really 
 helpful talk in ordinary home life? Oh, I wish I could go 
 back and tell them this!" 
 
 His face beamed with enthusiasm as he talked, and I, too, 
 wished it might be possible for him to do as he desired. But 
 alas! "they will not be persuaded even if one arise from 
 the dead," I thought. 
 
 " It is now time for me to go with my grandfather," he 
 said, rising, " but we will walk together as far as your 
 home; and you will let me often see you, will you not?" 
 
 " Gladly," I answered, as we set forth. 
 
 We still conversed of many things, as we walked, and 
 when we parted at the door I said, " I am soon to learn how 
 to weave lovely draperies; then I can help you, when you are 
 ready for them." 
 
 " That will make my work more delightful still," was his 
 reply, as he hastened on in the direction of my father's home.
<page 55>

<page 56>

 
 CHAPTER VII. 
 
 She is not dead the child of our affection 
 
 But gone unto that school 
 Where she no longer needs our poor protection, 
 
 And Christ himself doth rule. 
 Day after day we think what she is doing 
 
 In those bright realms of air; 
 Year after year, her tender steps pursuing, 
 
 Behold her grown more fair. 
 
 [Longfellow. 
 
 Hark! 'tis the voice of angels 
 
 Borne in a song to me, 
 Over the fields of glory, 
 
 Over the jasper sea! 
 
 [W. H. Doane. 
 
 AS time passed, and I grew more accustomed to the 
 heavenly life around me, I found its loveliness un- 
 folded to me like the slow opening of a rare flower. 
 Delightful surprises met me at every turn. Now a dear 
 friend, from whom I had parted years ago in the earth-life, 
 would come unexpectedly upon me with cordial greeting; 
 now one perhaps on earth greatly admired, but from whom 
 I had held aloof, from the fear of unwelcome intrusion 
 would approach me, showing the lovely soul so full of 
 responsive kindness and congenial thought, that I could 
 but feel a pang of regret for what I had lost. Then the clear 
 revelation of some truth, only partly understood in life, 
 though eagerly sought for, would stand out clear and strong 
 before me, overwhelming me with its lustre, and perhaps 
 
 55
<page 57>

 
 56 INTRA MUROS 
 
 showing the close tie linking the earth-life with the divine. 
 But the most wonderful to me was the occasional meeting 
 with some one whom I had never hoped to meet " over 
 there," who, with eager handclasp and tearful eyes, would 
 pour forth his earnest thanks for some helpful word, some 
 solemn warning, or even some stern rebuke, that had turned 
 him, all unknown to myself, from the paths of sin into the 
 " life everlasting." Oh, the joy to me of such a revelation ! 
 Oh, the regret that my earth-life had not been more full of 
 such work for eternity ! 
 
 My first impulse daily on arousing from happy, blissful 
 rest, was to hasten to the " river of life " and plunge into its 
 wonderful waters, so refreshing, so invigorating, so inspiring. 
 With a heart full of thanksgiving and lips full of joyful 
 praise, morning after morning, sometimes in company with 
 my brother, sometimes alone, I hastened thither, returning 
 always full of new life and hope and purpose to our home, 
 where for a time each day I listened to the entrancing revela- 
 tions and instructions of my brother. One morning, soon 
 after my return from my first visit to earth, as I was on the 
 way to the river, my voice joined to the wonderful anthem 
 of praise everywhere sounding, I saw a lovely young girl 
 approaching me swiftly, with outstretched arms. 
 
 " Dear, dear Aunt Bertha!" she called, as she drew near, 
 " do you not know me?" 
 
 " My little Mae !" I cried, gathering the dainty creature 
 into my arms. " Where did you spring from so suddenly,
<page 58>

 
 INTRA MUROS 57 
 
 dear? Let me look at you again!" holding her a moment 
 at arm's length, only to draw her again tenderly to me. 
 
 " You have grown very beautiful, my child. I may say 
 this to you here without fear, I am sure. You were always 
 lovely; you are simply radiant now. Is it this divine life?" 
 
 " Yes," she said modestly and sweetly ; " but most of all 
 the being near the Savior so much." 
 
 "Ah, yes, that is it the being near Him! That will 
 make any being radiant and beautiful," I said. 
 
 " He is so good to me; so generous, so tender! He seems 
 to forget how little I have done to deserve his care." 
 
 " He knows you love him, dear heart; that means every- 
 thing to him." 
 
 "Love him! Oh, if loving him deserves reward, I am 
 sure I ought to have every wish of my heart, for I love him 
 a thousandfold better than anything in earth or heaven. I 
 would die for him!" 
 
 The sweet face grew surpassingly radiant and beautiful 
 as she talked, and I began to dimly understand the wonder- 
 ful power of Christ among the redeemed in heaven. This 
 dear child, so lovely in all mortal graces, so full of earth's 
 keenest enjoyments during the whole of her brief life pure 
 and good, as we count goodness below, yet seemingly too 
 absorbed in life's gayeties to think deeply of the things she 
 yet in her heart revered and honored, now in this blessed 
 life counted the privilege of loving Christ, of being near 
 him, beyond every other joy! And how that love refined
<page 59>

 
 58 INTRA MUROS 
 
 and beautified the giver! As a great earthly love always 
 shines through the face and elevates the whole character 
 of the one who loves, so this divine love uplifts and glorifies 
 the giver, until not only the face but the entire person 
 radiates the glory that fills the heart. 
 
 " Come with me to the river, Mae," I said presently, after 
 we had talked together for some time ; " come with me for 
 a delightful plunge." 
 
 " Gladly," she said ; " but have you ever been to the lake 
 or the sea?" 
 
 "The lake or the sea?" I echoed. "No indeed. Are 
 there a lake and sea here?" 
 
 " Certainly there are," said Mae, with a little pardonable 
 pride that she should know more of the heavenly surround- 
 ings than I. " Shall we go to the lake to-day, and leave the 
 sea for another day? Which shall it be?" 
 
 " Let it be the lake to-day," I said. 
 
 So, turning in an entirely different direction from the 
 path that led to the river, we walked joyously on, still 
 talking as we went. So much to ask, so much to recall, so 
 much to look forward to with joy ! 
 
 Once she turned to me and asked quickly : 
 
 K When is my Uncle Will coming?" 
 
 My hand closed tightly over hers, and a sob almost rose in 
 my throat, though I answered calmly: 
 
 " That is in God's hands alone ; we may not question."
<page 60>

 
 INTRA MUROS 59 
 
 " Yes, I know. His will is always right ; but I so long 
 to see my dear uncle again; and to ' long ' is not to repine." 
 
 She had grown so womanly, so wise, this child of tender 
 years, since we parted, that it was a joy to talk with her. I 
 told her of my sad errand to earth, and the sorrow of the 
 dear ones I had left. 
 
 "Yes, yes, I know it all!" she whispered, with her soft 
 arms about me. " But it will not be long to wait. They 
 will come soon. It never seems long to wait tor anything 
 here. There is always so much to keep one busy; so many 
 pleasant duties, so many joys oh, it will not be long!" 
 
 Thus she cheered and comforted me as we walked through 
 the ever-varying and always perfect landscape. At length 
 she cried, lifting her arm and pointing with her rosy finger: 
 
 " Behold! Is it not divinely beautiful?" 
 
 I caught my breath, then stopped abruptly and covered 
 my face with my hands to shield my eyes from the glorified 
 scene. No wonder my brother had not sooner brought me to 
 this place; I was scarcely yet spiritually strong enough to 
 look upon it. When I again slowly lifted my head, Mae 
 was standing like one entranced. The golden morning light 
 rested upon her face, and, mingling with the radiance that 
 had birth within, almost transfigured her. Even she, so long 
 an inhabitant here, had not yet grown accustomed to its 
 glory. 
 
 " Look, darling auntie ! It is God's will that you should 
 see," she softly whispered, not once turning her eyes away
<page 61>

 
 60 INTRA MUROS 
 
 from the scene before her. " He let me be the one to show 
 you the glory of this place !" 
 
 I turned and looked, like one but half awakened. Before 
 us spread a lake as smooth as glass, but flooded with a golden 
 glory caught from the heavens, that made it like a sea of 
 molten gold. The blossom- and fruit-bearing trees grew 
 down to its very border in many places, and far, far away, 
 across its shining waters, arose the domes and spires of what 
 seemed to be a mighty city. Many people were resting upon 
 its flowery banks, and on the surface of the water were 
 boats of wonderful structure, filled with happy souls, and 
 propelled by an unseen power. Little children, as well as 
 grown persons, were floating upon or swimming in the 
 water; and as we looked a band of singing cherubs, floating 
 high overhead, drifted across the lake, their baby voices 
 borne to us where we stood, in notes of joyful praise. 
 
 " Come," said Mae, seizing my hand, " let us join them "; 
 and we hastened onward. 
 
 " Glory and honor!" sang the child voices. " Dominion 
 and power!" caught up and answered the voices of the vast 
 multitude together, and in the strain I found that Mae and I 
 were joining. The cherub band floated onward, and away 
 in the distance we caught the faint melody of their sweet 
 voices, and the stronger cadence of the response from those 
 waiting below. 
 
 We stood upon the margin of the lake, and my cheeks 
 were tear-bedewed and my eyes dim with emotion. I felt
<page 62>

 
 INTRA MUROS 61 
 
 weak as a little child; but oh, what rapture, what joy un- 
 speakable filled and overmastered me! Was I dreaming? 
 Or was this indeed but another phase of the immortal life? 
 
 Mae slipped her arm about my neck and whispered, 
 " Dearest, come. After the rapture rest." 
 
 I yielded to her passively; I could not do otherwise. She 
 led me into the water, down, down into its crystal depths, 
 and when it seemed to me we must be hundreds of feet 
 beneath the surface, she threw herself prostrate and bade 
 me do the same. I did so, and immediately we began to 
 slowly rise. Presently I found that we no longer rose, but 
 were slowly floating in mid-current, many feet still beneath 
 the surface. Then appeared to me a marvel. Look where I 
 would, perfect prismatic rays surrounded me. I seemed to be 
 resting in the heart of a prism; and such vivid yet delicate 
 coloring, mortal eyes never rested upon. Instead of the 
 seven colors, as we see them here, the colors blended in such 
 rare graduation of shades as to make the rays seem almost 
 infinite, or they really were so ; I could not decide which. 
 
 As I lay watching this marvelous panorama, for the colors 
 deepened and faded like the lights of the aurora borealis, I 
 was attracted by the sound of distant music. Although 
 Mae and I no longer clung together, we did not drift 
 apart, as one would naturally suppose we might, but lay 
 within easy speaking-distance of each other, although few 
 words were spoken by either of us; the silence seemed too 
 sacred to be lightly broken. We lay upon, or rather within,
<page 63>

 
 62 INTRA MUROS 
 
 the water, as upon the softest couch. It required no effort 
 whatever to keep ourselves afloat; the gentle undulation of 
 the waves soothed and rested us. When the distant music 
 arrested my attention, I turned and looked at Mae. She 
 smiled back at me, but did not speak. Presently I caught 
 the words, " Glory and honor, dominion and power," and I 
 knew it was still the cherub choir, although they must now 
 be many miles distant. Then the soft tones of a bell a 
 silver bell with silver tongue fell on my ear, and as the 
 last notes died away, I whispered: 
 
 " Tell me, Mae." 
 
 " Yes, dear, I will. The waters of this lake catch the 
 light in a most marvelous manner, as you have seen; a 
 wiser head than mine must tell you why. They also trans- 
 mit musical sounds only musical sounds for a great 
 distance. The song was evidently from the distant shore of 
 the lake." 
 
 "And the bell >" 
 
 " That is the bell which in the city across the lake calls 
 to certain duties at this hour." 
 
 " There never was a sweeter call to duty," I said. 
 
 " Yes, its notes are beautiful. Hark ! now it rings a 
 chime." 
 
 We lay and listened, and as we listened a sweet spell 
 wrapped me round, and I slept as peacefully as a child on its 
 mother's bosom. I awoke with a strange sense of invigora- 
 tion and strength. It was a feeling wholly dissimilar to that
<page 64>

 
 INTR4 MUROS 63 
 
 experienced during a bath in the river, yet I could not ex- 
 plain how. Mae said: 
 
 " One takes away the last of the earth-life, and prepares 
 us for the life upon which we enter; the other fills us to 
 overflowing with a draught from the Celestial Life itself." 
 
 And I think the child was right. 
 
 When we emerged from the water we found the banks 
 of the lake almost deserted, every one having gone, at the 
 call of the bell, to the happy duties of the hour. Groups of 
 children still played around in joyous freedom. Some 
 climbed the trees that overhung the water, with the agility 
 of squirrels, and dropped with happy shouts of laughter into 
 the lake, floating around upon its surface like immense and 
 beautiful water-lilies or lotus flowers. 
 
 " No fear of harm or danger; no dread of ill, or anxiety 
 lest a mishap occur; security, security and joy and peace! 
 This is indeed the blessed life," I said, as we stood watching 
 the sports of the happy children. 
 
 " I often think how we were taught to believe that heaven 
 was where we would wear crowns of gold and stand with 
 harps always in our hands! Our crowns of gold are the 
 halos His blessed presence casts about us ; and we do not need 
 harps to accentuate our songs of praise. We do see the 
 crowns, and we do hear the angelic harps, when and as God 
 wills it, but our best worship is to do his blessed will," said 
 Mae as we turned to go. 
 
 " You are wise in the lore of heaven, my child," I
<page 65>

 
 64 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 answered; "how happy I am to learn from one so dear! 
 Tell me all about your life here." 
 
 So as we walked she told me the history of her years in 
 heaven her duties, her joys, her friends, her home with 
 all the old-time freedom. I found her home was distant from 
 our own far beyond the spires of the great city across the 
 lake but she added: 
 
 " What is distance in heaven ? We come and go at will. 
 We feel no fatigue, no haste, experience no delays; it is 
 blessed, blessed!" 
 
 Not far from our home we saw a group of children 
 playing upon the grass, and in their midst was a beautiful 
 great dog, over which they were rolling and tumbling with 
 the greatest freedom. As we approached he broke away 
 from them and came bounding to meet us, and crouched and 
 fawned at my very feet with every gesture of glad welcome. 
 
 " Do you not know him, auntie ?" Mae asked brightly. 
 
 " It is dear old Sport!" I cried, stooping and placing my 
 arms about his neck, and resting my head on his silken hair. 
 " Dear old fellow! How happy I am to have you here!" 
 
 He responded to my caresses with every expression of de- 
 light, and Mae laughed aloud at our mutual joy. 
 
 " I have often wondered if I should not some day find 
 him here. He surely deserves a happy life for his faithful- 
 ness and devotion in the other life. His intelligence and his 
 fidelity were far above those of many human beings whom 
 we count immortal."
<page 66>

<page 67>

<page 68>

 
 INTRA MUROS 65 
 
 " Did he not sacrifice his life for little Will?" 
 
 "Yes; he attempted to cross the track in front of an 
 approaching train, because he saw it would pass between him 
 and his little master, and feared he was in danger. It cost 
 his life. He always placed himself between any of us and 
 threatened danger, but Will he seemed to consider his 
 especial charge. He was a gallant fellow he deserves im- 
 mortality. Dear, dear old Sport, you shall never leave me 
 again!" I said, caressing him fondly. 
 
 At this he sprang to his feet, barking joyously, and gam- 
 bolled and frolicked before us the rest of the way home, 
 then lay down upon the doorstep, with an upward glance 
 and a wag of his bushy tail, as though to say, " See how I 
 take you at your word!" 
 
 " He understands every word we say," said Mae. 
 
 " Of course he does ; he only lacks speech to make him 
 perfect. I somehow hoped he might find it here." 
 
 " He would not be half so interesting if he could talk," 
 said Mae. 
 
 " Possibly not. How silken and beautiful his long hair 
 is!" 
 
 " He has his bath in the river every day, and it leaves its 
 mark on him also. Do you know I think one of the sweetest 
 proofs we have of the Father's loving care for us is, that we 
 so often find in this life the things which gave us great 
 happiness below. The more unexpected this is, the greater 
 joy it brings. I remember once seeing a beautiful little girl
<page 69>

 
 66 INTRA MUROS 
 
 enter heaven, the very first to come of a large and affection- 
 ate family. I afterward learned that the sorrowful cry of 
 her mother was, ' Oh, if only we had someone there to meet 
 her, to care for her!' She came, lovingly nestled in the 
 Master's own arms, and a little later, as he sat, still caressing 
 and talking to her, a remarkably fine Angora kitten, of which 
 the child had been very fond, and which had sickened and 
 died some weeks before, to her great sorrow, came running 
 across the grass and sprang directly into her arms, where it 
 lay contentedly. Such a glad cry as she recognized her little 
 favorite, such a hugging and kissing as that kitten received, 
 made joy even in heaven! Who but our loving Father 
 would have thought of such comfort for a little child ? She 
 had evidently been a timid child ; but now as the children 
 gathered about her, with the delightful freedom they always 
 manifest in the presence of the beloved Master, she, looking 
 up confidingly into the tender eyes above her, began to shyly 
 tell of the marvelous intelligence of her dumb pet, until at 
 last Jesus left her contentedly playing among the flowers 
 with the little companions who had gathered about her. Our 
 Father never forgets us, but provides pleasures and com- 
 forts for us all, according to our individual needs." 
 
 " When shall I behold the Savior? When shall I meet, 
 face to face, him whom my soul so loveth?" my hungry 
 heart began to cry out in its depths. 
 
 Mae, as though understanding the silent cry, placed both
<page 70>

 
 INTRJ MUROS 67 
 
 arms about my neck, looked tenderly into my eyes, and 
 whispered : 
 
 " You, too, dearest, will see him soon. He never delays 
 when the time is ripe for his coming. It will not be long; 
 you, too, will see him soon." 
 
 So we parted, each to the duties of the hour.
<page 71>

<page 72>

 
 CHAPTER VIII. 
 
 Sae little noo I ken o' blessed, bonnie place, 
 
 I only ken it's Hame, whaur we shall see His face 
 
 It wad surely be eneuch forever mair to be 
 
 In the glory o' His presence, in oor ain countrie. 
 
 Like a bairn to his mither, a wee birdie to its nest, 
 
 I wad fain be gangin' noo unto my Savior's breast, 
 
 For he gathers in his bosom witless, worthless lambs like me, 
 
 And carries them himseP to his ain countrie. 
 
 [Mary Lee Demarest. 
 
 THE following morning my brother said to me, after an 
 interesting hour of instruction : 
 
 " Shall we go for the promised visit to Mrs. Wick- 
 ham now?" 
 
 " Indeed, yes!" I answered eagerly; so we at once set 
 forth. 
 
 We soon reached her lovely home and found her waiting 
 at the entrance as though expecting us. After a cordial 
 greeting to our friend, my brother said: 
 
 " I will leave you together for that ' long talk ' for which 
 I know you are both eager, and will go my way to other 
 duties. I will find you, later on, at home." The last remark 
 to me. 
 
 " All right," I answered. " I am familiar with the way 
 now, and need no attendance." 
 
 After he had gone, my friend took me all over her lovely 
 home, showing me, with great pleasure, the rooms prepared 
 for each beloved member of her earthly household still to 
 
 69
<page 73>

 
 70 1NTRA MVROS 
 
 come. One very large room, into whose open windows at 
 each end the blossom- and fruit-laden boughs of the im- 
 mortal trees looked invitingly, was evidently her especial 
 care ; she whispered to me, " Douglass always did like a 
 large room. I am sure he will like this one." And I was 
 also sure. 
 
 Returning down the broad stairway, we found it entered 
 into a very large music-room, with broad galleries supported 
 by marble columns, running across three sides of it, on a 
 level with the second floor. In this gallery was a number 
 of musical instruments harps, viols, and some unlike any 
 instruments I had ever seen elsewhere. The room itself 
 was filled with easy-chairs, couches and window-seats, where 
 listeners could rest and hear the sweet harmonies from the 
 galleries. 
 
 " My daughter," my friend explained, " who left us in 
 early childhood, has received a fine musical training here, 
 and is fond of gathering in her young friends and giving 
 us quite often a musical treat. You know our old home of 
 Springville has furnished some rare voices for the heavenly 
 choirs. Mary Allis, Will Griggs, and many others you will 
 often hear in this room, I trust." 
 
 We re-entered, from this room, the dainty reception hall 
 opening upon the front veranda and outer steps. Here Mrs. 
 Wickham drew me to a seat beside her and said : 
 
 " Now, tell me everything of the dear home and all its 
 blessed inmates."
<page 74>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 71 
 
 Holding each other's hands as we talked, she questioning, 
 I answering, things too sacred to be repeated here were 
 dwelt upon for hours. At last she said, rising hastily : 
 
 " I will leave you for a little while nay, you must not 
 go," as I would have risen, " there is much yet to be said ; 
 wait here, I will return." 
 
 I had already learned not to question the judgment of 
 these wiser friends, and yielded to her will. As she passed 
 through the doorway to the inner house, I saw a stranger 
 at the front entrance and arose to meet him. He was tall 
 and commanding in form, with a face of ineffable sweetness 
 and beauty. Where had I seen him before? Surely, surely 
 I had met him since I came. " Ah, now I know!" I thought; 
 " it is St. John, the beloved disciple." He had been pointed 
 out to me one morning by the river-side. 
 
 " Peace be unto this house," was his salutation as he 
 entered. 
 
 How his voice stirred and thrilled me! No wonder the 
 Master loved him, with that voice and that face! 
 
 " Enter. Thou art a welcome guest. Enter, and I will 
 call the mistress," I said, as I approached to bid him wel- 
 come. 
 
 " Nay, call her not. She knows that I am here ; she will 
 return," he said. " Sit thou awhile beside me," he continued, 
 as he saw that I still stood, after I had seen him seated. 
 He arose and led me to a seat near him, and like a child
<page 75>

 
 72 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 I did as I was bidden; still watching, always watching, the 
 wonderful face before me. 
 
 " You have but lately come ?" he said. 
 
 " Yes, I am here but a short time. So short that I know 
 not how to reckon time as you count it here," I answered. 
 
 " Ah, that matters little," he said with a gentle smile. 
 " Many cling always to the old reckoning and the earth- 
 language. It is a link between the two lives; we would not 
 have it otherwise. How does the change impress you ? How 
 do you find life here?" 
 
 " Ah," I said, " if they could only know ! I never fully 
 understood till now the meaning of that sublime passage, 
 ' Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
 the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for 
 them that love him.' It is indeed past human conception." 
 I spoke with deep feeling. 
 
 " ' For them that love him ' ? Do you believe that all 
 Christians truly love him?" he asked. " Do you think they 
 love the Father for the gift of the Son and the Son because of 
 the Father's love and mercy? Or is their worship ofttimes 
 that of duty rather than love?" He spoke reflectively and 
 gently. 
 
 " Oh," I said, " you who so well know the beloved Master 
 who were so loved by him how can you doubt the love 
 he must inspire in all hearts who seek to know him?" 
 
 A radiant glow oversprsad the wonderful face, which he 
 lifted, looking directly at me the mist rolled away from
<page 76>

 
 IXTRA MUROS 73 
 
 before my eyes and I knew him! With a low cry of joy 
 and adoration, I threw myself at his feet, bathing them with 
 happy tears. He gently stroked my bowed head for a mo- 
 ment, then rising, lifted me to his side. 
 
 " My Savior my King!" I whispered, clinging closely to 
 him. 
 
 " Yes, and Elder Brother and Friend," he added, wiping 
 away tenderly the tears stealing from beneath my closed 
 eyelids. 
 
 " Yes, yes, ' the chiefest among ten thousand, and the 
 One altogether lovely!' " again I whispered. 
 
 " Ah, now you begin to meet the conditions of the new 
 life! Like many another, the changing of faith to sight with 
 you has engendered a little shrinking, a little fear. That is 
 all wrong. Have you forgotten the promise, ' I go to pre- 
 pare a place for you; that where I am, there ye may be 
 also ' ? If you loved me when you could not see me except 
 by faith, love me more now when we have really become 
 ' co-heirs of the Father.' Come to me with all that perplexes 
 or gladdens; come to the Elder Brother always waiting to 
 receive you with joy." 
 
 Then he drew me to a seat, and conversed with me long 
 and earnestly, unfolding many of the mysteries of the divine 
 life. I hung upon his words; I drank in every tone of his 
 voice; I watched eagerly every line of the beloved face; and 
 I was exalted, uplifted, upborne, beyond the power of words 
 to express. At length with a divine smile, he arose.
<page 77>

 
 74 INTRA MUROS 
 
 "We will often meet," he said; and I, bending over, 
 pressed my lips reverently to the hand still clasping my own. 
 Then laying his hands a moment in blessing upon my bowed 
 head, he passed noiselessly and swiftly from the house. 
 
 As I stood watching the Savior's fast-receding figure, 
 passing beneath the flower-laden trees, I saw two beautiful 
 young girls approaching the way he went. With arms inter- 
 twining they came, happily conversing together, sweet Mary 
 Bates and Mae Camden. When they saw the Master, with 
 a glad cry they flew to meet him, and as he joyously extended 
 a hand to each, they turned, and each clinging to his hand, 
 one upon either side, accompanied him on his way, looking 
 up trustingly into his face as he talked with them, and ap- 
 parently conversing with him with happy freedom. I saw 
 his face from time to time in profile, as he turned and looked 
 down lovingly, first upon one, then the other lovely up- 
 turned face, and I thought, " That is the way he would have 
 us be with him really as children with a beloved elder 
 brother." I watched them till the trees hid them from my 
 sight, longing to gather the dear girls to my heart, but 
 knowing his presence was to them then more than aught else ; 
 then I turned and passed softly through the house to the 
 beautiful entiance at the rear. Just before I reached the 
 door I met my friend Mrs. Wickham. Before I could speak, 
 she said : 
 
 " I know all about it. Do not try to speak; I know your
<page 78>

 
 INTRA MUROS 75 
 
 heart is full. I will see you very soon there, go!" and she 
 pushed me gently to the door. 
 
 How my heart blessed her for it indeed seemed sacrilege 
 to try to talk on ordinary topics after this blessed experience. 
 I did not follow the walk, but kept across the flowery turf, 
 beneath the trees, till I reached home. I found my brother 
 sitting upon the veranda, and as I ascended the steps he 
 rose to meet me. When he looked into my face, he took both 
 hands into his for an instant, and simply said, very gently: 
 
 " Ah, I see. You have been with the Master !" and 
 stepped aside almost reverently for me to enter the house. 
 
 I hastened to my room, and, dropping the draperies behind 
 me at the door, I threw myself upon the couch, and with 
 closed eyes lived over every instant I had spent in that 
 hallowed Presence. I recalled every word and tone of the 
 Savior's voice, and fastened the instructions he had given me 
 indelibly upon my memory. I seemed to have been lifted to 
 a higher plane of existence, to have drunk deeper draughts 
 from the fountain of all good, since I had met " Him whom 
 my soul loved." It was a long, blessed communion that I 
 held thus with my own soul on that hallowed day. When 
 I looked upon the pictured face above me, I wondered that 
 I had not at once recognized the Christ, the likeness was so 
 perfect. But I concluded that for some wise purpose my 
 " eyes were holden " until it was his pleasure that I should 
 see him as he is. 
 
 When at last I arose, the soft golden twilight was about
<page 79>

 
 76 INTRA MUROS 
 
 me, and I knelt by my couch, to offer my first prayer in 
 heaven. Up to this time my life there had been a constant 
 thanksgiving there had seemed no room for petition. Now 
 as I knelt all I could utter over and over, was : 
 
 " I thank Thee, blessed Father; I thank Thee, I thank 
 Thee!" 
 
 When I at last descended the stairs, I found my brother 
 standing in the great " flower-room," and, going to him, I 
 said softly: 
 
 " Frank, what do you do in heaven when you want to 
 pray?" 
 
 "We praise!" he answered. 
 
 " Then let us praise now," I said. 
 
 And standing there, with clasped hands, we lifted up our 
 hearts and voices in a hymn of praise to God; my brother 
 with his clear, strong voice leading, I following. As the 
 first notes sounded, I thought the roof echoed them; but I 
 soon found that other voices blended with ours, until the 
 whole house seemed filled with unseen singers. Such a grand 
 hymn of praise earth never heard. And as the hymn went 
 on, I recognized many dear voices from the past Will 
 Griggs' pathetic tenor, Mary Allis' exquisite soprano, and 
 many another voice that wakened memories of the long ago. 
 Then as I heard sweet child-voices, and looked up, I saw 
 above us such a cloud of radiant baby faces as flooded my 
 heart with joy. The room seemed filled with them. 
 
 "Oh, what a life what a divine life!" I whispered, as,
<page 80>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 77 
 
 after standing until the last lingering notes had died away, 
 my brother and I returned to the veranda and sat in the 
 golden twilight. 
 
 " You are only in the first pages of its record," he said. 
 " Its blessedness must be gradually unfolded to us, or we 
 could not, even here, bear its dazzling glory." 
 
 Then followed an hour of hallowed intercourse, when 
 he led my soul still deeper into the mysteries of the glorious 
 life upon which I had now entered. He taught me; I 
 listened. Sometimes I questioned, but rarely. I was con- 
 tent to take of the heavenly manna as it was given me, with 
 a heart full of gratitude and love.
<page 81>

<page 82>

 
 CHAPTER IX. 
 
 Not as a child shall we again behold her: 
 
 For when with rapture wild 
 In our embraces we again enfold her, 
 
 She will not be a child, 
 But a fair maiden, in her Father's Mansion, 
 
 Clothed with celestial grace, 
 And beautiful with all the soul's expansion 
 
 Shall we behold her face. 
 
 [Henry W. Longfellow 
 
 THE next day, my brother being away upon an im- 
 portant mission, I started out alone to see if I might 
 not find the dear young friends of whom I had caught 
 a fleeting glimpse the day before. I knew that all things 
 were ordered aright in that happy world, and that sooner or 
 later I should find them again ; yet I could but hope it might 
 be very soon. I recalled the happy light upon their fresh 
 young faces as they had met the beloved Master, and I 
 longed to talk with them of their life from day to day. From 
 thinking of them, I began again to think of my blessed inter- 
 view with Him, and became so absorbed in these thoughts 
 that I was even oblivious to the beautiful world around me. 
 Suddenly I heard some one say : 
 
 " Surely that is Mrs. Sprague!" and looking up, I saw 
 sweet Mary Bates a few steps away, regarding me intently. 
 I cried joyfully : 
 
 " My precious Mamie !" 
 
 79
<page 83>

 
 80 INTRA MUROS 
 
 She flew to me, and folding me in her arms, drew my head 
 to her shoulder in the old caressing way, almost sobbing in 
 her great joy. 
 
 " Dear, dear little muzzer!" a pet name often used by 
 her in the happy past " how glad, hew glad I am to have 
 you here! I could scarcely wait to find you." 
 
 " How did you know I was here, Mamie?" 
 
 " The Master told me," she said softly. " Mae had al- 
 ready told me, and we were on the way to find you when 
 we met him, and he told us he had just left you. Then 
 we knew we must wait a little," she said reverently. 
 
 How my heart thrilled! He had thought about, had 
 spoken of me, after we parted! I longed to ask her what 
 he had said, but dared not. Seeming to divine my thoughts, 
 she continued: 
 
 " He spoke so tenderly about you, and said we must be 
 with you much. Mae had work to do to-day, and as she 
 had already seen you once, I came alone. She may be here 
 later on. May I stay a long time with you? There is so 
 much to tell you, so much to ask about!" 
 
 " Indeed you may. I had started out to find you, when 
 we met. Come, dear child, let us return home at once." 
 
 So, clinging to each other, we set out toward my home. 
 
 " What shall I tell you first?" I asked. 
 
 " Everything about the dear ones every individual mem- 
 ber of our beloved household. Begin with my precious, 
 heart-broken mother;" here her voice broke a little, but she
<page 84>

 
 INTRA MUROS 81 
 
 soon continued, " I am with her often, but her great, and I 
 fear unreconciled, sorrow, keeps me from being the comfort 
 to her I long to be. If only she could spend one hour with 
 me here, could know God's wisdom and love as we know 
 it, how the cloud would lift from her life ! How she would 
 see that the two lives, after all, are but one." 
 
 " Yes, dear," I answered, " I always urged her to think of 
 it in that light and to trust implicitly in the Father's tender 
 care and never-failing love; but it is difficult for us to see 
 beyond the lonely hearthstone and the vacant chair. Still, I 
 believe she does begin to dimly grasp the comfort you are 
 so eager to impart." 
 
 " Ah, if only she knew that I need just that to complete 
 my happiness now! We cannot sorrow here as we did on 
 earth, because we have learned to know that the Will of 
 the Father is always tender and wise; but even heaven can 
 never be complete for me while I know that my precious 
 mother is forgetful of her many rare blessings, simply be- 
 cause I may not be with her, in the flesh, to share them. 
 There is my father, and the boys why, I am as truly hers 
 still as they are! I often sit with them all, with her hand 
 in mine, or my arms about her my dear little mother! 
 Why must she see me, to recognize this? But this is almost 
 complaining, is it not? Some day she will know all we 
 must be patient." 
 
 As we walked on slowly, conversing of the earth-life, still 
 in many phases so dear to us, she asking eager questions, I
<page 85>

 
 82 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 answering as best I could, we saw a group of four persons, 
 three women and a man, standing under the trees a little to 
 one side of the walk. The man's back was towards us, but 
 we at once recognized the Master. The women were all 
 strangers, and one of them seemed to have just arrived. Her 
 hand the Savior held, as he talked with her, while all were 
 intently listening to his words. We regarded the group in 
 silence as we slowly passed, not hoping for recognition from 
 him at such a time, but just as we were opposite to them, 
 " he turned and looked upon " us. He did not speak but 
 oh, that look! So full of tenderness and encouragement and 
 benediction! It lifted us, it bore us upward, it enthralled 
 and exalted us; and as we passed onward, the clasp of our 
 hands tightened, and rapture unspeakable flooded our hearts. 
 
 We finished our walk in silence, and sat down on the 
 marble steps in the shadow of the overhanging trees. The 
 dear child nestled close against my side, and laid her head 
 upon my shoulder, while I rested my cheek caressingly upon 
 it. After a time I whispered, half to myself, " Was there 
 ever such a look!" 
 
 Instantly she raised her head and looking at me, said eager- 
 ly : " You think so, too ? I was sure you would. It is 
 always just so. If he is too much engaged to speak to you 
 at the time, he just looks at you, and it is as though he had 
 talked a long while with you. Is he not wonderful ! Why, 
 why could we not know him on earth as we know him here?" 
 
 " How long were you here before you met him ?" I asked.
<page 86>

 
 INTRA MUROS 83 
 
 " Oh, that is the wonderful part of it! His was the first 
 face I looked upon after I left the body. I felt bewildered 
 when I first realized that I was free, and I stood for a mo- 
 ment irresolute. Then I saw him standing just beside me, 
 with that same look upon his face. At first I felt timid and 
 half afraid. Then he stretched forth his hand to me, and 
 said gently, ' My child, I have come to take care of you ; 
 trust me; do not be afraid.' Then I knew him, and instantly 
 all fear left me, and I clung to him as I would have done to 
 either of my brothers. He did not say much to me, but 
 somehow I felt that he understood all of my thoughts. After 
 a moment, I asked : 
 
 ' May I not remain awhile with mamma? She is heart- 
 broken.' 
 
 ' Yes, dear child, as long as you desire,' he answered 
 compassionately. 
 
 'Will you also remain?' I asked, for I already felt I 
 could not bear to have him leave me. 
 
 " He looked much pleased, as though he divined my 
 thought, as he answered : ' Yes, I will never leave you, till 
 you are ready to accompany me.' 
 
 " Then I went to mamma and put my arms about her, 
 and presently the Master, too, came and whispered words 
 of comfort to her; but I am not sure she recognized our 
 presence, though I fancied that she grew more calm beneath 
 my caresses. We stayed till all was over. I never left mamma 
 an instant, except that twice I stole to poor little Hal's sick-
<page 87>

 
 84 1NTR4 MUROS 
 
 room when he was for a short time alone. I have always 
 felt that he recognized my presence more than any of them, 
 he lay so still and calm when I talked to him. He seemed 
 to be listening. When they gathered for the last time about 
 my casket, it seemed to me I must speak, I must show my- 
 self to them! Could they for one instant have seen my 
 living self, standing so calmly in their midst, they would 
 have turned forever from the lifeless clay they had embalmed 
 and beautified for the tomb. They would have known I was 
 not there. But they would not recognize the truth. At last 
 I pleaded with the Master to let me show myself once to 
 them, there. But he said, ' It is not the Father's will.' 
 
 " After that I accepted fully the Father's will, and soon 
 thereafter he brought me here in his arms. And what a 
 blessed life it is!" 
 
 I can give only a brief outline of our conversation on that 
 first happy day. It is too sacred to be scanned by curious 
 eyes. We talked until the golden twilight fell, and we 
 watched the little birds nestling in the vines, and heard afar 
 the solemnly joyous notes of the angels' choral song, and 
 joined our voices in the hymn of praise. Later we went to 
 my room, and lay down upon my dainty couch for rest, and 
 the last words I heard before sinking into heaven's blissful 
 sleep were, tenderly whispered : " Dear, dear little muzzer, 
 I am so glad and happy that you are here !" 
 
 More than once the question has been asked, " Was there 
 night there?" Emphatically, no! What, for want of a better
<page 88>

 
 INTRA MUROS 85 
 
 designation, we may call " day," was full of a glorious 
 radiance, a roseate golden light, which was everywhere. 
 There is no language known to mortals that can describe this 
 marvelous glory. It flooded the sky; it was caught up and 
 reflected in the waters; it filled all heaven with joy and all 
 hearts with song. After a period much longer than our long- 
 est earthly day, this glory mellowed and softened until it 
 became a glowing twilight full of peace. The children 
 ceased their playing beneath the trees, the little birds nestled 
 among the vines, and all who had been busy in various ways 
 throughout the day sought rest and quiet. But there was no 
 darkness, no dusky shadows even only a restful softening 
 of the glory.
<page 89>

<page 90>

 
 CHAPTER X. 
 
 O sweet and blessed country, 
 
 The home of God's elect! 
 O sweet and blessed country 
 
 That eager hearts expect! 
 There stand those halls of Zion 
 
 All jubilant with song, 
 And bright with many an angel, 
 
 And all the martyr throng. 
 
 [St. Bernard of Cluny. 
 
 NOT long after this my brother said, " We will go to 
 the grand auditorium this morning; it will be a rare 
 day even here. Martin Luther is to talk on ' The 
 Reformation ; Its Causes and Effects,' and this will be supple- 
 mented by a talk from John Wesley. There may also be 
 other speakers." 
 
 It was not the first time we had visited this great audi- 
 torium, although I have not hitherto described it. It stood 
 upon a slight eminence, and the mighty dome was supported 
 by massive columns of alternate amethyst and jasper. There 
 were no walls to the vast edifice; only the great dome and 
 supporting columns. A broad platform of precious marbles, 
 inlaid in porphyry, arose from the center, from which the 
 seats ascended on three sides, forming an immense amphi- 
 theater. The seats were of cedar wood highly polished ; and 
 back of the platform were heavy hangings of royal purple. 
 An altar of solid pearl stood near the center of the platform. 
 
 87
<page 91>

 
 88 INTRA MUROS 
 
 The great dome was deep and dark in its immensity, so that 
 only the golden statues around its lower border were dis- 
 tinctly visible. All this I had noted at former visits. 
 
 When we entered, we found the building filled with 
 people eagerly waiting for what was to follow. We soon 
 were seated and also waiting. Soft strains of melody floated 
 about us, from an invisible choir, and before long Martin 
 Luther, in the prime of a vigorous manhood, ascended the 
 steps and stood before us. It is not my purpose to dwell 
 upon his appearance, so familiar to us all, except to say that 
 his great intellect and spiritual strength seemed to have 
 added to his already powerful physique, and made him a fit 
 leader still, even in heavenly places. 
 
 His discourse would of itself fill a volume, and could not 
 be given even in outline, in this brief sketch. He held us 
 enthralled by the power of his will and his eloquence. When 
 he at length retired, John Wesley took his place, and the 
 saintly beauty of his face, intensified by the heavenly light 
 upon it, was wonderful. His theme was " God's love ;" and 
 if in the earth-life he dwelt upon it with power, he now 
 swept our souls with the fire of his exaltation, until we were 
 as wax in his hands. He showed what that love had done 
 for us, and how an eternity of thanksgiving and praise could 
 never repay it. 
 
 Silence, save for the faint, sweet melody of the unseen 
 choir, rested upon the vast audience for some time after he 
 left. All seemed lost in contemplation of the theme so
<page 92>

 
 INTRA MUROS 89 
 
 tenderly dwelt upon. Then the heavy curtains back of the 
 platform parted, and a tall form, about whom all the glory 
 of heaven seemed to center, emerged from their folds and 
 advanced toward the middle of the platform. Instantly the 
 vast concourse of souls arose to their feet, and burst forth as 
 with one voice into that grand anthem in which we had so 
 often joined on earth : 
 
 " All hail the power of Jesus' name, 
 
 Let angels prostrate fall; 
 Bring forth the royal diadem, 
 
 And crown him Lord of all." 
 
 Such a grand chorus of voices, such unity, such harmony, 
 such volume, was never heard on earth. It rose, it swelled, 
 it seemed to fill not only the great auditorium, but heaven 
 itself. And still, above it all, we heard the voices of the 
 angel choir, no longer breathing the soft, sweet melody, but 
 bursting forth into paeans of triumphant praise. A flood of 
 glory seemed to fill the place, and looking upward we beheld 
 the great dome ablaze with golden light, and the angelic 
 forms of the no longer invisible choir in its midst, with 
 their heavenly harps and viols, and their faces only less 
 radiant than that of Him in whose praise they sang. And 
 he, before whom all heaven bowed in adoration, stood with 
 uplifted face and kingly mien, the very God of earth and 
 heaven. He was the center of all light, and a divine radiance 
 surrounded him that was beyond compare. 
 
 As the hymn of praise and adoration ceased, all sank slow-
<page 93>

 
 90 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 ly to their knees, and every head was bowed and every face 
 covered as the angel choir chanted again the familiar words: 
 
 " Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy 
 Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, 
 world without end. Amen, Amen!" 
 
 Slowly the voices died away, and a holy silence fell upon 
 us. Presently, slowly and reverently, all arose and resumed 
 their places. No, not all. Sweet Mary Bates had accom- 
 panied us to the sanctuary', and I now noticed that she alone 
 still knelt in our midst, with clasped hands and radiant up- 
 lifted face, her lovely eyes fixed upon the Savior, as he still 
 stood waiting before us, with such a look of self-forgetful 
 adoration and love as made her herself truly divine. She was 
 so rapt I dared not disturb her; but in a moment the Master 
 turned and met her adoring eyes with such a look of loving 
 recognition, that with a deep sigh of satisfied desire, as he 
 turned again, she quietly resumed her seat beside me, slipping 
 her little hand into mine with all the confidence of a child 
 who feels sure it is understood to the utmost. 
 
 As I looked upon the glorious form before us, clothed in 
 all the majesty of the Godhead, my heart tremblingly asked : 
 " Can this indeed be the Christ-man whom Pilate condemned 
 to die an ignominious death upon the cross?" I could not 
 accept it. It seemed impossible that any man, however vile, 
 could be blind to the divinity so plainly revealed in him. 
 
 Then the Savior began to speak, and the sweetness of his 
 voice was far beyond the melody of the heavenly choir. And
<page 94>

 
 INTRA MUROS 91 
 
 his gracious words! Would that I could, would that I 
 dared, transcribe them as they fell from his lips. Earth 
 has no language by which I could convey their lofty meaning. 
 He first touched lightly upon the earth-life, and showed so 
 wonderfully the link of light uniting the two lives the 
 past with the present. Then he unfolded to us some of the 
 earlier mysteries of the blessed life, and pointed out the 
 joyous duties just before us. 
 
 When he ceased, we sat with bowed heads as he withdrew. 
 Our hearts were so enfolded, our souls so uplifted, our spirits 
 so exalted, our whole being so permeated with his divinity, 
 that when we arose we left the place silently and reverently, 
 each bearing away a heart filled with higher, more divine 
 aspirations, and clearer views of the blessed life upon which 
 we were permitted to enter. 
 
 I can touch but lightly upon these heavenly joys. There is 
 a depth, a mystery to all that pertains to the divine life, 
 which I dare not try to describe; I could not if I would, I 
 would not if I could. A sacredness enfolds it all that curious 
 eyes should not look upon. Suffice it to say, that no joy 
 we know on earth, however rare, however sacred, can be 
 more than the faintest shadow of the joy we there find; no 
 dreams of rapture, here unrealized, approach the bliss of one 
 moment, even, in that divine world. No sorrow; no pain; 
 no sickness; no death; no partings; no disappointments; no 
 tears but those of joy ; no broken hopes ; no mislaid plans ; no 
 night, nor storm, nor shadows even ; but light and joy and
<page 95>

 
 92 INTRA MUROS 
 
 love and peace and rest forever and forever. " Amen," and 
 again my heart says revently, " Amen."
<page 96>

 
 CHAPTER XI 
 
 Jerusalem! Jerusalem! 
 
 Thy streets of pearl and gold 
 Are trod by the blest feet of them 
 
 We knew and loved of old. 
 Their voices full of calm delight 
 
 Steal through the radiant air 
 Jerusalem! Jerusalem! 
 
 Our hearts are with them there! 
 
 AS the days passed I found my desires often led me to 
 the sacred lake, sometimes alone, sometimes with one 
 or more of my own family circle my revered father 
 and precious mother, my dear brother and sister, and many 
 beloved friends both within and without the bond of con- 
 sanguinity. It was always to me an inspiration and an up- 
 lifting. I never could grow sufficiently familiar with it to 
 overcome the first great awe with which it inspired me; but 
 I found that the oftener I bathed or floated and slept in its 
 pellucid current, the stronger I grew in spirit, and the more 
 clearly I comprehended the mysteries of the world about me. 
 My almost daily intercourse with the dear ones of our 
 home life from whom I had so long been separated, served 
 to restore to me the home feeling that had been the greatest 
 solace of my mortal life; and I began to realize that this 
 was indeed the true life, instead of that probationary life 
 which we had always regarded as such. I think it was the 
 day after my return from my first visit to earth, that, as 
 
 03
<page 97>

 
 94 INTRA MUROS 
 
 I had started to cross the sward lying between my father's 
 house and our own, I heard my name called in affectionate 
 tones. I turned and saw approaching me a tall, fine-looking 
 man, whose uncovered head was silvery white, and whose 
 deep blue eyes looked happily and tenderly into mine, as he 
 drew near. 
 
 " Oliver!" I cried with outstretched hands of welcome, 
 "dear, dear Oliver!" It was the husband of my eldest 
 sister, always dearly loved. 
 
 " I did not know that you had come, until a few moments 
 since, when our father told me. It is delightful to have you 
 here; it seems more like the old life to see you than any of 
 the others who are here we were together so much during 
 the last years of my stay," he said, grasping my hands warmly. 
 " Where are you going now ? Can you not come with me 
 awhile? I was thinking only a few days ago how much I 
 wished you could be here a little while before Lu came ; you 
 know her tastes so well. And now here you are ! So often 
 our unspoken wishes are thus gratified in heaven!" 
 
 " Is my sister coming soon ?" I asked a little later. 
 
 " That I cannot confidently say ; but you know the years 
 of the earth-life are passing, and her coming cannot be much 
 longer delayed. Can you come with me now?" 
 
 " Gladly," I said, turning to walk with him. 
 
 " It is only a little way from here," he said. " Just where 
 the river bends. Lu loves the water so, I chose that spot in 
 preference to one even nearer your home."
<page 98>

 
 INTRA MUROS 95 
 
 " This is truly enchanting!" I cried, as we drew near the 
 place. " I have not been this way before." 
 
 "I want you to see the river from her room windows," he 
 said ; "I know you will enjoy it." 
 
 We entered the truly beautiful house, built of the purest 
 white granite, so embedded in the foliage of the flower- 
 laden trees that from some points only glimpses of its fine 
 proportions could be seen. 
 
 " She loves flowers so much will she not enjoy these 
 trees?" he asked with almost boyish delight. 
 
 " Beyond everything," I answered. 
 
 We passed through several delightful rooms on the lower 
 floor, and, ascending the stairway, which in itself was a 
 dream of beauty, entered the room he was so anxious I should 
 see. I stopped upon the threshold with an exclamation of 
 delight, while he stood watching with keen enjoyment the 
 expression on my face. 
 
 " It is the most delightful room I ever saw!" I cried 
 enthusiastically. 
 
 The framework of couches, chairs and desk was of pure 
 and spotless pearl, upholstered in dim gold; soft rugs and 
 draperies everywhere ; and through the low window, opening 
 upon the flower-wreathed balcony, so enchanting a view of 
 the broad, smooth river below, that again I caught my breath 
 in delight. A thousand exquisite tints from the heavens 
 above were reflected upon the tranquil waters, and a boat 
 floating on the current was perfectly mirrored in the opaline-
<page 99>

 
 96 INTRA MUROS 
 
 tinted ripples. Far across the shining waters the celestial 
 hills arose, with domes and pillared temples and sparkling 
 fountains perceptible everywhere. When at last I turned 
 from this entrancing view, I saw on the opposite wall, smil- 
 ing down upon me, the same Divine face that I daily looked 
 upon in my own room at home. 
 
 We descended the stairs without a word, then I could only 
 falter : 
 
 " Only heaven could give such perfection in even-thing!" 
 
 Oliver pressed my hand sympathetically, and let me de- 
 part without a word. 
 
 Many months, by earthly time, had passed since that day, 
 and many times I had visited that lovely home and held sweet 
 converse with one I loved so well. I could suggest nothing 
 that would add to the beauty of the place, but we talked of 
 it together, and planned for ancf anticipated the joy of her 
 coming. 
 
 One day I found him absent, and though I waited long 
 for his return, he came not. I had not seen him for several 
 days, and concluded he had been sent upon some mission by 
 the Master. As I passed onward to our home, I met a 
 group of happy young girls and boys, of different ages, 
 hastening the way I had come, with their arms full of most 
 beautiful flowers. As they drew near I saw they were the 
 grandchildren of my dear sister Stanley and Mary and 
 David and Lee and little Ruth. As soon as they saw me, 
 they all with one accord began to shout joyfully:
<page 100>

 
 INTRA MUROS 97 
 
 Grandma is coming! Grandma is coming! We are 
 taking flowers to scatter everywhere! We are so glad!" 
 
 " How do you know she is coming, children? I have just 
 been to the house no one is there !" 
 
 " But she is coming," said little Lee. " We had a message 
 from grandpa, and he is to bring her." 
 
 " Then I will tell the others, and we will all come to 
 welcome her," I said. 
 
 With a great joy in my heart I hastened onward to my 
 father's house. I found them awaiting me, full of joyful 
 expectation. 
 
 " Yes, we also have had word," my father said, " and were 
 only awaiting your return, that we might go together." 
 
 " Then I will go for brother Frank, that he also may 
 accompany us," I said. 
 
 " He is here!" said a genial voice; and, looking up, I saw 
 him at the door. 
 
 " Col. Sprague is always present when he is needed," said 
 my father cordially. 
 
 So we set forth, a goodly company, to welcome this dearly 
 loved one to her home my father, my mother, and my sister 
 Jodie; my brother the doctor, and his two fair daughters; my 
 Aunt Gray, her son Martin, and his wife and daughter; 
 my brother Frank and I. 
 
 As we approached the house we heard the sound of joyous 
 voices, and looking in, we saw my sister standing in the room, 
 her husband's arm about her, and the happy grandchildren
<page 101>

 
 98 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 thronged around them, like humming-birds among the flow- 
 ers. But what was this? Could this radiant creature, with 
 smooth brow and happy eyes, be the pale, wan woman I 
 had last seen, so bowed with suffering and sorrow? I looked 
 with eager eyes. Yes, it was my sister ; but as she was full 
 thirty years ago, with the bloom of health upon her face, 
 and the light of youth in her tender eyes. I drew back into 
 the shadow of the vines and let the others precede me, for my 
 heart was full of a strange, triumphant joy. This truly was 
 the " victory over death " so surely promised by our risen 
 Lord. I watched the happy greetings, and the way she took 
 each beloved one into her tender arms. When, one by one, 
 she had greeted and embraced them all, I saw her, with a 
 strange yearning at my heart, turn and look wistfully 
 around, then whisper to my father: 
 " Is not my little sister here ?" 
 
 I could wait no longer, but, hastening to her side, cried : 
 " Dearest, I am here! Welcome! Welcome!" 
 She folded me to her heart and held me fast in her warm 
 arms, she showered me with kisses upon my upturned face, 
 while I returned each loving caress, and laughed and cried 
 for very gladness that she had come at last. Oh, what a 
 family reunion was that inside the walls of heaven! And 
 how its bliss was heightened by the sure knowledge (not the 
 hope) that there should be no partings for us henceforth for- 
 ever! 
 
 My brother Oliver looked on with proud and happy eyes.
<page 102>

 
 INTRA MUROS 99 
 
 The hour for which he had longed and waited had come to 
 him at last; his home-life would now be complete for ever- 
 more. I told him how I had waited for him that day, and 
 he said, " We saw you as you left the house, but were too 
 distant to call you. I had taken her into the river, and she 
 had looked at and admired the house very greatly before she 
 knew it was our home." 
 
 " What did she do when she saw her lovely room?" 
 
 " Cried like a child, and clung to me, and said, ' This 
 more than repays us for the lost home of earth!' If the 
 children had not come, I think she would have been at that 
 window still!" he said, laughing happily. 
 
 " I am glad you had her all to yourself at the first," I 
 whispered ; " you deserved that happiness, dear, if any man 
 ever did." 
 
 He smiled gratefully, and looked over at his wife, where 
 she stood the center of a happy group. 
 
 " Does she not look very young to you, Oliver?" I asked. 
 
 " The years rolled from her like a mask, as we sat beneath 
 the water in the river. Ah, truly in those life-giving waters 
 we do all ' renew our youth ' ; but she became at once un- 
 commonly fair and young." 
 
 " Her coming has brought youth likewise to you," I said, 
 noting his fresh complexion and his sparkling eyes; " but I 
 hope it will not change your silver hair, for that is to you a 
 crown of glory." 
 
 He looked at me a moment critically, then said :
<page 103>

 
 100 INTRA MUROS 
 
 " I wonder if you realize the change that has likewise 
 come to you in this wonderful clime?" 
 
 " I?" I said, a little startled at the thought; " I confess I 
 have not once thought of my personal appearance. I realize 
 what, through the Father's mercy, this life has done for me 
 spiritually, but as for the other, I have never given it an 
 instant's thought." 
 
 " The change is fully as great in your case as in Lu's, 
 though with you the change has been more gradual," he said. 
 
 I felt a strange thrill of joy that when my dear husband 
 should come to me, he would find me with the freshness and 
 comeliness of our earlier years. It was a sweet thought, and 
 my heart was full of gratitude to the Father for this further 
 evidence of hre loving care. So we talked together as the 
 hours sped, until my father said : 
 
 " Come, children ; we must not forget that this dear 
 daughter of mine needs rest this first day in her new home. 
 Let us leave her and her happy husband to their new-found 
 bliss." 
 
 So with light hearts we went our way, and left them to 
 spend their first hours in heaven together
<page 104>

 
 CHAPTER XII. 
 
 Holy, holy, holy! All the saints adore Thee, 
 Casting down their golden crowns around the glassy sea; 
 Cherubim and Seraphim falling down before Thee, 
 Which wert, and art, and evermore shall be. 
 
 [Bishop Heber. 
 
 AFTER we had left my parents and friends on our 
 return from our welcome to my sister, my brother 
 hastened away upon some mission, and I walked on 
 alone toward the sacred lake. I felt the need of a rest in its 
 soothing waters after the exciting scenes through which I 
 had passed. I had hitherto visited the lake in the early 
 morning hours; it was now something past noontide of the 
 heavenly day, and but few persons lingered on the shore. 
 The boats that sped across its calm surface seemed to be 
 filled rather with those intent upon some duty than simply 
 pleasure-seekers. I walked slowly down into the water, and 
 soon found myself floating, as at former times, in mid- 
 current. The wonderful prismatic rays that in the early 
 morning were such a marvel, now blended into a golden 
 glory, with different shades of rose and purple flashing 
 athwart their splendor. To me it seemed even more beauti- 
 ful than the rainbow tints; just as the maturer joys of our 
 earthly life cast into shadow, somewhat, the more evanescent 
 
 pleasures of youth. I could but wonder what its evening 
 
 101
<page 105>

 
 102 INTRA MUROS 
 
 glories would be, and resolved to come at some glowing 
 twilight, and see if they would not remind me of the calm 
 hours of life's closing day. I heard the chimes from the 
 silver bell of the great city ringing an anthem as I lay, and 
 its notes seemed to chant clearly: 
 
 " Holy! Holy! Holy! Lord God Almighty!" The waters 
 took up the song and a thousand waves about me responded, 
 "Holy! Holy! Holy!" 
 
 The notes seemed to " vibrate," if I may use the expres- 
 sion, upon the waves, producing a wondrously harmonious 
 effect. The front row in the battalion of advancing waves 
 softly chanted " Holy " as they passed onward ; immediately 
 the second roll of waves took up the word that the first 
 seemed to have dropped as it echoed the second " Holy " in 
 the divine chorus, then it, too, passed onward to take up 
 the second note as the third advancing column caught the 
 first; and so it passed and echoed from wave to wave, until 
 it seemed millions of tiny waves about me had taken up 
 and were bearing their part in this grand crescendo this 
 wonderful anthem. Language fails me I cannot hope to 
 convey to others this experience as it came to me. It was 
 grand, wonderful, overpowering. I lay and listened until 
 my whole being was filled with the divine melody, and I 
 seemed to be a part of the great chorus, then I, too, lifted up 
 my voice and joined with full heart in the thrilling song of 
 praise. 
 
 I found that, contrary to my usual custom, I floated
<page 106>

 
 INTRA MUROS 103 
 
 rapidly away from the shore whence I had entered the water, 
 and after a time was conscious that I was approaching a 
 portion of the lake shore I had never yet visited. Refreshed 
 and invigorated, I ascended the sloping banks, to find myself 
 in the midst of a lovely suburban village, similar to the one 
 where our own home was situated. There was some differ- 
 ence in the architecture or construction of the houses, though 
 they were no less beautiful than others I had seen. Many 
 were constructed of polished woods, and somewhat resembled 
 the finest of the chalets one sees in Switzerland, though far 
 surpassing them in all that gives pleasure to the artistic eye. 
 
 As I wandered on, feasting my eyes upon the lovely views 
 about me, I was particularly pleased by the appearance of an 
 unusually attractive house. Its broad verandas almost over- 
 hung the waters of the lake, the wide low steps running on 
 one side of the house quite to the water's edge. Several 
 graceful swans were leisurely drifting about with the cur- 
 rent, and a bird similar to our Southern mocking-bird, but 
 with softer voice, was singing and swinging in the low 
 branches overhead. There were many larger and more 
 imposing villas near, but none possessed for me the charm 
 of this sweet home. 
 
 Beneath one of the large flowering trees close by this 
 cottage home, I saw a woman sitting, weaving with her 
 delicate hands, apparently without shuttle or needle, a snow- 
 white gossamer-like fabric that fell in a soft fleecy heap at 
 her side as the work progressed. She was so very small in
<page 107>

 
 104 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 stature that at first glance I supposed she was a child ; but a 
 closer scrutiny showed her to be a mature woman, though 
 with the glow of youth still upon her smooth cheek. Some- 
 thing familiar in her gestures, rather than her appearance, 
 caused me to feel that it was not the first time we had met ; 
 and growing accustomed now to the delightful surprises that 
 met me everywhere in this world of rare delights, I drew 
 near to accost her, when, before I could speak, she looked up, 
 and the doubt was gone. 
 
 " Maggie!" " Mrs. Sprague dear!" we cried simultane- 
 ously, as, dropping her work from her hands, she stepped 
 quickly up to greet me. 
 
 Our greeting was warm and fervent, and her sweet face 
 glowed with a welcome that reminded me of the happy days 
 when we had met, in the years long gone, by the shore of 
 that other beautiful lake in the world of our earth-life. 
 
 " Now I know why I came this way to-day to find you, 
 dear," I said, as we sat side by side, talking as we never had 
 talked on earth; for the sweet shyness of her mortal life 
 had melted away in the balmy air of heaven. 
 
 " What is this lovely fabric you are weaving?" I presently 
 asked, lifting the silken fleecy web in my fingers as I spoke. 
 
 " Some draperies for Nellie's room," she said. " You 
 know we two have lived alone together so much, I thought 
 it would seem more like home to her, to us both, if we did 
 the same here. So this cottage is our own special home, just 
 a step from Marie's," pointing to an imposing house a few
<page 108>

 
 INTRA MUROS 105 
 
 yards distant, " and I am fitting it up as daintily as I can, 
 especially her room." 
 
 " Oh, let me help you, Maggie dear !" I said. " It would 
 be such a pleasure to me." 
 
 She hesitated an instant, with something of the old-time 
 shyness, then said: 
 
 " That is so like you, dear Mrs. Sprague. I have set my 
 heart on doing Nellie's room entirely myself there is no 
 hurry about it, you know but if you really would enjoy it, 
 I shall love to have you help me in the other rooms." 
 
 " And will you teach me how to weave these delicate 
 hangings?" 
 
 " Yes, indeed. Shall I give you your first lesson now?" 
 
 Lifting the dainty thread, she showed me how to toss and 
 wind it through my fingers till it fell away in shining folds. 
 It was very light and fascinating work, and I soon was 
 weaving it almost as rapidly as she did. 
 
 " Now, I can help Carroll !" was my happy thought, as I 
 saw the shimmering fabric grow beneath my hands. " To- 
 morrow I will go and show him how beautifully we can 
 drape the doors and windows." 
 
 So in heaven our first thought ever is to give pleasure 
 to others. 
 
 " You are an apt scholar," said Maggie, laughing happily; 
 " and what a charming hour you have given me !" 
 
 "What a charming hour you have given me, my dear I" 
 I answered.
<page 109>

 
 106 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 When we parted it was with the understanding that every 
 little while I was to repeat the visit. When I urged her 
 likewise to come to me, the old-time shyness again appeared, 
 as she said : 
 
 " Oh, they are all strangers to me, and here we shall be 
 entirely alone. You come to me." 
 
 So I yielded, as in heaven we never seek to gain reluctant 
 consent for any pleasure, however dear; and many were 
 the happy hours spent with her in the cottage by the lake.
<page 110>

 
 CHAPTER XIII. 
 
 " I take these little lainbs," said He 
 
 And lay them in my breast; 
 Protection they shall find in Me, 
 
 In Me be ever blest." 
 
 [Samuel Stennett. 
 
 ON one of my walks about this time, I chanced upon a 
 scene that brought to mind what Mae had said to me 
 about the Savior's love for little children. I found him 
 sitting beneath one of the flowering trees upon the lake shore, 
 with about a dozen children of all ages clustered around him. 
 One dainty little tot, not more than a year old, was nestled 
 in his arms, with her sunny head resting confidingly upon 
 his bosom, her tiny hands filled with the lovely water-lilies 
 that floated everywhere on the waters. She was too young 
 to realize how great her privilege was, but seemed to be 
 enjoying his care to the utmost. The others sat at his feet, 
 or leaned upon his knees; and one dear little fellow, with 
 earnest eyes, stood by him, leaning upon his shoulder, while 
 the Master's right arm encircled him. Every eye was fixed 
 eagerly upon Jesus, and each child appeared alert to catch 
 every word he said. He seemed to be telling them some 
 very absorbing story, adapted to their childish tastes and ca- 
 pacities. I sat down upon the sward among a group of 
 people, a little removed from the children, and tried to 
 
 107
<page 111>

 
 108 INTRA MVROS 
 
 hear what he was saying, but we were toe far away to catch 
 more than a sentence now and then, and in heaven one 
 never intrudes upon another's privileges or pleasures. So we 
 simply enjoyed the smiles and eager questions and excla- 
 mations of the children, and gathered a little of the tenor of 
 the story from the disjointed sentences which floated to us. 
 
 " A little child lost in the dark woods of the lower 
 world " we heard the Master say, in response to the in- 
 quiring looks ef the interested children. 
 
 " Lions and bears " came later on. 
 
 " Where was his papa?" asked an anxious voice. 
 
 We could not hear the reply, but soon a little fellow 
 leaning upon the Savior's knee, said confidently : " No lions 
 and bears up here !" 
 
 " No," he replied, " nothing to harm or frighten my 
 little children here !" 
 
 Then as the story deepened and grew in interest, and 
 the children pressed more closely about the Master, he 
 turned with a sweet smile and we could see an increased 
 pressure of the encircling arm to the little fellow with the 
 earnest eyes who leaned upon his shoulder, and said : 
 
 " What, Leslie, would you have done, then ?" 
 
 With a bright light in his eyes and a flush on his fair 
 cheek, the child answered quickly and emphatically: 
 
 " I should have prayed to Thee and asked Thee to ' close 
 the lion's mouth,' as Thou didst for Daniel, and Thou 
 wouldst have done it!"
<page 112>

 
 INTRA MUROS 109 
 
 " Ah," I thought, " could C and H =r^ see the look 
 
 the beloved Master cast upon their boy as he made his brave 
 reply, they would be comforted even for the absence of their 
 darling." 
 
 Lost in these thoughts, I heard no more that passed, until 
 an ecstatic shout from the little folks proclaimed how satis- 
 factorily the story had ended, and, looking up, I saw the 
 Savior passing onward, with the baby still in his arms, and 
 the children trooping about him. 
 
 " Of such is the kingdom of heaven." How well he un- 
 derstood ! How much he loved them ! 
 
 I, too, arose and started homeward. I had not gone far 
 before I met my brether Frank, who greeted me with: 
 
 " I am on my way to the city by the lake; will you accom- 
 pany me?" 
 
 "It has been long my wish to visit the city. I only waited 
 until you thought it wise for me to go," I answered. 
 
 " You are growing so fast in the knowledge of the heaven- 
 ly ways," he said, " that I think I might venture to take you 
 almost anywhere with me now. You acquire the knowledge 
 for the very love of it; not because you feel it your duty to 
 know what we would have you learn. Your eagerness to 
 gather to yourself all truth, and at the same time your 
 patient submission in waiting, ofttimes when I know the 
 trial is great, have won for you much praise and love from 
 our dear Master, who watches eagerly the progress of us all 
 in the divine life. I think it only right that you should
<page 113>

 
 110 INTRA MUROS 
 
 know of this; we need encouragement here as well as in 
 the earth-life, though in a different way. I tell you this by 
 divine permission. I think it will not be long before He 
 trusts you with a mission; but this I say of myself, not by 
 his command." 
 
 It would be impossible for me to convey, in the language 
 of earth, the impression these words of commendation left 
 upon me. They were so unexpected, so unforeseen. I had 
 gone on, as my brother said, eagerly gathering the knowledge 
 imparted to me, with a genuine love for the study of all 
 things pertaining to the blessed life, without a thought that 
 I in any way deserved commendation for so doing ; and now 
 I had won the approbation of the Master himself! The 
 happiness seemed almost more than I had strength to bear. 
 
 " My brother, my dear brother!" was all I could say, in 
 my deep joy, stopping suddenly and looking up into his 
 face with grateful tears. 
 
 " I am so glad for you, little sister!" he said, warmly 
 clasping my hand. " There are, you see, rewards in heaven ; 
 it does my soul good that you have unconsciously won one 
 of these so soon." 
 
 I would I might record in detail the precious words of 
 wisdom that fell from his lips; I would that I might recount 
 minutely the events of that wonderful life as it was un- 
 folded to me day by day; but I can only say, " I may not." 
 When I undertook to make a record of that never-to-be- 
 forgotten time, I did not realize how many serious difficulties
<page 114>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 111 
 
 I would have to encounter ; how often I would have to pause 
 and consider if 1 might really reveal this truth or paint that 
 scene as it appeared to me. The very heart has often been 
 left out of some wonderful scene I was attempting to de- 
 scribe, because I found I dared not reveal its sacred secret. 
 I realize painfully that the narrative, as I am forced to give 
 it, falls infinitely short of what I hoped to make it when I 
 began. But bear with me; it is no fancy sketch I am draw- 
 ing, but the veritable life beyond, as it appeared to me when 
 the exalted spirit rose triumphant over the impoverished 
 flesh, made slavishly subservient through suffering. 
 
 My brother and I walked slowly back to the margin of the 
 lake, where we stepped into a boat lying near the shore, and 
 were at once transported to the farther shore of the lake, and 
 landed upon a marble terrace the entrance to the city by 
 the lake. I never knew by what power these boats were pro- 
 pelled. There were no oarsmen, no engine, no sails, upon 
 the one in which we crossed the water ; but it moved steadily 
 onward till we were safely landed at our destination. Lux- 
 uriously cushioned seats were all around it, and upon one of 
 them lay a musical instrument, something like a violin, al- 
 though it had no bow, but seemed to be played by the ringers 
 alone. Upon another seat lay a book. I picked it up and 
 opened it; it seemed to be a continuation of that book that 
 has stirred and thrilled millions of hearts in the mortal life 
 "The Greatest Thing in the World." As I glanced 
 through it while we journeyed, I grasped the truth that this
<page 115>

 
 112 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 great mind already had grappled with the mighty things of 
 eternity and given food to immortals, even as he had to 
 those in mortal life in the years gone by. 
 
 I was roused from my thoughts by the boat touching the 
 marble terrace, and found my brother already standing 
 waiting to assist me to the shore. Passing up a slight ac- 
 clivity, we found ourselves in a broad street that led into 
 the heart of the city. The streets I found were all very 
 broad and smooth, and paved with marble and precious 
 stones of every kind. Though they were thronged with 
 people intent on various duties, not an atom of debris, or 
 even dust, was visible anywhere. There seemed to be vast 
 business houses of many kinds, though I saw nothing re- 
 sembling our large mercantile establishments. There were 
 many colleges and schools, many book and music-stores and 
 publishing houses; several large manufactories, where, I 
 learned, were spun the fine silken threads of manifold colors 
 which were so extensively used in the weaving of the 
 draperies I have already mentioned. There were art rooms, 
 picture galleries and libraries, and many lecture halls and 
 vast auditoriums. But I saw no churches of any kind. At 
 first this somewhat confused me, until I remembered that 
 there are no creeds in heaven, but that all worship together 
 in harmony and love the children of one and the same 
 loving Father. " Ah," I thought, " what a pity that that 
 fact, if no other in the great economy of heaven, could not be 
 proclaimed to the inhabitants of earth! How it would do
<page 116>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 113 
 
 away with the petty contentions, jealousies and rivalries of 
 the church militant! No creeds in heaven! No contro- 
 verted points of doctrine ! No charges of heresy brought by 
 one professed Christian against another! No building up of 
 one denomination upon the ruins or downfall of a different 
 sect! But one great universal brotherhood whose head is 
 Christ, and whose corner-stone is Love." I thought of the 
 day we had listened in the great auditorium at home to the 
 divine address of our beloved Master; of the bowed heads 
 and uplifted voices of that vast multitude as every voice 
 joined in the glorious anthem, " Crown Him Lord of All!" 
 and I could have wept to think of the faces that must some 
 day be bowed in shame when they remember how often they 
 have in mortal life said to a brother Christian, " Stand aside; 
 I am holier than thou!" 
 
 We found no dwelling-houses anywhere in the midst of 
 the city, until we came to the suburbs. Here they stood in 
 great magnificence and splendor. But one pleasing fact was 
 that every home had its large door-yard, full of trees and 
 flowers and pleasant walks; indeed, it was everywhere, out- 
 side of the business center of the town, like one vast park 
 dotted with lovely houses. There was much that charmed, 
 much that surprised me in this great city, of which I may 
 not fully speak, but which I never can forget. We found in 
 one place a very large park, with walks and drives and foun- 
 tains and miniature lakes and shaded seats, but no dwellings 
 or buildings of any kind, except an immense circular open
<page 117>

 
 114 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 temple capable of seating many hundred; and where, my 
 brother told me, a seraph choir assembled at a certain hour 
 daily and rendered the oratorios written by the great musical 
 composers of earth and heaven. It had just departed, and 
 the crowd who had enjoyed its divine music yet lingered as 
 though loath to leave a spot so hallowed. 
 
 " We will remember the hour," my brother said, " and 
 come again when we can hear them."
<page 118>

 
 CHAPTER XIV. 
 
 Not all the archangels can tell 
 
 The joys of that holiest place, 
 Where the Father is pleased to reveal 
 
 The light of His heavenly face. 
 
 [Charles Wesley. 
 
 " And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, 
 and from his power." Rev. 15: 8. 
 
 STILL passing through the park, we came out upon the 
 open country, and walked some distance through flow- 
 ery meadows and undulating plains. At length we 
 entered a vast forest whose great trees towered above us like 
 swaying giants. The day was well-nigh spent the day so 
 full of joy and glad surprises and happy hours! Full as it 
 had been I felt there was still something left for me, deep 
 hidden in the twilight-valley of the day ; something that held 
 my soul in awe, as the last moments preceding the Holy 
 Sacrament. 
 
 My brother walked by me, absorbed in silent thought, but 
 with a touch beyond even his usual gentleness. I did not ask 
 where we were going at that unusual hour, so far from 
 home, for fear and doubt and questionings no longer vexed 
 the quiet of my soul. Although the forest was dense, the 
 golden glow of the twilight rested beneath the trees, and 
 sifted down through the quivering branches overhead, as 
 though falling through the windows of some grand cathe- 
 dral. 
 
 116
<page 119>

 
 116 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 At length we emerged from the forest upon a vast plain 
 that stretched out into illimitable space before us, and far 
 away we faintly heard the thunder of the breaking waves of 
 that immortal sea of which I had heard so much but had not 
 yet seen. But for their faint and distant reverberation the 
 silence about us was intense. We stood a moment upon the 
 verge of the forest, then as we advanced a few steps into 
 the plain I became aware that immediately to our right 
 the ground rose into quite an elevation; and, as I turned, a 
 sight broke upon my bewildered eyes that the eternal years 
 of earth and heaven can never efface. Upon the summit of 
 this gentle slope a Temple stood, whose vast dome, massive 
 pillars and solid walls were of unsullied pearl, and through 
 whose great mullioned windows shone a white radiance that 
 swallowed up the golden glow of the twilight and made it its 
 own. I did not cry aloud nor hide my face, as at former 
 revelations; but I sank slowly to my knees, and, crossing my 
 hands upon my breast, with uplifted face, stilled heart and 
 silent lips, laid my whole being in worship at His feet " who 
 sitteth upon the throne." How long I knelt thus I know 
 not. Even immortal life seemed lost before that greatest of 
 celestial mysteries. At length my brother, who had been 
 silently kneeling beside me, arose, and, lifting me to my feet, 
 whispered gently, " Come." 
 
 I felt rather than saw that his face was colorless with the 
 depth of his emotion, and I yielded to his guidance in silence. 
 A long flight of low, broad steps, in gradations, rose from
<page 120>

 
 INTRA MUROS 117 
 
 almost where we stood to the very door of the Temple. 
 They, too, were of solid pearl, bordered on either side by 
 channels paved with golden stones through which coursed 
 crystal waters that met and mingled in one stream far out 
 upon the plain. Ascending these steps, we entered the 
 Temple, and for a moment stood in silence. I do not know 
 how it was, but in that brief instant it may have been 
 longer than I knew every detail of that wonderful interior 
 was fastened upon my memory as a scene is photographed 
 upon the artist's plate. Heretofore it had taken repeated 
 visits to a room to enable me to describe it correctly in 
 detail, but this, in a lightning's flash, was stamped upon the 
 tablet of my memory indelibly for all time nay, for eternity. 
 The immense dome, at that moment filled with a luminous 
 cloud, was upheld by three rows of massive pillars of gold. 
 The walls and floors were of pearl, as also the great plat- 
 form that filled at least one-third of the Temple upon the 
 eastern side. There were no seats of any kind. The great 
 golden pillars stood like rows of sentinels upon the shining 
 floor. A railing of gold ran entirely around the platform 
 upon the three sides, so that it was inaccessible from the body 
 of the Temple. Beneath this railing, upon the temple-floor, 
 a kneeling-step passed around the platform, also of pearl. In 
 the center of the platform an immense altar of gold arose, 
 supported by seraphs cf gold with outspread wings, one at 
 each corner; and underneath it, in a great pearl basin, 
 a fountain of sparkling water played, and I knew intuitively
<page 121>

 
 118 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 it was the source of the magical river that flowed through 
 the gardens of heaven and bore from us the last stains of 
 death and sin. 
 
 Nothing living, beside ourselves, was within the Temple 
 except two persons who knelt with bowed heads beside the 
 altar-rail upon the farther side; but by the altar stood four 
 angels, one upon either side, dressed in flowing garments of 
 white, with long, slim trumpets of gold uplifted in their 
 hands, as though waiting in expectancy the signal for their 
 trumpet call. Long draperies of silvery gossamer hung in 
 heavy folds back of the altar platform. Suddenly, in the mo- 
 ment that we looked, we saw the draperies tremble and glow 
 until a radiance far beyond the splendor of the sun at mid- 
 day shone through them, and the whole Temple was " filled 
 with the glory of the Lord." We saw, in the midst of the 
 luminous cloud that filled the dome, the forms of angelic 
 harpers, and as we dropped with bowed heads beside the 
 altar-rail and hid our faces from the " brightness of His com- 
 ing," we heard the trumpet-call of the four angels about the 
 altar, and the voices of the celestial harpers as they sang: 
 
 "Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty! 
 
 All thy works shall praise thy name, in earth, and sky. and sea. 
 
 Holy, Holy, Holy, merciful and mighty, 
 
 God in three persons blessed Trinity. Amen!" 
 
 The voices softly died away; the last notes of the golden 
 trumpets had sounded ; " and there was silence in heaven." 
 We knew that the visible glory of the Lord was, for the
<page 122>

 
 INTRA MUROS 119 
 
 present, withdrawn from the Temple which is his throne; 
 still we knelt with bowed heads in silent worship before 
 him. When at last we arose I did not lift my eyes while 
 within the Temple; I desired it to remain upon my memory 
 as it appeared when filled with his glory. 
 
 We walked some time in silence, I leaning upon my 
 brother's arm, for I yet trembled with emotion. I was sur- 
 prised that we did not return into the forest, but went still 
 farther out upon the plain. But when I saw that we ap- 
 proached the confluence of the two streams which issued 
 from the fountain beneath the altar, I began to understand 
 that we would return by way of the river, instead of by 
 forest and lake. 
 
 We reached the stream, at length, and, stepping into a 
 boat that lay by the shore, we were soon floating with the 
 current toward home. We passed through much beautiful 
 scenery on our course that I had not seen before, and which 
 I resolved I would visit in the future, when leisure from 
 my daily duties would permit. Lovely villas, surrounded by 
 beautiful grounds stretching directly up from the water's 
 edge, lay on both sides of the river, and formed a panorama 
 upon which the eye never tired of resting. Toward the end 
 of the journey we passed my sister's lovely home, and we 
 could plainly see her and her husband drinking in the scene 
 with enraptured eyes, from the window of her own room. 
 
 My brother and I were both silent the greater part of 
 the time during our journey homeward, though each noted
<page 123>

 
 120 INTRA MUROS 
 
 with observant eyes the signs of happy domestic life by 
 which we were surrounded on every side. The verandas 
 and steps of the homes we passed were full of their happy 
 inmates; glad voices could be constantly heard, and mercy 
 shouts of laughter came from the throngs of little children 
 playing everywhere upon the flowery lawns. Once I broke 
 our silence by saying to my brother: 
 
 " I have been more than once delightfully surprised to 
 hear the familiar songs of earth reproduced in heaven, but 
 never more so than I was to-day. That hymn has long been 
 a favorite of mine." 
 
 " These happy surprises do not come by chance," he 
 answered. " One of the delights of this rare life is that 
 no occasion is ever overlooked for reproducing here the pure 
 enjoyments of our mortal life. It is the Father's pleasure 
 to make us realize that this existence is but a continuance 
 of the former life, only without its imperfections and its 
 cares." 
 
 " Frank, I believe you are the only one of our friends 
 here who has never questioned me about the dear ones left 
 behind; why is it?" 
 
 He smiled a peculiarly happy smile as he answered : " Per- 
 haps it is because I already know more than you could tell 
 me." 
 
 " I wondered if it was not so," I said, for I remembered 
 well how my dear father had said, in speaking of my brother 
 upon the first day of my coming, " He stands very near to
<page 124>

 
 INTRA MUROS 121 
 
 the Master," and I knew how often he was sent upon mis- 
 sions to the world below. 
 
 I lay down upon my couch, on our return, with a heart 
 overflowing with joy and gratitude and love, beyond the 
 power of expression; and it seemed to me the tenderness in 
 the Divine eyes that looked down upon me from the wall was 
 deeper, purer, holier than it had ever been before. 
 
 " I will reach the standard of perfection you have set for 
 me, my Savior," I faltered, with clasped hands uplifted to 
 him, " if it takes all my life in heaven and all the help from 
 all the angels of light to accomplish it;" and with these 
 words upon my lips, and his tender eyes resting upon me, I 
 sank into the blissful repose of heaven.
<page 125>

<page 126>

 
 CHAPTER XV. 
 
 I shall know the loved who have gone before, 
 And joyfully sweet will the meeting be, 
 
 When over the river, the peaceful river, 
 The Angel of Death shall carry me. 
 
 [Nancy A. W. Priest. 
 
 SO much occurred, and so rapidly, from the very hour of 
 my entrance within the beautiful gates, that it is im- 
 possible for me to transcribe it all. I have been able 
 only to cull here and there incidents that happened day by 
 day ; and in so doing many things I would gladly have related 
 have unconsciously been omitted. Of the many dear friends 
 I met, only a very few have been mentioned, for the reason 
 that, of necessity, such meetings are so similar in many 
 respects that the constant repetition, in detail, would become 
 wearisome. I have aimed principally to give such incidents 
 as would show the beautiful domestic life in that happy 
 world; to make apparent the reverence and love all hearts 
 feel toward the blessed Trinity for every good and perfect 
 gift, and to show forth the marvelous power of the Christ- 
 love even in the life beyond the grave. 
 
 This world, strange and new to me, held multitudes of 
 those I had loved in the years gone by, and there was scarce- 
 ly an hour that did not renew for me the ties that once were 
 severed in the mortal life. I remember that as I was walking 
 one day in the neighborhood of Mrs. Wickham's home, 
 
 123
<page 127>

 
 124 INTRA MUROS 
 
 
 shortly after my first memorable visit there, I was attracted 
 by an unpretentious but very beautiful house, almost hid- 
 den by luxuriant climbing rose vines, whose flowers of 
 creamy whiteness were beyond compare with any roses I had 
 yet seen in earth or heaven. Meeting Mrs. Wickham, I 
 pointed to the house and asked : " Who lives there ?" 
 
 " Suppose you go over and see," she said. 
 
 " Is it any one I know?" I asked. 
 
 " I fancy so. See, someone is even now at the door as 
 though expecting you." 
 
 I crossed over the snowy walk and flowery turf for the 
 house stood in an angle formed by two paths crossing, al- 
 most opposite Mrs. Wickham's and before I could ascend 
 the steps I found myself in the embrace of two loving arms. 
 
 " Bertha Sprague ! I was sure it * -as you when I saw you 
 go to Mrs. Wickham's a day or two ago. Did not she tell 
 you I was here?" 
 
 " She had no opportunity until to-day," I said. " But dear 
 Aunt Ann, I should have found you soon; I am sure you 
 know that." 
 
 " Yes, I am sure you would." 
 
 Then I recounted to her something of my visit to Mrs. 
 Wickham's that eventful day. She listened with her dear 
 face full of sympathy, then said: 
 
 "There, dear, you need not tell me. Do I not know? 
 When the Master comes to gladden my eyes, I have no 
 thought or care for anything beyond, for days and days!
<page 128>

 
 INTRA MUROS 125 
 
 Oh, the joy, the peace of knowing I am safe in this blessed 
 haven! How far beyond all our earthly dreams is this 
 divine life!" 
 
 She sat for a moment lost in thought, then said wistfully: 
 " Now, tell me of my children are they coming?" 
 
 I gladdened her heart with all the cheering news I could 
 bring of her loved ones; and so we talked the hours away, 
 recalling many sweet memories of the earth-life, of friends 
 and home and family ties, and looking forward to the future 
 coming to us of those whom even the joys of heaven could 
 not banish from our hearts. 
 
 Then also another evening, as the soft twilight fell, and 
 many of our dear home circle were gathered with us in the 
 great " flower-room," we heard a step upon the veranda, and 
 as my brother went to the open door a gentle voice said : 
 
 " Is Mrs. Sprague really here?" 
 
 " She is really here. Come and see for yourself." And 
 sweet Mary Green entered the room. 
 
 " I am so glad to welcome you home!" she said, coming 
 to me with extended hands, and looking into mine with her 
 tender, earnest eyes. 
 
 " My precious girl!" I cried, taking her to my heart in a 
 warm embrace. " I have been asking about you, and longing 
 to see you." 
 
 " I could scarcely wait to reach here when I heard that 
 you had come. Now, tell me everything everything!" she 
 said as I drew her to a seat close beside me.
<page 129>

 
 126 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 But questions asked and the answers given are too sacred 
 for rehearsal here. Every individual member of her dear 
 home-circle was discussed, and many were the incidents she 
 recounted to me that had occurred in her presence when her 
 mother and I were together and talking of the dear child we 
 considered far removed from our presence. 
 
 " I was often so close that I could have touched you with 
 my hand, had the needed power been given," she said. 
 
 After a long, close converse had been held between us, 
 I took her to the library, whither the rest had gone to ex- 
 amine a new book just that day received. I introduced her 
 to them all as the daughter of dear friends still on earth, 
 confident of the welcome she would receive. My youngest 
 sister and she at once became interested in each other, finding 
 congeniality in many of their daily pursuits, and I was glad 
 to believe they would henceforth see much of each other in 
 many different ways. 
 
 There was no measurement of time as we measure it here, 
 although many still spoke in the old-time language of 
 " months " and " days " and " years." I have no way of 
 describing it as it seemed to me then. There were periods, 
 and allotted times; there were hours for happy duties, hours 
 for joyful pleasures, and hours for holy praise. I only know 
 it was all harmony, all joy, all peace, at all times and in all 
 conditions.
<page 130>

 
 CHAPTER XVI. 
 
 There is an endearing tenderness in the love of a mother to a 
 son, that transcends all other affections of the heart. It is neither 
 to be chilled by selfishness, nor daunted by danger, nor weakened 
 by worthlessness, nor stifled by ingratitude. She will sacrifice 
 every comfort to his convenience; she will surrender every 
 pleasure to his enjoyment; she will glory in his fame, and exult 
 in his prosperity; and if adversity overtake him, he will be the 
 dearer to her by misfortune; and if disgrace settle upon his name, 
 she will still love and cherish him; and if all the world beside 
 cast him off, she will be all the world to him. [Washington 
 Irving. 
 
 THE current of my life flowed on in the heavenly 
 ways, until the months began to lengthen into years 
 and my daily studies ascended higher in the scale of 
 celestial mysteries. I never wearied of study, though much 
 was taught and gained through the medium of observation 
 in the journeys that I was permitted to take with my brother 
 into different parts of the heavenly kingdom. I never lacked 
 time for social pleasures and enjoyments, for there is no 
 clashing of duties with inclination, no unfulfilled desires, no 
 vain strivings for the unattainable in that life, as in the life 
 of earth. Many precious hours of intercourse were spent 
 in my dear father's home, and sometimes on rare occasions I 
 was permitted to accompany him to his field of labor and 
 assist him in instructing those lately come into the new life 
 with little or no preparation for its duties and responsibilities. 
 On ojie occasion he said to me : 
 
 137
<page 131>

 
 129 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 " I have the most difficult problem to deal with I have ever 
 yet met in this work. It is how to enlighten and help a man 
 who suddenly plunged from an apparently honorable life into 
 the very depths of crime. I have never been able to get 
 him to accompany me to the river, where these earthly cob- 
 webs would be swept from his poor brain ; his excuse being 
 always that God's mercy is so great in allowing him inside 
 heaven's gates at all, that he is content to remain always in 
 its lowest scale of enjoyment and life. No argument or 
 teaching thus far can make him alter his decision. He was 
 led astray by infatuation for a strange woman, and killed his 
 aged mother in order to secure her jewels for this wretched 
 creature. He was executed for the crime, of which in the 
 end he sincerely repented, but he left life with all the 
 horror of the deed clinging to his soul." 
 
 " Has he seen his mother since coming here? Does she 
 know of his arrival?" 
 
 " No; she is entirely alone in this world, and it was not 
 thought wise to tell her of his coming till his soul was in a 
 better condition to receive her. He was an only child, and 
 does not lack the elements of refinement, but he was com- 
 pletely under the control of this vile though fascinating 
 woman. It is said she drugged his wine and incited him 
 to do the dreadful deed while under its influence, because of 
 her hatred for his mother, whose influence was against her. 
 When he came from under the influence of the wine, he 
 was horrified at what he had done, and his infatuation for
<page 132>

 
 witn man 
 an antjd , 
 n\\ the/
<page 133>

<page 134>

 
 INTRA MUROS 129 
 
 the woman turned to loathing but, alas, too late! He 
 would not see her during his entire incarceration." 
 
 " How long was he in prison ?" 
 
 " Almost a year." 
 
 "Has he seen the Christ?" 
 
 " No; he begs not to see him. He is very repentant, and 
 grateful to be saved from the wrath he feels was his just 
 punishment, but though he is conscious that his sin is for- 
 given, he does not yet feel that he can ever stand in the 
 presence of the Holy One. And here, as upon earth, each 
 must be willing to receive him. His presence is never given 
 undesired. I have not yet appealed for higher help ; my am- 
 bition is to lead these weak souls upward through the 
 strength entrusted to me. Can you suggest anything that 
 would probably reach him?" 
 
 " His mother. May I bring her?" 
 
 He thought a moment reflectively, then said : " A wom- 
 an's intuition. Yes, bring her." 
 
 I soon was on my way. I found the poor woman, laid the 
 facts gently before her, and waited her decision. There was 
 no hesitancy upon her part ; in an instant she said, " My poor 
 boy! Certainly I will go with you at once." 
 
 We found my father waiting for us, and went immediate- 
 ly to the great " Horn* " where tbes* " students "-"-would 
 we call them ?-*-staye<l. It was a beautiful great building 
 in the midst of a park, with shaded walks ami fountains and 
 flowers everywhere. To one )uet freed f lom earth it seemed
<page 135>

 
 130 INTRJ MUROS 
 
 a paradise indeed ; but to those of us who had tasted heaven's 
 rarer joys, something was wanting. We missed the lovely 
 individual homes, the little children playing on the lawns, the 
 music of the angel choir; it was tame indeeJ beside the 
 pleasures we had tasted. 
 
 We found the young man seated beneath one of the 
 flower-laden trees, intently perusing a book that my father 
 had left with him. There was a peaceful look on his pale 
 face, but it was rather the look of patient resignation than 
 of ardent joy. His mother approached him alone; my father 
 and I remaining in the background. After a little time he 
 glanced up and saw his mother standing near him. A 
 startled look came into his face, and he rose to his feet. She 
 extended her arms toward him, and cried out pathetically, 
 " John, my dear boy, come home to me I need you !" That 
 was all. 
 
 With a low cry he knelt at her feet and clasped her knees, 
 sobbing: " Mother! mother!" 
 
 She stooped and put her tender arms about him ; she drew 
 his head gently to her breast and showered kisses on his 
 bowed head. Oh, the warm mother-love, the same in earth 
 and heaven! Only the Christ-love can exceed it. Here was 
 this outraged mother, sent into eternity by the hands of him 
 who should have shielded and sustained her, bending above 
 her repentant son with the mother-love with which her 
 heart was overflowing shining upon him from her gentle 
 eyes. I saw my father turn his head to conceal his emotion,
<page 136>

 
 INTRA MUROS 131 
 
 and I knew that my own eyes were wet. My father had 
 explained to the mother that the first thing to be accom- 
 plished was to get her son to the river, so we now heard her 
 say caressingly: 
 
 " Come, John, my boy, take the first step upward, for your 
 mother's sake, that in time I may have the joy of seeing 
 you in our own home. Come, John, with mother." 
 
 She gently drew him, and to our great joy we saw him 
 rise and go with her, and their steps led them to the river. 
 They walked hand in hand, and as far as we could see them 
 she seemed to be soothing and comforting him. 
 
 "Thank God!" said my father fervently. "There will 
 be no further trouble now. When they return he will see 
 with clearer vision." And so it proved. 
 
 After this, by divine permission, I became much of the 
 time a co-laborer with my father, and thus enjoyed his 
 society and his instructions much oftener than otherwise I 
 could have done.
<page 137>

<page 138>

 
 CHAPTER XVII. 
 
 " Some day," we say, and turn our eyes 
 Toward the fair bills of Paradise; 
 Some day, some time, a sweet new rest 
 Shall blossom, flower-like, in each breast. 
 Some day, some time, our eyes shall see 
 The faces kept in memory; 
 Some day their hand shall clasp oar hand, 
 Just over in the Morning-land 
 O Morning-land! O Morning-land! 
 
 [Edward H. Phelps. 
 
 ONE evening, some three years counted by the calen- 
 dar of earth after I had entered upon the joys and 
 duties of the heavenly life, I sat resting upon the up- 
 per veranda of our home, after a somewhat arduous journey 
 to a distant city of the heavenly realm. From this part of 
 the veranda we caught rare glimpses of the river through 
 the overhanging branches of the trees; and just below us, at 
 a little distance, we could see the happy children at their 
 play upon the lawn. Here my brother sought me out, and 
 throwing himself upon a soft veranda lounge near, lay for a 
 time motionless and silent. He looked as wearied as one 
 can ever look in that life, but I felt no anxiety about him, 
 for I knew the rest was sure. He had been absent on some 
 earth-mission much of the time for many days, and I knew 
 from experience that some of the fatigue and care of earth 
 will cling to us on such occasions, till we are restored by 
 heaven's balmy air and life-giving waters. He had not told 
 
 133
<page 139>

 
 134 INTR4 MUROS 
 
 me, as he sometimes did, where his mission had led him, and 
 I had not asked him, feeling sure that all it was best I 
 should know would be imparted. My own duties had of late 
 been unusually responsible, leading me daily to a distant 
 part of the heavenly kingdom, hence I myself had not visited 
 the beloved of earth for a much longer period than usually 
 elapsed between my visits. When last seen, all of the dear 
 ones had seemed in such vigorous health and were so sur- 
 rounded by earthly blessings that I had ceased to feel they 
 needed my ministrations as in the early days of their sorrow, 
 hence I had thrown all of my energies into the work assigned 
 me by the Master. 
 
 At length, after a time of rest, my brother arose to a 
 sitting posture, and regarding me for a moment in silence, 
 said gently: " I have news for you, little sister." 
 
 A thrill like an electric shock passed through me, and in 
 an instant I cried out joyously: " He is coming!" 
 
 He nodded his head, with a sympathetic smile, but did not 
 at once reply. 
 
 " When will it be? Am I to go to him?" I asked. 
 
 He hesitated an instant before saying: " Of course you 
 are permitted to go, if your heart will not be denied." 
 
 " Oh, I must go to him! I must be the first to greet him! 
 Perhaps it may be granted him to see me even while he is yet 
 in the flesh." 
 
 He shook his head sadly at this, and said, " No, dear ; he 
 will not know you."
<page 140>

 
 INTRA MUROS 135 
 
 " Why ? Frank, tell me all and why you think, as I 
 plainly see you do, that it is not best I should go." 
 
 " He was stricken suddenly in the midst of his work, while 
 apparently in perfect health, and has not regained con- 
 sciousness since; nor will he ever on earth. Hence your 
 presence could be no solace to him." 
 
 "When was this?" 
 
 " Three days ago ; I have been with him almost constantly 
 by day and night ever since." 
 
 " Oh, why did you not sooner tell me?" 
 
 " It was thought wise to spare you the unnecessary pain 
 of seeing him suffer when you could not minister to him, 
 and I have come to tell you now that you may go if you 
 still so desire." 
 
 " He will know me as soon as the struggle is past?" 
 
 " Yes, but he will be bewildered and weak ; he will need 
 stronger help and guidance than you alone can give, and you 
 will miss the rapture of the meeting as it would be a little 
 later on." 
 
 " What would you have me do ? You know I will yield 
 to your wiser judgment even against the pleadings of my 
 heart. But I can wait!" 
 
 " I will not say, ' do not go.' You shall accompany me 
 if you wish. I only think that after the first bewilderment 
 of the change has passed, after he has bathed in the waters 
 of the River of Life, he will be better prepared for the de- 
 lightful reunion which awaits him. You remember what the
<page 141>

 
 136 1NTRA ML'ROS 
 
 waters did for you, and how bewildered and oppressed in 
 spirit you were till you went with me that morning, into the 
 river. It is the same with all of us, only where there has 
 been serious trouble with the brain at last, it is even more 
 needed than on ordinary occasions. And that is the case with 
 my brother; he will not be fully himself until the magical 
 waters have swept the clouds from his brain." 
 
 " You are always right, my brother, and I will yield to 
 your wise advice, although my heart cries out to hasten at 
 once to his side. When will you return to him ?" 
 
 " Immediately. There will be little time to wait. With 
 the quickening of the morning light we will be here. My 
 brave-hearted, wise little sister, the delay will be to you 
 neither sorrowful nor long." 
 
 He arose, and, bending over me, dropped a kiss lightly on 
 my brow, and in a moment he had passed from my sight. 
 
 " How strange," I thought, " that even in this matter, so 
 near to my heart, I am able to yield unmurmuringly ! Father, 
 I thank Thee! I thank Thee for the glad reunion so near 
 at hand ; but, even more than that, for the sweet submission 
 in all things that has grown into my life ; that I can yield to 
 Thy will even when Thou wouldst permit it to be other- 
 wise." 
 
 I bowed my head upon my hand and gave myself up to 
 mingled sad and happy thoughts. Was he, this dearly loved 
 one, indeed insensible to his suffering? Would the Father 
 mercifully spare him even the pang of the parting? Oh, that
<page 142>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 137 
 
 the morning were here ! How could I wait even that brief 
 while for the sight of the beloved face! 
 
 Suddenly a soft touch rested upon my bowed head, and a 
 Voice I had learned to recognize and love beyond all things 
 in earth or heaven said : " Have I not said truly, ' Though 
 he were dead, yet shall he live again ' ? What are now the 
 years of separation, since the meeting again is at hand? 
 Come, and let us reason a little together," the Master said, 
 smiling down into my uplifted face. He took my extended 
 hand into his own, and sitting down beside me, continued : 
 
 " Let us consider what these years have done for you. Do 
 you not feel that you are infinitely better prepared to confer 
 happiness than when you parted from him you love?" 
 
 I nodded in glad affirmation. 
 
 " Do you not realize that you stand upon a higher plane, 
 with more exalted ideas of life and its duties; and that, in 
 the strength of the Father, you two henceforward will walk 
 upward together?" 
 
 Again I gladly acquiesced. 
 
 " Is the home-life here less attractive than it was in the 
 earth-life?" 
 
 " No, no ! A thousand times no !" I cried. 
 
 " Then there is nothing but joy in the reunion at hand ?" 
 
 " Nothing but joy," I echoed. 
 
 Then the Savior led me on to talk of the one so soon to 
 come, and I opened my glad heart to him and told him of 
 the noble life, the unselfish toil, the high aspirations, the un-
<page 143>

 
 138 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 faltering trust of him I loved. I spoke of his fortitude in 
 misfortune, his courage in the face of sore trial and disap- 
 pointment, his forgiveness of even malicious injury; and 
 concluded by saying, " He lived the Christianity many others 
 professed. He always distanced me in that." 
 
 The face of the Master glowed in sympathy as I talked, 
 and when I ceased he said : " I perceive that you have 
 discovered the secret which makes marriage eternal as the 
 years of heaven." 
 
 "Oh," I said, " to me marriage must be eternal! How 
 could it be otherwise when two grow together and become as 
 one? Death cannot separate them without destroying; they 
 are no longer two perfect beings, but one in soul and spirit 
 forever." 
 
 " Aye," he answered ; " but having the marriage rite pro- 
 nounced does not produce this change. It is the divinity of 
 soul wedded to soul alone that can do it." 
 
 So he led me on until my soul flew upward as a lark in 
 the early morning. He unfolded to me mysteries of the soul- 
 life that filled my heart with rapture, but which I may not 
 here reveal. At length, to my infinite surprise, I saw the 
 rosy glow deepening across the sky, and k.iew that morning 
 love's morning had dawned for me in heaven. The 
 Master arose, and pointing to the radiance, said : " By the 
 time thou art ready to receive them they will be here;" and 
 with a smile, and a touch that made a benediction, he de- 
 parted.
<page 144>

 
 INTRA MUROS 139 
 
 As I arose and stood with face uplifted to the coming 
 day, I caught in the near distance the triumphant notes of 
 the angels' choral song; and this morning, as though in 
 sympathy with my thought, they sang: 
 
 "He is risen! Hear it, ye heavens, and ye sons of earth! He 
 is risen, and has become the firstfruits of them that slept!" 
 
 I lifted up my voice with joy, and joined their thrilling 
 song; and as they swept onward and the cadence died away, 
 I slowly descended the stairway, crossed the lawn whose 
 flowers never crushed or withered beneath our feet, and 
 sank for a moment beneath the pure waters of the river. 
 I felt no haste, no unwonted excitement or unrest, though I 
 knew that he was coming for whom my soul had waited all 
 these years. The Master's presence had filled me with calm 
 and peace that nothing had power to disturb; had prepared 
 and fitted me for the great happiness lying just before me. 
 
 Uplifted with a new, strange delight, I recrossed the 
 lawn, stopping upon the veranda before entering the house, 
 to gather a knot of cream-white roses and fasten them to my 
 breast. Then going to the library, I refilled the golden 
 bowl with the spicy-breathed scarlet carnations, laying one 
 aside to fasten upon my husband's shoulder. I wanted to 
 myself gather the flowers that would greet him on his 
 coming. I twisted up my hair in the manner that he had 
 most admired, and fastened a creamy bud within the folds, 
 that I might seem to him as I had of old.
<page 145>

 
 140 INTRJ MUROS 
 
 Soon thereafter I heard voices and steps. Listen! Yes, 
 it is the same dear step for which I had so often listened in 
 the old home-life, the step that had always brought gladness 
 to my heart, and sunshine in our home! His step in heaven! 
 I flew to the open doorway, and in an instant was held close 
 in the strong arms and to the loving, throbbing heart of my 
 dear husband. Was there anything more for me that heaven 
 could give! 
 
 My brother, with thoughtful care, passed onward to the 
 upper rooms of the house, and for awhile we were alone 
 together, we whose lives had run, so happily mingled, 
 through the long years of our mortal life. I drew him with- 
 in the house, and in the vestibule again he took me in his 
 arms and drew me to his heart. 
 
 " This is heaven indeed !" he said. 
 
 We passed into the " flower-room," and on its threshold 
 he stood a moment, entranced with its beauty; but when I 
 would have related to him its history, as my brother had 
 given it to me, he said : " Not to-day, my dear ; I have only 
 eyes and ears for you to-day ; all else in heaven must wait." 
 
 So we sat and talked together as in the olden days, and the 
 happy hours came and went, and the day melted into the 
 twilight glow, before we realized it was half spent. Our 
 brother Frank had come to us about the noontide, and to- 
 gether we had gone over the lovely house, had stood upon the 
 broad verandas and eaten of the heavenly fruit. Then we 
 all sat together where I had spent the hours waiting in
<page 146>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 141 
 
 the presence of the blessed Master. I told them much that 
 he then had said to me, and how he turned into triumphant 
 rejoicing the hours which I had anticipated would pass in 
 lonely waiting. The eyes of my dear husband were tear- 
 filled, and he pressed my hand, which he still kept in his, in 
 tender sympathy. 
 
 " Oh, darling, it is a blessed, blessed life!" I said. 
 
 " I already realize the blessedness," he replied, " for has 
 it not given me back my brother and my wife my precious 
 wife!" 
 
 Early the following morning I said to my husband and our 
 brother : " We must go to father and mother Sprague's to- 
 day. They have the first claim, after ours, Frank." 
 
 " Yes, we will go at once," they both replied. 
 
 So together we all started. In the earliest days of my 
 heavenly life I had sought out with much joy the home of 
 my husband's parents, and was by them accorded, as in 
 the earth-life, a warm place in their hearts, and many happy 
 hours had we spent together since. Now we were taking to 
 them a favorite son, and I realized how his coming would 
 bring gladness to their hearts and home. It was a joyful 
 meeting, especially to our mother, and the day was far spent 
 before we arose to return. 
 
 " William," said our mother, fondly laying her hand upon 
 his arm, " yours was a happy home on earth I used to think 
 a perfect home; it will be far happier here," with a loving 
 glance at me.
<page 147>

 
 142 MTRA MUROS 
 
 " I am sure of that, mother. I have my dear wife and 
 Frank constantly with me; and you and my father and 
 Josephine " a favorite niece " to come to here ; and after 
 awhile," with a little hesitation, " the holier joys and privi- 
 leges of heaven." 
 
 We turned to go, and upon the threshold met an aunt who 
 in the earth-life blind and helpless had been a favorite 
 with us all. 
 
 " My dear children," she exclaimed, " how good it seems 
 to see you all again !" 
 
 " Aunt Cynthia!" my husband said fondly. 
 
 " Yes, Aunt Cynthia, but no longer groping helpless in the 
 darkness. ' Whereas I once was blind, now I see,' " she 
 quoted, smiling happily. 
 
 And so it was the Master's touch had rested on the 
 sightless eyes, and, closing to the darkness of earth, they had 
 opened upon the glories of heaven. Marvelous transition! 
 No wonder we left her singing: 
 
 Glory to Him who this marvel hath wrought, 
 Filling my spirit with joy and delight! 
 
 Lo, in my blindness I safely hare walked 
 Out of the darkness into the light!
<page 148>

 
 CHAPTER XVIII. 
 
 Down by the sea, the crystal sea, 
 Where all of the redeemed shall be, 
 Where you and I, beloved, shall go, 
 Our crimson robes washed white as snow 
 In Christ's dear blood what hymns of praise 
 Thro' countless ages we shall raise! 
 There all our loved ones we shall see 
 Think what a meeting that will be 
 Down by the sea! 
 
 [From " Songs by the Sea." 
 
 DAYS lengthened into weeks, and weeks into months, 
 and these in turn crept onward into years, and the 
 duties and joys of heaven grew clearer and dearer 
 with each passing hour. Our home-life was perfect, though 
 we looked forward with joy to the future coming of our 
 son and daughter to make its ties complete. We had often 
 spoken of going together to the great celestial sea, but the 
 time had never seemed quite ripe for so doing. We realized 
 it was one of the great mysteries of heaven, although we 
 knew not just what to expect, since there no one ever seeks 
 to forestall sight by description. One evening I said to my 
 brother : 
 
 " I have a strange desire to go to the sea, if you think it 
 wise that we should do so." 
 
 " I am glad that it is your desire to go, as it is mine to 
 have you. I was about to propose that you and my brother 
 should take together this blessed journey." 
 
 143
<page 149>

 
 144 INTRA MUROS 
 
 " Will you not accompany us?" 
 
 " Not at this time. We will all take it again together, 
 but it is best that now you two should go alone. You know 
 the way. Through the forest that leads to the Tempi?, till 
 almost there; then bear to the right and follow the golden 
 path that takes you direct to the shore." 
 
 So, in the quivering light of the glorious morning we 
 started, full of a holy joy that together we might take this 
 special journey. We entered and traversed the great forest, 
 where the golden light fell through the quivering branches 
 overhead, and birds of gorgeous plumage and thrilling song 
 were darting everywhere. We heard, nearer and ever 
 nearer, the regular dashing of the waves against the shore; 
 and now there came to us bursts of triumphant song and the 
 harmony of many instruments of music. At length we 
 emerged from the forest, and stood mute and motionless 
 before the overwhelming glory of the scene before us. 
 
 Can I describe it as it appeared to me that day? Never, 
 until my lips can speak, and your heart understand, the 
 language of the royal courts above. From our very feet 
 sloped downward toward the shore a golden strand many 
 hundred feet wide, and extending on either hand far beyond 
 the limits of our vision. This strand caught and radiated 
 the morning light until wherever it was visible it glittered 
 and glimmered like the dust of diamonds and other precious 
 stones, and the waves, as they came and went in ceaseless 
 motion, caught up this sparking sand and carried it on their
<page 150>

 
 INTRA MUROS 145 
 
 crests, like the phosphorescence we sometimes sec in the wake 
 of a vessel in mid-ocean. And the sea! It spread out before 
 us in a radiance that passes description in any language I 
 have ever known. It was like the white glory that shone 
 through the windows of the Temple, and beneath this shin- 
 ing glory we caught in the roll of the waves the blue tint of 
 the waters of that sea which has no limit to its depths or 
 bounds. Upon its shining bosom we saw in every direction 
 boats, representing all nations, but in beauty of construction 
 far surpassing anything earth has ever known. They were 
 like great open pleasure-barges, and were filled with people 
 looking with eager faces toward the shore, many in their 
 eagerness standing erect and gazing with wistful, expectant 
 eyes into the faces of those upon the shore. 
 
 Ah, the people upon the shore! " Numberless as the sands 
 of the sea," they stood, far as the eye could reach, far as 
 stretched the shore of that illimitable sea, a great mass of 
 beautiful souls clad in the spotless garments of the redeemed. 
 Many among them had golden harps and various instruments 
 of music, and whenever a boat touched the shore and its 
 inmates were welcomed by the glad voices and tender em- 
 braces ef their beloved ones in the throng, the harps would be 
 held aloft, all of the golden instruments would sound, and 
 the vast multitude would break forth into the triumphant 
 song of victory over death and the grave. 
 
 " Do these people stand here always, I wonder?" I said 
 softly.
<page 151>

 
 146 INTR4 MUROS 
 
 " Not the same people," said a radiant being near us, who 
 had heard my question. " But there is always a throng of 
 people here those who are expecting friends from the other 
 life, and those who assemble to share their joy. Some of 
 the heavenly choristers also are always here, but not always 
 the same ones. You will notice that most of those who 
 arrive are led quietly away by their friends, and many others 
 are constantly joining the multitude." 
 
 He passed onward toward the shore, and left us rapt in 
 awe and wonder. 
 
 We soon became deeply interested in watching the re- 
 unions, and found ourselves joining with rapture in the glad 
 songs of rejoicing. Now and then a face we remembered 
 to have seen on earth would be among the eager faces in the 
 boats, but none that had been especially dear to us; still it 
 made us notice more closely and sympathize more heartily 
 with those who welcomed beloved friends. Now we would 
 see a wife caught in the close embrace of a waiting husband ; 
 now a little child with a glad cry would spring into the 
 outstretched arms of the happy mother; friend would clasp 
 friend in glad reunion, and here an aged mother would be 
 folded to the heart of a beloved child. 
 
 As one boat of more than usual strength and beauty came 
 riding gracefully over the waves, we observed the tall figure 
 of a man standing near her prow with his arms about a 
 graceful woman who stood by his side. Each shaded with 
 uplifted hand from their dazzled eyes the unwonted splendor
<page 152>

 
 INTRA MUROS 147 
 
 and scanned, wistfully and searchingly, the faces of the 
 crowd as the boat neared the shore. Suddenly with a great 
 thrill of joy surging through my being, I cried out : 
 
 " It is our precious son, and his dear wife ! And they have 
 come together!" 
 
 In an instant we were swiftly moving through the throng 
 that parted in ready sympathy to let us pass. And, as the 
 boat touched the shore, with a swift movement they were 
 both beside us the dear daughter already close clasped to 
 the hearts of her own happy parents who were waiting near 
 the water's edge, while at the same instant we felt the arms 
 of our beloved son enfolding us ; and soon thereafter we were 
 all in each other's embrace. Oh, what a rapturous moment 
 was that! Our home life in heaven complete, no partings 
 forever! As we stood with encircling arms, scarcely realiz- 
 ing the unexpected bliss, the heavenly choir broke into song; 
 and with uplifted faces radiant with joy, eyes filled with 
 happy tears and voices trembling with emotion, we all joined 
 in the glad anthem: 
 
 Glory be unto the Father, and unto the Son! 
 Glory be unto the ever-blessed Three in One! 
 No more sorrow, no more parting, no more grief or pain; 
 Christ has broken death's strong fetters, we are free again! 
 Heart to heart and hand to hand, 
 Meet we on the golden strand. 
 Glory, glory to the Father! Glory to the Son! 
 Glory be unto the ever-blessed Three in One! 
 Alleluia! Amen!
<page 153>

 
 148 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 The song rose and swelled triumphantly as the vast multi- 
 tude caught it up, and the surge of the waves made a deep 
 undertone to the melody that increased its solemnity, as with 
 bowed heads and full hearts we passed onward hand in 
 hand ; and the light that fell about us was purer, holier, more 
 divine, than it had ever been before.
<page 154>

 
 CHAPTER XIX. 
 
 Can such things be, 
 
 And overcome us like a summer's cloud, 
 
 Without our special wonder? 
 
 [ Shakespeare. 
 
 A TIME came when one day as I stood in my lovely 
 room that had really become to me a shrine, and 
 looked up into the pictured face of the Christ above 
 me, I fancied that the tender eyes looking down into mine no 
 longer told of a deathless love alone, but carried in their 
 depths a pity, a loving compassion which I had never noticed 
 there before. Then as I turned toward my couch I even 
 fancied that his hands reached out from the canvas and rested 
 in benediction on my head. I stood a moment in blessed 
 peace before him, then as the hands seemed to be withdrawn, 
 I turned and lay down for an instant's rest. But strange 
 thoughts and fancies crept into my brain, such as I had not 
 known in years. I felt confused and bewildered, and started 
 up restlessly from my pillow, only to fail back again in 
 doubt, and something akin to dread. What could it mean? 
 Could the old unrest of earth find place in this divine re- 
 treat ? Then I heard unfamiliar voices. Someone said : 
 
 " Her color is better than it has been for several days, 
 I think." 
 
 149
<page 155>

 
 150 INTRA MUROS 
 
 " Yes, there is no doubt but she is better to-day. There is 
 really hope for her now, I am sure. But she came very 
 near passing through the Gates." 
 
 " Very near passing through the Gates " ! As though I 
 had not passed through, and in returning left them so ajar 
 that gleams of the heavenly radiance from beyond them will 
 fall about my life forever! 
 
 I have been in my Father's house. 
 
 " We shall know each other there !"
<page 156>

 
 SUPPLEMENTAL CHAPTER 
 
 IN the many letters received since the publication of 
 " Intra Muros," repeated inquiries have been made of 
 me on different points contained in the book, requiring 
 much correspondence, and it has been suggested that possibly 
 the addition of a few pages, as a supplement to the book, 
 might explain some matters, or, possibly, make more clear 
 some points that have not been fully comprehended by the 
 reader. 
 
 Let me in the beginning reassert what I have heretofore 
 stated : that I have never claimed that this strange experience 
 is either a revelation or an inspiration. It came to me during 
 a period of great physical suffering and prostration, and I 
 have always considered it as sent in compensation for that 
 suffering. Be this as it may, it has been a great comfort and 
 help to me, and, through the letters received from others, I 
 am led to believe it has been the same to many who have 
 read it, for which cause I am extremely gratified. I wish 
 that I might give the entire experience just as it came to me, 
 but I find that earth-language is wholly inadequate for me to 
 do so. There were so many mysteries, so many teachings far 
 beyond anything that in this life we have known, that I find 
 myself bewildered and lost when I attempt to convey to 
 
 151
<page 157>

 
 152 INTRJ MUROS 
 
 others the marvelous things that at that time seemed indeed 
 to me to be a most wonderful revelation. 
 
 The question has repeatedly been asked me, " Was this a 
 real experience, or merely a fanciful sketch?" What I have 
 written above will as nearly answer that question as it is 
 possible for me to do. The preface and early pages as given 
 in the little volume are as nearly accurate as I can make 
 them; and anything that I might add on that point would 
 simply be superfluous. To me, at the time, it was as real 
 as any experience in this life could possibly be. 
 
 Questions have been asked respecting the comparative dis- 
 tances in heaven and our powers of passing from one point 
 to another; and the question has even been asked if in the 
 other life we developed wings that aided us in passage, as the 
 wings of a bird. These matter-of-fact questions are some- 
 times quite difficult to answer, for my belief is, that if I 
 were really in the other life, as during this experience I 
 seemed to be, my thoughts would be so far above, so lifted 
 beyond such temporal matters, that I would be unable to 
 answer such inquiries satisfactorily on my return to this 
 life. Looking back upon it now, and trying to gather facts 
 from the impressions that I then received, I should say that 
 none who have ever passed through mortal life would in 
 any way be changed from their present personal appearance, 
 except to be etherealized and glorified. When I seemed to 
 stand in that wonderful Temple filled with the Glory of 
 God the Father, four angels with uplifted trumpets stood
<page 158>

 
 INTRA MUROS 153 
 
 beside the golden altar on the great platform of pearl, and 
 from their shoulders shadowy pinions enfolded them and 
 touched the floor upon which they stood. And when, in a 
 moment of bewildering emotion, I lifted my eyes to the 
 erstwhile cloud-filled dome, I saw about the hitherto invisible 
 choir, the shadowy pinions of which we so often read, half 
 concealing the harps and instruments of gold. Also, when 
 at the close of that wonderful day when I had first met the 
 Savior, we heard the angel voices as we stood together in 
 the great flower-room, and, looking upward, saw the child 
 faces in the golden twilight above us, they, too, had delicate 
 shadowy wings, half concealing the baby forms. Except 
 for this, I have no recollection of having seen any of those 
 glorious wings of which we so often read. 
 
 To me it seems that to the angels of God who have always 
 lived in heaven, these are given; but to those who have 
 suffered and toiled and borne the cross below, is given only 
 the glorified form, such as our Savior himself bore. We 
 appear to our friends when we meet them over there just as 
 they saw us here, only purified and perfect. Still, we had 
 powers of locomotion given us that carried us from point to 
 point swiftly and securely, as though borne by a boat upon 
 the waters. 
 
 I do not know how I can better illustrate this point than 
 by giving a little incident not mentioned in the book. I 
 remember, as I sat one morning upon the upper terrace in 
 the house of my sister whom I had welcomed there soon after
<page 159>

 
 154 INTRA MUROS 
 
 my arrival, and who, though really then a denizen of earth, 
 has since passed over and taken possession of that beautiful 
 home prepared for her, that my sister said to me: 
 
 " I often look across the river to those lovely hills in the 
 distance, and wonder if it is all as beautiful there as here. I 
 mean some day to go and see." 
 
 " Why not go to-day?" was my answer. 
 
 " Could you go with me this morning?" was her inquiry, 
 as she turned her radiant face again toward the river and 
 the lovely fields beyond. 
 
 " With pleasure," I replied. " I have often wished to go 
 myself. There is something very inviting in the beautiful 
 landscape beyond the river. Where is my brother Oliver?" 
 I asked; " will he not accompany us?" 
 
 " No," she said, looking smilingly toward me, " he has 
 gone upon an important mission for the Master to-day ; but 
 you and I, dear, can go, and be at home again before his 
 return." 
 
 " Then let us do so," I replied, rising and giving her my 
 hand. 
 
 She at once arose, and, instead of turning toward the stair- 
 way in the center of the building, we turned and walked de- 
 liberately to the low coping that surrounded the upper veran- 
 da. Without a moment's hesitation we stepped over this into 
 the sweet air that lay about us. There was no more fear of 
 falling than if our feet had been upon the solid earth. We 
 had the power of passing through the air at will, and through
<page 160>

 
 fN TRA MUROS 155 
 
 the water, just as we had the power of walking upon the 
 crystal paths and greensward about us. 
 
 We ascended slightly until we were just above the tree- 
 tops, and then what shall I say? we did not fly, we made 
 no effort either with our hands or our feet ; I can only think 
 of the word " drifting " that will at all describe this won- 
 derful experience. We went as a leaf or a feather floats 
 through the air on a balmy day, and the sensation was most 
 delightful. We saw beneath us through the green branches 
 of the trees the little children playing, and the people walk- 
 ing some for pleasure, some for duty. As we neared the 
 river we looked down on the pleasure-boats upon the water 
 and upon the people sitting or lying or walking on the 
 pebbly bottom; and we saw them with the same distinctness 
 as though we were looking at them simply through the at- 
 mosphere. 
 
 Conversing as we drifted onward, we soon were over the 
 tops of the hills to which we had looked so longingly from 
 the veranda of my sister's house, and, for some time, we had 
 no words to exchange ; our hearts were filled with sensations 
 such as only the scenes of heaven can give. Then my sister 
 said very softly, quoting from one of the old earth-hymns: 
 
 " Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood, 
 Stand dressed in living green." 
 
 And, in the same spirit, I answered, " It is indeed a rap- 
 turous scene
<page 161>

 
 156 INTRJ MUROS 
 
 " ' That rises to our sight, 
 Sweet fields arrayed in living green, and rivers of delight.' " 
 
 As we passed onward, in looking down we began to see 
 many suburban villages, similar to that in which our own 
 happy homes were situated. Among many of them there was 
 an unfamiliar air, and the architecture of the buildings in 
 many respects seemed quite different from our own. I sug- 
 gested to my sister that we drop downward a little. On 
 doing so, we soon realized what caused this apparent differ- 
 ence in the architecture and surroundings. Where our homes 
 were situated we were surrounded by people we had known 
 and loved on earth, and of our own nationality. Many of 
 these villages over which we were now passing we found 
 were formed from what, to us, would be termed of foreign 
 nations, and each village retained some of the peculiarities 
 of its earth-life, and these, to us, were naturally unfamiliar. 
 We recognized again the wisdom and goodness of the Father 
 in thus allowing friends of the same nationality to be located 
 near each other in heaven, as on earth. 
 
 As we still drifted onward, in passing over an exquisitely 
 beautiful valley, between low hills of the most enchanting 
 verdure, we saw a group of people seated upon the ground 
 in a semicircle. They seemed to be hundreds in number, 
 and in their midst a man was standing who, apparently, was 
 talking to them. Something familiar, and yet unfamiliar, in 
 the scene attracted us, and I said, " Let us go nearer, and
<page 162>

 
 1NTRA MUROS 157 
 
 hear, if possible, what he is saying, and see who these people 
 are." 
 
 Upon doing this we found the people to resemble in a 
 great measure our own Indian tribes; their dress, in a man- 
 ner, corresponding to that worn upon earth, though so 
 etherealized as to be surpassingly beautiful. But the dusky 
 faces and the long black hair still remained. The faces, 
 with intense interest depicted on each, were turned toward 
 the man who, we could see, was talking to them, and, looking 
 upon him, we saw at once that he belonged to the Anglo- 
 Saxon race. In a whisper of surprise I said to my sister: 
 
 " Why, he is a missionary 1" 
 
 As so often seemed to me to happen in that experience, 
 when a surprise or a difficulty presented itself, there was al- 
 ways some one near to answer and enlighten us. And so we 
 found on this occasion that our instructor was beside us ready 
 to answer any surprise or question that might be asked. He 
 said at once : 
 
 " Yes, you are right. This is a missionary who gave his 
 life to what on earth were called the heathen. He spent 
 many years in working for them and enlightening those who 
 sat in darkness, with the result, as you see before you, of 
 bringing hundreds into the kingdom of the Master. But, as 
 you will naturally suppose, they have much to learn, and 
 here he still gathers them about him, and day by day leads 
 them higher and higher into the blessed life,"
<page 163>

 
 158 1NTRA MUROS 
 
 " Are there many such," I asked, " doing this work in this 
 beautiful realm?" 
 
 " Many hundreds," he said. " To these poor minds, un- 
 enlightened as they were when they first came, heaven is as 
 beautiful and happy a place as it is to any who have ascended 
 higher, simply because we can enjoy only in the capacity to 
 which our souls can reach. There are none of us who have 
 not much yet to learn of this wonderful country." 
 
 In several instances, as we drifted across above the villages, 
 we heard songs of praise arising from the temples, and from 
 people collected in different ways. In many cases, to our 
 surprise, the hymns and the words were those with which we 
 had been familiar on earth, and, although sung in a strange 
 tongue, we understood them all. That was another of the 
 wonderful surprises of heaven. There was no language 
 there that we could not understand. 
 
 On, and on, and on, through wonderful scenes of beauty 
 we passed, returning finally to our own homes by a different 
 way from that by which we had gone forth, seeming to have 
 made almost a circle in our pleasant journeyings. When I 
 left my sister in her own home she whispered to me as she 
 bade me good-by for the present: 
 
 " It has been a day of such wonderful rest and pleasure 
 that we must soon repeat it together." And I answered : 
 
 " Yes, dear, we will." 
 
 In several instances the subject of dual marriages has been 
 introduced. More than once it has been suggested, " If a
<page 164>

 
 INTRA MUROS 159 
 
 man marrying in early life, and, being devotedly attached to 
 the woman he has married, should unfortunately lose her, 
 and after many years of solitary waiting find another con- 
 genial soul to whom his whole heart goes out and marriage is 
 the result, and they have many years of wedded happiness 
 together before she, too, is called, to whom will he belong 
 in the other life?" 
 
 In the many phases of the divine life that seemed to come 
 to me in my vision, such thoughts as the above were never by 
 any means suggested. Speaking from my own natural intui- 
 tions, I cannot but think that as soon as the immortal part 
 of us leaves the earthly tenement, it lays down forever, with 
 that tenement, all thoughts that embarrassed or grieved 
 or pained the spirit. In the homes of heaven there was per- 
 petual love and joy and peace and happiness without meas- 
 ure. This one thing I know: In heaven are no conflicting 
 ties; no questions that vex; no conditions that annoy; the 
 whole heart springs up to do the will of the Father, and 
 nothing less than that will suffice. 
 
 In answer to the question in many instances proposed to 
 me, as to whether I consider this experience as a revelation, I 
 can only say, as heretofore, that I gave it as it came to me, 
 and every one must draw his own inference concerning it. I 
 can be the guide for no one. 
 
 There are some seeming inconsistencies in the book, of 
 which I myself am aware. Looking back upon it after near- 
 ly four years have passed, it seems to me to be more a series
<page 165>

 
 160 INTRJ MUROS 
 
 of instructions such as we give little children here in a 
 kindergarten. It does not purport to be a revelation of 
 what has been or what will be, in the strict sense of the word, 
 but, as I have already suggested, more as we would teach 
 children in a kindergarten. I myself noticed, in transcribing 
 this strange experience, the fact that the first lesson to be 
 taught almost invariably came as an illustration; and, after 
 my wonder and pleasure had taken in all that the picture 
 itself would teach, then followed the revelation, or a general 
 application of its meaning. For instance, that I may make 
 my meaning more clear : When I myself first entered with- 
 in the gates, I was shown the wonders of the celestial gar- 
 dens and the magic of the beautiful river; then the meeting 
 with the dear ones from whom I had been so long parted. 
 And so I came to know the rapture of the disembodied spirit 
 on its first entrance " Within the Walls." Afterwards fol- 
 lowed the instruction or first lessons concerning this life 
 into which I seemed to have entered, until, as I said, the first 
 illustrations and the instructions formed for me but one 
 perfect lesson. And when, as time passed, I met and wel- 
 comed my dear sister, my husband and my son, I knew the 
 other side of the question the joy that came even to the 
 angels in heaven when they welcomed the beloved ones who 
 came to them from the world below. And so, all through 
 the book, the instruction was invariably preceded by the illus- 
 tration. Thus I can but think, if any meaning can be at- 
 tached to this strange vision, that it is simply a lesson in a
<page 166>

 
 INTRA MUROS 161 
 
 general way of what we may expect and hope for when we 
 reach the thither shore. 
 
 Again, the question is many times repeated, " Does this 
 experience retain its vividness as time passes, or does it grow 
 unreal and dreamlike to you?" I can partially forget some 
 of the happiest experiences of my earth-life, but time seems 
 only to intensify to me the wonders of those days when my 
 feet really stood upon the border-land of the two worlds. It 
 seemed to me that at every step we took in the divine life 
 our souls reached up toward something better, and we had 
 no inclination to look behind to that which had passed, or to 
 try to solve what in our mortal life had been intricate or 
 perplexing questions or mysteries. Like the cup that is filled 
 to overflowing at the fountain with pure and sparkling 
 water, so our souls were filled more than filled with 
 draughts from the fountain of all good, until there was no 
 longer room for aught else. " How then," you ask, " could 
 you reach out for more, when you had all that you could re- 
 ceive?" Because moment by moment, hour by hour, our 
 souls grew and expanded and opened to receive fresh 
 draughts of divine instruction which was constantly lifting 
 us nearer to the source of all perfection. 
 
 Some of the letters that have come to me have been so 
 pathetic in their inquiries, that they have called forth sym- 
 pathetic tears, and an intense longing to speak with authority 
 upon the questions raised. That privilege God has not given 
 me. I can only tell how it seemed to me in those blissful
<page 167>

 
 162 INTRA MUROS 
 
 hours when earth seemed remote and heaven very near and 
 real. One suffering mother writes, " Do you think I could 
 pray still for my darling girl ?" How I longed to take her in 
 sympathetic arms and whisper to her that the dear child of 
 her love, I doubted not, was praising God continually and 
 had no longer need of earthly prayer. She loved and trusted 
 the Savior as she went down into the Valley of Shadows, and 
 his loving arms received and comforted her. To all such I 
 would say and many are the letters of like import received : 
 
 " Look up, dear friends, and see the loved ones, as I saw 
 those so dear to me, happy and blessed beyond all human con- 
 ception in the house of many mansions prepared for us by 
 our loving Father." Oh, those wonderful mansions upon 
 which my longing heart looks back! Believe in them, look 
 forward to them, beloved friends, for we have the Savior's 
 promise that they at least are there : " In my Father's house 
 are many mansions." His promises never fail ; and I am 
 sure of one thing they will not be less beautiful than those 
 I looked upon in my vision. 
 
 This thought, to me, answers in a measure the questions 
 asked in regard to dual marriages. My own belief, of this 
 mortal life, is, that no two friends can occupy the same place 
 in our hearts. Each heart is filled with chambers stately and 
 old, and to each beloved guest is assigned a chamber exclu- 
 sively for himself. That room is always his. If death, or 
 distance, or even disgrace, separates him from us, still the 
 room is his and his only forever. No other person can ever
<page 168>

 
 INTRA MUROS 163 
 
 occupy it. Others may have rooms equally choice, but when 
 a guest has once departed from the room he has held in an- 
 other heart, the door of that room is barred forever; it is 
 held inviolate sacred to the departed guest. And so, in 
 heaven, each guest has his separate room or home. " In my 
 Father's house are many mansions. I go to prepare a place 
 (room) for you." 
 
 I am no advocate of second marriages. The thought of 
 two lives alone as one, is beautiful to me; but I do not, all 
 the same, believe that a man sins against the memory of a 
 wife beloved and lost, when he places by her side (not in her 
 place) a good woman to cheer and brighten his home. She 
 cannot, if she would, take the place left vacant in his home 
 and heart; it is inviolate. I speak, of course, of true mar- 
 riages, where not only hands are joined, but hearts and souls 
 are knit together as one forever. 
 
 " What are the duties of heaven ?" So many and varied, I 
 should judge, as to make the question unanswerable. Much 
 in " Intra Muros " shows the trend of daily life. 
 
 " Rest ?" One of the duties as well as the pleasures of 
 heaven. Rest does not of necessity mean inactivity. How 
 often in this life does laying aside of one duty and taking 
 up another bring rest to both mind and body! Still, as I 
 found it, there was at times absolute " rest " for both mind 
 and body in that blissful repose that only heaven can give. 
 
 In but one instance of the manifold letters received was 
 any feeling produced in their perusal except that of pleasure
<page 169>

 
 164 INTRA MUROS 
 
 and gratitude that I with so little physical strength of my 
 own could bring comfort and pleasure into the lives of 
 others. I thank our gracious Father that he has so kindly 
 permitted it. The one letter to which I refer contains so 
 many almost puerile inquiries, that I simply laid it aside with 
 a quotation from St. Paul, " Of the earth earthy," and asked 
 the Father to lift the heart of the writer into a purer light. 
 
 In conclusion I can only reiterate that I am no prophet, 
 I am no seer; but, in my inmost soul, I honestly believe that 
 if the joys of heaven are greater, if the glories " Within the 
 Walls " are more radiant than I in my vision beheld them, 
 I cannot understand how even the immortal spirit can bear 
 to look upon them. R. R. S.
<page 170>

 
 
 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 
 
 Los Angeles 
 This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 
 
 1988 
 
 ,n , 
 
 00| 
 
 oi 
 rol 
 ooi 
 
 Si
<page 171>

<page 172>
