
<page 1>

 
 1 
 
 THE LIBRARY 
 
 OF 
 
 THE UNIVERSITY 
 OF CALIFORNIA 
 
 LOS ANGELES 
 
 GIFT OF 
 
 MABEL R. GILLIS
<page 2>

<page 3>

<page 4>

<page 5>

 
 A LIST OF THE ELSIE BOOKS AND 
 OTHER POPULAR BOOKS 
 
 BY 
 
 MARTHA FINLEY 
 
 BLSIB D1NSMORB, 
 
 ELSIE'S HOLIDAYS AT ROSBLANDS. 
 ELSIE'S GIRLHOOD. 
 
 ELSIE'S WOMANHOOD. 
 ELSIE'S MOTHERHOOD. 
 
 ELSIE'S CHILDREN. 
 ELSIE'S WIDOWHOOD. 
 GRANDMOTHER ELSIE. 
 
 ELSIE'S NEW RELATIONS. 
 ELSIE AT NANTUCKET. 
 THE TWO ELSIES. 
 
 ELSIE'S KITH AND KIN. 
 ELSIE'S FRIENDS AT WOO DB URN. 
 
 CHRISTMAS WITH GRANDMA ELSIS. 
 ELSIE AND THE RAYMONDS. 
 
 ELSIE YACHTING WITH THE RA YMONDS, 
 ELSIE'S VACATION. 
 
 ELSIE AT VIAMEDE. 
 ELSIE AT ION. 
 
 ELSIE AT THE WORLD'S FAIR. 
 
 ELSIE'S JOURNEY ON INLAND WATERS. 
 ELSIE AT HOME. 
 
 ELSIE ON THE HUDSON. 
 ELSIE IN THE SOUTH. 
 ELSIE'S YOUNG FOLKS. 
 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 MILDRED AT ROSELANDS. 
 MILDRED'S MARRIED LIFE. 
 MILDRED AND ELSIE. 
 MILDRED AT HOME. 
 
 MILDRED'S BOYS AND GIRLS. 
 MILDRED'S NEW DAUGHTER. 
 
 C4SBLLA. 
 
 SIGNING THE CONTRACT AND WHAT IT COST* 
 THE TRAGEDY OF WILD RIVER VALLEY. 
 OUR FRED. 
 
 AN OLD-FASHIONED BOY. 
 WANTED, A PEDIGREE. 
 
 THE THORN IN THE NBST.
<page 6>

<page 7>

<page 8>

 
 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 MARTHA FINLEY 
 
 ( Martha Farquharson ~) 
 
 AT7THOR OF "ELSIE DINSMORE," "ELSIE'S CHILDREN," " OLD- 
 FASHIONED BOY," "OUR FRED," "WANTED 
 A PEDIGREE," TC. f ETC. 
 
 " She Is pretty to walk with, 
 And witty to talk with. 
 And pleasant, too, to think on." 
 
 BBKNNOBALT 
 
 NEW YORK 
 
 DODD, MEAD & COMPANY 
 
 PUBLISHERS
<page 9>

 
 Copyright, 187(1, Dodd, Mead, & Company.
<page 10>

 
 PREFACE. 
 
 THE Keith family were relatives of Horace 
 Dinsmore, and as my readers will observe, the 
 date of this story is some seven years earlier 
 than that oi the first Elsie book. 
 
 The journey, and that most sickly season, 
 which. I have attempted to describe, were 
 events in my own early childhood. The latter 
 still dwells in my memory as a dreadful dream. 
 
 Our family a large one were all down 
 with the fever except my aged grandmother 
 and a little sister of six or seven, and " help 
 could not be had for love or money." 
 
 My father, who waa a physician, kept up 
 and made his rounds among his town and 
 country patients for days after the fever had 
 attacked him, but was at length compelled to 
 take his bed, and I well remember lying there
<page 11>

 
 4 PREFACE. 
 
 beside him while the neighbors flocked into the 
 room to consult him about their sick ones at 
 home. 
 
 That region of country is now, I believe, as 
 healthy as almost any other part of our favored 
 land. Such a season, it was said, had never 
 been known before, and there has been none 
 
 like it since. 
 
 H. F.
<page 12>

 
 MIIDRED KEITH. 
 
 Cjjapttr 
 
 " Weep not that the world changes did it keep 
 A stable, changeless course, 'twere cause to weep." 
 
 BBYAOT. 
 
 A SPRING morning in 183- ; winter's icy 
 breath exchanged for gentle breezes ; a faint 
 tinge of yellow green on the woods but now so 
 brown and bare ; violets and anemones show- 
 ing their pretty modest faces by the roadside ; 
 hill and valley clothed with verdure, rivulets 
 dancing and singing, the river rolling onward 
 in majestic gladness ; apple, peach and cherry 
 trees in bioom ; birds building their nests; 
 men and women busied here and there in field 
 or garden, and over all 
 
 ' The uncertain glory of an April <jky. w 
 
 The sun now shining out warm and bright 
 from a cloudless sky, now veiling his face while
<page 13>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 a sudden shower of rain sends the busy workers 
 hurrying to the nearest shelter. 
 
 The air is full of pleasant rural sounds the 
 chirp of insects, the twittering of birds, the 
 crowing of cocks now near at hand, now far 
 away, mellowed by the distance ; and in the 
 streets of the pretty village of Lansdale, down 
 yonder in the valley, there is the cheerful hum 
 of busy life ; of buying and selling, of tearing 
 down and building up ; neighbors chatting on 
 doorsteps or over the garden fence, boys whist- 
 ling and hallooing to their mates, children con- 
 ning their tasks, and mothers crooning to their 
 babes. 
 
 Out of the side door of a substantial brick 
 house standing far back from the street, in the 
 midst of a garden where the grass is of a vel- 
 vety green spangled with violets, and snowballs 
 and lilacs are bursting into bloom, steps a slight 
 girlish figure. 
 
 The face half hidden under a broad brim- 
 med garden hat, is not regularly beautiful, but 
 there is a great deal of character in it ; the 
 mouth is both firm and sweet, the lips are full 
 and red, the eyes are large, dark and lustrous, 
 and the complexion rich with the hues of 
 health. 
 
 She sends a quick glance from side to side.
<page 14>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 1 
 
 clasps her hands together with a gesture as of 
 sudden pain, paces rapidly to and fro for a 
 moment, seemingly striving after self-control, 
 then turning into a path that leads across the gar- 
 den to the hedge that separates it from another, 
 hastens down it, opens the gate and passing 
 through looks about as if in search of some one. 
 
 But there is no one there, and the girl 
 trips gracefully onward to the house, a pretty 
 cottage with vine-covered porches. 
 
 The parlor windows were open and within 
 a little lady of middle age, quaintly attired in 
 a chintz gown very short and scant, and made 
 after a pattern peculiarly her own, was busied 
 with brush and duster. 
 
 Catching sight of the young girl as she 
 stepped upon the porch, she called to her in a 
 remarkably sweet-toned voice, 
 
 " In here, dearie ! Just step through the 
 window. I'm glad to see you." The windows 
 opening to the floor, it was an easy matter to 
 obey, and the girl did so ; then stood silent, 
 her lips quivering, her eyes full. 
 
 " My child, what is it ?" cried the older 
 lady, dropping her duster to take the girl's 
 hand and draw her to a seat upon the sofa, " is 
 is any one ill ?" 
 
 "No, no; not that, Aunt Wealthy!" and
<page 15>

 
 MILD-ROD KEITH. 
 
 the girl swallowed down her tears and spoke 
 with a determined effort to be calm. "But 
 something has happened and mother delegated 
 me to bring you the news. 
 
 "You know father has been talking for 
 some time of leaving Lansdale, and this morn- 
 ing, at breakfast, he told us us children, 1 
 mean he and mother had talked it over last 
 night, and I don't believe she slept much for 
 thinking of it that he had fully made up his 
 mind to move out to Indiana. And we're to 
 go just as soon as we can get ready. 
 
 " There, now you know it all 1" finishing 
 with a burst of tears in spite of herself. 
 
 For a moment her listener was dumb with 
 gnrprise; but it was not in Wealthy Stan- 
 hope's nature to witness distress without an 
 effort to comfort and relieve. 
 
 To lose the society of this family who were 
 her nearest and dearest relatives, would be a 
 great grief to her. The mother, Marcia Keith, 
 the orphan child of a sister, committed to her 
 care in early infancy and trained up by her to 
 I lovely and useful womanhood, was as a 
 daughter to her her boys and girls as grand- 
 children to be loved and petted and rejoiced 
 over after the custom of fond grandparents 
 What a bnely old age for her without them !
<page 16>

 
 M1LDBBD KEITH. 
 
 That was her first thought, the next how to 
 aseuage the sorrow of the weeping girl at her 
 side. 
 
 "There, there, Mildred, dear," she said 
 softly stroking and patting the hand she held, 
 " perhaps you will find it not so bad after all , 
 there must be a bright side tc the picture that 
 we shall discover if we look for it determinately. 
 There will be new scenes, perhaps some adven- 
 tures on the journey." 
 
 " Yes, auntie, very likely ; and I've often 
 wished I could have some adventures ! " Mil- 
 dred answered, dashing away her tears with a 
 -ather hysterical little laugh. 
 
 " You're not going to school to-day ? " 
 
 " No, auntie, no more school for me: that's 
 the hard part of it, for I do so want a good 
 education." 
 
 "WeJ, dear, you shall have books, and 
 your father and mother both educated people 
 will help you ; and who knows but you may 
 in the end distance your mates here? The 
 knowledge we gain by our own efforts, out of 
 school, is often the most serviceable." 
 
 The girl's face brightened. 
 
 "If I don't turn out something worth while 
 it shall not be for want of trying," she said, 
 her cheek flushing, her eyes sparkling.
<page 17>

 
 10 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Then starting up. " I must hurry home ; 
 fur mother and I are going to work with might 
 and main at the spring sewing ; and then at 
 the tearing up and packing. Aunt Wealthy, 
 I m glad I'm old enough to be a help ; there 
 are so many younger ones, you know." 
 
 " Yes, Milly, and you are a great help and 
 comfort to your mother." 
 
 "If if I could only learn her patience; 
 but the children are dreadfully trying with 
 their untidy ways, their mischief and noise. 
 They nearly distract me at times and before I 
 know it I've given somebody a shake or a slap, 
 or if not that , a very uncomplimentary piece 
 of my mind," she added half laughing, half 
 sighing. 
 
 Then with a hasty good-bye she tripped 
 away, her aunt calling after her, " Tell your 
 mother I'll be in after a while." 
 
 Miss Stanhope sat where the girl had left 
 her, the usually busy hands folded in her lap 
 her gaze fixed meditatively on the carpet 
 Presently she lifted her head with a deep 
 drawn sigh, her eye passed slowly about the 
 room resting lovingly now upon this familiar 
 object, now upon that. 
 
 " I don't think they would sell for much/' 
 she said, musingly : " the carpet has been in
<page 18>

 
 MILDRED KEITH II 
 
 wear for thirty odd years and the colors have 
 faded a good deal : the chairs and tab.es are 
 older still and so are the pictures on the walls . 
 that sampler my grandmother worked when 
 she was a young girl which was many yean 
 ago ; and these chair-cushions too " rising and 
 going from one to another, giving to each in 
 turn a little loving shake and pat " she em- 
 broidered and filled with her own feathers; 
 and so I value them more than their weight in 
 gold. Marcia, I think, values them also, but 
 to a stranger, I suppose they would all seem 
 old, dingy and worthless, though to me they 
 are real treasures. I've a sincere affection for 
 them. 
 
 " But what is that to my love for Marcia 
 and her children I what indeed ! " 
 
 She hastily picked up duster and brush, 
 gave a finishing touch here and there, drew 
 down the blinds and left the room. 
 
 A few moments later she might have been 
 seen in bonnet and shawl and armed with a 
 .arge cotton umbrella, issuing from her front 
 gate and walking briskly toward the business 
 part of the town. 
 
 It was nearly two hours before she re- 
 turned, with a step a trifle less brisk, and arms 
 filled with brown paper parcels.
<page 19>

 
 151 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 She passed her own gate and stopped al 
 Mr. Keith's. 
 
 Mildred ran to open it. 
 
 " Why, auntie, how you are loaded ! Give 
 me your bundles." 
 
 " Yes, child, carry them in to yonr mother. 
 I've been to every store in town ; such beauti- 
 ful remnants ! couldn't help buying ! make up 
 pretty for the children ; afraid there's none big 
 enough for you, dear. Am all out of breath 
 with walking." 
 
 " Yes ; it's too bad ; don't say anything 
 more till you've rested," said the girl, leading 
 the way into the pleasant family room, hastily 
 laying the packages on the table, and drawing 
 forward a large cushioned rocking chair. 
 
 " There, sit down, auntie, and let me take 
 yonr things." 
 
 " Aunt Wealthy ! come at last I we've been 
 wondering what kept you," said a handsome, 
 matronly, but still youthful looking lady, with 
 a babe in her arms, coming in at that moment. 
 " And you've been out shopping ? I hope yon 
 were not caught in any of the showers ?" 
 
 " No ; I managed to dodge them ; sand* 
 wiching my walks in between. So you re 
 going to leave Lansdale, Marcia ?" 
 
 " Yes, auntie ; and you ; that's the worst of it'
<page 20>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 13 
 
 The cheery voice faltered over the last 
 and the bright eyes grew dim. 
 
 " Not so fast, Marcia ; who says that Fin tc 
 be left behind?" 
 
 "Aunt Wealthy!, do you mean it? is it 
 possible you could think of such a sacrifice ?" 
 cried Mrs. Keith, starting up and nearly drop- 
 ping her babe in her intense, joyful surprise 
 
 " As what ? " queried the aunt between a 
 smile and a tear. " Marcia, I can't give up my 
 home, as yon very well know; but I have 
 found a tenant for it (the minister and his wife 
 who are perfectly delighted to get it ; for it's 
 their only chance for going to housekeeping ; 
 and they'll be sure to take good care of my 
 furniture and other belongings), and rented it 
 just as it stands, for a year ; and I'm going 
 with you to Hoosier land. 
 
 " It'll be quite an importation of Buckeyes, 
 won't it ? All coming in one lot." 
 
 And the good affectionate old soul finished 
 with a laugh, jumped up from her chair and 
 stretching out her arras to three little r nes who 
 had come running in while she was speakirg, 
 caught them to her bosom, kissed and cried 
 over them, asking, "Are you glad, Cyril 1 
 are you glad, Don ? and Fan, too ? are yon 
 glad that auntie is going with you ?"
<page 21>

 
 14 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 There was a chorus of shouts of delight; 
 there were huggings and kissings, asking and 
 answering of questions; and then things quieted 
 down a little and the children went back to 
 their play, Cyril remarking, as he shut the door, 
 
 " Now I shan't cry when we go ; 'cause all 
 my friends and eolations is goin' along." 
 
 " Now to business," said Aunt Wealthy at 
 tacking the parcels. " I'm going to help you. 
 Marcia, in getting your tribe ready for their 
 exodus out of this land of plenty into that 
 western wilderness. Here are two or three 
 dress patterns apiece for the little girls. These 
 stuff ones are for them to travel in, and I think 
 they had better be made long necked and high 
 sleeved. Don't you ?" 
 
 Mrs. Keith looked up with a slightly puzzled 
 expression ; then a light 'breaking over her 
 face, for she was used to her aunt's transposi- 
 tions " I don't know," she answered du- 
 biously, " wouldn't it make them look a little 
 old-womanish ? Low necks and short sleeves 
 are prettier for children, I think ; and they're 
 used to it. Summer's coming on, too, and we 
 must expect warm weather." 
 
 " What route shall you take ?' 
 
 " Up the Ohio and Erie Canal and round 
 Michigan by the lakes."
<page 22>

 
 MILDRED KEITH 15 
 
 " It will be cool on the water." 
 
 " Yes, that's true ; and I'll take youi ad- 
 rice." 
 
 "That's right; they'll be less likely to 
 catch cold from any little exposure, and theii 
 necks and arms will be protected from the 
 sun. Now, if yon'll tear off a skirt, I'll get to 
 work. I brought thimble and scissors along." 
 
 Those were not the days of sewing ma- 
 chines, and though garments were made in 
 much simpler style then than now, the sewing 
 for such a family as the Keiths was no small 
 task. 
 
 It would take some weeks of very diligent 
 work by three or four pairs of hands to accom- 
 plish what the mother deemed necessary in the 
 way of preparing their wardrobe for the con- 
 templated journey. 
 
 Under the instruction of her mother and 
 aunt, Mildred had already become as accom- 
 plished a needlewoman as either of them. A 
 seamstress had been engaged to assist but could 
 not be had for a few days ; so plans and pros- 
 pects could be talked over freely as the three 
 *at and worked together, Baby Annis asleep 
 in her cradle or playing contentedly .n the 
 carpet at her mother's feet
<page 23>

 
 <%ptrr 
 
 ** The mother, m her office, holds the key 
 Of the soul ; and she it is who stamps the coin 
 Of character, and makes the being who would be a savage, 
 But for her gentle cares, a Christian man." 
 
 OLD PLAY. 
 
 THE striking of the town clock, the ringing 
 of bells, the blowing of whistles and " the 
 schoolboy's glad shout" announced the noon- 
 tide hour. 
 
 A sound of coming footsteps, of gay, young 
 voices, an opening of doors, letting in fresh 
 breezes from without, and with them two 
 bright, blooming, merry little girls and a lad 
 between them and Mildred in age, in whose 
 great black eyes lurked a world of fan and 
 tnisehief. 
 
 " Softly, softly, children 1 " the mother said 
 looking up with a smile as they came dancing 
 kiid prancing in. " Eupert, are you not old 
 enough to begin to act in a rather more gentle- 
 manly way ? "
<page 24>

 
 MILDRED KEIIU. IT 
 
 u Yes, mother, I beg your pai Jon. Y JDI-& 
 too, Aunt Wealthy, I didn't know till this 
 moment that you were here." 
 
 " Mother, he's always teasing," complained 
 the younger of the girls, " he says we'll have 
 to live in wigwams like the Indians and perhapa 
 grow to be as black and ugly as they are." 
 
 " But they're not black, Ada," exclaimed 
 the other, " my g'ography calls 'em red men." 
 
 " Well, that's 'most worse, I'd as lief be 
 black as red." 
 
 " If you're careful to wear yoursunbonaeta 
 when you go oat, you won't grow to be either," 
 remarked Mildred, while Mrs. Keith said with 
 a look of mild reproof, 
 
 " Rupert, my son, was it quite truthful to 
 tell your sisters such things ?" 
 
 "I was only making fun," he answered, 
 trying to turn it off with a laugh, but blushing 
 as he spoke. 
 
 " Innocent fun I never object to, but sport 
 is too dearly bought at the sacrifice of truth. 
 
 ' My boy," she added with energy, " one 
 should go to the stake rather than tell a false- 
 hood ; though it were no more than to say that 
 two and two do not make four." 
 
 " Mother, I believe you would I " he said, 
 gazing with loving admiration into her earnest
<page 25>

 
 18 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 face. " I've never known you to swerve a 
 hair's breadth from the truth in any way, and 
 coming close to her side and speaking almost 
 in a whisper, " 1 mean to try to be worthy oi 
 you in the future." 
 
 She looked at him with glistening eyes, 
 and dropping her work took his hands in hers 
 for a moment. 
 
 The others were not listening ; Zillah and 
 Ada had caught sight of the new dresses, were 
 admiring them and asking eager questions of 
 their aunt and sister. 
 
 tf My boy," Mrs. Keith said in moved tones, 
 " I would rather be the mother of a poor hard 
 working man of whom it could be said that he 
 had always been perfectly honest and true, than 
 of one who had amassed his millions and at- 
 tained to the highest worldly honors by fraud 
 or questionable deeds or words. Remember 
 that all your life." 
 
 " Mother, 1 will ; I have my father's exam- 
 ple to help me as well as yours," the lad replied 
 with a proud glance at the noble, kindly, intel- 
 lectua. face of a gentleman who came in at 
 that instant with Fan in his arms and the twe 
 little boys gamboling about him. 
 
 " Ah, Aunt Wealthy, good morning ! " he 
 aid in a cheery tone, sitting down bes'de her,
<page 26>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 19 
 
 putting Fan on one knee, and lifting the babe, 
 who was laughing and crowing with delight at 
 sight of him, to the other. " I suppose yon 
 have heard the news ? " 
 
 " That you are going to Indiana, Stuart \ 
 Yes. You are not contented to let well enough 
 alone?" 
 
 "Can't consider it well enough to be barely 
 making the two ends meet while a growing 
 family must be constantly increasing my ex- 
 penses." 
 
 "How is this removal to help you? It 
 will cost a good deal." 
 
 " f Nothing venture, nothing have.' I'm 
 going to a new country where land is cheap. 
 I shall invest something in that and hope to 
 see it increase largely in value as the town 
 grows. 
 
 "Then lawyers are not so plenty there but 
 that some more will be needed as people move 
 in, and I hope by being on the spot in good 
 season, to secure extensive practice. 
 
 " It will cost the sundering of some very 
 tender ties," he continued, his face growing 
 grave almost to sadness, " but we are willing to 
 bear that for our children's sake. Is it not so, 
 wife ? " and he turned to her with a smile thai 
 spoke volumes of love and confidence.
<page 27>

 
 20 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 " Yes indeed, Stuart," she answered with 
 uheerful heartiness. "I shouldn't have hesi- 
 *ated for a moment if I had been quite sure it 
 would be the best thing for them ; but, as you 
 *cnow, I'm afraid we can not give them as good 
 in education there as we might here. However 
 we have now decided to go, and I can only 
 hope for the best. 
 
 " And do you know," she went on with a 
 smile directed to the corner where Miss Stan- 
 hope sat, " that since you left us this morning 
 something has happened that takes away more 
 than half the pain of the thought of leaving 
 Lansdale ? " 
 
 " No ; what may that be ? " 
 
 " Oh, I know 1 " shouted Cyril, turning a 
 somersault on the carpet. "Aunt Wealthy's 
 goin' along ! Aunt Wealthy' s goin' along I " 
 
 And then such raptures of delight as were 
 Indulged in by those who had not heard the 
 news before ! 
 
 These were interrupted by a summons to 
 the dinner-table ; but when the blessing had 
 been asked and the plates filled, the talk went 
 on again, though in a somewhat more subd ued 
 fashion. 
 
 "Is there absolutely no danger from the 
 Indians, Stuart ? " asked Miss Stanhope
<page 28>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 31 
 
 "None whatever; most of the tribes have 
 been removed to the far west ; all but one, 1 
 think, and that will probably be taken soon." 
 
 " What tribe is it ? the Wottapottamies ? * 
 
 " Pottawottamies ; yes." 
 
 " Father, will we have to live in wigwams 
 and dress in skins ? " asked Ada, anxiously. 
 
 " No ; we'll have a house ; if it is only a 
 log-cabin, and we'll carry plenty of clothes 
 along." 
 
 " P'raps dey might det losted on the way," 
 suggested Fan. 
 
 "Well, pussy, I think we'll find some 
 stores out there; and if everything else fails 
 we can always fall back on deerskins." 
 
 Lansdale was but a 1 small town ; everybody 
 in it knew the Keiths or knew of them, and by 
 the next day after their removal had been de- 
 cided upon, everybody knew that. 
 
 Many regrets were expressed and there 
 were some offers of assistance with their prep- 
 arations ; but these were declined with thanks : 
 " with Aunt Wealthy 's good help, and that of 
 the seamstress already engaged," Mrs. Keith 
 said " she and Mildred would be able to do all 
 that was necessary." 
 
 They were very busy cutting, fitting and 
 sewing, day after day, from morning to-night
<page 29>

 
 22 MILDRED KE1TR. 
 
 with occasional interruptions from tt ii<l4. 
 ones who were too young to go to school but 
 old enough to roam over house and grounds ; 
 nd being adventurous spirits, full of life and 
 energy, were constantly getting into mischief, 
 thns furnishing, gratis, a change of works to 
 mother and eldest sister, who, spite of a hearty 
 affection for the young rogues, was often sorely 
 tried by their pranks. 
 
 " Have you any cord, Mrs. Keith ? " asked 
 the seamstress, one morning. 
 
 " Yes," turning to her work-basket. " Why, 
 what has become of it ? I had two or three 
 pieces here. And that paper of needles has 
 disappeared ! Mildred did you " 
 
 " The children were here half an hour ago, 
 mother, and I remember seeing Donald peep- 
 ing into your basket." 
 
 " Run out and see what they have done 
 with them." 
 
 Going into the hall, Mildred stood a mo- 
 ment listening for some sound to tell her where 
 the children were. Little voices were prattling 
 in the garden near at hand. Stepping to the 
 door she saw the two boys seated on the grass 
 busied with a kite Rupert had made for them. 
 
 " What are you doing I" she asked, going 
 nearer.
<page 30>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 23 
 
 " Makin' a longer tail." 
 
 " Where did you get that piece of string ?" 
 
 No answer ; only a guilty look on the two 
 chubby faces. 
 
 " Oh, I know ! it's some cord you took from 
 mother's work-basket. And now it's wanted ; 
 but you've spoilt it entirely ; why did you cut 
 and knot it so?" 
 
 " Why," said Cyril, " you see Don was ray 
 crazy man and I had to tie him ; and then I 
 had to cut the string to get it off, 'cause I 
 couldn't untie the knots." 
 
 " Oh, you mischievous fellows. Another 
 time don't you take things without leave. Did 
 you take a paper of needles too ?" 
 
 " No, we didn't ; maybe Fan did." 
 
 Mildred went in search of Fan, and found 
 her digging and planting in her little garden, 
 the empty needle paper lying near. 
 
 " Fan," said Mildred, picking it up, " What 
 have you done with the needles that were in 
 this?" 
 
 " Sowed 'em in dis bed ; and when dey 
 drows up we'll have lots an' lots for mother an 1 
 you." 
 
 "You silly, provoking little puss! nee- 
 dee don't grow. Show me whore yon put 
 them."
<page 31>

 
 84 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 tl Tan't dey's all round and round in de 
 gwond." 
 
 Mildred took up a bit of stick and poked 
 about in the fresh earth for a minute or two, 
 then remarking to herself that it was as boot- 
 less as hunting in a haystack, went into the 
 house with the report of the hapless fate of the 
 missing articles. 
 
 The boys were there before her, penitently 
 exhibiting the ruined cord and promising to do 
 so no more. 
 
 "We didn't fink, mother," pleaded Don, 
 looking up in her face with such a droll mix- 
 tnre of fun and entreaty in his roguish blue 
 eyes, that she could not refrain from giving 
 him a kiss and a smile as she answered, " Ah, 
 my boys must learn to think and not take 
 mother's things without leave. Now run away 
 to your plays and try to be good children." 
 
 " Mother, I do think you're a little too easy 
 with them," Mildred said in a slightly vexed 
 tone. 
 
 " Perhaps ; but if I make a mistake, is it 
 not far better to do so on the side of mercy 
 than of severity f' 
 
 " I suppose so ; I shouldn't like to see them 
 whipped." 
 
 Then laughingly she told the story of Fan's
<page 32>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 25 
 
 doings, and as needles and cord miibt be re- 
 placed, put on her bonnet and sallied forth 
 upon the errand. 
 
 Mildred as one of the prettiest, most accom- 
 plished, graceful, and fascinating young ladies 
 of the place, and belonging to one of the first 
 families, was a good deal admired, and never 
 lacked attention at a party, picnic or any sort 
 of gathering of the young people of the town. 
 
 As she left the store where she had made 
 her purchases, Spencer Hall crossed the street 
 and joined her. 
 
 He was the only son of the wealthiest man 
 in the place and, because of his great expecta- 
 tions, looked upon by most of the young girls 
 and their mammas as a desirable match. 
 
 Mildred, however, was of a different opin- 
 ion, knowing him to be idle, purse-proud, vain 
 and conceited. 
 
 She therefore returned his greeting rather 
 coldly ; heartily wishing that he had not hap- 
 pened to see her, or that something would occui 
 to rid her at once of his undesirable company. 
 
 Greatly amazed would the young exquisite 
 have been could he have read her thoughts; 
 for he had no doubt that she felt highly grati- 
 fied and honored by his notice. Was he not 
 arrayed in broadcloth suit, silk hat and immac-
<page 33>

 
 26 MILDRED KKITH. 
 
 ulate kids, while she wore calico, cotton glovw 
 and the simplest of straw bonnets ? And could 
 not his father buy hers out ten times over I 
 
 His manner was gracious and patronizing 
 as he remarked sauntering along by her side, 
 " Why, Miss Mildred, can it be true that you 
 are going to leave us ? I don't see what Lans- 
 dale will do without you." 
 
 "It is quite true that we are going, Mr. 
 Hall/' she answered, with a slight curl of the 
 lip; "and I suppose my father and mother 
 will be missed ; but I can not think that my 
 loss will in any way affect the prosperity of the 
 town or the happiness of the people." 
 
 " Some people's it certainly will," he said, 
 with increased graciousness, exerting himself 
 slightly to keep pace with her, as she quickened 
 her steps to a very rapid walk. "We don't 
 want to lose you ; might it not be possible to 
 persuade you to remain among us ? " 
 
 " Certainly not ; unless my parents should 
 change their plans and decide to stay. Of 
 which there is not the least probability." 
 
 " Do you know that you are walking very 
 fast, Miss Mildred ?" he said, laughing. " Do 
 let us slacken our pace a little, for who knows 
 when we may have the pleasure of walking to- 
 gether again."
<page 34>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 27 
 
 " You must excuse me ; I am in great haste, 
 But there is not the slightest necessity for your 
 exerting yourself to keep pace with me. It is 
 broai daylight and I know the way." 
 
 " Now don't be sarcastic, my dear young 
 lady. I'd be willing at any time to make a fai 
 greater exertion for the pleasure of your soci- 
 ety ; but if we move so rapidly it will shorter 
 our interview considerably." 
 
 " I have already explained that I am in 
 haste ; there is much to be done in the few 
 weeks before we leave," the girl answered 
 coldly, pressing on with accelerated speed. 
 
 " Haven't time even for a word with an old 
 friend, eh ? Then good-morning, Miss Keith," 
 and turning about in disgust, he sauntered 
 leisurely along in another direction while she 
 sped on her way as before. 
 
 " Is it possible 1 what does the girl mean I ' 
 he ejaculated the next minute, as on turning 
 his head to look after her, he perceived that 
 Mildred had actually stopped upon the side- 
 walkstopped to speak to a mutual acquaint- 
 ance, a lad a year or two younger than himself, 
 who was working his own way in the world, 
 getting an education by the hardest and help- 
 ing a widowed, invalid mother. 
 
 For Frank Osborne Mildred had the highest
<page 35>

 
 88 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 respect, though she looked upon him as a mere 
 boy and was wholly unconscious that to him 
 she was the embodiment of every virtue and 
 grace ; that her words, looks and smiles were 
 treasured up in his very heart of hearts ; nor 
 did she dream how unhesitatingly he would 
 have laid down his life to save hers had it been 
 in danger. It was only a boy's passion, but it 
 was deep and strong. 
 
 The news of the intended removal of the 
 Keiths to what, in those days, seemed a far dis- 
 tant region, had been a great shock to him ; 
 but with the hopefulness of youth he consoled 
 himself with the resolve to follow and seek her 
 out when in the course of years he should 
 earn fame and fortune though she should be 
 carried to the ends of the earth. 
 
 His eye brightened and his cheek flushed, 
 as on turning a corner, he came suddenly upon 
 her in her rapid walk, and she stopped and 
 held out her hand in friendly greeting. 
 
 He took it almost reverentially. 
 
 "How d'ye do, Frank? and how is yonr 
 mother to-day ? " she was saying, her bright 
 eyes looking straight into his. 
 
 "Better, thank you, Miss Mildred. And 
 you are well ? and oh, can it be true that you
<page 36>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 9$ 
 
 are all going so far away ? " he asked with a 
 wistful, longing look. 
 
 "Yes; to the land of the Hoosiers, wild 
 Indians and wolves," she said gayly. " Don't 
 you envy me?" 
 
 " I envy those that go with you," he an- 
 swered, sighing. " You won't forget old friends, 
 Miss Mildred ? " 
 
 " No ; no, indeed, Frank," she said, heartily. 
 " But good-bye. I must hurry home," and 
 with a nod and smile she tripped away ; to 
 the satisfaction of Hall who had jealously 
 watched the whole interview. 
 
 He was glad it had been no longer, though 
 he could not avoid the unpleasant conscious- 
 ness that more favor had been shown to " thai 
 pauper " than to himself, the prospective heif 
 to a comfortable fortune.
<page 37>

 
 " Lessons so dear, so fraught with holy truth 
 Afl those her mother's faith shed oil her youth." 
 
 " Now," said Mildred, taking up her sewing 
 -again, *' I must work fast to make up for lost 
 time, for I've set my heart on finishing this 
 dress of Ada's to-day." 
 
 The words had scarcely left her lips when 
 there came a loud crash and scream from the 
 hall, followed by a sound of tumbling and roll- 
 ing. 
 
 Up sprang mother, aunt and sister, scatter- 
 ing scissors, thimbles and work, and rushed 
 toward the scene of commotion. 
 
 They found the etairs, and Fan, who sat 
 weeping half way up, drenched with water; 
 while at the foot were scattered fragments of a 
 large pitcher, Cyril lying among them half 
 etunned and with the blood streaming from a 
 cut in his head ; Don gazing down upon him 
 from the landing and adding his mite to the
<page 38>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 3t 
 
 confusion by screaming, " Oh 1 oh t oh 1 he's 
 (leaded ! he's deaded ! " 
 
 " No, he ain't," said Cyril, slowly getting on 
 hie feet. " Mother, I didn't mean to. Please 
 don't let Milly scold us young ones. Oh, stop 
 this quick I " putting his hand to his head. 
 
 " Yes, sonny, as soon as possible," said Mrs. 
 Keith, taking his head in her hands and hold- 
 ing the lips of the wound together. " A basin 
 of cold water, Milly, quick ! and aunt, there is 
 sticking plaster in the work-table drawer. Hush 
 Don ; don't cry any more, Fan ; Cyril isn't much 
 hurt and mother will soon make it all right." 
 
 Her orders were promptly obeyed, the wound 
 skillfully dressed, Fan's wet clothes changed, 
 and then inquiry was made as to how it had all 
 happened. 
 
 "Why why," said Cyril, "you see Fan 
 wanted to wash her hands ; 'cause she d been 
 diggin' in her garden and dey was all dirty / 
 and dere wasn't any water in the pitcher and 
 we brung it down and got it full and I wag' 
 carryin* it up and my foot tripped and I fell 
 down with it and knocked Fan over cause she 
 was behind me. And I couldn't help it. 
 Could I, Don ? " 
 
 " No, you touldna help it," assented Don 
 * And Fan touldn't too."
<page 39>

 
 32 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " And he's dot a bad hurt on his head," pat 
 in Fan pityingly. 
 
 " Yes, he's punished enough, I think," said 
 the mother, caressing him ; " his intentions 
 seem to have been good ; but next time you 
 want water, dears, come and tell mother or 
 sister Milly." 
 
 u There, the morning's gone," said Mildred, 
 as bells and whistles began their usual an- 
 nouncement ; " a full hour of it wasted, too, 
 by the pranks of those children. I hope they've 
 finished up the business for to-day I " 
 
 Yain hope ! inactivity was impossible to 
 those restless spirits : their surplus energy must 
 be worked off in some way. 
 
 They had not been heard from for two hours 
 and Mrs. Keith had just remarked that she 
 feared it must be some mischief that was keep- 
 ing them so quiet, when shrieks and wails from 
 three infantile voices, coming from the second 
 story, appealed strongly to the compassion of 
 their relatives in the sitting-room. 
 
 The call for help was responded to as 
 promptly as on the previous occasion. Mother, 
 aunt, and sister flew to the rescue and on enter, 
 ing the room whence the sounds proceeded, 
 found Fan locked in the wardrobe and the two 
 boys seated in the lower drawer of the bureau
<page 40>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 33 
 
 which their weight had caused to tip eo far for- 
 ward that they could not get out without as- 
 sistance. A chair standing so near as to pre- 
 vent the bureau from falling entirely to the 
 floor, had probably saved them from a serioui 
 accident; but there they were, bent nearly 
 double, legs dangling, vociferous screams issu- 
 ing from their throats. 
 
 It was the work of a moment for the laugh- 
 ing mother and aunt to lift up the bureau and 
 release the two rogues, while Mildred sprang 
 to the wardrobe, unlocked it and took the sob- 
 bing Fan in her arms. 
 
 " You poor dear, who fastened you in 
 there?" 
 
 " Cyril did. He said I stealed and must go 
 to jail. And and I was T aid it would de& 
 tumble over ; it shaked so when I tried to det 
 out." 
 
 " The naughty boy !" cried Mildred, flash- 
 ing an indignant glance at him as he and Don 
 crept from the drawer, straightened themselves 
 and stood up looking very much abashed and 
 ill at ease. 
 
 " Mother, I do think Cyril ought to be pun- 
 ished." 
 
 " I didn't hurt her," he muttered, hanging 
 his head ; " and I was goin' to let her out 'fore 
 2*
<page 41>

 
 S4 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 long. And we didn't mean to tumble the 
 bureau over. Did we Don I" 
 
 " No ; it dus went yight over its ownee'f,' 1 
 chimed in th2 little brother. " Pease, mamma 
 we's doin to be dood boys now." 
 
 " You might have been very much hurt if 
 the chair had not been where it was," she said, 
 composing her features and speaking with be- 
 coming gravity, " I am very thankful for your 
 escape, and you must never do such things 
 again. Especially never lock each other into 
 & wardrobe or closet," she added sitting down, 
 drawing Fan to her side and caressing her ten- 
 derly, while Miss Stanhope and Mildred re- 
 stored the contents of the bureau drawers, 
 which the boys had unceremoniously tossed 
 upon the carpet. 
 
 " Why, mother ?" queried the self-constitu 
 ted jailor. 
 
 " Because it is very dangerous. Your little? 
 gister might have been frightened into a tit 01 
 have died for want of air to breathe." 
 
 Cyril's eyes dilated, then filled with tears as 
 he seemed to see the little sister he loved so 
 dearly lying before him white and cold and 
 dead. 
 
 " I won't ever, ever do it again," he said 
 iremulously.
<page 42>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 35 
 
 " No, you must be Fan's big brave brother 
 that she can trust to take care of her and shield 
 her from harm. I don't believe my CyrlJ 
 would be such a mean coward as to hurt a little 
 girl or anything smaller or weaker than him- 
 self, except for that naughty ' didn't think 1' " 
 
 " But I didn't hurt her, mother." 
 
 " Yes, my son, you hurt her feelings very 
 much." 
 
 He considered a moment. " Yes, I s'pose 
 that's so," he said slowly, " Fan, I'll tell you ; 
 I'm real sorry ; and you may be jailor now and 
 lock me up in that wardrobe." 
 
 " No, no ! there must be no more such do- 
 ings," quickly interposed mamma. 
 
 " Dess I wouldn't do such sing !" said Fan, 
 wiping away her tears with her chubby little 
 hand. 
 
 " What a room !" said Mildred, shutting the 
 last bureau drawer and turning to look about 
 her ; " every chair out of place and turned on 
 its side, the bed all tumbled and bits of paper 
 scattered over the carpet." 
 
 " Pick them up, children, and try to keep 
 out of mischief for the rest of the day. 1 must 
 go back to my sewing," Mrs. Keith said, fol- 
 lowing hei aunt, wh6 had already left the 
 room.
<page 43>

 
 36 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Mildred staid behind tc assist in sett ng it 
 to rights. 
 
 " You naughty children ! really I could 
 almost enjoy spanking you all round," she ex- 
 claimed directly, as she came upon the frag- 
 ments of a delicate china vase belonging to her- 
 self, and a valued letter from a friend torn into 
 bits. 
 
 " Milly," said Cyril solemnly, " s'pose wf 
 should get deaded some day ; wouldn't you be 
 sorry I" 
 
 " Suppose I should get deaded," she re- 
 torted, '* wouldn't you be sorry for spoiling my 
 pretty things ?" 
 
 She was ashamed of her outburst neverthe- 
 less, and the child's words haunted her all the 
 afternoon. 
 
 It was evening; two candles burned on the 
 sitting-room table, and beside it sat Mildred 
 and her mother still busily plying their 
 needles. 
 
 The rest of the family were in bed and 
 Miss Stanhope and the seamstress had gone to 
 iheir own homes hours ago. 
 
 " My child, put up your work for to-night" 
 said Mrs. Keith ; " You are looking weary and 
 depressed ; and no wonder, for you have had a 
 hard day."
<page 44>

 
 NILDRED KEITH. 37 
 
 " A busy day, mother ; but not so hard as 
 yours, because I have had a walk in the fresh 
 air while you have been stitch, stitching from 
 early morning till now. And if you don't for- 
 bid it I shall sit up and work as long as you 
 do. I consider it one of the eldest daughter's 
 privileges to share her mother's burdens." 
 
 " My dear girl ! you are a comfort to me I 
 I thank God for you every day," the mother 
 said, looking at her with dewy eyes and a 
 beautiful smile, " but because you are young 
 and growing, you need more rest and sleep 
 than I do. So go, daughter, and never mind 
 leaving me." 
 
 " Mayn't I stay a little longer," pleaded the 
 girl, " I want one of our nice confidential talks. 
 O mother, I am so disgusted with myself! I 
 was very angry with Cyril and Don to-day 
 when I found they'd broken that vase I valued 
 eo because you gave it to me as a birthday 
 present ; and it was so pretty too and torn up 
 that sweet letter dear Miss Grey wrote me just 
 before she died." 
 
 "Indeed! I didn't know they had done 
 such damage and I am very sorry for your loss, 
 dear ! " 
 
 "Yes, mother, I knew you would be; my 
 loss of temper, though, was worse than all. I
<page 45>

 
 38 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 do wish I knew how you contrive always to b 
 eo patient." 
 
 " I'm afraid it's very often all on the out* 
 *ide," the mother answered with a slight smile. 
 '* But I find it a great help in bearing patiently 
 with the little every day worries, to think of 
 them as sent, or permitted, by my best Friend 
 One who never makes a mistake for my 
 growth in grace ; for you know we grow strong 
 by resistance." 
 
 " Well, mother, I am constantly resolving 
 that I will not give way to my temper, and yet I 
 keep on doing so ; and I grow so discouraged and 
 eo disgusted with myself. What shall I do?" 
 
 " My child, watch and pray. Our suffi- 
 ciency is of God. He is our strength. And 
 do not look at yourself; try to forget self alto- 
 gether in ' looking unto Jesus;' get your mind 
 and heart full of his lovely image, so full that 
 there will be no room in it for aught else ; and 
 thus shall you grow into His likeness." 
 
 Mildred's eyes shone as she looked up _nto 
 her mother's earnest face. 
 
 " I am sure that must be the way," she said, 
 low and feelingly, " and I will try it ; for I do 
 long to be like Him, mother ; for He is indeed 
 to me, ' the chiefest among ten thousand and 
 the one altogether lovely 1 ' "
<page 46>

 
 MILDRED KE11H. 39 
 
 * Oh, how good He is to me 1 " ejaculated 
 the mother, glad tears shining in her eyes: 
 " that you might learn thus to know and love 
 Him has been the burden of my prayer for you 
 for each of my dear children since they first 
 saw the light." 
 
 They worked on in silence for some min- 
 utes, then Mildred seeing a smile playing about 
 her mother's lips, asked what was the thought 
 that provoked it. 
 
 " A reminiscence of some of your infautilo 
 pranks," her mother answered laughing. " You 
 should be forbearing with your little brother 
 and sisters for you were fully as mischievous as 
 they are. 
 
 " Before you could walk I caught you one 
 day seated in the middle of the table set for 
 tea, your hand in the sugar bowl, your mouth 
 full and your face well besmeared. 
 
 " You were a great climber and it was dif- 
 ficult to keep anything out of your way; and 
 as soon as Rupert could creep he followed you 
 into danger and mischief ; pulling things about, 
 breaking, tearing, cutting, climbing fences and 
 trees, and even getting out of windows on to 
 roofs. 
 
 " Besides, you had a perfect mania for fcast- 
 ing everything that could possibly be eaten or
<page 47>

 
 40 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 drunk soap, candles, camphor, lye, medicines 
 whatever you could lay your hands on till I 
 was in constant fear for your lives." 
 
 " Tou poor, dear mother, what a time you 
 must have had with us 1 " exclaimed the girl. 
 " We can never hope to repay you for your 
 patient love and care." 
 
 " My child, I have always felt that my dar- 
 lings paid for their trouble as they went along j 
 their love has always been so sweet to me," 
 Mrs. Keith answered, cheerily. " And I can 
 not tell you how much I enjoy the sweet so- 
 ciety and confidence of my eldest daughter 
 the knowledge that she has no secrets from 
 me." 
 
 " I have not, indeed," Mildred said, heart- 
 ily, " as why should I ? knowing as I do that 
 my mother is my best and wisest, as well as 
 dearest earthly friend." 
 
 Then recalling the events of the morning 
 she gave a laughing account of her interview 
 with Spencer Hall. 
 
 " If I could contemplate the possibility of 
 leaving you behind it would certainly not be 
 in his care," her mother said, joining in her 
 merriment, "and I am glad you have senso 
 enough not to fancy him." 
 
 " Truly I do not in the least ; though many
<page 48>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 41 
 
 of the girls consider him a great catch becaaee 
 of his father's wealth," said Mildred. " But 
 really I don't believe he meant anything, and 
 J felt like showing him that I understood that 
 very well and resented his trifling ; and 
 wouldn't have been much better pleased if 
 he had been in earnest "
<page 49>

 
 And, like some low and mournful spell, 
 To whisper but one word farewell." 
 
 PAEK BENJAMHT. 
 
 ONE sweet June morning an expectant 
 group gathered in the shade of the vine- 
 wreathed porch of Miss Stanhope's pretty cot- 
 tage. It consisted of that good lady herself 
 Mr. and Mrs. Keith and their eight children, 
 all attired in neat traveling costume, and await- 
 ing the coming of the stage coach which was to 
 carry them the first step of their journey to the 
 nearest town situate on the Ohio and Erie 
 Canal. 
 
 Mr. and Mrs. Park, the new occupants of 
 the cottage, were there too, and a few old 
 neighbors and friends who had run in for a last 
 good-bye. 
 
 Mrs. Keith and Mildred turned now and 
 tnen, a tearful lingering look upon their de- 
 serted home and this other which was equally 
 familiar, almost equally dear; Miss Stanhope
<page 50>

 
 MILDRED KEITH 48 
 
 seemed to have some ado to control her feelings 
 of sadness and anxiety for the future ; but Mr. 
 Keith was in fine spirits in which the children 
 evidently shared very largely 
 
 Eager to be off, they moved restlessly about 
 asking again and again, " When will the stage 
 coine?" and kept sending out reconnoitering 
 parties to see if there were any signs of its ap- 
 proach. 
 
 At length they espied it and announced the 
 fact with joyful exclamations as its four pran- 
 cing steeds carne sweeping around the corner 
 and, swaying and rolling, it dashed up to the 
 gate. 
 
 The driver drew rein, the guard sprang 
 from his lofty perch, threw open the door and 
 let down the steps. 
 
 There were hurried embraces and farewells, 
 a hasty stowing away of bags, bundles, and 
 passengers large and small, in the inside, and 
 of more bulky baggage in the boot of the coach, 
 the steps were replaced, the door slammed to, 
 and amid waving }f handkerchiefs and a chorus 
 of good-byes anc good wishes, the " toot . 
 toot 1" of the guard's horn, the crack of the 
 soaehman's whip, they swept away down the 
 street, looking, in all probability, their iast 
 upon many a well knowt object, many a friendly
<page 51>

 
 44 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 face, nodding and smiling to them from door or 
 window. 
 
 Frank Osborne, at work in his mother's gar 
 den, dropped his hoe to lift his hat and bow as 
 the stage passed, and to gaze after it with a. 
 longing, lingering look. 
 
 Spencer Hall, standing, cigar in mouth, on 
 the steps of his father's mansion, did likewise. 
 
 But Mildred had turned her head away, pur- 
 posely, and did not see him. 
 
 Never before had Lansdale put on so invit- 
 ing an appearance, or the surrounding country 
 looked so lovely as to-day, while they rolled 
 onward through the valley and over the hills 
 now clothed in all the rich verdure of early sum- 
 mer and basking in the brilliant sunlight occa- 
 sionally mellowed and subdued by the flitting 
 shadow of some soft, white, fleecy like cloud 
 floating in the deep azure of the sky. 
 
 A few hours' drive took our travellers to the 
 town where they were to exchange the stage for 
 the canal boat, the packet Pauline. She lay at 
 the wharf, and having dined comfortably at a 
 hotel near by, they went on board, taking with 
 them the luggage brought by the stage. 
 
 Their household goods had been dispatched 
 on the same route some days before. 
 
 Here they were in quarters only less con
<page 52>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 45 
 
 fined than those of the stage, the Panliue'a 
 cabin being so narrow that when the table wa& 
 to be set for a meal, most of the passengers had 
 to go on deck to be out of the way. 
 
 All along the side of the cabin ran ft 
 cushioned seat ; used for that purpose in the 
 daytime and as a lower berth at night ; other 
 helf-like berths being then set up over it ; all so 
 narrow that the occupant could scarcely turn 
 upon his couch ; and the upper ones so close to 
 the ceiling that it required some care to avoid' 
 striking the head against it in getting in or out. 
 Also there was an unpleasant dampness about 
 the bedding. 
 
 In the cool of the evening or when the sun 
 was clouded, the deck was the favorite place of 
 resort ; but there a constant lookout for bridge* 
 must be kept, and to escape them it was some- 
 times necessary to throw one's self flat upon 
 the deck ; not the most pleasant of alternatives 
 
 The progress of these packets was so slow 
 too, that it tool' nearly a week to reach Cleve- 
 land from the point where our friends em- 
 Varked. 
 
 But thia mode of travel had its compensa- 
 tions. One was the almost absolute safety; 
 another the ease with which the voyager could 
 step ashore when the boat was in a lock and
<page 53>

 
 46 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 refresh himself with a brisk walk along the 
 tow-path ; boarding her again when the next 
 lock was reached. 
 
 This was done daily by some of the Keith 
 family, even the very little ones being some- 
 times allowed the treat when the weather and 
 walking were fine and the distance was not too 
 great. 
 
 Passengers were constantly getting off and 
 on at the locks and the towns along the route, 
 and often the boat was crowded. It was so 
 the first night that our friends spent c.n board ; 
 babies cried, older children fretted and some 
 grown people indulged in loud complaints of 
 scant and uncomfortable accommodations ; 
 altogether the cabin was a scene of confusion 
 and the young Keiths felt very forlorn. 
 
 But mother, aunt and older sister were very 
 patient, soothed, comforted, and at length suc- 
 ceeded in getting them all to sleep. 
 
 Then Aunt Wealthy, saying that she felt 
 disposed to lie down and rest beside the chil- 
 dren, persuaded Mrs. Keith and Mildred to go 
 upon deck for an hour to enjoy the moonlight 
 and the pleasant evening breeze with Mr. Keith 
 tnd Eupert, who had been there ever since 
 anpper. 
 
 Mr. Keith helped his wife and daughter up
<page 54>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 47 
 
 the short flight cf steps that led from the stern 
 to the deck, and found them seats on some of 
 their own trunks. 
 
 There were a number of other passengers 
 sitting about or pacing to and fro ; among 
 the former a burly German who sat flat on the 
 deck at the stern end of the boat, his long legs 
 dangling over the edge, his elbow on his knee 
 and his bearded chin in his hand, gazing out 
 idly over the moonlight landscape, while 
 wreaths of smoke from a pipe in his mouth, 
 curled slowly up from his lips. 
 
 The Pauline glided onward with easy pleas 
 ant motion ; all had grown quiet in the cabin 
 below and the song of the bullfrogs, the dull 
 thud of the horses' hoofs and the gentle rush of 
 the water against the sides of the boat, were the 
 only sounds that broke the stillness. 
 
 " How nice it is here !" exclaimed Mildred, 
 * the breeze is so refreshing, the moonlight so 
 bewitching !" 
 
 "Yes, the country is looking beautiful/ 
 said her mother, " and one gets a good view 
 of it here ; but I feel somewhat apprehensive in 
 regard to the bridges. We must be on the 
 watch for them and dodge in time." 
 
 " "We will," said her husband ; " though we 
 may pretty safely trust to the steersman ; ?t is-
<page 55>

 
 18 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 his duty to be on the lookout and give timely 
 warning." 
 
 " Well, we're facing in the right direction 
 to see them," remarked Rupert, " but thkt 
 Dutchman back there is not. 1 s'pose he's safe 
 enough, though, with the man at the helm to 
 eing out as we near them." 
 
 "With that they fell into talk on other 
 topics, and thought no more of the smoker. 
 
 " Bridge !" sang out the steersman, and 
 xiown went every head except that of the Ger- 
 uian, who sat and smoked on unmoved. 
 
 " Bridge !" The cry was repeated in louder 
 more emphatic tones. 
 
 " Yah, pridge, pridge 1" responded the 
 German straightening up a little, nodding hia 
 iiead assentingly, but not looking round. 
 
 " Bridge !" sang out the steersman for the 
 thir^ time, " bridge, you stupid lout 1 dodge 
 or"- 
 
 But the boat was already sweeping under, 
 *md the bridge taking the German across hia 
 uhoulders threw him with sudden violence to 
 the platform below, whence he rolled over into 
 the canal, uttering a half stifled cry for help 
 le the water closed over him. 
 
 But he rose again instantly panting and 
 spluttering, and striking out vigorously fo
<page 56>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. * 
 
 the boat ; he presently succeeded :n laying 
 hold of the edge of the platform, and, the 
 steersman lending him a helping hand, clam, 
 bered on board, crestfallen and dripping, whi] 
 the crowd on deck, seeing him safe, indulged 
 in a hearty laugh at his expense. 
 
 " I loss mein bipe," he said ruefully, shrug- 
 ging his shoulders and shaking the water from 
 his clothes. 
 
 " Well, you got a free bath in exchange and 
 may be thankful you didn't lose your life," re- 
 marked the steersman with a grin. " Next 
 time I call out bridge I guess you'll duck your 
 head like the rest." 
 
 The rain had been falling heavily all night, 
 but the sun shone brightly, and the clouds were- 
 flying before a high wind that blew fresh and 
 cool from Lake Erie as the Pauline glided 
 quietly into Cleveland. 
 
 "What a beautiful city!" exclaimed the 
 young Keiths as they stepped ashore. " Do 
 let us walk to the hotel, father, if it is not too- 
 for." 
 
 "Just as Aunt Wealthy and your mother 
 say," he replied, taking the baby from his wife. 
 " I am told it is but a short distance, Marcia ; 
 1 will have our heavy baggage carried directly 
 to the steamer which leaves this afternoon j, 
 3
<page 57>

 
 -SO MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 *nd Rupert and the girls can take charge of the 
 satchels and small packages." 
 
 The ladies decided in favor of tho walk as 
 afiording agreeable exercise and enabling them 
 to see the city to better advantage than if cooped 
 up in hack or omnibus, and no one regretted 
 their choice: they found the wide streets so clean, 
 the breeze so refreshing and exhilarating, and en- 
 joyed so very much gazing upon the tall, elegant 
 looking houses and the pretty things displayed 
 in the windows of the large, handsome stores. 
 
 After a good dinner at the hotel, Mr. Keith 
 his wife and older children, went out for another 
 etroll about the city ; Miss Stanhope, who in- 
 sisted that she had had exercise enough, and 
 preferred to stay where she was, taking charge 
 of the little ones in their absence. 
 
 On the return of the pedestrians the whole 
 party went on board the steamer which was to 
 convey them across the lake to Detroit. It 
 was a fine boat, the cabin large and handsome; 
 staterooms on each side furnished with berths 
 of far more comfortable size than those of the 
 canal packets. 
 
 The table here was better, too, both in its 
 appointments and the quality of the food, and 
 was set in a lower saloon, reached from the 
 Capper one by a flight of broad winding stairs.
<page 58>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 51 
 
 The children were delighted with the 
 change and wanted to be on the guards all 
 afternoon, watching the play of the great stero 
 wheel, admiring the rainbows in the clouds oi 
 epray it sent up, looking out over the widt 
 waste of waters, at the islands and an occasional 
 passing boat, or racing back and forth. 
 
 Mildred and Rupert were given charge oi 
 the three little ones and found great vigilance 
 necessary to prevent Cyril and Don from putting 
 themselves in peril of their lives. Mildred was 
 more than once sorely tempted to shake the 
 young rogues who gave her no peace ; but, re- 
 membering and acting upon her mother's ad- 
 vice, was able to restrain herself and treat them 
 with uniform gentleness. 
 
 She felt rewarded when, as she was putting 
 them to bed, her mother being busy with the 
 babe, Don threw his arms impulsively round 
 her neck and kissing her again and again, said 
 " I loves you, Milly ; you so dood to us naughty 
 chillens." 
 
 "That she is!" assented Cyril, heartily, 
 an' I wish I didn't be so baa." 
 
 " Well, try again to-morrow to be ever so 
 good," Mildred answered, tucking them in and 
 leaving them with a good-night kiss. 
 
 She helped her sisters with their prepara
<page 59>

 
 58 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 tions for the night, then was rewarded with 
 delightful evening spent with the older mem- 
 bers of the family in the open air, looking out 
 upon the beautiful wide expanse of waters, now 
 starlit and anon illumined by the silvery rays 
 of the moon as she rose apparently from the 
 distant eastern edge of the lake and slowly as- 
 cended the azure vault of the heavens, now 
 shining resplendently and again veiling her 
 fair face for a moment with a thin floating 
 cloud. 
 
 The next morning the steamer lay at anchor 
 in Detroit harbor and our friends left her for a 
 hotel in what was then the principal street of 
 the city. Here, too, they walked out to view 
 the land, and passing the stores and public 
 buildings, found well-shaded streets and hand- 
 gome residences with pretty door-yards in 
 front. 
 
 Mr. Keith gave his children their choice of 
 passing around tHe lakes in a steamer or in the 
 sloop Queen Charlotte. They chose the latler 
 and the next morning the family and their Ing- 
 gage were transferred to her decks. 
 
 The ladies pointed out the articles they 
 wished carried to their staterooms and followed 
 3n the wake of the bearers. 
 
 There was less of show here than on the
<page 60>

 
 MILDRED RE1TB. 63 
 
 steamer they had left, but comfort and conve- 
 nience had not been overlooked, and though 
 Mildred's face clouded a little, it brightened 
 again in a moment as she noted the cheerful 
 content in those of her mother and aunt. 
 
 They hurried on deck again where Rupert 
 had been left in charge of the younger children, 
 to watch the vessel getting under way. 
 
 They were lying close to a steamer on whose 
 other side was a second sloop in quite as close 
 proximity. All seemed hurry and bustle on 
 board the three. 
 
 " I don't see how we are to start," observed 
 Mildred, glancing up at the sails which hung 
 almost motionless on the masts, " for there's 
 scarcely a breath of wind." 
 
 " Don't you see that they're lashing us and 
 the Milwaukee yonder fast to the steamboat, 
 one on each side I" said Rupert. " She's to tow 
 both till the wind gets up." 
 
 " Oh, is that the way ? she'll have hard work 
 to do it, I should think." 
 
 " Shs won't growl any way." 
 
 " No, I suppose not. Which is the captain, 
 Ru.T 
 
 " That nice jolly looking chap over yonder, 
 that's giving orders in such a loud peremptory 
 tone, is Captain Wells, master of the ship ; that
<page 61>

 
 64 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 blue eyed, brown haired, rosy cheeked stripling 
 standing near is his son, Edward Wells ; and 
 they're both English ; so don't remind them that 
 this vessel was taken from the British in the 
 last war." 
 
 " Of course not, unless they say something 
 mean or exasperating about Washington 01 
 America." 
 
 " In that case I give you leave to twit 'em 
 as hard as you like." 
 
 "Who was that nice looking man that 
 helped us on board ? I thought father or some- 
 body called him captain." 
 
 " So he is, Captain Jones ; but acting aa 
 first mate here. That lady, talking to mother 
 md Aunt Wealthy, is his wife. They're both 
 Tankees ; so you can relieve your mind occa- 
 lionally on the subject of the ship, by a little 
 private exultation with them. 
 
 " Do yon notice the contrast between those 
 \wo faces ? mother's and Mrs. Jones' ; hers so 
 iark, mother's so beautifully fair and rosy." 
 
 " Who could help noticing it ? Kupert, I 
 dc think our mother has just the loveliest face 
 in the world!" 
 
 " Ditto 1" he said, gazing at her with a 
 world of filial love, pride and chivalrrc admira- 
 tion in his handsome eyes.
<page 62>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 55 
 
 " 1 say what's the use ? you may just as well 
 set still where you hare," growled a voice near 
 at hand. 
 
 The young people turned involuntarily at 
 the sound, and perceived that the speaker was a 
 burly, red-faced young Englishman ; the one so 
 politely and kindly addressed, a little meek- 
 eyed woman of the same nationality, with a 
 chalky complexion, and washed out appearance 
 generally, who, as they afterward learned, and 
 suspected at the time, was the wife of his 
 bosom. 
 
 "'"What a bear!' exclaimed Kupert in an 
 aside to his sister, and drawing her away as he 
 spoke. " See, we're beginning to move. 
 Let's go over to the other side where we can 
 have a better view." 
 
 " I presume that's what she wanted to do," 
 remarked Mildred, glancing back at the meek- 
 eyed woman. " And why shouldn't he have 
 let her?" 
 
 " "Why, indeed, except that he's a cowardly 
 bully." 
 
 " How do you know ?" 
 
 " Because that's the only kind of man that 
 would speak so to a decent woman/
<page 63>

 
 " Hark I to the hurried question of despair : 
 1 Where is my child f and echo answers ' where f 
 
 BTBOH. 
 
 ' How did you learn all you've been telling 
 me, Eu. ?" asked Mildred as they stood side by 
 side watching with interest the Queen Char- 
 lotte and her consorts slowly clearing the har- 
 bor. " Oh, easily enough ; young Wells and I 
 got into talk while you and the others were 
 down in the cabin ; I asked questions and he 
 answered 'em. Ah, here he comes," he added 
 looking round, " I'll introduce him for he's a 
 nice fellow, I'm sure, and it's a good thing to 
 have a friend at court ; in other words to be in 
 favor with the reigning powers ; i. e. the cap- 
 tain and his nearest of kin. My sister, Miss 
 Mildred Keith, Mr. Wells." 
 
 " Happy to make your acquaintance, Miss,' 
 said the young sailor, gallantly, lifting his hat 
 and bowing low. " Hope yon'll enjoy your 
 voyage on the Queen Charbtte Shall be most
<page 64>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 51 
 
 happy to do all I can to make the trip pleasant 
 to you 
 
 " Thank you kindly." 
 
 He began at once by finding comfortable 
 seats for them where they were sheltered from 
 the sun, and had a good view of the Canada 
 and Michigan shores; and being acquainted 
 with the localities, and their history, and pos- 
 sessed of a ready command of language, he 
 added much to the interest of the scene by the 
 information he imparted ; sometimes unsolicited, 
 at others in answer to questions. 
 
 When they had passed through Detroit 
 river and so far out into Lake St. Glair that 
 little could be seen but water and sky, he 
 offered to show them over the vessel. 
 
 They gladly accepted, enjoyed the tour, and 
 when it was over rejoined the rest of their party 
 just as the cabin passengers were summoneil 
 to the supper table. 
 
 Mildred was seated between Kupert and 
 Elward Wells; opposite them sat Mr. and 
 Mrs. Sims, the bullying Euglishman and hie 
 meek-eyed wife, and a bachelor gentleman of 
 pleasing countenance and manners, whom Cap- 
 tain Wells addressed as Mr. Carr. Next them 
 were Captain and Mrs. Jones. There were 
 many more passengers of both sexes, sever** 
 3*
<page 65>

 
 58 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 nationalities, and a variety of agea from in 
 fants in arms, up to hoary headed grandpa- 
 rents, but with most of them our story has 
 little or nothing to do 
 
 The two captains, the wife of the one and 
 the son of the other, were polite and genial 
 the fare was excellent, and every one present 
 seemed disposed to contentment and good 
 tiumor except Mr. Sims, who turned up his nose 
 at the food, snubbed his wife and scowled at 
 his opposite neighbors ; perchance reading too 
 plainly in the frank, youthful countenances 
 their disapproval of him. 
 
 Mildred so compassionated the long-suffer- 
 ing wife that, in the course of the evening, 
 seeing her sitting by herself and looking sad 
 and lonely, she drew near and opened a con- 
 versation. 
 
 Mrs. Sims responded readily. 
 
 "Do sit down, Miss," she said, making 
 room for Mildred by her side, " I'm so glad to 
 'ave some one to speak to, for I gets hawfnl 
 'omesick at times." 
 
 " Ah, that must be a very trying feeling," 
 Mildred said compassionately. " I know noth- 
 ing of it myself; for I've never been awaj 
 from home or mother for a week at a time." 
 
 " Well, Miss, you're fortunate."
<page 66>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 69 
 
 " Have you been long in the country ?" 
 
 " It's barely six months, Miss, since I left 
 me father's 'ouse in London. We kept an 
 'otel there ; an' that's 'ow I came to know Mr 
 Sims; he takin' lodgin' with us while up to 
 London about some business 'e 'ad with the 
 "awyers." 
 
 " And are your own family all still in Eng- 
 and ?" 
 
 " Yes, Miss ; hevery one ; I left 'em all 
 father, mother, brothers and sisters for 'im," 
 she answered with a tremble in her voice ana 
 wiping her eyes furtively. 
 
 " What a shame he should treat you as he 
 does !" was the indignant exclamation that rose 
 to Mildred's lips, but she checked herself in 
 time, and changed it for, " Then I think he 
 ought to be very good to you." 
 
 " I 'ope we'll be 'appy, Miss, when we're 
 settled down in a 'ome of our own," remarked 
 the little woman with a half stifled patient 
 sigh. " And indeed it's not 'alf so bad as I 
 expected ; I've been hastonished, at finding so 
 many white women in America. I thought 
 when I landed in New York I ? d be the honly 
 white woman there. I s'posed all the rest 
 would be Injuns or niggers." 
 
 " Indeed 1 how relieved you must have
<page 67>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 been on discovering your mistake," remarked 
 Mildred demurely, while her eyes twinkled 
 with suppressed fun. 
 
 " That I was, Miss, as you may well be 
 lieve ; it quite reconciled me to the country." 
 
 The sun rose brightly the next morning 
 and the young Keiths were early on deck, 
 romping and racing about, full of the vivacity 
 and mirth usually incident to extreme youth 
 and perfect health. 
 
 They were well watched over by their 
 father, Mildred and Rupert, or there is nc 
 knowing what wild and dangerous pranks 
 anight have been indulged in by Cyril and Don. 
 
 The former actually proposed a flying leap 
 from the deck of the Queen Charlotte to that 
 of the steamer and was not at all pleased by 
 the decided veto put upon it by his father. 
 
 " I think you might let a fellow try, papa,' 
 he grumbled, "it would be such fun and 1 
 know I could do it." 
 
 " No, you couldna," said Don, peeping over 
 the ship's side, " it's a big, big place." 
 
 " Come over to the other side of the deck, 
 and stay there," said Mr. Keith, leading them 
 away. 
 
 Rupert followed holding Fan by the hand 
 " What was that ? what were they throwing
<page 68>

 
 MILDRED SKITS. 61 
 
 in ?" he asked, stopping suddenly at a sound as 
 of a heavy body plunging into the water, while 
 at the same instant a startled cry came from 
 the deck of the Milwaukee. 
 
 " A man overboard 1 " 
 
 " A man overboard 1 " the fearful cry was 
 taken up and repeated on all sides amid the 
 rush of many feet and the quick, sharp imper- 
 ative words of command. 
 
 Almost instantly a boat was lowered and 
 strong arms were pulling with swift, vigorous 
 strokes for the spot, already left far behind, 
 where the splash of the falling body had been 
 heard, and keen eyes were eagerly searching 
 the waste of waters ; the crews and passengers 
 of the three vessels crowding the decks and 
 following their movements in breathless anxiety 
 and suspense. 
 
 They pulled backward and forward, calling 
 out to the drowning one that help was near. 
 
 " Ah, yonder he is at last ! " cries a woman's 
 voice in exultant tones ; u there he is with his 
 head above water, for I see his hat." 
 
 " And they see him too, and are pulling to 
 ward him with all their might 1" 
 
 " Ah, they're up with him ! they have him 
 now I hurrah 1" and a wild cheer rose from hun- 
 dreds of throats.
<page 69>

 
 MILDRED KEITH, 
 
 But it died away in a groan. 
 
 " It was his hat only his hat, poor fellow . 
 nd they've given it up and are coming back 
 without him ! " sighs the woman who had beec 
 the first to raise the alarm. 
 
 Every face wears a look of sadness for the 
 few moments of silent waiting as the rowers 
 slowly return. 
 
 They gain the deck of the Milwaukee ; one 
 of thorn a lad of nineteen or twenty, a rough, 
 hardy sailor comes forward with a subdued 
 manner in strange contrast to his accustomed 
 rude hilarity lips white and quivering, tears 
 in his manly eyes. 
 
 " Mother, mother," he says, low and huskily, 
 Irawing near this woman with tottering steps, 
 "don't don't take it too hard. I I couldn't 
 bear to see you. I did my best ; we all did ; 
 but we couldn't find him; and here's his hat 
 Itit was little Billy." 
 
 " My boy ! mine ! my little one !" she 
 shrieked, and fell fainting into the arms of her 
 elder son. 
 
 There was not a dry eye among the spea 
 tators, and as the sad story spread to the other 
 vessels many a tremulous tone and falling tear 
 attested the pity and sympathy of those who 
 told the tale and those who listened to it.
<page 70>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 68 
 
 " But how did it happen ? " queried one and 
 anothei ; and the answer was, " He was jump- 
 ing back and forth from one vessel to another, 
 and fell in between the Milwaukee and the 
 steamer; and it is conjectured that he must 
 have been struck by the wheel, as he did not 
 come up again." 
 
 "And it might have been one of ours," 
 sobbed Mrs. Keith, clasping her babe to her 
 breast, while her eye glanced from one to an- 
 other of her darlings. " Ah, how frightened I 
 was when I heard the cry. I don't know how 
 I got up the cabin steps ! for I thought it was 
 perhaps " 
 
 Tears choked her utterance ; tears of min- 
 gled gratitude for herself and sorrow for the 
 bereaved mother. 
 
 "Yes, it might have been you, Cyril or 
 Don ; and think how poor mother's heart would 
 have been broken, and mine too," Mr. Keith 
 added, sitting down and taking one on each 
 knee. "Now do you want to try jumping 
 across like that boy did 2" 
 
 They shook their heads, gazing up into Ilia 
 face with awe-struck countenances. 
 
 The sad event of the morning seemed to 
 have exerted a subduing influence upon all the 
 passengers ; it was a very quiet day on board.
<page 71>

 
 64 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 The calm continued throughout the day 
 but a breeze sprang up in the night and the 
 vessels parted company. 
 
 By daylight the breeze had stiffened into ft 
 wind that made the lake very rough ; the ship 
 tossed about on the waves with a motion by no 
 means agreeable to the land lubbers in her 
 cabin and steerage ; everything not made fast 
 to floor or walls went dashing and rolling from 
 side to side of stateroom or saloon ; few of the 
 passengers cared to breakfast, and those who 
 made the attempt had to do so under serious 
 difficulties table and floor being both inclined 
 planes, sloping now in one direction now in an- 
 other. 
 
 They passed a miserable day, confined to 
 the cabin, for the rain was falling heavily and 
 the great waves would now and then sweep 
 across the deck. 
 
 Still the captain assured them the storm 
 was not a bad one and they were in no danger. 
 
 By the next day it had abated so that they 
 Gould seek the outer air, going about without 
 experiencing much difficulty in preserving the, 
 centre of gravity ; and nearly every one had so 
 far recovered from the deathly sea-sickness as. 
 to be able to appear at meals. 
 
 Life on shipboard which had seemed quite
<page 72>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 65 
 
 dreadful during the long hours of the storm, 
 oecame very tolerable again. 
 
 The older people promenaded the deck or 
 eat there with book or work, or merely chatting 
 and looking out upon the restless waters, while 
 the children amused themselves with their 
 plays or in running about exploring every nook 
 and cranny and making acquaintance with the 
 sailors who seemed to enjoy their innocent prat- 
 tle and merry ways. 
 
 All the Keiths had suffered from sea-sick- 
 ness and Mildred was among the last to recover ; 
 it was not until towards sunset of the second 
 day that she could be induced to leave her berth 
 and allow her father to assist her up the cabin 
 stairs to the deck. 
 
 Here a couch had been prepared for her and 
 the loving hands of mother and aunt busied 
 themselves in making her comfortable. Broth- 
 ers and sisters gathered rejoicingly around. 
 Mrs. Jones brought a glass of lemonade, Mrs. 
 Sims offered smelling salts, some one else a fan, 
 and presently the two captains and young Wells 
 came up to offer their congratulations on her 
 recovery. 
 
 Then Cyril and Don led up and introduced 
 Mr. Carr, the bachelor gentleman with whom 
 they had already formed a firm friendship.
<page 73>

 
 66 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " He's a real nice man, Milly," said Cyril ; 
 " kaows lots of stories and games and things, 
 and " 
 
 " An' p'ays wis boys," put in Bon, " and tan 
 do every fing." 
 
 "Yes, he's weal dood,'' chimed in Fan. 
 " and I likes him." 
 
 " Thank you, my little maid," said the gen- 
 tleman, laughing and stroking her curls. " Now 
 if you could only get your sister to look at me 
 through your spectacles." 
 
 " Why, I hasn't dot any 'pectacles !" ox- 
 claimed the child, opening her eyes very wide 
 " Maybe papa buy me some when I dets an old 
 lady. Den I lets Milly 'ook froo." 
 
 "That's my good, generous little sister,* 
 Mildred said, laughing, " and if I'm so fortu 
 nate as to get glasses first, you shall borrow 
 them whenever you wish." 
 
 " Now go to your plays, dears, and let sister 
 rest till she feels better," said their mother. 
 
 " Please turn wis us, Mr. Tarr," said Don 
 tugging at that gentleman's coat. 
 
 " Don, Don, you must not " 
 
 "Ah, don't reprove him," interposed the 
 gentleman, lifting the child to his shoulder and 
 prancing away with him, while the little fellow 
 shouted with laughter and delight.
<page 74>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 67 
 
 u Isn't ho a nice man ?" cried Zillah and 
 Ada, looking after him, "we all like hixn ever 
 so much." 
 
 " Yes," assented the mother, " but I am very 
 much afraid my children impose upon his good 
 nature." 
 
 "Don't let that trouble you, Mrs. Keith; 
 he is surely able to take care of himself. Be- 
 sides it's quite evident that he enjoys their soci- 
 ety as much as they do his," said Edward Wells, 
 taking a seat near Mildred's couch, where he 
 remained chatting in a lively strain with her 
 and the other ladies until it was time for them 
 to retire to the cabin. 
 
 Fair weather and favorable winds made the 
 i maining days of the voyage a pleasure till one 
 bright June morning they entered the Straits 
 of Mackinaw and reaching the island of the 
 same name, anchored in front of its fort. 
 
 The captain, informing his passengers that 
 the ship would lie there for a day or two, good 
 naturedly offered to take ashore any or all who 
 would like to go. 
 
 Nearly everybody eagerly accepted. The 
 boats put off from the ship, each with a for 
 complement of passengers, whom they landed 
 just under the white walls of the fortress, situ 
 *te on a bluff one hundred and fifty feet high
<page 75>

 
 68 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Passing up a flight of stone steps they en 
 tered the parade ground. It was smooth, hard 
 and clean as a well swept floor. They walked 
 across and about it, viewing the officers' quar- 
 ters (on the outside) and the barracks of the 
 men, walked along by the wall, noting how it 
 commanded the harbor and the village of Mack- 
 inaw, with its great guns, beside each of which 
 lay a pile of black balls heaped up in pyramidal 
 foim. 
 
 Then they visited the town, saw some In- 
 dians and bought curious little bark baskets or 
 namented with porcupine quills, blue, red and 
 white, and filled with maple sugar ; moccasins, 
 too, made of soft skins and heavily trimmed 
 with bead work, all manufactured by the 
 Indians. 
 
 The young Keiths were made happy with 
 a pair of moccasins apiece from their father, 
 bark baskets from their mother and aunt, and 
 unlimited maple sugar from their friend Mr. 
 Carr. 
 
 They returned to the ship tired but fuU of 
 Content. 
 
 They were as usual early on deck the next 
 morning, a little before the rising of the sun, 
 for they " liked to see him come up out of the 
 water."
<page 76>

 
 MILDRED KE1TB.. 
 
 u How very still it is ! hardly a breath 
 of air stirring," Mildred was saying to her 
 father as Edward Wells drew near the little 
 group, all standing together looking eagerly 
 for the first glimpse of the sun's bright face. 
 
 " Yes, we are becalmed," said Mr. Keith. 
 
 " And very possibly may be detained here 
 for several days in consequence," added Edward, 
 greeting them with a cheerful good-morning. 
 " In that case we will have an opportunity to 
 explore the island. May I have the pleasure 
 of being your guide in so doing ?" 
 
 " Do you mean all of us ?" queried Cyril. 
 
 " Yes, my man ; if you will all go ?" an- 
 swered the sailor lad ; but the glance of his 
 eye seemed to extend the invitation to Mildred 
 in particular. 
 
 " O father, can we ? can we I" chorused the 
 children. 
 
 " We will see ;" he said. " Now watch or 
 vou'll miss the sight we left cur beds so early 
 for." 
 
 The matter was under discussion at the 
 breakfast table and afterward, and it was de- 
 cided that all might go ashore, but that the 
 walk under contemplation was too long for the 
 b'ttle ones. 
 
 Ada Keith was the youngest of that
<page 77>

 
 70 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 vrho was permitted to go ; but others joined 
 them and Edward found himself at the head of 
 quite a party of explorers. 
 
 Ada came back looking heated, weary and 
 troubled. " O mother," she cried, with tears in 
 her eyes, " we saw a cave where some French- 
 men were hiding from the Indians and got 
 smoked to death ; the Indians did it by build- 
 ing a fire at the cave's mouth, because they 
 couldn't get at them to kill them some othei 
 way. Oh, I'm so afraid of the savages; do 
 persuade father to take us all back to Ohio 
 again !" 
 
 The mother soothed and comforted the 
 frightened child with caresses and assurances 
 of the present peaceable disposition of the In 
 dians, and at length succeeded in so far banish- 
 ing her fears that she was willing to proceed 
 upon her journey. 
 
 However, the calm continuing, nearly a 
 week passed and many excursions had been 
 wade to the island before they could quit its 
 harbor. 
 
 At length one day directly after dinner, a 
 favorable wind having sprung up, the good ship 
 weighed anchor and pursuing her westward 
 course passed out of the straits into Lake 
 Michigan.
<page 78>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 71 
 
 All night she flew before the wind and 
 xrhen our friends awoke the following morning 
 she rode safely at anchor in the harbor of 
 Chicago. 
 
 Though a large city now, it was then a 
 town of less than five thousand inhabitants. 
 
 This was the port of the Queen Charlotte 
 and her passengers must be landed, her cargo 
 discharged. 
 
 It was with feelings of regret on both sides 
 that her officers and the Keiths parted ; Ed- 
 ward Wells taking an opportunity to say in an 
 undertone to Mildred that he hoped they would 
 sometime meet again. 
 
 St. Joseph, on the opposite side of the lake, 
 was the next port whither the Keiths were 
 bound. A much smaller vessel carried them 
 across. 
 
 They had a rough passage, wind and rain 
 compelling them to keep closely housed in a 
 little confined cabin, and were glad to reach 
 the town of St. Joseph ; though they found it 
 hut a dreary spot, no grass, no trees, the hotel 
 a large, barn-like, two story building, with the 
 hot summer sun streaming in through its win. 
 dows without hindrance from curtain or blind ; 
 for tbe rain ceased about the time of their 
 arrival and the sun shone out with fervid heat
<page 79>

 
 72 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 during the two or three days that they wore 
 detained there, resting the Sabbath day and 
 awaiting the arrival of their household goods 
 before ascending the St. Joseph river, on which 
 Pleasant Plains, their final destination, was 
 situated. 
 
 There were no railroads in that part of the 
 country then, nor for many years after ; I think 
 there was no stage route between the two 
 places ; there were no steamers on the river ; 
 'lie best they could do was to take a keel-boat. 
 
 The rain had ceased and the sun shone 
 brightly on the rippling, dancing waters of the 
 lake and river, on the little town and the green 
 fields and forests of the adjacent country, as 
 they went on board the keel-boat Mary Ann, 
 and set out upon this the last stage of their long 
 Journey. 
 
 The boatmen toiled at their oars and the 
 Mary Ann moved slowly on against the cur- 
 rent, slowly enough to give our travelers abun- 
 iance of time to take in the beauties of the 
 scenery; which they, the older ones at least 
 lid not fail to do. 
 
 Much of it was unbroken forest, but they 
 passed sometimes a solitary clearing with its 
 lonely log cabin, sometimes a little village 
 The river flowe^ swiftly along, clear and spark-
<page 80>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. Tfc 
 
 ling, between banks now low, now high, green 
 to the water's edge. 
 
 The sun was nearing the western horizor 
 as, at last, the boat was run in close to shor* 
 and made fast, with the announcement, " Here 
 we are, strangers; this here's the town of 
 Pleasant Plains."
<page 81>

 
 44 Nor need we power or splendor, 
 
 "Wide hal*. or lordly dome ; 
 The good, the true, the tender, 
 These form the wealth of home." 
 
 MBS. HAM. 
 
 PLEASANT PLAINS considered itself quite a 
 town. It stood high above the river on two 
 plains, the upper familiarly known as the 
 " Bluff." It was laid out in very wide, straight 
 streets, crossing each other at right angles; 
 there were perhaps two hundred dwelling 
 houses, principally frame, but with a goodly 
 proportion of log cabins and a respectable 
 sprinkling of brick buildings. 
 
 The county seat, it had its court-house and 
 jaL ; there were some half dozen stores where 
 almost everything could be had, from dress 
 goods to butter and eggs, and from a plowshare 
 to a fine cambric needle ; two taverns, as many 
 blacksmith, shoemaker, and carpenter shops, a 
 flouring mill and a bakery.
<page 82>

 
 MILDRED 
 
 Also two churches belonging to different 
 denominations; both frame structures, of ex- 
 tremely plain and unpretentious architecture,, 
 with bare walls, uncurtained windows, rough, 
 ancarpeted floors, and rude hard benches in 
 lieu of pews. 
 
 No thought of architectural beauty or even 
 of comfort and convenience, beyond that of 
 mere protection from the weather, seemed to 
 have entered the minds of any of the builders 
 here; the houses were mere shells; with no 
 cupboards or closets or the slightest attempt at 
 ornamentation. 
 
 Nor was their unsightliness concealed by 
 vines, trees, or shrubbery ; almost every one of 
 the beautiful monarchs of the forest once adorn- 
 ing the locality had been ruthlessly felled, and 
 a stump here and there was all that was left to 
 tell of their former existence. 
 
 As the keel cf the Mary Ann grated on the 
 gravelly shore, a tall figure in rough farmer 
 attire came springing down the bank, calling 
 out in tones of unfeigned joy, " Hello, Keith t 
 Come at last wife, children, and all ; eh i 
 I'm glad to see ye ! Never was more delighted 
 in my life." 
 
 And the speaker catching Mr. Keith's hand 
 in his shook it with hearty good will, then
<page 83>

 
 76 MILDRED K.E1TH 
 
 treating the rest of the party in like manner 
 as with his and Mr. Keith's assistance, each ic 
 turn stepped from the boat. 
 
 Mr. George Ward was an old client anc 
 friend of Mr. Keith's, who had been long arg 
 ing this removal. 
 
 " I declare I wish I lived in town for a few 
 days now," he went on, " but we're three mile 
 out on the prairie, as you know, Keith. I have 
 my team here, though, and if you like to pile 
 into the wagon, all of yon, I'll take you home 
 with ne, as it is." 
 
 The hospitable invitation was declined with 
 thanks. 
 
 " There are quite too many of us, Mr. 
 Ward," Mrs. Keith said, smilingly, " and we 
 want to get into a house of our own just ae 
 eoon as possible." 
 
 " Ah yes, so your husband wrote me ; and 
 I've been looking round for you. But the 
 best that's to be had will seem a poor place to 
 you, Mrs. Keith, after what you've left behind 
 in Lansdale." 
 
 " I suppose so, but of course we must ex- 
 pect to put up with many inconveniences and 
 probably some hardships even, for the first few 
 5 ears," she answered, cheerfully. 
 
 * I'm afraid that's so, but I hope you'll find
<page 84>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 7T 
 
 yourselves paid for it in the iong run. 
 shall I take you to the Union Hotel? Yon 
 can't, of coarse, get into your own house to- 
 night. 
 
 " Here, let me carry you, bub," picking up 
 Cyril, " the soil's real sandy here and makes 
 I eavy walking." 
 
 " If, as I presume from your recommenda 
 tion of it, it is your best house of entertain- 
 tnent," Mr. Keith said, in reply to the question 
 
 " Yes, sir, there's only one other, and it's a 
 very poor affair," returned Mr. Ward, leading 
 the way. 
 
 Mrs. Prior, the landlady, a pleasant-faced, 
 middle-aged woman, with kind, motherly man- 
 ners, met them at the door with a welcome 
 nearly as hearty as that of their old time 
 friend. 
 
 " I'm glad to see you," she said, bustling 
 about to wait upon them, " We've plenty o' 
 room here in town for the right sort o' folks, 
 and glad to get 'em." 
 
 She had taken them into her parlor, th 
 only one the house afforded. 
 
 The furniture was plain a rag carpet, 
 green paper blinds, a table with a rod and 
 black cover, Windsor chairs, two of them rock- 
 ing chairs with chintz-covered cushions, the
<page 85>

 
 78 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 rest straight-backed and hard ; on the higb 
 wooden mantel shelf an old-fashioned look- 
 ing-glass, a few shells and two brass candle- 
 sticks; these last bright as scouring could 
 make them. 
 
 "I'm afraid it must seem but a poor place 
 to you, ladies," she continued, pushing forward 
 a rocking chair for each. " And you're dread- 
 ful tired, ain't you ? with your long journey 
 Do sit down and rest yourselves." 
 
 " You are very kind, and everything looks 
 very nice indeed," Mrs. Keith answered, look- 
 ing up at her with a pleased smile as she 
 accepted the offered seat, and began untying 
 her baby's bonnet strings. 
 
 " Indeed, I, for one, didn't expect to find 
 half as good accommodations out in these west- 
 ern wilds," remarked Aunt Wealthy, glancing 
 round the room. " I thought you had no floors 
 to your carpets." 
 
 " No floors ? oh yes ; rather rough to be 
 sure ; carpenters here don't make the ocst of 
 work ; and I think sometimes I could a' most 
 plane a board better myself but to get the 
 carpets is the rub ; we mostly make 'em our- 
 eelves and the weaviii's often done so poor that 
 they don't last no time hardly. Soil's sandy. 
 YOU see, and it cuts the carpets right out."
<page 86>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 7fr 
 
 " They say this country's hard on womet 
 *nd oxen," put in Mr. Ward, " and I'm afraid 
 : t's pretty true." 
 
 "Now don't be frightening them first 
 thing, Mr. Ward,'-' laughed the landlady. 
 " Come, take off your things and the children's, 
 ladies, and make yourselves to home. Here, 
 just let me lay 'em in here," she went on, open- 
 ing an inner door and revealing a bed covered 
 with a patch-work quilt. 
 
 " You can have this room if you like, Mrs. 
 
 Keith ; I s'pose you'd prefer a downstairs one 
 
 with the baby and t'other little ones? There 
 
 is a trundle bed underneath that'll do for them 
 
 " And the rest of you can take the two 
 
 rooms right over these. They're all ready and 
 
 you can go right up to 'em whenever you like. 
 
 Is there anything more I can do for you now?' r 
 
 " The query was answered in the negative. 
 
 "Then I'll just excuse myself," she said; 
 
 " for I must go and see to the supper ; can't 
 
 tnst girls here." 
 
 She passed out through another door, leav- 
 ing it ajar. 
 
 " That's the dining-room, I know, Fan, 
 'cause I see two big tables set," whispered Cy- 
 ril peeping in, " and there's not a bit of carpet 
 en the floor. Guess they're cleanin' house."
<page 87>

 
 60 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 a "Well, wife, I'll have to leave you for a lit 
 tie, I must see to the landing of our goods," 
 .said Mr. Keith, taking his hat. "Will you 
 go along, Ward f" 
 
 " And let us go up and look at our rooms 
 girls/' said Mildred to her sisters. " Mayn't 
 we, mother ?" 
 
 " Yes, go and make yourselves neat for the 
 supper table." 
 
 They came back reporting bare floors 
 -everywhere, of boards pone too well planed 
 either, but everything scrupulously clean. 
 
 " Then we may well be content," said their 
 mother. The gentlemen returned and the 
 guests were presently summoned, by the ring- 
 ing of a bell on top of the house, to the supper 
 table, which they found furnished with abund- 
 ance of good, wholesome well-cooked food. 
 
 And they were really able to make a very 
 comfortable meal, despite the presence of del/ 
 ware, two-pronged steel forks, and the absence 
 of napkins. 
 
 ''"What about the goods, Stuart?" asked 
 Mrs. Keith on their return to the parlor. 
 
 " I have had them carted directly to the 
 house ; that is, I believe the men are at it now.' 
 
 "The house?" 
 
 ' The one Ward spoke of. I have taken it
<page 88>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 8> 
 
 It was Hobson's choice, my dear, or you should 1 
 have seen it first." 
 
 " Can I see it now ?" 
 
 " "Why, yes, if you choose ; it won't be dark 
 yet for an hour. If you and Aunt Wealthy 
 will put on your bonnets, I'll take you round." 
 
 " Ada and me, too, father ?" cried Zillah 
 eagerly. 
 
 " And Fan and Don and me ? chorused 
 Cyril. 
 
 " You couldn't think of going without your 
 eldest son ;" said Rupert, looking about for his 
 hat. 
 
 Mrs. Keith turned an inquiring eye upon 
 her husband. 
 
 "Is it far?" 
 
 " No ; even Fan can easily walk it. Let. 
 them come. You, too, Mildred," taking the 
 babe from her arms. " I'll carry baby." 
 
 " "We'll make quite a procession," laughed 
 die young girl. " "Won't the people stare ?" 
 
 " What if they do ? who of us cares ?" 
 
 " Not I ! " cried Rupert, stepping back from 
 the doorway with a commanding wave of the 
 hand, "Procession will please move forward 
 Mr. Keith and wife taking the lead, Miss Stan- 
 hope and Miss Keith next in order, Zilly an* 
 A.da following close upon their heels, the three 
 4*
<page 89>

 
 62 MILDRED KfflTH. 
 
 inseparables after them, while Marshal Rupert 
 brings up the rear to see that all are in line. 5 ' 
 
 Everybody laughed at this sally while they 
 promptly fell into line as directed, passed out 
 npon the sidewalk and pursued their way 
 through the quiet streets. 
 
 People did stare to be sure, from open doors 
 and windows, some asking, " "Who are they ?' 
 others answering " New comers and they've got 
 a big family to support." 
 
 Some remarked that they were nice looking 
 people ; while others shook their heads wisely, 
 or dubiously, and said they " expected they 
 were real stuck up folks ; dressed so dreadful 
 fine." 
 
 However, the subjects of these charitable 
 comments did not overhear, and therefore were 
 not disturbed by them. 
 
 " Do you see that yellow frame yonder, 
 wife ?" Mr. Keith asked as they turned a cor- 
 ner. 
 
 " With the gable-end to the street and two 
 doors in it, one above and one below ?" 
 
 14 The same." 
 
 " It looks like a warehouse. ' 
 
 " That's what it was originally intended for ; 
 but finding it not available for that purpose, the 
 ownei offered it for rent."
<page 90>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 83 
 
 4 And is it the one you have rented ?" 
 
 " Yes ; & poor place to take you to, my dear 
 but, as I told you, it was Hobson's choice." 
 
 " Then we'll make the best of it and DC 
 thankful." 
 
 " What a horrid old thing!" remarked Mil- 
 dred in an undertone, heard only by Aunt 
 Wealthy. 
 
 " "We'll hope to find the inside an improve- 
 ment on the out," was the cheerful rejoinder. 
 
 "It has need to be, I should say!" cried 
 the girl as they drew near. " Just see ! it 
 fronts on two streets and there's not a bit of a 
 space separating it from either ; doors open 
 right out on to a sand bank." 
 
 * That's what was made by digging the cel- 
 lar," said Rupert. 
 
 " There's a big yard at the side and behind, ' 
 said Zillah. 
 
 " Something green in it, too," added Ada, 
 whose sight was imperfect. 
 
 " Nothing but a crop of ugly weeds," said 
 Mildred, ready to cry as memory brought 
 vividly before her the home they had left with 
 its large garden carpeted with green grass, 
 adorned with shrubbery and filled with the 
 Moom of summer fbwers. 
 
 The June roses must be out now and the
<page 91>

 
 84 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 woodbine the air sweet with their delicioui 
 perfume and they who had planted anc 
 tended them, BO far away in this desolate look- 
 Ing spot. 
 
 " Not a tree, a shrub, a flower or a blade of 
 grass !" she went on, sighing as she spoke. 
 
 " Never mind, we'll have lots of them next 
 year, if I plant every one myself," said Rupert 
 
 The last load of their household goods had 
 just been brought up /rom the river, the men 
 were carrying in the heavy boxes and setting 
 them down upon the floor of the front room. 
 The door stood wide open and they all walked in. 
 
 " Not a bit of a hall!" exclaimed Mildred, 
 " not a cupboard or closet ; nothing but four 
 bare walls and two windows each side of the 
 front door." 
 
 " Yes, the floor and ceilings," corrected 
 Rupert. 
 
 " And another door on the other side," 
 said Ada, running and opening it. 
 
 " Ifot a mantelpiece to set anything on, noi 
 any chimney at all ! How on earth are we 
 going to keep warm in the winter time?" Mil- 
 dred went on, ignoring the remarks of her 
 younger brother and sister. 
 
 " With a stove, Miss; pipes run up through 
 the floor into the room above ; there's a flue
<page 92>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 8a 
 
 there," said one of the men, wiping the peiv 
 epiration from his forehead with the sleeve of 
 his checked shirt. 
 
 Mr. Keith stopped to settle with the men 
 for their work, and the others walked on into 
 the next room. 
 
 It was as bare and more dreary than the 
 first ; somewhat larger, but had only one win- 
 dow, that and an outside door, opening directly 
 upon the side street. 
 
 Back of the two rooms and in a line with 
 them, was the kitchen ; smaller than either of 
 the other rooms, but provided with a chimney 
 and fireplace ; also a small, dark closet under a 
 flight of steep and crooked stairs which led 
 from it to the story above. 
 
 This, as they found on climbing up to it, 
 consisted of two rooms, the first extending over 
 kitchen and sitting-room, the other over the 
 front room and of exactly the same size. 
 
 The stairs led directly into the first room 
 and it must be passed through to reach tho 
 second ; therefore had not the recommendation 
 of privacy. 
 
 " What a house ! " grumbled the children ; 
 " how'll we ever live in it ? Such a few rooms 
 and not a bit nice." 
 
 Mrs. Keith stood in the middle of that
<page 93>

 
 86 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 large, barn-like upper room, saying never a 
 word, but her heart sinking lower and Jpwer ai 
 ihe glanced from side to side taking in the 
 arhole situation. 
 
 Aunt Wealthy saw it and came to the res- 
 cue. " Never mind, dearie ; it will look very 
 different when we have unpacked and arranged 
 your furniture. With the help of curtains 
 several rooms can be made out of this, and 
 we'll do nicely." 
 
 "Yes, no doubt we shall, auntie," Mrs. 
 Keith answered with determined cheerfulness. 
 " That front room shall be yours " 
 
 " No, no ! you and Stuart must take that '" 
 
 " I'm quite set on having my own way in 
 this," interrupted the younger lady in her turn. 
 "It is the best room, and you must take it. 
 Don't hesitate or object, for I should be afraid 
 to have my little ones in there with that out- 
 side door opening on to nothing," she concluded, 
 with a laugh. 
 
 " Well, wife, what do you think ? " asked 
 Mr. Keith, coming up the stairs. 
 
 " That we can be very happy here if we 
 aiake up our minds to be content with our lot." 
 
 " That is like you, Marcia ; always ready to 
 make the best of everything," he said, with 
 pleased look.
<page 94>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 87 
 
 " I think it'e a dreadful place I" exclaimed 
 Mildred, " like a great barn ; and so dirty 1 
 plaster all over the floor and spattered on the 
 windows too." 
 
 " I hope it can be cleaned/' her father said, 
 laughing at her rueful face. " Mrs. Prior can 
 probably tell us where to find a woman to 
 do it." 
 
 A little more time was spent in discussing 
 plans for the arrangement of the inside of the 
 dwelling ; then they stepped into the side-yard 
 and viewed it from the out. 
 
 A great dead wall of rough weather board- 
 ing broken by one window only and that in 
 the second story, was what met their view as 
 they looked up ; down below, first a heap of 
 sand, beyond that a wilderness of weeds and 
 brushwood. 
 
 " I'm dumb with despair ! " cried Mildred, 
 folding her hands with a tragical air. 
 
 Can dumb folks talk?" asked Cyril. 
 
 " As ugly as mud this side," remarked 
 Zillah, turning up her nose scornfully as she 
 BcaunoJ the unsightly wall. 
 
 "We'll cover it with vines," said Aunt 
 Wealthy. 
 
 " And I'll clear the yard and sod it," adde4 
 Rupert, seizing a great mullein stalk and pull-
<page 95>

 
 88 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 ing it up by the roots as he spofce. " Twon \ 
 be nearly so hard as the clearing the early pi- 
 -meere of Ohio had to do, our grandfathers 
 among the rest." 
 
 "That's the right way to look at it, my 
 boy," responded Mr. Keith, heartily. " Come 
 now, we'll lock up the house and go back to 
 our hotel for the night." 
 
 " There's a log house nearly opposite," re- 
 marked Rupert, when k hey were in the street 
 again, "and the next ie a real shabby one-and 
 a-half-etory frame with a blacksmith shop at- 
 tached. We haven't the worst place in town 
 after all. Ho 1 look at the sign, ' G. Lightcap ;' 
 what a name ! 'specially for a blacksmith." 
 
 Mrs. Prior joined her guests in the parlor 
 after the younger portion had gone to bed. 
 
 "Well, how did you like the house?" she 
 asked. 
 
 " I hope we shall be able to make ourselves 
 comfortable there," Mr. Keith answered, in a 
 cheerful tone. 
 
 "You can get possession right away, I 
 i'pose." 
 
 " Yes ; and want to move in as quickly as 
 possible, but must have some cleaning done 
 first." 
 
 Mrs. Prior recommended a woman for that
<page 96>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 89 
 
 without waiting to be asked, and offered to 
 " send round " at once and see if she could ,>e 
 engaged for the next day. 
 
 The offer was accepted with thanks and the 
 .nessenger brought back word that Mrs. Rood 
 would be at the house by six o'clock in the 
 morning. 
 
 " But," suggested Aunt Wealthy in dismay, 
 " she'l want hot water, soap, cloths, scrubbing 
 brushes !" 
 
 " I'll lend a big iron kettle to heat the 
 water," said the landlady ; " a fire can be made 
 in that kitchen fireplace, you know, or out 
 doors, with the brush wood." 
 
 " And brushes and soap can be had at the 
 stores, I presume," suggested Mr. Keith. 
 
 "Yes; and if they ain't open in time, I'll 
 lend mine for her to start on." 
 
 " Thank you very much," said Mrs. Keith. 
 *' But, Stuart, we may as well unpack our own ; 
 1 can tell you just which box to open." 
 
 " What a woman you are for doing things 
 systematically, Marcia," he said, admiringly. 
 *' Yours is the best plan, I think. Can we be 
 op in season to be on hand there at half past 
 five, think you ?" 
 
 " We can try," she answered brightly. 
 M Mrs. Prior, where is your market ?''
<page 97>

 
 90 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " We haven't got to that yet, ma am," re 
 plied the landlady, laughing and shaking hei 
 head. 
 
 " No market ? why how do you manage 
 without ?" 
 
 " There's butcher shops where we can buy 
 fresh meat once or twice a week beef, veal, 
 mutton, lamb, just whatever they happen to 
 kill and we put up our own salt pork, hams, 
 dried beef, and so forth, and keep codfish and 
 mackerel on hand. 
 
 " Most folks have their own chickens, and 
 the country people bring 'em in too ; and but- 
 ter and eggs and vegetables; though a good 
 many town folks have garden sass of their own 
 raisin' ; keep a cow and make their own but- 
 ter." 
 
 " That's the most independent way," re- 
 marked Mr. Keith. " I think I must have a 
 cow ; if I can get a girl who can milk. Do 
 you know of a good girl wanting a place, Mrs. 
 Prior?" 
 
 " I wish I did; but they're dreadful scarce 
 gir; and so sassy! you can't keep 'em unless 
 yon let 'em come to the table with the family ; 
 and you must be mighty careful what you ask 
 em to do
<page 98>

 
 'I feel my sinews slacken'd with the frigh, 
 And a cold sweat thrills down all o'er my limbs, 
 As if I were dissolving into water." 
 
 DRYDEIT'S TKSCPESI-, 
 
 THE Lightcaps were at supper ; father and 
 eldest son, each of whom stood six feet in his 
 stockings, with shirt sleeves rolled up above 
 their elbows, displaying brown sinewy arms ; 
 the mother in a faded calico, grizzled hair 
 drawn straight back from a dull, careworn 
 face and gathered into a little knot behind in 
 which was stuck a yellow horn comb ; years of 
 incessant toil and frequent exposure to sun and 
 wind had not improved a naturally dark, rough 
 skin, and there was no attempt at adornment 
 in her attire, not a collar or a ruffle to cover 
 up the unsightliness of the yellow, wrinkled 
 neck. 
 
 Khoda Jane, the eldest uaaghter, seated at 
 ner father's right hand, was a fac-simiie <>i
<page 99>

 
 92 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 what the mother had been in hei girlhood, 
 ^rith perhaps an added touch of intelligence 
 and a somewhat more bold and forward manner. 
 
 There were besides several younger childreL 
 of both sexes, quite ordinary looking creature* 
 and just now wholly taken up with the busi- 
 ness in hand ; vieing with each other in the 
 amount of bread and butter and molasses, fried 
 potatoes and fried pork they could devour in a 
 given space of time. 
 
 " Some new comers in town, mother," re. 
 marked Mr. Lightcap, helping himself to a 
 second slice of pork. " The keelboat Mary 
 Ann come up the river with a lot of travellers." 
 
 " Who, father ? somebody that's going to 
 stay?" 
 
 " Yes ; that lawyer we heerd was comin', 
 you know. What's his name ?" 
 
 " Keith," said Rhoda Jane, " I heerd Miss 
 Prior tell Damaris Drybread last Sunday aftei 
 meetin'. And so they've come, hev they ?" 
 
 " Yes ; I had occasion to go up street a bit 
 ago, and saw George Ward takin' 'em to the 
 Union Hotel ; the man hisself and two or three 
 wimmin folks and a lot of young uns." 
 
 "Damaris was wishing there'd be some 
 children ;" remarked Rhoda Jane, " she wants 
 more scholars "
<page 100>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 9& 
 
 " It don't foller they'd go to her ii there 
 ipas," put in her brother. 
 
 " Oh now you just shut up, Goto I you 
 aever did take no stock in Daraaris." 
 
 " No, nor you neither, Rhode Jane ; 'cepl 
 once in a while just fur contrariness. No, 1 
 don't take no shine to Miss Drybread ; she's a 
 unmitigated old maid." 
 
 " I wish the man had been a doctor and 
 good on curin' the agur," said Mrs. Lightcap, 
 replenishing her husband's cap. " What's up 
 now, Rhoda Jane?" as that damsel suddenly 
 pushed back her chair, sprang up, and rushed 
 through the adjoining room to the front door. 
 
 " A wagon goin' by filled full of great boxe& 
 o' goods," shouted back the girl. " There 
 they're stoppin' at the yaller house on the cor- 
 nor. Come and Took." 
 
 The whole family, dropping knives and 
 forks, the children with hands and mouths full, 
 ran pell mell to door and windows to enjoy the 
 sight. 
 
 " I wonder what's up, father? are we goin* 
 to have a new store over there, think ?" queried 
 Mrs. Lightcap, standing on the outer step with 
 her hands on her hips, her gaze turned steadily 
 in the direction of the corner house. 
 
 " Dunno, mother; b'lieve I'll jest step over
<page 101>

 
 $4 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 *nd ask. Come along Goto, I guess they'd like 
 ome help with them thar big boxes." 
 
 They were kind-hearted, neighborly folk 
 those early settlers of Pleasant Plains, always 
 ready to lend a helping hand wherever it was 
 needed. 
 
 " It's the new lawyer feller's traps," an- 
 nounced Mr. Lightcap, as he and his son rejoined 
 the waiting, expectant wife and children ; " he's 
 took the house and we'll have 'em for neigh- 
 bors." 
 
 There was another rush to the door, half an 
 hour later, when the Keiths were seen passing 
 on their way to inspect their future abode. 
 
 " The prettiest gal I ever see," remarked 
 Gotobed, gazing admiringly after Mildred's 
 graceful, girlish figure. 
 
 "They look like eastern folks," said his 
 mother. " Won't they wish they'd staid where 
 they was when they find out how hard 'tis to 
 get help here?" 
 
 " Real stuck up folks ; dressed to kill," 
 eneered Rhoda Jane. " Look at the white pan- 
 talets on them young uns ! and the girl's got a 
 veil on her bunnit." 
 
 " Well, what's the harm !" asked her brother. 
 " If you had as pretty a skin, I guess you'd be 
 for takin' care of it too."
<page 102>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 9S 
 
 u Humph ! beauty that's only skin deep 
 won't last," and with a toss of the head Miss 
 laghtcap walked into the house in her most 
 dignified style. 
 
 For the next ten days the doings at the cor 
 ner house and the comings and goings of the 
 Keiths were a source of entertainment and in- 
 tense interest to their neighbors the Lightcaps 
 and others ; a fact not to be wondered at when 
 we consider the monotony of life in the town 
 at that time ; no railroad, no telegraph, no 
 newspaper, except those brought by the weekly 
 mail ; no magazines, no public library, and very 
 few books in private houses. 
 
 Really the daily small occurrences in their own. 
 little world were pretty nearly all the Pleasant 
 Plainers could find to talk or think about. 
 
 And the Keiths, as recent arrivals from an 
 older settled part of the country, and above 
 many of them in the social scale, were considered 
 worthy of more than ordinary attention. Their 
 dress, their manners, the furnishing of their 
 house and their style of living were subjects of 
 eager discussion. 
 
 The general opinion among the Lightcaps 
 and their set seemed to be that they were too 
 fine for the place ; such remarks as the fellow 
 ing being frequently heard,
<page 103>

 
 $6 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 * Why would you believe it, they've got a 
 real store carpet on that front room, and a soiy 
 and cheers covered with horse-hair cloth and 
 ?vhite curtains to the winders and picture hang- 
 ing upon to the walls." 
 
 " And the little girls wears white pantalets 
 caliker ones such as our youngsters wears isn't 
 good enough for them." 
 
 There were in the town, however, a numbei 
 of families of educated, refined people who re- 
 joiced in this addition to their society and only 
 waited for the new comers to get settled in 
 their new home before calling. 
 
 Among these Mrs. Keith and her aunt found 
 several pleasant, congenial companions ; and with 
 two or three the acquaintance soon ripened into 
 a close intimacy, a warm, enduring friendship. 
 
 Mildred also soon had more than one young 
 girl crony whom she found as worthy of regard 
 as those she had left behind. 
 
 Back of the yellow house was a grove ol 
 saplings which became favoute haunt of the 
 children in their hours of recreation. They 
 would bend down the smaller trees and ride 
 them, climb up into the larger and sit among 
 the branches; or build baby- houses and play 
 housekeeping underneath, where the shade was 
 thickest.
<page 104>

 
 M1LDREL KEITH. 97 
 
 It was here they spent the warm, sunny- 
 days while the older members of the family 
 bnsied themselves in making the dwelling hab- 
 i table and the yard neat and orderly 
 
 On the morning after their arrival Rupert 
 spread a buffalo robe on the ground in the 
 shadiest part of the grove, whereon Zillah and 
 Ada seated themselves with their baby sister 
 who had been entrusted to their care. 
 
 There were many lovely wild flowers spring- 
 ing up here and there, and Cyril, Don and Fan 
 ran hither and thither gathering them, prattling 
 merrily to each other the while, and now and 
 then uttering a joyous shout as they came upon 
 some new floral treasure. 
 
 " Be careful not to go too far away, chil- 
 dren," Zillah called to them. 
 
 "No, we won't go far," they answered, 
 Cyril adding, " And I'll take care of Fan." 
 
 In a little while they came running back 
 with full hands. 
 
 " See, see !" they said, " so many and such 
 pretty ones blue, and white, and purple, and 
 yellow. There, you take these and we'll pick 
 r-ome more for ourselves. And for mother and 
 Aunt Wealthy ; we'll make a big bunch fot 
 each of them," and away they ran again. 
 
 " Oh, aren't they pretty ?' cried Ada. 
 6
<page 105>

 
 $8 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " Let's make a bouquet for mother out of 
 these." 
 
 "She won't want two," said Zillah, "'spe- 
 cially just now when she's no place to put 
 them. Let's make wreaths for Annis and 
 Fan." 
 
 " Oh yes !" and they began sorting the 
 flowers with eager interest, little Annis pulling 
 at them too, crowing and chattering in sweet 
 baby fashion. 
 
 Suddenly Zillah gave a start and laid a 
 trembling hand on Ada's arm. Her face had 
 grown very pale and there was a look of terror 
 in her large blue eyes. 
 
 Ada turned quickly to see what had caused 
 it, and was quite as much alarmed on behold- 
 ing a tall Indian, with rifle in hand, tomahawk 
 and scalping knife in his belt, standing within 
 a few feet of them, evidently regarding them 
 with curiosity. 
 
 He wore moccasins and leggins, and had a 
 blanket about his shoulders; feathers on his 
 head, too ; but no war paint on his face. 
 
 Behind him was a squaw with a great 
 bark basket full of wild berries, slung to hei 
 back. 
 
 The little girls were too terribly frightened 
 to cry out or speak, they sat there as if turned
<page 106>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 99 
 
 to stone, while the Indian drew nearer and 
 nearer still closely followed by his squaw. 
 
 Stopping close beside the children, he 
 grunted out a word or two to her, and she 
 filnng her basket to the ground. 
 
 Taking up a double handful of the berries, 
 he poured them into Zillah's lap, saying, " Pap- 
 poose!" 
 
 The squaw restored her basket to its place 
 and the two walked leisurely away ; happily 
 not in the direction of Fan and the boys. 
 
 The little girls gazed at each other in blank 
 astonishment ; then burst out simultaneously, 
 " Oh, weren't you frightened ? I thought ho 
 was going to kill us 1" 
 
 " But wasn't it good in him to give us the 
 berries ?" 
 
 " Yes ; he meant them for baby ; but mothel 
 doesn't let her have any, you know; so we 
 mustn't give them to her." 
 
 " No, but I'll call the children to get some.' 
 
 " Yes, do." 
 
 " Where did you get em ?" queried Cyril, 
 devouring his share with zest. 
 
 " An Indian gave them to us." 
 
 " An Indian ? why that was like a friend 
 and eolation ! I shan't be 'fraid of 'em any 
 more."
<page 107>

 
 100 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 *' I dou t know," returned Ada with a 
 shake of her head, " I'd rather not see 'em even 
 with their berries." 
 
 The little feast was jnst ended when they 
 espied a gentleman passing along the road be- 
 yond the grove. He turned and came toward 
 them. 
 
 " Good - morning," he said, pleasantly. 
 "These are Mr. Keith's children, I believe f" 
 
 " Tes, sir," answered Zillah. 
 
 " I'm glad to see you," shaking hands with 
 them ; " and I should like to make the ac- 
 quaintance of your parents. Are they at home, 
 in the house yonder ?" 
 
 " Mother is, sir ; but I saw father go away 
 a little while ago." 
 
 " Do you think your mother could see me 
 fcr ft moment ? My name is Lord.'* 
 
 Cyril opened his eyes very wide ; gazing up 
 into the gentleman's face with an odd expres- 
 sion of mingled curiosity and astonishment. 
 
 " I don't know, sir ;" answered Zillah, 
 " they're just cleaning the house and Cyril. 
 roc and ask mother." 
 
 Away flew the child, rushing into the room 
 where Miss Stanhope and Mrs. Keith were 
 overseeing the opening of boxes and the un- 
 packing of the household gear.
<page 108>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 101 
 
 " Mother, mother," he cried breathlessly, 
 * the Lord's out yonder and he wants to you 
 you ! Can he come in ? shall I bring him ?" 
 
 "The Lord! what can the child mean? ; 
 cried Aunt Wealthy, in her astonishment and 
 perplexity nearly dropping a large china bowl 
 which she held in her hand. 
 
 Mrs. Keith, too, looked bewildered for a 
 moment, then a sudden light breaking over her 
 face, 
 
 " Yes, bring him in," she said, and turning 
 to her aunt as the child sped on his errand, 
 " It must be the minister, auntie ; I remember 
 now that Stuart told me his name was Lord." 
 
 Mr. Lord, who was a very absent-minded 
 man, came in apologizing for his " neglect in 
 not calling sooner ; he had been engaged with 
 his sermon and the matter had slipped his 
 mind." 
 
 " I think you are blaming yourself unde- 
 servedly, sir," Mrs. Keith said, giving him her 
 hand with a cordial smile, " we arrived in town 
 only yesterday. Let me introduce you to my 
 aunt. Miss Stanhope." 
 
 The two shook hands, and Mr. Lord seating 
 himself upon a box, instead of the chair that 
 had been set for him, sprang up instantly witl 
 a hurried exclamation.
<page 109>

 
 102 
 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 A portion of the contents ol a paper of 
 tacks Lad been accidentally spilt there. 
 
 The ladies were too polite to smile. Mrs 
 Keith offered the chair again, simply saying, 
 " You will find this a more comfortable seat ; 
 please excuse the disorder we are in ;" theii 
 plunged into talk about the town and the little- 
 church he had recently organized there.
<page 110>

 
 11 Home ia the sphere of harmony and peace, 
 The spot where angels find a resting place, 
 When bearing blessings, they descend to earth." 
 
 Mas. HAUL 
 
 CYRIL came running back carrying a cov 
 ered basket. 
 
 " He's gone, girls. He wasn't the Lord at 
 all ; only a man ; and he didn't stay long ; I 
 guess 'cause he sat down on the tacks and 
 hurted himself. 
 
 " Here's our dinner. Mother says we may 
 eat it out here under the trees and it'll be ae 
 good as a picnic." 
 
 "So it will. Let's see what it is,' and 
 Zillah took the basket and lifted the lid. " Oh 
 that's nice 1 buttered biscuits and oold tongue 
 and cheese and ginger bread lots of it and a 
 turnover apiece." 
 
 " Isn't our mother good?" cried Ada grate- 
 fully. " Did you tell her about the Indian and 
 the berries f "
<page 111>

 
 104: MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " Yes; and father was there he jnst came 
 home and he says we needn't be a single bit 
 afraid ; they don't kill folks now, and they 
 wouldn't dare to hurt us right here in the 
 town ; even if they wanted to." 
 
 " Baby's been fretting a little ; 'cause she's 
 hungry, I guess," said Zillah, putting a bit of 
 gingerbread in the little one's hand. 
 
 " Yes ; mother said you should give her 
 eonie cake ; and she'll come directly and take 
 her awhile. Now let's begin to eat, for I'm 
 as hungry as a big black bear." 
 
 " So am I," piped the small voices of Don 
 And Fan. " Bat father always asks a blessing 
 first." 
 
 " Yes," assented Zillah, stopping short in 
 her distribution of the good things ; " and 
 mother does it when he's away, but " and she 
 glanced from one to the other of the childish 
 but grave faces of the little group. 
 
 " I'll do it," said Cyril, closing his merry 
 blue eyes and folding his chubby hands. " O 
 Lord, we thank thee for the ginger bread and 
 turnovers and and all the good things, Amen. 
 Now gi me mine, Zil," opening his eyes wide 
 and holding out both hands. 
 
 " Ladies first, you know," answered the 
 8tcr. " and we must all spread our handker-
<page 112>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 105 
 
 chiefs in our laps to keep the greasy crumbi 
 from our clothes." 
 
 "Oh, yes; I fordot. Help Ada and Faa 
 and yourself, then Don too, and me last 'cause 
 we're the gentlemen." 
 
 "No, myself last, because that's the way 
 mother does." 
 
 " And mother and father always do every- 
 thing right," commented Ada, beginning upon 
 her sandwich. 
 
 They were rosy, healthy children and their 
 appetites were keen ; but they were not selfish 
 or greedy, and the supply of food was more 
 than amply sufficient for all. 
 
 They were never stinted but had been taught 
 that waste was sinful ; so the remains of the 
 meal were put carefully by in the basket, which 
 Zillah then hung up on a branch near at hand. 
 
 As she did so the others set up a glad shout, 
 "Mother's coming!" and sprang forward to 
 meet her, while baby held out her hands with 
 a crow of delight. 
 
 "Well, dears, had you plenty of dinner f" 
 Mrs. Keith asked, taking Annis in her armi 
 and sitting down on the buffalo robe while they 
 grouped themselves about her. 
 
 " Oh yes ; yes indeed 1 some left ; and if 
 was very good. Thank yon for it, mother." 
 5*
<page 113>

 
 106 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 "You quite deserved it; you have been 
 dear, good children, taking care of yourseivei 
 and baby all morning, and not giving any trou- 
 ble to anybody." 
 
 How the young cheeks flushed and the eyea 
 grew bright at these words of commendation 
 from those dear lips. How they loved her for 
 them, and what an increased desire to merit 
 her approbation they felt swelling in their 
 breasts. 
 
 She could stay with them only a little while 
 but suggested various amusements, some games 
 they might play, some stories Zillah might re 
 late to the younger ones. 
 
 " Are you getting done fast, mother ? can 
 we sleep in our own home to-night?" they 
 asked. 
 
 " No, dears ; for though the bedroom floors 
 are cleaned there might be some dampness that 
 would injure us. We will go back to the tav- 
 ern for our supper and to sleep to-night ; but 
 to-morrow night we will be in our own home 
 once more." 
 
 " Not the nice home we used to have, 
 though P sighed Zillah. 
 
 " No, daughter ; but we must try to be con- 
 tent and thankful ; and if we are, we may be aa 
 happy in the new home as we were in the old."
<page 114>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 10? 
 
 With that the now sleeping babe was laid 
 gently down on the robe, a light covering 
 thrown over her, and with a charge to the 
 others to take care of her, and a caress bestowed 
 upon each, the mother hastened back to the 
 house. 
 
 " We're tired running 'bout and picking 
 flowers, Fan and Don and me," said Cyril; 
 " so won't you please tell us a story now, 
 Zil?" 
 
 " Tes ; I'll tell you Androcles and the Lion ; 
 you always like that." 
 
 " Yes ; and then tell 'bout the girl that had 
 a silk dress and couldn't run and play 'cause 
 her shoes pinched," begged Fan. 
 
 " Oh look !" exclaimed Ada in an under- 
 tone, " see those girls. They haven't silk 
 dresses or shoes to pinch their toes. Don't 
 they look queer ?" 
 
 The subjects of her remarks were two little 
 maids one about her own size, the other a 
 trifle smaller who were slowly making their 
 way through the bushes toward the spot whew 
 the Keith children were seated. 
 
 They had sallow, sunburnt faces, tawny, 
 yellow locks straggling over their shoulders, 
 and their thin, lanky little forms were arrayed 
 in calico dresses faded, worn and skimpy:
<page 115>

 
 108 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 pantalets of the same material but different 
 color, appeared below their skirts. Their feet 
 were bare, and on their heads were sunbonnete 
 of pasteboard covered with still another pattern 
 of calico both faded and soiled. 
 
 " Shall we ask them to come and join us ? n 
 jneried Zillah. 
 
 " No ; they don't look nice ; they're dirty, 
 -jrhispered Cyril, with a glance of disgust di- 
 rected toward the strangers. 
 
 " Maybe dey is hungry," suggested Fan , 
 * let's dive 'em some n'ng out o' de basket." 
 
 " Good afternoon, little girls," said Zillah, 
 raising her voice slightly as they drew near ; 
 u will you come and sit with us ?" 
 
 They shook their heads but came creeping 
 on, each with a finger in her mouth. 
 
 " Have you had your dinner ?" An affirma- 
 tive nod. 
 
 " I'm going to tell a story to these children, 
 %nd if you like to come and listen too, you can. 
 What are your names ?" 
 
 " Mine's Emmaretta Lightcap, and here if 
 Minerva Lightcap. She's my sister, she is. 
 Now go on and tell your story. Min, let's set 
 down on the grass right here." 
 
 They listened in open-mouthed wonder till 
 summoned by a shrill voice from the direction
<page 116>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 10S 
 
 of the smithy, when they rose aud scampered 
 sway. 
 
 Tho Keiths were a very domestic family \ 
 no place like home to them ; and all, from the 
 father down to little Fan, were heartily weary 
 of the unsettled life they had led for some 
 weeks past. 
 
 It was therefore with joy they found them- 
 selves once more able to sit down under their 
 own vine and fig tree, (if a rented domicile so 
 unsightly as "the yellow house on the corner ' 
 may fitly be compared to natural objects so full 
 of beauty and grace). 
 
 By the evening of the second day the ad- 
 vanced stage of the internal improvements 
 warranted them in taking possession. 
 
 As the shadows grew long the children were 
 called in, the family gathered about a neatly 
 appointed table set out in the centre one of the 
 three lower rooms ; spoken of indifferently as 
 the sitting, or dining-room, since it must an- 
 swer both purposes. 
 
 The meal was enlivened by cheerful chat, in 
 which the children were allowed to take part ; 
 the only restriction being that but one voice was 
 to be heard at a time ; and that not in loud or 
 boisterous tones. 
 
 No domestic had been found yet and leav*
<page 117>

 
 110 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 ing mother and aunt to chat with the father.. 
 Mildred and the younger girls cleared the table, 
 washed the dishes and made all neat in the 
 kitchen. 
 
 This done they returned to the sitting-room 
 The great family Bible lay open on the table 
 before the father, a pile of hymn-books beside 
 it. These last Rupert took up and distributed ; 
 the father read a few verses of Scripture and 
 gave out a hymn. The mother's sweet voice set 
 the tune, the others joined in and a full chorus 
 of praise swelled upon the summer evening air. 
 
 It died away, and all knelt while the father 
 offered a short but fervent prayer giving thanka 
 for the mercies of the day, asking for protection 
 through the night, confessing sins and pleading 
 {or pardon and eternal life, for all temporal and 
 spiritual good, through the atoning blood of 
 Christ. 
 
 It was thus each day was begun and ended 
 in this truly Christian family. " As for me 
 and my house we will serve the Lord," was the 
 resolution with which Mr. and Mrs. Keith had 
 begun their married life. 
 
 Each little one came to claim a good-night 
 kiss from father and Aunt Wealthy, then cheer- 
 fully followed their mother up the steep 
 crooked stairway to the large room above.
<page 118>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. Ill 
 
 *Oh, how much nicer it looks 1* they cried. 
 1 Auntie's room too," running to the open doo* 
 and peeping in. 
 
 Everything was now clean and neat, carpets 
 covered the rough boards of the floor, curtains 
 draped the windows and divided the large room 
 into several apartments, in each of which was 8 
 neat, white bed. 
 
 But little of their heavy furniture had been 
 brought with them from the old home, but its 
 place was partially supplied by turning packing 
 boxes into chintz-covered and cushioned lounges ; 
 and toilet tables, whose unsightliness was con- 
 cealed by dainty drapery. Ingenuity and taste 
 had done wonders in making the house com- 
 fortable and attractive at small expense.
<page 119>

 
 Cjjapte S 
 
 " 'Tis necessity, 
 To which the gods must yield." 
 
 THE children had said their prayers, tired 
 little heads were laid on soft white pillows, 
 weary young limbs stretched out to rest, and 
 leaving a kiss on each rosy mouth, the mother 
 went down stairs to rejoin her husband and 
 aunt in the sitting-room. 
 
 She found Mrs. Prior with them ; the good 
 woman had " just run in " to tell them of a girl 
 in want of a place. 
 
 "I don't know anything about her," she 
 went on, "except, that she's aright decent look- 
 ing girl and wants to work out a spell ; and that 
 they tell me the family's English ; respectable 
 but poor. 
 
 " If you would wish to give her a trial> Mis' 
 Keith, I've an opportunity to send her word 
 this evening and as like as not she'd get a 
 chance to come in with some of the country 
 folks to-morrow."
<page 120>

 
 DRED KEITH. 113 
 
 Mrs. Keith gladly gave consent, feeiing at 
 the moment as if almost any sort of help would 
 be better than none ; then asked, " Is there wiy 
 school in town that you could recommend foi 
 ray little girls, Mrs. Prior ?" 
 
 "Well, I don't know of but cneand I've 
 my doubts about that bein' such as you'd want 
 to send to. Damaris Drybread s the teacher, 
 and I shouldn't judge by her talk that she'd 
 had a finished education ; not by no means \ 
 still she may do well enough for little ones. I 
 haven't any, you know, so I haven't tried her.' 
 
 " Suppose we have a light," suggested Mr 
 Keith, " it's growing too dark for us to see each 
 other's faces." 
 
 Mildred rose, went to the kitchen, and 
 presently returned with a lighted candle and a 
 pair of snuffers, which she placed on the table. 
 
 Miss Stanhope was asking what sort of 
 society was to be found in the place, to whicli 
 Mrs. Prior made answer, 
 
 "Well, ma'am, we have pretty much alt 
 sorts ; and yet don't divide up in circles like 
 they do in a good many places. I s'pose there'll 
 be more of that as the town grows larger. 
 
 " There's educated folks that's fond o' booke 
 and the like, and know what manners is, and 
 how to talk well, and there's others that's rongfr
<page 121>

 
 114 MILDRED EE1TH. 
 
 and ignorant, yet mostly well meaning with it 
 all real honest and industrious. 
 
 " There are very few thieves, if any ; folks 
 cave their doors unlocked sometimes wide 
 open at night, and their clothes hanging out on 
 the line ; and I never hear of anything bein' 
 took. There's very little drinking, either ; a 
 drunken man's a rare sight with us." 
 
 " There are a good many New Englanders 
 here, are there not ?" inquired Mr. Keith. 
 
 " Yes, quite a good many ; and from York 
 state and Pennsylvany and Yirginia; from 
 Jersey too ; I hail from there myself. 
 
 "Bat I must be going, it's gettin' late; 
 evenins is so short this time o' year and how- 
 over it may be with Mr. Keith, I know yoa 
 women folks are tired enough to be ready for 
 bed. 
 
 " Now don't be formal with me, but run in 
 whenever you can. I'll always be glad to se 
 you. 
 
 " No, never mind your hat, Mr. Keith, I 
 don't want a beau ; for I'm not the least mite 
 afraid. Good-night to you all," and she hur- 
 ried away. 
 
 The candle was flaring and wasting in the 
 wind. Miss Stanhope fastened to snuff it, re- 
 marking, " These are miserable tallows ; get
<page 122>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 116 
 
 me some candle to-morrow, Stuart, and I'll try 
 to make some that will be an improvement 
 npon them. We have the moulds and the 
 wick ; all we want is the tallow." 
 
 Near noon of the next day a flauntily dressed 
 j oung woman walked in at the open door and 
 introduced herself to Mrs. Keith as the " Hing- 
 lish girl, Tiny Apple, that Mrs. Prior had rec- 
 ommended." 
 
 Mrs. Keith received her kindly, " Can you 
 cook and do general housework ?" she asked. 
 
 " Yes, mum ; of course, that's what I came 
 for." 
 
 " I hope you understand how to work, but 
 it is not to be expected that your way will 
 always be what will suit me best ; so I trust 
 vou are willing to be directed." 
 
 " If you're not too hard to please, mum, 
 I'll suit, I'm sure." 
 
 " We will try it. Zillah, show Yiny where 
 she is to sleep." 
 
 " Is she to come to the table ?" asked Mil- 
 dred, when the two had disappeared up the 
 stairway. 
 
 ''We shall see; I have not spoken of it 
 yet.'' 
 
 u You won't put up with that, mother 
 rarely?"
<page 123>

 
 116 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 u I think I must if that is the only conditir fc 
 on which we can have help with our house- 
 work." 
 
 On coming down, Yiny was directed to set 
 the table for dinner, shown where to find the 
 requisite articles, told how many were in the 
 family, and left to the performance of her task. 
 
 Mildred noted the number of plates set on, 
 and saw that Yiny had counted herself in with 
 the rest. 
 
 " You have one plate too many," she said 
 with some sharpness of tone. 
 
 "No, Miss." 
 
 "You certainly have. Here are eleven; 
 and we are only ten." 
 
 " And I make 'leven," returned Yiny, a hot 
 flush on her cheek and an angry gleam in her 
 eyes. 
 
 "You?' 
 
 " Yes, Miss, I'm as good as the rest ; and 
 if I cook the victuals I 'ave a right to eat 
 'em." 
 
 A warning glance from her mother's eye 
 checked the angry exclamation on the tip of 
 Mildred's tongue. 
 
 u We will consent to your coming to the 
 table with us, Yiny, on condition that you are 
 always neat and tidy in appearance," Mr
<page 124>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 117 
 
 Keith remarked in a quiet tone. " And now 
 you may help me to dish up the dinner 
 
 Aunt Wealthy was busied with her candle 
 moulds in one corner of the kitchen ; putting 
 in the wicks. 
 
 " So that question's settled," she said in 
 an aside to her niece ; " and I think you have 
 done wisely, Marcia." 
 
 The faces that surrounded the dinner-table 
 tnat day were a study. Those of Miss Stan- 
 hope and Mrs. Keith wore their usual placid 
 expression, but Mildred's was flushed and 
 angry, Eupert's full of astonishment, reflected 
 to some extent by the younger ones, while that 
 of the new comer expressed self-assertion and 
 defiance. 
 
 Mr. Keith glanced quizzically from one to 
 another for a moment. Then gave his atten- 
 tion to filling the plates ; talking at the same 
 time in a cheerful strain. 
 
 " I have found a lot, wife, which I think 
 will suit us for building on. If nobody feels 
 too tired for a walk after tea we will all go and 
 look at it. It is to be for the family, and the 
 family must decide as to its merits." 
 
 This turned the current of thought and all 
 the young people grew eager and animated. 
 Tt was quite evident that no one intended to be
<page 125>

 
 118 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 too much fatigued to be of the party of inspec- 
 tion. 
 
 In the midst of the talk a low, half-terrified 
 exclamation from Fan drew the attention of all, 
 and following the direction of her glance they 
 Baw a tall Indian in the doorway, while beyond 
 in the street, were many others, some on foot, 
 eome on horseback, some in the act of die- 
 mounting. 
 
 They were of both sexes and all ages ; the 
 papooses tied into little wooden troughs which 
 the mothers stood up on end on the ground. 
 
 The babies were very quiet, not a whimper 
 to be heard from any of them ; though they 
 were deprived of the use of their hands their 
 clothing being a straight strip of cloth folded 
 around their bodies in such a way as to pin 
 their poor little arms down to their sides and 
 had nothing to amuse them but a string of tiny 
 bells stretched across the trough in front of their 
 faces. 
 
 "Ugh I" said the Indian on the doorstep, 
 "ehawp!" and he pointed from a basket of 
 berries his squaw had set down beside him to 
 the loaf on the table. 
 
 " Oh do let's give it to 'im ! no knowin' 
 what VU do if we don't 1" cried Viny in 
 fright.
<page 126>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 119 
 
 " It will be a good enough exchange," said 
 Mr. Keith, taking the loaf and handing it to 
 the Indian. " Bring a pan for the berries." 
 
 The Indian passed the loaf on to his squaw 
 with a grunt of satisfaction, poured a quart oi 
 so of berries into the pan Yiny had hastened to 
 bring, then again pointed to the table. 
 
 "What now?" asked Mr. Keith, good- 
 humoredly. 
 
 The Indian replied by a gesture as if lifting 
 a cup to his lips ; and Mildred saying, " He's 
 thirsty," hastened to pour out a tumbler of milk 
 and hand it to him. 
 
 He drank it, returned the glass with a nod 
 of thanks and walked away. 
 
 " I'll just run hout and water 'em hall," said 
 Yiny, hurrying into the kitchen for a bucket 
 and tin cup, " it's always best to keep on the 
 good side of 'em, folks tell me, if you don't want 
 to run no risk of losin' the 'air hoff yer 'ead." 
 
 Mr. Keith was standing in the doorway 
 * here the Indian had been a moment before. 
 
 " Come and look at them, wife, and all of 
 yon," he said, " it's qui ie v show and there's 
 not the least danger." 
 
 Thus encouraged the children crowded to 
 the door and window and found much amuse- 
 ment in watching the movements of the savagei
<page 127>

 
 120 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 and Viny's efforts to win favor with them ; ef 
 forts apparently well-directed, for the day was 
 warm and they drank the cool water freshly 
 drawn from the well in the yard, as if they 
 found it very refreshing. 
 
 The troop some thirty or forty in number 
 did not tarry long ; in less than an hour they 
 had all remounted and gone on their way. 
 
 " There 1 them savage wild Hinguns :s all 
 clear gone and hour scalps is safe for the pres- 
 ent," remarked Tiny, with a sigh of relief as 
 the last one disappeared from view in a cloud 
 of dust far down the street. 
 
 She had run out to the corner of the house, 
 dishtowel in hand, to watch their movements 
 as far as she could see them. 
 
 "Don't talk so; you'll frighten the chil- 
 dren," said Mildred, reprovingly, speaking from 
 the front door where she stood with the little 
 ones grouped about her. 
 
 "I don't take my borders from you," mut- 
 tered the girl, stalking back to her kitchen. 
 
 After an early tea the proposed family walk 
 was taken. 
 
 The lot a little farther to the north thar 
 Any which had been built upon as yet, on the 
 high river bank and overlooking the ferry was 
 pronounced all that could be desired.
<page 128>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 121 
 
 It was on a corner, and on two sides afforded 
 & fine view of the river, on the othars of town 
 and country. 
 
 " When we have our house built," remarked 
 Mi. Keith, "we'll be able to see the Kankakee 
 Marsh from the second story windows." 
 
 " Marsh ?" repeated his wife in a tone of 
 alarm, "how far off is it ?" 
 
 " We're about two miles from this end ; it 
 is two hundred miles long, you remember, ex- 
 tending far over into Illinois. But why that 
 
 " Ague !" 
 
 " Well, don't let us cross the bridge before 
 we come to it. This is a beautiful spot. I 
 think we can, in a few years, make it superior 
 in point of beauty to any we have ever lived 
 in/' 
 
 " I think so too, if we can keep these fine 
 old oaks." 
 
 There were several of them ; grand old 
 trees that had stood the storms of centuries, , 
 perhaps. 
 
 " We will ; we'll manage our building in a 
 way not co interfere with them." 
 
 At thai Mildred's face brightened as it had 
 not since her first sight of the yellow house. 
 
 She had been very homesick for the dear 
 6
<page 129>

 
 122 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 old home in Lansdale, though not a word of it 
 nad she breathed even into her mother's sym- 
 pathetic ear. , 
 
 " How soon can the house be done ? she 
 asked. 
 
 " Better inquire first how soon it will be 
 begun," laughed her father. " If we get into it 
 by next spring we may consider ourselves for- 
 tunate." 
 
 " Oh dear I" sighed the children with one 
 accord. 
 
 " The time will slip around before you know 
 it, dears," remarked their aunt cheerily. 
 
 " And we'll soon get the ground fenced in 
 and let you spend your leisure time, and exer- 
 cise your taste and ingenuity in beautifying it," 
 said their father. 
 
 " And may we all help plan the house V 
 asked Rupert. 
 
 Mr. Keith smiled, a kindly good natured 
 smile, with some amusement in it too. 
 
 " You may all make suggestions ; it is to 
 be our house : not the parents' only, but the 
 children's, too."
<page 130>

 
 " Heaven gives us friends to bless the present scene." 
 
 Toirao. 
 
 " On Rhody Jane, Rhody Jane, I say just 
 come au' look !" 
 
 " Look at what, Einmaret ? you're always 
 inakin' a fuss about nothing" returned Miss 
 Lightcap scornfully, but nevertheless, stepping 
 very promptly, plate and dishcloth in hand, to 
 the front door whence the hasty summons had 
 come. 
 
 " 'Taiu't nothin' this time," Emmaretta 
 went on ; " they're agoin' to Sunday school, 
 them Keith girls, and just see how they're 
 dressed up!" 
 
 "Did you ever see anything so fine!' 
 chorused Minerva ; " sech lovely dresses ; and 
 black silk aprons with colored lace onto 'em 
 Oh my I I wish I had one like 'em I" 
 
 " Maybe you shall some o' these days when 
 your pop gits rich," said her mother, who was 
 gazing fiDm the window.
<page 131>

 
 124 MILDRED KSITB. 
 
 " But the bonnets is what takes me. Did 
 you notice 'em, Khoda Jane? the' re gimp 
 with blue ribbings and blue flowers." 
 
 " And the white and red in their faces make* 
 them powerful becoming," remarked Gotobed. 
 standing just outside. 
 
 But he turned his head the other way, 
 ghamefacedly, as Mildred, looking sweet and 
 fair in white muslin and pink ribbons, followed 
 her younger sisters into the street, and sent a 
 casual glance in his direction 
 
 " Don't she think she's some !" said Rhoda 
 Jane enviously. 
 
 " And so she is ; she looks like a posey,' 
 said Gotobed. 
 
 " Is that the grandmother ? the old lady 
 walking with Mr. Keith." 
 
 "No ; Viny Apple says she's Mrs. Keith's 
 aunt ; and talks in the funniest way sometimes ; 
 gets things hind part before telling her to 
 make up the floors and sweep the beds, and the 
 like. 
 
 " There they're all out o' sight. 1 guess the 
 mother's stay in' to home with the baby ; Viny 
 said she wasn't agoiii' to, and I s'pose she's up 
 stairs primpin'." 
 
 " And that's what you'd ought to be doin 
 forelong, if you're goin' to meetin', Rhoda
<page 132>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 125 
 
 Jane, observed Mrs. Lightcap, drawing iu her 
 Lead. " Hurry up now with them dishes. And 
 you children walk right in here and hunt up 
 your Sunday things, and wash your hands and 
 faces and comb your hair ; it'll be meetin* time 
 'fore we know it." 
 
 A narrow foot-path, bordered on each side 
 by grass still wet with dew, led past the grove 
 of saplings to the little church whither the 
 Keiths were bound. 
 
 Mildred, lifting her white skirts daintily, 
 and warning her sisters and brothers of the 
 danger of wet and soiled shoes, should they step 
 aside from the beaten track, picked her way 
 with careful steps, rejoicing in the fact that the 
 distance was not great. 
 
 The church membership was as yet very 
 small ; Sabbath school ditto. The newly ar- 
 rived family made an important addition to the 
 ranks of both teachers and scholars. 
 
 Two Bible classes were organized this morn- 
 ing and given, respectively, into the charge of 
 Mr. Keith and Miss Stanhope ; Rupert becom- 
 ing a member of his father's, Mildred of Aunt 
 Wealthy's. There were but two others iu this 
 latter class; Claudina Chetwood and Lucilla 
 Grange; both intelligent, lady-like, refined 
 girls, who made an agreeable impression upon
<page 133>

 
 126 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Miss Stanhope and Mildred also. And this 
 was mutual. 
 
 The morning service followed immediately 
 upon the close of Sabbath school. The sermon 
 was excellent ; the singing, though not artistic, 
 and somewhat interrupted by the necessity 01 
 lining out the hymn, on account of the scarcity 
 of books, earnest and spirited ; the people sing- 
 ing, apparently with the understanding and the 
 heart also ; the prayer was fervent, and the be- 
 havior of the congregation throughout tha 
 whole service was quiet and devotional. 
 
 Most of them were town folk, but a few 
 families had come in from the surrounding 
 country. 
 
 There was little display of fashion or style 
 in dress ; no one was expensively attired ; most 
 of the women and girls wore calico; but all 
 were neat, some really tasteful ; and in intellect 
 and moral worth, the majority of faces would 
 have compared favorably with an equal number 
 in the older States. 
 
 People lingered after church for mutual in- 
 troductions and the exchange of friendly 
 remarks and inquiries. The Keiths were 
 warmly welcomed, assured of intentions to call, 
 hopes expressed that they would " like the 
 place," feel qu'te at home in the church and be
<page 134>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 127 
 
 sociable ; the country people adding " Come 
 out and see us whenever you can." 
 
 Squire Chttwood and Mr. Keith, who had 
 made acquaintance during the preceding week, 
 DOW introduced their families ; each with very 
 excusable fatherly pride in the good looks and 
 good manners of his offspring. 
 
 The young Chetwoods were nearly as num. 
 erous, as handsome and intelligent as the 
 Keiths. 
 
 " I hope we shall be good friends," said 
 Claudina, as she and Mildred walked away to- 
 gether. " Mother was not out to-day because 
 of a headache ; but she and I are coming to see 
 vour mother and you this week." 
 
 " We shall be pleased to see you," Mildred 
 answered heartily, " and I am very glad to ac- 
 cept your offer of friendship." 
 
 They parted at Mr. Keith's door, mutually 
 pleased, and Mildred carried a brighter face 
 into the house than she haa worn for weeks. 
 
 Her mother remarked upon it with delight 
 
 " Yes, mother," she responded gayly, " I 
 begin to feel a little happier about living here, 
 now that I find we are to have good preaching, 
 Sunday school with an excellent and compe- 
 tent teacher for my share " glancing archly at 
 A.unt Wealthy's kindly, sensible face "and
<page 135>

 
 128 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 pleasant friends ; * going on to give a flattering 
 description of the Chetwoods, particularly 
 Olaudina. 
 
 " I hope she will prove a valuable friend 
 and a very great comfort to you, daughter," 
 said Mrs. Keith. " You need young compan- 
 ionship and I am very glad to know that it 
 will be provided." 
 
 The little girls had been up stairs putting 
 away their best bonnets. 
 
 "Where's Yiny ?" asked Zillah, running 
 back into the sitting-room where the older peo- 
 ple still were. 
 
 " She went out telling me that she wouldn't 
 be back till bedtime," replied the mother. 
 
 " Leaving us to do our own work 1" cried 
 Mildred. "Oh, mother, what made you let 
 her?" 
 
 " Let her, my child ? she did not ask my 
 permission," laughed Mrs. Keith ; " but indeed 
 I think we are quite a& .veil off without her for 
 to-day ; as we do no cooking on Sunday." 
 
 Before another week had passed, Mildred 
 was ready to subscribe to the opinion that they 
 were as well without her altogether she hav- 
 ing proved herself utterly inefficient, slow and 
 slovenly about her work, unwilling to be di- 
 rected, impertinent, bold and forward.
<page 136>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 129 
 
 There was not a Jay when Mildred's indig- 
 nation did not rise to fever heat in view of the 
 many and aggravated sins of omission and com- 
 mission on the part of their " help ;" yet it sel- 
 dom found vent in words. She was striving 
 with determined purpose to rule her own 
 spirit, and asking daily and hourly for strength 
 for the conflict from Him who has said,. "In 
 me is thine help," " My strength is made per- 
 fect in weakness." 
 
 The example set her by her mother and 
 aunt was also most helpful. They were both 
 cheerful, patient, sunny-tempered women ; 
 never a word of fretfulness or complaint from 
 the lips of either; Aunt Wealthy calm and 
 serene as an unclouded summer day, Mrs. Keith 
 often bringing to her aid a strong sense of the 
 ludicrous; turning her vexations into occasions 
 for jesting and mirth. 
 
 Mildred knew that they were trials never- 
 theless, and her love and admiration, and her 
 resolve to show herself worthy to be the daugh 
 ter of such a mother, grew apace. 
 
 To the affectionate heart of the unselfish 
 girl there seemed no greater trial than seeing 
 this dear mother overburdened with care and 
 toil ; but try as she might to take all the bur- 
 dens on her young shoulders, it was utterly im- 
 6*
<page 137>

 
 130 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 possible ; and while the conviction that to set 
 her impatient and unhappy would add to her 
 mother's troubles, helped her to maintain hei 
 self-control, the reflection that Yiny's short- 
 comings added largely to those trials, made it 
 tenfold more difficult to bear with them. 
 
 So also with the little tempers, untidinesses, 
 and mischievous pranks of her younger brothers 
 and sisters. 
 
 Home, even a happy home, is often a hard- 
 fought battle-field ; and who shall say that there 
 is not sometimes more true courage displayed 
 there than in another kind of conflict amid the 
 roar of cannon and clash of arms, where earthly 
 glory and renown are to be won. 
 
 The Chetwoods and Granges, and several 
 others of the same standing in society, called 
 that week ; also Mr. Lord, the minister, brought 
 his old mother who kept house for him, he 
 being a bachelor. 
 
 When Yiny happened to be the one to ad- 
 mit callers, she seemed to think it incumbent 
 upon her to take a seat in the parlor with them 
 and exert herself for their entertainment. 
 
 Mildred speedily undertook to disabuse hn 
 of thifi impression, but the girl haughtily m- 
 formed her that " she had as good a right in the 
 parlor as anybody else."
<page 138>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 131 
 
 " But I wouldn't go into it to visit with 
 anybody that didn't come to see me/ said Mil- 
 dred, with a determined effort to keep dowi> 
 ber rising anger. 
 
 " Well, I guess they're about as likely tc 
 want to see me as any o' the rest ; and if they 
 don't they'd ought to. So there I" 
 
 " But you have your work to attend to." 
 
 "The work can wait. And the rest o' 
 you's got plenty to do too." 
 
 The only remedy was to keep Yiny busy 
 in the kitchen while some of the family watched 
 the doors into the streets and admitted visitors. 
 
 Even this stratagem sometimes failed and 
 they could only console themselves that the 
 visitors understood the situation. 
 
 "Ain't you goin' to call on the Keiths?" 
 asked Gotobed Lightcap at the dinner table one 
 day about the middle of the week, 
 
 "Who? me?" queried his mother; then 
 pushing away her empty plate, and resting her 
 elbow on the table, her chin in her hand, while 
 ehe looked reflectively off into vacancy. " Well, 
 I s'pose a body'd ought to be neighborly, and 
 I'm as willin' to do my part as the next one ; 
 but there's always a sight of work to do at 
 home ; and then I feel kinder backward 'bout 
 callin' on 'em ; they live so fine, you know ;
<page 139>

 
 iS2 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Viny Apple says they use real silver spoons 
 and eat off real chancy every day ; an' that's 
 inore'n we can do when we have company." 
 
 " Well, old woman, I gnesa the victual? 
 don't taste no better for bein' eat off then; 
 things," responded her husband, cheerfully, 
 passing his empty cup. 
 
 " Maybe. And they don't have no tea noi 
 coffee for dinner, Yiny says. I think it's real 
 stingy." 
 
 "P'raps they don't want it," remarked 
 Gotobed. 
 
 "Don't you b'lieve no such thing!" ex- 
 claimed Rhoda Jane, scornfully, " 'tain't fash- 
 ionable ; and they'd ruther be fashionable than 
 comfortable. Yiny says they're awful stuck 
 up ; wouldn't let her come to the table or into 
 the parlor if they could help themselves. 
 
 " But I don't keer, I'm not afeard on 'em. 
 if mother is; and I'm goin' over there this 
 afternoon ; if it's only to let 'em see that I feel 
 myself as good as they be any day ; and I'll tell 
 em so too, if they don't treat me right." 
 
 " Pshaw, Rhoda Jane, how you talk !" said 
 bei mother. 
 
 " Well, I'm spunky, mother; that's a fact ; 
 and I ain't a bit ashamed of it nuther." 
 
 " Don't jou go if you can't behave your-
<page 140>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 133 
 
 self, 1 said Gotobed, leaving the tiole and the 
 room. 
 
 Mrs. Keith had gathered her children about 
 her in the parlor, it being the shadiest and 
 coolest apartment in the house in the after 
 noon. She, herself, Aunt Wealthy and the 
 little girls were sewing, while Rupert kept the 
 little boys quiet and interested with the making 
 of a kite, and Mildred read alond from Mrs. 
 Sherwood's " Roxobelle." 
 
 Mildred had a clear, sweet-toned voice, 
 enunciated distinctly, and read with feeling 
 and expression; so that it was a pleasure to 
 listen to her. 
 
 Rupert, Zillah and Ada were also good read 
 ers, and would take their turns as such ; for this 
 was no new thing, but one of the mother's ways 
 of educating her children and training them to 
 a love of literature. 
 
 While many another thing had been left be- 
 hind in Ohio, they had brought all their books 
 with them. Poetry, histories, biographies, 
 books of travel, religious and scientific works, 
 juvenile story-books and a few novels, all 
 of the best class, were to be fourd among 
 their treasured stores, reveled in by old and 
 young. 
 
 Mr. Keith had his volumes of legal lore
<page 141>

 
 134 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 too, but with these the other members of tl.ti 
 family seldom if ever cared to interfere. 
 
 Mrs. Sherwood was a favorite author with 
 the young people ; they were reading " Roxo- 
 belie " for the first time and had reached a most 
 exciting part the scene where the little dog 
 had led Sophie Beauchamp into the room where 
 his invalid and much abused mistress lay, 
 chained by disease to her wretched bed, when 
 Mrs. Lightcap and Rhoda Jane appeared in the 
 open doorway. 
 
 They were dressed with the utmost simplici 
 ty gowns, aprons and sunbonnets of calico, 
 made without regard to fashion ; no collars or 
 cuffs ; hands bare and brown ; faces sunburnt, 
 the mother's stolid, the girl's sufficiently sharp 
 but lacking education and refinement. 
 
 It was far from being a welcome interrup- 
 tion. Mildred closed her book with a half sup- 
 pressed sigh, the little girls exchanged glances 
 of vexation and disappointment ; Rupert, too. 
 scowled and uttered an exclamation of impa- 
 tience half under his breath ; but Mrs. Keith 
 nid Miss Stanhope rose smilingly, gave the 
 , isitors a cordial greeting, asked them to be 
 ?cated and entered into conversation. 
 
 " It's powerful warm," remarked Mrs. Light- 
 cap, accepting the offered chair and wiping the
<page 142>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 136 
 
 perspiration from her heated face with the cor- 
 ner of her apron. 
 
 " Yes, it has been an unusually warm day," 
 responded Miss Stanhope, handing a fan ; while 
 Mrs. Keith asked if they would not take ofi 
 their bonnets. 
 
 " Well ma'am, I don't care if I do," re- 
 turned Mrs. Lightcap, pulling hers off and lay- 
 ing it on her lap ; Khoda Jane doing likewise. 
 
 " Let me lay them on the table," Mildred 
 eaid, recovering her politeness. 
 
 " No, thank you ; 'tain't worth while fur 
 the few minutes we're agoin' to set ; they's no 
 ways hefty. 
 
 " Our names is Lightcap ; this here's my 
 daughter Khoda Jane and she says to me, 
 4 mother,' says she, ' we'd ought to be sociable 
 with them new neighbors of ourn ; let's go 
 over and set a bit.' No, now what am I talkin' 
 abont?' 'twan't her nuther, 'twas Gote that 
 bpoke of it first , but my gal here was more'n 
 vvilling to come." 
 
 " Yes, we always try to be neighborly," as- 
 sented the girl. "How do you like Pleasant 
 Plains, ladies ?" 
 
 " It seems a pleasant town and we find 
 very pleasant people in it," was Mrs. Keith's 
 smiling rejoinder.
<page 143>

 
 136 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 "That's the talk!" exclaimed Miss Light- 
 cap laughing. " You'l. do, Mis' Keith." 
 
 " Comin' so late you won't be able to raise 
 no garden sass this year," remarked the mother ; 
 then went on to give a detailed account of what 
 they had planted, what was growing well, and 
 what was not, with an occasional digression to 
 her husband, her cooking and housework, the 
 occasional attacks of " agur " that interfered 
 with her plans ; and so on and so on her 
 daughter managing to slip in a word or two 
 now and then. 
 
 At length they rose to go. 
 
 " How's Viny ?" queried Rhoda Jane, ad- 
 dressing Mildred. 
 
 " Quite well, I believe," replied Mildred in 
 a freezing tone, and drawing herself up with 
 dignity. 
 
 " Tell her we come to see her too," laughed 
 the girl, as she stepped from the door, " Good- 
 bye. Hope you won't be ceremonious, but mr 
 In sociable any time o* day."
<page 144>

 
 " Zeal and duty are not slow : 
 Bat on occasion's forelock watchful wait." 
 
 MlLTOJt. 
 
 " THE impudent thing !" exclaimed Mil 
 dred to her mother with a flushed and angrj 
 face ; " putting us and onr maid of all work on 
 the same level ! Visit her ? Not I, indeed . 
 and I do hope, mother, that neither you nor 
 Aunt Wealthy will ever cross their threshold." 
 
 " My dear, she probably did not mean it,* 
 said Mrs. Keith. 
 
 "And now let us go on with our story, 
 Yon have all waited quietly and politely like 
 good children." 
 
 "Gotobed Lightcap 1 Lightcap ! Gotobed 
 Nightcap !" sang Cyril, tumbling about on the 
 carpet. " O Don, don't you wish you had such 
 a pretty name ?" 
 
 "No I wouldna ; I just be Don.' 
 
 " There, dears, don't talk now ; sister's go.
<page 145>

 
 138 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 ng to read, said their mother. " If jou don't 
 A-ant to be still and listen you may run out 
 ind play in the yard." 
 
 " Somebody else tumin'," whispered Fan. 
 Calling at her mother's skirts. 
 
 Mildred closed again the book she had just 
 fesuined, rose and inviting the new comer to 
 enter, handed her a chair. 
 
 She was a tall, gaunt, sallow-corn plexioned 
 <voman of uncertain age, with yellow hair, pale 
 watery blue eyes, and a sanctimonious expres- 
 sion of countenance. 
 
 Her dress was almost austere in its simpli- 
 city ; a dove-colored calico, cotton gloves of a 
 little darker shade, a white muslin handkerchief 
 crossed on her bosom, a close straw bonnet 
 with no trimming but a skirt of plain, white 
 ribbon and a piece of the same put straight 
 across the top, brought down over the ears and 
 tied under the chin. 
 
 " My name is Drybread," she announced 
 with a slight, stiff courtesy ; tbv: seating her- 
 self bolt upright on Mildrec . offered chair, 
 tfaitec to be addressed. 
 
 " Mrs. or Miss 1" queried Mrs. Keith pleas- 
 antly. 
 
 "Miss. And yours?" 
 
 " Mrs. Keith. Allow me to introduce mv
<page 146>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 139 
 
 annt, Miss Stanhope, and my daughter Mildred. 
 These little people too belong to me." 
 
 " Gueth we do so ?" said Don, showing a 
 double row of pearly teeth, " cauth you're OBI 
 own mamma. Ain't she, Cyril ?" 
 
 "Do you go to school, my little man?' 
 asked the visitor, unbending slightly in the 
 stiffness of her manner. 
 
 " Ain't your man ! don't like dwy bwead, 
 'cept when I'se vewy hungwy." 
 
 " Neither do I," chimed in Cyril. " And 
 we don't go to school. Papa says we're not 
 big enough." 
 
 " Don ! Cyril ! my little boys must not be 
 rude," reproved the mamma. " Run away now 
 to your plays." 
 
 " They're pretty children," remarked the 
 caller as the twain disappeared. 
 
 "Yery frank in the expression of their 
 sentiments and wishes," the mother responded 
 emiling. 
 
 " Extremely so, I should say ;" added Mil- 
 dred dryly. 
 
 " Is it not a mother's duty to curb and 
 restrain ?" queried the visitor, fixing her cold 
 blue eyes upon Mrs. Keith's face. 
 
 " Certainly ; where she deems it needful." 
 
 Mrs. Keith's tones were perfectly sweet.
<page 147>

 
 140 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 tempered ; Mildred's not quite so, sis she added 
 with emphasis, "And no one so capable of 
 judging when it is needful as my mother." 
 
 "Quite natural and proper sentiments foi 
 her daughter, no doubt. How do y<ya like 
 Pleasant Plains f" 
 
 The question was addressed more particular- 
 ly to Miss Stanhope, and it was she who replied. 
 
 " We are quite disposed to like the place 
 Miss Stalebread ; the streets are widely pleas- 
 ant and would be quite beautiful if the forest 
 trees had been left." 
 
 "My name is Z^bread ! a good honest 
 name; if not quite so aristocratic and fine 
 sounding as Keith." 
 
 " Excuse me !" said Miss Stanhope. " I 
 have an unfortunate kind of memory for names 
 and had no intention of miscalling yours." 
 
 " Oh 1 then it's all right. 
 
 " Mrs. Keith, I'm a teacher ; take young 
 boys and girls of all ages. Perhaps you might 
 feel like entrusting me with some of yours. I 
 see you have quite a flock." 
 
 " I will take it into consideration," Mrs. 
 Keith answered; "What branches do yoo 
 teach ?" 
 
 " Reading, writing, arithmetic, geography 
 and English grammar."
<page 148>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 141 
 
 "I've heard of teachers boarding round,*" 
 remarked Mildred, assailed by a secret appre- 
 hension; "is that the way you do?" 
 
 " No ; I live at home, at my father's." 
 
 Miss Dry bread was scarcely out of earshot 
 when Ada burst out vehemently. 
 
 " I don't want to be distrusted to her! she 
 doesn't look distrusty, does she, Zillah ? Mother 
 please don't consider it !" 
 
 " But just say yes at once ?" asked mother 
 playfully, pressing a kiss upon the little flushed, 
 anxious face. 
 
 " Oh no, no, no ! please, mamma dear ;" 
 cried the child returning the caress and putting 
 her arms lovingly about her mother's neck. 
 " You didn't like her, did you ?" 
 
 Mrs. Keith acknowledged laughingly that 
 ehe had not been very favorably impressed, and 
 Zillah joining in Ada's entreaties, presently 
 promised that she would try to hear their les- 
 sons at home. A decision which was received 
 with delight and a profusion of thanks and 
 
 Mildred was glad to find herself alone witl 
 her mother that evening for a short time, after 
 the younger ones were in bed ; for she had a 
 plan to unfold. 
 
 It was that she should act as governess to
<page 149>

 
 i42 MILDRED KEIIB 
 
 her sisters, and the little boys, if the} were con- 
 sidered old enough now to begin the ascent of 
 the hill of science. 
 
 " My dear child 1" the mother said with a 
 look of proud affection into the glowing ani- 
 mated face, "I full} 7 - appreciate the love and 
 self-devotion to me and the children that have 
 prompted this plan of yours ; but I am by no 
 means willing to lay such heavy burdens on 
 your young shoulders." 
 
 " But mother" 
 
 " Wait a little, dearie, till I have said my 
 Say. Your own studies must be taken up 
 again. Your father is greatly pleased with an 
 arrangement he has just made for you and Ku- 
 j^C-t and Zillah to recite to Mr. Lord. 
 
 " The English branches, Latin, Greek and 
 the higher mathematics, are what he is willing 
 to undertake to teach." 
 
 Mildred's eyes sparkled. " O mother, how 
 glad I am ! Will he open a school?" 
 
 "No; only hear recitations for a couple of 
 hours every week-day except Saturdays, whicl 
 lie says he must have unbroken fcr his pulpi? 
 preparations. 
 
 " \our father thinks he is very glad of tlif 
 opportunity to add a little to his salary ; which 
 of course, is quite small."
<page 150>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. H 
 
 1 Then we study at home ? I shall like that. 
 But he won't take little ones ?" 
 
 "No; none that are too young to learu 
 Latin. Your father wants Zillah to begin that 
 now ; and he hopes that a few others will join 
 the class some of the Chet woods, perhaps." 
 
 Mildred's face was all aglow with delight ; 
 for she had a great thirst for knowledge, and 
 there had seemed small hope of satisfying it in 
 this little frontier town where the means for 
 acquiring a liberal education were so scant and 
 poor. 
 
 " So you see, daughter, you will have na 
 lack of employment," Mrs. Keith went on; 
 " especially as with such inefficient help in the 
 kitchen and with general housework, I shall 
 often be compelled to call upon you ; or rather," 
 she added, with a slight caress, " to accept the 
 assistance you are only too ready to give." 
 
 " It is too bad 1" cried the girl, indignantly ; 
 'thatYiny doesn't earn her salt! I wondei 
 how you can have patience with her, mother, 
 if I were her mistress I'd have sent her off at a 
 moment's warning long before this." 
 
 41 Let us try to imitate God's patience with 
 us, which is infinite ;" Mrs. Keith answered low 
 and reverently ; " let us bear with her a little 
 'onger. But indeed, I do not know that we
<page 151>

 
 14* MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 could fill her place with any one who would 
 be more competent or satisfactory in any way." 
 
 " I'm afraid that is quite true ; but it does 
 seem too hard that such a woman as my gifted, 
 intellectual, accomplished mother should have 
 to spend her life in the drudgery of housework, 
 cooking, mending and taking care of babies." 
 
 " No, dear ; you are taking a wrong view of 
 it. God appoints our lot; he chooses all our 
 changes for us ; Jesus, the God-man, dignified 
 manual labor by making it Irs own employ- 
 ment during a great part of his life on earth ; 
 and ' it is enough for the disciple that he be a? 
 his Master, and the servant as his Lord.' 
 
 " Besides, what sweeter work can a mother 
 have than the care and training of her own off- 
 spring 1" 
 
 " But then the cooking, mother, and all the 
 rest of it !" 
 
 "Well, dear, the health, and consequently 
 tho happiness and usefulness of my husband 
 and children, depend very largely upon the 
 proper preparation of their food ; so that is no 
 mean task." 
 
 " Ah, mother, you are determined to make 
 out a good case and not to believe yourself 
 tiardly used/' said Mildred, smiling, yet speak- 
 ing in a half petulant tone.
<page 152>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. Ufc 
 
 u No, I am not hardly used ; my life is 
 crowned with mercies, of the very least of which 
 I am utterly unworthy," her mother answered, 
 gently. 
 
 " And, my child, I find that any woik is 
 sweet when done ' heartily as to the Lord and 
 not unto men !' What sweeter than a service 
 of love ! ' Be ye followers of God as dear chil- 
 dren.' " 
 
 "Yes," said Aunt Wealthy, coming in at 
 the moment; " ' as dear children,' not as ser- 
 vants or slaves, but doing the will of God from 
 the heart ; not that we may be saved, but be- 
 cause we are saved ; our obedience not the 
 ground of our acceptance; but the proof of our 
 love to Him, our faith in Him who freely gives 
 us the redemption purchased for us by His own 
 blood. Oh what a blessed religion it is ! how 
 sweet to belong to Jesus and to owe everything 
 to him !" 
 
 " I feel it so," Mrs. Keith said, with an an 
 dertone of deep joy in her sweet voice. 
 
 "And I," whispered Mildred, laying her 
 head in her mother's lap as she knelt at her 
 side, as had been her wont in childish days. 
 
 They were all silent after that for many 
 miuutes, sitting there in the gloaming ; Mrs. 
 Keith's hand passing softly, caressingly over 
 7
<page 153>

 
 *46 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 her daughter's hair and cheeks- then Mildrec 
 spoke. 
 
 " Let me try it, mother dear ; teaching the 
 children, I mean. You know there is nothing 
 helps one more to be thorough ; and I want tc 
 fit myself for teaching if ever I should have nw 
 own living to earn." 
 
 " Well, well, my child, you may try." 
 
 " That's my own dear mother !" exclaimed 
 the girl joyfully, starting up to catch and kiss 
 the hand that had been caressing her. " Now, 
 I must arrange my plans. I shall have to be 
 very systematic in order to do all I wish." 
 
 "Yes," said Miss Stanhope, "one can ac- 
 complish very little without system, but often 
 a great deal with it." 
 
 Mildred set to work with cheerfulness and 
 a great deal of energy and determination, and 
 showed herself not easily conquered by difficul- 
 ties ; the rest of that week was given to planning 
 and preparing for her work, and on tho following 
 Monday her long neglected studies wore re- 
 sumed and her duties as family governors en 
 tered upon. 
 
 These took up the morning from nine to 
 twelve, but by early rising and diligence she 
 was able to do a good deal about the house be- 
 fore the hour for lessons to begin.
<page 154>

 
 MILDRED KEITH, 147 
 
 Her mother insisted that she must have an 
 hour for recreation every afternoon, taking a 
 walk when the wearther permitted ; then anothei 
 for study, and the two with Mr. Lord left but a 
 email margin for anything else ; the sewing 
 and reading with mother and sisters usually 
 filled out the remainder of the day. 
 
 Sometimes her plans worked well and she 
 was able to go through the round of self-im- 
 posed duties with satisfaction to herself and to 
 that of her mother and aunt, who looked on with 
 great interest and were ever on the watch to 
 lend a helping hand and keep hindrances out 
 of her way. 
 
 But these last would come now and again, 
 in the shape of callers, accidents, mischievous 
 pranks on the part of the little ones or delin- 
 quencies on that of the maid of all work, till at 
 times Mildred's patience and determination 
 were sorely tried. 
 
 She would grow discouraged, be nearly ready 
 to give up, then summon all her energies to 
 the task, battle with her difficulties and fora 
 tune rise superior to them. 
 
 But a new foe appeared upon the field and 
 vanquished her. It wa? the ague, attacking 
 now one, and now another of the family ; soou 
 they were seldom all well and it was no un-
<page 155>

 
 148 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 con mon thing for two or three to be down with 
 it at once. Viny took it and left, and they 
 hardly knew whether to be glad or sorry. 
 
 Governessing had to be given up, nursing 
 and housework substituted for that and for 
 sewing and reading, while still for some weeks 
 longer the lessons with Mr. Lord were kept up ; 
 but at length they also had to be dropped, for 
 Mildred herself succumbed to the malaria and 
 grew too weak, ill and depressed for study.
<page 156>

 
 " We're not ourselves, 
 
 When nature, being oppress'd, commands the mind 
 To suffer with the body." 
 
 SHAKB. Kmo LAB. 
 
 THE neighbors were very kind ; coming in 
 with offers of assistance in nursing the sick, 
 bringing dainties to tempt their appetites, en- 
 couraging them with the assurance that they 
 were but sharing the common lot; "almost 
 everybody expected a chill about once in two 
 or three weeks; especially this time of year; 
 and they weren't often disappointed, and 
 thought themselves fortunate if they could stop 
 at one paroxysm till the week came round again. 
 
 " Quinine would generally stop it, and when 
 people had a long siege of the ague, they often 
 got used to it so far as to manage to keep up 
 and about their work; if not at all times at 
 least between the chills, which as a general 
 thing came only every other day. 
 
 " Indeed it was no unusual thing for them
<page 157>

 
 1 50 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 to feel quite bright and well on the intermedi- 
 ate day." 
 
 The Lightcaps were not a whit behind the 
 others in these little acts of kindness. Rhoda 
 Jane forgot her envy of Mildred on learning 
 that she was sick and seemed to have lost her 
 relish for food. 
 
 One morning Miss Stanhope, who was get- 
 ting breakfast, was favored with an early call 
 from Miss Lightcap. 
 
 She appeared at the open kitchen door 
 basket in hand, and marched in without stop- 
 ping to knock. " I heerd Miss Mildred was 
 eick and couldn't eat nothin'," she said ; " and 
 I knowed you hadn't no garden sass o' your 
 own ; so I fetched over eome toiuats ; we have 
 a lot this year, real splendid big ones, and there 
 ain't nothiu' tastes better when you're gettiu' 
 over the agur, than tomats. 
 
 " Just you cut 'em up with vinegar and 
 pepper and salt, and if she don't say they're 
 first-rate eatin' I'm mistaken ; that's all." 
 
 " Thank you, you're very kind, Miss Night- 
 cap," said Aunt Wealthy, looking so pleased 
 and grateful that the girl could not take the 
 misnomer as an intentional insult. 
 
 " Pshaw !" she said, it's nothin' ; weVe 
 plenty of 'em."
<page 158>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. I5i 
 
 Having emptied her basket upon the tal>!<, 
 she was starting for the door, but looked back 
 
 " Say, do you want a girl ?" 
 
 ' Tea, indeed, if we can get one that's 
 worth anything." 
 
 " Well, Celestia Ann Hunsinger told me 
 she wouldn't mind coming here for a spell ; 
 'cause she wants money to git new clo'es." 
 
 " What sort of a girl is she ?" 
 
 " Pretty high-strung and spunky, but some 
 punkuns for work." 
 
 " Thank you. I'll tell Mrs. Keith about it, 
 and send you word directly after breakfast." 
 
 " All right. I guess she'll come if you 
 want her." 
 
 She was scarcely gone when the door at the 
 foot of the stairs opened, and Mildred's pale 
 face appeared. 
 
 " Aunt Wealthy, it is too bad to see you at 
 work here. Let me get breakfast. I do think 
 I can. The children are dressing each other, 
 mother has the baby and won't let me do any- 
 thing up there." 
 
 " Well, you'll nnt find me a whit more 
 tractable," returned Miss Stanhope. " Let you 
 get breakfast, indeed i I'd be worse than a 
 brute if I did. 
 
 " Go intr the sitting-room and lie down on
<page 159>

 
 152 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 the lounge," she continued taking up cue of 
 the finest tomatoes and beginning to divest it 
 of its skin, " and I'll bring you something pies- 
 ently that I really hope will taste good to you . 
 
 " That Miss Heavycap brought you a pres- 
 ent. She's not over refined, but good-hearted, 
 I think, in spite of her rude ways and rough 
 talk." 
 
 " Yes, they have been very kind and neigh- 
 borly ; I wish they were the sort of people one 
 could enjoy being intimate with," Mildred 
 eaid, languidly. " Auntie, let me skin those 
 tomatoes." 
 
 " Child, you look ready to drop." 
 
 " Do I ?" smiling faintly, " well, I'll sit 
 down to it. I really can't let you do every- 
 thing. How fine and large these are ; are they 
 what Khoda Jane brought ?" 
 
 " Tes ; for your breakfast. I hope you'll 
 relish them ; and the corn-pone I have in the 
 oven, too." 
 
 " See here ! haven't I learned how ?" cried 
 Rupert exultingly, stepping in at the open 
 door and holding up a foaming bucket of milk 
 " Viny never persuaded old Suky to give us so 
 much." 
 
 " It's beautiful," said Aunt Wealthy, tab 
 ing it from him wit! a congratulatory smile
<page 160>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 153 
 
 " I'll strain it at once before the cream begin? 
 to rise." 
 
 " I'll carry the pans down cellar. And what 
 more can I do, auntie ?" 
 
 " Fou may draw the butter up out of the 
 well, presently, when breakfast is quite ready." 
 
 " And let it down again when the meal's 
 over. Hello, Milly ! is that you ? how white 
 and weak you look 1" 
 
 " Yes," she said, laying the last tomato in 
 the dish, " I believe I'll have to lie down, as 
 Aunt Wealthy bade me, till breakfast is ready." 
 
 She tottered into the sitting-room and laid 
 herself down on the lounge feeling so miserably 
 weak and forlorn, so homesick for the old home 
 where they had all enjoyed good health, that 
 the tears would come in spite of every effort to 
 restrain them. 
 
 BreaM'ast was to be eaten here ; the table 
 was already set, neatly, too, with snowy cloth, 
 shining silver and delicate china ; but there wae 
 \ look of discomfort about the room that vexed 
 and tried her orderly soul ; sand on the carpet, 
 dust on the furniture, children's toys and a few 
 articles of clothing scattered here and there 
 and she had no strength to rise and put it in 
 order. 
 
 "And no one else is much better able," she
<page 161>

 
 154 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 aighed to herself, " for Aunt Wealthy, mothei 
 and Zillah have all had chills within a week. 
 Oh dear, this dreadful country ! why did we 
 ever come to it !" 
 
 She heard her father's voice in the kitchen. 
 
 " Here, Aunt Wealthy, is some steak ; rather 
 better than usual, I think ; can we have a bit 
 broiled for breakfast ? " and Miss Stanhope'e 
 cheery tones in reply, 
 
 "Yes, Stuart, I'll put it right on. I'm so 
 glad you succeeded in getting some fresh meat. 
 It's something of a rarity to us in these days, 
 and I hope they'll all relish it, Marcia and 
 Milly, especially ; for they both need something 
 to build up their strength." 
 
 " Where are they ? not able to be up f 
 
 His tone was anxious and concerned. 
 
 Mildred did not catch the words of Mis&< 
 Stanhope's reply, but the door opened, her fa- 
 ther came to her side, stooped over her and 
 kissed her pale cheek tenderly. 
 
 " How are you, daughter ? Don't be dis- 
 .onraged ; we'll have you all right before long.' 
 
 " O father, I'm so out of heart," she sobbed, 
 raising herself to put her arms round his neck 
 and lay her head on his shoulder. 
 
 " Oh, that won't do 1 you must be bravs 
 rnd hopeful," he said, stroking her hah
<page 162>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 155 
 
 * You're not ho very ill, my child ; ague is not 
 a dangerous disease." 
 
 " It isn't that, but there's so much to be 
 done and ncbody to do it ; we're all so poorly." 
 
 "Don't fret about the work; we'll find 
 Borne one to do it." 
 
 " But they don't do it right. Viny never 
 would spread up a bed straight or sweep or 
 dust without leaving half the dirt behind her. 
 And when she washed she faded the calicoes, 
 shrank the flannels and made the white clothes 
 a wretched color, though she tore them tc 
 pieces with hard rubbing and wringing." 
 
 "Well, we'll have just to try not to mind 
 these trifles or be too particular," he said, sooth- 
 ingly. "Ah, here comes the breakfast," as 
 Miss Stanhope, Rupert, Zillah and Ada trooped 
 in, each bearing a dish, " let me help you to the 
 table." 
 
 " I dpn't feel in the least hungry," ehe ol> 
 jected. 
 
 " Then eat to please father." 
 
 " And mother too," said Mrs. Keith corning 
 in with Baby Annis in her arms. " Come, 
 daughter, dear, auntie has prepared an excellent 
 meal for us. With some help from our kind 
 neighbors too, I hear." 
 
 " Yes," assented Miss Stanhope, " and I've
<page 163>

 
 166 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 directed them according to preparations and 
 they do taste good. Come now ; when I see 
 you eating, I'll tell you a bit of news the girl 
 brought besides." 
 
 Mildred laughed, felt her spirits begin to 
 rise, tasted the tomatoes, pronounced them ex- 
 cellent and went on to make a good hearty 
 meal. 
 
 The world looked brighter after that. 
 
 It had been decided to try Miss Hunsinger 
 if she could be got. Mr. Keith went in search 
 of her shortly after breakfast, and within an 
 hour she was duly installed into office. 
 
 She was a tall, strong woman with a large 
 proportion of bone and muscle ; ditto of self- 
 conceit and impudence united to uncommon 
 energy and decision, and a faculty of turning off 
 a great amount of work ; doing it thoroughly 
 well too. 
 
 At first she seemed a great improvement 
 upon Viny, and Mildred's heart rejoiced in a 
 complete sweeping, dusting and setting to rights 
 of the whole house. 
 
 The children had been sent out to play in 
 the shade of the sapling grove, while Mrs. Keith 
 superintended the operations of the new help, 
 and Miss Stanhope and Mildred, in the parlor, 
 busied themselves, the one with the week'i
<page 164>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 151 
 
 mending for the family, the other over hei 
 sometime neglected studies. 
 
 " She's a real new broom is my Celestte 
 Ann," said Mrs. Keith, coming cheerily in, 
 " leaves no dirty corners or cobwebs, no wrinkles 
 in sheets or spreads." 
 
 " O, mother, what a blessing ?" cried Mil- 
 dred, " if she'll only stay so." 
 
 " Ah, there's the rub ! she cannot be a rose 
 without a thorn. What was it Rhoda Jane 
 said of her, Aunt Wealthy ?" 
 
 The old lady reflected a moment ere she 
 iinswered. 
 
 " Large potatoes, I think it was, Marcia ; 
 and I understood it to mean that she was a good 
 worker. Something also that gave me the im- 
 pression that she might be high-tern] >ered and 
 saucy. But as you say, we cannot expect 
 thorns without roses." 
 
 " She's getting dinner now," remarked Mrs 
 Keith, " and seems to feel as much at home 
 there as about her other work. I've told her 
 what to get, and showed her where everything- 
 is ; and now I shall leave her to her own de- 
 vices ; and see what will be the result." 
 
 Half an hour later the door of the parlor, 
 where now the whole family were gathered, WM 
 thrown open with the announcement,
<page 165>

 
 158 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " Dinner's ready ; all on the table hero." 
 
 Having given the summons MissHunsingei 
 rushed back to the table in advance of the 
 family, seated herself, spread out her elbows 
 npon it and with a nonchalant air said, " Come, 
 folks, it's all ready ; set right up." 
 
 There was a rapid exchange of glances 
 among the party addressed, but not a word of 
 remonstrance or disapproval was uttered. 
 Physically unequal to the work that must be 
 done, they were helpless in the hands of their 
 "help/' 
 
 The meal was begun in a profound silence 
 which she was the first to break. 
 
 " Ther's some hot biscuits out thar," with a 
 ierk of the head toward the kitchen door. 
 
 " You may bring some in," said Mrs 
 Keith. 
 
 " Just let one o' your gals do it this time, 1 
 will next. Turn about fair play you know." 
 
 Mildred's eyes flashed, and she opened her 
 lips to speak ; then closed them firmly as she 
 thought of the consequences to her mother and 
 aunt should this girl be sent away before she 
 was able to take up even a part of the burdec 
 of the work. 
 
 "I'll go, mother," eaid Zillah, hastily leav- 
 ing her place, I don't mind it ; but if I wero
<page 166>

 
 MILDRED KBITH. 15$ 
 
 paid for doing it, I would want to earn my 
 money by doing it myself." 
 
 " Well, my dear, what do you .Link of youj 
 new help?" queried Mr. Keith, mischievously 
 when they had withdrawn to the privacy oi 
 the parlor. 
 
 " The thorn is rather large and sharp," she 
 answered laughing, " but we are not the only 
 people in the world who must make a choice of 
 evils." 
 
 " For my part," said Mildred severely, " 1 
 think it's a species of dishonesty to take pay for 
 doing the work of a family and then ask them 
 to do it themselves." 
 
 " Aren't you a trifle too hard on her, dear ?" 
 said Miss Stanhope. " It was very forward and 
 impertinent, but I think hardly dishonest, be- 
 cause she is not expected to do quite all the 
 work of the family." 
 
 " Here comes Etninaretta Lightcap," said 
 Ada, who was standing in the open doorway. 
 " She has n an old faded calico dress, and 
 siinbonnet and bare feet, just as usual ; and 
 tin pan in her hands." 
 
 " Come in, Emmaretta." 
 
 Tho little girl stepped over the threshold^ 
 and approaching Mrs. Keith said, 
 
 *' Here's more tomats mother sent you
<page 167>

 
 160 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 and a bird for her," pointing to Mildred, 
 " Gote he's been out shootin' and he sent it to 
 her." 
 
 " He's very kind, take him my thanks for 
 it," said Mildred, coloring, and vexed with her- 
 self for doing so. " Please tell your sister, too, 
 that I thank her for the tomatoes and that I 
 liked them very much." 
 
 " Are you a comin' to our school ? cause 
 Miss Damaris, she said you was," said the child, 
 turning to Ada, while waiting for her pan, 
 which Zillah had carried away to empty it. 
 
 " No ! no, indeed 1" cried Ada ; " I don't 
 like her, and wouldn't go there for anything !" 
 
 " Hush, hush, Ada ! you don't know Miss 
 Drybread," said Mrs. Keith, quite surprised at 
 the outbreak. 
 
 "Yes, mother; don't you remember she 
 was here one day I" 
 
 " Khoda Jane, Eht's comin' over to see you 
 this evenin'," said the little maid, taking hei 
 pan and departing. 
 
 Mildred's countenance fell ; she appreciated 
 Rhoda Jane's kindness; but could not enjoy 
 her society. 
 
 "Why, Ada," said Mr. Keith, "I knew 
 nothing of your dislike to Miss Drybread ; and 
 > when she met me in the street this morning
<page 168>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 161 
 
 and asked me to send her a scholar, I thought 
 of Milly's sickness and that she must not 
 have so much to do, and promised that yon 
 should go." 
 
 " O father 1" exclaimed the child beginning 
 to cry. 
 
 Then they all tried to comfort her, and 
 finally she grew in a measure reconciled to her 
 fate.
<page 169>

 
 irterlji 
 
 M 'Tifl with our judgments as our watches, none 
 Go just alike, yet each believes his own." 
 
 You hain't returned more'n our fust call ; 
 and then you didn't stay but ten minutes," 
 Rhoda Jane said in a half-offended tone, to 
 Mildred, " And we're such near neighbors too ; 
 we'd ought to be real sociable." 
 
 Mildred apologized by stating the fact that 
 her time was very fully occupied. 
 
 " Well you and Claudina Chetwood seems 
 to be pretty thick. But the Chetwoods is 
 richer'n we are, an' 1 s'pose that makes it easier 
 to find time to visit with 'em." 
 
 "The riches don't make any difference," 
 said Mildred, flushing ; " and I've heard that 
 the Chetwoods are not very rich." 
 
 " Well, they hold their heads high anyway, 
 
 " I'm agoin' to have a rag carpet party 
 pretty soon, and give you an invite, and if you 
 don't come I'll be so mad I won't never conic 
 oear you again."
<page 170>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 16& 
 
 " Perhaps I may be sick," sighed Mildred, 
 half hoping ID her secret heart that so it might 
 fall out. 
 
 " Oh, then of course I couldn't be inad ; but 
 I'll try to lix it when you're well." 
 
 " When is it to be ? and what is it like 1" 
 
 " Soon's mother and me gits the rags all 
 cut ; 'bout a week from now, I reckon. Why 
 a passel o' girls gits together and sews the rags 
 and winds 'em up into balls, and after awhile the 
 boys come in and then we have lots o' fun and 
 good things to eat. Now I must run home. 
 Good-bye, mind you're to be sure to come." 
 
 This was Friday. On the ensuing Monday 
 morning little Ada set out sorrowfully for Mis8 
 Dry bread's school, in company with Emmar- 
 etta and Minerva Lightcap. 
 
 Mildred was alone in the parlor when the 
 child came back at noon. 
 
 " Well, pussy, how did you like it ?" she 
 asked with a sympathetic smile. 
 
 " Not at all. O Mildred, she isn't a lady 
 or a Christian ; for she deceives ; she acts lies ; 
 ehe made a naughty girl believe she was goiiii| 
 to roast her to death. There's a stove and . 
 big oven in it ; and she said she was going to 
 put her in there and build up a hot tire a^<* 
 cook her."
<page 171>

 
 164 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 "Did the girl believe it?" 
 
 " Yes ; she was dreadfully frightened ; she 
 screamed like everything and promised that 
 ndeed, and indeed she'd be good ; and Misi 
 Drybread let her go to her seat." 
 
 " That was acting a lie and telling one too ; 
 and anybody who would do so, is unfit to have 
 the care of children," said Mildred. " I shall 
 tell lather and mother about it, and I'm very 
 eure they won't send you any longer than this 
 one quarter anyhow." 
 
 "Mildred, she doesn't look like a lady 
 either; she doesn't wear anything white round 
 her neck ; just a pink calico cape and an apron 
 of the same, and another kind of calico dress." 
 
 "No matter about that if she only acted 
 and talked right. She's neat and clean, I sup- 
 
 " Yes ; I didn't see any soil on her clothes." 
 " "Well, learn your lessons well and behave 
 nicely, so that she can't find any excuse for ill 
 treating you." 
 
 Mildred looked upon the expected carpel 
 rag party with nearly as great aversion as Ada 
 felt for her new school, but was a good deal 
 relieved on learning from Claudhia Chetwood 
 that she, too, had been notified of its approach 
 and expected to attend
<page 172>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 165 
 
 44 J didn't know that you visited the Light- 
 caps," said Mildred. 
 
 " Oh, yes ; they are not cultivated people, 
 or very refined ; but they're clever folks and 
 kind neighbors ; especially in times jf sickness ; 
 and would feel dreadfully hurt if one should 
 decline their invitations. They're not the sort 
 of people we exchange formal calls with ; in- 
 deed they never make them ; but, as mother 
 says, while society here is in the crude state 
 it is now, it will not do to insist upon making 
 associates of those only who are congenial." 
 
 " Or quite belong to our station in life ?" 
 
 " Yes; we can not divide up into many cir- 
 cles, and must be willing to mix to some ex- 
 tent, with all who can lay claim to respectabil- 
 ity and moral worth." 
 
 " I'm afraid I'm very proud," said Mildred 
 laughing and blushing. " I've never been used 
 to associating with any one so rough and 
 uncouth, and it goes a good deal against the 
 grain." 
 
 " Perhaps it isn't exactly pride," suggested 
 Claudina ; " they offend your taste ; they do 
 mine, I know ; but surely we can bear that 
 rather than give them the pain of thinking that 
 we despise them." 
 
 " Yes, indeed." assented Mildred heartilv ;
<page 173>

 
 166 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 ind from that moment ceased to allow herself 
 to hope that something would occur to give 
 her a plausible excuse for staying away from 
 Clhoda Jane's merry-making. 
 
 She repeated Claudina's remarks to her 
 mother and aunt and found that they fully ap. 
 proved of the sentiments she had expressed. 
 
 " Time was when I should have been very 
 unwilling to see you consort with that class on 
 terms of equality," said Mrs. Keith, " but cir- 
 cumstances alter cases." 
 
 The invitation came for Friday afternoon 
 and evening ; Rhoda Jane hailing Rupert aa 
 he passed and sending it through him. 
 
 Mildred was nearly in her usual health and 
 accepted without a demur; but puzzled to 
 know what to wear, and at what hour to go, 
 went to Claudina for instruction on these im- 
 portant points. 
 
 " We are invited to work, you know," said 
 Miss Chetwood, laughing, "so will be expected 
 early ; we should not be later than one o'clock, 
 I think, and as it is not very nice work car- 
 pet rags being apt to be dusty we should not 
 wear anything that will not wash. I shall put 
 on a calico dress and carry a big work apron 
 me." 
 Then I shall do the same."
<page 174>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 167 
 
 " I wish you would ; for there will be some 
 girls theie who haven't the means to drees and 
 would feel badly if you or I outshone them very 
 much." 
 
 "I can't go before three, or half -past, 
 though ; on account of having to recite to Mr, 
 Lord." 
 
 " Never mind ; 1 daresay it's just as well : 
 for you'll get quite enough of both the work 
 and the company." 
 
 Following out the instructions received, 
 Mildred attired herself for the occasion with 
 the utmost simplicity ; but could not lay aside 
 her delicate prettiness or a certain air of culture 
 and refinement that made her more the real 
 lady in her calico, than almost any of her com- 
 panions of the afternoon would have been in 
 the richest silk or velvet. 
 
 Just as she was ready to go, Ada came in 
 from school, crying heartily. 
 
 " What's the matter ?" asked Mildred, meet- 
 ing her on the threshold and turning back full 
 of sympathy. 
 
 " I I've lost my place in the spelling-cass, ' 
 sobbed the child "and I didn't miss a word 
 cither. Yon know I got up head the first day, and 
 I've kept there ever since 'way above all those 
 big, big girls, some of 'em as big as you, Milly,"
<page 175>

 
 168 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " But how did you get down if you didn't 
 miss ? was it for bad behavior ?" 
 
 " No ; but she upset the class and made ui 
 &r draw lots for our places, and the one I drew 
 made my place next to the foot." 
 
 " Mother, do you hear that ?" asked Mil- 
 dred, hotly ; for anything like abuse or unjusl 
 treatment of her little brothers or sisters wai 
 sure to rouse her ire. 
 
 " Yes," Mrs. Keith said, " but Ada, you like 
 the fun of getting up in your class, and you 
 could never have that if you were always at the 
 head." 
 
 This seemed a new idea to the child, and 
 she smiled faintly through her tears. 
 
 But the wound was so deep it must bleed 
 awhile, and the briny drops fell fast again. 
 
 She was an uncommonly good speller for a 
 child of her age, and had taken great pride in 
 keeping her place, working very hard to be aWa 
 to do so ; and this sudden, unexpected downfall, 
 due to no failure on her part, almost over- 
 whelmed her with a sense of loss, humiliation 
 and injustice. 
 
 Mildred waited ; she couldn't bear to go 
 nd leave Ada in such distress. 
 
 "Don't cry," she said, stroking her hail 
 caressingly while the mother wiped away the
<page 176>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 169 
 
 fast flowing tears with her own soft white hand- 
 kerohief, and kissed the flushed cheek, " don't 
 cry, you'll soon get up again." 
 
 " And I shall write a note to Miss Dry- 
 bread, telling her that I cannot approve of 
 drawing lots to decide so trivial a matter ;" said 
 Mrs. Keith. " It seems to me very wrong ; 
 because it is an appeal to God. * The lot is 
 cast in to the lap; but the whole disposing there- 
 of is of the Lord !' It might be well enough to 
 turn the class round occasionally, or in some 
 other way to give the poor scholars a chance to 
 rise ; but this proceeding I so highly disapprove 
 of that I shall not allow you to take part in it 
 again." 
 
 " I wish you'd take me away out of her 
 school, mother, oh do," pleaded the little girl. 
 
 " You shall not be kept there long," Mrs. 
 Keith said. " But Mildred, child," she added 
 gayly, "you must hurry away or I fear you'll 
 not earn your supper." 
 
 A dozen maidens, mostly under twenty years 
 of age, were collected in " the front room " at 
 Mr. Lightcap's. A large clothes basket filled 
 with many colored rags, torn or cut into strips 
 <>f various lengths, occupied a conspicuous place 
 upon the floor. 
 
 A number of girls were grouped about tt 
 8
<page 177>

 
 170 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 and armed with needles and thread, scissors and 
 thimbles, were busily engaged picking out the 
 strips, sewing the ends together and winding the 
 jong strings thus formed, into balls ; others had 
 filled their laps and seated themselves here and 
 there about the room. 
 
 They seemed a very merry company, laugh, 
 ing and chatting as they worked. 
 
 " Oh, how d'ye do ?" said Rhoda Jane, 
 catching sight of Mildred as she drew near 
 the door, which was standing open ; " thought 
 you wasn't cornin' at all. Walk right in. Let 
 me take your sunbonnet. Here's a seat for 
 you 'long side of Miss Chetwood. Guess you're 
 better acquainted with her than any body else, 
 without it's Yiny Apple. 
 
 " Ladies, this is Miss Keith." 
 
 " I don't need no hintroduction," laughed 
 Miss Apple. " 'Ope you're well, Miss Milly." 
 
 The others looked up with a nod and a 
 murmured word or two, as Rhoda Jane named 
 each in turn ; then they seemed to take up the 
 thread of their discourse where it had been 
 dropped, while Mildred tied on her apron, took 
 the chair assigned her, threaded a needle, and 
 helping herself, by invitation, from Claudina's 
 lap, began her first ball , at the same time ex 
 plaining that her lessons had detained her.
<page 178>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 171 
 
 K You must be goin' to be dreadful learned,' 
 commented Rhoda Jane, filling Mildred's lap 
 from the basket, " I wouldn't be you for some- 
 tiling. I hate books and always did." 
 
 " Are we all here now ?" asked some one 
 
 " All but Damaris Dry bread. She's oldish 
 for the rest of us, but she's the schoolma'ain, 
 you know, and likes to be invited. And though 
 she's late comin' yonder she is now she 
 works dreadful fast when she does get at it." 
 
 Mildred overheard a whisper not compli- 
 mentary to the coming woman, 
 
 " Pshaw ! I wish ehe hadn't been asked^ 
 She spoils everything ; for she's as solemn as a 
 funeral and 'pears to think it's a sin to laugh." 
 
 " Yes," assented another voice, " that's so I 
 and she never forgets that she's a schoolma'am ; 
 but takes it upon herself to tell you your duty 
 without waiting to be invited to." 
 
 But now Miss Drybread was upon the 
 threshold. 
 
 " Good evening," she said, in solemn tone 
 And with a stiff little bow, addressing her salu- 
 tation to the company in general ; then giving 
 her sunbonnet to Rhoda Jane, she seated her- 
 self in her usual bolt upright manner and fell 
 to work. 
 
 Her presence acted as a damper upon the
<page 179>

 
 172 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 spirits jf the younger portion of the party. A 
 <Jead silence succeeded the merry chatter and 
 laughter of a moment before. 
 
 Mildred had cared little for that while it 
 front on, but it vexed her now that this woman, 
 for whom, principally on Ada's account, she 
 began to feel a decided dislike, should have it in 
 her power thus to spoil the enjoyment of others ; 
 and she determined that it should not be. 
 
 Raising her voice that all might hear, she 
 told an amusing anecdote that set everybody 
 to laughing except the " schoolma'am," whose 
 increasing solemnity of aspect seemed to reprove 
 their levity. 
 
 " Oh, that was first-rate ! do tell us another,'* 
 cried Rhoda Jane, holding her sides. " I had 
 no idea you could be so funny." 
 
 Mildred went on with anecdotes, jests, 
 conundrums, Claudina and one or two others 
 -contributing their quota also, till with the ruder 
 ones the mirth became somewhat boisterous. 
 
 As it died down again, Miss Drybread 
 
 " Life, permit me to observe to you all, is 
 too serious and solemn to be spent in laughing 
 and joking. Allow me to say, Miss Keith, 
 that I am astonished that you, a church mem 
 her, should indulge in such frivolity."
<page 180>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 173 
 
 1 Do yon think a Christian should alwayfr 
 wear a long face, ma'am ?" asked Mildred y 
 saucily, her tell-tale countenance showing all 
 too plainly the contempt and aversion she felt 
 for her self-constituted censor. 
 
 4 Yes ; I think that folks that profess that 
 they've got religion ought to be grave and 
 sober, and let the world see that they don't bo- 
 long to it." 
 
 "As if there was any harm in innocent 
 mirth !" exclaimed Mildred, " as if there was 
 anybody in the world with so good a right ta 
 be glad and happy as one who knows that Jesus 
 loves him ! ' Eejoice in the Lord, ye righteous 
 and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.' 
 The Bible is full of commands to God's people 
 to rejoice, to be glad, to sing for joy ; and the 
 best Christians I know seem to me the happiest 
 people on earth." 
 
 " You're rather young to set up your judg- 
 ment as to who's the best Christian and who'? 
 got religion and who hasn't," returned tna 
 spinster bridling. 
 
 "Well, none o' your long-faced, sour-look 
 ing Christians forme 1" exclaimed Rhoda Jane, 
 "I'd never want to get religion till the last 
 minute, if I wasn't to be 'lowed to laugh and 
 joke no more "
<page 181>

 
 174 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 1 can not read the heart, nor can any 
 other human creature," said Mildred, replying 
 to Miss Drybread's last remark; "but Jestii 
 says, 'By their fruits ye shall know them.' 
 'He that keepeth my commandments he it is 
 that loveth me ;' and when you live with peo- 
 ple and see them constantly serving God with 
 gladness, walking in his ways, rejoicing in hia 
 love, making the Bible always their rule of 
 faith and practice, showing far more solicitude 
 about heavenly than about earthly things, both 
 for themselves and their children, I think you 
 may be very sure they are real Christians." 
 
 " I think so too 1" sai<? Claudina emphati- 
 cally. 
 
 "So do I," "and I," chimed in several 
 other voices, "but do you know any such 
 folks?" 
 
 " I have been describing my father and 
 Mother," Mildred said. " And my dear Aunt 
 Wealthy too." 
 
 "That's a fact," spoke up Yiny. "Yon 
 'ave to live with folka to find 'em out, and I've 
 lived there and I never seen better Christians ; 
 they don't keep their religion for Sundays, but 
 Mr. Keith *e reads in the good book hevery 
 night and mornin' and prays just like a minis- 
 ter-- honly not so long and they sing 'ymna.
<page 182>

 
 MILDRED KEITH 175 s 
 
 And 1 never 'card a cross word pass between 
 Mr. and Mrs. Keith or Mrs. Stan'ope neither, 
 and they never threaten the children tbey'i) 
 do something hawful like breakin' their boia* 
 orskinnin' of em alive, has some folks does ; but* 
 jnst speaks to 'em quiet like, sayin' exactly w hat 
 ti ey mean : and they're always minded too/'
<page 183>

 
 er Jwrtentft. 
 
 "Jest and youthful jollity, 
 Quips and cranks and wanton wiles, 
 Nods aud becks and wreathed smiles.' 
 
 " THERE had better be less talk, if these 
 rags are all to be sewed to-day," remarked Miss 
 Drybread, taking a fresh supply from the bas- 
 ket, then straightening herself till she was, if 
 possible, more erect than before. 
 
 " I can talk and work too ; my needle haint 
 stopped because my tongue was runnin'," re- 
 torted Viny ; " and it strikes me you've been 
 <3oin' your share as well's the rest." 
 
 " My second ball's done," said Claudiua, 
 tossing it up. 
 
 "A good big one too, and wound real 
 tight," said Rhoda Jaue taking it, giving it n 
 squeeze, then rolling it into a corner wherv 
 quite a pile had collected. 
 
 " How quick you are, Claudina," said Mil- 
 dred. 
 
 " Not so very ; I've been at it quite a good
<page 184>

 
 MILDRED KEITH W 
 
 while. Some folks can pretty nearly make two 
 to my one." And she glanced toward Miss Dry- 
 bread who was jnst beginning to wind her 
 second. 
 
 "But 'tain't everybody that winds era ae 
 good and solid as you do, Claudina," said an- 
 other girl significantly ; " windin' loose can 
 make a ball grow fast, I tell you I" 
 
 " All is not gold that glitters,'" quoted 
 Mildred. 
 
 " I'd begin to wind if I were you," said 
 Claudina, " you have quite a pile there and it 
 might get into a tangle." 
 
 "Thank you. I'm new to the business," 
 said Mildred laughing, " and shall take the. 
 advice of an older hand." 
 
 "Supper's ready," announced Minerva, 
 opening the kitchen door. 
 
 " Put down your rags and walk right out, 
 ladies," said Rhoda Jane. 
 
 " It seems to me that I, for one, need some 
 preparation," said Mildred, dropping hers and 
 looking at her hands. 
 
 " Oh yes, we'll wash out here," said Rhuda 
 Jane, leading the way. 
 
 A tin bucket full of water, a dipper and 
 washbasin, all bright from a recent scouring, 
 stood on a bench in the shed at the onto? 
 8*
<page 185>

 
 178 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 kitchen door; a piece of brown soap lay there 
 also, and a clean crash towel hung on a nail in 
 the wall close by. 
 
 The girls used these in turn, laughing and 
 chatting merrily the while, then gathered abcut 
 the table, which was bountifully spread with 
 good plain country fare chicken, ham, dried 
 beef, pickles, tomatoes, cucumbers and radishes, 
 cheese, eggs, pie, cake and preserves, in several 
 varieties, hot cakes and cold bread, tea and 
 coffee. 
 
 None of the family partook with their 
 guests except Rhoda Jane ; they would eat af- 
 terwards ; and Mrs. Lightcap busied herself now 
 in waiting upon the table ; filling the tea and 
 coffee cups in the shed where the cooking stove 
 stood during the months of the year when its 
 heat was objectionable in the house. 
 
 u I don't know as we've earned our supper, 
 Mis' Lightcap," remarked one of the girls, 
 stirring her tea ; " we hain't begun to git all 
 them rags sewed up yet." 
 
 " Well, then, I'll just set you to work again 
 as soon as you're done eatin'; that'll do just as 
 well ; folks don't always pay in advance, you 
 know." 
 
 " And if we don't get through 'fore the boy* 
 <orae we'll make them help," said Rhoda Jane
<page 186>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 119 
 
 "What boys?" queried Mildred; whereat 
 several of the girls giggled. 
 
 " Why the fellows, of course," laughed Misa 
 laghtcap; "the boys is what we mostly call 
 'em ; though some of 'em's pretty old, I should 
 judge, for that." 
 
 " Yes, there's Kocap Stubblefield, must be 
 thirty at least," said one. 
 
 "And Nick Ransquattle's twenty-five if 
 he's a day," remarked another. 
 
 " Well, the rest's young enough," said Mrs. 
 Lightcap. " Pass that cake there, Ehoda Jane. 
 There's my Ghotobed just turned twenty-one, 
 and York Mocker, and Wallace Ormsby, and 
 Claudina's brother Will's all younger by some 
 months or a year or so." 
 
 The meal concluded, the work went on 
 quite briskly again, Mildred catching now and 
 then a whispered word or two about the desira- 
 bleness of getting through with it in time to 
 have some fun ; but the raw material for sev- 
 eral more balls still remained in the basket 
 when " the boys " began to come. 
 
 Gotobed was naturally among the first 
 He was quite " slicked up," as Rhoda Jan 
 elegantly expressed it, though his toilet had 
 been made under difficulties. 
 
 The only legitimate way of reaching the
<page 187>

 
 180 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 second story and his Sunday clothes, wae by * 
 stairway leading up from the front room, where 
 the girls were. 
 
 The windows of his bedroom, however, 
 ooked out upon the leanto which formed the 
 kitchen part of the building and whose roof 
 was not many feet higher than that of the 
 shed. 
 
 Watching his opportunity for doing so un- 
 seen, he climbed upon the shed, gained the roof 
 of the leanto, and entered his room by the 
 window. 
 
 There was nothing of the dandy about the 
 honest fellow, yet somehow dressing was a slow 
 business with him to-night ; he stood before a 
 little square of looking-glass hanging on the 
 wall, tying and retying his cravat till it was too 
 dark to see, then giving up in sheer despair 
 went down over the roof as he had come, and 
 sought his mother, who, with the help of Em- 
 maretta and Minerva, was washing dishes in 
 the kitchen. 
 
 " My land 1" she exclaimed, as he came in, 
 1 what a time you've been up there. I never 
 tan wed you to take half as long to dress afore.' 
 
 "My fingers are all thumbs," he said, a hot 
 flush overspreading his sunburnt face, " I can't 
 tie this decent nohow at all."
<page 188>

 
 MILDRED KEJ.TB. 181 
 
 " "Well, just wait till I can wipe my hands, 
 and I'll do it. There, that'll do ; the girls ain't 
 agoin* to look partickler hard at that bit o 
 black ribbing." 
 
 " Maybe not, but I'm obleeged to you all 
 the same for fixin' it right. Is it time to go 
 in?" 
 
 " Of course, if you want to." 
 
 He passed out at the back door and through 
 the yard into the street. He was bashful and 
 did not like to face such a bevy of girls alone ; 
 at the thought of addressing one of their num- 
 ber in especial Mildred Keith he felt him- 
 self grow hot and uncomfortable. He had been 
 admiring her from a distance all these weeks, 
 but had never met her, and much as he de- 
 sired an acquaintance, his courage seemed 
 hardly equal to seeking it now. 
 
 How rough and boorish, how awkward and 
 ill-bred he would appear to one so delicate and 
 refined. 
 
 He waited about a little, till joined by a 
 fellow mechanic, Nicholas Kansqnattle, when 
 they went in together. 
 
 This was a wiser step than Gotobed knew ; 
 for his well-made, stalwart figure showed to 
 good advantage beside that of Nicholas, who 
 was short and thick-set, had scarcely any neck,
<page 189>

 
 182 MILDRED KBITS. 
 
 moved like a wooden man, and carried his head 
 thrown back on his shoulders ; he had a wooden 
 face, too ; large featured and stolid in expre*. 
 ebn. 
 
 But he was not troubled with bashfulness. 
 or any fear that his society would be other than 
 most acceptable to any one upon whom he 
 might see fit to bestow it. 
 
 " Good evening, ladies ; I'm happy to meet 
 you all," he said, making a sweeping bow to 
 the company as he entered, hat in hand. 
 '* And I hope I see you well." 
 
 " Good evening," responded several voices. 
 * Good-evening, Mr. Lightcap." 
 
 " Find yourselves Beats and we'll give you 
 employment, threading our needles for us." 
 
 Rhoda Jane was snuffing the candles. 
 Hastily laying down her snuffers, she introduced 
 the young men to Mildred, and dexterously 
 managed to seat Kansquattle on the farther side 
 of the room, leaving the field clear for her 
 brother ; for an empty chair stood invitingly at 
 Miss Keith's side. 
 
 Gotobed took it, and, almost wondering at 
 ,bii own audacity, addressed his divinity with a 
 mark upon the weather that never-failing 
 ource when all other topics elude us. 
 
 She answered with gracious sweetness,
<page 190>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 183 
 
 " Yes it has been a lovely day, Mr. Light- 
 cap." 
 
 What should he say next. 
 
 " I I guess you never sewed carpet ragg 
 ifore ?" 
 
 " IB it my awkwardness at the business that 
 makes you think so ?" she returned, with a 
 quizzical look and smile, as she lifted her fine 
 eyes to his face. 
 
 " No, no, no sirree 1 ma'am, I mean," he 
 stammered growing red and hot ; "you do it 
 beautiful !" 
 
 " Let me give you some work," she said, 
 taking pity on his embarrassment ; " will you 
 thread this needle for me ?" 
 
 " And then mine, please," put in Claudina, 
 who was again seated near her friend ; then to 
 ais further relief she launched out into a rem- 
 iniscence of a candy pulling they had both at- 
 tended the year before. 
 
 Others of " the boys " came flocking in, the 
 work was speedily finished, there was some toss- 
 ing back and forth of the balls, amid rather up- 
 roarious laughtoi ; but some of them unwound 
 and became entangled ; and so that sport wa 
 given up ; the girls washed their hands as b& 
 fore supper ; Blindnian's Buff, Puss in the Cor- 
 ner and other games were played with as much
<page 191>

 
 184 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 zest as if the players had been a parcel of chil- 
 dren ; then refreshments followed, served up in 
 the kitchen ; huckleberries with cream and 
 sugar, watermelons, and muskmelons, dough- 
 nuts and cup cake. 
 
 At eleven o'clock the party broke up and the 
 young men saw the girls safely home, Gotobed 
 being so fortunate as to secure the privilege of 
 waiting upon Mildred to her father's door. 
 
 She would, perhaps, have slightly preferred 
 the attentions of Yorke Mocker, or Wallace 
 Ormsby ; both of whom she had met before and 
 who were young men of much better education 
 and much more polish and refinement than 
 poor Gotobed. 
 
 It was Mrs. Keith who admitted her daugh- 
 ter ; every one else in the house having retired. 
 
 " Had you a pleasant time ?" she asked, 
 with a motherly smile. 
 
 " I heard some of the others, as they went 
 away, saying it had been perfectly splendid," 
 Mildred answered with an amused little laugh, 
 " but the fun was of rather too rough a sort for 
 me." 
 
 " Games ?" 
 
 " Yes, ma'am ; and I took part nntil they 
 began kissing ; when I retired to the ranks ol 
 the spectators.'
<page 192>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 185 
 
 " That was right," Mrs. Keith said emphati- 
 cally. 
 
 " And what do you think, mother I" laughed 
 Mildred. " Viny Apple was one of the guestg. 
 The idea of being invited out to meet your ci- 
 devant housemaid and cook ! isn't it too funny V 
 
 " Well, dear, let us be thankful that Celes- 
 t' Ann was not invited also ; leaving me to 
 get tea to-night," Mrs. Keith said, joining in 
 the laugh.
<page 193>

 
 Chapter Jfiftetjn 
 
 ** The knight, perusing this epistle, 
 Believ'd h' had hrought her to his whistle. 
 And read it like a jocund lover, 
 With great applause t' himself twice over. 
 
 BUTLKB'S HUDIBRAS. 
 
 RHODA JANE liad set the ball in motion and 
 for several weeks similar festivities were much 
 in vogue among the young people of Pleasant 
 Plains. There were other rag carpet bees, 
 some quilting, berrying and nutting parties, 
 boatings on the river, " buggy rides," and rides 
 on horseback. 
 
 Then as the days grew short and the even- 
 ings long, a singing school was started. It met 
 once a week at Damans Dry bread's schoolroom, 
 was largely attended by the youth of both 
 sexes, quite as much for the sport to be got out 
 uf it as for the improvement of their vocal 
 powers. 
 
 Each carried thither a note book and a 
 tallow candle, and at the end of the term paid
<page 194>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 187 
 
 his or her proportion of the salary of the teacher 
 one Timothy Buzzard, from a neighboring 
 town. 
 
 Not the fittest name in the world for a sing, 
 ing teacher, people said ; but then he couldn't 
 help that, and soon proved himself competent 
 for what he had undertaken ; for imparting in- 
 struction at least ; as to keeping order among 
 his pupils, some of whom were years older than 
 himself that he found was quite another thing. 
 Of course there was often a good deal of mis- 
 behavior on the part of silly, giggling girls and 
 tittering lads which tried his patience, occa- 
 sionally even beyond endurance. 
 
 Mildred, Claudina and their friend Lucilla 
 Grange were not of these ; but invariably con- 
 ducted themselves in a ladylike manner which 
 won the admiration and gratitude of the some- 
 times sorely tried teacher, and gave him a pow- 
 erful motive to self control, in the natural desire 
 to win their respect and esteem. 
 
 These three girls were the belles of the 
 town ; Timothy was an unmarried man, and 
 when he seemed to pay court in a manner, to 
 :>ne or another of them, several of the young 
 men were inclined to grow wrathy over it, and 
 to feel th*s their rights were invaded. 
 
 Will Chetwood, Yorke Mocker, and
<page 195>

 
 188 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 lace Ormsby had become frequent visitors &\ 
 Mr. Keith's ; though, perhaps not more so in 
 the case of the latter two, than at the homes of 
 Mildred's two intimate girl friends; the six 
 formed a coterie of their own and were gener- 
 ally seen together at the merry-makings ; pair- 
 ing off now in one way now in another. 
 
 Gotobed Lightcap would now and then 
 pluck up courage to step in upon Mildred of an 
 evening, and was invariably treated politely and 
 kindly, though not in a way to give undue en- 
 couragement. 
 
 He had an instinctive understanding of that, 
 attributed it in a great measure, to his own 
 awkward, ungainly ways, and looked with envy 
 upon those whose better education and moro 
 polished manners made them more acceptable 
 companions. 
 
 Nicholas Ransquattle was not one of that 
 number, yet esteemed himself such, and an- 
 noyed our heroine not a little by his unwel- 
 come attentions. 
 
 They were declined whenever it could be 
 done without positive rudeness, but vanity and 
 eelf-conceit are often very blind. 
 
 Nicholas was quite a reader for a man of hie 
 station and limited opportunities; his family 
 were proud of his attainments ; he even more
<page 196>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 189 
 
 so ; he was given to displaying them on all pos- 
 sible occasions ; often wasting a great deal of 
 breath in the charitable effort to enlighten the 
 ignorance of his whilom associates. 
 
 He would call at Mr. Keith's early in the 
 evening, and if occasion offered, talk to Mildred 
 by the hour of his " abstruse studies " and the 
 .fighter literature with which he found it neces- 
 sary to " unbend his mind from them," till she 
 voted him an intolerable bore, and he became 
 the laughing stock of her younger brothers and 
 sisters, who found his clumsy, lumbering move- 
 ments, self-conceit, and egotistical discourse so 
 mirth-provoking that they learned to be on the 
 lookout for him and to find excuses for remain- 
 ing in the room while he staid ; in which last 
 endeavor they received every encouragement 
 from Mildred. 
 
 Meanwhile so blinded by egotism was tho 
 man, that he supposed himself an olject of great 
 admiration to them, and had little, if any doubt, 
 tnat the whole family were ready to receive him 
 with open arms whenever he should make for- 
 mal proposals for Mildred's hand. 
 
 He was a shoemaker by trade ; had a little 
 shop in the principal business street of the town, 
 just opposite the store of Chetwood and Mocker, 
 - -Claudina's brother and cousin.
<page 197>

 
 190 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Mr. Keith had opened an office next door te 
 them and Wallace Ormsby was diligently study 
 ing law with him. 
 
 Nicholas with a soul above his last, some- 
 times envied Wallace the prospective distinc- 
 tion of being a member of one of the learned 
 professions, and while busied with his waxed 
 ends and awl, considered the propriety of offer- 
 ing himself to Mr. Keith as a student and son- 
 in-law both in one. 
 
 He finally decided that the proposal to 
 Mildred should be made first, the other to fol- 
 low immediately upon her joyful acceptance. 
 
 Winter had come in earnest ; the ground 
 had frozen hard and a heavy fall of snow upon 
 this good foundation had made excellent sleigh- 
 ing ; the young folk were jubilant over it, and 
 more than one plan for its enjoyment h<td been 
 set afloat. 
 
 " Mornin', Nick, see here, I want you to 
 make me a pair o' new boots ; put your very 
 best work on to 'em," said Gotobed Lightcap, 
 entering Eansquattle's shop after a moment's 
 vigorous kicking and stamping of the encw 
 from his feet upon the doorstep. 
 
 " All right, Gote. Sit down and oflT with 
 your boot," returned Nicholas, putting down 
 his last and taking up his measures.
<page 198>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 191 
 
 " Let me have ? em as soon as you can," said 
 Gotobed. "And be sure to make 'em a neat 
 fit," he added, laughing, " else they'll, maybe 
 be throwed back on your hands." 
 
 " They'll give satisfaction, you may depend, ' 
 returned Ransquattle, straightening himself 
 and throwing his head back on his shoulders 
 in his accustomed fashion ; " whatever I un 
 dertake is always done in the best style." 
 
 " Eh ! I hadn't noticed that," said Goto- 
 bed, innocently. " You're goin' to the sleigh- 
 in' to-morrow night, I s'pose ?" 
 
 "Yes; and I calculate to take Mildred 
 Keith." 
 
 " You do 1" Lightcap ejaculated in tones of 
 mingled anger and inquiry, his brows knitting 
 wrathfully, a hot flush dyeing his swarthy 
 cheek. "Have you asked her? got her con- 
 sent?" 
 
 "Her? what her? may I ask?" queried 
 Yorke Mocker, coming in as Gotobed's question 
 was propounded, "Wallace Ormsby close at hia 
 heels. 
 
 " No, I haven't asked her yet, but I shall in 
 the course of the day ; and now I warn you 
 fellows that she's my choice and you may 
 each pick out some other girl to take to the 
 aleighing."
<page 199>

 
 192 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 "In leed ! and may I ask how you came by 
 the right to the first pick ?" 
 
 " I've as much right to Mildred Keith ai 
 anybody else, Mr. Mocker; more, I should 
 say ; for I'm going to marry her." 
 
 There was a simultaneous explosion of a& 
 tonishment and indignation at his presump- 
 tion, from Mocker and Ormsby, while Lightcap, 
 thinking no one would dare speak with such 
 confident boasting who had not received great 
 encouragement, turned pale, then flushed again 
 as he picked up and drew on the boot he had 
 just taken off. 
 
 " I admire the modesty of the man," re- 
 marked Ormsby with cutting sarcasm. "I 
 presume you will find the young lady ready to 
 drop into your arms at the fiivc hint of your 
 intentions." 
 
 " Of course, since it must be evident to her 
 that she couldn't possibly do any better," 
 sneered Yorke. " Pray, when did you learn 
 that you were such a favorite ?" 
 
 " I flatter myself that I do not lack discern- 
 ment," returned Ransquattle, with unmoved 
 self-complaisance, as he entered his measure- 
 ments in his book, then used his coat-tail as a 
 pen- wiper u Anything I can do for you thif 
 morning, gentlemen ?"
<page 200>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 19& 
 
 " No," growled Ormsby, " but there's some- 
 thing I can do for you ; namely, save you the 
 trouble of asking Miss Keith to go with you 
 tc-morrow night by informing you that she 
 has already consented to allow me to be her 
 escort." 
 
 " Is that so ?" exclaimed Ransquattle, red- 
 dening with anger and disappointment. " Well, 
 I must say I think it's very unfair ; the way 
 you fellows always get ahead of the rest of ns." 
 
 " So do I," said Gotobed, leaving the shop 
 and walking away in moody discontent; too 
 much chagrined at learning that he had no 
 chance, to enjoy the discomfiture of Nicholas. 
 
 " There has been no unfair dealing about 
 it," retorted Ormsby, shortly, as he and Mocker 
 followed Gotobed into the street; in their 
 anger and excitement quite forgetting the er- 
 rand that had brought them to Eansquattle's 
 shop, viz., to borrow his horse and sleigh fo 
 the proposed expedition, in case he were not 
 going to rrake use of 'hem himself 
 
 They crossed the street, joined Will Chet- 
 wood in the store, and roused hie ire also by 
 a recital of what had just occurred. 
 
 Rausquattle was angry too. "No unfair 
 Scaling about it, eh !" he muttered, looking 
 after them. " Well, I say there has been ; 
 9
<page 201>

 
 194 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 they've managed to keep other fellows at a dis 
 tance from the girl without any regard to hei 
 wishes. But I'll soon put a stop to that game, 
 mj lads. See if I don't." 
 
 He took a letter from his pocket as he 
 spoke, unfolded it, handling it tenderly, and 
 glanced over the contents with a smile of self- 
 congratulatiofl. 
 
 " Ah, ha ! we'll see if she'll be able to resist 
 this !" he said, half aloud, as he refolded and 
 returned it to its place in the breast-pocket of 
 his coat. 
 
 A sleigh was at that moment standing at 
 the front door of the yellow house on the cor- 
 ner and into it Mr. Keith was assisting his wife 
 and aunt. Then followed the babe and the 
 three next in age. They were going to the 
 country, to spend the day with their Lansdale 
 acquaintances, the Wards. 
 
 Mildred, Kupert, Zillah and Ada stood in 
 the doorway to see them off. 
 
 " You won't be back to tea ?" Mildred said 
 inquiringly. 
 
 " No ; but by bedtime," her father answered 
 as he turned the horses' heads. " Now go in, 
 all cf you, out of the cold before you catch the 
 ague." 
 
 "What did Claudina say?" asked Mil
<page 202>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 195 
 
 dred, addressing Kupert as they obeyed the 
 order. 
 
 " Yes, of course ; isn't she always glad of % 
 chance to come here ?" 
 
 " That's good. How soon ?" 
 
 " In about half an hour, I believe she said 
 So you'd better hear Ada's lessons and havr 
 them out of the way." 
 
 It was some weeks now since Ada's hearf 
 had been rejoiced by a final deliverance front 
 Miss Drybread's control and a return to the in 
 struction of her sister. Mr. Lord still kept uj 
 his class and Mildred's zeal for study had not 
 abated, but the minister had a funeral to attend 
 at a distant point that afternoon ; so there 
 would be no recitations to interfere with the 
 pleasure of a day with Claudina. Celestia Ann 
 etill kept her position in the family, and though 
 only ten o'clock, the house was in order, and 
 dinner and tea would require no supervision by 
 the eldest daughter of the house. 
 
 Claudina brought her sewing, and the twc 
 passed an uneventful, but pleasant day together, 
 chatting over their work or reading aloud in 
 turn ; for Claudina was nearly as great a lovei 
 of books as was Mildred. 
 
 Their talk was not largely of their neigh- 
 bore, but some jests passed between them a
<page 203>

 
 196 MILDRED KEITH, 
 
 Ransquattle's expense. They were quite severe 
 in their criticisms, as young things are too apt 
 to be; but if the ears of the vjctim burned it 
 was not enough to prevent the act of folly he 
 had in contemplation. 
 
 Tea was over, Miss Hunsinger had removed 
 the dishes to the kitchen ; Mildred spread a 
 bright colored cover over the table, placed the 
 candles on it, and she and Claudiua settled 
 themselves to their sewing again ; Zillah and 
 Ada were the only other occupants of the 
 room, Kupert having gone out. 
 
 Presently there came a knock at the outer 
 door. 
 
 " I'll go," said Ada, running to open it. 
 
 A man, Nicholas Ransquattle, stood on 
 the threshold. Stepping past the child with- 
 out speaking, he made directly for Mildred, and 
 silently extended his right hand, between the 
 thumb and forefinger of which he held a letter 
 
 In a sort of maze the girl took it, and with 
 one of his profound obeisances, of one of which 
 Cyril had remarked, " I thought he was going 
 to squattle on the stove when he put his head 
 down so low," he withdrew without having 
 spoken a word. 
 
 They could hear the crackling of the snov 
 tinder his heavy tread as he > <1 away.
<page 204>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 197 
 
 O Milly, what is it ? what is it 1 what did 
 he bring it for ? had he been to the post-office ?' 
 the little girls were asking with eager curiosity 
 
 Mildred turned to Claudina. They looked 
 into each other's eyes for a moment, then burst 
 into a simultaneous hearty laugh. 
 
 " Did ever you see such a comi^-il perform- 
 ance ?" 
 
 " Never 1 It's addressed to you of course ?" 
 
 " Yes." 
 
 Seizing a candle, laughing and blushing, 
 41 Come, help me to read it," Mildred said. 
 " We'll go up stairs where we won't be dis- 
 turbed." 
 
 " Mayn't we go too ? mayn't we know what 
 your letter's about ?" pleaded the little girls aa 
 the older ones were hurrying away. 
 
 " No, no ! tisn't the sort for children like 
 you to know about," laughed the sister. " Be 
 good and stay here. We won't be gone long ; 
 and some day, perhaps, I'll tell you what it says.' J 
 
 They hurried through the kitchen where 
 Miss Hun singer was vigorously setting things 
 to rights, up the crooked stairway and on into 
 Aunt Wealthy 's room, fastened the door and 
 proceeded to examine the missive. 
 
 It was an offer to Miss Mildred Keith, of the 
 heart, hand and fortune of the writer, Nicholas
<page 205>

 
 198 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Ransquattle, who denominated himself her de 
 voted worshiper and slave, and addressed her 
 as an angel and the loveliest and sweetest of 
 created beings. The girls giggled over it at 
 nrst, but at length Mildred threw it down in 
 supreme disgust. 
 
 "Such stuff and nonsense! it's perfectly 
 sickening ! I'm anything but an angel ; espe- 
 cially when I lose my temper. And I believe 
 I'm losing it now ; for I feel insulted by an 
 offer from such a conceited booby !" 
 
 " Somebody's coming !" exclaimed Clau- 
 dina. 
 
 "Yes; Rupert. I know his step. "Well, 
 Bu, what is it ?" as the boy rapped lightly on 
 the door. 
 
 " Why before you answer that letter and 
 accept the fellow, let me tell you something." 
 
 Mildred threw open the door. 
 
 " Who told you I had one?" 
 
 " The children told me about old Nick 
 bringing you a letter," he answered laughing, 
 but looking angry too, " and it's easy enough 
 to guess the subject ; particularly since I heard 
 a bit of news over yonder at the smithy. Goto 
 Lightcap says he heard him old Nick boast- 
 ing this morning, before several young men, 
 that he was going to marry Mildred Keith "
<page 206>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 199 
 
 For a minute or more Mildred did not 
 speak : she had, probably never felt so angry in 
 all her life. 
 
 " The conceited puppy !" she cried at last, 
 " wouldn't I like to take some of it out of 
 him !" 
 
 " Good for you !" cried Rupert clap ping hfa 
 hands. " I knew you'd be mad. And wouldn't 
 [ like to horsewhip him for his impudence ?" 
 
 " But it isn't right," said Mildred, already 
 cooling down a little and ashamed of her out- 
 burst. " You couldn't thrash him, Ru, but in- 
 stead you shall, if you will, have the pleasure of 
 carrying him my answer." 
 
 " Tell me what it is first." 
 
 Mildred took the letter and wrote, in pencil, 
 beneath the signature, " The above offer is 
 positively declined ; all future visits on the part 
 of the writer aiso," and signed her name. 
 " There, return it," she said, ' with the infor- 
 mation that it is my final reply."
<page 207>

 
 " Oh jealousy I thou bane of pleasing friendship, 
 Thou worst invader of our tender bosoms : 
 How does thy rancour poison all our softness, 
 And turn our gentle natures into bitterness I" 
 
 Bowx. 
 
 THE news was too good to keep, and Kupert 
 could not forbear stopping at the smithy on his 
 return and giving Gotobed a hint of how mat- 
 ters stood. 
 
 To say that the certainty of a decided rejec- 
 tion of Kansquattle's suit lifted a burden of 
 anxiety from young Lightcap's mind, is not an 
 over-estimate of the relief the boy's communi- 
 cation afforded him. 
 
 He had been moody and depressed since hie 
 visit of the morning to Ransquattle's shop, and 
 iiad refused to give Ehoda Jane any satisfaction 
 as to his intentions in regard to making one of 
 the sleighing party of the following evening. 
 She was therefore agreeably surprised when to- 
 ward bed-time he came, in quite a merry mood,
<page 208>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 901 
 
 into the kitchen where she sat sewing alone, 
 their mother having stepped out to see a neigh- 
 bor, to tell her that he had decided to go. 
 
 " Well, I'm glad of it," she said, " and who 
 .*re you going to take ?" 
 
 He colored at the question and answered 
 almost doggedly, " I'm going after Sarah 
 Miller." 
 
 " "Why don't you ask Mildred Keith ?" 
 
 " 'Cause there ain't no use ; Ormsby's 
 headed me off there. ' 
 
 "Yes; an' if you don't look out, with yer 
 pokin' ways, he'll head you off altogether, and 
 marry her afore you know it." 
 
 '* She ain't goin' off in such a hurry," he 
 muttered, drumming on the table with his fin- 
 gers ; then jumping up from his chair and going 
 over to the stove, making a pretense of warm- 
 ing himself that he might avoid the keen scru- 
 tiny of his sister's sharp eyes ; " but what's the 
 use o' me a tryin' with all them fellers round ?" 
 
 "Gote Lightcap,Pm ashamed of you !" ex- 
 claimed Khoda Jane. "If I was a man I'd 
 have more plnck by a long shot. 'T would n't 
 bo, me that would let any feller get ahead where 
 1 was amind to go in and win." 
 
 " You don't know nothin' about it," he re- 
 torted, lighting a candle and stalking off to bed
<page 209>

 
 202 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 " Dear me, if he only had half mj spunk/* 
 said Rhoda Jane, looking after him with scorn- 
 ful eyes and a curling lip. 
 
 The wish was echoed more than once in hig 
 heart as he lay awake far into the night revolv- 
 ing the subject in his mind, and tilled with 
 longings, doubts and fears. 
 
 He had been so greatly rejoiced over the 
 downfall of Ransquattle's hopes ; yet after all 
 what did it avail him while the other three, 
 whose superiority he could not help acknowledg- 
 ing to himself, remained in the way ? Alas, 
 there was no great cause for exultation that one 
 rival out of four had been removed from hia 
 path. 
 
 Still was it quite certain that they were all 
 rivals ? might it not be that Miss Chetwood or 
 Miss Grange was the more attractive girl to one 
 or all of them ? The six were so constantly seen 
 together, the attentions of the three young men 
 were so equally divided between the three girls, 
 that who could tell how they were going to pair 
 off, if at all? 
 
 Besides there was no accounting for tastes 
 and a lady didn't always select that one from 
 among her admirers whom other people in 
 general considered tLe most desirable match. 
 There was yet & tpark of hope for him, but ah
<page 210>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 80S 
 
 ll he only had Rhoda Jane's pluck and energy 
 oJ determination 1 
 
 Near sunset of the next day a large omnibus 
 sieigh drawn by four horses with jingling belle, 
 and well supplied with buffalo robes and other 
 appliances for keeping the cold at bay, went 
 from house to house in Pleasant Plains, picking 
 up the girls and " boys " to the number of a 
 dozen or more a very merry company then 
 glided swiftly on over the snow for some six of 
 eight miles. 
 
 The sleighing was fine, the weather not 
 severe ; the moon rose soon after the setting of 
 the sun, and the girls being well muffled up in 
 hoods, cloaks and other wraps, were warm and 
 cosy, and vastly enjoyed the ride. 
 
 Of course the lads did the same. They 
 laughed, jested and sang, and found time fly as 
 swiftly as the horses; who seemed to make 
 nothing of their load. 
 
 The destination of the party was a hotel in 
 a neighboring village, where a supper had been 
 ordered for them some days before. It was 
 served up, hot and savory, shortly after their 
 arrival. 
 
 A couple of hours were afterward spent ii 
 the parlor of the hotel, in social chat and play- 
 ing games ; and here they were joined bv MJ
<page 211>

 
 1304 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Timothy Buzzard, who taught a singing- school 
 in this town also. 
 
 " There's another rival," thought Gotobed 
 jealously watching him carrying on a lively 
 conversation with Mildrel ; " 'pears like every 
 body's after her ; and I can't get no chance at 
 all." 
 
 Rhoda Jane was equally jealous partly foi 
 her brother, but still more for herself ; because 
 last year Mr. Buzzard had waited upon hei 
 more than on any other girl in Pleasant Plains, 
 and she considered him her property and 
 " didn't fancy bein' cut out by no newcomer 
 nor by anybody else, for that matter." 
 
 Influenced by the desire to separate the 
 two, she was the first to suggest that it was 
 time to start for home. She was agreeably sur- 
 prised that Mildred promptly seconded the 
 motion. 
 
 Some objected, saying there was no hurry, 
 but as it was now eleven o'clock, these were 
 overruled by the majority, and the sleigh was 
 presently announced as in readiness. 
 
 " Can't we make room for another passen- 
 ger?" some one asked, as amid laughter and 
 jesting, they were crowding into the vehicle. 
 
 " Who is it ?" queried another. 
 
 *' Why, Buzzaid would "
<page 212>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 205 
 
 "No, we hain't room for no more?" intei 
 rupted Gotobed. " We're not agoin 1 to have 
 the ladies crowded." 
 
 " Speak fur yerself, Gote Lightcap,' spok 
 up Khoda Jane with spirit. " There ain t none 
 of us so disobligin' as not to be willin* to 
 scrouge a little for the sake of accommodatin' 
 a fellow critter in distress. Set up a little 
 closer, girls, snd there'll be lots o' room." 
 
 " Yes ; the more the merrier, and the closer 
 the warmer," assented Sarah Miller. Gote Light- 
 cap's partner for the expedition, who had 
 noticed with vexation and chagrin his evident 
 interest in Mildred Keith. "Come on, Buz- 
 zard," making room for the singing teacher 
 between Ehoda Jane and herself. 
 
 " Thank you, ladies. I shall be a thorn be- 
 tween two roses," he said, taking the offered 
 seat with a laugh at his own stale jest. 
 
 " Now we've got the singing master along, 
 let's have some music," said Rhoda Jane, whei 
 they were fairly on their way. 
 
 " Yes, you'll be expected to pay your way 
 Buzzard," remarked Ormsby. 
 
 " I hope I'll always be found willing to do 
 that,' he responded. " Miss Lightcap, what 
 shaL 1 sing." 
 
 " Highly pleased that the choice was given
<page 213>

 
 206 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 her, Rhoda Jane promptly named a love song 
 she had heard him sing as a solo. 
 
 He gave it, then another, selected by Miss 
 Miller, then turning to Mildred, 
 
 " I think it is your turn now, Miss Keith," 
 he said. 
 
 She proposed a round he had taught them 
 that winter, saying all could join in it. 
 
 All did so with right good will. Other 
 rounds, glees, choruses and solos followed. They 
 sang on even after reaching Pleasant Plains; 
 sang on till but two or three were left as one 
 after another was set down at his or her own 
 door. 
 
 A light burned in the parlor at Mr. Keith's 
 and the front door was opened before the sleigh 
 had quite drawn up to it. 
 
 " Poor, dear mother ! what a shame to have 
 kept you up so long !" Mildred exclaimed as 
 ehe came in. 
 
 "Never mind," was the cheerful reply 
 " Here s a good warm fire ; take this arm-chai? 
 close to it, and don't remove any of your wrapa 
 till you cease to feel chilly. I should have 
 prepared you some hot lemonade but for one 
 little difficulty in the way ; no lemons to be 
 had. Coffee would keep you awake ; but you 
 shall have a glass of good rich nrlk : either hot
<page 214>

 
 MILDRED KSITH. 207 
 
 or cold, as you prefer. Now tell me what sort 
 of a time you had." 
 
 " I wish every girl had such a mother as 
 mine," Mildred said, smiling fondly up into 
 the face she loved so well. " I verily believe I 
 take as much pleasure in recounting my ad- 
 ventures to you as in going through them. 
 And it is so nice to have so safe and wise and 
 loving a confidante. 
 
 " Mother, I have a great deal to tell you, 
 not so much about what has occurred to-night 
 as of something that happened last night. I 
 have been looking for an opportunity all day, 
 but without finding it ; for you know we were 
 unusually busy all the morning and had com- 
 pany all the afternoon till it was time for me to 
 get ready for the sleigh-ride." 
 
 Mrs. Keith glanced at the face of a tall 
 old-fashioned clock ticking- in a corner of the 
 room. 
 
 " I want very much to hear your story, 
 daughter; but if you can sleep without hav- 
 ing- told it I think we will reserve it till to- 
 morrow; for see! it is now half -past twelve." 
 
 The girl would have been glad to unbur- 
 den her mind and to learn if her mother ap- 
 proved not her rejection of Ransquattle of 
 that there could be no doubt but her man-
<page 215>

 
 208 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 ner of doing it ; bat that dear mother s lace 
 cheerful though it was, told of physical ex- 
 haustion and need of sleep. 
 
 Mildred rose hastily. "High time then 
 that we wore both in bed. My story will keep 
 perfectly well till to-morrow." 
 
 " Sit down and finish warming yourself," 
 Mrs. Keith said, with a smile. " I want to hear 
 about to-night. We will keep the longer storj 
 for to-morrow." 
 
 The Lightcaps found their house all dark 
 the family had retired to bed hours ago, bu\ 
 leaving the kitchen door unlocked and a good 
 fire in the stove. 
 
 " Good and warm in here," remarked Goto- 
 bed, feeling for the candle and matches his 
 mother was sure to have left on the table ready 
 for them. 
 
 " Yes ; feels comfortable. I shall set down 
 and warm a bit 'fore I crawl up to that there 
 cold bed-room." 
 
 " Me too ; don't expect to sleep none when 
 I do get to bed," growled Gote, as he succeeded 
 in lighting the candle, after two or three inef- 
 fectual attempts, and set it on the table again. 
 
 " Kind o' eggzited are ye ?" 
 
 " Some. I say, what did you make room 
 f 01 that "
<page 216>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 20fr 
 
 " Don't swear ;" she sneered, as he paused 
 for a suitable cognomen to bestow upon Buz- 
 zard. 
 
 " I wa'n't agoiu* to I" he said angrily ; 
 " not but what I've sufficient cause in your let- 
 ting that unclean bird in amongst us decent 
 folks." 
 
 " There now ; that'll do fur to-night," she 
 snapped. " Tim. Buzzard ain't no more an 
 unclean bird than you are ; he's twicet as good 
 lookin' and sings like a nightingale. 
 
 " But now see here ; don't let's quarrel, but 
 go to work together to bring things round right. 
 You don't want him to cut you out with Mil- 
 dred Keith, and I don't want her to cut me out 
 with him. So now you just spunk up and pop 
 the question right off. If you don't, one or 
 other o' them fellers '11 get ahead o' you ; you 
 may just take my word for that." 
 
 Gotobed dropped his head into his hands and 
 sighed deeply, then rose and walked the floor. 
 
 Rhoda Jane watched him with an eager, 
 half-contemptuous look. 
 
 "Well!" he said at length, "I wisht I 
 Knowed how !" 
 
 " Knowed how ! you needn't make many 
 words about it ; 'tain't like makin* up a sermor 
 or a president's message."
<page 217>

 
 S10 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " it's a heap more important ; the happiness 
 of a feller's whole life a dependin' onto it." 
 
 Silence for some minutes, Rhoda Jane sit 
 rng meditatively before the stove, her feet on 
 its hearth, her hands clasped round her knees, 
 while her brother continued his restless walk. 
 
 She was the first to speak. " I'd write it 
 out if I was you." 
 
 " I ain't used to writin' much." 
 
 " Well, you can get used to it ; you can try 
 and try till you've writ somethin' that'll do." 
 
 " I couldn't write anything good enough for 
 her to see." 
 
 " Then take t'other way." 
 
 " I don't never git no chance ; and if I did 
 I'd be tongue-tied, sure as the world." 
 
 " Then you'll have to write it, and I'll help 
 you !" concluded Rhoda Jane with energy. 
 
 She arose as she spoke, picked up the candle, 
 stepped quickly to a corner shelf in the next room, 
 whence she brought an inkstand and a quill pen 
 
 Setting these down on the kitchen table, 
 Bhe went back, and opening a bureau drawer 
 where miscellaneous articles were kept, fished 
 Out from its depths a sheet of foolscap, which 
 she spread out beside the inkstand. 
 
 " That ain't nice enough," said Gotobed, 
 ying it disapprovingly.
<page 218>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 211 
 
 " Make it up on that and get better at the 
 atore to-morrow to copy it onto," returned hie 
 sister. " Now you set down and go at it like 
 a man ; or maybe I'd better Bay like a woman," 
 ehe added sarcastically. 
 
 "If I'd only had an edicationl" groaned 
 Gotobed, taking up the pen ; " but it's mighty 
 hard on a feller such things as this is when 
 he hasn't." 
 
 " Well, do the best you kin, and mebbe it'll 
 come out right for all. You're good-lookin' 
 and got a good trade and can make a good 
 livin' for her. Just tell her that ; and tell her 
 you think she's as purty as a picter, and good- 
 tempered, and knows a lot ; and that you wor- 
 ship the ground she walks on, and won't never 
 let the wind blow rough on her, won't never 
 say no cross words to her, and and a lot more 
 o' such stuff; that's what girls like." 
 
 " Well, I s'pose you'd ought to know, see- 
 ing you belong to the sect; but it's a heap 
 easier for you to say it than for me to git it 
 writ down in black and white," he sighed. 
 
 " I declare I'm clear beat out with you 
 a'most," said Khoda Jane, snuffing the candle 
 impatiently ; " and I've a great mind to leave 
 you to make it up by yourself. 
 
 But she went on coaxing, suggesting and
<page 219>

 
 212 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 prompting, till between them they Lad com 
 posed an epistle which was satisfactory to her 
 though not to her brother. 
 
 " It's nigh onto three o'clock, and I'm awful 
 tired and sleepy," she remarked, as at last they 
 separated and sought their beds. 
 
 The next day Gotobed searched the town 
 for letter paper and bought half a quire of the 
 best he could find. 
 
 During the next week all his leisure mo- 
 ments were spent in making revised and im- 
 proved copies of his and Rhoda Jane's joint 
 composition. 
 
 He had used his last sheet, and seized with 
 a fit of desperation, he selected the one which 
 seemed to him the least faulty and sent it by 
 his sister. 
 
 Mrs. Keith, opening the door in answer tc 
 Khoda Jane's knock, was struck with the pecu- 
 liar expression of the girl's face a mixture of 
 pride, condescension and exultation. 
 
 " Good evenin' Mis' Keith. Where's Mil- 
 dred ?" she said, stepping in and glancing 
 about the room with an air of importance, " I 
 want to see her pertickler ; got somethin' fur 
 her," and a conscious glance at the missive in 
 her hand enlightened the quick-witted lady as 
 to its nature.
<page 220>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 213 
 
 " Mildred is not at home," she said ; u will 
 not be until bedtime ; but anything you choose 
 to leave with me will be given her on her re- 
 turn." 
 
 Khoda Jane considered a moment. She 
 felt a strong desire to deliver the note into 
 Mildred's own hand, and to watch her while 
 reading it ; but should she carry it back Goto 
 might change his mind and put off indefinitely 
 this business which she was so desirous to have 
 carried through at once. 
 
 She left it, though with evident reluctance. 
 
 She presently congratulated herself that she 
 had done so. Gotobed, eagerly awaiting her 
 return, peering anxiously every other minute 
 through the smithy door, hailed her in breath- 
 less excitement. 
 
 " Well, what what did she" 
 
 " She wasn't there. She's gone out some- 
 wheres and won't be back till bedtime." 
 
 " Give it to me then ; quick !" and he held 
 out his hand with a peremptory gesture. 
 
 " I ain't got it," Rhoda Jane answered with 
 a sardonic grin. 
 
 " Where is it? you ain't gone and left it." 
 he cried aghast. 
 
 " Yes, I have; I give it to Mis' Keith." 
 
 Gotobed groaned. u I'd thought better of
<page 221>

 
 214 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 it ; I'd throw it in the fire this minute if I had 
 it here. She'll think me a fool. I know she 
 will!" 
 
 "If she does she's one," returned Rhoda 
 Jane shortly, and left him to his unavailing 
 regrets. 
 
 How they tortured him ! how could he bear 
 the suspense. 
 
 Mildred was merciful and did not keep him 
 in doubt any longer than necessary. He found 
 a letter next morning, in the post-office, with 
 his address upon it, written in a lady's delicate 
 graceful hand. 
 
 His heart seemed to jump into his mouth 
 at the sight. He almost snatched it from the 
 postmaster's hand, and without stopping to an- 
 swer the jesting remark of that functionary on 
 his sudden accession of color, hurried away, 
 never stopping till he reached the privacy of 
 his own room, thankful that he succeeded in 
 doing so without being seen by any of the 
 family. 
 
 But now it was a full minute ere he could 
 summon courage to open the missive and learn 
 his fate. And even when it lay open before 
 him he passed his hand several times across his 
 eyes as if to clear his sight. 
 
 Yet it was very plainly written; also
<page 222>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 215 
 
 fiaimy expressed ; a distinct, decided, though 
 very kindly rejection of his suit ; the only reason 
 given that she could not love him and a love- 
 less marriage could be fruitful of nothing but 
 oiisery to both parties
<page 223>

 
 " The rose that all are praising 
 IB not the rose for me." 
 
 liATLLB. 
 
 " GOTOBED LIGHTOAP, you're the biggest fool 
 that ever was born!" exclaimed the young 
 blacksmith, between his clenched teeth, throw- 
 ing Mildred's dainty note upon the floor and 
 grinding it with his heel, while the hot blood 
 surged over his swarthy face, which expressed 
 in every lineament intense mortification and 
 chagrin. " You might 'a knowed the likes o* 
 her couldn't never fancy sech a ungainly, know 
 nothin' varmint as you be." 
 
 He dropped his face into his hands for a 
 moment, groaning in spirit for the wound in 
 his heart was deep as well as that to his pride. 
 
 " It does seem as if there warn't nothin' left 
 in this world worth livin' fur!" he sighed 
 " But then I'm not the feller to give up and 
 die! I'll fight it out an' get over it yet." 
 
 He picked up the letter and thrust it into his
<page 224>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 217 
 
 bosom, straightened himself, went down intc 
 the smithy, and fell to work at his anvil, deal 
 irg vigorous blows as if thus he would drive 
 away the demon of despair. 
 
 lie ate little at dinner, and conscious that 
 Rhoda Jane's sharp eyes were upon him, 
 scarcely lifted his from his plate. 
 
 He hurried back to his work. She followed 
 him the next minute. 
 
 " So she's give you the mitten ?" 
 
 "Who told you so?" he asked defiantly, 
 standing before her with arms folded and head 
 erect, but reddening to his very hair. 
 
 " Humph ! I ain't blind, and anybody could 
 see it with half an eye. Well, never you mind 1 
 you're a sight too good fur her, the " 
 
 " Don't you call her no names now ! I ain't 
 agoin' to have it. It's me that isn't fit to hold 
 a caudle to the like o' her, and had ought to had 
 sense enough to know it. 
 
 "Well, I didn't boast like Kansquattle; 
 that'? one small bit o' comfort as things has 
 turned out," he concluded moodily, picking up 
 Lis hammer. 
 
 "How'd he take his mitten?" laughed 
 Rhoda Jane. " Wouldn't I ha' liked to seen 
 him puttin' it on !" 
 
 " Take it ! you never see anybody look so 
 10
<page 225>

 
 218 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 cheap as Nick when Mocker asked him 'tothej 
 day when the weddin' was to conie off. Then 
 the fellers run him ('twas at Chetwood and 
 Mocker's store; I'd run in on a arrant fur 
 mother) and he growed thunderin' mad, and 
 begun callin' her names till Ormsby was ready 
 to put him out if he hadn't walked off hisself 
 and I could 'a horse-whipped him with a 
 right good will." 
 
 " Well, don't you go and break your heart 
 fur her." 
 
 "I ain't a goin* to. There now, you'd 
 better leave ; fur I've a job on hand." 
 
 The building lot selected by the Keiths was 
 bought and fenced in almost immediately, and 
 men set to work at digging the cellar, and then 
 putting up the walls of the new house. 
 
 By dint of energetic oversight and urging on 
 of the workmen, Mr. Keith succeeded in having 
 it roofed in before the first heavy fall of snow ; 
 so that some advance could be made with the 
 laying of floors, lathing, etc., during the win ter. 
 
 When spring came things took a fresh start ; 
 more men were employed and every effort put 
 forth by the owner, to have the building hur- 
 ried on to completion. 
 
 Each member of the family was deeply in- 
 terested ; the children made daily journeys tc
<page 226>

 
 MILDRED KEITH 2L 
 
 the spot anJ all Rupert's leisure time was de- 
 voted to digging, planting and other improve- 
 ments of the grounds. 
 
 The boy was full of energy and fond of life- 
 in the open air. His garden did him credit, 
 supplying nearly all the vegetables wanted for 
 family use. 
 
 With some assistance from older heads and 
 hands, he terraced the bank overlooking the 
 river, made steps down to the water's edge r 
 where was a fine spring, and built a small arbor 
 and a spring-house. 
 
 The new dwelling would be hardly so large 
 ae the one they were to leave for it, until an 
 addition should be built, but of more sightly 
 appearance and far more conveniently arranged^ 
 Besides it was their own, and who does not know 
 the charm that ownership gives ? 
 
 They were very impatient to get into it ; 
 and there was great rejoicing among the chil- 
 dren when at last the announcement was made 
 that it was fit for occupancy. 
 
 It was their father who brought the news 
 into their reading and sewing circle, one bright 
 warm afternoon early in July. 
 
 u When shall we move, wife ?" he asked. 
 
 " Oh to-night, to-night ! please, mother sajf 
 to-night,' cried several little voices.
<page 227>

 
 220 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Mrs. Keith laughed. " It is no sucn quici 
 work, children." 
 
 " But we might bedin," said Don. "I'll 
 take dis tat and turn back aden for othei 
 lings," hugging up a large white and yellow 
 cat that had been a petted member of the 
 household for some months past. 
 
 " H'm 1" said Cyril, " Toy can take his own 
 eelf ; he's got more feet to run with than any 
 of the rest." 
 
 " And he always runs alongside where vei 
 we goes," put in Fan. " Mother can we help 
 move?" 
 
 The question was unheard and remained 
 unanswered ; for the reason that the older peo- 
 ple were talking busily among themselves. 
 
 "I think we may begin to-morrow," Mrs. 
 Keith was saying ; " Celestia Ann is through 
 with her week's washing and ironing, and I'll 
 set her and Mrs. Rood both to cleaning the new 
 bouse, while we pack up things here." 
 
 " Oh, goodie, goodie ! mother, mayn't we 
 all help !" chorused the children. 
 
 " "We will see, dears; perhaps there may be 
 some little things that you can carry ; your own 
 toys you shall carry at any-rate, if you wish. 
 Yes, Stuart, I have had the parlor and one bod- 
 room of the new house cleaned already '
<page 228>

 
 X1LDRED KEITH 221 
 
 ' O mother," can't we have this carpel 
 taken up immediately I mean go to work and 
 take it up and have it shaken and carried right 
 over there ? and perhaps we could get it down 
 this afternoon, you and auntie and I ; and have 
 the furniture of that room carried right into it 
 to-morrow morning, the first thing." 
 
 " A capital idea,'' her father said ; " then we 
 will have one room comfortable there before- 
 all are torn up here. Gome, children, scamper 
 out of the way ! Wife i wheie's the tack ham- 
 mei 1" 
 
 * Oh, can't we help ?" pleaded the children, 
 " Where shall we go ?" 
 
 " No, not with this. Go anywhere out of 
 the way." 
 
 The order was obeyed somewhat reluctantly, 
 all going out to the adjoining room. Zillah 
 and Ada stopped there and each took a book 
 the younger three went up stairs. 
 
 " Let's pack up our things," said Cyril. 
 
 " What'll we pack 'em in ?" queried Don. 
 
 "We'll see." 
 
 The boys got out their stores of marbles, 
 balls, bits of twine, a broken knife or two, a few 
 fish hooks and a set of Jackstraws their father 
 had made for them. 
 
 Fan brought out her treasures also, whicb
<page 229>

 
 222 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 consisted of several dolls and thei' wardrobes, 
 a picture book and some badly battered and 
 bruised dishes ; the remains of a once highly 
 piized metal toy tea set. 
 
 A packing box in one corner of the large 
 seoond story room was where the playthings of 
 the little ones were always kept when not in use 
 " A place for everything and everything in its 
 place," being one of the cardinal rules of the 
 household. 
 
 " Can we take 'em over there now ?" asked 
 Fan, as she gathered hers pell mell into her apron. 
 
 " No, of course not," said Cyril. " Didn't 
 you hear mother say we couldn't begin moving 
 till to-morrow ?" 
 
 u Then what did we get 'em out for ?" 
 
 " To pack 'em up and have 'em ready to 
 take over in the morning." 
 
 " What '11 we pack 'em in ?" reiterated Don. 
 
 " Let's look round for a box 'bout the right 
 elze," said Cyril. " Course we can't carry them 
 in the big board one. It's too heavy." 
 
 A good deal of rummaging followed upon 
 that ; first in the outer room, then in the other, 
 occupied by Aunt Wealthy and Mildred. 
 
 Finally they came upon a pasteboard box 
 standing on Mildred's writing table, which 
 Cyril pronounced just the thing.
<page 230>

 
 MILDRED KEITH, *22ft 
 
 " But maybe Milly won't like us to take it," 
 objected Fan, as he unceremoniously emptied 
 the contents upon the table. 
 
 " Oh, she won't care ; there's nothing in it 
 but old papers and things writed all over. 
 She's done with them and she'll be puttin* 
 them in the fire next thing. You know she 
 always likes to burn up old rubbish." 
 
 That last statement was certainly according 
 to fact, and Fan made no further objection. 
 
 Don suggested asking leave, but Cyril over- 
 ruled that also. 
 
 " No ; they're all too busy down there ; we 
 mustn't bother," he said, walking off with his- 
 prize. 
 
 One paper had fallen on the floor. Fan. 
 stooped, picked it up and looked at it curiously, 
 as the boys hurried off into the other room with 
 their prize. 
 
 "Milly didn't do that," she remaiked; 
 " tain't pretty writin' like hers. Guess she 
 wouldn't want to keep such an ugly old thing.'* 
 
 " Come Fan," Cyril called, " do you want 
 to put your things in too ?" 
 
 *' Yas ;" she said, coming out with the let- 
 ter still in her hand. 
 
 Fan's dolls were put in last and the box was 
 too full to allow the lid to go on.
<page 231>

 
 224 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 "I'll take Bertha and carry her in mj 
 arras," she said, lifting out her largest and 
 favorite child. " I want her to play wis now 
 and I'd raser not trust her in dere wis dose 
 marbles and balls rollin' round." 
 
 " Now the lid fits on all right," said Cyril, 
 adjusting it. 
 
 " "We're all packed up," observed Don, with 
 satisfaction. "Now let's go play in the 
 grove." 
 
 The others were agreed and Fan decided 
 that she must take with her two small rag dolls 
 in addition to Bertha. 
 
 Puss had come up stairs with the children 
 and was walking round and round them, as 
 they sat on the carpet, rubbing affectionately 
 against them and purring loudly. 
 
 " Let's give 'em a ride on Toy's back," said 
 Cyril. " Here's a string to tie 'em on with, 
 and this old letter shall be the saddle." picking 
 up the one Fan had brought from the other 
 room, and which she had laid down beside the 
 bc^. 
 
 The others were pleased with tne idea ; 
 Cyril twisted the letter into some slight resem- 
 blance to a saddle, and in spite of a vigorous re- 
 Distance from the cat, tied it and the dolls pretty 
 securely to her back.
<page 232>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 225 
 
 She was of course expected to go with or 
 follow them as usual ; but the instant they re- 
 leased her she flew down the stairs, darted out 
 ;>f the open kitchen door, tore across the yard 
 md scaled the fence in a twinkling. 
 
 The children pursued at their utmost speed, 
 but Toy was out of sight before they could 
 descend the stairs. 
 
 " Well, I never ! that 'ar cat must a gone 
 mad," Celestia Ann was saying, standing in the 
 doorway, her hands on her hips, her gaze turned 
 wonderingly in the direction Toy had taken. 
 
 " "Where ? which way did she go ? " asked 
 the children breathlessly. 
 
 " Over the fence yonder, tearing like mad. 
 She went like a streak o' lightnin' through the 
 kitching here, and I didn't see no more of her 
 after she clum the fence. She's got the hydro- 
 phoby bad, you may depend ; and I only hope 
 she won't bite nobody, 'fore somebody knocks 
 her in the head." 
 
 "No, it's my dolls she's got," said Fan, who 
 had not the slightest idea what " hydrophoby " 
 might be. " O, boys, hurry and catch her 'fore 
 phe loses 'em," she called after Ler brothers as 
 they renewed the pursuit, hurrying across the- 
 yard and climbing the fence with a speed that 
 did credit to their ability in that line. 
 
 to*
<page 233>

 
 226 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Fan stood beside it, gazing out anxiously 
 through a crack between the high, rough boards 
 till the boys returned all breathless with run- 
 mug, to report, "No Toy and no dolls to be 
 seen anywhere. 
 
 " But don't cry," added Cyril, seeing Fan's 
 lips tremble ominously ; " she'll come back when 
 she wants her supper ; you bet." 
 
 " It's wicked to bet," remarked Don virtu- 
 ously. 
 
 "I didn't," said Cyril, " come let's go play 
 in the grove. I'll bend down a tree and give 
 you a nice ride, Fan." 
 
 Gotobed Lightcap had just finished a job, 
 and pausing a moment to rest, was wiping the 
 perspiration from his brow with a rather dilapi- 
 dated specimen of pocket-handkerchief, when a 
 cat darted in at the open door, ran round the 
 smithy IP a frightened way, then lay down OD 
 the floor and rolled and squirmed kicking its 
 feet in the air in the evident effort to rid itself 
 of something tied to its back. 
 
 "With a single stride Gotobed was at the e ; de 
 of the struggling animal. 
 
 He took it up and in a few seconds had re- 
 jeved it of its hated incumbrance. 
 
 "It's them Keith children's pet cat," he 
 said half aloud, " and thev've been a tyin* some
<page 234>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 227 
 
 of their doll babies onto it. There you km go, 
 puss ; don't take up yer lodgin' here ; for we've 
 cats enough o' our own. 
 
 " Eh 1 what's this ?" as his eye fell on the 
 letter and he recognized his own awkward, ill- 
 shaped hieroglyphics. 
 
 He felt his face grow very led and hot a? 
 he straightened it out upon his knees, his heart 
 fluttering with the thought of the possibility 
 that it might have been some little liking for 
 the writer that had prevented its immediate de 
 struction. 
 
 There were some words in pencil along the 
 margin ; he held it up to the light and slowly 
 deciphered them. 
 
 He was not much accustomed to reading 
 writing and this had become slightly blurred : 
 but he made it out clearly at last ; a jesting re- 
 mark about his mistakes in spelling and gram- 
 mar, which were many and glaring. 
 
 " I wouldn't ha' believed it of her !" he ex- 
 claimed, crimsoning with anger and shame as 
 he flung the torn and crumpled sheet into the 
 fire of his forge, the dolls after it. 
 
 He caught up his hammer and fell to work 
 again, muttering to himself, " It's her writin'; 
 there can't be nc mistake ; fur it's just like what 
 she writ me afore. And I would n't a* believed
<page 235>

 
 228 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 it of her, I wouldn't ; I thought she d a kind 
 heart and would make allowance fur them that 
 hasn't had the same chance as her." 
 
 lie had not been wrong in his estimate of 
 Mildred. She would never have wounded his 
 feelings intentionally. She had a habit of 
 writing her thoughts on the margin of what 
 she was reading, and the words had been care- 
 lessly traced there with no expectation that they 
 would ever be seen by any eye but her own. 
 Nor would they but for the mischievous med- 
 dling of the children. 
 
 She set no value upon the letter ; did not 
 miss it till months afterwards, and then supposed 
 she had destroyed it, though she could not dis- 
 tinctly remember having done so. 
 
 In the meantime Gotobed kept his own 
 counsel, concealing his hurt as well as he could 
 and trying not to hate the hand that had in- 
 flicted it
<page 236>

 
 " Farewell, a long farewell." 
 
 THE Keiths were scarcely more than well 
 settled in their new home when Miss Stan- 
 hope announced her intention of returning to 
 Ohio almost immediately. 
 
 This news was received by the family with 
 something akin to consternation. " How could 
 they do without her ?" they asked ; " didn't 
 everybody need her every day of their lives, 
 from father and mother down to Annis 51" 
 
 "Ah," she answered smiling, though her 
 eyes were dim with unshed tears, " you'll have 
 each other and will soon find that you can get 
 on very well indeed without your blundering 
 old auntie. But the question is how shall she 
 do without you ? The old Lansdale home will 
 be very lonely with no little feet pit-patting 
 about it." 
 
 " Then what makes you go, Aunt Wealthy V
<page 237>

 
 230 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 chorused the children, clinging to her with 
 many a loving caress. 
 
 " I must, my darlings ; there's business 1 
 have to attend to ; and I feel that the ague is 
 breaking me down." 
 
 " I fear that is too true/ Mrs. Keith said, 
 with a strong effort to speak cheerfully, " and 
 therefore I will not entreat you to stay, dear 
 auntie ; but rather urge your departure before 
 the sickly season sets in. 
 
 " Though it just breaks my heart to think 
 of the parting !" she added, hurrying from the 
 room to conceal her emotion. 
 
 "But you'll come back soon, won't you, 
 auntie?" pleaded the children. 
 
 " Not very, I in afraid, dears, it's a long and 
 expensive journey." 
 
 " Too long for you to take alone, Aunt 
 Wealthy," Mildred said. " I dread it for you. 
 I don't see how we can let you go without a 
 protector." 
 
 " I shall not, child. Is not the promise to 
 me, ' Behold, I am with thee, and will keep 
 thee in aL places whither thou goest V Yes ; 
 to me and to each one of His children. S j I 
 am not afraid, and you need not fear for 
 me." 
 
 " Dear auntie, if the Saviour were here, I
<page 238>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 231 
 
 think he would say to you, ' O woman, great 
 is thy faith !' " 
 
 " My dear, I deserve 110 such commenda- 
 tion ; my faith is often very weak. But I want 
 you to remember and try to realize that this 
 almighty Friend not only goes with me when 
 I leave you, but stays with you also ; according 
 to His gracious promise, ' I will never leavo 
 thee nor forsake thee.' 
 
 " Troubles and trials will come and there 
 are dark and stormy days in every life but ' as 
 thy ' days so shall thy strength be.' 
 
 " I can not tell you, Mildred, how hard it 
 is for me to leave you all," she continued, her 
 voice trembling with emotion, " but it would 
 be ten times harder were it not that I know 
 
 * this God is our God forever and ever ; * 
 and that ' he will be our guide even unto 
 death.' " 
 
 " Aunt Wealthy," said Mrs. Keith coming 
 in again, " Stuart and I have been talking this 
 over this resolve of yours to return to Ohio- 
 and he says it will never do for you to attempt 
 it without an escort." 
 
 " I shall be very glad of an escort, if there 
 a one to be had," Miss Stanhope answered ; 
 
 * out if not, I must even go without trusting 
 u Providence."
<page 239>

 
 232 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " But you would wait a few weeks rather 
 than go alone ?" 
 
 "Certainly; God works by means, and we 
 are to use them, while at the same time we 
 trust only in him." 
 
 " Stuart says the merchants will be going 
 on East to buy their fall goods. He will in- 
 quire among them and let you know." 
 
 " Ah yes ; I think I heard Mr what's 
 
 his name ? Mimicker ? Sneerer ?" 
 
 " Mocker ?" suggested Mildred with a smile. 
 
 " Yes, yes, Mr. Mocker, I heard him say 
 something about it being his turn this fall to 
 lay in a new supply of goods." 
 
 " Ah, I hope it will turn out that you will 
 have him for your escort, Aunt Wealthy," said 
 Mildred, " for I know that he will take the 
 best possible care of you. But do try, auntie, 
 to get his name fixed in your memory." 
 
 "That I will," Miss Stanhope answered 
 with a good humored smile; "for he might 
 not fancy the synonyms of it ; the meaning no* 
 being the most complimentary in the world." 
 
 Mr. Keith brought home word that Mr. 
 Mocker would leave for the East in a fort- 
 night and would be happy to take charge of 
 Miss Stanhope. 
 
 Aunt Wealthy had always been very deal
<page 240>

 
 H1LD11KD KEITH. 238 
 
 to these nieces and nephews, but now that they 
 were about to lose her, it seemed to them that 
 they had never realized half her worth. 
 
 They lingered near her, they hung npon 
 her words and looks, and when the time for 
 parting came, eking about her with sobs and 
 tears, loading her with caresses, till she was 
 forced to tear herself from their embraces and 
 hurry away. 
 
 The stage had drawn up before the gate ; 
 she hastened down the garden path, the weep- 
 ing children running after ; Mr. Keith and 
 Mr. Mocker assisted her into the vehicle, the 
 latter took his place by her side, and in another 
 moment she was whirled away out of sight, all 
 drowned in tears, and leaving the others in like 
 condition. 
 
 " It eeems just like a funeral !" sobbed Ada, 
 " oh, will she never, never come back any more I" 
 
 " Perhaps she may, dear," said the mother, 
 wiping away her own tears, " we will try to 
 think so at least, and be cheerful and happy in 
 looking forward to that time. And in the 
 meanwhile we may hope for a letter now and 
 then." 
 
 " Oh," cried Rupert, that reminds me that 
 there's a letter in the office for you now, 
 mother 1 I saw it there, but had no money
<page 241>

 
 234 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 with me to pay the postage. If you'll give me 
 the two shillings, I'll run and get it now." 
 
 " Do so, my son," Mrs. Keith said, giving 
 him the money. " I'm sorry you forgot it 
 and did not get it out in time for Aunt 
 Wealthy to see it." 
 
 Letters were rarities in those days, and the 
 older members of the family awaited Rupert's 
 return from the post-office with a good deal of 
 eagerness, not unmixed with anxiety. 
 
 He was not long gone for he too was curious 
 in regard to it, desirous to learn its contents 
 and who was the writer. 
 
 " It's post marked Detroit," he said, deliv- 
 ering it to his mother. " I can't think who'd 
 be likely to write to any of us from there. 
 
 " Unless it might be Captain or Edward 
 Wells," he added with a quizzical glance at 
 Mildred. 
 
 " The hand looks familiar," remarked Mrs. 
 Keith carefully breaking the seal ; then open- 
 ing out the sheet, " Horace Dinsmore !" she 
 exclaimed, " And he is coming to see us ! Oh, 
 what a pity that Aunt Wealthy has just missed 
 him!" 
 
 " A pity indeed !" echoed her husband. 
 '* But he may stay with us some weeks, and 
 perhaps take Lansdale on his way home."
<page 242>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 235 
 
 " 1 hope he won't ; won't stay here long, I 
 mean," muttered Kupert in an aside to Mildred. 
 I didn't like him the other time." 
 
 "Nor I, very much, but perhaps he has 
 improved." 
 
 "Mother, who is he?" the younger ones 
 were asking. 
 
 " My cousin ; his mother and mine were 
 sisters." 
 
 " "Were ? Aren't they now ?" queried Zillah. 
 
 " Yes, dear, but they both went home to 
 heaven many years ago. My mother first 
 before Aunt Eva married Mr. Dinsinore and 
 went away down south to live. 
 
 44 But wait till I have read the letter and 
 then you may ask all the questions you wish." 
 
 It was not a lengthy epistle. Mrs. Keith 
 glanced over it, then read it aloud. Its tone 
 was cousinly and affectionate. 
 
 The writer stated that he had lately gradu- 
 ated from college and was now taking a tour 
 to rest and refresh himself after many months 
 of hard study ; that he had arrived in Detroit, 
 would tarry there a week and then journey 
 on into Indiana to visit his relatives in Pleasant 
 Plains." 
 
 "This letter has been some time on the 
 way," Mrs. Keith remarked, examining the
<page 243>

 
 236 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 date, " and really I think he may walk in upon 
 us day after to-morrow." 
 
 " Then we'd better be getting ready for 
 him !" exclaimed Mildred, starting up in her 
 energetic way. 
 
 " Wait a little. Mother promised to tell us 
 about him," cried the children. 
 
 " Yes, and will. There's time enough, 
 Milly." 
 
 Mildred resumed her seat ; for she, too 
 wanted to hear all her mother had to tell. 
 
 "My mother," Mrs. Keith began, "was 
 two years younger than Aunt Wealthy, who 
 was the daughter of my grandfather by his first 
 wife ; therefore only half sister to my mother 
 and Aunt Eva, who were the children of the 
 second. 
 
 " Aunt Eva was five years younger than my 
 mother and was still single when mother died ; 
 which, as you have all heard, was when I, hei 
 only child, was but little more than two years old. 
 
 " Cousin Horace, too, was the only child oi 
 his mother, and quite a little fellow when she 
 died. I was there, on a visit, at the time and 
 did what I could to comfort him. 
 
 "We grew quite fond of each other then 
 and have always been so ever since, though we 
 have lived far apart and met very seldom."
<page 244>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 23T 
 
 "Has he got a father?" asked Cyril, "and 
 does he live with hitn ?" 
 
 " Yes ; he has a father, and lives with him 
 when he is at home ; but for years past most ot 
 his time has been spent at school and college." 
 
 " I thought Cousin Horace had brothers and 
 sisters?" Rupert said, inquiringly. 
 
 " Yes ; his father soon married again and 
 has a large family by the second wife." 
 
 "What is Cousin Horace like, mother?'* 
 asked Ada. 
 
 " Wait until he comes and see for yourself," 
 jeas the smiling rejoinder. 
 
 " How glad you look, mother 1" said Mildred 
 'are you really so much pleased that he 'la 
 coming ?" 
 
 " Why, certainly, my child 1 he is my near 
 kinsman, and, as I have just told you, I am: 
 very fond of him ; he's like a dear younger 
 brother to me. And particularly welcome just 
 now as his coming will take from the dreadful. 
 ly lonely feeling Aunt Wealthy's departure haa 
 given the house." 
 
 " But, mother, we can't entertain him suita- 
 bly , we're so cramped for room and our house 
 only half -furnished ; and he is used to living in 
 such grand style. You know you have often 
 told me about it what a beautiful place Rose-
<page 245>

 
 238 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 lands is, and how many carriages and aorees, 
 and what a retinue of servants they keep." 
 
 Mrs. Keith smiled kindly at the anxious 
 face turned toward hers. " Well, daughter 
 dear, we'll just do the best we can for him 
 and it won't hurt him to try roughing it in the 
 backwoods or prairies rather for a little 
 while." 
 
 " Well, it's a little better than if he had 
 come while we were in the old yellow house 
 We've a nice porch here, and a front yard 
 ehaded with grand old oaks; and no neighbors 
 near enough to watch everj movement." 
 
 " A good many conveniences, too," added 
 her mother, cheerily,, " and a beautiful view of 
 river and town. I think, too, that we can 
 manage to give him a room to himself, and to 
 feed him well, with the help of Eupert's gar- 
 den, the cow and the chickens." 
 
 The expectation of this visit was a real 
 blessing to the family ; to Mrs. Keith and Mil- 
 dred in especial just at this time ; giving oc- 
 cupation to their thoughts as well as hands, in 
 the necessary preparation for the proper accom- 
 modation and entertainment of the coming 
 guest; thus preventing much of the sadnese 
 the loss of Miss Stanhope's loved society would 
 have caused them.
<page 246>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 239 
 
 The next arrival of the semi-weekly stage 
 brought Horace Dinsmore, his servant and lug- 
 gage to their door. 
 
 Mr. Dinsmore was a dark-eyed, handsome 
 pouth of distinguished appearance and with the 
 air of a prince of the blood royal ; yet evidently 
 a kind master; for his man John, a spruce 
 young negro, seemed to take the greatest pride 
 and pleasure in waiting upon " Massa Horace '" 
 and anticipating his every wish. 
 
 While warmly welcoming her young rela- 
 tive, Mrs. Keith was somewhat dismayed at the 
 unexpected sight of the servant house room 
 being so scarce ; but the difficulty was obviated 
 by placing a cot-bed in the empty loft of the 
 newly erected stable at the foot of the garden. 
 
 " How very thoughtless and selfish in 
 Cousin Horace to bring that fellow along," Mil- 
 dred said to her mother. 
 
 " No, my dear, not when we consider that 
 chey have always been together and neither 
 would know very well how to do without the 
 other. I was the thoughtless one not to re- 
 member that and expect John." 
 
 ' Always together, mother?" 
 
 " Yes ; they are nearly the sair>e age John 
 a few months older than his young master- 
 and were playfellows in infancy.
<page 247>

 
 240 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " John's mother was Horace's ' mammy.' as 
 ihe children down south call their nurses ; and 
 i think loved her white nursling even better 
 than her own children. 
 
 " John's aiFection for Horace is probably afi 
 great, and it would come near breaking his 
 heart to be separated from him." 
 
 Horace Dinsmore had paid a visit to Lans- 
 dale the year before the removal of the Keiths 
 to Indiana. The impression he had then made 
 upon his young cousins was not at all favorable ; 
 he was silent, morose and seemed to take little 
 or no interest in anybody or anything. 
 
 " He is not like himself," Mrs. Keith had 
 said to Aunt Wealthy again and again ; " he ie 
 in trouble, some great sorrow has come to him." 
 
 But they did not succeed in winning his 
 confidence ; he rejected their sympathy, locked 
 up his secret in his own bosom, and left them 
 as sad and moody as when he came. 
 
 He was changed for the better now ; was 
 cheerful, at times even gay, and showed much 
 interest in them and their affairs, making them 
 valuable presents ; for he had large means and 
 a, generousf nature. 
 
 Some gifts of dress-goods, jewelry and 
 children's toys, he had brought with him, and 
 4i addition he presented Mildred and Rupert
<page 248>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 241 
 
 each with a town lot in the immediate neigh- 
 borhood of their new home. 
 
 Mr. Keith, in his sturdy pride of independ- 
 ence, was inclined to reject these last ; but his 
 wife said, 
 
 " No, Stuart, do not ; you will hurt Horace's 
 feelings ; the land is very cheap, the price of it 
 nothing to him with his large wealth ; I know 
 it is a real pleasure to him to give it to the 
 children." 
 
 Mr. Keith yielded the point and said 
 nothing. 
 
 Mr. Dinsmore, not being a religious man, 
 and belonging to a very proud and aristocratic 
 family, was not one to mingle with those he 
 denominated " the common herd," as his cousin 
 well knew. Therefore only a few of their ac- 
 quaintances the educated and refined were 
 invited to meet him and accompany them on 
 some little excursions riding, boating, and 
 fishing gotten up for his entertainment. 
 
 He made himself agreeable on these occa- 
 sions ; an easy thing for him to do with hie 
 handsome person, polished manners and good 
 conversational powers but soon let it be known 
 to his relatives that he decidedly preferred exclu- 
 sively family parties. After that they had only 
 such while he staid, which was for several weeks. 
 11
<page 249>

 
 Chapter Itmetetjj. 
 
 " Seldom shall she hear a tale 
 So sad, so tender, and so true." 
 
 HORACE DINSMOKE showed much interest 
 in Mildred, seemed to like to watch her, let 
 her employment be what it might, and to have 
 her company in long solitary walks and drives. 
 
 Several times he remarked to her mother 
 that she was growing very lovely in person and 
 was a girl of fine mind ; adding that he sincerely 
 hoped she would not throw herself away upon 
 ome country boor. 
 
 The two Mrs. Keith and Mr. Dinsmore 
 were alone in the sitting-room, one pleasant 
 afternoon early in September, when this remark 
 was made for the third or fourth time ; alone 
 except that little Annis was playing about the 
 floor, apparently absorbed \vith Toy and her 
 doll. 
 
 Mrs. Keith was sewing, her cousin whc
<page 250>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 243 
 
 had been pacing to and fro, now standing be- 
 fore her. 
 
 She lifted her head with a startled look. 
 
 " Horace, don't forget that you and Mildred 
 are cousins." 
 
 He colored slightly, then laughingly an- 
 swered to her thought rather than her words, 
 
 " Don't be alarmed, Marcia ; I'm not think- 
 ing of her in that way at all." 
 
 His face suddenly clouded as with some 
 gloomy recollection. 
 
 " Marcia," he said, taking a chair near her 
 side, "my visit is drawing to a close and there 
 is something I must tell you before I go; I 
 came with the purpose of doing so, but hitherto 
 my heart has failed me. "We seem to be alone 
 in the house and perhaps there will be no bet- 
 ter time than this." 
 
 " I think not," she said, " we can secure 
 ourselves from intrusion by locking the door** 
 
 He rose, turned the key, and came back. 
 
 He did not speak again for a moment, but 
 sat watching Annis with a peculiar expression 
 which excited hid cousin's surprise and 3uri- 
 osity and not for the first time either ; she had 
 noted it before ; the child seemed to both attract 
 and repel him. 
 
 More than mce Mrs. Keith had seen him
<page 251>

 
 244 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Bnatch her up suddenly with a gesture of strong 
 affection, only to set her down the next minute 
 nd turn away as if from something painful to 
 x*>k upon. 
 
 " What is it you see in my baby, Horace V 
 she asked, laying her hand affectionately upon 
 his arm. 
 
 "She is a sweet, pretty little thing, yet it 
 gives me more pain than pleasure to look at 
 her," he said sighing and passing his hand 
 across his brow. 
 
 " Yon cannot imagine why it should," he 
 went on, smiling sadly into his cousin's wonder- 
 ing face, " because there is a page in my past 
 life that you have never read." 
 
 His features worked with emotion. He 
 rose and paced the floor back and forth several 
 times ; then coming to her side again, 
 
 " Marcia, I have been a husband ; I am a 
 father; my little girl whom I have never 
 seen must be just about the age of Annis." 
 
 " You, Horace ? you are but twenty years 
 old !" dropping her work to look up at him in 
 uttei amazement. 
 
 " I knew you would be astonished that 
 yon could hardly credit it but it is true." 
 
 Then resuming his seat he poured out in 
 impassioned language, the story al-oadv so weli
<page 252>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 245 
 
 known to the readers of the Elsie books 
 of his visit to New Orleans three years 
 before this, his hasty and clandestine marriage 
 to the beautiful heiress, Elsie Grayson, their 
 speedy separation by her guardian and his 
 father, the subsequent birth of their little daugh 
 ter and the death of the young mother, follow- 
 ing so soon thereafter. 
 
 Her work forgotten, her hands lying idly in 
 her lap, her eyes gazing intently into his, Mrs. 
 Keith listened in almost breathless silence, the 
 tears coursing down her cheeks during the sad 
 dest passages. 
 
 " My poor Horace ! my poor, dear cousin !" 
 she said when he had finished. " Oh, it was 
 hard, very hard ! Why did you never tell me 
 before." 
 
 " I could not, Marcia," he answered in trem- 
 ulous tones, " it is the first time I have spoken 
 my darling's name since since I knew that 
 she was lost to me forever." 
 
 " Forever ! oh do not say that ! You 
 have told me she was a sweet Christian girl, 
 and none who trust in Jesus can ever be 
 
 toft' 
 
 " But to me ; I am no Christian," he sighed, 
 " But you may become one. The invita- 
 tion is to you, * Come unto me ;' and the blessed
<page 253>

 
 246 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 assurance, ' Him that cometh unto me, I wit 
 in no wise cast out." 
 
 He sat silent, his face averted, his hea<? 
 Oowed upon his hands. 
 
 She waited a moment, then spoke again. 
 
 " Your child, Horace !" 
 
 " She is at Viamede with the guardian." 
 
 " And you have never seen her ?" 
 
 "No." 
 
 " Oh how can you bear it ? doesn't your 
 heart yearn over her ? don't you long to have 
 her in your arms ?" 
 
 "No; why should I? she robbed me of 
 her my darling wife." 
 
 " But you do not know that ? and certainly 
 t was innocently, if at all." 
 
 " That has always been my feeling." 
 
 " You ought not to allow yourself to feel 
 so " she said almost indignantly. " Poor little 
 motherless darling ! must she be worse than 
 fatherless too ?" 
 
 " What would you have, Marcia ?" he asked 
 ooldly, his face still turned from her, " what 
 could I do with a child ? And she is well ofl 
 where she is; better than she could be any- 
 where else; under the care of a pious old 
 Scotch woman who has been house-keeper in 
 the Grayson fair; ' for many years, and that
<page 254>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 247 
 
 of her mammy who nursed her mother before 
 her: a faithful old creature so proud and fond 
 of her young mistress that I doubt if she would 
 have hesitated to lay down her life for her." 
 
 " That is well so far as it goes, Horace, but 
 do you wish your child to grow up a stranger to 
 you ? would you have no hand in the moulding 
 of her character, the training of her mind ?" 
 
 " I had not thought of that," he said sigh- 
 ing, " but I do not feel competent to the task.' 
 
 " But it is your work ; a work God himself 
 has appointed you in giving you the child ; a 
 work for which he will give wisdom if you seek 
 it of him. 
 
 " ' If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of 
 God, who giveth to all men liberally and up- 
 braideth not : and it shall be given him.' 
 
 " And if you neglect it, my dear cousin, 
 bear with me, while I say it it will be at your 
 peril." 
 
 " How do you mean, Marcia ?" 
 
 " The day may come when you will want 
 that child's love and obedience : when you will 
 covet them more than any other earthly good, 
 and perhaps, find that they are denied you." 
 
 " It is possible you may be right in regard 
 to the first," he said haughtily, his dark eyes 
 flashirg, as he turned hie face towards her
<page 255>

 
 24:8 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 again, " but as to the other her obedience it 
 will be strange indeed if I cannot compel it 
 She may have a strong will, but she will find 
 that mine is yet stronger." 
 
 " Horace," said his cousin earnestly, "if yon 
 refuse or neglect to do a father's duty cy her, 
 what right can you have to claim a child's duty 
 from her ?" 
 
 "I am not conscious of having neglected 
 my duty toward her thus far," he said, stil. 
 haughtily. " As I have already explained, she is 
 where, in my judgment, she is better off for the 
 present, than she could be anywhere else. 
 What changes may come in the future I do not 
 know.'' 
 
 " Forgive me if I have seemed to blame yon 
 undeservedly," Mrs. Keith said with tears in 
 her eyes ; " but ah, my heart yearns over that 
 poor baby!" 
 
 She caught up her own and kissed it pas- 
 sionately as she spoke. 
 
 " Ah ! " she sighed, pressing the little crea- 
 ture to her bosom, " whatever would my dar- 
 lings do without a father's and a mother'? 
 love!" 
 
 He walked to the window and stood there 
 for several minutes. Then coming back, 
 
 " Marcia," he said, will you do me the
<page 256>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 249 
 
 favor to write about this to Aunt Wealthy I 
 and tell her I have always felt ashamed of my 
 behavior during my visit to you both, two years 
 igo. I could not bring myself to explain then 
 the cause of my what shall I call it ? sullen- 
 ness ? It must have looked like it to you and 
 her and to all who saw me. 
 
 " But you will understand it now and per- 
 haps have some charity for me." 
 
 " We had then, Horace," she said, " we 
 were sure it was some secret grief that made 
 you so unlike your former self. Yes, I will 
 write to Aunt Wealthy. May I tell your story 
 to Mildred also ?" 
 
 " Not now, please. When I am gone she 
 may hear it." 
 
 " Excuse another question. Do you know 
 any tiling of your little one's looks ?" 
 
 " I have heard nothing; but if she at all re 
 sembles her mother, she must be very pretty." 
 
 "And you have never even asked! O 
 Horace!" 
 
 "I'm afraid you think me very heartless," 
 he said, coloring. " But you must make some 
 allowance for my being a man. Women, I 
 think, feel more interest in such things than we 
 ol the sterner sex do." 
 
 " Then I think my husband must be an e*- 
 11*
<page 257>

 
 250 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 oeptional man, for he loves his children verj 
 dearly, and takes great pride in their beauty 
 and intelligence." 
 
 " I daresay ; it might have been the same 
 with me under happier circumstances," he an- 
 swered in a bitter tone. 
 
 Little feet came pitpatting through the hail, 
 little voices were asking for mother. 
 
 Mr. Dinsmore opened the door and ad- 
 mitted the inseparable three. 
 
 " Mother, I'm cold," said Fan shivering, 
 and her teeth chattering as she spoke. 
 
 " Cold, darling ? Come here." 
 
 " She's got a chill," remarked Cyril sagely. 
 " I'm as warm as toast. It's real hot in the sun 
 where we've been playing." 
 
 * I'm afraid she has ; her nails are quite 
 blue," Mrs. Keith said, taking one small hand 
 in hers. " Come, dear ; mother will put you to 
 bed and cover you up nice and warm, and give 
 you something hot to drink." 
 
 "Me too, mother," said Don, creeping to 
 her side and laying his head on her shoul- 
 ler, " I'm so tired and my head aches so 
 bad." 
 
 His cheeks were flushed, his hands hot and 
 dry. 
 
 " You, too, mother's little man ?" she ez-
<page 258>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 251 
 
 claimed. " Mother is so sorry for you ooth. 
 Have you been cold, Don ?" 
 
 " Yes, ma'am, and it creeps down my back 
 now." 
 
 " Take care of Annis, Cyril," said Mrs 
 Keith, and excusing herself to her cousin, she 
 led the sick ones away. 
 
 Coming back after some little time, " 
 found Ada down, too," she sighed. " She had 
 crept away by herself, without a word to any 
 one poor, dear child ! ' not wanting to trouble 
 mother,' and there she lay shaking till the very 
 bed shook under her." 
 
 " It's dreadful 1" cried Mr. Dinsmore, 
 " positively dreadful, Marcia ! How can yon 
 stand it 1 I believe there has hardly been a 
 week since I came when you were all well." 
 
 " Ah, that's because there are so many of 
 us!'' she answered, laughing, though tears 
 sprang to her eyes. 
 
 " Why do you stay here 1 I'd pack up every- 
 thing and be off instanter." 
 
 " Necessity knows no law," she said 
 *' Cyril, son, can you go down to the spring and 
 get some fresh water for the sick ones ?" 
 
 " Yes, ma'am ; I'll take the biggest bucket ; 
 cause folks always want to drink so much water 
 Then the chill's on 'em."
<page 259>

 
 $52 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 ( Cyril knows that by experience," hi 
 mother remarked as the boy left the room. 
 
 " Why do you speak of staying here as a 
 necessity, Marcia ?" asked her cousin. " You 
 had as large a fortune from your mother as 1 
 from mine." 
 
 "Riches take wings, Horace, and a largo 
 family and unfortunate investments supplied 
 them to mine." 
 
 She spoke cheerfully, jestingly, as though it 
 were but occasion for mirth, but his tone was 
 fall of concern as he answered, 
 
 " Indeed I never knew that. It is a thou- 
 sand pities! I wonder you can be so content 
 and light-hearted as you seem." 
 
 " Ah, I have so much left ! All my chief est 
 treasures, husband, children, many great and 
 precious promises for both this life and the 
 next." 
 
 " Ah, but if you stay here, how long are you 
 likely to keep husband and children? not to 
 speak of the danger to your own life and 
 health." 
 
 "Sickness and death find entrance every, 
 where in this sad world," she said ; her voice 
 trembling slightly, " and in all places we are 
 under the same loving care. It seems our duty 
 to stay here, and the path of duty is the safest
<page 260>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 253 
 
 It is thought that in a few years this will be- 
 come a healthy country.'* 
 
 " I hope so, indeed, for yonr sake, but it is a 
 hard one for you in other ways. I am net BO 
 unobservant as not to have discovered that you 
 do a great deal of your own work. And I don't 
 like that it should be so, Marcia." 
 
 "You are very kind," she answeied, smiling 
 up orlghtly into his face as he stood looking 
 down upon her with a vexed and anxious ex- 
 pression, " It is very nice to have you care so 
 much for me, Horace." 
 
 " There's nobody in the world I care more 
 for, Marcia," he said, " and going over some of 
 our late talk, in my mind, I have thought there 
 is nobody to whom I should so much like to 
 commit the care and training of my child. I 
 mean, of course, if your hands were not already 
 full and more than full with your own." 
 
 "They are not so full that I would not 
 gladly do a mother's part by her," she answered 
 with emotion, " were it not for the danger of 
 bringing her to this climate." 
 
 " Yes, that is the difficulty. It would nevei 
 Jo, so miasmatic and so cold and bleak during 
 * great part of the year; especially for one 
 born so far south. But I thank you, cousin &tt 
 the samo "
<page 261>

 
 S54 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " "We have not much sickness here except 
 igue," she remarked presently, " but there are 
 several varieties of that chills and fever occur- 
 ring at regular intervals generally every other 
 day at about the same hour ; dumb ague, shak- 
 ing ague, and sinking or congestive chills; which, 
 last are the only very alarming kind, sometimes 
 proving fatal in a few hours." 
 
 " Indeed ! you almost frighten me away," 
 he said half seriously, half in jest. " That is 
 not a very common form, I hope ?" 
 
 " !No, rather rare." 
 
 " Don't you send for the doctor ?" 
 
 " Not often now ; we did at first, but it is 
 so frequent a visitor that we have learned to 
 manage it ourselves." 
 
 The sickly season had fairly set in, and more 
 afraid of it than he liked to acknowledge, Mr. 
 Dinsmore hastened his departure, leaving for 
 the East by the next stage.
<page 262>

 
 I marked the Spring as she pass'd along, 
 
 With her eye of light and her lip of song ; 
 
 While she stole in peace o'er the green earth's breast, 
 
 While the streams sprang out from their icy rest. 
 
 The buds bent low to the breeze's sigh, 
 
 And their breath went forth in the scented sky; 
 
 When the fields look'd fresh in their sweet repose, 
 
 And the young dews slept on the new-born rose." 
 
 WILLIS GAYLORD CIABZ. 
 
 " WELL, I'm both glad and sorry Horace is 
 gone," Mrs. Keith remarked with a smile, & 
 sigh and a dewy look about her eyes, as the 
 stage passed out of sight. " I'm fond of the 
 lad, but was troubled lest the ague should get 
 hold of him. Besides, the dearest of guests ie 
 something of a burden with sickness in the 
 house and a scarcity of help." 
 
 " Tes, that is very true, mother," Mildred 
 answered, " and so thoroughly do I realize it 
 that I am wholly and heartily glad he's gone ; 
 albeit 1 liked him much better this time than I 
 did before." 
 
 Celestia Ann had left months ago, and they
<page 263>

 
 256 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 had had very indifferent help during Mr. Dins. 
 more's visit, though fortunately such as they 
 could keep away from the table when their 
 guest was present at it. 
 
 Mildred went on now to express her satis- 
 faction that such had been the case, adding, 
 " "What would he have done if Miss Hunsinger 
 had been here, and in her usual fashion asserted 
 her right to show that she felt herself as good 
 as he or anybody else ?" 
 
 "He'd have annihilated her with a look," 
 laughed Rupert. 
 
 " He would have acted like the perfect gen- 
 tleman he is," said Mrs. Keith, " but it would 
 have been exceedingly mortifying to me to have 
 him so insulted at my table ; for as he has been 
 brought up, he could not avoid feeling it an 
 insult to be put on a social equality with one so 
 rude and vulgar." 
 
 " The house feels lonely," said Zillah, "it 
 seems 'most as if Aunt Wealthy had just gone 
 away." 
 
 " We'll get our sewing and a book," said 
 her mother, " Come all into the sitting-room. 
 Rupert may be the reader this time. 
 
 " Mildred, you and I will have to be rerj 
 busy now with the fall sewing." 
 
 " Yes mother dear ; it's a blessing to have
<page 264>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 257 
 
 plenty of employment. But do you think I 
 shall need to give up my studies for a time ?" 
 
 " No, daughter, I hope not. I want you to 
 go on with them ; Mr. Lord says you are doing 
 so nicely. Your cousin, too, told me be 
 thought you were getting a better more thor- 
 ough education with him, than you would be 
 likely to in any school for girls that he knows 
 of." " 
 
 Mildred's eyes sparkled, and cousin Horace 
 took a warmer place in her affections than he 
 had held before. It was well, for it needed all 
 that to keep her from disliking him for his in- 
 difference toward his motherless little one, 
 when, a few days later, she heard his story from 
 her mother's lips. 
 
 They had a very busy fall and winter, miss- 
 ing sorely Miss Stanhope's loved companion- 
 ship and her help in the family sewing, the 
 putting up of fruit the pickling and preserv- 
 ing, indeed in every department of household 
 work ; and in nothing more than in the care 
 of the sick. 
 
 Letters came from her at rare intervals for 
 mails were infrequent in those days and post- 
 age was very high were read and re-read, then 
 put carefully by to be enjoyed again when time 
 an i opportunity could be found for another pe-
<page 265>

 
 258 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 meal. They were not the brief statements ol 
 facts that letters of the present day generally 
 are, but long chatty epistles, giving in pleasing 
 detail, her own doings and those of old friendi 
 and acquaintances, and all that had happened 
 in Lansdale since they left ; telling of her pets, 
 of the books she read and what she thought of 
 them. 
 
 Then there were kind inquiries, conjectures 
 as to what they were doing and thinking; 
 answers to their questions, and words of coun- 
 sel and of tender sympathy in their joys and 
 sorrows. 
 
 Many a langh did they give their readers, 
 and many a tear was dropped upon their pages 
 They so loved the dear old lady and couid 
 almost hear the sweet tones of her voice as they 
 read or repeated to each other, her quaint say 
 ings. 
 
 Fall and winter passed, bringing with them 
 no marked changes in the family, but very 
 much the same round of work, study and diver- 
 sion as in the former year. 
 
 The children grew, mentally and physically, 
 now mother, and now sister Mildred, " teach- 
 ing the young ideas how to shoot ;" for they 
 could not endure the thought of resigning the 
 precious darlings to the tender mercies of Da-
<page 266>

 
 MILDRED KEITH 259 
 
 maiis Drybread, whose school was still the only 
 one in town. 
 
 The old intimacy was kept up in just the 
 old way among the coterie of six, and the gos- 
 sips vainly puzzled their brains with the ques- 
 tion which girl was the admired and admirer of 
 which young man. 
 
 Mildred was happily freed from the visits 
 oi Ransquattle of which Lu Grange had be- 
 come the impatient and disgusted recipient 
 and saw little of Gotobed Lightcap, who, upon 
 one excuse, or another, absented himself from 
 most of the merry-makings of the young people 
 
 Indeed there had been scarcely any inter- 
 course between the two families since the re- 
 moval of the Keiths from the immediate 
 neighborhood of the Lightcaps ; for there was 
 no similarity of taste, no common bond of in- 
 terest to draw them together ; nothing in truth, 
 save a kind and friendly feeling toward each 
 other ; and as regarded Rhoda Jane, even this 
 was lacking. 
 
 She had never yet forgiven Mildred's rejec- 
 tion of her brother and almost hated her for it, 
 though she knew naught of her added offense 
 in the matter of the criticism on his letter, 
 That was a secret which Gotobed kopt faith 
 fnllv locked iir his own breast.
<page 267>

 
 260 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 The spring opened early for that climate ; 
 with warm rains that brought vegetation for- 
 ward rapidly. 
 
 The Keith children revelled in oat door 
 work and play ; each of the younger ones had a 
 tittle garden to dig and plant as he or she 
 pleased, and a pet hen or two in the chicken 
 yard, and there was much good-natured rivalry 
 as to who should have the earliest vegetables, 
 the greatest variety of flowers, the largest broods 
 of young chicks, or the most newly laid eggs tc 
 present to father and mother, or the invalid of 
 the hour ; for the old enemy ague still vis- 
 ited them occasionally ; now one, now another, 
 or it might be several at once, succumbing to 
 its attacks. 
 
 However, the lion's share of both gardening 
 and poultry-raising fell to Rupert ; who busied 
 himself out of study hours, with these and many 
 little odd jobs of repairing and adorning such 
 as mending fences, putting up trellises, train- 
 ing vines and trimming shrubbery and trees. 
 
 The mother and Mildred found so much to 
 dc within doors, that some oversight and direc- 
 tion of these younger workers, and the partial 
 care of a few flower-beds near the house, were 
 'ill they could undertake outside. 
 
 The} had been without a domestic for some
<page 268>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 26 1 
 
 weeks, had passed through the trying ordeal of 
 the regular spring house-cleaning with only 
 Mrs. Rood's assistance, when one pleasant May 
 morning, while dishing up breakfast, their hearts 
 were gladdened by the sight of the sinewy form 
 and energetic countenance of Celestia Ann 
 Hunsinger as she stepped in at the kitchen door 
 with a characteristic salutation. 
 
 " How d'ye, Mis' Keith ? You don't want 
 no help round here, do ye ?" 
 
 " We want just the sort of help we'll be sure 
 of if you'll take off your bonnet and stay," Mrs. 
 Keith answered, giving her a hearty grip of the 
 hand. 
 
 " Then that's what I'll do and no mistake," 
 returned the girl, setting down a bundle on a 
 chair, with the remark, " You see I've brought 
 some o' my duds along," pulling off her sun bon- 
 net and hanging it on a nail. " Here, Miss 
 Mildred, let me smash them 'taters." 
 
 " So Mis' Keith, you've been buildin' since 
 I was here last." 
 
 " Yes ; a new kitchen ; so we could take the 
 old for a dining-room and be less crowded/* 
 
 " It's awful nice ; I always did like a {rood 
 bigkitching; room to turn round and teap 
 things straight." 
 
 " It's going to be nicer still, Celestia Ann,
<page 269>

 
 262 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 said Kupert who had just come in from his 
 work in the garden, and was washing his hands 
 preparatory to taking a seat at the table, " it 
 wants a coat of paint on the outside and I'm 
 going to put it on myself, to-day." 
 
 " Well, I never 1" she ejaculated, " do ye 
 think you're up to that ?'' 
 
 "Of course I do; and so, I suppose, do 
 lather and mother ; or they wouldn't have con- 
 sented to let me try." 
 
 " Well, there's nothin' like tryin' ; as I've 
 found out in my own experience," returned Miss 
 Hunsinger, using her potato masher vigorously, 
 "and I allers enjoy meetin' with folks that's 
 willin' fur it. But do you know, Mis' Keith, 
 'pears to me lite ' I can't ' comes the easiest to 
 most human critters' tongues of any two words 
 in the American language; and with more'ii 
 half on 'em they're lyin' words ; yes, there's 
 more lies told in them two words than in any 
 other ten. So there !" as she laid down hei 
 masher to stir in the milk, butter and salt. 
 
 " I'm afraid there is only too much truth in 
 your remark," said Mrs. Keith, " but certainly 
 ao one can accuse you of a fondness for that 
 favorite phrase of the indolent and ease-loving.' 
 
 " Thank yon, Mis' Keith. I've lots of faults 
 and failin's as well's the rest o' the human fam-
<page 270>

 
 MILDRED KEiTH. 203 
 
 tly,but I'm certain sure there ain't no lazj **& 
 in my body. 
 
 " Here these taters is ready to set on th 
 table, and I see you've got your steak and bit 
 cuits dished up. But I hain't inquired afte 
 the fam'ly. Anybody got the agur ?" 
 
 " No, I believe we are all well this morning 
 thanks to a kind Providence. Rupert, call 
 your father and the rest to breakfast." 
 
 No frowns greeted Celestia Ann as she. with 
 her accustomed nonchalance, took her place 
 with the others. Everybody was glad to see 
 her, because her arrival meant comparative rest 
 for mother and Mildred, and more time to be 
 devoted by them to the loving care and enter- 
 tainment of father and the younger children. 
 
 After breakfast, family worship. Then Mr. 
 Keith went to his office and the others scattered 
 to their work or play. Sunbonnets and hats 
 \rere in request among the little ones ; for 
 mother had given permission to go out if they 
 would be careful to keep on the gravel walks 
 till the dew was off the grass. 
 
 Sister Mildred gave kind assistance, and 
 away they ran, while she and Zillah and Ada, 
 old enough now to begin to be useful about the 
 house, made beds, dusted and set things to 
 rights in sleeping and dwelling rooms, and
<page 271>

 
 864 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Rupert donned a suit of overalls and went tc 
 his chosen task. 
 
 Celestia Ann needed but little direction or 
 oversight, and in half an hour Mrs. Keith re- 
 paired to the sitting-room. 
 
 What a pleasant place it seemed as she 
 came in 1 fresh and bright from its recent 
 cleaning, neat as a new pin, the open windows 
 looking out upon the grassy side yard, with its 
 shrubbery and trees clothed in vivid green, and 
 giving a charming view of the clear waters of 
 the swiftly flowing river sparkling in the sun- 
 light. 
 
 " Isn't it a lovely morning, mother ?" cried 
 Mildred, whose graceful figure was flitting 
 about here and there, putting a few finishing 
 touches to the adornments of the room. "1 
 think the sunshine was never brighter, the air 
 never sweeter. It is a luxury just to live ! 
 Hark to that robin's song and the sweet prat- 
 tling of the little voices you and I love so well \ 
 A.nd I feel as blithe and gay as a bird." 
 
 " Yes, dear child," said the mother, happy 
 tears springing to her eyes, " Oh, how great is 
 Ilis goodness to us unworthy creatures! so 
 much of mercy and blessing here and the cer 
 tainty of endless joy and bliss beyond ! Life 
 has its dark and dreary days, but after all ther
<page 272>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 265 
 
 is more of brightness, to those who look foi 
 it, than of gloom." 
 
 " I believe that is true, mother," responded 
 Mildred, " though when the dark and dreary 
 days are upon us, it is sometimes very difficult 
 to hold fast to one's faith. 
 
 "I do love this time of year," she added, 
 leaning from the window to watch the ferry- 
 boat slowly crossing, 
 
 ' Sweet spring, full of sweet days and roses, 
 A. \wx where sweets compacted lie.' " 
 
 " Oome, xet ^s go out ; I think we may 
 spare an hour to the garden this morning," 
 Mrs. Keith said gayly, leading the way. 
 " What a blessing, among others, it is to have 
 a good reliable girl in the kitchen !" 
 
 " Yes," laughed Mildred, " I could almost 
 have hugged Celestia Ann ; I was so glad tc 
 see her. What do you suppose brought her 
 just at this time, mother ?" 
 
 " Need of money for summer finery, I pre- 
 sume. See, our morning glories are coming 
 up nicely." 
 
 " Mother, mother, and Milly," cried Fan 
 running to them in an ecstasy of delight, " my 
 speckled hen has thirteen .ittle chicks, the 
 prettiest bits of fuzzy things you ever saw 
 Do come and lookl" 
 lit
<page 273>

 
 266 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 She turned and Bped back again toward the 
 chicken yard, mother and sister following. 
 
 The ether three little ones were there watch 
 ing " Speckle " and her brood with intense in- 
 terest. 
 
 " See ! see ! mamma, Milly ! see ! see !' 
 cried Baby Annis in aflutter of delight, holding 
 her little skirts close to her chubby legs, as the 
 " bits of fuzzy things" ran hither and thither 
 about her feet, " pitty 'ittle chickies, dust turn 
 out of eggs." 
 
 " Yes, dears, they are very pretty," Mrs. 
 Keith said ; " but they are very tender little 
 things ; so be careful not to hurt them. No, 
 Cyril, don't pick them up, and be sure you 
 don't step on them. Ton may go to the house 
 for some bread crumbs, Fan, and you and Annis 
 may feed them." 
 
 This permission gave great pleasure, and 
 Fan's small feet went skipping and dancing 
 through the garden in the dir tion of the 
 kitchen door . 
 
 Then mother must look at Annis s lieu sit- 
 ting on her nest, and notice how the older 
 broods, belonging to Cyril and Don, were 
 growing in size and strength ; Zillah's and 
 Ada's also ; and hear how many eggs the other 
 nests had furnished this morning.
<page 274>

 
 MILDRED KEiTH. 267 
 
 After that the gardens were submitted to 
 her inspection, Mildred still bearing her com- 
 pany, both making suggestions and giving as- 
 sistance, 
 
 And so a full hour had slipped by before 
 they returned to the house, and Kupert, they , 
 found, had made great progress with his work. 
 
 " I've painted the whole end, mother ; do 
 you see ?" he called to her ; " and now I'm be- 
 ginning this side. I think I'll have the whole 
 job done to-day." 
 
 " You have been very industrious," she said, 
 " but don't make haste so fast that it will not be 
 done well." 
 
 " Oh, no, ma'am, I don't intend to." 
 
 He was at the top of his ladder and near 
 the roof of the new one-story addition to their 
 house. 
 
 " Take care, my son," said Mrs. Keith ; " it 
 seems to me your ladder doesn't stand very 
 securely. Is there no danger of its slipping ?" 
 
 " Never a bit, mother," laughed the boy 
 " why what should make it slip ?" 
 
 She and Mildred turned and walked on to- 
 ward the front of the house, had just set foot 
 npoa the porch there, when a shout from Ru- 
 pert startled them and made them pause and 
 look back at him.
<page 275>

 
 268 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 They saw the ladder slip, slip tnen slide 
 rapidly to the ground, while with a cry of alarm 
 they rushed toward him. 
 
 But they were much too far off to reach 
 him in time to be of the least assistance. Down 
 he came to the ground, falling with considera- 
 ble impetus and alighting upon his feet, his 
 brush in one hand, his paint pot in the other, 
 striking with a force that sent the paint all 
 over his person. 
 
 He reeled and dropped. 
 
 " Are you hurt ? oh, my boy, are you much 
 hurt?" asked his mother tremulously, as she 
 hurried to him, looking very pale and fright- 
 ened. 
 
 "My clothes have got the worst of it, I be- 
 lieve, mother/' he said, laughing and stagger- 
 ing to his feet. " I'm afraid they've robbed 
 the house of half its new coat." 
 
 The others came running from chicken-yard 
 and garden ; Celestia Ann poked her head out 
 of the kitchen window, and a peal of .aughter 
 met him from all sides. 
 
 " I dare say I cut quite a comical figure," 
 he said, taking it in good part, " but since I've 
 broken no bones, I w >uldn't care a red cent, if 
 it wasn't for the loss of the paint and the dam- 
 age to my illegant attire.
<page 276>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. '<J69 
 
 " ' what a fall was there, my coautry- 
 men.' " 
 
 " Since you are nnhurt, no matter for the 
 33othes; even if they were an elegant suit," 
 sa ? d his mother, with a sigh of relief. 
 
 " But half the paint's gone, mother or at 
 least put upon my person where it's worse than 
 useless," cried the lad, surveying himself with 
 an expression so comically lugubrious that there 
 was a fresh explosion of mirth. 
 
 " Never mind ; it will not cost a great deal 
 to replace it," said Mrs. Keith. " But I think 
 the job may wait now till we can get a regular 
 house-painter to finish it up." 
 
 " What ! would you have me give up so 
 easily, mother, and own myself beaten ? I don't 
 like to do it. Please let me try again, and I'D 
 place the ladder more carefully." 
 
 " I don't know ; we'll ask your father first. 
 There's no special haste and how wouid you 
 all like to go with me for a walk ? a nice long 
 stroll down to the bridge, and over the river, 
 to look for wild flowers." 
 
 The proposal was greeted with loud accla 
 nations and clapping of hands. " Oh, de- 
 lightful 1" " Oh goodie ! goodie !" " May we, 
 mother ? r 
 
 " Yes ; we've all been working hard thi
<page 277>

 
 4 270 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 long time, and 1 think really deserve a holiday 
 Rupert, make yourself decent and we'll set out 
 at once, taking a hmch with us, so that we need 
 not hurry home." 
 
 "Tan I do, mamma ? tan Annis do?" asked 
 the baby girl eagerly, the rosy face all aglow 
 with delight. 
 
 " Yes, indeed, mother's darling ; you shall 
 go in your little coach ; because your dear little 
 feet couldn't travel fast enough to keep up with 
 the rest, and would get so tired." 
 
 " Do we need to be dressed up, mother ?" 
 asked Fan, " me and Don and all the children ?" 
 
 "No, dear; we don't go through town and 
 are dressed quite enough for the woods." 
 
 They were soon on the way, strolling lei 
 surely along, drinking in with keen enjoyment 
 the sweet sights and sounds. 
 
 The sky ovei their heads was of a dark 
 celestial blue with here and there a floating 
 clond of snowy whiteness, whose shadow flitted 
 over the landscape, gi"ing to it a charming 
 variety of light and shade. 
 
 Their road lay along the bank of the rivei 
 and its soft murmur mingled with the hum of 
 insects and the song of birds. The grass be- 
 neath their feet was emerald green thickly 
 studded with wild flowers of every hue, and the
<page 278>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 271 
 
 groves of saplings through which they passed 
 were fast donning their summer robes. 
 
 The bridge was a rough wooden structure 
 half a mile below the town ; quite out of dan- 
 ger of crowding the houses of the citizens or 
 doing much injury to the custom of the ferry. 
 
 The walk was a longer one than the younger 
 children were accustomed to take, but there 
 was no occasion for haste they were in search 
 of rest and pleasure, and when little feet grew 
 weary, mother let them stop and amuse them- 
 selves with making wreaths and bouquets of 
 the flowers they had gathered, or by throwing 
 stones into the river, till they were ready to 
 go on again. 
 
 They did not go far beyond the bridge ; 
 only climbed the bank, on the other side 
 picked a few flowers there, ai d were ready to 
 return.
<page 279>

 
 ** Yon ore meek and humble mouth'd ; 
 Yon sign your place and calling, in full scorning, 
 With meekness and humility ; but your heart 
 Is cramm'd with arroganoy, spleen, and pride." 
 
 SHAKS. HKTBT VHIra 
 
 "On, what's that? what's that?" cried B 
 chorus of young voices, as Mrs. Keith and her 
 little troop, returning from their morning stroll, 
 stepped into the front porch at home. 
 
 "What indeed!" echoed the mother, as 
 much surprised as any one of the others. " It 
 looks very like a box of goods ; but where could 
 it come from ?" 
 
 " Aunt Wealthy," suggested Mildred, exam- 
 ining it with a curious eye. 
 
 " Ah, so you have come back at last, eh f ' 
 said Mr. Keith coming out with a smiling face. 
 " That's been waiting for you for over an hour," 
 consulting his watch. " Come let's have din 
 nor and then we'll see what's inside." 
 
 *< Is it ready ?" asked Mrs. Keith, taking ofl 
 ier bonnet.
<page 280>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 273 
 
 " Yes ; barely time for the washing of smail 
 hands and faces," he said, picking up Annis and 
 racing off to the nursery with her ; for so they 
 called the room where the little ones slept and 
 were dressed and undressed, though but a small 
 part of the day was ordinarily spent there. 
 
 There was no lingering over the dinner 
 table, though the meal was a good one, and the 
 children's appetites had been sufficiently keen 
 until they saw the box. 
 
 They ate and drank with dispatch, taking 
 time for but little talk beyond a few conjectures 
 as to its probable contents. 
 
 Father and mother certainly shared their 
 curiosity and eagerness to some extent, and did 
 not keep them waiting long. 
 
 A few minutes' work with the hatchet and 
 the lid was off. 
 
 " Just newspapers !" cried Don, in a tone of 
 bitter disappointment. 
 
 " Wait a bit, laddie," laughed Kupert. 
 
 " Something else under, I guess," said Cyril, 
 while father, mother and Mildred made haste to 
 lift and lay aside the papers for further perusal, 
 for newspapers were too rare in those days tc 
 be despised, even though some weeks old. 
 
 " Books 1 oh delightful !" 
 
 " How good and kind in her!" 
 12*
<page 281>

 
 a 14 MIL JJ BED KEITH. 
 
 " Now we'll have a feast !" exclaimed one 
 nd another in varying tones of gladness. 
 
 "What are they ? let us see," said Mr. Keith 
 proceeding to lift them out one or two at a time 
 and with a glance at the titles on the backs, 
 handing them to wife, son or daughter. 
 
 "Cooper's Naval History of the United 
 States ! There, that will particularly interest 
 you, Rupert. 
 
 '* And here are his novels, which mother and 
 Mildred will enjoy. Scott's works also : those 
 for older folks and his ' Tales of a Grandfather' 
 for the children. Two more little books 
 * Anna Ross,' and Ruth Lee/ " 
 
 " Oh, they look pretty 1" cried Zillah and 
 Ada, peeping into these last. 
 
 " ' Dunallan' for me 1 oh how glad I am !" 
 exclaimed Mildred the next instant. 
 
 " Here's a bundle," said Mr. Keith, hand 
 ing it out. 
 
 <: Remnants, I presume," his wife said laugh- 
 ingly, and opening it found her surmise correct. 
 
 Groceries, candies and toys for the children, 
 and some few other miscellaneous articles filled 
 tip the rest of this most welcome box. 
 
 "Dear old auntie! She shouldn't have 
 wasted so much of her money on us," Airs. 
 Keith said with tears in her eyes, as she glanced
<page 282>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 275 
 
 over a note pinned to a dress pattern for her- 
 self. " But she says she has enjoyed it intensely, 
 and I know that is so ; for giving, especially to 
 us, is her greatest delight." 
 
 "Yes, there never was a more generou* 
 soul," assented her husband. 
 
 " Ah, if we could only do something for her 
 in return 1" exclaimed Mildred. 
 
 "Yes, indeed! what a feast she has pro- 
 vided us!" cried Eupert, taking a peep here 
 and there into the history. " Mother, can't we 
 begin on them this afternoon 2" 
 
 "I'm not ready for Mr. Lord," objected 
 Mildred, " and in an hour it will be time to go 
 to him." 
 
 That reminded the lad that he, too,had a lesson 
 to prepare, and he left the room to attend to it. 
 
 "Wife," said Mr. Keith, "do you know 
 that little Mary Chetwood is seriously id?" 
 
 " No, I did not, I'll put on my bonnet and 
 go over there at once." 
 
 " Mother," said Mildred, " I've been think 
 ing it would be nice to lend one of these books 
 to Effie Prescott. I do not know her at all in- 
 timately, but Claudina says she is very intelli- 
 gent and fond of reading, and in such pool 
 health that she is often too miserably weak and 
 ill to do anything but read."
<page 283>

 
 276 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " Certainly ! she must have the reading oi 
 every book in the house, if she wishes, and will 
 mt abuse them." 
 
 " Claudina says she is always very careful oi 
 those she lends her, and very glad to get them. 
 She's a lovely Christian, too, and very patient 
 under her trials." 
 
 " Yes ; I have been pleased with the little I 
 have seen of her. I believe I owe Mrs. Pres- 
 cott a call ; so I shall take their house on my 
 way to the squire's and carry a book with me." 
 
 Mrs. Keith found Mrs. Prescott out, the in 
 valid girl lying back in a large rocking chair, 
 and Damaris Drybread seated, in her accus- 
 tomed bolt upright fashion, directly opposite. 
 
 At sight of Mrs. Keith, Effie started up in 
 nervous haste and trepidation, to offer her 
 hand and then a chair. 
 
 " Never mind, dear child, I will help my- 
 self," said the lady, pressing the trembling 
 hand tenderly in hers. " How are you to-day ?" 
 
 " About as usual, thank you ; which i8 
 neither very sick nor very well," the girl an- 
 swered with a faint smile, sinking back again, 
 breathing short and hard. 
 
 " Now don't talk so ; you look very well," 
 remarked Miss Drybread in a cold, hard tone. 
 " Just make up your mind that there's nothing
<page 284>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 277 
 
 much the matter, and you're not going to give 
 up to the hypo, and ten to one it won't be long 
 till you find yourself well enough." 
 
 Tears sprang to Effie's eyes, for she was 
 Doth nervous and sensitive to the last degree. 
 
 " I know I look well," she said. " I'm not 
 thin, and I have a good color ; but it's often 
 brightest when I feel the worst. And I've 
 tried to believe my sickness was all imagina- 
 tion, but I can't ; it's too real." 
 
 " No, Effie, you do not look well," said Mrs. 
 Keith ; " that brilliant bloom hardly belongs 
 to health, and your eyes are heavy, your coun 
 tenance is distressed." 
 
 "Of course she'll wear a distressed counte- 
 nance as long as she imagines she's sick," ob- 
 served the schoolrna'am severely. " And you, 
 Mrs. Keith, are only making matters worse by 
 talking in that way." 
 
 " Not so," said the sick girl, " such kind 
 sympathy does me good. Oh, thank you a 
 thousand times !" as Mrs. Keith put " Dunallan" 
 into her hands. "I shall enjoy it so much, 
 and will be very careful of it, and return it 
 foon. 1 read it years ago and liked it ex- 
 ceedingly, and it will be new to me now 
 Grace Kennedy is such a sweet writer ; what a 
 pity she died so early I"
<page 285>

 
 278 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " A nove. 1" sniffed Damans. " If you are 
 really sick you oughtn't to read anything but 
 the Bible." 
 
 " The teachings of this book are so fully in 
 accord with those of the Scriptures, that I can 
 cot think it will hurt her," said Mrs. Keith. 
 
 " T .ove the Bible," said Effie, "I never 
 could do without it; its words often come to 
 me when I am sad and suffering and are 
 * sweeter than honey and the honeycomb ,' but 
 reading other good books seems like talking 
 with a Christian friend, and refreshes me in the 
 same way." 
 
 At this moment Mrs. Prescott came in and 
 greeting the two callers with a pleasant " Good 
 afternoon," sat down to chat with them. 
 
 The talk presently turned upon their gar- 
 dens, and Mrs. Prescott invited the visitors to 
 vralk out and look at hers. 
 
 Mrs. Keith accepted the invitation, but 
 Miss Drybread said she would just sit with 
 Effie till they came back. 
 
 ' Aren't you teaching now, Miss Damans I" 
 asked tho girl, as the others left the room. 
 
 "No, I've closed my school for a couple of 
 Weeks to do my spring sewing." 
 
 " It was kind in you to take time to call to 
 see me when you are always so busy."
<page 286>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 279 
 
 " I tiy to attend to every duty," retnrned 
 the schoolma'ara, witli a sanctimonious air " and 
 I felt that I had a duty to perform here I've 
 been thinking a good deal about you, Effie ; 
 trying to find out why your afflictions are sent ; 
 and I've concluded that it's as a punishment 
 for your sins, and that when you repent and 
 reform, your health will be better. 
 
 " You know Christians (and I really hope 
 you're one ; I know you belong to the church) 
 won't have any punishment in the other world ; 
 BO they have to take it in this, and so, as I 
 said, I've been considering about you, and I 
 think if you thought better of Brother Smith 
 and enjoyed his sermons and prayers and talks 
 in the meetin's, 'twould be better for you. 
 
 " He's a good Christian and so you'd ought 
 to like what he says, and be his friend with 
 other folks that isn't inclined to listen to him." 
 
 " He may be a Christian ; I hope he is," 
 returned Effie, " though it is very difficult for 
 me to realize that a man has much true love to 
 Christ and for souls, when his tone and man- 
 ner are utterly indifferent and business like (or 
 perhaps that isn't quite the right word; for 
 men generally show some interest in their busi- 
 ness). 
 
 *' Besidee it requires other things in addition
<page 287>

 
 280 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 to conversion to fit a man for teaching; he 
 tnus* have knowledge and the ability to im- 
 part it. 
 
 "I have nothing against Mr. Smith person- 
 ally, bnt he does not instruct me, does not give 
 me any food for thought, or help me on my way 
 to heaven. So I felt it my duty to object to hav- 
 ing him become my pastor. But I haven't been 
 going about slandering him, and don't know 
 why you come and talk to me in this way. 
 
 "It strikes me, too, that you are the 'last 
 person to do it as I have heard you say far 
 harder things of other ministers than ever I've 
 said of him." 
 
 An angry flush rose in the sallow cheek of 
 the spinster at that. 
 
 " I've tried to do my duty always," she 
 said, bridling. " I've never indulged in any 
 vanities of dress ; but that's been one of your 
 sins, Effie Prescott ; bows and even flowers and 
 feathers on your bonnets, and knots of bright 
 ribbon at your throat and in your hair. It'a 
 sinful and you may depend you'll be afflicted 
 till you'll give up and be consistent in all 
 things." 
 
 " I know better than you can tell me, that 
 I deserve all I suffer and a great deal more," 
 said the girl humbly, tears gathering in hei
<page 288>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 281 
 
 eyes ; " but for all that I don't believe you are 
 right. You are a Job's comforter, and God re- 
 proved those men for talking so to him. 
 
 " And don't you remember what Jesus said 
 ahout trying to take the mote out of your 
 brother's eye while there is a beam in your own ?" 
 
 " I see it s time for me to go," said Dama- 
 ns, rising. 
 
 She .rtood a moment looking at Effio, her 
 lips compressed, her face white and her eyes 
 ablaze with rage. 
 
 " The.ro.' s no Christian spirit about you/' she 
 hissed, "you don't like faithful dealing; you 
 don't want to be told of your sins. Very well, 
 Miss, I wash my hands of you ; I shake off the 
 dust of my feet against you." 
 
 And with arms folded on her breast and 
 head erect, she stalked out of the house, leaving 
 the invalid girl quivering from head to foot 
 with nervous excitement and distress, crying 
 and laughing hysterically. 
 
 " Oh dear ! oh dear !" she sighed to herself. 
 "I haven't behaved in a Christian manner; I 
 was angry at what she said." 
 
 Mrs. Prescott and Mrs. Keith were strolling 
 in from the garden, chatting pleasantly of theii 
 domestic affairs, when an infant's screams were 
 heard coming from a back room.
<page 289>

 
 282 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 * There, my baby is awake and calling foj 
 his mother," said Mrs. Prescott. " Please ex- 
 cuse me a minute. Just step into the parloi 
 again and talk with Effie." 
 
 Mrs. Keith complied and found Effie alone, 
 lying back in her chair, trembling, flushed and 
 tearful. 
 
 " My poor child ! are you suffering very 
 much?" she asked, bending over her and 
 smoothing her hair with a caressing motion. 
 
 "No, ma'am, I'm not worse only it waa 
 something that Damaris said ; and that I didn't 
 take it quite as I ought. 
 
 " Oh, Mrs. Keith, do you think God sends 
 sickness to punish us for our sins ? and that my 
 health is poor because I'm more wicked than 
 anybody who is well ?" 
 
 " Certainly not. I have excellent health as 
 a general thing, while many an eminent saint 
 has been a great sufferer. 
 
 "We know that sin brought disease and 
 death into the world and that God sometimes 
 sends afflictions as chastisements ; but to his own 
 people it is in love and for their growth in 
 grace. 
 
 " ' As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten *, 
 be zealous therefore and repent.' ' Whom the 
 Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every
<page 290>

 
 MILDRED KE1TB 283 
 
 on whom he receiveth. If ye endure chasten- 
 ing, God dealeth with you as with sons/ 
 
 " Remembering that, would you wish to 
 escape it t" 
 
 " Oh no, no ! But oh, it makes the burden sc 
 much heavier to think that it is because He is 
 angry with me !" 
 
 " It is because he loves you. Do not look at 
 it as punishment, but as discipline ; as the cut- 
 ting and carving which are necessary to bring 
 out the beautiful statue from the shapeless block 
 of marble, or to change the diamond in the 
 rough to the brilliant sparkling gem. 
 
 "As to the. idea that the Christian bears 
 any part of the penalty of his sins atoning for 
 them by his own suffering, or his works, or in 
 any other way, either in this life or the next, 
 it is totally unscriptural. * For Christ is the 
 end of the law for righteousness to every one 
 that believeth.' " 
 
 44 O, thank you, so much, so very much!' 
 she exclaimed, looking up gratefully. " What 
 wonderful love His was, and who would not be 
 willing to bear any suffering to be made like 
 unto Him ?" 
 
 " That is unquestionably a Christian spirit,' 
 said Mrs. Keith ; " none but those who have 
 felt the burden of sin and learned to hungei
<page 291>

 
 284 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 and thirst after righteousness know that ardent 
 desire for conformity to His image." 
 
 " You make my heart glad !" cried the girl. 
 " Damaris just told me there was no Christian 
 epirit about me ; and I'm often afraid there 
 isn't; yet I do love Jesus and desire His love 
 more than anything else. I want to do and 
 suffer all His holy will !" 
 
 Little Mary Chetwood, a sweet child of six, 
 was the only daughter except Claudina, and 
 coming after some half dozen boys, naturally 
 became, from the first, a great pet and darling, 
 made much of by parents, sister and brothers. 
 
 Tet she was not a spoiled child ; she had 
 been taught obedience, religiously trained, and 
 not indulged to her hurt. 
 
 Love and wise indulgence do no harm, but 
 quite the contrary ; while harshness, a dearth 
 of affection, and undue severity have ruined 
 many a one for time and eternity. 
 
 Mrs. Keith found the Chetwoods a dis- 
 tressed household ; for though the little girl had 
 been but two days ill, such was the violence of 
 the attack that it was already apparent that 
 there was small hope of recovery. 
 
 " This is kind," whispered Mrs. Chetwood, 
 pieasing her friend's hand, while tears coursed 
 down her cheeks. "The darling won't be
<page 292>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 285 
 
 tended by any body but mother, father or sis- 
 ter, but your very presence is a comfort." 
 
 "I should have been here sooner, but did 
 not know of her illness till this afternoon," 
 Mrs. Keith responded in the same subdued 
 key. " If I can be of any use, I will take 
 off my bonnet and stay ; it is perfectly con- 
 venient." 
 
 The offer was gratefully accepted, a note 
 dispatched to Mildred, entrusting the children 
 at home to her care till such time as her mother 
 could be of no more service at the squire's, and 
 Mrg. Keith's gentle ministries in the sick room 
 began. 
 
 Her quiet movements, her though tfulness, 
 qnick comprehension and fertility of resource, 
 made her invaluable at such a time. 
 
 The end came sooner than was expected; 
 day was just breaking when, with her head 
 on the bosom of her who gave her birth, the 
 little one gently breathed her last. 
 
 In all the trying scenes that followed, Mr 
 and Mrs. Keith and Mildred were most kind, 
 helpful and sympathizing, and the ties of Chris- 
 tian friendship were thus more closely drawn 
 than ever between the two families. 
 
 The bereaved family found their home 
 eadly desolated, but there was no murmuring
<page 293>

 
 S86 
 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 against the Hand that dealt the blow; the 
 language of their hearts was, " The Lord 
 gave, and the Lord hath taken away; 
 blessed be the name of the Lord."
<page 294>

 
 " Hail I independence, hail ! heaven's next beat gift, 
 To that of life, and an immortal soul." 
 
 THOUSOK. 
 
 " There is strength, 
 
 Deep bedded in our hearts, of which we reck 
 But little till the shafts of heaven have piero'd 
 Its fragile dwelling. Must not earth be rent 
 Before her gems are found t" 
 
 MBS. Huuim. 
 
 "BOOM!" 
 
 The loud voice of the cannon rent the air 
 with sudden shock just as eager waiting eyes 
 caught the first glimpse of the sun's bright 
 disc peeping above the eastern horizon. 
 
 The sound broke suddenly in upon many a 
 dream, woke many a sleeper. 
 
 " Independence day ! the glorious Fourth, 
 the nation's birthday," shouted Cyril, giving 
 Don a kick, then springing out of bed and hur- 
 rying on his clothes. 
 
 " Oh ! oh ! Fourth of July !" echoed 
 following suit. " I'm so glad, 'cause now 
 can fire our crackers."
<page 295>

 
 288 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Their clatter and another shot roused Fan 
 and Annis who joined in the rejoicing, the lat- 
 ter calling loudly for mother or Milly to coine 
 and dress her. 
 
 "No more hope of sleep," yawned Mr 
 Keith, in the next room ; " so we may as well 
 get up." 
 
 " Yes," returned his wife, " I wish you 
 would, and watch over the children ; see that 
 they don't burn their fingers or set things on 
 fire. 
 
 " Yes, Annis, mother's coming." 
 
 Breakfast was prepared amid the almost 
 <$onstant firing of crackers and childish shouta 
 of exultation, near at hand, and the occasional 
 booming of the more distant cannon. 
 
 The young folks were full of gayety and 
 excitement, hurrahing, singing " Hail Colum- 
 bia!" "Yankee Doodle," and "Star-spangled 
 Banner." 
 
 Kupert came in a little late to breakfast, 
 from a stroll down town, and reported that a 
 wonderfully large flag-staff had been planted in 
 front of the court-house, and that the stars and 
 stripes were floating from its top. 
 
 The Sunday schools were to unite and 
 march in procession through the streets of the 
 town, then separate, and each school betake it
<page 296>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 289 
 
 self to its o^fn church, there to enjoy a little 
 feast prepared by the parents and friends of the 
 scholars. 
 
 There had been a good deal of baking going 
 on in Mrs. Keith's kitchen the day before, and 
 shortly after breakfast a large basket was packed 
 with delicacies and sent to the church. 
 
 Then mother and Mildred had their hands 
 full for an hour or so in dressing the children 
 and themselves for the grand occasion. 
 
 They made a goodly show as they issued 
 from the gate and took their way toward the 
 place of rendezvous ; the girls all in white mus- 
 lin and blue ribbons, the boys in their neat 
 Sunday suits, and each with a flower or tiny 
 nosegay in his button-hole. 
 
 The house had to be shut up, as Celestia 
 Ann claimed the holiday, but was left in its 
 usual neat and orderly condition, by means of 
 early rising and extra exertion on the part of 
 the three older girls. Otherwise Mildred 
 could not have been content to go , and delay 
 was dangerous, as on account of the heat of the 
 weather the procession was to move by nine 
 o'clock. 
 
 The whole town was in holiday attire, and 
 everywhere smiling faces were seen. 
 
 A shower in the night had laid the dust 
 13
<page 297>

 
 290 MILDRED KBITS. 
 
 without turning it to mud, and the Sunday 
 echool celebration proved quite a success. 
 
 The children enjoyed their treat of cakes, 
 candies and lemonade, then the little Keiths 
 went home, tired enough to be glad to sit down 
 and rest while father, mother and Milly told 
 them stories of other Fourths that they could 
 remember. 
 
 After dinner Mildred went to call on her 
 friend Claudina, carrying with her another 
 book for Effie Prescott. 
 
 " Dunallan," had been returned in perfect 
 condition and with a little note of thanks. 
 
 Effie met Mildred with a pleased look, a 
 cheerful greeting, and warm thanks for the book, 
 
 " I am so glad to see you !" she said, " and 
 it was very kind in you to come ; for I am 
 owing you a call. I thought I should have 
 paid it long ago, but there are so many days 
 when I don't feel quite equal to the walk." 
 
 " You do walk out then ?" 
 
 " Oh yes ! every day when the weather is 
 good. That is part of the cure. But I can. 
 not walk fast or far." 
 
 : 'I hope you are improving." 
 
 " Yes, I believe so, but very slowly. I'm 
 never confined to bed, but never ab.e to do 
 much, and the books are such a blessing."
<page 298>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 2'Jl 
 
 From that they fell into talk about books 
 and authors and were mutually pleased to find 
 their tastes were similar as regarded literature, 
 and that their religious views accorded. 
 
 It was the beginning of a friendship which 
 became a source of great enjoyment to both. 
 
 Effie had learned to love Mrs. Keith. That 
 drew Mildred toward her ; and their common 
 faith in Christ and love to Him, was a yet 
 stronger bond of union. 
 
 They regretted that they had been so long 
 comparative strangers, and Mildred felt well re- 
 warded for the kind thoughtfulness on her part, 
 which had at length brought them together. 
 
 But leaving Effie to the perusal of the book, 
 ghe walked on to Squire Chetwood's. 
 
 Mrs. Chetwood and Claudina, in their deep 
 mourning dress, sat quietly at home, with no 
 heart to join in the mirth and jollity going on 
 about them ; yet calm and resigned. 
 
 " Ah," sighed the mother, tears springing to 
 her eyes, as the joyous shouts of children pen&. 
 trated to their silent room, " our little darling 
 would have been so gay and happy to day ! But 
 why do I say that ! I know she is far, far hap- 
 pier in that blessed land than she could evei 
 possibly have been here." 
 
 ( 'I know that," said Claudina, weeping.
<page 299>

 
 292 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " and I do rejoice in the thought of her blessed 
 ness ; but oh, the house is so dreary and deso- 
 late without her ! O Mildred, how rich you are 
 with four sisters !" 
 
 There was a knock at the street door, an- 
 swered by the girl, and the next moment Miss 
 Drybread walked into the parlor where the 
 ladies were sitting. 
 
 She was courteously received and invited to 
 take a seat; which she did, drawing a deep 
 sigh. 
 
 " Are you well, Miss Damaris ?" asked Mrs 
 Chetwood. 
 
 " Yes ; I'm always well ; I try and do right, 
 and have no sick fancies ; am never troubled 
 with the vapors. I hope you're well ?" 
 
 " As usual, thank you." 
 
 " You've had a great affliction." 
 
 No response, for the torn hearts could scarce 
 endure the rude touch ; her tone was sc cold 
 and hard. 
 
 " I hope you're resigned," she went on. 
 " You know we ought to be ; especially consid- 
 ering that we deserve all our troubles and 
 trials." 
 
 " I trust we are," said Mrs. Chetwood, " we 
 can rejoice in her happiness while we weep foi 
 ourselves.
<page 300>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 293 
 
 " Don't you think you made an idol of that 
 child ? I think you did, and that that is the 
 reason why she was taken ; for God won't allow 
 idols." 
 
 " We loved her very dearly," sobbed the 
 bereaved mother, " but I do not think we made 
 an idol of her, or ever indulged her to her hurt." 
 
 "The heart is deceitful," observed the 
 schoolma'am with emphasis, " and putting on 
 mourning, and shedding so many tears, doesn't 
 look like submission and resignation. I don't 
 see how a Christian can act so." 
 
 " Wait till you are bereaved," replied the 
 mother, sobs almost choking her utterance. 
 
 " And remember how Jesus wept at the 
 tomb of Lazarus, and that he never reproved the 
 Jews for putting on sackcloth and ashes when 
 mourning for their dead," said Mildred, adding, 
 in her uncontrollable indignation, " I think 
 you might be at better work, Miss Drybread, 
 than wrenching the hearts of these bereaved 
 ones whom Jesus loves, and in all whose afflic- 
 tions He is afflicted." 
 
 " I'm only doing my duty," retorted the 
 spinster ; "the Bible says we must reprove our 
 brethren and not suffer sin upon them." 
 
 " It says ' Judge not, that ye be not judged 
 They are the words of Jesus in the Sermon on
<page 301>

 
 294 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 the Mount, and if you turn to the passage and 
 read on a little further, you will see that people 
 who try to pull the mote out ol a brother's eye 
 while there is a beam in their own, He calls 
 hypocrites." 
 
 " I can understand an insinuation as well as 
 the next one," said Miss Drybread, rising in 
 vrrath, "and let me tell you, Miss, that I con 
 eider you the most impertinent young person I 
 ever met. 
 
 " Good afternoon, Mrs. ^nd Miss Chetwood ; 
 1 wish you joy of your friend," and she swept 
 from the room and toe house, before the aston- 
 ished ladies could utter a word. 
 
 " What a disagreeable, self-righteous old 
 hypocrite !" cried Mildred, her cheeks flushed, 
 her eyes flashing. " To think of her talking to 
 yon in that cold-hearted, cruel manner, Mrs. 
 Chetwood and Claudina. But there! I am 
 judging her. Oh dear! oh dear!" 
 
 She finished with a burst of sobs, clasping het 
 arms about her friend, who was weeping bitterly 
 
 Mrs. Chetwood, too. was shedding tears; 
 but presently wiped them p.^ay, eayirig, " "We 
 will try to forgive and for^y her harsh words. 
 I trust she is a well-meaner,, and perhaps, truly 
 good woman ; though mistaken as to her 
 and sadly wanting in tact.*'
<page 302>

 
 MILDRED KBITU 295 
 
 On her way home Mildred passed Mr 
 Lightcap 3. She usually avoided doing so by 
 taking th3 other street ; bnt to-day was too full 
 of grief for her bereaved friends, to care which 
 way her steps were tending till they were ar 
 rested by Mrs. Lightcap's voice, speaking from 
 her open door. 
 
 " Why, if it ain't Miss Keith ! I hain't seen 
 a sight o' you this long time. Walk in, won't 
 you ? and sit a bit. They've all run off some- 
 wheres and left me settin' here without a soul 
 to speak to, and I'm dreadful lonesome." 
 
 Mildred could not well refuse the invitation, 
 eo stepped in and took a seat. 
 
 Her first feeling on becoming aware that 
 Mrs. Lightcap was addressing her was one of 
 embarrassment at the idea of facing the mother 
 of her rejected suitor ; but the next instant she 
 concluded from the cordial manner of her neigh- 
 bor, that she must be entirely ignorant of the 
 affair, which was really the case; Gotobed 
 having insisted upon Rhoda Jane keeping his 
 secret. 
 
 Mildred was not in a talking mood, but Mrs 
 Lightcap grew garrulous over the day's celebra- 
 tion, the heat of the weather, prophesying 
 that if it lasted long, coming as it did after a 
 very rairy sv ig, there would be a great deal
<page 303>

 
 296 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 of eickness branching off finally to her house- 
 work and garden ; two inexhaustible themes 
 with her. 
 
 An occasional yes, or no, or nod of acquies- 
 cence, was all that was necessary on the part of 
 her listener ; and these Mildred could supply 
 without giving her undivided attention to the 
 steady flow of empty talk. 
 
 The firing of the cannon at short intervals 
 had been kept up all day. " Boom 1" it came 
 now, causing Mrs. Lightcap to give a sudden 
 Btart and break off in the middle of a sentence. 
 
 " Well, I declare ! " she exclaimed, " I can't 
 git used to that there firin' ; and I jest wisht 
 they'd stop it ; 'fore some on 'em gits hurt. It's 
 a dreadful dangerous thing gunpowder is, and 
 I guess there ain't never a Fourth when there 
 don't somebody git about half killed." 
 
 " Or quite," said Mildred ; " people will 
 be so careless ; and I suppose that even with 
 the greatest care there must be some danger, 
 from the bursting of guns and other accidents 
 that it is, perhaps, impossible to guard against." 
 
 Mildred sat very near the open door, Mrs. 
 Lightcap farther within the room. 
 
 "Well as I was a sayin','' began the latter, 
 resuming the thread of her discourse. 
 
 Some one came running without, his heavj
<page 304>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 297 
 
 footsteps resounding upon the sidewalk. It 
 was a man. He paused before the door, book- 
 ing pale and frightened, and beckoning to Mil- 
 dred, said in a low, hurried tone, " Just step thia 
 iray a minute, Miss, I want to speak to you." 
 
 Hardly comprehending, too much taken by 
 surprise even to wonder what he could want, 
 she hastily complied. 
 
 " She ought to be prepared, you know,*' he 
 went on in the same breathless, agitated man- 
 ner, drawing her further away from the door aa 
 he spoke ; " he's awfully hurt, a'most killed, I 
 believe, and they're bringin* him up the street 
 now." 
 
 " Who ?" gasped Mildred. 
 
 " Her son Gote ; gun went off while he was 
 ramming in the wadding and shot the ramrod 
 right through his hands ; I guess they'll both 
 have to come off." 
 
 Mildred staggered back, sick and faint, and 
 with a dazed sort of feeling that she was some 
 how to blame. 
 
 "They're coinin'," repeated the man hui> 
 riedly, pointing to a little crowd of men and 
 boys moving slowly up the street, scarcely 
 square away, " can't you say something to her I 
 kind o* break the shock a little, you know." 
 
 Mrs. Lightest) had stepped into the door 
 13*
<page 305>

 
 298 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 way and was looking this ^ ay and that, euriona 
 to learn the cause of Mildred's sudden exit. 
 
 " Why, Jim Foote, is that you ?" she ex- 
 claimed. " What on airth are you a wantin' 
 with Miss Keith ?" then catching sight of the 
 approaching crowd, " What's goin' on ?" she 
 asked, " anything the matter ?" 
 
 Mildred sprang to her side, and fairly push- 
 ing her back into the house, threw her arms 
 about her sobbing, " Oh, I'm so sorry for you t 
 so sorry ! Don't look ! not yet. He he's 
 living but" 
 
 " Who ? who's a livin' ? who's hurt ? Girl, 
 tell me quick ! 'Tain't none o* mine, sure ? 
 Taint my old man ? Oh, what'll I do ? what'll 
 I do?" 
 
 The trampling of many feet drew near, her 
 husband rushed in, pale, breathless, trembling, 
 and at sight of her burst out crying like a 
 child. Then the wounded man was supported 
 into the house, men and boys, and even women 
 and girls crowding in after, till in a moment 
 the room was full. 
 
 Rhoda Jane and the younger brothers and 
 sisters were there, screaming and crying. Goto- 
 bed was silent, bearing his agony with the 
 heroism of a soldier, but as his mother caught 
 sight of his ghastly face, hh mangled hands, the
<page 306>

 
 MILDRED KEITH 299 
 
 blood upon his person, and the surgeon with 
 his instruments, she uttered a wild shriek and 
 fell back fainting. 
 
 Her husband carried her into the kitchen, 
 and some of the neighbor women gathered 
 round with restoratives and whispered words 
 of pity and condolence, while others hurried 
 back and forth in quest of such articles as the 
 surgeon called for. 
 
 Rhoda Jane rushed out of the kitchen door, 
 and ran to the foot of the garden, screaming 
 and wringing her hands, the younger ones fol- 
 lowing her. 
 
 Mildred could not go away and leave the 
 family in their dire distress. She caught 
 Gotobed's eye, and there was in it a dumb en- 
 treaty which she had neither power nor heart 
 to resist. 
 
 Silently she made her way to his side 
 The doctors were clearing the room of all who 
 were not needed. 
 
 " They're a goin' to take off my right hand," 
 he said hoarsely. " It's an awful thing, but if 
 if you'll stand by me and let me look in your 
 eyes, 1 can bear it." 
 
 She turned hers on the surgeon Lucilla 
 Grange s father. 
 
 " Mav I ?"
<page 307>

 
 300 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 'If you have the nerve, my dear child ; it 
 would je a great kindness to the poor fellow. 
 There ought to be a woman near him, and 't 
 seems neither mother nor sister is equal to it." 
 
 " I will stay," she said, a great compassion 
 tilling her heart. " I shall not look at what you 
 are doing ; but I will stand by and fan him." 
 
 She kept her word ; forgetting herself en- 
 tirely, thinking of him only as one suffering 
 terrible agony and in need of her support, she 
 stood gazing into his eyes, her heart going up 
 in silent, fervent prayer on his behalf. 
 
 Chloroform and ether were not known in 
 those days, and the knife's cruel work must be 
 borne without the blessed insensibility to pain 
 that they can give. Had the magnetism of 
 Mildred's gaze a like effect ? I know not ; but 
 something enabled Gotobed to pass through the 
 terrible ordeal without a groan or moan ; almost 
 without flinching. 
 
 The right hand had to be taken off at the 
 wrist ; the left, though much mangled , the sur- 
 geon hoped to save ; and did so ultimately. 
 
 The amputation and the dressing of the 
 wounds was over at last and Mildred was turn- 
 ing away when a cup of tea was put into he* 
 hind with the words, spoken in a half whisper, 
 " Give him this ; he will take it from you. '
<page 308>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 301 
 
 She held it to his lips and he drank ; a plate 
 was silently substituted for the cup and she fed- 
 him like a child. 
 
 Poor fellow ! it would be long before he 
 could feed himself again. 
 
 Mildred set down the plate and stole quickly 
 from the house. Her long pent up emotion 
 must find vent. 
 
 She went weeping home, her heart break- 
 ing with pity for the man she could not love, 
 could not have married for the wealth of the 
 world. Oh, why did he love her so ? 
 
 She had read it in his eyes ; that she was 
 more to him than all the world beside, and that 
 he knew his was a hopeless passion. 
 
 She was glad to see that the sun was set- 
 ting ; because she knew from the lateness of 
 the hour that tea must be over at home, and 
 the little ones in bed; for she dreaded their 
 questionings and curious looks, and loathed 
 the thought of food. 
 
 Her mother., that best earthly friend, who 
 always understood her as by intuition, met her 
 t the door and clasped her in a tender, loving 
 embrace; and on that dear bosom the whole 
 sad story was sobbed out. 
 
 " Poor poor fellow ! my heart aches for 
 him," Mrs. Keith said, mingling her tears with
<page 309>

 
 302 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Mildred's. " And, my dear child I am very 
 glad you had the courage and firmness to give 
 him the help you did. I pity him, too, for his 
 unfortunate attachment, at the same time that 
 I, of course, could never, never be willing to 
 eee it returned. 
 
 " But your courage surprises me, I doubl 
 if I should be capable of the like myself," she 
 added, smiling through her tears. 
 
 " I know you would, mother dear," returned 
 the girl, gazing with loving admiration into her 
 mother's eyes ; " for you are far braver and 
 firmer than I. I should not have expected to 
 be able to do it myself, but we never know 
 what we can do till we are tried. 
 
 " I am sure our Father helped me in an- 
 swer to prayer, and according to his gracious 
 promise, ' As thy days, so shall thy strength 
 be,' " she added in subdued, tremulous tones. 
 
 " I do not doubt it," said Mrs. Keith ; foi 
 our sufficiency is of God.' " 
 
 Throughout the whole town great sympa 
 thy was felt for the wounded young man 
 People showed it in various ways ; by inquiries 
 made of the doctor or at the door, by calling in 
 for a little friendly chat and sending delicacies 
 to tempt his appetite ; which for a time failed 
 undei the pressure of pain, enforced idleness
<page 310>

 
 MILDRED KEITH 303 
 
 (a great change for one who had been all hia 
 life a hard worker) and depression of spirits ; 
 for there were seasons when he was well-nigh 
 overwhelmed at the thought of his maimed and 
 helpless condition. 
 
 Mrs. Keith went frequently to see and 
 comfort him and his distressed mother, and was 
 more successful in so doing than almost any 
 one else ; except Mildred, who occasionally ac- 
 companied her. 
 
 They carried to Gotobed food for the mind 
 as well as the body ; books which they read to 
 him ; as he could not hold them himself, and 
 the other members of the family had little time 
 or ability to entertain him in that way. 
 
 Also they said many a kind, encouraging 
 word concerning the possibilities of future use- 
 fulness yet remaining to him. 
 
 "I shall never be good for nothing no 
 more," he sighed, mournfully, one day, looking 
 down at his maimed arm and wounded hand ; 
 " can never swing my hammer, or shoe a horse 
 again. I'll have to be a helpless burden on 
 other folks, 'stead o' takin' care o' father and 
 mother when they git old, as I used to think I 
 should." 
 
 " I don't know that, Gotobed," Mrs. Keith 
 answered cheerily; *'I think God has giveo
<page 311>

 
 304 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 you a good mind, and that you will gradually 
 learn to do a great deal with that left hand ; 
 write, hold a book and turn the leaves, and so 
 be able to educate yourself for usefulness in 
 some new line ; perhaps do more for your 
 parents and friends than you ever could have 
 done with your hammer." 
 
 A light broke over his face at her words, 
 " Oh !" he said drawing a long breath, " if I 
 thought that I could bear it." 
 
 " I think you are bearing it bravely," she 
 said. 
 
 " I'm tryin' my best," he sighed, " but the 
 Lord only knows how hard it is ; 'specially when 
 folks comes and tells you it's a judgment sent 
 onto you for your sins." 
 
 " And who dares to tell you that ?" she 
 cried, flushing with indignation, " who could be 
 *o heartlessly cruel ?" 
 
 " Well, Damaris was in t'other day. She 
 means well enough, I guess; she fetched 
 something she'd cooked up for me but she 
 don't seem to understand a feller critter's feel- 
 in'a. She give me a long lecture ; said I'd 
 been dreadful proud o' my strength and what 
 a neat job I could make o' shoein' a horse and 
 the like, and so that the Lord took away my 
 liand to punish me and fetch me down. Do
<page 312>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 305 
 
 yoo think 'twas that way, Mis' Keith ? I was 
 thinkin' 'twas my own carelessness and not to 
 be blamed on Him at all.'* 
 
 "It strikes me that you are very nearly 
 right there," she replied, half smiling at the 
 earnest simplicity with which he spoke. "He 
 is very merciful and gracious, full of tender pity 
 and compassion for the creatures He ha? made ; 
 especially those who are peculiarly His own be- 
 cause they have accepted of the salvation offered 
 through Christ Jesus ; yet He does not always 
 see fit to save them from the consequences, a& 
 regards this life, of their own follies and sins." 
 
 " Carelessness is a sin," he said with a heavy 
 sigh. " I didn't use to think so, but it's plain 
 enough to me now. And do you think, Mis' 
 Keith, He feels kind o' sorry for me even 
 though 'twas my own fault ?" 
 
 "I am sure of it ; and that He will give 
 you strength to bear your trouble if you will 
 ask Him ; to bear it bravely and not let it spoil 
 your life by robbing you of cheerfulness and 
 hope, and the usefulness you may attain to by 
 a determined, manly struggle with your diffi- 
 culties. 
 
 " There is a pleasure in overcoming difficul- 
 ties," she added with a bright, winning smile,, 
 that was like a ray of sunlight to his saddened
<page 313>

 
 306 
 
 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 heart, "a pleasure that the slothful know 
 nothing' of." 
 
 "I'll try it!" he said with determination. 
 "God helping me, I will. Bless you, Mis' 
 Xeith, fur them words. "I'll not forget 'em."
<page 314>

 
 The sad vicissitudes of things." 
 
 STEKNE. 
 
 " MY poor, dear friend, would that I could 
 comfort you !" Mrs. Keith said in tones of deep 
 heartfelt sympathy, folding her arms abont Mrs. 
 Chetwood and weeping with her ; " but only 
 Jesus can do that in such sorrow as yours." 
 
 " And He does, else I should die ; for oh my 
 arms are so empty, my heart and home so deso- 
 late !" sobbed the bereaved mother. 
 
 " I know it, I know it by sad experience ; 
 for I too, have wept over the grave of a darling 
 little one." 
 
 " You P* Mrs. Chetwood said with a look oi 
 surprise ; " you have so many." 
 
 " Yes ; but then I had not all I have now 
 Eva was between Kupert and Zillah and would 
 be thirteen now. She was five when God took 
 her to himself." 
 
 " Ah, you do know how to feel for me 1"
<page 315>

 
 308 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " Yes and let me tell yon how I was com- 
 forted. I fear I was not quite submissive at 
 first ; but a dear old mother in Israel, who had 
 several times passed through the same deep 
 waters, came to me and said 'My dear, the 
 Lord gave you quite a little flock and when He 
 comes and asks you to return him one, and you 
 know He will keep it so safely in his kind arms 
 and on his tender bosom, will you refuse ? can 
 you not spare Him one ?' 
 
 " Then my heart was almost broken to think 
 I had been so churlish toward my beloved Mas- 
 ter and I resigned her cheerfully into His care, 
 and by and by grew happy in thinking of her, 
 so safe from all sin and sorrow and pain, so full 
 of joy, at His right hand ; and of the time when 
 my work shall be done and I shall go to her." 
 
 Mrs. Chetwood thought for a moment, then 
 turning to her friend with eyes brimful of tears, 
 " Thank you," she said, " your words have done 
 me good. Surely I too, can spare Him one. 
 Had He taken all, what right could I have to 
 complain ? and oh, how sweet is the thought 
 that He is caring so tenderly for my precious 
 uimbkin I" 
 
 The mothers mingled their tears again for a 
 little, tears of blended grief and joy ; then Mrs. 
 Chetwood said " What else dear friend ! I seem
<page 316>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 309 
 
 to read in your eyes that you have something 
 more to say to me." 
 
 " Only this, suggested to me by the same 
 old Christian soldier and confirmed by my own 
 experience ; that efforts to comfort others react 
 upon ourselves, so proving the best panacea for 
 our own sorrow." 
 
 " I believe it, am conscience-smitten that 1 
 have been so selfishly wrapped up in my own 
 grief, and shall set about the work at once. 
 Will you do me the favor to suggest where I 
 shall begin ?" 
 
 Mrs. Keith spoke of Gotobed and the sort ol 
 comfort and assistance of which he stood in 
 need. 
 
 Mrs. Chetwood shuddered. " Poor, poor 
 fellow!" she said; "my heart aches for him. 
 I feel sick at the very thought of seeing any one 
 in that mutilated condition, but I will go to him 
 and do what I can for his comfort and relief.' 
 " Thank you," returned Mrs. Keith heartily 
 "' And speak comfortingly to the poor mother. 
 >^he is grieving very much for him, and does 
 .\ot look well. One of the little girls, too, is 
 uite ill with intermittent fever." 
 
 It was well that Mrs. Keith had engaged 
 ter friend to take up the labor of love, for it 
 \SJB long before she herself could resume it,
<page 317>

 
 310 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 On reaching home she found Mildred sitting 
 with Annis in her arms, the little creature 
 moaning with pain and in a high fever. 
 
 " Mother, she is very sick/' whispered Mil- 
 dred tremulously, her eyes full of tears ; for she 
 was thinking of how suddenly Mary Chetwood 
 had been snatched away by the grim destroyer 
 Death. 
 
 " I fear she is, poor darling ! poor little pet !" 
 the mother said, bending over her and softly 
 pressing her lips to the burning cheek. 
 
 " O mother, mother, if we should lose her !' 
 
 " We will do all we can to make her well, 
 asking God's blessing on our efforts," Mrs. 
 Keith answered with determined cheerfulness, 
 though a sharp pang shot through her heart at 
 the bare suggestion. 
 
 Dr. Grange was sent for at once. He pro- 
 nounced the child very ill, but by no meant 
 hopelessly so. 
 
 " The sickly season,'' he remarked, " is set- 
 ting in unusually early and with uncommon 
 severity, both in town and country ; people are 
 taken down with the fever every day. But it 
 is what I have been expecting as the result of 
 the long heavy rains we had all through the 
 spring, succeeded by this intensely hot, dry 
 weather. Why we haven't had a drop of rain
<page 318>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 311 
 
 now, scarcely a cloud, for three weeks; the 
 heavens above us are as brass, and the marshes 
 and pools of stagnant water on every side are 
 teeming with miasma. 
 
 f< Keep the children and yourselves out of 
 the sun during the heat of the day, and do not 
 on any account allow them to be exposed to 
 the night air and dew." 
 
 " Thank you for your suggestions," said 
 M^. Keith, "we will do our best to follow 
 thorn." 
 
 He had just come home from his office ; for 
 it was near tea-time. The children too had 
 come in from their work or play, and the whole 
 family were gathered in the sitting- room, where 
 the baby girl lay in her cradle, mother and sis- 
 ter hanging over her in tender solicitude. 
 
 Fan had climbed her father's knee and was 
 lying very quiet in his arms with her head on 
 his shoulder. 
 
 The doctor taking his hat to go, paused as 
 his eye fell on her, and stepping quickly to her 
 side, took her hand in his. 
 
 "This child is sick too," he eaid, and went 
 on to question and prescribe for her, directing 
 that she should be put to bed at once. 
 
 "Oh," sighed Mildred, "if we only had 
 Aunt Wealthy here 1"
<page 319>

 
 312 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 * I wish you had," the doctor said ; " but 
 the neighbors here are always very kind in 
 times of sickness." 
 
 " Yes ; we have had experience of that in 
 the past," replied Mrs. Keith. 
 
 The doctor called on Mrs. Chetwood and 
 Mrs. Prior on his homeward way, and within 
 an hour both were at Mr. Keith's offering their 
 services in nursing or any thing else that was 
 needed. 
 
 "You are very kind," Mrs. Keith said, 
 " but I think we can manage for a while, and 
 that you should save your strength for those 
 who need it more." 
 
 The little ones objected to being waited 
 npon by strangers, and Celestia Ann insisted 
 that she wanted no help with her housework 
 or cooking ; so the ladies departed after exact- 
 ing a promise that they should be sent for if 
 needed. 
 
 That time came soon ; before the crisis was 
 passed with Annis and Fan, three more of the 
 children, Zillah, Cyril, and Don, were taken 
 down ; then the father ; and oh, what a weary 
 burden of care, anxiety, toil and grief fell upon 
 the mother and sister! They had sore need 
 DOW of all the faith, patience and hope they 
 had garnered up in happier days; of all the
<page 320>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 313 
 
 great and precious promises they had learned 
 to lean upon. 
 
 Rupert was slowly dressing himself one 
 August morning, feeling weak and ill, when hi 
 mother's pale, sorrowful face looked in at his door 
 
 He tried to brighten up and seem strong 
 and well as he turned to meet her, asking, 
 tl How are yo, mother dear? and the sick 
 ones ? I hope you all slept." 
 
 " Not much," she said, vainly striving after 
 the accustomed cheery tone. " Annis and Fan 
 did pretty well (oh, I am thankful that the 
 doctor considers them out of danger now, if we 
 can only give them the good nursing they 
 need,) but poor Cj T ril is quite delirious, very, 
 very sick, I fear, and Zillah not much better. 
 Besides " but here her voice broke, and for a 
 moment she was unable to go on. 
 
 " O mother, not another one down ?" he 
 cried, " You and Mildred will be killed with 
 so much nursing." 
 
 " Rupert, it is your father now," she sobbed. 
 
 * He tries to makes us believe it is not much; 
 that he'll sleep it off in an hour or so, but oh, I 
 can see that he's very sick." 
 
 " My father very sick," he echoed, aghast ; 
 
 * poor father ! and you must lose his help with 
 tLe others, and have him to nurse, too !" 
 
 14
<page 321>

 
 814 MILDRED KEITH 
 
 " That is not the worst of it. He is suffer- 
 ing and perhaps in danger. Celestia Ann haa 
 breakfast nearly ready. I want you to eat at 
 once then go for the doctor (ht did not coma 
 last night) and call and tell Mrs. Chetwood and 
 Mrs. Prior what a sick household we are and 
 that now if they can give me help in nursing, 
 I shall be very glad and thankful." 
 
 Mrs. Keith passed on into the kitchen. 
 
 " Breakfast's on table," said Celestia Ann. 
 " You just sit down and eat, Mis' Keith ; fur 
 yon look ready to drop. I'll pour you out a 
 cup o* coffee, and then run in and look after 
 the sick till you're done." 
 
 Thank you," Mrs. Keith said, " though I 
 have no desire for food, I will accept your offer, 
 for I do feel faint and empty. Tell Mildred to 
 come too, as soon as she can be spared." 
 
 Kupert and Ada came in together at that 
 moment and took meir places at the table. 
 
 "Only three of us this morning, 'stead of 
 ten," Ada remarked sadly. 
 
 " Well, we'll hope the others will all be back 
 soon ;" said Rupert, longing to comfort and 
 aheer his mother. 
 
 His head ached and chills were creeping 
 down his back, but he said nothing about it, 
 drank his coffee, forced himself to eat a little,
<page 322>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 315 
 
 and presently declaring himself done, put on 
 his hat and hurried away on his errand, 
 
 It was now a fortnight since Annis had 
 been taken ill and not a drop of rain had fallen 
 yet. The nights and mornings were chilly and 
 damp, then the sun rose and shone all day with 
 a fierce, burning heat that scorched everything 
 it touched ; and day by day the fever had found 
 new victims till every physician's hands were 
 full to overflowing. 
 
 " How chilly it is I" thought Rupert, as he 
 nastened down the path to the gate, "but it'll 
 be hot enough presently," he added, looking up 
 at the sky ; " not a cloud to be seen, and the sun 
 will be glaring down on us as fiercely as ever. 
 I think if there isn't some change soon we'll all 
 eicken and die." 
 
 He walked on up the street. Doors 
 windows were closed ; scarcely any one s-~ d 
 astir. 
 
 "They're sleeping late," he thought 
 'Well who can blame them? they're eithei 
 sick themselves or worn out taking care of the 
 sick." 
 
 He came first to the hotel. Mrs. Prior WM 
 very busy getting breakfast, but stepped to the 
 door to hear his message. 
 
 I'm dreadful sorry ;" she said, " and I'll
<page 323>

 
 316 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 call round, tell your mother, just as soon as i 
 can ; but I've half a dozen boarders down with 
 the fever, and only one girl ; the rest's all gone 
 off to 'tend to their own folks; for the fever't 
 bad all round in the country ; and between 
 them and the town folks the doctors is goin' 
 night and day." 
 
 \ "I don't see how you can come at all then, 
 Mrs. Prior," Rupert said, " I should think your 
 hands must be more than full here at home." 
 
 " I'll come if I can, you may depend," she 
 answered, " for I think a sight of your mother." 
 
 The boy sighed heavily as he turned and 
 went on his way. How much of the brightness 
 seemed to have gone out of life just then. 
 
 Dr. Grange's house was a few steps furthei 
 on. An old lady, the doctor's mother, an 
 awered his knock. 
 
 " The doctor is in bed and asleep just now, 7 ' 
 she said. " He has had very little rest for the 
 last three weeks, was up all night out in the 
 country, and came home with a heavy chill 
 And the rest of the family are all down with 
 the fever except myself and little five year old 
 Ellen." 
 
 " What are we coming to !" exclaimed the 
 lad. 
 
 " 1 don't know," she arswered : "but God
<page 324>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 317 
 
 is our refuge and strength ; a very present help 
 in trouble !' " 
 
 " I do not know what to do," said Rupert, 
 looking sadly perplexed and anxious ; " mother 
 says my father and Cyril are both very ill." 
 
 " I will tell the doctor when he wakes, and 
 perhaps he will be able to go down. It would 
 hardly be worth while to send you for another, 
 for they're all equally busy." 
 
 " Thank you," he said, " we would not like 
 to have to try another," and bidding her good 
 morning, he went on his way to the Squire's. 
 
 Mrs. Chetwood put on her bonnet at once 
 and went with him. 
 
 " Claudina would come too," she said, " but 
 two of the boys are sick, and I'm afraid she is 
 taking the fever heraelf." 
 
 " It seems as if everybody is taking it," said 
 Rupert. " Mrs. Chetwood, is it often so sickly 
 here?" 
 
 " Never was known to be quite so bad be- 
 fore," she answered ; " they say the oldest in- 
 habitant doesn't remember such a time. Do 
 you notice how quiet and empty the streete 
 ire?" 
 
 " Yes, ma'am ; people seem to be very late 
 in getting up. The stores are all shut up still.' 1 
 
 " There's no business doing at all," she re-
<page 325>

 
 818 mLDRED KEITH. 
 
 turned, "and people are not up because they're 
 ill ; too ill, most of them, to leave their beds. 
 
 " There are not many houses in town where 
 more than one or two are able to crawl about 
 to help themselves or wait on the sick. 
 
 " And Dr. Grange tells me it is just as bad in 
 the country. The harvest is uncommonly fine, 
 but there's nobody to gather it in ; there are 
 loads of wild berries ripe on the bushes, but 
 nobody able to pick them. 
 
 " Emmaretta Lightcap died yesterday ; I was 
 there last night and helped to lay her out. AP 
 the rest of the family are in bed with the fever, 
 except poor Gotobed and his mother. 
 
 " Oh, it's a sorrowful time ! Effie and one 
 or two of the little ones are sick at Mr. Pres- 
 cott's, and in the next house not one of the 
 family is able to be out of bed." 
 
 Mr. Keith was quite as ill as his wife feared. 
 
 She devoted herself principally to him, 
 while Mrs. Chetwood and Mildred together 
 nursed the others. 
 
 Rupert had had a chili and fever followed 
 In due season ; but he managed to keep up and 
 to conceal his illness from all but Celestia Ann, 
 who did the best she could for him. 
 
 Mrs. Prior came in for an hour in the after 
 noon, and taking Mildred's place enabled her to
<page 326>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 319 
 
 'ie down for a little greatly needed rest and 
 aieep. 
 
 Mrs. Chetwood spent the day and nigh 
 with them, but then went home to return nc 
 more, her own family being no longer able to 
 dispense with her oare and nursing. 
 
 Zillah was slightly better that morning, but 
 Mr. Keith, Cyril and Don were all delirious 
 and so evidently in danger that the hearts oi 
 mother and sister were very heavy. 
 
 Mrs. Keith scarcely left her husband's bed 
 side except occasionally to pass into the next 
 room and bend for a moment over her little 
 boys, to take Annis or Fan in her arms to 
 caress, and reluctantly put them down again, and 
 to whisper a word of hope and encouragement 
 to Mildred, the other little girls and Rupert. 
 
 Celestia Ann had full sway in the kitchen, 
 and with genuine kindness of heart took charge 
 of the rest of the house, so far as she could, and 
 prepared delicacies for the sick. 
 
 She was a great help in looking after the 
 convalescing, had always a cheery word ready 
 for the weary, anxious nurses, and in short 
 proved herself invaluable in this great emer- 
 gency. 
 
 "What then was their distress and despair 
 when they found they must lose her.
<page 327>

 
 320 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 Glancing from the window on the 'morning 
 of the second day after that which Mrs. Chet- 
 wood had spent with them, Mildred saw a 
 Countryman passing round toward the kitchen, 
 and in a moment after his voice and Celestia 
 Ann's could be heard in earnest colloquy, the 
 latter interrupted by heavy sobs. 
 
 Then she appeared at the door of the 
 nursery with her apron to her eyes and 
 silently beckoned to Mildred. 
 
 " What is it ?'' the latter asked going to her. 
 
 " Why my brother's come to fetch me home, 
 and I'll have to go, bad as I hate to leave you ; 
 for if I do say it that shouldn't, I don't see how 
 you're agoin' to git along without me." 
 
 " Nor I," said Mildred, aghast. " O, Celes- 
 tia Ann, must you go ?" 
 
 " Yes ; can't help it ; for they're all down 
 with the fever, 'cept mother (and she's poorly) 
 and this brother that's come after me ; and he's 
 got a chill on him now. So I'll have to pick 
 up my duds and be off right away." 
 
 " Yes, of course you must go to your own 
 when they need you," said Mildred ; " unless 
 they could get some one else. O, Celestia Ann, 
 don't you think it possible they could?" 
 
 "No; I know they can't, Miss Mildred; 
 there's no help to be got these days for love or
<page 328>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 321 
 
 oioney ; and the Lord only knows what's to be- 
 some of us all ! 
 
 " Sam says there's seveial died in our neigh- 
 borhood a'readj 7 , just for want o' good nussin 
 and proper victuals ; so the doctor says." 
 
 " And just so it will be with us," sobbed Mil - 
 dred sinking into a chair and covering her face 
 with her hands. " I cannot nurse them all prop- 
 erly, and cook what they need to eat ; and oh, it ia 
 so terrible to think they must die for want of it." 
 
 "It's awful, and I'm dreadful sorry for you 
 and everybody," sighed Celestia Ann, wiping 
 away the tears that were streaming over her 
 cheeks. " Maybe you might git Mis' Kood to 
 come in for a few days. I'll git Sam to go and 
 see while I'm a pickin' up my things. 
 
 " She ain't much for cookin' I don't sup- 
 pose, but she could clean up and do that big 
 washin', and help a liftin' the sick ones. That 
 is if she'll come ; but I dunno but she may be 
 down sick herself." 
 
 Sam kindly undertook the errand, but alas, 
 Mrs. Kood was " down sick herself," and no 
 help could be had from that quarter, nor appa. 
 rently, from any other ; and with many tears 
 Celestia Ann took her departure, saying, " I'll 
 come back as soon as I kin, if I keep well, and 
 iny folks gits able to do without me " 
 14*
<page 329>

 
 er 
 
 " Calamity is man's true touch stope." 
 
 IT was to Mildred Celestia Ann's parting 
 words were spoken, Mildred sitting in dumb 
 despair beside the bed, where Cyril and Don 
 lay tossing and moaning in a burning fever. 
 Her heart sank like lead in her bosom, as she 
 listened to the rumbling of the wheels of the 
 wagon that was bearing away her late efficient 
 helper. " What could they do without her ?" 
 
 A quiet step crossed the room, a soft hand 
 was laid caressingly on Mildred's bowed head, 
 and looking up she saw her mother's sweet, palo 
 face bending over her ; a worn and weary face, 
 but with a strange peacefulness shining through 
 its care and sorrow. 
 
 " O mother, mother, whatever shall we do \ n 
 cried the girl in a broken whisper, and with a 
 burst of tears. 
 
 Mrs. Keith had a small Bible in her hand, 
 her finger between the leaves. She laid it open 
 before Mildred, pointed to a passage in the
<page 330>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 32a 
 
 sixty-second psalm, and just touching her lipg 
 to her daughter's forehead, turned away to the- 
 little sufferers on the bed. 
 
 "Mother's darlings! mother's poor little 
 men 1 Try to be very patient and good like the 
 dear Lord Jesus when he was in pain, and 
 mother hopes you will soon be well again. 
 She is asking Jesus to make you well." 
 
 " I wish he would," moaned Cyril, while 
 Don uttered some incoherent words, showing 
 that his mind wandered. 
 
 " I'se better, mamma," piped the baby voice 
 of Annis from another bed. " Fan and me's 
 better. I dess Dod will make us well, 'tause 
 we asked him to." 
 
 " Yes, mother, don't fret about us," joined 
 in Fan and Zillah patiently. 
 
 She went over and kissed all three, calling 
 them " dear good children," then passed on into 
 the kitchen. 
 
 Rupert was there trying to make a custard ; 
 Ada washing dishes. 
 
 " You see you're not entirely without help 
 in this department yet, mother," the lad said 
 laughingly. 
 
 " No," she answered with a smile that he 
 felt was ample reward for his efforts " how 
 are you succeeding ?"
<page 331>

 
 324 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 " Bravely ; at least it looks nice. Please 
 3ome and tell me if 'tis ready to be taken off." 
 
 " It will be in a moment. Run out and get 
 me a handful of leaves from that young peach 
 tree, to flavor it with." 
 
 He obeyed, she stirring the custard and com- 
 mending Ada's industry, while he was gone. 
 
 " Here they are, mother; is this enough I" 
 fie asked, coming back. 
 
 " Quite," she said taking them from him ; 
 hen as her hand touched his, " Rupert," she 
 cried with anguish in her tones, " you are sick ! 
 burning up with fever !" 
 
 " Heated over the stove, mother," he said, 
 trying to laugh it off, as he lifted the kettle 
 from the fire and poured its contents into a 
 bowl. 
 
 " No, I am not to be deceived," she answered 
 in a choking voice, " you ought to be in bed 
 now." 
 
 He shook his head. "Somebody must 
 keep up ; several somebodies to take anything 
 like proper care of the sick ones. And, mother, 
 I'm as able as you are; you look dreadfully 
 worn and ill." 
 
 She was all that ; she felt the chills creep- 
 ing over her at that moment, and her bead 
 seemed ready to burst ; her heart also.
<page 332>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 325 
 
 Oh, she had need of all the comfort and 
 support of the words she had pointed out to 
 Mildred, and of the exhortation contained 
 therein. 
 
 " My soul, wait thou only upon God ; for 
 my expectation is from him. He only is my 
 rock and my salvation ; he is my defense, I 
 shall not be moved. In God is my salvation 
 and my glory ; the rock of my strength and 
 my refuge is in God." 
 
 She whispered them to herself, as with 
 clasped hands and closed eyes, she sank heavily 
 into a chair, half unconscious of what she was 
 doing. 
 
 Rupert sprang to her side, thinking she 
 was about to faint, and Ada, with the same 
 thought in her mind, set down the plate she 
 was wiping and hurried to her also. 
 
 They caught the last words. " The rock 
 of my strength and my refuge is in God.' " 
 
 " Yes, mother, dear," sobbed the lad, put- 
 ting his arms around her, " and oh, you know 
 It's a refuge that will never fail. ' Therefore 
 will we not fear though the earth be removed 
 and though the mountains be carried into the 
 midst of the sea.' ' Man's extremity is God'e 
 opportunity,' and He will help us through thii 
 strait somehow."
<page 333>

 
 386 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 "Yes," she whispered, ' and though it 
 should be by death, what is that but going 
 home? To those of us who love the Lord and 
 trust in His imputed righteousness," she added 
 looking earnestly, questioningly into his face. 
 
 " Mother, I believe I do," he said, " though 
 I have never told you so before." 
 
 " Now I can bear it," she whispered, closing 
 her eyes again, while a sweet smile played 
 about her lips. 
 
 Her head dropped heavily on her son's 
 shoulder. 
 
 " Oh," shrieked Ada, " she's dying 1 moth- 
 er's dying I" 
 
 " Hush !" cried Kupert sternly, thinking of 
 the mischief her cry might work should it reach 
 the ears of the sick ones, " she has only fainted. 
 A tumbler of water ; quick, quick, Ada !" 
 
 As the terrified child hastened to do hie 
 bidding, Mildred came flying from the inner 
 room, her face pale, her whole frame trembling 
 with affright. 
 
 " Mother 1" the word came in tones of 
 igony from her pale, quivering lips. 
 
 "It's only a faint," said Rupert hoarsely. 
 li Help rae to lay her down and loosen hei 
 clothes. And haven't you hartshorn or some 
 thing whatever the
<page 334>

 
 MILDRED RBl'lH. 327 
 
 " Yes , Ada, quick, quick ! the bottle of 
 smelling salts! it's on the stand by father's oed- 
 lide. O, mother, mother ! you too ! what's to 
 become of us? O, Rupert, she's just killed 
 with nursing I and I couldn't help it." 
 
 " Of course you couldn't ; you are nearly 
 killed yourself," he said, his tears falling almost 
 as fast as hers, while between them they half 
 carried, half dragged the insensible form into 
 the adjoining room and laid it tenderly down 
 upon a lounge. 
 
 Poor children I so utterly overwhelmed 
 were they by their mother's helpless condition, 
 superadded to all the other causes for anxiety, 
 perplexity and distress, so taken up with efforts 
 for her restoration to consciousness, that they 
 tjarcely heard the cries of the sick little ones, 
 who could not understand why they were thug 
 left alone, or the calls of their father who had 
 roused from sleep and missed his gentle nurse ; 
 nor did they notice who it was that came ID 
 through the open kitchen door and silently as- 
 sisted them, raising the window blind and 
 sprinkling water on the still white face. 
 
 At last Mrs. Keith's eyes unclosed and sh 
 ttarted up asking faintly " What is it f have I 
 been ill ?" then fell back again completely ex- 
 hausted.
<page 335>

 
 328 MILDRED KE1TE. 
 
 " You were faint, another dear," said Mil 
 dred, vainly striding to steady her voice, " bnt 
 lie still fora while and I hope you will get ovei 
 it. You have been doing toe much and must 
 rest now." 
 
 " Kest, child ! how can I ? There is yom 
 father calling me. And the children are cry- 
 ing." 
 
 She started up again but with the same re 
 suit as before. 
 
 " My poor sick husband ! my little ailing 
 childrer \ what is to become of you?" she 
 sighed, tears stealing from beneath the closed 
 eyelids and trickling down the pale cheeks. 
 
 " Mother, I will do my best," sobbed Mil- 
 dred ; " only lie and rest yourself." 
 
 " And I am here to assist, and able to do it/ 
 said a somewhat harsh, discordant voice, though 
 there was in it a tone of kindness too. 
 
 Then they looked up and saw standing near, 
 the stiff, angular figure of Daman's Drybread. 
 
 "You?" Mildred exclaimed in utter sur- 
 prise. 
 
 " Yes, I, Miss Keith. Did you think there 
 was none of the milk of human kindness in me ? 
 My school's broke up by this pestilence, and 
 only one of our family has took the fever yet ; 
 so when I heard that you were nea-'y all down
<page 336>

 
 MILDRED KE1TR. 329 
 
 sick here, and your girl had gone : ff and left 
 you, I said to myself, ' There's a duty for you 
 there, Damaris Drybread ; go right away and 
 do it' And I came." 
 
 " And it was very, very kind in you," Mil 
 dred said, extending her hand. " I have hardly 
 deserved it from you, for I've judged you, 
 harshly." 
 
 "Well, I shouldn't wonder if I'd done the 
 same to you," Damaris answered coldly, taking 
 the offered hand only to drop it again instantly. 
 " But that's neither here nor there ; and I don't 
 ask no thanks. I'm only tryin' to be a good 
 Samaritan to you, because we're told, ' Go, and 
 do thou likewise.' '' 
 
 The cries of the children had become BO 
 piteous and importunate that Mildred rushed 
 away to attend to them. 
 
 Her father's calls had ceased and as the lit- 
 tle ones quieted down she could hear a manly 
 voice speaking to him in gentle soothing tones. 
 
 " It is the doctor " she thought, with ao 
 emotion somewhat akin to pleasure ; he was so 
 sorely needed and had not called since the pre- 
 nous night ; but on going in she found Mr. 
 Lord by the bedside. 
 
 He turned, showing a face full of sympathy 
 and concern, and held out his hand.
<page 337>

 
 830 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 *' This is kind," she said, putting hew 
 into it. 
 
 " My poor child 1" he responded feelingly, 
 raising the hand to his lips in his absent way 
 f< my heart aches for you. And there are many 
 others in like affliction ; many others ! all round 
 the country people are sick, dying; many of 
 them simply for lack of suitable nourishment." 
 
 The tears rolled down his manly cheeks as 
 ,he spoke, and the sight of them did not lower 
 him in the girl's esteem. 
 
 " And what can I do ?" he went on. " I 
 know nothing of cooking; I can only carry 
 them crackers to sustain their poor bodies, and 
 try to feed their souls with the bread of life. I 
 feel for them all ; but for you O, Mildred, 
 dear girl, what can I do to help and comfort 
 you in this extremity I" 
 
 " We have need of nurses. Mother " 
 
 But with that word she broke into uncon 
 trollable weeping ; suppressed, for fear of dig- 
 turbing her father, who had fallen into a doze- 
 but shaking her whole frame with its violence. 
 
 It distressed her listener. He made a step 
 tc ward her, a gesture as if he would fold her 
 in his arms, but drew hastily back, blushing 
 and confused as the door opened and Dr. Grange 
 came in.
<page 338>

 
 Cjmpter 
 
 " All love la sweet, 
 
 Given or returned. Common as light Is lov, 
 And its familiar voice -wearies not ever." 
 
 " AH, good morning, my dear child 1 Good 
 morning, sir," the doctor said in an undertone, 
 giving his hand to Mildred and the minister in 
 turn. Then with an anxious glance at the bed 
 " How is he ? sleeping now, I see. How did 
 he rest through the night ?" 
 
 " Not very well, and " 
 
 " Your mother ? where is she ? not down 
 too?" with almost a groan, as he read the truth 
 in the young girl's face. 
 
 Mildred led him to her. She lay on the 
 lounge still, with closed eyes and face of deathly 
 pallor, her cheek resting against the dark curls 
 of Rupert, who had thrown himself on the floor 
 by her side, and laid his head on the same pil- 
 low, while he held one of her hands, caressing 
 it tenderly.
<page 339>

 
 332 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 His cheeks were burning, his eyes sparkling 
 with fever. 
 
 The doctor glanced from one to the other. 
 " Ought to be in bed ; both of you. Go my 
 boy, at once ; you are not fit to be here." 
 
 " I can't, sir, indeed ; I'm needed to take 
 care of the others." 
 
 " You will help most by giving up at once," 
 gaid the doctor ; " otherwise you will make 
 yourself so sick as to need a great deal of 
 attention." 
 
 " Yes, go, my dear boy," whispered Mrs, 
 Keith. 
 
 "I will, since you bid me, darling mother/ 
 he answered, pressing his hot lips to her cheek, 
 then tottering from the room. 
 
 She looked after him with sad, pitying 
 eyes, " So sick, and your mother not able to 
 nurse you ! Mildred, my poor dear child, how 
 are you to stand it ?" she sighed, turning them 
 upon her daughter's face as she bent over her. 
 
 " Try not to be troubled and anxious, my 
 dear madam," said the doctor, " the more quiet 
 and free from care you can keep your mind, the 
 better for you. Trust the Lord that all will 
 come out right." 
 
 " I will ; lie is all my hope and trust foi 
 myself and for my dear ones," she answered,
<page 340>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 333 
 
 with almost her accustomed cheerfulness. 
 " Things look very dark but ' behold, the Lord's 
 hand is not shortened that it cannot save; 
 neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear.' " 
 
 " And he has sent ui some help already,' 
 observed Mildred ; " from a most unexpected 
 quarter." 
 
 Damaris came in at that moment' from the 
 kitchen, saluted the doctor in her usual formal 
 way, and turning to Mrs. Keith, remarked, 
 
 " I hope you're not going to be very sick ; 
 but you'd ought to go to bed for to-day, any- 
 how. Don't you say so, doctor 2" 
 
 "I do most emphatically," answered the 
 physician, who had seated himself at the table 
 and was busied in measuring out medicines; 
 " and I'm very glad, Miss Damaris, to see you 
 here." 
 
 " It appeared to be my duty to come," she 
 said, looking not ill-pleased ; " I'm no great 
 nurse, but I can do housework and cook foi 
 sick or well ; and them things is as necessary 
 is the nursing." 
 
 " Certainly," said Dr. Grange, and went on 
 to give directions to her concerning the proper 
 food for his patients, and to Mildred in regard 
 to the administering of medicines and othei 
 remedies.
<page 341>

 
 834 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 He made nis round among them, pronounced 
 Zillah much better, Mr. Keith slightly to. He 
 was silent as to the little boys, and Mildred'a 
 heart was full of anguish as she perceived from 
 his countenance, or thought she did, that their 
 recovery was still very doubtful. 
 
 Mr. Lord had remained at Mr. Keith's bed- 
 side while the doctor and Mildred were absent 
 from the room, and was still there when they 
 returned. He looked perplexed and ill at ease. 
 
 " I have no skill in nursing," he said ; 
 " never ha\ r e had any experience ; am in fact a 
 very unsuitable person for the task ; being very 
 absent minded, as you both know. But if I 
 can be of any service, I Miss Mildred, I can 
 sit here and hand anything he asks for, call you 
 if he needs your assistance, and give the medi- 
 cines, if you will be good enough to remind me 
 when it is time to do so." 
 
 The offer was gladly accepted and the new 
 nurse entered upon his duties immediately. 
 
 Yet even with these new and unexpected 
 helps it was clearly impossible for the weary 
 girl to give proper attention to five very sick 
 persons, and two who were barely convalescent. 
 Her heart was overwhelmed ; the burden 
 heavier than she could bear. 
 
 But blessed be God, the God of Israel hii
<page 342>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 335 
 
 people need not bear their griefs and anxieties 
 alone ; he bids them not. 
 
 " Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he 
 shall sustain thee." " Call upon me in the day 
 of trouble ; 1 will deliver thee, and thou shalt 
 glorify me." 
 
 These and other like great and precious 
 promises were brought home with power and 
 sweetness to Mildred's mind in this time of deep 
 distress and anguish, and kept her from sinking 
 beneath the load. 
 
 " O Lord of hosts, blessed i& the man that 
 trusteth in thee." " For thou, Lord, wilt bless 
 the righteous; with favor wilt thou compass 
 him as with a shield." 
 
 There seemed no earthly friend left to come 
 to Mildred's aid ; she could think of none. 
 Claud ina Chetwood and Lucilla Grange were 
 both themselves lying upon sick beds ; so were 
 all her lady acquaintances in Pleasant Plains 
 except such as, like herself, had their hands 
 more than full with the care of the sick in theii 
 own families ; and Aunt Wealthy was so far, 
 far away that before a message could reach her, 
 they might all be in their graves. 
 
 How long it seemed since she went away ! 
 how long since the beginning of this dreadful 
 rickly season that had, as it were, shut hei
<page 343>

 
 336 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 (Mildred) away from all pleasant social inter, 
 course with her young companions into her own 
 little world of trial and trouble ! 
 
 It was a comfort that some one was attend- 
 teg to domestic affairs, some one sitting with 
 her sick father and Rupert, who now shared his 
 bed ; but ah, she could not more than half at- 
 tend to the pressing needs of the others. 
 
 The day was intensely hot, scarce a breath 
 of air stirring though every door and window 
 stood wide open. The little boys feverish and 
 restless, wanted to be fanned every moment, 
 and called almost incessantly for " cold fresh 
 water." 
 
 The others craved it, too ; and it could be 
 had only from the spring at the foot of the 
 steep river bank. And ice being an unknown 
 luxury in Pleasant Plains at that period, it could 
 not be kept eeol for any length of time. 
 
 She did not feel at liberty to call upon eithef 
 Miss Drybread or Mr. Lord for this service, 
 and as the one judged it unnecessary that tho 
 water should be brought frequently and the 
 other was too absent-minded to think of offer- 
 ing to bring it, and she could not leave her 
 charges to go herself, even if her strength had 
 been equal to the effort in addition to all the 
 other demands upon it,, she could but endure
<page 344>

 
 MILDRED KS1TH. 33? 
 
 the pain of seeing the loved ones suffer from 
 thirst. 
 
 " Water, water, cold water, Hilly," sobbed 
 little Don. 
 
 " This is cold water, dear," she said holding 
 ft cup to his lips. 
 
 " No, 'tisn't right cold," he fretted, pushing 
 it away ; " it doesn't taste good. Oh, send some- 
 body to bring cold, cold water 1" 
 
 She set down the cup and burst into tears. 
 
 Absorbed in her grief and distress, she did 
 not hear the gate gently opened and shut again, 
 or a step coming up the path, across the porch, 
 through the hall and into the room where she 
 eat weeping such bitter tears as she had never 
 wept beturc. 
 
 But it was a cautious tread ; as of one who 
 feared to disturb the sick, as was the fact. With 
 that fear before his eyes Wallace Orinsby had 
 taken thought even to come in slippered feet. 
 
 He should have paused at the room door 
 till invited to enter, but forgot everything else 
 at sight of Mildred's distress, and never stopped 
 till he was close at her side. 
 
 " O, Mildred, dear Mildred, what is it ? what 
 can I do to help and comfort you ?" he said in 
 tones tremulous with love and pity, as he bent 
 over her and took her hand in his. 
 15
<page 345>

 
 338 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 She started with surprise, but the hand wa 
 not withdrawn, and the lips and eyes smiled 
 faintly through the rain of tears as she looked 
 up into his noble face and read there ardent 
 affection and deep sympathy in her sorrow. 
 
 " Surely you will let me help you in thig 
 dreadful time when there's no more proper per- 
 gon to doit?" he said with earnest entreaty. 
 "Why should we care for conventionalities 
 now ? You are weak and worn out, in sore 
 need of assistance ; I am well and strong, able 
 and more than willing to give it. Say, may 1 
 not stay here by your side and help with this 
 nursing ?" 
 
 " Water, cold water I" sobbed Don, "oh, go 
 get cold water for me and Cyril." 
 
 " Yes, Wallace, Mr. Ormsby," Mildred said, 
 the tears coursing down her cheeks, " I cannot 
 sacrifice them to conventionalities, and so gladly 
 accept your kind offer of help." 
 
 "Oh, don't talk! go get water, quick!" 
 fretted Don, " I can't wa^. Milly, what makes 
 yon so naughty to me ?" 
 
 Wallace seized a pitcher standing near, and 
 hastened to the spring. He was no stranger to 
 the premises and knew the way. 
 
 For the next fortnight he had what he con- 
 sidered the blessed privilege of sharing M ; >
<page 346>

 
 MILDRED KEITH. 339 
 
 dred'e burdens, griefs snd cares ; watching with 
 her over each of those dear ones as they passed 
 through the crisis of the disease, and the first 
 stages of the after convalescence ; for they all 
 recovered ; a fact which the parents and older 
 children recognized with deep heart-felt grati- 
 tude to Him to whom " belong the issues from 
 death." 
 
 Nor did they forget the thanks due their 
 earthly helpers and friends. The minister held 
 a warmer place than before in the hearts of 
 these parishioners, and Damaris Drybread re- 
 ceived a substantial reward for her services; 
 which, as she was dependent upon her own ex- 
 ertions for a livelihood, was not declined. 
 
 That fearful sickly season passed away ; but 
 not soon to be forgotten by the survivors, and 
 comparative health and prosperity again dawned 
 upon the town and surrounding country. 
 
 The Keiths returned to their old busy cheer- 
 ful life, and Wallace Ormsby, beloved by the 
 whole family, seemed as one of them. Years 
 of ordinary social intercourse could not have 
 brought him into so close an intimacy with 
 them, and especially with Mildred, as those two 
 weeks in which they two shared the toils, the 
 oares and anxieties of those who watch by beds 
 of sickness that may end in death.
<page 347>

 
 340 MILDRED KEITH. 
 
 They had learned to know each other's 
 faults and weaknesses, strong points and virtues, 
 and with the knowledge their mutual esteem 
 and admiration had but increased ; they had 
 been warm friends before, now they were 
 not plighted lovers, Ormsby had not spoken 
 yet but 
 
 " To his eye 
 
 There was but one beloved face on earth, 
 And that was shining on him."
<page 348>

<page 349>

<page 350>

<page 351>

 
 NON-RENEWABLE ffi 
 
 .9 1 
 OCT111999 
 
 05 | 8 
 DUE 2 WKS FROM DATE RECEIVED g^ < 
 
 |L*> 
 
 
 .iEC'DVRt NOV22-99 
 
 - 
 
 THE LIBRARY 

<page 352>

 
 Illlillllllllilllllllllllllllll 
 
 F5zm L 006 849 048 1 
 
 PS 
 
 1678 
 
 F5zm
<page 353>

<page 354>
