

<page 1>


<page 2>
Return this book on or before the
latest Date stamped below.
University of Illinois Library -
NOV 30.1335
5
art 30 %
| || "…
* .…)
MAN 102006






<page 3>

<page 4>

<page 5>

<page 6>
M E M O I R S
OF THE
PRIVATE LIFE,
RETURN, AND REIGN
OF
NA POLE ON
In 1815.
Ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem habes. ScIPIo.
BY M. FLEURY DE CHABOULON,
Ex-Secretary of the Emperor Napoleon and of his Cabinets, Master of
Requests to the Council of State, Baron, Officer of the Legion of
Honour, and Knight of the Order of Reunion.
WOL. I.
\
LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.
1820.*.

<page 7>

<page 8>
44/65.
// W.
V, 1
TO THE READER.
*
'Tis revolution of the 20th of March will form
unquestionably the most remarkable episode in
the life of Napoleon, so fertile as it is in su-
* pernatural events. It has not been my inten-
stion, to write the history of it: this noble task
is above my powers: I have only attempted, to
'place Napoleon on the stage of action, and op-
-Spose his words, his deeds, and the truth, to the
erroneous assertions of certain historians, the
#: of the spirit of party, and the insults
S of those timeserving writers, who are accus-
tomed to insult in misfortune those, to whom
they have subsequently paid court.
se Hitherto people have not been able to agree
on the motives and circumstances, that deter-
'mined the Emperor, to quit the island of Elba.
$Some supposed, that he had acted of his own
so accord: others, that he had conspired with his

<page 9>
vi TO THE READER,
partisans the downfal of the Bourbons. Both
these suppositions are equally false. The world
will learn with surprise, perhaps with admira-
tion, that this astonishing revolution was the
work of two individuals and a few words.
The narrative of Colonel Z***, so valuable
from the facts it reveals, appears to me to merit
the reader's attention in other respects. On
studying it carefully, we find in it the exhi-
bition of those defects, those qualities, those pas-
sions, which, confounded together, form the
character, so full of contrasts, of the incompre-
hensible Napoleon. We perceive him alter-
natively mistrustful and communicative, ardent
and reserved, enterprising and irresolute, vin-
dictive and generous, favourable to liberty and
despotic. But we see predominant above all,
that activity, that strength, that ardour of
mind, those brilliant inspirations, and those
sudden resolves, that belong only to extraor-
dinary men, to men of genius.
The conferences I had at Bale with the mys-
terious agent of Prince Metternich have re-
mained to this day buried in profound secrecy.

<page 10>
TO THE READER. vii
The historians, who have preceded me, relate,
without any explanation, that the Duke of
Otranto laid before the Emperor, at the mo-
ment of his abdication, a letter from M. de
Metternich; and that this letter, artfully
worded, had determined Napoleon to abdicate,
in the hope that the crown would devolve to
his son. The particulars given in these Me-
moirs will entirely change the ideas formed of
this letter, and of its influence. They confirm
the opinion too, pretty generally prevalent, that
the allied sovereigns deemed the restoration of
the Bourbons of little importance, and would
willingly have consented, to place the young
Prince Napoleon on the throne.
It had been supposed, that the famous de-
cree, by which Prince de Talleyrand and his
illustrious accomplices were sent before the
courts of justice, was issued at Lyons in the
first burst of a fit of vengeance. It will be
seen, that it was the result of a plan simply
political: and the noble resistance, which Ge-
neral Bertrand (now labouring under a sen-
tence of death) thought it his duty to oppose

<page 11>
viii TO Til E READER.
to this measure, will add, if it be possible, to
the high esteem, merited on so many accounts
by this faithful friend to the unfortunate. -
The writings published previously to this
work, equally contain nothing but inaccurate or
fabulous reports, with regard to the abdication
of Napoleon. Certain historians have been
pleased, to represent Napoleon in a pitious state
of despondency: others have depicted him as
the sport of the threats of M. Regnault St.
Jean d’Angely, and of the artifices of the Duke
of Otranto. These Memoirs will show, that
Napoleon, far from having fallen into a state of
weakness, that would no longer permit him to
wield the sceptre, aspired, on the contrary, to
be invested with a temporary dictatorship, and
that, when he consented to abdicate, it was be-
cause the energetic attitude of the representa-
tives disconcerted him, and he yielded to the
fear of adding the calamities of a civil war to the
disasters of a foreign invasion.
It was perfectly unknown too, that Napoleon
was detained a prisoner at Malmaison after his
abdication. It was presumed, that he deferred

<page 12>
TO THE READER. ix
his departure, in the hope of being replaced at
the head of the army and of the government.
These Memoirs will show, that this hope, if it
dwelt within the breast of Napoleon, was not
the real motive of his stay in France; and that
he was detained there by the committee of
government, till the moment when, honour out-
weighing all political considerations, it obliged
Napoleon to depart, to prevent his falling into
the hands of Blucher. -
The negotiations and conferences of the
French plenipotentiaries with the enemy’s ge-
nerals; the proceedings of the Prince of Eck-
muhl; the intrigues of the Duke of Otranto;
the efforts of those members of the committee,
who remained faithful to their trust; the de-
bates on the capitulation of Paris, and all the
collateral facts, connected with these different
circumstances, had been totally misrepresented;
These Memoirs establish or unfold the truth.
They bring to light the conduct of those mem-
bers of the committee, who were supposed to be
the dupes or accomplices of Fouché ; and that
of the marshals, the army, and the chambers.

<page 13>
X TO THE READER.
They contain also the correspondence of the
plenipotentiaries, and the instructions given to
them; documents hitherto unpublished, which
will make known, what the politics and wishes
of the government of France at that time were.
Finally I shall observe, in order to complete
the account I think it right to give the reader
of the substance of this work, that it furnishes
elucidations of the campaign of 1815, the want
of which has been imperiously felt. The causes,
that determined Napoleon, to separate from his
army at Laon, were not known: I point them
out. General Gourgaud, in his narrative, could
give no explanation of the march of the corps
of Count Erlon at the battle of Ligny, of the
conduct of Marshal Ney on the 16th, of the
inactivity of Napoleon on the 17th, &c. All
these points, I believe, I have elucidated. I
show also, that it was not, as General Gourgaud
and other writers assert, to raise the spirits,
and excite the courage of the French army, that
its leader announced to it the arrival of Marshal
Grouchy. It is a certain fact, that Napoleon
was himself deceived by a brisk firing, which

<page 14>
TO THE READER. xi
took place between the Prussians and Saxons,
and it is falsely, that he has been charged with
having knowingly deceived his soldiers, at a
moment when the laws of war and of humanity
presented to him, to think rather of a retreat,
than of continuing the battle.
I had at first rejected from these Memoirs
such official papers, as had already been made
known: but have since thought, that they ought
to be inserted. This work, which embraces all
the events of the reign of a Hundred Days,
would be imperfect, if the reader were obliged
to refer to the papers of the day; to read or
consult the act of the congress of Vienna, that
placed the Emperor Napoleon out of the pale
of the law of nations; the Additional Act,
which occasioned his loss of popularity; and
the eloquent speeches and nervous declarations
by which Napoleon, his ministers, and his coun-
sellors, sought to explain and justify the 20th of
March. I have thought, besides, that perhaps
the reader would not find it uninteresting, to
witness the contests exhibited, at that import-

<page 15>
xii TO THE READER.
ant period, between the legitimacy of nations
and the legitimacy of sovereigns.
The colours under which I represent Napo-
leon, the justice I do him for the purity of his
intentions, will not please all the world. Many
persons, who would blindly have believed any
ill I could say of the ancient sovereigns of
France, will give little credit to my eulogies:
they are wrong: if praises lavished on power
be suspicious, those bestowed on the unfor-
tunate will be true; to doubt them would be
sacrilege.
Neither can I conceal from myself, that the
men, who, from principle, see nothing but a
hateful conspiracy in the revolution of the 20th
of March, will accuse me of having embellished
facts, and designedly distorted the truth. No
matter: I have depicted this revolution as I
saw it, as I felt it. How many others are
pleased, to tarnish the honour of the nation, to
represent their countrymen as composed of
rebels or cowards! For my part, I think it the
duty of a good Frenchman, to prove to all

<page 16>
TO THE READER. xiii
Europe, that the king was not guilty of abandon-
ing France:
That the insurrection of the 20th of March
was not the work of a few factious persons,
who might have been repressed; but a grand
national act, against which the efforts and voli-
tions of individuals would have been vain:
That the royalists were not cowards, and all
other Frenchmen traitors:
Lastly, that the return from the island of
Elba was the terrible consequence of the faults
of ministers and the ultras, which called to
France the man of fate, as the conductor draws
down the lightning from heaven.
This sentiment naturally led me, to conclude
these Memoirs by a philosophical examination
of the Hundred Days, and a refutation of the *
reproaches daily bestowed on the men of the
20th of March: but considerations, easy to
divine, held my pen. It was my duty, to con-
tent myself with placing a statement of the
facts before the eyes of the grand jury, the
public, and leave it to decide. I know, that
the question has been determined in the fields

<page 17>
xiv TO THE READER.
of Waterloo; but a victory is not a judicial
sentence.
Whatever opinion the impartial reader may
form of this work, I can protest beforehand,
that I have not allowed myself to be influenced
by any private consideration, by any feeling of
hatred, affection, or gratitude. I have followed
no impulse but that of my conscience, and I
may say with Montaigne: “This is an honest
book.”
Too young to have participated in the errors
or crimes of the revolution, I began and ended
my political career without blot, and without
reproach. The places, titles, and decorations,
which the Emperor deigned to bestow on me,
were the reward of several acts of great de-
votion to his service, and of twelve years of
trials and sacrifices. Never did I receive from
him any favours or gifts: I entered his service
rich, I quitted it poor. -
When Lyons opened to him its gates, I was
free: I spontaneously embraced his cause: it
appeared to me, as to the immense number of
Frenchmen, that of liberty, honour, and our

<page 18>
TO THE READER. XV
country. The laws of Solon declared infamous
those, who took no part in civil troubles. I
followed their maxims. If the misfortunes of
the 20th of March must fall on the heads of
the guilty, these guilty, I repeat, will not be
in the eye of posterity, the Frenchmen who
abandoned the royal standard, to return to the
ancient colours of their country; but those
imprudent and senseless men, who, by their
threats, their acts of injustice, and their out-
rages, compelled us to choose between insur-
rection and slavery, between honour and in-
famy.
During the Hundred Days, there was no
person to whom I did an ill turn; frequently I
had an opportunity of doing good, and seized it
with joy.
Since the return of the regal government, I
have lived tranquil and solitary; and, whether
from forgetfulness, or from a sense of justice, I
escaped in 1815 the persecutions, which the
partisans and servants of Napoleon experienced.
This explanation, or this apology, appeared

<page 19>
xvi TO THE READER.
to me necessary: it is right the reader should
know, who it is that addresses him.
I could have wished, to abstain from speaking
of the royal government in the first part of this
work: but it was impossible. It was necessary
for me, prominently to exhibit the errors and
faults of the king's ministers one by one, to
render evident this truth, that they were the
sole authors of the 20th of March. When else-
where, as here, I say the government, I mean
not to designate the King, but his ministers.
In a constitutional monarchy, in which the mi-
nisters are responsible, we cannot, and ought
not to confound them with the King. “It is
from the King,” said the keeper of the seals,
when he proposed to the deputies of the nation
the project of a law on the responsibity of
ministers, “that every act of equity, protec-
tion, and clemency, and every regular employ-
ment of power, emanates: it is to the ministers
alone, that abuses, injustice, and misconduct,
are to be imputed.

<page 20>
ME MO IRS,
&c. &c.
UNTIL the close of the Spanish war, Napoleon,
whether as the First Consul of the Republic, or
as the Chief of the Empire, had never ceased to
be the object of the love, the pride, and the
confidence of the people. But the multitude
neither judge, nor can judge of the actions of
their rulers but from appearances which often
mislead them in their judgment; and the loyalty
of the nation then became enfeebled. The con-
duct of Napoleon was stigmatized as a series of
hateful aggressions; the war, as an unjustifiable
act of violence. Disaffection increased. Na-
poleon was assailed by the anger of his subjects,
and, for the first time, they upbraided him with
having spilt their blood, and wasted their riches,
in gratifying his vain and culpable ambition.
At this juncture the public mind became ab-
sorbed in the contemplation of the invasion of
Russia, and the general discontent was with-
VOL. I. B

<page 21>
Q MiEMOIRS OF
drawn from the events which had taken place
in the peninsula.
Our arms were crowned with good fortune
and glory at the commencement of the Russian
war; but that conflict was ended by a cata-
strophewhich has no parallel in the annals of
the world.
The Emperor, who escaped almost alone from
the perils of the campaign, returned to the
capital. His countenance was that of a hero
who defies adversity. But his firmness was
deemed to be the result of heartless insensibility.
Instead of inspiring the people with hope, it em-
bittered their feelings. Louder murmurs broke
forth; their indignation expressed itself with
greater emphasis. Yet such was the enthusiasm
which was even then inspired by the proud re-
collections of the triumphs of Napoleon, that
France, blushing for her disgrace, implored him
to win new victories. Armies formed them-
selves as if by enchantment, and Napoleon
stood again in the midst of Germany, more
terrible than ever.
After we had conquered at Lutzen, at Baut-
zen, and at Dresden, the battle of Leipsic was
fought". Never before that day had we been
*The misfortunes of that eventful day, and of the remainder
of the campaign, were caused by the treachery of the Saxons

<page 22>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 3
doomed to witness our national armies flying
before the enemy. The scattered wrecks of
our battalions, which had been created by the
last hope, by the last effort of our country, at
length reached our frontiers. But our soldiers
were no longer the vigorous and resolute war-
riors of France; they were bowed down by
want, toil, and humiliation. Soon afterwards
they were followed by wandering trains of
military carriages, loaded with diseased and
wounded wretches, who festered beneath the
corpses amongst which they were heaped, and
who at once absorbed and diffused the germs
of pestilence and contagion. Even the firmest
minds now yielded to despair; and the grief
occasioned by the havoc now made amongst
our defenders renewed the sorrows of the
mothers and the wives of those who erewhile
had perished in Russia and in Spain. Curses
upon Napoleon, the author of all these evils,
resounded from side to side of the empire.
As long as good fortune waited upon Napo-
leon, his most ambitious attempts commanded
the applauses of the nation. We boasted of
his profound political wisdom, we extolled his
genius, we worshipped his courage. When his
and the defection of the Princes of the Confederation of the
Rhine.
B 2

<page 23>
4 MEMOIRS OF
fortune changed, then his political wisdom was
called treachery, his genius, ambition, and his
courage, fool-hardiness and infatuation.
Napoleon was not to be depressed by ingra-
titude or misfortune. He re-assembled the feeble
fragments of his armies, and proclaimed aloud
that he would conquer or die at the head of
his soldiery. This resolution only produced a
momentary impression. The French, who so
lately believed that the happiness and salvation
of France depended only upon the life of Na-
poleon, now coolly considered that his death,
the fate which he was prepared to encounter,
afforded the only means of putting an end to the
calamities of war, for peace otherwise appeared
unattainable.
Napoleon departed. He achieved prodigies,
but to no effect. National spirit no longer
existed, and the nation had gradually sunk into
that state of insensibility so fatal to sovereigns,
when the public mind has no perception of
their dangers, and abandons them to their
destiny.
France was thus affected when Napoleon con-
sented to divest himself of his crown *. The
* Napoleon, according to the common report, was fre-
quently heard to repeat, after his abdication, “I have been

<page 24>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 5
apathy of the nation drove him to this ex-
tremity; for it deprived him of the means
ruined by liberal ideas.” I do not think that he ever ex-
pressed himself in this manner. I do not intend to doubt
the irresistible force which liberal ideas have now acquired;
but I do not think, that they contributed to effect the first
downfall of the imperial throne. Nobody thought about
liberal ideas at that period. France had been trained to the
government of Napoleon, and his despotism gave rise to no
complaints. She was not free in the manner according to
which the nation now wishes to enjoy liberty. But the
liberty which France then possessed was enough for the
French. Napoleon would often exercise unlimited authority,
but the country had only one master, and he was the master
of all. If it is true that the French abandoned Napoleon in
1814, it was not because we were tired of Napoleon or dis-
contented with his government, but because the nation was
exhausted, discouraged, and demoralized by an uninterrupted
succession of calamitous wars. The people would still have
been delighted to obey him, but they had neither strength
nor soul.
The real causes of the downfal of Napoleon are to be
found in his hatred towards England, and in the continental
system, which resulted from that hatred. This gigantic
system, which oppressed all Europe, could not fail to raise
the entire continent against Napoleon and France, and thus
to bring on the ruin of both. “Rome,” as it is said by
Montesquieu, “extended her empire because her wars only
followed in succession. Each nation, such was her incon-
ceivable good fortune, waited till another had been con-
quered, before beginning the attack." Rome fell as soon
as all the nations assailed and penetrated on every side.

<page 25>
6 MEMOIRS OF
either of carrying on the war, or of making
peace.
Hostilities ended with the abdication of Na-
poleon. The people of Paris, who had scarcely
recovered from the panic with which they were
struck by the marauding hordes of Russia, dis-
played the most extravagant gladness when
they thought that they were delivered from the
visitation, which again threatened them in the
presence of the allies and the imperial army.
The neighbouring departments, which the
enemy prepared to invade, rejoiced on being re-
lieved from impending pillage and devastation.
The departments which had been occupied
by the enemy were intoxicated with joy, when
they anticipated the termination of their suf-
ferings.
Thus almost all the people of France turned
away from their discarded sovereign. And
they abandoned themselves to joy when they
thought that they were delivered from the
scourge of war, and that they could hope to
enjoy the blessings of peace.
It was in the midst of this pouring out of the
spirit of selfishness, that the senate raised the
brother of Louis XVI. to the throne. His elec-
tion was not in conformity to the expectations
of the people, and it disappointed the wishes

<page 26>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 7
which had been uttered in favour of the Em-
press and her son; yet the choice of the senate
was but slightly opposed, because the recall of
Louis seemed to be necessarily the pledge of
peace. And peace was more the object of the
public wish than any other thing. Besides
which, the Bourbons followed the wise counsels
which had been given to them. They lost no
time in issuing their proclamations, couched in
fair language, in order to calm the fears and
diminish the antipathies excited by their recall.
“We will guarantee,” said they, “the rank,
the honours, and the rewards of the military.
“The magistracy and all public functionaries
shall retain their offices and their pre-eminence.
“To the people we promise a total oblivion
of their political conduct; and we will maintain
them in the full enjoyment of their civil rights,
their property, and their social institutions.”
The French nation, whose confidence is so
easily abused, considered these promises as
sacred and inviolable, and they delighted in re-
peating the happy reply of the Count of Artois",
“Il n'yaura rien de changé en France, illny aura
* He arrived at Paris before his august brother, and by
these pleasing expressions he replied to the addresses of
congratulation presented to him by the municipality of
Paris.

<page 27>
8 MEMOIRS OF
que quelques Français de plus.” They, the
men, who had banished the imperial dynasty,
laboured to foster the growing confidence of
the nation. The press was brought into full
play, and the country teemed with publications
in which they represented the sovereign whom
they had brought in, as invested with those
attributes which were calculated to conciliate
the nation. The public were carefully informed,
that the king “opened and read all the dis-
patches himself. It is he who dictates every
answer. Where it becomes necessary to meet
the ministers of foreign powers, he transacts
business with them; he receives the reports of
their missions, which he answers either by word
of mouth, or in writing. In short, he alone
directs all the concerns of the government,
both at home and abroad. If his virtues and
goodness are such as to cause the French to
know that they will now find a kind and affec-
tionate father in their King, they may also look
with confidence to the future fate of the nation,
relying on his brilliant information, his strength
of character, and his aptitude for business”.”
* Extracted from the Journal des Debats. The principal
proprietor and editor of this paper was Monsieur Laborie,
one of Talleyrand's creatures, and private secretary to the
provisional government.

<page 28>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 9
Thus the people congratulated themselves,
when they were assured that their Chief Ma-
gistrate was an enlightened sovereign, a kind
sovereign, an equitable sovereign, and one who
was determined not to allow the guiding reins
of the state to slip from his paternal hands into
those of his ministers. Our lively imagination
gave us a present enjoyment of the blessings,
which, as we anticipated, would hereafter be
diffused over the kingdom by his goodness, his
prudence, and his acquirements. If this glow-
ing vision of hope and loyalty was slightly
dimmed by a few secret doubts, such mis-
givings were checked and repelled by the name
of our native country; nay, by the name of
the Emperor himself. For when Napoleon bade
farewell to his trusty soldiers, it was in these
words: “Be faithful to the new sovereign of
France; do not rend asunder our beloved and
long-suffering land.”
These circumstances (nor must the charm of
novelty be excluded) united in favour of the
king, and won every head and every heart. He
appeared—he was received with acclamations
of love and gladness, which resounded until he
entered the palace of his forefathers.
No counter revolution ever effected the
change of a royal dynasty, under such favour-
able auspices.

<page 29>
10 MEMOIRS OF
The French nation felt jaded by civil dissen-
sions, by misfortune—even their victories had
wearied them. They longed for the happiness
of repose. Memorable were the words of the
king's brother; “let us forget the past, let us
look only towards the future, let us all unite in
the good work of labouring to heal the wounds
of our common country;” and these honoured
precepts had become implanted in every mind.
They formed the canon of all our feelings and
all our duties.
As long as the machinery of the new govern-
ment did not begin to work, this loyal harmony
subsisted, and no longer. For when it became
necessary to settle the organization of the army,
the ministry, and the magistracy, then self-love
gained an easy victory over patriotism, and the
bad passions, pride, ambition, and party-hatred,
roused themselves from their slumber.
During a quarter of a century, our emigrants
had sojourned in a strange country. Useless
and troublesome guests to the strangers by whom
they were fed, their lives had been droned away
in shameless and cowardly idleness. They could
not cheat themselves into a belief that they pos-
sessed the talents and experience of the sons of
the revolution. But they imagined that nobi-
lity, as in the old time, might pass for worth;
and that their patents and pedigrees still gave

<page 30>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 1 I
them a right to monopolize all power and all
honour.
The citizens, the soldiers, the nation, relied on
the lawfulness of their rights no less than on the
promises of the king. The members of the old
privileged caste, instead of exciting suspicion,
were only the objects of harmless mirth. The
people laughed at the grotesque appearance of
some, and at the decrepit sottishness of others.
They never dreamed that these pretended war-
riors, whose bloodless swords had rusted in their
scabbards, would attempt to snatch the staff of
command from the veteran generals of France;
and that nobles who had grown old in sloth
and ignorance would aspire to the direction of
public affairs.
But though merit and valour were denied to
them, they stood upon a vantage ground, which
gave them a direful and incalculable pre-
ponderance in the state. They surrounded the
throne. Soon did their insolence announce
that they had craftily availed themselves of the
advantages which they possessed; and we fore-
saw with affliction that inveterate prejudice,
malignant prepossessions, and old habits of fa-
miliarity, would, sooner or later, crush the prin-
ciples of justice and equity, however solemnly
proclaimed. - - -

<page 31>
12 MEMOIRS OF
The emigrants, rendered arrogant by the
prospects which opened upon them, now treated
their rivals with contemptuous disdain. They
dared not insult the defenders of our country
face to face, because the scars of the warriors
scared them. But they were spitefully active in
disparaging their birth, their services, and their
glory, and these noble retainers of royalty took
care to impress the soldiers of Napoleon with
a due sense of the width of the gulf which was
henceforth to separate a gentleman of good
family, from an upstart soldier of the revolu-
tion.
The women of the ancien regime did not
share in the timidity which, to a certain degree,
still restrained their husbands. They threw
off all decency and all reserve, and indulged in
all the fury of their spite and pride. Without
attempting to disguise their sentiments, they
openly insulted the titled dames belonging to
the new nobility, and such of the latter as were
compelled to go to court on account of the si-
tuations held by their husbands, never entered
the saloon without dread, and never quitted it
without being bathed in tears.
Uneasy, harassed, and discontented, the peo-
ple implored the fulfilment of the king's pro-
mises: they prayed with confidence; but the

<page 32>
NAPolEON IN 1815. I3
government heard them not, and repulsed them
harshly. The Doge of Genoa, speaking of
Louis XIV, said, “his majesty steals our hearts
by his amiability, but his ministers give them
back again to us.” The apophthegm of the
Doge might have been pertinently applied to
Louis XVIII. by the people.
Hitherto the government appeared to adhere
to the resolution of dealing out impartial justice
to both parties, and of performing the covenant
which the new monarch had entered into with
the nation. But now he was bound by an in-
fluence which he could not withstand. En-
snared by the machinations, the threats, and the
fears of his emigrant court, and perhaps be-
lieving that the new order of things was incompa-
tible with the stability of the Bourbon dynasty,
the maxims of his government underwent a total
change. He was taught to consider the equality
of civil rights as a revolutionary conquest, the
liberties of the nation as an usurpation of the au-
thority of the throne, the new constitution as
insulting the independence of the sovereign. It
was therefore determined that all “dangerous
characters” should be led quietly out of all
* This expression was one of those of which the ministers
made the worst use. If they were told that any magistrate,

<page 33>
14 MEMOIRS. OF
civil and military offices. The old trustworthy
nobility of the old kingdom were again to
become the sole depositaries of the power of
the state : and by slow but sure degrees it was
resolved to cancel the royal charter, and either
by fair means or by foul, to place the nation
again beneath the yoke of absolute power.
The government often appealed to the au-
thority of the King's predecessor on the throne
—of Bonaparte. Bonaparte, it was said, had
acknowledged that it was dangerous to con-
cede a representative government to the people,
and that it was fit and proper to rule them
despotically. But Napoleon, he who re-esta-
blished the authority of royalty, morality, and
religion—who had re-organized society—who
had given tranquillity to France, at the same
time that he rendered her formidable to the
world—he had earned his authority by his
services and his victories, and, if I may venture
to use the expression, he had acquired a legiti-
mate right of despotism, which neither belonged,
nor could belong, to a Bourbon. Besides which,
any officer, any functionary, whom they had turned out,
had fulfilled his duties with honour and distinction, that he
was loved and regretted by the people, they answered, “he
is a dangerous character,” and there was an end of the
business.

<page 34>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 15
in spite of the real or pretended despotism of
the imperial government, it was still a national
government; a character wholly foreign to the
Bourbon government, and which it had no
tendency to acquire.
The prognostics of the re-action which the
ministers intended to bring about were disclosed
in all parts of the body politic. Alarm seized
even the Chamber of Deputies: it hastened
to become the organ of the uneasiness of the
people, and to remind the King of the warranty
which he had given to the nation.
In the address, or rather in the protest pre-
sented by the chamber on the 15th of June, the
national representatives say, “The charter se-
cures to the voice of truth every channel which
leads to the throne, since it consecrates the
liberty of the press, and the right of petition.
“Amongst the guarantees which it contains,
the nation will attend to that which insures the
responsibility of any minister who may betray
the confidence reposed in him by your Majesty,
by trespassing on the public or private rights
insured by the constitutional charter.
“By virtue of this charter, nobility in all
future times will only command the respect of
the people as surrounded by proofs of honour

<page 35>
16 MEMOIRS OF
and glory, which the recollections of feudality
will not have the power of tarnishing.
“The principles of civil liberty are founded
upon the independence of judicial authority,
and the retention of trial by jury, that invaluable
guarantee of all our rights.”
If the King had known the truth, this energetic
address would have attained its end. But the
truth could not reach him. At first he intended
to bestow his personal confidence upon the
greater part of the leading “notables” of the
revolution; but by means of remonstrances and
recriminations, another party contrived to place
his good sense again under the yoke of prejudice,
and he surrounded himself with old nobility
alone, with men who had refused to obey the
constitution sanctioned by Louis XVI., because
it destroyed their privileges; and who, for the
same reason, had refused to acknowledge the
new constitution, against which they had even
dared to protest. His companions were so
blinded, so besotted by their presumption, that
they imagined that decrees and ordinances gave
them the faculty of overturning the edifice
which the nation had erected during five and
twenty years of revolution. His confidents were
those alone who, instead of wishing to reveal to

<page 36>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 17
their sovereign the object of the projects of the
ministry, and of the faction which had rendered
the ministry their tools, had become the accom-
plices of ministerial guilt, joint conspirators in
the plot which was to destroy the royal charter.
The cabinet contained, however, some able
and experienced statesmen. They were con-
vinced that instead of teasing the nation by
holding out the probability of the restora-
tion of ancient privileges, it was the duty of
government to tranquillize the country by
guaranteeing the stability of the new system of
polity. These ministers were aware of the im-
policy of attempting to re-establish the monarchy
on its ancient principles; because by such an
attempt it would be deprived of the only ad-
vantage which it possessed over the late go-
vernment—that of being liberal. And, lastly,
they felt that if despotism and violence had been
the distinguishing characteristics of the govern-
ment of Napoleon, it was necessary that mode-
ration and justice should be the attributes of
the government of a Bourbon.
But they had not sufficient authority or per-
sonal influence to enable them to struggle
against the emigrants, and the protectors of the
emigrant faction. In the council chamber their
opinions, often well concerted, and always be-
VOL. I. C

<page 37>
18 MEMOIRS OF
nevolent, were sanctioned and approved. Out
of the council, each minister acted according to
his own plans; and, unfortunately, those depart-
ments which ramify most deeply into the nation
and its affairs were confided to men who seemed
to think that they were bound to irritate and
sour the public mind. -
General Dupont obtained the important office
of minister of the war department, as a reward
due to his proscription. According to the go-
vernment party, the general had been proscribed
by the Emperor. An odious name was thus
given to the lenient punishment which had been
inflicted upon Dupont, he who had shuffled off
the allegiance which he owed to his Emperor,
and whose cowardice had surrendered into cap-
tivity the legions intrusted to his command".
Weak, indolent, irresolute, devoid of character
and resources, he never had the wish or the
ability of becoming any thing else than the pliant
functionary of the court and the ruling courtiers.
Another, the Abbé de Montesquiou, received
the “porte-feuille” of the home department.
When a member of the Constituent Assembly
* When Dupont capitulated to the Spaniards, the insur-
gents refused to acknowledge the Emperor. Dupont there-
fore only took the title of general in the French service.

<page 38>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 19
he had been honourably distinguished by his
soft and persuasive eloquence. The temperance
of his public conduct seemed to be insured by
his personal character; he was a servant of the
altar, his health was delicate, he had lived long
in quiet retirement. But Montesquiou, meek,
mild, and timid as long as he was in the back-
ground, became scornful, angry, and overbear-
ing the instant that he stepped into power. He
detested and despised the revolution—I may
almost say, he detested and despised the nation.
This sentiment was the principle which guided
him. Montesquiou never deigned to inquire
whether any given portion of our polity was
sound or useful, whether it had been formed
with difficulty, whether it could be modified, or
ameliorated, or fitted into existing circum-
stances. He only inquired into the date of its
institution—and the date decided the question.
A third, Dambray, the chancellor, and the
chief law officer of the nation, had distinguish-
ed himself in his youth as a Judge of Parlia-
ment. His credit arose from his prudence and
his principles no less than from his talents.
He had been long since recalled to his country.
During the reign of Napoleon he fulfilled the
duties of a citizen and a subject with zeal and
fidelity. We never doubted but that he would
C 2

<page 39>
20 MEMOIRS OF
protect those constitutional forms of govern-
ment under which he had flourished in peace
and honour. Scarcely, however, was the
Chancellor clothed in his robe, when he be-
came the oppressor of the magistracy, the an-
tagonist of our new system of jurisprudence,
and the dull partisan of those slavish forms and
barbarous customs and oppressive edicts, which
had been long since annihilated by reason,
liberty, and knowledge.
The trust reposed in this portion of the
cabinet was a source of unhappiness to the na-
tion, but it was not the only one. Louis, ac-
cording to the promises held out on his restora-
tion, was to reign in person; and the more the
French have ever been desirous to obey their
sovereign with cheerful alacrity, the greater is
the repugnance which they feel to submit to the
orders of his minions. Dismay, therefore, pre-
vailed throughout the kingdom when we learnt
that Louis, weakened by an obstinate and pain-
ful disease, had entirely divested himself of his
royal authority in favour of Monsieur de Blacas.
And how much more painful did our consterna-
tion become, when we were able to understand
the views and projects of this Mayor of the
palace, and when we ascertained the baneful
extent of his ascendancy.

<page 40>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 21
It was impossible that the royal government,
including such elements in its composition,
could retain its hold on public opinion. It was
seen too clearly that the effects of a despicable
coterie would tend either to involve our country
in a civil war, or overwhelm us again with the
wretchedness and slavery from which we had
been delivered by the revolution.
The absolute necessity of rising in opposi-
tion to these nefarious attempts was felt by
the entire country. Not a man would remain
Ineuter.
During the earliest period of the reign of
Louis, the emigrant faction comprehended no-
thing but the party composed of the relics of
the ancient privileged cast. The parvenus of
the imperial government alone constituted the
so called Bonapartists. Considering their pri-
vate gratification and profit as of greater im-
portance than the public cause, each party had
hitherto only wrangled for place and power.
Their war was a matter of calculation and
selfishness. But soon their disputes involved
the fate of the main interests created by the re-
volution: the emigrants directed their attacks
not only against individuals but also against
principles, and the people, who had hitherto
only looked on, now shared the quarrel, and

<page 41>
22 MEMOIRS OF
all France was divided into two great hostile
parties".
The court, the courtiers, and the ministry
appeared as the central phalanx of the pure
royalists. As their auxiliaries, they had the old
nobility,—the priesthood,—a certain number of
apostates who had skulked away from the im-
perial government,—and lastly, all those who
had been disqualified by their incapacity and
disloyalty from obtaining employment under
Napoleon. It was the undisguised wish of this
party to wash out every stain of the revolution,
and to effect a full and unqualified restoration
of the ancien regime in all its parts, and to all
intents and purposes. -
On the other side were arrayed the party de-
signated as that of the Bonapartists, led on by
our most honourable and most virtuous citizens,
and numbering within its ranks the great body
of the people; this party strove to withstand
the impending resuscitation of the privileges
and abuses of the old government, and which
was to be effected only by the total subversion
of our existing institutions.
* I speak only of acting and thinking beings. In all
countries there is to be found a class of cyphers, who are so
careless, stupid, or selfish, that they belong to no party,
and indeed to no nation.

<page 42>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 23
The pure royalists endeavoured to annihilate
the charter, which their opponents defended,
and thus a strange contradiction took place.
The royal charter had the royalists for its
enemies, whilst its defenders were only found
amongst those who were stigmatized as the ad-
herents of Bonaparte. -
Abortive attempts were made by the pure
royalists to palliate the treachery of the go-
vernment. They tried to persuade the people
that the tranquillity and welfare of the nation
depended but on the re-establishment of an
absolute monarch, of a feudal aristocracy, and
of all the trumpery of superstition. Such was
the tendency of the publications which issued
from the ministerial press, owing their birth to
writers who had either sold themselves to the
government, or who had denationalized them-
selves by their political intolerance. But it
must not be supposed that liberty could remain
in need of advocates.
Each of the earliest stages of the growth of the
young government of royalty had been marked
by obscure yet decisive symptoms of bad faith,
not the less mischievous because they were re-
stricted to signs, and symbols, and phrases. In-
stead of the constitution voted by the senate, and
which the king had engaged to accept and ratify,
he graciously granted and conceded a charter,

<page 43>
24 MEMOIRS OF
by which he gave a new form to the government;
and which, according to its tenor, emanated
from the sovereign in the full and free exer-
cise of his royal authority. The tricoloured
cockade worn by Louis XVI. and which our .
armies had rendered illustrious, was exchanged
for the white, though to the mind’s eye the
latter was seen drenched in the blood of the
people. Louis took the title of Louis XVIII.
King of France and Navarre, and he dated his
proclamations and ordinances in the 19th year
of his reign, and thus it was to be inferred, that
the nation had been in a state of rebellion
during five and twenty years. He had disdained
to receive his crown from the will of the people,
and rather chose to hold it by divine right and
the good offices of the Prince Regent. These
ungracious affronts wounded the national feel-
ings, but no notice was taken of them at the
time, because it was apprehended that angry
recriminations might endanger the profit which
had resulted from the important sacrifices to
which we had consented for the public good.
But when the government unveiled its de-
formity, the silence of the patriotic party was
at end, and they attacked the government most
unrelentingly. The editors of the Censeur
were most conspicuous. Every abuse of power,
every violation of the charter, was proclaimed

<page 44>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 25
to France by these young tribunes of the
people; and the country was loud in applaud-
ing their zeal, their talents, and their courage.
Other writers of a more lively class stung the
emigrants to the quick by sarcasms and satire,
and brought down the chastisement of contempt
and ridicule upon those who had been spared
by the gravity of the Censeur.
The nation also obtained a clear develope-
ment of the anti-revolutionary conspiracy of the
administration, from the “Memoir” of Car-
not, and the pamphlets of Benjamin Constant.
The undeniable facts, and the unwelcome truths
which were brought forward and stated by these
writers, apprized the people that their rights and
liberties were in fearful danger.
A judicial blindness had fallen upon the mi-
nisters. All warnings, all lessons, all reproaches,
were lost upon them. Far from being awed by
public opinion, they thought they deserved high
honour for defying it. The ministers had made
up their mind. Deceived by the opinions which
they had formed respecting the preponderance
of their faction, they miscalculated the influence
and resources of the partizans of the revolution.
Confiding in their power, and in the fear in-
spired by their power, they thought it useless to
maintain any further reserve; and that they
could charge onwards to the end of the career

<page 45>
26 MEMOIRS OF
which they had in view. Intoxicated by their
ignorant enthusiasm, they insulted the nation in
the person of each individual, whilst they en-
croached upon the rights which he valued most,
and insulted him both in his interests and his
feelings. The imperial guard was removed
from Paris: the emigrants grudged the renown
of these troops, and feared their patriotism. It
was given out that the discontent evinced by
the guard when the king came in, was the cause
of the punishment which they received *.—
But had not the government called forth this
discontent? Surely it was ungenerous to com-
pel those heroes to walk as attendants in the
triumph of a new master. Their grief and
fidelity deserved not to be thus insulted. I
then saw these honoured warriors. Haggard
looks and sullen silence revealed their feelings.
Absorbed by grief, they appeared to be in-
sensible to the outward world. “Vive la Garde
Impériale” was the shout of the pitying Pa-
risians, who wished to cheer them. These
* The accusation that a spirit of mutiny prevailed amongst
them cannot be refuted more effectually than by quoting the
expressions used by M. de Montesquiou on the 14th of March.
“In the last two months,” said he, “not one of the soldiers
or officers belonging to the corps of the old guard composing
the garrison of Metz, has been once reprimanded.”

<page 46>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 27
salutations, which, perhaps, they despised, were
unheeded. Submissive to their superiors, they
obeyed the word of command which told them
that they must march: they marched, and that
was all.
Troops of the line replaced the imperial
guards, who were drafted out of the capital with
great expedition. Little time elapsed before
the dissatisfaction of the new troops became
manifest. The regiments were wholly disor-
ganized; officers were thrust upon the soldiers,
amongst whom they stood as complete strangers.
In consequence of these changes the troops
were put out of temper; and they became dis-
gusted with service, because they were wearied
by endless parades and reviews which took
place, not to perfect them in their discipline,
but for the instruction of their raw commanders.
The government broke their spirit by affronting
them: they were compelled to present arms to
the king's body guard, whom they detested.
The re-establishment of the “Maison du Roi”
was opposed by the general feeling of the nation,
and it particularly tended to rouse the jealousy
and discontent of the garrison of Paris. The
troops of the line and the national guards who
were on duty at the Tuileries could not sub-
mit to acknowledge the “gardes du corps” as
their superiors, and refused to present arms to

<page 47>
28 MEMOIRS OF
them. The “gardes du corps” complained,
and it was ordered that the troops of the line
should salute them with military honours, or be
punished. After this victory, the young “gardes
du corps,” who were proud of it, used to walk
up and down before the sentinels, in order to
force the latter to worship their epaulettes. It
may easily be imagined how such childish in-
sults, which were never checked, must have
mortified the old soldiers of Napoleon: and we
all know that the self-love of a Frenchman is
not to be offended with impunity.
Self-love is the medium through which the
soldier ascends into glory. When Napoleon
earned immortal fame in Italy, he nourished
and dignified this passion by addressing his
soldiers in language breathing the lofty spirit of
the heroic age, he rekindled the courage of his
army, and every man became a conqueror. But
the royalist officers sought to destroy all warlike
sentiment by expressing their contempt for our
national victories, by displaying the puffed in-
solence of birth and rank; and they lost the
confidence and the esteem of the army which
they were appointed to command.
Widely different, indeed, was the example
which was set by the most exalted and most
formidable of our enemies. It is needless to
name him. This sovereign never tried to un-

<page 48>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 29
dervalue our glory: he was only happy when
he could bear testimony again and again to the
talents and the courage of the French nation.
When he received our officers he did not treat
them with that ill-concealed disdain, so often
lavished on the conquered, but with the honest
esteem inspired by valour; and with that de-
licacy, I would almost say respect, which is due
to honourable misfortune. The subject of his
discourse sometimes compelled him to allude to
our reverses; but he never failed to allay the
smart by lavishing his praises on the efforts
which we had made to deprive him of victory.
He seemed to be astonished that he had been
able to withstand us. .
How deeply were our warriors affected when
they contrasted his chivalrous magnanimity
with the endeavours of their royalist masters,
who tried incessantly to poison the fond recol-
lection of their former triumphs, and to deprive
them of the only consolation which remained
to them in the hour of affliction.
Whatever discontent might prevail amongst
the troops, yet the greater part of the staff and
regimental officers had transferred themselves
to the Bourbons with cordial sincerity. Per-
haps a few, who were less confident than the
rest, still appeared distrustful and lukewarm;

<page 49>
30 MEMOIRS OF
but they might have been easily won over,
either by those sugared and alluring phrases
which sound so sweetly when pronounced by
royalty, or even by merely leaving them quiet.
until their resentment could cool of itself.
When Henry IV. recovered his throne,
the bigoted partisans of the league, whom he
had pardoned, continued still to threaten and
revile him. It was suggested that he should
punish them; but Henry said, “No,-we
must wait, they are yet vexed.” Those who
were constantly invoking the memory of good
king Henry, never sought to imitate his con-
duct. Instead of allowing time to our generals
to get over their vexation, they embittered their
temper by daily insults. Our officers were
treated like ruffian bandits; they were branded
as rebels, who were too happy if they obtained
a pardon. Praise and favour fell only to the
share of the army of Condé, the Vendeans, and
the Chouans. The triumphal arches destined
to eternize the exploits of our armies were
menaced with sacrilegious ruin; and it was
solemnly proposed to erect a monument to the
memory of the Vendeans and the emigrants
who fell at Quiberon.
Certainly our deluded brethren deserved
to be regretted and mourned. Yet they had

<page 50>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 31
turned their weapons against the sacred bosom
of their country. They were either the auxi-
liaries or the hirelings of our implacable, ene-
mies the English, and if honours were paid
to them as illustrious victims, it was equivalent
to a declaration that their conquerors were
their murderers.
Our warriors had been graced with titles
of nobility, bought with the blood which they
had shed in the defence of the country. Their
honours were treated with insolent scorn, and
the ghost of Georges Cadoudal, a murderer in
effect, and a traitor in intent, was ennobled by
the gracious patent which was bestowed upon
his father.
Georges in attempting the life of Napoleon
had committed an act against all law, whether
human or divine. If such a crime was decked
out as a virtue, if signal rewards were allotted
to the memory of the criminal, the government
abetted assassination and regicide. The safety
of Louis XVIII. and of every other monarch
was compromised, and a sanction was given to
the dangerous and antisocial doctrine which
teaches that any individual may sit in judgment
on the legitimacy of the title of the occupier of
the throne, and then determine to murder his
sovereign if he doubts the validity of his rights.

<page 51>
32 MEMOIRS OF
Other affronts exactly of the same com-
plexion were offered to France and to the
army. Titles, military commissions, and pen-
sions, were showered, in La Vendee, upon the
heads of such of the Chouans as were most
celebrated for their cruelty", and these marks
of favour were distributed amongst them in the
presence of the victims of their rapine and fe-
rocity.
The members of the ruling faction thought
that they had not done enough in endeavouring
to honour the French enemies of France at the
expense of her defenders, and therefore they
compassed the degradation and destruction of
the institutions which reminded the people of
the praises and the glory of our national armies.
In despite of the most solemn engagements
the government robbed the legion of honour
* The Chouans never allowed the opportunity of com-
mitting murder to escape them. They carried their muskets
as they walked by the side of the plough, and the furrows
which they trod were frequently sprinkled with blood. The
priests who had taken the oaths, and the purchasers of na-
tional domains, were particularly the objects of the refine-
ments of their cruelty. They seldom entered a town without
plundering the inhabitants, and without slaughtering those
who had been pointed out to their vengeance.—Lacretelle,
Precis de la Revolution.

<page 52>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 33
of its prerogatives. Then the ministerial papers
hinted that henceforward the order of St. Louis
was to be the only military order; and that the
legion of honour was to be the reward of civil
merit. The blow was aimed at the heart; the
army shuddered, our marshals burned with in-
dignation. The government was compelled to
disclaim and abandon its intent.
Yet one sure method of debasing the legion of
honour was completely in the power of govern-
ment; they could make it cheap, and to this
plan they resorted. Under Napoleon the Cross
was never granted until it had been long and
truly deserved: now it became the prey of mean-
ness. The order was prostituted and cast to
favourite underlings and intriguers, to whom it
was distributed by caprice or bribery.
Our soldiers, who had purchased this distinc-
tion with their blood,—the magistrates, the func-
tionaries, the learned, the manufacturers, who
had received it as the reward of the services
which they had rendered to the state, to the
arts, to useful industry, -all were filled with con-
sternation when they found themselves elbowed
by a mean and worthless mob. Yielding to
their honest pride, the greater part of our old
legionaries refused to wear the insignia, which,
instead of conferring distinction, could only
VOL. I. D

<page 53>
34 MIEMOIRS OF
confound them with men whom public opinion
had branded and proscribed.
Success encouraged the government, and they
did not stop. Richly endowed asylums for
the daughters of the deceased members of the le-
gion had been founded by the Emperor. Under
the pretext of economy, of saving the annual sum
of forty thousand francs, the ministers took the
King by surprise, and hurried the Sovereign into
the signature of an order for turning the orphans
out of doors. Marshal Macdonald declared in
vain that the old leaders of the army would
never abandon the children of their compa-
mions, and that they were ready to defray the
expense which was falsely assigned as the
motive of the expulsion of the girls. Equally
fruitless was the generosity of Madame Del-
chan, the matron of the establishment of Paris,
who offered to continue its management without
any assistance from the government, and to ex-
pend her entire fortune in the support of her
pupils. Nor did the ministers pay the least
attention to those who stated that the greater
part of the children had neither friends nor re-
lations, and that if they were thrown destitute
upon the world, they would be inevitably con-
signed to misery or vice. No consideration
could move the pity of the ministry.

<page 54>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 35
But at length the indignation of the public
found a voice in the Lower House, and the re-
presentatives of the people were about to remon-
strate with the Sovereign. Ministers were dis-
concerted and abashed, and they abandoned
their profligate enterprise.
This check, however, did not amend them.
A few days afterwards they dissolved the mili-
tary academies of St. Cyr and St. Germain,
alleging that they were superfluous; and at
the same moment the “Ecole Royale Militaire”
was re-established, “in order that the nobility
of the kingdom might enjoy the advantages
secured to them by the edict of January 1757.”
By this impudent violation of the principles
of the charter our representatives were again
roused, and the ministers were again obliged to
recede.
Irritated by these defeats, they sought re-
venge; and actuated by an ill-judged hope of
weakening the resisting obstacles, they dismissed
a countless multitude of military officers, who
were turned out of the army upon half pay,
though their full pay had been formally gua-
rantied. It must be acknowledged that the
number of the officers of the imperial army was
much greater than was required by the strength
of the royal army; but as it was alleged that
D 2

<page 55>
36 MEMOIRS OF
they were useless and expensive, it was not
right to insult them in their misfortunes by
ministerial profusion; for, at the same time,
they saw the government granting rank and pay
to a number of emigrants who were good for
nothing in the army. The government raised
six thousand “gardes du corps,” troops of
musketeers and light horse, “gendarmes de la
garde,” &c. who scandalized Paris, and disgusted
the army by their new epaulettes, and their
sumptuous and splendid uniforms. Lastly, the
government, led on by its innovating madness,
did not respect those veterans whom Death had
spared on the field of battle. Without pitying
age or infirmities, the ministers, using their
accustomed pretext of economy, withdrew the
benefactions which a grateful nation had be-
stowed upon two thousand five hundred of these
objects of compassion. -
Since the ministers did not dread giving
public offence to the army, and in matters
where the offence would be felt most acutely,–
since they refused to recognize both its services
and its rights, it may be easily supposed that the
military were disgusted and oppressed when they
appeared before the ministry as individuals. It
is not intended to detail the complaints and ac-
cusations which then justly abounded; but one

<page 56>
TWAPOLEON IN 1815. 37
fact may be stated as giving a double illustra-
tion of the spirit which prevailed.
General Milhaud had distinguished himself
in the course of our national wars, by success
and bravery. At the time when France was
invaded by the allies, he “covered himself with
glory” at the head of a handful of dragoons,
who cut a considerable corps of the enemy’s
troops entirely to pieces. This officer, in con-
sequence of his rank, his standing, and his
services, had been appointed a chevalier de St.
Louis as a matter of right; but at the moment
of his reception, the cross was taken from him
with ignominy, because he had been so un-
fortunate as to vote for the death of the King
twenty years before.
Houis XVIII., when he returned to France,
had promised that he would not inquire into
the votes which had been given against his
august brother. This promise, which had been
demanded from him, and which he ratified by
his charter, could not be otherwise than a pain-
ful victory over the feelings of his heart. He
must have grieved when he found himself under
the necessity of admitting those judges into his
court, who had condemned Louis XVI. to the
scaffold, and to present them to the daughter
of the murdered monarch. But still he had

<page 57>
38 MEMOIRS OF
sworn not to avenge his death, and the oaths by
which a monarch binds himself to his people
should be inviolable.
All resentment was to be repressed. The
voters had been pardoned, and therefore the go-
vernment could not be justified in reviving the
memory of their crime, and in bringing down
vengeance and death upon their heads. A
funeral veil ought to have been drawn over
that period of our revolution, during which
we were all equally misled or guilty. Besides,
we must state plainly and distinctly, that the
grief excited by the murder of Louis XVI.,
was not the true cause of the invectives with
which the regicides were assailed by the emi-
grants. Unfortunately the effect produced
at Coblentz by the trial and execution of the
king, is too well known. If the errors of some
of the men of the revolution were hunted out
with so much malignant zeal, it was only for
the purpose of coming to this result—that as
the revolution was the work of crime, it was
necessary to root out every thing which had
proceeded from the revolution.
The insult to which General Milhaud was
subjected, was therefore rather a political move-
ment, than a punishment inflicted on an in-
dividual. In selecting Milhaud as the object

<page 58>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 39
of the first assault against the regicides, the
government gave a proof of their want of tact;
for if they wanted to render the regicides con-
temptible or odious, they should have avoided
attacking an officer who had long since washed
away the stains of the blood of his King, by
imbruing himself in the blood of our enemies!
But whilst the military, from the highest to
the lowest, were exposed to the persecution
and tyranny of the prevailing faction, the ma-
gistracy, and the civil functionaries of the state,
suffered no less from ill treatment and injustice.
Commissioners had been despatched into the
departments, even at the beginning of the new
reign, “in order to consolidate the royal go-
vernment, and to examine into the conduct of
the public functionaries under existing circum-
stances;” that is to say, at the moment of the
restoration of the Bourbons.
Such was the confidence which the nation
placed in the promises of the King, that no
jealousy was excited by this measure. On the
contrary, people expected that great good
would result from it, that party heat would be
allayed, and public interest and opinion be-
come more speedily united to the throne.
This pleasing illusion was soon dispelled. A
great number of emigrants, who had just come

<page 59>
40 MEMOIRS OF
in again, were appointed commissioners. In-
stead of listening to cool and experienced
advisers, they gave themselves up to the priests
and nobles who beset them, and who were
neither moderate nor enlightened.
The middling classes, who, from their habitual
intercourse with the lower orders, possess so
great an influence over the body of the people,
were considered by the commissioners as a
rabble multitude of upstart “roturiers.” They
treated the middling class with disdain and con-
tempt. Deceived by the recollection of the
excesses of the revolution, they fancied, that
whoever could win the populace, became the
ruler of the country. When money is not to
be had, the surest way of getting over the mul-
titude, is by appealing to its passions. They
therefore announced, that they were sent to do
justice to the people, to listen to their com-
plaints, to reform abuses, and to abolish the
“droits réunis,” and the conscription.
Meetings were announced in the villages and
in the country towns. All persons of respect-
ability kept away; but the populace, who are
always delighted with uproar and novelty,
crowded in. There was no end to the pre-
posterous charges which were preferred against
the magistrates, the prefects, the under-prefects,

<page 60>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 41
the mayors, the administrators of public affairs,
the officers of revenue; in short, none of the
depositaries of public authority were spared.
Instead of despising such accusations, or sub-
mitting them to an impartial inquiry, the com-
missioners hailed the popular clamour with trans-
port. They triumphed in the tumult; they were
overflowing with happiness at the fancied suc-
cess of their efforts; they continued exclaiming
with increasing joy, “that is right, Good
People; the King is your father; these fellows
are nothing but canaille; upon our word of
honour, we will kick them out.”
These promises were kept. The public
officers and functionaries of all classes were
gradually dismissed, and their places given to in-
formers, or to the old nobility. As the common
people cooled, they became undeceived, and it
was found that they had gained neither in riches
nor in loyalty. The commissioners, instead of
adding as they expected to the popularity of
the government, only helped to cry it down.
The cause of royalty was compromised by the
scenes of riot which they encouraged, and they
degraded it by acts of injustice and oppression.
The non-emigrant commissioners acted far
otherwise. They knew how to value the lying
declamations of the nobles, and of the mob

<page 61>
42 MEMOIRS OF
whom the nobles had set on. From the dif-
ferent conduct pursued by each party, effects
resulted which exhibited the most striking con-
trast. In one department the public function-
aries retained their situations, in another they
were disgraced and vituperated.
These scandalous proceedings excited the ge-
neral indignation of the country. The govern-
ment was universally blamed. The important
task of instituting inquiries, which were to
affect the honour and the civil existence of the
most respectable characters, had been entrusted
to emigrants who had lived amongst strangers
during the best part of their lives. And these
men, who knew nothing of the forms, the
principles, or even the faults of the imperial
government, were consequently wholly unable
to appreciate the conduct, whether praise-
worthy or blameable, of the depositaries of
public authority.
The people discovered that they had been
cheated, and that this measure, disguised by
specious representations, was in truth adopted
only for the purpose of more effectually dis-
placing the old functionaries of the nation.
And, lastly, it was evident that this general dis.
mission would carry off those authorities who
were the natural guardians of every individual

<page 62>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 43
who had taken a part in the revolution. And
that all who were thus affected would be
placed beneath the sway of their sworn enemies,
the nobles, the priests, and their adherents.
Indications were given by the government
that a “purification” of the courts of justice was
in contemplation; and the public apprehension
increased. The independence and immovability
of the judges had been guaranteed to the nation,
and this guarantee was certainly the most valua-
ble of the rights which we had gained. But on
account of its importance, the government were
the more desirous of violating it.
When the proposed “purification” became
known, our national magistrates trembled in
their chairs, and they foresaw that they would
be plucked out for the purpose of making way
for the antiquated survivors of the courts of
parliament.
The nation was alarmed, and protested against
the measure. But the “purification” was not
to be stopped in its swoop. The process began
in the supreme tribunal of the kingdom, the
Court of Cassation. And, to remove all doubts
respecting the ulterior object of the govern-
ment, it was officially announced that the eli-
mination, disguised under the name of the
“installation royale,” had been deferred only
*

<page 63>
44 MEMOIRS OF
for the purpose of “obtaining the information
which was necessary to direct or decide the
choice of the judges, and that it would take
place successively in all the courts and tribunals
of the kingdom.”
The “installation” was felt to be not only a
breach of faith, but an open conspiracy against
the security of the person and property of the
subject. We knew that the tribunals would now
be filled with magistrates whose prejudices, prin-
ciples,and interest, must be in perpetual hostility
against our national laws, and that the new men
would seek to elude or crush our juridical sys-
tem. The royal magistrates, as it was but too
evident, would be the relations, the friends, or
the creatures of the nobility, the emigrants, and
of all who claimed to be restored to their rights
and privileges. Nor could we hope that judges
so constituted would deal out impartial justice
between the ci-devant privileged tribes, whom
they would naturally consider as the victims of
revolutionary principles, and the children of
the revolution, who, according to the same
mode of reasoning, they could not fail to con-
sider as the oppressors and robbers of the
privileged tribes.
The owners of national property were most
alarmed by the approaching expulsion of the

<page 64>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 45
revolutionary judges. By the charter, the in-
violability of their property had been guaranteed
to them. But they had not forgotten that a
violent debate arose on the “redaction” of this
article; and that the ministers had been al-
ready accused on account of the obscurity of
the clause, which they refused to correct into
such words as might prevent all future quibbling
and special pleading.
If the emigrants, the priesthood, and the
nobility, did not scruple to express their hopes
aloud that the sales of the national domains
might be declared null and void, it was equally
well known to the public that certain Great Per-
sonages entertained the same hopes in secret.
Doubts respecting the legality, and, consequent-
ly, of the validity of the sales, were expressed in
the ministerial journals; and various publications
were industriously disseminated, in which the
purchases were directly impugned. The authors
of these works were favoured and protected";
* M.M. David and Falconnet. In order to appease the pub-
lic indignation, a summons was issued against these writers,
it being stated in the process that they had endeavoured to
excite civil war. There was no difficulty in guessing that this
proceeding was a farce, and that by overcharging the crime
it was the intention of the government to favour the acquittal
of the accused; and accordingly they were acquitted.

<page 65>
46 MEMOIRS OF
and it was whispered that the Great Personages,
to whom we have already alluded, had de-
liberated on the means of realizing their hopes.
All these tokens of the times united in giving
too reasonable a ground for the apprehensions
entertained by the proprietors of the confiscated
lands; and the disorganization of the tribunals
was considered as a national calamity.
It is calculated that the individuals who are
interested directly or indirectly either in the
purchases of the national domains, or in the
rights and liabilities arising out of them, amount
in number to somewhat between nine and ten
millions.
An opportunity offered itself when all the un-
easiness felt by this integral portion of the
population of France might have been removed.
It was when the law, by which the emigrants
recovered possession of such part of their pro-
perty as had not been alienated, came under
consideration. It was natural to suppose that
the administration would take advantage of the
capability of the proceeding, in order to revive
the confidence of the public, and to renew the
guarantee of the charter. Such was not their
conduct. On the contrary, M. Ferrand, the
government orator, one of the men who did
most mischief to the King and the kingdom,

<page 66>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 47
abandoned himself—we borrow the expression
of the reporter of the committee—to all the
acrimony of his passions, and all the profligacy
of his principles. His fury could only be equalled
by his folly. He did not scruple to maintain, in
the midst of the representatives of the nation,
that the emigrants had the greatest right to
claim the justice and favour of the royal govern-
ment, because they alone had not wandered from
the righteous path. And starting with this
position, he represented the forfeiture and sale
of their property, not as the justifiable acts of .
a legislative body, but as revolutionary outrages
and robberies which the nation ought to hasten
to make good.
The Chamber of Deputies passed their cen-
sure upon the inflammatory doctrines and lan-
guage of the royalist orator, and expunged the
word “restitution” from the law. It had not
been inserted without design, for “restitution”
supposes a previous robbery, and the emigrants
had not been robbed of the property: it had
been confiscated by virtue of a law sanctioned
by the King; and which law was only a new
application of the system of confiscation created
and followed up by the King's predecessors.
Without travelling into more remote periods,

<page 67>
48 MEMOIRS OF
we may ask if it was not with the spoils of the
victims who had been sacrificed to the mur-
derous policy of Richelieu, and the religious
intolerance of Louis XIV., that the first families
had been enriched ? And who can tell whether
the lands which the emigrants reclaimed with
so much pride and bitterness, were not the
same which their ancestors had received without
a blush from the bloody hands of Richelieu and
Louis? -
It must be confessed that the unalterable
fidelity of a certain number amongst the emi-
grants bound the royal government to reward
their fidelity and to alleviate their misfortunes.
But all had not an equal right to the affection
and gratitude of the King. If some had gene-
rously sacrificed their fortunes and their country
in the cause of royalty, yet others only fled
from France because they wished to escape their
creditors", and thought that in strange coun-
tries they might find dupes to feed upon, and
thus exist upon swindling resourcestowhich they
could no longer resort with impunity at home.
* Before the revolution it was customary for “les grands
seigneurs” to obtain what were called “lettres de surséance,”
by means of which they avoided the payment of their debts,
and defeated their creditors.

<page 68>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 49
It was therefore necessary to separate the
first class of emigrants from the last; and after
establishing this distinction, the government
should have made a fair appeal to the justice
and generosity of the nation. Frenchmen, who
yield so readily to every dignified sentiment,
would not have allowed the faithful and virtuous
servants of their King to languish in poverty.
We may appeal to the universal assent which
was given to the proposal" made by the marshal
duke of Tarentum, that ten millions of francs
should be annually appropriated for the indem-
nification of the emigrants who had been de-
prived of their property, and of the soldiers who
had lost their “dolations.”
But the government party should not have
attempted to assist the emigrants by resorting
to means offensive to the nation, and derogatory
to the charter. And, above all, they should
not have puffed up the emigrants with proud
and silly hopes. If they had been left to
themselves, they would have fallen in with the
purchasers of their property, they would have
treated for anamicable settlement of their claims,
and they would have regained possession of their
hereditary estates without jarring and without
scandal. -
* This proposal was not carried into execution.
VOI. I. E

<page 69>
50 MEMOIRS OF
The partiality which was shown towards the
emigrants on all occasions produced another
evil of still greater extent. It contributed,
even more than the efforts of disaffection, in
persuading the peasantry that the government
wished to chain them again to the soil, and to
render them once more the tributaries both of
the nobility and of the priesthood.
The revolution has taught the countryman to
know that he is somebody in the state. After the
revolution the peasants became rich, and they
were delivered from the double vassalage of
former days,when they crouched before the priest
and the lord: therefore they could not think of
any alteration without horror. Day after day
they heard or they read (in France every body
reads now,) that the government intended to
restore the “ancien regime.” And the restora-
tion of the “ancien regime” was interpreted by
them, as well as by many others, to mean the
restoration of tithes, vassalage, and feudal rights.
They were confirmed in their dangerous and dis-
quieting opinion by the outrageous claims of the
emigrants, and the declamations of the priests.
It was to no purpose that the government tried
to re-assure them. They had been already de-
ceived; and it seldom happens that you can
catch a French peasant twice in the same snare.
The abolition of the conscription had been pro-

<page 70>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 51
mised, and the old code was continued in force
with allitsharshness, and still the refractory con-
scripts were sent away in chains, whilst fines were
imposed upon their families. The abolition of
the “droits réunis” had also been promised, and
they were not only levied with greater rigour
and harshness than before, but even some of
these imposts had been greatly increased.
Such was the fatality which influenced all the
actions of the government, that all proceedings
which in themselves were simple and reasonable,
became venomous and corrupted when con-
ducted by the ministry, and only added to the
general disorder and discontent, instead of pro-
ducing the good effects which they might have
been justly expected to produce.
The discontent of the people, the inevitable
result of the injuries inflicted on the feelings
and interests of individuals”, was increased by
* There are times when a government may attack general
principles without danger. But men and their personal in-
terests can never be assailed with impunity. Personal interest
is the prime mover of public opinion and feeling; and how-
ever degrading the truth may appear, it is not to be disputed.
After a great national catastrophe this baleful egotism is
particularly evident. Dignified passions become extinct for
want of fuel; and the human mind, destitute of external oc-
cupation, works inward upon itself, and begets selfishness,
the true pestilence of the soul. When this disease affects a
U. CT -- Lö.
E 2

<page 71>
52 . MEMOIRS OF
the open infringement of the rights of the
people, although these rights were secured to
the country by a compact which seemed to be
inviolable.
Liberty of conscience had been promised by
the charter, and this liberty was immediately
annihilated. An ordonnance was issued by the
police", which revived regulations enacted in
an age of intolerance, for enforcing the strict
and universal observance of the Lord’s day,
and the festivals of the church. Napoleon,
anxious to preserve a strict neutrality between
the catholics and the protestants, prohibited the
religious processions of the former in all towns
containing places of worship belonging to the
latter communion. His prohibition was re-
moved, and the catholic priesthood exulted in
their processions, in which they marched in
triumph. They ought to have tranquillized the
apprehensions of their opponents, and to have
nation, the government is lost if it attacks the interests of
individuals.
• By means of ordonnances the ministers legislated ac-
cording to their pleasure in matters which ought only to
have been regulated by the law, so that the greater part of
the bills presented to the chambers “had been already
enacted and executed in the shape of ordonnances; and the
legislature had no other function except that of giving a legal
sanction to the arbitrary decrees of the ministers.”-Censeur.

<page 72>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 53
edified the faithful by humility, or at least by
feigning humility; but they disdained to con-
ciliate the public, whom they scandalized by
their pride and irritated by their violence *.
The imagination of the priests became fired
by the victory which they supposed they had
gained. They dreamt that they were in full
possession of their ancient power; and they
wished immediately to revive it according to
their ancient fashion. An actress belonging to
the Theatre Français died without being ab-
solved, and without suspecting that it was ne-
cessary to be absolved, from the excommunica-
tion which had been formerly fulminated against
stage players; and which, as every body knows,
deprived Moliere of christian burial.
Following the same precedents, the clergy
would not allow the rites of sepulture to the
actress in question. The populace, who fol-
lowed the funeral out of curiosity, learnt the
affront which was thus offered to her remains.
Transported by sudden indignation, they rushed
to the hearse, and dragged it onwards. The
doors of the interdicted church were burst
open in a moment. They called for a priest;
no priest appeared. The tumult augmented.
* Even in Paris several persons were ill treated and
bayoneted, because they refused to pull off their hats and
kneel, whilst the processions were passing by.

<page 73>
54 MEMOIRS OF
The church and the neighbouring streets re-
sounded with the groans and threats of ten
thousand persons. Their agitation became more
violent, and there was no possibility of fore-
seeing where the effervescence of popular feeling
would stop, when a messenger arrived from the
court, who ordered, in the name of the King,
that the funeral should proceed.
The accounts of this event, and the comments
to which it gave rise, excited the most lively in-
terest in Paris and throughout France: nor did it
fail to give the greatest pleasure to the enemies of
religion. The friends of public decency and good
order accused the government of encouraging
the alarming progress of sacerdotal despotism.
It was particularly in the smaller towns, and
in the country, that the priests behaved with
the most blamable audacity, abusing the pri-
vilege of speech which had been restored to
them". The pulpit became a tribunal from
whence they pronounced sentence of present
infamy, with the reversion of eternal damna-
tion, upon all who refused to participate in
their opinions and bigotry. Making common
cause with the emigrants, they employed hints,
inuendoes, insinuations, arguments, promises,
* Under the reign of Napoleon, if a priest had ventured to
utter any opinion contrary to the system of government, he
would have been immediately removed.

<page 74>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 55
and threats of every species, for the purpose of
compelling the owners of the national property
to yield up their lands, and of leading the
wretched peasantry again beneath the tyrant
yokes of feudality and superstition.
During the revolution, the priesthood had
betrayed its real character. Contempt had
fallen on the clergy, and it was out of the
power of the government to invest them sud-
denly with the salutary influence which they
had lost. This influence ought to be gained by
wise and prudent conduct, by active and im-
partial benevolence, by the practice of sacer-
dotal virtues. It cannot be gained by ordon-
nances of police, by abuse, by violence, by
mumming processions, which, in our times, are
out of character and ridiculous.
By the charter the liberty of the press had
been guarantied as well as the liberty of public
worship; yet every day innumerable publications
were seized or suppressed contrary to the laws.
M. Durbach, a deputy who never equivocated
with his conscience or yielded to danger, com-
plained on this subject in the chamber: the opi-
nion of the house went along with him; and the
government, pretending to yield to the feeling
of the deputies, presented a bill to the chambers
through the medium of M. de Montesquiou,

<page 75>
6 MEMOIRS OF
which, instead of delivering the press from its
slavery, gave full establishment to the censor-
ship, and legalized the tyranny which had been
exercised over the press by mere force under the
former government.
Benjamin Constant attacked the bill with
vigour: the same side was taken by the public
journals, and by all public writers; but there
was no possibility of putting M. de Montesquiou
out of countenance. It was demonstrated to
him that his law would wholly destroy the liberty
of the press. By holding the charter before
his eyes, the advocates of public rights proved
that the charter only declared that the licence
of the press was to be restrained, and that his
bill was therefore radically unconstitutional,
because the preliminary censorship was not
intended to restrain abuses, but to prevent
their taking place. Montesquiou answered
gravely, that the persons with whom such ob-
jections originated did not understand French;
that the words “prevenir” and “reprimer”
were perfectly synonymous: and that the bill,
instead of being offensive or unconstitutional,
contained a most complete and a most liberal
development of the clause in the charter.
This unparalleled endeavour of Montesquiou,
who persuaded himself that he could convince

<page 76>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 57
an assembly of Frenchmen that they did not
understand their own language, was justly con-
sidered by the chamber as a matchless speci-
men of impudence and folly. Lexicographical
subtleties were employed with bitter mockery
for the purpose of destroying a public right,
consecrated by the constitutional compact.
Never had insolence and bad faith been dis-
played so prominently: Raynouard, the re-
porter of the committee, exclaimed in the
language of grief and indignation, “Minister
of our King, confess, at least, that your law is
contrary to the constitution, since you cannot
refute the evidence adduced against it: your
obstinacy in contesting such an indisputable
truth would not then inspire us with such just
alarms.”
The law was ultimately adopted by both
chambers; ministerial influence triumphed over
reason, and rased the most important bulwark of
the rights guarantied to the nation. The result
of the conflict produced the most lively sensa-
tion. No man who was capable of forethought
and reasoning could remain undisturbed. Not-
withstanding the patriotism of Dupont (of
the department of the Eure), of Raynouard,
of Durbach, of Bedoch, of Flaugergues, it was
seen too clearly that the chamber of deputies

<page 77>
58 MEMOIRS OF
could not oppose any effectual obstacle to the
despotic and anti-constitutional plans of the go-
vernment; and that the ministers would have
full power, whenever they thought proper, to
interpret the clauses of the charter according
to their own way, and to rob the French nation
of the few rights which it yet might promise to
them. “By means of such interpretations,”
the people said, “the senate sacrificed the in-
dependence of the nation to Napoleon. But at
least the imperial despotism assumed a character
by which it was justified and ennobled. It
tended to render our nation the greatest nation
in the world; but the despotism which awaits
us has no other accompaniment but bad faith,
and no other end except the degradation and
slavery of France.”
By such reflections, the suspicion and disgust
and aversion inspired by the government, were
excited to the utmost pitch. The public
feeling did not stop there: the French people
are naturally inconstant in their opinions and
sentiments; and their former prejudices against
Napoleon were changed into transports of ad-
miration. France, under the royal government,
was humiliated, disorganized, and degenerate;
and they contrasted the present state of the
country with the influence, the strength, the

<page 78>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 59
compactness, which it enjoyed under the reign ,
of Napoleon; and He, who had lately been
cursed as the root of all evil, now appeared to
be the greatest of men, and the greatest of
heroes, though in misfortune.
The government knew that Napoleon was
again admired by the people, and that they re-
gretted his loss. To counteract these sentiments,
coarse and vulgar caricatures were exposed to
the eyes of the populace; and his person and
his character became the theme of false and
scandalous libels published under the direction
of the ministry. No effect was produced. The
mob looked at the caricatures with a smile of
contempt; and the actions of Napoleon, which,
under his reign, excited the greatest censure
and disapprobation, now found the most zealous
apologists and defenders.
If Napoleon was accused of having over-
thrown the republican government, and en-
slaved the country by the revolution of the 18th
Brumaire, they answered *:—“At that era,
anarchy, emboldened by the misfortunes of the
country, could only be repressed by victory.
Civil war had been organized in twenty depart-
* I cannot express their thoughts more forcibly than by
copying the passage, which I have quoted in my text, from
the View of the Revolution by Lacretelle. |
|

<page 79>
60 MEMOIRS OF
ments; insurrections had taken place in many,
rapine infected them all; robbery and murder
took place with impunity on many of the prin-
cipal high roads. Two dreadful laws, the law
of the hostages, and that of the forced loans,
occasioned greater evils than they could cure.
No nation had ever existed in which the finances
of the state were in equal confusion; and a suc-
cession of partial bankruptcies prolonged the
opprobrium of the general bankruptcy of the
country. The money of the public was robbed
whilst in transit on the high roads. Robbers even
carried it off from the houses of the receivers,
and the deficiency could not be made good by
the most violent exactions. The jacobins were
on the point of recommencing their reign of
terror. The royalists had recourse without
scruple to all the measures which might enable
them to satiate their revenge; and the peaceable
friends of the law were placed between the con-
flicting parties in a state of disgraceful weakness
and neutrality. Such was the desperate situation
of France when Napoleon seized the helm of
the state. Instead of imputing the slavery of
the country to him, he ought to have been
blessed; for he delivered us from the spoliations,
the murders, and the tyranny which were con-
sequent upon the reign of anarchy and terror.”

<page 80>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 61
Was it maintained that Napoleon had reigned
despotically? They held that this accusation
was unjust; and they had recourse to the fol-
lowing reasoning. “Anarchy was silenced by
Napoleon. It became necessary, that order
should take the place of disorder; that the
authority of one should be substituted for the
authority of all. Parties were to be restrained
within the bound of moderation; traitors were
to be annihilated. It was necessary to curb
the prejudices of the nobility, and the revolu-
tionary habits and manners of the jacobins.
This great work could not be accomplished,
without engaging in a conflict against individual
interests and opinions. Napoleon was considered
as a despot; this was inevitable. Whenever
the existing polity of a state has been totally
subverted, he who first raises the edifice of
society from its ruins, is necessarily accused of
despotism, because apparently he has no other
rule except his own will. Nor must we forget
that Napoleon had been accustomed to com-
mand implicit obedience in the camp. He re-
tained his military attitude on the throne. He
usually addressed his courtiers, his connexions,
and his ministers, in the tone which he had for-
merly adopted when speaking to his soldiers or

<page 81>
62 MEMOIRS OF
their generals". An appearance of despotism
was certainly given to his way of reigning and
commanding, by such language which is seldom
* From his early youth, it may be even said from his days
of boyhood, Napoleon felt an inward presentiment that he
was not destined to live in mediocrity. This persuasion
soon taught him to treat others with disdain, and to entertain
the highest opinion of himself. Scarcely had he obtained a
subaltern command in the artillery, when he considered
himself as the superior of his equals, and the equal of his
superiors. In his 20th year he was placed at the head of the
army of Italy. Without appearing to be in the slightest
degree surprised by his elevation, he passed from a secondary
station to the chief command. He immediately treated the old
generals of the army—they who were so proud of the laurels
—with an air of dignity and authority, which placed them in
a situation which was probably new to them. But they did
not feel humiliated, and their inferiority seemed to result as a
matter of course, for the ascendancy exercised by Napoleon
was irresistible; and he was thoroughly endued with that
instinct of authority, that talent of ensuring obedience, with
those faculties which are usually confined to those who are
kings by birth. Napoleon could probably have attained to
supreme authority in any country in the world. Nature had
formed him for command, and she never creates such men
for the purpose of leaving them in obscurity. It seems, ac-
cording to the remark of a writer whose name I have for-
gotten, that she is proud of her own work, and that she
wishes to offer it to admiration, by placing it at the head of
human society.

<page 82>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 63
heard in civil society. And in almost all cases,
appearance is taken for reality.
At first the imperious tone adopted by Na-
poleon was blamed, next it was admired. He
soon employed it in his intercourse with foreign
ambassadors, with foreign sovereigns. The
wily forms of ancient diplomacy were dis-
carded. Napoleon did not negociate; he issued
his orders. With one hand he brandished his
victorious sword; in the other he held crowns
and sceptres. He bade the sovereigns of Europe
make their choice; he offered his friend-
ship or his hatred, kingdoms or blows. The
monarchs who stood before his throne were
taught wisdom by experience. They knew
that Napoleon could reward and punish; they
crowded into the ranks of his allies; and they
consoled themselves for their weakness, by ,
crying out upon his tyranny".
When these causes were united, they aided
* The continental system induced Napoleon to exercise
a real tyranny over Europe. We do not pretend to deny the
fact; but we only wish to add, that this exterior despotism
always induced a belief amongst foreigners, that Napoleon,
who tyrannized so violently over nations which did not
belong to him, must necessarily be the tyrant of his own
subjects.

<page 83>
64 MEMOIRS OF
in persuading the world that Napoleon was really
a despot. For, as Montesquieu observes, there
are some things which we believe at last, merely
because we hear them continually repeated.
But if the government of Napoleon is considered
impartially, we shall feel convinced, that the
despotism attributed to him existed rather in
words and forms, than in deeds. Let the
acts of his reign be scrutinized, and none will
be found impressed with the character of
real despotism; that is to say, of despotism
founded on the mere arbitrary will and pleasure
of the prince. On the contrary, they all prove
that the interest and aggrandizement of France
sentered alone into the views of Napoleon, and
that instead of being under a tyrannical govern-
ment, the people never enjoyed the benefits of
distributive justice with greater equality, and
were never protected more completely against
the oppressions of public functionaries, and of
the higher ranks. He may, perhaps, be censured
for having violated certain laws, for violations in
which the senate and the representatives of the
people were his accomplices. But laws are
only binding upon sovereigns in the ordinary
course of things, and the most rigid writers on
the law of nations acknowledge this principle.
When extraordinary and unforeseen circum-

<page 84>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 65
stances take place, it is the duty of the sovereign
to be above the law. In order to judge fairly of
the actions of a monarch, we must not consider
them separately. Many an action which, if
taken singly, appears unjustifiable or hateful,
loses that character when viewed as one of the
series of events from which it arose, as a con-
necting link in the political chain of which it
forms a part. Neither should the conduct of a
sovereign be judged according to the principles
of natural equity. In the estimation of those,
upon whom the task of ruling nations has de-
volved, necessity and the public safety ought to
know no law. Every apprehension of injuring
private interest vanishes, and must ever vanish,
before state considerations.
“After all,” continued they, “the real point
at issue is, not whether the government of Na-
poleon was more or less despotic; but whether
it was such as was required by the character of
his people and of his times,—such as it needed
to be, in order that France might become tran-
quil, happy, and powerful. Now it is impossible
to deny but that, during the reign of Napoleon,
the interior of France enjoyed an unruffled
calm, and that the ascendancy of his genius
bestowed upon the country a degree of power
and prosperity, which it never attained before,
and which probably it will never possess again.
VOL. I. F

<page 85>
66 MEMOIRS OF
Was the emperor taxed with boundless am-
bition? Were the calamities of Spain and Russia
laid to his charge?—his indefatigable apologists
found a ready answer.—The Spanish war, in-
stead of being an unjust aggression, was an en-
terprise guided by the soundest political talent.
It had been provoked by the wavering treachery
of that allied government, which, in spite of its
engagements, was secretly negociating with the
English; and which, yielding to their instiga-
tions, had endeavoured to take advantage of
our difficulties and of the absence of our armies,
in order to invade our territory, and to become
a sharer in the plots of our enemies.
The detention of Ferdinand ceased to be an
odious breach of faith. It resulted necessarily
from his duplicity, his parricidal projects, and
his English connexions. The nomination of
Joseph as King of Spain and the Indies, had been
universally attributed to the excessive vanity of
Napoleon, who, as it was supposed, was de-
termined to drop a crown upon the head of
every member of the imperial family. But now
opinion changed. King Joseph’s promotion
was felt to have been caused by the necessity
of placing Spain for ever out of the reach of
English influence. Had not Napoleon allowed
the Cortes of Spain to elect their monarch of
their own uncontrolled authority? Had he not

<page 86>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 67
said to them in public, “Dispose of the throne. ,
Little do I care whether the king of Spain is
called Ferdinand, or whether he is called Jo-
seph; let him only be the ally of France, and
the enemy of England"?” -
It was still more easy to justify the Russian
war. A Quixotic love of the marvellous was no
longer supposed to be the passion which excited
it. In making war against Russia, he was
actuated by the desire of avenging the injuries
which that power had occasioned to France, at
the moment when the Russian government again
opened its ports to the English, thus snatching
from the nation the reward of the sacrifices
which we had made for the establishment and
consolidation of the continental blockade,-of
that universal barrier which made England and
her thousand vessels tremble!
The invasion of Germany was no longer the
effect of Napoleon's insatiate thirst of power and
glory t. It was seen, that there was no other
* The Emperor thus addressed the Spanish Cortes, when
assembled at Bayonne.
f Napoleon was accused of having aspired to universal
monarchy. In all ages, this desire has been imputed to
powerful and ambitious sovereigns. Let us confess that no
monarch was ever better justified in yielding to the seductions
F 2

<page 87>
68 MEMOIRS OF
sure method, by which the English, the irre-
concilable enemies of France, could be deprived
of their fatal continental influence, by which
they could be compelled to abandon the empire
of the seas. In short, Napoleon was only in-
flicting a salutary and equitable punishment,
deserved by those sovereigns of all sizes. After
having implored or obtained the alliance of
Napoleon, and after having ratified the bond by
engagements and promises upon which he ge.
nerously relied, they compelled him to take up
arms, in order to prevent them from receiving
of this brilliant phantom than Napoleon. From the summit
of his throne he held the reins which guided the greater
part of Europe, whose docile monarchs instantly obeyed any
direction which he chose to give them. At the first word, at
the slightest signal, their subjects were arrayed beneath
the imperial eagle. Their continual intercourse with us, the
obligation of obeying Napoleon, an obligation imposed upon
them by their own princes, had accumstomed them to con-
sider the Emperor as their chieftain. But whatever ambition
may have been attributed to Napoleon, his good sense re-
strained him from aspiring to universal monarchy. He had
another plan; he intended to re-establish the eastern and
western empires. It would now be useless to reveal the
lofty and powerful considerations by which this grand and
noble idea was suggested to Napoleon. Then, France ":
have been allowed to grasp again the sceptre of Charlemagne:
but now, we must forget that we have been the masters of
the world.

<page 88>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 69
the agents of England into their cabinets, and
her merchandizes into their ports.
Thus the partisans of Napoleon invented ar-
guments by which they palliated his faults and
justified his errors. No objection, no reproach
was left without its answer. After defending him
against his accusers they became his advocates;
and,turning to the fairer pages of his history,their
praises knew no bounds; these eulogiums were
certainly more just, and, perhaps, more sincere.
“Napoleon,” said they, “had all the great
qualities of the greatest monarchs, whilst he was
exempted from their vices. Napoleon was not
stained by the lechery of Caesar, nor by the
drunkenness of Alexander, nor by the cruelty
of Charlemagne.”
At an age when others scarcely start in life,
his years were outnumbered by his victories;
and the kings of Europe, conquered by his
sword or subjugated by his genius, cowered
before the imperial eagle.
In France, when aggrandized by the con-
quests of Napoleon, the empire of ancient Rome
was re-produced before the astonished world.
The French name, tarnished by the crimes of
the revolution, regained its ancient honour and
its mastery. The nation was feared, admired,
and respected by the entire universe.
Philosophy graced Napoleon no less than war-

<page 89>
70 MEMOIRS OF
-
like prowess. After he had covered the nation
with glory by his victories, he was willing to
insure our welfare by his laws. He bestowed
upon us that immortal code of jurisprudence
which invested him with the title of the legis-
lator of France, a title to which our former
kings had aspired in vain. He organised that,
admirable system of finance and administration,
which their subjects, groaning under misrule,
implored but without effect.
Still he had not accomplished enough to sa-
tisfy his noble and beneficent ardour. Arts,
sciences, and industry were to flourish in our
country. The munificent aids" which were
granted by Napoleon, created the thousands and
thousands of manufactories from whence pro-
ceeded those finished works of skill and labour
which became the pride of the French, and the
despair and ruin of foreign nations. The sons
of Apollof, on whom he lavished his gifts and
favours, seized the crayon, the compass, and the
* Neither the nature nor the extent of these aids has
been well understood out of France. Napoleon revived our
industry by the loans, which he never hesitated to grant to
any enterprising manufacturer who needed capital; and this
assistance was always liberal and well-timed.
+ Louis XIV., who has been so much praised for his
liberality, only distributed 52,300 francs per annum to the
literati and artists of France, and 14,000 francs to foreigners.

<page 90>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 71
chisel. Paris became a second Athens, when
adorned by the wonders of art to which his mu-
nificence gave birth. We then saw the venera-
ble Louvre rise, as by enchantment, from its de-
serted ruins; the palaces of our Kings became
more gorgeous; the temples of the arts were
enriched by productions which rivalled the relics
of antiquity; our native land brought forth
those establishments so proudly useful to the
public, and those monuments destined to trans-
mit the recollections of our fame and glory to
the most distant posterity.
At the same moment his sovereign will
guided the hands which curbed the waves of
the ocean, and caused them to roll over a new
abyss. He directed those labours which sub-
stituted wide harbours, superb dock-yards, and
fertilizing canals, in the place of desert shores
and pestilential marshes, restoring commerce
and existence to the innumerable inhabitants of
the sea coast, and of the banks of the Scheld
and the Somme. At the same moment his
voice created those Roman highways, branch-
ing through all parts of France, and Germany,
and Italy, equally useful and majestic, and
which afforded to the inhabitants of those,
countries means equally speedy and secure of
communicating with each other, and of ex-
changing the products of their industry: and

<page 91>
72 MEMOIRS OF
never will the friend or even the enemy of Na-
poleon cross the summits of the Alps, or ascend
their craggy sides, without venerating the mag-
nanimous sovereign, who, anxious to guide the
steps and protect the life of the traveller, has
enclosed the precipice, chained the torrent, and
linked the great mountains of the earth, which
during so many ages have braved the might of
man and time. When future ages shall gather
up in memory the glorious and transcendent
deeds of Napoleon; when they shall number the
blessings which he dispensed, and the victories
which he gained, never will they believe that
one man can have worked such miracles in so
short a period. They will rather fancy that the
historian was playing with the credulity of pos-
terity, that he culled out all the great deeds per-
formed by successive generations of the greatest
men during an infinite series of ages, and that
he has attributed them all to his ideal hero.
The soldiers who had bled beneath the ban-
ners of Napoleon would not listen in silence to
the praises which others bestowed upon his
name. His foreign conquests, which even they
had lately considered as the causes of our mis-
fortunes, became again the sources of inex-
haustible admiration.
They recollected that Napoleon had ruled as
the master of Madrid, of Lisbon, of Munich, of

<page 92>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 73
Warsaw, of Hamburgh, of Berlin, of Vienna, of
Milan, of Amsterdam, of Rome, of Moscow, of
Cairo.
Some recalled the memory of the day of Lodi.
They saw him standing on the bridge re-animat- '
ing his dispirited followers, defying danger and
death whilst he waved the national flag, and
drove the enemy from their entrenchments,
and blasted their glory. Others pointed him \
out whilst crossing the perpetual snows and
yawning chasms of Mount St. Bernard, and
then victorious on the plains of Marengo, where
he won that battle which insured the peace and
glory of the country.
Austerlitz had its chroniclers, who described
Napoleon as he fell with the rapidity and
violence of the thunderbolt on the battalions of
the Austrian and the Russian, and when he af.
forded to those trembling monarchs an example
of magnanimity which they knew not how to
imitate when generosity became their duty.
Nor did his enthusiastic advocates omit the
field of Jena, where his victorious ensigns chased
the flying troops of Frederic, who, deceived
by their recollections, yet held themselves to
be the paragons of military worth. They re-
traced his paths amidst the burning sands of
Egypt, amidst the icy wastes of Muscovy;
and in either region Napoleon supported fire

<page 93>
74 MEMOIRS OF
and frost without ostentation, and taught re-
signation and endurance to his soldiers by his
unshaken constancy.
More recent and more painful victories con-
tributed equally to endear him. They saw Na-
poleon in Champagne, when his veteran army
scarcely equalled one of the numerous divisions
of the enemy. At the head of his scanty troops
he watched, and avoided, and surprised the
Austrians, the Russians, and the Prussians:
wounding them on all sides by his victorious
weapons, and with such promptitude, that he
seemed to have bestowed wings upon iron and
death. They placed him at Arcis sur Aube,
advancing before his squadrons, and rushing
forward to meet the balls and bullets of the
enemy; for he sought to sacrifice on the field
of battle that life, which he foresaw he could no
longer dedicate on the throne, to the glory and
prosperity of the nation.
In short, generals, officers, and soldiers, all
vied with each other in calling to mind the
marches, the sieges, the conflicts, the attacks,
the days, which had immortalized their ge-
neral *; and is there a heart amongst us which
does not beat higher at these recollections?
* The soldiers identified the name of Napoleon with their
country and their honour. When the accession of Louis

<page 94>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 75
The sentiments thus awakening in favour of
Napoleon were cherished by his friends, and by
all those who, wearied of the Bourbons or dis-
contented with their government, now wished
for his return. His name, which lately we had
scarcely dared to utter, was now in every mouth,
his image in every mind. The nation began to
regret the Emperor, then they longed for him;
and every one was impressed by a secret pre-
sentiment that these expectations would soon
be realized.
Whilst this formidable revulsion of opinion
was increasing and appearing throughout the
kingdom, it was scarcely heeded by the ministry,
the court, and the emigrants, who reposed
with complacent security on the volcano which
they had kindled, and without entertaining the
slightest apprehension of the approaching ex-
plosion. -
“If they wish to go out of the kingdom,”
said M. de Chateaubriand, when alluding to the
partisans of the Emperor, “if they wish to re-
XVIII. put an end to the sufferings and captivity of those
who were imprisoned in England, they returned to France,
cursing the cause of their liberty, and exclaiming, “Vive
l'Empereur !” Even in the deserts of Russia, neither threats
of ill treatment, nor promises of assistance offered to the
French prisoners at the moment when they were starving,
could extort a single complaint against Napoleon.

<page 95>
76 MEMOIRS OF
turn again, to receive or despatch letters, to send
expresses, to make proposals, to circulate false
intelligence, and even to distribute bribes, to
assemble in secret or in public, to menace, to
disseminate libels, in short, to conspire against
the government, they are at liberty to do
their worst. The royal government, which began
but eight months ago, now rests upon so sure a
basis, that, were it now to be obstinate in repeat-
ing folly after folly, it would hold good in spite
of all its errors.”
This infatuation, however, soon diminished.
Without understanding the full extent of the
evil, the government ascertained that the army
and the nation were agitated and discontented,
and they deliberated on the methods which it
would be proper to employ, not for the purpose
of conciliation, but for enforcing silence.
Acquainted with the uneasiness of the go-
vernment, certain frantic Chouans gave out that
it was full time to despatch the Bonapartists.
One chieftain, celebrated in the annals of La
Vendée, was even so audacious as to declare to
general Ex . . . . . that he only waited for the
arrival of his faithful Vendeans, and then he
would fall upon the Jacobins.
The news of this massacre soon reached the
ears of the intended victims. Some quitted
Paris, others armed themselves, and prepared

<page 96>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 77
to sell their lives as dearly as they could. It is
said that the government became acquainted
with the bloody conspiracy of the Chouans, and
that they relieved France and the world from
the spectacle of another St. Bartholomew’s day.
This intended massacre (I have never been
able to believe in it,) persuaded the revolu-
tionists that they could expect neither respite
nor mercy from the royalists, and that one of
the two parties would be compelled to destroy
the other. The soldiers of Napoleon began to
unite, and to make themselves ready. The
ministers were anxious to disperse these assem-
blages, which gave them uneasiness; orders
were issued, by which all officers, whether of
the staff or regimental, were prohibited from
residing at Paris without permission; and all
who were not Parisians by birth were ordered
to return to their native provinces. This mea-
sure increased the exasperation of the military,
and it did not diminish the danger. The re-
duced officers, instead of conforming to the
order, encouraged each other in disobedience.
According to the regulations of the war de-
partment, their contumacious residence at Paris
would subject them to the loss of their half-pay;
and many of them, though in poverty, preferred
independence to submission. The ministers

<page 97>
78 MEMOIRS OF
were irritated by this resistance, and they de-
termined to make an example. It happened
that a letter of congratulation which General
Excelmans addressed to his former sovereign,
the king of Naples, was intercepted. This op-
portunity was gladly seized by the new Minister
at war". He put the General on the half-pay
list, and ordered him to retire immediately, and
until further orders, to the distance of sixty
leagues from Paris. Excelmans maintained
that the Minister at war had no right to remove
an officer, not being in active service, from his
domicile; and he would not go; upon this he
was immediately taken into custody. It was
pretended that he had been guilty of a traitorous
intercourse with the enemies of the King, and
that he was also guilty of disobedience to his
Majesty's orders. The government expected that
this blow would produce the best possible effect;
but it recoiled against them : Excelmans was
known to all France; he was valued as one of
her bravest and most estimable children. The
spite and hatred of the ministers had loaded
him with accusations; but his alleged treasons,
far from depriving him of public esteem and
* Marshal Soult had just succeeded General Dupont.

<page 98>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 79
public affection, only endeared him to his com-
panions in arms, and to the nation at large.
Excelmans was brought to trial, and the court
acquitted him". The council of war, by sanc-
tioning the disobedience of the General, de-
clared that the government did not possess that
authority over reduced officers which they had
assumed; and from this moment the govern-
ment was ruined. The decision by which the
half-pay military were enfranchised, and which
left them at liberty to brave the commands of
the government, was a shock which beat the
royal authority to the ground.
Here I shall stop. It would be of no further
use to lengthen the history and the investiga-
tion of the absurd tyranny of the government.
If we trace the progress of the principles suc-
cessively enounced by the ministry, and the
actions of which they were the authors, we
shall see that they had formed and executed the
* M. Comte, one of the acute and courageous editors of
the Censor, was chosen by the general as his “counsel.”
General Fressinet was his advocate. (According to the
forms of the French courts of judicature, the counsel assists
by his advice, the advocate pleads.) This officer, equally
distinguished by his firmness, his talents, and his bravery,
was afterwards punished and exiled on account of the ge-
nerous assistance which he gave on this important occasion
to General Excelmans, his fellow soldier and friend.

<page 99>
80' MEMOIRS OF
project of re-establishing the old monarchy, and ,
of overturning the constitutional government
either by artifice or by main force. The royal
charter was spurned by them, and they trampled
without scruple on the civil and political rights
which it consecrated. Every guarantee given
to the army, the magistracy, the public func-
tionaries, or the nation, was forgotten, attacked,
or violated. Our national glory was insulted;
public feeling was wounded. The manners and
customs and opinions of the new era were all
treated with harshness: all ranks and classes of
citizens experienced those vexations which filled
them with discontent. By injustice and bad faith
the government deprived the King of our con-
fidence and love, and caused the restoration of
the Emperor to become the hope of the nation.
In spite of the obstacles experienced by the mi-
nistry, in spite of the affronts to which they had
been subjected, in spite of the retrograde steps
which they had been compelled to take, they
still clung to the baneful system which they had
fostered; and, bigoted to these plans, they
continued to persevere in those errors which
recalled Napoleon from his exile, just as Na-
poleon persevered in the errors which recalled
the Bourbons back from theirs.
But whilst the storm was gathering in France,
how was Napoleon employed? Ambition had

<page 100>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 81
taken flight, and he was seen to prefer a life
of unostentatious retirement to all his former
grandeurs. Repose had greater charms for him
than the noble turmoil of war; and his genius, no
longer teeming with meditation, yielded to the
pleasures of retirement. The study of botany,
the cares of his household, the plantations which
he had made, and those which he was still
planning, beguiled his hours"; and, like the
Roman Diocletian, he might have said to those
who suspected that he longed in secret after
the throne, “Come and see me in my retire-
ment: I will show you the gardens which I have
planted, and you will talk no more to me about
the empire.” -
Napoleon, during the early part of his re-
tirement in Elba, felt only a vague desire of
reigning. Grieved by the miseries of France,
the country which he loved so truly, wearied
by the vicissitudes of fortune, disgusted with
mankind, he feared that, if he attempted to
seize the sceptre again, he should involve France
and himself in new troubles; and, without aban-
* It has been alleged, but without foundation, that he
retained his taste for military exercises. Not one review
took place during his residence at Porto Ferrajo; arms
seemed to have no attractions for him.
VOL. I. G

<page 101>
82 - MEMOIRS OF
doning his expectation of re-ascending the
throne, he resolved to allow his resolutions to
be guided by futurity.
The turn taken by public affairs soon roused
the Emperor from this state of indifference and
hesitation. At first he hoped, and I have heard
him say so, that the Bourbons, instructed by
adversity, would confer liberty and happiness
upon the nation. But when he witnessed the
power which was bestowed upon the priesthood,
the emigrants, and the courtiers, he foresaw
that the very same causes which had produced
the first revolution, would soon occasion a
second. From that period he watched the con-
tinent; nor did he lose sight, even for a mo-
ment, of the congress, or of France, or of the
Bourbons. He could tell the talents", the prin-
ciples, the vices, and the virtues of all those
who had acquired the confidence of Louis
XVIII, either by intrusion or by favour. He
could measure the degrees of influence which
each was capable of acquiring and exercising,
and he calculated beforehand on the errors
* It is well known that there was not a single individual of
note in the service, either of his allies or of his enemies,
w" strong and weak points were not perfectly understood
Poleon.

<page 102>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 83
which they would inevitably induce his docile
successor to commit.
Napoleon now employed himself again in
reading the public journals of France and of
foreign countries; he read assiduously all pe-
riodical works of a political tendency; he studied
these productions; he investigated them with
acuteness, and he could well divine the meaning
of a writer who was compelled to be silent, and
conjecture the nature of intelligence which an
editor was forced to suppress.
Strangers of distinction, and particularly the
English, were received by Napoleon with affa-
bility and kindness, and he used to talk freely
with his visitors on public affairs. He knew
how to draw them out, and to lead them to ex-
patiate on points which he wished to penetrate;
and he seldom failed to obtain much useful in-
formation from those interviews. By these
simple methods Napoleon obtained a correct
idea of the events which were taking place on
the continent; he was too well acquainted
with revolutions not to be sensible that the
sway of events would open the gates of France,
and admit him; and he was too wary to enter
into a private correspondence with his partisans,
when any accident might have revealed his
secret wishes, and have afforded a pretext to
G 2

<page 103>
| 84 MEMOIRS OF
his enemies for attacking his independence and
his liberty.
Napoleon thus waited in silence till the fated
time of his re-appearance in France should
arrive, when a French Officer", disguised as a
sailor, disembarked at Porto Ferrajo.
Some few days before this Officer set out to
join the army in the year 1815, he gave over to
me the manuscript narrative of his voyage to the
Isle of Elba. “To you,” added he, “I deliver
my history, which is also that of the revolution
of the 20th of March. As the Emperor, when
regaining his throne, did not think fit to speak
of me, I was therefore bound to be silent;
but I am as eager to live in the memory of
after-ages as he can possibly bet. It is my
wish that posterity may learn, that I too shared
* This officer is the person who is named in the declara-
tion made on the 15th of March to the prince of Essling, then
governor of the 8th military division, by Monsieur P*****,
who landed with Napoleon from the Isle of Elba, and was
arrested at Toulon by order of the prefect of the department
of the War. - -
+ At Malmaison the Emperor asked me what had become
of M. Z ***. I answered that he had been killed on Mount
St. Jean: “Well,” answered the Emperor, “he is happy.
“But pray did he tell you that he had been at Elba?”
“Yes, Sire; he even entrusted me with the narrative of his

<page 104>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 85
in the glorious enterprise of subverting the
Bourbon government, and of bringing back the
voyage, and of the conversations which he had with your
Majesty.”—“You must give me this narrative: I will take it
with me: it will help me in the composition of my memoirs.”
“Sire, it is no longer in my possession.”—“What have
you done with it? you must get it back, and let me have it to-
morrow.”—“I have deposited it with a friend, who happens
to be absent from Paris.”—“So the narrative will be handed
about at the mercy of the world.”—“No, Sire. It is in-
closed in an envelope, and deposited in a box of which I
keep the key; but if I should not be able to deliver it to your
Majesty, before your Majesty's departure, it will yet come to
your knowledge, for I intend to publish it according to the
last wishes of M. Z ***, unless your Majesty forbids me.”
—“No, I allow you to print it, only leave out whatever may
tend to compromise those who have displayed their attach-
ment towards me. If Z*** has made a faithful report of all
that passed, the people will know that I sacrificed myself for:
their good; and that it was not the love of power which
brought me again into France, but that I yielded to the
desire of restoring to the French those gifts which are dearest
to great nations—independence and glory. Take care lest
they should get hold of your manuscript—they will falsify it.
Send it to England to * * * * *; he will print it; he is devoted
to me, and he may be very useful to you. M. *** will give
you a letter for him : do you understand me?”—“Yes,
Sire.”—“But do your utmost to recover your manuscript be-
fore my departure. I see that you are anxious to keep it, and
I will leave it with you. I only wish to read it.” The Em-
peror read the manuscript, and he returned it to me, saying,
“Z * * * has told the truth, and nothing but the truth;
Reep his manuscript for future generations.”

<page 105>
86 MEMOIRS OF
Emperor. My mind misgives me. I have a
presentiment that I shall die in this campaign.
Keep my manuscript, and promise to publish it
when the time shall arrive.” I gave my word
accordingly; and the forebodings of my friend
were realised, for he was killed at Waterloo.
I now fulfil my promise. I have not dared to
make any alterations in the narrative: if I had,
I should have felt that I was betraying the
wishes of my friend. But I have suppressed
the names of the parties concerned, and I have
expunged some passages, in which the Bourbon.
family were treated with disrespect.


<page 106>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 87
HISTORY OF THE REVOLUTION OF
THE 20th OF MARCH.
When Napoleon resigned his crown, I broke my
sword. I swore that I never more would use it
in the service of France, or of the new Sovereign
of the nation. But the generous farewell of
the Emperor could not fail to affect me; and,
conquered by the irresistible influence which
the love of glory and of our native land exercises
upon a French soldier, I soon awoke to more
praiseworthy and more tempered feelings. My
recollections faded, my regrets were softened,
and I aspired most sincerely to the honour of
being again useful to my country, and to my
country’s King.
At first the character which I had earned,
procured for me the most gratifying reception.
Dazzling prospects were held out to me. I
believed that I was treated with sincerity. This
error was of short duration. Deceived and
baffled, I now understood that they were cheat-
ing the army and myself. They affected to
honour us in the aggregate, because they were
afraid of us; and they insulted us individually,

<page 107>
88 MEMOIRS OF
in conformity to their systematic hated. My
character was too proud to allow me to bear
with the insults and the contempt which they
wished to pour out upon me. I resigned
my commission. France and her government
sickened me; but my military enthusiasm had
not abated. I thought that I should be re-
collected by the Emperor, who had distinguished
me in the field of battle; and that he would
deign to grant that boon which was dearest to
my heart; that he would allow me to live and
die in his service. I therefore made up my
mind to visit the isle of Elba.
Just, however, as I was on the point of depart-
ing, I was stopped by a sudden thought. Aban-
doned, betrayed, and denied, by men whom he
has heaped with rewards and honours, will the
Emperor really believe that I am really attached
to him? Perhaps he will even suspect that I am
a spy, and that the Bourbons have sent me to
watch his words and actions. I was still in re-
lation with those persons who had formerly en-
joyed the confidence of the Emperor. Since
the restoration, their conduct had been marked
by frankness and honesty. Their feelings led
them to be faithful to the person of Napoleon;
their patriotism and their principles led them
to be devoted to his cause; and they had not

<page 108>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 89
sought to conceal either their fidelity or their
devotion. Many efforts had been made to gain
them over to the royal party, but they had
continued immoveable. I therefore thought,
that whatever recommendation I could obtain
from any one of the persons in question, would
protect me from the suspicions of the Emperor;
and to them I therefore confided my plans and
the causes of my uneasiness, without hesitation
OT TeSeTVe.
The first, and the second, to whom I thus
applied, severally assured me that they took
the most lively interest in the undertaking, and
they betrayed the most tender anxiety for its
result. They desired me to express to the Em-
peror the grief which his loss had occasioned
to them, and their hopes of seeing him once
more; but both were afraid to compromise
themselves by writing to him, and I quitted
them without having obtained my wishes. Then
I proceeded to the third, whom I shall call
Monsieur X. We had known each other in
those eventful periods when men are put to the
test, and he had kindly formed and retained
a favourable opinion of my character and
courage. I unveiled my projects and my fears.
“Your fears,” answered he, “are well founded.

<page 109>
90 MEMOIRS OF
The Emperor will distrust you, and probably he
will not allow you to continue with him. My
recommendation would, without doubt, be of
great utility to you, but I cannot give it without
danger. Not that I should be in danger, for
my affection towards the Emperor is well known
to all the world, but we might put the Emperor
himself in jeopardy; for, if they were to take
my letter from you, they might give it over to
a spy, nay, even to an assassin.”
This argument appeared conclusive to me,
but I answered, “A lucky thought flashes
across my mind. You have acted so long and
so often in connexion with the Emperor, that
surely you must be able to recollect some cir-
cumstances, some disclosures known only to
yourselves, which, if I relate them to his Ma-
jesty, will prove to him that you trust me, and
that I am worthy of his trust.”—“Your idea
is excellent; yet,” added he, “I must either
give you insignificant details, and then the Em-
peror will have forgotten them, or I must reveal
important secrets to you, and I am forbidden by
my duty to do so; yet I will turn the matter
over in my mind. Call here again to-morrow
morning.”
I called again. “I have ransacked my me-

<page 110>
NAPOLEON IN 18 l 5. 91
mory,” said M. X*** as he accosted me, “and
here is the very thing which you want.” He
then delivered a note to me. “I had only
considered your expedition to Elba,” continued
M. X***, “in relation to your own concerns;
but it is of much greater importance than you
imagine, or than I myself thought it would be.
It may produce tremendous consequences. It
is impossible that the Emperor can be indif-
ferent to what is going on in France. If he was
to put any questions to you on that head, how
would you answer him? You must be fully
aware how very dangerous it might be if you
were to give him an erroneous idea of our
political situation.”—“Though I am a soldier
by profession, yet I am not an utter novice in
politics. I have often reflected on the present
position of France. I really think that I under-
stand enough of the matter to be able to satisfy
the curiosity of Napoleon.”—“I don’t doubt
it: but, come, what is your opinion of affairs?”
In answer to this interrogatory, I entered into
an illustrative analysis of the faults of govern-
ment, and of the consequences ensuing there-
from. Our conversation became warmer, and
when, after having discussed the time present,
we began to contemplate futurity, our thoughts

<page 111>
92. MEMOIRS OF
were evolved with so much rapidity; we were
carried so much further than we intended, that
we ourselves were astonished, and we then both
continued during a short interval in a kind of
reverie. I was the first who broke silence.
“Well,” said I, “suppose the Emperor, after
having questioned me, were to ask, Do you think
the time of my re-appearance in France is ar-
rived, what must I answer?”—“You will tell
his Majesty that I could not dare to decide so
important a question; but that he may consider
it as a positive and incontestible fact that our
present government (as you have well observed)
has wholly lost the confidence of the people and
of the army; that discontent has increased to
the highest pitch; and that it is impossible to
believe that the government can stand much
longer against the universal dislike. You will
add, that the Emperor is the only object of the
regret and hope of the nation. He, in his wis-
dom, will decide what he ought to do.”—“If
he asks me whether this opinion is only yours,
or whether Messrs. ******* all share in it, what
shall I answer?”—“Tell him that since his
abdication those persons have ceased to be in
communication with each other, but that my
opinion is conformable to the general opinion.”

<page 112>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 93
––“I am now able to answer all the questions
which the Emperor may ask. Adieu.”
We embraced each other repeatedly, and
we parted.
As soon as I had quitted M. X*** all that
had passed between us filled my mind again.
I now contemplated at leisure the mission
which I was called upon to fulfil. I measured
its extent, and weighed its consequences, and I
could not help feeling astonished, and in some
measure alarmed, by the result of this self-ex-
amination. So long as I merely intended to go
to Elba for the sole purpose of offering my
services to the Emperor, my journey appeared
to be nothing out of the common course of
things, and I thought that I should not have
hesitated to declare to the government that I
was going to rejoin my former benefactor, the
Sovereign of my choice; but since the object of
my journey had become so much more import-
ant; since, to use the words of M. X***, it
might produce tremendous consequences, it
seemed that the government would not fail to
watch me; that it would dog me in my path,
and endeavour to spy out all my words and
actions.
Hence I became suspicious and uneasy. The

<page 113>
9.4 MEMOIRS OF
note of M. X*** appeared an immense burthen.
I got it by heart, and then I threw it in the
fire. Instead of asking at once for a passport
to Genoa or Leghorn, as I had at first intended,
I asked for a passport to Milan. There was a
General officer then residing in that city whom
I knew; and I thought that if the Police were
to question me, I might then declare that I was
going to Milan in order to settle my accounts
with my friend the General, he being in my
debt for money which I had advanced to him.
Having thus settled my plan, I went on to
the “prefecture de police.” Whilst I was
stepping across the threshold of the door, my
heart began to beat so violently that I could
hardly move or breathe. If at that instant any
body had cried out to me, “Rascal, what are
you about?” I think I should have dropped,
and that I should have let out the whole secret.
It must not be thought that my confusion arose
from cowardly fear; no, it was the impression
which every honest man ought to feel, when,
for the first time in his life, he commits an
action which he is under the necessity of con-
cealing.
In a few minutes I came to myself again. In
I went, and presented myself boldly to Mon-

<page 114>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. - Q5
sieur Riviere, the Prefect of Police. He cross-
questioned me at full length, but my answers
were clear and firm. My countenance was un-
abashed, and appeared to preclude all suspicion,
and he granted my passport. Yet, at all events,
I thought it prudent to ascertain whether I was
watched, and to my great surprise I found that
during two days I was closely followed. I did
not give any token by which my spy could as-
certain that I was aware of his company, and,
in order to mislead him, I went to the messa-
geries, where I took and paid for a place in the
Lyons diligence, But when night came I hired
post-horses under a feigned name, and set off
as fast as possible, and in a few days I was at
Milan.
My friend the General was absent: I wrote
to him, and he hastened to meet me. I con-
fessed that I intended to try to obtain employ-
ment under Napoleon. “You won’t get it,”
said he, “Napoleon has not ready money enough
to pay his body guard. A good many of my old
officers have joined him, and for themselves and
their families they only receive fifty, or perhaps
sixty francs a month. They are in a state of
starvation and despair.”—“No matter; I
love the Emperor, and come what may, I will

<page 115>
96 MEMOIRS OF
join him. Do tell me how I can soonest put
to sea.”—“The thing is not easy; there is
no place from whence you can sail, except only
from Leghorn or from Genoa; and those two
points are under such close inspection, that
you will be sure to be taken up, if you are
known to be a Bonapartist. You might slip
through with greater ease if you could pass
for a tradesman of this town. I will try to
get you a passport, but I am afraid it will
be a difficult job.”—“Besides, there is an-
other difficulty, which is still greater; ma foi!
I can’t speak a dozen words of Italian.”—
“Is it possible?”—“Yes, I am in earnest.”
“And you would venture on such a scheme !
are you crazy?”—“Crazy or not, I will ven-
ture; but can I really embark no where but at
Leghorn or Genoa’—“There are very many
small ports on the coast of Tuscany, but if you
go to any of them you must stop till there is an
opportunity of getting out; and in the mean
time you would be under the surveillance of
the authorities, who are, one and all, exceed-
ingly ill-disposed towards the Emperor and his
people. Perhaps you might be able to embark
immediately in the gulf of Spezzia at Lerici;
but, in order to get there, you must go through

<page 116>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 9%
Genoa, and along the shore; and then there is
great reason to fear that you may be snapped
either by the Piedmontese carabineers, or by
the new consul at Genoa, who, according to
what I hear, is quite outrageous. There is
another road through the mountains of Spezzia,
but it has not been used for a long time, and
you would run the risk either of breaking your
neck, or of being knocked on the head.”—
“No matter, if there is no danger in the vic-
tory there is no glory in the triumph. That road
suits me; and to-morrow I will set out on my
expedition.” “Is your passport all right?”
—“I will go and get it marked for Lerici.”
—“Another piece of stupidity; don’t you
know that here you have to deal with our im-
placable enemies, the Austrians, who will raise
all kinds of difficulties; but I know a Tedesco
Colonel (in Italy an Austrian is called a Te-
desco), who will probably be able to do the
needful for us: we will ask him to come and
dine with us. Business or quarrels can all be
settled with these gentry when they are feeding.”
Our Tedesco Colonel really got my passport
through the office. I left my “caleche” and
my baggage at Milan, and the next day I
started in a “seggiola,” a kind of a little ca-
briolet, in which you drive along at an infernal
VOL. I. H

<page 117>
98 MEMOIRS OF
rate. I travelled through cross roads till I
came to the foot of the mountains. As it was
impossible to ascend them in a wheeled car-
riage, I was compelled, though reluctantly, to
separate myself from my “conducteur.” I
bought two horses, one for myself, and the
other for my new guide; this new guide could
not speak a word of French. I had taken care
to provide myself with a pocket dictionary,
French and Italian; but I was completely igno-
rant, or at least very nearly so, of the way either
of pronouncing Italian words, or of arranging
them; and thus our conversation was reduced
on both sides to a few detached phrases, which
were often mutually unintelligible.
We set out at break of day. About noon
the snow began to fall, and we had the greatest
difficulty imaginable in reaching a hamlet, the
name whereof I have forgotten. The next day
the weather became still more wretched; my
guide's horse foundered in the snow, and we
lost two hours in hauling him out again. My
guide was an Italian, and, like all Italians, he was
full of superstition, and easily discouraged. He
considered this accident as a bad omen, and he
wanted to turn back; I could only conquer his
repugnance by means of a double Napoleon
d’or. Scarcely had I given it to him when I
*. -

<page 118>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 99
felt the extent of my imprudence; I was ex-
citing his avarice, and perhaps exposing myself
to become his victim. As we advanced, the
road became worse and worse; at every step
we encountered pits and holes, or the road
was stopped by rocks which had fallen in, and
which forced us to scramble through new paths.
So much snow had fallen in the north of Italy,
and particularly in the district which we were
then crossing, that even the muleteers had de-
serted the mountains: and my guide, unable
to discern the beaten road, was compelled to
make a survey at every step, lest we should
either lose ourselves, or else tumble down the
precipices which bordered our road of danger.
The next day we arrived at Borcetto; the
perils which I had escaped taught me caution:
I hired two more horses, and another guide;
and for this addition to my train, I paid out of
all reason. I then met with a custom-house
officer, who either out of kindness, or for the
purpose of alarming me, I know not which,
warned me to be particularly on my guard in
crossing “la Size,” a very lofty and dangerous
mountain, for he told me that it swarmed with
robbers. I put fresh priming in my pistols; I
turned up my eyes toward Heaven to implore its
protection, and I set out. When we had pro-
4
H 2

<page 119>
100 MEMOIRS OF
ceeded half way up the mountain, I was accosted
by a soldier, who compelled me to enter the
guard-house, and to produce my passport. This
post, which had been lately established for the
security of travellers, was occupied by a subal-
tern and by six soldiers, who had all served in
the imperial army. They guessed by my looks
that I had seen some service, and, after a short
conversation, they asked me to come in and
warm myself by drinking the health of the
Emperor Napoleon. I refused at first, lest I
should be entrapped, but they insisted so
frankly that I was compelled to yield. On
taking leave I gave them a twenty-franc piece,
in order to drink the health of Napoleon, and
mine too; and I begged them to recommend my
guides to take care of me. The commandant
called the guides, and at the same time that he
fired a volley of oaths and curses, he declared
that if any accident happened to me, he would
shoot them both on their return. My worthy
military friends also escorted me during a con-
siderable distance, and we separated with feel-
ings which no one but a soldier can appreciate
or understand.
We were to sleep at Pontremoli. Our halt
retarded us, and night overtook us. In order
to shorten the distance, my guides led me by a

<page 120>
NA POLEON IN 1815. 101
broad path which wound round the side of the
mountain. The descent was so steep that, our
horses came down every moment, and we our-
selves were obliged to slide along. I found my-
self at the foot of the mountain in a spot which
was so dark and dreary, that Ifancied my guides
had conducted me thither in order to dispatch
me. After having groped along for some time,
my guides stopped. The darkness and the snow
concealed the face of the country to such a de-
gree, that they did not know where they were, .
nor which way they ought to turn: their fear
became excessive; they prayed to all the Saints
in heaven in their turn: they shook each other by
the hand, and embraced each other like sailors
on the point of being shipwrecked. My sang
froid did not desert me; I took one of the
horses which looked like an old roadster; I
dropped the bridle on his neck, and gave him a
sound cut with my whip; he started, I followed,
and a few minutes afterwards, to the inexpres-
sible surprise, and also to the inexpressible sa-
tisfaction of my guides, we found ourselves in
the right road, and within half an hour's ride of
Pontremoli, where we arrived towards midnight.
From Pontremoli to Spezzia there was yet a
journey of four-and-twenty hours; and four-
and-twenty hours on such roads as I had gone

<page 121>
102 MEMOIRS OF
over are equal to four-and-twenty centuries.
But how great was my delight on quitting Pont-
remoli, when, instead of the frozen rocks and
deserts, which I had crossed the eve before, I
saw nothing as I looked around, but valleys
clothed with verdure, and enamelled with
flowers; and hills surrounded and crowned by
evergreens and olive-trees. On the day before,
winter reigned with all his severity; the day
after exhibited spring with all her charms. This
pleasing transition beguiled my impatience;
and the agitations which had become habitual
to my soul were succeeded by that happy tran-
quillity, which is inspired by the contemplation
of the beauties and the gifts of nature.
A few leagues beyond Pontremolithe road is
interrupted by a deep and rapid stream. There is
a ford across this torrent. It had scarcely been
indicated to me by my guides, beyond whom I
had advanced, when I dashed into the water; but
instead of guiding my horse to the right (as I
ought to have done), I took the opposite di-
rection. My guides, who saw my mistake,
screamed out in Italian, “fermate, fermate!”
which means, “stop, stop!” I thought it
meant “firm, firm'” so I whipped and spurred
my horse with all my might; he lost his foot-
ing, and I narrowly escaped drowning. When


<page 122>
NAPOLEON IN 18 lj. 103
I reached the opposite shore my guides treated
me with a sermon, which I dare say was very
energetic, and in which the “Devil and the
Frenchman” appeared to be the leading actors.
I arrived on the **** at Lerici. I rejoiced
when I saw the sea before me, when I saw the
last obstacle which was interposed between the
fulfilment of my hopes and the termination of
my labours. But unhappily my joy was of short
duration; in the course of the night I was at-
tacked by an oppression on my chest, accom-
panied by a burning fever: this was the result
of the cold bath which I had taken in the river.
My mental sufferings were severe: I thought to
myself, if I should be so unlucky as to get an
inflammation on my lungs, what will become
of me here without help, without friends, and
in a strange land? Ah, my beloved country!
ah, my dear mother! have I left you both, in
order to perish in the arms of hirelings and of
strangers | Have I only reached the long
wished-for shores of Spezzia but to experience
the grief of not being able to sail from them
Ah, if I could but have reached the Emperor,
if I could but have spoken to him, if I could but
have expired at his feet, then I should not have
regretted life! My devoted attachment would
have been known; my memory honoured; my

<page 123>
104. MEMOIRS OF
name, linked to the destiny of the Emperor,
would, perhaps, have descended with his unto
posterity . . . . I sent for a doctor: by singular
good fortune, the medical man who came to
attend me was a retired army surgeon, a worthy
man, and a great admirer of the French. When
I was quite out of danger, he expressed a wish
to know the motives which had induced me to
cross the mountains to Lerici : and he gave me
to understand that he guessed my views. A
man who speaks is always liable to less suspi-
cion than a man who says nothing; I therefore
thought it right to allay the doctor's curiosity.
After exhorting him to secrecy, and making a
great mystery of the matter, I confessed that I
was a Colonel in the French army, and that an
officer who held a high rank in the service of
Napoleon had married my sister. My sister, I
proceeded to state, was so afflicted and broken
down by the expatriation of her husband, that
her medical attendants had declared her life to
be in the greatest danger. My sister’s illness, and
the care of her four small children, prevented
her from rejoining her husband; and therefore,
in order to restore health and happiness to my
poor dear sister, I had determined to go to
Elba, for the purpose of reminding my brother-
in-law of the duty which he owed to his wife and

<page 124>
NAPO LEON IN 1815. 105
children, and that I hoped to be able to induce
him to return to France, at least for a short
time.
I took care to diversify my romance with sighs
and sentimental reflections, and it appeared
to affect him exceedingly. He condoled with
me, he tried to console me; he gave me the
most flattering hopes, and he promised to serve
me to the utmost of his power, and with all his
heart and soul.
As soon as I was in a state of convalescence,
I became more ardent than before, in search of
an immediate opportunity of embarking. My
complaisant doctor introduced me to the cap-
tain of a running felucca, and I hired his vessel
for a fortnight.
The captain asked me for my passport, in order
that he might receive his “feuille de bord” and
his “boletta” from the port officer. This was in
consequence of regulations of which I was
wholly ignorant. The fact is, that no vessel
can clear out of one port, or enter another,
without a “feuille de bord,” stating the com-
plement of the crew, and the number of pas-
sengers; and a “boletta,” or certificate, delivered
by the health officers to each of the passen-
gers and crew individually, stating that the
bearer has not been attacked by any infectious

<page 125>
106 MIEMOIRS OF
disorder. These papers are only delivered on
the production of the passports, to which they
must correspond exactly. I did not expect this
proceeding: my plans were all disorganized:
my passport did not authorize me to embark;
and I was afraid if I produced it, (for in such
situations we are afraid of every thing), that
difficulties might arise, and that they would
refer to the Consul or his agents.
The Captain guessed the cause of my un-
easiness, and he offered to procure a passport
and a boletta under a feigned name. I refused:
I thought it more advisable to run the risk of
being punished as a Bonapartist than as an im-
postor. “Since you will not do so,” said the
captain, “there is but one course which you
can pursue: you must get on board a boat, and
pass for a common sailor. I will manage the
business for you.” Some hours afterwards
the captain came to me with a Gallo-Genoese
sailor, who offered to take me, without any
papers, wherever I wished to go. He added,
that he had a relation who was a gunner on
board the Inconstant, a brig belonging to Na-
poleon, and that he should be very glad to see
him again. I judged that my design of going
to Elba had got wind: I therefore determined,
if possible, to depart that very night. It was

<page 126>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 107
therefore agreed that Salviti, so the sailor was
called, should fetch me, and that we should put
out to sea, however bad the weather might
prove. -
Whilst these arrangements were going on
my doctor paid me a visit. The doctor told
me that the commandant of the town, whom
he attended, was going to send a file of his ca-
rabineers to bring me before him in order to
ascertain the reason of my arrival, and of my
residence on the shores of the gulf. “I told
him,” continued the doctor, “that you are
unwell, and that you are going to your family
in Corsica, and that you intend to begin your
voyage as soon as you are able to support the
fatigue. I think I have made him easier, yet
don’t trust him: be off as quick as you can.”
—“I shall be off to-night; but as your com-
mandant or his gensdarmes might take a fancy
to lay hold of me between this and then, I
therefore think it will be more prudent for me
to go to him of my own accord, and to confirm
the story which you have had the goodness to
tell him.” Accordingly I went immediately to
the Commandant; and as the doctor had let me
into the character of the man, I easily succeeded
in pleasing and tranquillizing him. However,
he made me promise that I would bring my

<page 127>
]O8 MEMOIRS OF
passport to him to-morrow. I gave as many
promises as he could wish. At midnight we
set sail; and by break of day we had already
lost sight of the gulf of Spezzia, and of the ma-
jestic scenery which surrounds it. The bark
which carried me and all my fortunes was only
a common boat with four oars and a lateen sail.
The crew consisted of six men; Salviti could
speak French, and he was a good-looking fel-
low: the countenances of the others displayed
want and utter profligacy. They examined me
with great curiosity, and they were constantly
talking about me. Salviti interpreted their dis-
course. I gave them civil language. We even
seek to please sailors when we are in need of
their help *. I was sea-sick without intermis-
sion; and to complete my misfortunes I had
omitted to furnish myself with provisions. I
was therefore obliged to mess with my com-
panions; and their food consisted of stinking
salt fish, and chiefly of bacalao, or salt cod,
which is eaten quite raw.
The wind was against us, therefore we did not
come in sight of the lighthouse of Leghorn until
the morning of the second day. How can I ex-
* On cherche à plaire même à des matelots quand on a
besoin d'eux.

<page 128>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 109
press my surprise and anger when I saw that
our vessel was making the mouth of the har-
bour ! “Salviti, where are you taking me?”
“To Leghorn.”—“I won’t go to Leg-
horn,” I exclaimed with a great oath. “It
is not to Leghorn that you promised to take
me.” Salviti answered, with confusion, that
he was not the owner of the vessel, but that he
hired it in partnership with the rest of the
crew, that they were all smugglers, and that
they were going to Leghorn for the purpose of
arranging an expedition of consequence with
other smugglers there. Their business would
be soon settled, and then they would take me
to Porto Ferrajo; and he declared that he gave
his word of honour that he would do so, and
that I might trust him.—“I will not agree
to all this,” I exclaimed, presenting my pistols
to his breast: “Let us go straight on to Elba,
or I will shoot you.” “Shoot away, if you
like, but you will not do yourself much good:
my companions will heave you into the sea,
or else you will be guillotined at Leghorn.”
The coolness of the fellow completely disarmed
me. “Well, then,” said I, “swear that you will
take me to-morrow to the isle of Elba.”—“I
have told you already that I am a scoundrel if
I break my word.” The sailors did not under-

<page 129>
I 10 MEMOIRS OF
stand a word of our dialogue, nor could they
make out what was the cause of my fury. One
of them, who had deserted from the English
navy, seized a big knife in the shape of a stiletto.
The others seemed to wait the result, in order to
throw themselves upon me. When this scene
had finished, I endeavoured to bribe Salviti to
turn back, but no; he had given his word of ho-
nour to go to Leghorn, and his word of honour
was inviolable. Thus I was conducted against
my will into the trap which I wished to avoid.
I was worked up to the highest pitch of fury
and vexation; I foamed with rage and despair.
Thus, thought I, wringing my hands, these
ruffians will deprive me of the reward which I
was to obtain for my sufferings. Alas! the
Emperor, the Emperor! so near him—under
his eyes—at the moment that—“Rascal!” I
cried out to Salviti, “I will follow you like your
shadow, and sooner than allow myself to be
arrested, I will blow out your brains!” Sal-
viti shrugged up his shoulders, and answered,
“Well and good; but, in the mean time, strip,
and dress yourself like a sailor.” “Why?”
—“Why! why, because you have no passport,
and they will lock you up.” I submitted to
this new tribulation. One of the wretches
pulled off a heavy jacket with a hood attached

<page 130>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 1 11
to it, in which I arrayed myself. A coloured
handkerchief, all drenched with sweat and fil-
thiness, was taken from the neck of another of
them, and tied round mine. A third gave me
his woollen cap; and in spite of my unavoidable
disgust, I was compelled to draw it on my head
down to my eyes. My beard, by good luck,
did not disgrace my unshaved messmates, and
in order that the colour of my hands might not
betray me, I washed them in the bilge-water
which stagnated beneath the flooring of our
boat. More remained to be done: our “feuille
de bord” stated that our crew consisted of six
men: we were seven. It therefore became
necessary to hide one". We chose him who
was the shortest, and the most slender. He
nestled at the end of the boat, and we covered
him with some old mats and sailors' jackets.
These preparations being terminated, I was
told to seat myself in the place of a rower, and
to take an oar in my hand; and at night-fall
we came into the road of Leghorn.
* As only six were noted in the “feuille de bord” they
took an extra sailor, in order that there might be six on
board after my landing, otherwise, on landing, they would
have been obliged to account for the sailor whom I repre-
sented.

<page 131>
1 12 MEMOIRS OF
Salviti presented his papers. The date was
too old". The officers raised objections: he lost
his temper; and by way, both of punishment
and precaution, we were ordered to submit to
the lesser quarantine, that is to say, to remain
prisoners in the roads during three days.
Salviti came with a sorrowful visage and
announced this fresh misfortune; our vessel
tacked about, and we reached our station of
exile.
On the morning of the third day Salviti in-
formed me that, according to custom, they
intended to put an “inspector of health” on
board of our vessel, who would pass the night
with us, in order to ascertain whether we were
all well. From the person who had brought, or
who, rather, had thrown us our provisions (for
all contact is prohibited under pain of death),
he had ascertained the name of our intended
inspector. He was a gamester and a drunkard.
* The time required for sailing from one port to another
is pretty well ascertained; if this period is exceeded, and no
sufficient reason can be assigned for the delay, it is assumed
that the vessel may have touched at some infected port; and,
by excess of caution, they compel you to undergo the lesser
quarantine. The lesser quarantine is also ordered as a
punishment when the master of a vessel does not behave with
due respect and submission to the health officers.

<page 132>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. | 13
Salviti procured cards and wine; and he as-
sured me that he would manage the inspector
in such a manner as to prevent his taking any
notice of me.
As for me, I was not as easy as Salviti. I
was afraid lest the inspector might discover the
sailor whom we had hidden, or that he might
guess by my manner, my looks, and my awk-
wardness, that I was not really the character
which I seemed to be. Besides, a single ques-
tion would have ended the matter. I did not
understand a single word of Italian, and I should
have betrayed myself either by answering him,
or by remaining silent. It came into my head
to counterfeit deafness: this would excuse me
from taking a part in the conversation: and to
make believe that I had a wound in my hand:
this would account for my inactivity, and pre-
vent his observing how little I knew of my pre-
tended occupation. I drew a few drops of
blood, which I smeared upon some dirty rags,
in which I wrapped my hand. Salviti explained
my stratagem to my companions, and their loud
peals of laughter explained to me that they ap-
proved of it. The inspector arrived. I kept
myself to myself. Salviti acted his part ad-
mirably. So did I: and to my great delight the
evening closed, and nothing disagreeable had
VOL. I. I

<page 133>
114. MEMOIRS OF
happened. Until this night I had always slept
separately from the rest on a tolerable mattrass.
But the inspector was now accommodated with
my birth and my bed; and I was compelled to
lie on the floor with the sailors; my head being
placed even with the feet of my two next neigh-
bours. The stench and closeness of the atmo-
sphere of my den drove the blood into my head,
and I thought I should have been suffocated.
Early in the morning my companions began to
eat and drink: I kept at a distance. “Come
here, and eat,” said Salviti.—“I can't.”—
“The inspector will fancy that you are ill, and
that will be enough to give us another quaran-
time.” I ate. At ten o'clock the health-
officers came near us; and as our inspector
made a favourable report, we were allowed to
enter the harbour. I remained on board with
one of the crew, whom I kept as a hostage.
The smugglers broke up their cabinet council
about two o'clock; and at three o'clock we
quitted our anchorage. A fair wind filled the
sail, and I forgot all my sufferings and my dan-
gers when I perceived the rock where I was to
meet with Napoleon the Great.
We entered the road of Porto Ferrajo", with-
* I had believed, according to the statements in the mini-
sterial journals, that the sea was covered by French and En-

<page 134>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 115
out any difficulty, at the moment when the
cannon fired, announcing that the harbour
was about to close. I heard the French drums
sounding the roll: my heart beat high : I passed
the night on the deck of the boat. Notwith-
standing the joy which I felt at my arrival, I
could not help indulging in a certain degree of
melancholy, inspired, perhaps, by the silence of
the night, and the aspect of the arid and gloomy
mountains which surrounded me. Ah, how
vain is human grandeur ! thought I. The air
of that sterile islet is breathed by that incom-
prehensible man who lately felt that he had not
breathing room in Europe. It is in that hum-
ble hovel that he now dwells with his scanty
train of faithful followers; He whom I have
seen in the palace of the Caesars, receiving the
homage and the worship of the most brilliant
court in the world; He whom I have seen sit-
ting covered, whilst eight Kings stood before
him with their hats in their hands. It is over
glish ships, by which all vessels and passengers, proceeding
to the island, were intercepted. I did not meet with a sin-
gle ship of this description. The ports were placed under
a “surveillance,” equally brutal and tyrannical, but the sea
was free. All vessels went in and out of Porto Ferrajo with-
out experiencing the slightest obstacle.
I 2

<page 135>
| 16 MEMOIRS OF
this little tribe alone, not exceeding the po-
pulation of a village, that Napoleon the Great
is now doomed to reign l Napoleon the Great!
He who endowed the thrones of his allies
with the leavings of his conquests—He who
so long was the master and the terror of the
universe !
The sun rose, and put an end to my musings.
My joy was inexpressible when I recognized on
the ramparts those old grenadiers whom I had
so often admired and honoured on the field of
battle.
I jumped on shore, and I rushed into the
nearest inn for the purpose of putting off my
sailor’s dress, and then flying to the palace of
Napoleon. But I had been watched and fol-
lowed: and the functionaries despatched by
general Cambronne, the Commandant of the
town, immediately appeared to secure me. I
tranquillized them, and they accompanied me
to the town-house, where General Bertrand
then lodged. I sent in my name, and the
General came out. “Sir, do you come from
France P”—“Yes, Monsieur le Marechal.”
——“What do you want here?”—“I wish
to see the Emperor, and to solicit employment.”
“Does the Emperor know you?”
“Yes, Sir, and M. X* * * has also given me

<page 136>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 1 17
the means of proving to the Emperor that I am
not unworthy of his goodness.” “Do you
bring us any news from France?”—“I do,
Monsieur le Marechal; and I think that the in-
telligence which I bring is good.” “Well,
Heaven hears you; as for us, we are so wretched
—I am dying with impatience to have a talk
with you about France; but I must inform the
Emperor of your arrival. Perhaps he may not
be able to see you immediately. To-day the
English corvette" is here, and those people are
suspicious of every thing: is it publicly known
who you are ?”—“It is known that I am a
French officer.”—“So much the worse; hide
your decorations, hold your tongue, and remain
within doors and rest yourself at your inn. I
will send for you.” Half an hour afterwards
the Marshal desired me to proceed as quickly
as possible to the Emperor's garden-gate: the
Emperor, would come there, and speak to me
without appearing to know me. I went ac-
cordingly: the Emperor, according to his cus-
tom, was walking with his hands behind his
back. He passed several times before me
without lifting up his eyes; at last he looked
at me: he stopped, and asked me in Italian
* The corvette commanded by Captain Campbell.

<page 137>
I 18 MEMOIRS OF
what countryman I was. I answered in French
that I was a Parisian; that business had called
me to Italy; and that I could not resist the de-
sire of seeing my old sovereign.—“Well, Sir,
talk to me about Paris and France;”—and as
he finished these words he began to walk again,
I accompanied him; and after he had put se-
veral indifferent questions to me aloud, he de-
sired me to enter his apartments: he then or-
dered Bertrand and Drouot to retire, and forced
me to sit down by his side. Napoleon began
in a reserved and absent manner: “The grand
Marshal tells me that you have just arrived from
France.”—“Yes, Sire.” “What do you
want here?”—“Sire, I wish to offer my ser-
vices to you; my conduct in 1814—” Napo-
leon interrupting me, “Sir, I do not ques-
tion but that you are a very good officer, how-
ever I have so many officers with me already,
that it will be very difficult for me to assist you;
yet we will see: it appears that you know M.
X***.”—“Yes, Sire.”—“Has he sent a
letter for me by you?”—“No, Sire.”—Na-
poleon, interrupting me, “I see he forgets me
just like the rest; since I have been here, I have
not heard a word of him or of any body.” I
interrupted the Emperor in my turn, “Sire, he
has never ceased to entertain those sentiments

<page 138>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 119
of devotion and attachment towards your Ma-
jesty which are still cherished by all true French-
men; and ”Napoleon, with disdain; “What,
do they still think of me in France?”—“Never
will they forget you.”—“Never! that is a
strong expression; the French have another
Sovereign, and they are commanded both by
their duty and their tranquillity to think on him
alone.” This answer did not please me: the Em-
peror, thought I to myself, is out of humour be-
cause I have not brought him any letters; he
mistrusts me: it was not worth while to come
so far for the sake of such an ungracious recep-
tion. Napoleon, continuing, “What do they
think about me in France?”—“There, your
Majesty is universally deplored and regretted.”
“Yes, and there, also, they manufacture all
sorts of lies concerning me. Sometimes they say
that I am mad, sometimes that I am ill, and you
may see (here the Emperor looked at his em-
bonpoint), if I look like an ailing man. It is
also given out that they intend to transport me
either to St. Helena or to Malta. I would not
advise them to try. I have provisions for six
months, and brave followers to defend me: but
I cannot think that Europe will be so disho-
mourable as to rise in arms against a single man,
who has neither the power nor the inclination

<page 139>
120 MEMOIRS OF
of hurting others. The emperor Alexander has
too much love for posterity to lend himself to
such a crime. They have guaranteed the sove-
reignty of the isle of Elba to me by a solemn
treaty. Here I am in my own home; and as
long as I do not go out to pick a quarrel with
my neighbours, they have no right to come and
disturb me . . . . have you served in the grand
army?”—“Yes, Sire, I had the felicity of
distinguishing myself under your Majesty’s eyes
in the plains of Champagne; your Majesty ap-
peared to take such particular notice of me, that
I had dared to hope that your Majesty would re-
collect me.”—“Why, yes; I thought, some-
how, that I knew your face when I saw you, but
I have only a confused recollection of you.”
Poor mortals' thought I to myself, go and ex-
pose your lives for the sake of Kings, go and sa-
crifice your youth, your repose, your happiness
for their sake!—“In what affairs have you
distinguished yourself?”—“Sire, at * * ***,
and at ***** Marshal Ney there presented
me to your majesty, saying, “Sire, here is the
intrepid S. ... P. . . . . of whom I have spoken
to your Majesty.”—“Ah! ah! I really do
recollect—yes, I was very well pleased indeed,
with your behaviour at **** and at ****;
you showed much resolution, much strength of

<page 140>
NAPOLEoN IN 1815. 121
*
character. Did I not “decorate you on the
field of battle?”—“Yes, Sire.” Napoleon,
with greater warmth and confidence, “Eh
bien / how are they all treated in France by the
Bourbons?”—“Sire, the Bourbons have not
realized the expectations of the French, and the
number of malcontents increases every day.”
Napoleon, sharply; “So much the worse,
so much the worse: but how, has not X. sent me
any letters?”—“No, Sire; he was afraid lest
they might be taken from me; and as he thought
that your Majesty, being now compelled to be
vigilant, and to distrust all the world, might dis-
trust me also, he has revealed several circum-
stances to me, which are only known to your
Majesty and to himself; thus enabling me to
give a proof that I am worthy of your Majesty's
confidence.”—“Let us hear them.” I began
my detail, but he exclaimed, without allowing
me to finish, “that’s enough; why did you not
begin by telling me all that ? there is half an
hour that we have lost.” This storm * discon-
• Napoleon usually liked to intimidate and disconcert those
who approached him. Sometimes he feigned that he could
not hear you, and then he would make you repeat in a very
loud tone what he had heard perfectly well before. How-
ever, he was really deaf in a slight degree. At other times

<page 141>
122 MEMOIRS OF
certed me. He perceived my confusion, and
resumed his discourse with mildness.
“Come, make yourself easy, and repeat to me,
with the greatest minuteness, all that has passed
between you and X****.” I then related
the circumstances which had induced me to
have an interview with Monsieur X ****. I
repeated our conversation word for word. I
gave him a complete account of all the faults
and excesses of the royal government; and I
was going to draw the inferences which had
occurred to Monsieur X **** and me. But
the Emperor, who, when he was affected, was
incapable of listening to any recital without in-
terrupting it, and making his comments at every
moment, stopped my mouth. “I thought so,
too,” said he, “when I abdicated, that the
Bourbons, instructed and disciplined by ad-
versity, would not fall again into the errors
which ruined them in 1789. I thought that
he would overwhelm you with such rapid and abrupt inter-
rogatories, that you had not time to understand him, and
were compelled to give your answers in confusion. He used
then to laugh at your embarrassment; and when he had
driven you out of your presence of mind and confidence, he
amused himself at your expense.—Note of the author of the
work.

<page 142>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. . 123
the King would govern you ‘en bon homme.”
This was the only way by which he could obtain
a pardon from you, for having been put upon
you by foreigners. But since they have stepped
into France, they have done nothing but acts
of madness. Their treaty of the twenty-third
of April,” (raising his voice,) “has made me
deeply indignant: with one stroke of the pen
they have robbed France of Belgium, and of
all the territory acquired since the revolution.
They have deprived the nation of its docks, its
arsenals, its fleets, its artillery, and the immense
materiel which I had collected in the fortresses
and the ports which they have ceded. Talley-
rand has led them into this infamous business:
he must have been bribed. Peace is easy upon
such terms. If, like them, I had consented to
the ruin of France, they would not now be on
my throne:” (with energy,) “I would sooner
have cut off my right hand. I preferred re-
nouncing my throne rather than to retain it by
staining my glory, and the honour of the French
nation . . . . . . . A degraded crown is an into-
lerable burthen. My enemies have published
everywhere, that I obstinately refused to make
peace. They have represented me as a wretched
madman, eager only for blood and carnage: this
language answered their turn. When you wish

<page 143>
124 MEMOIRS OF
to hang your dog, you give out that he is mad:
Quand on veut tuer son chien, il faut bien faire
accroire qu'ilest enragé. But Europe shall know
the truth: I will let the world know all that
was said and done at Chatillon. I will unmask
the Austrians, the Russians, and the English
with a powerful hand. Europe shall judge:
Europe shall say who was the rogue, and who
was wishing to shed human blood. If I had
been mad for war, I might have retired with
my army beyond the Loire, and I might have
enjoyed mountain warfare to my heart’s con-
tent. I would not; I was tired of carnage....
my name, and the brave fellows who remained
faithful to me, yet made the allies tremble, even
in my capital. They offered Italy to me as the
price of my abdication: I refused it. After
once reigning over France, one ought not to
reign anywhere else. I chose the isle of Elba.
They were too happy to give Elba to me. This
position suited me. I can watch France and
the Bourbons. All that I have done has been
only for France. It is for her sake and not for
mine that I wished to render her the first nation
in the universe. My glory is made for myself"
* “Magloire est faite a moi. Mon nom vivra autant que
celui de Dieu / "I"


<page 144>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 125
* * * * * * *. If I had only thought
of myself, I would have returned to a private
station, but it was my duty to retain the im-
perial title for my family and my son . . . Next
to France, my son is the dearest object in the
world to me.”
During the whole of this discourse, the Em-
peror continued striding up and down, and ap-
peared violently agitated. He paused a little
while, and then he began again. They (i. e.
the emigrants) know too well that I am here,
and they would like to assassinate me. I discover
new plots, new snares every day. They have
sent to Corsica one of the assassins of Georges,
a wretch whom the English journals themselves
have pointed out to Europe as a blood-thirsty
assassin; but let us be on the alert. If he
misses me, I won’t miss him. I shall send my
grenadiers after him, and he shall be shot as an
example to others.
After a few moments of silence, he said, “Do
my generals go to court? they must cut a sad
figure there.” I waited for the end of this di-
gression, in order to resume the thread of my
discourse. As I was convinced that I could
not possibly lead the conversation, I resolved
to let the Emperor have it according to his
own way, and I answered, “Yes, Sire, and they

<page 145>
126 MEMOIRS OF
are furious to see themselves superseded in
favour by emigrants who have never heard the
sound of a cannon.”—“The emigrants will
never alter. As long as they were only re-
quired to dance attendance in my anti-chamber,
I had more than enough of them. When it
was necessary to show any heart, they slunk
away like . . . . . . I committed a great error,
when I recalled that anti-national race into
France. If it had not been for me, they
would have died of starvation abroad; but then
I had great motives. I wanted to reconcile
Europe to us, and to close the revolution . . . .
What do my soldiers say about me?”—
“The soldiers, Sire, talk constantly about your
immortal victories. They never pronounce
your name but with respect, admiration, and
grief. When the Princes give money to the
soldiers, they drink it out to your health, and
when they are forced to cry Wive le Roi! they
add in a whisper, de Rome.”—“And so they
still love me?” (smiling.) “Yes, Sire, and I
may even venture to say, more than ever.”
“What do they say about our misfortunes?”
“They consider them as the effect of
treachery; and they constantly repeat, that they
never would have been conquered, if they had
not been sold to their enemies. They are par-

<page 146>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 127
ticularly indignant with respect to the capitula-
tion of Paris.”—“They are right: had it not
been for the infamous defection of the Duke
of Ragusa, the allies would have been lost. I
was master of their rear, and of all their re-
sources; not a man would have escaped. They
too would have had their twenty-ninth bulletin.
Marmont is a wretch; he has ruined his country,
and delivered up his sovereign. His conven-
tion with Schwartzenburg would alone suffice
to dishonour him. If he had not known when
he surrendered, that he compromised my person
and my army, he would not have found it ne-
cessary to make stipulations in favour of my
liberty and life. This piece of treachery is not
the only one. He has intrigued with Talley-
rand to take the regency from the Empress, and
the crown from my son. Caulincourt, Macdo-
nald, and the rest of the marshals, have been
cheated and gulled by him in the most shameful
manner. All his blood would not be sufficient
to expiate the harm which he has done to
France. . . . . I will devote his name to the
execration of posterity. I am glad to learn
that my soldiers retain the feeling of their su-
periority, and that they attribute our great mis-
fortunes to the right authors. I collect with
great pleasure, from the intelligence which you

<page 147>
198 MEMIOIRS OF
have brought, that the opinion which I had
formed respecting the situation of France, is
correct. The family of the Bourbons is not fit
to reign. Their government may be good for
priests, nobles, and old fashioned countesses:
it is good for nothing for the present genera-
tion. The revolution has taught the people to
know their rank in the state. They will never
consent to fall back into their former nullity,
and to be tied up by the nobility and the
clergy. The army can never belong to the
Bourbons. Our victories and our misfortunes
have established an indissoluble tie between
the army and myself. It is only through me
that the soldiers can earn vengeance, power,
and glory. From the Bourbons they can get
nothing but insults and blows. Kings can only
retain their power by the love of their subjects
or by fear. The Bourbons are neither loved
nor feared. At last they will throw them-
selves off their throne; but they may yet retain
their position for a long time. Frenchmen do
not know how to conspire.”
In pronouncing these words, the Emperor
continued walking hastily, and using many
gestures. He rather appeared to be soliloquiz-
ing than addressing any one else; he then con-
tinued, looking at me aside, “Does M. X." **

<page 148>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 129
think that those people can stand much longer?”
“His opinion on this point is exactly con-
formable to the general opinion; that is to say,
it is now the general impression and conviction,
that the government is hastening to its fall.
The priests and the emigrants are its only par-
tisans; every man of patriotism or soul is its
enemy.” Napoleon (with energy), “Yes, all
men in whose veins any national blood is flowing
must be its enemies; but how will all this end?
Is it thought that there will be a new revolu-
tion?”—“Sire, discontent and irritation pre-
vail to such an extent, that the slightest partial
effervescence would inevitably cause a general
insurrection, and nobody would be surprised if
it were to take place to-morrow.” ** But
what would you do were you to expel the
Bourbons: would you re-establish the repub-
lic?”—“The republic, Sire! nobody thinks
about it; perhaps they would create a regency.”
Napoleon (with vehemence and surprise),
“A regency! And wherefore? am I dead?”
“But your absence . . . . . * * “My
absence makes no difference. In a couple of
days I would be back again in France, if the
nation were to recal me. Do you think it
would be well, if I were to return ?” The
Emperor turned away his eyes, and I could
VOL. I. K

<page 149>
130 MEMOIRS. Of
easily remark, that to this question he attached
more importance than he cared to manifest,
and that he expected my answer with anxiety.
“Sire, I dare not personally attempt to answer
such a question, but . . . . ” Napoleon
(abruptly), “That's not what I am asking you;
answer yes or no.” “Why then, Sire,—yes.”
Napoleon (with tenderness), “You really
think so?”—“Yes, Sire, I am convinced, and
so is M. X****, that the people and the army
would receive you as their deliverer, and that
your cause would be embraced with enthusiasm.”
-Napoleon (appearing agitated and impa-
tient), “Then X*** advises me to return ?”
“We had foreseen that your Majesty would
make inquiries on this point, and the following
is literally his answer. You will tell his Majesty
that I would not dare to decide so important a
question, but that he may consider it as a
positive and incontrovertible fact, that our pre-
sent government has wholly lost the confidence
of the people and of the army; that discontent
has increased to the highest pitch, and that it is
impossible to believe that the government can
stand much longer against the universal dislike.
You will add, that the Emperor is the only ob-
ject of the regret and hope of the nation. He,
in his wisdom, will decide what he ought to do.”

<page 150>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 131
The Emperor became silent and pensive;
and, after a long meditation, he said, “I will
reflect upon it; I will keep you with me. Come
here to-morrow at eleven o’clock.”
On leaving the Emperor, I met the Grand
Marshal, who said, “the Emperor has detained
you a long time. I am in terror lest this inter-
view should have been noticed. We are sur-
rounded by English spies. The slightest indis-
cretion might cost us dear. I do not ask you
to relate to me any thing which was reserved
for the Emperor; but if, without violating your
duty, you could give me any details relating to
France, you would be doing me a great favour.
We hear nothing of what is going forward, ex-
cept from the journals and a few commercial
travellers; and the intelligence which we thus
obtain is so trifling and so contradictory, that we
do not know what to make of it.”—“I can
satisfy you, Monsieur le Marechal, and without
acting indiscreetly: what I have told to the Em-
peror is known to all France. Discontent is at
its greatest height, and the royal government is
on its last legs.”—“I cannot tell what futurity
promises to us; but whatever our fate may be,
we cannot be worse off than we are at present.
Our resources are dwindling away daily; we
are becoming home-sick. If we were not a
K 2

<page 151>
132 MEMOIRS OF
little upheld by hope, I really do not know
what would become of us. Has the Emperor
allowed you to remain with us?”—“Yes,
Monsieur le Marechal.”—“I give you joy,
but I pity you. There is no happiness out of
one's own country. I do not regret having fol-
lowed the Emperor—this step was dictated to
me by my duty and my gratitude; but I regret
France, like an infant who has lost its mother;
like a lover who has lost his mistress.” The
Grand Marshal's eyes were filled with tears;
he pressed my hand affectionately, and then
said, “Come and breakfast with us to-morrow
morning. I will introduce you to my wife; it
will be as good as a fête to her when she has
an opportunity of receiving a Frenchman, and
above all, a true Frenchman.”
It was soon known all over the town, that a
Frenchman had arrived from the continent.
My inn was besieged by a crowd of officers
and grenadiers, who overwhelmed me with in-
quiries after their friends and relations. They
seemed to think that I must be acquainted with
every living creature in France. Many in-
quired respecting the state of public affairs. I
evaded their interrogatories, by declaring that I
had quitted France five months since.
I waited on the Grand Marshal according to

<page 152>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 133
*
his invitation. He resided in one wing of the
building occupied by the municipality. In his
apartment, there was hardly anything to be seen
except the four walls. He took notice that I was
surveying its appearance.—“You are con-
templating our misery,” said he: “Perhaps it
contrasts itself with the opinion which you may
have formed respecting our situation. It is
supposed throughout Europe, that the Emperor
carried off immense treasures; but his camp-
plate, his camp bed, and a few broken down
horses, are the only objects which he has pre-
served, or which he wished to preserve. Like
Saladin, he could cause an outcry to be made at
his door, whilst he exposes our tatters,—behold
all that Napoleon the Great, the conqueror of
the universe, has retained from his conquests!”
The General was as good as his word: he
introduced me to Madame la Marechale. I
was enchanted by her manners and her ami-
ability. Our conversation turned upon France
and the Isle of Elba, the present and the future;
and on quitting Madame Bertrand, I did not
know what I ought most to admire—the lively
graces of her mind, or the dignity and energy
of her character.
At eleven o'clock I attended, to present my-

<page 153>
134 MEMOIRS OF
*
self to the Emperor. They made me wait in
his saloon on the ground floor. The striped silk
hangings were half worn out and faded; the
carpet was threadbare, and patched in several
places; a few shabby arm chairs completed the
furniture of the apartment. I thought upon
the splendour of the imperial palaces, and I
drew a deep and melancholy sigh. The Em-
peror arrived: he had assumed a degree of
calmness in his manner, which was belied by
his eyes. It was easy to see that he had been
violently agitated. “Sir,” said he, “I declared
to you yesterday, that I retained you in my ser-
vice. I repeat the same to you to-day. From
this instant you belong to me, and I hope you
will fulfil your duties towards me like a good and
faithful subject: you swear that you will—is it
not so?”—“Yes, Sire, I swear.”—“That’s
right.” After a pause, “I had foreseen the crisis
to which France would come, but I did not
think that things were so ripe. It was my in-
tention not to interfere any longer in political
affairs. The intelligence which you have
brought to me has changed my resolutions. I
have caused the misfortunes of France; there-
fore I must remove them: but before I commit
myself, I wish to have a thorough knowledge

<page 154>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 135
of the state of our affairs. Sit down: repeat to
me all that you told me yesterday; I like to
hear you.”
Re-assured by these words, and by a look
full of kindness and benignity, I abandoned
myself without reserve to all the inspirations of
my heart and soul. The picture which I drew
of the sufferings and hopes of the nation, which
I presented to the Emperor, was so touching
and so animated, that he was astonished. “You
are a noble young fellow,” said he, “you have
truly the soul of a Frenchman; but are you not
carried away by your imagination?”—“No,
Sire; the recital which I have made to your
Majesty is quite faithful. I may have expressed
myself with warmth, because I cannot express
my feelings otherwise; but all that I have
told you is exact and true. Under such im-
portant circumstances, I should have thought
it a crime to substitute the inspirations of my
imagination in the place of truth.”—“You
therefore think that France awaits her redemp-
tion from me; that I shall be received as a
deliverer.” “Yes, Sire; I will even say
more: the royal government is so exceedingly
hateful and disgusting to the French, the go-
vernment weighs so very heavily on the nation
and the army, that not only your Majesty, but

<page 155>
136 MEMOIRS OF
any body else who would endeavour to liberate
the French would find them disposed to second
him.” Napoleon (with dignity): “Repeat
that to me again.”—“Yes, Sire, I do repeat
it. The French are so wearied, and degraded,
and incensed, by the anti-national yoke of the
emigrants and the priests, that they are ready
to join any one who will promise to deliver
them.”—“But if I were to disembark in
France, is there not reason to fear that the pa-
triots may be massacred by the emigrants and
the chouans?” “No, Sire, I do not think so;
we are the most numerous and the bravest
party.”—“Yes, but they may heap you in
the prisons, and cut your throats.”—“Sire,
the people will not let them do that.”—“I
hope you may not be deceived; to be sure, I
shall get to Paris so speedily, that they won’t
have time to consider where they are to hide
their heads. I shall be there as soon as the
news of my disembarkation ...... Yes,” the
Emperor continued, after taking a few steps,
“I have resolved . . . . . . It was I who gave the
Bourbons to France, and it is I who must rid
France of them . . . . . . I will set off. . . . . . The
enterprise is vast, it is difficult, it is dangerous,
but it is not beyond me. On great occasions
fortune has never abandoned me ...... I shall

<page 156>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 137
set off, but not alone; I won’t run the risk of
allowing myself to be collared by the gens-
darmes. I will depart with my sword, my
Polanders, my grenadiers . . . . . . all France is
on my side. I belong to France; and for her
I will sacrifice my repose, my blood, my life,
with the greatest joy.” After this speech,
the Emperor stopped; his eyes sparkled with
hope and genius: his attitude announced energy,
confidence, victory; he was grand, he was beau-
tiful, he was adorable!—he resumed his dis-
course, and said, “Do you think that they will
dare to wait for me?” “No, Sire.”—- “I
don’t think so, either: they will quake when
they hear the thunder of my name; and they
will know that they can only escape me by a
speedy flight. But what will be the conduct of
the national guards? Do you think they will
fight for them?” “I think, Sire, that the
national guards will remain neutral.”—“Even
that's a great deal; as to their ‘gardes du corps,”
and their red regiments, I am not afraid of them:
they are either old men or boys: they will be
frightened by the mustachios of my grenadiers.
I will make my grenadiers hoist the national
flag;” lifting up his voice and his hand: “I
will appeal to my old soldiers; I will speak to
them. None of them will refuse to hear the

<page 157>
1 38 MIEMOIRS OF
voice of their old general . . . . . It is certain that
the soldiers cannot hesitate to choose between
the white flag and the tricoloured flag; between
me, by whom they have been covered with
rewards and glory, and the Bourbons, who wish
to dishonour them. . . . And the Marshals, what
will they do?”—“The Marshals, who are full
of money and titles, have nothing to wish for
but repose. They would fear to compromise
their existence by embracing a doubtful party;
and perhaps they will continue merely specta-
tors of the crisis. Perhaps even the fear lest
your Majesty may possibly punish them for their
defection or treason in 1814 may induce them
to adhere to the king.”—“I will punish no
one. Do you take me rightly ? Tell M. ****
clearly, that I will forget every thing. We have
all reason to reproach each other.” “Sire, I
will tell him so with the greatest joy. This as-
surance will completely gain all opinions over
to your side; because even amongst your par-
tisans there are men who dread your return;
lest you should revenge yourself.”—“Yes, I
know that it is thought that I am revengeful,
and even sanguinary; that I am considered as
a kind of ogre, as a man-eater. They are mis-
taken: I will make every one do his duty, and
I will be obeyed; and that’s all. A weak sove-

<page 158>
NAPOLEON IN 18 l 5. 139
reign is a calamity to his subjects. If he allows
criminals and traitors to fancy that he does not
know how to punish, there is no longer any Se-
curity either for the state or for individuals.
More crimes are prevented than repressed by
severity. A sovereign must govern by his head,
and not by his heart. Yet, tell X *** that
I except Talleyrand, Augereau, and the Duke
of Ragusa, out of the general pardon. They
caused all our misfortunes. The country must
be revenged.”—“But why exclude them,
Sire? Is there not reason to fear that this exclu-
sion may deprive you of the fruits of your cle-
mency, and may even raise doubts as to your
sincerity in future?” “It would be much
more exposed to doubt were I to pardon them.”
“But, Sire . . . .” “Don’t you trouble
your head about it . . . . what is the strength of
the army?”—“Sire, I do not know; I only
know that it has been much weakened by de-
sertion and by discharges, and that few of the
regiments consist of more than three hundred
men.” “So much the better; those who are
good for nothing have probably left the army;
the good soldiers will have remained. Do you
know the names of the officers who command
the maritime districts, and the eighth division?”
——“No, Sire.”——Napoleon (out of temper),

<page 159>
140 MEMOIRS OF
“Why did not X*** give you that informa-
tion?”—“Sire, both M. X. " " " and myself
were far from supposing that your Majesty
would immediately embrace the glorious reso-
lution of re-appearing in France; besides which,
he might believe, according to the common
report, that your agents did not allow you to
remain in ignorance of any circumstance which
might interest you.” “I do know that the
newspapers gave out that I had agents . . . . . .
It is an idle story. It is true that I sent
some of my people to France, in order to learn
what was going on; but they stole my money,
and only treated me with the gabble of the
canaille. C * * * * has been to see me, but he
knew nothing. You are the first person from
whom I have ascertained the situation of France
and the Bourbons under all its extensive bear-
ings. Had it not been for you, I should never
have known that the hour of my return had
struck. Had it not been for you, they would
have left me here to dig in my garden. I have
received—I do not exactly know from what
quarter—the description of certain assassins,
hired against me; and one or two anonymous
letters besides—all from the same hand, in
which I was told to remain quiet, that the em-
broideries were coming into fashion, and other

<page 160>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 141
nonsense in the same style; but that's all. It is
not upon such data that one is induced to at-
tempt a crash. But how do you think foreigners
will like my return: there is the great question?”
“Foreign nations, Sire, have been compelled to
confederate against us in order to protect them-
selves; allow me to say it . . . . . . ”——“Speak
out, speak out.” “In order to protect them-
selves against the effects of your ambition, and
the abuse of your strength. Now that Europe
has recovered her independence, and that
France has ceased to be dangerous, foreign
powers will probably be unwilling to run the
risk of a new war, which may end by restoring
to us that ascendancy which we have lost.”——
“If the allied sovereigns were at home in their
capitals they would certainly consider the mat-
ter twice before they would take the field again;
but they are yet face to face; and it is to be
feared that war may become an affair of vanity.
Do you think it is true that they are on ill terms
with each other?”—“Yes, Sire, it appears
that discord reigns in the congress; that each
of the great powers wishes to seize the largest
share of the booty.”——“It appears, also, that
their subjects are discontented: is it not so?”
“Yes, Sire; kings and people, every thing
seems to unite in our favour. The Saxons,

<page 161>
1492 , MEMOIRS OF
the Genoese, the Belgians, the inhabitants of the
banks of the Rhine, the Polanders, all refuse the
new sovereigns to whom they are to be given.
Italy, tired of the avarice and the grossness of
the Austrians, pants for the moment of with-
drawing from their sovereignty. Experience
has taught the King of Naples that you are his
surest protector, and he will assist the rising of
the Italians whenever you wish it. The princes
of the confederation of the Rhine, warned by
the example of Saxony, will become the allies
of your majesty after the first victory. Prussia
and Russia will sit quiet, if you will only allow
them to retain their new acquisitions. The
Emperor of Austria, who has every thing to
fear from Russia and Prussia, and nothing to hope
for from the King of France, will easily consent,
if you only guarantee Italy to him, to allow you
to do what you think best with the Bourbons.
In short, all the powers of Europe, England
only excepted, are more or less interested in
not declaring themselves against you; and be-
fore England can have corrupted, or raised the
continent, your Majesty will be so firmly fixed
on the throne, that your Majesty’s enemies may
try in vain to make you totter.”
Napoleon (shaking his head), “All this is
very fine; . . . . . . however, I consider it as

<page 162>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 145
certain, that the Kings who have fought against
me are no longer guided by the same unity,
the same views, the same interests. The Em-
peror Alexander must esteem me: he must
be able to estimate the difference which exists
between Louis XVIII. and myself. If he were
to understand his policy rightly, he would
rather see the French sceptre in the hands of
a powerful sovereign, the relentless enemy
of England, than in the hands of a weak so-
vereign, the friend and vassal of the Prince
Regent. I would give him Poland, and a great
deal more, if he wished it: he knows that I have
been always more inclined to tolerate his ambi-
tion than to restrain it. If he had continued
my friend and my ally, I would have made him
greater than he ever will be now. Prussia, and
the petty Kings of the Rhenish confederation,
will follow the lot cast by Russia. If I had
Russia on my side, she would secure me all the
second-rate powers. As to the Austrians, I do
not know what they would do: they have never
treated me candidly. I suppose I could keep
Austria in order by threatening to deprive her
of Italy. Italy is yet very grateful to me, and
much attached to me: if I were to ask that
country for an hundred thousand men, and an
hundred millions, I should have the men and

<page 163>
144 MEMOIRS OF
the money. If they were to force me to make
war, I could easily revolutionize the Italians; I
would grant them whatever they might wish,
independence or Eugene. Mejean and some
others have done him harm, but, in spite of
that, he is warmly loved, and highly esteemed:
he deserves to be so; he has shown that he pos-
sesses a noble mind. Murat is ours. I have
had great reason to complain of him. Since I
have been here, he has wept for his errors, and
has done his utmost to repair the injuries which
he has inflicted upon me. He has regained my
friendship and my confidence: his assistance, if I
were engaged in war, would be very useful to me.
He has little brains; he has nothing but hand
and heart; but his wife would direct him. The
Neapolitans like him tolerably well; and I have
yet some good officers amongst them who would
keep them in the right way. As to England,
we should have shaken hands from Dover to
Calais, if Mr. Fox had lived; but as long as that
country continues to be governed by the prin-
ciples and passions of Mr. Pitt, we must always
be as hostile as fire and water . . . . . From Eng-
land I expect no quarter, no truce . . . . . Eng-
land knows that the instant I place my foot in
France, her influence will be driven back across
the seas . . . . . as long as I live I will wage a war

<page 164>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 145
of extermination against her maritime despotism.
If the continental powers had seconded me; if
they had not been afraid of me; if they had un-
derstood my ambition, their flags would have
floated from the mast-head throughout the uni-
verse, and the world would have enjoyed peace.
All things considered, foreign powers have great
reasons to declare war against me; whilst there
are also great reasons to induce them to remain
at peace with me. It is to be feared, as I have
already said to you, that they may turn the war
into an affair of vanity, or that they make it a
point of honour. On the other hand, it is pos-
sible that they may renounce their coalition,
which has now no longer any object, in order
to watch their subjects; preserving at the same
time an armed neutrality, until Ishall have given
them sufficient guarantees.
“Their determinations, whatever they may
be, will not influence mine. France speaks, and
that is sufficient for me. In 1814 I had to deal
with all the powers in Europe, but they should
not have laid down the law to me if France had
not left me to wrestle alone, against the entire
world. Now the French know my value; and,
as they have regained their courage and their
patriotism, they will triumph over the enemies
who may attack them, just as they triumphed
VOL. I. L

<page 165>
146 MEMOIRS OF
in the good days of the revolution. Experience
has shown that armies cannot always save a
nation; but a nation defended by the people is
always invincible. -
“I have not settled the day of my departure:
by deferring it I should have the advantage of
allowing the Congress to run out; but then, on
the other hand, I should run the risk of being
kept here as a close prisoner by the vessels of the
Bourbons and of the English, if, as every thing
appears to indicate, there should be a rupture
amongst foreign powers. Murat would lend me
his navy if I wanted it; but if we do not suc-
ceed he would be compromised. We must not
be anxious about all these matters: we must
allow some room for destiny to come into play.
“I think we have considered all the points
upon which it was important that I should be
settled, and that we should understand each
other. France is tired of the Bourbons; she
demands her former sovereign. The people
and the army are for us: foreign powers will
be silent. If they speak, we shall be able to
reply: this, in short, is the state of the present
time and of the future.
“Depart. Tell X*** that you have seen me,
and that I have determined to expose myself to
every danger for the purpose of yielding to the

<page 166>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 147
prayers of France, and of ridding the nation of
the Bourbons. . . . Say also that I shall leave
this place with my guard, on the first of April
—perhaps sooner. I pardon every thing. I
will give to France and to Europe all the gua-
rantees which can be expected or demanded
of me. I have renounced all my plans of ag-
grandizement, and I wish to repair the evils
which war has caused to us, by a permanent
peace.
“You will also tell X*** and the rest of my
friends to nourish and strengthen the good dis-
position of the people and the army by all pos-
sible means. Explain to X *** that if the ex-
cesses of the Bourbons should hasten their fall, if
the French should drive them out before my dis-
embarkation, then I will not allow of a regency,
or anything in the shape of it; but let them esta-
blish a provisional government, composed of....
of . . . . of . . . . of .... and of . . . . Go, Sir, I
hope that we shall soon meet again.”—“Sire,
where shall I land?”—“You must proceed
to Naples; here is a passport of the island, and
a letter for * * * *. Pretend to place great
trust in him, but do not trust him with any
thing. You will give him a loose account of
the French news, and you may tell him that I
L 2

<page 167>
148 - MEMOIRS OF
send you there to explore the soundings, and
settle some concerns of moment. I have di-
rected * * * * to furnish you with a passport,
in order that you may be able to return to
Paris without meeting with any obstacle or
danger.” “Your Majesty has then de-
termined to send me back to France?”—
“It must absolutely be so.”—“Your Ma-
jesty knows my attachment, and that I am
ready to prove it in any way which may be re-
quired. But, Sire, deign to consider, both for
your interest and for that of France, that my de-
parture has been remarked, and that my return
will excite still more notice, and that it may
give rise to suspicion, and perhaps induce the
Bourbons to put themselves on their guard,
and cause them to watch the coasts and the
island of Elba.”—“Bah! do you suppose that
fellows of the police know every thing, and can
foresee every thing? More is invented than is
discovered by the police. The agents of our
police were decidedly as good as those of the
present people, and yet they frequently knew
nothing of what was going on but at the end
of a week or a fortnight; and then they found
it out only by chance, or incaution, or treason.
I don’t fear that any disclosures will be obtained

<page 168>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 149
from you by any of these means. You are
clever and decided, and, if they were to work
upon you, you would easily get clear. Besides,
when you once arrive at Paris, don’t show your-
self; creep into a corner, and nobody will think
of ferreting you out. I could certainly confide
this mission to some of the people who are
about me; but I do not wish to make any ad-
ditional confidant: you are trusted by X***:
I trust you; and, in one word, you are exactly
the man whom I want. Your return is cer-
tainly exposed to objections, but they are as
nothing when compared to its advantages. All
that we have said about the Bourbons, and
about France, and about myself, is mere talk,
and talk won't overturn a throne. In order
that my enterprise may not be rendered abor-
tive, it must be seconded, and the patriots must
prepare to attack the Bourbons on one side,
whilst I shall occupy them on the other. And,
above all, it is necessary that they should know
that they may depend upon me; that they may
know my sentiments, my views, and the resolu-
tion which I have made of submitting to every
sacrifice, and exposing myself to every danger,
for the purpose of saving the country.”—The
Emperor stopped to look at me. He certainly

<page 169>
150 MEMOIRS OF
thought that I was one of those men who only
appear reluctant to obey, in order to enhance
the price of their services; so he said, “Money
is always wanted in travelling; I will order them
to pay you a thousand Louis, and then you may
set off.”—“A thousand Louis !” I exclaimed
with indignation, “Sire, I must answer your Ma-
jesty in the words with which the soldier an-
swered his general, “These actions are not per-
formed for pay.”—“That's very right; I like
to see pride.”—“Sire, I am not proud, but I
have a soul; and if I thought that your Majesty
could believe that I embraced your Majesty’s
cause for the sake of filthy lucre, I should re-
quest your Majesty to cease to rely on my
services.”—“If I had believed that to be
the case, I should not have trusted you. No
person ever received a more honourable and
splendid proof of my confidence, than that
which I am now bestowing upon you, in decid-
ing, merely on the strength of your word, to
quit the isle of Elba, and in directing you, as
my precursor, to announce my speedy arrival
in France. But do not let us talk any more on
that head; and tell me if you recollect fully all
that I have told you.”——“I have not lost one
of your Majesty’s expressions. They are all en-

<page 170>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 151
graven on my memory.” “Then I have
only to wish you a pleasant journey. I have
directed that every thing should be got ready
for your departure.
“This evening, at nine o’clock, you will find
a guide and horses at the gate of the town: you
will be taken to Porto Longone. The com-
mandant has been authorised to furnish you
with the necessary quarantine documents. He
knows nothing; say nothing to him. At mid-
night a felucca will leave the port, by which
you will reach Naples. I am sorry to have
hurt your feelings by offering money to you,
but I thought you might be in want of it.
Adieu, Monsieur; be cautious. I hope we shall
soon meet again, and I shall acknowledge, in
a manner worthy of your merits, your exertions
in favour of the country and of myself.”
Hardly had I gone down to the town, when
he sent for me again. “I have considered,”
said he, “that it is desirable that I should
know what regiments are stationed in the eighth
and tenth military divisions, and the names of
the commanding officers. You will take care
to procure this information during your journey,
and transmit it to me without the slightest
delay. Write triplicates of your letters. Send
one by way of Genoa, the second by Leghorn,

<page 171>
152 MEMOIRS OF
and the third by Civita Vecchia. You will
take care to write this name legibly, (here he
gave me a memorandum containing the name
of an inhabitant of the island). Fold your
letters in a business-like way. In order that
the secret of your correspondence may not be
discovered, should any accident happen, you
will put your intelligence in the shape of com-
mercial transactions, and you will imitate the
usual style of bankers. I will suppose, for ex-
ample, that between Chambery and Lyon, going
by the way of Grenoble, there are five regi-
ments. You will write to me . . . . in my way
I have seen the five merchants whom you men-
tioned; their views continue the same: your
credit is increasing daily. The concern will
turn out well ... do you understand me?”
“Yes, Sire; but how am I to send the names
of the colonels and the generals in command?”
“Transpose the letters of their names,
and nothing will be more easy. There is not a
single colonel or general whom I do not know,
and I shall soon be able to recompose their
names.” But, Sire, the anagrams which I
shall make will perhaps be so uncouth, that it
will be seen at the post-office, that the names
are disguised on purpose.”—“Do you think
then, that they amuse themselves at the post-

<page 172>
NAPOLEoN IN 1815. 153
office by opening and reading all the letters of
business which pass through 2 They could not
get through them. I have attempted to un-
ravel the correspondence carried on under the
disguise of banking transactions, but I could
never succeed. The post-office is like the po-
lice, only fools are caught; yet think of any
other method: I shall have no objection.
After I had considered a little while, I said
to the Emperor, “Sire, there is a method which
perhaps will do. Your majesty has the imperial
calendar.” “Yes, sure.”—“Well, Sire,
the calendar contains the lists of the general
officers and colonels of the army. Now, I will
suppose, for example, that the regiment quar-
tered at Chambery is commanded by Colonel
Paul. I look into the calendar, and I find that
Paul stands forty-seven in the list of colonels.
I will also suppose that, between ourselves,
“bill of exchange means ‘colonel’ or “general.’
Then I shall write to your Majesty, I have seen
your correspondent at Chambery; he has paid
me the amount of your bill of exchange, No.
47. Your Majesty will turn to your Majesty’s
calendar, and then your Majesty will see, that
the 47th colonel who commands the regiment
of Chambery, is called “Paul.” And, lastly, in
order that your Majesty may be able to tell

<page 173>
154 MEMOIRS OF
when I speak of a colonel, a general, or a mar-
shal, I shall take care to indicate the rank of
the officer by one, two, or three dots, placed
after the “No.’ The colonel will have one dot,
No...; the general two, No. ..., &c.”——“Very
good, very good. Here is a calendar for you.
Bertrand has one which I will take.”
The calendar given to me by the Emperor
was richly bound, and stamped with the imperial
arms. I tore off the binding. The Emperor
kept walking up and down, and saying, as he
laughed, “It is really excellent; they will
never be able to see through it.” When I had
finished, he said, “One thought brings on an-
other. I have asked myself how you would
manage to write to me, if you should have any
thing of unexpected importance to communi-
cate. For instance, suppose any extraordinary
event should make you think that my disem-
barkation ought to be accelerated or retarded;
if the Bourbons were to be on their guard; in
short, I know not what.” He remained silent,
and then began again. “I only know one way
to provide for it: the confidence which I place
in you ought to be unbounded. I will give
you the key to a cipher which was composed
for my use, in order that I might employ it in
corresponding with my family under the most

<page 174>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 155
important circumstances. I need not tell you
that you must keep it with care: always carry
it about you, lest it should be lost: and if the
smallest danger arises, burn it or tear it at
the slightest suspicion. With this cipher you
may write any thing to me which you like. I
would rather that you should use it, than be
under the necessity of coming back, or of send-
ing any messenger to me. If they intercept a
letter written in my cipher, it will take them
three months to read it; whilst the capture of
an agent might ruin all in an instant.” He
then went and looked out his cipher; he made
me employ it under his eyes, and delivered it
to me, exhorting me not to use it unless all
other modes of communication should become
insufficient.
The Emperor continued, “I do not suppose
that you will have occasion to return here be-
fore my departure, unless the sudden over-
throw of our projects should force you to seek
an asylum here. In such a case, apprise me of
your intended return, and I will send for you
to any place which you may name. But we
must hope that victory will declare for us. She
loves France . . . . . You have not spoken to me
about the affair of Excelmans: if such a thing
had happened in my time, I should have thought

<page 175>
156 MEMOIRS OF
myself lost: when the authority of the master
is not recognised, all is over. The more I think
upon the matter (here he displayed a sudden
emotion), the more I am convinced that France
is mine, and that the patriots and the army will
receive me with open arms.” “Yes, Sire, I
swear to you, upon my soul, the people and the
army will declare for you as soon as they hear
your name, as soon as they see the caps of your
grenadiers.” “Provided the people do seek
to do themselves justice before my arrival, a
popular revolution would alarm foreign powers:
they would dread the contagion of example.
They know that royalty only hangs by a thread,
that it does not agree with the ideas of the age;
they would rather see me seize the throne, than
allow the people to give it to me. They have
re-established the Bourbons in order to con-
vince the people that the rights of sovereigns
are sacred and inviolable. They have blun-
dered. They would have done more for the
cause of legitimacy by leaving my son there, than
by re-establishing Louis XVIII. My dynasty
had been recognised by France and by Europe; it
had been consecrated by the Pope. They ought
to have respected it. By abusing the rights of
victory, it was in their power to deprive me of
the throne: but it was unjust, odious, impolitic,

<page 176>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 157
to punish the son on account of the wrongs of
his father, and to deprive him of his inheritance.
I was not an usurper : they may say so as long as
they like; nobody will believe them. The En-
glish, the Italians, the Germans, are now too
enlightened to allow themselves to be crammed
with old ideas, with antiquated notions. In the
eyes of nations, the Sovereign who is chosen by
the entirety of the nation, will always be the legi-
timate Sovereign . . . . . The sovereigns who sent
their ambassadors to me with servile solemnity;
who placed in my bed a girl of their breed; wh
called me their brother, and who, after doing
all this, have stigmatized me as an usurper, they
have spit in their own faces by trying to spit at -
me. They have degraded the majesty of kings.
They have covered majesty with mud. What
is the name of an emperor ? A word like any
other. "If I had no better title than that, when
I shall present myself to future ages they
would scorn me. My institutions, my bene-
factions, my victories—these are the true titles
of my glory. Let them call me a Corsican, a
corporal, an usurper... I don’t care.... I shall
not be less the object of wonder, perhaps of ve-
neration, in all future time. My name, new as
it is, will live from age to age, whilst the names
of all these kings, and their royal progeny, will

<page 177>
15S ME MOIRS OF
be forgotten before the worms will have had
time to consume their carcases.” The Empe-
ror stopped, and then continued, “I forget that
time is precious; I will not detain you any longer.
Adieu, Monsieur; embrace me, and depart; my
thoughts and good wishes follow you."———
Two hours afterwards I was at sea. My atten-
tion, my faculties were wholly absorbed by the
Emperor, his words, his disclosures, his plans.
I had neither leisure nor opportunity to think
of myself. As soon as I was quite out at sea,
my ideas were filled by the extraordinary part
which chance had assigned to me. I contem-
plated it with pride, and I returned my thanks
to destiny for having selected me as the instru-
ment by which its impenetrable decrees were
to be accomplished. Perhaps no man was ever
placed in so “imposing a situation. I was the
arbiter of the fate of the Bourbons, and of the
Emperor, of France and Europe. With one
word I could destroy Napoleon ; with one word
I could save Louis. But Louis was nothing to
me: in him I only saw a sovereign who had
been forced upon the throne by foreign hands
still imbrued with French blood. In Napoleon
I saw the sovereign to whom France had freely
offered the crown as the reward of twenty years
of danger and of glory. The perspective of the

<page 178>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 1.59
evils which the attempt of Napoleon might bring
upon France did not arise before my imagina-
tion. I was persuaded that all foreign powers
(England excepted), would remain neutral; and
that the French would receive Napoleon as a
deliverer, and as a father. Still less did I con-
sider myself as engaged in treason or conspiracy
against the Bourbons. Since I had taken the
oath of allegiance to Napoleon, I considered
him as my legitimate sovereign; and I rejoiced
to think that the confidence which Napoleon re-
posed in me had induced him to call upon me
to concur in restoring to France the liberty, the
power, and the glory of which the country had
been unjustly deprived. I enjoyed, by antici-
pation, the public eulogiums, which, after his
success, he would bestow upon my courage, my
self-devotion, my patriotism. In short, I aban-
doned myself with rapture and with pride to all
the thoughts, and all the generous resolutions
which can be inspired by the love of fame and
the love of our country.
The dialogues which had taken place between
me and the Emperor continued impressed on
my memory; yet, lest I might vary them, or
omit any part, I employed my time during the
voyage in recalling his own expressions, and in
classing his questions and my answers. I after-

<page 179>
16O MEMOIRS OF
wards got the whole by heart, just as a scholar
learns his lesson, in order that I might be able
to affirm to M. X*** that I was making a
faithful and literal report to him of all that the
Emperor had said, and of all that he had ordered
me to tell him.
The weather being tolerably favourable, we
soon reached Naples. I went immediately to
M.t":": he put a great number of indiscreet
questions to me; and I replied by an equal
number of unmeaning answers. He probably
thought that I knew no better, and therefore
my caution did not offend him. When our
preliminary conversation was exhausted, I de-
sired him to give me my passport; he did so im-
mediately: it was a Neapolitan passport. “This
won’t do for me,” said I; “I must have a
French passport.” “I have not got one.”
“The Emperor told me that you could
get one.”—“That is just like the Emperor;
he thinks every thing is possible: where does
he suppose that I can procure it? I am doing
a great deal in giving you a passport as a subject
of his Majesty. It is already known that we
are in relation with the isle of Elba. If they
were to find out that you are attached to Na-
poleon, and that you are going back to France
by his directions, and with the assistance of the


<page 180>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 161
King, all Europe would hear of it, and the King
would be committed. Why does not the Em-
peror keep himself quiet! he will ruin himself,
and ruin us all along with him.”—“It is not
fit that I should examine the conduct of his Ma-
jesty, much less that I should censure it. I am
in his service; and my duty commands me to
obey him. I want a French passport: can you,
or can you not get me one *"——“I tell you
again that it is impossible: it is doing too
much if I give you one as a Neapolitan sub-
ject.” “Then I must return to Porto Fer-
rajo: but I cannot conceal from you that the
Emperor is very desirous that I should return
to France; and he will certainly be very much
displeased, both with you and with the King.”
“Then he will act unfairly: the King has
done, and will do, every thing in his power for
him : but the Emperor should know what the
King may do under his present critical situation,
and what he may not. But why won’t you take
the passport which I offer you?”——“Because
I do not understand Italian, and consequently
your passport would expose me to greater sus-
picion than my own.”—“Then why don’t
you try to push on as far as Rome there you
will find the family of the Emperor. Louis
VOL. I. M

<page 181>
162 MEMOIRS OF
XVIII. has a legation there; and perhaps
money may get you a passport.”—“Your
idea is excellent: I will go. Inform the Em-
peror of the delay which I have experienced,
in order that he may send another agent, if he
thinks it advisable so to do.”
When the mind is in perpetual activity, and
constantly assailed by new feelings, there is no
time for reflection. I thus went to Rome, full
of the idea that I should visit the family of
the Emperor, and request their help to aid me
out of my difficulties. But when the time came,
and I was to present myself, it then struck me
that the Emperor, though aware that I was to
pass through Rome, had not directed me to see
them; and I concluded that he had his reasons.
I therefore determined to continue my route.
From Naples I have proceeded to Rome with-
out any obstacle; and I shall proceed, thought
I to myself, from Rome to Milan without any
greater obstacle: there I shall meet my friend
and his Tedesco; I will get them to legalize
my French passport for the second time, and
destiny will accomplish the rest.
I therefore presented myself boldly to the
police at Rome, in order to have my Elba pass-
port indorsed for Milan. I was introduced to

<page 182>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 163
his Eminence the Director-general, who, as I
believe, had been shut up at Vincennes under
the imperial government. He received me with
great rudeness; and he wished to compel me to
present myself to the French embassy. I would
not consent. I answered, firmly, “The King
of France is no longer my sovereign; I am the
subject of the Emperor Napoleon: the allied
sovereigns have proclaimed and recognized him
as the sovereign of the isle of Elba : he there-
fore reigns at Porto Ferrajo like the Pope at
Rome, George at London, and Louis XVIII.
at Paris. The Emperor and his Holiness are
on good terms with each other. The subjects
and the vessels of the Roman states are well
received in the isle of Elba", and therefore you
are bound to afford aid and protection to the
Elbese, so long as the holy father shall not be-
come the enemy of Napoleon.”
This reasoning produced its effect; and his
Eminence ordered, though he continued grum-
bling, that my demand was to be granted.
“What are you going to do at Milan?” said
he, and I think he muttered an oath between
his teeth: “I am going,” I answered, “rela-
tive to the dotations which were assigned to us
* I obtained this information in the course of my voyage.
M 2

<page 183>
164 MEMOIRS OF
upon the ‘Mont Napoleon.” He was satis-
fied with my answer, and so was I. I wrote to
M. * * **, the Neapolitan consul, transmitting
my letter; and I requested him to send to the
island an account of my new route.
I continued my journey. My passport was
headed by the imperial arms. The name of
Napoleon, and his title of Emperor, were in-
scribed in large letters. I was the first French-
man from the island who had been able or who
had dared to traverse Italy. How many things
there were which roused curiosity and com-
manded attention I was overwhelmed with
questions relative to Porto Ferrajo and its illus-
trious sovereign. I answered as fully as they
wished. Whilst they were busying themselves
about the Emperor, they did not think of me,
and that was what I wanted. In order to avoid
troublesome examinations, I took care to pass
through the towns at night, and never to stop
in them. At length, thanks to my address and
good fortune, I arrived safe and sound at Milan;
there I found my friend and his colonel, and
every thing was settled admirably.
I set off again for Turin with all possible
speed. When I arrived on the Place of . . . . . .
I perceived several numerous groups of per-
sons, who appeared exceedingly animated.

<page 184>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 165
How great was my surprise when I found that
they were talking of Napoleon, and his escape
from the isle of Elba. This piece of intelli-
gence, which had been just received, put me
in a violent passion: I accused the Emperor of
perfidiousness. I reproached him with having
misled, deceived, and sacrificed me.
When my first fit of ill humour was calmed,
I considered the conduct of the Emperor under
another aspect. I thought that unexpected
considerations might have induced him to em-
bark precipitately. I was ashamed of my sus-
picions and of my violence, and I only wished
to fly to his footsteps; but already orders had
been given to prevent communication. I passed
eight days, which appeared so many ages, in
soliciting permission to return to France; and
at last I obtained it. I arrived at Paris on the
25th of March: on the 26th M. X*** pre-
sented me to the Emperor: he embraced me,
and said, “I have weighty reasons for wishing
that you and X*** may both forget whatever
passed at the isle of Elba. I alone will not for-
get it. Rely on my esteem and protection on
all occasions *.”
* This narrative evidently shows, that the revolution of

<page 185>
166 MEMOIRS OF
IHere ends the memoir of M. Z ****.
This officer had scarcely quitted the island of
Elba, when the Emperor (and I had the parti-
culars from his Majesty himself) acknowledged
the 20th of March was not the effect of a conspiracy, but,
strange to say, the work of two men, and a few words.
The share that M. Z * ** had in the return of Napoleon
will, perhaps, call down upon his head the censures of those
who judge events only from their results. Will this opinion
be well founded? Are men responsible for the caprice of
fate Is it not to fortune, rather than to M. Z * **, that
we must impute the disastrous end of this revolution, begun
under such happy auspices?
More fortunate than Napoleon, M. Z * * * was killed on
Mount St. Jean, the moment when our troops penetrated
thither amidst the plaudits of the army. He was permitted
to draw his last breath on the standards, which the conquerors
of Ligny had just snatched from the English; and, far from
foreseeing that his visit to the island of Elba would at some
future day be a reproach to his memory, he died with the
persuasion, that victory had irrevocably fixed his destiny, and
that his name, cherished by the French, cherished by the
hero whom he had restored to them, would be for ever hal-
lowed by the gratitude of France, become once more the
great nation.
I shall not prematurely reb his manes of this consoling il-
lusion; I shall not inform them, that . . . no ! it will be time
enough hereafter to disturb their repose, and I shall await
the attack before I begin the defence.

<page 186>
NAPOLEON IN IS15. 167
and deplored the imprudence of which he had
been guilty, in sending Z*** to the continent.
The character and firmness of this faithful ser-
vant were sufficiently known to him, to prevent
his feeling any anxiety on his account. He was
certain (I use his own words), that he would
suffer himself to be cut to pieces, before he would
open his mouth: but he was afraid, that the in-
quiries he had directed him to make on the
road, the letters he might address to him, or the
conferences he might have at Paris with M.
X*** and his friends, would excite the suspi-
cions of the police; and that the Bourbons
would station cruizers, so as to render an escape
from the island of Elba, and a landing on the
coast of France, altogether impossible.
Thus the Emperor felt that there was but one
way of preventing the danger, that of departing
immediately.
On this point he did not hesitate. From that
moment everything assumed a different aspect
in the island of Elba.
This island, but the moment before the abode
of philosophy and peace, became in an instant
the imperial head-quarters. Couriers, orders,
and counter-orders, were incessantly going and
returning from Porto Ferrajo to Longone, and
from Longone to Porto Ferrajo, Napoleon,

<page 187>
ió8 MEMOIRS OF
whose fiery activity had been so long enchained,
gave himself up, with infinite delight, to all the
cares, that his audacious enterprise demanded.
But in whatever mystery he fancied he had
shrouded himself, the unusual accounts he had
caused to be delivered in, the particular atten-
tion he had paid to his old grenadiers, had ex-
cited their suspicion; and they scarcely doubted,
that he had it in contemplation to quit the
island. Every one supposed, that he would land
at Naples, or in some other port of Italy: no
one ventured even to imagine, that his plan was
to go and expel Louis XVIII. from the throne.
On the 26th of February, at one o’clock, the
guard and the officers of his household received
orders to hold themselves in readiness to de-
part. Every thing was in motion : the grena-
diers with joy resumed their arms, that so long
had lain idle, and spontaneously swore, never to
quit them but with life. The whole population
of the country, crowds of old men, women, and
children, eagerly rushed to the shore; the most
affecting scenes were exhibited on all sides.
They thronged round the faithful companions
of Napoleon in his exile, and contended with
each other for the pleasure, the honour, oftouch-
ing them, seeing them, embracing them for the
last time, The younger members of the families

<page 188>
NAPOLEON 1N 1815. 169
of the first distinction in the island solicited as
a favour, the danger of sharing in the perils of
the Emperor. Joy, glory, hope, sparkled in
every eye. They knew not whither they were
going, but Napoleon was present, and with him
could they doubt of victory?
At eight in the evening a gun gave the
signal for departure. A thousand times em-
braces were immediately lavished and returned.
The French rushed into their boats; martial
music struck up ; and Napoleon and his fol-
lowers sailed majestically from the shore, amid
the shouts of “Long live the Emperor!” a
thousand times repeated ". |
Napoleon, when he set foot on board his
vessel, exclaimed with Caesar, “The die is
cast!” His countenance was calm, his brow
serene: he appeared to think less of the success
of his enterprise, than of the means of promptly
attaining his object. The eyes of Count Ber-
trand sparkled with hope and joy: General
* The flotilla of Napoleon consisted of the brig Incon-
stant, carrying twenty-six guns and four hundred grena-
diers, and six other light vessels, on board which were two
hundred foot, two hundred Corsican chasseurs, and about a
hundred Polish light horse. The feluccas and the brigs had
been so fitted up, as to show no signs of the troops, and to
have the appearance of mere merchantmen.

<page 189>
170 MEMOIRS OF
Drouot was pensive and serious: Cambronne
appeared to care little about the future, and to
think only of doing his duty well. The old
grenadiers had resumed their martial and me-
nacing aspect. The Emperor chatted and joked
with them incessantly: he pulled their ears
and their mustachios, reminded them of their
dangers and their glory, and inspired their minds
with that confidence, with which his own was
animated.
All were burning to know their destination:
respect did not allow any one to ask the ques-
tion: at length Napoleon broke silence. “Gre-
nadiers,” said he, “we are going to France,
we are going to Paris.” At these words every
countenance expanded, their joy ceased to
be mingled with anxiety, and stifled cries of
“France for ever!” attested to the Emperor,
that in the heart of a Frenchman the love of his
country is never extinct.
An English sloop of war, commanded by
Captain Campbell, appeared to have the charge
of watching the island of Elba": she was con-
* People are pretty generally of opinion, that the escape
of the Emperor from the Island of Elba was favoured by
Captain Campbell. I do not think so; but every thing leads
to the belief, that this officer had received orders from his

<page 190>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 171
tinually sailing from Porto Ferrajo to Leghorn,
and from Leghorn to Porto Ferrajo. At the
moment of embarkation she was at Leghorn,
and could occasion no alarm; but several vessels
were descried in the channel, and their pre-
sence gave room for just apprehensions. It
was hoped, however, that the night breeze
would favour the progress of the flotilla, and
that before daybreak it would be out of sight.
This hope was frustrated. ““Scarcely had it
doubled Cape St. Andrew, in the island of Elba,
when the wind fell and the sea became calm.
At daybreak it had advanced only six leagues,
and was still between the islands of Elba and
Capraea.
““The danger appeared imminent: several
of the seamen were for returning to Porto Fer-
rajo. The Emperor ordered them to hold on
their course, as, at the worst, he had the chance
either of capturing the French cruiser, or of
taking refuge in the island of Corsica, where he
was assured of being well received. To facili-
tate their manoeuvres, he ordered all the lug-
gage embarked to be thrown overboard, which
was cheerfully executed at the instant.””
government, not to prevent such a step-(Note by the author
of the Memoirs.)

<page 191>
172 MEMOIRS OF
About noon the wind freshened a little. At
four o’clock they were off Leghorn. One frigate
was in sight five leagues to leeward, another
on the coast of Corsica, and a man-of-war brig,
which was perceived to be Le Zéphir, com-
manded by Captain Andrieux, was coming
down upon the imperial flotilla right before the
wind. It was first proposed to speak to him,
and make him hoist the three-coloured flag.
“The Emperor, however, gave orders to the
soldiers of the guard to take off their caps and
conceal themselves below, choosing rather to
pass by the brig without being known, and re-
serving himself in case of necessity, for the alter-
native of making him change his colours. At
six o'clock the two brigs passed alongside of
each other, and their commanders, who were
acquainted, spoke together. The captain of Le
Zéphir inquired after the Emperor, and was
answered through a speaking trumpet by the
Emperor himself, that he was extremely well.
““The two brigs, steering opposite courses,
were soon out of sight of each other, without
Captain Andrieux having any suspicion of the
valuable prize, that he had allowed to escape.
““In the night of the 27th the wind con-
tinued to freshen. At day-break a seventy-four
was descried, which appeared steering for San

<page 192>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 173
Fiorenzo or Sardinia, and it was soon perceived,
that she took no notice of the brig".””
The Emperor, before he quitted the island of
Elba, had prepared with his own hand two pro-
clamations, one addressed to the French people,
the other to the army; and he was desirous of
having them copied out fairly. His secretary
and General Bertrand, being neither of them
able to decipher them, carried them to Na-
poleon, who, despairing of doing it himself,
threw them into the sea from vexation. Then,
after meditating for a few moments, he dictated
to his secretary the two following proclamations
on the spot.
Proclamation.
Gulf of Juan, March the 1st, 1815.
Napoleon, by the grace of God and con-
stitution of the empire, Emperor of the French,
&c. &c. &c.
To the Army.
Soldiers |
We have not been vanquished: two men,
who issued from our ranks, betrayed our
* The passages between two sets of inverted commas are
copied from the official account published on the 22d of
March. This account was drawn up by Napoleon, and I
thought I could not do better than borrow his words.

<page 193>
174 MEMOIRS OF
laurels, their country, their prince, their bene-
factor.
Shall they, whom we have seen for five and
twenty years traversing all Europe, to stir up
enemies against us—who have spent their lives
in fighting against us in the ranks of foreign
armies, and cursing our lovely France—now
pretend to command us, and to enchain our
eagles, the looks of which they could never
withstand Shall we suffer them to inherit the
fruits of our glorious toils? to seize upon our
honours, and our property, and calumniate our
fame? Should their reign continue, all would
be lost, even the remembrance of our memorable
victories.
With what virulence do they distort them !
They endeavour to poison what is the admira-
tion of the world; and if any defenders of
our glory still remain, it is among those very
enemies whom we combated in the field.
Soldiers! in my exile I heard your voice: I
am arrived through every obstacle, through
every danger.
Your general, called to the throne by the
voice of the people, and raised on your shields,
is restored to you. Come and join him.
Tear down those colours, which the nation
has proscribed, and which for five and twenty
years served as a signal to rally all the enemies

<page 194>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 175
of France. Mount that tricoloured cockade,
which you wore in our great victories. We
must forget, that we have been the masters of
other nations; but we must not suffer any to
interfere in our affairs. Who shall pretend to
be our master? Who is able to be so? Resume
the eagles you bore at Ulm, at Austerlitz, at
Jena, at Eylau, at Wagram, at Friedland, at
Tudela, at Eckmuhl, at Essling, at Smolensko,
at Moscow, at Lutzen, at Wurtchen, at Mont-
mirail. Think you that handful of Frenchmen,
now so arrogant, can support their sight? They
will return whence they came; and there, if
they please, they may reign, as they pretend to
have reigned for nineteen years.
Your property, your rank, your glory—the
property, the rank, the glory of your children—
have no greater enemies than those princes,
who have been imposed on us by foreigners.
They are the enemies of our glory; since the
recital of so many glorious actions, which have
rendered illustrious the French people, fighting
against them to emancipate themselves from
their yoke, is their condemnation.
The veterans of the armies of the Sambre
and Meuse, of the Rhine, of Italy, of Egypt,
of the west, of the grand army, are humiliated;
their honourable scars are disgraced; their suc.

<page 195>
176 MEMOIRS OF
cesses would be crimes, the valiant would be
rebels, if, as the enemies of the people assert,
legitimate sovereigns were among the foreign
armies. Their honours, rewards, affections, are
for those who have served them, against us and
against our country.
Soldiers, come and arrange yourselves under
the standards of your chief: his existence con-
sists only of yours; his rights are only those of the
people and of you; his interest, his honour, his
glory, are no other than your glory. Victory will
march forward with the charge step: the eagle,
with the national colours, will fly from steeple
to steeple till it reaches the towers of Notre
Dame. You may then display your scars with
honour, you may then boast of what you have
done: you will be the deliverers of your country.
In your old age, surrounded and respected
by your fellow citizens, they will listen with
veneration to the recital of your noble deeds:
you may proudly say, I too was in that grand
army which twice entered the walls of Vienna,
and those of Rome, of Berlin, of Madrid, and
of Moscow, and which cleansed Paris from the
stain inflicted on it by treason and the pre-
sence of the enemy. Honour to those brave
soldiers, the glory of their country! and eternal
shame to those guilty Frenchmen, in whatever .

<page 196>
NAPOLEON IN 18 l 5. 177
rank it was their fortune to be born, who
fought for five and twenty years in company
with foreigners, to wound the bosom of their
country.
Signed, NAPOLEoN.
By the Emperor.
The grand marshal, executing the functions
of major-general of the grand army.
Signed, BERTRAND.
Proclamation.
Gulf of Juan, March 1, 1815.
Napoleon, by the grace of God and the con-
stitution of the empire, Emperor of the French,
&c. &c. &c.
To the French People.
Frenchmen |
The defection of the Duke of Castiglione
gave up Lyons without defence to our enemies.
The army, the command of which I had en-
trusted to him, was capable, from the bravery
and patriotism of the troops of which it was
formed, of beating the Austrian army opposed
to it, and taking in the rear the left flank of the
enemy’s army, that threatened Paris.
The victories of Champ Aubert, of Mont-
mirail, of Chateau Thierry, of Vauchamp, of
Mormane, of Montereau, of Craone, of Rheims,
WOL. I. N

<page 197>
178 MEMOIRS OF
of Arcy-sur-Aube, and of St. Dizier; the insur-
rection of the brave peasantry of Lorraine, of
Champagne, of Alsace, of Franche Comté, and
of Burgundy; and the position I had taken in
the rear of the enemy’s army, cutting it off from
its magazines, its parks of reserve, and convoys,
and all its waggons, had placed it in a desperate
situation. The French were on the point of
being more powerful than ever, and the flower
of the enemy’s army was lost without resource;
it would have found its grave in those vast
countries, which it had so pitilessly ravaged,
when the treachery of the Duke of Ragusa de-
livered up the capital, and disorganized the
army. The unsuspected conduct of these two
generals, who betrayed at once their country,
their prince, and their benefactor, changed the
fate of the war: the situation of the enemy was
such, that, after the affair that took place before
Paris, he was without ammunition, in conse-
quence of being separated from his parks of
reserve *.
Under these new and important circum-
stances, my heart was torn, but my mind re-
mained unshaken: I consulted only the interests
of our country, and banished myself to a rock
surrounded by the seas: my life was useful to

* They had fled precipitately as far as Basil.

<page 198>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 179
you, and was destined still to be so. I would
not permit the great number of citizens, who
were desirous of accompanying me, to share
my fate: I deemed their presence advantageous
to France, and I took with me only the handful
of brave fellows necessary for my guard.
Raised to the throne by your choice, every
thing that has been done without you is illegal.
Within these five and twenty years France has
acquired new interests, new institutions, new
glory, to be guarantied only by a national go-
vernment, and a dynasty born under these new
circumstances. A prince who should reign over
you, who should be seated on my throne by the
power of the same armies, that have ravaged our
territories, would seek in vain to support him-
self by the principles of feudal right; he could
secure the honour and the rights only of a small
number of individuals, enemies to the people,
who have condemned them in all our national
assemblies for five and twenty years. Your
tranquillity at home, and estimation abroad,
would be lost for ever.
Frenchmen! in my exile I heard your com-
plaints and wishes: you called for that govern-
ment of your own choice, which alone is legi.
timate; you blamed my long slumber; you re-
proached me with sacrificing the great interests
of the country to my own repose.

N 2

<page 199>
18() MEMOIRS OF
I have crossed the seas amid perils of every
kind: I arrive among you to resume my rights,
which are also yours. Every thing that in-
dividuals have done, written, or said, since the
taking of Paris, I shall consign to everlasting
oblivion; it shall have no influence on the re-
membrance I retain of the important services
they have rendered, for there are events of
such a nature, that they are above the frame of
man.
Frenchmen there is no nation, however
small, that has not possessed the right of with-
drawing, and that has not withdrawn itself,
from the disgrace of obeying a prince imposed
upon it by an enemy temporarily victorious.
When Charles VII. re-entered Paris, and over-
turned the ephemeral throne of Henry VI., he
acknowledged, that he held his crown from the
valour of his brave people, and not from the
Prince Regent of England.
It is to you only, and to the brave men of
the army, that I make, and shall always make
it my glory, to owe every thing.
Signed, NAPolEoN.
By the Emperor.
The grand marshal, executing the functions
of major-general of the grand army.
Signed, BERTRAND.

<page 200>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 181
The Emperor, while he dictated these pro-
clamations, appeared to be animated with the
most profound indignation. He seemed to
have before his eyes, both the generals, whom
he accused of having given up France, and the
enemies, who had subjugated it. He incessantly
repeated the names of Marmont and Augereau,
and they were always accompanied with threats
and with epithets, suited to the idea he had con-
ceived of their treachery.
When the proclamations were transcribed,
the Emperor directed them to be read aloud,
and invited all those who could write a good
hand to copy them. In an instant, benches
and drums were converted into tables; and
soldiers, sailors, and officers, set themselves
gayly to work.
After a certain time, his Majesty said to the
officers around him, “Now, gentlemen, it is
your turn, to speak to the army: you must tell
it what France expects of it under the im-
portant circumstances in which we shall soon
find ourselves. Come, Bertrand, take your
pen.” The grand marshal excused himself.
The Emperor then resumed his discourse, and
dictated, without stopping, an address to the
generals, officers, and soldiers of the army, in
which the imperial guard conjured them, in the

<page 201>
182 MEMOIRS OF
name of honour and their country, to shake off
the yoke of the Bourbons.
“Soldiers,” said they to them, “the drum
beats the general, and we march: run to arms,
come and join us, join your Emperor, and our
eagles.
“And if these men, now so arrogant, who have
always fled at the sight of our weapons, dare
wait for us, where can we find a fairer occasion
of shedding our blood, and chanting the hymn
of victory?
“Soldiers of the seventh, eighth, and nine-
teenth military divisions, garrisons of Antibes,
Toulon, and Marseilles, retired officers, veterans
of our army, you are called to the honour of
setting the first example: come with us to
conquer that throne, which is the palladium of
your rights; and let posterity some day tell,
‘Foreigners, seconded by traitors, had imposed
a disgraceful yoke on France; the brave arose,
and the enemies of the people, of the army,
disappeared, and returned to their original no-
thingness.’”
This address was scarcely finished, when the
coast of Antibes was descried at a distance. .
Immediately on this, the Emperor and his brave
fellows saluted the land of their country with
shouts of “France for ever! Success to the

<page 202>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 183
French !” and at the same instant resumed the
tricoloured cockade *.
On the 1st of March, at three o’clock, they
entered the Gulf of Juan. General Drouot,
and a certain number of officers and soldiers,
who were on board the felucca Caroline, landed
before the Emperor, who was still at a consider-
able distance from the shore. At this moment
they perceived to the right a large vessel,
which appeared to them (though they were
mistaken in this) to be steering with all sails
towards the brig. Suddenly they were seized
with the greatest disquiet; they walked back-
ward and forward, testifying by their gestures
and their hurried steps, the emotion and fear
with which they were agitated. General Drouot
ordered the Caroline to be unloaded, and to
hasten to meet the brig. In an instant cannons,
carriages, chests, baggage, every thing was
thrown out upon the sand, and already the gre-
nadiers and brave sea officers of the guard
were rowing away with all their strength, when
acclamations from the brig saluted their ears
and their affrighted eyes. It was the Emperor:
whether from prudential motives or impatience,
* The cockade adopted by Napoleon, as sovereign of the
island of Elba, was white and amaranth powdered with bees.

<page 203>
184 MEMOIRS OF
he had got into a simple boat. Their alarms
ceased; and the grenadiers, stretching out their
arms to him, received him with the most affect-
ing demonstrations of devotedness and joy. At
five o’clock he landed. I have heard him say,
that he never felt an emotion so profound.
““His quarters for the night were taken
up in a field surrounded by olive-trees. This,
he exclaimed, is a happy omen: may it be
realized !”” -
A few peasants were seen: the Emperor
ordered them to be called, and interrogated
them. One of them had formerly served under
him: he knew his old general, and would not
quit him. Napoleon, turning to the grand
marshal, said to him, with a smile, “Well,
Bertrand, you see we have a reinforcement
already.” He spent the evening chatting and
laughing familiarly with his generals and the
officers of his household. “I see from this
spot,” said he, “the fright I shall give the
Bourbons, and the embarrassment of all those
who have turned their backs upon me.” Then,
continuing to joke on the same subject, he de-
fined, with his wonted sagacity, the characters
of the marshals and great personages, who had
formerly served him; and was much amused
with the endeavours they would make ““to

<page 204>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 185
save appearances, and prudently await the mo-
ment for declaring themselves for the strongest
party.””
The success of his enterprise appeared less to
employ his thoughts, than the dangers to which
his friends and partisans, whom he no longer
called by any other name than that of patriots,
were going to be exposed. “What will become
of the patriots before my arrival at Paris?” he
frequently exclaimed: “I tremble lest the Ven-
deans and emigrants should massacre them.
Wo betide those who touch them | I will have
no mercy on them.”
Immediately after he landed, the Emperor
had despatched a captain of the guard with five
and twenty men to Antibes: their instructions
were, to present themselves as deserters from
the island of Elba; to sound the disposition of
the garrison; and, if this appeared favourable,
to seduce it: but, led away by their imprudent
ardour, they entered the city, shouting, “Long
live the Emperor!” and the commandant caused
the drawbridge instantly to be raised, and de-
tained them as prisoners. Napoleon, finding
they did not return, sent for a civil officer of the
guard, and said to him, ““You will immedi-
ately repair to the walls of Antibes: you will
deliver this despatch, or cause it to be delivered

<page 205>
186 MEMOIRS OF
to General Corsin: you will not enter the place,
as you might be detained: you will draw toge-
ther the soldiers, you will read to them my pro-
clamations, and you will harangue them. Do
you not know, you will say to them, that your
Emperor is here? that the garrisons of Grenoble
and Lyons have marched to join him with the
charge step? What do you wait for? Will you
leave to others the honour of joining him before
you? the honour of marching at the head of his
advanced guard? Come, and salute our eagles
and our tricoloured flags. The Emperor and
your country command it; then come.””
This officer, on his return, said, that the
gates of the town and harbour were closed, and
that it was not possible for him to see General
Corsin, or to speak to the soldiers. Napoleon
appeared disappointed, though but little dis-
turbed by the disappointment. At eleven in
the evening he began his march, with four small
pieces of artillery in his train. The Poles,
though unable to embark their horses, had
brought with them their accoutrements, and
gayly marched in the advanced guard, bending
beneath the weight of their enormous luggage.
Napoleon purchased for them every horse he
met with, and thus remounted his handful of
cavalry one by one.


<page 206>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 187
He proceeded to Cannes, thence to Grasses,
and, in the evening of the 2d, arrived at the
village of Cerenon, having marched twenty
leagues this first day. Every where he was re-
ceived with sentiments, that presaged the suc-
cess of the enterprise.
On the 3d the Emperor slept at Bareme, and
on the 4th at Digne. The report of his land-
ing, which preceded him from place to place,
excited every where a mingled feeling of joy,
surprise, and anxiety. The peasants blessed his
return, and expressed their good wishes to him
in their simple language; but when they saw
his little troop, they looked on him with tender
pity, and had no hope of his being triumphant
with such feeble means.
On the 5th Napoleon slept at Gap, and re-
tained with him only six horsemen, and forty
grenadiers.
In this city he printed, for the first time, his
proclamations: they were diffused with the ra-
pidity of lightning, and inflamed every head
and every heart with such violent and prompt
devotedness, that the whole population of the
country was desirous of rising in a body, and
marching as his advanced guard.
In these proclamations he did not borrow, as
has been asserted, the title of general in chief, .

<page 207>
188 MEMOIRS OF
or of lieutenant general of his son. Before he
quitted the island of Elba, he had determined to
resume the style of Emperor of the French as
soon as he landed.
He was aware, that any other title would di-
minish his strength, and his ascendancy over the
people and the army; would render his inten-
tions doubtful; would give rise to scruples and
hesitation; and besides, would place him in a
state of hostility against France. In short, he
was aware, that it would always be in his power
to give legitimacy to his title of Emperor of the
French, should the suffrages of the nation prove
necessary, to restore to him in the eyes of Eu-
rope, and even of France, those rights, which
might have been temporarily lost by his abdi-
cation.
The superior authorities of Gap had retired
at his approach: he had to receive the congra-
tulations only of the mayor, the municipal coun-
cil, and the half-pay officers. He discoursed
with them on the benefits of the revolution, the
sovereignty of the people, liberty, equality, and
particularly of the emigrants and the Bourbons.
Before he left them, he addressed his public
thanks to the inhabitants of the Upper and Lower
Alps, in the following words:

<page 208>
NApoleoN IN 1815. 189
Citizens,
I have been strongly touched by all the sen-
timents that you have testified towards me: your
prayers will be heard; the cause of the nation
will still triumph. You have reason to call me
your father; I live only for the honour and hap-
piness of France. My return dissipates your
disquietudes; it guarantees the preservation of
every one’s property, the equality of all classes;
and those rights, which you have enjoyed for
twenty-five years, and for which our forefathers
so frequently sighed, now form a part of your
existence.
In whatever circumstances I may be placed,
I shall always remember, with a lively interest,
what I have seen in traversing your country.
** “On the 6th, at two o’clock in the after-
noon, the Emperor left Gap, and the whole city
went out to see him set off.
- ““At St. Bonnel the inhabitants, seeing the
small number of his soldiers, were full of fears,
and proposed to him to sound the alarm-bell, in
order to collect the neighbouring villagers, and
accompany him in a body. “No, said the Em-
* The passages marked with two sets of inverted commas
continue to be extracts from the official account.

<page 209>
190 MEMOIRS OF
peror, ‘your sentiments convince me, that I have
not deceived myself; they are a sure guarantee
of the sentiments of my soldiers; those whom I
meet will range themselves on my side; and the
more they are, the more certain will be my suc-
cess. Remain, therefore, tranquil at home.’””
The same day the Emperor came to sleep at
Gorp; General Cambronne and forty men,
forming the advanced guard, pushed on as far
as Mure.
Cambronne most commonly proceeded alone
before his grenadiers to explore the road, and
cause quarters and subsistence to be provided
for them. Scarcely had he pronounced the
name of the Emperor, when every one was eager
to testify to him the most lively and tender so-
licitude. One mayor alone, the Marquis de
* * *, mayor of Sisteron, tried to raise the in-
habitants of that commune, describing to them
the soldiers of Napoleon as robbers and incen-
diaries. Confounded by the sudden appearance.
of General Cambronne alone, and with no other
weapon than his sword, he changed his language,
and pretended to have had no fear but that of
being paid ". Cambronne coolly threw him his
* The public papers, since the second restoration, have
not failed to assert, that the troops of the Emperor disgrace-

<page 210>
NAPOLEON INIS15. 191
purse, and said, “Pay yourself!” The indig-
nant people were eager to furnish more provi-
sion than was demanded; and when the bat-
talion of Elba appeared, they offered it a tri-
coloured flag, as a sign of their esteem and
devotedness.
On quitting the mayor, General Cambronne
and his forty grenadiers met a battalion sent
from Grenoble to block up their passage. Cam-
bronne wished to parley with them, but they
would not listen to him. The Emperor, in-
formed of this resistance, immediately went
forward: his guard, exhausted by a long march
through the snow and rough roads, had not all
been able to follow him; but when it heard of
fully pillaged the communes through which they passed. This
imputation, like many others, is a cowardly slander. The
Emperor had recommended to his grenadiers, and it is well
known that they never disobeyed him, to exact nothing from
the inhabitants; and in order to prevent the least irregularity,
he took care himself to arrange the means of ascertaining
every thing that was furnished, and paying for it. He had
given this in charge to an inspector in chief of reviews,
M. Boinot, and a commissary at war, M. Ch. Vauthier, for
whose zeal and integrity he had the highestesteem. What-
ever was furnished was paid for on delivery by the treasurer,
M. Peyruse, on an account authenticated by M. Vauthier,
and at the prices fixed by the mayors themselves.




<page 211>
192 MEMOIRS OF
the affront offered to Cambronne, and the dan-
gers the Emperor might run, it forgot its fa-
tigues, and hastened after him. Those soldiers,
who could no longer support themselves on their
galled or wounded feet, were assisted by their
comrades, or carried by them on litters formed
with their musquets: all swore, like the soldiers
of Fabius, not to conquer or die, but to be vic-
tors. When the Emperor perceived them, he
held out his hand to them, and said, “With
you, my brave soldiers, I should not be afraid
of ten thousand men.”
Meantime the troops come from Grenoble
had retreated, and taken a position three leagues
from Gorp, between the lakes, and near a vil-
lage. The Emperor went to reconnoitre them.
He found in the line opposed to him a battalion
of the fifth regiment, a company of sappers, and
a company of miners; in all seven or eight hun-
dred men. He sent to them chef d'escadron
Roul: they refused to listen to him. On this,
Napoleon, turning to Marshal Bertrand, said,
“Z. has deceived me; no matter, forwards !”
Immediately, alighting from his horse, he
marched straight to the detachment, followed
by his guard, with arms secured (l'arme baissée):
“What, my friends!” said he to them, “do you
not know me? I am your Emperor: if there be

<page 212>
NAPOLEON IN 18 15 • 193
a soldier among you, who is willing to kill his
general, his Emperor, he may do it: here I am!”
and he placed his hand upon his breast....
The unanimous shout of “Long live the Em-
peror!” was the answer.
““Immediately they requested permission,
to be the first to march against the division,
that covered Grenoble. The march commenced
amid a crowd of the inhabitants, which increased
every instant. Vizille distinguished itself by its
enthusiasm: “It is here the revolution is born,”
said these brave fellows: “we are the first who
have dared to claim the privileges of men: it is
here, too, that French liberty revives, and that
France recovers its honour and independence.”
““Between Vizille and Grenoble, an adju-
tant-major of the seventh of the line came to
announce, that Colonel Labedoyère, deeply
wounded by the dishonour that affected all
France, and governed by the noblest senti-
ments, had separated from the division of Gre-
noble, and with his regiment was hastening with
all speed to meet the Emperor.””
Soon after, numerous acclamations were heard
at a distance: they were from Labedoyère, and
the seventh. The two troops, impatient to join,
broke their ranks: embraces, and shouts a thou-
VOI. I. O

<page 213>
194 MEMOIRS OF
sand times repeated, of “The guard for ever!
the seventh for ever! long live the Emperor!"
became the pledge of their union, and of their
sentiments. -
Napoleon, who saw his forces and the public
enthusiasm increase at every step, resolved to
enter Grenoble that very evening.
Before he reached the city he was stopped by
a young merchant, an officer of the national
guard. “Sire,” said he, “I come to offer
your Majesty a hundred thousand francs, and
my sword.”——“I accept both: remain with
us.” Farther on he was joined by a party of
officers, who confirmed to him what he had
learned from Labedoyère, that General Mar-
chand and the prefect had declared against
him, and that neither the garrison, nor the
national guard, had yet displayed any favourable
disposition.
““In fact, General Marchand had caused
the troops to re-enter Grenoble, and closed the
gates: the ramparts were covered by the third
regiment of engineers, composed of two thou-
sand sappers, all veterans, covered with ho-
nourable scars; by the fourth of artillery of the
line, the very regiment in which the Emperor
had been made a captain five and twenty years

<page 214>
NAPOLEON IN T 815. 195
before; then the two battalions of the fifth
of the line, and the faithful hussars of the
fourth.””
Never did a besieged town exhibit a simi-
lar spectacle; the besiegers, with arms reversed,
and marching in joyful irregularity, approached
the walls singing. No noise of arms, no war-
like shouts from the soldiers, rose to affright the
air: nothing was heard but repeated acclama-
tions of “Grenoble for ever! France for ever !
Napoleon for ever!” no cries but those of the
most unrestrained gaiety, and the purest enthu-
siasm. The garrison, the national guard, the
town's-people, spread over the ramparts, beheld
at first with surprise, with emotion, these trans-
ports of joy and attachment. It was not long
before they shared them; and the besiegers and
besieged, united by the same thoughts, the
same sentiments, uttered at once the rallying
words, “Long live the Emperor!” The peo-
ple and the soldiers repaired to the gates, which
were in an instant beaten down, and Napoleon,
surrounded, thronged by an idolizing crowd,
made his triumphant entry into Grenoble. A
few moments after, the people came and brought
him the fragments of the gates with trumpets
sounding, and said, “For want of the keys of
O 2

<page 215>
196 MEMOIRS OF
the good town of Grenoble, here are the gates
for you.” -
The possession of this place was of the high-
est importance to Napoleon: it afforded him a
point of support, ammunition, arms, and artil-
lery. He could not conceal his extreme satis-
faction, and said repeatedly to his officers, “All
is now decided; we are sure of getting to Paris."
He questioned Labedoyère at large on the state
of Paris, and the situation of France in general.
This young colonel, full of the noblest senti-
ments, expressed himself with a frankness that
sometimes staggered Napoleon. “Sire,” he
said, “the French will do every thing for your
Majesty; but then your Majesty must do every
thing for them: no more ambition, no more des-
potism: we are determined to be free and happy.
It is necessary, Sire, to renounce that system of
conquest and power which occasioned the mis-
fortunes of France, and of yourself.”—“If I
succeed,” answered Napoleon, “I will do every
thing requisite to fulfil the expectations of the
nation: its happiness is dearer to me than my
own: it is to render it free and happy, that I
have embarked in an undertaking, which might
not succeed, and might cost me my life; but
we shall have the consolation of dying in our

<page 216>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 197
native land.”—“And of dying,” added La-
bedoyère, “for its honour and its liberty.”
The Emperor gave orders to have his pro-
clamations printed in the course of the night,
and despatched emissaries in every direction to
announce his having entered Grenoble; that
Austria was for him; that the king of Naples
was following him with eighty thousand men;
. . . . and, in short, to discourage, intimidate,
and curb, by false alarms and false confidences,
the partisans and agents of the regal govern-
ment.
The proclamations, posted up in abundance,
produced the most lively sensation, as at Gap.
In fact, never had the national pride, patriot-
ism, and the noblest passions of the mind, been
addressed with more fascination, strength, and
eloquence. The soldiers and citizens were never
tired of reading and admiring them. Every
person was desirous of having them. Travellers,
and the inhabitants of the neighbouring country,
received an immense quantity, which they took
upon themselves to spread abroad on their road,
and to send to all parts.
The next day, the 8th, the clergy, the staff-
officers, the imperial court, the tribunals, and
the civil and military authorities, came to ac-
knowledge Napoleon, and to offer him their

<page 217>
198 MEMOIRS OF
congratulations. He conversed familiarly with
the judges on the administration of justice;
with the clergy on what was necessary to public
worship; with the soldiery on the armies; with
the municipal officers on the sufferings of the
people, the towns, and the country places; and
delighted them all by the variety of his know-
ledge, and the benevolence of his intentions.
He then said to them: “I knew that France
was unhappy; I heard its groans and its re-
proaches; I am come with the faithful compa-
nions of my exile, to deliver her from the yoke
of the Bourbons .... their throne is illegitimate
.... my rights were conferred on me by the
nation, by the unanimous will of the French
people: they are no other rights than theirs....
I am come to resume them; not to reign, the
throne is nothing to me: not to revenge myself,
for I shall forget everything that has been said,
done, or written, since the capitulation of Paris;
but to restore to you the rights, which the Bour-
bons have taken from you, and to emancipate
you from the subscription to the glebe, the vas-
salage, and the feudal system, with which you are
threatened by them .... I have been too fond
of war; I will make war no more: I will leave
my neighbours at rest: we must forget, that we
have been masters of the world. ... I wish to


<page 218>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 199
reign, in order to render our lovely France free,
happy, and independent; and to place its hap-
piness on foundations not to be shaken; I wish
to be less its sovereign than the first and best of its
citizens. I might have come to attack the Bour-
bons with ships and numerous fleets; but I
would have no assistance from Murat or from
Austria. I know my fellow citizens, and the
defenders of my country, and I reckon on their
patriotism.”
The audience ended, the Emperor reviewed
the garrison, consisting of five or six thousand
men. As soon as he appeared, the sky was
darkened by the multitude of sabres, bayonets,
grenadier-caps, chacos, &c., which the people
and the soldiers raised in the air, amid the most
lively demonstrations of attachment and love.
He said a few words to the people, which
could not be heard, and repaired to the front of
the fourth of artillery. “It was among you,”
said he, “that I began my career in arms. I
love you all as old comrades; I have observed
you in the field of battle, and I have always
been satisfied with your conduct. But I hope,
that we shall have no occasion for your guns:
France has need of moderation and repose.
The army will enjoy, in the bosom of peace,

<page 219>
200 MEMOIRS OF
the benefits I have already conferred on it, and
those I shall yet bestow. In me the soldiers
have found again their father: they may reckon
upon the rewards they have deserved.”
After this review, the garrison set out on its
march to Lyons.
In the evening Napoleon wrote to the Em-
press and Prince Joseph. He directed him to
make known at Rome, at Naples, and at Porto
Ferrajo, that his enterprise had every appear-
ance of being crowned with the most speedy
and brilliant success. The couriers departed
with great noise; and care was taken to make
known, that they were carrying to the Empress
the news of the Emperor's return, with orders
to come immediately, with her son, and join
him.
On the 9th the Emperor declared the esta-
blishment of the imperial power by three de-
CreeS. -
The first directed all public acts, and the
administration of justice, to be executed in his
name from the 15th of March.
The two others organized the national guards
of the five departments of the Upper and Lower
Alps, la Drôme, Mont Blanc, and the Izere, and
entrusted to the honour and patriotism of the

<page 220>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 2O1
inhabitants of the seventh division the fortified
towns of Briançon, Grenoble, Fort Barreaux,
Colmar, &c.
The moment he set off, he addressed to the
inhabitants of the department of the Izere the
following proclamation:
Citizens,
When in my exile I learned all the misfor-
tunes, that oppressed the nation; that all the
rights of the people were disregarded, and that
I was reproached with the state of repose in
which Ilived: I lost not a moment: I embarked
on board a slight vessel, crossed the sea in the
midst of ships of war belonging to various na-
tions, landed alone on the shores of our country,
and thought of nothing but of arriving with the
rapidity of an eagle in this good city of Gre-
noble, of the patriotism of which, and its per-
sonal attachment to me, I was well aware.
Men of Dauphiny, you have answered my ex-
pectation.
I have endured, not without a wounded heart,
but without being dejected, the misfortunes to
which for a twelvemonth I have been a prey.
The spectacle displayed to my eyes by the
people on my journey has inspired me with the
most lively emotions. Though a few clouds

<page 221>
202 MEMOIRS OF
have altered the high opinion I entertained of
the French people, what I have seen has con-
vinced me, that they are still worthy of the
name of the Great People, which I gave them
twenty years ago.
Men of Dauphiny, about to quityour country,
to repair to my good city of Lyons, I could not
refrain from expressing to you all the esteem,
with which your lofty sentiments have inspired
me. My heart is filled with the emotions, that
you have excited in it, and I shall never forget
them.
The news of the Emperor's landing did not
reach Paris till the 5th of March, at night. It
transpired on the 6th; and on the 7th a royal
proclamation appeared in the Moniteur, con-
voking the chambers immediately; and a de-
cree, that placed Napoleon, and all who should
join or assist him, out of the protection of the
law"; without any farther particulars.
* This mode of proceeding, worthy of the barbarous ages,
was a new infraction of the law of nations, and of the consti-
tutional laws of France, on the part of the ministry. No
article of the charter conferred on the monarch the right of
life and death over his subjects; and consequently he had no
authority to proscribe those who accompanied and assisted
Napoleon. If they were considered as robbers, it was the
office of the tribunals to judge and to punish them.

<page 222>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 92O3
On the 8th the Moniteur and other news-
papers announced, that Bonaparte had landed
with eleven hundred men, most of whom had
already deserted him; that he was wandering
in the mountains, accompanied only by a few
individuals; that he had been refused provision,
was in want of every thing, and, pursued and
on the point of being surrounded by the troops
sent against him from Toulon, Marseilles, Va-
lence, and Grenoble, he must speedily expiate
his rash and criminal enterprise.
This news struck all parties with astonish-
ment, and made different impressions on them,
according to their different sentiments and opi-
nions.
The discontented had no doubt of the success
of the Emperor, and the ruin of the Bourbons.
Neither was he authorized, to order Napoleon to be mur-
dered. He had preserved the title of Emperor, legally en-
joyed the prerogative of sovereignty, and might make war or
peace as he pleased.
The title of Emperor of the French, which he arrogated to
himself, could not be a title to proscription. George III.,
previous to the treaty of Amiens, styled himself King of
France and Navarre. Had he made a descent in arms on
our territory, would any one have had a right, to proclaim
him out of the pale of the law, and order the French people
to murder him 2

<page 223>
204 MEMOIRS OF
“The courtiers regretted that there was not
sufficient danger in this mad and audacious
enterprise, to give at least some value to their
attachment.” -
The emigrants looked at it with pity, turned
it into ridicule; and, if they had wanted nothing
more than jests, abuse, and swaggering, to beat
Napoleon, there could have been no doubt of
their victory.
The government itself participated in their
boasting and security.
Fresh despatches soon made known the pro-
gress of Napoleon.
The Count d’Artois, the Duke of Orleans,
and Marshal Macdonald, set off hastily for
Lyons.
The royalists were uneasy, the government
removed their fears.
The Count d’Artois, they said, at the head of
fifteen thousand national guards, and ten thou-
sand of the troops of the line, must stop him
before Lyons.
General Marchand, General Duverney, the
Prince of Essling, and the Duke d’Angoulême,
were getting into his rear, and would cut off
his retreat.
General le Courbe was manoeuvring on his
flanks.

<page 224>

NAPOLEON IN 1815. 205
Marshal Oudinot was arriving with his faithful
royal grenadiers.
The national guards of Marseilles, and the
whole population of the south, were marching
from all quarters in pursuit of him; and it was
impossible for him to escape.
This was the 10th of March.
The next day an officer of the King's house-
hold appeared in the balcony of the Tuileries,
and, waving his hat, announced, that the King
had just received an official account of the
Duke of Orleans, at the head of twenty thou-
sand men of the national guard of Lyons, having
attacked Bonaparte on the side towards Bur-
going, and completely beaten him.
The same day information was given, that
Generals d'Erlon, Lefevre Desnouettes, and
Lallemand, who had attempted to seduce the
troops under their orders, had completely failed,
and taken flight*.
* These four generals had agreed, to repair together to
Paris. The troops of Count d'Erlon, quartered at Lisle,
deceived by supposititious orders, were on their march, when
they were met by the Duke de Trévise, who was going to
take the command of his government. He interrogated
them, perceived the plot, and ordered them back.
Count Lefevre Desnouettes, ignorant of this unlucky cir-
cumstance, put in motion his regiment, which was in garrison

<page 225>
2O6 - MEMOIRS OF
The malecontents were in doubt: the royalists
were intoxicated.
On the 12th, the victory of the Duke of
Orleans was contradicted. The official paper
announced, that Bonaparte must have slept at
Bourgoing; that he was expected to enter
Lyons on the evening of the 10th of March;
at Cambrai. When he reached Compiègne, he did not find
the troops he expected, and showed some hesitation. The
officers of his corps, and particularly Major Lyon, questioned
him, and finally abandoned him.
On the other hand, the brothers Lallemand, one of whom
was general of artillery, had marched to Fère with a few
squadrons, intending to seize the park of artillery. The re-
sistance they met from General d'Aboville disconcerted them,
and, after they had attempted in vain to seduce the garrison,
they fled, but were shortly after arrested.
It was supposed, that this rising in arms had been con-
certed with Napoleon; but I know from good authority,
that it was solely the result of an evening spent at General
* * *’s. A few bowls of punch had heated their brains;
they complained of their situation; they were indignant, that
a handful of cowardly emigrants should prescribe laws to
them; they were persuaded it would be easy to displace
them; and, proceeding from one step to another, they con-
cluded by agreeing to march to Paris, and compel the King
to change his ministry, and banish from France all those
whom the public voice denounced as enemies to the charter,
and disturbers of the public tranquillity and happiness. Such
was their true and only object.

<page 226>
NA PoleoN IN 1815. 207
and that it appeared certain, that Grenoble
had not yet opened its gates to him.
The Count d’Artois soon arrived, and con-
firmed by his return the taking of Lyons, and
the inutility of his efforts.
The alarm was renewed. -
The King, whose countenance was at the
same time dignified and affecting, invoked by
eloquent proclamations the attachment of the
French, and the courage and fidelity of the
army.
The army maintained silence. The judicial
bodies, the civil authorities, the order of advo-
cates, and a number of individual citizens, an-
swered the King's appeal by addresses testifying
their love and fidelity.
The two chambers equally laid at the foot of
the throne the expression of their sentiments:
but their language differed.
“Sire,” said the Chamber of Peers, “hitherto
paternal goodness has marked all the acts of
your government". If it be necessary that
the laws should be rendered more severe, you
would no doubt lament it; but the two cham-
* The chancellor, no doubt, had forgotten the proscrip-
tion, that delivered over to death all those Frenchmen who
joined or assisted Bonaparte.

<page 227>
208 MEMOIRS OF
bers, animated with the same spirit, would be
eager to concur in every measure that the im-
portance of circumstances, and the safety of the
people, may require.”
“Whatever faults may have been committed,”
said the Chamber of Deputies, “the present is
not the moment for inquiring into them. It
is the duty of all of us, to unite against the
common enemy, and afterwards endeavour, to
render this crisis beneficial to the security of
the throne and its public liberty.”
The King did not stop at empty proclama-
tions. He decreed,
That a new army should be assembled in
front of Paris, under the orders of the Duke of
Berri and the command of Marshal Macdonald:
That all the soldiers on furlough, or con-
ditionally discharged, should rejoin their corps:
That all the half-pay officers should be called
Out:
That the three millions of national guards of
the kingdom should take up arms, in order to
check the factious and disperse their meetings,
while the army took the field:
That the young national guards, who were
desirous of forming a part of the acting army,
should be armed and accoutred, and sent to the
parts that were threatened:

- - -

<page 228>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 209
That to render useful the services of those
brave Frenchmen, who on all sides were de-
manding to be led against the enemy, battalions
of royal volunteers should be formed, and make
a part of the army of the Duke of Berri.
Marshal Ney, whose popularity and influence
were well known, was appointed to take the
command of the troops of the east.
The Duke de Feltre took the place of Mar-
shal Soult.
In short, the King omitted nothing, that
could concur in protecting his throne from the
dangers, with which it was threatened.
Such measures, sufficient to stop an army of
three hundred thousand men, could only attest
the success of Napoleon; and yet the ministry
daily caused the most encouraging reports to
be spread among the people, and confirmed by
the newspapers.
M. de Montesquiou, faithful to the system of
deception he had adopted, continued to mislead
the deputies, cheating them by false intelligence,
and lulling them with hopes, which he himself
no longer entertained. He knew the intoxica-
tion, which was excited in every place by the
approach and passage of Napoleon. He knew,
that he was master of Grenoble and Lyons;
that the troops attempted to be opposed to him
VOL. I. P

<page 229>
Q10 MEMOIRS OF
had joined his with enthusiasm: and neverthe-
less he announced to the chamber, “that the
population of all the departments invaded by the
adventurer of the island of Elba loudly mani-
fested their indignation against this audacious
robber; that they may have been surprised,
but not subjugated; that all his summonses of
places, and the orders he had attempted to issue
to the local authorities, had been rejected with
firmness; that the Lyonese had displayed the
attachment, that was to be expected from their
noble character; that the departments of Bur-
gundy, Franche Comté, Lorraine, Champagne,
Picardy, &c. &c. rivalled each other in their
attachment and energy; that the good disposi-
tion of the troops was answerable to that of the
citizens; and that all together, generals, officers,
soldiers, and citizens, concurred in the defence
of their country and of their King.”
These political juggleries were not without
effect. They satisfied some credulous men,
and inflamed the courage and imaginations
of a few youths. The enrolments of volum-
teers were more numerous: a certain number
of pupils of the schools of law and physic
offered their services, and traversed the streets
of Paris, shouting “Long live the King! Down
with the Corsican Down with the tyrant! &c.”

- -
- -

<page 230>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. Q11
This effervescent movement could not be
durable; and whatever pains were taken to
deceive the metropolis, the truths announced
by travellers and private letters opposed these
ministerial falsehoods.
The defection of Marshal Ney soon came to
tear off the veil, and spread affright and con-
sternation among the ministers and their par-
tisans.
The King repaired to the Chamber of De-
puties, in the hope of confirming their attach-
ment, and of dissipating by a solemn oath those
doubts of his adherence to the charter, and of
his intention to maintain it, which his ministers
occasioned. Never was a more imposing and
pathetic spectacle exhibited. What heart could
steel itself against the sorrows of that august
and aged man, against the sound of his mournful
voice? Those prophetic words, “I fear nothing
for myself, but I fear for France: at sixty years
of age can I better close my career, than by
dying in defence of the state?” These words
of the King excited the most lively emotion,
and tears in abundance fell from every eye.
The oath pronounced by the King, to main-
tain the charter, was immediately repeated by
the Count d’Artois, who had hitherto refrained
from it. “We swear,” said he, “on our
P 2

<page 231>
212 MEMOIRS OF
honour, I and my family, to live and die faithful
to our King, and to the constitutional charter,
which assures the happiness of France.” But
these tardy protestations could not repair the
mischief, that the disloyal conduct of the go-
vernment had done to the Bourbons and their
CauSe.
In vain did the words country, liberty, and
constitution, recur in every discourse, and in
every proclamation.
In vain was it solemnly promised, that France,
as soon as it was delivered, should receive all
the securities claimed by the public voice, and
that the press should recover perfect freedom.
In vain was the lustre and the prerogative, of
which the legion of honour had been despoiled,
offered to be restored to it.
In vain were pompous eulogies and brilliant
promises lavished on the army.
The time was past. .
The minister had robbed the King of
confidence, which is the prime agent of the
ascendancy of princes over the people; and
of strength, which can alone supply the place
of confidence, and command fear and obe-
dience.
The approach of Napoleon;
The desertion of Marshal Ney;

<page 232>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 213
The declaration made by those generals, who
still retained their fidelity, that the troops would
not fight against the Emperor, left the govern-
ment no doubt of the fate that awaited it.
From that moment there was no longer har-
mony in their designs, or concert in the means
of executing them.
Orders and counter-orders were given on the
one hand, and revoked on the other. Schemes
of every kind, all equally inconsiderate and im-
practicable, were approved and rejected, re-
sumed and abandoned.
The chambers and the government had ceased
to act in unison. The ministers complained of
the deputies; the deputies publicly demanded
of the King the dismissal of his ministers, and
that he would place around himself men, “who
have been the constant defenders of justice and
liberty, and whose names shall be a guarantee
for the interest of all *.”
* It is asserted, that on this occasion a conference took
place, at which M. Lainé, MM. de Broglie, la Fayette,
d’Argenson, Flaugergue, Benjamin Constant, &c. were pre-
sent, where it was decided, that the King should be required
in the name of the public safety:
1. To dismiss MM. de Blacas, Montesquiou, Dambray,
and Ferrand:
2. To call to the Chamber of Peers forty new members,
chosen exclusively from men of the revolution:
*
-*
-

<page 233>
214 MEMOIRS OF
The same disorder, the same disunion, mani-
fested themselves every where at the same
time: there was only one point in which people
agreed; that all was lost. -
In fact so it was.
The people, whom the nobles had humbled,
vexed, or terrified by haughty and tyrannical
pretensions;
They who had acquired national domains,
whom they had wished to dispossess;
The protestants, who had been sacrificed;
The magistrates, who had been turned out;
The persons in office, who had been reduced
to want;
The soldiers, officers, and generals, who had
been despised and ill-treated;
The revolutionists, who had been incessantly
insulted and menaced;
The friends of justice, and of liberty, who
had been abused;
All the French, whom the government had
reduced, as it were, in spite of themselves, to
wish for another order of things; eagerly em-

3. To confer on M. de la Fayette, the command of the
national guard: and
4. To despatch patriotic commissioners, to stimulate the
attachment, the zeal, and the fidelity of the troops.

<page 234>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 215
braced the cause of Napoleon, which had be-
come the national cause through the faults of
the government.
Royalty had no defenders left but women
and their handkerchiefs; priests without in-
fluence; nobles without courage; body guards
without youth, or without experience.
The legions of the national guard, on which
such great reliance had been placed, were re-
viewed by their colonel-general: he harangued
them on the charter, and the tyranny of Bona-
parte; he told them, that he would march at
their head, and said: “Let those, who love
their King, come out from their ranks, and
follow me.” Scarcely two hundred obeyed the
order. -
The royal volunteers, who had made so much
noise, when they expected to be victors without
incurring any peril, had gradually dispersed;
and those, whom the approach of danger had
neither intimidated nor cooled, were too few to
have any weight in the balance.
The government had one sole and last hope
remaining: it was, dare I say it? that Napoleon
would be assassinated.
The same men who had preached up a civil
war, and declared, that it would be shameful not

<page 235>
216 MEMOIRS OF
to have one; soiled the walls of Paris with pro-
vocations to murder, and fanatic praises be-
stowed beforehand on murderers. Emissaries,
mixing in the various groups of the people,
endeavoured to put the poniard into the hands
of the new Jacques Clements. A public act
had proscribed Napoleon; a reward was publicly
offered for his head. This call for a crime,
which indignant France first heard from the
assassins of Coligny, was repeated by men, who,
like them, had the sacred words of morality,
humanity, and religion, continually in their
mouths, and who, like them, thirsted only after
vengeance and blood,
But while they were conspiring at Paris to
assassinate Napoleon, he peaceably pursued his
triumphant march.
Quitting Grenoble on the 9th, he came that
night and slept at Burgoign. "“‘‘The crowd
and the enthusiasm continued to increase: “We
have long expected you,” said all these brave
fellows to the Emperor; “at length you are
come, to deliver France from the insolence of
the nobility, the pretensions of the priests, and
the disgrace of a foreign yoke.”
* The double sets of inverted commas are still used to dis-
tinguish passages extracted from the official account.

<page 236>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 217
““The Emperor, being fatigued *, was in
his calash, the horse walking, surrounded by a
crowd of peasants, singing songs, that expressed
the noble sentiments of these brave Dauphinese.
“Ah!” said the Emperor, “I here find again
the sentiments, which twenty years ago led me
to hail France by the name of the great nation!
Yes, you are still the great nation, and you
shall ever be so.””
They approached Lyons: the Emperor had
sent his emissaries before him, who informed
him, that the Count d’Artois, the Duke of Or-
leans, and Marshal Macdonald, had determined
to defend the city, and that they were going to
break down the bridges de la Guillotière and
Moraud. ““The Emperor laughed at these
ridiculous preparations: he could not doubt the
disposition of the Lyonese, still less those of
the soldiers; yet he gave orders to General
Bertrand, to collect boats at the Mirbel, intend-
ing to cross the river in the night, and cut off
the roads to Moulins and Macon for the Prince,
who wanted to prevent his passing the Rhone.
At four o'clock a reconnoitring party of the
* He had travelled from Cannes to Grenoble partly on
horseback, but chiefly on foot.

<page 237>
218 MEMOIRS OF
fourth hussars arrived at la Guillotière, and
were received with shouts of “Long live the
Emperor!” by the immense population of the
suburb, that has always been distinguished for
its attachment to its country.””
The Emperor immediately countermanded
the passage at Mirbel, and desirous of availing
himself of this first enthusiastic movement, as
at Grenoble, galloped forward to the suburb
of Guillotière.
The Count d’Artois, less fortunate, could
not even succeed in opposing to his adversary
a shadow of defence.
He was desirous of destroying the bridges,
but the city opposed it.
The troops, whose attachment he fancied he
could purchase by the distribution of money,
or the bait of rewards, had remained deaf to his
words, his entreaties, his promises. Passing
before the thirteenth regiment of dragoons, he
said to a brave fellow, decorated with three
chevrons and with scars: “Come, comrade,
shout Long live the King!”—“No, Sir,”
answered the brave dragoon, “No soldier will
fight against his father; I can only answer you
by saying Long live the Emperor!” Confused
and in despair, he exclaimed in a sorrowful tone,
“All is lost!” and these words, instantly spread.

<page 238>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 219
ing from one to another, only strengthened the
prevailing ill will or discouragement".
Marshal Macdonald, however, who was well
known to the troops, had succeeded in bar-
ricading the bridge of la Guillotière, and led
two battalions of infantry thither in person;
when the hussars of Napoleon came out from
the suburb, and presented themselves before
the bridge, preceded, surrounded, and followed,
by all the youth of the place.
The marshal restrained the soldiers a few
minutes: but moved, seduced, borne away, by
the incitements of the people and the hussars,
they rushed to the barricadoes, burst them, and
were quickly in the arms and in the ranks of
the soldiers of Napoleon.
The Count d'Artois, foreseeing this defec-
tion, had quitted Lyons, unaccompanied by a
single gendarme, but escorted by a detachment
of the thirteenth dragoons, commanded by lieu-
tenant Marchebout. It is due to the troops to
say, that they did not cease to respect him, and
that he ran no riskt.

* It was a great oversight, to send the Count d'Artois to
face Napoleon. It was easy to foresee, that, if this prince
should fail in a city of a hundred thousand inhabitants against
eight hundred men, the business would be decided.
+Marshal Macdonald was not so happy. Two hussars, one

<page 239>
220 MEMOIRS OF
At five in the evening the whole garrison
rushed out to meet Napoleon.
An hour after, the imperial army took pos-
session of the city.
At seven Napoleon made his solemn entry,
proceeding alone before his troops, but pre-
ceded and followed by an immense crowd, ex-
pressing, by incessant acclamations, the intoxi-
cation, happiness, and pride, they felt at seeing
him again. He alighted at the archbishop's
palace, and quietly took his rest in the very
places, which the Count d’Artois, yielding to
despair, had just watered with his tears.
Napoleon immediately entrusted the guard-
ing of his person, and the interior charge of the
palace, to the national guard. He would not
accept the services of the horse-guards. “Our
institutions,” said he to them, “know nothing
of national guards on horseback; besides, you
behaved so ill with the Count d’Artois, that I
will have nothing to say to you.”
In fact the Emperor, who had always re-
spected misfortune, had made inquiries con-
cerning the Count d’Artois on his arrival; and
had learned, that the nobles, of whom the horse-
of whom was drunk, pursued him, and would have arrested
him, if he had not been extricated by his aide-de-camp.

<page 240>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 221
guards were chiefly composed, after having
sworn to the prince to die for him, had deserted
him; one excepted, who remained faithfully
attached to his escort, till the moment he
thought his life and liberty out of all danger.
The Emperor did not confine himself to
commendation of the conduct of this generous
Lyonese. “I never left a noble action,” said
he, “without reward:” and he appointed him
a member of the Legion of Honour.
I was at Lyons the moment when Napoleon
arrived. He knew it, and sent for me that very
evening. “Well!” said he to me with a smile,
“you did not expect to see me again so soon *.”
“No, Sire; your Majesty alone is capable
of occasioning such surprises.”—“What do
they say of all this at Paris?”—“Why, Sire,
there, as here, they are rejoiced, no doubt, at
your Majesty's happy return.”—“And pub-
lic opinion, how is that?”—“Sire, it is greatly
changed: formerly we thought of nothing but

* Those who have been about Napoleon's person know,
that he recommended to his secretaries, and the officers of
his household, to take notes of what he said and did on his
journeys. A number of notes of this nature must have been
found at the Tuileries, most of which contained particulars
that were highly interesting. I preserved mine, and from
them I have composed, in great measure, the present work.

<page 241>
222 MEMOIRS OF
glory, now we think only of liberty. The
struggle that has arisen between the Bourbons
and the nation has revealed to us our rights;
it has engendered in men's minds a number of
liberal ideas, that did not exist in your Ma-
jesty's time; people feel, people experience,
the necessity of being free; and the most cer-
tain means of pleasing the French would be to
promise, and to give them, laws truly popular.”
“I know that the discussions they * have
suffered to take place, have diminished the
respect for power, and enfeebled it. Liberal
ideas have resumed all the ground I had gained
for it. I shall not attempt to reconquer it: no
one should attempt to contend with a nation;
it is the earthen pot against the iron pot. The
French shall have reason to be satisfied with
me. I know, that there is both pleasure and
glory in rendering a great people free and happy.
I will give pledges to France: I did not stint
it in glory, I will not stint it in liberty. I will
retain no farther power than is necessary to
enable me to govern. Power is not incompa-
tible with liberty: on the contrary, liberty is
never more entire, than when power is well
established. When it is weak, it is captious: -

* The Bourbons,

<page 242>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 223
when it is strong, it sleeps in tranquillity, and
leaves the reins loose on the neck of liberty. I
know what is requisite for the French; we shall
settle that point: but no licentiousness, no
anarchy; for anarchy would lead us to the
despotism of the republicans, the most fertile
of all despotisms in tyrannic acts, because every
body takes a share in it .... Do they suppose
we shall come to a battle?”—“They do not
think it: the government have never had con-
fidence in the soldiery; it has made itself de-
tested by the officers; and all the troops that
may be opposed to your Majesty’s, will be so
many reinforcements sent you.”—“I think
so too: and the marshals?”—“Sire, they
cannot but be apprehensive, that your Majesty
will remember Fontainbleau; and perhaps it
will be well to remove their fears, and to make
known to them personally your Majesty's inten-
tion of consigning everything to oblivion.”
“No, I will not write to them; they would
consider me as under obligations to them; and
I will be obliged to no person. The troops are
well disposed, the officers are good, and if the
marshals wished to restrain them, they would be
hurried along by them.... where is my guard?”
“I believe at Metz and at Nancy.”—“Of


<page 243>
224 MEMOIRS OF
that I am sure, do what they will, they will never
corrupt it. What are Augereau and Marmont
about?”—“I do not know.” “What is
Ney doing? On what terms is he with the
king?”—“Sometimes good, sometimes bad:
I believe he has had reason to complain of the
court on account of his wife.”—“His wife
is an affected creature; no doubt she has at-
tempted to play the part of a great lady, and
the old dowagers have ridiculed her. Has Ney
any command?”—“I do not think he has,
Sire.”—“Is he one of us?”—“The part
he took in your abdication”. . . . “Ay, I read
that at Porto Ferrajo: he boasted of having ill-
treated me, of having laid his pistols on my
table: it was all false. Had he dared to fail of
respect to me, I would have ordered him to be
shot. A heap of tales has been spread respect-
ing my abdication. I abdicated, not in conse-
quence of their advice, but because my army
was out of its senses: besides, I would not have
a civil war. It was never to my taste. It was
said, that Augereau, when I met him, loaded
me with reproaches .... it was a lie: no one of
my generals would have dared, in my presence,
to forget what was due to me. Had I known
of the proclamation of Augereau, I would have

<page 244>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 225
forbidden him my presence": cowards only
insult misfortune. His proclamation, which I
was reported to have had in my pocket, was
unknown to me till after our interview. It was
General Koller who showed it me: but let us
quit these popular rumours. What has been
done at the Tuileries?”—“Nothing has been
altered, Sire; even the eagles have not yet
been removed.” (Smiling) “They must
have thought my arrangement of them ad-
mirable.”—“So I presume, Sire: it has been
said, that the Count d’Artois went through all
the apartments immediately after his arrival,
and could not cease to admire them.”—“I
can readily believe it. What have they done
with my pictures?”—“Some have been taken
away, but that of the battle of Austerlitz is still
in the council-chamber.” “And the thea-
tre?”—“It has not been touched: it is no
longer used.”—“What is Talma doing?”
“Why, Sire, he continues to deserve and
obtain public applause.”—“I shall see him
* The newspapers of the day asserted, that Napoleon,
though he had in his pocket the proclamation of Augereau,
filled with reproaches and invectives, had thrown himself
into his arms, and heard the cutting reprehensions of the
marshal, without saying a word.
VOL. I. Q.

<page 245>
226 MEMOIRS OF
again with pleasure. Have you been at court?"
——“Yes, Sire, I have been presented.”
“I am told, they all have the air of upstarts of
yesterday; that they know not how to utter a
word, or take a single step, with propriety: have
you seen them on grand public days?”—“No,
Sire, but I can assure your Majesty, that people
pay as little regard to ceremony at the Tuileries,
as at their own homes: they go thither in dirty
boots, common frock-coats, and round hats.”
“That must have a very majestic appear-
ance. But how do all those old thicksculls
spend their money? for every thing has been
restored to them.”—“But, probably, Sire,
they wish to wear out their old clothes.”
“Poor France! into what hands hast thou
thrust thyself! And the king, what sort of a
countenance has he ?”—“He has a tolerably
fine head.”—“Is his coin handsome 2"–
“Of this your Majesty may judge: here is a
twenty-franc piece.”—“What! they have
not re-coined louis: I am surprised at this.
(Turning the piece over) He does not look as
if he would starve himself: but observe, they
have taken away Dieu protege la France (God
protect France), to restore their Domine, salvum
fac regem (Lord, preserve the King). This is
as they always were: everything for themselves,

<page 246>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 227
nothing for France. Where is Maret? where
is Caulincourt? where is Lavalette? where is
Fouché?” “They are all at Paris.”—
“And Môlé?”—“He, too, is at Paris; I
observed him a short time ago at the Queen’s.”
“Have we any persons hereabout, who
were nearly attached to me?”—“I do not
know, Sire.”—“You must inquire, and bring
them to me. I should be glad to be thoroughly
acquainted with the spirit of the times, and
know something of the present state of affairs.
What does Hortense do?”—“Sire, her house
is still the resort of men, who know how to ap-
preciate wit and elegance: and the Queen,
though without a throne, is not less an object
of the respect and homage of all Paris.”—
“She did a very foolish thing, in exhibiting
herself as a spectacle before the tribunals.
They who advised her to it were blockheads.
Why, too, did she go and demand the title of
duchess?”—“She, Sire, did not demand
it, it was the Emperor Alexander....”
“No matter, she ought not to have accepted,
any more than demanded it: she should have
called herself Madame Bonaparte: this name is
full as good as any other. Besides, what right
had she to have her son made a duke of St.
Leu, and a peer of the Bourbons? Louis was
Q 2

<page 247>
228 MEMOIRS OF
in the right to oppose it: he was sensible, that
the name of her son was sufficiently honourable,
not to suffer himself to change it. If Josephine
had been alive, she would have prevented her
from engaging in such a foolish piece of busi-
ness. Was she much regretted?”—“Yes,
Sire, your Majesty knows how much she was
beloved and honoured by the French.”
“She deserved it. She was an excellent
woman: she had a great deal of sense. I
greatly regretted her too, and the day when I
heard of her death was one of the most un-
happy of my life. Was there a public mourn-
ing for her?”—“No, Sire. Indeed I think
she would have been refused the honours due
to her rank, had not the Emperor Alexander
insisted on their being paid her.”—“So I
heard at the time, but I did not believe it. He
was no way interested in it.”—“The gene-
rosity of Alexander was not confined within any
limits: he showed himself the protector of the
Empress, the Queen, Prince Eugene, the Duke
of Vicenza, and a number of other persons of
distinction, who, but for him, would have been

persecuted or ill treated.”—“You love him,
it seems.” “Sire. ...” “Is the national
guard of Paris well disposed?”—“I cannot
positively affirm it; but of this at least I am
-

<page 248>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 229
certain, that if it do not declare for your Ma-
jesty, at least it will not act against us.”—“I
imagine so too. What is it supposed, that the
foreigners will think of my return?”—“It is
thought, that Austria will connect itself with
your Majesty, and that Russia will behold the
disgrace of the Bourbons without regret.”—
“Why so?”—“It is said, Sire, that Alex-
ander was not pleased with the princes while at
Paris. That the predilection of the king for
England, and his attributing his crown to the
Prince Regent, offended him.”—“It is well
to know that. Has he seen my son?”
“Yes, Sire: I have been assured, that he em-
braced him with a tenderness truly paternal,
and exclaimed: He is a charming fellow:
how have I been deceived !”—“What did he
mean by that?”—“They say he had been
informed, that the young prince was ricketty
and imbecile.”—“Wretches! he is an ad-
mirable child: he gives every indication of be-
coming a distinguished character. He will be
an honour to his age. Is it true, that so much
was made of Alexander at Paris?”—“Yes,
Sire, nobody else was attended to but he: the
other sovereigns appeared as if they were his
aides-de-camp.” “In fact, he did a great
deal for Paris: but for him the English would have

<page 249>
239 MEMOIRS OF
ruined it, and the Prussians would have set it
on fire.—He acted his part well.... (with a
smile) if I were not Napoleon, perhaps I would
be Alexander.”
The next day he reviewed the division of
Lyons in Bellecour Square. “I shall see that
square again with pleasure,” said he, to the
chiefs of the national guard, who stood round
him: “I remember, that I raised it from its
ruins, and laid the first stone of it fifteen years
ago.” He went out merely preceded by a few
hussars. A crowd of men, old men, women
and children, thronged the bridges, the quays,
and the streets. They rushed under the horses'
feet to hear him, to see him, to have a closer
view of him, to touch his garments.... it was
an actual delirium. Scarcely had he proceeded
a few steps, when the crowd, that had already
seen him, ran to another spot, to see him
again. The air rung with uninterrupted ac-
clamations. It was a rolling volley of “The
nation for ever! The Emperor for ever! Down
with the priests! Down with the royalists!” &c.
The division of Brayer, as soon as reviewed,
set out on its march to Paris.
When the Emperor returned to the archiepis-
copal palace, the great gallery was crowded with
generals, colonels, magistrates, and public of:

<page 250>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 231
ficers of all ranks and kinds. You might have
thought yourselves in the Tuileries.
The Emperor stopped a few minutes: he
embraced Generals Mouton Duvernay, Girard,
and other officers, whom Paris supposed to be
in pursuit of him; and after having distributed
on the right and left a few smiles and many
compliments, he proceeded to his saloon, and
admitted to be presented to him the imperial
court, the municipal body, and the chiefs of
the military corps and the national guard.
He conversed a long time with them on the
faults of the Bourbons, and the deplorable situa-
tion in which he found France. He confessed
to them with noble frankness, that he was not
altogether inculpable for its misfortunes. “I
was hurried on,” said he, “by the course of
events, into a wrong path. But, taught by
experience, I have abjured that love of glory,
so natural to the French, which has had such
fatal consequences to them and to me . . . . . I
was mistaken in supposing, that the time was
arrived for rendering France the metropolis of
a great empire: I have renounced for ever
that grand enterprise; we have enough of
glory, we want repose. -
ck It is not ambition, that has brought me back
to France: it is the love of the country. I

<page 251>
232 MEMOIRS OF
could have preferred the tranquillity of the
island of Elba to the cares of a throne, had I
not known, that France was unhappy, and had
need of me.
“On setting foot on our dear France,” con-
tinued he, after a few unimportant answers
from his auditors, “I made a vow to render it
free and happy: I bring nothing to it but be-
nefits. I am returned to protect and defend
those interests, to which our revolution has
given birth: I return to concur with the re-
presentatives of the nation in a family compact,
that shall preserve for ever the liberty and the
rights of every Frenchman: henceforward it
will be my ambition, and my glory, to effect
the happiness of the great people from whom I
hold every thing. I will not, like Louis XVIII.,
grant you a revocable charter; I will give you
an inviolable constitution, and it shall be the
work of the people, as well as of myself.”
Such were his words. He pronounced them
with an air of such satisfaction, he appeared so
confident of himself and of the future, that a
man would have thought himself criminal to
suspect the purity of his intentions, or to doubt
the happiness he was about to secure to France.
The language he held at Lyons we perceive
was not the same, as that he had uttered at

<page 252>

NAPOLEON IN 1815. 233
Gap and at Grenoble. In the last-mentioned
towns he sought principally to excite in men’s
minds hatred of the Bourbons, and the love of
liberty: he had spoken as a citizen, rather than
a monarch. No formal declaration, not a single
word, revealed his intentions. It might as well
have been supposed, that he thought of restoring
the republic, or the consulship, as the empire.
At Lyons, there was no longer anything vague,
any thing uncertain: he spoke as a sovereign,
and promised to give a national constitution.
The idea of the Champ de Mai had recurred to
him.
Not one of us suspected the sincerity of the
promises and resolves of Napoleon.
Time, reflection, misfortune, the grand
teacher of mankind, had effected the most fa-
vourable changes in the principles of Napoleon.
Formerly, when unforeseen obstacles arose,
suddenly to thwart his projects, his passions,
accustomed to no restraint, to respect no bridle,
burst forth with the fury of a raging sea: he
spoke, he ordered, he decided, as if he had
been master of the earth and of the elements;
nothing appeared to him impossible.
After his reverse of fortune, he had learned
in the calm of solitude and meditation, to con-
trol the violence of his will, and to subject it to

<page 253>
234 MEMOIRS OF
the yoke of reason and prudence. He had read
attentively the writings, pamphlets, and even
libels, published against him: and amid the re-
vilings, calumnies, and absurdities, which they
frequently contained, he had found useful truths,
judicious observations, and profound views, of
which he knew how to benefit himself.
“Princes,” observes the learned author of
the Spirit of Laws, “have in their lives periods
of ambition to which other passions, and even
indolence, succeed.” Napoleon’s hour of in-
dolence was not yet come: but to the ambition
of increasing his power without limit, had suc-
ceeded the desire of rendering France happy,
and of repairing by a durable peace, and a pa-
ternal government, all the evils that had been
brought upon it by war.
The Emperor spent the evening of the 11th
in his closet: his first thought was for the Em-
press. He wrote her a very tender letter, which
began with these remarkable words. “Madam
and dear wife, I have re-ascended my throne.”
He informed Prince Joseph" also, that he
had resumed his crown; and directed him to
make known to foreign powers, through their
ministers to the Helvetic Confederation, that
-
-
* He had retired to Switzerland.

<page 254>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 255
he intended never more to disturb the tran-
quillity of Europe, and faithfully to maintain
the treaty of Paris. He particularly recom-
mended to him, strongly to impress upon Au-
stria and Russia, how desirous he was of re-
establishing his former connexions with them
in the most intimate manner.
He appeared to set a particular value on the
alliance of Russia. His predilection was founded,
no doubt, on political motives not difficult to
guess; yet I believe he was equally induced to
it by Alexander's generous conduct towards the
French. The popularity and renown, which this
prince had acquired in France, excited, and
could not but excite, the jealousy of Napoleon:
but this jealousy, the attribute of great minds,
did not render him unjust; he knew how to
estimate Alexander.
Hitherto Napoleon has been engaged only in
depriving the King of his army; he now thought
the time was come, to take from him also the
sceptre of civil government. “On this I have
resolved,” said he to me: “I will now anni-
hilate the royal authority, and dismiss the
chambers. Since I have resumed the govern-
ment, no authority but mine ought to exist. The
public must be taught from this moment, that

<page 255>
236 MEMOIRS OF
they are to obey me alone.” He then dictated
to me in succession the following decrees, known
by the name of the decrees of Lyons.
Lyons, 13th of March, 1815.
NAPolEoN, Emperor of the French, &c. &c.
Considering, that the Chamber of Peers is
partly composed of persons who have borne
arms against France, and who are interested in
the re-establishment of feudal rights, in the de-
struction of the equality of the different classes,
in the nullification of the sale of the national
domains, and finally in depriving the people of
the rights they have acquired by fighting for
five and twenty years against the enemies of the
national glory:
Considering, that the powers of the deputies
of the legislative body have expired, and that
from that moment the Chamber of Commons
has no longer a national character; that a part
of this chamber has rendered itself unworthy
the confidence of the nation, by assenting to
the re-establishment of the feudal nobility,
abolished by the constitution accepted by the
people; by making France pay debts contracted
with foreign powers for negotiating coalitions,
and paying armies, against the French people;

<page 256>
NAOOLEON IN 1815. 237
by giving to the Bourbons the title of legiti-
mate King, which was declaring the French
people and the armies rebels, proclaiming those
emigrants, who for five and twenty years have
been wounding the vitals of their country, the
only good Frenchmen, and violating all the
rights of the people, by sanctioning the prin-
ciple, that the nation is made for the throne,
not the throne for the nation:
We have decreed, and do decree, as follows:
Article I.
The Chamber of Peers is dissolved.
Article II.
The Chamber of Commons is dissolved: it is
ordered, that every one of the members con-
vened and arrived at Paris since the 7th of
March last shall repair to his home without
delay.
Article III.
The electoral colleges of the departments of
the empire shall assemble at Paris in the course
of the month of May next, in order to take
proper measures for correcting and modifying
our constitutions agreeably to the interests and
will of the nation; and at the same time to
assist at the coronation of the Empress, our

<page 257>
238 MEMOIRS. QF
dear and well-beloved wife, and that of our
dear and well-beloved son.
Article IV.
Our Grand Marshal, executing the functions
of Major-general of the grand army, is appointed
to take necessary measures for making public
the present decree.
SECOND DECREE.
NAPOLEoN, &c.
Article I.
All the emigrants, whose names have not
been erased, amnestied, or eliminated, by us, or
by the governments that have preceded us;
and who have returned to France since the 1st
of January, 1814, shall immediately quit the
territory of the empire.
Article II.
Those emigrants, who shall be found in the
territory of the empire fifteen days after the
promulgation of the present decree, shall be
arrested and tried conformably to the laws de-
creed by our national assemblies: unless how-

<page 258>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 239
ever it be proved, that they had no knowledge
of the present decree; in which case, they shall
merely be arrested, and conducted out of the
territory by the gendarmerie.
Article III.
All their property, moveable and immove-
able, &c. &c. shall be placed in sequestration.
THIRD DECREE.
NAPolEoN, &c.
Article I.
The nobility is abolished, and the laws of the
Constituent Assembly shall be put in force.
it as a Article II.
Feudal titles are suppressed.
Article III.
Those individuals, who have obtained from us
national titles, as national rewards, and whose
letters patent have been verified before the
council by the seal of state, shall continue to
bear them.

<page 259>
24O MEMOIRS OF
Article IV.
We reserve to ourselves the power of giving
titles to the descendants of those men, who
have rendered the French name illustrious in
various ages, whether in the command of armies
by land and sea, in the councils of sovereigns,
in the administration of justice or of civil
authority, or finally in the arts and sciences,
commerce, &c.
FOURTH DECREE.
NAPOLEoN, &c.
*** Article I.
All those generals and officers by land and
sea, of whatever rank, who have been in-
troduced into our armies since the 1st of April,
1814, who had emigrated; or who, not having
emigrated, had quitted the service at the period
of the first coalition, when the country had the
greatest need of their services; shall imme-
diately cease their functions, relinquish the
marks of their rank, and repair to their homes,
&c. &c. 29.

<page 260>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 241
FIFTH DECREE.
NAPOLEoN, &c.
Considering, that by our constitutions the
members of the judicial order are not removable,
we decree:
it
rollo 'o Article I.
All the arbitrary changes made in our inferior
tribunals and courts are null, and to be con-
sidered as having never taken place.
Article II.
The presidents of the court of cassation, our
procureur-general (attorney-general), and the
members who have been unjustly, and from a
spirit of reaction, dismissed from the said court,
are restored to their functions, &c. &c.
l'ºl
By four other decrees the Emperor ordered,
that the property of the Bourbon family should
be placed in sequestration.
That all the property of emigrants, which
belonged to the Legion of Honour, hospitals,
communes, the sinking fund, or the national
domains, should be restored to these different
establishments.
VOL. i. R

<page 261>
242 MEMOIRS OF
That the King's household and the Swiss
should be dismissed, and that no foreign corps
should be admitted as a guard to the sovereign.
And that the decoration of the lily, and the
orders of St. Louis, the Holy Ghost, and St.
Michael, should be abolished.
These decrees, which embraced at once every
part of the political, civil, and military admi-
nistration of the state, succeeded each other so
rapidly, that Napoleon had scarcely time to in-
terpose a few words between them.
By restoring to their seats those magistrates,
who had been expelled from them, he gained
with a stroke of the pen all the members of the
judicial order; but I know not why he did
not extend this beneficial measure to the func-
tionaries of the administrative order, particularly
to the prefects and sub-prefects, whom M. de
Montesquiou had so cruelly persecuted. Among
these functionaries there were unquestionably
some, who, from the weakness or incapacity
they had shown during the last moments of the
imperial government, merited no confidence:
but the greater part of them had remained
worthy of it; and Napoleon, by placing them
at the head of their former offiees, would have
added to the advantage of publicly repairing an
act of royal injustice, that of entrusting the

<page 262>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. '24.3
administration to experienced men, and who,
already knowing the partisans of the revolution
and those of the Bourbons, had only to show
themselves, to intimidate the latter, and render
effective the patriotism of the former.
With this exception, every thing he did at
Lyons appeared to me a master-piece of wisdom
and address.
It was necessary, to overturn the Chamber of
Peers: he did it at one stroke. “It is com-
posed,” said he, “only of men who have borne
arms against their country, and who are in-
terested in restoring feudal rights, and an-
nulling the national sales.”
The Chamber of Deputies had shown some
resistance to the ministers, and attachment to
liberal doctrines; it was difficult, therefore, to
render it unpopular, yet the Emperor did it by
a word: “It has shown itself unworthy of the
confidence of the nation, by making the people
pay debts contracted with foreigners for the
shedding of French blood.” -
It was necessary, to remove the apprehen-
sions of France respecting the future: he called
the electors to the Champ de Mai. It was ne-
cessary, to excite the belief, that he had a good
understanding with Austria, and that Maria
Louisa would be restored to him: he announced
R 2

<page 263>
244 MEMOIRS OF
the approaching coronation of the Empress and
her son.
It was necessary, to seduce the patriots, the
republicans: he abolished the feudal nobility;
and declared, that the throne was made for the
nation, not the nation for the throne. It was
necessary, to tranquillize those, who had ac-
quired national domains; he expelled the emi-
grants not erased from the lists, and resumed
their property: to please the peasantry and the
poor, he restored to the hospitals the property
of which they had been despoiled: to flatter the
guard and the army, he expelled from their
ranks foreigners and emigrants, dismissed the
King’s household, and restored to the Legion
of Honour its endowments and prerogatives.
Men may censure his conduct at Lyons;
may represent it as that of a madman, resolved
to alter, to destroy, to overturn everything; no
matter . . . . they who judge with impartiality,
I believe, will find, that he conducted himself
with all the skill of a consummate politician.
He knew how to inspire confidence, dissipate
apprehensions, confirm attachments, and fill the
people and the army with enthusiasm: what
could he do more?
The steps taken at Paris against him were
known to him on the 12th. He appeared de-

<page 264>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 245
lighted, that a command was given to Marshal
Ney; not that he held any intelligence with
him; but because he knew the weakness and
fickleness of his character. He directed the
Grand Marshal to write to him. “You will
inform him,” said he, “of the delirium excited
by my return, and of all the forces sent against
me having joined my army in succession. You
will tell him, that the troops under his com-
mand will infallibly follow the example of their
brave comrades, sooner or later: and that the
efforts he might make would have no farther
effect, than at most to retard the fall of the
Bourbons a few days. Give him to understand,
that he will be responsible to France, and to
me, for the civil war and bloodshed, of which
he would be the cause. Flatter him,” added
the Emperor, “but do not caress him too
much; he would think me afraid of him, and
require to be entreated.”
Letters were written also to all the com-
manders of corps, that were known to be quar-
tered in the neighbouring departments. None
of them were in a supplicatory style: the Em-
peror already spoke as a master; he did not
entreat, he commanded.
Every thing being finished, on the 13th Na-
poleon departed; and profoundly moved with

<page 265>
246 MEMOIRS OF -
the affection the Lyonese had shown him, he
bade them adieu in the following words:
“Lyonese,
“At the moment of quitting your city to re-
pair to my capital, I feel it necessary, to make
known to you the sentiments with which you
have inspired me: you have always ranked with
the foremost in my affections. On the throne
or in exile, you have always displayed the
same feelings towards me: the lofty character
that distinguishes you, has merited my entire
esteem: in a period of greater tranquillity, I
shall return, to consider the welfare of your
manufactures, and of your city.
“Lyonese, I love you.” fit
These last words were the ingenuous expres-
sion of his feelings: in dictating, he pronounced
them with that indefinable charm, that was im-
pressed on his words when they came from the
heart.
So much has been said of the hardness of
Napoleon's heart, and the harshness of his lan-
guage, that whatever is at variance with the
received opinion must appear fabulous. Yet it
is a truth, and they who have been about the
Emperor's person will vouch for it, that he was

<page 266>
* NAPOLEON IN 1815. 247
far from being so unfeeling, as he was com-
monly thought. His military education, and
the necessity of commanding fear and re-
spect, had rendered him grave, severe, and in-
flexible; and had accustomed him, to check and
despise the suggestions of his sensibility. But
when nature resumed her rights, he felt a de-
light in yielding to the movements of his soul,
and he then expressed the emotions or senti-
ments, that had overpowered him, in an ardent
and impassioned tone, and with a sweetness
and grace, as seducing as it was inimitable.
Indeed the Lyonese merited the esteem and
love, that Napoleon avowed for them. Though
yet young, I have more than once seen popular
displays of enthusiasm and infatuation; yet
never did I see any thing comparable to the
transports of joy and tenderness, that burst
from the Lyonese. Not only the quays, and
the places near the palace of the Emperor, but
even the most distant streets rung with per-
petual acclamations". Workmen and their
* The author of a libel entitled Les Quinze Semaines,
“The Fifteen Weeks,” asserts, that shouts were heard of
“Death for ever ! Guilt for ever ! Down with virtue! Down
with God!” Such a charge requires no refutation: I men-
tion it here only to show, to what a point the spirit of party,

<page 267>
248 MEMOIRS OF
masters, the common people and the citizens,
rambled about the city arm in arm, singing,
dancing, and giving themselves up to the im-
pulse of the most ardent gaiety. Strangers
stopped one another, shook hands, embraced,
and congratulated each other on the return of
the Emperor, as if he had conferred on them
fortune, life, and honour.
The national guard, affected by the con-
fidence he had shown it, by entrusting to it the
care of his person, participated with equal
ardour the general intoxication; and the day
of Napoleon’s departure was a day of sorrow
and regret to the city of Lyons, as that of his
arrival had been a day of real festivity.
We slept at Macon. The Emperor would
not alight at the prefect's, but went to lodge at
the sign of the Savage. He found it was no
longer necessary, to wait at the gates of the
towns, as at Grenoble and Lyons: the people
and the rancorous passions, have misled writers, who call
themselves royalists. It has been equally asserted, that the
people plundered and destroyed a number of shops and ware-
houses. This, too, is false: no disorder occurred, except in
Bellecour Square, where the people broke the windows and
tables of the Bourbon coffee-house, known to be the place
where the ultra-royalists assembled; and this disorder was
quieted and suppressed immediately.

<page 268>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 249
and the magistrates ran out to meet him, and
disputed the honour of being foremost, to do
him homage, and express their good wishes.
The next morning he received the felicita-
tions of the national guard, the municipal body,
&c. One of the colleagues of the mayor gave
us a long, ridiculous harangue, which amused
us much. When he had finished, the Emperor
said to him : “You were much astonished,
then, at hearing of our having landed?”—
“Yes, faith:” answered the orator: “when I
knew you had landed, I said to every body, the
man must be mad, he will never be able to
escape.” Napoleon could not help laugh-
ing at this simplicity. “I know,” said he, with
a sarcastic smile, “that you are all a little in-
clined to be frightened; you gave me a proof
of this last campaign; you should have behaved
as the men of Chalons did; you did not main-
tain the honour of the Burgundians.”—“It
was not our fault, Sire,” said one of the party:
“we were badly commanded; you had not given
us a good mayor.”—“That is very possible;
we have all been guilty of foolish actions, and
they must be forgotten; the safety and hap-
piness of France are henceforward the only
objects, to which we ought to attend.” He
dismissed them in a friendly manner.

<page 269>
250 MEMOIRS OF
The prefect had taken flight. The Emperor
asked me his name. It was one Germain,
whom he had made a count, and a gentleman
of the bedchamber, without well knowing why.
“What!” said he to me, “does that little
Germain fancy it necessary to shun me? he
must be brought back:” and he thought no
more of him. -
He directed me, to cause an account of the
events at Grenoble and Lyons to be inserted in
the newspaper of the department. The editor,
a furious royalist, had hidden himself. I en-
trusted to the new subprefect the business of
fulfilling the Emperor's orders; but, whether it
were carelessness or incapacity on his part, he
had recourse to the printer of the paper, who
supplied him with an article far from answering
OUlt V16WS. -
It began with a very just, but ill-timed eulogy
of the goodness of Louis XVIII.; and ended
with declaring in substance, that so good a king
was not fitted to reign over the French, and
that they required a sovereign such as Na-
poleon, &c. -
The Emperor, who would read every thing,
asked me for the paper. I pretended I could
not lay my hand upon it: but, after a thousand
attempts to put him off from seeing it, I was at

<page 270>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 251
length obliged to bring it him. I thought he
would have given me a severe reprimand, but
he contented himself with saying: “Change
that man, he is a fool; and desire him for the
future, never to attempt a eulogy of me.” I
sent for him, scolded him, and, like me, he was
let off for the fright.
It was at Macon, that we first received official
news of what was going on at Paris. It was
brought us by M. ***. The unskilful manner
in which the royalist party superintended the
police of the roads, was truly astonishing. Not
one of its emissaries escaped us, while ours went
and came without any obstruction. Rage or
fear must have turned the brains of all the
royalists. M. * * * assured the Emperor, that
the national guard appeared determined to
defend the king, and that the king had de-
clared, he would not quit the Tuileries. “If
he choose to wait for me there,” said Napoleon,
“I have no objection: but I doubt it much.
He suffers himself to be lulled by the boastings
of the emigrants; and when I get within twenty
leagues of Paris, they will abandon him, as the
nobles of Lyons abandoned the Count d'Artois.
What indeed could he do with the old puppets
that are about him? One of our grenadiers
would knock down a hundred of them with the

<page 271>
252 MEMOIRS OF
butt-end of his musket. ... The national guard
shouts at a distance; when I am at the barriers
it will be silent. Its business is not to raise a
civil war, but to maintain peace and order in
the country. The majority is sound; there is
nothing rotten in it but a few officers; and
them I will expel. Return to Paris; tell my
friends not to implicate themselves, and within
ten days my grenadiers will mount guard at the
Tuileries: go.”
We arrived at Chalons on the 14th, at an
early hour. It was terrible weather, yet the
whole population had come out of the city, to
see the Emperor a few minutes the sooner. On
approaching the walls, he perceived artillery
and ammunition waggons, and was surprised at
it. “They were intended,” said the people,
“to act against you; but we have stopped them
on their way, and present them to you.”
“That’s right, my lads; you have always been
good citizens.” Witt º
He was well pleased, to find himself among
the Chalonese, and received them with much
affection and regard. “I have not forgotten,”
said he, “that you resisted the enemy for forty
days, and valiantly defended the passage of the
, Saône. Had all the French possessed your
courage and patriotism, not a single foreigner

<page 272>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 253
would have escaped out of France.” He ex-
pressed to them his desire of knowing the brave
men, who had most distinguished themselves;
and on their unanimous testimony, he granted
on the spot the decoration of the Legion of
Honour to the mayor of St. Jean Delonne. “It
was for the brave men like him and you,” said
he to them, “that I instituted the Legion of
Honour, and not for emigrants pensioned by
our enemies.” When the audience was ended,
he said to me: “The mayor of Chalons is not
come; yet it was I who appointed him: but he
is related to an ancient family, and probably
has his scruples. The inhabitants complain of
him, and will make him suffer for it. You must
go and see him. If he object to you his oath,
tell him, that I absolve him from it; and make
him sensible, that, if he wait till he is freed from
it by Louis XVIII., he will wait a long time.
Say to him, in short, what you please; I care
little about his visit; it is for his own sake I
wish him to come. If he do not come, the
people will stone him to death after I am gone.
Germain was lucky to escape"; let his exam-
ple be a lesson to him.”
* He attempted to harangue the Chalonese, but they
allowed him only time to take to his heels.

<page 273>
2.54 • MEMOIRS OF
I repaired immediately to the municipality,
where I found the mayor, and a few municipal
counsellors. He appeared to me a man of
merit. I informed him, that it was my usual
office, to introduce to his Majesty the muni-
cipal authorities; that I had observed with
surprise, he had not been as eager as the mayors
of other cities, to pay his duty to the Emperor;
and that I was come to remove his fears, &c.
He answered me frankly, that he had great
respect and admiration for Napoleon; but,
having sworn fealty to Louis XVIII., he
thought it his duty to keep his oath, till he
was absolved from it. I had my answer
ready. “I, like you,” said I, “consider per-
jury as the most degrading act, of which man
can be guilty. But it is necessary, to make a
distinction between a voluntary oath, and the
stipulated oath, which people take to their go-
vernment. In the eye of reason, this oath is
merely an act of local submission; a pure and
simple formality, which the monarch, whoever
he may be, has a right to require of his subjects;
but which cannot, as it ought not, enchain their
persons and faith to perpetuity. France, since
1789, has sworn by turns to be faithful to roy-
alty, to the convention, to the republic, to the
directory, to the consulship, to the empire, to

<page 274>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 255
the charter: if those Frenchmen, who had taken
an oath to royalty, had sought to oppose the
establishment of a republic, by way of acquitting
themselves of their oaths; if those, who had taken
an oath to the republic, had opposed the esta-
blishment of the empire, &c.; into what a state
of anarchy and disorder, into what a deluge of
blood and evils, would they not have plunged
our unhappy country? On similar occasions,
the national will ought to be the sole guide of
our conscience and our actions: the moment it
is manifested, it is the duty of good citizens, to
yield and obey.”
“These principles,” replied he, “may be
very good as a general rule; but our present
case is an exception, never before known. When
the governments, that have existed since the re-
volution, were overturned, the new government
seized the authority, and it ought to be pre-
sumed, that the assent of the nation was on its
side: but here it is a different affair; the royal
government subsists; the Emperor abdicated
voluntarily; and till the king has renounced
the crown, I shall consider him as the sove-
reign of France.”
“If you wait for the king's renunciation,”
rejoined I, “before you acknowledge the Em-
peror, you will wait a long time. Has not the

<page 275>
256 MEMOIRS OF
king pretended, that he has not ceased to reign
over France these five-and-twenty years? And
if he thought himself sovereign of France at
a time, when the imperial government was ren-
dered legitimate by the unanimous suffrages of
France, and acknowledged by all Europe, do
you think he will renounce the crown at pre-
Sent P
“The time when kings reigned in virtue of
right divine is far removed from us: their rights
are no longer founded on any thing but the
formal or tacit consent of nations: the moment
nations reject them, the contract is broken; the
conditional oaths taken to them are annulled in
law and in fact, without their intervention or
consent being necessary; for, as the proclama-
tions of Napoleon say, kings are made for the
people, not the people for kings.
“As to the abdication of Napoleon, whether
voluntary or compulsive, and the rights newly
acquired by Louis XVIII., it would be requi-
site, in order to answer this part of your objec-
tions, to inquire, whether the chief of a nation
have a right to relinquish the authority en-
trusted to him, without the consent of that
nation; and whether a government imposed by
foreigners, either through influence or force
of arms, unite those characters of legitimacy,

<page 276>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 257
which you ascribe to it. I have read in our
publicists, that we owe obedience to a govern-
ment de facto and since the Emperor has in
fact resumed the sceptre, I think we cannot do
better, than submit to his laws; with the pro-
viso,” added I jocularly, “ of leaving to poste-
rity the task of deciding the question of right
between Napoleon and Louis XVIII.
“However,” continued I, “I leave you per-
fectly at liberty to embrace which side you
judge best: it is not my intention to take you
by surprise, or to put any violence on your
conscience; and I beg you to consider the
attempts I have made to convince you, only
as a proof of my desire to bring you over to
my opinion by the force of reason.”
“Well, sir,” said he, “I yield to your ob-
servations: be so good as to announce me to
his Majesty.”
The next day he was displaced !
On the 16th we slept at Avalon. Napoleon
was received there as he had been every where;
that is to say, with demonstrations of joy, that
were actually bordering on madness. People
crowded, thronged, to see, to hear, to speak to
him: his quarters were instantly surrounded,
besieged, by such a numerous and obstinate mul-
VOL. I. S

<page 277>
258 MEMOIRS OF
titude, that it was impossible for us to enter or
go out, without walking on the heads of all
the population of the country. Those men
who made part of the national guard would
remain on duty from morning to night. Women
of the greatest distinction in the place spent
the day and night on the stairs and in the pas-
sages, to watch for his going by. Three of
them, tired with standing the whole day for
want of seats, requested permission to sit down
by us: it was in the hall (adjoining the Empe-
ror's chamber), in which some mattresses had
been laid on the floor, in order that we might
gain a few minutes' rest. It was pleasant
enough, to see these three young and elegant
Bonapartists timidly huddling together on a
little couch in the midst of our dirty guard-
room. We endeavoured to keep them com-
pany; but our eyes closed in spite of us. “Go
to sleep,” said they to us, “we will watch over
the Emperor.” In fact, fatigue got the better
of gallantry; and, to our shame be it spoken,
we were soon asleep at their feet. When we
awoke, we found one of these ladies keeping
guard at Napoleon's door. We heard of it, and
thanked her for her attachment, in very polite
and pleasing terms. -

<page 278>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 259
I think it was at Avalon *, that an officer of
the staff came and brought us Marshal Ney's
submission, and his orders of the dayt. These
* I dare not positively affirm it, for in my memorandums
I have confounded together Chalons, Avalon, &c.
t oRDERs of THE DAY.
The Marshal Prince of the Moskowa, to the troops of his
Government.
Officers, non-commissioned officers, and soldiers!
The cause of the Bourbons is lost for ever. The legiti-
mate dynasty, which the French nation has adopted, is
about to re-ascend the throne: it belongs to the Emperor
Napoleon alone, our sovereign, to reign over our fine coun-
try. Whether the nobility of the Bourbons take the step of
expatriating itself again, or consent to live among us, is no
concern of ours. The sacred cause of liberty, and of our
independence, will no longer suffer from their fatal influence.
They have endeavoured to debase our military glory; but
they have found themselves mistaken. This glory is the
fruit of labours too noble for us to lose the remembrance of
it. Soldiers' those days are no more, when nations were
governed by stifling their rights. Liberty is at length tri-
umphant; and Napoleon, our august Emperor, is about to
confirm it for ever. Henceforth let this lovely cause be
ours, and that of all Frenchmen: let all the brave fellows,
whom I have the honour to command, be thoroughly im-
bued with this grand truth.
Soldiers | I have often led you to victory; I am now
going to conduct you to that immortal phalanx, which the
S 2

<page 279>
260 MEMOIRS OF
orders of the day were printed that night; but
the Emperor, after having read them over,
directed them to be changed and reprinted. I
know not whether his Majesty judged it proper
to alter them, or whether the printer had made
any mistake.
On the 17th the Emperor arrived at Auxerre,
where he was received for the first time by a
prefect. He alighted at the prefect's house.
On the mantel-piece of the first saloon were
the busts of the Empress, and of her son; and
in the next was a whole-length portrait of Na-
poleon, in his imperial robes: it might have
been supposed, that the reign of the Emperor
had never been interrupted. -
Napoleon immediately received the congra-
tulations of all the authorities, and of the tri-
bunals. These congratulations began to be no
longer a mark of attachment in our eyes, but
the fulfilment of a duty. After having dis-
coursed with them on the grand interests of the
state, the Emperor, whose good humour was
Emperor Napoleon is conducting to Paris, and which will be
there in a few days, and our hopes and our happiness will be
for ever realized. Long live the Emperor!
Lons le Saulnier, the 13th of March, 1815.
The marshal of the empire,
PRINCE of THE MoskowA.

<page 280>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 261
inexhaustible, began to joke about the court of
Louis XVIII. “His court,” said he, “ has
the air of that of King Dagobert: we see no-
thing in it but antiques; the women are old
and frightfully ugly; there were no pretty
women in it but mine, and those were so ill-
treated, that they were obliged to desert it. All
those people are made up of nothing but haughti-
ness and pride: I have been reproached with
being proud; I was so to strangers; but never
did any one see me suffer my chancellor to set
one knee to the ground to receive my orders,
or oblige my prefects and mayors to wait at
table on my courtiers and dowagers". They
say, that the men about the court are little
better than the women; and that, to distinguish
them from my generals, whom I had covered
with gold lace, they are dressed like beggars.
My court, it is true, was superb : I was fond of
magnificence; not for myself, a plain soldier's
coat was sufficient for me; I was fond of it,
* He alluded to the installation of the council of state,
where the chancellor actually dropped on one knee, to ask
and receive the King's orders.
And to the city entertainment, where the prefect, his
wife, and the municipal body, waited at table on the King
and his suite, consisting of forty ladies of the old court, and
only four ladies of the new nobility, two of whom were the
wives of the marshals on duty.

<page 281>
262 MEMOIRS OF
because it encourages our manufactures: with-
out magnificence there is no industry. I
abolished at Lyons all that parchment nobility;
it was never sensible of what it owed me: it
was I that exalted it, by making counts and
barons of my best generals. Nobility is a
chimera; men are too enlightened to believe,
that some among them are noble, others not:
they all spring from the same stock; the only
distinction is that of talents, and of services
rendered the state: our laws know no others.”
The Emperor imagined, that he should find
Ney at Auxerre on his arrival: “I cannot con-
ceive,” said he to General Bertrand, “why Ney
is not here: I am surprised at it, and uneasy:
has he changed his opinions? I cannot think
so; he would never have suffered Gamot * to
implicate himself. Yet we must know on what
we are to depend; see to it.” A few hours
after, the marshal arrived. It was about eight
o'clock, and Count Bertrand came to inform
the Emperor of it. “The marshal, before he
comes into your Majesty's presence,” said he,
“is desirous of collecting his ideas, and justify-
ing in writing his conduct both previous and
* M. Gamot, prefect of Auxerre, had married the sister
of Madame Ney,

<page 282>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 263
*
subsequent to the events of Fontainbleau.’
“What need is there of any justification to
me?” answered Napoleon: “tell him, that I
love him still, and that I will embrace him to-
morrow.” He would not receive him the same
day, as a punishment for having had to wait for
him.
The next day the Emperor, as soon as he
perceived him, said: “Embrace me, my dear
marshal; I am glad to see you. I want no ex-
planation or justification: I have honoured and
esteemed you as the bravest of the brave.”
“Sire, the newspapers have told a heap of lies,
which I wish to confute: my conduct has ever
been that of a good soldier, and a good French-
man.” “I know it, and accordingly never
doubted your attachment.” – “You were
right, Sire. Your Majesty may always depend
upon me, when my country is concerned . . . .
It is for my country I have shed my blood, and
for it I would still spill it to the last drop. I love
gou, Sire, but my country above all! above all-
(The Emperor interrupting him) “It is pa-
triotism too, that brings me to France. I
learned, that our country was unhappy, and I am
come to deliver it from the emigrants and the
Bourbons. I will confer upon it all that it
expects from me.”—“Your Majesty may be

<page 283>
264 - MEMOIRS OF
assured, that we will support you: he who acts
with justice, may do what he pleases with the
French. The Bourbons have ruined themselves,
by having wished to act as they thought proper,
and thrown aside the army.”—“Princes who
never saw a naked sword could not honour the
army: its glory humbled them, and they were
jealous of it.”—“Yes, Sire, they incessantly
sought to humiliate us. I am still enraged,
when I think, that a marshal of France, an old
warrior like me, was obliged to kneel down
before that . . . . of a Duke of B . . . . . to re-
ceive the cross of St. Louis. It could not last;
and, if you had not come to expel them, we
should have driven them out ourselves *.”—
* It is indisputable, in fact, that a general insurrection,
provoked by the oppressive and senseless conduct of the
government, was ready to burst out, at the moment when
Napoleon re-appeared.
It is known, that France, wearied, disgusted, and dis-
contented with the new order of things, wished heartily for
a new revolution; and people had united and concerted
measures for preparing the crisis, and causing it to turn to
the advantage of the country.
Some of the malecontents maintained, that the first step
should be, to shake off the insupportable yoke, under which
they were groaning, and then see what was to be done: the
majority formally declared for the immediate recall of the
Emperor, and were desirous, that emissaries should be de-

<page 284>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 265
“How are your troops disposed?”—“Very
well, Sire; I thought they would have stifled
me, when I announced to them, that they were
about to march to meet your eagles.” –
“What generals are with you?”—“Le
Courbe and Bourmont.”—“Are you sure of
them?”—“I will answer for Le Courbe, but
I am not so sure of Bourmont.”—“Why are
they not come hither?”—“They showed
some hesitation, and I left them.”—“Are
you not afraid of Bourmont’s bestirring himself,
and embarrassing you?”—“No, Sire, he will
keep himself quiet: besides, he would find no-
body to second him. I have expelled from the
puted to him, or that vessels should be sent, to take him off
from the island of Elba.
The necessity of a change was unanimously agreed upon,
and they were endeavouring to settle the rest, when the
sudden arrival of Napoleon put an end to the discussion.
After the 20th of March, the Emperor was made ac-
quainted with these projects of insurrection; and knew that
certain chiefs hesitated about having any thing to do with
him. “The leaders,” said he, “wished to take the business
into their own hands, and labour for themselves; now they
pretend, that they opened the way for me to Paris: I know
better; it was the nation, the people, the soldiers, and the
sub-lieutenants, who did all. It is to these, and to these
only, that I owe every thing.”

<page 285>
266 MEMOIRS OF
ranks all the light infantry of Louis XIV.",
who had been given to us, and all the country
is fired with enthusiasm.”—“No matter, I
shall not leave him any possibility of disturbing
us: you will direct him and the royalist officers
to be secured till we enter Paris. I shall be
there without doubt by the 20th or 25th, and
sooner. If we arrive, as I hope, without any
obstacle, do you think they will defend them-
selves?” “I do not think they will, Sire:
you know what the Parisians are, more noise
than work.” “I have received despatches
from Paris this morning: the patriots expect
me with impatience, and are on the point of
rising. I am afraid of some quarrel taking
place between them and the royalists. I would
not for the world, that my return should be
stained with a single drop of blood. It is easy
for you, to hold communication with Paris:
write to your friends, write to Maret, that our
affairs go on well, that I shall arrive without
firing a single musket; and let them all unite,
to prevent the spilling of blood. Our triumph
should be as pure, as the cause we serve.”
Generals Bertrand and Labedoyère, who were
* A nickname given to the emigrant officers.

<page 286>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 267
-
present, then mixed in the conversation; and
after a few minutes the Emperor left them, and
retired into his closet.
He wrote to the Empress for the third
time. This letter finished, Napoleon turned his
thoughts to the means of embarking a part of
his army, harassed by forced marches. He sent
for the chief of the boat department, required
an account of the number of boats, the means
of preventing accidents, &c. He entered so
minutely into particulars with him, that the
man could scarcely recover from his surprise,
or comprehend how an Emperor should know
so much as a boatman. Napoleon persisted in
the speedy departure of his troops. Several
times he ordered me to go and hasten the em-
barkation: he was in the habit of employing
those about him for every thing that came into
his head. His genius knowing no bounds, he
imagined, that we poor mortals ought equally
to know everything, and do every thing.
The Emperor had given orders to his scouts,
to bring him all the mails; and he had ap-
pointed me, to examine their contents. I waged
implacable war with the correspondence of
ministers; and if I frequently found in it threats
and abuse, of which I came in for my share, it


<page 287>
268 MEMOIRS OF
presented me at least with matters as important
as curious. I particularly remarked two secret
instructions, the publication of which, even
now, would cover their authors with eternal
disgrace. The letters comme il faut were equally
revolting. Most of them, dictated by frantic
hatred, might have sanctioned the rigours of
the law; but I considered them as the offspring
of brains to be pitied for their diseased state,
and contented myself with writing on them in
large letters, before I returned to the postboy,
a Seen; which, like the head of Medusa, no
doubt petrified more than one noble reader.
The darksome conspiracies of the enemies of
Napoleon were not the only objects, that met
my indiscreet eyes. Sometimes I found myself
unintentionally initiated into gentler myste-
ries; and my pen, by mistake, traced the fatal
Seen at the bottom of epistles, which should
have charmed the sight only of the happy mor-
tals, for whom love had destined them.
It was from the newspapers, and the private
correspondence, we learned, that some Ven-
deans were set off from Paris, according to
their own account, with the design of assassi-
nating the Emperor. A paper, which it is
unnecessary to name, even said, that these gen-

<page 288>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 269
tlemen were disguised as soldiers, and as wo-
men, and that most assuredly the Corsican
could not escape them.
Though Napoleon did not appear to be un-
easy about these criminal plots, we were under
apprehensions for him. Previously, when tra-
vellers were desirous of telling him news, I
stepped aside to enjoy a few minutes' liberty:
but from that time I never quitted him, and,
with my hand on my sword, I never for a mo-
ment lost sight of the eyes, attitude, and ges-
ture of the persons I admitted to his presence.
Count Bertrand, General Drouot, and the
officers of his household, equally redoubled
their care and attention. But it seemed as if
the Emperor made a point of setting his mur-
derers at defiance. That very day he reviewed
the 14th of the line in the public square, and
afterwards mixed with the people and the sol-
diers. In vain did we endeavour to surround
him; we were jostled with so much perse-
verance and impetuosity, that it was impossible
for us to remain close to him for two minutes
together. The way in which we were elbowed
amused him extremely: he laughed at our
efforts, and, in order to brave us, plunged him-
self still deeper amid the crowd that besieged
11S. -

<page 289>
270 MEMOIRS OF
Our mistrust was nearly fatal to two of the
enemy’s emissaries.
One of them, a staff officer, came to offer us
his services. Being questioned, he scarcely
knew what answers to make. His embarrass-
ment had already excited violent suspicions,
when it was unfortunately perceived, that he
had on green pantaloons. This was sufficient
to convince every body, that he was one of the
Artois guards in disguise. Interrogated anew,
he answered still more awkwardly; and, at-
tainted and convicted of being a highly suspi-
cious person, and of wearing green pantaloons
to boot, he was on the point of being thrown
out of the window, when fortunately Count
Bertrand happened to pass by, and ordered
him merely to be turned out at the door. -
#This officer of the new batch had not come
to kill Napoleon; he had only been sent to spy
what passed at his head-quarters.
The same day witnessed another scene. "A
chef d'escadron of hussars, adorned with a
sabre-cut in the face, came also to join us." He
met an extraordinarily good reception, and was
even invited to breakfast at the table of the
great officers of the household. In wine there
is truth; and the new comer, forgetting his
part, explained himself so clearly, that it was

<page 290>
NAPOLEON IN 18 lj. 271
easy to distinguish in him a false brother. He
told us, that the national guard of Paris, and all
the imperial guard, were for the King: that
every soldier, who retained his fidelity, had a
gift of a hundred francs, every officer a thou-
sand, and was promoted a step, &c. &c.; that
Napoleon had been outlawed, and that if he
were taken . . . . At these words Colonel ***,
who sat next him, seized him by the collar;
every body was for knocking him on the head
at once; I alone was against it. “Gentle-
men,” said I, “the Emperor will not hear of
any blood being shed; you have sworn to give
no quarter to assassins, but this man is not one;
he is no doubt a spy. We are not afraid of
them; let them go, and report what they have
seen to those who have sent them: let us all
drink the health of our Emperor, Long live the
Emperor!” He was spitten upon, turned out,
and we saw him no more.
Another deserter from the royal army pre-
sented himself, to reveal an important secret, as
he said, to the Emperor. The Emperor, who
knew no secret but strength, would not waste
time in listening to him, and sent him to me.
He was an officer of hussars, the friend and
accomplice of Maubreuil. He did not think
me worthy of his secrets, and I introduced him

<page 291>
272 MEMOIRS OF
to the grand Marshal. The substance of what
he said was, that he, as well as Maubreuil, had
been commissioned by the provisional govern-
ment, and by very great persons, to assassinate
the Emperor, at the time of his departure for
the island of Elba: that he held in execration
such an execrable crime, and would not commit
it; and that, after having once saved the life of
Napoleon, he came to place himself near his
person, to make a rampart for him with his
body in case of necessity. He delivered to the
grand Marshal a memorial of Maubreuil’s, and
divers papers, of which the Emperor directed
me to give him an account. I examined them
all with the greatest care. They proved incon-
testably, that mysterious rendezvous had been
given to Maubreuil in the name of the pro-
visional government; but they contained no
clue, that could enable any one to penetrate
the object and end of these secret conferences:
the names of those illustrious personages, whom
some persons have since been desirous of im-
plicating in this odious plot, were not even
mentioned in them. This officer reaped no
benefit from his disclosures, real or pretended,
and disappeared.
From hearing so much of plots against his
life, however, a painful impression was at length

<page 292>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 273
made on the Emperor. “I cannot conceive,”
said he to me, “how men liable to fall into my
hands can be incessantly urging my assassi-
nation, and setting a price upon my head.
Had I wished to get rid of them by similar
means, they would long ago have been mingled
with the dust. Like them, I could have found
Georges, Brularts, and Maubreuils. Twenty
times, if I had wished it, persons would have
brought them to me bound hands and feet,
dead or alive. I had always the foolish gene-
rosity, to despise their rage: I despise it still;
but wo betide them, wo to all their infernal
gang, if they dare touch one of my people!
My blood boils, when I think, that they have
dared, in the face of nations, to proscribe
without trial the thousands of Frenchmen, who
are marching with us: is this known to the
army ?”—– “Yes, sire, some persons have
had the imprudence, to spread the report, that
we are all proclaimed out of the protection of
the laws, and that some of the body guards
and Chouans have set out to assassinate you :
accordingly, the troops have sworn, to give
them no quarter, and already two spies have
with difficulty escaped being knocked on the
head before my eyes.”——“So much the
VOL. I. T

<page 293>
274 MEMOIRS OF
worse, so much the worse; such are not my
intentions. I wish not a single drop of French
blood to be shed, not a single gun to be fired.
Girard" must be desired to restrain his sol-
diers; write: “General Girard, I am informed,
that your troops, being acquainted with the
decrees of Paris, have resolved, by way of re-
prisals, to kill all the Royalists they meet: you
will meet none but Frenchmen; I forbid you
to fire a single musket: calm your soldiers;
contradict the reports by which they are exas-
perated; tell them, that I will not enter Paris
at their head, if their weapons be stained with
French bloodt.”
Ministers of the King, guilty authors of the
parricidal ordinance of the 6th of March, read
this and blush !
The moment he was quitting Auxerre, the
* He had just been appointed to the command of the ad-
vanced guard.
+ Napoleon had already given similar orders to General
Cambronne. The following is his letter, which I reproach
myself with not having quoted. “General Cambronne, to
you I entrust my noblest campaign: all the French expect
me with impatience: every where you will find none but
friends: do not fire a single musket; I will not have my crown
cost the French a drop of blood.”

<page 294>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 275
Emperor heard, that the Marseillese appeared
to have an intention of annoying his rear. He
gave orders to the general posted in échelon on
the road, and set out without fear.
- In advance of Fossard, he perceived, drawn
up in order of battle, the dragoons of the King's
regiment, who had deserted their officers, to
come and join him. He alighted, saluted them
with that military gravity, which so well be-
came him, and bestowed on them compliments
and promotions. No regiment could escape
us. When the officers demurred, the soldiers
came without them. I am wrong, however:
there was one regiment, the third of hussars,
that the Emperor could not bring over to him.
The brave Moncey, who commanded it, was a
man of sound understanding, and his attach-
ment to Napoleon, his ancient benefactor, could
not be doubted: but all men do not see with
the same eyes; some made their duty consist
in running to meet Napoleon, Moncey thought
himself obliged to avoid him.
"He had conjured his regiment, not to subject
him to the disgrace of being deserted. His
officers and his hussars, by whom he was
adored, followed him, while they made the air
ring with shouts of Long live the Emperor!
thinking thus to reconcile their respect for their
**
T 2

<page 295>
276 MEMOIRS OF
colonel with their devotion to the cause and
person of Napoleon.
We were informed on the road, that two
thousand of the body guards were posted in
the forest of Fontainbleau. Though this ac-
count was improbable, it was thought neces-
sary, not to cross the forest without precaution.
At our urgent solicitation, the Emperor took
about two hundred horse to accompany him.
Hitherto his only escort had been the carriage
of General Drouot, which preceded his, and
mine, which closed the march. Colonels
Germanouski and Du Champ, Captain Raoul,
and three or four Polanders, galloped by the
side of them. Our horses, our postillions, our
couriers, with tricoloured ribands, gave our
peaceable party an air of festivity and happi-
ness, that formed a singular contrast to the
proscription suspended over our heads, and to
the mourning and despair of the men who had
proscribed us.
We marched almost all night, as the Em-
peror was desirous of reaching Fontainbleau
at break of day. I observed, that I thought
it would be imprudent in him, to alight at
the castle. “You are a child,” answered he;
“if any thing be to happen to me, all these pre-
cautions would be of no avail. Our fate is

<page 296>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 277
99
written above:” and he pointed with his finger
to the sky".
I had imagined, that the sight of the palace
of Fontainbleau, the place where he had so
lately descended from the throne, and where
he now re-appeared as conqueror and sovereign,
would make some impression on him, and
impel him to think of the fragility of human
grandeur. I watched him attentively; but he
did not appear to me, to experience any emo-
tion. Immediately on his arrival, he rambled
over the gardens and the palace with as much
pleasure and curiosity, as if he came to take
possession of them for the first time. Na-
poleon occupied the little apartments, and
complaisantly made me notice their extreme
elegance. He then led me to his library, and
in going up, said with an air of satisfaction,
“We shall be very well here.”—“Yes, sire,”
answered I, “people are always well at home.”
He smiled, and I believe was pleased with my
well-timed compliment.
* Napoleon was a fatalist, and superstitious; and made
no secret of it. He believed in lucky and unlucky days.
We might be astonished at this weakness, if we did not know,
that it was common to the greatest men both of ancient
and modern times.

<page 297>
278 MEMOIRS OF
At eleven o’clock he dictated to me the
orders of the day; and these orders announced,
that we should sleep at Essonne. It was not
till noon, that the news of the King's de-
parture was brought at once by a courier from
M. de Lavalette, by a letter from Madame Ha-
malin, and by M. de Ség.... He sent for me
immediately. “You will set out first,” he
said, “to get every thing ready.” “It is
to Essonne, I presume, your Majesty orders
me to repair?”—“No, to Paris. The King
and the Princes have fled. I shall be at the
Tuileries this evening.” He gave me some
secret directions, and I quitted Fontainbleau
with a heart full of happiness and joy. I had
never doubted Napoleon’s triumph; but from
hope to reality how great the distance!
In fact the King had quitted Paris.
The aspect of affairs had never changed since
the royal session of the 17th of March. The
minister, persevering in his system of falsehood
and dissimulation, still distorted the truth with
the same impudence, and did not cease to pre-
dict the approaching destruction of Napoleon
and his adherents. At length, after a thousand
subterfuges, it became necessary to confess,
that Napoleon was within a few leagues of
Paris. The King, whom the minister had not

<page 298>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. . 279
been afraid to deceive, had scarcely time to
think of retreating. In this painful situation,
he displayed a strength of mind above all praise.
His courage was not that of a warlike prince,
who defends his capital inch by inch, and trem-
bles with rage and despair when forced to quit
it; but that of a good father, who separates
himself with regret from his children, and from
the roof under which they were born. The
Bonapartists themselves, who made a great
distinction between the king and his family,
were not insensible to the tears of that august
and unfortunate monarch, and sincerely prayed,
that his flight might be exempted from danger
and trouble.
It was supposed, that Napoleon would make
a triumphal entry into his capital. His old
grenadiers, who had marched in seventeen days
a distance that would commonly require five-
and-forty, seemed, as they approached their
object, to acquire fresh strength at every step.
On the road you might see them in agitation,
pressing upon and encouraging one another.
They would have marched twenty leagues in an
hour, if necessary, not to be deprived of the
honour of entering Paris by the side of Napo-
leon. Their hopes were disappointed: the Em-

<page 299>
28O MEMOIRS OF
peror, who had witnessed their fatigues, ordered
them to take a day’s rest at Fontainbleau.
At two o'clock on the 20th of March, Napo-
leon set out for Paris. Retarded by the crowd,
that accumulated on his way, and by the feli-
citations of the troops and the generals, who
had run to meet him, he could not reach it till
nine in the evening. As soon as he alighted,
the people rushed on him; a thousand arms
lifted him up, and carried him along in triumph.
Nothing could be more affecting than the con-
fused assembly of the crowd of officers and ge-
nerals, who had pressed into the apartments of
the Tuileries at the heels of Napoleon. Happy
to see themselves once more triumphant, after
so many vicissitudes, humiliations, and disgusts,
they forgot the majesty of the place, to give
themselves up without constraint to the desire
of expressing their happiness and joy. They
ran to one another, and hugged each other
again and again. The halls of the palace
seemed metamorphosed into a field of battle,
where friends, brothers, unexpectedly escaped
from death, found and embraced one another
after victory.
We had been so spoiled on the road, how-
ever, that the Emperor's reception by the

<page 300>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 281
Parisians did not answer our expectations.
Multiplied shouts of “Long live the Empe-
ror!” saluted him on his way; but they wanted
those characters of unanimity and frenzy,
which were displayed by the acclamations, that
had accompanied him from the gulf of Juan to
the gates of Paris. It would be a mistake,
however, to infer, that the Parisians did not
behold the return of Napoleon with pleasure.
We must only conclude, therefore, that the
Emperor missed the proper time for his en-
trance.
The people of great cities are eager for sights:
to move their hearts, you must astonish their
eyes. If Napoleon, instead of traversing Paris
in the evening, and without being announced
or expected, had put it off till the next day, and
allowed the disquietudes inseparable from such
a crisis time to be allayed; if he had given his
entrance the pomp and splendour it ought to
have had; if he had caused the troops and half-
pay officers, who had hastened to his call, to
march before him; if he had presented himself
at the head of his grenadiers of the island of
Elba, with all their decorations; if he had been
surrounded by Generals Bertrand, Drouot, Cam-
bronne, and the faithful companions of his exile;

<page 301>
282 MEMOIRS OF
this grand and affecting train would have pro-
duced the most lively sensation, and the whole
population of Paris would have applauded the
return and the triumph of Napoleon. Instead
of those unanimous transports, he received only
the applauses of the populous part of the capi-
tal, that he had occasion to traverse; and his
detractors did not fail, to compare this recep-
tion with that of Louis XVIII., and to publish,
that he was obliged to enter Paris by night, in
order to escape the maledictions and vengeance
of the public. Napoleon, who had just tra-
velled two hundred and fifty leagues amid the
acclamations of two millions of Frenchmen,
could not be agitated by any such fears; but it
is well known with what confidence, what in-
toxication, he was inspired by the anniversary
of a victory or happy event; and as the 20th
of March was the birthday of his son, he deter-
mined at all events to enter the capital under
such fortunate auspices.
The very evening of his arrival, Napoleon
had a long conversation with the Duke of
Otranto, and the other dignitaries of the state,
on the situation of France. They all appeared
intoxicated with happiness and hope. The
Emperor himself could not disguise his rapture:

<page 302>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 283
never did I see him so madly gay, or so prodigal
of boxes on the ear". His conversation sa-
voured of the agitation of his heart: the same
words incessantly recurred to his tongue; and,
it must be confessed, they were not very flat-
tering to the crowd of courtiers and great per-
sonages, who already besieged him: he was
continually saying: “It was the disinterested
persons, who brought me back to Paris; the
sub-lieutenants and soldiers did every thing; I
owe all to the people and the army.”
That night and the following morning the
Emperor was busied in the choice and nomina-
tion of his ministers.
At their head Prince Cambacérès found him-
self placed. The system of defamation directed
against him had not altered the high considera-
tion, which he had acquired by his great wis-
dom, and constant moderation. The Emperor
offered him the port-folio of the minister of
justice, and was obliged to command him to
accept it. His sagacity and foresight, no doubt,
presaged the fatal issue of the new reign of
Napoleon.
* This was Napoleon's favourite compliment. The fonder
he was of a person, the more he gave him, and the harder
he struck.

<page 303>
284 MEMOIRS OF
The Prince of Eckmuhl was named minister
of war. By the harshness of his manners, by
acts of severity almost barbarous, he had for-
merly drawn upon himself universal animadver-
sions; his fidelity to the Emperor, and his de-
fence of Hamburgh, had subsequently conci-
liated public opinion. The feebleness and
versatility of his character indeed excited some
apprehensions; but it was hoped, that the Em-
peror would know how to master him, and that
the army would derive happy advantages from
his indefatigable zeal, and his strict probity.
The Duke of Vicenza" was placed at the
* The Duke of Vicenza, convinced of the inutility of the
efforts Napoleon might make, to establish any diplomatic con-
nexion with foreign powers, refused to accept the post. The
Emperor offered it to M. Môlé. M. Mölé objected, that he
was an entire stranger to diplomacy, and requested Na-
poleon, to make another choice. Napoleon and his other
ministers were then so pressing with the Duke of Vicenza,
that he considered it his duty to yield. He would have pre-
ferred the Emperor's giving him a command in the army,
where he would at least have found an opportunity of use-
fully serving his country and the Emperor.
The ministry of the interior, intended at first for M. Costaz,
was also offered to M. Môlé, and ultimately given to M.
Carnot, at the recommendation of the Duke of Bassano.
The Emperor was not pleased with the obstinate refusals
of M. Mölé: he was fond of his name, and valued his talents.

<page 304>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 285
helm of foreign affairs. The rectitude of his
principles, the firmness, nobleness, and inde-
pendence of his character, had justly acquired
him the esteem of France and of Europe; and
his appointment was considered as a pledge of
the loyal and pacific intentions of Napoleon.
. The Duke of Gaëta and Count Mollien be-
came again ministers of the finances and the
treasury. They had obtained the confidence
of the public by the ability, prudence, and in-
tegrity of their preceding administration; and
the choice of them met with general applause.
The Duke of Otranto had the charge of the
police. He had been at the helm of the state
in circumstances of difficulty and peril; he had
learned to form a sound judgment of the public
mind, and to foresee, prepare, and guide events.
Having belonged to all parties in succession,
he knew their tactics, their resources, their pre-
tensions, and the whole nation, convinced of
- * *
He had intended to appoint him governor of the Imperial
Prince; and it was to this intention that M. Môlé was chiefly
indebted for the high rank, to which he had been so rapidly
raised.
Nevertheless M. Môlé solicited and obtained the general
superintendance of highways and bridges, a post which he
occupied in 1813, before he was appointed minister of justice.

<page 305>
286 MEMOIRS OF
his experience, talents, and patriotism, hoped,
that he would successfully concur in the safety
of the Emperor and the empire.
The recall of the Duke of Bassano to the
ministry, as secretary of state, displeased the
court, and also those credulous people, who,
having no opinions but what are suggested to
them, adopt praise and blame without discern-
ment. -
Few men have been so ill treated, as this
minister.
Every one has taken pleasure in disfiguring
his character and even his features.
The Duke of Bassano had an open counte-
nance, an agreeable manner of conversation, a
politeness always uniform, a dignity sometimes
affected, but never offensive, with a natural
propensity to esteem men, courtesy in obliging
them, and perseverance in serving them. The
favour he enjoyed was at first the reward of
unexampled readiness in business; of indefa-
tigable activity; of pure intentions, lofty views,
probity, proof against all temptation, and I will
even add an iron constitution; for physical
strength also was a quality in the eyes of Na-
poleon. Subsequently it became the just return
for an attachment not to be shaken; an attach-
ment, which, by its force, vivacity, and con-

<page 306>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. - 287
stancy, seemed to be a compound of love and
friendship.
I must own, I believe, that M. de Bassano most
frequently shared and approved without ex-
ception the opinions of the Emperor; but it
was not from interested or base motives: the
Emperor was the idol of his heart, the object of
his admiration: with such sentiments, how was
it possible for him, to perceive the errors and
faults of Napoleon? Besides, having continually
to express the ideas of the Emperor, and to
imbue himself as it were with the emanations
of his spirit, he had identified himself with his
way of thinking and of viewing things, and
saw and thought as he did with the most per-
fect sincerity. Not but that he sometimes
differed from him in opinion; yet whatever
efforts he made, he always yielded ultimately
to the irresistible ascendancy, that the genius
of Napoleon exercised over him, as it did over
every other person.
The Duke of Decrès was called anew to the
post of minister of the navy, and this unex-
pected choice was completely disapproved.
This minister was not deficient in understand-
ing, talents, or bravery; but from the little
importance he appeared to set on acting with
justice or injustice, his cynicism, and his brutal

<page 307>
288 MEMOIRS OF
contempt for those under him, he had acquired
the aversion of all who came near him; and, as
evil spreads readily, this aversion, though un-
just, had become general.
The discontent this appointment excited was
repaired by the good effect, which was pro-
duced by that of M. Carnot to the ministry of
the home department. The soldiery did not
forget, that he had paved the way to victory for
many years; and the citizens remembered with
what zeal, this courageous patriot had shown
himself the defender of public liberty under Na-
poleon, both when consul and when Emperor,
and under Louis XVIII. To be a real patriot,
says one of our celebrated writers, it is requisite,
to possess greatness of soul; to have knowledge,
to have probity, to have virtue. In M. Carnot
all these rare and valuable qualities were com-
bined: and, far from acquiring any personal
lustre from this great name of patriot, he
seemed on the contrary to embellish the name
by wearing it; so well had he preserved it in
its primitive purity, amid the debasement into
which it had been plunged by the excesses of
the revolution, and the abuses of despotism.
The choice of such a minister was considered
as a pledge to the nation. The sovereign, who
was not afraid to introduce this illustrious

<page 308>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 289
citizen into the government of the state, could
not but entertain the generous design of se-
curing the happiness of his subjects, and re-
specting their rights.
The same day the Emperor gave the chief
command of the gendarmerie to the Duke of
Rovigo.
The Duke of Rovigo, an old aide-de-camp of
Napoleon, had sworn him an eternal attach-
, ment, both from feeling and gratitude. This
attachment, born in a camp, had retained the
character of military obedience: a word, a ges-
ture, was sufficient to call it into action. But
however great its strength, or, if you will, its
fanaticism, it never affected the rectitude and
frankness, which were the base and ornament
of the duke’s character.
From no other person, except the Duke of
Vicenza, did the Emperor hear more bold and
useful truths. Twenty times did he venture to
say to him, as his ministerial correspondence
testifies, that France and Europe were tired of
shedding blood; and that, if he did not re-
nounce his system of war, he would be aban-
doned by the French, and precipitated from the
throne by foreigners. -
The command of the gendarmerie was taken
from Marshal Moncey, not from disgust or dis-,
vol. 1. U

<page 309>
290 . MEMOIRS OF

satisfaction, but because the marshal showed
little eagerness to retain it. On this occasion
he wrote to the Emperor a letter full of fine
sentiments, in which he requested him, to con-
tinue to his son the kindness he had formerly
conferred on himself: it was difficult to recon-
cile the gratitude he owed Napoleon with the
fidelity he had promised the King: in this he
was so happy as to succeed.
All the marshals were not so fortunate.
M. de Montalivet, formerly minister of the
home department, became intendant of the civil
list, an office that suited him better. In ad-
ministration, as in many other things, en-
deavours to do better prevent people from
doing so well; and M. de Montalivet, from a
desire to neglect no minute particular, and
seeking to carry every thing to perfection, lost
in empty trifles that time, which he might have
employed in promoting the general good on a
large scale.
The strangest metamorphosis was that of the
Duke de Cadore: he was made a surveyor of
buildings.
“Soyez plutót maçon, si c'est votre métier *.”
* “Make him, nor think his genius check'd,
A herald, or an architect.”–GAY.

<page 310>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 291

This place, hitherto the modest portion of
auditors or masters of request, who had interest
at court, was astonished at the honour of be-
longing to a duke and peer, ex-ambassador, ex-
minister, ex-grand chancellor, &c. &c. &c. But
so much was his excellency then devoted to the
sovereign of the day, that he would readily
have accepted the post of a gentleman usher,
had there been no other to offer him.
The council of state was re-established on
the ancient footing, and composed of nearly
the same members.
"The Emperor was neither politic nor prudent
in ostensibly bestowing his confidence on some
of them, who were obnoxious to the public.
The usurpations of the imperial power were
ascribed to their servile counsels, and their pre-
sence near the throne could not but revive re-
collections and anxieties, which it was of im-
portance to destroy for ever. If their merit
and experience rendered them necessary, they
should have been consulted in private, but not
held up to public view. A government firmly
established may sometimes brave opinion, but
a rising government ought to respect and sub-
mit to it. |
All the aides-de-camp of the Emperor, with
the exception, I believe, of General Lauriston,
U 2

<page 311>
292 MIE MOIRS OF
whom he would not employ again, were re-
called. He could not place around him officers
more worthy of his confidence for their noble-
mindedness and superior talents. Generals Le
Tort and Labedoyère were added to their
number. The Emperor, deceived by false ap-
pearances", had taken from the former the
command of the dragoons of the guard, and to
compensate for this involuntary injustice, he
made him his aide-de-camp. The same favour
was conferred on Labedoyère, as a recompense
for his conduct at Grenoble; but he answered
the kindness of Napoleon by a formal refusal.
“I will not allow it to be thought,” said he
proudly, “that I joined the Emperor for the
sake of reward. I espoused his cause, simply
because it was that of liberty, and of my country;
the honour of having served it is enough for
me: I desire nothing more; the Emperor per-
sonally owes me nothing.”
This noble refusal will not surprise those,
who had an opportunity of knowing and esteem-
ing the patriotism and disinterestedness of that
brave and unfortunate young man." "
• Introduced to society at an early age, he
conducted himself at first as those generally do,
* General Le Tort's address to the King. , , ,

<page 312>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 29S
who have a handsome face, elegance of manners,
wit, a name, wealth, and no experience. Soon
brought to himself, he felt, that he was not
born to lead a life of dissipation; and his con-
duct became as honourable, as it had been irre-
gular. His mind, turned to serious occupation,
engaged in political speculations: his soul, na-
turally proud and independent, matured and
enlarged itself, and expanded to those liberal
ideas and noble sentiments, that the love of
glory and of our country inspires. Nature, in
giving him a lofty, firm, and daring character,
unquestionably destined him to act an important
part in the world; and if death, and what a
death! had not struck him in the flower of his
years, he would assuredly have fulfilled his
shining destiny, and done honour to France.
The Emperor set several persons to speak to
him, and after three days negotiations Labe-
doyère yielded. Napoleon persisted in re-
compensing him. In ordinary cases, the Em-
peror looked with indifference on the endea-
vours made to please him; never was he known
to say, I am pleased; and a person conjectured
he had given him satisfaction, when he did not
show any marks of discontent. If, on the other
hand, the services rendered him made a noise,

<page 313>
294 MEMOIRS OF
like those of Labedoyère, he was lavish of his
praises and rewards: and in this he had two
objects; the one, that of appearing not only
just, but generous; the other, that of inspiring
emulation. But frequently on the very day, on
which he had bestowed on you praises, and
proofs of his satisfaction, he would treat you
with disdain and harshness, to prevent your
attaching too much importance to the service
you might have rendered him, or believing,
that he had contracted a debt of obligation to
you. . -
The Emperor replaced about his person most
of the gentlemen of the bed-chamber, equer-
ries, and masters of ceremonies, who were with
him in 1814. He had retained his unfortunate
predilection for the great lords of former times,
and must have them at any price: had he not
been surrounded by ancient nobles, he would
have fancied himself in a republic.
Most of these (for there were some who were
most honourably excepted, as the Prince de
Beauveau, Messrs. de Turenne, de Montho-
lon, de Lascases, Forbin de Janson, Perre-
gaux, &c. &c.) had meanly renounced him in
1814, and become the common valets of the
Bourbons; but he would not believe a word of

<page 314>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 295
it. He had the weakness, common to all
princes, of considering his most cringing
courtiers as his most devoted subjects.
He would also form an establishment for the
Empress, and re-appointed Mesdames de Bas-
sano, de Vicenza, de Rovigo, Duchâtel, and
Marmier, ladies of the bed-chamber. The
Duchess of M*** was not recalled. He heard
from Prince Joseph, that after the events of
Fontainbleau, she had abused the confidence of
the Empress, and betrayed the secret of her
correspondence. -
It was said, but falsely, that the gracefulness
and beauty of the Duchess had formerly ob-
tained the homage of Napoleon; and her dis-
grace did not fail to be urged as a fresh proof of
the inconstancy of men; but I have assigned
the true and only cause.
The corruption of courts often sanctions a
number of lying suppositions, against which
few reputations can stand. This justice how-
ever must be done Napoleon; no prince was
ever a man of purer manners, or took so much
pains to avoid and even check scandal: he was
never seen, to be followed to the army by his
mistresses, like Louis XIV.; or disguised in the
dress of a porter, or of a small-coal man, like

<page 315>
296 MEMOIRS OF
Henry IV., to carry disgrace and despair into
the houses of his most faithful servants.
As a pretty remarkable contrast, Napoleon,
at the moment when he resumed with delight
his own upper servants, sent about their busi-
ness without pity the lacqueys, who had served
Louis XVIII. and the princes.
“De tout tems les petits ont payé pour les grands".”
These poor people were left destitute. It
has been said and repeated a hundred times,
that Napoleon ill-treated and struck all those
who came near him, right or wrong. Nothing
can be more false. He had his moments of
impatience and warmth; and what honest citi-
zen has not? But in general, the officers and
even subalterns of his household were in easy
circumstances with him, and he was more fre-
quently in a gay than in a serious humour.
He very easily became attached to a person;
and when he liked any one, he could not do
without him; and treated him with a kindness,
that frequently degenerated into weakness. It
is true, it would have been very difficult for him
* “In all ages the poor have suffered for the faults of the
great."

<page 316>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 297
to find servants more able, or more devotedly
attached to him: every one of them had made
it his particular study, to become, not what he
did wish, but what he might wish.
Tacitus has observed, that voluntary slaves
make more tyrants, than tyrants make slaves.
When we recollect the officiousness, the mean-
nesses, and the adulation, of certain nobles,
who had become the courtiers of Napoleon, we
are astonished, that it never entered his head
to follow the example of Alexander, and cause
himself to be adored as a god.
Counts Drouot and Bertrand were retained in
their posts of grand marshal of the palace, and
major-general of the guards. It had been ima-
gined, that the Emperor would have conferred
on them the titles of Duke of Porto Ferrajo,
and Duke of Porto Longone, as memorials of
their fidelity. He did no such thing.o. They
were fully recompensed, however, by the vene-
ration, with which Frenchmen and foreigners
were inspired for them both. Still, for what
reason, I cannot conceive, a higher value was
generally set on the devoted attachment of
General Bertrand.
When the Emperor had laid down his crown,
Count Drouot did not hesitate an instant, to
preserve that fidelity to him in adversity, which

<page 317>
298 MEMOIRS OF
he had sworn in his prosperity: and this fidelity
was not in his eyes a proof of attachment, still
less a sacrifice; it appeared to him only the
natural fulfilment of a duty imposed on him by
the kindnesses and misfortunes of Napoleon.
To follow him, he abandoned all that is most
dear to a well-born mind, his family and his
country, as well as the military career, in which
he had acquired the most glorious renown.
Transported into the midst of the seas, he
frequently cast his looks towards the land of
his birth: but no regret, no complaint, escaped
from his heart. His conscience was satisfied,
how could he be unhappy? As disinterested in
the service of the sovereign of the island of
Elba, as he had been in that of the Emperor of
the French", though poor, he would receive
no reward from Napoleon: “Give me food
and clothing,” said he, “I want nothing more.”
The most seducing offers were lavished on him,
to draw him over to the Bourbons. To these
he was insensible; and he felt no difficulty in

|
* He constantly refused the emoluments and allowances
of considerable offices, attached to the rank of major-general
of the guards. The appointments of a lieutenant-general
and aide-de-camp appeared to him, to pay him more than
his services deserved.

<page 318>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 299
preferring the rock of Napoleon to the lustre of
their throne.
Such was General Drouot; and such also
was his worthy rival, Count Bertrand; for there
existed no difference in the generosity of their
conduct, and none ought to exist in the ad-
miration they deserve.
The Emperor himself was not free from this
injustice: he seemed to give the preference to
Count Bertrand. This difference proceeded,
I believe, from that degree of intimacy, which
the functions of the grand Marshal established
between the Emperor and him, and perhaps
from the suitableness of their characters.
Bertrand, amiable, witty, insinuating, united
the agreeable and polished manners of a courtier
with an air of distinction. Feeble, irresolute,
in the ordinary conduct of life; he yielded to
no one in courage and firmness, on occasions
of difficulty and danger. A stranger to in-
trigue, inaccessible to seduction, he was in the
camp, as in the palace, a man of honour, a man
of probity.
Drouot, simple in his manners, affectionate
in his speech, displayed that rare assemblage of
virtues, which compel us to love the sages of
antiquity, and the heroes of the days of chi-

<page 319>
300 MEMOIRS OF
valry. He had the wisdom, the prudence of
Aristides, the valour, the modesty, the loyalty
of Bayard. The favour he enjoyed, the mili-
tary power with which he was invested, in-
spired him with no pride: he was not less hum-
ble and timid at court,than he was terrible and
daring in the field of honour.
Bertrand, when he was consulted, delivered
his opinion with the caution and skill of a
courtier; Drouot, with the precision and frank-
ness of a soldier: but neither was false to his
conscience. Their language, though different
in structure, was the same in substance; it was
always that of truth and honour. * if:
The Emperor, though greatly fatigued by noc-
turnal marches, reviews, perpetual harangues,
and his labours in the closet, which for the last
thirty-six hours had occupied all his moments,
would nevertheless review the troops, that pre-
viously composed the army of the Duke of
Berri. -
He caused them to be assembled in the court
of the Tuileries; and, to use his own words,
“The whole capital was witness to the senti-
ments of enthusiasm and attachment, by which
those brave troops were animated: they seemed
to have reconquered their country, and found

<page 320>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 301
again in the national colours the remembrance
of all those generous sentiments, which have
ever distinguished the French nation.”
After having gone through the ranks, he
made the troops form square battalions, and .
said to them: -
Soldiers, I came to France with six hundred
men, because I reckoned on the love of the
people, and the remembrance of the old sol-
diers. "I have not been deceived in my expecta-
tions: soldiers, I thank you. The glory of what
we have just done belongs wholly to you and
to the people, mine is only that of having known
you, and judged you rightly.
Soldiers, the imperial throne only can gua-
rantie the rights of the people, and more espe-
cially the first of our interests, that of our glory.
Soldiers, we are going to march, to chase from
Our territories those princes, who are the auxi.
liaries of foreigners. The nation will not only
second us with its good wishes, but will follow
our impulse. The French people and myself
depend upon you: we will not interfere with
the affairs of foreign nations; and wo to the
nation, that shall interfere with ours!”
At this moment General Cambronne, and
some officers of the guards of the battalion of
the island of Elba, appeared with the ancient

<page 321>
SO2 MEMOIRS OF

eagles of the guard: the Emperor resumed
his harangue, and said": “Here are the officers
of the battalion, who accompanied me in my
adversity: they are all my friends, they were
dear to my heart! Whenever I saw them, they
reminded me of the different regiments of the
army; for among these six hundred brave fel-
lows are men from every regiment. They re-
called to my mind those great victories, the
remembrance of which is so dear; for they are
all well covered with honourable scars received
in those memorable battles! In loving them, it
was all of you, soldiers, of the whole French
army, whom I loved. They bring back to you
these eagles; let them serve you as a rallying
point: in giving them to the guards, I give them
to the whole army.
“Treason and unfortunate circumstances had
covered them with a funereal veil: but, thanks
to the French people and to you, they appear
again resplendent with all their glory. Swear,
that they shall always be found, wherever the
interests of our country call them! that trai-
tors, and those who would invade our terri-
tories, shall never stand their appearance.”
“We swear it,” answered all the soldiers with
*-i-
*I cannot avoid remarking the beauty of this passage.

<page 322>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 303
enthusiasm. They then filed off with shouts of
“Long live the Emperor!” and to the sound of
military music, playing the favourite tunes of
the revolution, and the Marseillese march, so
celebrated in the annals of our crimes and our
victories.
When the review was over, the Emperor re-
turned to his closet, and applied himself im-
mediately to business. His situation rendered
it necessary, that he should ascertain without
delay the precise state of the country, of the
government of which he had resumed the reins.
This was so vast an undertaking, that the fa-
culties of any other man would have been
overwhelmed by it. He found the writing
table covered with mystic authors"; and sub-
* The king departed with such suddenness, that he had
not time to carry away his private papers. In his writing
table was found his family port-folio. It contained a great
number of letters from Madame the Duchess of Angoulême,
and from some of the princes. Napoleon cast his eye over
several of them, and gave me the port-folio, with orders,
that it should be scrupulously preserved. Napoleon would
have respect paid to royal majesty, and to every thing that
pertained to the person of kings.
The king habitually used a small table, that he had brought
from Hartwell. Napoleon took pleasure in writing on it for

<page 323>
304 MEMOIRS OF
stituted for them plans and maps. “The closet
of a French monarch,” said he, “should resem-
ble the tent of a general, not an oratory.” His
eyes rested on the map of France. After having
contemplated its recent limits, he exclaimed in
a tone of profound sorrow, “Poor France P”
He kept silence a few minutes, and then began
to hum in a low voice one of his usual burdens
of songs:
“S'il est un tems pour la folie,
Il en est un pour la raison *.”
The Emperor entered his closet habitually
a few hours: he afterwards ordered it to be removed, and
the greatest care to be taken of it.
The Merlin's chair used by the king, not being suited to
Napoleon, whose limbs and health were in full strength and
vigour, was banished to the back closet. Some person being
found sitting in it, when the Emperor passed through unex-
pectedly, he gave him an angry look, and the chair was re-
moved.
One of his valets de chambre, thinking to please him,
ventured to place over his mantel-piece some insulting ca-
ricatures of the Bourbons: these he disdainfully threw into
the fire, and severely enjoined the valet, never in future to
be guilty of such an impertinence.
* “If we sometimes play the fool,
Reason should resume her rule.”

<page 324>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 305
before six in the morning, and seldom quitted
it till night.
Impatience and vivacity are almost always
incompatible with order and precision. Napo-
leon, destined to be like no other person, added
to the fire of genius the methodical habits of
cold and little minds. For the most part, he
took care to arrange his numerous papers him-
self. Each of them had its settled place. Here
was found whatever related to the war depart-
ment: there, the budgets, the daily statements
of the treasury and finances: farther on, the
reports of the police, his secret correspondence
with his private agents, &c. He carefully re-
turned every thing to its place, after having
used it: compared with him the most me-
thodical clerk would have been but a bungler.
His first business was to read his correspond-
ence, and the despatches that had arrived in the
night. He put aside the interesting letters, and
threw the rest on the floor: this he called his
answered.
He afterwards examined the copies of letters
opened at the post office, and burnt them im-
. mediately. It seemed, as if he wished to anni.
hilate all traces of the abuse of power, of which
he had been guilty. -
He finished by casting an eye over the news-
VOL. I. X

<page 325>
306 MEMOIRS OF
papers. Sometimes he said, “That's a good
article; whose is it?” He must know every
thing.
These several readings ended, he set to work;
and it may be said without exaggeration, that
he was then as extraordinary, as incomparable,
as at the head of his armies.
As he would entrust to nobody the supreme
care of the government, he saw every thing
himself; and it is easy to conceive, on what
a multiplicity of objects he had to fix his eyes.
Independently of his ministers, the Duke of
Bassano, the commandant of the first division
of Paris, the prefect of the police, the inspector
general of the gendarmerie, the major-general
of guards, the grand marshal of the palace, the
great officers of the crown, the aides-de-camp,
and the orderly officers (officiers d'ordonnance)
on missions, daily sent him circumstantial re-
ports, which he examined, and answered im-
mediately: it being a maxim with him, to put
nothing off till to-morrow. And let it not be
supposed, that he satisfied himself with a super-
ficial judgment of affairs: he read every report
through, and examined every voucher atten- .
tively. Frequently the super-human sagacity,
with which he was gifted, enabled him to per-
ceive errors and imperfections, that had escaped

<page 326>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 307
the scrutinizing eyes of his ministers; and then
he corrected their labours. But still more fre-
quently he fashioned them anew from beginning
to end; and what was a fortnight’s work to a
whole ministry, scarcely cost the genius of Na-
poleon a few minutes.
The Emperor rarely sat down, but dictated.
as he walked about. He did not like to repeat
his words; and if you asked him a word not
clearly understood, he answered impatiently,
“I said,” and went on.
When he had to treat a subject worthy of
himself, his style, habitually nervous and con-
cise, rose to the level of his grand conceptions:
it became majestic and sublime.
- If the possibility of expressing his ideas was
shackled by the want of the proper word; or if
the customary terms did not appear to him suf-
ficiently strong, sufficiently animated, he brought
together words, that were astonished to find
themselves in each other’s company, and cre-
ated a language of his own, a language rich and
impressive, that might sometimes infringe esta-
blished rules, but compensated this happy fault,
by giving more loftiness and vigour to his

- -
thoughts *.
|
* I have been assured, that Napoleon in his youth com-
X 2

<page 327>
308 MEMOIRS OF
Sometimes, hurried away by the impetuosity
of his character, and eager to arrive more quickly
at his object, he did not take time to weigh his
words, his ideas, his desires. When his orders
had been dictated to us in such a fit of hasti-
ness, we were careful, as far as possible, not to
present them for signing the same day. The
next day, they were almost always modified,
softened, or torn. Napoleon was never dis-
pleased with us, for endeavouring to guard him
against the dangers of precipitancy. They who
think, that he never corrected a false step, are
mistaken: if under certain circumstances his
determinations were inflexible, in a number of
others he yielded to remonstrance, and relin-
quished his projects and resolves without diffi-
culty. lion's
The Emperor seldom wrote with his own
hand. Words of many syllables were tedious
to him; and, not having patience to write them
at length, he mutilated them. This habit,
- - • * ~ *
*
posed a history of Paoli, and of the war of liberty: may he
realize the design of writing the history of his own reign, for
the instruction of future ages! This reign is so fertile in
extraordinary events, and unforeseen catastrophes, and dis-
plays to our view such numerous examples of human vicissi-
tudes, that its history may supply the place of all others, and
become itself alone a lesson for kings and people.

<page 328>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. S09
added to the defective formation of his letters,
rendered his writing altogether illegible. Fre-
quently, too, from carelessness, or absence of
mind, he infringed the laws of orthography;
and people have not failed thence to infer, that
he was completely ignorant.
Most assuredly the ignorance of Napoleon,
were it proved, would detract nothing from his
glory and renown. Charlemagne could scarcely
sign his own name. Louis XIV., and I quote
him by choice, though born on a throne, was
unacquainted with the rules of grammar. Yet
Charlemagne and Louis were nevertheless great
kings. The imputation, however, is as false as
it is absurd. Napoleon, educated at the school
of Brienne, was distinguished there by that
facility of comprehension, that disdain of plea-
sure, that fondness for study, that enthusiastic
regard for models of greatness, which commonly
indicate superior minds. Destined for the pro-
fession of arms, he would not aspire to become
a man of letters, a man of reading, a learned
man: his object, for he had an object in his
earliest years, was to become some day a di-
stinguished officer, perhaps even a great cap-
tain. It was to the military sciences, therefore,
he bent his genius.... the universe knows the
rest.
But do I say his genius? the detractors of

<page 329>
310 MEMOIRS OF .
Napoleon also assert, that his mind was too sub-
ject to irregularities, for the possession of genius
to be granted him: do they not know, or do they
pretend to be ignorant, that such irregularities
are on the contrary the proof, the distinguish-
ing characteristics, of this precious gift of
nature.
“Genius,” says one of our philosophers,
“rises and stoops by turns; it is often imper-
fect, because it does not take the trouble to
improve itself. It is great in great things,
because they are adapted to excite its sublime
instinct, and call it into action. It is negligent
in ordinary things, because they are beneath it,
and have nething in them to stir it up: if, how-
ever, it do turn its attention to them, it fer-
tilizes them, aggrandizes them, and gives them
a new and unexpected appearance, that had
escaped vulgar eyes.”
And with how vast a genius must he have
been endowed! he, who, occupied by the tor-
ments of ambition, military calculations, poli-
tical schemes, and the anxieties inspired by the
enemies of his crown and of his life, still found.
sufficient time, sufficient calmness, sufficient
power, to command his numerous armies; to
govern twenty foreign nations, and forty mil-
lions of subjects; to enter solicitously into all
the particulars of the administration of his

<page 330>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 31 1,
states; to see every thing; to sift every thing
to the bottom; to regulate every thing; in
fine, to conceive, create, and realize those un-
expected improvements, those bold innova-
tions, those noble institutions, and those im-
mortal codes, that raise the civil glory of France
to a degree of superiority, which alone can match
its military glory. But I know not why I at-
tempt to combat such adversaries: they who
are blind to the genius of Napoleon, have never
known genius itself, and I ought to give them
no answer, but that of Rousseau : “Silence,
ye uninitiated!”
The Emperor, by his decrees issued at Lyons,
had in some degree repaired the wrongs imputed
to the royal government. One grievance still
remained for him; the slavery of the press.
The decree of the 24th of March", by sup-
* This decree, and all those previously dated from the
palace of the Tuileries, contained no title but simply that of
“Emperor of the French.” The “&c. &c.,” noticed with
anxiety in the proclamations and decrees from Lyons, were
suppressed. They had been inserted without reflection,
without object, and merely from custom. The Emperor,
too, would not have his familiar letters continue to be con-
cluded in the usual form : “On which I pray God, to have
you in his holy keeping, &c.” “All those antiquated
things,” said he, “must be laid aside; they are well enough
for kings by the grace of God."

<page 331>
312 MEMOIRS OF .
pressing the censors, the censorship, and the
superintendance of the bookselling trade, com-
pleted the imperial restoration.
This last concession was unquestionably the
greatest, that Napoleon could make to public
opinion. A press in the general interest of the
people is the surest protection of their rights.
It is the most noble conquest liberty can gain
over despotism: to honest men it gives dignity;
it inspires them with the love of their country,
and of the laws; in fine, according to the En-
glish definition, it is the mother of all liberty:
but in times of trouble and of revolution, it is a
dangerous weapon in the hands of the wicked;
and the Emperor foresaw, that the royalists
would employ it in the cause of the Bourbons;
and the Jacobins, to calumniate his sentiments,
and render his designs suspected. But, a de-
clared enemy of half-measures, he resolved,
since he had set thought at liberty, that it
should circulate unshackled *.
* Never, in fact, at any period of the revolution, did
writers enjoy such complete liberty and impunity. The
seizure of the Censeur Européen, which made such noise,
was the work of M. Fouché. The Emperor knew nothing
of this infringement of the law, till it had been carried into
effect; and he immediately ordered, that the copies seized

<page 332>
NAPOLEoN IN 1815. 3.13
This decree, and those that preceded it, were
undoubtedly sufficient to testify to the nation
the liberal disposition of Napoleon: but no
speech from the throne had yet declared with
solemnity the positive intentions of the Em-
peror.
At length he fixed on Sunday, the 26th of
March, as the day, on which he would make
his new profession of faith in the face of the
nation *.
The ministers, the council of state, the court
of cassation, the court of accounts, the imperial
court, the prefect, and the municipal council of
Paris, were admitted to the foot of the throne.
The prince arch-chancellor, speaking in the
name of the ministers, said:
“Sire, Providence, that watches over our
destiny, has re-opened to your Majesty the
road to that throne, to which you had been
raised by the free choice of the people, and the
national gratitude. Our country raises its ma-
should be returned to the editors of the Censeur, and that
they should be at liberty to circulate them freely.
* The audience was to take place at noon; and at nine
o'clock his Majesty had not prepared his answers. They
were dictated in haste, and we had scarcely time to copy
them out fairly.

<page 333>
314 MEMOIRS OF
jestic brow, and for the second time salutés with
the name of deliverer the prince, who destroyed
anarchy, and whose existence alone is at present
capable of consolidating our liberal institutions.
“The most just of revolutions, that which
will restore to men their dignity, and all their
political rights, has hurled from the throne the
dynasty of the Bourbons. After five and twenty
years of war and troubles, all the efforts of
foreigners have proved unable, to awaken affec-
tions that are extinct, or wholly unknown to the
present generation. The struggle of the inte-
rests and prejudices of a few against the en-
lightened state of the age, and the interests of
a great nation, is at length terminated.
“Our destinies are accomplished: the only
legitimate cause, the cause of the people, has
triumphed. Your Majesty has yielded to the
wishes of the French; you have seized anew the
reins of the state, amid the benedictions of the
people and of the army.
“France, Sire, has as a guarantee of it her
will, and her dearest interests; she has as a gua-
rantee of it all that your Majesty has said to the
population of the different parts of the country,
which assembled in crowds on your passage.
Your Majesty will keep your word, you will re-
member only the services rendered your coun-

<page 334>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 315
try; you will prove, that in your eyes, and in
your heart, whatever the different opinions and
exasperations of parties may have been, all citi-
zens are equal, as they are in the eye of the
law.
“Your Majesty will also forget, that we have
been the masters of the nations around us. Ge-
nerous idea! that adds another glory to the
glory already acquired.
“Already has Your Majesty traced out to
your ministers the path they have to pursue:
already have you made known to all the people
by your proclamations the maxims, by which
you would have your empire governed for the
future. No war without, unless to repel unjust
aggression; no re-action within, no arbitrary
proceedings; security of person, security of
property, and the free circulation of opinions,
are the principles you have sanctioned.
“Happy those, Sire, who are called to co-
operate in so many sublime acts! Such benefits
will ensure to you from posterity, when the days
of adulation are at an end, the name of Father
of your country: they will be guarantied to our
children by the august heir, whom your Majesty
is preparing to crown in the Champ de Mai.”
The Emperor answered:
“The sentiments you have expressed to me

<page 335>
316 MEMOIRS OF
are mine. “Every thing agreeably to the sense
of the nation, and every thing for France: such
is my motto. -
“I and my family, whom this great people
has raised to the French throne, and maintained
on it in spite of vicissitudes and political tem-
pests, will not, ought not, cannot, ever claim
any other title to it.”
The Count Défermon, father of the presi-
dents of the council of state, delivered to the
Emperor the following declaration, tending to
prove the nullity of the abdication of Fontain-
bleau :
“The council of state, in resuming its func-
tions, thinks it necessary to make known the
principles, by which its conduct and opinions
are guided.
“The sovereignty resides in the people, who
are the only legitimate source of power.
“In 1789 the nation recovered its rights,
which had long been usurped, or misunderstood.
“The National Assembly abolished the feudal
monarchy, and established a constitutional mo-
narchy, and a representative government.
“The resistance of the Bourbons to the wishes
of the people occasioned their downfal, and their
banishment from the French territories.

<page 336>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 317
“Twice the people sanctioned by its votes the
new form of government established by its repre-
sentatives.
“In the year 8th, Bonaparte, already crowned
by victory, found himself raised to the govern-
ment by the assent of the nation. A consti-
tution created the consular magistracy.
“The senatus consultum of the 16th of Ther-
midor, year 10, named Bonaparte consul for life.
“The senatus consultum of the 28th of Flo-
real, year 12, conferred on Napoleon the impe-
rial dignity, and made it hereditary in his family.
“These three solemn acts were laid for ac-
ceptance before the people, who sanctioned
them by nearly four millions of votes.
“Accordingly, the Bourbons had ceased to
reign in France for two and twenty years; they
were forgotten there by their contemporaries;
strangers to our laws, our institutions, our man-
ners, our glory; and the present generation
knew nothing of them.
“In 1814 France was invaded by the armies
of the enemy, and the capital occupied. The
foreigners created a pretended provisional go-
vernment. They assembled a minority of the
senators, and compelled them, in opposition to
their delegated powers and to their will, to
destroy the existing establishments, to overturn

<page 337>
318 MEMOIRS OF.
*
the imperial throne, and to recall the family of
the Bourbons.
“The senate, which had been instituted solely
to maintain the constitution of the empire, ac-
knowledged itself, that it had no power to alter
it. It decreed, that the scheme of a constitu-
tion, which it had prepared, should be submit-
ted to the people for their acceptance, and that
Louis Stanislas Xavier should be proclaimed
King of the French, as soon as he had accepted
the constitution, and sworn to observe it, and
cause it to be observed.
“The abdication of the Emperor Napoleon
was solely the result of the unfortunate situation,
to which France and the Emperor had been
reduced by the events of the war, by treason,
and by the occupation of the capital. The only
object of the abdication was, to avoid a civil
war, and the shedding of French blood. Un-
sanctioned by the will of the people, this act
could not annul the solemn contract, that was
established between them and the Emperor.
And if Napoleon possessed the power of abdi.
cating the throne in his own person, he had none
to sacrifice the rights of his son, appointed to
reign after him.
“The Emperor, therefore, by re-ascending

<page 338>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 319
the throne, to which the people had elevated
him, restored the people to their most sacred
rights: he only called into execution the decrees
of the Representative Assemblies, sanctioned
by the nation: he returns to reign on the only
legitimate principle, that France acknowledges
and has acknowledged for five and twenty years,
and to which all the authorities bound them-
selves by oaths, that they can be released from
by the will of the people alone.
“The Emperor is called upon, to guaranty
anew, by institutions, as he has engaged to do in
his proclamations to the nation and the army,
all the principles of liberty: personal freedom,
and equality of rights; the freedom of the press,
and abolition of the censorship; freedom of re-
ligious worship; the voting of laws and contri-
butions by the representatives of the nation law-
fully chosen; national property, from whatever
source arising; the independence and stability
of our tribunals; the responsibility of ministers,
and of all the agents of authority.
“The more perfectly to sanction the rights
and obligations of the people and the monarch,
the national institutions should be revised in a
grand assembly of the representatives already
announced by the Emperor.
“Previous to the meeting of this grand re-

<page 339>
320 MEMOIRS OF
presentative assembly, the Emperor ought to
exercise, and cause to be exercised, conform-
ably to the existing laws and constitution, the
authority they have delegated to him, which
could not be taken from him, which he could
not abdicate without the consent of the nation,
and which the wishes and general interest of the
French people render it his duty to resume.”
The Emperor answered:
“Princes are the first citizens of the state :
their authority is more or less extensive accord-
ing to the interests of the nations they govern:
the sovereignty itself is hereditary only because
the interest of the people requires it. I know
nothing of a legitimacy extraneous to these
principles.
“I have renounced the idea of that grand
empire, of which in the course of fifteen years I
had merely laid the foundations: henceforward
the happiness and consolidation of the French
empire will be the object of all my thoughts.”
The court of cassation expressed the same
principles and the same sentiments as the coun-
cil of state.
To this the Emperor answered:
“In the earliest ages of the French monarchy,
rude tribes made themselves masters of Gaul.

<page 340>
NAPoLEoN IN 1815. 321
The sovereignty, of course, was not framed for
the benefit of the Gauls, who were slaves, or
destitute of political rights; but for the benefit
of the conquering tribe. It can never have
been said with truth, therefore, in any period of
history, in any nation, even in the east, that the
people exist for kings. Every where it has been
established, that kings exist only for the people.
A dynasty created under circumstances, that
have created so many new interests, being itself
interested in the maintenance of the rights and
properties of all, can alone be natural and legi-
timate, and in possession of strength and con-
fidence, the two leading characters in all govern-
ment.” - - -
The court of accounts, and the imperial
court, held the same language as the preceding
authorities.
To these the Emperor answered:
“What particularly distinguishes the imperial
throne is, that it has been raised by the nation,
that it is consequently natural, and that it gua-
ranties the interests of all. This is the true
character of legitimacy. It is the interest of this
throne, to consolidate all that at present exists,
and all that has been done in France during
the twenty-five years of revolution. It comprises
VOL. I. Y

<page 341>
322 MEMOIRS OF
all interests, and particularly that of the national
glory, which is not the least among them.
“Whatever has returned with the foreign
armies, whatever has been done without con-
sulting the nation, is null. The courts of Gre-
noble and Lyons, and all the tribunals of the
judicial order, which I met with while the suc-
cess of events was yet uncertain, have shown
me, that these principles are engraved on the
heart of every Frenchman.”
The reception of these public bodies being
over, there was a grand audience in the apart-
ments of the palace. The answers of the Em-
peror, repeated with embellishments, had pro-
duced the most profound sensation. The words
national glory, liberty, country, so long un-
known and proscribed within these walls, re-
sounded on every side. When the emigrants
re-appeared, and the most illustrious servants
of the state were expelled, to make room for
men, who had become strangers to our manners,
our institutions, and our triumphs; you would
have said, that France existed no longer, that
it had passed under the dominion of foreigners.
When Napoleon returned, our country appear-
ed to have returned with him: he seemed to

<page 342>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 323
have brought it back from exile, and he might
then exclaim with just pride: “I am the na-
tion.”
The example set by the magistrates of Paris
soon found numerous imitators in the depart-
ments. The public functionaries, the judicial
and administrative authorities, which but a few
days before had offered up prayers to Heaven
and to the King for the extermination of the
Corsican, the tyrant, and the usurper, were
eager to congratulate the Emperor on his mira-
culous return; and to confer on him the titles
of hero, deliverer, and more especially of legiti-
mate sovereign.
Napoleon’s progress had been so rapid, that
many addresses to the King did not reach Paris
before the King was gone; and all these were
delivered at the same time with the new ad-
dresses voted to his successor * ! I remarked
this to the Emperor; who answered me with a
smile of pity: “See what men are P’
The favourites of Apollo did not fail to offerup
their obsequious incense to the god of the day.
We received from the Countess de G*** some
very pretty verses in honour of the violet.
* I am speaking here only of the addresses of bodies cor-
porate, and of certain generals and prefects.
Y 2

<page 343>
324 MEMOIRS OF
Another woman, still more celebrated, the Ba-
roness de S***, took occasion from some flat-
tering words said for her to M. B. C., to write
an epistle to the Emperor, which would make
a curious figure at the head of her last work.
The most rigid writers and lecturers on the
common law, who the evening before, with
Cujas and Bartholi in their hands, had formally
impleaded Napoleon, were eager to testify their
admiration of him, and proclaim him the so-
vereign of sovereigns.
Thus Napoleon was more honoured and
lauded than ever; and it must be confessed,
that he conducted himself so as to deserve it:
on one hand he caressed the nation, and on
the other private interests, which it is much
more difficult to conciliate than what is called
the public interest.
The decrees of Lyons had sequestrated anew
the estates restored to emigrants since 1814.
Part of these had been sold by those who had
recovered them; and it was necessary, to quiet
the apprehensions of the purchasers. The Em-
peror declared irrevocable all the sales, that
had been completed; and confirmed those, that
had taken place subsequently to the decree,
when it could be proved, that they were not
collusive.

<page 344>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 325
On the other hand, the emigrants, who had
returned, had purchased property, the price of
which might not have been entirely paid: and
in order to do justice both to the emigrants and
to the sellers, he ordered, that estates recently
acquired should not be subject to sequestration,
on condition of being re-sold within a certain
period.
Another decree from Lyons had indiscri-
minately abolished all promotions in the legion
of honour, and in the army, made since the
royal restoration. He subjected to revision the
nominations, that appeared to him the result of
favour, intrigue, and venality; and confirmed
all, that had been the reward of real and me-
ritorious services. He would not even allow
men’s opinions, to constitute a line of demarca-
tion; and directed the minister, to pay regard
to ancient services rendered by officers since
incorporated in the King's household.
He confirmed also the decorations granted
to the national guard; and distributed new
ones among the brave pupils of the polytech-
nical school, whose noble conduct had so much
excited the admiration of Paris, and of fo-
reigners, at the time of the occurrences of 1814.
The daughters of the members of the legion

<page 345>
326 MEMOIRS OF
of honour had claims to his remembrance, and
his consolation, too sacred, not to participate
in his favours. He went to visit them. His pre-
sence excited inexpressible enthusiasm among
these young orphans: they threw themselves
at his feet, embraced his knees, and watered
them with their tears. He had taken a spoon,
to taste their food: after he was gone, as every
one wished to have it, they broke it to pieces,
and shared it amongst them. Most of them
had braided rings of hair, on which were traced
patriotic devices, or the ingenious expression
of their sentiments for Napoleon. The Em-
peror having condescended to accept some of
these, and place them on his fingers, every one
of the orphans was desirous of obtaining the
same favour: they rushed on him, seized his
hands, and in an instant covered them with
these innocent pledges of love and gratitude,
The Emperor, moved, enchanted, submitted
with kind complaisance to the gentle fetters of
these amiable infants. They ingeniously in-
treated him, not to give away the rings they
had presented to him; and he promised to
keep them, assuring them, that they would be
as valuable in his eyes as the jewels of his
CrOWn.

<page 346>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 327
The working class, who had surnamed Na-
poleon le grand entrepreneur", also received its
share of the imperial favours. The works com-
menced in his reign, and buried in dust under
that of the Bonrbons, were resumed with ac-
tivity. The capital became, as before, a vast
workshop : and the Parisians, who had learned
from strangers to perceive the beauty of their
edifices, saw with a mingled sentiment of gra-
titude and pride, that new marvels were still
more to embellish their majestic city.
In fine, all classes received testimonies of the
solicitude and justice of Napoleon. Must it be
said? his old companions in the island of Elba
alone were forgotten.
While Napoleon had no throne but his rock,
they had shown themselves as disinterested as
faithful: when he had recovered his crown, they
flattered themselves, that they should be re-
compensed with generosity. -
Some, whom honour alone had attached to
Napoleon, enjoyed in prospect the praises, titles,
ribands, that would be bestowed on them:
others, inspired with less lofty sentiments, ex-
* We have no single word in our language answering to
this: it implies one who undertakes works of different kinds,
including our architect and civil engineer.—TR.

<page 347>
828 MEMOIRS OF
pected benefits more solid. The guard and its
worthy chiefs were ambitious only of the favour
of retaining the glorious title of grenadiers of
the island of Elba. Vain illusions ! the Em-
peror's thoughts, entirely absorbed by other
cares, were no longer turned to those brave
fellows, who had shared his exile and his mis-
fortunes. The moment of forgetfulness, how-
ever, had not time to degenerate into ingrati-
tude: it was repaired: promotions, endowments,
indemnifications, were bestowed on them; and,
if they did not feel themselves completely sa-
tisfied with the conduct of Napoleon, they had
at least no reason to complain.
The Emperor would have wished from feel-
ing, and perhaps too from ostentation, to have
had it in his power, to acknowledge in a
manner more worthy of himself their services
and attachment: but he was deterred by the
fear of being charged with imitating the Bour-
bons, and of preferring those Frenchmen, who
had gone into exile with him, to those who had
retained their fidelity in their mother country.
These scruples appear to me unfounded.
The emigrants had sullied their native land
with blood, shed either by their own weapons,
or in the civil wars they had fomented and
cherished; and the indignant nation had long

<page 348>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 329
combated them, and pursued them with its ma-
ledictions, as the enemies of its happiness and
tranquillity.
The Frenchmen who returned from the
island of Elba with Napoleon, on the contrary,
had spilt their blood in the defence of their
country. They were beloved, honoured, re-
spected; and the recompenses the Emperor,
might have bestowed upon them, instead of
tending to alienate France, would have fulfilled
her wishes. She would have enjoyed it with
that feeling of pride and pleasure, which a mo-
ther experiences, when she hears the triumphs
of her children proclaimed in the lists opened
for youth, and sees their heads adorned with
the rewards of their success.
Policy, no less than justice, required, that
Napoleon should confer, even with prodigality,
his favours and benefits on men, who had sa-
crificed themselves for him. In his situation it .
would have been better, to have been deemed
prodigal than ungrateful: but fortune favoured
him so highly, that he might be allowed, in some
degree, to neglect the means of securing the
feeble support of men.
The re-establishment of the imperial govern-
ment, which appeared as if it would experience
some obstacles, took place on all sides with a

<page 349>
380 MEMOIRS OF
promptitude and facility truly extraordinary.
Marshal Augereau, who had endeavoured in
his proclamation of 1814 to disgrace the Em-
peror, was eager to make his public recantation
in a fresh proclamation.
The Duke of Belluno, and Count Gouvion
St. Cyr, after attempting in vain to curb their
insurgent troops, were forced to shun their re-
sentment by flight.
The troubles excited in La Vendée and Cal-
vados by a few royal volunteers had been ap-
peased, and the perturbators disarmed.
The military household of the King had sub-
mitted to their discharge, and readily sur-
rendered their horses and arms.
In fine, the royal family had evacuated the
imperial territory.
The Emperor thought proper, to acquaint
his army in person with these happy results.
“Thanks to the French people and you,” said
he, on reviewing the troops on the 27th of
March, “the imperial throne is re-established.
It is acknowledged throughout the empire, and
not a single drop of blood has been spilt. The
Count de Lille, the Count d’Artois, the Duke
de Berri, the Duke of Orleans, have passed our
northern frontier, and sought an asylum among
foreigners. The tri-coloured flag waves on the

<page 350>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 331
towers of Calais, Dunkirk, Lille, Valenciennes,
Condé, &c. A few bands of Chouans had at-
tempted to form themselves in Poitou and La
Vendée: popular opinion, and the march of a
few battalions, were sufficient to disperse them.
The Duke of Bourbon, who came to excite dis-
turbances in the provinces, has embarked at
Nantes.
“How senseless were they,” continued the .
Emperor, “and how little did they know of
the nation, who imagined, that the French
would consent to receive a prince from those
very hands, that had ravaged our territory, and,
aided by treason, had for a moment obscured
our laurels'’
The King, who at first took refuge at Lille,
had in fact just retired to Ghent. His Majesty
had given orders to his household and the
princes, to join him in the former city, where it
had been apparently his intention, to take up
his residence, and convene the chambers. But
marshal the Duke of Treviso, governor of that
division, declared to him, that he would no
longer answer for his troops, if the musketeers,
the body guards, &c., entered the place; and
advised him to repair to Dunkirk, which, from
its geographical position, and the attachment
of its inhabitants, afforded him an opportunity

<page 351>
382 MEMOIRS OF
of awaiting the issue of events without danger.
M. de Blacas and the emigrants with the King
remonstrated with him strongly, that he would
not be out of danger there; and that he could
no longer be safe from the pursuit of Napoleon,
except in a foreign country. The Duke of
Treviso still insisted on the contrary: and the
King, in spite of the alarm and entreaties of
the Count de Blacas and the other courtiers,
had resolved to follow the advice of the marshal,
when some despatches from the Count d’Ar-
tois, received in the course of the night, deter-
mined him to pass the frontier.
The Emperor thought at first, that the de-
sign of Louis XVIII. was to return to Eng-
land. He was glad of this: and it was not
without extreme vexation, that he learned the
intention of this Prince, to remain on the Bel-
gic frontiers, observing the course of affairs.
But if this resolution, to which perhaps the
King was indebted for the recovery of his
throne, was displeasing to Napoleon, it never
inspired him with the criminal desire, as some
wicked writers have pretended, of making any
- attempts against the lives or liberty of the
Bourbons.
The orders given to General Excelmans
merely were, to drive the King and the Princes

<page 352>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 838
out of France step by step. He was never
commanded, “either to secure their persons,
or to kill them in case of resistance.”
The instructions given at the same time to
Marshal Ney, sent on a mission to the frontiers
of the North and East, directed him also in
express words, “to cause the royal family to
be respected, and facilitate its procuring the
means of quitting France freely and quietly".”
It has been asserted, that the Duke of Bassa-
no, who had the temporary charge of the port-
* It was this mission, that became the source of the dis-
grace, in which the marshal lived, till the day of his being
recalled to the army. The Emperor had ordered him, to
set off immediately: he answered, that he could not go,
till he was paid some twenty thousand francs, which were
owing to him. The Emperor, swearing, ordered them to be
paid.
The next day General Lecourbe, to whom the Emperor
had just entrusted an important command, wrote to him,
to demand several favours, and in addition a hundred and
fifty thousand francs, as arrears of pay, in order to discharge
his debts.
Two other generals, less known, were equally desirous of
being paid for their services. He was disgusted at their
claims. “Do these men think,” said he, “that I throw
away my money? I am not inclined to suffer myself to be
plundered like Henry IV; if they be not inclined to fight,
let them put on petticoats, and go and take an airing.”

<page 353>
834 MEMOIRS OF
folio of the home department, had sent orders
to M. Siméon, then royal prefect at Lille, to
arrest the King. The Duke of Bassano, indig-
nant at such an odious charge, would not quit
France, without having refuted it. He pro-
posed, to summon M. Siméon to declare the
truth; and his declaration would have been
made public through the means of the news-
papers and the press, if the police had not op-
posed it. w
The King quitted Lille on the 23d of March.
The Duke of Orleans, who had attended his
Majesty, and whom the King on his departure
had invested with the command of that place,
did not quit it till twenty-four hours after;
when he addressed the following letter to
Marshal Mortier.
“I commit entirely to your hands, my dear
Marshal, the command which I was so happy
as to exercise with you in the department of the
North. I am too good a Frenchman, to sacri-
fice the interests of France, because fresh mis-
fortunes compel me to quit it. I go to bury
myself in retirement and oblivion. The King
being no longer in France, I cannot issue
orders in his name: and nothing remains for
me, but to absolve you from all obedience to

<page 354>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 335
the orders I have already transmitted to you;
requesting you, to do whatever your own ex-
cellent judgment, and pure patriotism, shall
suggest to you as most conducive to the in-
terests of France, and most agreeable to the
duties you have to fulfil.” -
The Emperor, after having read this letter,
turned to the Duke of Bassano, and said: “See
what the Duke of Orleans writes to Mortier;
this letter does him honour. His heart was
always French.”
I then informed him, that I had been assured,
that the Duke of Orleans, when he parted from
his officers, said to one of them, Colonel Atha-
lin: “Go, sir, resume the national cockade: I
take a pride in having worn it, and I wish I
could wear it still.” The Emperor appeared
struck with these words, and made no reply.
A few minutes after he asked me, if I had not
a letter from Madame the Duchess of Orleans.
I delivered it to him : he read it, and said:
“Let his mother be treated with the regard he
merits.” And he ordered, that the duchess,
whose property had just been sequestrated,
should receive annually from the public trea-
sury three hundred thousand francs as an in-
demnification. At the same time another in-

<page 355>
336 MEMOIRS OF
*
demnification of a hundred and fifty thousand
francs was granted to the Duchess of Bourbon.
The Duke of Bourbon, though the Emperor
had announced his embarkation, did not sail
however till several days afterward. His pre-
sence and his proclamation had produced a
partial rising in the circle of Beaupréau; but
convinced by his own eyes, and by the reports
of his principal officers, that the great body of
the Vendéans would not stir, he yielded to the
wishes of Colonel Noirot, commandant of the
gendarmerie, expressed in the following letter:
“Monseigneur,
“It will not be in vain, I am persuaded, that
I make an appeal to your magnanimity. It is
in your power, with a single word, to calm an
effervescence, the first results of which may
once more stain with blood the fields of the too
unhappy Vendée: this word your Highness will
pronounce, and every thing will be restored to
order. You will be aware likewise, Monseig-
neur, that a longer stay in the circle of Beau-
préau, while it endangers the internal security of
the country, will also endanger the personal
safety of your Highness.
“Deign then, I conjure you, Monseigneur,
to yield to the wishes I entertain for your hap-

<page 356>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 337
*
piness, and for that of my country. For all the
means of safety, which your Highness may de-
sire, to repair to the place of destination you
may choose, I will engage.”
This letter, which I take a pleasure in quot-
ing, to prove what was the language of the men
of the 20th of March, was not without effect.
The Duke of Bourbon directed his aide-de-
camp to have an interview with Colonel Noi-
roit; and it was determined, that his Highness
should quit la Vendée, and embark at Nantes
for England.
For reasons with which I am unacquainted,
the prince did not fulfil his engagements. In
fact, he quitted Beaupréau, but still roamed
about the coast some time with a fictitious pass-
port, and under a borrowed name. General
* recognised him, but respected his dis-
guise. The Emperor approved this deference,
and gave orders, that he should merely be
obliged to depart: the father of the Duke of
Enghien was become sacred to him, and to
France.
Of all the family of the Bourbons the Duke
* I regret, that I did not learn his name.
VOI. I. Z

<page 357>
338 MEMOIRS OF
and Duchess of Angoulême alone persisted in
struggling against their ill-fortune.
She was at Bordeaux at the time of the land-
ing. The entrance of Napoleon into Paris, the
flight of the King, and the general defection
of the army, did not abate her courage. She
made the national guard take up arms: she
hastened to the barracks, to harangue the sol-
diers, and remind them of what they owed to
their oaths and to their King. Numerous bat-
talions of volunteers were instantly formed, and
directed by her orders, to defend the avenues
to the city, intercept all communication, and
prevent popular commotions.
General Clausel, however, appointed by the
Emperor head commandant of the 11th division,
had advanced as far as St. André de Cubsac,
six leagues from Bordeaux, at the head of about
five and twenty gendarmes collected on the
road, and of a hundred and fifty men from the
garrison of Blayes, who, informed of his arrival
by his emissaries, had come to meet him.
On his approach, a battalion of volunteers,
posted at Cubsac with two pieces of cannon,
retreated hastily to St. Vincent, and there
joined some other volunteers, to defend with
them the passage of the Dordogne.

<page 358>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 339
The soldiers of General Clausel attempted
to seize the flying bridge, and were saluted
with several discharges of artillery and small
arms, which they received without returning.
Their chief, desirous of avoiding a civil war,
requested, that some person might be sent, to
hold a parley with him. The Bordelese having
deputed their commandant, M. de Martignac,
for this purpose, he charged this officer, to
make known to them, that he had no design of
making any attempts against their persons or
property; and that he conjured them, in the
name of their country, not to spill the blood of
Frenchmen to no purpose. -
Nevertheless some hostile appearances were
continued on both sides; but the royal volun-
teers were alarmed at the sight of three boats,
which they supposed to be filled with troops,
and took flight. '*
General Clausel, thus become master of the
Dordogne, was preparing to cross it, when M.
de Martignac returned to inform him, that Ma-
dame the Duchess of Angoulême consented to
retire, and that the city should be delivered up
to him in twenty-four hours.
Madame, instead of fulfilling this double pro-
mise, allowed herself to yield to the desire and
hope of prolonging the defence. She assembled
Z 2

<page 359>
340 MEMOIRS OF
the national guard, and made fresh attempts to
bring over the troops of the garrison to the
royal party.
General Clausel perceived her at a distance
reviewing the national guards and volunteers:
he ordered M. de Martignac to be called back,
and complained of the promises made him not
being fulfilled. He urged in excuse, that the
national guard and the garrison were no longer
disposed to surrender the city. The general,
perceiving that the Bordelese flattered them-
selves with being seconded by the troops of the
line, assured M. de Martignac, that, on the
contrary, they only waited for a concerted sig-
mal, to declare themselves in favour of the im-
perial cause. M. de Martignac appearing to
doubt this, the general ordered a flag to be
waved in the air, and immediately the tri-
coloured standard was hoisted on Trompette
castle".
The Bordelese, astonished and affrighted,
requested a capitulation. General Clausel was
eager to grant all their proposals, and the next
day they opened the gates of the city to him.
The Emperor was well pleased with the happy
issue of this affair. He gave orders, to publish
* The fortress in which the garrison was quartered.

<page 360>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 341
the report of General Clausel immediately: but
as this report was a mere military statement, he
added to it himself the supplementary particu-
lars below, which he directed to be inserted in
the Moniteur under the head of Bordeaux.
a “The firm and courageous conduct of General
Clausel has prevented great evils: the passage
of the Dordogne made a strong impression here.
Before he reached la Bastide, the Duchess of
Angoulême, feeling an alarm she was unable to
conceal, sent him a promise, that she would quit
Bordeaux in the morning of the 1st of April;
which induced General Clausel, to halt at la
Bastide, in front of Bordeaux, on the right bank
of the Garonne, where he arrived on the 31st
of March in the evening. The Duchess of
Angoulême thought proper, to avail herself of
this delay, and break her promise: she went to
the barracks, caused the troops to be assem-
bled, and endeavoured to persuade them, to
oppose the entrance of General Clausel into
Bordeaux. The officers of all ranks told her
plainly, that they would pay her all the respect
due to her unfortunate situation, and to her
sex, but that, being Frenchmen themselves, no
motive could induce them, to take up arms
against Frenchmen. The Duchess shed abund-
ance of tears: she requested, that the troops

<page 361>
342 MEMOIRS OF
would at least remain neutral, if the national
guards should be willing to fight for her. The
officers answered, that they would not fire on
the national guard; but they would not suffer
the national guard, to fire on the troops of Ge-
neral Clausel: they would not allow a single
drop of French blood to be spilt. The soldiers
joined with one voice in the sentiments of their
officers: the Duchess retired with alarm in her
heart, and threats in her mouth: she was all
trembling. When she reached the quay, where
the national guard was under arms, she was
received in profound silence. A murmur per-
vaded the ranks of “No fighting! no civil war!”
The Duchess hastened to retire to the im-
perial palace, where she gave orders for her
departure". At eight o'clock she had quitted
Bordeaux. The fire she had kindled was not
extinguished in every bosom. The national
guard, which had just conducted itself so pru-
dently, had in company with it some unruly
persons. These were the dregs of the people,
forming the bulk of the companies of royal
* She set off in the evening for Pouillac, where, having
bidden adieu to the volunteer cavalry, who had escorted her,
she went on board an English vessel, and sailed for England
on the 2d of April.

<page 362>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. $4.3
volunteers, who had been bribed to enlist, and
reckoned upon plunder. Their hopes were
already disappointed by the firmness of the na-
tional guard. A small number of the most out-
rageous fired on the company of M. Troplong,
who was reputed to be of the soundest princi-
ples. The national guard returned the fire.
The volunteers fled, but Captain Troplong had
received a mortal wound. He has just been
interred with military honours. More than ten
thousand persons attended the funeral of this
excellent citizen; the regret occasioned by his
death suspended for a moment the gaiety of the
people, happy in being at length freed from the
evils, with which they were threatened.”
The energy and intrepidity, which the grand-
daughter of Maria Theresa displayed on this
occasion, excited the praise of the Emperor,
and drew from him the well known phrase:
“She is the only man in the family.”
He no less admired the firm and respectful
demeanour maintained by the regiments of the
garrison, amid the provocations and reproaches
of the Duchess. “Every thing that passed at
Bordeaux,” said he, “is truly extraordinary;
and I know not which most demands our asto-
nishment, the noble boldness of Madame d'An-

<page 363>
344 MEMOIRS OF
goulême, or the magnanimous patience of my
soldiers.”
The effervescence of the Bordelese having
subsided, Provence and Languedoc, where the
Duke of Angoulême had excited and main-
tained the flames of insurrection, still remained
to be pacified. .
This prince, having heard at Toulouse, that
the Emperor had landed in the gulf of Juan,
repaired immediately to the principal towns in
the South, and made the partisans of the Bour-
bons and of royalty take up arms.
Three thousand two hundred Marseillese, and
three thousand five hundred volunteers from
Nismes, Avignon, and Montpelier, ranged them-
selves under his standards.
The 10th, 53d, and 83d, regiments of the
line, containing about nine hundred men each;
The depôts of the 9th and 87th of foot, about
five hundred and fifty strong;
Two hundred and fifty chasseurs à cheval of
the 14th regiment, a hundred and fifty artillery-
men, and three hundred soldiers of the royal
regiment of foreigners, were drawn from their
respective garrisons; and formed, with the
royal volunteers, an army of twelve thousand
men; which must necessarily be increased by
*

<page 364>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 345
the levies daily made in the provinces, that con-
tinued subject to the royal government, and by
the succours, which the Prince had hastened to
demand from the King of Sardinia, and from
Switzerland, and which he hoped to obtain from
them. -
The Duke of Angoulême divided his army
into two corps.
The first, commanded by General Ernouf,
under whose orders were Major-Generals Gar-
danne and Loverdo, proceeded through Sis-
teron for Grenoble.
The second, commanded by the Prince in
person, and under his orders by Lieutenant-
general Monnier, Baron Damas, and Viscount
Descars, took the road of Valence.
These two corps, after having reduced the
country to submission, and rallied the royalists,
were to join at Grenoble, and march together
to Lyons.
The advanced guard of the second corps, con-
ducted by M. Descars, met no serious resist-
ance, till it came to pass the Drome.
General De Belle, at the head of a few hus-
sars of the 4th, a battalion of the 39th, and
about eight hundred national guards, had suf-
fered himself to be driven from Loriol, and
retired as well as he could behind the Dryme.

<page 365>
846 MEMOIRS OF
The volunteers of Vaucluse, covered by the
royal artillery, forded the river, and came and
took post on the left flank of the national guards.
At the same moment the Prince directed the
10th of the line, to attack the bridge. This
manoeuvre did not intimidate the national
guards; they stood firm; and the 10th, not-
withstanding the ardour, with which it was in-
spired by the example of the Duke of Angou-
lème, was on the point of giving way; when
several of the light infantry, who were at their
head, discovered among their antagonists some
of their ancient comrades. They began with a
mutual cessation of firing, and finished with
embracing amid shouts of Long live the Em-
peror.
During this conversation and embracing, the
rest of the 10th regiment recovered ground. The
imperials, supposing they were coming to join
them, advanced without distrust: a volley unde-
ceived them: the troops of General De Belle were
thrown into disorder, he made no attempt to rally
them, and the rout became complete. Part of
the imperials were made prisoners by the royal-
ists; others took refuge in the mountains, or
went to carry the news of their defeat to
Grenoble or Valence.
T he next day, the 3d of April, the Duke of

<page 366>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 847
Angoulême and his victorious army entered
Valence, and proceeded without loss of time to
Romans on the Isère.
The first corps, after having occupied Siste-
ron, separated into two columns: one, with
General Loverdo at its head, proceeded to La-
mure; the other, commanded by General Gar-
danne, having taken Gap in its way, advanced
as far as Travers; where the garrison of Gre-
noble, and the national guards of Vizille, La-
mure, and the surrounding communes, had just
taken up a position.
Hitherto everything had proved favourable
to the wishes of the royal army: it marched
from one success to another; and the noise of
its victories, swelled by fear and rumour, had
spread consternation and dismay as far as Gre-
noble and Lyons.
The Emperor himself was uneasy. On leav-
ing Lyons he had foreseen the possibility of a
partial rising in the south; and, relying on the
energy and patriotism of the Dauphinese, he
had entrusted to them the care of defending
their territory and their capital. But, if they
were strong enough to repel the aggressions of
the royalists, they were not in a condition to
resist four thousand soldiers, who had embraced
their cause, and fought in their ranks.


<page 367>
348 - MEMOIRS OF
General Grouchy had orders, to hasten to
Lyons, and raise in mass the national guards of
Dauphiny, the Lyonnais, and Burgundy.
At the name of the Emperor and of their
country all were in motion: the patriots of la
Drome and the Isère descended from their
mountains; the Lyonese quitted their work-
shops; the Burgundians spontaneously began
their march with half-pay officers at their head.
This patriotic burst was so unanimous, that
the roads were instantly covered with national
guards; and General Corbineau, whom the
Emperor had despatched to accelerate their
march, was obliged, on the contrary, to retard
it. But all these arrangements, sad presages of
a civil war, were happily unnecessary.
- The troops of General Gardanne, during their
stay at Gap, became acquainted with the Em-
peror's proclamations. These had awakened
their remembrances, electrified their minds, and
the 58th mounted the tricoloured cockade.
The defection of this regiment was soon
known to the division of General Loverdo;
and, in spite of this general’s efforts, a part of
the 14th chasseurs, and the whole of the 83d,
equally embraced the imperial cause. On the
other soldiers, though faithful in appearance,
the generals could no longer confide: “they

<page 368>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 349
could not speak to a single inhabitant of the
country, without receiving impressions abso-
lutely inimical to the party of the King",” and
they expected every moment, to see them go
over to the enemy.
General Loverdo, impatient to give battle,
and imagining, that he could dispense with their
assistance, attempted to force the defile of Saul-
ces, in advance of Gap, supported only by his
royal volunteers: but this attack, as rash as it
was useless, did not succeed, and he was forced
to fall back to Sisteron.
The second corps, restrained by the presence
of the Duke of Angoulême, had lost but a small
number of soldiers. The order to advance had
just been given, when the Prince received the
most disheartening news from all parts at once.
On one hand he was informed of the defection
of the regular troops under General Ernouf, and
his forced retreat to Sisteron.
On another he heard, that General Grouchy
was advancing to meet him with a formidable
force.
From a third source of intelligence he learned,
that the royal party at Nismes, and at Toulouse,
had dispersed without resistance: that M. Wi-

* Report of General Ernouf.

<page 369>
350 MEMOIRS OF
trolles, the head of the committee of insurrec-
tion, had been arrested; and that the patriots,
and the troops of the 9th division, united under
the orders of General Gilly, having marched to
take him in the rear, had retaken the bridge of
St. Esprit by assault, and passed the Rhone.
In fine, despatches from Turin announced to
him, that he must no longer reckon upon any
assistance from the Swiss, or upon the promises
of the King of Sardinia. *
The Prince in consequence ordered a retreat
to be sounded, and retired to Valence.
The Emperor, who, according to custom,
took the trouble to compose himself the articles
in the Moniteur relative to this little war, gave
the following account of the evacuation of
Valence.
Valence, the 7th of April. The Duke of
Angoulême has made a sad figure here. The
alarm bell sounded throughout Dauphiny, and
numerous battalions of the national guards de-
parted for Lyons. The Duke of Angoulême, in-
formed of their arrival, set off helter skelter with
the four thousand insurgents, who are under his
orders. The troops of the line, informed by
our citizens, that we were engaged in the cause
of the nation against a few privileged families,
of the people against the nobility, and in short

<page 370>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 351.
of the revolution against the counter-revolution,
suddenly changed sides. The army however
reckons three traitors, who appear to have taken
the part of the enemies of their country: they
are Generals Ernouf, Monnier, and D’Aultan-
nie.” He forgot General Loverdo.
The Emperor was equally careful, to make
public the correspondence, that was intercept-
ed: and as some announced the intention of
separating the chaff from the wheat, and throwing
it into the fire; others, Qf hanging all the rebels,
without exception, and without mercy; and, in
fine, others, invited Spain, Switzerland, and the
King of Piedmont, to come and reduce France to
reason; they contributed not less powerfully
than the success of the imperial army, to de-
tach from the cause of the Bourbons every
Frenchman, who was an enemy to treachery,
hanging, and foreigners. * * *
General Grouchy, informed of the retreat of
the Duke of Angoulême, sent some light troops
in pursuit of him. Most of the chasseurs of the
14th, and of the artillerymen, joined the im-,
perialists. The volunteers of the south, who
had hitherto set no bounds to their presump-
tuous hopes, now found none to their fears. As
cowardly in adversity, as they were arrogant in
prosperity, they abandoned their general at the

<page 371>
352 MEMOIRS OF
approach of danger; and all, with the exception
of a few hundreds of brave fellows, sought safety
in flight.
The Duke of Angoulême, surrounded by the
feeble remnants of their battalions, and by the
10th of the line, which still remained faithful,
continued his retrograde march night and day;
and traversed in silence the places, which his
army had made ring with the shouts of victory
but a few days before. The mountaineers,
who had suffered so much from the exactions
and ill treatment of the royal volunteers, now
repeated in their turn “Wo to the vanquished!”
and did not allow a moment’s rest to the Duke
of Angoulême and his followers. Pressed on
one side by the columns of Grouchy, on the
other by the troops of General Gilly; shut in,
without hope of succour, between the Drome,
the Rhone, the Durance, and the mountains,
the Duke of Angoulême had only two re-
sources: one was, to abandon his army, and get
over the mountains to Marseilles or Piedmont;
the other, to submit, with his companions in
misfortune, to the law of the conqueror.
The Prince would not separate his fate from
that of his army. He consented to surrender.
Baron de Damas and General Gilly regulated
the conditions of the capitulation. It was

<page 372>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 353
agreed, that the Prince should disband his army,
and have liberty to embark at Cette. As soon
as this intelligence was announced by a tele-
graphic despatch, it was immediately made
known to the Emperor by the Duke of Bassano,
who prevailed on him, though opposed by se-
veral distinguished persons, to return an answer,
by the same mode of conveyance, approving of
the capitulation. At the same instant a second
despatch announced, that General Grouchy re-
fused to sign the treaty, unless he had the con-
sent of the Emperor, and the Duke of Angou-
lême was deemed a prisoner. Upon this the
Duke of Bassano hastened to transmit the first
orders of Napoleon, and delayed informing him
of the impediment to the ratification, till night
rendered any new orders by telegraph imprac-
ticable. Being made acquainted with this noble
daring of his minister, instead of reprimanding
him, the Emperor dictated to him the following
letter:
“M. le Count Grouchy, the ordinance of
the king, dated on the 6th of March, and the
declaration signed at Vienne on the 13th by
his ministers, would authorize me to treat the
Duke of Angoulême, as that ordinance, and
that declaration, would have had me and my
family treated: but, persevering in that dispo-
VOL. I. A A

<page 373>
$54 MEMOIRS OF
sition, which induced me to ordain, that the
members of the Bourbon family might have free
egress from France, my intention is, that you
give orders for the Duke of Angoulême to be
conducted to Cette, where he shall be embarked,
and that you watch over his safety, and prevent
him from receiving any ill treatment. You will
only take care to recover the money that has
been taken from the public offices, and to re-
quire the Duke of Angoulême to engage to
restore the diamonds of the crown, which are
the property of the nation *. You will at the
same time make known to him the provisions of
the laws of the national assemblies, which have
been renewed, and which apply to those mem-
bers of the Bourbon family, who shall re-enter
the French territories,” &c.
While awaiting the decision of Napoleon, the
Duke of Angoulême was strictly watched. He
* The diamonds that were sought to be obtained in ex-
change for the Duke of Angoulême were worth fourteen
millions. The Duke of Otranto proposed to the Emperor,
to throw M. de Vitrolles into the bargain, if they were re-
stored; to which the Emperor readily consented. The
Duke of Otranto opened a negotiation on this point, which
had no farther result, than procuring him an opportunity of
corresponding more at his ease with Ghent.

<page 374>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 355
supported this fresh disgrace with firmness and
tranquillity. The Marquis de Rivière, informed
of his detention, threatened Count Grouchy, if
he did not restore him to liberty, to surrender
Marseilles to the English, and raise up all Pro-
vence. These empty threats had no effect.
The fate of the duke did not depend on Count
de Grouchy: it was in opposition to his own
feelings, that he had ventured to lay a sacri-
legious hand on this prince; and he prayed sin-
cerely, that the decision of the Emperor would
allow him to break his chains.
As soon as the decision reached him, the ge-
neral hastened to insure the Duke of Angou-
lême the means of embarking speedily; and
with religious zeal took the necessary measures,
for his being treated on the passage with due
respect.
The prince, on his arrival at Cette, embarked
immediately, and sailed for Cadiz.
His capitulation and departure soon led to
the submission of Marseilles: and, thanks to the
prudence and firmness of the Prince of Essling,
governor of that division, the royal standard
was hauled down, and the tricoloured flag
hoisted in its stead, without any disturbance or
effusion of blood. -
The Emperor named General Grouchy mar-
A A 2

<page 375>
356 MEMOIRS OF
shal of the empire; not because he entertained
any great admiration of his conduct, for he was
aware, that he had but faintly pressed the Duke
of Angoulême; but in order to give some splen-
dor to the disgrace of the prince, and discou-
rage the royalists in other parts of France.
Resolving at the same time to punish the trea-
son committed by the 10th at the passage of
the Drome, he decreed, that this regiment
should wear a piece of crape on its colours,
till it had washed in the blood of the enemy
those arms, which it had stained with the blood
of Frenchmen *.
By the telegraph the Emperor was informed
of the submission of Marseilles, and the entire
pacification of the south, just as he was going
to review the national guard of Paris. It was
always in similar circumstances, that great news
reached the Emperor: it seemed as if fortune,
attentive to please him, sought to enhance her
gifts by bestowing them apropos. Ever since
his arrival he had been intending to have this
review, but the successive inspections of the
*on
#s *
* It was discovered by the Duke d’Albufera, that this
supposed treason was the consequence of the mistake, which
I have related above, and the decree was not carried into
effect. `ries. onegro-

<page 376>
NAPOLEoN IN 1815. 357
troops of the line had prevented him. Some per-
sons did not fail to ascribe this delay, so easily
to be accounted for, to his fear of the sentiments
and bayonets of the legions of Paris. Meantime
some grenadiers of the royal ex-volunteers in-
dulged in threats and imprecations against him.
This was enough to terrify some of the alarmists
of the court; and they requested Napoleon to
mix a few battalions of his guards in the review,
by way of precaution. The Emperor rejected
their entreaties, and was angry at their fears:
nevertheless, they caused him to be attended,
without his knowledge, by ten or a dozen gre-
nadiers, who were directed not to lose sight of
him for a moment.
While the Emperor was walking his horse
along the ranks, his escort had followed him
without his paying any attention to it: but
when he set off at a gallop, he perceived, that
his grenadiers were galloping after him, and
stopped. “What do you do there?” said he to
one of them: “Go about your business!” The
old grumbler", who knew that apprehensions
- were entertained for the life of his general, ap-
peared disposed not to obey. The Emperor
"A nickname given by Napoleon to his old grenadiers.

<page 377>
358 MEMOIRS OF
then took hold of him by his hairy cap, and,
giving it a hearty shake, repeated with a smile
his order to him to retire: “Go all of you
away: I am surrounded by none but good
Frenchmen; I am as safe with them as with
you.” The national guards, who heard these
words, cried out spontaneously, “Yes, yes,
Sire, you are right; we would all defend your
life at the expense of our own.” Encouraged
by the familiarity which the Emperor displayed
towards them, they quitted their ranks, and
crowded round him: some pressed his hands,
others kissed theirs to him; all expressed their
satisfaction and attachment by continued shouts
of “Long live the nation | Long live the Em-
peror!”
After this unexpected scene, the Emperor
proceeded with his review: he then caused a
circle of officers to be formed, alighted, and
addressed them nearly in the following terms:
“Soldiers of the national guard of Paris, I
am well pleased to see you. Fifteen months
ago I formed you for the preservation of tran-
quillity in the capital, and for its security. You
have fulfilled my expectations. You have shed
your blood in defence of Paris: and if hostile
troops entered your walls, the blame falls not
on you, but on treason, and above all on that

<page 378>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 359
fatality, which attaches itself to our affairs under
adverse circumstances.
“The royal throne was not adapted to
France: it gave the people no security for its
most valuable interests; it was imposed upon
us by foreigners. I am arrived, equipped with
all the strength of the people and of the army,
to obliterate this stain, and restore the honour
and glory of France to all their lustre.
“Soldiers of the national guard, this very
morning the telegraph of Lyons has informed
me, that the tricoloured flag is waving at An-
tibes and at Marseilles. The discharge of a
hundred cannon on our frontiers will proclaim
to foreign nations, that our civil discords are at
an end: I say foreign nations, because we yet
know of none that are enemies. If they assemble
their troops, we will assemble ours. All our
armies are composed of brave men, who have
distinguished themselves in various battles, and
who will display to foreigners a barrier of iron;
while numerous battalions of grenadiers and
chasseurs of the national guards will secure our
frontiers. I shall not interfere with the affairs
of foreign nations: wo to those governments,
that shall interfere with ours! Misfortunes
have tempered anew the character of the
French people: it has resumed that youth,

<page 379>
360 MEMOIRS OF
that vigour, which astonished Europe twenty
years ago.
“Soldiers, you have been obliged to wear
colours proscribed by the nation. But the
national colours remained in your hearts: you
now swear, to take them always for your rally-
ing signal, and to defend the imperial throne,
the only and natural guarantie of our rights;
you swear never to suffer foreigners, in whose
country we have appeared repeatedly as mas-
ters, to interfere with our constitution or go-
vernment. In fine, you swear, to sacrifice
every thing to the honour and independence
of France.”
This oath was pronounced with enthusiasm.
The national guard showed, that it was not
afraid of being taken at its word.
Apprehensions had been entertained, that
the guards, who had long borne the Parisians
a grudge for having surrendered so promptly
in 1814, would indulge in some offensive re-
proaches: but Napoleon had enjoined his gre-
nadiers to maintain silence; and, in order to
oomplete the reconciliation, he caused it to be
cemented by a dinner, to which the imperial
guards invited the national guard and the gar-
rison of Paris.
Fifteen thousand soldiers of every description

<page 380>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 361
assembled at the Champ de Mars under the
eyes of the people of Paris: the joyous songs
of the soldiers and citizens answered each other
by turns, and gave a truly national character
to this festival.
When the repast was over, a numerous crowd
of soldiers, officers, and national guards, set off
for the Tuileries, carrying the bust of Napoleon
crowned with laurels. When they arrived be-
fore his Majesty’s windows, they saluted him
with thousands and thousands of acclamations;
and then they repaired to la Place Vendôme,
where they devoutly deposited at the foot of
the monument raised to the glory of our armies
the image of the hero, who had led them to
victory. The Emperor, as soon as he was in-
formed of it, ordered me to write to the mi-
nister of the police, to have the bust removed
in the night. “It is not after bacchanalian
orgies,” said he, proudly, “that my image
should be placed on the column.”
Every body, in fact, knows, that the statue
of Napoleon, by which this monument was for-
merly surmounted, had been pulled down in
the early days of the restoration; and it was
not for individual and unauthorized citizens to
repair this affront.
A few royalists, at the head of whom figured

<page 381>
362 MEMOIRS OF
M. de Maubreuil and M. Sostène de la Roche-
foucault, were guilty of this profanation. M.
de Rochefoucault, whose family had shared so
largely in the gifts and favours of Napoleon,
himself put a rope about the neck of his bene-
factor, with intention to have it dragged through
the mud by some vagabonds, whom he had
hired: but the statue mocked his endeavours;
and the only fruit he reaped from them was
the reprobation of honest men, and the con-
tempt of foreigners".
The column itself was long offensive to the
jealous eyes of the enemies of our glory. They
conspired its destruction; and would have ac-
complished it, had they dared. History, which
leaves nothing unpunished, will brand, I trust,
these unworthy Frenchmen, these new Vandals,
with eternal disgrace. It will inscribe their
names, and their sacrilegious wishes, on the
foot of the immortal column, which they wanted
to overturn. No doubt it will also tell, that the
federates, the half-pay officers, and all the par-
tisans of Napoleon, whom some have been
pleased to represent as madmen, as robbers,
respected during the hundred days the statue
* The Emperor Alexander, in particular, expressed the
most generous indignation.
{

<page 382>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 363
of Henry IV.; though this statue, placed within
reach of their blows, and constructed of frail
materials, would have fallen with the slightest
shock.
Napoleon had said to the national guard of
Paris, “We yet know of none that are ene-
mies:” and these words were true. It had
been remarked, that the foreign troops con-
centrated themselves on our frontiers, but none
of their dispositions appeared hostile, and Na-
poleon might still reasonably hope, that his
care to maintain peace would not be fruitless.
On the very day of his entry into Lyons, he
had hastened to commission Prince Joseph, to
declare to the Austrian and Russian ministers
at the Helvetic diet, that he was ready to ratify
the treaty of Paris. -
When he arrived in the capital, he found
that the foreign ministers, particularly Baron
de Vincent, the Austrian minister, and M.
Boudiakeen, Russian chargé d'affaire, had not
yet quitted it, for want of passports.
He caused the departure of M. de Vincent
and M. de Boudiakeen to be delayed; and di-
rected the Duke of Vicenza to see them, and
assure them anew of his pacific disposition.
Baron de Vincent at first refused all kind of

<page 383>
364 MEMOIRS OF
communication or conferences; but at length
he consented to meet M. de Vicenza at the
house of a third person. They had a con-
ference together at Madame de Souza's. M. de
Vincent did not conceal the resolution of the
allies, to oppose Napoleon’s retaining the
throne: but he hinted, that in his opinion
there might not be the same repugnance to
his son. He engaged, however, to make known
the sentiments of Napoleon to the Emperor of
Austria; and consented to take charge of a
letter for the Empress Marie Louise *.
M. de Boudiakeen, after having equally re-
fused the conference proposed by the Duke of
Vicenza, finished also with accepting it. It
was agreed, that they should meet at the house
of Mademoiselle Cauchelet, lady of the bed-
chamber to the Princess Hortense.
M. de Jaucourt had forgotten to take out of
the portfolio of foreign affairs a secret treaty,
by which England, Austria, and France, had
mutually engaged to oppose, peaceably or by
* M. de Vincent set out before this letter was written,
and it was entrusted to his secretary. The Emperor of
Austria ordered it to be delivered into his hands, and con-
tented himself with informing the Empress Marie, that he
had received news of her husband, and that he was well.

<page 384>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 365
force, the dismemberment of Saxony, which
Russia and Prussia openly conspired.
The Emperor thought, that this treaty might
perhaps alienate these two powers from the
Bourbon interest, and generate distrust and
discord between the allies. He directed the
Duke of Vicenza, to show it to the Russian
minister; and represent it to him as a fresh
proof of the ingratitude, with which the court
of the Tuileries repaid the numerous benefits of
Alexander. The existence of this triple alliance
was wholly unknown to M. de Boudiakeen, and
appeared to cause him as much surprise as dis-
satisfaction. But he declared, that he was too
well acquainted with the principles of his so-
vereign, to venture to flatter himself, that the
circumstance of this treaty, or any other, could
produce a favourable change in his disposition.
He promised, however, to make a faithful re-
port to him of the conference he had had with
M. de Vicenza; and to express to him the
desire, manifested by the Emperor Napoleon,
of becoming again the ally and friend of Russia.
The Emperor, in order to give more efficacy
to his proposals, directed the Princess Hor-
tense, to confirm them in person to the Em-
peror Alexander. He also caused letters to be
written to Prince Eugene, and to the Grand

<page 385>
366 MEMOIRS OF
Duchess Stéphanie of Baden, to request them,
to renew the same assurances to that sovereign,
and to neglect no means of detaching him from
the coalition.
In fine, the Emperor directed overtures to
be made to the cabinet of London, by means of a
person pointed out by the Duke of Otranto; and
in order to gain the suffrage of the parliament,
and give the English ministry a pledge of his
good intentions beforehand, he abolished the
slave trade by a spontaneous decree.
After having taken these indirect steps, Na-
poleon thought his duty as well as his dignity
required him, to give a solemn and authentic
character to the manifestation of his pacific in-
tentions.
Accordingly he wrote to the foreign sove-
reigns a letter couched in the following terms:
“Sire, my brother,
“You will have heard in the course of last
month of my return to the French coast, my
entering Paris, and the departure of the Bourbon
family. The true nature of these events must
now be known to your Majesty: they are the
work of an irresistible power, the work and the
unanimous will of a great nation, who knows its
duties and its rights. The dynasty, which force

<page 386>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 367
had bestowed on the French people, was not
formed for them: the Bourbons would not ac-
commodate themselves either to their senti-
ments, or to their manners. France could not
but separate itself from them. Her voice
called for a deliverer: the expectations, that
had induced me, to make the greatest of all
sacrifices, had been frustrated. I came, and
from the spot where I touched the shore I was
conducted by the love of my people to the
bosom of my capital. The first wish of my
heart is, to repay such great affection by the
maintenance of an honourable tranquillity. The
re-establishment of the imperial throne being
necessary to the happiness of the French, no-
thing can be more pleasing to my thoughts,
than to render it at the same time advantageous
to the consolidation of the tranquillity of Eu-
rope. Sufficient glory had crowned the standards
of the different nations by turns; the vicissitudes
of fate have occasioned a sufficient succession
of great successes and great defeats: a nobler
career now opens itself to sovereigns, and I am
the first to enter it. After having exhibited to
the world the spectacle of great battles, it will
be more pleasing, henceforth to know no rivalry
but that of the advantages of peace, no strife
but the sacred striving after the happiness of

<page 387>
368 - MEMOIRS OF
nations. France takes a pleasure in frankly
proclaiming this noble end of all her wishes.
Jealous of her own independence, the invariable
principle of her politics will be the most absolute
respect for the independence of other nations.
If such be the personal sentiments of your
Majesty, as I am happy to persuade myself,
the general tranquillity is ensured for a long
time to come; and justice, sitting on the con-
fines of states, will be sufficient alone to guard
their frontiers.
“Paris, the 4th of April.”
The Duke of Vicenza received orders, per-
sonally to express to the foreign ministers the
sentiments, with which the Emperor was ani-
mated: but the couriers, who carried his de-
spatches, could not reach the places of their
destination; one was arrested at Kehl, another at
Mayence; a third, sent off for Italy, could not
get beyond Turin; the communications were
interrupted. The arrangements of the declara-
tion of the congress of Vienna of the 13th of
March were acted upon already.
This declaration, transmitted directly by the
emissaries of the King to the prefects of the
frontier cities, and distributed by the royalists,
was in circulation at Paris. The inferior papers

<page 388>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 369
had announced its appearance, and united in
asserting, that such an act was unworthy of the
allied sovereigns, and could only be the work
of calumny and malevolence.
However, when it became impossible to
question its legitimacy, it was necessary to
come to the resolution of no longer making a
mystery of it to the French people; and ac-
cordingly the following account was given of it
in the Moniteur on the 13th of April.
“CouncIL of MINISTERs.
“Sitting of the 29th of March.
“The Duke of Otranto, minister of the ge-
neral police, states, that he is about to read to
the council a declaration, dated Vienna the
13th, which is supposed to have been issued
by the congress:
“That this declaration, as it contains an in-
centive to the assassination of the Emperor,
appears to him apocryphal: that, if it should
prove genuine, it would be unexampled in the
history of the world: that the libellous style, in
which it is written, gives room to suppose, it
ought to be classed among the papers fabricated
by party-spirit, and by those pamphleteers, who
of late years have foisted themselves uncom-
VOL. I. B B

<page 389>
870 MEMOIRS OF
missioned into all state affairs: that it pretends
to be signed by the English ministers; but it
is impossible to suppose, that the ministers of a
free nation, and particularly Lord Wellington,
could have taken a step inconsistent with the
legislation of their country, and with their own
characters: that it pretends to be signed by the
ministers of Austria; but it is impossible to
conceive, whatever political dissensions may
subsist between them, that a father could call
for the assassination of his son: that, contrary
to every principle of religion and morality, it is
derogatory to the honourable character of the
sovereigns, whose mandates are thus compro-
mised by the libellists: that this declaration
has been known several days, but, from the
considerations abovementioned, it could not be
considered otherwise than as deserving the pro-
foundest contempt: that it was not deemed fit
to engage the attention of the ministry, till
official reports from Metz and Strasburg made
known, that it had been brought into France
by couriers from the Prince of Benevento; a
fact confirmed by the result of the investigation
that took place, and the interrogatories put:
in fine, that it is proved, that this paper, which
could not have been signed by the ministers of
Austria, Russia, and England, was issued by the

<page 390>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 371
legation of the Count of Lille at Vienna; which
legation had added to the crime of provoking
assassination that of falsifying the signature of
the members of the congress.
“The pretended declaration of the congress,
the reports from Metz and Strasburg, as well as
the investigation and interrogatories conducted
by order of the minister of the general police,
which ascertain, that the said declaration pro-
ceeded from the plenipotentiaries of the Count
of Lille at Vienna, will be sent to the presidents
of the sections of the council.
“DECLARATION.
“The powers, who signed the treaty of Paris,
assembled in Congress at Vienna, being in-
formed of the escape of Napoleon Bonaparte,
and of his entering France by force of arms,
owe to their own dignity, and to the interests
of society, a solemn declaration of the sen-
timents, with which this event has inspired
them.
“By thus infringing the convention, which
settled him in the island of Elba, Bonaparte has
destroyed the only legal title he had to his
situation in life (auquel son eaistence se trouvait
attachée.) By re-appearing in France, with the
design of disturbing and subverting it, he has
B B 2

<page 391>
372 MEMOIRS OF
deprived himself of the protection of the laws,
and has made manifest to the universe, that
there can be neither peace nor truce with him.
“The powers declare in consequence, that
Napoleon Bonaparte has thrown himself out of
all the relations of civilized society; and that,
as an enemy and disturber of the world, he
has rendered himself obnoxious to public ven-
geance.
“At the same time they declare, that, firmly
resolved to maintain unbroken the treaty of
Paris of the 30th of March, 1814, and the ar-
rangements sanctioned by that treaty, as well
as those they have decreed, or may yet decree,
for completing and consolidating it; they will
employ all their means, and unite all their
efforts, to prevent the general peace, the object
of the wishes of all Europe, the constant aim
of their labours, from being disturbed anew;
and to guard it from every attempt, that would
threaten to replunge nations into the disorders
and calamities of revolutions.
“And though intimately persuaded, that all
France, rallying round its legitimate sovereign,
will annihilate without delay this last attempt
of a criminal and impotent delirium, all the so-
vereigns of Europe, animated with the same
sentiments, and guided by the same principles,

<page 392>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 373
declare, that if, contrary to all calculation, any
real danger whatever should arise from this
event, they will be ready to furnish the King of
France and the French nation, or any other
government that may be attacked, with the suc-
cours necessary to restore the public tranquil-
lity, as soon as they shall be demanded, and to
make common cause against all, who may at-
tempt to disturb it.
“The present declaration, inserted in the
register of the congress assembled at Vienna,
in the sitting of the 13th of March, 1815, shall
be made public.
“Done and certified as true by the plenipo-
tentiaries of the eight powers, who signed the
Treaty of Paris, at Vienna, the 13th of March,
1815.
Here follow the signatures in the alphabetical
order of the courts.
- (The Prince de METTERNICH,
“Austria . . .
The Baron de WEsseMBERG.
o: • 6 e { P. GoMEz LABRADoR.
The Prince de TALLEYRAND,
The Duke D’ALBERG,
France . . . . . 4 LATOUR DUPIN,
The Count ALEXIS DE No-
AILLES.

<page 393>
374 MEMOIRS OF
WELLINGTON,
CLANCARTY,
CATHCART,
STEwART.
The Count PALMELA,
Portugal . . . £
LoBo.
The Prince de HARDENBERG,
' ' The Baron de HUMBOLDT.
The Count de RAsoUMowski,
Russia . . . . 4
Great Britain
Prussia . . .
The Count de STAKELBERG,
The Count de NEsseLRoDE.
Sweden . . . . LowRNHIELM.”
This declaration, which no doubt will here-
after excite the astonishment of posterity, was
commented upon and victoriously refuted by the
Emperor himself. Count Boulay, to whom the
following report is ascribed, had no farther
share in it, than condensing it a little, and
softening some of its expressions.
Report of the committee of presidents of the
council of state.
“In consequence of the reference made to
it, the committee, composed of the presidents
of the sections of the council of state, has ex-
amined the declaration of the 13th of March,
the report of the minister of the general police,
and the papers added to them.

<page 394>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 375
“The declaration is in an unusual form,
composed in such strange terms, and expresses
such anti-social ideas, that the committee was
led to consider it as one of those supposititious
productions, by means of which despicable men
endeavour to impose upon people’s minds, and
mislead the public opinion.
“But the verification of the examinations
taken at Metz, and of the interrogatories of the
couriers, admit no doubt, that the declaration
was sent by members of the French legation
at Vienna; and consequently it must be con-
sidered as adopted and signed by them.
“It is under this last point of view, that the
committee imagines it ought first to examine
this production, which has no precedent in the
annals of diplomacy, and in which Frenchmen,
men invested with the most respectable of
public characters, begin with a sort of out-
lawry, with a provocation to assassinate the
Emperor Napoleon.
“We say with the minister of the police, that
this declaration is the work of the French pleni-
potentiaries: because those of Austria, Prus-
sia, Russia, and England, could not have been
capable of signing a paper, which the sove-
reigns and people, to whom they belong, will be
eager to disavow.

<page 395>
376 MEMOIRS OF •
“And in the first place these plenipo-
tentiaries, most of them coadjutors in the treaty
of Paris, know, that Napoleon was there ac-
knowledged as retaining the title of Emperor,
and as sovereign of the island of Elba: they
would have mentioned him by these titles, and
would not have deviated, either in matter or in
manner, from the respect they impose.
“They would have felt, that, agreeably to
the laws of nations, a prince, however trifling
the extent or population of his state, enjoys, as
far as regards his political and civil character,
the rights belonging to every sovereign prince
in respect to the most powerful monarch; and
Napoleon, acknowledged under the title of Em-
peror, and in quality of a sovereign prince, by
all the powers, was no more amenable to the
congress of Vienna than any of them.
“The forgetfulness of these principles, im-
possible to be supposed in plenipotentiaries,
who weigh the rights of nations maturely with
wisdom and consideration, has nothing asto-
nishing in it when manifested by French mi-
nisters, whose conscience reproaches them with
more than one act of treason, in whom fear has
engendered rage, and whose remorse leads their
reason astray.
“Such men as these may have risked the

<page 396>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 377
fabrication and the publication of a piece like
the pretended declaration of the 13th of March,
in the hope of stopping the progress of Napo-
leon, and misleading the French people with
regard to the real sentiments of foreign powers.
“But they cannot judge like these powers of
the merits of a nation, which they have misun-
derstood, betrayed, and delivered up to the
arms of foreigners. -
“This nation, brave and generous, revolts
against every thing that bears the marks of
cowardice and oppression: its affections are
heightened, when the object of them is threat-
ened or affected by a great injustice; and
assassination, which the commencement of the
declaration of the 13th of March is intended to
excite, will find not a single hand to execute it,
either among the twenty-five millions of French-
men, the majority of whom attended, guarded,
and protected Napoleon from the Mediterra-
nean to the capital; nor among the eighteen
millions of Italians, the six millions of Belgians
or inhabitants of the banks of the Rhine, and
the numerous nations of Germany, who, on this
solemn occasion, have not pronounced his name
without respectful remembrance; nor a single
individual of the indignant English nation,
whose honourable sentiments disavow the lan-

<page 397>
378 MEMOIRS OF
guage, that those men have dared to attribute
to the sovereigns.
“The people of Europe are enlightened;
they judge the rights of Napoleon, the rights
of the allied princes, and those of the Bourbons.
“They know, that the convention of Fon-
tainbleau was a treaty between sovereigns. Its
violation, the entrance of Napoleon into the
French territory, like any other infraction of
a diplomatic act, like any hostile invasion,
could only bring on an ordinary war; the
result of which can only be, to the person, that
of being conqueror or conquered, free or a pri-
soner of war; to possessions, that of being lost
or preserved, diminished or increased; and that
every thought, every threat, every attempt,
against the life of a prince at war with another,
is a thing unheard of in the history of nations,
and of the cabinets of Europe.
“In the violence, the rage, the forgetfulness
of principle, that characterize the declaration
of the 13th of March, we recognize the envoys
of the same prince, the organs of the same
councils, who, by the ordinance of the 6th of
March, also put Napoleon out of the pale of the
law, also invoked for him the daggers of assas-
sins, and also promised a reward to whoever
would bring his head.

<page 398>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 379
“Yet what has Napoleon done? By his con-
fidence he has honoured the men of all nations,
who were insulted by the infamous office to
which they were invited: he has shown him-
self temperate, generous, a protector, even
toward those who had devoted his head to
destruction.
“When he spoke to General Excelmans,
marching toward the column that closely
pressed Louis Stanislas Xavier; to General
Count Erlon, who was to receive him at Lille;
to General Clausel, who was going to Bour-
deaux, where the Duchess of Angoulême was;
to General Grouchy, who marched to put a
stop to the civil disturbances excited by the
Duke of Angoulême; every where, in short,
orders were given by the Emperor, that their
persons should be respected, and sheltered from
all attack, from all danger, from all violence,
during their progress on the French territories,
and to the moment of their quitting them.
“Contemporary nations and posterity will
judge, on which side respect has been paid in
this grand conjuncture to the rights of nations
and of sovereigns, to the laws of war, the prin-
ciples of civilization, and the maxims of law
civil and religious: they will pronounce be-
tween Napoleon and the house of Bourbon.

<page 399>
380 MEMoIRs of
“If, after having examined the pretended
declaration of the congress in this first point of
view, we discuss it in its relations to diplomatic
conventions, to the treaty of Fontainbleau of
the 11th of April, ratified by the French go-
vernment, we shall find, that their violation is
imputable only to those very persons who charge
it on Napoleon. - :
“The treaty of Fontainbleau has been vio-
lated by the allied powers, and by the house of
Bourbon, in what regards the Emperor Napo-
leon and his family, in what affects the rights
and interests of the French nation:
“1st. The Empress Marie Louise and her
son were to obtain passports and an escort, to
enable them to repair to the Emperor: but, far
from performing this promise, the wife was
separated by force from her husband, the son
from his father, and this under painful circum-
stances, when the strongest mind finds it neces-
sary to seek consolation and support in the
bosom of its family and domestic affections.
“2d. The safety of Napoleon, of the impe-
rial family, and of their suite, was guarantied
(Art. 14 of the treaty) by all the powers: yet
bands of assassins were organized in France
under the eyes of the French government, and
even by its orders, as the solemn proceedings

<page 400>
NAPOLEoN IN 1815. 381
-
against the Sieur de Maubreuil will shortly
prove, to attack both the Emperor, his brothers,
and their wives: this first branch of the plot
failing of the expected success, a tumult was
planned at Orgon, on the road taken by the
Emperor, in order to make an attempt against
his life by the hands of some brigands: one of
the cut-throats of Georges, the Sieur Brulart,
raised for the purpose to the rank of major-
general, known in Brittany, in Anjou, in Nor-
mandy, in la Vendée, throughout all England,
by the blood he has shed, was sent to Corsica as
governor, in order to prepare and insure the
crime; and, in fact, several solitary assassins
attempted, in the island of Elba, to gain, by the
murder of Napoleon, the culpable and disgrace-
ful salary which was promised them.
“3d. The duchies of Parma and Placentia
were given in full propriety to Marie Louise, for
herself, her son, and his descendants: yet, after
long refusal to put them into possession, the
injustice was consummated by an absolute spo-
liation, under the illusory pretext of an ex-
change without valuation, without proportion,
without sovereignty, without consent; and the
documents existing in the office of foreign
affairs, of which we have had an account pre-
sented to us, prove, that it was at the instance

<page 401>
382 MEMOIRS OF
and through the intrigues of the Prince of
Benevento, that Marie Louise and her son were
despoiled.
“4th. A suitable establishment, out of France,
had been given to Prince Eugene, the adopted
son of Napoleon, who has done honour to
France, where he was born, and gained the
affection of Italy, where he was naturalized;
yet he has obtained nothing.
“5th. The Emperor had stipulated (Art. 3
of the treaty) in favour of his brave soldiers the
preservation of their salaries from the Napoleon
fund ('sur le mont Napoléon); he had reserved
out of the extraordinary domain, and the funds
remaining of the civil list, the means of recom-
pensing his servants, and of paying the soldiers,
that attached themselves to his fate. The whole
was taken away and kept back by the ministers
of the Bourbons. An agent of the French
soldiers went in vain to Vienna, to claim for
them the most sacred of all property, the price
of their valour and their blood.
“6th. The preservation of the property, mova-
ble and immovable, of the Emperor's family,
is stipulated by the same treaty (Art. 6); yet it
has been despoiled of both : in France, with
force of arms, by commissioned brigands; in
Italy, by the violence of military commanders;

<page 402>
Napoleon IN 1815. 388
in both countries by seizures and sequestrations
solemnly appointed.
“7th. The Emperor Napoleon was to receive
two millions of francs a year, and his family two
millions and a half, agreeably to the distribution
fixed by Art. 6 of the treaty: but the French
government has constantly refused to fulfil
these engagements, and Napoleon would have
soon seen himself reduced to the necessity of
dismissing his faithful guard, for want of the
means of ensuring its pay, if he had not found
in the grateful remembrances of the bankers
and merchants of Genoa and Italy the honour-
able resource of a loan of twelve millions, which
was offered him.
“8th. In fine, it was not without a motive,
that certain persons were desirous of separating
from Napoleon, by any means, the companions
of his glory, models of attachment and con-
stancy, unshaken guaranties of his life and
safety. The island of Elba was secured to him
in full property (Art. 3 of the treaty): yet the
resolution to deprive him of it, desired by the
Bourbons, and solicited by their agents, had
been taken at the Congress.
“And if Providence in its justice had not
interposed, Europe would have seen attempts
made against the person, the liberty of Na-

<page 403>
384 MEMOIRS OF
poleon, banished for ever at the mercy of his
enemies, far from his family, separated from his
servants, either to St. Lucie, or to St. Helena,
which was assigned him as a prison.
“And when the allied powers, yielding to
the imprudent wishes, or cruel instigations, of
the agents of the house of Bourbon, have stooped
to violate a solemn contract, on the faith of
which Napoleon had absolved the French nation
from its oaths; when himself, and all the mem-
bers of his family, saw themselves menaced and
attacked in their persons, in their property, in
their affections, in all the rights stipulated in
their favour as princes, and even in those
secured by the laws to simple citizens; how
ought Napoleon to act?
“Ought he, after having endured so many
insults, and suffered so many acts of injustice,
to consent to the complete violation of the
engagements entered into with him; and, re-
signing himself to the fate prepared for him,
abandon also to their fearful destiny, his wife,
his son, his relations, and his faithful servants P
“Such a resolution seems to require more
than human strength of mind: yet Napoleon
was capable of taking it, if the peace and hap-
piness of France could have been purchased
by this new sacrifice. He would again have

<page 404>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 385
devoted himself for the French people, from
whom, as he wishes to declare in the face of all
Europe, he makes it his glory to hold every
thing, to whom he refers every thing, and to
whom alone he will hold himself responsible for
his actions and devote his life.
“It was for France alone, and to save her
from the calamities of an intestine war, that he
abdicated the crown in 1814. He restored to
the French people the rights he held from
them; he left them free to choose a new master,
and to found their liberty and happiness on in-
stitutions, that would protect both.
“He hoped, that the nation would preserve
all it had acquired by five and twenty years of
glorious fighting; and the exercise of its sove-
reignty in the choice of a dynasty, and in sti-
pulating the conditions, on which it should be
called to the throne.
“He expected from the new government
respect for the glory of the armies, and for the
rights of the brave; the guaranty of all the new
interests, interests generated and maintained
during a quarter of a century, resulting from all
the civil and political laws, observed and revered
during that time, because they are identified
with the manners, habits, and wants of the
nation.
VOI. I. C C

<page 405>
386 MEMOIRS OF
“Far from all this, every idea of the sove-
reignty of the people has been discarded.
“The principle, on which all public and civil
legislation has been founded since the revolu-
tion, has been equally discarded.
“France has been treated as a revolted
country, reconquered by the armies of its
ancient masters, and subjugated anew to a feu-
dal domination.
“A constitutional law has been imposed on
France, as easy to be eluded as revoked; and in
the form of royal ordinances simply, without
consulting the nation, without even hearing
those bodies, become illegal, the phantoms of
national representation.
“The violation of this charter has been
checked only by the timidity of the government;
the extent of the abuses of its authority has been
limited only by its weakness.
“The disjointing of the army, the dispersion
of its officers, the exile of several, the debase-
ment of the soldiers, the suppression of their
endowments, the privation of their pay or
pensions; the reduction of the pay of the legion-
aries, the despoiling them of their honours, the
pre-eminence given to the decorations of the
feudal monarchy, the contempt of the citizens,
designated anew under the name of tiers-état

<page 406>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 387
(third estate); the spoliation of the purchasers
of national property, prepared and already
begun, the actual diminution of value of such
as was obliged to be sold; the return of the
feudal system in its titles, privileges, and useful
rights, the re-establishment of tramontane
principles, the abolition of the liberties of the
Gallican church, the annihilation of the Con-
cordat, the re-establishment of tithes, the re-
viving intolerance of an exclusive form of wor-
ship; the domination of a handful of nobles
over a people accustomed to equality: are what
the ministers of the Bourbons have done, or
wished to do, for the people of France.
“It was under such circumstances, that the
Emperor Napoleon quitted the island of Elba:
such were the motives of the resolution he took,
and not the consideration of his own personal
interests, so trivial in his opinion compared with
the interests of the nation, to which he has
devoted his existence. - ‘. . . . .
“He has not brought war into the bosom of
France: on the contrary, he has extinguished
the war, which the possessors of national pro-
perty, constituting four fifths of the landholders
throughout France, would have been compelled
to make upon their despoilers; the war, which
the citizens, oppressed, degraded, humiliated
C C 2

<page 407>
388 MEMOIRS OF
by the nobles, would have been forced to
declare against their oppressors; the war, which
the Protestants, the Jews, and the people of
different sects, would have been obliged to
maintain against their persecutors.
“He came to deliver France; and as a deli-
verer he has been received.
“He arrived almost alone; he travelled two
hundred and twenty leagues, without meeting
any obstacle, without a battle; and has resumed
without resistance, in the midst of the capital,
and of the acclamations of an immense majority
of the citizens, the throne relinquished by the
Bourbons; who, from among the army, their
own household, the national guards, or the
people, could not raise a single person in arms,
to endeavour to maintain them in it.
“Yet, replaced at the head of the nation,
which had already chosen him three times, and
has just elected him a fourth time by the recep-
tion it gave him on his march, and his trium-
phant arrival; of that nation, by which, and for
the interest of which, he wishes to reign;
“What is the desire of Napoleon? What the
French people desire, the independence of
France, peace within, peace with all nations, the
execution of the treaty of Paris, of the 30th of
May, 1814.

<page 408>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. S89
“What is there, then, changed in the future
state of Europe, and in the hope of repose pro-
mised it? What voice is raised, to demand those
succours, which, according to the declaration,
are to be granted only when claimed?
“There is nothing changed, if the allied
powers recur, as we have a right to expect from
them, to just and temperate sentiments; if they
acknowledge, that the existence of France in a
respectable and independent state, as far from
conquering as from being conquered, from
domineering as from being held in subjection,
is necessary to the balance of great realms, as
well as to the guaranty of smaller states.
“There is nothing changed, if, not attempt-
ing to compel France to resume with a dynasty,
which she can no longer desire, the feudal
chains she has broken, and to submit to the
seigneurial or ecclesiastical pretensions, from
which it has emancipated itself, those powers
do not attempt to impose on her laws, to inter-
fere in her internal concerns, to assign her a
particular form of government, to give her
masters suited to the interests and passions of
her neighbours.
“There is nothing changed, if, while France
is occupied in preparing the new social compact,

<page 409>
390 MEMOIRS OF
that shall guaranty the liberty of her citizens,
and the triumph of those generous ideas, that
prevail in Europe, and can no longer be stifled;
she be not compelled, to call off her attention
from these pacific ideas, and from the means of
domestic prosperity, to which the people and
their chief are desirous of devoting themselves
in happy concord, in order to prepare for battle.
“There is nothing changed, if, while the
French nation demands nothing, but to remain
at peace with all Europe, an unjust coalition do
not oblige her to defend, as it did in 1792, her
will, and her rights, and her independence, and
the sovereign of her choice.”
This eloquent refutation, full of irrefragable
facts, and reasonings not to be refuted, was no
longer necessary. French honour had judged
and condemned the Congress of Vienna and its
Declaration.
When this declaration appeared, France grew
pale: she was astonished, affrighted at the cala-
mities, which the future boded; and groaned at
the idea of being exposed to a war for the sake
of one single man.
This first impression over, her pride, her
virtue, felt indignant, that the allies should dare

<page 410>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 391
to conceive the thought, that she would yield to
their menaces, and cowardly consent, to give
Napoleon up to them.
Had Napoleon been no more than a simple
citizen, the attempt to violate by authority the
rights of men and nations in his person would
have been sufficient, to induce the French, or at
least all worthy of the name, to think themselves
obliged to protect and defend him.
But Napoleon was not merely a simple citi-
zen, he was the head of the French nation: it
was for having aggrandized it by his conquests,
and ennobled it by his victories, that he was
proscribed by foreigners; and the most timid
as well as the most generous made it their sacred
duty to place him under the safeguard of the
nation, and of French honour.
Thus the declaration of the Congress, in-
stead of intimidating France, heightened its
courage; instead of separating Napoleon from
the French, drew still more close the bands that
united them; instead of calling down on his
head the public vengeance, rendered him more
estimable and more dear in the eyes of the
people.
If Napoleon, availing himself of these ge-
nerous sentiments, had said to the French:
“You have restored to me the crown, foreign-

<page 411>
392 MEMOIRS OF
ers are desirous of tearing it from me; I am
ready, either to defend it, or to lay it down;
say which I shall do:” the whole nation would
have understood Napoleon, and would have
risen in a body, to cause the sovereign of its
heart and its choice to be respected.
But Napoleon had other ideas: he considered
the declaration of the Congress merely as a
paper adapted to the circumstances of the day,
the object of which was, at the time when it was
subscribed by the allies, to support the courage
of the royalists, and to restore to the Bour-
bons the confidence and moral strength they
had lost. -
He thought, that his entrance into Paris,
and the entire pacification of the South, would
have completely changed the state of things;
and he hoped, that foreign nations would ulti-
mately acknowledge him, when they were con-
vinced, that he had been re-established on the
throne by the unanimous consent of the French,
and that his ideas of conquest and dominion had
given place to the real desire of respecting the
tranquillity and independence of his neigh-
bours, and of living in harmony with them.
In fine, he considered, that prudence would
induce the allies, as it was their interest, not to
engage in a war, the results of which could not

<page 412>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 893
be favourable to them: “They will feel, that
they will not this time have to do with the
France of 1814; and that their successes, if
they gain any, will be no longer decisive, but
will merely serve to render the war more ob-
stinate and bloody; while, if victory favour me,
I may become as formidable as ever. I have
for me Belgium and the Rhenish provinces,
and with a tricoloured flag and a proclamation
I could revolutionize them in four-and-twenty
hours.”
The treaty of the 25th of March, by which
the great powers, renewing the arrangements
of the treaty of Chaumont, engaged themselves
anew not to lay down their arms, as long as
Napoleon should be on the throne, appeared to
him merely the natural consequence of the
act of the 18th of March, and of the erroneous
opinions the allies had formed of France. He
thought, that it would not alter the state of the
question; and resolved, notwithstanding this
treaty, and the affronting manner in which his
first overtures were received, to endeavour re-
peatedly to make the voice of truth, of reason,
and of peace, heard at Vienna.
Baron de Stassart, late auditor to the council
of state and prefect, had been made chamberlain
of Austria, or of Bavaria, since the restoration.

<page 413>
394 MEMOIRS OF
He was at Paris. The Emperor, hoping he
might be able to reach Vienna under favour of
his quality of chamberlain, charged him with a
mission for the Empress Marie Louise, and
fresh despatches for the Emperor of Austria.
Napoleon at the same time had recourse to
other means: he was aware of the intimacy
and connexions of MM. D. de St. L** and de
Mont" with Prince Talleyrand; and persuaded,
that M. de Talleyrand would procure for them
authority to repair to Vienna, he resolved, to
send them thither. He did not deceive himself
with the idea, that they would accept their
mission for any other purpose than that of more
easily serving the royal cause; but he paid
little regard to their intrigues with the King,
provided they delivered and brought back with
exactness the despatches, that should be en-
trusted to them *.
* It was a laughable singularity, that, of all the double-faced
men employed by the Emperor, there was no one, in whom
he had more confidence, than he had in M. de Mont”. He
had formerly ill-treated, persecuted, and banished him: he
knew, that he detested him, and was the most intimate, the
most devoted friend of M. de Talleyrand: but he knew also
the bent of M. de Mont”s mind; and he thought, that he
would feel an infinite pleasure, in executing his mission well,
and humming [rouer] M. de Talleyrand, who flattered him.

<page 414>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 395
: About the King, however, and what passed at
Ghent, he took little concern: his anxious eyes
were turned to Vienna; and convinced of the
influence, that M. de Talleyrand might exert
there, he particularly directed M. ***, to
offer him his favour, and money also, if he
would abandon the Bourbons, and employ his
talents, and experience for the benefit of the
imperial cause. -
The Emperor, who did not cease to hope,
that his exertions, time, and reflection, might
effect some changes in the resolutions of the
allies, heard with extreme displeasure, that the
King of Naples had commenced hostilities.
This prince had long been dissatisfied with
the complaisance, with which the allied sove-
reigns listened to the protests of France, Sa-
voy, and Spain: and, though his crown had
been guarantied to him by a solemn compact
with Austria, and by the formal declarations of
Russia and England, he foresaw, that the doc-
self, that he had never been hummed by any person. , I
know not whether M. de Mont” found it pleasant, or not,
to take in M. de Talleyrand; what I know is, that he justi-
fied the expectations of Napoleon, and brought back to him
intact the letters, that were delivered to him by M. de
Mont”.

<page 415>
396 MEMOIRS OF
trine of legitimacy would carry the point against
the faith of treaties, and that Austria, though
interested in not allowing another crown to be
transferred to the house of Bourbon, would be
obliged to submit to the unanimous will of the
other powers.
Thus the fear of being driven from the
throne, and the resolution to maintain him-
self in it, possessed Joachim, when the news
of the successful landing of Napoleon reached
Naples.
The horror with which the Austrian sway in-
spired the Italians, the attachment they retained
to Napoleon, and the joy they displayed on hear-
ing of his departure from the island of Elba,
persuaded the King, that he should find no
difficulty in raising Italy; and he flattered
himself with bringing the allies, either by force
of arms, or by way of negotiation, to guaranty
to him irrevocably the possession of his king-
dom.
Desirous on the other hand of securing the
protection of Napoleon, in case of failure of
success, he secretly despatched an emissary to
congratulate him; and announce, that, with a
view of seconding his operations, he was about
to attack the Austrians, and, if his wishes were
answered by victory, he would soon join him

<page 416>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 897
with a formidable army: “in fine,” he wrote,
“the moment of atoning for the wrong I have
done your Majesty, and of proving my attach-
ment, is now arrived; I will not let it escape.”
This letter, which I deciphered, reached the
Emperor at Auxerre; and he immediately en-
joined the King, to continue his preparations,
but wait for his giving him the signal, before he
commenced hostilities. The natural impetuo-
sity and impatience of this Prince did not allow
him, to wait for the answer of Napoleon, and
when his despatches arrived, the gauntlet had
been thrown down.
The better to disguise his intentions, Joa-
chim had summoned the ambassadors of Aus-
tria and England, immediately on hearing of
the landing of Napoleon, and had assured them,
that he would remain faithful to his engage-
ments. When he had assembled his army (put
in motion under pretence of reinforcing his
troops in the March of Ancona), he fell unex-
pectedly on the Austrians; and announced to
the Italians, by a proclamation dated at Ri-
mini the 31st of March, that he had taken up
arms to liberate Italy from a foreign yoke, and
restore its ancient freedom and independence.
g 6 Italians,” said he to them, “the moment is
arrived, when the great decrees of destiny are

<page 417>
398 MEMOIRS OF
to be fulfilled. Providence at length calls you,
to become an independent people : one cry re-
sounds from the Alps to the straits of Scylla,
the independence of Italy. By what right
would foreigners rob you of your independ-
ence, the first right, and the first good, of all
nations? . . . . . . . . . . . . .
“Formerly masters of the world, you have
expiated this fatal glory by an oppression of
twenty centuries. Let your glory now be, to
have no more masters
“Fourscore thousand Italians hasten to you
under the command of their king. They swear
not to rest, till Italy is free. Italians of all
countries, second their magnanimous efforts . . .
let those, who have borne arms, resume them,
let the unpractised youth exercise themselves
in the use of them, let all the friends of their
country raise up one generous voice for liberty
Can England refuse you her suffrages, she
whose noblest claim to glory is to spend her
blood and treasure for the independence and
freedom of nations? . . . . . . . . .
• - - - • - • • • • • - - -

<page 418>
NAPOLEoN IN 1815. 399
“I call on all the brave, to come and fight
with me; I call on all men of enlightened un-
derstandings, to prepare, while the passions are
silent, the constitution and laws, that ought
henceforward to govern happy and independ-
ent Italy . . . . . .
This proclamation, to the great astonishment
of Italy and France, did not once mention the
name of Napoleon. It kept the most profound
silence respecting his return, his intercourse
with Joachim, and the hopes their combined
efforts must inspire.
Joachim however was not ignorant of the
ascendancy, which the name of Napoleon had
on the spirit and courage of the Italians. But
he knew also, that this name was odious to the
English, and dared not invoke it, for fear of
displeasing them. He thought he was suf-
ficiently powerful of himself, to act independ-
ently of the Emperor; and that it would be
enough, if he showed himself in arms to the
Italian nation, and offered it independence, to
raise it at his pleasure. He deceived himself:
all his strength was borrowed from Napoleon:
personally he enjoyed no weight, no influence,
in Italy. The Italians could not forgive him
for having betrayed his brother-in-law and

<page 419>
400 MEMOIRS OF
benefactor in 1814, or for having revealed to
Austria the patriotic conspiracy of Milan in
1815 *.
Thus prejudiced, they durst not confide in
him; his intentions appeared doubtful, his pro-
mises vague, his resources uncertain; and they
remained quiet spectators of the combat.
It is not, in fact, by concealments, that peo-
ple are reduced or hurried away: to subjugate
them, it is necessary, to convince their hearts
and their understandings; and the heart and
the understanding comprehend no language
but the straight forward voice of truth. Un-
happily this language was no longer known to
Murat. Since his accession to the throne, he
had adopted the system of dissimulation and
duplicity, which pretty generally characterise
Italian politics. These narrow politics, which
support themselves by cunning and temporiz-
ing, were incompatible with the French blood,
that circulated in his veins; and the continual
conflicts, that arose between his novel inclina-
tions and his natural petulance, were inces-
santly rendering his words and actions at va-
riance, and leading him into devious paths,
* I know not whether the fact be true: but, true or
false, it had the same effect on the minds of the Italians.

<page 420>
NA PoleoN IN 1815. 4O1
where he could not fail, to go astray and meet
his ruin. * -
Nevertheless, such is the magic power of the
sacred words of liberty and our country, that
Murat did not utter them in vain. Bologna
and a few cities declared for him; and a num-
ber of young Italians ran to enlist under his
standards. Victory favoured their first steps;
but Napoleon did not deceive himself: the
moment had been ill-chosen, he foresaw the
defection or ruin of Murat, and what passed
beyond the Alps no longer inspired him with
any thing but disgust. From that time he
turned his attention with more ardor than
ever to the means of struggling alone against
his adversaries, whose proceedings began to
assume a threatening appearance.
. The royal government, partly through fear,
partly from economy, had disorganized the
army, reduced the regiments one half, changed
their denominations, and dispersed the soldiers
among new battalions.
Napoleon re-established the regiments on
their ancient footing; restored to them their
glorious surnames of Invincible, Incomparable,
Terrible, One to Ten, &c. &c., which they had
acquired and merited in the field of battle. He
recalled to their standards the brave men who
VOL. I. - D D

<page 421>
402 MEMOIRS OF
had been banished from them; and the army,
which was scarcely fourscore thousand strong,
soon reckoned on its lists near two hundred
thousand fighting men.
The marines" and guards of the coasts, who
so brilliantly signalized their courage in the
plains of Lutzen and Bautzen, were united
under the command of their officers, and formed
a body of fifteen or eighteen thousand men,
who were appointed to protect our maritime
establishments, or, in case of necessity, rein-
force the active army.
The cavalry of the imperial guard and the
old grenadiers opened their ranks to ten thou-
sand soldiers selected from the flank companies;
the light artillery was re-organized; and the
young guard received an addition of several
regiments.
But it was not sufficient to restore to the
army the forces, of which it had been deprived;
it was equally necessary, to repair its destitu-
tion: the foot wanted arms and clothing, the
cavalry had neither saddles nor horses.
* Les marins. Properly, perhaps, the seamen, whom Na-
poleon took from the ships of war, and converted into sol-
diers.-Tr.

<page 422>
NAPolEoN IN 1815. 4.08
The Emperor looked to all these things.
Levies and purchases of horses were made at
once in all the departments.
The gendarmerie, by giving up the ten thou-
sand horses belonging to it, which it replaced
immediately, supplied the heavy cavalry with so
many horses already trained, which in ten days
rendered its numerous squadrons complete.
Spacious manufactories of clothing, arms,
and equipage, were opened at once in all parts.
The Emperor caused an account of the num-
ber of workmen, and the produce of their
labour, to be delivered to him every morning.
He knew how long it took a tailor to finish a
soldier's dress, a wheelwright to construct a
carriage, or an armourer to fit up a musket.
He knew the quantity of arms, in a good or
bad state, contained in the arsenals. “You
will find,” he wrote to the minister at war, “in
such an arsenal, so many old muskets, and so
many broken up. Set a hundred men at work
there, and arm me five hundred men a week.”
Such was the extent and variety of Napoleon's
genius, that he soared without effort to the
loftiest abstractions of the art of governing,
and descended with the same facility to the
minutest details of management.
D D 2 .

<page 423>
404 MEMOIRS OF
Extraordinary commissioners were employed
at the same time to direct the repairing and for-
tifying of the frontier towns. They employed
themselves day and night on this important
business. But the slightest delay appeared to
the Emperor an age of expectation, and fre-
quently he put his hand to the work himself.
He was perfectly acquainted with the nature
of the fortifications of every place, the number
of men it ought to contain, and the approaches
necessary to be defended; and in a few hours
he settled what the most experienced engineer
would have found it difficult to conceive and
determine in several days. And let it not be
supposed, that the works he thus ordered bore
any marks of precipitancy. At the head of his
topographical cabinet he had one of the first
engineer officers in France, General Bernard;
and this general, too brave, too loyal, to be a
flatterer, could never enough admire the pro-
found knowledge the Emperor possessed of the
art of fortification, and his happy and prompt
application of it.
The zeal and joint efforts of these com-
mittees, and of the Emperor, produced, in a
short time, effects truly miraculous. All France
seemed an intrenched camp. Napoleon, in the

<page 424>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 405
articles he wrote", frequently gave an account
of the progress of his armament, of the fortified
places, and of the works of defence. I will
transcribe here one of these articles, which,
exclusive of the merit of depicting the aspect
of France at that period, in a better manner
than I could, appears to me well adapted to
convey an idea of the fervid activity of Napo-
leon, and the immensity of the objects his eye
embraced. -
“All the strong places on the northern
frontier, from Dunkirk to Charlemont, are
furnished with ordnance, provision, and stores:
the sluices are put into order, and the country
will be inundated at the first hostile move-
ment: field-works have been laid out in the
forest of Mormale: measures are taken for
throwing up intrenchments in the different
passes of the forest of Aregonne: all the strong
places of Lorraine are prepared: intrenchments
are formed at the five passes of the Vosges:
the fortresses of Alsace are equipped : orders
are given for the defence of the pass of Jura,
and all the frontiers of the Alps. The passes
of the Somme, which are in the third line, are
* For the Moniteur, I presume—Tr.

<page 425>
406 MEMOIRS OF
putting into order. In the interior, Guise, la
Ferté, Vitry, Soissons, Château Thierry, and
Langres, are equipping and fortifying. Orders
have been issued even for constructing works
on the heights of Montmartre and Ménil-mon-
tant, and furnishing them with three hundred
pieces of ordnance: they will be formed at first
of earth, and the solidity of permanent fortifica-
tions will be given them in succession.
“His Majesty has ordered, that Lyons should
be put into a state of defence: a tête-de-pont
will be established at Broteaux. The draw-
bridge at La Guillotière is replacing. The
space between the Saône and the Rhone will
be fortified: some redoubts are preparing to
be constructed in advance of this space. A re-
doubt will be constructed on the height of
Pierre en Size, to support a work, that closes
the city on the right bank. The heights, that
command the quarter of St. Jean, on the right
bank of the Saône, will be defended by several
redoubts: a train of eighty pieces of cannon,
with the necessary stores, is sent off for Lyons.
Sisteron and the bridge of St. Esprit will be
placed in a state of defence. Eight armies or
corps of observation are formed: namely
“The army of the North;
“The army of the Moselle;

<page 426>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 407
“The army of the Rhine;
“The corps of observation of the Jura, which
is assembling at Befort;
“The army of the Alps, which is assembling
at Chambery;
“The corps of observation of the Pyrenees,
which is assembling at Perpignan and at Bor-
deaux;
“And the army of reserve, which is as-
sembling at Paris and at Laon.
“The old soldiers are every where on the
march, animated with the greatest enthusiasm,
and come to complete our hundred and twenty
regiments of infantry. The purchases made
for remounting the cavalry have been going on
rapidly for this month, and will soon render our
seventy regiments of cavalry fully complete.
Regiments of volunteer cavalry are forming in
many parts: Alsace has already furnished two
regiments of lancers, of a thousand men each.
We have reason to think, that this example will
be followed in Brittany, Normandy, and Li-
mousin, the province in which the greatest
number of horses are bred.
“Parks of artillery, forming more than a
hundred and fifty batteries, are already har-
nessed, and on the march for the different
armies. The corps of artillery for the defence

<page 427>
408 MEMOIRS OF
of Lyons is composed of two companies formed
in the school of Alfort. The corps for serving
the three hundred pieces of ordnance, that will
be placed on the heights of Paris, will consist of
twelve companies of marine artillery, two com-
panies of invalids, two companies of the school
of Alfort, two companies of the polytechnic
school, two companies of the school of St. Cyr,
and six companies of foot artillery.
“Corps of partisans and free corps are form-
ing in a great number of departments. An
adjutant-general, stationed with each general
commanding in chief, will conduct the cor-
respondence with these corps; which, if the
enemy be rash enough to penetrate into our
territories, will fall upon his communications in
the mountains and forests, and find support in
the fortified towns.
“The organization of the levy in mass of
Alsace, Lorraine, the county of Messin, Franche
Comté, Burgundy, Dauphiny, and Picardy, is
prepared.
“All the cities will arm in defence of their
vicinity: they will follow the example of Cha-
lons sur Saône, Tournus, and St. Jean de
Losne. Every unfortified town even would
betray the national honour, if it surrendered to
light troops, and did not make the best defence

<page 428>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 409 -
its means will allow, till the arrival of infantry
and artillery in such force, that its resistance
would cease to be prescribed by the laws of
War.
“Every thing is in motion in all parts of
France. If the coalition persist in the designs
they have announced of making war on us, if
they violate our frontiers, it is easy to foresee,
what fruits they will reap from their attempt on
the rights of the French nation: all the depart-
ments will emulate in zeal those of Alsace, the
Vosges, Franche Comté, Burgundy, and the
Lyonnese; every where the people are animated
with a patriotic spirit, and ready to make any
sacrifice, to maintain the independence of the
nation, and the honour of the throne.”
In fine, to complete his means of resistance
and attack, the Emperor remodelled the na-
tional guard, and divided it into three thousand
one hundred and thirty battalions, forming a
body of two millions two hundred and fifty
thousand men. All the national guards from
twenty years old to forty were classed in active
companies of light infantry and grenadiers, and
fifteen hundred of these companies, or a hun-
dred, and eighty thousand men, were imme-
diately placed at the disposal of the minister at

<page 429>
410 MEMOIRS OF
war, to form the garrisons of the frontier places,
and reinforce the armies of reserve.
The general officers sent to the frontier de-
partments, to accelerate the raising and depar-
ture of this national militia, had need only to
show themselves, to accomplish their mission.
Every citizen aspired beforehand to the honour
of making a part of it; and in the provinces of
the east, the north, and the centre, it was found
necessary to form supernumerary companies".
The father would have renounced his son, the
wife her husband, the girl her betrothed lover,
if they had been deaf to the voice of honour
and their country. The mothers themselves,
* I cannot avoid here making a comparison. On the 15th
of March, the Count d'Artois wished to form a legion from
the light infantry and grenadiers of the national guard of
Paris. He reviewed the twelve legions, harangued them,
and announced, that he would march at the head of the vo-
lunteer national guards: a hundred and fifty turned out.
Napoleon from his closet called the national guard to the
defence of the imperial cause: 150,000 men took up arms,
and hastened to battle.
What must we conclude from this coldness on the one
hand, and this enthusiasm on the other? I leave the question
to be answered by those, who pretend, that the revolution of
the 20th of March obtained the assent only of a handful of
factious persons.

<page 430>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 411
*
who at other times had so bitterly deplored the
departure of their children, encouraged them,
like the Spartans, to march against the enemy,
and fall, if it must be so, in the sacred cause of
their country. This picture is not an exaggera-
tion, it is faithful, it is true. Never was a more
beautiful spectacle exhibited to the eyes of any
man, to whom the glory and independence of his
country were dear, than that of the enthusiasm
and martial joy, with which the warlike in-
habitants of Alsace, Lorraine, Burgundy, Cham-
pagne, and the Vosges, were animated. The
roads were covered with waggons loaded with
young warriors, who hastened, gaily singing, to
the post of honour assigned them by Napoleon:
the population of the towns and villages received
them on their way with applauses, which in-
flamed their minds with fresh ardor, and made
them enjoy by anticipation the praises and
acclamations, that their friends, parents, and
fellow-citizens would lavish on them at their
return.
France seemed to call aloud, to see her
eclipsed greatness restored. She had recovered.
all her energy: an evident proof, that the
strength of a nation is always the work of the
prince, by whom it is governed. It is he, who
enervates the public spirit, and bastardizes his

<page 431>
412 MEMOIRS OF
subjects, by the effeminacy of his government:
or it is he, who inspires them with the love of
their country, with priding themselves in it,
and leads them to undertake, whatever can
augment its glory and its power.
To draw still more closely the bonds of union
between the French people, and impart greater
intensity to their patriotism, Napoleon autho-
rized the re-establishment of popular clubs, and
the formation of civic confederations. This
time his expectations were not answered by
success. The major part of the clubs were
filled with men, who formerly composed the
revolutionary tribunals and societies; and their
imprecations against kings, and their liberticide
motions, made the Emperor fear, that he had
revived the spirit of anarchy.
The sentiments manifested by the federates
equally disquieted him. He perceived, that he
did not occupy the first place in their thoughts
and affections; that the primary wish of their
hearts was liberty; and, as this liberty was in
his eyes synonimous with republicanism, he
exerted all his endeavours to moderate, restrain,
and repress, the development of these patriotic
associations. Perhaps there were men among
the federates, whose principles might be dan-
gerous, and their intentions criminal: but in

<page 432>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 413
general they consisted of pure patriots, who
had taken up arms to defend the imperial go-
vernment, and not to overturn it.
Napoleon had never been able to surmount
the aversion, which he felt for the veterans of
the revolution. He dreaded their constancy,
and their daring spirit; and he would have
thought himself in danger, if not lost, had they
become consolidated, and resumed their ascend-
ancy. This panic fear was the cause, that he
did not reap from the confederations the advan-
tages he promised himself; and which they
would unquestionably have afforded him, if he
had not clogged their wings. It was also the
cause of his committing a perhaps still greater
fault, that of putting a stop to the popular
movements, that had shown themselves in most
of the departments. In the critical state in
which he found himself, and into which he had
drawn France, he should not have disregarded
any means of security; and the most efficacious,
the most analogous to his situation, was indis-
putably that of engaging the people most in-
timately in his fate, and in his defence. It
was necessary, therefore, while preventing them
from spilling a single drop of blood, to let them
compromise themselves with some of those
incorrigible ultras, who had harassed, ill-

<page 433>
414 MEMOIRS OF
treated, and insulted them, since the restoration.
The people would then have been more sen-
sible, that it was no longer the personal cause
of Napoleon alone, that they had to defend;
and the dread of chastisement, and of the
yoke, would have restored to them that ancient
enthusiasm, which had proved so fatal to the
first coalition.
The moderation adopted by Napoleon on this
occasion was honourable, but not politic. He
conducted himself, as he might have done at a
time, when all parties, confounded together and
reconciled, acknowledged him for their sole and
only sovereign. But things had changed: he
had no longer the whole of France in his favour;
and hence it was necessary, that he should
conduct himself rather as the head of a party,
than as a sovereign; and that he should display
as it were all the vigour and energy of the leader
of a faction. Energy unites men, by taking
from them all uncertainty, and hurrying them
with violence toward their object. Moderation,
on the contrary, divides and enervates them,
because it leaves them to their own irresolution,
and allows them leisure, to listen to their in-
terests, their scruples, and their fears.
The attention paid by the Emperor to his
military preparations did not prevent his con-

<page 434>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 415
tinuing to occupy himself on the welfare of the
state, and endeavour more and more to con-
ciliate the confidence and affection of the
public.
Already, in other days, he had drawn out
from its ruins the ancient University. A new
basis, more broad, more extensive, more ma-
jestic, had raised this noble institution to a level
with the age, and with France. But the first
stage of education did not answer the efforts
made to improve it, and to diffuse it among the
younger classes of society.
M. Carnot, in a report that combined the
most pleasing philanthropy with the most sage
and lofty views, taught the Emperor the advan-
tages of the methods of Bell and Lancaster,
and the monarch and the minister made a
present to France, to morality, to humanity, of
the system of mutual instruction.
The Emperor, on removing his eyes from this
interesting youth, the hope of the country,
turned them to those old soldiers, who had for-
merly been its pride and support.
A royal ordinance had expelled from their
asylum a considerable number of invalids, and
had taken from them a portion of their endow-
·ments: a decree restored them to their rights;
and a visit, which the Emperor paid these

<page 435>
416 MEMOIRS OF
veterans in glory, added a kindness to the be-
nefit. -
He also repaired to the Polytechnic school.
It was the first time of his showing himself to its
pupils. Their love of perfect liberty, their
inclination for republican institutions, had long
alienated from them the affections of the Em-
peror: but the striking bravery they had dis-
played under the walls of Paris had restored to
them his esteem and friendship; and it was
satisfactory to him (these are his own words),
to have such a fine occasion of reconciling him-
self with them.
The suburb of St. Antoine, that cradle of the
revolution, was not forgotten. The Emperor
traversed it from one end to the other. He had
the doors of all the workshops opened to him,
and examined them very minutely. The nu-
merous workmen of the manufactory of M.
Lenoir, who retained a grateful remembrance
of what the Emperor had done for their master
and for themselves, loaded him with expressions
of their attachment. The commissary of police
of the quarter had followed Napoleon into this
manufactory; and, willing to set the example,
opened his mouth to its utmost extent, to holla
as loud as he could bawl “Long live the Em-
peror!” but, by a terrible slip of the tongue, a

<page 436>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 417
very distinct “Long live the King!” on the
contrary issued from it. This caused great
confusion: but the Emperor, turning to him, .
said in a rallying tone: “So, Mr. Commissary,
you are determined then not to get rid of your
bad habits.” This sally was the signal for a
general laugh: and the commissary, plucking
up his spirits, convinced Napoleon by many
a vigorous “Long live the Emperor!” that
we never lose any thing by a little patience.
The Emperor was accompanied only by
three officers of his household. It was im-
possible for them to defend him from the ap-
proaches and caresses of the people: the wo-
men kissed his hands; the men squeezed them,
till they made him cry out; both expressed to
him in a thousand ways, which I cannot tran-
scribe, the difference they made between him
and his predecessor. At all times he had been
much beloved by the class of workmen and
artisans. He had enriched it: and interest is
the prime mover of regard among the people,
as well as among the great". -
* The reverses of Napoleon's fortune had been so rapid,
that the possessors of great places, and of great preferment,
had not had time to retrench their way of living. When
the Bourbons were recalled, they were obliged to come to a
WOL. I. E. E.

<page 437>
418 MEMOIRS OF
The Emperor received a great number of
petitions during his excursions. Unable to
reckoning with their means, and all these extravagant ex-
penses ceased at once.
On the other hand, the new court, in order to distinguish
itself from the imperial court, substituted the most offensive
simplicity for the useful pomp of Napoleon. The richest
emigrants imitated this pernicious example; and, as Napo-
leon remarked, the luxury of the table was almost the only
kind, on which encouragement was not spared. The result
of this economical system was, that the produce of our
manufactories remained unemployed, and industry was sud-
denly paralyzed.
Thus commerce, which had loudly called for peace, was
almost totally annihilated by it: and the manufacturers, the
mechanics, the merchants (those of the sea-ports excepted),
greatly regretted those happy times, when we were at war.
In fact, it must be admitted, that our industry was in-
debted to the war, and to our conquests, for its progress,
and its prodigious increase. The war, by depriving us of
the products of the English manufactories, had taught us, to
manufacture for ourselves.” The continual prohibition of
these articles protected our rising manufactures from the
danger of competition; and allowed them to engage with
safety in the trials and expenses necessary for equalling or
surpassing in perfection foreign manufactures. In all parts
of the empire were seen manufactories for spinning and
weaving cotton; and this branch of trade, almost unknown
before, employed three hundred thousand work people, and
produced goods to the value of more than two hundred and
fifty millions.
* -
* -
. . . . . . . . . . . *** * <^. A -
2 * * * * * * *.,
Af /
* * * * * * * * * *
* * , A.
* * . . . . . . . . . . . . . * * * -- *

<page 438>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 419
read them all, he ordered me, to examine them
carefully, and give him an account of them.
He loved to repay the confidence that the peo-
ple reposed in him; and frequently granted to
the request of an obscure and unknown citizen,
what he would perhaps have refused to the en-
treaties of a marshal or a minister. The utility
of these familiar communications between the
nation and the sovereign was not confined, in
his eyes, to the solitary interests of the pe-
titioner. He considered them as efficacious
means of coming at the knowledge of abuses
and acts of injustice, and of keeping the depo-
sitaries of authority within the limits of their
The other products of our industry equally received im-
provements and extension; and France, in spite of the con-
scription, reckoned in its numerous workshops nearly twelve
hundred thousand workpeople.
If this flourishing state of our continental trade were the
effect of the enlargement of our territory, and the scope the
war had given to our industry, we must say, that it was also
the result of the succour, encouragement, and honorary
distinctions, which Napoleon knew how to bestow appro-
priately on our manufacturers; and the return for those
enormous sacrifices he made, to create, repair, and keep in
order, those superb roads, and those numerous canals,
which rendered the communications between France, and
the countries subjected to its empire, equally easy, safe, and
pleasant.
E E 2

<page 439>
420 MEMOIRS OF
duty. He was fond of encouraging them, that
the phrase, If the Emperor knew it, or The
Emperor shall know it, might solace the heart
of the oppressed, and make the oppressor
tremble.
In former days he had appointed a special
commission, to receive petitions, and give them
suitable effect. This benefit not appearing to
him sufficiently complete, he would have them
subjected to a preliminary examination, under .
his own eye. He decided himself the method
to be followed: and directed me, to make
known to him every day, without disguise, the
complaints, wants, and wishes, of the French
people. I made it a point of duty, of honour,
to execute this task in a proper manner, and to
become the zealous protector of those who had
none. Every morning I laid before the Em-
peror an analytical report of the requests capa-
ble of demanding his attention: he examined
them with care, made marginal notes on them
with his own hand, and sent them to his mi-
nisters with a favourable decision, or an order
to verify them, and give him an account of the
result.
In fine, to fulfil, as much as in him lay, the
public expectation, the Emperor made nu-
merous changes in the laws relating to the

<page 440>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 421
consolidated taxes (droits réunis), which, while
they diminished the impost, freed it from its
abuses and tyrannical forms, and rendered it
less odious, and more supportable. These be-
neficial meliorations, though incomplete, were
received with gratitude; and the Emperor was
thanked for his endeavours to reconcile the in-
terests of individuals with the wants of the
public treasury.
But the satisfaction Napoleon derived from
the happy effects of his solicitude was frequently
disturbed by the disquietude and perplexity,
which the cabals and manoeuvres of the royalists
occasioned him. “The priests and the nobles,”
said he one day in a fit of ill-humour, “are
playing a deep game. If I were to let loose the
people upon them, they would all be devoured
in the twinkling of an eye".”
- By a decree of the 25th of March, he had
already ordered the ministers of the King, and
the civil and military officers of his household,
* These words, and several others that I have quoted,
prove Napoleon not to have been ignorant of the use he
might make of the people. If he did not have recourse to
them, no doubt it was because he feared, that the remedy
might prove worse than the disease.

<page 441>
422 MEMOIRS OF
as well as of those of the princes, as also the
chiefs of the Chouans, of the Vendeans, and of
the royal volunteers, to remove to a distance
of thirty leagues from Paris. This prudent
precaution was but imperfectly executed. M.
Fouché, to secure himself a refuge in the King's
party, had sent for the principal of the pro-
scribed persons to his house; expressed to them
how much he felt interested for their situation,
and the efforts he had made, to prevent their
banishment; and finally authorised them pretty
generally, to remain at Paris.
The Emperor, not aware that their audacity
was owing to the protection of his minister,
watched for an opportunity of intimidating
them by an act of severity. While things were
in this state, a M. de Lascours, a colonel, was
arrested at Dunkirk, where he had introduced
himself as an emissary from the King. Napo-
leon, deceived by the similarity of the name,
supposed this officer to be the person, who pre-
tended, in 1814, to have received orders, to
blow up the powder magazine at Grenelle, and
refused to execute them. “I should be sorry,”
said he, “to sacrifice by way of example a
worthy man; but an impostor like this deserves
no pity. Write to the minister at war, to have

<page 442>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 423
him taken before a military commission, and
tried as an instigator to civil war, and to the
overturning of the established government.”
The Emperor, turning towards me, added:
“How is it, that the absurd fable of this man
has not been contradicted?”—“Sire,” I an-
swered, “Gourgaud has often assured me, that
all your officers had publicly avowed their sen-
timents on it; and that it had been the inten-
tion of several generals, and particularly of
general Tirlet, to unmask this odious lie to the
King; but . . . .”, “Enough,” said the Em-
peror, “I make no account of intentions: send
the order, and let me hear no more of him.”
I lost sight of this business: but I have since
learned, that M. de Lascours was acquitted.
If M. de Lascours had been so unfortunate,
as to fall a victim to his zeal, the Emperor would
have been accused of barbarity; yet he was
neither cruel nor sanguinary, for cruelty must
not be confounded with severity. I know but
one single act, the result of the most fatal
counsels, for which, alas! he may be reproached
by posterity". Who besides have been the vic-
* Napoleon, during the hundred days, entertained for a
moment the design of issuing a demi-official note on the arrest
and death of the Duke of Enghien.

<page 443>
424. MEMOIRS OF
tims of his pretended ferocity? Will the death
of Georges, and his obscure accomplices, be
The following memorandums are taken from papers, from
which the note was to have been compiled.
Reports from the police had informed Napoleon, that there
were conspiracies of the royalists beyond the Rhine, and
that they were conducted and supported,
1st, By Messrs. Drake and Spencer Smith, the English
ministers at Stutgard, and at Munich;
2dly, by the Duke d'Enghien and General Dumourier :
The central point of the former was at Offenbourg; where
were some emigrants, some English agents, and the Baroness
de Reich, so noted for her political intrigues:
The central point of the latter was given out to be at the
castle of Ettenheim, where the Duke d'Enghien, Dumourier,
an English colonel, and several agents of the Bourbons, re-
sided.
The hundred and twenty thousand francs given by the
minister Drake to the Sieur Rosey, chef debataillon, to ex-
cite an insurrection,
The declarations of Mehée;
And the reports of M. Sh***, prefect of Strasbourg,
and brother-in-law of the Duke de Fel . . . . ; leave no doubt
of the existence of the intrigues at Offenbourg and Etten-
heim, to which M. Sh*** ascribes in particular the agita-
tion, and symptoms of discontent, that prevail at Weissem-
bourg, and in several parts of Alsace.
On the other hand, the conspiracy of the 3d of Nivose had
just broken out. The discoveries made by the servant of
Georges, and by other individuals, led to the belief, that the
Duke d'Enghien had been sent by England to the borders of

<page 444>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 4.25
considered as a judicial murder? Are the infer-
nal machine and its terrible ravages forgotten?
the Rhine, in order to place himself at the head of the insur-
rection, as soon as Napoleon was made away with.
The necessity of putting an end to these plots, and strike
terror into their instigators by a grand act of reprisal, squared
in an incredible degree with the political considerations, that
led Napoleon to attempt a bold stroke, in order to give the
revolution, and the revolutionists, those guaranties, which
circumstances demanded:
Napoleon, named consul for life (I borrow here the
language of the Manuscript from St. Helena), felt the weak-
ness of his situation, the ridiculousness of his consulship. It
was necessary to establish something solid, to serve as a sup-
port to the revolution. The republicans were alarmed at the
height, on which circumstances had placed him: they were
suspicious of the use he might make of his power: they
dreaded his renewing an antiquated royalty by the help of
his army. The royalists fomented this rumour, and took a
delight in representing him as an ape of the ancient
monarchs: other royalists, more adroit, whispered about, that
he was enamoured of the part of Monk, and that he would
take the pains to restore the power, only to make a present
of it to the Bourbons, when it should be in a proper state to
be offered them.
Ordinary minds, unacquainted with his powers, credited
these reports; they sanctioned the tales of the royalist party,
and decried him to the people, and to the army; for they
began to suspect him, and his attachment to their cause. He
could not allow such an opinion to pass current, because it
tended to unhinge every thing. It was necessary, at all

<page 445>
426 MEMOIRS OF
Georges, at the head of the Chouans, was a
misled Frenchman, to be pitied, and to be
events, to undeceive France, the royalists, and Europe at
large, in order that they might know, what they had to reck-
on upon in him. A persecution of reports in detail never
produces anything but a bad effect, for it does not attack
the root of the evil.
The death of the Duke d'Enghien would decide the ques-
tion, that agitated France; it would decide the character of
Napoleon beyond return; in fine, it might intimidate and
punish the authors of the plots incessantly contriving against
his life, and against the state: accordingly he determined
on it.
He sent for Marshal Berthier, and this minister directed
General Ord **, by an order which the Emperor dictated,
and which I have seen, to set off post for Strasbourg; to cause
General Lev * * to place under his orders fifteen boatmen,
three hundred dragoons from the garrison of Schelstadt, and
thirty gendarmes; to pass the Rhine at Rheinan, to proceed
to Ettenheim, to surround the town, and to carry off the Duke
d'Enghien, Dumourier, an English colonel, and all the persons
in their suite.
The Duke d'Enghien,
General Thumery,
Colonel de Grunstein,
Lieutenant Schmidt,
Abbé Weinburn, and five other inferior persons, were
arrested by a chef d'escadron of the gendarmerie, named
Ch **, who was charged with this part of the expedition.
Then, and then only, it became certain, that Dumourier
was not at Ettenheim. General Thumery had been mis-

<page 446>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 427
spared. Georges, at the head of a band of
assassins, was undeserving of pity, and the
r
taken for him. This mistake, occasioned by the similarity
of their rank, and some likeness of sound between their
names, which the Germans pronounced nearly alike, had
heightened the importance and criminality of the pretended
plots at Ettenheim in the mind of Napoleon, and had the
most fatal influence on his determination.
The Duke d'Enghien was brought from Strasbourg to
Paris, and carried before a military commission.
The Empress Josephine, the Princess Hortense, fell at
Napoleon’s feet in tears, and conjured him to spare the life
of the Duke d'Enghien. Prince Cambacérès and the Prince
of Neufchâtel strongly remonstrated to him on the horrible
inutility of the blow he was about to strike. He appeared
to hesitate, when the information was brought him, that the
prince WaS no more. -
Napoleon had not expected so speedy a catastrophe. He
had even given orders to M. Réal, to repair to Vincennes,
to interrogate the Duke d'Enghien: but his trial and execu-
tion had been hastened by Murat; who, urged by some
regicides, at the head of whom was M. Fou * **, thought.
he should render a service to Napoleon, to his family, and
to France, by insuring the death of a Bourbon.
The Prince de T ***, whom the Emperor often publicly
reproached with having advised the seizure and death of the
Duke d'Enghien, was directed to pacify the court of Baden,
and to justify the violation of its territory in the eyes of
Europe. M. de Caulincourt being at Strasbourg, the Em-
peror thought him more proper than any other person, to
follow up a negotiation, if the turn of affairs should require

<page 447>
428 MEMOIRS OF
cause of morality, as well as of humanity, de-
manded his punishment.
it; and he was directed to send to the minister of Baden the
despatch of the Prince de T ***. But there was no need of
having recourse to negotiations: the court, far from com-
plaining of the violation of its territory, expressed itself well
contented, that the step taken had saved it the disgrace of
consenting, or the embarrassment of a refusal.
This is an exact and true recital of the circumstances,
that preceded, followed, and accompanied, the carrying off
and death of the last of the house of Condé.
The seizure of the Duke d'Enghien was long imputed to
M. de Caulincourt, and is still imputed to him by persons
uninformed of the truth.
Some assert, that he arrested him with his own hands:
Others, that he gave orders for the seizure of his person:
both these imputations are equally false.
He did not arrest the Duke d'Enghien, for his seizure was
executed and consummated by chef d'escadron Ch * * *.
Neither directly, nor indirectly, did he give orders for
seizing the prince: for the particular mission, to carry him
off, was confided to General Ord "", and this general had
no orders to receive from M. de Caulincourt his equal, per-
haps even his inferior.
What made it be supposed, at a time when it was not pos-
sible to explain the facts, that M. de Caulincourt had been
employed to seize the Duke d'Enghien, or cause him to be
seized, was, that M. de Caulincourt received, at the same
moment as General Ord **, orders to repair to Strasbourg,
to cause the emigrants and English agents, who had fixed the
seat of their intrigues at Offenbourg, to be carried off. But

<page 448>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 429
Will it be said, that Pichegru was strangled
by his orders? The designs of Pichegru were
SO clearly substantiated, and the laws so clear,
this mission, for which it would be requisite to take measures
in concert with General Ord **, and perhaps even to assist
him in case of need; for a simultaneous proceeding was ne-
cessary, that one expedition might not cause the failure of
the other; this mission, I say, though analogous to that of
General Ord **, had no real connexion with it.
Their objects were different:
That of one was to carry off the Duke d'Enghien from
Ettenheim;
That of the other, to seize the conspirators at Offenbourg,
which was eight or ten leagues distant.
Perhaps it will be objected, that M. de Caulincourt was
not ignorant of General Ord **’s being directed, to seize
the Duke d'Enghien. Be it so: I cannot perceive the con-
sequence, attempted to be drawn from this. But what I
have seen in the cabinet, and what I attest, is, that the order
given to M. de Caulincourt said nothing of Ettenheim, and
that the name of the Duke d'Enghien was not even men-
tioned in it: it related solely, in the first place, to the con-
struction of a flotilla, that was preparing on the Rhine; and,
secondly, to the expedition of Offenbourg; an expedition
that terminated, as no doubt is still remembered, in the
laughable flight of the minister Drake and his agents.
I have thought it my duty as a Frenchman and an his-
torian, to enter into these details, and destroy for ever an
error, which malevolence and the spirit of party have laid
hold of, in order to tarnish the political life of one of the

<page 449>
4.30 MEMOIRS OF
that he could not escape the scaffold: why,
then, should he cause him to be murdered?
The greatest criminals themselves do not com-
mit useless crimes. Were apprehensions en-
tertained of the disclosures he might make?
. . . . . . What could he disclose to the French
people? That Napoleon aspired to the throne?
Of this no one was ignorant.
A man, that Napoleon had reason to dread,
was Moreau: was his life attempted? Yet it
was less dangerous, to assassinate him, than to
send to a tribunal, where guilt presided, a war-
rior at that time so dear to France and to the
army.
No, Napoleon was not cruel, he was not san-
guinary. If he were sometimes inexorable, it
was because there are circumstances, in which
men, who do the greatest honour to the imperial government
and to France.
M. de Caulincourt would not have been less irreproach-
able, had he committed the fatal seizure ascribed to him: he
would have done his duty, as General Ord” did his. A
soldier is not the judge of the orders he is to execute. The
great Condé, covered with the laurels of Rocroy, Fribourg,
Norlinguen, and Lenz, was arrested, in spite of the faith
pledged to him, in the apartments of the King; yet neither
his contemporaries, nor posterity, have charged Marshal
d'Albret with this arrest as a crime.

<page 450>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 431
the monarch must shut his heart to compassion,
and leave the law free to act: but, if he knew
how to punish, he was also capable of pardon-
ing; and, at the moment when he gave up
Georges” to the sword of justice, he spared the
lives of Messrs. de Polignac and the Marquis
de Rivière, whose courage and zeal he re-
spected.
The Emperor did not stop at the rigorous
trial, to which he had delivered over the person
of M. de Lascours: by a decree, dated the 13th
of March, and published the 9th of April, he
ordered the condemnation, and the sequestra-
tion of the property of
The Prince of Benevento,
The Duke of Ragusa,
The Duke of Alberg,
The Abbé de Montesquiou,
. The Count de Jaucourt,
The Count de Bournonville, and
The Sieurs Lynch,
Vitrolles,
* I have been assured, that Georges was three times
offered his pardon by Napoleon, if he would promise, not to
engage in any conspiracy again; and that it was not till after
his third refusal, that his sentence was ordered to be carried
into execution.

<page 451>
4.32 MEMOIRs of
The Sieurs Alexis de Noailles,
Bourienne,
Bellard,
La Roche-Jaquelin, and
Sostène de la Rochefoucault”;
All of whom, as members of the provisional
government, or agents of the royal party, had
concurred in the subversion of the imperial go-
vernment, previous to the abdication of Na-
poleon.
This decree, though supposed to have ori-
ginated at Lyons, first saw the light at Paris;
and was, as I have just said, the result of the
ill humour, into which the plots of the royalists
had thrown Napoleon. The terms, in which it
was originally couched, too clearly attested its
source: the first article said; “are declared
traitors to their country, and shall be punished
as such, &c.”
It was I, who wrote this decree, from the
dictation of the Emperor. When I had finished
it, he ordered me, to go and get it signed by
Count Bertrand, who had countersigned the
* Marshal Augereau, Duke de Castiglione, was also in
this list. His name was struck out at the request of the
duchess, and in consideration of the proclamation, which he
published on the 23d of March.

<page 452>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 433
decrees of Lyons. I went to the marshal. He
read the decree, and returned it to me, saying:
“I will never sign it: this is not what the Em-
peror promised us; they who advise him, to
take such measures, are his bitterest enemies;
I will speak to him about it.” I related this
firm and courageous answer to Napoleon word
for word. He ordered me, to return to the
grand Marshal, to endeavour to overcome his
repugnance, and, if he still persisted, to bring
him to him. Count Bertrand instantly followed
me, with head erect, into the Emperor's closet.
“I am astonished,” said Napoleon to him in a
dry tone, “that you make such difficulties
about it to me. The severity I wish to display
is necessary for the good of the state.”—“I
do not think so, Sire.”—“I do, I tell you:
and it is my business alone to judge of it. I
did not ask your advice, but your signature,
which is only a matter of form, and cannot in
any way compromise you.” “Sire, a mi-
nister, who countersigns the act of a sovereign,
is morally responsible for that act; and I should
think myself wanting in my duty to your Ma-
jesty, and perhaps to myself, if I were weak
enough to set my hand to such measures. If
your Majesty choose to reign by the laws, you
have no right, arbitrarily to pronounce, by a
VOL. I. F F

<page 453>
4:34 - MEMOIRS OF
simple decree, sentence of death, and forfeiture
of property, against your subjects. If you
choose to act as a dictator, and to have no law
but your own will, you have no need of the
addition of my signature. Your Majesty has de-
clared, by your proclamations, that you would
grant a general amnesty. I countersigned them
most cordially; and I will not countersign the
decree, that revokes them.”—“But you well
know, I always told you, that I never would
pardon Marmont, Talleyrand, and Augereau;
and that I promised only to overlook, what had
passed since my abdication. I know better
than you, what I ought to do, to keep my pro-
mises, and ensure the tranquillity of the state.
I begun with being indulgent, even to weak-
ness; and the royalists, instead of appreciating
my moderation, have abused it: they bestir
themselves, they conspire, and I ought and will
bring them to their senses. I would rather
have my blows fall on traitors, than on men
who are misled. Besides, all those who are on
the list, Augereau excepted, are out of France,
or in concealment. I shall not seek for them:
my intention is to terrify them more than harm
them. You see, therefore,” continued the
Emperor, softening his voice, “you have not
rightly considered the business: sign this for

<page 454>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 435
me, my dear Bertrand: you must.”—“I
cannot, Sire. I request your Majesty's per-
mission, to submit my observations to you in
writing.” “All that, my dear sir, will make
us lose time: you are startled, I assure you,
without any reason; sign, I tell you; I request
you, you will do me pleasure.”-—“Permit
me, Sire, to wait, till your Majesty has seen my
observations.” The marshal went away. This
noble resistance did not offend the Emperor:
-the language of truth and honour never dis-
pleased him, when it issued from a pure heart.
General Bertrand delivered to Napoleon a
statement of his reasons. It did not alter his
resolution; it only determined him, to give it
a legal form. -
The Emperor, persuaded that General Ber-
trand would equally retain his opinion, would
not have this new decree presented to him, and
it appeared without being countersigned.
The effect it produced justified the apprehen-
sions of the grand Marshal. It was considered
as an act of despotism and vengeance; as the
first infraction of the promises made to the
nation. The murmurs of the public were echoed
even within the walls of the imperial palace.
Labedoyère, at a moment when Napoleon was
passing by, said loud enough to be heard, “If
- F F 2

<page 455>
436 MEMOIRS OF
the system of proscriptions and sequestrations
begin again, all will soon be over.”
The Emperor, according to his custom on
such occasions, affected to be perfectly satisfied
with himself, and appeared no way apprehen-
sive of the storm. Being at table with several
personages and ladies of distinction belonging
to the court, he asked the Countess Duchâtel,
if her husband, who was director-general of the
domains, had executed the order for seques-
trating the estates of Talleyrand and company.
“There is no hurry for that,” answered she
drily. He made no reply, and changed the
conversation. -
The persons about him are incessantly re-
proached, with having basely crouched to his
will and opinions: this anecdote, and many
others that I might relate, prove, that all of
them at least did not deserve this reproach.
But, supposing it to be just with regard to
some, is it as easy, as is commonly thought, to
overcome the will of a sovereign?
From pride, and perhaps from a conviction
of superiority, Napoleon did not readily endure
counsel.
In affairs of state, he imposed upon himself
the law of consulting his counsellors, and his
ministers. Endowed by nature with the faculty

<page 456>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 437
of knowing every thing, or of divining every
thing, he almost always took an active part in
the discussion: and I must say, to the honour
of the Emperor, his ministers, and his counsel-
lors, in common, an inexpressible degree of
confidence, frankness, and independence, pre-
vailed in these discussions, highly animated as
for the most part they were. The Emperor,
far from being shocked when any one contra-
dicted him, endured, may provoked contradic-
tion; and adopted without resistance the advice
of his opponents, when he thought it preferable
to his own opinion.
When the question concerned those grand
decisions, that influence the fate of empires, the
case was different. He listened for a certain
time to the objections of his ministers: but,
when his attention had reached its bounds, he
interrupted them, and supported his own opinion
with so much fire, force, and perseverance, that
he reduced them to silence.
This silence was less the effect of their passive
obedience to the intentions of the monarch,
than the result of the lessons taught by ex-
perience. They had seen, that the most rash,
the most incomprehensible, I had almost said
the most senseless, enterprises of Napoleon were
invariably crowned with success; and they

<page 457>
4.38 MEMOIRS OF
were convinced, that reason could not contend
against the inspirations of genius, and the fa-
vours of fortune.
In fine, Napoleon often consulted only his
own will; and his ministers then knew nothing
of his resolves, till they received orders, to carry
them into execution. -
Such was, and such always will be the situ-
ation of ministers, in a monarchy, where the
Prince governs for himself; and more espe-
cially when this Prince, like Napoleon, owes
his throne merely to the ascendancy of his
genius and his sword.
Besides, the time of flatterers and flattery
was past with Napoleon. Every one was in-
terested in telling him the truth, and no one
was sparing of it to him.
The security inspired by this rare and valu-
able veracity was strengthened by the arrival of
Prince Joseph and Prince Lucien. The mo-
deration of the one, and the patriotism of the
other, were well known; and the care of main-
taining the liberal and pacific intentions of the
Emperor was laid on them both. -
Prince Lucien had been deeply afflicted in
1814 at the misfortunes of his brother, and was
eager to offer him his fortune and his services.
This generous offer did not entirely efface from

<page 458>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 439
the heart of Napoleon the remembrance of their
ancient differences, but it softened the asperity
of them; and it might be foreseen, that their
enmity would not be eternal,
As soon as Prince Lucien heard of the entry
of Napoleon into Paris, he wrote him a letter
of congratulation. “Your return,” said he,
“fills up the measure of your military glory.
But there is another glory still greater, and
above all more desirable, civil glory. The sen-
timents and intentions, which you have solemnly
promulgated, promise France, that you know
how to acquire it,” &c. *
Prince Lucien, however, notwithstanding his
desire of revisiting that country, the cause of
which he pleaded, did not venture to approach
it. But the invasion of the King of Naples
having rendered his services necessary to the
Sovereign Pontiff, the gratitude he owed to the
Holy Father triumphed over his apprehensions.
He departed under the title of secretary to the
Pope's nuncio, and crossed the Alps without
any obstacle. Arrived in the French territory,
he wrote to Napoleon, to inform him of his
mission, and to ask if his coming to Paris would
be agreeable to him. Napoleon’s first feeling
was that of hesitating to receive him : his se-
cond, that of opening to him his arms. The

<page 459>
440 MEMOIRS OF
intention of the Prince was to return quickly
to Rome, whither he was called by the concerns
entrusted to him: but the interruption of the
communications did not allow this. Obliged
to return to Paris, he laid aside his incognito.
His return was then publicly announced, and
made an advantageous and agreeable impression
on every mind.
A few days before, the Emperor had made
the acquisition of another personage; less illus-
trious, it is true, but equally renowned for his
patriotism and intelligence: I mean M. Ben-
jamin Constant.
Napoleon, knowing the experience and re-
putation of this learned civilian, sent for him,
to converse with him “on liberty and the con-
stitution.” Their conversation continued more
than two hours. The Emperor, willing to at-
tach M. Constant to his party, employed all his
means of seduction; and I leave it to those
Frenchmen, and those foreigners, who have
had access to him, to say, whether it were pos-
sible to resist him.
When he wished to fix any one in his train,
he studied and penetrated with extreme 'sa-
gacity his way of thinking, his principles, his
character, his ruling passions; and then with
that familiar grace, that affability, that force

<page 460>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 441
and vivacity of expression, which gave so much
value and such a charm to his conversations",
he insinuated himself imperceptibly into your
heart, made himself master of your passions,
gently excited them, and artfully flattered
them: then, displaying at once the magic re-
sources of his genius, he plunged you into in-
toxication, into admiration, and subdued you -
so rapidly, so completely, that it seemed the
effect of enchantment.
Thus M. Benjamin Constant was subjugated:
he arrived at the Tuileries with repugnance, he
quitted the palace an enthusiast.
The next day he was named counsellor of
state: and this favour he owed to no base sub-
missions, as his enemies have pretended, but to
* These conversations with persons, whose merit and
opinion Napoleon esteemed, were always pleasing, instruc-
tive, interesting, always marked with strong thoughts, and
bold, ingenious, or sublime expressions. With persons in-
different to him, or whose nullity he discerned, his phrases,
scarcely begun, were never finished: his ideas turned only
on insignificant, common-place matters, which, by way of
amusing himself, he was apt to season with biting sarcasm,
or jokes more whimsical than witty.
This explains the contradictions between the different
opinions given of Napoleon's understanding by foreigners
introduced at his court.

<page 461>
44% MEMOIRS OF
his learning, and to the desire the Emperor had
of giving to public opinion, and to M. B. Con-
stant himself, a pledge of his having forgotten
the past; a pledge so much the more me-
ritorious, as the Emperor, independently of the
Philippic launched against him by this writer
on the 19th of March, had besides before his
eyes a letter in his own hand to M. de Blacas,
the subject and expressions of which were of a
nature, to inspire Napoleon with something
more than aversion for its author.
M. de Blacas had left in his boxes a great
number of papers. The Emperor directed the
Duke of Otranto to examine them. Of this
he immediately repented, and sent for them
again. Part fell to our share: the rest were
delivered to the Duke of Vicenza. Their exa-
mination afforded nothing interesting. The
Emperor, disappointed, accused M. Fouché of
having removed the important papers. Those
we inspected consisted only of private reports,
and confidential and anonymous notes. The
hatred of the revolution pervaded every line,
every word. The writers did not dare to pro-
pose plainly the revocation of the Charter, and
the abolition of the new institutions; but they
declared without any circumlocution, that the
dynasty of the Bourbons would never be secure

<page 462>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 443
with the existing laws; and that it was neces-
sary, to distrust and get rid of the men of the
revolution. More effectually to know and per-
secute these, M. de Blacas had caused to be
disinterred from the archives of the cabinet,
and of the ministers, the documents that might
serve to make known their conduct ever since
1789, and he had directed biographical notices
of each to be composed, which might easily
have been taken for indictments drawn up by
M. Bellart”.
We found also a number of minutes of laws
and ordinances, written by the hand of this
minister, and attesting by their laborious cor-
rections, how destitute he was of readiness and
of imagination. Frequently he made three or
four foul copies, before he could give any con-
sistency or connection to his ideas. His fa-
miliar style was dry and turgid: if the style
exhibit the man, how I pity M. de Blacas! He
took extreme pains to vary, himself, the form
of his appointments (rendez-vous): and the
trouble he gave himself, to say the same thing
in several different ways, wonderfully reminded
us of the billet-doux of the Bourgeois Gentil-
* Attorney-general to the king, employed on certain
occasions, to prosecute political crimes and misdemeanors.

<page 463>
444. MEMOIRS OF
homme: “Belle Marquise, vos beaur yeur me
Jönt mourir d'amour; d’amour mourir me font,
belle Marquise, vos beauv yeuv".”
In fine, we collected from the cabinet of this
minister an ample collection of royal denun-
ciations, petitions, justifications, and confes-
sions, of those men, who, like Lockard, are
always “the most humble servants of circum-
stances.”
These humble servants, when the Emperor
returned from the island of Elba, did not fail to
prostrate themselves before him anew. They
assured him, after the example of a certain
Marquis well known, that they had denied, in-
sulted, calumniated him, only that they might
remain faithful to him, without being suspected
by the royal government: they conjured him,
to grant them the happiness and glory of serving
him; but he disdained their supplications, as
he had disdained their insults: they gained no-
thing but his contempt. Always as devoid of
shame as of faith, they were eager, immediately
after the fall of Napoleon, to turn round anew,
and carry back to the King their faded homage.
* “Beautiful Marchioness, your beautiful eyes make me
die of love; of love make me die, beautiful Marchioness,
your beautiful eyes.”

<page 464>
NAPOLEON IN 1815. 445
Some, as M. the Count de M***, whose hands
are still reeking with the blood of his assistants
(administres), contrived, with the help of their
lying fidelity, to surprise his easy confidence.
Others, as M. F***, became in their writings
the virulent persecutors of men, whose lot they
had envied, and whose support they had begged.
All arrogated to themselves exclusively the title
of pure royalists: the title of honest men.....
I know them . . . . . . the mask, with which they
cover themselves, the honours, the dignities,
with which they are invested, cannot disguise
them to my eyes . . . . . . . . . Shall I name
them? And the Emperor is accused of despising
mankind! ah, where is the sovereign, that can
esteem them :
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME,

<page 465>
LONDON:
painten RY THOMAs Davison, white FRIARs.

<page 466>

<page 467>
-



<page 468>

<page 469>


<page 470>


<page 471>
T.I.
|
|
|
- -
- -


<page 472>
