
<page 1>
LIBRARY OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA

PRESENTED BY
MRS. GEORGE E. WALKER, Jr.

<page 2>

<page 3>
f

<page 4>

<page 5>

<page 6>

<page 7>

<page 8>

<page 9>


<page 10>
TltUE STORIES
\atii \:, !; u av"i .i -. *:
'- H , It r, E I; A ./ . :I
MDCCC LI.

<page 11>


<page 12>
TllUE STORIES
HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY.
BY
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.
BOSTON:
TICKNOR, REED, AND FIELDS.
MDCCC LI.

<page 13>
GIFT
JUN 1 6 47
F
440564
E itered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1851, by
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts.

THCHSTOy, TORRT, ASD EMERSON, PRINTERS.

<page 14>
PREFACE.
In writing this ponderous tome, the author's desire
has been to describe the eminent characters and re-
markable events of our annals in such a form and
style that the young may make acquaintance with
them of their own accord. For this purpose, while
ostensibly relating the adventures of a chair, he has
endeavored to keep a distinct and unbroken thread of
authentic history. The chair is made to pass from
one to another of those personages of whom he
thought it most desirable for the young reader to have
vivid and familiar ideas, and whose lives and actions
would best enable him to give picturesque sketches
of the times. On its sturdy oaken legs it trudges
diligently from one scene to another, and seems al-
ways to thrust itself in the way, with most benign
complacency, whenever an historical personage happens
to be looking round for a seat. 
<page 15>
ir
PREFACE.
There is certainly no method by which the shadowy
outlines of departed men and women can be made to
assume the hues of life more effectually than by con-
necting their images with the substantial and homely
reality of a fireside chair. It causes us to feel at
once that these characters of history had a private
and familiar existence, and were not wholly contained
within that cold array of outward action which we are
compelled to receive as the adequate representation of
their lives. If this impression can be given, much is
accomplished. Setting aside Grandfather and his auditors, and
excepting the adventures of the chair, which form the
machinery of the work, nothing in the ensuing pages
can be termed fictitious. The author, it is true, has
sometimes assumed the license of filling up the outline
of history with details for which he has none but
imaginative authority, but which, he hopes, do not
violate nor give a false coloring to the truth. He
believes that, in this respect, his narrative will not be
found to convey ideas and impressions of which the
reader may hereafter find it necessary to purge his
mind. The author's great doubt is, whether he has sue-

<page 16>
> »
PREFACE. V
i
in writing a book which will be readable by
the class for whom he intends it. To make a lively
and entertaining narrative for children, with such
unmalleable material as is presented by the sombre,
stern, and rigid characteristics of the Puritans and
their descendants, is quite as difficult an attempt as to
manufacture delicate playthings out of the granite
rocks on which New England is founded.

<page 17>

<page 18>
THE WHOLE HISTORY
or
GRANDFATHER'S CHAIR.
COMPLETE IN THREE PARTS.

<page 19>

<page 20>
GRANDFATHER'S CHAIR.
PART I.
CHAPTER L
Grandfather had been sitting in his old arm-
chair, all that pleasant afternoon, while the chil-
dren were pursuing their various sports far off
or near at hand. Sometimes you would have
said, "Grandfather is asleep;' but still, even
when his eyes were closed, his thoughts were
with the young people, playing among the
flowers and shrubbery of the garden. He heard the voice of Laurence, who had
taken possession of a heap of decayed branches
which the gardener had lopped from the fruit trees, and was building a little hut for his cousin
Clara and himself. He heard Clara's gladsome
voice, too, as she weeded and watered the flower-
bed which had been given her for her own. He
could have counted every footstep that Charley
took, as he trundled his wheelbarrow along the
1

<page 21>
2
grandfather's chair.
gravel walk. And though Grandfather was old
and gray-haired, yet his heart leaped with joy
whenever little Alice came fluttering, like a but-
terfly, into the room. She had made each of
the children her playmate in turn, and now made
Grandfather her playmate too, and thought him
the merriest of them all. At last the children grew weary of their sports;
because a summer afternoon is like a long life-
time to the young. So they came into the room
together, and clustered round Grandfather's great
chair. Little Alice, who was hardly five years
old, took the privilege of the youngest, and
climbed his knee. It was a pleasant thing to
behold that fair and golden-haired child in the
lap of the old man, and to think that, different
as they were, the hearts of both could be glad-
dened with the same joys.
'Grandfather,' said little Alice, laying her
head back upon his arm, "I am very tired now.
You must tell me a story to make me go to
sleep.'
'That is not what story-tellers like,' answered
Grandfather, smiling. "They are better satisfied
when they can keep their auditors awake.'
'But here are Laurence, and Charley, and I," cried cousin Clara, who was twice as old as little
Alice. "We will all three keep wide awake.
And pray, Grandfather, tell us a story about this
strange-looking old chair.'

<page 22>
grandfather's chair.
3
Now, the chair in which Grandfather sat was
made of oak, which had grown dark with age,
but had been rubbed and polished till it shone as
bright as mahogany. It was very large and
heavy, and had a back that rose high above
Grandfather's white head. This back was curi-
ously carved in open-work, so as to represent
flowers, and foliage, and other devices, which the
children had often gazed at, but could never
understand what they meant. On the very tiptop
of the chair, over the head of Grandfather him-
self, was a likeness of a lion's head, which had
such a savage grin that you would almost expect
to hear it growl and snarl. The children had seen Grandfather sitting in
this chair ever since they could remember anything. Perhaps the younger of them supposed
that he and the chair had come into the world
together, and that both had always been as old
as they were now. At this time, however, it
happened to be the fashion for ladies to adorn
their drawing-rooms with the oldest and oddest
chairs that could be found. It seemed to cousin
Clara that, if these ladies could have seen Grand-
father's old chair, they would have thought it
worth all the rest together. She wondered if it
were not even older than Grandfather himself,
and longed to know all about its history.
'Do, Grandfather, talk to us about this chair," she repeated.

<page 23>
4
grandfather's chair.
'Well, child,' said Grandfather, patting Clara's
cheek, "I can tell you a great many stories of my
chair. Perhaps your cousin Laurence would like
to hear them too. They would teach him some-
thing about the history and distinguished people
of his country which he has never read in any
of his school-books.'
Cousin Laurence was a boy of twelve, a bright
scholar, in whom an early thoughtfulness and
sensibility began to show themselves. His
young fancy kindled at the idea of knowing all
the adventures of this venerable chair. He
looked eagerly in Grandfather's face; and even
Charley, a bold, brisk, restless little fellow of
nine, sat himself down on the carpet, and
resolved to be quiet for at least ten minutes,
should the story last so long. Meantime, little Alice was already asleep; so
Grandfather, being much pleased with such an
attentive audience, began to talk about matters
that happened long ago. 
<page 24>
grandfather's chair.
5
CHAPTER H.
But, before relating the adventures of the
chair, Grandfather found it necessary to speak of
the circumstances that caused the first settlement
of New England. For it will soon be perceived
that the story of this remarkable chair cannot be
told without telling a great deal of the history
of the country.
So, Grandfather talked about the Puritans, as
those persons were called who thought it sinful
to practise the religious forms and ceremonies
which the Church of England had borrowed
from the Roman Catholics. These Puritans
suffered so much persecution in England that, in
in 1607, many of them went over to Holland,
and lived ten or twelve years at Amsterdam and
Leyden. But they feared that, if they con-
tinued there much longer, they should cease to
be English, and should adopt all the manners, and ideas, and feelings of the Dutch. For this
and other reasons, in the year 1620 they em-
barked on board of the ship Mayflower, and
crossed the ocean to the shores of Cape Cod.
There they made a settlement, and called it
Plymouth, which, though now a'part of Massa-
chusetts, was for a long time a colony by itself.
And thus was formed the earliest settlement of
the Puritans in America. Meantime, those of the Puritans who remained 
<page 25>
6
grandfather's chair.
in England continued to suffer grievous perse-
cution on account of their religious opinions.
They began to look around them for some spot
where they might worship God, not as the king
and bishops thought fit, but according to the dictates of their own consciences. When their
brethren had gone from Holland to America,
they bethought themselves that they likewise
might find refuge from persecution there. Sev-
eral gentlemen among them purchased a tract of
country on the coast of Massachusetts Bay, and
obtained a charter from King Charles, which
authorized them to make laws for the settlers.
In the year 1628 they sent over a few people,
with John Endicott at their head, to commence
a plantation at Salem. Peter Palfrey, Roger
Conant, and one or two more, had built houses
there in 1626, and may be considered as the first
settlers of that ancient town. Many other Pu-
ritans prepared to follow Endicott.
'And now we come to the chair, my dear
children," said Grandfather. "This chair is sup-
posed to have been made of an oak-tree which
grew in the park of the English Earl of Lincoln,
between two and three centuries ago. In its
younger days it used, probably, to stand in the
hall of the earl's castle. Do not you see the
coat of arms of the family of Lincoln carved
in the open-work of the back? But when his
daughter, the Lady Arbella, was married to a 
<page 26>
grandfather's chair.
7
certain Mr. Johnson, the earl gave her this valu-
able chair.'
'Who was Mr. Johnson?' inquired Clara.
"He was a gentleman of great wealth, who
agreed with the Puritans in their religious opin-
ions," answered Grandfather. "And as his belief
was the same as theirs, he resolved that he
would live and die with them. Accordingly, in
the month of April, 1630, he left his pleasant
abode and all his comforts in England, and em-
barked with the Lady Arbella, on board of a
ship bound for America."
As Grandfather was frequently impeded by the
questions and observations of his young auditors,
we deem it advisable to omit all such prattle as
is not essential to the story. We have taken
some pains to find out exactly what Grandfather
said, and here offer to our readers, as nearly as
possible in his own words, the story of THE LADY ARBELLA. The ship in which Mr. Johnson and his lady
embarked, taking Grandfather's chair along with
them, was called the Arbella, in honor of the
lady herself. A fleet of ten or twelve vessels,
with many hundred passengers, left England
about the same time; for a multitude of people,
who were discontented with the king's govern-
ment and oppressed by the bishops, were flock-
ing over to the new world. One of the vessels in 
<page 27>
8
grandfather's chair.
the fleet was that same Mayflower which had
carried the Puritan Pilgrims to Plymouth. And
now, my children, I would have you fancy
yourselves in the cabin of the good ship Arbella;
because, if you could behold the passengers
aboard that vessel, you would feel what a bless-
ing and honor it was for New England to have
such settlers. They were the best men and
women of their day.
Among the passengers was John Winthrop,
who had sold the estate of his forefathers, and
was going to prepare a new home for his wife
and children in the wilderness. He had the
king's charter in his keeping, and was appointed
the first governor of Massachusetts. Imagine
him a person of grave and benevolent aspect,
dressed in a black velvet suit, with a broad ruff
around his neck, and a peaked beard upon his
chin. There was likewise a minister of the
gospel whom the English bishops had for-
bidden to preach, but who knew that he should
have liberty both to preach and pray in the
forests of America. He wore a black cloak,
called a Geneva cloak, and had a black velvet
cap, fitting close to his head, as was the fashion
of almost all the Puritan clergymen. In their
company came Sir Richard Saltonstall, who had
been one of the five first projectors of the new
colony. He soon returned to his native country. But his descendants still remain in New England; 
<page 28>
grandfather's chair.
9
and the good old family name is as much respected
in our days as it was in those of Sir Richard. Not only these, but several other men of
wealth and pious ministers were in the cabin of
the Arbella. One had banished himself forever
from the old hall where his ancestors had lived
for hundreds of years. Another had left his
quiet parsonage, in a country town of England.
Others had come from the Universities of Oxford
or Cambridge, where they had gained great fame
for their learning. And here they all were, toss-
ing upon the uncertain and dangerous sea, and
bound for a home that was more dangerous than
even the sea itself. In the cabin, likewise, sat
the Lady Arbella in her chair, with a gentle and
sweet expression on her face, but looking too
pale and feeble to endure the hardships of the
wilderness. Every morning and evening the Lady Ar-
bella gave up her great chair to one of the min-
isters, who took his place in it and read passages
from the Bible to his companions. And thus,
with prayers, and pious conversation, and fre-
quent singing of hymns, which the breezes
caught from their lips and scattered far over the
desolate waves, they prosecuted their voyage,
and sailed into the harbor of Salem in the
month of June. At that period there were but six or eight
dwellings in the town; and these were mise-

<page 29>
10
grandfather's chair.
rable hovels, with roofs of straw and wooden
chimneys. The passengers in the fleet either
built huts with bark and branches of trees, or
erected tents of cloth till they could provide
themselves with better shelter. Many of them
went to form a settlement at Charlestown. It
was thought fit that the Lady Arbella should
tarry in Salem for a time: she was probably
received as a guest into the family of John Endicott. He was the chief person in the planta-
tion, and had the only comfortable house which
the newcomers had beheld since they left
England. So now, children, you must imagine
Grandfather's chair in the midst of a new scene. Suppose it a hot summer's day, and the lat-
tice-windows of a chamber in Mr. Endicott's
house thrown wide open. The Lady Arbella,
looking paler than she did on shipboard, is sit-
ting in her chair and thinking mournfully of
far-off England. She rises and goes to the
window. There, amid patches of garden ground
and cornfield, she sees the few wretched hovels
of the settlers, with the still ruder wigwams and
cloth tents of the passengers who had arrived
in the same fleet with herself. Far and near
stretches the dismal forest of pine-trees, which
throw their black shadows over the whole land,
and likewise over the heart of this poor lady. All the inhabitants of the little village are
busy. One is clearing a spot on the verge of 
<page 30>
grandfather's chatr.
11
the forest for his homestead; another is hewing
the trunk of a fallen pine-tree, in order to build
himself a dwelling; a third is hoeing in his field
of Indian corn. Here comes a huntsman out of
the woods, dragging a bear which he has shot,
and shouting to the neighbors to lend him a
hand. There goes a man to the seashore, with
a spade and a bucket, to dig a mess of clams,
which were a principal article of food with the
first settlers. Scattered here and there are two
or three dusky figures, clad in mantles of fur,
with ornaments of bone hanging from their ears,
and the feathers of wild birds in their coal-black
hair. They have belts of shell-work slung
across their shoulders, and are armed with bows
and arrows and flint-headed spears. These are
an Indian sagamore and his attendants, who
have come to gaze at the labors of the white
men. And now rises a cry that a pack of
wolves have seized a young calf in the pasture; and every man snatches up his gun or pike and
runs in chase of the marauding beasts. Poor Lady Arbella watches all these sights,
and feels that this new world is fit only for
rough and hardy people. None should be here
but those who can struggle with wild beasts and
wild men, and can toil in the heat or cold, and
can keep their hearts firm against all difficulties
and dangers. But she is not one of these. Her
gentle and timid spirit sinks within her; and

<page 31>
12
grandfather's chair.
turning away from the window, she sits down in
the great chair and wonders whereabouts in the
wilderness her friends will dig her grave. Mr. Johnson had gone, with Governor Winthrop and most of the other passengers, to
Boston, where he intended to build a house for
Lady Arbella and himself. Boston was then
covered with wild woods, and had fewer inhabi-
tants even than Salem. During her husband's
absence, poor Lady Arbella felt herself growing
ill, and was hardly able to stir from the great
chair. Whenever John Endicott noticed her
despondency, he doubtless addressed her with
words of comfort. "Cheer up, my good lady!" he
would say. "In a little time, you will love this
rude life of the wilderness as I do." But En-
dicott's heart was as bold and resolute as iron,
and he could not understand why a woman's
heart should not be of iron too. Still, however, he spoke kindly to the lady,
and then hastened forth to till his cornfield and
set out fruit-trees, or to bargain with the Indians
for furs, or perchance to oversee the building of
a fort. Also, being a magistrate, he had often to
punish some idler or evil-doer, by ordering him
to be set in the stocks or scourged at the whip-
ping-post. Often, too, as was the custom of the
times, he and Mr. Higginson, the minister of
Salem, held long religious talks together. Thus
John Endicott was a man of multifarious busi-

<page 32>
grandfather's chair.
13
ness, and had no time to look back regretfully to
his native land. He felt himself fit for the new
world, and for the work that he had to do, and
set himself resolutely to accomplish it.What a contrast, my dear children, between
this bold, rough, active man, and the gentle
Lady Arbella, who was fading away, like a pale
English flower, in the shadow of the forest!
And now the great chair was often empty,
because Lady Arbella grew too weak to arise
from bed. Meantime, her husband had pitched upon a
spot for their new home. He returned from
Boston to Salem, travelling through the woods
on foot, and leaning on his pilgrim's staff. His
heart yearned within him; for he was eager to
tell his wife of the new home which he had
chosen. But when he beheld her pale and
hollow cheek, and found how her strength was
wasted, he must have known that her appointed
home was in a better land. Happy for him
then — happy both for him and her — if they
remembered that there was a path to heaven, as
well from this heathen wilderness as from the
Christian land whence they had come. And so,
in one short month from her arrival, the gentle
Lady Arbella faded away and died. They dug
a grave for her in the new soil, where the roots
of the pine-trees impeded their spades; and
when her bones had rested there nearly two

<page 33>
14
grandfather's chair.
hundred years, and a city had sprung up around
them, a church of stone was built upon the spot. Charley, almost at the commencement of the
foregoing narrative, had galloped away, with a
prodigious clatter, upon Grandfather's stick, and was not yet returned. So large a boy should
have been ashamed to ride upon a stick. But
Laurence and Clara had listened attentively, and
were affected by this true story of the gentle
lady who had come so far to die so soon.
Grandfather had supposed that little Alice was
asleep, but, towards the close of the story, hap-
pening to look down upon her, he saw that her
blue eyes were wide open, and fixed earnestly
upon his face. The tears had gathered in them,
like dew upon a delicate flower; but when
Grandfather ceased to speak, the sunshine of
her smile broke forth again.
'0, the lady must have been so glad to get
to heaven!" exclaimed little Alice.
"Grandfather, what became of Mr. Johnson?" asked Clara.
"His heart appears to have been quite broken," answered Grandfather; "for he died at Boston
within a month after the death of his wife. He
was buried in the very same tract of ground where he had intended to build a dwelling for
Lady Arbella and himself. Where their house
would have stood, there was his grave.

<page 34>
grandfather's chair.
15
'I never heard anything so melancholy!' said
Clara.
'The people loved and respected Mr. Johnson
so much," continued Grandfather, "that it was the
last request of many of them, when they died,
that they might be buried as near as possible to
this good man's grave. And so the field became
the first burial-ground in Boston. When you
pass through Tremont Street, along by King's
Chapel, you see a burial-ground, containing
many old grave-stones and monuments. That
was Mr. Johnson's field.'
'How sad is the thought," observed Clara,
"that one of the first things which the settlers
had to do, when they came to the new world,
was to set apart a burial-ground!'
'Perhaps,' said Laurence, "if they had found
no need of burial-grounds here, they would have
been glad, after a few years, to go back to Eng-
land." Grandfather looked at Laurence, to discover
whether he knew how profound and true a thing
he had said. 
<page 35>
16
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER m.
Not long after Grandfather had told the story
of his great chair, there chanced to be a rainy
day. Our friend Charley, after disturbing the
household with beat of drum and riotous shouts,
races up and down the staircase, overturning of
chairs, and much other uproar, began to feel the
quiet and confinement within doors intolerable.
But as the rain came down in a flood, the little
fellow was hopelessly a prisoner, and now stood
with sullen aspect at a window, wondering
whether the sun itself were not extinguished by
so much moisture in the sky. Charley had already exhausted the less eager
activity of the other children; and they had be-
taken themselves to occupations that did not
admit of his companionship. Laurence sat in a
recess near the bookcase, reading, not for the
first time, the Midsummer Night's Dream. Clara
was making a rosary of beads for a little figure
of a Sister of Charity, who was to attend the
Bunker Hill fair and lend her aid in erecting
the Monument. Little Alice sat on Grandfather's
footstool, with a picture-book in her hand; and,
for every picture, the child was telling Grand-
father a story. She did not read from the book,
(for little Alice had not much skill in reading,)
but told the story out of her own heart and
mind.

<page 36>
grandfather's chair.
17
Charley was too big a boy, of course, to care
anything about little Alice's stories, although
Grandfather appeared to listen with a good deal
of interest. Often, in a young child's ideas and
fancies, there is something which it requires the
thought of a lifetime to comprehend. But Char-
ley was of opinion, that if a story must be told,
it had better be told by Grandfather than little
Alice.
'Grandfather, I want to hear more about your
chair," said he.
Now Grandfather remembered that Charley had
galloped away upon a stick in the midst of the
narrative of poor Lady Arbella, and I know not
whether he would have thought it worth while
to tell another story merely to gratify such an
inattentive auditor as Charley. But Laurence
laid down his book and seconded the request.
Clara drew her chair nearer to Grandfather; and
little Alice immediately closed her picture-book,
and looked up into his face. Grandfather had
not the heart to disappoint them. He mentioned several persons who had a share in the settlement of our country, and who would be well worthy of remembrance, if we could find room to tell about them all. Among the rest, Grandfather spoke of the famous Hugh Peters, a minister of the gospel, who did much good to the inhabitants of Salem. Mr. Peters afterwards went back to England, and was
2

<page 37>
18
grandfather's chair.
chaplain to Oliver Cromwell; but Grandfather
did not tell the children what became of this
upright and zealous man at last. In fact, his
auditors were growing impatient to hear more
about the history of the chair.
'After t the death of Mr. Johnson," said he,
"Grandfather's chair came into the possession of
Roger Williams. He was a clergyman, who
arrived at Salem, and settled there in 1631.
Doubtless the good man has spentmany a stu-
dious hour in this old chair, either penning a
sermon or reading some abstruse book of the-
ology, till midnight came upon him unawares.
At that period, as there were few lamps or
candles to be had, people used to read or work by
the light of pitch-pine torches. These supplied
the place of the "midnight oil," to the learned
men of New England." Grandfather went on to talk about Roger Wil-
liams, and told the children several particulars,
which we have not room to repeat. One inci-
dent, however, which was connected with his
life, must be related, because it will give the
reader an idea of the opinions and feelings of
the first settlers of New England. It was as
follows:
THE RED CROSS.
While Roger Williams sat in Grandfather's
chair at his humble residence in Salem, John 
<page 38>
grandfather's chair.
19
Endicott would often come to visit him. As the
clergy had great influence in temporal concerns,
the minister and magistrate would talk over the
occurrences of the day, and consult how the
people might be governed according to scriptural
laws. One thing especially troubled them both. In
the old national banner of England, under which
her soldiers have fought for hundreds of years,
there is a Red Cross, which has been there ever
since the days when England was in subjection
to the pope. The cross, though a holy symbol,
was abhorred by the Puritans, because they con-
sidered it a relic of Popish idolatry. Now,
whenever the trainband of Salem was mus-
tered, the soldiers, with Endicott at their head,
had no other flag to march under than this same
old Papistical banner of England, with the Red
Cross in the midst of it. The banner of the
Red Cross, likewise, was flying on the walls of
the fort of Salem; and a similar one was dis-
played in Boston Harbor, from the fortress on
Castle Island.
'1 profess, brother Williams,' Captain Endi-
cott would say, after they had been talking of
this matter, 'it distresses a Christian man's
heart to see this idolatrous cross flying over our
heads. A stranger, beholding it, would think
that we had undergone all our hardships and
dangers, by sea and in the wilderness, only to
get new dominions for the Pope of Rome.'

<page 39>
20 grandfather's chair.
'Truly, good Mr. Endicott," Roger Williams
would answer, "you speak as an honest man
and Protestant Christian should. For mine own
part, were it my business to draw a sword, I
should reckon it sinful to fight under such a
banner. Neither can I, in my pulpit, ask the
blessing of Heaven upon it." Such, probably, was the way in which Roger
Williams and John Endicott used to talk about
the banner of the Red Cross. Endicott, who
was a prompt and resolute man, soon determined
that Massachusetts, if she could not have a ban-
ner of her own, should at least be delivered
from that of the Pope of Rome. Not long afterwards there was a military
muster at Salem. Every able-bodied man, in
the town and neighborhood was there. All
were well armed, with steel caps upon their
heads, plates of iron upon their breasts and at
their backs, and gorgets of steel around their
necks. When the sun shone upon these ranks
of iron-clad men, they flashed and blazed with
a splendor that bedazzled the wild Indians who
had come out of the woods to gaze at them.
The soldiers had long pikes, swords, and mus-
kets, which were fired with matches, and were
almost as heavy as a small cannon. These men had mostly a stern and rigid
aspect. To judge by their looks, you might
have supposed that there was as much iron in 
<page 40>
grandfather's chair. 21
their hearts as there was upon their heads and
breasts. They were all devoted Puritans, and
of the same temper as those with whom Oliver
Cromwell afterwards overthrew the throne of
England. They hated all the relics of Popish
superstition as much as Endicott himself; and
yet over their heads was displayed the banner
of the Red Cross.
Endicott was the captain of the company.
While the soldiers were expecting his orders to
begin their exercise, they saw him take the
banner in one hand, holding his drawn sword in
the other. Probably he addressed them in a
speech, and explained how horrible a thing it
was, that men, who had fled from Popish idol-
atry into the wilderness, should be compelled to
fight under its symbols here. Perhaps he con-
cluded his address somewhat in the following
style.
'And now, fellow-soldiers, you see this old
banner of England. Some of you, I doubt not,
may think it treason for a man to lay violent
hands upon it. But whether or no it be treason
to man, I have good assurance in my conscience
that it is no treason to God. Wherefore, I have
resolved that we will rather be God's soldiers than soldiers of the Pope of Rome; and in that
mind I now cut the Papal cross out of this
banner."
And so he did. And thus, in a province 
<page 41>
grandfather's chair.
belonging to the crown of England, a captain
was found bold enough to deface the king's banner with his sword. When Winthrop and the other wise men of
Massachusetts heard of it they were disquieted,
being afraid that Endicott's act would bring
great trouble upon himself and them. An ac-
count of the matter was carried to King Charles;
but he was then so much engrossed by dissen-
sions with his people that he had no leisure
to punish the offender. In other times, it might
have cost Endicott his life, and Massachusetts
her charter.
'I should like to know, Grandfather," said
Laurence, when the story was ended, "whether,
when Endicott cut the Red Cross out of the
banner, he meant to imply that Massachusetts
was independent of England?'
'A sense of the independence of his adopted
country must have been in that bold man's
heart," answered Grandfather; "but I doubt
whether he had given the matter much consid-
eration except in its religious bearing. How-
ever, it was a very remarkable affair, and a very
strong expression of Puritan character." Grandfather proceeded to speak further of
Roger Williams and of other persons who sat
in the great chair, as will be seen in the follow-
ing chapter. 
<page 42>
grandfather's chair.
23
CHAPTER IV.
'Roger Williams,' said Grandfather, "did not
keep possession of the chair a great while. His
opinions of civil and religious matters differed,
in many respects, from those of the rulers and
clergymen of Massachusetts. Now, the wise
men of those days believed that the country
could not be safe unless all the inhabitants
thought and felt alike.'
'Does any body believe so in our days, Grand-
father?" asked Laurence.
'Possibly there are some who believe it," said
Grandfather; "but they have not so much power
to act upon their belief as the magistrates and
ministers had in the days of Roger Williams.
They had the power to deprive this good man
of his home, and to send him out from the midst
of them in search of a new place of rest. He
was banished in 1634, and went first to Ply-
mouth colony; but as the people there held the
same opinions as those of Massachusetts, he was
not suffered to remain among them. However,
the wilderness was wide enough; so Roger Wil-
liams took his staff and travelled into the forest,
and made treaties with the Indians, and began a
plantation which he called Providence.'
'I have been to Providence on the railroad," said Charley. "It is but a two hours' ride.'
'Yes, Charley," replied Grandfather; 'but

<page 43>
21
grandfather's chair.
when Roger Williams travelled thither, over
hills and valleys, and through the tangled woods,
and across swamps and streams, it was a journey
of several days. Well, his little plantation is
now grown to be a populous city; and the in-
habitants have a great veneration for Roger Wil-
liams. His name is familiar in the mouths of
all, because they see it on their bank bills. How
it would have perplexed this good clergyman if
he had been told that he should give his name
to the Roger Williams Bank!'
'When he was driven from Massachusetts," said Laurence, "and began his journey into the
woods, he must have felt as if he were burying
himself forever from the sight and knowledge of
men. Yet the whole country has now heard of
him, and will remember him forever.'
'Yes,' answered Grandfather, 'it often hap-
pens that the outcasts of one generation are
those who are reverenced as the wisest and best
of men by the next. The securest fame is that
which comes after a man's death. But let us
return to our story. When Roger Williams was
banished, he appears to have given the chair
to Mrs. Anne Hutchinson. At all events, it was
in her possession in 1637. She was a very
sharp-witted and well-instructed lady, and was
so conscious of her own wisdom and abilities that she thought it a pity that the world should
not have the benefit of them. She therefore 
<page 44>
grandfather's chair.
25
used to hold lectures in Boston once or twice a
week, at which most of the women attended.
Mrs. Hutchinson presided at these meetings,
sitting with great state and dignity in Grand-
father's chair.'
'Grandfather, was it positively this very
chair?" demanded Clara, laying her hand upon
its carved elbow.
'Why not, my dear Clara 1' said Grandfather.
"Well, Mrs. Hutchinson's lectures soon caused
a great disturbance; for the ministers of Boston
did not think it safe and proper that a woman
should publicly instruct the people in religious
doctrines. Moreover, she made the matter worse by declaring that the Rev. Mr. Cotton was the
only sincerely pious and holy clergyman in New
England. Now, the clergy of those days had
quite as much share in the government of the
country, though indirectly, as the magistrates
themselves; so you may imagine what a host of
powerful enemies were raised up against Mrs.
Hutchinson. A synod was convened; that is to
say, an assemblage of all the ministers in Massa-
chusetts. They declared that there were eighty-
two erroneous opinions on religious subjects diffused among the people, and that Mrs.
Hutchinson's opinions were of the number.'
'If they had eighty-two wrong opinions," ob-
served Charley, "I don't see how they could
have any right ones.'

<page 45>
26
grandfather's chair.
'Mrs. Hutchinson had many zealous friends
and converts," continued Grandfather. "She
was favored by young Henry Vane, who had
come over from England a year or two before,
and had since been chosen governor of the colony,
at the age of twenty-four. But Winthrop and
most of the other leading men, as well as the
ministers, felt an abhorrence of her doctrines.
Thus two opposite parties were formed; and so
fierce were the dissensions that it was feared the
consequence would be civil war and bloodshed.
But Winthrop and the ministers being the most
powerful, they disarmed and imprisoned Mrs. Hutchinson's adherents. She, like Roger Wil-
liams, was banished.'
'Dear Grandfather, did they drive the poor
woman into the woods?" exclaimed little Alice,
who contrived to feel a human interest even in
these discords of polemic divinity.
"They did, my darling," replied Grandfather;
"and the end of her life was so sad you must
not hear it. At her departure, it appears, from
the best authorities, that she gave the great chair
to her friend Henry Vane. He was a young man
of wonderful talents and great learning, who had
imbibed the religious opinions of the Puritans,
and left England with the intention of spending
his life in Massachusetts. The people chose
him governor; but the controversy about Mrs.
Hutchinson, and other troubles, caused him to 
<page 46>
grandfather's chair.
27
leave the country in 1637. You may read the
subsequent events of his life in the History of
England.'
'Yes, Grandfather," cried Laurence; "and we
may read them better in Mr. Upham's Biography of Vane. And what a beautiful death he
died, long afterwards! beautiful, though it was
on a scaffold.'
'Many of the most beautiful deaths have been
there," said Grandfather. "The enemies of a
great and good man can in no other way make
him so glorious as by giving him the crown of
martyrdom."
In order that the children might fully under-
stand the all-important history of the chair, Grand-
father now thought fit to speak of the progress
that was made in settling several colonies. The
settlement of Plymouth, in 1620, has already
been mentioned. In 1635 Mr. Hooker and Mr.
Stone, two ministers, went on foot from Massa-
chusetts to Connecticut, through the pathless
woods, taking their whole congregation along
with them. They founded the town of Hartford.
In 1638 Mr. Davenport, a very celebrated minis-
ter, went, with other people, and began a planta-
tion at New Haven. In the same year, some
persons who had been persecuted in Massachu-
setts went to the Isle of Rhodes, since called
Rhode Island, and settled there. About this time,
also, many settlers had gone to Maine, and were 
<page 47>
28
grandfather's chair.
living without any regular government. There
were likewise settlers near Piscataqua River, in
the region which is now called New Hampshire. Thus, at various points along the coast of New
England, there were communities of Englishmen.
Though these communities were independent of
one another, yet they had a common dependence
upon England; and, at so vast a distance from
their native home, the inhabitants must all have
felt like brethren. They were fitted to become
one united people at a future period. Perhaps
their feelings of brotherhood were the stronger because different nations had formed settlements
to the north and to the south. In Canada and
Nova Scotia were colonies of French. On the
banks of the Hudson River was a colony of
Dutch, who had taken possession of that region
many years before, and called it New Netherlands. Grandfather, for aught I know, might have
gone on to speak of Maryland and Virginia; for
the good old gentleman really seemed to suppose that the whole surface of the United States was
not too broad a foundation to place the four legs
of his chair upon. But, happening to glance at
Charley, he perceived that this naughty boy was
growing impatient and meditating another ride
upon a stick. So here, for the present, Grand-
father suspended the history of his chair. 
<page 48>
grandfather's chair.
29
CHAPTER V.
The children had now learned to look upon
the chair with an interest which was almost the
same as if it were a conscious being, and could
remember the many famous people whom it had
held within its arms. Even Charley, lawless as he was, seemed to
feel that this venerable chair must not be clam-
bered upon nor overturned, although he had no
scruple in taking such liberties with every other
chair in the house. Clara treated it with still
greater reverence, often taking occasion to smooth
its cushion, and to brush the dust from the carved
flowers and grotesque figures of its oaken back
and arms. Laurence would sometimes sit a
whole hour, especially at twilight, gazing at the
chair, and, by the spell of his imaginations,
summoning up its ancient occupants to appear in
it again. Little Alice evidently employed herself in a
similar way; for once, when Grandfather had
gone abroad, the child was heard talking with
the gentle Lady Arbella, as if she were still
sitting in the chair. So sweet a child as little
Alice may fitly talk with angels, such as the
Lady Arbella had long since become. Grandfather was soon importuned for more
stories about the chair. He had no difficulty in
relating them; for it really seemed as if every

<page 49>
30
grandfather's chair.
person, noted in our early history had, on some
occasion or other, found repose within its com-
fortable arms. If Grandfather took pride in anything, it was in being the possessor of such an
honorable and historic elbow chair.
"I know not precisely who next got possession
of the chair after Governor Vane went back to
England," said Grandfather. "But there is rea-
son to believe that President Dunster sat in it,
when he held the first commencement at Har-
vard College. You have often heard, children,
how careful our forefathers were to give their
young people a good education. They had
scarcely cut down trees enough to make room for
their own dwellings before they began to think
of establishing a college. Their principal object
was, to rear up pious and learned ministers; and
hence old writers call Harvard College a school
of the prophets.'
'Is the college a school of the prophets now?" asked Charley.
'It is a long while since I took my degree,
Charley. You must ask some of the recent
graduates," answered Grandfather. "As I was
telling you, President Dunster sat in Grandfath-
er's chair in 1642, when he conferred the degree
of bachelor of arts on nine young men. They
were the first in America who had received that
honor. And now, my dear auditors, I must con-
fess that there are contradictory statements and 
<page 50>
grandfather's chair.
31
some uncertainty about the adventures of the
chair for a period of almost ten years. Some
say that it was occupied by your own ancestor,
William Hawthorne, first Speaker of the House
of Representatives. I have nearly satisfied
myself, however, that, during most of this
questionable period, it was literally the chair of
state. It gives me much pleasure to imagine that several successive governors of Massachu-
setts sat in it at the council board.' ,
'But, Grandfather,' interposed Charley, who
was a matter-of-fact little person, "what reason
have you to imagine so?'
'Pray do imagine it, Grandfather," said Lau-
rence.
'With Charley's permission, I will," replied
Grandfather, smiling. "Let us consider it set-
tled, therefore, that Winthrop, Bellingham, Dud-
ley, and Endicott, each of them, when chosen
governor, took his seat in our great chair on
election day. In this chair, likewise, did those
excellent governors preside while holding con-
sultations with the chief councillors of the
province, who were styled assistants. The
governor sat in this chair, too, whenever mes-
sages were brought to him from the chamber of
Representatives.'
And here Grandfather took occasion to talk rather tediously about the nature and forms of
government that established themselves, almost 
<page 51>
32
grandfather's chair.
spontaneously, in Massachusetts and the other
New England colonies. Democracies were the
natural growth of the new world. As to Massa-
chusetts, it was at first intended that the colony
should be governed by a council in London.
But in a little while the people had the whole
power in their own hands, and chose annually
the governor, the councillors, and the representa-
tives. The people of Old England had never
enjoyed anything like the liberties and privi-
leges which the settlers of New England now
possessed. And they did not adopt these modes
of government after long study, but in simplicity,
as if there were no other way for people to be
ruled.
'But, Laurence,' continued Grandfather, "when you want instruction on these points, you
must seek it in Mr. Bancroft's History. I am
merely telling the history of a chair. To pro-
ceed. The period during which the governors
sat in our chair was not very full of striking
incidents. The province was now established
on a secure foundation; but it did not increase
so rapidly as at first, because the Puritans were
no longer driven from England by persecution.
However, there was still a quiet and natural
growth. The legislature incorporated towns,
and made new purchases of lands from the
Indians. A very memorable event took place in
1643. The colonies of Massachusetts, Plymouth, 
<page 52>
grandfather's chair.
33
Connecticut, and New Haven formed a union,
for the purpose of assisting each other in diffi-
culties, for mutual defence against their
enemies. They called themselves the United
Colonies of New England.'
'Were they under a government like that of
the United States?' inquired Laurence.
'No,' replied Grandfather, 'the different col-
onies did not compose one nation together; it was
merely a confederacy among the governments. It
somewhat resembled the league of the Amphictyons, which you remember in Grecian history.
But to return to our chair. In 1644 it was high-
ly honored; for Governor Endicott sat in it when he gave audience to an ambassador from
the French governor of Acadia, or Nova Scotia.
A treaty of peace between Massachusetts and
the French colony was then signed.'
'Did England allow Massachusetts to make
war and peace with foreign countries?' asked
Laurence.
'Massachusetts, and the whole of New Eng-
land was then almost independent of the mother
country," said Grandfather. "There was now
a civil war in England; and the king, as you
may well suppose, had his hands full at home,
and could pay but little attention to these remote
colonies. When the Parliament got the power
into their hands, they likewise had enough to
do in keeping down the Cavaliers. Thus New
3

<page 53>
34
grandfather's chair.
England, like a young and hardy lad whose
father and mother neglect it, was left to take
care of itself. In 1646 King Charles was be-
headed. Oliver Cromwell then became Pro-
tector of England; and as he was a Puritan
himself, and had risen by the valor of the Eng-
lish Puritans, he showed himself a loving and
indulgent father to the Puritan colonies in Amer-
ica." Grandfather might have continued to talk in
this dull manner nobody knows how long; but suspecting that Charley would find the subject
rather dry, he looked sidewise at that vivacious
little fellow, and saw him give an involuntary
yawn. Whereupon Grandfather proceeded with
the history of the chair, and related a very enter-
taining incident, which will be found in the next
chapter.

<page 54>
grandfather's chair.
35
CHAPTER VI.
'According to the most authentic records,
my dear children," said Grandfather, "the chair,
about this time, had the misfortune to break its
leg. It was probably on account of this acci-
dent that it ceased to be the seat of the gov-
ernors of Massachusetts; for, assuredly, it would
have been ominous of evil to the commonwealth if the chair of state had tottered upon three
legs. Being therefore sold at auction, — alas!
what a vicissitude for a chair that had figured
in such high company! — our venerable friend
was knocked down to a certain Captain John
Hull. This old gentleman, on carefully exam-
ining the maimed chair, discovered that its
broken leg might be clamped with iron and
made as serviceable as ever.'
'Here is the very leg that was broken!" ex-
claimed Charley, throwing himself down on the
floor to look at it. "And here are the iron
clamps. How well it was mended!"
When they had all sufficiently examined the
broken leg, Grandfather told them a story about
Captain John Hull and THE PINE-TREE SHILLINGS. The Captain John Hull, aforesaid, was the
mint-master of Massachusetts, and coined all the
money that was made there. This was a new 
<page 55>
36
grandfather's chair.
line of business; for, in the earlier days of the
colony, the current coinage consisted of gold
and silver money of England, Portugal, and
Spain. These coins being scarce, the people
were often forced to barter their commodities instead of selling them. For instance, if a man wanted to buy a coat,
he perhaps exchanged a bear-skin for it. If he
wished for a barrel of molasses, he might pur-
chase it with a pile of pine boards. Musket-
bullets were used instead of farthings. The
Indians had a sort of money, called wampum,
which was made of clam-shells; and this strange
sort of specie was likewise taken in payment
of debts by the English settlers. Bank-bills
had never been heard of. There was not money
enough of any kind, in many parts of the coun-
try, to pay the salaries of the ministers; so that
they sometimes had to take quintals of fish,
bushels of corn, or cords of wood, instead of
silver or gold. As the people grew more numerous, and their
trade one with another increased, the want of
current money was still more sensibly felt. To
supply the demand, the general court passed a
law for establishing a coinage of shillings, six-
pences, and threepences. Captain John Hull
was appointed to manufacture this money, and
was to have about one shilling out of every
twenty to pay him for the trouble of making
them.

<page 56>
grandfather's chair.
37
Hereupon, all the old silver in the colony was
handed over to Captain John Hull. The bat-
tered silver cans and tankards, I suppose, and
silver buckles, and broken spoons, and silver
buttons of worn-out coats, and silver hilts of
swords that had figured at court, — all such
curious old articles were doubtless thrown into
the melting-pot together. But by far the greater
part of the silver consisted of bullion from the
mines of South America, which the English
buccaniers — (who were little better than pirates — had taken from the Spaniards, and brought to
Massachusetts. All this old and new silver being melted down
and coined, the result was an immense amount
of splendid shillings, sixpences, and threepences.
Each had the date, 1652, on the one side, and
the figure of a pine-tree on the other. Hence
they were called pine-tree shillings. And for
every twenty shillings that he coined, you will
remember, Captain John Hull was entitled to
put one shilling into his own pocket. The magistrates soon began to suspect that
the mint-master would have the best of the
bargain. They offered him a large sum of
money if he would but give up that twentieth
shilling which he was continually dropping into
his own pocket. But Captain Hull declared
himself perfectly satisfied with the shilling. And
well he might be; for so diligently did he labor, 
<page 57>
38
grandfather's chair.
that, in a few years, his pockets, his money-bags,
and his strong-box were overflowing with pine-tree shillings. This was probably the case when
he came into possession of Grandfather's chair;
and, as he had worked so hard at the mint, it
was certainly proper that he should have a com-
fortable chair to rest himself in. When the mint-master had grown very rich,
a young man, Samuel Sewell by name, came
a-courting to his only daughter. His daughter
— whose name I do not know, but we will call
her Betsey — was a fine, hearty damsel, by no
means so slender as some young ladies of our
own days. On the contrary, having always fed
heartily on pumpkin pies, doughnuts, Indian
puddings, and other Puritan dainties, she was as
round and plump as a pudding herself. With
this round, rosy Miss Betsey did Samuel Sewell
fall in love. As he was a young man of good
character, industrious in his business, and a
member of the church, the mint-master very
readily gave his consent.
'Yes, you may take her," said he, in his rough
way; 'and you '11 find her a heavy burden
enough!'
On the wedding-day, we may suppose that
honest John Hull dressed himself in a plum-colored coat, all the buttons of which were made
of pine-tree shillings. The buttons of his waist-
coat were sixpences; and the knees of his small-

<page 58>
grandfather's chair. 39
clothes were buttoned with silver threepences.
Thus attired, he sat with great dignity in Grand-
father's chair; and, being a portly old gentle-
man, he completely filled it from elbow to
elbow. On the opposite side of the room,
between her bridemaids, sat Miss Betsey. She
was blushing with all her might, and looked
like a full-blown pasony, or a great red apple. There, too, was the bridegroom, dressed in a
fine purple coat and gold lace waistcoat, with
as much other finery as the Puritan laws and
customs would allow him to put on. His hair
was cropped close to his head, because Governor
Endicott had forbidden any man to wear it
below the ears. But he was a very personable
young man; and so thought the bridemaids and
Miss Betsey herself. The mint-master also was pleased with his
new son-in-law; especially as he had courted
Miss Betsey out of pure love, and had said
nothing at all about her portion. So, when the
marriage ceremony was over, Captain Hull
whispered a word to two of his men-servants,
who immediately went out, and soon returned,
lugging in a large pair of scales. They were
such a pair as wholesale merchants use for
weighing bulky commodities; and quite a bulky
commodity was now to be weighed in them.
'Daughter Betsey," said the mint-master, 'get
into one side of these scales.'

<page 59>
40 grandfather's chair.
Miss Betsey — or Mrs. Sewell, as we must
now call her — did as she was bid, like a dutiful
child, without any question of the why and
wherefore. But what her father could mean,
unless to make her husband pay for her by the
pound, (in which case she would have been a
dear bargain,) she had not the least idea.
'And now," said honest John Hull to the ser-
vants, "bring that box hither." The box to which the mint-master pointed,
was a huge, square, iron-bound, oaken chest; it
was big enough, my children, for all four of you
to play at hide-and-seek in. The servants tug-
ged with might and main, but could not lift this
enormous receptacle, and were finally obliged to
drag it across the floor. Captain Hull then took
a key from his girdle, unlocked the chest, and
lifted its ponderous lid. Behold! it was full to
the brim of bright pine-tree shillings, fresh from
the mint; and Samuel Sewell began to think
that his father-in-law had got possession of all
the money in the Massachusetts treasury. But
it was only the mint-master's honest share of the
coinage. Then the servants, at Captain Hull's com-
mand, heaped double handfuls of shillings into
one side of the scales, while Betsey remained in
the other. Jingle, jingle, went the shillings, as
handful after handful was thrown in, till, plump
and ponderous as she was, they fairly weighed
the young lady from the floor.

<page 60>
grandfather's chair.
41
'There, son Sewell!" cried the honest mint-
master, resuming his seat in Grandfather's chair,
"take these shillings for my daughter's portion.
Use her kindly, and thank Heaven for her. It
is not every wife that's worth her weight in
silver!"
The children laughed heartily at this legend,
and would hardly be convinced but that Grand-
father had made it out of his own head. He
assured them faithfully, however, that he had
found it in the pages of a grave historian, and
had merely tried to tell it in a somewhat funnier
style. As for Samuel Sewell, he afterwards be-
came Chief Justice of Massachusetts.
'Well, Grandfather," remarked Clara, "if wed-
ding portions nowadays were paid as Miss
Betsey's was, young ladies would not pride
themselves upon an airy figure, as many of them
do.'

<page 61>
42 grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER VII.
When his little audience next assembled round
the chair, Grandfather gave them a doleful his-
tory of the Quaker persecution, which began in
1656, and raged for about three years in Massa-
chusetts. He told them how, in the first place, twelve of
the converts of George Fox, the first Quaker in
the world, had come over from England. They
seemed to be impelled by an earnest love for the
souls of men, and a pure desire to make known
what they considered a revelation from Heaven.
But the rulers looked upon them as plotting the
downfall of all government and religion. They
were banished from the colony. In a little
while, however, not only the first twelve had
returned, but a multitude of other Quakers had
come to rebuke the rulers and to preach against
the priests and steeple-houses. Grandfather described the hatred and scorn
with which these enthusiasts were received.
They were thrown into dungeons; they were
beaten with many stripes, women as well as men;
they were driven forth into the wilderness, and
left to the tender mercies of wild beasts and In-
dians. The children were amazed to hear, that,
the more the Quakers were scourged, and im-
prisoned, and banished, the more did the sect
increase, both by the influx of strangers and by 
<page 62>
grandfather's chair.
converts from among the Puritans. But Grand-
father told them that God had put something
into the soul of man, which always turned the
cruelties of the persecutor to nought. He went on to relate, that, in 1659, two
Quakers, named William Robinson and Marmaduke Stephenson, were hanged at Boston. A
woman had been sentenced to die with them,
but was reprieved on condition of her leaving
the colony. Her name was Mary Dyer. In the
year 1660 she returned to Boston, although she
knew death awaited her there; and, if Grand-
father had been correctly informed, an incident
had then taken place which connects her with
our story. This Mary Dyer had entered the
mint-master's dwelling, clothed in sackcloth and
ashes, and seated herself in our great chair with
a sort of dignity and state. Then she proceeded
to deliver what she called a message from Hea-
ven; but in the midst of it they dragged her to
prison.
'And was she executed?' asked Laurence.
'She was," said Grandfather.
'Grandfather,' cried Charley, clinching his
fist, 'I would have fought for that poor Quaker
woman!'
'Ah, but if a sword had been drawn for her," said Laurence, "it would have taken away all
the beauty of her death." It seemed as if hardly any of the preceding 
<page 63>
44
grandfather's chair.
stories had thrown such an interest around
Grandfather's chair as did the fact that the
poor, persecuted, wandering Quaker woman had
rested in it for a moment. The children were so
much excited that Grandfather found it neces-
sary to bring his account of the persecution to a
close.
'In 1660, the same year in which Mary Dyer
was executed," said he, "Charles the Second was
restored to the throne of his fathers. This king
had many vices; but he would not permit blood
to be shed, under pretence of religion, in any
part of his dominions. The Quakers in England
told him what had been done to their brethren
in Massachusetts; and he sent orders to Gover-
nor Endicott to forbear all such proceedings in
future. And so ended the Quaker persecution,
— one of the most mournful passages in the his-
tory of our forefathers." Grandfather then told his auditors, that, shortly
after the above incident, the great chair had been
given by the mint-master to the Rev. Mr. John
Eliot. He was the first minister p£__Roxbury.
But besides attending to his pastoral duties there,
he learned the language of the red men, and often
went into the woods to preach to them. So
earnestly did he labor for their conversion that
he has always been called the apostle to the In-
dians. The mention of this holy man suggested 
<page 64>
grandfather's chair.
45
to Grandfather the propriety of giving a brief
sketch of the history of the Indians, so far as
they were connected with the English colonists. A short period before the arrival of the first
Pilgrims at Plymouth there had been a very
grievous plague among the red men; and the
sages and ministers of that day were inclined
to the_jppjmonj that Providence had sent this
mortality in order to make room for the settle-
ment of the English. __Byt.I know not why we
should suppose that an Indian's life is less pre-
cious, in the eye of Heaven, than that of a white
mam Be that as it may, death had certainly
been very busy with the savage tribes. In many places the English found the wig-
wams deserted and the cornfields growing to
waste, with none to harvest the grain. There
were heaps of earth also, which, being dug open,
proved to be Indian graves, containing bows and
flint-headed spears and arrows; for the Indians
buried the dead warrior's weapons along with
him. In some spots there were skulls and other
human bones lying unburied. In 1633, and the
year afterwards, the small-pox broke out among
the Massachusetts Indians, multitudes of whom
died by this terrible disease of the old world.
These_misibrtuue& made them far less powerful
thji hey had formerly been. For nearly half a century after the arrival of the
English the red men showed themselves gene-

<page 65>
46
grandfather's chair.
rally inclined to peace and amity. They often
made submission when they might have made
successful war. The Plymouth settlers, led by
the famous Captain Miles Standish, slew some of
them, in 1623, without any very evident neces-
sity for so doing. In 1636, and the following
year, there was the most dreadful war that had
yet occurred between the Indians and the English.
The Connecticut settlers, assisted by a celebrated
Indian chief named Uncas, bore the brunt of this
war, with but little aid from Massachusetts.
Many hundreds of the hostile Indians were slain or burned in their wigwams. Sassacus, their
sachem, fled to another tribe, after his own
people were defeated; but he was murdered by
them, and his head was sent to his English
enemies. From that period down to the time of King
Philip's war, which will be mentioned_hereafter,
there was not much trouble with the.Jndians.
But the colonists were always on their guard,
and kept their weapons ready for the conflict.
'I have sometimes doubted,' said Grandfather,
when he had told these things to the children,
'I have jspjratimes_doubJed whethej there was
more than a single man, among our forefathers,
who realized that an Indian possesses a mind and
a heart, and an immortal soul. That single man
was John Eliot. All the rest of the early settlers
seemed to think that the Indians were an inferior 
<page 66>
grandfather's chair.
47
race of beings, whom the Creator had merely
allowedtoTfeerTpbssession of this beautiful coun-
try till the white men should be in want of it.
'Did the pious men of those days never try to
make Christians of them 7' asked Laurence.
'Sometimes, it is true,' answered Grandfather,
'the magistrates and ministers would talk about
civilizing and converting the red people. But,
at the bottom of their hearts, they would have
had almost as much expectation of civilizing the wild bear of the woods and making him fit for
paradise. They felt no faith in the success of
any such attempts, because they had no love for
the poor Indians. Now, Eliot was full of love
for them; and therefore so full of faith and hope that he spent the labor of a lifetime in their
behalf.'
'I would have conquered them first, and then
converted them,' said Charley.
'Ah, Charley, there spoke the very spirit of
our forefathers!' replied Grandfather. 'But Mr.
Eliot had a better spirit. He looked upon them
as his brethren. He persuaded as many of them
as he could to leave off their idle and wander-
ing habits, and to build houses, and cultivate the
earth, as the English did. He established
schools among them, and taught many of the
Indians how to read. He taught them, likewise,
how to pray. Hence they were called "praying
Indians." Finally, having spent the best years 
<page 67>
48
grandfather's chair.
of his life for their good, Mr. Eliot resolved to
spend the remainder in doing them a yet greater
benefit.'
'I know what that was!' cried Laurence.
'He sat down in his study,' continued Grand-
father, 'and began a translation of the Bible
into the Indian tongue. It was while he was
engaged in this pious work that the mint-master
gave him our great chair. His toil needed it and deserved it.'
'O, Grandfather, tell us all about that Indian
Bible!" exclaimed Laurence. "I have seen it
in the library of the Athenaeum; and the tears
came into my eyes to think that there were no
Indians left to read it.'

<page 68>
grandfather's chair.
49
CHAPTER VIII.
As Grandfather was a great admirer of the
apostle Eliot, he was glad to comply with the
earnest request which Laurence had made at the
close of the last chapter. So he proceeded to
describe how good Mr. Eliot labored, while he
was at work upon THE INDIAN BIBLE. My dear children, what a task would you
think it, even with a long lifetime before you,
were you bidden to copy every chapter, and
verse, and word, in. yonder great family Bible!
Would not this be a heavy toil? But if the
task were, not to write off the English Bible,
but to learn a language utterly unlike all other
tongues, — a language which hitherto had never
been learned, except by the Indians themselves,
from their mothers' lips, — a language never
written, and the strange words of which seemed
inexpressible by letters, — if the task were, first
to learn this new variety of speech, and then to
translate the Bible into it, and to do it so care-
fully that not one idea throughout the holy
book should be changed, — what would induce
you to undertake this toil? Yet this was what
the apostle Eliot did. It was a mighty work for a man, now grow-
ing old, to take upon himself. And what earthly
4

<page 69>
50
grandfather's chair.
reward could he expect from it? None; no
reward on earth. Butjhe believed that the red
men were the descendants of thos^J^oJtTnhes of
Israel of whom history has been able to tell us
nothing for thousands of years. He hoped that
God had sent the English across the ocean, Gen-
tiles as they were, to enlighten this benighted
portion of his once chosen race. And when he
should be summoned hence, he trusted to meet
blessed spirits in another world, whose bliss
would have been earned by his patient toil in
translating the word of God. This hope and
trust were far dearer to him than anything that
earth could offer. Sometimes, while thus at work, he was visited
by learned men, who desired to know what lite-
rary undertaking Mr. Eliot had in hand. They,
like himself, had been bred in the studious
cloisters of a university, and were supposed to
possess all the erudition which mankind has
hoarded up from age to age. Greek and Latin
were as familiar to them as the babble of their
childhood. Hebrew was like their mother tongue.
They had grown gray in study; their eyes were
bleared with poring over print and manuscript
by the light of the midnight lamp. And yet, how much had they leftjinlearned!
Mr. Eliot would put into their hands some of
the pages which he had been writing; and be-
hold! the gray-headed men stammered over the 
<page 70>
grandfather's chair.
51
long, strange words, like a little child in his first
attempts to read. Then would the apostle call
to him an Indian boy, one of his scholars, and
show him the manuscript which had so puzzled
the learned Englishmen.
"Read this, my child," said he, 'these are
some brethren of mine, who would fain hear the
sound of thy native tongue." Then would the Indian boy cast his eyes over
the mysterious page, and read it so skilfully that
it sounded like wild music. It seemed as if the
forest leaves were singing in the ears of his
auditors, and as if the roar of distant streams
were poured through the young Indian's voice.
Such were the sounds amid which the language
of the red man had been formed; and they were
still heard to echo in it. The lesson being over, Mr. Eliot would give
the Indian boy an apple or a cake, and bid him
leap forth into the open air which his free nature
loved. The apostle was kind to children, and
even shared in their sports sometimes. And
when his visitors had bidden him farewell, the
good man turned patiently to his toil again. No other Englishman had ever understood the
Indian character so well, nor possessed so great
an influence over the New England tribes, as
the apostle did. His advice and assistance
must often have been valuable to his countrymen in their transactions with the Indians. Occa-

<page 71>
52
grandfather's chair.
sionally, perhaps, the governor^ndj^rne^of the
councillors came to visit Mr. Eliot. Perchance
they were seeking some method to circumvent
the forest people. They inquired, it may be,
how they could obtain possession of such and
such a tract of their rich land. Or they talked
of making the Indians their servantSj_as if God
had destined them for perpetual bondage to the
more powerful white man. Perhaps, too, some warlike captain, dressed in
his bufi'-coat, with a corslet beneath it, accom-
panied the governor and councillors. Laying
his hand upon his sword-hilt, he would declare,
that the only method of dealing with the red
men was to meet them with the sword drawn and the musket presented. But the apostle resisted both the craft of the
politician and the fierceness of the warrior.
'Treat these sons of the forest as men and
brethren," he would say, 'and let us endeavor
to make them Christians. Their forefathers
were of that chosen race whom God delivered
from Egyptian bondage. Perchance he has des-
tined us to deliver the children from the more
cruel bondage of ignorance and idolatry. Chiefly
for this end, it may be, we were directed across
the ocean." When these other visitors were gone, Mr.
Eliot bent himself again over the half-written
page. He dared hardly relax a moment from 
<page 72>
grandfather's chair.
53
his toil. He felt that, in the book which he
was translating, there was a deep human as well
as heavenly wisdom, which would of itself suf-
fice to civilize and refine the savage tribes. Let
the Bible be diffused among them, and all earthly
good would follow. But how slight a consider-
ation was this, when he reflected that the eternal
welfare of a whole race of men depended upon
his accomplishment of the task which he had
set himself! What if his hands should be pal-
sied? What if his mind should lose its vigor?
What if death should come upon him ere the
work were done? Then must the red man
wander in the dark wilderness of heathenism forever. Impelled by such thoughts as these, he sat
writing in the great chair when the pleasant
summer breeze came in through his open case-
ment; and also when the fire of forest logs sent
up its blaze and smoke, through the broad stone
chimney, into the wintry air. Before the earliest
bird sang in the morning the apostle's lamp was
kindled; and, at midnight, his weary head was
not yet upon its pillow. And at length, leaning
back in the great chair, he could say to himself,
with a holy triumph, —'The work is finished!"
It was finished. Here was a Bible for the
Indians. Those long-lost descendants of the ten
tribes of Israel would now learn the history of
their forefathers. That grace which the ancient 
<page 73>
54
grandfather's chaie.
Israelites had forfeited was offered anew to their
children. There is no impiety in believing that, when
his long life was over, the apostle of the Indians
was welcomed to the celestial abodes by the
prophets of ancient days and by those earliest
apostles and evangelists who had drawn their
inspiration from the immediate presence of the
Saviour. They first had preached truth and sal-
vation to the world. And Eliot, separated from
them by many centuries, yet full of the same
spirit, had borne the like message to the new
world of the west. Since the first days of
Christianity, there has been no man more worthy
to be numbered in the brotherhood of the apos-
tles than Eliot.
'My heart is not satisfied to think," observed
Laurence, "that Mr. Eliot's labors have done no
good except to a few Indians of his own time.
Doubtless he would not have regretted his toil,
if it were the means of saving but a single soul.
But it is a grievous thing to me that he should
have toiled so hard to translate the Bible, and
now the language and the people are gone!
The Indian Bible itself is almost the only relic
of both.'
'Laurence,' said. his Grandfather, "if ever you
should doubt that man is capable of disinterested
zeal for his brother's good, then remember how 
<page 74>
grandfather's chair.
55
the apostle Eliot toiled. And if you should feel
your own self-interest pressing upon your heart
too closely, then think of Eliot's Indian Bible.
It is good for the world that such a man has
lived and left this emblem of his life." The tears gushed into the eyes of Laurence,
and he acknowledged that Eliot had not toiled
in vain. Little Alice put up her arms to Grand-
father, and drew down his white head beside her
own golden locks.
'Grandfather,' whispered she, 'I want to kiss
good Mr. Eliot!" And, doubtless, good Mr. Eliot would gladly
receive the kiss of so sweet a child as little Alice,
and would think it a portion of his reward in
heaven. Grandfather now observed that Dr. Francis
had written a very beautiful Life of Eliot, which
he advised Laurence to peruse. He then spoke
of King Philip's war, which began in 1675, and
terminated with the death of King Philip, in the
following year. Philip was a proud, fierce In-
dian, whom Mr. Eliot had vainly endeavored to
convert to the Christian faith.
'It must have been a great anguish to the
apostle," continued Grandfather, "to hear of
mutual slaughter and outrage between his own
countrymen and those for whom he felt the
affection of a father. A few of the praying
Indians joined the followers of King Philip. A 
<page 75>
56
grandfather's chair.
greater number fought on the side of the English.
In the course of the war, the little community of
red people whom Mr. Eliot had begun to civilize was scattered, and probably never was restored to
a flourishing condition. But his zeal did not
grow cold; and only about five years before his
death he took great pains in preparing a new
edition of the Indian Bible.'
'I do wish, Grandfather," cried Charley, "you
would tell us all about the battles in King
Philip's war.'
'O, no!' exclaimed Clara. "Who wants to
hear about tomahawks and scalping knives!'
'No, Charley,' replied Grandfather, "I have
no time to spare in talking about battles. You
must be content with knowing that it was the
bloodiest war that the Indians had ever waged
against the white men; and that, at its close, the
English set King Philip's head upon a pole.'
'Who was the captain of the English 7' asked
Charley.
"Their most noted captain was Benjamin
Church,—a very famous warrior," said Grand-
father. "But I assure you, Charley, that neither
Captain Church, nor any of the officers and
soldiers who fought in King Philip's war, did
anything a thousandth part so glorious as Mr.
Eliot did when he translated the Bible for
the Indians.'
'Let Laurence be the apostle," said Charley to
himself, "and I will be the captain.'

<page 76>
grandfather's chair.
57
CHAPTER IX.
The children were now accustomed to as-
semble round Grandfather's chair at all their
unoccupied moments; and often it was a strik-
ing picture to behold the white-headed old sire,
with this flowery wreath of young people around
him. When he talked to them, it was the past
speaking to the present, or rather to the future, —
for the children were of a generation which had
not become actual. Their part in life, thus far,
was only to be happy and to draw knowledge
from a thousand sources. As yet, it was not
their time to do. Sometimes, as Grandfather gazed at their fair,
unworldly countenances, a mist of tears bedimmed his spectacles. He almost regretted
that it was necessary for them to know anything
of the past or to provide aught for the future.
He could have wished that they might be always
the happy, youthful creatures who had hitherto
sported around his chair, without inquiring
whether it had a history. It grieved him to
think that his little Alice, who was a flower-bud
fresh from paradise, must open her leaves to the
rough breezes of the world, or ever open them
in any clime. So sweet a child she was, that it
seemed fit her infancy should be immortal. But such repinings were merely flitting
shadows across the old man's heart. He had 
<page 77>
58
grandfather's chair.
faith enough to believe, and wisdom enough to
know, that the bloom of the flower would be
even holier and happier than its bud. Even
within himself, —though Grandfather was now
at that period of life when the veil of mortality
is apt to hang heavily over the soul, still, in
his inmost being) he was conscious of something
that he would not have exchanged for the best
happiness of childhood. It was a bliss to which
every sort of earthly experience,— all that he
had enjoyed, or suffered, or seen, or heard, or
acted, with the broodings of his soul upon the
whole — had contributed somewhat. In the
same manner must a bliss, of which now they
could have no conception, grow up within these
children, and form a part of their sustenance for
immortality. So Grandfather, with renewed cheerfulness,
continued his history of the chair, trusting that a
profounder wisdom than his own would extract,
from these flowers and weeds of Time, a fra-
grance that might last beyond all time. At this period of the story Grandfather threw
a glance backward as far as the year 1660. He
spoke of the ill-concealed reluctance with which
the Puritans in America had acknowledged the
sway of Charles the Second, on his restoration to
his father's throne. When death had stricken
Oliver Cromwell, that mighty protector had no
sincerer mourners than in New England. The 
<page 78>
grandfather's chair.
59
new king had been more than a year upon the
throne before his accession was proclaimed in
Boston; although the neglect to perform the
ceremony might have subjected the rulers to
the charge of treason. During the reign of Charles the Second, how-
ever, the American colonies had but little reason
to complain of harsh or tyrannical treatment.
But when Charles died, in 1685, and was suc-
ceeded by his brother James, the patriarchs of
New England began to tremble. King James
was a bigoted Roman Catholic, and was known
to be of an arbitrary temper. It was feared by
all Protestants, and chiefly by the Puritans, that
he would assume despotic power and attempt to
establish Popery throughout his dominions. Our
forefathers felt that they had no security either
for their religion or their liberties. The result proved that they had reason for
their apprehensions. King James caused the
charters of all the American colonies to be taken
away. The old charter of Massachusetts, which
the people regarded as a holy thing and as the
foundation of all their liberties, was declared
void. The colonists were now no longer free-
men; they were entirely dependent on the king's
pleasure. At first, in 1685, King James appoint-
ed Joseph Dudley, a native of Massachusetts, to
be President of New England. But soon after-
wards Sir Edmund Andros, an officer of the 
<page 79>
60
grandfather's chair.
English army, arrived, with a commission to be
Governor-general of New England and New
York. The king had given such powers to Sir Ed-
mund Andros that there was now no liberty, nor
scarcely any law, in the colonies over which he
ruled. The inhabitants were not allowed to
choose representatives, and consequently had no
voice whatever in the government, nor control
over the measures that were adopted. The
councillors with whom the governor consulted on matters of state were appointed by himself.
This sort of government was no better than an
absolute despotism.
'The people suffered much wrong while Sir
Edmund Andros ruled over them," continued
Grandfather, 'and they were apprehensive of
much more. He had brought some soldiers with
him from England, who took possession of the
old fortress on Castle Island and of the fortifica-
tion on Fort Hill. Sometimes it was rumored
that a general massacre of the inhabitants was to
be perpetrated by these soldiers. There were
reports, too, that all the ministers were to be slain
or imprisoned.'
'For what?" inquired Charley.
'Because they were the leaders of the people,
Charley," said Grandfather. "A minister was a
more formidable man than a general in those
days. Well, while these things were going on 
<page 80>
grandfather's chair. 61
in America, King James had so misgoverned the
people of England that they sent over to Holland
for the Prince of Orange. He had married the
king's daughter, and was therefore considered to
have a claim to the crown. On his arrival in
England, the Prince of Orange was proclaimed
king, by the name of William the Third. Poor
old King James made his escape to France." Grandfather told how, at the first intelligence of
the landing of the Prince of Orange in England,
the people of Massachusetts rose in their strength and overthrew the government of Sir Edmund
Andros. He, with Joseph Dudley, Edmund Ran-
dolph, and his other principal adherents, was thrown into prison. Old Simon Bradstreet, who
had been governor when King James took away
the charter, was called by the people to govern
them again.
'Governor Bradstreet was a venerable old man,
nearly ninety years of age," said Grandfather.
"He came over with the first settlers, and had
been the intimate companion of all those excel-
lent and famous men who laid the foundation of
our country. They were all gone before him to
the grave; and Bradstreet was the last of the
Puritans."
Grandfather paused a moment and smiled, as
if he had something very interesting to tell his
auditors. He then proceeded:
'And now, Laurence, — now, Clara, — now, 
<page 81>
62
grandfather's chair.
Charley, — now, my dear little Alice, — what
chair do you think had been placed in the coun-
cil chamber, for old Governor Bradstreet to take
his seat in? Would you believe that it was this
very chair in which Grandfather now sits, and of
which he is telling you the history?'
'I am glad to hear it, with all my heart!" cried Charley, after a shout of delight. "I thought
Grandfather had quite forgotten the chair.'
'It was a solemn and affecting sight," said
Grandfather, "when this venerable patriarch,
with his white beard flowing down upon his
breast, took his seat in his chair of state. Within
his remembrance, and even since his mature age,
the site where now stood the populous town had
been a wild and forest-covered peninsula. The
province, now so fertile and spotted with thriv-
ing villages, had been a desert wilderness. He
was surrounded by a shouting multitude, most
of whom had been born in the country which
he had helped to found. They were of one
generation, and he of another. As the old man
looked upon them, and beheld new faces everywhere, he must have felt that it was now time
for him to go, whither his brethren had gone
before him.'
'Were the former governors all dead and
gone?" asked Laurence.
"All of them," replied Grandfather.. 'Winthrop
had been dead forty years. Endicott died, a 
<page 82>
grandfather's chair.
very old man, in 1665. Sir Henry Vane was
beheaded, in London, at the beginning of the
reign of Charles the Second. And Haynes, Dud-
ley, Bellingham, and Leverett, who had all been
governors of Massachusetts, were now likewise
in their graves. Old Simon Bradstreet was the
sole representative of that departed brotherhood.
There was no other public man remaining to
connect the ancient system of government and
manners with the new system which was about
to take its place. The era of the Puritans was
now completed.'
'I am sorry for it!" observed Laurence; 'for,
though they were so stern, yet it seems to me
that there was something warm and real about
them. I think, Grandfather, that each of these
old governors should have his statue set up in
our State House, sculptured out of the hardest
of New England granite.'
'It would not be amiss, Laurence," said Grand-
father; "but perhaps clay, or some other perish-
able material, might suffice for some of their
successors. But let us go back to our chair. It
was occupied by Governor Bradstreet from April,
1689, until May, 1692. Sir William Phipps then
arrived in Boston with a new charter from King
William and a commission to be governor.'

<page 83>
64
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER X.
'And what became of the chair?' inquired
Clara.
'The outward aspect of our chair," replied
Grandfather, "was now somewhat the worse for
its long and arduous services. It was considered
hardly magnificent enough to be allowed to keep
its place in the council chamber of Massachusetts.
In fact, it was banished as an article of useless
lumber. But Sir William Phipps happened to see
it, and, being much pleased with its construction,
resolved to take the good old chair into his
private mansion. Accordingly, with his own
gubernatorial hands, he repaired one of its arms,
which had been slightly damaged.'
'Why, Grandfather, here is the very arm!" interrupted Charley, in great wonderment. "And
did Sir William Phipps put in these screws with
his own hands? I am sure he did it beautifully!
But how came a governor to know how to mend
a chair?'
'I will tell you a story about the early life of Sir
William Phipps," said Grandfather. "You will then
perceive that he well knew how to use his hands." So Grandfather related the wonderful and true
tale of THE SUNKEN TREASURE.
Picture to yourselves, my dear children, a hand-
some, old-fashioned room, with a large, open 
<page 84>
grandfather's chaik.
65
cupboard at one end, in which is displayed a
magnificent gold cup, with some other splendid
articles of gold and silver plate. In another part
of the room, opposite to a tall looking-glass,
stands our beloved chair, newly polished, and
adorned with a gorgeous cushion of crimson
velvet tufted with gold. In the chair sits a man of strong and sturdy
frame, whose face has been roughened by north-
ern tempests and blackened by the burning sun
of the West Indies. He wears an immense peri-
wig, flowing down over his shoulders. His coat
has a wide embroidery of golden foliage; and his
waistcoat, likewise, is all flowered over and be-
dizened with gold. His red, rough hands, which
have done many a good day's work with the
hammer and adze, are half covered by the deli-
cate lace ruffles at his wrists. On a table lies his
silver-hiked sword, and in a corner of the room
stands his gold-headed cane, made of a beauti-
fully polished West India wood. Somewhat such an aspect as this did Sir Wil-
liam Phipps present when he sat in Grandfather's
chair, after the king had appointed him governor
of Massachusetts. Truly there was need that
the old chair should be varnished and decorated
with a crimson cushion, in order to make it suit-
able for such a magnificent looking personage.
But Sir William Phipps had not always worn a
gold-embroidered coat, nor always sat so much
5

<page 85>
grandfather's chaik.
at his ease as he did in Grandfather's chair. He
was a poor man's son, and was born in the
Province of Maine, where he used to tend sheep
upon the hills in his boyhood and youth. Until
he had grown to be a man, he did not even
know how to read and write. Tired of tending
sheep, he next apprenticed himself to a ship-
carpenter, and spent about four years in hewing
the crooked limbs of oak trees into knees for
vessels. In 1673, when he was twenty-two years old,
he came to Boston, and soon afterwards was
married to a widow lady, who had property
enough to set him up in business. It was not
long, however, before he lost all the money that
he had acquired by his marriage, and became a
poor man again. Still he was not discouraged.
He often told his wife that, some time or other,
he should be very rich, and would build a "fair
brick house" in the Green Lane of Boston. Do not suppose, children, that he had been to
a fortuneteller to inquire his destiny. It was
his own energy and spirit of enterprise, and his
resolution to lead an industrious life, that made
him look forward with so much confidence to
better days. Several years passed away, and William Phipps
had not yet gained the riches which he prom-
ised to himself. During this time he had begun
to follow the sea for a living. In the year 1684,

<page 86>
grandfather's chair.
67
he happened to hear of a Spanish ship which
had been cast away near the Bahama Islands,
and which was supposed to contain a great deal
of gold and silver. Phipps went to the place in
a small vessel, hoping that he should be able to
recover some of the treasure from the wreck.
He did not succeed, however, in fishing up gold
and silver enough to pay the expenses of his
voyage. But, before he returned, he was told of an-
other Spanish ship, or galleon, which had been
cast away near Porto de la Plata. She had now
lain as much as fifty years beneath the waves.
This old ship had been ladened with immense
wealth; and, hitherto, nobody had thought of
the possibility of recovering any part of it from
the deep sea which was rolling and tossing it
about. But though it was now an old story, and
the most aged people had almost forgotten that
such a vessel had been wrecked, William Phipps
resolved that the sunken treasure should again
be brought to light. He went to London and obtained admittance
to King James, who had not yet been driven
from his throne. He told the king of the vast
wealth that was lying at the bottom of the sea.
King James listened with attention, and thought
this a fine opportunity to fill his treasury with
Spanish gold. He appointed William Phipps
to be captain of a vessel, called the Rose Algier, 
<page 87>
68
grandfather's chaie.
carrying eighteen guns and ninety-five men.
So now he was Captain Phipps of the English
navy.
Captain Phipps sailed from England in the
Rose Algier, and cruised for nearly two years in
the West Indies, endeavoring to find the wreck of
the Spanish ship. But the sea is so wide and
deep, that it is no easy matter to discover the
exact spot where a sunken vessel lies. The
prospect of success seemed very small; and most
people would have thought that Captain Phipps
was as far from having money enough to build a
"fair brick house" as he was while he tended
sheep. The seamen of the Rose Algier became dis-
couraged, and gave up all hope of making their
fortunes by discovering the Spanish wreck.
They wanted to compel Captain Phipps to turn
pirate. There was a much better prospect, they
thought, of growing rich by plundering vessels which still sailed in the sea than by seeking for
a ship that had lain beneath the waves full half
a century. They broke out in open mutiny; but
were finally mastered by Phipps, and compelled
to obey his orders. It would have been dangerous,
however, to continue much longer at sea with
such a crew of mutinous sailors; and, besides,
the Rose Algier was leaky and unseaworthy.
So Captain Phipps judged it best to return to
England. 
<page 88>
grandfather's chair.
69
Before leaving the West Indies, he met with a
Spaniard, an old man, who remembered the
wreck of the Spanish ship, and gave him direc-
tions how to find the very spot. It was on a
reef of rocks, a few leagues from Porto de la
Plata. On his arrival in England, therefore, Captain
Phipps solicited the king to let him have another
vessel and send him back again to the West
Indies. But King James, who had probably
expected that the Rose Algier would return laden
with gold, refused to have anything more to do
with the affair. Phipps might never have been
able to renew the search if the Duke of Albe-
marle and some other noblemen had not lent
their assistance. They fitted out a ship, and gave
the command to Captain Phipps. He sailed from
England, and arrived safely at Porto de la Plata,
where he took an adze and assisted his men to
build a large boat. The boat was intended for the purpose of
going closer to the reef of rocks than a large
vessel could safely venture. When it was fin-
ished, the captain sent several men in it to
examine the spot where the Spanish ship was
said to have been wrecked. They were accom-
panied by some Indians, who were skilful divers,
and could go down a great way into the depths
of the sea. The boat's crew proceeded to the reef of 
<page 89>
70
grandfather's chair.
rocks, and rowed round and round it a great
many times. They gazed down into the water,
which was so transparent that it seemed as if
they could have seen the gold and silver at the
bottom, had there been any of those precious
metals there. Nothing, however, could they
see; nothing more valuable than a curious sea shrub, which was growing beneath the water, in
a crevice of the reef of rocks. It flaunted to
and fro with the swell and reflux of the waves,
and looked as bright and beautiful as if its leaves
were gold.
"We won't go back empty-handed,' cried. an
English sailor; and then he spoke to one of the
Indian divers. "Dive down and bring me that
pretty sea-shrub there. That's the only treasure
we shall find!'
Down plunged the diver, and soon rose drip-
ping from the water, holding the sea-shrub in his
hand. But he had learned some news at the
bottom of the sea.
'There are some ship's guns," said he, the
moment he had drawn breath, "some great can-
non, among the rocks, near where the shrub was
growing." No sooner had he spoken than the English
sailors knew that they had found the very spot
where the Spanish galleon had been wrecked so
many years before. The other Indian divers
immediately plunged over the boat's side, and

<page 90>
grandfather's chair.
71
swam headlong down, groping among the rocks
and sunken cannon. In a few moments one of
them rose above the water with a heavy lump
of silver in his arms. The single lump was
worth more than a thousand dollars. The sailors
took it into the boat, and then rowed back as
speedily as they could, being in haste to inform
Captain Phipps of their good luck. But, confidently as the captain had hoped to
find the Spanish wreck, yet, now that it was
really found, the news seemed too good to be true.
He could not believe it till the sailors showed
him the lump of silver.
'Thanks be to God!" then cries Captain
Phipps. "We shall every man of us make our
fortunes!" Hereupon the captain and all the crew set to
work, with iron rakes and great hooks and lines,
fishing for gold and silver at the bottom of the
sea. Up came the treasure in abundance. Now
they beheld a table of solid silver, once the prop-
erty of an old Spanish grandee. Now they
found a sacramental vessel, which had been
destined as a gift to some Catholic church. Now
they drew up a golden cup, fit for the king of
Spain to drink his wine out of. Perhaps the
bony hand of its former owner had been grasp-
ing the precious cup, and was drawn up along
with it. Now their rakes or fishing lines were
loaded with masses of silver bullion. There 
<page 91>
grandfather's chair.
were also precious stones among the treasure,
glittering and sparkling, so that it is a wonder
how their radiance could have been concealed. There is something sad and terrible in the
idea of snatching all this wealth from the de-
vouring ocean, which had possessed it for such a
length of years. It seems as if men had no right
to make themselves rich with it. It ought to
have been left with the skeletons of the ancient
Spaniards, who had been drowned when the ship
was wrecked, and whose bones were now scat-
tered among the gold and silver. But Captain Phipps and his crew were troubled
with no such thoughts as these. After a day or
two they lighted on another part of the wreck,
where they found a great many bags of silver
dollars. But nobody could have guessed that
these were money-bags. By remaining so long
in the salt water, they had become covered over
with a crust which had the appearance of stone,
so that it was necessary to break them in pieces
with hammers and axes. When this was done,
a stream of silver dollars gushed out upon the
deck of the vessel. The whole value of the recovered treasure,
plate, bullion, precious stones, and all, was esti-
mated at more than two millions of dollars. It
was dangerous even to look at such a vast
amount of wealth. A sea captain, who had
assisted Phipps in the enterprise, utterly lost his 
<page 92>
grandfather's chair.
73'
reason at the sight of it. He died two years
afterwards, still raving about the treasures that
lie at the bottom of the sea. It would have
been better for this man if he had left the
skeletons of the shipwrecked Spaniards in quiet
possession of their wealth. Captain Phipps and his men continued to fish
up plate, bullion, and dollars, as plentifully as
ever, till their provisions grew short. Then, as
they could not feed upon gold and silver any
more than old King Midas could, they found it
necessary to go in search of better sustenance.
Phipps resolved to return to England. He arrived
there in 1687, and was received with great joy
by the Duke of Albemarle and other English
lords who had fitted out the vessel. Well they
might rejoice; for they took by far the greater
part of the treasure to themselves. The captain's share, however, was enough to
make him comfortable for the rest of his days.
It also enabled him to fulfil his promise to his
wife, by building a 'fair brick house,' in the
Green Lane of Boston. The Duke of Albemarle
sent Mrs. Phipps a magnificent gold cup, worth
at least five thousand dollars. Before Captain
Phipps left London, King James made him a
knight; so that, instead of the obscure ship-
carpenter who had formerly dwelt among them,
the inhabitants of Boston welcomed him on his
return as the rich and famous Sir William Phipps.

<page 93>
74
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER XI.
'Sir William Phipps,' continued Grandfather,
'was too active and adventurous a man to sit
still in the quiet enjoyment of his good fortune.
In the year 1690 he went on a military expedi-
tion against the French colonies in America,
conquered the whole province of Acadia, and
returned to Boston with a great deal of plunder.'
'Why, Grandfather, he was the greatest man
that ever sat in the chair!" cried Charley.
'Ask Laurence what he thinks," replied Grand-
father, with a smile. "Well, in the same year,
Sir William took command of an expedition
against Quebec, but did not succeed in capturing
the city. In 1692, being then in London, King
William the Third appointed him governor of
Massachusetts. And now, my dear children,
having followed Sir William Phipps through all
his adventures and hardships till we find him
comfortably seated in Grandfather's chair, we
will here bid him farewell. May he be as happy
in ruling a people as he was while he tended
sheep!"
Charley, whose fancy had been greatly taken
by the adventurous disposition of Sir William
Phipps, was eager to know how he had acted and
what happened to him while he held the office
of governor. But Grandfather had made up his
mind to tell no more stories for the present.

<page 94>
grandfather's chair.
75
'Possibly, one of these days, I may go on
with the adventures of the chair," said he. "But
its history becomes very obscure just at this
point; and I must search into some old books
and manuscripts before proceeding further. Be-
sides, it is now a good time to pause in our nar-
rative; because the new charter, which Sir
William Phipps brought over from England,
formed a very important epoch in the history of
the province.'
'Really, Grandfather," observed Laurence,
"this seems to be the most remarkable chair in
the world. Its history cannot be told without
intertwining it with the lives of distinguished
men and the great events that have befallen the
country.'
'True, Laurence," replied Grandfather, smiling,
'we must write a book with some such title as
this,—Memoirs of Mr own Times, by Grand-
father's Chair.'
'That would be beautiful!" exclaimed Lau-
rence, clapping his hands.
'Bat, after all," continued Grandfather, "any
other old chair, if it possessed memory and a
hand to write its recollections, could record stran-
ger stories than any that I have told you. From
generation to generation, a chair sits familiarly
in the midst of human interests, and is witness
to the most secret and confidential intercourse that mortal man can hold with his fellow. The 
<page 95>
76
grandfather's chair.
human heart may best be read in the fireside
chair. And as to external events, Grief and Joy
keep a continual vicissitude around it and within
it. Now we see the glad face and glowing form
of Joy, sitting merrily in the old chair, and
throwing a warm firelight radiance over all the
household. Now, while we thought not of it,
the dark-clad mourner, Grief, has stolen into the
place of Joy, but not to retain it long. The
imagination can hardly grasp so wide a subject as is embraced in the experience of a family
chair.'
'It makes my breath flutter, my heart thrill,
to think of it," said Laurence. "Yes, a
family chair must have a deeper history than a
chair of State.'
'0, yes!" cried Clara, expressing a woman's
feeling on the point in question, 'the history of
a country is not nearly so interesting as that of
a single family would be.'
'But the history of a country is more easily
told," said Grandfather; 'So, if we proceed
with our narrative of the chair, I shall still con-
fine myself to its connection with public events." Good old Grandfather now rose and quitted
the room, while the children remained gazing at
the chair. Laurence, so vivid was his concep-
tion of past times, would hardly have deemed it
strange if its former occupants, one after another,
had resumed the seat which they had each left
vacant such a dim length of years ago. 
<page 96>
grandfather's chair.
77
First, the gentle and lovely Lady Arbella
would have been seen in the old chair, almost
sinking out of its arms for very weakness; then
Roger Williams, in his cloak and band, earnest,
energetic, and benevolent; then the figure of
Anne Hutchinson, with the like gesture as when
she presided at the assemblages of women; then
the dark, intellectual face of Vane, "young in
years, but in sage counsel old." Next would
have appeared the successive governors, Win-
throp, Dudley, Bellingham, and Endicott, who
sat in the chair while it was a chair of state. Then its ample seat would have been pressed by
the comfortable, rotund corporation of the honest
mint-master. Then the half-frenzied shape of
Mary Dyer, the persecuted Quaker woman, clad
in sackcloth and ashes, would have rested in it
for a moment. Then the holy, apostolic form of
Eliot would have sanctified it. Then would
have arisen, like the shade of departed Puritan-
ism, the venerable dignity of the white-bearded
Governor Bradstreet. Lastly, on the gorgeous
crimson cushion of Grandfather's chair, would
have shone the purple and golden magnificence
of Sir William Phipps.
But, all these, with the other historic person-
ages, in the midst of whom the chair had so
often stood, had passed, both in substance and
shadow, from the scene of ages. Yet here
stood the chair, with the old Lincoln coat of 
<page 97>
78 grandfather's chair.
arms, and the oaken flowers and foliage, and the
fierce lion's head at the summit, the whole,
apparently, in as perfect preservation as when it
had first been placed in the Earl of Lincoln's hall.
And what vast changes of society and of nations
had been wrought by sudden convulsions or by
slow degrees since that era!
'This chair had stood firm when the thrones
of kings were overturned!" thought Laurence.
"Its oaken frame has proved stronger than many
frames of government!"
More the thoughtful and imaginative boy
might have mused; but now a large yellow cat,
a great favorite with all the children, leaped in
at the open window. Perceiving that Grand-
father's chair was empty, and having often before
experienced its comforts, puss laid herself qui-
etly down upon the cushion. Laurence, Clara,
Charley, and little Alice all laughed at the idea
of such a successor to the worthies of old times.
'Pussy,' said little Alice, putting out her
hand, into which the cat laid a velvet paw, "you
look very wise. Do tell us a story about Grand-
father's Chair!'

<page 98>
4 GRANDFATHER'S CHAIR.
PART II.
CHAPTER I.
'O Grandfather, dear Grandfather," cried
little Alice, "pray tell us some more stories about
your chair!" How long a time had fled since the children
had felt any curiosity to hear the sequel of this
venerable chair's adventures! Summer was now
past and gone, and the better part of autumn likewise. Dreary, chill November was howling out of doors, and vexing the atmosphere with
sudden showers of wintry rain, or sometimes
with gusts of snow, that rattled like small peb-
bles against the windows. When the weather began to grow cool, Grand-
father's chair had been removed from the sum-
mer parlor into a smaller and snugger room. It
now stood by the side of a bright blazing wood-
fire. Grandfather loved a wood-fire, far better
than a grate of glowing anthracite, or than the
dull heat of an invisible furnace, which seems to 
<page 99>
80
grandfather's chair.
think that it has done its duty in merely warm-
ing the house. But the wood-fire is a kindly,
cheerful, sociable spirit, sympathizing with man-
kind, and knowing that to create warmth is but
one of the good offices which are expected from
it. Therefore it dances on the hearth, and laughs
broadly through the room, and plays a thousand
antics, and throws a joyous glow over all the
faces that encircle it. In the twilight of the evening the fire grew
brighter and more cheerful. And thus, perhaps,
there was something in Grandfather's heart that
cheered him most with its warmth and comfort
in the gathering twilight of old age. He had
been gazing at the red embers as intently as if
his past life were all pictured there, or as if it
were a prospect of the future world, when little
Alice's voice aroused him.
1Dear Grandfather," repeated the little girl,
more earnestly, "do talk to us again about your
chair." Laurence, and Clara, and Charley, and little
Alice had been attracted to other objects for
two or three months past. They had sported in
the gladsome sunshine of the present, and so
had forgotten the shadowy region of the past,
in the midst of which stood Grandfather's chair.
But now, in the autumnal twilight, illuminated
by the flickering blaze of the wood-fire, they
looked at the old chair, and thought that it had 
<page 100>
grandfather's chair.
81
never before worn such an interesting aspect.
There it stood in the venerable majesty of more
than two hundred years. The light from the
hearth quivered upon the flowers and foliage that were wrought into its oaken back; and the
lion's head at the summit seemed almost to
move its jaws and shake its mane.
'Does little Alice speak for all of you?' asked
Grandfather. "Do you wish me to go on with
the adventures of the chair?'
'Oh, yes, yes, Grandfather!" cried Clara.
"The dear old chair! How strange that we
should have forgotten it so long!'
'Oh, pray begin, Grandfather," said Laurence;
"for I think, when we talk about old times, it
should be in the early evening, before the candles
are lighted. The shapes of the famous persons who once sat in the chair will be more apt to
come back, and be seen among us, in this glim-
mer and pleasant gloom, than they would in the
vulgar daylight. And, besides, we can make
pictures of all that you tell us among the glow-
ing embers and white ashes." Our friend Charley, too, thought the evening
the best time to hear Grandfather's stories, be-
cause he could not then be playing out of doors.
So, finding his young auditors unanimous in their
petition, the good old gentleman took up the nar-
rative of the historic chair at the point where he
had dropped it. 6

<page 101>
82
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER II.
'You recollect, my dear children," said Grand-
father, "that we took leave of the chair in 1692,
while it was occupied by Sir William Phipps. This fortunate treasure-seeker, you will remem-
ber, had come over from England, with King
William's commission, to be governor of Massa-
chusetts. Within the limits of this province were
now included the old colony of Plymouth and
the territories of Maine and Nova Scotia. Sir
William Phipps had likewise brought a new
charter from the king, which served instead of a
constitution, and set forth the method in which
the province was to be governed.'
'Did the new charter allow the people all their
former liberties?" inquired Laurence.
"No," replied Grandfather. "Under the first
charter, the people had been the source of all power. Winthrop, Endicott, Bradstreet, and the
rest of them had been governors by the choice
of the people, without any interference of the
king. But henceforth the governor was to hold
his station solely by the king's appointment and
during his pleasure; and the same was the case
with the lieutenant-governor, and some other
high officers. The people, however, were still
allowed to choose representatives; and the gov-
ernor's council was chosen by the general court.'
'Would the inhabitants have elected Sir Wil-

<page 102>
grandfather's chair.
Ham Phipps,' asked Laurence, "if the choice of
governor had been left to them?'
'He might probably have been a successful can-
didate," answered Grandfather; "for his adven-
tures and military enterprises had gained him a
sort of renown, which always goes a great way
with the people. And he had many popular
characteristics, being a kind, warmhearted man,
not ashamed of his low origin, nor haughty in
his present elevation. Soon after his arrival, he
proved that he did not blush to recognize his
former associates.'
'How was that?" inquired Charley.
'He made a grand festival at his new brick
house," said Grandfather, "and invited all the ship-
carpenters of Boston to be his guests. At the
head of the table, in our great chair, sat Sir Wil-
liam Phipps himself, treating these hard-handed
men as his brethren, cracking jokes with them,
and talking familiarly about old times. I know
not whether he wore his embroidered dress; but
I rather choose to imagine that he had on a suit
of rough clothes, such as he used to labor in while he was Phipps the ship-carpenter.'
'An aristocrat need not be ashamed of the
trade," observed Laurence; "for the Czar Peter
the Great once served an apprenticeship to it.'
'Did Sir William Phipps make as good a
governor as he was a ship-carpenter ?y asked
Charley.

<page 103>
84
grandfather's chair.
'History says but little about his merits as a
ship-carpenter,' answered Grandfather; "but, as
a governor, a great deal of fault was found with
him. Almost as soon as he assumed the govern-
ment, he became engaged in a very frightful
business, which might have perplexed a wiser
and better cultivated head than his. This was
the witchcraft delusion."
And here Grandfather gave his auditors such
details of this melancholy affair as he thought it
fit for them to know. They shuddered to hear
that a frenzy, which led to the death of many
innocent persons, had originated in the wicked
arts of a few children. They belonged to the
Rev. Mr. Parris, minister of Salem. These chil-
dren complained of being pinched and pricked
with pins, and otherwise tormented by the shapes
of men and women, who were supposed to have
power to haunt them invisibly, both in darkness
and daylight. Often in the midst of their family
and friends the children would pretend to be
seized with strange convulsions, and would cry
out that the witches were afflicting them. These stories spread abroad, and caused great
tumult and alarm. From the foundation of New
England, it had been the custom of the inhabit-
ants, in all matters of doubt and difficulty, to look
to their ministers for counsel. So they did now;
but, unfortunately, the ministers and wise men
were more deluded than the illiterate people. 
<page 104>
grandfather's chair.
85
Cotton Mather, a very learned and eminent cler-
gyman, believed that the whole country was full
of witches and wizards, who had given up their
hopes of heaven, and signed a covenant with the
Evil One.
Nobody could be certain that his nearest
neighbor or most intimate friend was not guilty
of this imaginary crime. The number of those
who pretended to be afflicted by witchcraft grew daily more numerous; and they bore testi-
mony against many of the best and worthiest
people. A minister, named George Burroughs,
was among the accused. In the months of
August and September, 1692, he and nineteen
other innocent men and women were put to
death. The place of execution was a high hill,
on the outskirts of Salem; so that many of the
sufferers, as they stood beneath the gallows,
could discern their own habitations in the town. The martyrdom of these guiltless persons
seemed only to increase the madness. The af-
flicted now grew bolder in their accusations.
Many people of rank and wealth were either
thrown into prison or compelled to flee for their
lives. Among these were two sons of old Simon
Bradstreet, the last of the Puritan governors. Mr.
Willard, a pious minister of Boston, was cried out
upon as a wizard in open court. Mrs. Hale, the
wife of the minister of Beverly, was likewise
accused. Philip English, a rich merchant of 
<page 105>
86
grandfather's chair.
Salem, found it necessary to take flight, leaving
his property and business in confusion. But a
short time afterwards, the Salem people were
glad to invite him back.
"The boldest thing that the accusers did,'
continued Grandfather, "was to cry out against
the governor's own beloved wife. Yes, the
lady of Sir William Phipps was accused of being
a witch and of flying through the air to attend
witch meetings. When the governor heard this he probably trembled, so that our great chair
shook beneath him.'
'Dear Grandfather," cried little Alice, cling-
ing closer to his knee, "is it true that witches
ever come in the night-time to frighten little
children?'
'No, no, dear little Alice," replied Grandfather.
"Even if there were any witches, they would
flee away from the presence of a pure-hearted
child. But there are none; and our forefathers
soon became convinced that they had been led
into a terrible delusion. All the prisoners on
account of witchcraft were set free. But the
innocent dead could not be restored to life; and
the hill where they were executed will always
remind people of the saddest and most humili-
ating passage in our history.'
Grandfather then said that the next remark-
able event, while Sir William Phipps remained
in the chair, was the arrival at Boston of an Eng-

<page 106>
grandfather's chair.
lish fleet in 1693. It brought an army which
was intended for the conquest of Canada. But
a malignant disease, more fatal than the small-
pox, broke out among the soldiers and sailors,
and destroyed the greater part of them. The
infection spread into the town of Boston, and
made much havoc there. This dreadful sickness
caused the governor, and Sir Francis Wheeler,
who was commander of the British forces, to
give up all thoughts of attacking Canada.
'Soon after this," said Grandfather, "Sir Wil-
liam Phipps quarrelled with the captain of an
English frigate, and also with the collector of
Boston. Being a man of violent temper, he
gave each of them a sound beating with his
cane.'
'He was a bold fellow," observed Charley,
who was himself somewhat addicted to a similar
mode of settling disputes.
'More bold than wise," replied Grandfather;
"for complaints were carried to the king, and Sir
William Phipps was summoned to England to
make the best answer he could. Accordingly he
went to London, where, in 1695, he was seized
with a malignant fever, of which he died. Had
he lived longer, he would probably have gone
again in search of sunken treasure. He had
heard of a Spanish ship, which was cast away
in 1502, during the lifetime of Columbus. Bovadilla, Roldan, and many other Spaniards, were

<page 107>
83
grandfather's chair.
lost in her, together with the immense wealth of
which they had robbed the South American
kings.'
'Why, Grandfather!" exclaimed Laurence,
'what magnificent ideas the governor had!
Only think of recovering all that old treasure which had lain almost two centuries under the
sea! Methinks Sir William Phipps ought to
have been buried in the ocean when he died, so that he might have gone down among the
sunken ships and cargoes of treasure which he
was always dreaming about in his lifetime.'
'He was buried in one of the crowded ceme-
teries of London," said Grandfather. "As he
left no children, his estate was inherited by his
nephew, from whom is descended the present
Marquis of Normanby. The noble Marquis is
not aware, perhaps, that the prosperity of his
family originated in the successful enterprise of a
New England ship-carpenter.'

<page 108>
jrandfather's chair. 89
CHAPTER III.
'At the death of Sir William Phipps," pro-
ceeded Grandfather, "our chair was bequeathed
to Mr. Ezekiel Cheever, a famous schoolmaster in Boston. This old gentleman came from Lon-
don in 1637, and had been teaching school ever
since; so that there were now aged men, grand-
fathers like myself, to whom Master Cheever had taught their alphabet. He was a person of
venerable aspect, and wore a long white beard.'
'Was the chair placed in his school?" asked
Charley.
'Yes, in his school," answered Grandfather;
"and we may safely say that it had never before
been regarded with such awful reverence — no,
not even when the old governors of Massachu-
setts sat in it. Even you, Charley, my boy,
would have felt some respect for the chair if
you had seen it occupied by this famous school-
master." And here Grandfather endeavored to give his
auditors an idea how matters were managed in
schools above a hundred years ago. As this will
probably be an interesting subject to ourvreaders,
we shall make a separate sketch of it, and call it THE OLD FASHIONED SCHOOL.
Now imagine yourselves, my children, in Mas-
ter Ezekiel Cheever's school-room. It is a large, 
<page 109>
90
grandfather's chair.
dingy room, with a sanded floor, and is lighted
by windows that turn on hinges and have little
diamond-shaped panes of glass. The scholars sit
on long benches, with desks before them. At
one end of the room is a great fireplace, so very
spacious that there is room enough for three or
four boys to stand in each of the chimney cor-
ners. This was the good old fashion of fire-
places when there was wood enough in the
forests to keep people warm without their
digging into the bowels of the earth for coal. It is a winter's day when we take our peep
into the school-room. See what great logs of
wood have been rolled into the fireplace, and
what a broad, bright blaze goes leaping up the
chimney! And every few moments a vast
cloud of smoke is puffed into the room, which
sails slowly over the heads of the scholars, until
it gradually settles upon the walls and ceiling.
They are blackened with the smoke of many
years already.
Next, look at our old historic chair! It is
placed, you perceive, in the most comfortable
part of the room, where the generous glow of
the fire is sufficiently felt without being too
intensely hot. How stately the old chair looks,
as if it remembered its many famous occupants,
but yet were conscious that a greater man is
sitting in it now! Do you see the venerable
schoolmaster, severe in aspect, with a black

<page 110>


<page 111>

<page 112>
grandfather's chair.
91
scull-cap on his head, like an ancient Puritan,
and the snow of his white beard drifting down to
his very girdle? What boy would dare to play,
or whisper, or even glance aside from his book,
while Master Cheever is on the lookout behind
his spectacles? For such offenders, if any such
there be, a rod of birch is hanging over the fire-
place, and a heavy ferule lies on the master's
desk. And now school is begun. What a murmur
of multitudinous tongues, like the whispering
leaves of a windstirred oak, as the scholars con
over their various tasks! Buz, buz, buz! Amid
just such a murmur has Master Cheever spent
above sixty years; and long habit has made it
as pleasant to him as the hum of a beehive when the insects are busy in the sunshine. Now a class in Latin is called to recite. Forth
steps a row of queer-looking little fellows, wear-
ing square-skirled coats, and small clothes; with
buttons at the knee. They look like so many
grandfathers in their second childhood. These
lads are to be sent to Cambridge and educated
for the learned professions. Old Master Cheever
has livedso long, and seen so many generations
of school-boys grow up to be men, that now he
can almost prophesy what sort of a man each
boy will be. One urchin shall hereafter be a
doctor, and administer pills and potions, and stalk
gravely through life, perfumed with assafoetida.

<page 113>
92 grandfather's chair.
Another shall wrangle at the bar, and fight his
way to wealth and honors, and, in his declining
age, shall be a worshipful member of his Majesty's
council. A third — and he is the master's favor-
ite — shall be a worthy successor to the old
Puritan ministers now in their graves; he shall
preach with great unction and effect, and leave
volumes of sermons, in print and manuscript, for
the benefit of future generations. But, as they are merely school-boys now, their
business is to construe Virgil. Poor Virgil! whose
verses, which he took so much pains to polish,
have been mis-scanned, and misparsed, and mis-
interpreted by so many generations of idle school-
boys. There, sit down, ye Latinists. Two or
three of you, I fear, are doomed to feel the
master's ferule. Next comes a class in arithmetic. These boys
are to be the merchants, shopkeepers, and me-
chanics of a future period. Hitherto they have
traded only in marbles and apples. Hereafter some will send vessels to England for broadcloths and all sorts of manufactured wares, and
to the West Indies for sugar, and rum, and coffee.
Others will stand behind counters, and measure
tape, and ribbon, and cambric by the yard.
Others will upheave the blacksmith's hammer,
or drive the plane over the carpenter's bench, or
take the lapstone and the awl and learn the
trade of shoemaking. Many will follow the sea,
and become bold, rough sea-captains. 
<page 114>
grandfather's chair.
This class of boys, in short, must supply the
world with those active, skilful hands, and clear,
sagacious heads, without which the affairs of life
would be thrown into confusion by the theories
of studious and visionary men. Wherefore, teach
them their multiplication table, good Master
Cheever, and whip them well when they de-
serve it; for much of the country's welfare
depends on these boys. But, alas! while we have been thinking of
other matters, Master Cheever's watchful eye has
caught two boys at play. Now we shall see
awful times. The two malefactors are sum-
moned before the master's chair, wherein he sits with the terror of a judge upon his brow. Our
old chair is now a judgment-seat. Ah, Master
Cheever has taken down that terrible birch-rod!
Short is the trial — the sentence quickly passed
— and now the judge prepares to execute it in
person. Thwack! thwack! thwack! In these
good old times, a schoolmaster's blows were
well laid on.
See ! the birch-rod has lost several of its twigs,
and will hardly serve for another execution.
Mercy on us, what a bellowing the urchins
make! My ears are almost deafened, though
the clamor comes through the far length of a
hundred and fifty years. There, go to your
seats, poor boys; and do not cry, sweet little
Alice, for they have ceased to feel the pain a
long time since. /

<page 115>
94
grandfather's chair.
And thus the forenoon passes away. Now it
is twelve o'clock. The master looks at his great
silver watch, and then, with tiresome delibera-
tion, puts the ferule into his desk. The little
multitude await the word of dismissal with
almost irrepressible impatience.
"You are dismissed," says Master Cheever. The boys retire, treading softly until they
have passed the threshold; but, fairly out of the
school-room, lo, what a joyous shout! what a
scampering and trampling of feet! what a
sense of recovered freedom expressed in the
merry uproar of all their voices! What care
they for the ferule and birch-rod now f Were
boys created merely to study Latin and arithmetic? No; the better purposes of their being
are to sport, to leap, to run, to shout, to slide
upon the ice, to snow-ball!
Happy boys! Enjoy your playtime now,
and come again to study and to feel the birch rod and the ferule to-morrow; not till to-mor-
row, for to-day is Thursday-lecture; and, ever
since the settlement of Massachusetts, there has
been no school on Thursday afternoons. There-
fore, sport, boys, while you may; for the morrow
cometh, with the birch-rod and the ferule; and
after that another morrow, with troubles of its
own. Now the master has set everything to rights,
and is ready to go home to dinner. Yet he goes 
<page 116>
grandfather's chair.
95
reluctantly. The old man has spent so much of
his life in the smoky, noisy, buzzing school-
room, that, when he has a holiday, he feels as if
his place were lost and himself a stranger in the
world. But forth he goes; and there stands
our old chair, vacant and solitary, till good
Master Cheever resumes his seat in it to-morrow
morning.
'Grandfather,' said Charley, "I wonder whether
the boys did not use to upset the old chair when
the schoolmaster was out.'
'There is a tradition," replied Grandfather,
'that one of its arms was dislocated in some such
manner. But I cannot believe that any school-
boy would behave so naughtily." As it was now later than little Alice's usual
bedtime, Grandfather broke off his narrative,
promising to talk more about Master Cheever and
his scholars some other evening.

<page 117>
96
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER IV.
I
Accordingly the next evening, Grandfather
resumed the history of his beloved chair.
"Master Ezekiel Cheever," said he, "died in
1707, after having taught school about seventy
years. It would require a pretty good scholar in
arithmetic to tell how many stripes he had in-
flicted, and how many birch-rods he had worn
out, during all that time, in his fatherly tenderness
for his pupils. Almost all the great men of that
period, and for many years back, had been whipped into eminence by Master Cheever. Moreover, he
had written a Latin Accidence, which was used
in schools more than half a century after his
death; so that the good old man, even in his
grave, was still the cause of trouble and stripes
to idle school-boys.'
Grandfather proceeded to say, that, when
Master Cheever died, he bequeathed the chair to
the most learned man that was educated at his
school, or that had ever been born in America.
This was the renowned Cotton Mather, minister
of the Old North Church in Boston.
'And author of the Magnalia, Grandfather,
which we sometimes see you reading," said
Laurence.
"Yes, Laurence," replied Grandfather. "The
Magnalia is a strange, pedantic history, in which
true events and real personages move before the

<page 118>
grandfather's chair.
97
reader, with the dreamy aspect which they wore
in Cotton Mather's singular mind. This huge
volume, however, was written and published
before our chair came into his possession. But, as
he was the author of more books than there are
days in the year, we may conclude that he wrote
a great deal while sitting in this chair.'
'I am tired of these schoolmasters and learned
men," said Charley. "I wish some stirring man,
that knew how to do something in the world,
like Sir William Phipps, would sit in the chair.'
'Such men seldom have leisure to sit quietly
in a chair," said Grandfather. "We must make
the best of such people as we have." As Cotton Mather was a very distinguished
man, Grandfather took some pains to give the
children a lively conception of his character.
Over the door of his library were painted these
words — be short — as a warning to visitors
that they must not do the world so much harm as needlessly to interrupt this great man's won-
derful labors. On entering the room you would
probably behold it crowded, and piled, and heaped
with books. There were huge, ponderous folios
aud quartos, and little duodecimos, in English,
Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldaic, and all other
languages that either originated at the confusion
of Babel or have since come into use. All these books, no doubt, were tossed about
in confusion, thus forming a visible emblem of
7

<page 119>
98
grandfather's chair.
the manner in which their contents were crowded
into Cotton Mather's brain. And in the middle
of the room stood a table, on which, besides
printed volumes, were strewn manuscript ser-
mons, historical tracts, and political pamphlets, all
written in such a queer, blind, crabbed, fantasti-
cal hand, that a writing-master would have gone
raving mad at the sight of them. By this table
stood Grandfather's chair, which seemed already
to have contracted an air of deep erudition, as if
its cushion were stuffed with Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, and other hard matters. In this chair, from one year's end to another, sat
that prodigious bookworm, Cotton Mather, some-
times devouring a great book, and sometimes
scribbling one as big. In Grandfather's younger
days there used to be a wax figure of him in
one of the Boston museums, representing a sol-
emn, dark-visaged person, in a minister's black
gown, and with a black-letter volume before
him.
'It is difficult, my children," observed Grand-
father, "to make you understand such a char-
acter as Cotton Mather's, in whom there was so
much good, and yet so many failings and frailties.
Undoubtedly he was a pious man. Often he
kept fasts; and once, for three whole days, he
allowed himself not a morsel of food, but spent
the time in prayer and religious meditation.
Many a livelong night did he watch and pray. 
<page 120>
grandfather's chair.
99
These fasts and vigils made him meagre and
haggard, and probably caused him to appear as if
he hardly belonged to the world.'
'Was not the witchcraft delusion partly caused
by Cotton Mather?" inquired Laurence.
'He was the chief agent of the mischief," an-
swered Grandfather; "but we will not suppose
that he acted otherwise than conscientiously.
He believed that there were evil spirits all about
the world. Doubtless he imagined that they
were hidden in the corners and crevices of his
library, and that they peeped out from among
the leaves of many of his books, as he turned
them over, at midnight. He supposed that these
unlovely demons were everywhere, in the sun-
shine as well as in the darkness, and that they
were hidden in men's hearts, and stole into their
most secret thoughts."
Here Grandfather was interrupted by little
Alice, who hid her face in his lap, and murmured
a wish that he would not talk any more about
Cotton Mather and the evil spirits. Grandfather
kissed her, and told her that angels were the
only spirits whom she had anything to do with.
He then spoke of the public affairs of the period. A new war between France and England had
broken out in 1702, and had been raging ever
since. In the course of it, New England suf-
fered much injury from the French and Indians,
who often came through the woods from Canada,

<page 121>
100 GRANDFATHERS CHAIR.
and assaulted the frontier towns. Villages were
sometimes burned, and the inhabitants slaughtered,
within a day's ride of Boston. The people of
New England had a bitter hatred against the
French, not only for the mischief which they
did with their own hands, but because they in-
cited the Indians to hostility. The New Englanders knew that they could
never dwell in security until the provinces of
France should be subdued and brought under
the English government. They frequently, in
time of war, undertook military expeditions
against Acadia and Canada, and sometimes be-
sieged the fortresses by which those territories
were defended. But the most earnest wish of
their hearts was to take Quebec, and so get
possession of the whole Province of Canada.
Sir William Phipps had once attempted it, but
without success. Fleets and soldiers were often sent from Eng-
land to assist the colonists in their warlike un-
dertakings. In 1710 Port Royal, a fortress of
Acadia, was taken by the English. The next
year, in the month of June, a fleet, commanded
by Admiral Sir Hovenden Walker, arrived in
Boston Harbor. On board of this fleet was the
English General Hill, with seven regiments
of soldiers, who had been fighting under the
Duke of Marlborough in Flanders. The gov-
ernment of Massachusetts was called upon to 
<page 122>
grandfather's chair.
101
find provisions for the army and fleet, and to
raise more men to assist in taking Canada. What with recruiting and drilling of soldiers,
there was now nothing but warlike bustle in the
streets of Boston. The drum and fife, the rattle
of arms, and the shouts of boys were heard
from morning till night. In about a month the
fleet set sail, carrying four regiments from New
England and New York, besides the English
soldiers. The whole army amounted to at least
seven thousand men. They steered for the
mouth of the river St. Lawrence.
'Cotton Mather prayed most fervently for their
success," continued Grandfather, "both in his
pulpit and when he kneeled down in the solitude
of his library, resting his face on our old chair.
But Providence ordered the result otherwise. In
a few weeks tidings were received that eight or
nine of the vessels had been wrecked in the St.
Lawrence, and that above a thousand drowned
soldiers had been washed ashore on the banks of
that mighty river. After this misfortune Sir
Hovenden Walker set sail for England; and
many pious people began to think it a sin even
to wish for the conquest of Canada.'
'I would never give it up so," cried Charley.
'Nor did they, as we shall see," replied Grand-
father. "However, no more attempts were made
during this war, which came to a close in 1713.
The people of New England were probably glad 
<page 123>
102 "grandfather's chair.
of some repose , for their young men had been
made soldiers, till many of them were fit for
nothing else. And those who remained at home had been heavily taxed to pay for the arms,
ammunition, fortifications, and all the other end-
less expenses of a war. There was great need
of the prayers of Cotton Mather and of all pious
men, not only on account of the sufferings of
the people, but because the old moral and re-
ligious character of New England was in danger
of being utterly lost.'
'How glorious it would have been," remarked
Laurence, "if our forefathers could have kept
the country unspotted with blood.'
'Yes,' said Grandfather; "but there was a
stern, warlike spirit in them from the beginning.
They seem never to have thought of question-
ing either the morality or piety of war." The next event which Grandfather spoke of was one that Cotton Mather, as well as most of
the other inhabitants of New England, heartily
rejoiced at. This was the accession of the Elec-
tor of Hanover to the throne of England, in
1714, on the death of Queen Anne. Hitherto the people had been in continual dread that the
male line of the Stuarts, who were descended
from the beheaded King Charles and the ban-
ished King James, would be restored to the
throne. In that case, as the Stuart family were
Roman Catholics, it was supposed that they 
<page 124>
grandfather's chair. 103
would attempt to establish their own religion
throughout the British dominions. But the Elec-
tor of Hanover and all his race were Protes-
tants; so that now the descendants of the old
Puritans were relieved from many fears and dis-
quietudes.
"The importance of this event," observed
Grandfather, "was a thousand times greater than
that of a Presidential Election, in our own days.
If the people dislike their president, they may
get rid of him in four years; whereas a dynasty
of kings may wear the crown for an unlimited
period."
The German elector was proclaimed king from
the balcony of the town-house, in Boston, by
the title of George the First, while the trumpets
sounded, and the people cried amen. That
night the town was illuminated; and Cotton
Mather threw aside book and pen, and left
Grandfather's chair vacant, while he walked
hither and thither to witness the rejoicings. 
<page 125>
104
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER V.
'Cotton Mather,' continued Grandfather,
"was a bitter enemy to Governor Dudley; and
nobody exulted more than he when that crafty
politician was removed from the government, and
succeeded by Colonel Shute. This took place
in 1716. The new governor had been an officer
in the renowned Duke of Marlborough's army,
and had fought in some of the great battles in
Flanders.'
'Now, I hope," said Charley, "we shall hear
of his doing great things.'
'I am afraid you will be disappointed, Charley," answered Grandfather. "It is true that Colonel
Shute had probably never led so unquiet a life
while fighting the French as he did now, while
governing this province of Massachusetts Bay. But his troubles consisted almost entirely of dis-
sensions with the legislature. The king had
ordered him to lay claim to a fixed salary; but
the representatives of the people insisted upon
paying him only such sums from year to year as they saw fit.'
Grandfather here explained some of the circum-
stances that made the situation of a colonial gov-
ernor so difficult and irksome. There was not
the same feeling towards the chief magistrate,
now, that had existed while he was chosen by
the free suffrages of the people. It was felt, that

<page 126>
grandfather's chair.
as the king appointed the governor, and as he
held his office during the king's pleasure, it
would be his great object to please the king.
But the people thought that a governor ought
to have nothing in view but the best interests
of those whom he governed.
'The governor," remarked Grandfather, "had
two masters to serve — the king, who appointed
him; and the people, on whom he depended for
his pay. Few men in this position would have
ingenuity enough to satisfy either party. Colonel
Shute, though a good-natured, well-meaning man,
succeeded so ill with the people, that, in 1722, he
suddenly went away to England and made com-
plaint to King George. In the mean time Lieu-
tenant-Governor Dummer directed the affairs of
the province, and carried on a long and bloody
war with the Indians.'
'But where was our chair all this time?" asked Clara.
'It still remained in Cotton Mather's library," replied Grandfather; "and I must not omit to
tell you an incident which is very much to the
honor of this celebrated man. It is the more
proper, too, that you should hear it, because it
will show you what a terrible calamity the small
pox was to our forefathers. The history of the
province (and, of course, the history of our
chair) would be incomplete without particular
mention of it.'

<page 127>
106
grandfather's chair.
Accordingly, Grandfather told the children a
story, to which, for want of a better title, we
shall give that of THE REJECTED BLESSING. One day, in 1721, Doctor Cotton Mather sat in
his library reading a book that had been pub-
lished by the Royal Society of London. . But,
every few moments he laid the book upon the
table, and leaned back in Grandfather's chair with an aspect of deep care and disquietude.
There were certain things which troubled him
exceedingly, so that he could hardly fix his
thoughts upon what he read. It was now a gloomy time in Boston. That
terrible disease, the small-pox, had recently made
its appearance in the town. Ever since the first
settlement of the country this awful pestilence
had come, at intervals, and swept away multi-
tudes of the inhabitants. Whenever it com-
menced its ravages, nothing seemed to stay its
progress until there were no more victims for it
to seize upon. Oftentimes hundreds of people at once lay groaning with its agony; and when
it departed, its deep footsteps were always to be
traced in many graves. The people never felt secure from this calam-
ity. Sometimes, perhaps, it was brought into
the country by a poor sailor, who had caught the
infection in foreign parts, and came hither to die,

<page 128>
grandfather's chair. 107
and to be the cause of many deaths. Some-
times, no doubt, it followed in the train of the
pompous governors when they came over from
England. Sometimes the disease lay hidden in
the cargoes of ships, among silks, and brocades,
and other costly merchandise which was im-
ported for the rich people to wear. And some-
times it started up seemingly of its own accord, and nobody could tell whence it came. The
physician, being called to attend the sick person,
would look at him, and say, — 'It is the small-
pox! Let the patient be carried to the hospital." And now this dreadful sickness had shown
itself again in Boston. Cotton Mather was
greatly afflicted for the sake of the whole pro-
vince. He had children, too, who were exposed
to the danger. At that very moment he heard
the voice of his youngest son, for whom his
heart was moved with apprehension.
'Alas! I fear for that poor child," said Cotton
Mather to himself. "What shall I do for my
son Samuel?'
Again, he attempted to drive away these
thoughts by taking up the book which he had
been reading. And now, all of a sudden, his
attention became fixed. The book contained a
printed letter that an Italian physician had writ-
ten upon the very subject about which Cotton
Mather was so anxiously meditating. He ran
his eye eagerly over the pages; and, behold! a 
<page 129>
108
grandfather's chair.
method was disclosed to him by which the
small-pox might be robbed of its worst terrors.
Such a method was known in Greece. The
physicians of Turkey, too, those long-bearded
Eastern sages, had been acquainted with it for
many years. The negroes of Africa, ignorant as
they were, had likewise practised it, and thus had
shown themselves wiser than the white men.
'Of a truth," ejaculated Cotton Mather, clasp-
ing his hands and looking up to Heaven, 'it was
a merciful Providence that brought this book
under mine eye. I will procure a consultation
of physicians, and see whether this wondrous
inoculation may not stay the progress of the
destroyer." So he arose from Grandfather's chair and
went out of the library. Near the door he met
his son Samuel, who seemed downcast and out
of spirits. The boy had heard, probably, that
some of his playmates were taken ill with the
small pox. But, as his father looked cheerfully
at him, Samuel took courage, trusting that either
the wisdom of so learned a minister would find
some remedy for the danger, or else that his
prayers would secure protection from on high.
Meanwhile, Cotton Mather took his staff and
three-cornered hat, and walked about the streets,
calling at the houses of all the physicians in
Boston. They were a very wise fraternity; and
their huge wigs, and black dresses, and solemn

<page 130>
grandfather's chair.
109
visages, made their wisdom appear even profounder than it was. One after another he acquainted
them with the discovery which he had hit upon. But the grave and sagacious personages would
scarcely listen to him. The oldest doctor in
town contented himself with remarking that no
such thing as inoculation was mentioned by
Galen or Hippocrates; and it was impossible that
modern physicians should be wiser than those
old sages. A second held up his hands in dumb
astonishment and horror at the madness of what
Cotton Mather proposed to do. A third told him,
in pretty plain terms, that he knew not what he
was talking about. A fourth requested, in the
name of the whole medical fraternity, that Cot-
ton Mather would confine his attention to peo-
ple's souls, and leave the physicians to take care
of their bodies. In short, there was but a single doctor among
them all who would grant the poor minister so
much as a patient hearing. This was Doctor
Zabdiel Boylston. He looked into the matter
like a man of sense, and finding, beyond a doubt,
that inoculation had rescued many from death,
he resolved to try the experiment in his own
family. And so he did. But when the other physi-
cians heard of it they arose in great fury and
began a war of words, written, printed, and
spoken, against Cotton Mather and Doctor Boyl-

<page 131>
110
grandfather's chair.
ston. To hear them talk, you would have sup-
posed that these two harmless and benevolent
men had plotted the ruin of the country. The people, also, took the alarm. Many, who
thought themselves more pious than their neigh-
bors, contended that, if Providence had ordained
them to die of the smallpox, it was sinful to aim
at preventing it. The strangest reports were in
circulation. Some said that Doctor Boylston had
contrived a method for conveying the gout, rheu-
matism, sick headache, asthma, and all other
diseases from one person to another, and diffus-
ing them through the whole community. Others
flatly affirmed that the Evil One had got posses-
sion of Cotton Mather, and was at the bottom of
the whole business. You must observe, children, that Cotton
Mather's fellow-citizens were generally inclined
to doubt the wisdom of any measure which he
might propose to them. They recollected how
he had led them astray in the old witchcraft de-
lusion; and now, if he thought and acted ever so
wisely, it was difficult for him to get the credit
of it. The people's wrath grew so hot at his attempt
to guard them from the small-pox, that he could
not walk the streets in peace. Whenever the
venerable form of the old minister, meagre and
haggard with fasts and vigils, was seen approach-
ing, hisses were heard, and shouts of derision, 
<page 132>
grandfather's chair.
Ill
and scornful and bitter laughter. The women
snatched away their children from his path, lest
he should do them a mischief. Still, however,
bending his head meekly, and perhaps stretching
out his hands to bless those who reviled him, he
pursued his way. But the tears came into his
eyes to think how blindly the people rejected
the means of safety that were offered them. Indeed, there were melancholy sights enough
in the streets of Boston to draw forth the tears
of a compassionate man. Over the door of al-
most every dwelling a red flag was fluttering in
the air. This was the signal that the small-pox
had entered the house and attacked some mem-
ber of the family; or perhaps the whole family,
old and young, were struggling at once with the
pestilence. Friends and relatives, when they
met one another in the streets, would hurry on-
ward without a grasp of the hand or scarcely a
word of greeting, lest they should catch or com-
municate the contagion; and often a coffin was
borne hastily along.
'Alas, alas!" said Cotton Mather to himself.
'What shall be done for this poor, misguided
people? O that Providence would open their
eyes, and enable them to discern good from
evil!"
So furious, however, were the people, that
they threatened vengeance against any person
who should dare to practise inoculation, though 
<page 133>
112 grandfather's chair.
it were only in his own family. This was a
hard case for Cotton Mather, who saw no other
way to rescue his poor child Samuel from the
disease. But he resolved to save him, even if
his house should be burned over his head.
'I will not be turned aside," said he. "My
townsmen shall see that I have faith in this
thing, when I make the experiment on my be-
loved son, whose life is dearer to me than my
own. And when I have saved Samuel, peradventure they will be persuaded to save themselves.'
Accordingly, Samuel was inoculated; and
so was Mr. Walter, a son-in-law of Cotton
Mather. Doctor Boylston, likewise, inoculated
many persons; and while hundreds died who
had caught the contagion from the garments of
the sick, almost all were preserved who fol-
lowed the wise physician's advice. But the people were not yet convinced of
their mistake. One night a destructive little
instrument, called a hand-grenade, was thrown
into Cotton Mather's window, and rolled under
Grandfather's chair. It was supposed to be filled
with gunpowder, the explosion of which would
have blown the poor minister to atoms. But the
best-informed historians are of opinion that the
grenade contained only brimstone and assafoetida,
and was meant to plague Cotton Mather with a
very evil perfume. This is no strange thing in human experience.

<page 134>
grandfather's chair.
113
Men, who attempt to do the world more good than the world is able entirely to comprehend are almost invariably held in bad odor. But yet,
if the wise and good man can wait awhile,
either the present generation or posterity will do
him justice. So it proved in the case which we
have been speaking of. In after years, when
inoculation was universally practised and thou-
sands were saved from death by it, the people
remembered old Cotton Mather, then sleeping in
his grave. They acknowledged that the very
thing for which they had so reviled and perse-
cuted him was the best and wisest thing he ever
did.
"Grandfather, this is not an agreeable story," observed Clara.
'No, Clara," replied Grandfather. "But it is
right that you should know what a dark shadow
this disease threw over the times of our fore-
fathers. And now, if you wish to learn more
about Cotton Mather, you must read his biogra-
phy, written by Mr. Peabody, of Springfield.
You will find it very entertaining and instruc-
tive; but perhaps the writer is somewhat too
harsh in his judgment of this singular man. He
estimates him fairly, indeed, and understands him
well; but he unriddles his character rather by
acuteness than by sympathy. Now, his life
8

<page 135>
114
GRANDFATHER S CHAIR.
should have been written by one who, knowing
all his faults, would nevertheless love him." So Grandfather made an end of Cotton Mather,
telling his auditors that he died in 1728, at the
age of sixty-five, and bequeathed the chair to
Elisha Cooke. This gentleman was a famous
advocate of the people's rights. The same year William Burnet, a son of the
celebrated Bishop Burnet, arrived in Boston with
the commission of governor. He was the first
that had been appointed since the departure of
Colonel Shute. Governor Burnet took up his
residence with Mr. Cooke while the Province
House was undergoing repairs. During this pe-
riod he was always complimented with a seat
in Grandfather's chair; and so comfortable did he
find it, that, on removing to the Province House,
he could not bear to leave it behind him. Mr.
Cooke, therefore, requested his acceptance of it.
'I should think," said Laurence, "that the peo-
ple would have petitioned the king always to
appoint a native-born New Englander to govern
them.'
'Undoubtedly it was a grievance," answered
Grandfather, "to see men placed in this station who perhaps had neither talents nor virtues to fit
them for it, and who certainly could have no
natural affection for the country. The king
generally bestowed the governorships of the
American colonies upon needy noblemen, or 
<page 136>
grandfather's chair.
hangers-on at court, or disbanded officers. The
people knew that such persons would be very
likely to make the good of the country subser-
vient to the wishes of the king. The legisla-
ture, therefore, endeavored to keep as much
power as possible in their own hands, by refus-
ing to settle a fixed salary upon the governors.
It was thought better to pay them according to
their deserts.'
'Did Governor Burnet work well for his
money?" asked Charley. Grandfather could not help smiling at the sim-
plicity of Charley's question. Nevertheless, it
put the matter in a very plain point of view. He then described the character of Governor
Burnet, representing him as a good scholar, pos-
sessed of much ability, and likewise of unspotted
integrity. His story affords a striking example how unfortunate it is for a man, who is placed
as ruler over a country, to be compelled to aim
at any thing but the good of the people. Gov-
ernor Burnet was so chained down by his instruc-
tions from the king that he could not act as he
might otherwise have wished. Consequently,
his whole term of office was wasted in quarrels
with the legislature.
'I am afraid, children," said Grandfather, "that
Governor Burnet found but little rest or comfort
in our old chair. Here he used to sit, dressed in
a coat which was made of rough, shaggy cloth 
<page 137>
116
grandfather's chair.
outside, but of smooth velvet within. It was
said that his own character resembled that coat; for his outward manner was rough, but his inward
disposition soft and kind. It is a pity that such
a man could not have been kept free from trou-
ble. But so harassing were his disputes with
the representatives of the people that he fell
into a fever, of which he died in 1729. The
legislature had refused him a salary while alive;
but they appropriated money enough to give him
a splendid and pompous funeral." And now Grandfather perceived that little Alice
had fallen fast asleep, with her head upon his foot-
stool. Indeed, as Clara observed, she had been
sleeping from the time of Sir Hovenden Walker's
expedition against Quebec until the death of
Governor Burnet — a period of about eighteen
years. And yet, after so long a nap, sweet little
Alice was a golden-haired child of scarcely five
years old.
"It puts me in mind," said Laurence, "of the
story of the Enchanted Princess, who slept many
a hundred years, and awoke as young and beau-
tiful as ever.'

<page 138>
grandfather's chair.
117
CHAPTER VI.
A few evenings afterwards, cousin Clara hap-
pened to inquire of Grandfather whether the old
chair had never been present at a ball. At the
same time little Alice brought forward a doll,
with whom she had been holding a long con-
versation.
'See, Grandfather,' cried she. "Did such a
pretty lady as this ever sit in your great chair?" These questions led Grandfather to talk about
the fashions and manners which now began to
be introduced from England into the provinces.
The simplicity of the good old Puritan times was
fast disappearing. This was partly owing to the
increasing number and wealth of the inhabitants,
and to the additions which they continually
received by the arrival and settlement of people
from beyond the sea. Another cause of a pompous and artificial
mode of life, among those who could afford it,
was, that the example was set by the royal
governors. Under the old charter, the gov-
ernors were the representatives of the people,
and therefore their way of living had probably
been marked by a popular simplicity. But now,
as they represented the person of the king, they
thought it necessary to preserve the dignity of
their station by the practice of high and gor-
geous ceremonials. And, besides, the profitable 
<page 139>
118
grandfather's chair.
offices under the government were filled by men
who had lived in London, and had there con-
tracted fashionable and luxurious habits of living which they would not now lay aside. The
wealthy people of the province imitated them;
and thus began a general change in social life.
"So, my dear Clara," said Grandfather, "after
our chair had entered the Province House, it must often have been present at balls and fes-
tivals; though I cannot give you a description of
any particular one. But I doubt not that they
were very magnificent; and slaves in gorgeous
liveries waited on the guests, and offered them
wine in goblets of massive silver.'
'Were there slaves in those days?' exclaimed
Clara.
"Yes, black slaves and white," replied Grand-
father. "Our ancestors not only brought negroes
from Africa, but Indians from South America,
and white people from Ireland. These last were
sold, not for life, but for a certain number of
years, in order to pay the expenses of their
voyage across the Atlantic. Nothing was more
common than to see a lot of likely Irish girls advertised for sale in the newspapers. As for
the little negro babies, they were offered to be
given away like young kittens.'
'Perhaps Alice would have liked one to play
with, instead of her doll," said Charley, laugh-
ing.

<page 140>
grandfather's chair.
119
But little Alice clasped the waxen doll closer
to her bosom.
'Now, as for this pretty doll, my little Alice," said Grandfather, "I wish you could have seen
what splendid dresses the ladies wore in those
times. They had silks, and satins, and damasks,
and brocades, and high headdresses, and all sorts
of fine things. And they used to wear hooped
petticoats, of such enormous size that it was
quite a journey to walk round them.'
'And how did the gentlemen dress?" asked
Charley.
'With full as much magnificence as the ladies," answered Grandfather. "For their holiday suits they had coats of figured velvet, crimson, green,
blue, and all other gay colors, embroidered with
gold or silver lace. Their waistcoats, which
were five times as large as modern ones, were
very splendid. Sometimes the whole waistcoat,
which came down almost to the knees, was made
of gold brocade.'
'Why, the wearer must have shone like a
golden image!" said Clara.
'And, then,' continued Grandfather, "they
wore various sorts of periwigs, such as the tie, the spencer, the brigadier, the major, the albemarle, the ramilies, the Feather-top, and the
Full-bottom! Their three-cornered hats were
laced with gold or silver. They had shining
buckles at the knees of their small clothes, and

<page 141>
120
grandfather's chair.
buckles likewise in their shoes. They wore
swords with beautiful hilts, either of silver, or
sometimes of polished steel, inlaid with gold.'
'Oh, I should like to wear a sword!" cried
Charley.
'And an embroidered crimson velvet coat," said Clara, laughing, "and a gold brocade waist-
coat down to your knees!'
'And knee-buckles and shoe-buckles,' said
Laurence, laughing also.
"And a periwig," added little Alice, soberly,
not knowing what was the article of dress which she recommended to our friend Charley. Grandfather smiled at the idea of Charley's
sturdy little figure in such a grotesque capar-
ison. He then went on with the history of the
chair, and told the children that, in 1730, King
George the Second appointed Jonathan Belcher
to be governor of Massachusetts in place of the
deceased Governor Burnet. Mr. Belcher was a
native of the province, but had spent much of
his life in Europe. The new governor found Grandfather's chair
in the Province House. He was struck with its
noble and stately aspect, but was of opinion that age and hard services had made it scarcely
so fit for courtly company as when it stood in
the Earl of Lincoln's hall. Wherefore, as Gov-
ernor Belcher was fond of splendor, he employed
a skilful artist to beautify the chair. This was 
<page 142>
grandfather's chair.
121
done by polishing and varnishing it, and by gild-
ing the carved work of the elbows, and likewise
the oaken flowers of the back. The lion's head
now shone like a veritable lump of gold. Fi-
nally Governor Belcher gave the chair a cushion
of blue damask, with a rich golden fringe.
'Our good old chair being thus glorified," pro-
ceeded Grandfather, "it glittered with a great
deal more splendor than it had exhibited just a
century before, when the Lady Arbella brought
it over from England. Most people mistook it
for a chair of the latest London fashion. And
this may serve for an example, that there is
almost always an old and time-worn substance
under all the glittering show of new invention.'
'Grandfather, I cannot see any of the gilding," remarked Charley, who had been examining the
chair very minutely.
'You will not wonder that it has been rubbed
off," replied Grandfather, "when you hear all the
adventures that have since befallen the chair.
Gilded it was; and the handsomest room in the
Province House was adorned by it." There was not much to interest the children in what happened during the years that Gover-
nor Belcher remained in the chair. At first, like
Colonel Shute and Governor Burnet, he was en-
gaged in disputing with the legislature about his
salary. But, as he found it impossible to get a
fixed sum, he finally obtained the king's leave to 
<page 143>
grandfather's chair.
accept whatever the legislature chose to give
him. And thus the people triumphed, after this
long contest for the privilege of expending their
own money as they saw fit. The remainder of Governor Belcher's term of
office was principally taken up in endeavoring to
settle the currency. Honest John Hull's pine-tree shillings had long ago been worn out, or
lost, or melted down again; and their place was
supplied by bills of paper or parchment, which
were nominally valued at threepence and up-
wards. The value of these bills kept continually
sinking, because the real hard money could not
be obtained for them. They were a great deal
worse than the old Indian currency of clam-shells.
These disorders of the circulating medium were
a source of endless plague and perplexity to the
rulers and legislators, not only in Governor Bel-
cherts days, but for many years before and after-
wards.
Finally, the people suspected that Governor
Belcher was secretly endeavoring to establish the
Episcopal mode of worship in the provinces.
There was enough of the old Puritan spirit re-
maining to cause most of the true sons of New
England to look with horror upon such an at-
tempt. Great exertions were made to induce
the king to remove the governor. Accordingly,
in 1740, he was compelled to resign his office,
and Grandfather's chair into the bargain, to Mr.
Shirley. 
<page 144>
grandfather's chair.
123
CHAPTER VII.
'William Shirley,' said Grandfather, "had
come from England a few years before, and be-
gun to practise law in Boston. You will think,
perhaps, that, as he had been a lawyer, the new
governor used to sit in our great chair reading
heavy lawbooks from morning till night. On
the contrary, he was as stirring and active a
governor as Massachusetts ever had. Even Sir
William Phipps hardly equalled him. The first
year or two of his administration was spent in
trying to regulate the currency. But in 1744,
after a peace of more than thirty years, war
broke out between France and England.'
'And I suppose," said Charley, "the governor
went to take Canada.'
'Not exactly, Charley," said Grandfather,
'though you have made a pretty shrewd conjec-
ture. He planned, in 1745, an expedition against
Louisburg. This was a fortified city, on the
Island of Cape Breton, near Nova Scotia. Its
walls were of immense height and strength, and
were defended by hundreds of heavy cannon. It
was the strongest fortress which the French pos-
sessed in America; and if the king of France
had guessed Governor Shirley's intentions, he
would have sent all the ships he could muster to protect it."
As the siege of Louisburg was one of the 
<page 145>
124
grandfather's chair.
most remarkable events that ever the inhabitants
of New England were engaged in, Grandfather
endeavored to give his auditors a lively idea of
the spirit with which they set about it. We
shall call his description THE PROVINCIAL MUSTER. The expedition against Louisburg first began
to be thought of in the month of January.
From that time the governor's chair was con-
tinually surrounded by councillors, representa-
tives, clergymen, captains, pilots, and all manner
of people, with whom he consulted about this
wonderful project. First of all, it was necessary to provide men
and arms. The legislature immediately sent out
a huge quantity of paper money, with which, as
if by magic spell, the governor hoped to get
possession of all the old cannon, powder and
balls, rusty swords and muskets, and everything
else that would be serviceable in killing French-
men. Drums were beaten in all the villages of
Massachusetts to enlist soldiers for the service.
Messages were sent to the other governors of
New England, and to New York and Pennsyl-
vania, entreating them to unite in this crusade
against the French. All these provinces agreed
to give what assistance they could. But there was one very important thing to be
decided. Who shall be the general of this great 
<page 146>
grandfather's chair.
125
army? Peace had continued such an unusual
length of time, that there was now less military
experience among the colonists than at any for-
mer period. The old Puritans had always kept
their weapons bright, and were never destitute
of warlike captains who were skilful in assault
or defence. But the swords of their descendants
had grown rusty by disuse. There was nobody
in New England that knew anything about
sieges or any other regular fighting. The only
persons at all acquainted with warlike business were a few elderly men, who had hunted Indians
through the underbrush of the forest in old
Governor Dummer's war. In this dilemma Governor Shirley fixed upon
a wealthy merchant, named William Pepperell,
who was pretty well known and liked among the
people. As to military skill, he had no more of
it than his neighbors. But, as the governor
urged him very pressingly, Mr. Pepperell con-
sented to shut up his leger, gird on a sword, and
assume the title of General.
Meantime, what a hubbub was raised by this
scheme! Rub-a-dub-dub! rub-a-dub-dub! The
rattle of drums, beaten out of all manner of time,
was heard above every other sound. Nothing now was so valuable as arms, of
whatever style and fashion they might be. The
bellows blew, and the hammer clanged contin-
ually upon the anvil, while the blacksmiths were 
<page 147>
126
grandfather's chair.
repairing the broken weapons of other wars.
Doubtless some of the soldiers lugged out those
enormous, heavy muskets which used to be fired, with rests, in the time of the early Puritans.
Great horse-pistols, too, were found, which would
go off with a bang like a cannon. Old cannon,
with touchholes almost as big as their muzzles,
were looked upon as inestimable treasures. Pikes which, perhaps, had been handled by Miles
Standish's soldiers, now made their appearance
again. Many a young man ransacked the garret and brought forth his great-grandfather's sword,
corroded with rust and stained with the blood
of King Philip's war.
Never had there been such an arming as this,
when a people, so long peaceful, rose to the war with the best weapons that they could lay their
hands upon. And still the drums were heard —
Rub-a-dub-dub! Rub-a-dub-dub ! — in all the
towns and villages; and louder and more nu-
merous grew the trampling footsteps of the re-
cruits that marched behind. And now the army began to gather into Bos-
ton. Tall, lanky, awkward fellows came in
squads, and companies, and regiments, swagger-
ing along, dressed in their brown homespun
clothes and blue'yarn stockings. They stooped as if they still had hold of the plough-handles,
and marched without any time or tune. Hither
they came, from the cornfields, from the clearing 
<page 148>
grandfather's chair.
in the forest, from the blacksmith's forge, from
the carpenter's workshop, and from the shoe-
maker's seat. They were an army of rough
faces and sturdy frames. A trained officer of
Europe would have laughed at them till his
sides had ached. But there was a spirit in their
bosoms which is more essential to soldiership
than to wear red coats and march in stately
ranks to the sound of regular music.
St!ill was heard the beat of the drum — rub-
a-dub-dub! — and now a host of three or four
thousand men had found their way to Boston.
Little quiet was there then! Forth scampered
the school-boys, shouting behind the drums.
The whole town — the whole land — was on
fire with war. After the arrival of the troops, they were
probably reviewed upon the Common. We may
imagine Governor Shirley and General Pepperell
riding slowly along the line, while the drum-
mers beat strange old tunes, like psalm-tunes, and
all the officers and soldiers put on their most
warlike looks. It would have been a terrible
sight for the Frenchmen, could they but have
witnessed it!At length, on the 24th of March,
1745, the army gave a parting shout, and set sail
from Boston in ten or twelve vessels which had
been hired by the governor. A few days after-
wards an English fleet, commanded by Commo-

<page 149>
123
grandfather's chair.
dore Peter Warren, sailed also for Louisburg to
assist the provincial army. So now, after all
this bustle of preparation, the town and province
were left in stillness and repose.
But, stillness and repose, at such a time of
anxious expectation, are hard to bear. The
hearts of the old people and women sunk within
them when they reflected what perils they had
sent their sons, and husbands, and brothers to
encounter. The boys loitered heavily to school,
missing the rub-a-dub-dub and the trampling
march, in the rear of which they had so lately
run and shouted. All the ministers prayed ear-
nestly in their pulpits for a blessing on the army
of New England. In every family, when the
good man lifted up his heart in domestic worship,
the burden of his petition was for the safety of
those dear ones who were fighting under the
walls of Louisburg. Governor Shirley all this time was probably
in an ecstasy of impatience. He could not sit
still a moment. He found no quiet, not even in
Grandfather's chair; but hurried to and fro, and
up and down the staircase of the Province
House. Now he mounted to the cupola and
looked seaward, straining his eyes to discover if
there were a sail upon the horizon. Now he
hastened down the stairs, and stood beneath the
portal, on the red freestone steps, to receive
some mud-bespattered courier, from whom he 
<page 150>
grandfather's chair.
129
hoped to hear tidings of the army. A few weeks
after the departure of the troops, Commodore
Warren sent a small vessel to Boston with two
French prisoners. One of them was Monsieur
Bouladrie, who had been commander of a bat-
tery outside of the walls of Louisburg. The
other was the Marquis de la Maison Forte, cap-
tain of a French frigate which had been taken
by Commodore Warren's fleet. These prisoners
assured Governor Shirley that the fortifications
of Louisburg were far too strong ever to be stormed by the provincial army. Day after day and week after week went on.
The people grew almost heart-sick with anxiety;
for the flower of the country was at peril in this
adventurous expedition. It was now daybreak on the morning of the 3d of July.
But, hark! what sound is this? The hurried
clang of a bell! There is the Old North pealing
suddenly out! — there the Old South strikes
in!—now the peal comes from the church in
Brattle Street!—the bells of nine or ten steeples
are all flinging their iron voices at once upon
the morning breeze! Is it joy, or alarm 1 There
goes the roar of a cannon, too! A royal salute
is thundered forth. And, now, we hear the loud
exulting shout of a multitude assembled in the
street. Huzza! huzza! Louisburg has surren-
dered! Huzza!
S

<page 151>
130
grandfather's chair.
'O Grandfather, how glad I should have been
to live in those times!" cried Charley. "And
what reward did the king give to General Pepperell and Governor Shirley?'
'He made Pepperell a baronet; so that he was
now to be called Sir William Pepperell," replied
Grandfather. "He likewise appointed both Pep-
perell and Shirley to be colonels in the royal
army. These rewards, and higher ones, were
well deserved; for this was the greatest triumph
that the English met with in the whole course
of that war. General Pepperell became a man
of great fame. I have seen a full-length por-
trait of him, representing him in a splendid
scarlet uniform, standing before the walls of
Louisburg, while several bombs are falling
through the air.'
'But did the country gain any real good by
the conquest of Louisbourg?' asked Laurence.
"Or was all the benefit reaped by Pepperell and
Shirley?'
'The English Parliament," said Grandfather,
"agreed to pay the colonists for all the expenses
of the siege. Accordingly, in 1749, two hundred
and fifteen chests of Spanish dollars and one
hundred casks of copper coin were brought from
England to Boston. The whole amount was
about a million of dollars. Twenty-seven carts
and trucks carried this money from the wharf to
the provincial treasury. Was not this a pretty
liberal reward?'

<page 152>
grandfather's chair.
131
'The mothers of the young men who were
killed at the siege of Louisburg would not
have thought it so," said Laurence.
'No, Laurence,' rejoined Grandfather; "and every warlike achievement involves an amount
of physical and moral evil, for which all the gold
in the Spanish mines would not be the slightest
recompense. But we are to consider that this
siege was one of the occasions on which the
colonists tested their ability for war, and thus
were prepared for the great contest of the Revo-
lution. In that point of view, the valor of our
forefathers was its own reward."
Grandfather went on to say that the success
of the expedition against Louisburg induced
Shirley and Pepperell to form a scheme for con-
quering Canada. This plan, however, was not
carried into execution. In the year 1746 great terror was excited by
the arrival of a formidable French fleet upon the
coast. It was commanded by the Duke d'Anville, and consisted of forty ships of war, besides vessels with soldiers on board. With this force the French intended to retake Louisbourg, and
afterwards to ravage the whole of New England.
Many people were ready to give up the country
for lost. But the hostile fleet met with so many disas-
ters and losses by storm and shipwreck, that the
Duke d'Anville is said to have poisoned himself 
<page 153>
132
grandfather's chaIr.
in despair. The officer next in command threw
himself upon his sword and perished. Thus de-
prived of their commanders, the remainder of
the ships returned to France. This was as great
a deliverance for New England as that which
Old England had experienced in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, when the Spanish Armada
was wrecked upon her coast.
"In 1747," proceeded Grandfather, 'Governor
Shirley was driven from the Province House,
not by a hostile fleet and army, but by a mob of
the Boston people. They were so incensed at
the conduct of the British Commodore Knowles,
who had impressed some of their fellow-citizens,
that several thousands of them surrounded the
council-chamber, and threw stones and brick-
bats into the windows. The governor attempted
to pacify them; but not succeeding, he thought
it necessary to leave the town and take refuge
within the walls of Castle William. Quiet was
not restored until Commodore Knowles had sent
back the impressed men. This affair was a flash
of spirit that might have warned the English
not to venture upon any oppressive measures
against their colonial brethren."
Peace being declared between France and
England in 1748, the governor had now an
opportunity to sit at his ease in Grandfather's
chair. Such repose, however, appears not to
have suited his disposition; for in the following

<page 154>
grandfather's chair.
133
year, he went to England, and thence was despatched to France on public business. Mean-
while, as Shirley had not resigned his office,
Lieutenant-Governor Phipps acted as chief mag-
istrate in his stead.

<page 155>
134
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER VIII.
In the early twilight of Thanksgiving eve came Laurence, and Clara, and Charley, and little
Alice, hand in hand, and stood in a semicircle
round Grandfather's chair. They had been joy-
ous throughout that day of festivity, mingling
together in all kinds of play, so that the house
had echoed with their airy mirth. Grandfather, too, had been happy, though not
mirthful. He felt that this was to be set down
as one of the good Thanksgivings of his life.
In truth, all his former Thanksgivings had borne
their part in the present one; for his years of
infancy, and youth, and manhood, with their
blessings and their griefs, had flitted before
him while he sat silently in the great chair.
Vanished scenes had been pictured in the air.
The forms of departed friends had visited him.
Voices to be heard no more on earth had sent
an echo from the infinite and the eternal. These
shadows, if such they were, seemed almost as
real to him as what was actually present — as
the merry shouts and laughter of the children —
as their figures, dancing like sunshine before his
eyes. He felt that the past was not taken from him.
The happiness of former days was a possession
forever. And there was something in the min-
gled sorrow of his lifetime that became akin to 
<page 156>
grandfather's chair.
135
happiness, after being long treasured in the
depths of his heart. There it underwent a
change, and grew more precious than pure gold. And now came the children, somewhat aweary
with their wild play, and sought the quiet en-
joyment of Grandfather's talk. The good old
gentleman rubbed his eyes and smiled round
upon them all. He was glad, as most aged
people are, to find that he was yet of conse-
quence and could give pleasure to the world.
After being so merry all day long, did these
children desire to hear his sober talk? O, then,
old Grandfather had yet a place to fill among
living men, — or at least among boys and girls!
"Begin quick, Grandfather," cried little Alice;
"for pussy wants to hear you.'
And, truly, our yellow friend, the cat, lay upon
the hearth rug, basking in the warmth of the
fire, pricking up her ears, and turning her head
from the children to Grandfather, and from
Grandfather to the children, as if she felt herself
very sympathetic with them all. A loud pur, like the singing of a teakettle or the hum of a
spinning-wheel, testified that she was as com-
fortable and happy as a cat could be. For puss had feasted; and therefore, like Grandfather and
the children, had kept a good Thanksgiving.
'Does Pussy want to hear me?" said Grand-
father, smiling. "Well, we must please pussy, if we can!'

<page 157>
136
grandfather's chair.
And so he took up the history of the chair from the epoch of the peace of 1748. By one
of the provisions of the treaty, Louisburg, which the New Englanders had been at so much
pains to take, was restored to the King of
France. The French were afraid that, unless their
colonies should be better defended than here-
tofore, another war might deprive them of the
whole. Almost as soon as peace was declared,
therefore, they began to build strong fortifica-
tions in the interior of North America. It was
strange to behold these warlike castles on the
banks of solitary lakes, and far in the midst of
woods. The Indian, paddling his birch-canoe
on Lake Champlain, looked up at the high ram-
parts of Ticonderoga, stone piled on stone, brist-
ling with cannon, and the white flag of France
floating above. There were similar fortifications
on Lake Ontario, and near the great Falls of
Niagara, and at the sources of the Ohio River.
And all around these forts and castles lay the
eternal forest; and the roll of the drum died
away in those deep solitudes.
The truth was, that the French intended to
build forts all the way from Canada to Louis-
iana. They would then have had a wall of
military strength at the back of the English set-
tlements, so as completely to hem them in. The
King of England considered the building of 
<page 158>
grandfather's chair.
137
these forts as a sufficient cause of war, which
was accordingly commenced in 1754.
'Governor Shirley,' said Grandfather, 'had
returned to Boston in 1753. While in Paris he
had married a second wife, a young French girl,
and now brought her to the Province House.
But when war was breaking out it was impos-
sible for such a bustling man to stay quietly at
home, sitting in our old chair, with his wife and
children round about him. He therefore obtained
a command in the English forces.'
'And what did Sir William Pepperell do?'
asked Charley.
'He staid at home,' said Grandfather, 'and
was general of the militia. The veteran regi-
ments of the English army which were now
sent across the Atlantic would have scorned to
fight under the orders of an old American mer-
chant. And now began what aged people call
the Old French War. It would be going too far
astray from the history of our chair to tell you
one half of the battles that were fought. I can-
not even allow myself to describe the bloody
defeat of General Braddock, near the sources of
the Ohio River, in 1755. But I must not omit
to mention, that when the English general was
mortally wounded and his army routed, the
remains of it were preserved by the skill and
valor of George Washington.'
At the mention of this illustrious name, the

<page 159>
138
grandfather's chair.
children started, as if a sudden sunlight had
gleamed upon the history of their country, now
that the great deliverer had arisen above the
horizon. Among all the events of the Old French War,
Grandfather thought that there was none more
interesting than the removal of the inhabitants
of Acadia. From the first settlement of this
ancient province of the French, in 1604, until
the present time, its people could scarcely ever
know what kingdom held dominion over them.
They were a peaceful race, taking no delight in
warfare, and caring nothing for military renown.
And yet, in every war, their region was infested
with iron-hearted soldiers, both French and
English, who fought one another for the priv-
ilege of ill treating these poor, harmless Acadians.
Sometimes the treaty of peace made them sub-
jects of one king, sometimes of another. At the peace of 1748 Acadia had been ceded
to England. But the French still claimed a
large portion of it, and built forts for its defence.
In 1755 these forts were taken, and the whole
of Acadia was conquered by three thousand men
from Massachusetts, under the command of Gen-
eral Winslow. The inhabitants were accused of
supplying the French with provisions, and of
doing other things that violated their neutrality.
'These accusations were probably true," ob-
served Grandfather; "for the Acadians were 
<page 160>
grandfather's chair.
descended from the French, and had the same
friendly feelings towards them that the people
of Massachusetts had for the English. But their
punishment was severe. The English deter-
mined to tear these poor people from their native
homes and scatter them abroad." The Acadians were about seven thousand in
number. A considerable part of them were
made prisoners, and transported to the English
colonies. All their dwellings and churches were
burnt, (heir cattle were killed, and the whole
country was laid waste, so that none of them
might find shelter or food in their old homes after the departure of the English. One thou-
sand of the prisoners were sent to Massachusetts;
and Grandfather allowed his fancy to follow
them thither, and tried to give his auditors an
idea of their situation. We shall call this passage the story of THE ACADIAN EXILES. A sad day it was for the poor Acadians when
the armed soldiers drove them, at the point of
the bayonet, down to the seashore. Very sad
were they, likewise, while tossing upon the
ocean in the crowded transport vessels. But,
methinks, it must have been sadder still when
they were landed on the Long Wharf, in Boston,
and left to themselves on a foreign strand. Then, probably, they huddled together, and

<page 161>
140
grandfather's chair.
looked into one another's faces for the comfort
which was not there. Hitherto they had been
confined on board of separate vessels, so that
they could not tell whether their relatives and
friends were prisoners along with them. But now, at least, they could tell that many had been
left behind or transported to other regions.
Now, a desolate wife might be heard calling
for her husband. He, alas! had gone, she knew
not whither; or perhaps had fled into the woods
of Acadia, and had now returned to weep over
the ashes of their dwelling. An aged widow was crying out in a querulous, lamentable tone for her son, whose affectionate
toil had supported her for many a year. He was
not in the crowd of exiles; and what could this
aged widow do but sink down and die? Young
men and maidens, whose hearts had been torn
asunder by separation, had hoped, during the
voyage, to meet their beloved ones at its close.
Now they began to feel that they were sepa-
rated forever. And, perhaps, a lonesome little
girl, a golden-haired child of five years old, the
very picture of our little Alice, was weeping and
wailing for her mother, and found not a soul to
give her a kind word.
O, how many broken bonds of affection were
here! Country lost ! — friends lost ! — their
rural wealth of cottage, field, and herds all lost
together! Every tie between these poor exiles 
<page 162>
grandfather's chair.
141
and the world seemed to be cut off at once.
They must have regretted that they had not died
before their exile; for even the English would
not have been so pitiless as to deny them graves
in their native soil. The dead were happy; for
they were not exiles!While they thus stood upon the wharf, the cu-
riosity and inquisitiveness of the New England
people would naturally lead them into the midst
of the poor Acadians. Prying busybodies thrust
their heads into the circle wherever two or three
of the exiles were conversing together. How
puzzled did they look at the outlandish sound of
the French tongue! There were seen the New
England women, too. They had just come out
of their warm, safe homes, where everything
was regular and comfortable, and where their
husbands and children would be with them at
nightfall. Surely they could pity the wretched
wives and mothers of Acadia! Or did the sign
of the cross which the Acadians continually
made upon their breasts, and which was abhorred
by the descendants of the Puritans, — did that
sign exclude all pity?Among the spectators, too, was the noisy brood
of Boston school-boys, who came running, with
laughter and shouts, to gaze at this crowd of
oddly dressed foreigners. At first they danced
and capered around them, full of merriment and
mischief. But the despair of the Acadians soon 
<page 163>
142
grandfather's chair.
had its effect upon these thoughtless lads, and
melted them into tearful sympathy. At a little distance from the throng might be
seen the wealthy and pompous merchants whose
warehouses stood on Long Wharf. It was dif-
ficult to touch these rich men's hearts; for they
had all the comforts of the world at their com-
mand; and when they walked abroad their feel-
ings were seldom moved, except by the rough-
ness of the pavement irritating their gouty toes.
Leaning upon their gold-headed canes, they
watched the scene with an aspect of composure.
But let us hope they distributed some of their
superfluous coin among these hapless exiles to
purchase food and a night's lodging. After standing a long time at the end of the
wharf, gazing seaward, as if to catch a glimpse
of their lost Acadia, the strangers began to stray
into the town. They went, we will suppose, in parties and
groups, here a hundred, there a score, there ten,
there three or four, who possessed some bond of
unity among themselves. Here and there was
one, who, utterly desolate, stole away by him-
self, seeking no companionship. Whither did they go? I imagine them wan-
dering about the streets, telling the townspeople, in outlandish, unintelligible words, that no
earthly affliction ever equalled what had befallen
them. Man's brotherhood with man was suffi-

<page 164>
grandfather's chair.
143
cient to make the New Englanders understand
this language. The strangers wanted food. Some
of them sought hospitality at the doors of the
stately mansions which then stood in the vicin-
ity of Hanover Street and the North Square.
Others were applicants at the humble wooden
tenements, where dwelt the petty shopkeepers and mechanics. Pray Heaven that no family
in Boston turned one of these poor exiles from
their door! It would be a reproach upon New
England — a crime worthy of heavy retribution
— if the aged women and children, or even the
strong men, were allowed to feel the pinch of
hunger. Perhaps some of the Acadians, in their aimless
wanderings through the town, found themselves
near a large brick edifice, which was fenced in
from the street by an iron railing, wrought with
fantastic figures. They saw a flight of red
freestone steps ascending to a portal, above
which was a balcony and balustrade. Misery
and desolation give men the right of free pas-
sage everywhere. Let us suppose, then, that
they mounted the flight of steps and passed into
the Province House. Making their way into
one of the apartments, they beheld a richly-clad
gentleman, seated in a stately chair, with gilding
upon the carved work of its back, and a gilded
lion's head at the summit. This was Governor
Shirley, meditating upon matters of war and
state, in Grandfather's chair! 
<page 165>
141
grandfather's chair.
If such an incident did happen, Shirley, re-
flecting what a ruin of peaceful and humble
hopes had been wrought by the cold policy of
the statesman and the iron hand of the warrior,
might have drawn a deep moral from it. It
should have taught him that the poor man's
hearth is sacred, and that armies and nations
have no right to violate it. It should have made
him feel that England's triumph and increased
dominion could not compensate to mankind nor atone to Heaven for the ashes of a single
Acadian cottage. But it is not thus that states-
men and warriors moralize.
'Grandfather,' cried Laurence, with emotion
trembling in his voice, "did iron-hearted War
itself ever do so hard and cruel a thing as this
before?'
'You have read in history, Laurence, of whole
regions wantonly laid waste," said Grandfather.
"In the removal of the Acadians, the troops were
guilty of no cruelty or outrage, except what was
inseparable from the measure." Little Alice, whose eyes had all along been
brimming full of tears, now burst forth a-sobbing;
for Grandfather had touched her sympathies more
than he intended.
'To think of a whole people homeless in
the world!" said Clara, with moistened eyes.
"There never was anything so sad!'
'It was their own fault!" cried Charley, ener-

<page 166>
grandfather's chair.
getically. "Why did not they fight for the
country where they were born? Then, if the
worst had happened to them, they could only
have been killed and buried there. They would
not have been exiles then!'
'Certainly, their lot was as hard as death," said Grandfather. "All that could be done for
them in the English provinces, was to send
them to the almshouses, or bind them out to
taskmasters. And this was the fate of per-
sons who had possessed a comfortable property
in their native country. Some of them found
means to embark for France; but though it was
the land of their forefathers, it must have been
a foreign land to them. Those who remained
behind always cherished a belief that the King of France would never make peace with Eng-
land till his poor Acadians were restored their
country and their homes.'
'And did he?" inquired Clara.
'Alas, my dear Clara," said Grandfather, "it
is improbable that the slightest whisper of the
woes of Acadia ever reached the ears of Louis
the Fifteenth. The exiles grew old in the Brit-
ish provinces, and never saw Acadia again.
Their descendants remain among us to this day.
They have forgotten the language of their an-
cestors, and probably retain no tradition of their
misfortunes. But, methinks, if I were an Ameri-
10

<page 167>
146
grandfather's chair.
can poet, I would choose Acadia for the subject
of my song." Since Grandfather first spoke these words, the
most famous of American poets has drawn sweet
tears from all of us by his beautiful poem of
Evangeline. And now, having thrown a gentle gloom around
the Thanksgiving fireside by a story that made
the children feel the blessing of a secure and
peaceful hearth, Grandfather put off the other
events of the old French war till the next
evening.

<page 168>
grandfather's chair.
147
CHAPTER IX.
In the twilight of the succeeding eve, when
the red beams of the fire were dancing upon the
wall, the children besought Grandfather to tell
them what had next happened to the old chair.
"Our chair," said Grandfather, "stood all this
time in the Province House. But Governor Shir-
ley had seldom an opportunity to repose within its
arms. He was leading his troops through the
forest, or sailing in a flat-boat on Lake Ontario,
or sleeping in his tent, while the awful cataract
of Niagara sent its roar through his dreams. At
one period, in the early part of the war, Shirley
had the chief command of all the king's forces
in America.'
'Did his young wife go with him to the war?" asked Clara.
'I rather imagine," replied Grandfather, "that
she remained in Boston. This lady, I suppose,
had our chair all to herself, and used to sit in
it during those brief intervals when a young
Frenchwoman can be quiet enough to sit in a
chair. The people of Massachusetts were never
fond of Governor Shirley's young French wife.
They had a suspicion that she betrayed the mili-
tary plans of the English to the generals of the
French armies.'
'And was it true?" inquired Clara.
"Probably not," said Grandfather. "But the 
<page 169>
148
grandfather's chair.
mere suspicion did Shirley a great deal of harm.
Partly, perhaps, for this reason, but much more
on account of his inefficiency as a general, he
was deprived of his command in 1756, and re-
called to England. He never afterwards made
any figure in public life." As Grandfather's chair had no locomotive prop-
erties, and did not even run on castors, it cannot be supposed to have marched in person to the old French war. But Grandfather delayed its mo-
mentous history while he touched briefly upon
some of the bloody battles, sieges, and onslaughts,
the tidings of which kept continually coming to
the ears of the old inhabitants of Boston. The
woods of the north were populous with fighting
men. All the Indian tribes uplifted their toma-
hawks, and took part either with the French or
English. The rattle of musketry and roar of
cannon disturbed the ancient quiet of the forest,
and actually drove the bears and other wild beasts
to the more cultivated portion of the country in
the vicinity of the seaports. The children felt
as if they were transported back to those forgot-
ten times, and that the couriers from the army,
with the news of a battle lost or won, might
even now be heard galloping through the streets.
Grandfather told them about the battle of Lake
George in 1755, when the gallant Colonel Wil-
liams, a Massachusetts officer, was slain, with
many of his countrymen. But General Johnson 
<page 170>
GRANDFATHER S CHAIR.
149
and General Lyman, with their army, drove back
the enemy and mortally wounded the French
leader, who was called the Baron Dieskau. A
gold watch, pilfered from the poor baron, is still
in existence, and still marks each moment of
time without complaining of weariness, although
its hands have been in motion ever since the hour
of battle. In the first years of the war there were many
disasters on the English side. Among these was
the loss of Fort Oswego in 1756, and of Fort
William Henry in the following year. But the
greatest misfortune that befell the English dur-
ing the whole war was the repulse of General
Abercrombie, with his army, from the ramparts
of Ticonderoga, in 1758. He attempted to storm
the walls; but a terrible conflict ensued, in which
more than two thousand Englishmen and New
Englanders were killed or wounded. The slain
soldiers now lie buried around that ancient for-
tress. When the plough passes over the soil, it
turns up here and there a mouldering bone. Up to this period, none of the English generals
had shown any military talent. Shirley, the Earl
of Loudon, and General Abercrombie had each
held the chief command at different times; but
not one of them had won a single important
triumph for the British arms. This ill success
was not owing to the want of means; for, in
1758, General Abercrombie had fifty thousand 
<page 171>
150
grandfather's chair.
soldiers under his command. But the French
general, the famous Marquis de Montcalm, pos-
sessed a great genius for war, and had something
within him that taught him how battles were to
be won. At length, in 1759, Sir Jeffrey Amherst was
appointed commander-in-chief of all the British
forces in America. He was a man of ability and a skilful soldier. A plan was now formed
for accomplishing that object which had so long
been the darling wish of the New Engla/iders,
and which their fathers had so many times
attempted. This was the conquest of Canada. Three separate armies were to enter Canada from different quarters. One of the three, com-
manded by General Prideaux, was to embark on
Lake Ontario and proceed to Montreal. The
second, at the head of which was Sir Jeffrey
Amherst himself, was destined to reach the River
St. Lawrence, by the way of Lake Champlain,
and then go down the river to meet the third
army. This last, led by General Wolfe, was to
enter the St. Lawrence from the sea and ascend
the river to Quebec. It is to Wolfe and his
army that England owes one of the most splen-
did triumphs ever written in her history. Grandfather described the siege of Quebec,
and told how Wolfe led his soldiers up a rugged
and lofty precipice, that rose from the shore of
the river to the plain on which the city stood. 
<page 172>
grandfather's chair.
151
This bold adventure was achieved in the dark-
ness of night. At daybreak tidings were carried
to the Marquis de Montcalm that the English
army was waiting to give him battle on the plains
of Abraham. This brave French general ordered
his drums to strike up, and immediately marched
to encounter Wolfe. He marched to his own death. The battle
was the most fierce and terrible that had ever
been fought in America. General Wolfe was at
the head of his soldiers, and, while encouraging
them onward, received a mortal wound. He
reclined against a stone in the agonies of death;
but it seemed as if his spirit could not pass away while the fight yet raged so doubtfully. Sud-
denly a shout came pealing across the battle-
field — ' They flee! they flee!" and, for a
moment, Wolfe lifted his languid head. "Who
flee?" he inquired. "The French," replied an officer. "Then I die satisfied!" said Wolfe, and
expired in the arms of victory.
'If ever a warrior's death were glorious,
Wolfe's was so!' said Grandfather; and his eye
kindled, though he was a man of peaceful
thoughts and gentle spirit. "His lifeblood
streamed to baptize the soil which he had added
to the dominion of Britain. His dying breath
was mingled with his army's shout of victory!'
'Oh, it was a good death to die!" cried
Charley, with glistening eyes. "Was it not a
good death, Laurence?'

<page 173>
152 grandfather's chair.
Laurence made no reply; for his heart burned
within him, as the picture of Wolfe, dying on
the blood-stained field of victory, arose to his
imagination; and yet he had a deep inward
consciousness that, after all, there was a truer
glory than could thus be won.
"There were other battles in Canada after
Wolfe's victory," resumed Grandfather; "but we
may consider the old French war as having ter-
minated with this great event. The treaty of
peace, however, was not signed until 1763. The
terms of the treaty were very disadvantageous
to the French; for all Canada, and all Acadia,
and the island of Cape Breton, in short, all the
territories that France and England had been
fighting about for nearly a hundred years,—
were surrendered to the English.'
'So, now, at last," said Laurence, "New Eng-
land had gained her wish. Canada was taken!'
'And now there was nobody to fight with but the Indians," said Charley. Grandfather mentioned two other important
events. The first was the great fire of Boston in 1760, when the glare from nearly three
hundred buildings, all in flames at once, shone
through the windows of the Province House,
and threw a fierce lustre upon the gilded foliage
and lion's head of our old chair. The second
event was the proclamation, in the same year, of
George the Third as King of Great Britain. 
<page 174>
grandfather's chair.
153
The blast of the trumpet sounded from the bal-
cony of the Town House, and awoke the echoes
far and wide, as if to challenge all mankind to
dispute King George's title. Seven times, as the successive monarchs of
Britain ascended the throne, the trumpet-peal of
proclamation had been heard by those who sat in
our venerable chair. But when the next king
put on his father's crown, no trumpet-peal pro-
claimed it to New England. Long before that
day America had shaken off the royal govern-
ment. 
<page 175>
154 grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER X.
Now that Grandfather had fought through the
old French war, in which our chair made no
very distinguished figure, he thought it high time to tell the children some of the more pri-
vate history of that praiseworthy old piece of
furniture.
"In 1757," said Grandfather, "after Shirley had
been summoned to England, Thomas Pownall
was appointed governor of Massachusetts. He
was a gay and fashionable English gentleman,
who had spent much of his life in London, but
had a considerable acquaintance with America.
The new governor appears to have taken no
active part in the war that was going on; al-
though, at one period, he talked of marching
against the enemy at the head of his company
of cadets. But, on the whole, he probably con-
cluded that it was more befitting a governor to
remain quietly in our chair, reading the news-
papers and official documents.'
'Did the people like Pownall?" asked Char-
ley.'
'They found no fault with him," replied
Grandfather. "It was no time to quarrel with
the governor when the utmost harmony was
required in order to defend the country against
the French. But Pownall did not remain long
in Massachusetts. In 1759 he was sent to be 
<page 176>
grandfather's chair.
155
governor of South Carolina. In thus exchang-
ing one government for another, I suppose he felt
no regret, except at the necessity of leaving
Grandfather's chair behind him.'
'He might have taken it to South Carolina," observed Clara.
"It appears to me," said Laurence, giving the
rein to his fancy, "that the fate of this ancient
chair was, somehow or other, mysteriously con-
nected with the fortunes of old Massachusetts.
If Governor Pownall had put it aboard the vessel
in which he sailed for South Carolina, she would
probably have lain wind-bound in Bostpn harbor.
It was ordained that the chair should not be
taken away. Don't you think so, Grandfather?'
'It was kept here for Grandfather and me to
sit in together," said little Alice, "and for Grand-
father to tell stories about.'
'And Grandfather is very glad of such a com-
panion and such a theme," said the old gentle-
man, with a smile. "Well, Laurence, if our
oaken chair, like the wooden palladium of Troy,
was connected with the country's fate, yet there
appears to have been no supernatural obstacle to
its removal from the Province House. In 1760 Sir Francis Bernard, who had been governor of
New Jersey, was appointed to the same office in
Massachusetts. He looked at the old chair, and
thought it quite too shabby to keep company
with a new set of mahogany chairs and an aris-

<page 177>
156
GRANDFATHER S CHAIR.
tocratic sofa which had just arrived from Lon-
don. He therefore ordered it to be put away in
the garret."
The children were loud in their exclamations
against this irreverent conduct of Sir Francis
Bernard. But Grandfather defended him as
well as he could. He observed that it was then
thirty years since the chair had been beautified
by Governor Belcher. Most of the gilding was
worn off by the frequent scourings which it had
undergone beneath the hands of a black slave.
The damask cushion, once so splendid, was now
squeezed out of all shape, and absolutely in tat-
ters, so many were the ponderous gentlemen who
had deposited their weight upon it during these
thirty years. Moreover, at a council held by the Earl of
Loudon with the governors of New England in
1757, his lordship, in a moment of passion, had
kicked over the chair with his military boot. By
this unprovoked and unjustifiable act, our vene-
rable friend had suffered a fracture of one of its
rungs.
'But,' said Grandfather, "our chair, after all,
was not destined to spend the remainder of its
days in the inglorious obscurity of a garret.
Thomas Hutchinson, lieutenant-governor of the
province, was told of Sir Francis Bernard's de-
sign. This gentleman was more familiar with
the history of New England than any other man 
<page 178>
grandfather's chair.
157
alive. He knew all the adventures and vicis-
situdes through which the old chair had passed,
and could have told as accurately as your own
Grandfather who were the personages that had
occupied it. Often, while visiting at the Prov-
ince House, he had eyed the chair with admi-
ration, and felt a longing desire to become the
possessor of it. He now waited upon Sir Fran-
cis Bernard, and easily obtained leave to carry it
home.'
'And I hope," said Clara, "he had it varnished
and gilded anew.'
'No,' answered Grandfather. "What Mr.
Hutchinson desired was, to restore the chair as
much as possible to its original aspect, such as
it had appeared when it was first made out of
the Earl of Lincoln's oak-tree. For this purpose
he ordered it to be well scoured with soap and
sand and polished with wax, and then provided
it with a substantial leather cushion. When all
was completed to his mind, he sat down in the
old chair, and began to write his History of Mas-
sachusetts.'
'Oh, that was a bright thought in Mr. Hutch-
inson!" exclaimed Laurence. 'And, no doubt the dim figures of the former possessors of the
chair flitted around him as he wrote, and in-
spired him with a knowledge of all that they
had done and suffered while on earth.'
'Why, my dear Laurence," replied Grand-

<page 179>
158
grandfather's chair.
father, smiling, "if Mr. Hutchinson was favored
with any such extraordinary inspiration, he made
but a poor use of it in his history; for a duller
piece of composition never came from any man's
pen. However, he was accurate, at least, though
far from possessing the brilliancy or philosophy
of Mr. Bancroft.'
'But, if Hutchinson knew the history of the
chair," rejoined Laurence, "his heart must have
been stirred by it.'
'It must, indeed," said Grandfather. "It would
be entertaining and instructive, at the present
day, to imagine what were Mr. Hutchinson's
thoughts as he looked back upon the long vista
of events with which this chair was so remark-
ably connected." And Grandfather allowed his fancy to shape
out an image of Lieutenant-Governor Hutchin-
son, sitting in an evening revery by his fireside,
and meditating on the changes that had slowly
passed around the chair. A devoted monarchist, Hutchinson would
heave no sigh for the subversion of the original
republican government, the purest that the world
had seen, with which the colony began its exist-
ence. While reverencing the grim and stern old
Puritans as the founders of his native land, he
would not wish to recall them from their graves,
nor to awaken again that king-resisting spirit which he imagined to be laid asleep with them

<page 180>
grandfather's chair.
159
for ever. Winthrop, Dudley, Bellingham, Endi-
cott, Leverett, and Bradstreet! All these had
had their day. Ages might come and go, but
never again would the people's suffrages place a
republican governor in their ancient chair of
State!
Coming down to the epoch of the second char-
ter, Hutchinson thought of the ship-carpenter
Phipps, springing from the lowest of the people and attaining to the loftiest station in the land.
But he smiled to perceive that this governor's
example would awaken no turbulent ambition in
the lower orders; for it was a king's gracious boon
alone that made the ship-carpenter a ruler. Hutch-
inson rejoiced to mark the gradual growth of an
aristocratic class, to whom the common people,
as in duty bound, were learning humbly to re-
sign the honors, emoluments, and authority of
state. He saw — or else deceived himself, —
that, throughout this epoch, the people's dispo-
sition to self-government had been growing
weaker through long disuse, and now existed
only as a faint traditionary feeling. The lieutenant-governor's reverie had now
come down to the period at which he himself
was sitting in the historic chair. He endeavored
to throw his glance forward over the coming
years. There, probably, he saw visions of hered-
itary rank for himself and other aristocratic colo-
nists. He saw the fertile fields of New England,

<page 181>
160
grandfather's chair.
portioned out among a few great landholders,
and descending by entail from generation to
generation. He saw the people a race of ten-
antry, dependent on their lords. He saw stars,
garters, coronets, and castles.
'But,' added Grandfather, turning to Laurence,
"the lieutenant-governor's castles were built no-
where but among the red embers of the fire before which he was sitting. And, just as he
had constructed a baronial residence for himself
and his posterity, the fire rolled down upon the
hearth and crumbled it to ashes!"
Grandfather now looked at his watch, which
hung within a beautiful little ebony temple, supported by four Ionic columns. He then laid
his hand on the golden locks of little Alice,
whose head had sunk down upon the arm of
our illustrious chair.
'To bed, to bed, dear child!" said he. "Grand-
father has put you to sleep, already, by his stories
about these Famous Old People.'

<page 182>
GRANDFATHER'S CHAIR.
PART III.
CHAPTER I.
On the evening of New Year's day Grand-
father was walking to and fro across the carpet,
listening to the rain which beat hard against the
curtained windows. The riotous blast shook
the casement as if a strong man were striving
to force his entrance into the comfortable room.
With every puff of the wind the fire leaped
upward from the hearth, laughing and rejoicing
at the shrieks of the wintry storm.
Meanwhile, Grandfather's chair stood in its
customary place by the fireside. The bright
blaze gleamed upon the fantastic figures of its
oaken back, and shone through the open-work,
so that a complete pattern was thrown upon the
opposite side of the room. Sometimes, for a
moment or two, the shadow remained immova-
ble, as if it were painted on the wall. Then all
at once it began to quiver, and leap, and dance,
11

<page 183>
162 grandfather's chair.
with a frisky motion. Anon, seeming to remem-
ber that these antics were unworthy of such a
dignified and venerable chair, it suddenly stood
still. But soon it began to dance anew.
"Only see how Grandfather's chair is dancing!" cried little Alice. And she ran to the wall and tried to catch hold
of the flickering shadow; for, to children of five
years old, a shadow seems almost as real as a
substance.
'I wish," said Clara, "Grandfather would sit
down in the chair and finish its history." If the children had been looking at Grand-
father, they would have noticed that he paused
in his walk across the room when Clara made
this remark. The kind old gentleman was ready
and willing to resume his stories of departed
times. But he had resolved to wait till his audi-
tors should request him to proceed, in order that
they might find the instructive history of the
chair a pleasure, and not a task.
'Grandfather,' said Charley, "I am tired to
death of this dismal rain and of hearing the
wind roar in the chimney. I have had no good
time all day. It would be better to hear stories
about the chair than to sit doing nothing and
thinking of nothing." To say the truth, our friend Charley was very
much out of humor with the storm, because it
had kept him all day within doors, and hindered 
<page 184>
grandfather's chair.
163
him from making a trial of a splendid sled, which
Grandfather had given him for a New Year's
gift. As all sleds, nowadays, must have a
name, the one in question had been honored
with the title of Grandfather's Chair, which was
painted in golden letters on each of the sides.
Charley greatly admired the construction of the
new vehicle, and felt certain that it would out-
strip any other sled that ever dashed adown the
long slopes of the Common. As for Laurence, he happened to be thinking,
just atthis moment, about the history of the
chair. Kind old Grandfather had made him a
present of a volume of engraved portraits, rep-
resenting the features of eminent and famous
people of all countries. Among them Laurence
found several who had formerly occupied our
chair or been connected with its adventures.
While Grandfather walked to and fro across the
room, the imaginative boy was gazing at the
historic chair. He endeavored to summon up
the portraits which he had seen in his volume,
and to place them, like living figures, in the
empty seat.
'The old chair has begun another year of its
existence, to-day," said Laurence. "We must
make haste, or it will have a new history to be
told before we finish the old one.'
'Yes, my children," replied Grandfather, with
a smile and a sigh, "another year has been added 
<page 185>
164
grandfather's chair.
to those of the two centuries and upward which
have passed since the Lady Arbella brought this
chair over from England. It is three times as
old as your Grandfather; but a year makes no
impression on its oaken frame, while it bends
the old man nearer and nearer to the earth; so
let me go on with my stories while I may.'
Accordingly, Grandfather came to the fireside and seated himself in the venerable chair. The
lion's head looked down with a grimly good-natured aspect as the children clustered around
the old gentleman's knees. It almost seemed as
if a real lion were peeping over the back of the
chair, and smiling at the group of auditors with
a sort of lion-like complaisance. Little Alice,
whose fancy often inspired her with singular
ideas, exclaimed that the lion's head was nodding
at her, and that it looked as if it were going to
open its wide jaws and tell a story.
But, as the lion's head appeared to be in no
haste to speak, and as there was no record or
tradition of its having spoken during the whole
existence of the chair, Grandfather did not con-
sider it worth while to wait.

<page 186>
grandfather's chair.
165
CHAPTER II.
'Charley, my boy," said Grandfather, "do
you remember who was the last occupant of the
chair?'
'It was Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson,' an-
swered Charley. "Sir Francis Bernard, the new
governor, had given him the chair, instead of
putting it away in the garret of the Province
House. And when we took leave of Hutchin-
son he was sitting by his fireside, and thinking
of the past adventures of the chair and of what
was to come.'
'Very well," said Grandfather; "and you
recollect that this was in 1763, or thereabouts,
at the close of the old French war. Now, that
you may fully comprehend the remaining adven-
tures of the chair, I must make some brief re-
marks on the situation and character of the New
England colonies at this period."
So Grandfather spoke of the earnest loyalty
of our fathers during the old French war, and
after the conquest of Canada had brought that
war to a triumphant close. The people loved and reverenced the king of
England, even more than if the ocean had not
rolled its waves between him and them; for, at
the distance of three thousand miles, they could
not discover his bad qualities and imperfections.
Their love was increased by the dangers which 
<page 187>
166
grandfather's chair.
they had encountered in order to heighten his
glory and extend his dominion. Throughout the
war the American colonists had fought side by
side with the soldiers of Old England; and
nearly thirty thousand young men had laid down
their lives for the honor of King George. And
the survivors loved him the better because they
had done and suffered so much for his sake.
But, there were some circumstances that
caused America to feel more independent of
England than at an earlier period. Canada and
Acadia had now become British provinces; and
our fathers were no longer afraid of the bands of
French and Indians who used to assault them in
old times. For a century and a half this had
been the great terror of New England. Now the old French soldier was driven from the north
forever. And even had it been otherwise, the
English colonies were growing so populous and
powerful, that they might have felt fully able to
protect themselves without any help from Eng-
land. There were thoughtful and sagacious men,
who began to doubt whether a great country
like America would always be content to remain
under the government of an island three thou-
sand miles away. This was the more doubtful,
because the English Parliament had long ago
made laws which were intended to be very ben-
eficial to England at the expense of America. 
<page 188>
grandfather's chair.
167
By these laws the colonists were forbidden to
manufacture articles for their own use, or to
carry on trade with any nation but the English.
'Now,' continued Grandfather, "if King George
the Third and his counsellors had considered
these things wisely, they would have taken an-
other course than they did. But when they
saw how rich and populous the colonies had
grown, their first thought was how they might
make more profit out of them than heretofore.
England was enormously in debt at the close
of the old French war; and it was pretended that this debt had been contracted for the defence
of the American colonies, and that therefore a
part of it ought to be paid by them.'
'Why, this was nonsense,' exclaimed Charley;
'did not our fathers spend their lives, and their
money too, to get Canada for King George?'
'True, they did," said Grandfather; "and they
told the English rulers so. But the king and
his ministers would not listen to good advice.
In 1765 the British Parliament passed a Stamp
Act.'
'What was that?" inquired Charley.
'The Stamp Act,' replied Grandfather, "was a
law by which all deeds, bonds, and other papers
of the same kind were ordered to be marked
with the king's stamp; and without this mark they were declared illegal and void. Now, in
order to get a blank sheet of paper with the 
<page 189>
168
grandfather's chair.
king's stamp upon it, people were obliged to pay
threepence more than the actual value of the
paper. And this extra sum of threepence was
a tax, and was to be paid into the king's
treasury.'
'I am sure threepence was not worth quar-
relling about!" remarked Clara.
4It was not for threepence, nor for any amount
of money, that America quarrelled with England," replied Grandfather; "it was for a great principle.
The colonists were determined not to be taxed except by their own representatives. They said
that neither the king and Parliament, nor any
other power on earth, had a right to take their
money out of their pockets unless they freely
gave it. And, rather than pay threepence when
it was unjustly demanded, they resolved to sacri-
fice all the wealth of the country, and their lives
along with it. They therefore made a most
stubborn resistance to the Stamp Act.'
'That was noble!" exclaimed Laurence. "I
understand how it was. If they had quietly
paid the tax of threepence, they would have
ceased to be freemen, and would have become
tributaries of England. And so they contended
about a great question of right and wrong, and
put everything at stake for it.'
'You are right, Laurence," said Grandfather;
'and it was really amazing and terrible to see
what a change came over the aspect of the

<page 190>


<page 191>

<page 192>
grandfather's chair. 169
people, the moment the English Parliament had
passed this oppressive act. The former history
of our chair, my children, has given you some
idea of what a harsh, unyielding, stern set of
men the old Puritans were. For a good many
years back, however, it had seemed as if these
characteristics were disappearing. But no sooner
did England offer wrong to the colonies than
the descendants of the early settlers proved
that they had the same kind of temper as their
forefathers. The moment before, New England
appeared like a humble and loyal subject of the
crown; the next instant she showed the grim,
dark features of an old king-resisting Puritan." Grandfather spoke briefly of the public meas-
ures that were taken in opposition to the Stamp
Act. As this law affected all the American colo-
nies alike, it naturally led them to think of con-
sulting together in order to procure its repeal.
For this purpose the legislature of Massachu-
setts proposed that delegates from every colony
should meet in Congress. Accordingly nine colo-
nies, both northern and southern, sent delegates
to the city of New York.
"And did they consult about going to war with
England?" asked Charley.
"No, Charley," answered Grandfather; "a great
deal of talking was yet to be done before Eng-
land and America could come to blows. The
Congress stated the rights and grievances of 
<page 193>
170
grandfather's chair.
the colonists. They sent a humble petition to
the king, and a memorial to the Parliament, be-
seeching that the Stamp Act might be repealed.
This was all that the delegates had it in their
power to do.'
'They might as well have staid at home, then," said Charley.
"By no means," replied Grandfather. "It was
a most important and memorable event — this
first coming together of the American people by
their representatives from the north and south.
If England had been wise, she would have trem-
bled at the first word that was spoken in such an
assembly!'
These remonstrances and petitions, as Grand-
father observed, were the work of grave, thought-
ful, and prudent men. Meantime the young and
hot-headed people went to work in their own
way. It is probable that the petitions of Con-
gress would have had little or no effect on the
British statesmen if the violent deeds of the
American people had not shown how much
excited the people were. Liberty Tree was
soon heard of in England.
'What was Liberty Tree?" inquired Clara.
'It was an old elm tree,' answered Grandfather,
"which stood near the corner of Essex Street,
opposite the Boylston Market. Under the spread-
ing branches of this great tree the people used to
assemble whenever they wished to express their 
<page 194>
grandfather's chair.
171
feelings and opinions. Thus, after a while, it
seemed as if the liberty of the country was con-
nected with Liberty Tree.'
'It was glorious fruit for a tree to bear," re-
marked Laurence.
"It bore strange fruit, sometimes," said Grand-
father. "One morning in August, 1765, two
figures were found hanging on the sturdy
branches of Liberty Tree. They were dressed in
square-skirted coats and small-clothes; and, as
their wigs hung down over their faces, they
looked like real men. One was intended to
represent the Earl of Bute, who was supposed to
have advised the king to tax America. The
other was meant for the effigy of Andrew Oliver,
a gentleman belonging to one of the most re-
spectable families in Massachusetts.'
'What harm had he done?' inquired Charley.
"The king had appointed him to be distrib-
utor of the stamps," answered Grandfather. "Mr.
Oliver would have made a great deal of money
by this business. But the people frightened him
so much by hanging him in effigy, and after-
wards by breaking into his house, that he prom-
ised to have nothing to do with the stamps.
And all the king's friends throughout America
were compelled to make the same promise.'

<page 195>
I
172 grandfather's chair.CHAPTER in.
'Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson,' con-
tinued Grandfather, "now began to be unquiet
in our old chair. He had formerly been much
respected and beloved by the people, and had
often proved himself a friend to their interests.
But the time was come when he could not be a
friend to the people without ceasing to be a
friend to the king. It was pretty generally un-
derstood that Hutchinson would act according
to the king's wishes, right or wrong, like most
of the other gentlemen who held offices under
the crown. Besides, as he was brother-in-law of
Andrew Oliver, the people now felt a particular
dislike to him.' ^
'I should think," said Laurence, "as Mr.
Hutchinson had written the history of our Puri-
tan forefathers, he would have known what the
temper of the people was, and so have taken
care not to wrong them.'
'He trusted in the might of the King of Eng-
land,' replied Grandfather, "and thought himself
safe under the shelter of the throne. If no dis-
pute had arisen between the king and the people,
Hutchinson would have had the character of a
wise, good, and patriotic magistrate. But, from
the time that he took part against the rights of
his country, the people's love and respect were
turned to scorn and hatred, and he never had
another hour of peace.'

<page 196>
grandfather's chair.
173
In order to show what a fierce and dangerous
spirit was now aroused among the inhabitants,
Grandfather related a passage from history which
we shall call THE HUTCHINSON MOB. On the evening of the 26th of August,
1765, a bonfire was kindled in King Street. It
flamed high upward, and threw a ruddy light
over the front of the Town House, on which was
displayed a carved representation of the royal
arms. The gilded vane of the cupola glittered
in the blaze. The kindling of this bonfire was
the well-known signal for the populace of Bos-
ton to assemble in the street. Before the tar-barrels, of which the bonfire
was made, were half burned out, a great crowd
had come together. They were chiefly laborers
and seafaring men, together with many young
apprentices, and all those idle people about town
who are ready for any kind of mischief. Doubt-
less some school-boys were among them. While these rough figures stood round the
blazing bonfire, you might hear them speaking
bitter words against the high officers of the
province. Governor Bernard, Hutchinson, Oliver,
Storey, Hallowell, and other men whom King
George delighted to honor, were reviled as trai-
tors to the country. Now and then, perhaps, an
officer of the crown passed along the street, 
<page 197>
174
grandfather's chair.
wearing the gold-laced hat, white wig, and em-
broidered waistcoat which were the fashion of
the day. But when the people beheld him they
set up a wild and angry howl; and their faces
had an evil aspect, which was made more terri-
ble by the flickering blaze of the bonfire.
"I should like to throw the traitor right into
that blaze!" perhaps one fierce rioter would say.
'Yes; and all his brethren too!" another
might reply; "and the governor and old Tommy
Hutchinson into the hottest of it!'
'And the Earl of Bute along with them,' mut-
tered a third; "and burn the whole pack of
them under King George's nose! No matter if
it singed him!"
Some such expressions as these, either shouted
aloud or muttered under the breath, were doubt-
less heard in King Street. The mob, mean-
while, were growing fiercer and fiercer, and
seemed ready even to set the town on fire for
the sake of burning the king's friends out of
house and home. And yet, angry as they were,
they sometimes broke into a loud roar of laugh-
ter, as if mischief and destruction were their
sport. But we must now leave the rioters for a time,
and take a peep into the lieutenant-governor's
splendid mansion. It was a large brick house,
decorated with Ionic pilasters, and stood in Gar-
den Court Street, near the North Square. 
<page 198>
GRANDFATHERS CHAIR.
175
While the angry mob in King Street were
shouting his name, Lieutenant-Governor Hutch-
inson sat quietly in Grandfather's chair, unsus-
picious of the evil that was about to fall upon his
head. His beloved family were in the room with
him. He had thrown off his embroidered coat
and powdered wig, and had on a loose-flowing
gown and purple-velvet cap. He had likewise
laid aside the cares of state and all the thoughts
that had wearied and perplexed him throughout
the day. Perhaps, in the enjoyment of his home, he had
forgotten all about the Stamp Act, and scarcely
remembered that there was a king, across the
ocean, who had resolved to make tributaries of
the New Englanders. Possibly, too, he had for-
gotten his own ambition, and would not have
exchanged his situation, at that moment, to be
governor, or even a lord. The wax candles were now lighted, and
showed a handsome room, well provided with
rich furniture. On the walls hung the pictures
of Hutchinson's ancestors, who had been emi-
nent men in their day, and were honorably
remembered in the history of the country. Ev-
ery object served to mark the residence of a rich,
aristocratic gentleman, who held himself high
above the common people, and could have noth-
ing to fear from them. In a corner of the room,
thrown carelessly upon a chair, were the scarlet 
<page 199>
176 grandfather's chatr.
robes of the chief justice. This high office, as
well as those of lieutenant-governor, counsellor,
and judge of probate, was filled by Hutchinson. Who or what could disturb the domestic quiet
of such a great and powerful personage as now
sat in Grandfather's chair?
The lieutenant-governor's favorite daughter
sat by his side. She leaned on the arm of our
great chair, and looked up affectionately into her
father's face, rejoicing to perceive that a quiet
smile was on his lips. But suddenly a shade
came across her countenance. She seemed to
listen attentively, as if to catch a distant sound.
'What is the matter, my child?" inquired
Hutchinson. 'Father, do not you hear a tumult
in the streets?" said she. The lieutenant-governor listened. But his
ears were duller than those of his daughter; he
could hear nothing more terrible than the sound
of a summer breeze, sighing among the tops of
the elm-trees.
'No, foolish child!" he replied, playfully pat-
ting her cheek. "There is no tumult. Our
Boston mobs are satisfied with what mischief
they have already done. The king's friends
need not tremble."
So Hutchinson resumed his pleasant and peace-
ful meditations, and again forgot that there were
any troubles in the world. But his family were
alarmed, and could not help straining their ears 
<page 200>
grandfather's chair.
177
to catch the slightest sound. More and more
distinctly they heard shouts, and then the tramp-
ling of many feet. While they were listening,
one of the neighbors rushed breathless into the
room.
"A mob ! — a terrible mob!" cried he: 'they
have broken into Mr. Storey's house, and into
Mr. Hallowell's. and have made themselves
drunk with the liquors in his cellar; and now
they are coming hither, as wild as so many
tigers. Flee, lieutenant-governor, for your life!
for your life!'
'Father, dear father, make haste!" shrieked
his children. But Hutchinson would not hearken to them.
He was an old lawyer; and he could not realize
that the people would do anything so utterly law-
less as to assault him in his peaceful home. He
was one of King George's chief officers; and it
would be an insult and outrage upon the king
himself if the lieutenant-governor should suffer
any wrong.
'Have no fears on my account," said he; 'I
am perfectly safe. The king's name shall be
my protection."
Yet he bade his family retire into one of the
neighboring houses. His daughter would have
remained; but he forced her away. The huzzas and riotous uproar of the mob
were now heard, close at hand. The sound was
12

<page 201>
178
grandfather's chair.
terrible, and struck Hutchinson with the same
sort of dread as if an enraged wild beast had
broken loose and were roaring for its prey. He
crept softly to the window. There he beheld
an immense concourse of people, filling all the
street and rolling onward to his house. It was
like a tempestuous flood, that had swelled beyond
its bounds and would sweep everything before
it. Hutchinson trembled; he felt, at that mo-
ment, that the wrath of the people was a thou-
sand-fold more terrible than the wrath of a king. That was a moment when a loyalist and an
aristocrat like Hutchinson might have learned
how powerless are kings, nobles, and great men,
when the low and humble range themselves
against them. King George could do nothing
for his servant now. Had King George been
there he could have done nothing for himself.
If Hutchinson had understood this lesson, and
remembered it, he need not, in after years, have
been an exile from his native country, nor finally
have laid his bones in a distant land. There was now a rush against the doors of
the house. The people sent up a hoarse cry.
At this instant the lieutenant-governor's daugh-
ter, whom he had supposed to be in a place of
safety, ran into the room and threw her arms
around him. She had returned by a private
entrance.
'Father, are you mad!' cried she. "Will the 
<page 202>
grandfather's chair.
179
king's name protect you now? Come with me,
or they will have your life.'
'True,' muttered Hutchinson to himself;
"what care these roarers for the name of king?
I must flee, or they will trample me down on the
door of my own dwelling!'
Hurrying away, he and his daughter made
their escape by the private passage at the mo-
ment when the rioters broke into the house.
The foremost of them rushed up the staircase,
and entered the room which Hutchinson had just
quitted. There they beheld our good old chair facing them with quiet dignity, while the lion's
head seemed to move its jaws in the unsteady
light of their torches. Perhaps the stately as-
pect of our venerable friend, which had stood
firm through a century and a half of trouble,
arrested them for an instant. But they were
thrust forward by those behind, and the chair lay
overthrown. Then began the work of destruction. The
carved and polished mahogany tables were shat-
tered with heavy clubs and hewn to splinters
with axes. The marble hearths and mantel-
pieces were broken. The volumes of Hutchinson's
library, so precious to a studious man, were torn
out of their covers, and the leaves sent flying
out of the windows. Manuscripts, containing
secrets of our country's history, which are now
lost forever, were scattered to the winds. 
<page 203>
180
grandfather's chair.
The old ancestral portraits, whose fixed coun-
tenances looked down on the wild scene, were
rent from the walls. The mob triumphed in
their downfall and destruction, as if these pic-
tures of Hutchinson's forefathers had committed
the same offences as their descendant. A tall
looking-glass, which had hitherto presented a
reflection of the enraged and drunken multitude,
was now smashed into a thousand fragments.
We gladly dismiss the scene from the mirror of
our fancy. Before morning dawned the walls of the
house were all that remained. The interior was
a dismal scene of ruin. A shower pattered in at
the broken windows; and when Hutchinson and
his family returned, they stood shivering in the
same room where the last evening had seen
them so peaceful and happy.
'Grandfather,' said Laurence, indignantly, 'if
the people acted in this manner, they were not
worthy of even so much liberty as the King of
England was willing to allow them.'
'It was a most unjustifiable act, like many
other popular movements at that time," replied
Grandfather. "But we must not decide against
the justice of the people's cause merely because
an excited mob was guilty of outrageous vio-
lence. Besides, all these things were done in
the first fury of resentment. Afterwards, the

<page 204>
grandfather's chair.
181
people grew more calm, and were more influ-
enced by the counsel of those wise and good
men who conducted them safely and gloriously
through the Revolution.'
Little Alice, with tears in her blue eyes, said
that she hoped the neighbors had not let Lieu-
tenant-Governor Hutchinson and his family be
homeless in the street, but had taken them into
their houses and been kind to them. Cousin
Clara, recollecting the perilous situation of our
beloved chair, inquired what had become of it.
"Nothing was heard of our chair for some
time afterwards," answered Grandfather. "One
day, in September, the same Andrew Oliver, of
whom I before told you, was summoned to
appear at high noon under Liberty Tree. This
was the strangest summons that had ever been
heard of; for it was issued in the name of the
whole people, who thus took upon themselves
the authority of a sovereign power. Mr. Oliver
dared not disobey. Accordingly, at the appointed
hour he went, much against his will, to Liberty
Tree." Here Charley interposed a remark that poor
Mr. Oliver found but little liberty under Liberty
Tree. Grandfather assented.
'It was a stormy day," continued he. "The
equinoctial gale blew violently, and scattered the
yellow leaves of Liberty Tree all along the street.
Mr. Oliver's wig was dripping with water-drops,

<page 205>
182
grandfather's chair.
and he probably looked haggard, disconsolate,
and humbled to the earth. Beneath the tree, in
Grandfather's chair, — our own venerable chair,
— sat Mr. Richard Dana, a justice of the peace.
He administered an oath to Mr. Oliver that he
would never have anything to do with distrib-
uting the stamps. A vast concourse of people
heard the oath, and shouted when it was taken.'
'There is something grand in this," said Lau-
rence. "I like it, because the people seem to
have acted with thoughtfulness and dignity; and
this proud gentleman, one of his Majesty's high
officers, was made to feel that King George could
not protect him in doing wrong.'
'But it was a sad day for poor Mr. Oliver,'
observed Grandfather. "From his youth upward it had probably been the great principle of his life to be faithful and obedient to the king. And now,
in his old age, it must have puzzled and distracted
him to find the sovereign people setting up a
claim to his faith and obedience." Grandfather closed the evening's conversation
by saying that the discontent of America was so
great, that, in 1766, the British Parliament was
compelled to repeal the Stamp Act. The people
made great rejoicings, but took care to keep
Liberty Tree well pruned and free from cater-
pillars and canker worms. They foresaw that
there might yet be occasion for them to assemble
under its far-projecting shadow. 
<page 206>
grandfather's chair.
183
CHAPTER IV.
The next evening, Clara, who remembered
that our chair had been left standing in the rain under Liberty Tree, earnestly besought Grand-
father to tell when and where it had next found
shelter. Perhaps she was afraid that the venera-
ble chair, by being exposed to the inclemency of
a September gale, might get the rheumatism in
its aged joints. 1
'The chair," said Grandfather, "after the cere-
mony of Mr. Oliver's oath, appears to have been
quite forgotten by the multitude. Indeed, being
much bruised and rather rickety, owing to the
violent treatment it had suffered from the Hutch-
inson mob, most people would have thought that
its days of usefulness were over. Nevertheless,
it was conveyed away under cover of the night and committed to the care of a skilful joiner.
He doctored our old friend so successfully, that,
in the course of a few days, it made its appear-
ance in the public room of the British Coffee
House, in King Street.'
'But why did not Mr. Hutchinson get posses-
sion of it again?" inquired Charley.
'I know not," answered Grandfather, "unless
he considered it a dishonor and disgrace to the
chair to have stood under Liberty Tree. At all
events, he suffered it to remain at the British
Coffee House, which was the principal hotel in 
<page 207>
grandfather's chair.
Boston. It could not possibly have found a sit-
uation where it would be more in the midst of
business and bustle, or would witness more im-
portant events, or be occupied by a greater variety
of persons." Grandfather went on to tell the proceedings of
the despotic king and ministry of England after
the repeal of the Stamp Act. They could not
bear to think that their right to tax America
should be disputed by the people. In the year 1767, therefore, they caused Parliament to pass
an act for laying a duty on tea and some other
articles that were in general use. Nobody could
now buy a pound of tea without paying a tax
to King George. This scheme was pretty craftily
contrived; for the women of America were very
fond of tea, and did not like to give up the use
of it. But the people were as much opposed to this
new act of Parliament as they had been to the
Stamp Act. England, however, was determined
that they should submit. In order to compel
their obedience, two regiments, consisting of
more than seven hundred British soldiers, were
sent to Boston. They arrived in September, 1768, and were landed on Long Wharf. Thence
they marched to the Common with loaded mus-
kets, fixed bayonets, and great pomp and parade.
So now, at last, the free town of Boston was
guarded and overawed by redcoats as it had
been in the days of old Sir Edmund Andros. 
<page 208>
grandfather's chair.
In the month of November, .more regiments
arrived. There were now four thousand troops
in Boston. The Common was whitened with
their tents. Some of the soldiers were lodged in
Faneuil Hall, which the inhabitants looked upon
as a consecrated place, because it been the scene
of a great many meetings in favor of liberty.
One regiment was placed in the Town House,
which we now call the Old State House. The
lower floor of this edifice had hitherto been
used by the merchants as an exchange. In the
upper stories were the chambers of the judges,
the representatives, and the governor's council.
The venerable councillors could not assemble
to consult about the welfare of the province without being challenged by sentinels and pass-
ing among the bayonets of the British soldiers.
Sentinels, likewise were posted at the lodgings
of the officers in many parts of the town. When
the inhabitants approached they were greeted by
the sharp question —'Who goes there?' while
the rattle of the soldier's musket was heard as
he presented it against their breasts. There was
no quiet even on the Sabbath day. The pious
descendants of the Puritans were shocked by the
uproar of military music; the drum, fife, and
bugle drowning the holy organ peal and the
voices of the singers. It would appear as if the
British took every method to insult the feelings
of the people.

<page 209>
186 grandfather's chair.
'Grandfather,' cried Charley, impatiently, "the
people did not go to fighting half soon enough!
These British redcoats ought to have been driven
back to their vessels the very moment they land-
ed on Long Wharf.'
'Many a hot-headed young man said the same
as you do, Charley," answered Grandfather. "But the elder and wiser people saw that the time was
not yet come. Meanwhile, let us take another
peep at our old chair.'
'Ah, it drooped its head, I know," said Charley,
"when it saw how the province was disgraced. Its old Puritan friends never would have borne
such doings.'
'The chair," proceeded Grandfather, "was now
continually occupied by some of the high tories,
as the king's friends were called, who frequented
the British Coffee House. Officers of the custom-
house, too, which stood on the opposite side of
King Street, often sat in the chair wagging their
tongues against John Hancock.'
'Why against him 1' asked Charley.
'Because he was a great merchant and con-
tended against paying duties to the king," said
Grandfather.
'Well, frequently, no doubt, the officers of the
British regiments, when not on duty, used to
fling themselves into the arms of our venerable
chair. Fancy one of them, a red-nosed captain in his scarlet uniform, playing with the hilt of 
<page 210>
grandfather's chair.
187
his sword, and making a circle of his brother
officers merry with ridiculous jokes at the ex-
pense of the poor Yankees. And perhaps he
would call for a bottle of wine, or a steaming
bowl of punch, and drink confusion to all rebels.'
'Our grave old chair must have been scan-
dalized at such scenes," observed Laurence.
'The chair that had been the Lady Arbella's,
and which the holy apostle Eliot had conse-
crated.'
'It certainly was little less than sacrilege," re-
plied Grandfather; "but the time was coming when even the churches, where hallowed pastors
had long preached the word of God, were to be
torn down or desecrated by the British troops.
Some years passed, however, before such things
were done." Grandfather now told his auditors that, in
1769, Sir Francis Bernard went to England after
having been governor of Massachusetts ten years.
He was a gentleman of many good qualities, an
excellent scholar, and a friend to learning. But
he was naturally of an arbitrary disposition; and
he had been bred at the University of Oxford,
where young men were taught that the divine
right of kings was the only thing to be regarded
in matters of government. Such ideas were ill
adapted to please the people of Massachusetts.
They rejoiced to get rid of Sir Francis Bernard,
but liked his successor, Lieutenant-Governor
Hutchinson, no better than himself. 
<page 211>
188
grandfather's chair.
About this period the people were much in-
censed at an act committed by a person who
held an office in the custom-house. Some lads,
or young men, were snowballing his windows.
He fired a musket at them, and killed a poor
German boy, only eleven years old. This event
made a great noise in town and country, and
much increased the resentment that was already
felt against the servants of the crown.
'Now, children,' said Grandfather, "I wish to
make you comprehend the position of the British
troops in King Street. This is the same which
we now call State Street. On the south side of
the Town House, or Old State House, was what
military men call a court of guard, defended by
two brass cannons, which pointed directly at one
of the doors of the above edifice. A large party
of soldiers were always stationed in the court of
guard. The custom-house stood at a little dis-
tance down King Street, nearly where the Suffolk
Bank now stands; arid a sentinel was continually
pacing before its front.'
'I shall remember this, to-morrow,' said Char-
ley; "and I will go to State Street, so as to see
exactly where the British troops were stationed.'
'And, before long," observed Grandfather, "I shall have to relate an event which made King
Street sadly famous on both sides of the Atlantic.
The history of our chair will soon bring us to
this melancholy business.

<page 212>
grandfather's chair.
189
Here Grandfather described the state of things which arose from the ill-will that existed between
the inhabitants and the redcoats. The old and
sober part of the townspeople were very angry
at the government for sending soldiers to over-
awe them. But those gray-headed men were
cautious, and kept their thoughts and feelings in
their own breasts, without putting themselves in
the way of the British bayonets. The younger people, however, could hardly
be kept within such prudent limits. They red-
dened with wrath at the very sight of a soldier,
and would have been willing to come to blows
with them at any moment. For it was their
opinion that every tap of a British drum within
the peninsula of Boston was an insult to the
brave old town.
'It was sometimes the case," continued Grand-
father, "that affrays happened between such wild
young men as these and small parties of the
soldiers. No weapons had hitherto been used except fists or cudgels. But when men have
loaded muskets in their hands, it is easy to fore-
tell that they will soon be turned against the
bosoms of those who provoke their anger.'
'Grandfather,' said little Alice, looking fear-
fully into his face, "your voice sounds as though
you were going to tell us something awful!'

<page 213>
190
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER V.
Little Alice, by her last remark, proved her-
self a good judge of what was expressed by the
tones of Grandfather's voice. He had given the
above description of the enmity between the
townspeople and the soldiers in order to prepare
the minds of his auditors for a very terrible
event. It was one that did more to heighten the
quarrel between England and America than anything that had yet occurred. Without further preface, Grandfather began
the story of THE BOSTON MASSACRE. It was now the 3d of March, 1770. The sun-
set music of the British regiments was heard as
usual throughout the town. The shrill fife and
rattling drum awoke the echoes in King Street,
while the last ray of sunshine was lingering on
the cupola of the Town-House. And now all
the sentinels were posted. One of them marched
up and down before the custom-house, treading
a short path through the snow, and longing for
the time when he would be dismissed to the
warm fireside of the guard-room. Meanwhile,
Captain Preston was perhaps sitting in our great
chair before the hearth of the British Coffee
House. In the course of the evening, there
t were two or three slight commotions, which 
<page 214>
grandfather's chair.
191
seemed to indicate that trouble was at hand.
Small parties of young men stood at the corners
of the streets or walked along the narrow pave-
ments. Squads of soldiers who were dismissed
from duty passed by them, shoulder to shoulder,
with the regular step which they had learned at
the drill. Whenever these encounters took
place, it appeared to be the object of the young
men to treat the soldiers with as much incivility
as possible.
"Turn out, you lobsterbacks!" one would
say. "Crowd them off the sidewalks!" another
would cry. "A redcoat has no right in Boston
streets.'
'Oh, you rebel rascals!" perhaps the soldiers
would reply, glaring fiercely at the young men.
"Some day or other, we'll make our way through
Boston streets at the point of the bayonet!"
Once or twice such disputes as these brought
on a scuffle; which passed off, however, with-
out attracting much notice. About eight o'clock,
for some unknown cause, an alarm bell rang
loudly and hurriedly. At the sound many people ran out of their
houses, supposing it to be an alarm of fire. But
there were no flames to be seen; nor was there
any smell of smoke in the clear, frosty air; so
that most of the townsmen went back to their
own firesides and sat talking with their wives
and children about the calamities of the times. ,

<page 215>
192
grandfather's chair.
Others, who were younger and less prudent re-
mained in the streets; for there seems to have
been a presentiment that some strange event was
on the eve of taking place. Later in the evening, not far from nine o'clock,
several young men passed by the Town House and walked down King Street. The sentinel
was still on his post in front of the custom-
house, pacing to and fro; while, as he turned, a
gleam of light from some neighboring window glittered on the barrel of his musket. At no
great distance were the barracks and the guard-
house, where his comrades were probably telling
stories of battle and bloodshed. Down towards the custom-house, as I told
you, came a party of wild young men. When
they drew near the sentinel he halted on his
post, and took his musket from his shoulder,
ready to present the bayonet at their breasts.
"Who goes there?" he cried, in the gruff, per-
emptory tones of a soldier's challenge. The young men, being Boston boys, felt as if
they had a right to walk their own streets with-
out being accountable to a British redcoat, even
though he challenged them in King George's
name. They made some rude answer to the
sentinel. There was a dispute, or perhaps a
scuffle. Other soldiers heard the noise, and ran
hastily from the barracks to assist their comrades. At the same time many of the town's-people

<page 216>
grandfather's chair.
193
rushed into King Street by various avenues, and
gathered in a crowd round about the custom-
house. It seemed wonderful how such a mul-
titude had started up all of a sudden. The wrongs and insults which the people had
been suffering for many months now kindled
them into a rage. They threw snowballs and
lumps of ice at the soldiers. As the tumult
grew louder it reached the ears of Captain Pres-
ton, the officer of the day. He immediately
ordered eight soldiers of the main guard to take
their muskets and follow him. They marched
across the street, forcing their way roughly
through the crowd, and pricking the towns-
people with their bayonets. A gentleman (it was Henry Knox, afterwards
general of the American artillery) caught Cap-
tain Preston's arm.
"For Heaven's sake, sir," exclaimed he, "take heed what you do, or here will be bloodshed.'
'Stand aside!' answered Captain Preston,
haughtily. "Do not interfere, sir. Leave me to
manage the affair."
Arriving at the sentinel's post, Captain Preston
drew up his men in a semicircle, with their
faces to the crowd and their rear to the custom-
house. When the people saw the officer and
beheld the threatening attitude with which the
soldiers fronted them, their rage became almost
uncontrollable.
13

<page 217>
194
grandfather's chair.
'Fire, you lobster-backs!' bellowed some.
"You dare not fire, you cowardly redcoats!" cried others.
'Rush upon them!" shouted many voices.
"Drive the rascals to their barracks! Down
with them! Down with them! Let them fire if they dare!"
Amid the uproar, the soldiers stood glaring at
the people with the fierceness of men whose
trade was to shed blood.
O, what a crisis had now arrived! Up to
this very moment, the angry feelings between
England and America might have been pacified.
England had but to stretch out the hand of
reconciliation, and acknowledge that she had
hitherto mistaken her rights, but would do so no
more. Then the ancient bonds of brotherhood
would again have been knit together as firmly
as in old times. The habit of loyalty, which
had grown as strong as instinct, was not utterly
overcome. The perils shared, the victories won,
in the old French war, when the soldiers of the
colonies fought side by side with their comrades
from beyond the sea, were unforgotten yet.
England was still that beloved country which
the colonists called their home. King George,
though he had frowned upon America, was still
reverenced as a father.
But should the king's soldiers shed one drop
of American blood, then it was a quarrel to 
<page 218>
grandfather's chair.
195
the death. Never — never would America rest
satisfied until she had torn down the royal
authority and trampled it in the dust.
"Fire, if you dare, villains!" hoarsely shouted
the people, while the muzzles of the muskets
were turned upon them; 'you dare not fire!"
They appeared ready to rush upon the levelled
bayonets. Captain Preston waved his sword,
and uttered a command which could not be dis-
tinctly heard amid the uproar of shouts that
issued from a hundred throats. But his soldiers
deemed that he had spoken the fatal mandate —
'fire!" The flash of their muskets lighted up
the street, and the report rang loudly between
the edifices. It was said, too, that the figure of
a man, with a cloth hanging down over his face,
was seen to step into the balcony of the custom-
house, and discharge a musket at the crowd. A gush of smoke had overspread the scene.
It rose heavily, as if it were loath to reveal the
dreadful spectacle beneath it. Eleven of the
sons of New England lay stretched upon the
street. Some, sorely wounded, were struggling
to rise again. Others stirred not nor groaned; for they were past all pain. Blood was stream-
ing upon the snow; and that purple stain in the
midst of King Street, though it melted away in
the next day's sun, was never forgotten nor
forgiven by the people. 
<page 219>
196
grandfather's chair.
Grandfather was interrupted by the violent
sobs of little Alice. In his earnestness he had
neglected to soften down the narrative so that it
might not terrify the heart of this unworldly
infant. Since Grandfather began the history of
our chair, little Alice had listened to many tales
of war. But, probably, the idea had never
really impressed itself upon her mind that men
have shed the blood of their fellow-creatures.
And now that this idea was forcibly presented to
her, it affected the sweet child with bewilder-
ment and horror.
"I ought to have remembered our dear little
Alice," said Grandfather reproachfully to himself.
• Oh, what a pity! Her heavenly nature has
now received its first impression of earthly sin
and violence. Well, Clara, take her to bed and
comfort her. Heaven grant that she may dream
away the recollection of the Boston massacre!'
'Grandfather,' said Charley, when Clara and
little Alice had retired, "did not the people rush
upon the soldiers and take revenge?'
'The town drums beat to arms," replied
Grandfather, "the alarm bells rang, and an im-
mense multitude rushed into King Street. Many
of them had weapons in their hands. The
British prepared to defend themselves. A whole
regiment was drawn up in the street, expecting
an attack; for the townsmen appeared ready to
throw themselves upon the bayonets.'

<page 220>
grandfather's chair.
197
'And how did it end?" asked Charley.
"Governor Hutchinson hurried to the spot," said Grandfather, "and besought the people to
have patience, promising that strict justice should
be done. A day or two afterward the British
troops were withdrawn from town and stationed
at Castle William. Captain Preston and the
eight soldiers were tried for murder. But none
of them were found guilty. The judges told
the jury that the insults and violence which had
been offered to the soldiers justified them in
firing at the mob.'
'The Revolution,' observed Laurence, who
had said but little during the evening, "was not
such a calm, majestic movement as I supposed.
I do not love to hear of mobs and broils in the
street. These things were unworthy of the
people when they had such a great object to
accomplish.'
'•Nevertheless, the world has seen no grander
movement than that of our Revolution, from first
to last," said Grandfather. "The people, to a
man, were full of a great and noble sentiment.
True, there may be much fault to find with their
mode of expressing this sentiment; but they
knew no better — the necessity was upon them
to act out their feelings in the best manner they
could. We must forgive what was wrong in
their actions, and look into their hearts and minds
for the honorable motives that impelled them.'

<page 221>
198
grandfather's chair.
'And I suppose," said Laurence, 'there were
men who knew how to act worthily of what
they felt.'
'There were many such," replied Grandfather,
'and we will speak of some of them, hereafter.'
Grandfather here made a pause. That night Charley had a dream about the Boston massacre, and thought that he himself was in the crowd and struck down Captain Preston with a great
club. Laurence dreamed that he was sitting in
our great chair, at the window of the British
Coffee House, and beheld the whole scene which
Grandfather had described. It seemed to him,
in his dream, that, if the townspeople and the
soldiers would but have heard him speak a single
word, all the slaughter might have been averted.
But there was such an uproar that it drowned
his voice. The next morning the two boys went together
to State Street and stood on the very spot where
the first blood of the Revolution had been shed.
The Old State House was still there, presenting
almost the same aspect that it had worn on that
memorable evening, one-and-seventy years ago.
It is the sole remaining witness of the Boston
Massacre.

<page 222>
grandfather's chair.
199
CHAPTER VI.
The next evening the astral lamp was lighted
earlier than usual, because Laurence was very
much engaged in looking over the collection of
portraits which had been his New Year's gift
from Grandfather. Among them he found the features of more
than one famous personage who had been con-
nected with the adventures of our old chair.
Grandfather bade him draw the table nearer to
the fireside; and they looked over the portraits
together, while Clara and Charley likewise lent
their attention. As for little Alice, she sat in
Grandfather's lap, and seemed to see the very
men alive whose faces were there represented. Turning over the volume, Laurence came to
the portrait of a stern, grim-looking man, in plain
attire, of much more modern fashion than that of
the old Puritans. But the face might well have
befitted one of those iron-hearted men. Beneath
the portrait was the name of Samuel Adams.
"He was a man of great note in all the doings
that brought about the Revolution,' said Grand-
father. "His character was such, that it seemed
as if one of the ancient Puritans had been sent
back to earth to animate the people's hearts with
the same abhorrence of tyranny that had distin-
guished the earliest settlers. He was as religious
as they, as stern and inflexible, and as deeply 
<page 223>
200
grandfather's chair.
imbued with democratic principles. He, better
than any one else, may be taken as a representa-
tive of the people of New England, and of the
spirit with which they engaged in the revolu-
tionary struggle. He was a poor man, and earned
his bread by a humble occupation; but with
his tongue and pen he made the King of Eng-
land tremble on his throne. Remember him,
my children, as one of the strong men of our
country.'
'Here is one whose looks show a very differ-
ent character," observed Laurence, turning to the
portrait of John Hancock. "I should think, by
his splendid dress and courtly aspect, that he
was one of the king's friends.'
'There never was a greater contrast than be-
tween Samuel Adams and John Hancock," said
Grandfather. "Yet they were of the same side
in politics, and had an equal agency in the Revo-
lution. Hancock was born to the inheritance of
the largest fortune in New England. His tastes
and habits were aristocratic. He loved gorgeous
attire, a splendid mansion, magnificent furniture,
stately festivals, and all that was glittering and
pompous in external things. His manners were
so polished that there stood not a nobleman at
the footstool of King George's throne who was
a more skilful courtier than John Hancock might
have been. Nevertheless, he in his embroidered
clothes, and Samuel Adams in his threadbare 
<page 224>
grandfather's chair.
201
coat, wrought together in the cause of liberty.
Adams acted from pure and rigid principle. Han-
cock, though he loved his country, yet thought
quite as much of his own popularity as he did of
the people's rights. It is remarkable that these
two men, so very different as I describe them,
were the only two exempted from pardon by the
king's proclamation."
On the next leaf of the book was the portrait
of General Joseph Warren. Charley recognized
the name, and said that here was a greater man
than either Hancock or Adams.
"Warren was an eloquent and able patriot," replied Grandfather. "He deserves a lasting
memory for his zealous efforts in behalf of lib-
erty. No man's voice was more powerful in
Faneuil Hall'than Joseph Warren's. If his death
had not happened so early in the contest, he
would probably have gained a high name as a
soldier."
The next portrait was a venerable man, who
held his thumb under his chin, and, through his
spectacles, appeared to be attentively reading a
manuscript.
"Here we see the most illustrious Boston boy
that ever lived," said Grandfather. "This is
Benjamin Franklin. But I will not try to com-
press into a few sentences the character of the
sage, who, as a Frenchman expressed it, snatch-
ed the lightning from the sky and the sceptre 
<page 225>
grandfather's chair.
from a tyrant. Mr. Sparks must help you to the
knowledge of Franklin."
The book likewise contained portraits of
James Otis and Josiah Quincy. Both of them,
Grandfather observed, were men of wonderful
talents and true patriotism. Their voices were
like the stirring tones of a trumpet arousing the
country to defend its freedom. Heaven seemed
to have provided a greater number of eloquent
men than had appeared at any other period, in
order that the people might be fully instructed
as to their wrongs and the method of resistance.
'It is marvellous," said Grandfather, "to see
how many powerful writers, orators, and soldiers
started up just at the time when they were
wanted. There was a man for every kind of
work. It is equally wonderful that men of such
different characters were all made to unite in the
one object of establishing the freedom and inde-
pendence of America. There was an overruling
Providence above them.'
'Here was another great man," remarked Lau-
rence, pointing to the portrait of John Adams.
'Yes; an earnest, warm-tempered, honest,
and most able man," said Grandfather. "At the
period of which we are now speaking he was a
lawyer in Boston. He was destined in after
years to be ruler over the whole American peo-
ple, whom he contributed so much to form into
a nation.'

<page 226>
grandfather's chair. 203
Grandfather here remarked that many a New
Englander, who had passed his boyhood and
youth in obscurity, afterward attained to a fortune which he never could have foreseen even in his
most ambitious dreams. John Adams, the second
President of the United States and the equal of
crowned kings, was once a schoolmaster and
country lawyer. Hancock, the first signer of
the Declaration of Independence, served his ap-
prenticeship with a merchant. Samuel Adams,
afterwards governor of Massachusetts, was a
small tradesman and a tax-gatherer. General
Warren was a physician, General Lincoln a far-
mer, and General Knox a bookbinder. General
Nathaniel Greene, the best soldier, except Wash-
ington, in the revolutionary army, was a Quaker
and a blacksmith. All these became illustrious
men, and can never be forgotten in American
history.
"And any boy who is born in America may
look forward to the same things," said our am-
bitious friend Charley. After these observations, Grandfather drew the
book of portraits towards him, and showed the
children several British peers and members of
Parliament who had exerted themselves either
for or against the rights of America. There
were the Earl of Bute, Mr. Grenville, and Lord
North. These were looked upon as deadly ene-
mies to our country. 
<page 227>
204 grandfather's chair.
Among the friends of America was Mr. Pitt,
afterward Earl of Chatham, who spent so much
of his wondrous eloquence in endeavoring to
warn England of the consequences of her injus-
tice. He fell down on the floor of the House of
Lords after uttering almost his dying words in
defence of our privileges as freemen. There
was Edmund Burke, one of the wisest men and
greatest orators that ever the world produced.
There was Colonel Barre, who had been among
our fathers, and knew that they had courage
enough to die for their rights. There was
Charles James Fox, who never rested until he
had silenced our enemies in the House of Com-
mons.
'It is very remarkable to observe how many
of the ablest orators in the British Parliament
were favorable to America," said Grandfather.
"We ought to remember these great Englishmen
with gratitude; for their speeches encouraged
our fathers almost as much as those of our own
orators in Faneuil Hall, and under Liberty Tree.
Opinions which might have been received with
doubt, if expressed only by a native American,
were set down as true, beyond dispute, when
they came from the lips of Chatham, Burke,
Barre, or Fox.'
'But, Grandfather," asked Laurence, "were
there no able and eloquent men in this country
who took the part of King George 1'

<page 228>
grandfather's chair.
205
'There were many men of talent who said
what they could in defence of the king's tyran-
nical proceedings," replied Grandfather. "But
they had the worst side of the argument, and
therefore seldom said anything worthremem-
bering. Moreover, their hearts were faint and
feeble; for they felt that the people scorned and
detested them. They had no friends, no defence,
except in the bayonets of the British troops. A
blight fell upon all their faculties, because they
were contending against the rights of their own
native land.'
'What were the names of some of them?" inquired Charley.
"Governor Hutchinson, Chief Justice Oliver,
Judge Auchmuty, the Reverend Mather Byles,
and several other clergymen, were among the
most noted loyalists," answered Grandfather.
11 wish the people had tarred and feathered
every man of them!" cried Charley.
"That wish is very wrong, Charley," said
Grandfather. "You must not think that there
was no integrity and honor except among those
who stood up for thefreedom of America. For
aught I know, there was quite as much of these
qualities on one side as on the other. Do you
see nothing admirable in a faithful adherence to
an unpopular cause? Can you not respect that
principle of loyalty which made the royalists
give up country, friends, fortune, every thing, 
<page 229>
206
grandfather's chair.
rather than be false to their king? It was a
mistaken principle; but many of them cherished
it honorably, and were martyrs to it.'
'Oh, I was wrong!" said Charley, ingen-
uously. "And I would risk my life rather than
one of those good old royalists should be tarred
and feathered.'
'The time is now come when we may judge
fairly of them," continued Grandfather. "Be
the good and true men among them honored;
for they were as much our countrymen as the
patriots were. And, thank Heaven, our coun-
try need not be ashamed of her sons, — of most
of them at least, — whatever side they took in
the revolutionary contest.'
Among the portraits was one of King George
the Third. Little Alice clapped her hands, and
seemed pleased with the bluff good-nature of his
physiognomy. But Laurence thought it strange that a man with such a face, indicating hardly a
common share of intellect, should have had in-
fluence enough on human affairs to convulse the
world with war. Grandfather observed that
this poor king had always appeared to him one
of the most unfortunate persons that ever lived.
He was so honest and conscientious, that, if he
had been only a private man, his life would
probably have been blameless and happy. But
his was that worst of fortunes, to be placed in a
station far beyond his abilities.

<page 230>
grandfather's chair.
207
'And so," said Grandfather, "his life, while he
retained what intellect Heaven had gifted him
with, was one long mortification. At last he
grew crazed with care and trouble. For nearly
twenty years the monarch of England was con-
fined as a madman. In his old age, too, God
took away his eyesight; so that his royal palace
was nothing to him but a dark, lonesome prison-
house.'

<page 231>
208 grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER VII.
'Our old chair," resumed Grandfather, "did
not now stand in the midst of a gay circle of
British officers. The troops, as I told you, had
been removed to Castle William immediately
after the Boston massacre. Still, however, there
were many tories, custom-house officers, and
Englishmen who used to assemble in the British
Coffee House and talk over the affairs of the
period. Matters grew worse and worse; and in
1773 the people did a deed which incensed the
king and ministry more than any of their former
doings." Grandfather here described the affair, which is
known by the name of the Boston Tea Party.
The Americans, for some time past, had left off
importing tea, on account of the oppressive tax.
The East India Company, in London, had a
large stock of tea on hand, which they had ex-
pected to sell to the Americans, but could find
no market for it. But, after a while, the govern-
ment persuaded this company of merchants to
send the tea to America.
'How odd it is," observed Clara, "that the
liberties of America should have had anything
to do with a cup of tea!" Grandfather smiled, and proceeded with his
narrative. When the people of Boston heard
that several cargoes of tea were coming across 
<page 232>
grandfather's chair.
209
the Atlantic, they held a great many meetings
at Faneuil Hall, in the Old South Church, and
under Liberty Tree. In the midst of their de-
bates, three ships arrived in the harbor with the
tea on board. The people spent more than a
fortnight in consulting what should be done.
At last, on the 16th of December, 1773, they
demanded of Governor Hutchinson that he
should immediately send the ships back to Eng-
land. The governor replied that the ships must not
leave the harbor until the custom-house duties
upon the tea should be paid. Now, the pay-
ment of these duties was the very thing against
which the people had set their faces; because it
was a tax unjustly imposed upon America by the
English government. Therefore, in the dusk of
the evening, as soon as Governor Hutchinson's
reply was received, an immense crowd hastened
to Griffin's Wharf, where the tea-ships lay. The
place is now called Liverpool Wharf.
'When the crowd reached the wharf," said
Grandfather, "they saw that a set of wild-look-
ing figures were already on board of the ships.
You would have imagined that the Indian war-
riors of old times had come back again; for
they wore the Indian dress, and had their faces
covered with red and black paint, like the In-
dians when they go to war. These grim figures
hoisted the tea chests on the decks of the ves-
14

<page 233>
210
grandfather's chair.
sels, broke them open, and threw all the con-
tents into the harbor.'
'Grandfather,' said little Alice, "I suppose In-
dians don't love tea; else they would never
waste it so.'
'They were not real Indians, my child," an-
swered Grandfather. "They were white men in disguise; because a heavy punishment would
have been inflicted on them if the king's offi-
cers had found who they were. But it was
never known. From that day to this, though
the matter has been talked of by all the world,
nobody can tell the names of those Indian fig-
ures. Some people say that there were very
famous men among them, who afterwards be-
came governors and generals. Whether this be
true, I cannot tell."
When tidings of this bold deed were carried
to England, King George was greatly enraged.
Parliament immediately passed an act, by which
all vessels were forbidden to take in or discharge
their cargoes at the port of Boston. In this way they expected to ruin all the merchants, and
starve the poor people, by depriving them of
employment. At the same time another act was
passed, taking away many rights and privileges
which had been granted in the charter of Massa-
chusetts. Governor Hutchinson, soon afterward, was
summoned to England, in order that he might 
<page 234>
grandfather's chair.
211
give his advice about the management of Amer-
ican affairs. General Gage, an officer of the old French war, and since commander-in-chief of
the British forces in America, was appointed gov-
ernor in his stead. One of his first acts was to
make Salem, instead of Boston, the metropolis
of Massachusetts, by summoning the General
Court to meet there. According to Grandfather's description, this
was the most gloomy time that Massachusetts
had ever seen. The people groaned under as
heavy a tyranny as in the days of Sir Edmund
Andros. Boston looked as if it were afflicted
with some dreadful pestilence, — so sad were the
inhabitants, and so desolate the streets. There
was no cheerful hum of business. The mer-
chants shut up their warehouses, and the labor-
ing men stood idle about the wharves. But all
America felt interested in the good town of Bos-
ton; and contributions were raised, in many
places, for the relief of the poor inhabitants.
'Our dear old chair!" exclaimed Clara. "How
dismal it must have been now!'
'Oh,' replied Grandfather, "a gay throng of
officers had now come back to the British Coffee
House; so that the old chair had no lack of
mirthful company. Soon after General Gage
became governor a great many troops had
arrived, and were encamped upon the Common.
Boston was now a garrisoned and fortified town; 
<page 235>
212
grandfather's chair.
for the general had built a battery across the
Neck, on the road to Roxbury, and placed guards
for its defence. Everything looked as if a civil
war were close at hand.'
•Did the people make ready to fight?" asked
Charley.
"A Continental Congress assembled at Phila-
delphia," said Grandfather, "and proposed such
measures as they thought most conducive to the
public good. A Provincial Congress was like-
wise chosen in Massachusetts. They exhorted
the people to arm and discipline themselves. A
great number of minute men were enrolled.
The Americans called them minute men, be-
cause they engaged to be ready to fight at a
minute's warning. The English officers laughed,
and said that the name was a very proper one,
because the minute men would run away the
minute they saw the enemy. Whether they
would fight or run was soon to be proved." Grandfather told the children that the first
open resistance offered to the British troops, in
the province of Massachusetts, was at Salem.
Colonel Timothy Pickering, with thirty or forty
mititia men, prevented the English colonel, Les-
lie, with four times as many regular soldiers,
from taking possession of some military stores.
No blood was shed on this occasion; but soon
afterward it began to flow. General Gage sent eight hundred soldiers to 
<page 236>
grandfather's chair.
213
Concord, about eighteen miles from Boston, to
destroy some ammunition and provisions which
the colonists had collected there. They set out
on their march in the evening of the 18th of
April, 1775. The next morning, the general sent Lord Percy with nine hundred men to
strengthen the troops that had gone before. All
that day the inhabitants of Boston heard various
rumors. Some said that the British were mak-
ing great slaughter among our countrymen.
Others affirmed that every man had turned out
with his musket, and that not a single soldier
would ever get back to Boston.
'It was after sunset," continued Grandfather,
"when the troops, who had marched forth so
proudly, were seen entering Charlestown. They
were covered with dust, and so hot and weary
that their tongues hung out of their mouths.
Many of them were faint with wounds. They
had not all returned. Nearly three hundred were
strown, dead or dying, along the road from
Concord. The yeomanry had risen upon the
invaders and driven them back.'
'Was this the battle of Lexington?" asked
Charley.
'Yes,' replied Grandfather; "it was so called,
because the British, without provocation, had
fired upon a party of minute men, near Lexing-
ton meeting-house, and killed eight of them.
That fatal volley, which was fired by order of 
<page 237>
214
grandfather's CHAIR. -
Major Pitcairn, began the war of the Revolu-
tion.'
About this time, if Grandfather had been cor-
rectly informed, our chair disappeared from the
British Coffee House. The manner of its de-
parture cannot be satisfactorily ascertained. Per-
haps the keeper of the Coffee House turned it
out of doors on account of its old-fashioned
aspect. Perhaps he sold it as a curiosity. Per-
haps it was taken, without leave, by some per-
son who regarded it as public property because
it had once figured under Liberty Tree. Or,
perhaps, the old chair, being of a peaceable
disposition, had made use of its four oaken legs and run away from the seat of war.
'It would have made a terrible clattering over
the pavement," said Charley, laughing.
'Meanwhile,' continued Grandfather, "during
the mysterious non-appearance of our chair, an
army of twenty thousand men had started up and come to the siege of Boston. General Gage
and his troops were cooped up within the narrow
precincts of the peninsula. On the 17th of June,
1775, the famous battle of Bunker Hill was
fought. Here General Warren fell. The British
got the victory, indeed, but with the loss of more
than a thousand officers and men.'
'O, Grandfather,' cried Charley, "you must
tell us about that famous battle.'
'No, Charley," said Grandfather, "I am not like 
<page 238>
grandfather's chair.
215
other historians. Battles shall not hold a prom-
inent place in the history of our quiet and
comfortable old chair. But to-morrow evening,
Laurence, Clara, and yourself, and dear little
Alice too, shall visit the Diorama of Bunker Hill.
There you shall see the whole business, the
burning of Charlestown and all, with your own
eyes, and hear the cannon and musketry with
your own ears.'

<page 239>
216
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER VIII.
The next evening but one, when the children
had given Grandfather a full account of the Dio-
rama of Bunker Hill, they entreated him not to
keep them any longer in suspense about the fate
of his chair. The reader will recollect, that at
the last accounts, it had trotted away upon its
poor old legs nobody knew whither. But, be-
fore gratifying their curiosity, Grandfather found
it necessary to say something about public
events. The Continental Congress, which was assem-
bled at Philadelphia, was composed of delegates
from all the colonies. They had now appointed
George Washington, of Virginia, to be com-
mander-in-chief of all the American armies. He
was, at that time, a member of Congress; but
immediately left Philadelphia, and began his
journey to Massachusetts. On the 3d of July,
1775, he arrived at Cambridge, and took com-
mand of the troops which were besieging General
Gage.
'O, Grandfather,' exclaimed Laurence, "it
makes my heart throb to think what is coming
now. We are to see General Washington him-
self." The children crowded around Grandfather and
looked earnestly into his face. Even little Alice
opened her sweet blue eyes, with her lips apart, 
<page 240>
grandfather's chair.
217
and almost held her breath to listen; so instinc-
.tive is the reverence of childhood for the father
of his country. Grandfather paused a moment;
for he felt as if it might be irreverent to introduce
the hallowed shade of Washington into a history where an ancient elbow chair occupied the most
prominent place. However, he determined to
proceed with his narrative, and speak of the hero
when it was needful, but with an unambitious
simplicity. So Grandfather told his auditors, that, on Gen-
eral Washington's arrival at Cambridge, his first
care was to reconnoitre the British troops with
his spyglass, and to examine the condition of his
own army. He found that the American troops
amounted to about fourteen thousand men.
They were extended all round the peninsula of
Boston, a space of twelve miles, from the high
grounds of Roxbury on the right to Mystic River on the left. Some were living in tents of sail-
cloth, some in shanties rudely constructed of
boards, some in huts of stone or turf, with curious
windows and doors of basket-work. In order to be near the centre and oversee the
whole of this wide-stretched army, the com-
mander-in-chief made his head-quarters at Cam-
bridge, about half a mile from the colleges. A
mansion-house, which perhaps had been the
country-seat of some tory gentleman, was pro-
vided for his residence.

<page 241>
218
grandfather's chair.
• When General Washington first entered this
mansion," said Grandfather, 'he was ushered up
the staircase and shown into a handsome apart-
ment. He sat down in a large chair, which was
the most conspicuous object in the room. The
noble figure of Washington would have done
honor to a throne. As he sat there, with his
hand resting on the hilt of his sheathed sword,
which was placed between his knees, his whole
aspect well befitted the chosen man on whom his
country leaned for the defence of her dearest
rights. America seemed safe under his protec-
tion. His face was grander than any sculptor
had ever wrought in marble; none could behold
him without awe and reverence. Never before
had the lion's head at the summit of the chair looked down upon such a face and form as Wash-
ington's!'
'Why! Grandfather,' cried Clara, clasping her
hands in amazement, "was it really so? Did
General Washington sit in our great chair?'
'I knew how it would be," said Laurence;
"I foresaw it the moment Grandfather began to
speak." Grandfather smiled. But, turning from the
personal and domestic life of the illustrious leader,
he spoke of the methods which Washington
adopted to win back the metropolis of New Eng-
land from the British. The army, when he took command of it, was 
<page 242>
gkandfather's chair.
219
without any discipline or order. The privates
considered themselves as good as their officers; and seldom thought it necessary to obey their
commands, unless they understood the why and
wherefore. Moreover, they were enlisted for so
short a period, that, as soon as they began to be
respectable soldiers, it was time to discharge
them. Then came new recruits, who had to be
taught their duty before they could be of any
service. Such was the army with which Wash-
ington had to contend against more than twenty
veteran British regiments. Some of the men had no muskets, and almost
all were without bayonets. Heavy cannon, for
battering the British fortifications, were much
wanted. There was but a small quantity of powder and ball, few tools to build intrenchments with, and a great deficiency of provisions
and clothes for the soldiers. Yet, in spite of
these perplexing difficulties, the eyes of the
whole people were fixed on General Washing-
ton, expecting him to undertake some great
enterprise against the hostile army. The first thing that he found necessary, was
to bring his own men into better order and dis-
cipline. It is wonderful how soon he transformed
this rough mob of country people into the sem-
blance of a regular army. One of Washington's
most invaluable characteristics, was the faculty
of bringing order out of confusion. All business,

<page 243>
220
grandfather's chair.
with which he had any concern seemed to regu-
late itself as if by magic. The influence of his
mind was like light gleaming through an unshaped world. It was this faculty, more than
any other, that made him so fit to ride upon the
storm of the Revolution, when everything was
unfixed and drifting about in a troubled sea.
"Washington had not been long at the head
of the army," proceeded Grandfather, "before his
soldiers thought as highly of him as if he had
led them to a hundred victories. They knew that
he was the very man whom the country needed,
and the only one who could bring them safely
through the great contest against the might of
England. They put entire confidence in his
courage, wisdom, and integrity.'
'And were they not eager to follow him against
the British?" asked Charley.
'Doubtless they would have gone whitherso-
ever his sword pointed the way," answered
Grandfather; "and Washington was anxious to
make a decisive assault upon the enemy. But
as the enterprise was very hazardous, he called
a council of all the generals in the army. Ac-
cordingly, they came from their different posts,
and were ushered into the reception room. The
commander-in-chief arose from our great chair to
greet them.'J
'What were their names?" asked Charley.
'There was General Artemas Ward,' replied

<page 244>
grandfather's chair.
221
Grandfather, "a lawyer by profession. He had
commanded the troops before Washington's arri-
val. Another was General Charles Lee, who had
been a colonel in the English army, and was
thought to possess vast military science. He
came to the council, followed by two or three
dogs, who were always at his heels. There was
General Putnam, too, who was known all over
New England by the name of Old Put.'
'Was it he who killed the wolf?" inquired
Charley.
"The same," said Grandfather; "and he had done good service in the old French war. His
occupation was that of a farmer; but he left his
plough in the furrow at the news of Lexington
battle. Then there was General Gates, who
afterward gained great renown at Saratoga, and
lost it again at Camden. General Greene, of
Rhode Island, was likewise at the council.
Washington soon discovered him to be one of
the best officers in the army." When the generals were all assembled, Wash-
ington consulted them about a plan for storming
the English batteries. But it was their unani-
mous opinion that so perilous an enterprise ought
not to be attempted. The army, therefore, con-
tinued to besiege Boston, preventing the enemy
from obtaining supplies of provisions, but with-
out taking any immediate measures to get pos-
session of the town. In this manner the summer,
autumn, and winter passed away.

<page 245>
222
grandfather's chair.
'Many a night, doubtless," said Grandfather,
"after Washington had been all day on horse-
back, galloping from one post of the army to
another, he used to sit in our great chair, rapt in
earnest thought. Had you seen him, you might
have supposed that his whole mind was fixed on
the blue china tiles which adorned the old-fash-
ioned fireplace. But, in reality, he was medi-
tating how to capture the British army, or drive
it out of Boston. Once, when there was a hard
frost, he formed a scheme to cross the Charles
River on the ice. But the other generals could
not be persuaded that there was any prospect of
success.'
'What were the British doing all this time?" inquired Charley.
'They lay idle in the town," replied Grand-
father. "General Gage had been recalled to Eng-
land, and was succeeded by Sir William Howe.
The British army and the inhabitants of Boston were now in great distress. Being shut up in
the town so long, they had consumed almost all
their provisions and burned up all their fuel. The
soldiers tore down the Old North Church, and
used its rotten boards and timbers for firewood.
To heighten their distress, the small-pox broke
out. They probably lost far more men by cold,
hunger, and sickness than had been slain at
Lexington and Bunker Hill.'
'What a dismal time for the poor women and
children!" exclaimed Clara.

<page 246>
grandfather's chair.
223
'At length," continued Grandfather, "in March,
1776, General Washington, who had now a good
supply of powder, began a terrible cannonade and
bombardment from Dorchester Heights. One of
the cannon balls which he fired into the town struck the tower of the Brattle Street Church, where it may still be seen. Sir William Howe
made preparations to cross over in boats and
drive the Americans from their batteries, but was
prevented by a violent gale and storm. General
Washington next erected a battery on Nook's
Hill, so near the enemy that it was impossible
for them to remain in Boston any longer.'
'Hurrah! Hurra!' cried Charley, clapping his
hands triumphantly. "I wish I had been there to see how sheepish the Englishmen looked.'
And, as Grandfather thought that Boston had
never witnessed a more interesting period than
this, when the royal power was in its death
agony, he determined to take a peep into the
town and imagine the feelings of those who
were quitting it forever.

<page 247>
224
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTERIX.
'Alas! for the poor tories!" said Grandfather.
"Until the very last morning after Washington's
troops had shown themselves on Nook's Hill, these unfortunate persons could not believe that
the audacious rebels, as they called the Ameri-
cans, would ever prevail against King George's
army. But when they saw the British soldiers
preparing to embark on board of the ships of war,
then they knew that they had lost their country.
Could the patriots have known how bitter were
their regrets, they would have forgiven them all
their evil deeds, and sent a blessing after them as
they sailed away from their native shore." In order to make the children sensible of the
pitiable condition of these men, Grandfather
singled out Peter Oliver, chief justice of Massa-
chusetts under the crown, and imagined him
walking through the streets of Boston on the
morning before he left it forever. This effort of Grandfather's fancy may be
called —
THE TORY'S FAREWELL. Old Chief Justice Oliver threw on his red cloak,
and placed his three-cornered hat on the top of his
white wig. In this garb he intended to go forth
and take a parting look at objects that had been
familiar to him from his youth. Accordingly, he 
<page 248>
grandfather's chair.
225
began his walk in the north part of the town,
and soon came to Faneuil Hall. This edifice,
the cradle of liberty, had been used by the Brit-
ish officers as a play-house.
'Would that I could see its walls crumble to
dust!" thought the chief justice; and, in the
bitterness of his heart, he shook his fist at the
famous hall. "There began the mischief which
now threatens to rend asunder the British em-
pire. The seditious harangues of demagogues
in Faneuil Hall have made rebels of a loyal
people and deprived me of my country." He then passed through a narrow avenue and
found himself in King Street, almost on the very
spot which, six years before, had been reddened
by the blood of the Boston massacre. The chief
justice stepped cautiously, and shuddered, as if he
were afraid that, even now, the gore of his
slaughtered countrymen might stain his feet. Before him rose the Town House, on the front
of which were still displayed the royal arms.
Within that edifice he had dispensed justice to
the people in the days when his name was never
mentioned without honor. There, too, was the
balcony whence the trumpet had been sounded and the proclamation read to an assembled mul-
titude, whenever a new king of England ascended
the throne.
"I remember — I remember," said Chief Justice
Oliver to himself, "when his present most sacred
15

<page 249>
226
grandfather's chair.
majesty was proclaimed. Then how the people
shouted! Each man would have poured out his
life-blood to keep a hair of King George's head
from harm. But now there is scarcely a tongue
in all New England that does not imprecate
curses on his name. It is ruin and disgrace to
love him. Can it be possible that a few fleeting
years have wrought such a change!'
It did not occur to the chief justice that
nothing but the most grievous tyranny could so
soon have changed the people's hearts. Hurry-
ing from the spot, he entered Cornhill, as the
lower part of Washington Street was then called.
Opposite to the Town House was the waste
foundation of the Old North Church. The sacri-
legious hands of the British soldiers had torn it
down, and kindled their barrack fires with the
fragments.
Further on, he passed beneath the tower of the
Old South. The threshold of this sacred edi-
fice was worn by the iron tramp of horses' feet; for the interior had been used as a riding-school
and rendezvous for a regiment of dragoons. As
the chief justice lingered an instant at the door a trumpet sounded within, and the regiment came
clattering forth and galloped down the street.
They were proceeding to the place of embarka-
tion.
'Let them go!" thought the chief justice, with
somewhat of an old Puritan feeling in his breast.

<page 250>
grandfather's chair. 227
'No good can come of men who desecrate the
house of God." He went on a few steps farther, and paused
before the Province House. No range of brick
stores had then sprung up to hide the mansion of
the royal governors from public view. It had a
spacious court-yard, bordered with trees, and
enclosed with a wrought-iron fence. On the
cupola that surmounted the edifice was the
gilded figure of an Indian chief, ready to let
fly an arrow from his bow. Over the wide front
door was a balcony, in which the chief justice
had often stood when the governor and high
officers of the province showed themselves to
the people. While Chief Justice Oliver gazed sadly at the
Province House, before which a sentinel was
pacing, the double leaves of the door were
thrown open, and Sir William Howe made his
appearance. Behind him came a throng of offi-
cers, whose steel scabbards clattered against the
stones as they hastened down the court-yard.
Sir William Howe was a dark-complexioned
man, stern and haughty in his deportment. He
stepped as proudly, in that hour of defeat, as if
he were going to receive the submission of the
rebel general.
The chief justice bowed and accosted him.
'This is a grievous hour for both of us, Sir
William," said he.

<page 251>
228
grandfather's chair.
'Forward! gentlemen," said Sir William Howe
to the officers who attended him; "we have no
time to hear lamentations now!'
And, coldly bowing, he departed. Thus the
chief justice had a foretaste of the mortifications
which the exiled New Englanders afterwards
suffered from the haughty Britons. They were
despised even by that country which they had
served more faithfully than their own. A still heavier trial awaited Chief Justice
Oliver, as he passed onward from the Province
House. He was recognized by the people in the
street. They had long known him as the de-
scendant of an ancient and honorable family.
They had seen him sitting in his scarlet robes upon the judgment seat. All his life-long, either
for the sake of his ancestors or on account of
his own dignified station and unspotted char-
acter, he had been held in high respect. The
old gentry of the province were looked upon
almost as noblemen while Massachusetts was
under royal government. But now all hereditary reverence for birth and
rank was gone. The inhabitants shouted in
derision when they saw the venerable form of
the old chief justice. They laid the wrongs of
the country and their own sufferings during the
siege — their hunger, cold, and sickness — partly
to his charge and to that of his brother Andrew and his kinsman Hutchinson. It was by their 
<page 252>
grandfather's chair. 229
advice that the king had acted in all the colo-
nial troubles. But the day of recompense was
come.
"See the old tory!" cried the people, with bit-
ter laughter. "He is taking his last look at us.
Let him show his white wig among us an hour
hence, and we'll give him a coat of tar and
feathers!"
The chief justice, however, knew that he
need fear no violence so long as the British
troops were in possession of the town. But, alas!
it was a bitter thought that he should leave no
loving memory behind him. His forefathers,
long after their spirits left the earth, had been
honored in the affectionate remembrance of the
people. But he, who would henceforth be dead
to his native land, would have no epitaph save
scornful and vindictive words. The old man
wept.
"They curse me — they invoke all kinds of
evil on my head!" thought he, in the midst of
his tears. "But, if they could read my heart,
they would know that I love New England well.
Heaven bless her, and bring her again under the
rule of our gracious king! A blessing, too, on
these poor, misguided people!"
The chief justice flung out his hands with a
gesture, as if he were bestowing a parting bene-
diction on his countrymen. He had now reached
the southern portion of the town, and was far 
<page 253>
230
grandfather's chair.
within the range of cannon shot from the Amer-
ican batteries. Close beside him was the broad
stump of a tree, which appeared to have been
recently cut down. Being weary and heavy at
heart, he was about to sit down upon the stump.
Suddenly it flashed upon his recollection that
this was the stump of Liberty Tree! The
British soldiers had cut it down, vainly boasting
that they could as easily overthrow the liberties
of America. Under its shadowy branches, ten
years before, the brother of Chief Justice Oliver
had been compelled to acknowledge the suprem-
acy of the people by taking the oath which they
prescribed. This tree was connected with all
the events that had severed America from Eng-
land.
"Accursed tree!" cried the chief justice,
gnashing his teeth; for anger overcame his sor-
row. "Would that thou hadst been left standing,
till Hancock, Adams, and every other traitor were hanged upon thy branches! Then fitly
mightest thou have been hewn down and cast
into the flames."
He turned back, hurried to Long Wharf with-
out looking behind him, embarked with the
British troops for Halifax, and never saw his
country more. Throughout the remainder of
his days Chief Justice Oliver was agitated with
those same conflicting emotions that had tortured
him while taking his farewell walk through the 
<page 254>
grandfather's chair.
231
streets of Boston. Deep love and fierce resent-
ment burned in one flame within his breast.
Anathemas struggled with benedictions. He felt
as if one breath of his native air would renew
his life, yet would have died rather than breathe
the same air with rebels. And such, likewise, were the feelings of the
other exiles, a thousand in number, who departed
with the British army. Were they not the most
unfortunate of men 1
'The misfortunes of those exiled tories," ob-
served Laurence, 'must have made them think
of the poor exiles of Acadia.'
'They had a sad time of it, I suppose," said
Charley. "But I choose to rejoice with the
patriots, rather than be sorrowful with the tories.
Grandfather, what did General Washington do
now?'
'As the rear of the British army embarked
from the wharf," replied Grandfather, "General
Washington's troops marched over the Neck, through the fortification gates, and entered Bos-
ton in triumph. And now, for the first time
since the pilgrims landed, Massachusetts was
free from the dominion of England. May she
never again be subjected to foreign rule — never
again feel the rod of oppression!'
'Dear Grandfather," asked little Alice, "did
General Washington bring our chair back to
Boston?'

<page 255>
232
grandfather's chair.
'I know not how long the chair remained at
Cambridge," said Grandfather. "Had it staid
there till this time, it could not have found a
better or more appropriate shelter. The mansion
which General Washington occupied is still
standing, and his apartments have since been
tenanted by several eminent men. Governor
Everett, while a professor in the university, re-
sided there. So at an after period did Mr.
Sparks, whose invaluable labors have connected
his name with the immortality of Washington.
And at this very time a venerable friend and
contemporary of your Grandfather, after long pil-
grimages beyond the sea, has set up his staff of
rest at Washington's head-quarters.'
'You mean Professor Longfellow, Grandfather," said Laurence. 'Oh, how I should love to see
the author of those beautiful Voices of the
Night!'
'We will visit him next summer," answered
Grandfather, 'and take Clara and little Alice
with us - and Charley, too, if he will be quiet.'

<page 256>
grandfather's chair.
233
CHAPTER X.
When Grandfather resumed his narrative the
next evening, he told the children that he had
some difficulty in tracing the movements of the
chair during a short period after General Wash-
ington's departure from Cambridge. Within a few months, however, it made its
appearance at a shop in Boston, before the door
of which was seen a striped pole. In the inte-
rior was displayed a stuffed alligator, a rattle-
snake's skin, a bundle of Indian arrows, an old-fashioned matchlock gun, a walking-stick of
Governor Winthrop's, a wig of old Cotton
Mather's,and a colored print of the Boston massacre. In short, it was a barber's shop, kept by
a Mr. Pierce, who prided himself on having
shaved General Washington, Old Put, and many
other famous persons.
"This was not a very dignified situation for
our venerable chair," continued Grandfather;
"but, you know, there is no better place for
news than a barber's shop. All the events of
the revolutionary war were heard of there, sooner
than any where else. People used to sit in the
chair, reading the newspaper or talking, and
waiting to be shaved, while Mr. Pierce, with his
scissors and razor, was at work upon the heads
or chins of his other customers.'
'I am sorry the chair could not betake itself 
<page 257>
234 grandfather's chair.
to some more suitable place of refuge," said Lau-
rence. "It was old now, and must have longed
for quiet. Besides, after it had held Washington
in its arms, it ought not to have been compelled
to receive all the world. It should have been
put into the pulpit of the Old South Church, or
some other consecrated place.'
'Perhaps so,' answered Grandfather. "But the chair, in the course of its varied existence,
had grown so accustomed to general intercourse
with society, that I doubt whether it would have
contented itself in the pulpit of the Old South.
There it would have stood solitary, or with no
livelier companion than the silent organ, in the
opposite gallery, six days out of seven. I incline
to think that it had seldom been situated more
to its mind than on the sanded floor of the snug
little barber's shop.'
Then Grandfather amused his children and
himself with fancying all the different sorts of
people who had occupied our chair while they
awaited the leisure of the barber. There was the old clergyman, such as Dr.
Chauncey, wearing a white wig, which the
barber took from his head and placed upon a
wig-block. Half an hour, perhaps, was spent in
combing and powdering this reverend appendage
to a clerical skull. There, too, were officers of
the continental army, who required their hair to
be pomatumed and plastered, so as to give them 
<page 258>
grandfather's chair. 235
a bold and martial aspect. There, once in a
while, was seen the thin, care-worn, melancholy
visage of an old tory, with a wig that, in times
long past, had perhaps figured at a Province
House ball. And there, not unfrequently, sat the
rough captain of a privateer, just returned from a
successful cruise, in which he had captured half
a dozen richly laden vessels, belonging to King
George's subjects. And, sometimes, a rosy little
school-boy climbed into our chair, and sat staring,
with wide-open eyes, at the alligator, the rattle-
snake, and the other curiosities of the barber's
shop. His mother had sent him, with sixpence
in his hand, to get his glossy curls cropped off.
The incidents of the Revolution plentifully
supplied the barber's customers with topics of
conversation. They talked sorrowfully of the
death of General Montgomery and the failure of
our troops to take Quebec; for the New Eng-
enders were now as anxious to get Canada from
the English as they had formerly been to con-
quer it from the French.
'But, very soon," said Grandfather, 'came
news from Philadelphia, the most important that
America had ever heard of. On the 4th of July,
1776, Congress had signed the Declaration of
Independence. The thirteen colonies were now
free and independent states. Dark as our pros-
pects were, the inhabitants welcomed these
glorious tidings, and resolved to perish rather
than again bear the yoke of England!'

<page 259>
236 grandfather's chair.
'And I would perish, too!" cried Charley.
'It was a great day — a glorious deed!" said
Laurence, coloring high with enthusiasm. "And,
Grandfather, I love to think that the sages in
Congress showed themselves as bold and true as
the soldiers in the field. For it must have re-
quired more courage to sign the Declaration of
Independence than to fight the enemy in battle." Grandfather acquiesced in Laurence's view of
the matter. He then touched briefly and hastily
upon the prominent events of the Revolution.
The thunder-storm of war had now rolled south-
ward, and did not again burst upon Massachusetts,
where its first fury had been felt. But she con-
tributed her full share to the success of the
contest. Wherever a battle was fought, — whether
at Long Island, White Plains, Trenton, Prince-
ton, Brandywine, or Germantown — some of her
brave sons were found slain upon the field. In October, 1777, General Burgoyne surren-
dered his army, at Saratoga, to the American
general, Gates. The captured troops were sent
to Massachusetts. Not long afterwards, Doctor
Franklin and other American commissioners
made a treaty at Paris, by which France bound
herself to assist our countrymen. The gallant
Lafayette was already fighting for our freedom by the side of Washington. In 1778 a French
fleet, commanded by Count d'Estaing, spent a
considerable time in Boston Harbor. It marks 
<page 260>
grandfather's chair.
237
the vicissitudes of human affairs, that the French,
our ancient enemies, should come hither as com-
rades and brethren, and that kindred England
should be our foe.
'While the war was raging in the Middle and
Southern States," proceeded Grandfather, "Massachusetts had leisure to settle a new constitution
of government instead of the royal charter.
This was done in 1780. In the same year John
Hancock, who had been president of Congress,
was chosen governor of the state. He was the
first whom the people had elected since the days
of old Simon Bradstreet.'
'But, Grandfather, who had been governor
since the British were driven away?" inquired
Laurence. "General Gage and Sir William
Howe were the last whom you have told us of.'
'There had been no governor for the last four
years," replied Grandfather. "Massachusetts had
been ruled by the legislature, to whom the people
paid obedience of their own accord. It is one of
the most remarkable circumstances in our history,
that, when the charter government was over-
thrown by the war, no anarchy nor the slightest
confusion ensued. This was a great honor to
the people. But now Hancock was proclaimed
governor by sound of trumpet; and there was
again a settled government." Grandfather again adverted to the progress of
the war. In 1781 General Greene drove the 
<page 261>
238 grandfather's chair.
British from the Southern States. In October of the same year General Washington compelled
Lord Cornwallis to surrender his army, at Yorktown, in Virginia. This was the last great event
of the revolutionary contest. King George and
his ministers perceived that all the might of
England could not compel America to renew her
allegiance to the crown. After a great deal of
discussion, a treaty of peace was signed in Sep-
tember, 1783.
'Now, at last," said Grandfather, "after weary
years of war, the regiments of Massachusetts
returned in peace to their families. Now the
stately and dignified leaders, such as General
Lincoln and General Knox, with their powdered
hair and their uniforms of blue and buff, were
seen moving about the streets.'
'And little boys ran after them, I suppose," remarked Charley; "and the grown people bowed
respectfully.'
'They deserved respect; for they were good
men as well as brave," answered Grandfather.
"Now, too, the inferior officers and privates came
home to seek some peaceful occupation. Their
friends remembered them as slender and smooth-
cheeked young men; but they returned with the
erect and rigid mien of disciplined soldiers. Some hobbled on crutches and wooden legs;
others had received wounds, which were still
rankling in their breasts. Many, alas! had fallen 
<page 262>
grandfather's chair.
239
in battle, and perhaps were left unburied on the
bloody field.'
'The country must have been sick of war," observed Laurence. <
'One would have thought so," said Grandfather.
"Yet only two or three years elapsed before the
folly of some misguided men caused another
mustering of soldiers. This affair was called
Shays' War, because a Captain Shays was the
chief leader of the insurgents.'
'O Grandfather, don't let there be another
war!" cried little Alice, piteously. Grandfather comforted his dear little girl by
assuring her that there was no great mischief
done. Shays' War happened in the latter part
of 1786 and the beginning of the following
year. Its principal cause was the badness of the
times. The State of Massachusetts, in its public
capacity, was very much in debt. So, likewise,
were many of the people. An insurrection took
place, the object of which seems to have been,
to interrupt the course of law and get rid of
debts and taxes. James Bowdoin, a good and able man, was
now governor of Massachusetts. He sent Gen-
eral Lincoln, at the head of four thousand men,
to put down the insurrection. This general,
who had fought through several hard campaigns
in the Revolution, managed matters like an old
soldier, and totally defeated the rebels at the
expense of very little blood.

<page 263>
grandfather's chair.
'There is but one more public event to be
recorded in the history of our chair," proceeded
Grandfather. "In the year 1794 Samuel Adams
was elected governor of Massachusetts. I have
told you what a distinguished patriot he was,
and how much he resembled the stern old Puri-
tans. Could the ancient freemen of Massachu-
setts who lived in the days of the first charter have arisen from their graves, they would proba-
bly have voted for Samuel Adams to be governor.'
'Well, Grandfather, I hope he sat in our
chair!' said Clara.
'He did," replied Grandfather. "He had long
been in the habit of visiting the barber's shop,
where our venerable chair, philosophically for-
getful of its former dignities, had now spent
nearly eighteen not uncomfortable years. Such
a remarkable piece of furniture, so evidently a
relic of long-departed times, could not escape the
notice of Samuel Adams. He made minute
researches into its history, and ascertained what
a succession of excellent and famous people had
occupied it.'
'How did he find it out?" asked Charley. 'For
I suppose the chair could not tell its own history.'
'There used to be a vast collection of ancient
letters and other documents in the tower of the
Old South Church," answered Grandfather. "Per-
haps the history of our chair was contained
among these. At all events, Samuel Adams 
<page 264>
grandfather's chair. 241
appears to have been well acquainted with it.
When he became governor, he felt that he could have no more honorable seat than that which
had been the ancient chair of state. He there-
fore purchased it for a trifle,(and filled it worthily
for three years as governor of Massachusetts.'
'And what next?" asked Charley.
"That is all," said Grandfather, heaving a
sigh; for he could not help being a little sad at
the thought that his stories must close here.
"Samuel Adams died in 1803, at the age of
above threescore and ten. He was a great pa-
triot, but a poor man. At his death he left
scarcely property enough to pay the expenses of
his funeral. This precious chair, among his
other effects, was sold at auction; and your
Grandfather, who was then in the strength of
his years, became the purchaser."
Laurence, with a mind full of thoughts that
struggled for expression but could find none,
looked steadfastly at the chair. He had now learned all its history, yet was
not satisfied.
'Oh, how I wish that the chair could speak!" cried he. "After its long intercourse with man-
kind, — after looking upon the world for ages, —
what lessons of golden wisdom it might utter!
It might teach a private person how to lead a
good and happy life — or a statesman how to
make his country prosperous!'
16

<page 265>
242
grandfather's chair.
CHAPTER XI.
Grandfather was struck by Laurence's idea that the historic chair should utter a voice, and
thus pour forth the collected wisdom of two cen-
turies. The old gentleman had once possessed
no inconsiderable share of fancy; and even
now its fading sunshine occasionally glimmered
among his more sombre reflections.
As the history of his chair had exhausted all
his facts, Grandfather determined to have re-
course to fable. So, after warning the children
that they must not mistake this story for a true
one, he related what we shall call, —
GRANDFATHER'S DREAM.
Laurence and Clara, where were you last
night? Where were you, Charley, and dear
little Alice 1 You had all gone to rest, and left
old Grandfather to meditate alone in his great
chair. The lamp had grown so dim that its
light hardly illuminated the alabaster shade.
The wood-fire had crumbled into heavy embers,
among which the little flames danced, and quiv-
ered, and sported about like fairies. And here sat Grandfather all by himself. He
knew that it was bedtime; yet he could not help
longing to hear your merry voices, or to hold a
comfortable chat with some old friend; because
then his pillow would be visited by pleasan

<page 266>
grandfather's chair. 243
dreams. But, as neither children nor friends
were at hand, Grandfather leaned back in the
great chair and closed his eyes, for the sake of
meditating more profoundly. And, when Grandfather's meditations had
grown very profound indeed, he fancied that he
heard a sound over his head, as if somebody
were preparing to speak.
'Hem!" it said, in a dry, husky tone. "H-e-m!
Hem!"
As Grandfather did not know that any person
was in the room, he started up in great surprise,
and peeped hither and thither, behind the chair,
and into the recess by the fireside, and at the
dark nook yonder near the bookcase. Nobody
could he see. >
'Pooh!' said Grandfather to himself, "I must
have been dreaming." But, just as he was going to resume his seat,
Grandfather happened to look at the great chair.
The rays of firelight were flickering upon it in
such a manner that it really seemed as if its
oaken frame were all alive. What! did it not
move its elbow? There, too! It certainly lifted
one of its ponderous fore-legs, as if it had a
notion of drawing itself a little nearer to the fire.
Meanwhile the lion's head nodded at Grand-
father with as polite and sociable a look as a
lion's visage, carved in oak, could possibly be
expected to assume. Well, this is strange!
"Good evening, my old friend," said the dry 
<page 267>
244 grandfather's chair.
•
and husky voice, now a little clearer than be-
fore. "We have been intimately acquainted so
long that I think it high time we have a chat
together.' .
Grandfather was looking straight at the lion's
head, and could not be mistaken in supposing
that it moved its lips. So here the mystery was
all explained.
'I was not aware," said Grandfather, with a
civil salutation to his oaken companion, "that
you possessed the faculty of speech. Other-
wise I should often have been glad to converse
with such a solid, useful, and substantial if not
brilliant member of society.'
'Oh!' replied the ancient chair, in a quiet
and easy tone; for it had now cleared its throat
of the dust of ages. "I am naturally a silent
and incommunicative sort of character. Once or
twice in the course of a century I unclose my
lips. When the gentle Lady Arbella departed
this life I uttered a groan. When the honest
mint-master weighed his plump daughter against
the pine-tree shillings I chuckled audibly at the
joke. When old Simon Bradstreet took the
place of the tyrant Andros I joined in the gen-
eral huzza, and capered on my wooden legs for joy. To be sure, the bystanders were so
fully occupied with their own feelings that my
sympathy was quite unnoticed.'
'And have you often held a private chat with
your friends?" asked Grandfather.

<page 268>
grandfather's chair.
245
'Not often," answered the chair. "I once
talked with Sir William Phipps, and communi-
cated my ideas about the witchcraft delusion.
Cotton Mather had several conversations with
me, and derived great benefit from my historical
reminiscences. In the days of the Stamp Act, I
whispered in the ear of Hutchinson, bidding him
to remember what stock his countrymen were
descended of, and to think whether the spirit of
their forefathers had utterly departed from them.
The last man whom I favored with a colloquy was that stout old republican, Samuel Adams.'
'And how happens it," inquired Grandfather,
"that there is no record nor tradition of your
conversational abilities? It is an uncommon
thing to meet with a chair that can talk.'
'Why, to tell you the truth," said the chair,
giving itself a hitch nearer to the hearth, "I am
not apt to choose the most suitable moments for
unclosing my lips. Sometimes I have incon-
siderately begun to speak, when my occupant,
lolling back in my arms, was inclined to take an
after-dinner nap. Or, perhaps, the impulse to
talk may be felt at midnight, when the lamp
burns dim and the fire crumbles into decay, and
the studious or thoughtful man finds that his
brain is in a mist. Oftenest, I have unwisely
uttered my wisdom in the ears of sick persons,
when the inquietude of fever made them toss
about upon my cushion. And so it happens,

<page 269>
246
grandfather's chair.
that, though my words make a pretty strong
impression at the moment, yet my auditors inva-
riably remember them only as a dream. I should
not wonder if you, my excellent friend, were to
do the same to-morrow morning.'
'Nor I either," thought Grandfather to himself.
However, he thanked this respectable old chair
for beginning the conversation, and begged to
know whether it had anything particular to
communicate.
"I have been listening attentively to your nar-
rative of my adventures," replied the chair, 'and
it must be owned that your correctness entitles
you to be held up as a pattern to biographers.
Nevertheless, there are a few omissions which I
should be glad to see supplied. For instance, you make no mention of the good knight Sir
Richard Saltonstall, nor of the famous Hugh
Peters, nor of those old regicide judges, Whalley,
Goffe, and Dixwell. Yet I have borne the
weight of all those distinguished characters at
one time or another."
Grandfather promised amendment if ever he
should have an opportunity to repeat his narra-
tive. The good old chair, which still seemed to
retain a due regard for outward appearance, then
reminded him how long a time had passed since
it had been provided with a new cushion. It
likewise expressed the opinion that the oaken
figures on its back would show to much better
advantage by the aid of a little varnish.

<page 270>
grandfather's chair.
247
'And I have had a complaint in this joint," continued the chair, endeavoring to lift one of
its legs, "ever since Charley trundled his wheel-
barrow against me.'
'It shall be attended to," said Grandfather.
"And now, venerable chair, I have a favor to
solicit. During an existence of more than two
centuries you have had a familiar intercourse
with men who were esteemed the wisest of their
day. Doubtless, with your capacious understand-
ing, you have treasured up many an invaluable
lesson of wisdom. You certainly have had time
enough to guess the riddle of life. Tell us poor
mortals, then,how we may be happy!'
The lion's head fixed its eyes thoughtfully
upon the fire, and the whole chair assumed an
aspect of deep meditation. Finally it beckoned
to Grandfather with its elbow, and made a step
sideways towards him, as if it had a very impor-
tant secret to communicate.
'As long as I have stood in the midst of human
affairs," said the chair, with a very oracular enun-
ciation, "I have constantly observed that Justice,
Truth, and Love, are the chief ingredients of
every happy life.'
'Justice, Truth, and Love !' exclaimed Grand-
father. "We need not exist two centuries to find
out that these qualities are essential to our hap-
piness. This is no secret. Every human being
is born with the instinctive knowledge of it.'

<page 271>
248 grandfather's chair.
'Ah!" cried the chair, drawing back in sur-
prise. "From what I have observed of the deal-
ings of man with man, and nation with nation,
I never should have suspected that they knew
this all-important secret. And, with this eternal
lesson written in your soul, do you ask me to
sift new wisdom for you out of my petty ex-
istence of two or three centuries?'
'Bat, my dear chair —' said Grandfather.
'Not a word more," interrupted the chair;
"here I close my lips for the next hundred years.
At the end of that period, if I shall have dis-
covered any new precepts of happiness better
than what Heaven has already taught you, they
shall assuredly be given to the world." In the energy of its utterance the oaken chair
seemed to stamp its foot, and trod (we hope
unintentionally) upon Grandfather's toe. The
old gentleman started, and found that he had
been asleep in the great chair, and that his heavy
walking stick had fallen down across his foot.
'Grandfather,' cried little Alice, clapping her
hands, "you must dream a new dream every
night about our chair!"
Laurence, and Clara, and Charley said the
same. But the good old gentleman shook his
head, and declared that here ended the history,
real or fabulous, of Grandfather's Chair.

<page 272>
-
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
BENJAMIN WEST,
SIR ISAAC NEWTON,
SAMUEL JOHNSON,
OLIVER CROMWELL,
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN,
QUEEN CHRISTINA.

<page 273>
This small volume and others of a similar character, from
the same hand, have not been composed without a deep sense
of responsibility. The author regards children as sacred, and
would not, for the world, cast anything into the fountain of a
young heart that might embitter and pollute its waters. And,
even in point of the reputation to be aimed at, juvenile litera-
ture is as well worth cultivating as any other. The writer, if he
succeed in pleasing his little readers, may hope to be remem-
bered by them till their own old age — a far longer period of
literary existence than is generally attained by those who seek
immortality from the judgments of full-grown men.

<page 274>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES. CHAPTER I.
When Edward Temple was about eight or
nine years old he was afflicted with a disorder
of the eyes. It was so severe, and his sight was
naturally so delicate, that the surgeon felt some
apprehensions lest the boy should become totally
blind. He therefore gave strict directions to
keep him in a darkened chamber, with a ban-
dage over his eyes. Not a ray of the blessed light
of heaven could be suffered to visit the poor
lad. This was a sad thing for Edward. It was
just the same as if there were to be no more
sunshine, nor moonlight, nor glow of the cheerful
fire, nor light of lamps. A night had begun which
was to continue perhaps for months, — a longer
and drearier night than that which voyagers are
compelled to endure when their ship is ice-
bound, throughout the winter, in the Arctic
Ocean. His dear father and mother, his brother
George, and the sweet face of little Emily Rob-

<page 275>
252
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
inson, must all vanish and leave him in utter
darkness and solitude. Their voices and foot-
steps, it is true, would be heard around him; he
would feel his mother's embrace and the kind
pressure of all their hands; but still it would
seem as if they were a thousand miles away.
And then his studies! They were to be en-
tirely given up. This was another grievous
trial; for Edward's memory hardly went back
to the period when he had not known how to
read. Many and many a holiday had he spent
at his book, poring over its pages until the deep-
ening twilight confused the print and made all
the letters run into long words. Then would
he press his hands across his eyes and wonder
why they pained him so, and, when the candles
were lighted, what was the reason that they
burned so dimly, like the moon in a foggy night?
Poor little fellow! So far as his eyes were con-
cerned he was already an old man, and needed
a pair of spectacles almost as much as his own
grandfather did. And now, alas! the time was come when even
grandfather's spectacles could not have assisted
Edward to read. After a few bitter tears, which
only pained his eyes the more, the poor boy sub-
mitted to the surgeon's orders. His eyes were
bandaged, and, with his mother on one side and
his little friend Emily on the other, he was led
into a darkened chamber.

<page 276>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
253
'Mother, I shall be very miserable!" said Ed-
ward, sobbing.
'Oh, no, my dear child!" replied his mother,
cheerfully. "Your eyesight was a precious gift
of Heaven, it is true; but you would do wrong
to be miserable for its loss, even if there were
no hope of regaining it. There are other en-
joyments besides what come to us through our
eyes.'
'None that are worth having," said Edward.
'Ah, but you will not think so long," rejoined
Mrs. Temple, with tenderness. "All of us —
your father, and myself, and George, and our
sweet Emily — will try to find occupation and
amusement for you. We will use all our eyes
to make you happy. Will they not be better
than a single pair?'
'I will sit by you all day long," said Emily,
in her low, sweet voice, putting her hand into
that of Edward.
'And so will I, Ned," said George, his elder
brother, — ' school-time and all, if my father will
permit me." Edward's brother George was three or four
years older than himself, a fine, hardy lad, of a
bold and ardent temper. He was the leader of
his comrades in all their enterprises and amuse-
ments. As to his proficiency at study there was
not much to be said. He had sense and ability
enough to have made himself a scholar, but 
<page 277>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
found so many pleasanter things to do that he
seldom took hold of a book with his whole
heart. So fond was George of boisterous sports
and exercises that it was really a great token of
affection and sympathy when he offered to sit
all day long in a dark chamber with his poor
brother Edward.
'As for little Emily Robinson, she was the
daughter of one of Mr. Temple's dearest friends.
Ever since her mother went to heaven (which
was soon after Emily's birth) the little girl had
dwelt in the household where we now find her.
Mr. and Mrs. Temple seemed to love her as well
as their own children; for they had no daughter
except Emily; nor would the boys have known
the blessing of a sister had not this gentle stran-
ger come to teach them what it was. If I could
show you Emily's face, with her dark hair
smoothed away from her forehead, you would be
pleased with her look of simplicity and loving kindness, but might think that she was some-
what too grave for a child of seven years old.
But you would not love her the less for that. So brother George and this loving little girl were to be Edward's companions and playmates while he should be kept prisoner in the dark
chamber. When the first bitterness of his grief
was over he began to feel that there might be
some comforts and enjoyments in life even for a
boy whose eyes were covered with a bandage.

<page 278>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
'I thank you, dear mother," said he, with
only a few sobs, 'and you, Emily; and you too,
George. You will all be very kind to me, I
know. And my father, —will not he come and
see me every day?'
'Yes, my dear boy," said Mr. Temple; for,
though invisible to Edward, he was standing
close beside him. "I will spend some hours of
every day with you. And as I have often
amused you by relating stories and adventures while you had the use of your eyes, I can do
the same now that you are unable to read. Will
this please you, Edward?'
'Oh, very much!' replied Edward.
'Well then,' said his father, "this evening we
will begin the series of Biographical Stories which I promised you some time ago.'

<page 279>
256
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
CHAPTER II.
When evening came, Mr. Temple found Ed-
ward considerably revived in spirits and disposed
to be resigned to his misfortune. Indeed, the
figure of the boy, as it was dimly seen by the fire-
light, reclining in a well-stuffed easy-chair, looked
so very comfortable that many people might have
envied him. When a man's eyes have grown old
with gazing at the ways of the world, it does
not seem such a terrible misfortune to have them
bandaged. Little Emily Robinson sat by Edward's side with the air of an accomplished nurse. As well
as the duskiness of the chamber would permit she watched all his motions and each varying
expression of his face, and tried to anticipate her
patient's wishes before his tongue could utter
them. Yet it was noticeable that the child
manifested an indescribable awe and disquietude whenever she fixed her eyes on the bandage;
for, to her simple and affectionate heart, it seemed
as if her dear friend Edward was separated from
her because she could not see his eyes. A
friend's eyes tell us many things which could
never be spoken by the tongue. George, likewise, looked awkward and con-
fused, as stout and healthy boys are accustomed
to do in the society of the sick or afflicted.
Never having felt pain or sorrow, they are 
<page 280>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
257
abashed, from not knowing how to sympathize
with the sufferings of others.
'Well, my dear Edward," inquired Mrs. Tem-
ple, "is your chair quite comfortable? and has
your little nurse provided for all your wants? If
so, your father is ready to begin his stories.'
'Oh, I am very well now," answered Edward,
with a faint smile. "And my ears have not for-
saken me, though my eyes are good for nothing.
So pray, dear father, begin!'
It was Mr. Temple's design to tell the children
a series of true stories, the incidents of which
should be taken from the childhood and early
life of eminent people. Thus he hoped to bring
George, and Edward, and Emily into closer
acquaintance with the famous persons who have
lived in other times by showing that they also
had been children once. Although Mr. Temple
was scrupulous to relate nothing but what was
founded on fact, yet he felt himself at liberty to
clothe the incidents of his narrative in a new
coloring, so that his auditors might understand
them the better.
"My first story," said he, "shall be about a
painter of pictures.'
|Dear me!' cried Edward, with a sigh. "I am afraid I shall never look at pictures any
more.'
'We will hope for the best,' answered his.
17

<page 281>
258
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
father. "In the mean time, you must try to see
things within your own mind."
Mr. Temple then began the following story:
BENJAMIN WEST.
Born 1738. Died 1820.
In the year 1738 there came into the world, in
the town of Springfield, Pennsylvania, a Quaker
infant, from whom his parents and neighbors
looked for wonderful things. A famous preacher
of the Society of Friends had prophesied about
little Ben, and foretold that he would be one of
the most remarkable characters that had appeared
on the earth since the days of William Penn.
On this account the eyes of many people were
fixed upon the boy. Some of his ancestors had
won great renown in the old wars of England
and France; but it was probably expected that
Ben would become a preacher, and would con-
vert multitudes to the peaceful doctrines of the
Quakers. Friend West and his wife were
thought to be very fortunate in having such a
son. Little Ben lived to the ripe age of six years without doing anything that was worthy to be
told in history. But one summer afternoon, in
his seventh year, his mother put a fan into his
hand and bade him keep the flies away from the
face of a little babe who lay fast asleep in the
cradle. She then left the room. 
<page 282>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
259
The boy waved the fan to and fro and drove
away the buzzing flies whenever they had the
impertinence to come near the baby's face.
When they had all flown out of the window or
into distant parts of the room, he bent over the
cradle and delighted himself with gazing at the
sleeping infant. It was, indeed, a very pretty
sight. The little personage in the cradle slum-
bered peacefully, with its waxen hands under its
chin, looking as full of blissful quiet as if angels
were singing lullabies in its ear. Indeed, it must
have been dreaming about heaven; for, while
Ben stooped over the cradle, the little baby
smiled.
'How beautiful she looks!" said Ben to him-
self. "What a pity it is that such a pretty
smile should not last forever!"
Now Ben, at this period of his life, had never
heard of that wonderful art by which a look,
that appears and vanishes in a moment, may be
made to last for hundreds of years. But, though
nobody had told him of such an art, he may be
said to have invented it for himself. On a table near at hand there were pens and paper, and ink
of two colors, black and red. The boy seized a
pen and sheet of paper, and, kneeling down be-
side the cradle, began to draw a likeness of the
infant. While he was busied in this manner he
heard his mother's step approaching, and hastily
tried to conceal the paper.

<page 283>
260
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
'Benjamin, my son, what hast thou been
doing?" inquired his mother, observing marks of
confusion in his face. At first Ben was unwilling to tell; for he felt
as if there might be something wrong in stealing
the baby's face and putting it upon a sheet of
paper. However, as his mother insisted, he
finally put the sketch into her hand, and then
hung his head, expecting to be well scolded.
But when the good lady saw what was on the
paper, in lines of red and black ink, she uttered
a scream of surprise and joy.
"Bless me!" cried she. "It is a picture of
little Sally!"
And then she threw her arms round our friend
Benjamin, and kissed him so tenderly that he
never afterwards was afraid to show his perform-
ances to his mother. As Ben grew older, he was observed to take
vast delight in looking at the hues and forms of
nature. For instance, he was greatly pleased
with the blue violets of spring, the wild roses of
summer, and the scarlet cardinal-flowers of early
autumn. In the decline of the year, when the
woods were variegated with all the colors of the
rainbow, Ben seemed to desire nothing better
than to gaze at them from morn till night. The
purple and golden clouds of sunset were a joy to
him. And he was continually endeavoring to
draw the figures of trees, men, mountains, houses, 
<page 284>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
261
cattle, geese, ducks, and turkeys, with a piece of
chalk, on barn-doors, or on the floor.
In these old times the Mohawk Indians were
still numerous in Pennsylvania. Every year a
party of them used to pay a visit to Springfield,
because the wigwams of their ancestors had for-
merly stood there. These wild men grew fond
of little Ben, and made him very happy by giving
him some of the red and yellow paint with which
they were accustomed to adorn their faces. His
mother, too, presented him with a piece of indigo. Thus he now had three colors,—red, blue, and
yellow— and could manufacture green by mix-
ing the yellow with the blue. Our friend Ben
was overjoyed, and doubtless showed his grati-
tude to the Indians by taking their likenesses in the strange dresses which they wore, with
feathers, tomahawks, and bows and arrows.
But, all this time the young artist had no paint-
brushes, nor were there any to be bought, unless
he had sent to Philadelphia on purpose. How-
ever, he was a very ingenious boy, and resolved
to manufacture paint-brushes for himself. With
this design he laid hold upon—what do you
think? Why, upon a respectable old black cat,
who was sleeping quietly by the fireside.
'Puss,' said little Ben to the cat, "pray give
me some of the fur from the tip of thy tail?"
Though he addressed the black cat so civilly,
yet Ben was determined to have the fur, whether 
<page 285>
262
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
she were willing or not. Puss, who had no great
zeal for the fine arts, would have resisted if she
could; but the boy was armed with his mother's
scissors, and very dexterously clipped off fur
enough to make a paint-brush. This was of so
much use to him that he applied to Madame Puss
again and again, until her warm coat of fur had
become so thin and ragged that she could hardly
keep comfortable through the winter. Poor thing!
she was forced to creep close into the chimney-
corner, and eyed Ben with a very rueful physi-
ognomy. But Ben considered it more necessary
that he should have paint-brushes, than that puss should be warm. About this period, Friend West received a visit
from Mr. Pennington, a merchant of Philadelphia,
who was likewise a member of the Society of
Friends. The visitor, on entering the parlor,
was surprised to see it ornamented with draw-
ings of Indian chiefs, and of birds with beautiful
plumage, and of the wild flowers of the forest.
Nothing of the kind was ever seen before in the
habitation of a Quaker farmer.
"Why, Friend West,' exclaimed the Philadel-
phia merchant, "what has possessed thee to cover
thy walls with all these pictures? Where on
earth didst thou get them?"
Then Friend West explained that all these pic-
tures were painted by little Ben, with no better
materials than red and yellow ochre and a piece 
<page 286>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
263
of indigo, and with brushes made of the black
cat's fur.
'Verily,' said Mr. Pennington, "the boy hath a
wonderful faculty. Some of our friends might
look upon these matters as vanity; but little
Benjamin appears to have been born a painter;
and Providence is wiser than we are." The good merchant patted Benjamin on the
head, and evidently considered him a wonderful
boy. When his parents saw how much their
son's performances were admired, they, no doubt, remembered the prophecy of the old Quaker
preacher respecting Ben's future eminence. Yet
they could not understand how he was ever to
become a very great and useful man merely by
making pictures. One evening, shortly after Mr. Pennington's re-
turn to Philadelphia, a package arrived at Spring-
field, directed to our little friend Ben.
'What can it possibly be?" thought Ben, when
it was put into his hands. "Who can have sent
me such a great square package as this?"
On taking off the thick brown paper which
enveloped it, behold! there was a paint-box,
with a great many cakes of paint, and brushes
of various sizes. It was the gift of good Mr. Pen-
nington. There were likewise several squares of
canvas such as artists use for painting pictures
upon, and, in addition to all these treasures, some
beautiful engravings of landscapes. These were 
<page 287>
264
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
the first pictures that Ben had ever seen, except
those of his own drawing. What a joyful evening was this for the little
artist! At bedtime he put the paint-box under
his pillow, and got hardly a wink of sleep; for,
all night long, his fancy was painting pictures in
the darkness. In the morning he hurried to the
garret, and was seen no more till the dinner-
hour; nor did he give himself time to eat more
than a mouthful or two of food before he hurried
back to the garret again. The next day, and the
next, he was just as busy as ever; until at last
his mother thought it time to ascertain what he
was about. She accordingly followed him to
the garret. On opening the door, the first object that pre-
sented itself to her eyes was our friend Benjamin,
giving the last touches to a beautiful picture.
He had copied portions of two of the engravings,
and made one picture out of both, with such ad-
mirable skill that it was far more beautiful than
the originals. The grass, the trees, the water,
the sky, and the houses were all painted in their
proper colors. There, too, were the sunshine and
the shadow, looking as natural as life.
'My dear child, thou hast done wonders!" cried his mother. The good lady was in an ecstasy of delight.
And well might she be proud of her boy; for
there were touches in this picture which old 
<page 288>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
265
artists, who had spent a lifetime in the business,
need not have been ashamed of. Many a year
afterwards, this wonderful production was ex-
hibited at the Royal Academy in London. When Benjamin was quite a large lad he was
sent to school at Philadelphia. Not long after his
arrival he had a slight attack of fever, which con-
fined him to his bed. The light, which would
otherwise have disturbed him, was excluded from
his chamber by means of closed wooden shut-
ters. At first it appeared so totally dark that
Ben could not distinguish any object in the
room. By degrees, however, his eyes became
accustomed to the scanty light. He was lying on his back, looking up towards
the ceiling, when suddenly he beheld the dim
apparition of a white cow moving slowly over
his head! Ben started, and rubbed his eyes in
the greatest amazement.
'What can this mean?" thought he. The white cow disappeared; and next came
several pigs, which trotted along the ceiling and
vanished into the darkness of the chamber. So
lifelike did these grunters look that Ben almost
seemed to hear them squeak.
'Well, this is very strange!' said Ben to him-
self. When the people of the house came to see
him, Benjamin told them of the marvellous cir-
cumstance which had occurred. But they would
not believe him.

<page 289>
266
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
'Benjamin, thou art surely out of thy senses!" cried they. "How is it possible that a white
cow and a litter of pigs should be visible on the
ceiling of a dark chamber?"
Ben, however, had great confidence in his own
eyesight, and was determined to search the mys-
tery to the bottom. For this purpose, when he
was again left alone, he got out of bed and ex-
amined the window-shutters. He soon perceived
a small chink in one of them, through which a
ray of light found its passage and rested upon
the ceiliug. Now the science of optics will
inform us that the pictures of the white cow
and the pigs, and of other objects out of doors,
came into the dark chamber through this nar-
row chink, and were painted over Benjamin's
head. It is greatly to his credit that he dis-
covered the scientific principle of this phenom-
enon, and by means of it constructed a Camera
Obscura, or Magic Lantern, out of a hollow box.
This was of great advantage to him in drawing
landscapes. Well, time went on, and Benjamin continued
to draw and paint pictures until he had now
reached the age when it was proper that he
should choose a business for life. His father and
mother were in considerable perplexity about
him. According to the ideas of the Quakers, it
is not right for people to spend their lives in
occupations that are of no real and sensible 
<page 290>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
267
advantage to the world. Now, what advantage
could the world expect from Benjamin's pictures?
This was a difficult question; and, in order to
set their minds at rest, his parents determined to
consult the preachers and wise men of their
society. Accordingly, they all assembled in the
meeting-house, and discussed the matter from
beginning to end.
Finally, they came to a very wise decision.
It seemed so evident that Providence had created
Benjamin to be a painter, and had given him
abilities which would be thrown away in any
other business, that the Quakers resolved not to
oppose his inclination. They even acknowl-
edged that the sight of a beautiful picture might
convey instruction to the mind and might ben-
efit the heart as much as a good book or a wise
discourse. They therefore committed the youth
to the direction of God, being well assured that
he best knew what was his proper sphere of
usefulness. The old men laid their hands upon
Benjamin's head and gave him their blessing,
and the women kissed him affectionately. All
consented that he should go forth into the world and learn to be a painter by studying the best
pictures of ancient and modern times. So our friend Benjamin left the dwelling of
his parents, and his native woods and streams,
and the good Quakers of Springfield, and the
Indians who had given him his first colors, — he

<page 291>
268
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
left all the places and persons whom he had hith-
erto known, and returned to them no more.
He went first to Philadelphia, and afterwards to
Europe. Here he was noticed by many great
people, but retained all the sobriety and sim-
plicity which he had learned among the Quakers.
It is related of him, that, when he was presented
at the court of the Prince of Parma, he kept his
hat upon his head even while kissing the
Prince's hand. When he was twenty-five years old he went
to London and established himself there as an
artist. Indue course of time he acquired great
fame by his pictures, and was made chief painter
to King George the Third, and president of the
Royal Academy of Arts. When the Quakers of
Pennsylvania heard of his success, they felt that
the prophecy of the old preacher as to little
Ben's future eminence was now accomplished.
It is true, they shook their heads at his pictures
of battle and bloodshed, such as the Death of
Wolfe, thinking that these terrible scenes
should not be held up to the admiration of the
world. But they approved of the great paintings in
which he represented the miracles and sufferings
of the Redeemer of mankind. King George
employed him to adorn a large and beautiful
chapel at Windsor Castle with pictures of these
sacred subjects. He likewise painted a magnifi-

<page 292>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
269
cent picture of Christ Healing the Sick, which
he gave to the hospital at Philadelphia. It was
exhibited to the public, and produced so much
profit that the hospital was enlarged so as to
accommodate thirty more patients. If Benjamin
West had done no other good deed than this, yet
it would have been enough to entitle him to an
honorable remembrance forever. At this very
day there are thirty poor people in the hospital who owe all their comforts to that same picture. We shall mention only a single incident more.
The picture of Christ Healing the Sick was ex-
hibited at the Royal Academy in London, where
it covered a vast space and displayed a multitude
of figures as large as life. On the wall, close
beside this admirable picture, hung a small and
faded landscape. It was the same that little Ben
had painted in his father's garret, after receiving
the paint-box and engravings from good Mr. Pen-
nington. He lived many years in peace and honor, and
died in 1820, at the age of eighty-two. The
story of his life is almost as wonderful as a fairy
tale; for there are few stranger transformations
than that of a little unknown Quaker boy, in the
wilds of America, into the most distinguished
English painter of his day. Let us each make
the best use of our natural abilities as Benjamin
West did; and, with the blessing of Providence,
we shall arrive at some good end. As for fame, 
<page 293>
270
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
it is but little matter whether we acquire it or
not.
IThank you for the story, my dear father," said Edward, when it was finished. "Do you
know that it seems as if I could see things with-
out the help of my eyes? While you were
speaking I have seen little Ben, and the baby in
its cradle, and the Indians, and the white cow, and the pigs, and kind Mr. Pennington, and all
the good old Quakers, almost as plainly as if
they were in this very room.'
'It is because your attention was not disturbed
by outward objects," replied Mr. Temple. "People, when deprived of sight, often have more
vivid ideas than those who possess the perfect use
of their eyes. I will venture to say that George
has not attended to the story quite so closely.'
'No indeed,' said George, 'but it was a very
pretty story for all that. How I should have
laughed to see Ben making a paint-brush out of
the black cat's tail! I intend to try the experi-
ment with Emily's kitten.'
'Oh, no, no, George!" cried Emily, earnestly.
"My kitten cannot spare her tail." Edward being an invalid, it was now time for
him to retire to bed. When the family bade him
good-night, he turned his face towards them,
looking very loath to part.
II shall not know when morning comes,' said

<page 294>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
he sorrowfully. 'And besides I want to hear
your voices all the time; for, when nobody is
speaking, it seems as if I were alone in a dark
world!'
'You must have faith, my dear child," replied
his mother. "Faith is the soul's eyesight; and
when we possess it the world is never dark nor
lonely.'

<page 295>
272
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
CHAPTER III.
The next day Edward began to get accus-
tomed to his new condition of life. Once, indeed,
when his parents were out of the way and only
Emily was left to take care of him, he could not
resist the temptation to thrust aside the bandage and peep at the anxious face of his little nurse.
But, in spite of the dimness of the chamber, the
experiment caused him so much pain that he felt
no inclination to take another look. So, with a
deep sigh, he resigned himself to his fate.
'Emily, pray talk to me!" said he, somewhat
impatiently. Now, Emily was a remarkably silent little girl,
and did not possess that liveliness of disposition
which renders some children such excellent com-
panions. She seldom laughed, and had not the
faculty of making many words about small mat-
ters. But the love and earnestness of her heart
taught her how to amuse poor Edward in his
darkness. She put her knitting-work into his
hands.
'You must learn how to knit," said she.
'What! without using my eyes?" cried Ed-
ward.
'I can knit with my eyes shut," replied Emily.
Then, with her own little hands she guided
Edward's fingers while he set about this new
occupation. So awkward were his first attempts,

<page 296>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
273
that any other little girl would have laughed
heartily. But Emily preserved her gravity, and
showed the utmost patience in taking up the in-
numerable stitches which he let down. In the
course of an hour or two his progress was quite
encouraging. When evening came, Edward acknowledged
that the day had been far less wearisome than he
anticipated. But he was glad, nevertheless,
when his father and mother, and George and
Emily, all took their seats around his chair. He
put out his hand to grasp each of their hands,
and smiled with a very bright expression upon
his lips.
"Now I can see you all with my mind's eye," said he; 'and now, father, pray tell us another,
story. So Mr. Temple began. SIR ISAAC NEWTON.
Born 1642. Died, 1727.
On Christmas day, in the year 1642, Isaac
Newton was born at the small village of Woolsthorpe, in England. Little did his mother think,
when she beheld her new-born babe, that he was
destined to explain many matters which had been
a mystery ever since the creation of the world. Isaac's father being dead, Mrs. Newton was
married again to a clergyman, and went to re-
side at North Witham. Her son was left to the
18

<page 297>
274
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
care of his good old grandmother, who was very
kind to him and sent him to school. In his
early years Isaac did not appear to be a very
bright scholar, but was chiefly remarkable for his
ingenuity in all mechanical occupations. He had
a set of little tools and saws of various sizes manufactured by himself. With the aid of these Isaac contrived to make many curious articles,
at which he worked with so much skill that he
seemed to have been born with a saw or chisel
in hand. The neighbors looked with vast admiration at
the things which Isaac manufactured. And his
old grandmother, I suppose, was never weary of
talking about him.
"He'll make a capital workman one of these
days," she would probably say. "No fear but
what Isaac will do well in the world and be a
rich man before he dies." It is amusing to conjecture what were the
anticipations of his grandmother and the neigh-
bors about Isaac's future life. Some of them,
perhaps, fancied that he would make beautiful
furniture of mahogany, rosewood, or polished
oak, inlaid with ivory and ebony, and magnifi-
cently gilded. And then, doubtless, all the rich
people would purchase these fine things to adorn
their drawing-rooms. Others probably thought
that little Isaac was destined to be an architect,
and would build splendid mansions for the no-

<page 298>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
275
bility and gentry, and churches too, with the
tallest steeples that had ever been seen in Eng-
land. Some of his friends, no doubt, advised Isaac's
grandmother to apprentice him to a clock-maker;
for, besides his mechanical skill, the boy seemed
to have a taste for mathematics, which would be
very useful to him in that profession. And then,
in due time, Isaac would set up for himself, and
would manufacture curious clocks, like those that
contain sets of dancing figures, which issue from
the dial-plate when the hour is struck; or like
those where a ship sails across the face of the
clock, and is seen tossing up and down on the
waves as often as the pendulum vibrates. Indeed, there was some ground for supposing
that Isaac would devote himself to the manufac-
ture of clocks; since he had already made one,
of a kind which nobody had ever heard of before.
It was set a-going, not by wheels and weights like other clocks, but by the dropping of water.
This was an object of great wonderment to all
the people round about; and it must be confessed
that there are few boys, or men either, who could
contrive to tell what a clock it is by means of a
bowl of water. Besides the water-clock, Isaac made a sundial. Thus his grandmother was never at a loss to
know the hour; for the water-clock would tell
it in the shade, and the dial in the sunshine. 
<page 299>
276
EI0GRAPH1CAL STORIES.
The sundial is said to be still in existence at
Woolsthorpe, on the corner of the house where
Isaac dwelt. If so, it must have marked the
passage of every sunny hour that has elapsed since Isaac Newton was a boy. It marked all
the famous moments of his life; it marked the
hour of his death; and still the sunshine creeps
slowly over it, as regularly as when Isaac first
set it up. Yet we must not say that the sundial has
lasted longer than its maker; for Isaac Newton
will exist long after the dial —yea, and long
after the sun itself — shall have crumbled to
decay. Isaac possessed a wonderful faculty of acquir-
ing knowledge by the simplest means. For
instance, what method do you suppose he took to find out the strength of the wind? You will
never guess how the boy could compel that un-
seen, inconstant, and ungovernable wonder, the wind, to tell him the measure of its strength.
Yet nothing can be more simple. He jumped
against the wind; and by the length of his jump he could calculate the force of a gentle breeze, a
brisk gale, or a tempest. Thus, even in his boy-
ish sports, he was continually searching out the
secrets of philosophy. Not far from his grandmother's residence there
was a windmill which operated on a new plan.
Isaac was in the habit of going thither frequently, 
<page 300>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
277
and would spend whole hours in examining its
various parts. While the mill was at rest he
pried into its internal machinery. When its
broad sails were set in motion by the wind, he
watched the process by which the mill-stones
were made to revolve and crush the grain that
was put into the hopper. After gaining a thor-
ough knowledge of its construction he was
observed to be unusually busy with his tools. It was not long before his grandmother and
all the neighborhood knew what Isaac had been
about. He had constructed a model of the wind-
mill. Though not so large, I suppose, as one of
the box-traps which boys set to catch squirrels,
yet every part of the mill and its machinery was
complete. Its little sails were neatly made of
linen, and whirled round very swiftly when the
mill was placed in a draught of air. Even a puff
of wind from Isaac's mouth or from a pair of
bellows was sufficient to set the sails in motion.
And, what was most curious, if a handful of
grains of wheat were put into the little hopper,
they would soon be converted into snow-white
flour.
Isaac's playmates were enchanted with his new
windmill. They thought that nothing so pretty and so wonderful had ever been seen in the
whole world.
"But, Isaac," said one of them, "you have for-
gotten one thing that belongs to a mill.'

<page 301>
278
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
'What is that?" asked Isaac; for he supposed that, from the roof of the mill to its foundation,
he had forgotten nothing.
'Why, where is the miller?" said his friend.
'That is true ! — I must look out for one," said Isaac; and he set himself to consider how
the deficiency should be supplied. He might easily have made the miniature
figure of a man; but then it would not have
been able to move about and perform the duties
of a miller. As Captain Lemuel Gulliver had
not yet discovered the island of Lilliput, Isaac
did not know that there were little men in the
world whose size was just suited to his wind-
mill. It so happened, however, that a mouse had
just been caught in the trap; and, as no other
miller could be found, Mr. Mouse was appointed
to that important office. The new miller made
a very respectable appearance in his dark grey
coat. To be sure, he had not a very good char-
acter for honesty, and was suspected of some-
times stealing a portion of the grain which was
given him to grind. But perhaps some two-legged millers are quite as dishonest as this small
quadruped. As Isaac grew older, it was found that he had
far more important matters in his mind than the
manufacture of toys like the little windmill.
All day long, if left to himself, he was either
absorbed in thought or engaged in some book of

<page 302>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES. 279
mathematics, or natural philosophy. At night, I
think it probable, he looked up with reverential
curiosity to the stars, and wondered whether
they were worlds like our own, and how great
was their distance from the earth, and what
was the power that kept them in their courses.
Perhaps, even so early in life, Isaac Newton felt
a presentiment that he should be able, hereafter,
to answer all these questions. When Isaac was fourteen years old, his
mother's second husband being now dead, she
wished her son to leave school and assist her in
managing the farm at Woolsthorpe. For a year
or two, therefore, he tried to turn his attention to
farming. But his mind was so bent on becoming
a scholar that his mother sent him back to
school, and afterwards to the University of Cam-
bridge. I have now finished my anecdotes of Isaac
Newton's boyhood. My story would be far too
long were I to mention all the splendid dis-
coveries which he made after he came to be a
man. He was the first that found out the nature
of light; for, before his day, nobody could
tell what the sunshine was composed of. You
remember, I suppose, the story of an apple's fall-
ing on his head, and thus leading him to discover
the force of gravitation, which keeps the heav-
enly bodies in their courses. When he had once
got hold of this idea, he never permitted his 
<page 303>
280
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
mind to rest until he had searched out all the
laws by which the planets are guided through
the sky. This he did as thoroughly as if he
had gone up among the stars and tracked them
in their orbits. The boy had found out the
mechanism of a windmill; the man explained to
his fellow-men the mechanism of the universe. While making these researches he was accus-
tomed to spend night after night in a lofty tower,
gazing at the heavenly bodies through a teles-
cope. His mind was lifted far above the things
of this world. He may be said, indeed, to have
spent the greater part of his life in worlds that
lie thousands and millions of miles away; for
where the thoughts and the heart are, there is
our true existence. Did you never hear the story of Newton and
his little dog Diamond? One day, when he was
fifty years old, and had been hard at work more
than twenty years studying the theory of light, he went out of his chamber, leaving his little
dog asleep before the fire. On thetable lay a
heap of manuscript papers, containing all the
discoveries which Newton had made during
those twenty years. When his master was gone,
up rose little Diamond, jumped upon the table,
and overthrew the lighted candle. The papers
immediately caught fire. Just as the destruction was completed Newton
opened the chamber-door, and perceived that the 
<page 304>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
281
labors of twenty years were reduced to a heap
of ashes. There stood little Diamond, the author
of all the mischief. Almost any other man
would have sentenced the dog to immediate
death. But Newton patted him on the head
with his usual kindness, although grief was at
his heart.
'Oh, Diamond, Diamond," exclaimed he, "thou little knowest the mischief thou hast done!"
This incident affected his health and spirits for
some time afterwards; but, from his conduct
towards the little dog, you may judge what was
the sweetness of his temper. Newton lived to be a very old man, and ac-
quired great renown, and was made a member of
Parliament, and received the honor of knight-
hood from the king. But he cared little for
earthly fame and honors, and felt no pride in the
vastness of his knowledge. All that he had
learned only made him feel how little he knew
in comparison to what remained to be known.
'I seem to myself like a child," observed he,
"playing on the sea-shore, and picking up here
and there a curious shell or a pretty pebble, while
the boundless ocean of Truth lies undiscovered
before me." At last, in 1727, when he was fourscore and
five years old, Sir Isaac Newton died, — or rather, he ceased to live on earth. We may be per-
mitted to believe that he is still searching out 
<page 305>
282 BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
the infinite wisdom and goodness of the Creator as earnestly, and with even more success, than
while his spirit animated a mortal body. He
has left a fame behind him which will be as
endurable as if his name were written in letters
of light formed by the stars upon the midnight
sky.
'I love to hear about mechanical contrivances
— such as the water-clock and the little wind-
mill," remarked George. "I suppose, if Sir Isaac
Newton had only thought of it, he might have
found out the steam-engine, and railroads, and all
the other famous inventions that have come into
use since his day.'
'Very possibly he might," replied Mr. Temple;
• and, no doubt a great many people would think
it more useful to manufacture steam-engines,
than to search out the system of the universe.
Other great astronomers besides Newton have
been endowed with mechanical genius. There
was David Rittenhouse, an American, — he
made a perfect little water-mill, when he was
only seven or eight years old. But this sort of
ingenuity is but a mere trifle in comparison with
the other talents of such men.'
'It must have been beautiful,' said Edward,
"to spend whole nights in a high tower as New-
ton did, gazing at the stars, and the comets, and
the meteors. But what would Newton have

<page 306>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
283
done, had he been blind? or if his eyes had been
no better than mine?'
'Why, even then, my dear child," observed
Mrs. Temple, "he would have found out some
way of enlightening his mind and of elevating
his soul. But come; little Emily is waiting to
bid you good-night. You must go to sleep and
dream of seeing all our faces.'
'But how sad it will be when I awake!" murmured Edward. 
<page 307>
2S4
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
CHAPTER IV.
In the course of the next day the harmony of
our little family was disturbed by something like
a quarrel between George and Edward. The former, though he loved his brother dear-
ly, had found it quite too great a sacrifice of his
own enjoyments to spend all his play-time in a
darkened chamber. Edward, on the other hand,
was inclined to be despotic. He felt as if his
bandaged eyes entitled him to demand that
every body, who enjoyed the blessing of sight should contribute to his comfort and amusement.
He therefore insisted that George, instead of
going out to play at football, should join with
himself and Emily in a game of questions and
answers. George resolutely refused, and ran out of the
house. He did not revisit Edward's chamber till
the evening, when he stole in, looking confused,
yet somewhat sullen, and sat down beside his
father's chair. It was evident, by a motion of
Edward's head and a slight trembling of his lips,
that he was aware of George's entrance, though
his footsteps had been almost inaudible. Emily,
with her serious and earnest little face, looked
from one to the other, as if she longed to be a
messenger of peace between them. Mr. Temple, without seeming to notice any of
these circumstances, began a story. 
<page 308>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
SAMUEL JOHNSON.
Bobn 1709. Died 1784.
'Sam,' said Mr. Michael Johnson, of Lichfield, one morning, "I am very feeble and ailing to-
-day. You must go to Uttoxeter in my stead, and
tend the bookstall in the market-place there." This was spoken above a hundred years ago,
by an elderly man, who had once been a thriving
bookseller at Lichfield, in England. Being now
in reduced circumstances, he was forced to go every market-day, and sell books at a stall, in the
neighboring village of Uttoxeter. His son, to whom Mr. Johnson spoke, was a
great boy, of very singular aspect. He had an
intelligent face; but it was seamed and distorted
by a scrofulous humor, which affected his eyes
so badly that sometimes he was almost blind.
Owing to the same cause his head would often
shake with a tremulous motion as if he were
afflicted with the palsy. When Sam was an
infant, the famous Queen Anne had tried to cure
him of this disease by laying her royal hands
upon his head. But though the touch of a king
or queen was supposed to be a certain remedy
for scrofula, it produced no good effect upon Sam
Johnson. At the time which we speak of the poor lad
was not very well dressed, and wore shoes from
which his toes peeped out; for his old father had 
<page 309>
286
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
barely the means of supporting his wife and
children. But, poor as the family were, young
Sam Johnson had as much pride as any noble-
man's son in England. The fact was, he felt
conscious of uncommon sense and ability, which,
in his own opinion, entitled him to great respect
from the world. Perhaps he would have been
glad if grown people had treated him as reve-
rentially as his schoolfellows did. Three of
them were accustomed to come for him every
morning; and while he sat upon the back of one,
the two others supported him on each side; and
thus he rode to school in triumph.
Being a personage of so much importance,
Sam could not bear the idea of standing all day
in Uttoxeter market offering books to the rude
and ignorant country people. Doubtless he felt
the more reluctant on account of his shabby
clothes, and the disorder of his eyes, and the
tremulous motion of his head. When Mr. Michael Johnson spoke, Sam
pouted and made an indistinct grumbling in his
throat; then he looked his old father in the face and answered him loudly and deliberately.
'Sir,' said he, "I will not go to Uttoxeter
market!"
Mr. Johnson had seen a great deal of the lad's
obstinacy ever since his birth; and while Sam
was younger, the old gentleman had probably
used the rod whenever occasion seemed to 
<page 310>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
287
require. But he was now too feeble and too
much out of spirits to contend with this stub-
born and violent-tempered boy. He therefore
gave up the point at once, and prepared to go to
Uttoxeter himself.
"Well, Sam," said Mr. Johnson, as he took his
hat and staff, "if for the sake of your foolish
pride you can suffer your poor sick father to
stand all day in the noise and confusion of the
market when he ought to be in his bed, I have
no more to say. But you will think of this,
Sam, when I am dead and gone!'
So the poor old man (perhaps with a tear in
his eye, but certainly with sorrow in his heart)
set forth towards Uttoxeter. The gray-haired,
feeble, melancholy Michael Johnson! How sad
a thing it was that he should be forced to go, in
his sickness, and toil for the support of an un-
grateful son who was too proud to do anything
for his father, or his mother, or himself! Sam
looked after Mr. Johnson with a sullen coun-
tenance till he was out of sight. But when the old man's figure, as he went
stooping along the street, was no more to be
seen, the boy's heart began to smite him. He
had a vivid imagination, and it tormented him
with the image of his father standing in the
market-place of Uttoxeter and offering his books
to the noisy crowd around him. Sam seemed to
behold him arranging his literary merchandise 
<page 311>
288
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
upon the stall in such a way as was best calcu-
lated to attract notice. Here was Addison's
Spectator, a long row of little volumes; here
was Pope's translation of the Iliad and Odyssey;
here were Dryden's poems, or those of Prior.
Here, likewise, were Gulliver's Travels, and a
variety of little gilt-covered childrenjs books, such
as Tom Thumb, Jack the Giant-queller, Mother
Goose's Melodies, and others which our great-
grandparents used to read in their childhood. And
here were sermons for the pious,and pamphlets
for the politicians, and ballads, some merry and
some dismal ones, for the country people to sing. Sam, in imagination, saw his father offer these
books, pamphlets, and ballads, now to the rude
yeomen who perhaps could not read a word, —
now to the country squires, who cared for noth-
ing but to hunt hares and foxes, — now to the
children, who chose to spend their coppers for
sugar-plums or gingerbread rather than for pic-
ture-books. And if Mr. Johnson should sell abook to man, woman, or child, it would cost him
an hour's talk to get a profit of only sixpence.
"My poor father!" thought Sam to himself.
"How his head will ache! and how heavy his
heart will be! I am almost sorry that I did not
do as he bade me!'
Then the boy went to his mother, who was
busy about the house. She did not know of
what had passed between Mr. Johnson and Sam.

<page 312>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
'Mother,' said he, "did you think father
seemed very ill to-day?'
'Yes, Sam," answered his mother, turning with
a flushed face from the fire, where she was cook-
ing their scanty dinner. "Your father did look
very ill; and it is a pity he did not send you to
Uttoxeter in his stead. You are a great boy
now, and would rejoice, I am sure, to do some-
thing for your poor father, who has done so much
for you."
The lad made no reply. But again his imagi-
nation set to work and conjured up another
picture of poor Michael Johnson. He was stand-
ing in the hot sunshine of the market-place, and
looking so weary, sick, and disconsolate, that the
eyes of all the crowd were drawn to him. "Had
this old man no son," the people would say among
themselves, "who might have taken his place at
the bookstall, while the father kept his bed?'
And perhaps,— but this was a terrible thought
for Sam! — perhaps his father would faint away and fall down in the market-place, with his gray
hair in the dust and his venerable face as death-
like as that of a corpse. And there would be
the bystanders gazing earnestly at Mr. Johnson,
and whispering, "Is he dead? Is he dead?'
And Sam shuddered as he repeated to him-
self: 'Is he dead?'
'Oh, I have been a cruel son!" thought he,
19

<page 313>
290
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
within his own heart. "God forgive me! God
forgive me!"
But God could not yet forgive him; for he
was not truly penitent. Had he been so, he
would have hastened away that very moment to
Uttoxeter, and have fallen at his father's feet,
even in the midst of the crowded market-place.
There he would have confessed his fault, and
besought Mr. Johnson to go home and leave the
rest of the day's work to him. But such was
Sam's pride and natural stubbornness that he
could not bring himself to this humiliation. Yet
he ought to have done so, for his own sake, for his father's sake, and for God's sake. After sunset old Michael Johnson came slowly
home and sat down in his customary chair. He
said nothing to Sam; nor do I know that a single
word ever passed between them on the subject of
the son's disobedience. In a few years his father
died, and left Sam to fight his way through the
world by himself. It would make our story
much too long were I to tell you even a few of
the remarkable events of Sam's life. Moreover,
there is the less need of this, because many books
have been writtenabout that poor boy, and the
fame that he acquired, and all that he did or
talked of doing after he came to be a man. But one thing I must not neglect to say.
From his boyhood upward until the latest day
of his life he never forgot the story of Uttoxeter 
<page 314>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
market. Often when he was a scholar of the
University of Oxford, or master of an academy at Edial, or a writer for the London booksellers,
— in all his poverty and toil and in all his suc-
cess, — while he was walking the streets without
a shilling to buy food, or when the greatest men
of England were proud to feast him at their
table, — still that heavy and remorseful thought
came back to him : — 'I was cruel to my poor
father in his illness!" Many and many a time,
awake or in his dreams, he seemed to see old
Michael Johnson standing in the dust and con-
fusion of the market-place and pressing his with-
ered hand to his forehead as if it ached. Alas! my dear children, it is a sad thing to
have such a thought as this to bear us company
through life. Though the story was but half finished, yet,
as it was longer than usual, Mr. Temple here
made a short pause. He perceived that Emily
was in tears, and Edward turned his half-veiled
face towards the speaker with an air of great
earnestness and interest. As for George, he had
withdrawn into the dusky shadow behind his
father's chair.

<page 315>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
CHAPTER V.
In a few moments Mr. Temple resumed the
story, as follows:
SAMUEL JOHNSON.
CONTINUED.
Well, my children, fifty years had passed away
since young Sam Johnson had shown himself so
hard-hearted towards his father. It was now
market-day in the village of Uttoxeter. In the street of the village you might see
cattle-dealers with cows and oxen for sale, and
pig-drovers, with herds of squeaking swine, and
farmers with cartloads of cabbages, turnips,
onions, and all other produce of the soil. Now
and then a farmer's red-faced wife trotted along
on horseback, with butter and cheese in two
large panniers. The people of the village, with
country squires, and other visitors from the neigh-
borhood, walked hither and thither, trading, jest-
ing, quarrelling, and making just such a bustle
as their fathers and grandfathers had made half
a century before. In one part of the street there was a puppet-
show, with a ridiculous Merry-Andrew, who
kept both grown people and children in a roar of
laughter. On the opposite side was the old stone
church of Uttoxeter, with ivy climbing up its
walls and partly obscuring its Gothic windows. 
<page 316>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES. 293
There was a clock in the gray tower of the
ancient church, and the hands on the dial-plate
had now almost reached the hour of noon. At
this busiest hour of the market a strange old gen-
tleman was seen making his way among the
crowd. He was very tall and bulky, and wore a
brown coat and small-clothes, with black worsted
stockings and buckled shoes. On his head was a
three-cornered hat, beneath which a bushy gray
wig thrust itself out, all in disorder. The old
gentleman elbowed the people aside, and forced
his way through the midst of them with a sin-
gular kind of gait, rolling his body hither and
thither, so that he needed twice as much room
as any other person there.
'Make way, sir!" he would cry out, in a loud,
harsh voice, when somebody happened to inter-
rupt his progress. — 'Sir, you intrude your per-
son into the public thoroughfare!'
'What a queer old fellow this is!" muttered
the people among themselves, hardly knowing
whether to laugh or to be angry.
But, when they looked into the venerable
stranger's face, not the most thoughtless among
them dared to offer him the least impertinence.
Though his features were scarred and distorted
with the scrofula, and though his eyes were dim
and bleared, yet there was something of au-
thority and wisdom in his look, which impressed
them all with awe. So they stood aside to let 
<page 317>
294 BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
him pass; and the old gentleman made his way
across the market-place, and paused near the cor-
ner of the ivy-mantled church. Just as he
reached it the clock struck twelve. On the very spot of ground where the stran-
ger now stood some aged people remembered
that old Michael Johnson had formerly kept his
bookstall. The little children who had once
bought picture-books of him were grandfathers
now.
"Yes; here is the very spot!" muttered the
old gentleman to himself. There this unknown personage took his stand and removed the three-cornered hat from his
head. It was the busiest hour of the day.
What with the hum of human voices, the low-
ing of cattle, the squeaking of pigs, and the
laughter caused by the Merry-Andrew, the mar-
ketplace was in very great confusion. But the
stranger seemed not to notice it any more than
if the silence of a desert were around him. He
was rapt in his own thoughts. Sometimes he
raised his furrowed brow to heaven, as if in
prayer; sometimes he bent his head, as if an
insupportable weight of sorrow were upon him.
It increased the awfulness of his aspect that
there was a motion of his head and an almost
continual tremor throughout his frame, with sin-
gular twitchings and contortions of his features. The hot sun blazed upon his unprotected 
<page 318>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES. « 295
head; but he seemed not to feel its fervor. A
dark cloud swept across the sky and rain-drops
pattered into the market-place; but the stranger
heeded not the shower. The people began to
gaze at the mysterious old gentleman with su-
perstitious fear and wonder. Who could he be?
Whence did he come? Wherefore was he stand-
ing bareheaded in the market-place? Even the
school-boys left the Merry-Andrew, and came to
gaze, with wide-open eyes, at this tall, strange-looking old man. There was a cattle-drover in the village who
had recently made a journey to the Smithfield
market, in London. No sooner had this man
thrust his way through the throng and taken a
look at the unknown personage, than he whis-
pered to one of his acquaintances:
'I say, neighbor Hutchins, would ye like to
know who this old gentleman is?'
'Ay, that I would," replied neighbor Hutchins;
'for a queerer chap I never saw in my life!
Somehow, it makes me feel small to look at
him. He's more than a common man.'
'You may well say so," answered the cattle-
drover. "Why, that's the famous Doctor Sam-
uel Johnson, who they say is the greatest and
learnedest man in England. I saw him in Lon-
don streets, walking with one Mr. Boswell.'
Yes; the poor boy — the friendless Sam —
with whom we began our story, had become the 
<page 319>
296 BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
famous Doctor Samuel Johnson. He was uni-
versally acknowledged as the wisest man and
greatest writer in all England. He had given
shape and permanence to his native language by
his Dictionary. Thousands upon thousands of
people had read his Idler, his Rambler, and his
Rasselas. Noble and wealthy men and beautiful
ladies deemed it their highest privilege to be his
companions. Even the King of Great Britain
had sought his acquaintance, and told him what
an honor he considered it that such a man had
been born in his dominions. He was now at the
summit of literary renown. But all his fame could not extinguish the
bitter remembrance, which had tormented him
through life. Never, never had he forgotten his
father's sorrowful and upbraiding look. Never
— though the old man's troubles had been over
so many years — had he forgiven himself for in-
flicting such a pang upon his heart. And now,
in his old age, he had come hither to do penance,
by standing at noonday, in the market-place of
Uttoxeter, on the very spot where Michael John-
son had once kept his bookstall. The aged and
illustrious man had done what the poor boy
refused to do. By thus expressing his deep re-
pentance and humiliation of heart, he hoped to
gain peace of conscience and the forgiveness of
God. My dear children, if you have grieved — I

<page 320>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
297
will not say your parents — but, if you have
grieved) the heart of any human being who has
a claim upon your love, then think of Samuel
Johnson's penance. Will it not be better to
redeem the error now than to endure the agony
of remorse for fifty years? Would you not
rather say to a brother — 'I have erred! For-
give me !' — than perhaps to go hereafter and
shed bitter tears upon his grave?Hardly was the story concluded when George
hastily arose, and Edward likewise, stretching
forth his hands into the darkness that surrounded
him to find his brother. Both accused them-
selves of unkindness; each besought the other's
forgiveness; and having done so, the trouble of
their hearts vanished away like a dream.
"I am glad! I am so glad!" said Emily, in a
low, earnest voice. "Now I shall sleep quietly
to-night.'
'My sweet child," thought Mrs. Temple as
she kissed her, "mayest thou never know how
much strife there is on earth! It would cost
thee many a night's rest.'

<page 321>
298
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
CHAPTER VI.
About this period Mr. Temple found it ne-
cessary to take a journey, which interrupted the
series of Biographical Stories for several even-
ings. In the interval, Edward practised various
methods of employing and amusing his mind. Sometimes he meditated upon beautiful ob-
jects which he had formerly seen, until the in-
tensity of his recollection seemed to restore him
the gift of sight and place everything anew
before his eyes. Sometimes he repeated verses
of poetry which he did not know to be in his
memory until he found them there just at the
time of need. Sometimes he attempted to solve
arithmetical questions which had perplexed him
while at school. Then, with his mother's assistance, he learned
the letters of the string-alphabet, which is used
in some of the institutions for the blind in
Europe. When one of his friends gave him a
leaf of St. Mark's Gospel, printed in embossed
characters, he endeavored to read it by passing
his fingers over the letters as blind children do. His brother George was now very kind, and
spent so much time in the darkened chamber that Edward often insisted upon his going out to
play. George told him all about the affairs at
school, and related many amusing incidents that
happened among his comrades, and informed him 
<page 322>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
what sports were now in fashion, and whose kite
soared the highest, and whose little ship sailed
fleetest on the Frog Pond. As for Emily, she
repeated stories which she had learned from a
new book called The Flower People, in which
the snowdrops, the violets, the columbines, the
roses, and all that lovely tribe are represented as
telling their secrets to a little girl. The flowers
talked sweetly, as flowers should; and Edward
almost fancied that he could behold their bloom
and smell their fragrant breath. Thus, in one way or another, the dark days
of Edward's confinement passed not unhappily.
In due time his father returned; and the next
evening, when the family were assembled, he
began a story.
"I must first observe, children," said he, "that
some writers deny the truth of the incident
which I am about to relate to you. There cer-
tainly is but little evidence in favor of it. Other
respectable writers, however, tell it for a fact;
and, at all events, it is an interesting story, and
has an excellent moral." So Mr. Temple proceeded to talk about the
early days of OLIVER CROMWELL.
Born 1599. Died 1058.
Not long after King James the First took the
place of Queen Elizabeth on the throne of Eng-

<page 323>
300 BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
land, there lived an English knight at a place
called Hinchinbrooke. His name was Sir Oliver
Cromwell. He spent his life, I suppose, pretty
much like other English knights and squires in
those days, hunting hares and foxes and drink-
ing large quantities of ale and wine. The old
house in which he dwelt had been occupied by
his ancestors before him for a good many years.
In it there was a great hall, hung round with
coats of arms and helmets, cuirasses and swords, which his forefathers had used in battle, and with
horns of deer and tails of foxes which they or
Sir Oliver himself had killed in the chase. This Sir Oliver Cromwell had a nephew, who
had been called Oliver, after himself, but who
was generally known in the family by the name
of little Noll. His father was a younger brother
of Sir Oliver. The child was often sent to visit
his uncle, who probably found him a troublesome
little fellow to take care of. He was forever in
mischief, and always running into some danger
or other, from which he seemed to escape only
by miracle. Even while he was an infant in the cradle a
strange accident had befallen him. A huge ape,
which was kept in the family, snatched up little
Noll in his forepaws and clambered with him to
the roof of the house. There this ugly beast sat
grinning at the affrighted spectators, as if it had
done the most praiseworthy thing imaginable. 
<page 324>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
301
Fortunately, however, he brought the child safe
down again; and the event was afterwards con-
sidered an omen that Noll would reach a very
elevated station in the world. One morning, when Noll was five or six years
old, a royal messenger arrived at Hinchinbrooke with tidings that King James was coming to
dine with Sir Oliver Cromwell. This was a
high honor, to be sure, but a very great trouble;
for all the lords and ladies, knights, squires,
guards and yeomen, who waited on the king,
were to be feasted as well as himself; and more
provisions would be eaten and more wine drunk in that one day than generally in a month.
However, Sir Oliver expressed much thankful-
ness for the king's intended visit, and ordered his
butler and cook to make the best preparations in
their power. So a great fire was kindled in the
kitchen; and the neighbors knew by the smoke
which poured out of the chimney that boiling,
baking, stewing, roasting, and frying were going
on merrily. By and by the sound of trumpets was heard approaching nearer and nearer; and a heavy,
old-fashioned coach, surrounded by guards on
horseback, drove up to the house. Sir Oliver,
with his hat in his hand, stood at the gate to
receive the king. His Majesty was dressed in a
suit of green not very new: he had a feather
in his hat and a triple ruff round his neck; and

<page 325>
302 BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
over his shoulder was slung a hunting horn, in-
stead of a sword. Altogether he had not the
most dignified aspect in the world; but the spec-
tators gazed at him as if there was something
superhuman and divine in his person. They
even shaded their eyes with their hands, as if
they were dazzled by the glory of his counte-
nance.
"How are ye, man?" cried King James, speak-
ing in a Scotch accent; for Scotland was his
native country. "By my crown, Sir Oliver, but
I am glad to see ye!"
The good knight thanked the king; at the
same time kneeling down while his Majesty
alighted. When King James stood on the
ground, he directed Sir Oliver's attention to a
little boy who had come with him in the coach.
He was six or seven years old, and wore a hat
and feather, and was more richly dressed than
the king himself. Though by no means an ill-looking child, he seemed shy, or even sulky;
and his cheeks were rather pale, as if he had
been kept moping within doors, instead of being
sent out to play in the sun and wind.
"I have brought my son Charlie to see ye," said the king. "I hope, Sir Oliver, ye have a
son of your own to be his playmate." Sir Oliver Cromwell made a reverential bow to
the little prince, whom one of the attendants had
now taken out of the coach. It was wonderful 
<page 326>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
303
to see how all the spectators, even the aged men with their gray beards, humbled themselves be-
fore this child. They bent their bodies till their
beards almost swept the dust. They looked as
if they were ready to kneel down and worship
him. The poor little prince! From his earliest
infancy not a soul had dared to contradict him;
everybody around him had acted as if he were a
superior being; so that, of course, he had imbibed
the same opinion of himself. He naturally sup-
posed that the whole kingdom of Great Britain
and all its inhabitants had been created solely
for his benefit and amusement. This was a sad
mistake; and it cost him dear enough after he
had ascended his father's throne.
"What a noble little prince he is!" exclaimed
Sir Oliver, lifting his hands in admiration. "No, please your Majesty, I have no son to be the
playmate of his Royal Highness; but there is a
nephew of mine, somewhere about the house.
He is near the prince's age, and will be but too
happy to wait upon his Royal Highness.'
'Send for him, man! send for him!" said the
king. But, as it happened, there was no need of
sending for Master Noll. While King James was
speaking, a rugged, bold-faced, sturdy little ur-
chin thrust himself through the throng of cour-
tiers and attendants and greeted the prince with 
<page 327>
304
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
a broad stare. His doublet and hose (which had
been put on new and clean in honor of the king's
visit) were already soiled and torn with the rough
play in which he had spent the morning. He
looked no more abashed than if King James
were his uncle and the prince one of his cus-
tomary playfellows. This was little Noll himself.
"Here, please your Majesty, is my nephew," said Sir Oliver, somewhat ashamed of Noll's
appearance and demeanor. "Oliver, make your
obeisance to the king's Majesty!'
The boy made a pretty respectful obeisance to
the king; for in those days children were taught
to pay reverence to their elders. King James,
who prided himself greatly on his scholarship,
asked Noll a few questions in the Latin grammar, and then introduced him to his son. The
little prince, in a very grave and dignified man-
ner, extended his hand, not for Noll to shake,
but that he might kneel down and kiss it.
"Nephew," said Sir Oliver, "pay your duty to
the prince.'
'I owe him no duty," cried Noll, thrusting aside
the prince's hand with a rude laugh. "Why
should I kiss that boy's hand?"
All the courtiers were amazed and confounded,
and Sir Oliver the most of all. But the king
laughed heartily, saying, that little Noll had a
stubborn English spirit, and that it was well for 
<page 328>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
305
his son to learn betimes what sort of a people
he was to rule over. So King James and his train entered the house;
and the prince, with Noll and some other children,
was sent to play in a separate room while his
Majesty was at dinner. The young people soon
became acquainted; for boys, whether the sons
of monarchs or of peasants, all like play, and are
pleased with one another's society. What games
they diverted themselves with I cannot tell.
Perhaps they played at ball — perhaps at blind-
man's buff — perhaps at leap-frog — perhaps at
prison-bars. Such games have been in use for
hundreds of years; and princes as well as poor
children have spent some of their happiest hours
in playing at them.
Meanwhile, King James and his nobles were
feasting with Sir Oliver in the great hall. The
king sat in a gilded chair, under a canopy, at the
head of a long table. Whenever any of the
company addressed him, it was with the deepest
reverence. If the attendants offered him wine or the various delicacies of the festival, it was
upon their bended knees. You would have
thought, by these tokens of worship, that the
monarch was a supernatural being; only he
seemed to have quite as much need of those vul-
gar matters, food and drink, as any other person
at the table. But fate had ordained that good
King James should not finish his dinner in peace.
20

<page 329>
306
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
All of a sudden there arose a terrible uproar
in the room where the children were at play.
Angry shouts and shrill cries of alarm were mixed
up together; while the voices of elder persons
were likewise heard, trying to restore order among
the children. The king and everybody else at
table looked aghast; for perhaps the tumult made
them think that a general rebellion had broken
out.
"Mercy on us!" muttered Sir Oliver; "that
graceless nephew of mine is in some mischief or
other. The naughty little whelp!"
Getting up from table, he ran to see what was
the matter, followed by many of the guests, and
the king among them. They all crowded to the
door of the play-room.
On looking in, they beheld the little Prince
Charles, with his rich dress all torn and covered
with the dust of the floor. His royal blood was
streaming from his nose in great abundance. He
gazed at Noll with a mixture of rage and affright,
and at the same time a puzzled expression, as if
he could not understand how any mortal boy
should dare to give him a beating. As for Noll,
there stood his sturdy little figure, bold as a lion,
looking as if he were ready to fight, not only the
prince, but the king and kingdom too.
"You little villain!" cried his uncle. "What
have you been about? Down on your knees,
this instant, and ask the prince's pardon. How 
<page 330>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
307
dare you lay your hands on the king's majesty's royal son 7'
'He struck me first," grumbled the valiant
little Noll; "and I've only given him his due."
Sir Oliver and the guests lifted up their hands in
astonishment and horror. No punishment seemed
severe enough for this wicked little varlet, who
had dared to resent a blow from the king's own
son. Some of the courtiers were of opinion that
Noll should be sent prisoner to the Tower of
London and brought to trial for high treason.
Others, in their great zeal for the king's service,
were about to lay hands on the boy and chas-
tise him in the royal presence. But King James, who sometimes showed a
good deal of sagacity, ordered them to desist.
"Thou art a bold boy," said he, looking fixedly
at little Noll; "and, if thou live to be a man, my
son Charlie would do wisely to be friends with
thee.'
'I never will!" cried the little prince, stamp-
ing his foot.
"Peace, Charlie, peace!" said the king; then
addressing Sir Oliver and the attendants, "Harm not the urchin; for he has taught my son a good
lesson, if Heaven do but give him grace to profit
by it. Hereafter, should he be tempted to tyran-
nize over the stubborn race of Englishmen, let
him remember little Noll Cromwell and his own
bloody nose!'

<page 331>
308
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
So the king finished his dinner and departed;
and for many a long year the childish quarrel
between Prince Charles and Noll Cromwell was
forgotten. The prince, indeed, might have lived
a happier life, and have met a more peaceful
death, had he remembered that quarrel and the
moral which his father drew from it. But when
old King James was dead, and Charles sat upon
his throne, he seemed to forget that he was but
a man, and that his meanest subjects were men
as well as he. He wished to have the property
and lives of the people of England entirely at
his own disposal. But the Puritans, and all who
loved liberty, rose against him, and beat him in
many battles, and pulled him down from his
throne. Throughout this war between the king and
nobles on one side and the people of England on
the other there was a famous leader, who did
more towards the ruin of royal authority than
all the rest. The contest seemed like a wrestling-
match between King Charles and this strong
man. And the king was overthrown. When the discrowned monarch was brought to
trial, that warlike leader sat in the judgment-hall.
Many judges were present besides himself; but
he alone had the power to save King Charles or
to doom him to the scaffold. After sentence was
pronounced, this victorious general was entreated
by his own children, on their knees, to rescue his
Majesty from death.

<page 332>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES. 309
'No!' said he, sternly. "Better that one man
should perish than that the whole country should
be ruined for his sake. It is resolved that he
shall die!"
When Charles, no longer a king, was led to
the scaffold, his great enemy stood at a window
of the royal palace of Whitehall. He beheld the
poor victim of pride, and an evil education, and
misused power, as he laid his head upon the
block. He looked on with a steadfast gaze while a black-veiled executioner lifted the fatal
axe and smote off that anointed head at a single
blow.
'It is a righteous deed," perhaps he said to him-
self. "Now Englishmen may enjoy their rights." At night, when the body of Charles was laid
in the coffin, in a gloomy chamber, the general
entered, lighting himself with a torch. Its gleam
showed that he was now growing old; his visage
was scarred with the many battles in which he
had led the van; his brow was wrinkled with
care and with the continual exercise of stern
authority. Probably there was not a single trait,
either of aspect or manner, that belonged to the
little Noll who had battled so stoutly with Prince
Charles. Yet this was he!He lifted the coffin-lid, and caused the light
of his torch to fall upon the dead monarch's face.
Then, probably, his mind went back over all the
marvellous events that had brought the heredi-

<page 333>
310 BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
tary King of England to this dishonored coffin,
and had raised himself, a humble individual, to
the possession of kingly power. He was a king,
though without the empty title or the glittering
crown.
'Why was it," said Cromwell to himself, or
might have said — as he gazed at the pale fea-
tures in the coffin, —' Why was it that this
great king fell, and that poor Noll Cromwell has
gained all the power of the realm?"
And, indeed, why was it?King Charles had fallen, because, in his man-
hood the same as when a child, he disdained to
feel that every human creature was his brother.
He deemed himself a superior being, and fancied
that his subjects were created only for a king to
rule over. And Cromwell rose, because, in spite
of his many faults, he mainly fought for the
rights and freedom of his fellow-men; and there-
fore the poor and the oppressed all lent their
strength to him.
'Dear father, how I should hate to be a king!" exclaimed Edward.
"And would you like to be a Cromwell?" in-
quired his father.
'I should like it well," replied George, 'only I
would not have put the poor old king to death.
I would have sent him out of the kingdom, or
perhaps have allowed him to live in a small

<page 334>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
311
house, near the gate of the royal palace. It was
too severe to cut off his head.'
:Kings are in such an unfortunate position," said Mr. Temple, 'that they must either be al-
most deified by their subjects, or else be dethroned
and beheaded. In either case it is a pitiable
lot.'
'Oh, I had rather be blind than be a king!" said Edward.
'Well, my dear Edward," observed his mother,
with a smile, "I am glad you are convinced that
your own lot is not the hardest in the world.'

<page 335>
312
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
CHAPTER VII.
It was a pleasant sight (for those who had
eyes, to see how patiently the blinded little boy
now submitted to what he had at first deemed
an intolerable calamity. The beneficent Creator
has not allowed our comfort to depend on the
enjoyment of any single sense. Though he has
made the world so very beautiful, yet it is pos-
sible to be happy without ever beholding the blue
sky, or the green and flowery earth, or the kind
faces of those whom we love. Thus it appears
that all the external beauty of the universe is a
free gift from God over and above what is neces-
sary to our comfort. How grateful, then, should
we be to that divine Benevolence, which show-
ers even superfluous bounties upon us!One truth, therefore, which Edward's blind-
ness had taught him was, that his mind and soul
could dispense with the assistance of his eyes.
Doubtless, however, he would have found this
lesson far more difficult to learn had it not been
for the affection of those around him. His pa-
rents, and George and Emily, aided him to bear
his misfortune; if possible, they would have lent
him their own eyes. And this, too, was a good
lesson for him. It taught him how dependent
on one another God has ordained us to be, inso-
much that all the necessities of mankind should
incite them to mutual love. 
<page 336>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
313
So Edward loved his friends, and perhaps all
the world, better than he ever did before. And
he felt grateful towards his father for spending
the evenings in telling him stories — more grate-
ful, probably, than any of my little readers will
feel towards me for so carefully writing these same stories down.
"Come, dear father," said he, the next evening,
"now tell us about some other little boy who
was destined to be a famous man.'
'How would you like a story of a Boston
boy?" asked his father.
'Oh, pray let us have it!" cried George, eager-
ly. "It will be all the better if he has been to
our schools, and has coasted on the Common,
and sailed boats in the Frog Pond. I shall feel
acquainted with him then.'
'Well, then," said Mr. Temple, '1 will intro-
duce you to a Boston boy whom all the world
became acquainted with after he grew to be a
man." The story was as follows: — BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.
Born 1706. Died 1790.
In the year 1716, or about that period, a boy
used to be seen in the streets of Boston who
was known among his schoolfellows and play-
mates by the name of Ben Franklin. Ben was
born in 1706; so that he was now about ten 
<page 337>
314
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
years old. His father, who had come over from
England, was a soap-boiler and tallow-chandler,
and resided in Milk Street, not far from the Old South Church. Ben was a bright boy at his book, and even a
brighter one when at play with his comrades.
He had some remarkable qualities which always
seemed to give him the lead, whether at sport
or in more serious matters. I might tell you a
number of amusing anecdotes about him. You
are acquainted, I suppose, with his famous story
of the Whistle, and how he bought it with a
whole pocketful of coppers and afterwards re-
pented of his bargain. But Ben had grown a
great boy since those days, and had gained wis-
dom by experience; for it was one of his pecu-
liarities, that no incident ever happened to him
without teaching him some valuable lesson.
Thus he generally profited more by his mis-
fortunes than many people do by the most
favorable events that could befall them. Ben's face was already pretty well known to
the inhabitants of Boston. The selectmen and
other people of note often used to visit his father,
for the sake of talking about the affairs of the
town or province. Mr. Franklin was considered
a person of great wisdom and integrity, and was
respected by all who knew him, although he
supported his family by the humble trade of boil-
ing soap and making tallow-candles.

<page 338>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
315
While his father and the visitors were holding
deep consultations about public affairs, little Ben
would sit on his stool in a corner, listening with
the greatest interest, as if he understood every
word. Indeed, his features were so full of intel-
ligence that there could be but little doubt, not
only that he understood what was said, but that
he could have expressed some very sagacious
opinions out of his own mind. But in those
days boys were expected to be silent in the
presence of their elders. However, Ben Franklin
was looked upon as a very promising lad, who
would talk and act wisely by and by.
"Neighbor Franklin," his father's friends would
sometimes say, "you ought to send this boy to
college and make a minister of him.'
'I have often thought of it," his father would
reply; "and my brother Benjamin promises to
give him a great many volumes of manuscript
sermons, in case he should be educated for the
church. But I have a large family to support,
and cannot afford the expense." In fact, Mr. Franklin found it so difficult to
provide bread for his family, that, when the boy
was ten years old, it became necessary to take
him from school. Ben was then employed in
cutting candle-wicks into equal lengths and fill-
ing the moulds with tallow; and many families
in Boston spent their evenings by the light of
the candles which he had helped to make. Thus,

<page 339>
316
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
yon see, in his early days, as well as in his man-
hood, his labors contributed to throw light upon
dark matters. Busy as his life now was, Ben still found time
to keep company with his former schoolfellows. He and the other boys were very fond of fishing,
and spent many of their leisure hours on the mar-
gin of the mill-pond, catching flounders, perch,
eels, and tomcod, which came up thither with
the tide. The place where they fished is now,
probably, covered with stone pavements and brick
buildings, and thronged with people and with
vehicles of all kinds. But at that period it was
a marshy spot on the outskirts of the town,
where gulls flitted and screamed overhead and
salt meadow-grass grew under foot. On the edge of the water there was a deep bed
of clay, in which the boys were forced to stand while they caught their fish. Here they dab-
bled in mud and mire like a flock of ducks.
"This is very uncomfortable," said Ben Frank-
lin one day to his comrades, while they were
standing mid-leg deep in the quagmire.
'So it is," said the other boys. "What a pity
we have no better place to stand!"
If it had not been for Ben, nothing more
would have been done or said about the matter.
But it was not in his nature to be sensible of
an inconvenience without using his best efforts
to find a remedy. So, as he and his comrades 
<page 340>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
317
were returning from the water-side, Ben suddenly
threw down his string of fish with a very deter-
mined air:
'Boys,' cried he, '1 have thought of a
scheme which will be greatly for our benefit and for the public benefit!'
It was queer enough, to be sure, to hear this
little chap — this rosy-cheeked, ten-year-old boy
— talking about schemes for the public benefit!
Nevertheless, his companions were ready to
listen, being assured that Ben's scheme, whatever
it was, would be well worth their attention.
They remembered how sagaciously he had con-
ducted all their enterprises ever since he had
been old enough to wear small-clothes. They remembered, too, his wonderful con-
trivance of sailing across the mill-pond by lying
flat on his back in the water and allowing him-
self to be drawn along by a paper-kite. If Ben
could do that, he might certainly do anything.
"What is your scheme, Ben? — what is it?" cried they all. It so happened that they had now come to a
spot of ground where a new house was to be
built. Scattered round about lay a great many
large stones, which were to be used for the cellar
and foundation. Ben mounted upon the highest
of these stones, so that he might speak with the
more authority.
"You know, lads," said he, "what a plague it

<page 341>
318
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
is, to be forced to stand in the quagmire yonder
— over shoes and stockings (if we wear any) in
mud and water. See! I am bedaubed to the
knees of my small-clothes, and you are all in
the same pickle. Unless we can find some rem-
edy for this evil, our fishing-business must be
entirely given up. And, surely, this would be a
terrible misfortune!'
'That it would ! — that it would!" said his
comrades, sorrowfully.
'Now I propose," continued Master Benjamin,
"that we build a wharf, for the purpose of carry-
ing on our fisheries. You see these stones.
The workmen mean to use them for the under-
pinning of a house; but that would be for only
one man's advantage. My plan is to take these
same stones and carry them to the edge of the
water and build a wharf with them. This will
not only enable us to carry on the fishing busi-
ness with comfort and to better advantage, but
it will likewise be a great convenience to boats
passing up and down the stream. Thus, instead
of one man, fifty, or a hundred, or a thousand,
besides ourselves, may be benefited by these
stones. What say you, lads ? — shall we build
the wharf?"
Ben's proposal was received with one of those
uproarious shouts wherewith boys usually express
their delight at whatever completely suits their
views. Nobody thought of questioning the right 
<page 342>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
319
and justice of building a wharf with stones that
belonged to another person.
'Hurrah, hurrah!" shouted they. "Let's set
about it!'
It was agreed that they should all be on the
spot that evening and commence their grand
public enterprise by moonlight. Accordingly, at
the appointed time, the whole gang of youthful
laborers assembled, and eagerly began to remove
the stones. They had not calculated how much
toil would be requisite in this important part of
their undertaking. The very first stone which
they laid hold of proved so heavy that it almost
seemed to be fastened to the ground. Nothing
but Ben Franklin's cheerful and resolute spirit
could have induced them to persevere. Ben, as might be expected, was the soul of
the enterprise. By his mechanical genius, he
contrived methods to lighten the labor of trans-
porting the stones, so that one boy, under his
directions, would perform as much as half a
dozen if left to themselves. Whenever their
spirits flagged he had some joke ready, which
seemed to renew their strength, by setting them
all into a roar of laughter. And when, after an
hour or two of hard work, the stones were trans-
ported to the water-side, Ben Franklin was the
engineer to superintend the construction of the
wharf. The boys, like a colony of ants, performed a 
<page 343>
320
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
great deal of labor by their multitude, though
the individual strength of each could have ac-
complished but little. Finally, just as the moon
sank below the horizon, the great work was
finished.
"Now, boys," cried Ben, "let's give three
cheers and go home to bed. To-morrow we
may catch fish at our ease!' 'Hurrah! hurrah!
hurrah!" shouted his comrades. Then they all went home in such an ecstasy
of delight that they could hardly get a wink of
sleep. The story was not yet finished; but George's
impatience caused him to interrupt it.
'How I wish that I could have helped to build
that wharf!" exclaimed he. "It must have been
glorious fun. Ben Franklin forever, say I!'
'It was a very pretty piece of work," said Mr.
Temple. "But wait till you hear the end of the
story.'
'Father,' inquired Edward, "whereabouts in
Boston was the mill-pond, on which Ben built
his wharf?'
'I do not exactly know," answered Mr. Tem-
ple; "but I suppose it to have been on the
northern verge of the town, in the vicinity of
what are now called Merrimack and Charlestown
Streets. That thronged portion of the city was
once a marsh. Some of it, in fact, was covered
with water.'

<page 344>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
321
CHAPTER VIII.
As the children had no more questions to ask,
Mr. Temple proceeded to relate what conse-
quences ensued from the building of Ben Frank-
lin's wharf. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.
CONTINUED.
In the morning, when the early sunbeams
were gleaming on the steeples and roofs of the
town and gilding the water that surrounded it,
the masons came, rubbing their eyes, to begin
their work at the foundation of the new house.
But, on reaching the spot, they rubbed their eyes
so much the harder. What had become of their
heap of stones?
'Why, Sam," said one to another, in great per-
plexity, "here's been some witchcraft at work while we were asleep. The stones must have
flown away through the air!'
'More likely they have been stolen !' answered
Sam.
'But who on earth would think of stealing a
heap of stones?" cried a third. "Could a man
carry them away in his pocket?"
The master-mason, who was a gruff kind of
man, stood scratching his head, and said nothing at first. But, looking carefully on the ground,
he discerned innumerable tracks of little feet,
21

<page 345>
322 . BIOGRAFHICAL STORIES.
some with shoes and some barefoot. Following
these tracks with his eye, he saw that they
formed a beaten path towards the water-side.
'Ah, I see what the mischief is," said he, nod-
ding his head. "Those little rascals, the boys!
they have stolen our stones to build a wharf
with!"
The masons immediately went to examine the
new structure. And to say the truth, it was well
worth looking at, so neatly and with such ad-
mirable skill had it been planned and finished.
The stones were put together so securely that
there was no danger of their being loosened by
the tide, however swiftly it might sweep along.
There was a broad and safe platform to stand
upon, whence the little fishermen might cast
their lines into deep water and draw up fish in
abundance. Indeed, it almost seemed as if Ben
and his comrades might be forgiven for taking
the stones, because they had done their job in
such a workmanlike manner.
"The chaps that built this wharf understood
their business pretty well," said one of the ma-
sons. "I should not be ashamed of such a piece
of work myself." But the master-mason did not seem to enjoy
the joke. He was one of those unreasonable
people who care a great deal more for their own
rights and privileges than for the convenience of
all the rest of the world.

<page 346>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
323
'Sam,' said he, more gruffly than usual, "go
call a constable."
So Sam called a constable, and inquiries were
set on foot to discover the perpetrators of the
theft. In the course of the day warrants were
issued, with the signature of a justice of the
peace, to take the bodies of Benjamin Franklin
and other evil-disposed persons who had stolen
a heap of stones. If the owner of the stolen
property had not been more merciful than the
master-mason, it might have gone hard with our
friend Benjamin and his fellow-laborers. But,
luckily for them, the gentleman had a respect for
Ben's father, and, moreover, was amused with the
spirit of the whole affair. He therefore let the
culprits off pretty easily. But, when the constables were dismissed, the
poor boys had to go through another trial, and
receive sentence, and suffer execution, too, from
their own fathers. Many a rod, I grieve to say,
was worn to the stump on that unlucky night. As for Ben, he was less afraid of a whipping
than of his father's disapprobation. Mr. Frank-
lin, as I have mentioned before, was a sagacious
man, and also an inflexibly upright one. He
had read much for a person in his rank of life,
and had pondered upon the ways of the world,
until he had gained more wisdom than a whole
library of books could have taught him. Ben
had a greater reverence for his father than for 
<page 347>
any other person in the world, as well on account
of his spotless integrity as of his practical sense
and deep views of things. Consequently, after being released from the
clutches of the law, Ben came into his father's
presence with no small perturbation of mind.
'Benjamin, come hither," began Mr. Franklin,
in his customary solemn and weighty tone. The boy approached and stood before his
father's chair, waiting reverently to hear what
judgment this good man would pass upon his
late offence. He felt that now the right and
wrong of the whole matter would be made to
appear.
'Benjamin,' said his father, "what could
induce you to take property which did not
belong to you?'
'Why, father," replied Ben, hanging his head at first, but then lifting his eyes to Mr. Frank-
lin's face, "if it had been merely for my own
benefit, I never should have dreamed of it.
But I knew that the wharf would be a public
convenience. If the owner of the stones should
build a house with them, nobody will enjoy any
advantage except himself. Now, I made use of
them in a way that was for the advantage of
many persons. I thought it right to aim at
doing good to the greatest number.'
'My son," said Mr. Franklin, solemnly, "so
far as it was in your power, you have done a 
<page 348>
BIOGEAPHIJAL STORIES. 325
greater harm to the public than to the owner of
the stones.'
'How can that be, father?" asked Ben.
'Because,' answered his father, "in building
your wharf with stolen materials, you have
committed a moral wrong. There is no more
terrible mistake than to violate what is eter-
nally right for the sake of a seeming expe-
diency. Those who act upon such a principle do the utmost in their power to destroy all that
is good in the world.'
'Heaven forbid!" said Benjamin.
"No act," continued Mr. Franklin, "can pos-
sibly be for the benefit of the public generally which involves injustice to any individual. It
would be easy to prove this by examples. But,
indeed, can we suppose that our all-wise and
just Creator would have so ordered the affairs
of the world that a wrong act should be the
true method of attaining a right end? It is
impious to think so. And I do verily believe,
Benjamin, that almost all the public and private
misery of mankind arises from a neglect of this
great truth — that evil can produce only evil —
that good ends must be wrought out by good
means.'
'I will never forget it again," said Benjamin,
bowing his head.
"Remember," concluded his father, "that, when-
ever we vary from the highest rule of right, just 
<page 349>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
so far we do an injury to the world. It may
seem otherwise for the moment; but, both in
time and in eternity, it will be found so." To the close of his life Ben Franklin never
forgot this conversation with his father; and we
have reason to suppose that, in most of his pub-
lic and private career, he endeavored to act upon
the principles which that good and wise man
had then taught him. After the great event of building the wharf,
Ben continued to cut wick-yarn and fill candle-
moulds for about two years. But, as he had no
love for that occupation, his father often took
him to see various artisans at their work, in
order to discover what trade he would prefer.
Thus Ben learned the use of a great many
tools, the knowledge of which afterwards proved
very useful to him. But he seemed much in-
clined to go to sea. In order to keep him at
home, and likewise to gratify his taste for let-
ters, the lad was bound apprentice to his elder
brother, who had lately set up a printing-office
in Boston. Here he had many opportunities of reading
new books and of hearing instructive conversa-
tion. He exercised himself so successfully in
writing composition, that, when no more than
thirteen or fourteen years old, he became a con-
tributor to his brother's newspaper. Ben was
also a versifier, if not a poet. He made two 
<page 350>
BIOGRAPHICAL STOKIES.
doleful ballads; one about the shipwreck of Cap-
tain Worthilake; and the other about the pirate
Black Beard, who, not long before, infested the
American seas. When Ben's verses were printed, his brother
sent him to sell them to the townspeople wet
from the press. "Buy my ballads!" shouted Ben-
jamin, as he trudged through the streets with a
basketful on his arm. 'Who '11 buy a ballad about
Black Beard? A penny apiece! a penny apiece!
who '11 buy my ballads?"
If one of those roughly composed and rudely
printed ballads could be discovered now, it would
be worth more than its weight in gold. In this way our friend Benjamin spent his boy-
hood and youth, until, on account of some disa-
greement with his brother, he left his native town
and went to Philadelphia. He landed in the lat-
ter city, a homeless and hungry young man, and
bought threepence worth of bread to satisfy his
appetite. Not knowing where else to go, he
entered a Quaker meeting-house, sat down, and
fell fast asleep. He has not told us whether his
slumbers were visited by any dreams. But it
would have been a strange dream, indeed, and
an incredible one, that should have foretold how
great a man he was destined to become, and how
much he would be honored in that very city where he was now friendless and unknown. So here we finish our story of the childhood 
<page 351>
32S BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
of Benjamin Franklin. One of these days, if
you would know what he was in his manhood,
you must read his own works and the history of
American Independence.
'Do let us hear a little more of him!' said
Edward; "not that I admire him so much as
many other characters; but he interests me, be-
cause he was a Yankee boy.'
'My dear son," replied Mr. Temple, "it would
require a whole volume of talk to tell you all
that is worth knowing about Benjamin Franklin.
There is a very pretty anecdote of his flying a
kite in the midst of a thunder-storm, and thus
drawing down the lightning from the clouds and proving that it was the same thing as elec-
tricity. His whole life would be an interesting
story, if we had time to tell it.'
'But, pray, dear father, tell us what made him
so famous," said George. "I have seen his por-
trait a great many times. There is a wooden
bust of him in one of our streets; and marble
ones, I suppose, in some other places. And
towns, and ships of war, and steamboats, and
banks, and academies, and children are often
named after Franklin. Why should he have
grown so very famous 1'
'Your question is a reasonable one, George," answered his father. "I doubt whether Franklin's
philosophical discoveries, important as they were,
or even his vast political services, would have 
<page 352>


<page 353>

<page 354>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
329
given him all the fame which he acquired. It
appears to me that Poor Richard's Almanac did
more than anything else towards making him
familiarly known to the public. As the writer
of those proverbs which Poor Richard was sup-
posed to utter, Franklin became the counsellor
and household friend of almost every family in
America. Thus it was the humblest of all his
labors that has done the most for his fame.'
'I have read some of those proverbs," remarked
Edward; "but I do not like them. They are all
about getting money or saving it.'
'Well,' said his father, "they were suited to the
condition of the country; and their effect, upon
the whole, has doubtless been good, — although
they teach men but a very small portion of their
duties.'

<page 355>
CHAPTER IX.
Hitherto, Mr. Temple's narratives had all been
about boys and men. But, the next evening, he
bethought himself that the quiet little Emily
would perhaps be glad to hear the story of a child
of her own sex. He therefore resolved to narrate
the youthful adventures of Christina, of Sweden,
who began to be a queen at the age of no more
than six years. If we have any little girls among
our readers, they must not suppose that Christina
is set before them as a pattern of what they ought
to be. On the contrary, the tale of her life is
chiefly profitable as showing the evil effects of a
wrong education, which caused this daughter of
a king to be both useless and unhappy. Here follows the story. QUEEN CHRISTINA.
Born 1626. Died 1689.
In the royal palace at Stockholm, the capital
city of Sweden, there was born, in 1626, a little
princess. The king, her father, gave her the
name of Christina, in memory of a Swedish girl
with whom he had been in love. His own name
was Gustavus Adolphus; and he was also called
the Lion of the North, because he had gained
greater fame in war than any other prince or
general then alive. With this valiant king for
their commander, the Swedes had made them-

<page 356>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES. 331
selves terrible to the Emperor of Germany and
to the King of France, and were looked upon as
the chief defence of the Protestant religion. The little Christina was by no means a beau-
tiful child. To confess the truth, she was re-
markably plain. The queen, her mother, did
not love her so much as she ought; partly, per-
haps, on account of Christina's want of beauty,
and, also, because both the king and queen had
wished for a son, who might have gained as
great renown in battle as his father had. The king, however, soon became exceedingly
fond of the infant princess. When Christina was
very young she was taken violently sick. Gustavus Adolphus, who was several hundred miles
from Stockholm, travelled night and day, and
never rested until he held the poor child in his
arms. On her recovery he made a solemn festi-
val, in order to show his joy to the people of
Sweden and express his gratitude to Heaven.
After this event he took his daughter with him
in all the journeys which he made throughout
his kingdom. Christina soon proved herself a bold and sturdy
little girl. When she was two years old, the king
and herself, in the course of a journey, came to
the strong fortress of Colmar. On the battle-
ments were soldiers clad in steel armor, which
glittered in the sunshine. There were likewise
great cannons, pointing their black mouths at 
<page 357>
332
EIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
Gustavus and little Christina, and ready to belch
out their smoke and thunder; for, whenever a
king enters a fortress, it is customary to receive
him with a royal salute of artillery. But the captain of the fortress met Gustavus
and his daughter as they were about to enter the
gateway.
'May it please your Majesty,' said he, taking
off his steel cap and bowing profoundly, "I fear
that, if we receive you with a salute of cannon,
the little princess will be frightened almost to
death." Gustavus looked earnestly at his daughter, and
was indeed apprehensive that the thunder of so
many cannon might perhaps throw her into con-
vulsions. He had almost a mind to tell the cap-
tain to let them enter the fortress quietly, as
common people might have done, without all
this head-splitting racket. But no; this would
not do.
'Let them fire," said he, waving his hand.
'Christina is a soldier's daughter, and must learn
to bear the noise of cannon."
So the captain uttered the word of command,
and immediately there was a terrible peal of
thunder from the cannon, and such a gush of
smoke that it enveloped the whole fortress in
its volumes. But, amid all the din and confu-
sion, Christina was seen clapping her little hands and laughing in an ecstasy of delight. Probably 
<page 358>
BIOGRAPHICAL STOBIES.
333
nothing ever pleased her father so much as to
see that his daughter promised to be fearless as
himself. He determined to educate her exactly
as if she had been a boy, and to teach her all
the knowledge needful to the ruler of a kingdom
and the commander of an army. But Gustavus should have remembered that
Providence had created her to be a woman, and
that it was not for him to make a man of her. However, the king derived great happiness
from his beloved Christina. It must have been
a pleasant sight to see the powerful monarch of
Sweden playing in some magnificent hall of the
palace with his merry little girl. Then he for-
got that the weight of a kingdom rested upon
his shoulders. He forgot that the wise Chancel-
lor Oxenstiern was waiting to consult with him
how to render Sweden the greatest nation of
Europe. He forgot that the Emperor of Ger-
many and the King of France were plotting
together how they might pull him down from
his throne. Yes; Gustavus forgot all the perils, and cares, and pompous irksomeness of a royal life; and was
as happy, while playing with his child, as the
humblest peasant in the realm of Sweden. How
gayly did they dance along the marble floor of
the palace, this valiant king, with his upright,
martial figure, his war-worn visage, and com-
manding aspect, and the small, round form of 
<page 359>
331
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
Christina, with her rosy face of childish merri-
ment! Her little fingers were clasped in her
father's hand, which had held the leading-staff
in many famous victories. His crown and scep-
tre were her playthings. She could disarm Gustavus of his sword, which was so terrible to the
princes of Europe.
But alas! the king was not long permitted to
enjoy Christina's society. When she was four
years old Gustavus was summoned to take com-
mand of the allied armies of Germany, which
were fighting against the emperor. His greatest
affliction was the necessity of parting with his
child; but people in such high stations have but
little opportunity for domestic happiness. He
called an assembly of the senators of Sweden and confided Christina to their care, saying, that
each one of them must be a father to her if he
himself should fall in battle. At the moment of his departure Christina ran
towards him and began to address him with a
speech which somebody had taught her for the
occasion. Gustavus was busied with thoughts
about the affairs of the kingdom, so that he did
not immediately attend to the childish voice of
his little girl. Christina, who did not love to be
unnoticed, immediately stopped short and pulled
him by the coat.
'Father,' said she, "why do not you listen to
my speech?'

<page 360>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
In a moment the king forgot every thing,
except that he was parting with what he loved
best in all the world. He caught the child in
his arms, pressed her to his bosom, and burst into
tears. Yes; though he was a brave man, and
though he wore a steel corselet on his breast,
and though armies were waiting for him to lead
them to battle, — still, his heart melted within
him, and he wept. Christina, too, was so afflicted that her attendants began to fear that she would
actually die of grief. But probably she was soon
comforted; for children seldom remember their
parents quite so faithfully as their parents remem-
ber them. For two years more Christina remained in the
palace at Stockholm. The queen, her mother,
had accompanied Gustavus to the wars. The
child, therefore, was left to the guardianship of
five of the wisest men in the kingdom. But
these wise men knew better how to manage the
affairs of state than how to govern and educate
a little girl so as to render her a good and happy
woman. When two years had passed away, tidings were
brought to Stockholm which filled everybody
with triumph and sorrow at the same time. The
Swedes had won a glorious victory at Lutzen.
But, alas! the warlike King of Sweden, the Lion
of the North, the father of our little Christina, had been slain at the foot of a great stone, which
still marks the spot of that hero's death.

<page 361>
33G
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
Soon after this sad event, a General Assembly,
or congress, consisting of deputations from the
nobles, the clergy, the burghers, and the peasants
of Sweden, was summoned to meet at Stockholm.
It was for the purpose of declaring little Christina
to be Queen of Sweden and giving her the crown
and sceptre of her deceased father. Silence be-
ing proclaimed, the Chancellor Oxenstiern arose.
'We desire to know," said he, "whether the
people of Sweden will take the daughter of our
dead king, Gustavus Adolphus, to be their queen." When the chancellor had spoken, an old man, with white hair and in coarse apparel, stood up
in the midst of the assembly. He was a peasant,
Lars Larrson byname, and had spent most of his
life in laboring on a farm.
'Who is this daughter of Gustavus?' asked
the old man. "We do not know her. Let her
be shown to us." Then Christina was brought into the hall and
placed before the old peasant. It was strange,
no doubt, to see a child — a little girl of six years
old — offered to the Swedes as their ruler instead
of the brave king, her father, who had led them
to victory so many times. Could her baby fingers
wield a sword in war? Could her childish mind
govern the nation wisely in peace 1
But the Swedes do not appear to have asked
themselves these questions. Old Lars Larrson
took Christina up in his arms and gazed earnestly 
<page 362>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
into her face. He had known the great Gustavus well; and his heart was touched when he
saw the likeness which the little girl bore to that
heroic monarch.
'Yes,' cried he, with the tears gushing down
his furrowed cheeks, 'this is truly the daughter
of our Gustavus! Here is her father's brow! —
here is his piercing eye! She is his very picture! This child shall be our queen!"
Then all the proud nobles of Sweden, and the
reverend clergy, and the burghers, and the peas-
ants, knelt down at the child's feet and kissed
her hand.
4Long live Christina, Queen of Sweden!" shouted they. Even after she was a woman grown Christina
remembered the pleasure which she felt in see-
ing all these men at her feet and hearing them
acknowledge her as their supreme ruler. Poor
child! she was yet to learn that power does not
insure happiness. As yet, however, she had not
any real power. All the public business, it is
true, was transacted in her name; but the king-
dom was governed by a number of the most
experienced statesmen, who were called a regency. But it was considered necessary that the little
queen should be present at the public ceremonies,
and should behave just as if she were in reality
the ruler of the nation. When she was seven
22

<page 363>
33S
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
years of age, some ambassadors from the Czar of
Muscovy came to the Swedish court. They
wore long beards, and were clad in a strange
fashion, with furs and other outlandish orna-
ments; and as they were inhabitants of a half-civilized country, they did not behave like other
people. The Chancellor Oxenstiern was afraid
that the young queen would burst out a-laugh-
ing, at the first sight of these queer ambassadors, or else that she would be frightened by their un-
usual aspect.
'Why should I be frightened?" said the little
queen ; — ' and do you suppose that I have no
better manners than to laugh 1 Only tell me
how I must behave, and I will do it." Accordingly, the Muscovite ambassadors were
introduced; and Christina received them and
answered their speeches with as much dignity
and propriety as if she had been a grown woman. All this time, though Christina was now a
queen, you must not suppose that she was left to
act as she pleased. She had a preceptor, named
John Mathias, who was a very learned man and
capable of instructing her in all the branches of
science. But there was nobody to teach her the
delicate graces and gentle virtues of a woman.
She was surrounded almost entirely by men, and had learned to despise the society of her own
sex. At the age of nine years she was sepa-
rated from her mother, whom the Swedes did 
<page 364>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
339
not consider a proper person to be intrusted with
the charge of her. No little girl who sits by a
New England fireside has cause to envy Chris-
tina in the royal palace at Stockholm. Yet she made great progress in her studies.
She learned to read the classical authors of
Greece and Rome, and became a great admirer of
the heroes and poets of old times. Then, as for
active exercises, she could ride on horseback as
well as any man in her kingdom. She was fond
of hunting, and could shoot at a mark with won-
derful skill. But dancing was the only feminine
accomplishment with which she had any ac-
quaintance. She was so restless in her disposition that
none of her attendants were sure of a moment's
quiet neither day nor night. She grew up, I am
sorry to say, a very unamiable person, ill-tem-
pered, proud, stubborn, and, in short, unfit to
make those around her happy or to be happy
herself. Let every little girl, who has been
taught self-control and a due regard for the
rights of others, thank Heaven that she has had
better instruction than this poor little Queen of
Sweden. At the age of eighteen Christina was declared
free to govern the kingdom by herself without
the aid of a regency. At this period of her life she was a young woman of striking aspect, a
good figure, and intelligent face, but very strangely 
<page 365>
dressed. She wore a short habit of gray cloth,
with a man's vest over it, and a black scarf
around her neck; but no jewels nor ornaments
of any kind. Yet, though Christina was so negligent of her
appearance, there was something in her air and
manner that proclaimed her as the ruler of a
kingdom. Her eyes, it is said, had a very fierce
and haughty look. Old General Wrangel, who
had often caused the enemies of Sweden to
tremble in battle, actually trembled himself when he encountered the eyes of the queen.
But it would have been better for Christina if
she could have made people love her, by means
of soft and gentle looks, instead of affrighting
them by such terrible glances. And now I have told you almost all that is
amusing or instructive in the childhood of
Christina. Only a few more words need be said
about her; for it is neither pleasant nor profit-
able to think of many things that she did after
she grew to be a woman. When she had worn the crown a few years,
she began to consider it beneath her dignity to
be called a queen, because the name implied that
she belonged to the weaker sex. She therefore
caused herself to be proclaimed King, thus de-
claring to the world that she despised her own
sex and was desirous of being ranked among
men. But in the twenty-eighth year of her age,

<page 366>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
341
Christina grew tired of royalty, and resolved to
be neither a king nor a queen any longer. She
took the crown from her head with her own
hands, and ceased to be the ruler of Sweden.
The people did not greatly regret her abdication;
for she had governed them ill, and had taken
much of their property to supply her extrav-
agance. Having thus given up her hereditary crown,
Christina left Sweden and travelled over many
of the countries of Europe. Every where, she
was received with great ceremony, because she
was the daughter of the renowned Gustavus, and
had herself been a powerful queen. Perhaps
you would like to know something about her
personal appearance in the latter part of her life.
She is described as wearing a man's vest, a short
gray petticoat, embroidered with gold and silver,
and a black wig, which was thrust awry upon
her head. She wore no gloves, and so seldom
washed her hands that nobody could tell what
had been their original color. In this strange
dress, and, I suppose, without washing her hands
or face, she visited the magnificent court of
Louis the Fourteenth.
She died in 1689. None loved her while she
lived, nor regretted her death, nor planted a single
flower upon her grave. Happy are the little girls
of America, who are brought up quietly and ten-
derly at the domestic hearth, and thus become 
<page 367>
342 BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
gentle and delicate women! May none of them
ever lose the loveliness of their sex by receiving
such an education as that of Queen Christina!Emily, timid, quiet, and sensitive, was the
very reverse of little Christina. She seemed
shocked at the idea of such a bold and mascu-
line character as has been described in the fore-
going story.
'I never could have loved her," whispered she
to Mrs. Temple; and then she added, with that
love of personal neatness which generally accom-
panies purity of heart, — 'It troubles me to think
of her unclean hands!'
'Christina was a sad specimen of womankind,
indeed,' said Mrs. Temple. "But it is very pos-
sible for a woman to have a strong mind, and to
be fitted for the active business of life, without
losing any of her natural delicacy. Perhaps some
time or other Mr. Temple will tell you a story
of such a woman." It was now time for Edward to be left to
repose. His brother George shook him heart-
ily by the hand, and hoped, as he had hoped
twenty times before, that to-morrow or the next
day Ned's eyes would be strong enough to look
the sun right in the face.
"Thank you, George," replied Edward, smil-
ing; "but I am not half so impatient as at first.
If my bodily eyesight were as good as yours, 
<page 368>
BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES.
343
perhaps I could not see things so distinctly with
my mind's eye. But now there is a light within
which shows me the little Quaker artist, Ben
West, and Isaac Newton with his windmill, and
stubborn Sam Johnson, and stout Noll Cromwell,
and shrewd Ben Franklin, and little Queen Chris-
tina, with the Swedes kneeling at her feet. It
seems as if I really saw these personages face to
face. So I can bear the darkness outside of me
pretty well." When Edward ceased speaking, Emily put up
her mouth and kissed him as her farewell for the
night.
'Ah, I forgot!" said Edward, with a sigh. "I
cannot see any of your faces. What would it
signify to see all the famous people in the world,
if I must be blind to the faces that I love?'
'You must try to see us with your heart, my
dear child," said his mother. Edward went to bed somewhat dispirited, but
quickly falling asleep, was visited with such a
pleasant dream of the sunshine and of his dearest
friends that he felt the happier for it all the next
day. And we hope to find him still happy when
we meet again.
THE END.

<page 369>
i

<page 370>

<page 371>

<page 372>

<page 373>
PLEASE RETURN TO
ALDERMAN LIBRARY
DUE
DUE
i

<page 374>
